Babesia gibsoni (B. gibsoni), an intracellular apicomplexan protozoan, poses great threat to canine health. Currently, little information is available about the B. gibsoni (WH58) endemic to Wuhan, China. Here, the mitochondrial (mt) genome of B. gibsoni (WH58) was amplified by five pairs of primers and sequenced and annotated by alignment with the reported mt genome sequences of Babesia canis (B. canis, KC207822), Babesia orientalis (KF218819), Babesia bovis (AB499088), and Theileria equi (AB499091). The evolutionary relationships were analyzed with the amino acid sequences of cytochrome c oxidase I (cox1) and cytochrome b (cob) genes in apicomplexan parasite species. Additionally, the mt genomes of Babesia, Theileria, and Plasmodium spp. were compared in size, host infection, form, distribution, and direction of the protein-coding genes. The full size of the mt genome of B. gibsoni (WH58) was 5865 bp with a linear form, containing terminal-inverted repeats on both ends, six large subunit ribosomal RNA fragments, and three protein-coding genes: cox1, cob, and cytochrome c oxidase III (cox3). Babesia, Theileria, and Plasmodium spp. had a similar mt genome size of about 6000 bp. The mt genomes of parasites that cause canine babesiosis showed a slightly smaller size than the other species. Moreover, Babesia microti (R1 strain) was about 11,100 bp in size, which was twice larger than that of the other species. The mt form was linear for Babesia and Theileria spp. but circular for Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium knowlesi. Additionally, all the species contained the three protein-coding genes of cox1, cox3, and cob except Toxoplasma gondii (RH strain) which only contained the cox1 and cob genes. The phylogenetic analysis indicated that B. gibsoni (WH58) was more identical to B. gibsoni (AB499087), B. canis (KC207822), and Babesia rossi (KC207823) and most divergent from Babesia conradae in Babesia spp. Despite the highest similarity to B. gibsoni (AB499087) reported in Japan, B. gibsoni (WH58) showed notable differences in the sequence of nucleotides and amino acids and the property in virulence to host and in vitro cultivation. This study compared the mt genomes of the two B. gibsoni isolates and other parasites in the phylum Apicomplexa and provided new insights into their differences and evolutionary relationships.