The large chronic wasting disease (CWD)-affected cervid population in the USA and Canada, and the risk of the disease being transmitted to humans through intermediate species, is a highly worrying issue that is still poorly understood. In this case, recombinant protein misfolding cyclic amplification was used to determine, in vitro, the relevance of each individual amino acid on cross-species prion transmission. Others and we have found that the β2–α2 loop is a key modulator of transmission barriers between species and markedly influences infection by sheep scrapie, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), or elk CWD. Amino acids that differentiate ovine and deer normal host prion protein (PrPC) and associated with structural rigidity of the loop β2–α2 (S173N, N177T) appear to confer resistance to some prion diseases. However, addition of methionine at codon 208 together with the previously described rigid loop substitutions seems to hide a key in this species barrier, as it makes sheep recombinant prion protein highly susceptible to CWD-induced misfolding. These studies indicate that interspecies prion transmission is not only governed just by the β2–α2 loop amino acid sequence but also by its interactions with the α3-helix as shown by substitution I208M. Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, characterized by long incubation periods and spongiform changes associated with neuronal loss in the brain, have been described in several mammalian species appearing either naturally (scrapie in sheep and goats, bovine spongiform encephalopathy in cattle, chronic wasting disease in cervids, Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease in humans) or by experimental transmission studies (scrapie in mice and hamsters). Much of the pathogenesis of the prion diseases has been determined in the last 40 years, such as the etiological agent or the fact that prions occur as different strains that show distinct biological and physicochemical properties. However, there are many unanswered questions regarding the strain phenomenon and interspecies transmissibility. To assess the risk of interspecies transmission between scrapie and chronic wasting disease, an in vitro prion propagation method has been used. This technique allows to predict the amino acids preventing the transmission between sheep and deer prion diseases.