Giant cell tumor of bone (GCTB) is a rare tumor with a spectrum of clinical behavior. Standard treatment modalities include surgical curettage to wide resection, and varying oncological and functional results have been reported. The aim of this study was to evaluate the functional outcome and recurrence rates of patients who underwent surgery for giant cell tumor in a rural tertiary cancer center from June 2009 to December 2016. A retrospective review of 12 patients (7 males and 5 females) with GCT of the extremity bones treated in the institution between the period of June 2009 and December 2016 was performed to study the oncological and functional outcomes. All patients were evaluated by clinical examination, plain X-ray of local parts, X-ray of the chest, and MRI of local parts. A biopsy was taken in all cases to confirm the diagnosis. All patients underwent surgical treatment including curettage combined with cryosurgery and bone cement or wide resection and reconstruction. Selection of the surgical technique was based on the site and size of the lesion, soft tissue involvement (intra- or extra-compartmental), and if recurrent or not. The patients were followed up to April 2018. The mean age of the patients was 31.3 years. The tumor sites were distal femur in 3 cases, proximal tibia in 6, ischial bone in 1, distal radius in 1, and 1 in the metacarpal bone. Campanacci radiographic grading was grade1 in 3 cases, grade 2 in 2 cases, and grade 3 in 7 cases. Out of 12 patients, local recurrence was noted in 2 patients (16.7%). Functional evaluation was performed according to the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society Scoring (MSTS) system. Mean MSTS score was 25. To preserve the good function of the extremities and avoid local recurrence, we consider that curettage with adjunctive therapy such as polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) and liquid nitrogen should be employed for the treatment of benign GCT of bone. Wide excision should be considered for large tumors where achieving oncological results with functional preservation would be difficult with curettage procedure.