The most important margin in determining the prognosis of rectal cancer is circumferential resection margin (CRM). But, the type of surgery is determined by distal rectal margin (DRM), whether sphincter saving procedure is possible or patient needs an abdominoperineal resection. There are no standardized uniform guidelines for measurement of DRM. The purpose of this study is to assess the distal microscopic spread beyond gross margin after neoadjuvant concurrent chemoradiation (CCRT) in rectal cancers, the factors influencing the distal microscopic spread, the shrinkage of the distal margin in pinned and unpinned fresh and fixed specimen, and to find out the best method of measurement of distal rectal margin. A prospective analytical study was conducted from May 2013 through February 2015 in 47 cases of carcinoma rectum (both AR and APR) who had received neoadjuvant CCRT. Fresh specimen was collected within 30 min of specimen retrieval and a longitudinal cut was made in the distal margin of all specimens. One side of the specimen was pinned onto a cork board and the other side was left unpinned. Measurements were made from the distal end of clinical gross tumor. DRM was determined in both pinned and unpinned sides in fresh and fixed specimen. Of the 47 patients, 2 patients (4.2%) had small focus of tumor beyond gross margins, 1 at 6 mm and another at 3.5 mm on the unpinned side. The average margin for fresh and fixed pinned specimens was 3.67 and 3.47 cm, respectively, with percentage shrinkage of 5.4% for the pinned specimens. The average margin for fresh and fixed unpinned specimens was 3.32 and 2.84 cm, respectively, with percentage shrinkage of 14.4% for the unpinned specimens. Six patients (12.7%) had complete pathological response. Correlation of distal margin was better in pinned specimen. A correction factor of 15% for shrinkage needs to be taken into account while assessing unpinned specimen. Only in 4.2% of patients, there was distal submucosal spread beyond gross margin. Long-term follow up is required for assessing adequacy of DRM post neoadjuvant CCRT.