Autosomal recessive CARD9 deficiency underlies life-threatening, invasive fungal infections in otherwise healthy individuals normally resistant to other infectious agents. In less than 10 years, 58 patients from 39 kindreds have been reported in 14 countries from four continents. The patients are homozygous (n = 49; 31 kindreds) or compound heterozygous (n = 9; 8 kindreds) for 22 different CARD9 mutations. Six mutations are recurrent, probably due to founder effects. Paradoxically, none of the mutant alleles has been experimentally demonstrated to be loss-of-function. CARD9 is expressed principally in myeloid cells, downstream from C-type lectin receptors that can recognize fungal components. Patients with CARD9 deficiency present impaired cytokine and chemokine production by macrophages, dendritic cells, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells and defective killing of some fungi by neutrophils in vitro. Neutrophil recruitment to sites of infection is impaired in vivo. The proportion of Th17 cells is low in most, but not all, patients tested. Up to 52 patients suffering from invasive fungal diseases (IFD) have been reported, with ages at onset of 3.5 to 52 years. Twenty of these patients also displayed superficial fungal infections. Six patients had only mucocutaneous candidiasis or superficial dermatophytosis at their last follow-up visit, at the age of 19 to 50 years. Remarkably, for 50 of the 52 patients with IFD, a single fungus was involved; only two patients had IFDs due to two different fungi. IFD recurred in 44 of 45 patients who responded to treatment, and a different fungal infection occurred in the remaining patient. Ten patients died from IFD, between the ages of 12 and 39 years, whereas another patient died at the age of 91 years, from an unrelated cause. At the most recent scheduled follow-up visit, 81% of the patients were still alive and aged from 6.5 to 75 years. Strikingly, all the causal fungi belonged to the phylum Ascomycota: commensal Candida and saprophytic Trychophyton, Aspergillus, Phialophora, Exophiala, Corynesprora, Aureobasidium, and Ochroconis. Human CARD9 is essential for protective systemic immunity to a subset of fungi from this phylum but seems to be otherwise redundant. Previously healthy patients with unexplained invasive fungal infection, at any age, should be tested for inherited CARD9 deficiency.