Introduction
Most protocols of myocardial perfusion SPECT imaging (MPI), planned on Anger cameras, involve lengthy recording times (>10 minutes), a cause of patient discomfort and motion artifacts, as well as high injected activities leading to effective doses of 14 mSv or higher for current one-day rest-stress protocols. , However, these issues may be largely overcomed with cardiac cameras being equipped with semiconductor Cadmium-Zinc-Telluride (CZT) detectors together with new collimation systems and novel reconstruction software. -
Low-dose protocols have already been assessed with these cardiac CZT cameras, leading to a lowering of the mean effective dose to less than 4 mSv for current one-day stress-rest protocols. , Although the recording of as much as one million myocardial counts was previously found to be suitable for providing an accurate assessment of myocardial perfusion, lower recorded counts are currently targeted for CZT- or Anger-SPECT. - , , A high diagnostic accuracy was recently documented for myocardial perfusion CZT-SPECT planned with the target of only 500 myocardial kcounts, very low injected doses, and an adapted method for images’ reconstruction. However, such a low level of recorded counts may prove problematic for gated-SPECT, especially when recorded with as much as 16 intervals and thus with a sufficiently high temporal resolution to avoid any global underestimation of left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction. -
This low-count setting may be managed with specific methods of iterative reconstruction. One of them is based on the incorporation of 4D image filtering at each iteration where a 1D temporal Fourier filter is associated with 3D spatial filtering. - SPECT images are then obtained at each interval using the overall myocardial activity, with the low-count gated-SPECT images attaining sufficient quality to be easily analyzed.
This study aimed at determining whether the assessment of LV function, obtained with the aforementioned 4D filtering method applied on 16-interval gated-SPECT images routinely recorded on a CZT camera with low injected activities and limited recording times, compares well with reference values obtained from cardiac MRI.
Materials and Methods
Selection of the Study Population
All patients from our institution are informed that their medical data can be rendered anonymous and used for scientific purposes. The study patients were retrospectively selected on the basis that they had routinely undergone, within a <2-month period, a MPI planned for a known or suspected coronary artery disease and a cardiac MRI. MPI had been performed on a high-sensitivity CZT camera (“D.SPECT” camera, Spectrum Dynamics) with a dedicated protocol involving very low injected activities (Table 1 ) and targeting the recording of only 500 myocardial kcounts in order to limit the recording times (<10 minutes for stress, <4 minutes for rest). , Patients were subsequently excluded if they had an incomplete MRI recording, a significant arrhythmia, or a potentially unstable clinical state (<1-month acute coronary syndrome and/or coronary revascularization process). Table 1 Tc-99m Sestamibi activities injected at stress and at rest according to body weight Body weight (kg) Stress activity (MBq) Rest activity (MBq) ≤60 80 240 61–70 100 300 71–80 120 360 81–90 140 420 91–100 145 434 101–110 190 570 >110 260 780
Stress Tests and Tracer Injection
Patients were referred to either a resting SPECT for viability assessment or to a stress-SPECT followed, when necessary, by a resting SPECT in a conventional one-day stress-rest protocol. The stress tests were performed as already described, with exercise performed in the upright position on a bicycle ergometer, except in the case of contraindication or poor physical capacity, in which instance a dipyridamole test was conducted with or without exercise.
As detailed in Table 1 , the injected activities of Tc-99m Sestamibi were adapted to the high sensitivity of this camera and to body weight. For example, the activities injected at stress were 120 MBq for a 75 kg body weight and more than twofold higher for >110 kg (260 MBq). , , The activities injected at rest were 3-times higher than those injected at stress, although no rest injection was routinely scheduled when stress MPI was considered as definitely normal.
Effective doses were determined according to the activity of Tc-99m Sestamibi measured with a dedicated dose calibrator (CRC ® -15R, Capintec Inc., Ramsey, NJ, USA) and from which respective ratios of 0.0079 mSv per MBq of Tc-99m Sestamibi for stress injection and 0.009 mSv per MBq of Tc-99m Sestamibi for rest injection were used.
Acquisition, Reconstruction, and Analysis of CZT-SPECT Images
The ECG-triggered SPECT acquisitions were initiated approximately 30 minutes after tracer injection, with the patients set in a semireclining prone position, and the electrodes positioned on the patient’s back. Using the myocardial count rate from the prescan acquisition, the time per projection was set to target the recording of 500 myocardial kcounts, leading to limit the recording times to less than 10 minutes for stress and 4 minutes for rest acquisitions. Reconstruction of the gated-SPECT images was conducted with a specific algorithm directed at the particular geometry of the wide-angle collimator and using the following parameters: 16-interval frames, 2 iterations, 32 subsets, a 3D spatial Kernel filter of 0.125, and a 1D temporal Fourier filter (truncation after the third harmonic of the Fourier series of the voxel count variations between interval frames). - In this manner, the ECG-triggered images exhibited high enough temporal (16 frames/cycle) and spatial resolutions (8 mm for the full width at half maximum of a punctual source placed at the center of the field of view), and they could be easily analyzed visually (see example in Figure 1 ). Figure 1 End-systolic (S) and end-diastolic (D) images obtained with MRI (upper panel) and 16-interval gated-SPECT images reconstructed with a temporal Fourier filtering (TFF) in a 4D filtering process (mid panel) or without TFF and with only a spatial 3D filtering (lower panel). Note that visual identification of the akinetic anterior-apical LV area (red arrows), corresponding here to a previous history of anterior infarction, is greatly facilitated by the TFF
LV volume and ejection fraction were determined automatically using Quantitative Gated SPECT software (Cedars-Sinai Medical Center). Regional contractility was assessed visually by an experienced observer, blinded to the results of the other imaging modalities, with a 17-segment LV division, and with the 2 proximal septal segments being excluded. , According to wall motion and to the systolic increase in myocardial count, each segment was classified as akinetic/dyskinetic, hypokinetic, or normal. In addition, the quality of the gated-SPECT images was scored visually according to the level of background noise, myocardial-to-background contrast, and the presence of adjacent abdominal foci, using a 5-point scale: excellent (4), good (3), moderate (2), or low quality leading to a difficult (1) or to an impossible (0) analysis.
Acquisition and Analysis of Cardiac MRI
Cardiac MRI was performed on either a 1.5-T or a 3-T MRI magnet from the same center (GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, USA). A steady-state free precession pulse sequence was used to assess LV function in contiguous short axis planes covering the entire LV volume. Each plane was recorded during 8 to 15 seconds expiratory breath-holds, as previously detailed. LV end-diastolic volume, end-diastolic mass, and ejection fraction were obtained by a single expert cardiologist, using dedicated software (MASS™, Medis, The Netherlands).
Regional contractility was assessed visually by the same experienced observer, blinded to the results of the other imaging modalities, according to the systolic increase in myocardial thickness and to wall motion and by the same LV division and segment classification (1, akinetic or dyskinetic; 2, hypokinetic; 3, normal) as used for gated-SPECT.
Finally, the myocardial infarction area was sized according to the percentage of the LV segments showing a delayed contrast enhancement, 10 to 15 minutes after the injection of a gadolinium-labeled tracer, as previously described elsewhere.
Statistical Analysis
Continuous variables are reported as mean ± SD and categorical variables as percentages. The LV ejection fractions and volumes provided by gated-SPECT were compared with the corresponding MRI values using linear regression analyses and those provided by paired comparisons with Wilcoxon tests. The concordance of the segmental contractility analyses provided by the two techniques was assessed with kappa values. For all tests, a p value < 0.05 was considered to reflect a significant difference.
Results
Selection and Main Characteristics of the Study Population
A total of 100 consecutive patients had routinely undergone, at a <2-month interval time, a cardiac MRI and an MPI planned on the same CZT camera with the very low-dose protocol. Twenty-four patients were ultimately excluded because of an incomplete MRI recording, significant arrhythmia, or a potentially unstable clinical state, leaving a total of 76 patients for the present study. Eight of the latter had been referred for a resting viability study and 68 for a conventional stress MPI that was followed by rest MPI in 53 cases. Only the LV function assessed on rest MPI was considered in our analyses, except for the 15 patients who were not referred to rest MPI because of a definitely normal stress MPI, a procedure that is planned to lower patients’ radiation doses. , The LV function of these 15 patients was thus analyzed on the normal poststress images.
Main patients’ characteristics are detailed in Table 2 . Mean patient age was 56 years and 30% were women. MRI was performed after SPECT in 69% of cases. At MRI, mean ejection fraction was 45 ± 13% (from 18 to 68%); 44 patients (58%) had evidence of a myocardial infarction on delayed retention images; 16 (21%) had a cardiomyopathy of a presumably nonischemic cause (LV hypertrophy and/or LV dysfunction but no evidence of myocardial infarction); and the remaining 16 (21%) had a normal LV. Table 2 Main characteristics of the study population Age (years) 56 ± 12 Women 24 (31%) Obesity 15 (20%) Medical history at the time of SPECT imaging Nonischemic cardiomyopathy 7 (9%) Myocardial infraction 44 (58%) Coronary angioplasty 30 (39%) Bypass grafting 2 (3%) Chest pain 21 (28%) Hypertension 43 (57%) Diabetes 11 (14%) Dyslipidemia 32 (42%) Left ventricular analysis at MRI Normal 16 (21%) Myocardial infarction 44 (58%) Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy 8 (10%) Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 7 (9%) Significant valvular disease 3 (4%) Ejection fraction (%) 45 ± 13 <50% 44 (58%) <35% 21 (28%)
Among the 1140 analyzed segments, 186 (16%) were considered as akinetic or dyskinetic at MRI, 114 (10%) were hypokinetic, and 840 (74%) had normal contractility (Table 3 ). Table 3 Contingency table of results from the segmental contractility analysis provided by CZT-SPECT (segment classification in normal, hypokinetic, or akinetic/dyskinetic) against the corresponding results from cardiac MRI Cardiac MRI CZT-SPECT Normal Hypokinetic Akinetic Total Normal 766 25 3 794 Hypokinetic 59 71 22 152 Akinetic 15 18 161 194 Total 840 114 186 1140 Exact agreement = 87%, kappa = 0.72 ± 0.02
CZT-SPECT Results
On average, the total injected activity was 325 ± 31 MBq, and the total effective dose was 3.5 ± 1.7 mSv. These values were of course much lower when only considering the subgroup of patients who only had stress MPI (123 ± 38 MBq and 0.97 ± 0.30 mSv, respectively). Mean myocardial recording kcounts was 547 ± 95, and mean recording times were 6.6 ± 2.2 minutes for the stress acquisitions and 2.8 ± 1.3 for the rest ones.
As shown in Figure 2 , the correlations between CZT-SPECT and MRI were good to excellent for LV ejection fraction ( r 2 = 0.77), and for LV end-diastolic ( r 2 = 0.88) and end-systolic ( r 2 = 0.93) volumes. However, as evidenced on Bland-Altman plots in Figure 2 , there were significant underestimations of the D.SPECT for end-diastolic volume ( P < 0.001, mean difference with MRI: −46 ± 25 mL) and end-systolic volume ( P < 0.001, mean difference with MRI: −20 ± 19 mL). Furthermore, this underestimation was clearly increased for the smaller volumes, although, on the Bland-Altman plots detailed in Figure 2 , the dependence on volume values was clearly significant for the end-systolic volume ( P = 0.04) but not for the end-diastolic one ( P = 0.10). Figure 2 Regression analyses (left side) and corresponding Bland-Altman plots (right side) for ejection fraction (upper panel), end-diastolic volume (median panel), and end-systolic volume (lower panel). Good to excellent correlations are documented, although the Bland-Altman analyses shows that gated-SPECT underestimates both end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes and that the difference in ejection fraction is influenced by the mean level of ejection fraction
A global underestimation was not documented for LV ejection fraction for which the mean difference with MRI was −1 ± 8% in the overall population. However, in a per-patient analysis, this difference was significantly and strongly related to the level of ejection fraction as shown on the corresponding Bland-Altman plot in Figure 2 .
More precisely, the D.SPECT overestimated high ejection fractions, and this is best illustrated by results from the paired comparisons between SPECT and MRI values in the first tercile of the distribution of ejection fractions (62 ± 7% vs. 58 ± 6%, P = 0.01, for patients with averaged MRI/CZT-SPECT ejection fractions >52%). On the contrary, the D.SPECT underestimated low ejection fractions, as illustrated by the same comparison in the third tercile (26 ± 7% vs. 30 ± 8%, P = 0.01, for patients with averaged ejection fractions <37%). It may also be pointed out that this third tercile was characterized by much larger MI areas at MRI (22 ± 14% of LV) than the first and second terciles (5 ± 7% and 10 ± 12% of LV, respectively).
Mean quality score of the gated-SPECT images was 3.1 ± 1.0 at visual analysis. As many as 72% of the gated-SPECT exams were considered as having an excellent (score = 4, 49%) or good (score = 3, 18%) quality, whereas 20% had a moderate quality, only 8% had a low quality leading to a difficult image analysis (score = 1), and none were considered as impossible to analyze (score = 0). Finally, as detailed in Table 3 , the identification of dyskinetic/akinetic or hypokinetic segments was well correlated between MRI and SPECT with a global kappa score of 0.72 ± 0.02 and an exact agreement rate of 87%.
Discussion
Several studies have already shown that a dose reduction strategy can be conducted with the highly sensitive cardiac CZT cameras up to a very low level of mean radiation dose. , This could furthermore be achieved while limiting the level of recording counts (500 myocardial kcounts) and thus the recording time to no more than 10 minutes, a crucial point for patient tolerance and for the risk of motion artifact. In a previous multicenter study, we found that the greater count density provided by the D.SPECT helped in preventing low-count artifacts, especially in obese patients. Moreover, high diagnostic performances could already be documented for identifying patients with coronary stenosis with the present low-dose and low-count protocol, with sensitivity and global accuracy of 88% and 80%, respectively, and with normalcy rate of 97%.
To the best of our knowledge, however, the present study is the first to show that, when planned in clinical routine, such a low-dose and limited-count protocol may also provide adequate global and regional evaluations of LV function, even when targeting high-resolution parameters (16 frames/cycle and 8-mm spatial resolution). This was rendered possible in the present series with the application of 4D image filtering at each iteration of the iterative OSEM reconstruction process, where a 1D temporal Fourier filter is added to a conventional 3D spatial filtering.
Temporal Fourier filtering consists of a truncated Fourier series of the voxel count variations between interval frames, resulting in SPECT images being obtained at each interval using the activity recorded at all intervals. - The application of a temporal Fourier filtering after each OSEM iteration was already found to be associated with introduction of a negligible error but also with a dramatic reduction in noise, corresponding to a more than 2-fold increase in time acquisition. The 4D filtering method was previously validated for the low-count gated-SPECT images recorded by conventional Anger cameras - and was shown to provide a clear advantage over conventional methods of temporal smoothing. However, the current study is the first to report an application on cardiac CZT cameras.
As illustrated in Figure 1 , a high-level image quality was provided by the 4D filtering, in spite of the limited level of recorded myocardial counts (approximately 500 kcounts for the overall 16-interval frames). Furthermore, the conventional visual analysis of segmental contractility was sufficiently accurate, as evidenced by the high concordance rate and kappa score with regard to the reference MRI data. The LV ejection fraction and volumes were also shown to be well correlated with the corresponding MRI values, and finally the use of as much as 16-interval frames allowed avoiding any global underestimation of LV ejection fractions in accordance with results from previous studies. -
Although several gated-SPECT studies had already reached an equivalent level of concordance with MRI values, , such concordance was further documented herein with a dramatic reduction in injected activities and in recording time. Mean recording times were indeed shorter than 7 minutes for the stress acquisitions and shorter than 3 minutes for the rest acquisitions, whereas recommended values are above 10 minutes and generally around 14 minutes for conventional Anger-SPECT. , Furthermore, the mean total effective dose was lower than 4 mSv for the overall population and even lower than 1 mSv for patients with a stress-only study, in accordance with a previous report on this low-dose protocol.
It is likely that some limitations, already documented for Anger-SPECT, could not be avoided in the present CZT-SPECT evaluation of LV function. In particular, there was a clear underestimation of the end-diastolic and end-systolic LV volumes. This is partly explained by a blurring of LV walls related to breathing motions and, moreover, to the partial volume effects induced by a still-limited spatial resolution, , , , even if CZT cameras provide an enhanced spatial resolution compared to conventional Anger cameras (8 mm for the full width at half maximum with the reconstruction parameters used in the present study). An important additional part of this volume underestimation is known to be due to the exclusion of the LV volume corresponding to the outflow tract where no myocardial signal can be detected on SPECT images. The relative importance of this underestimation is particularly manifested for the smallest end-systolic volumes, thereby leading to overestimate the normal ejection fractions from small LV, , a finding consistent with that observed on the Bland-Altman plots herein (Figure 2 ). By contrast, our results show an underestimation of ejection fraction in instances of severe LV dysfunction and in conjunction with extended myocardial infarctions, in accordance with previous gated-SPECT reports. ,
However, it should be kept in mind that gated-SPECT is not currently prescribed for providing only an analysis of LV function, but rather to determine the extent to which the perfusion abnormalities documented by this technique have an impact on this function. This information is indeed of great value, when added to the analysis of myocardial perfusion images, notably for improving (1) diagnostic accuracy, with the local identification of attenuation artifacts and of postischemic stunning; (2) risk stratification, with the poststress LV function being a strong indicator of the risk of cardiac death; and (3) the prediction of benefit from revascularization. -
All of our study patients had been routinely referred to CZT-SPECT for a known or suspected coronary artery disease. However, our retrospective way of patients’ selection, based on a further referral to cardiac MRI, has led to constitute a particular study population with high rates of LV dysfunction and of nonischemic cardiomyopathies [15 hypertrophic or idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathies (Table 2 )]. It may be pointed out that the exclusion of these nonischemic cardiomyopathies did not lead to lower the significance of our results. On the contrary, the R 2 values of all relationships that are displayed in Figure 2 would then be at least slightly increased (results not shown). Nevertheless, it is likely that our findings may not be fully extrapolated to more general populations of patients referred to myocardial perfusion imaging.
In conclusion, this study shows that the evaluation of left ventricular function provided by gated-SPECT is well correlated with the reference evaluation obtained from cardiac MRI when routinely planned on a CZT camera with as much as 16-interval, low injected activities, limited recorded times, and an adapted method of image reconstruction. This observation further acknowledges the consideration that an efficient low-dose strategy can be conducted with adapted protocols on cardiac CZT camera.
New Knowledge Gained
Left ventricular function may be assessed by gated-SPECT when routinely planned on a CZT camera with as much as 16-interval, low injected activities, limited recorded times, and an adapted method of image reconstruction.