Introduction
Microvascular obstruction (MVO) and intramyocardial hemorrhage (IMH) of varying severity have been reported in as many as 40%-50% of patients following percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for ST segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). , , Distal embolization of clot and atherosclerotic debris from the PCI site are responsible for mechanical obstruction of the vascular tree at differing levels depending on the size of the emboli. Disruption of platelets and clot from the PCI site results in release of vasoconstrictor agents (e.g., thromboxane A2, thrombin, endothelin) which also contribute to microvascular dysfunction and injury. , Moreover, reperfusion itself may contribute to injury both of myocytes and endothelium through a variety of different but interrelated biochemical mechanisms, oxidant stress featuring prominently amongst them. Since extent of microvascular injury and obstruction has been found to correlate inversely with recovery of left ventricular contractile function and patient outcomes, , , , , there has been considerable interest in physiological assessment of coronary microvascular function of patients in the acute, sub acute, and chronic stages of myocardial infarction. Accordingly, the present review will focus on relevant pathophysiological principles requisite to understanding the various coronary and myocardial blood flow parameters used to detect microvascular dysfunction and estimate prognosis in these settings. Important data obtained from invasive measurements of coronary pressure and flow (volume and velocity) as well as cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) will be reviewed. These data provide context for potential clinical applications and optimal interpretation of quantitative PET measurements of myocardial blood flow (MBF) in patients following myocardial infarction.
Pathophysiology: Myocardial Blood Flow Post STEMI: Acute/Sub acute Phase
Within moments of acute coronary occlusion in a canine model of myocardial infarction there is abrupt cessation of contraction in myocardium distal to the occlusion, followed immediately by ECG evidence of transmural ischemia (ST elevation). Myocardial necrosis begins in the endocardial layer of the segment in minutes and spreads in wave-like fashion over the course of minutes to hours to the epicardium. The presence or absence of collateral flow to the infarct zone influences the rate and extent to which myocardial necrosis occur as do a host of hemodynamic and metabolic factors. , In humans, clinical benefit for reperfusion of STEMI may be achieved up to 12 hours following onset though myocardial necrosis is considerably less and outcomes greatly improved when coronary reperfusion occurs in 2 hours or less. The direct physiological impact of ischemia on the coronary “microcirculation” in patients with STEMI of necessity represents an approximation since available quantitative technologies (e.g., invasive pressure, flow, CMR, and PET MBF) lump together small arteries, arterioles, and true microvessels (dia ~50-300 µ), each of which may differ in their responses to a given vasodilator or vasoconstrictor stimulus. , Further, the susceptibility of each class of “microvessel” not only to the initial ischemic insult but also to reperfusion injury will vary roughly with respect to size. Accordingly, the distribution of resistance will shift from microvessels between 150-300 µ diameter, where the bulk of resistance to flow in the normal coronary circulation resides, , to vessels which may be both larger (platelet/thrombus microemboli) and smaller in caliber (reperfusion edema, hemorrhage and infarction). Further, depending on the nature and extent of the injury, the time course of recovery (or not) is likely to vary and with it lumped estimates of “microvascular” function at a given moment in time. Thus, studies of the coronary microcirculation in humans with acute and sub acute MI, are subject to a considerable number of uncontrollable variables which will bear importantly on the outcomes and sometimes may make both comparisons and generalizations difficult. Further, such studies must take into account the contribution of diffuse conduit vessel disease which contributes importantly to coronary pressure flow relations and potentially clinical prognosis as well as. , ,
Invasive Assessment: Physiologic Metrics and Prognosis Post PCI for STEMI
Fractional flow reserve (FFR) and coronary flow reserve (CFR)
It is possible to measure FFR and CFR simultaneously either with a pressure, Doppler flow velocity or thermistor sensor guide wire. Coronary flow velocity during presumed maximal coronary dilation with adenosine vs rest provides CFR. The thermistor tip guide wire permits recording a thermodilution curve at rest and with adenosine. The mean transit time (Tmn) for the bolus (3 mL) of cold saline can then be computed and provides a measure of coronary flow velocity, since; $$ {\text{Tmn }} = {\text{ k}}/{\text{Q}}, $$ (1) where, k is the blood volume of the vascular bed (assumed constant), Q is the coronary flow velocity
Coronary microvascular resistance (IMR) typically is computed as the ratio of distal coronary mean pressure (Pd) to flow (Q) (Ohm’s Law; IMR = Pd/Q) and has been used extensively to assess the functional integrity of the microvasculature following PCI for STEMI. , , , , , , Likewise, both FFR and CFR have been employed either alone or in combination with IMR to assess prognosis in the acute, sub acute post-MI setting. , , It has been stated that FFR is a metric specific for stenosis hemodynamic severity, while CFR reflects both stenosis severity and microvascular function, and that IMR reflects microvascular function alone. However, the basic fluid dynamic equation for pressure drop (dP) across a stenosis is given as follows: $$ {\text{dP }} = {\text{ AQ}} + {\text{BQ}}^{ 2}, $$ (2) where Q is the flow, A is the Poiseuille constant (viscous resistance), B is the Stenosis geometry constant (stenosis resistance)
Accordingly, it is apparent the pressure drop across the stenosis (dP) is directly related to the flow through it. Flow in turn must reflect combined resistance in the conduit (proximal and distal) and microvessels downstream as well as the upstream perfusion pressure. , Only when the downstream series resistances are very small compared to that of the stenosis (i.e., maximal vasodilation in an otherwise normal coronary bed, as in the canine model first used to validate the concept) will FFR be a specific measure of stenosis severity. In patients with IHD, diffuse epicardial CAD not only is common but may be unappreciated, , , and so FFR cannot be taken as a metric specific for stenosis severity alone since both it and CFR are sensitive to the same factors.
In patients with IHD there is considerable evidence to show both diffuse conduit vessel disease and microvascular dysfunction are common and may contribute to the hemodynamic burden of coronary stenoses , , , particularly those of apparent intermediate severity by anatomical criteria (30 to <90% lumen diameter obstruction). Moreover, by dichotomizing what are continuous variables (i.e., FFR and CFR) into “normal” and “abnormal” categories, confusion may arise when there is discordance between the two (e.g., “normal” FFR >0.80 with “abnormal” CFR <2.0). , Differences in the relative contributions of diffuse and microvascular disease on the one hand and stenosis severity on the other are thought to account for discordance when the metrics are treated as categorical variables. However, more attention to the actual levels of rest and hyperemic flow, when available, would better help clarify the physiology.
Measurements of CFR and IMR in the acute and subacute phase of PCI for STEMI have been correlated with CMR findings indicative of endocardial microvascular injury (MVI; endocardial signal void in infarct zone as defined by delayed enhancement). , , Abnormal CFR (<2.0) is more often seen following PCI of vessels with distal MVI in comparison with those in which CFR is normal (≥2.0). The incidence of subsequent MACE and failure to recover contractile function is more common in patients having impaired CFR in this setting , , though IMR has been found in other studies to be a better predictor of recovery of contractile function and prognosis. , ,
Interestingly, a report of FFR in patients studied early post MI (20 ± 27 days, mean ± SD) found for comparable IRA stenosis dia (~65% by QCA) FFR was lower in those with reversible SPECT defect in the infarct zone compared to that of patients with fixed defect (0.52 ± 0.18 vs 0.67 ± 0.16, P < 0.01) but LVEF greater (63% ± 10% vs 52% ± 10%, P < 0.001). The authors argued the combination of lesser FFR and greater LVEF along with “ischemic” SPECT defect indicated greater mass of residual viable myocardium. This was so they postulated because the hyperemic response to adenosine was enhanced (vis-à-vis those with fixed defect) due to larger residual perfusion bed, greater flow and hence increased pressure drop across the stenosis (Eq. 2 ). Better preserved microvascular function as well may have contributed along with chronic negative remodeling of the microvasculature. Direct proof that residual viable myocardium explained the difference was not available but in any case the notion that FFR is a function of flow was clearly stated. Indeed, the authors wrote the results indicated anatomically identical stenoses may have very different FFR depending on the amount of residual viable myocardium in the distal perfusion bed and hence differing levels of hyperemic response to adenosine.
In a study which measured both FFR and CFR (thermodilution) in the setting of sub acute myocardial infarction (3.6 ± 6.7 months post MI), the authors noted FFR pre-PCI was lower for vessels supplying segments which recovered contractile function at 6 months after PCI (dobutamine stress echo data) compared with those which did not (0.56 + 0.14 vs 0.70 + 0.07, respectively, P < 0.001). Further, they observed CFR in those same vessels did not differ significantly pre-PCI for segments which did or did not recover function at 6 months (1.4 ± 0.3 vs 1.5 ± 0.3, respectively) though CFR post PCI did (2.6 ± 0.7 vs 2.0 ± 0.4, respectively, P < 0.001). Global LV systolic function as expected improved in those with improved segmental contractile function in comparison those who did not. It should be noted, however, the number of patients in the study was small ( n = 46) and only 13 were in the non-improvement group which had a greater incidence of Q-wave MI. While one might have expected CFR to have been greater in viable compared with non-viable segments for the same reason that FFR was lower, elevated rest flow could have reduced the ratio and so nullified the difference. This is especially so if, as might have been expected, rest flow was lower in non-viable, Q-wave infarct segments , hence spuriously elevating CFR. PET measurements of absolute MBF, rest and stress, would have been helpful in understanding the underlying pathophysiology.
IMR
Given the importance of the coronary microcirculation in influencing clinical outcomes following PCI for STEMI, , , , a number of invasive indices have been used to provide estimates of coronary microcirculatory resistance, as a marker of both the functional and anatomical integrity of the microcirculation . As noted above, all employ a simple Ohm’s Law model of resistance, which assumes negligible back pressure to flow both at rest and with maximal coronary dilation, an assumption which has been challenged in the past , , and does not accord with reported coronary pressure at zero flow (Pzf) measurements in humans (32 ± 15 mmHg). Nevertheless, the simplified model has gained considerable clinical currency and has been incorporated in a commercial device which displays aortic, coronary and thermistor wave forms along with computed FFR, CFR, and IMR. A correction for IMR (thermodilution method) has been proposed for conditions of well developed collateral flow to myocardium supplied by a severely stenosed or occluded coronary vessel , and is easily employed when indicated.
If a Doppler flow velocity sensor is incorporated along with a pressure sensor at the distal end of a guide wire, then in addition to FFR, CFR, and IMR, several diastolic indices of coronary pressure flow relations may be obtained and have been employed in addition to IMR to assess coronary microvascular function (instantaneous hyperemic diastolic velocity-pressure slope (IHDVPS)) and pressure at zero flow (Pzf)) or stenosis severity (dP 50 cm·s and iFR). , , , , The dP 50 cm·s metric requires induction of maximal hyperemia with adenosine and examines the instantaneous pressure gradient between aorta and distal coronary artery at a diastolic flow velocity of 50 cm·s. A cut point dP of 22 mHg was found to be a superior predictor of ischemia inducing stenosis (SPECT MIBI reversible defect) in comparison to that of FFR or CFR. In contrast, instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR) does not employ adenosine but instead relies upon the controversial assumption, that microvascular resistance is minimal, and equivalent to that during maximal hyperemia, during the mid-late diastolic pressure wave-free interval. , , , , Notwithstanding theoretical and empirical data indicating otherwise, the ratio of mean distal coronary to aortic mean pressure during the diastolic pressure wave-free interval,(i.e., iFR), at cut point 0.89 recently has been shown to be non-inferior to FFR in predicting clinical outcomes (MACE) in patients with stable IHD. , ,
A comprehensive, though small, study of 60 patients with acute STEMI treated by PCI reported on the relationships amongst CMR defined microvascular injury (MVI), indicative of microvascular obstruction and intramyocardial hemorrhage, myocardial perfusion by PET 15 O-water, and several Doppler flow velocity and coronary pressure derived indices of microvascular function. Areas of MVI within the infarct zone were defined as endocardial signal voids within the region of delayed gadolinium enhancement. Immediately following successful PCI of the infarct-related artery measurements of coronary flow velocity and instantaneous, mid-late diastolic flow velocity/pressure relations were made at rest and following bolus intracoronary injection of adenosine (150 µg). Both CFR and HMR (Pd/flow velocity) were computed in standard fashion. It was possible to obtain satisfactory diastolic flow velocity/pressure loops in only 29/48 patients with otherwise complete datasets. The diastolic flow velocity/pressure data points were fit to a simple linear model ( y = ax−b) and accepted only if R 2 ≥ 0.90. The slope of the line is a measure of diastolic conductance (G = flow/pressure), while the X intercept is the pressure at zero flow (Pzf, mmHg) and is simply computed by rearranging the model equation for flow (y) = 0. Thus, Pzf (x) = b/a.
Noteworthy was the observation, consistent with other reports, , that 50% of the patients had CMR evidence of MVI and those with MVI had greater HMR than those who did not (3.33 ± 1.50 mmHg·cm·sec −1 vs 2.41±1.26, P = 0.03). There was, however, considerable overlap in the individual data points. While HMR was a univariate and multivariate predictor of MVI (OR (95% interval) = 1.79 (1.03-3.11); P = 0.04), CFR was not. An ROC analysis indicated best cut point for HMR prediction of MVI was ≥2.5 with sensitivity 71% and specificity 63%. Patients with HMR ≥2.5 had higher peak CK-MB than that of those below the cut point (229 ± 231 vs 92 ± 108, respectively, P = 0.02). Importantly, CMR at 3-month post PCI demonstrated patients with HMR ≥2.5 had greater LVESV (mL) and lower LVEF (%) than that of patients with HMR <2.5 (54.4 ± 21.4 vs 39.0 ± 12.5 and 48 ± 19.2 vs 55.7 ± 8.6, respectively; both P ≤ 0.01).
PET hyperemic MBF (mL/min/g) was reduced in patients with MVI compared to that of those without (1.43 ± 0.45 vs 1.85 ± 0.55, respectively, P < 0.01) and as might be expected was significantly greater in those with myocardial perfusion ratio (MPR) ≥2.0 than that of those <2.0 (2.2 ± 0.2 vs 1.5 ± 0.1 respectively, P < 0.001). Finally, hyperemic PET MBF appeared to be a slightly better discriminator of patients with and without MVI than HMR (Fig 3F vs 3A, Ref #42).
A weak inverse correlation was observed between IHDVPS and HMR ( R = −0.52, P < 0.01) and a similarly weak direct correlation between Pzf and HMR ( R = 0.55, P < 0.01). While IHDVPS did not differ significantly between patients with (1.47, 0.82-2.69; inter quartile range) and without (1.39, 099-2.55) MVI, Pzf did (45 ± 68, 13 ± 16 vs 32 ± 02, 14 ± 98, respectively, P < 0.02). Further, by ROC analysis Pzf was found to be a predictor of MVI (AUC = 0.75, 95% CI 0.55-0.89, P = 0.01).
Thus, the authors concluded determination of HMR (cut point ≥2.5) at the time of PCI for STEMI is useful in predicting MVI as determined by CMR. In turn the presence of MVI is known to be a risk factor for MACE following STEMI. , , , , , An HMR ≥2.5 was associated with greater peak CK-MB and at 3-month follow-up greater LVESV and lower LVEF. More sophisticated parameters of microvascular function such as IHDVPS and Pzf either made only modest (Pzf) or no contribution (IHDVPS) to prediction of MVI. The authors postulated higher Pzf in those with evidence of MVI compared with that of those without was indicative of extra vascular compression of the microvasculature, which is thought to reflect both intra myocardial hemorrhage and anatomical disruption of the vessels themselves. ,
Interestingly, CFR was not a predictor of MVI notwithstanding the widely accepted notion it is an excellent indicator of microvascular function as well as prognosis following STEMI. , The reason(s) for this are unclear but likely reflect the combination of impaired hyperemic response to adenosine (only 1.85 mL·min·g) even in IRA segments without MVI as well as sensitivity of the ratio to rest MBF, which may have been relatively increased immediately post PCI due both to vascular stunning and negative remodeling. , Others also have reported superior prognostic power of IMR in comparison with that of CFR in patients treated with PCI for STEMI. , , , Finally, though not the principal focus of the paper, PET hyperemic MBF arguably was as good if not better predictor of MVI in comparison with HMR and as demonstrated by Figure 3F of Teunissen et al carried most, if not all, of the information in the MPR cut point of ≥2.0.
In another comprehensive study, IMR and CFR were measured by thermodilution method to assess for MVI as determined by CMR in patients treated by emergency PCI for STEMI. Both IMR and CFR were measured at completion of the procedure and results dichotomized (IMR >40 and ≤40; CFR >2 and ≤2) for purposes of univariate and multivariate analysis both of CMR endpoints and pre-specified MACE (all cause mortality or first heart failure hospitalization). In brief, while IMR >40 was an independent univariate and multivariate predictor of MVI (intra myocardial hemorrhage and microvascular obstruction), CFR ≤2 was not. The combined metric of IMR >40 and CFR ≤2 failed to improve prediction of MACE compared with IMR >40 alone. The authors also noted IMR >40 was a multivariate predictor of changes in both LVEDV (increase) and LVEF (decrease) independent of infarct size, at 6 months post MI, whereas other measures including CFR were not. Accordingly, the authors concluded, despite TIMI grade III flow in conduit vessels at the end of the procedure, failed reperfusion at the microvascular level and associated infarct pathology was demonstrated in roughly 50% of patients, an observation made by others. , , , Further, after controlling for infarct size, MVI was strongly associated with adverse LV remodeling (LVEDV 7.7, 0.4-15.3, P = 0.04), change in LVEF (−2.1, −4.1 to >−0.2, P = 0.03), and substantially increased risk of MACE (odds ratio 4.4, 2.1-9.1, P < 0.001). The hypothesis that the combined condition of IMR >40 and CFR ≤2 would prove superior to IMR >40 alone in prediction of MVI, adverse LV remodeling, and MACE was rejected.
The authors indicated failure of CFR to be predictive of these outcomes likely reflected combination of its sensitivity to rest MBF, narrow range of values, greater sensitivity to hemodynamic conditions, and lack of specificity for the microvasculature. While the first two factors appear likely, sensitivity to hemodynamic conditions and lack of specificity for the microvasculature do not, since both IMR and CFR share the same hyperemic coronary flow, which in turn is sensitive to arterial pressure under conditions of maximal coronary vasodilatation. The authors also indicated the CFR/FFR ratio, which they indicated was a true measure of coronary flow reserve, also lacked predictive value in multivariate analysis. However, since FFR post PCI generally was ≥0.90 (Table 1 of Ref #6), the division by ~1 obviously makes very little difference. An index of hyperemic coronary flow (Q = k/Tmn) per se as a predictor of MVI, LV remodeling and MACE was not reported and absolute measurements of MBF not made. Thus, it will be helpful to consider further the potential role of PET quantification of MBF in elucidating pathophysiology and estimating prognosis in the early as well as late post MI setting.
PET Quantification of MBF Post MI
PET quantitative measurement of MBF ( 13 N- ammonia)early after successful PCI for STEMI in one study demonstrated evidence of impaired vasodilator capacity in both the infarct-related artery(IRA), successful PCI, and TIMI 3 flow notwithstanding, as well as in the distribution of reference artery (RA) having <50% stenosis. Measurements were obtained at 26 ± 9 hours and compared to repeat study at 9 ± 3 days. Rest MBF in the IRA territory was less than that in the RA zone (0.54 ± 0.14 vs 0.84 ± 0.30, P < 0.001). Hyperemic MBF (IV adenosine) increased significantly vs rest in both zones (P<0.001) though the absolute level was greater in the RA (0.89 ± 0.30 vs 1.59 ± 0.44, IRA vs RA, respectively P < 0.001). In the IRA territory, MPR was significantly less than that of the RA (1.59 ± 0.33 vs 2.03 ± 0.62, P < 0.01). Although not computed microvascular resistance (MVR), given negligible pressure drop across any residual stenosis (IRA = 25 ± 7% by QCA), was ~94 mmHg·mL −1 ·min −1 ·g −1 on average for the IRA perfusion zone and ~53 in the RA.
Interestingly, repeat measurements made 9 days post PCI demonstrated no change vs early in rest MBF in either zone but improvement in hyperemic MBF in both (1.05 ± 0.59 vs 1.79 ± 0.76, IRA vs RA, respectively, vs early P < 0.001). Although MPR increased in both zones vs early the changes failed to attain statistical significance (1.93 ± 0.52; P = 0.07 and 2.54 ± 0.97; P = 0.16, IRA and RA respectively). Again, HMR was not computed by the authors but on average appeared to improve in each zone (79 and 46, respectively, IRA and RA) and roughly to the same extent (~16% vs 13% respectively, IRA and RA). The authors noted somewhat anecdotally, since sample size was very small ( n = 17 at 8 ± 2 months follow-up), that five patients suffering adverse outcomes (recurrent angina or reinfarction) tended to have lesser MPR at 9 days post PCI vs the remaining 12 or were event free (1.54 ± 0.34 vs 2.07 ± 0.52, P = 0.06). Absolute rest and hyperemic MBF’s were not reported.
The authors concluded PET could provide a useful non-invasive tool for following patients post MI and assessing prognosis. This appeared especially so in comparison with coronary angiography and TIMI 3 flow after successful PCI, since a wide range of absolute flows and associated flow reserves were observed not only in the IRA but also the RA. The mechanisms involved were not defined but the authors speculated in the IRA territory that microvascular spasm or obstruction (or both) could have played a role. The later, microvascular obstruction, was proven by CMR studies performed many years later. , , , , , , ,
A specific mechanism for baseline impairment with subsequent improvement in RA zone hyperemic MBF and MPR was not commented upon though impaired microvascular function in myocardium remote from an acutely ischemic region is a well documented phenomenon in animal models, has been reported in human subjects , and in some cases may be related to elevated LVEDP. , Since the remote zone also has been shown to exhibit cardioprotection in the context of remotely applied ischemic conditioning interventions, it is possible neural or circulating mediators may also contribute. Finally, it should be noted that remote zone CFR may remain unchanged and in the normal range for subjects with coronary disease between time of PCI and 2 weeks follow-up exam (2.27 ± 0.80 vs 2.48 ± 0.93; respectively, P = ns).
Improvement in IRA flow reserve over the course of a single hour in the acute setting in patients with successfully stented IRA and TIMI 3 flow (residual stenosis 6.1% ± 5.9%, QCA) has been reported. However, while PET MPR in the IRA zone was unchanged (and remained normal) between day 2 (2.19 ± 0.89) and 2 weeks (2.33 ± 0.86), both rest and hyperemic MBF increased significantly (26% and 40%, respectively; P < 0.01 and P < 0.05). Further, in these same patients, IRA volumetric flow data (Doppler flow velocity/QCA method) indicated improved CFR between 1 hour and 2 weeks post PCI was attributable to increase in hyperemic flow with unchanged rest flow. Accordingly, the results of the study illustrate when rest MBF is stable the information in CFR is carried by the hyperemic response to stress as the authors implied. However, when rest MBF floats, in the study discussed it increased, changes in coronary dilator capacity as assessed by CFR may be obscured and may only be apparent by reference to the absolute value of rest and especially hyperemic flow. There are considerable data to support this view in the context of PET quantitative MBF evaluation of stable patients with known or suspected CAD. , , , , ,
Clinical Implications for Interpretation of PET MBF Studies
Invasive coronary physiological studies of patients with acute MI have and are likely to continue to use dual function guide wires (dia ~0.36 mm; pressure and flow, either velocity or volume) to make quantitative measurements of both coronary microvascular and conduit vessel function. Evidence favoring complete coronary revascularization when possible at the time of PCI for STEMI , along with data demonstrating non-inferiority vis-à-vis FFR of the iFR metric of stenosis severity , , suggests that PET MBF exams performed in these patients should focus on quantitative measurements as well. Functional significance of coronary stenosis in non-IRA vessels or if the “culprit” vessel(s) is uncertain is best determined by PET measurement of hyperemic MBF. , , Rest MBF measurement will be useful to document coronary steal and thereby suggest the presence of collateral dependent myocardium with tenuous blood supply. , , Further, by referencing hyperemic MBF in a given vascular territory to that in a zone with normal hyperemic MBF (≥2 mL·min·g), , , , , , , , , one obtains FFR PET which has been shown to correlate approximately with invasive FFR and so may prove useful in consideration of PCI. None of these conclusions from the PET exam are possible if interpretation is limited to visual assessment for presence or absence of uptake defects and their reversibility or not.
Interpretation of PET MBF data in patients with recent MI, whether STEMI or NSTEMI, will require a detailed appreciation not only of basic coronary physiology , , , but also the pathophysiological changes which occur during evolving, typically reperfused, MI. The fact that PET MBF measurements reflect transmural flow while MI pathology both to myocardium and microvasculature generally is most severe in the endocardium, and in the case of NSTEMI may even be confined to it, must be recognized and will impact the values obtained both for rest and hyperemic MBF. In this regard it is helpful to recall in healthy controls who are free of CAD risk factors that rest and adenosine stress MBF ( 13 N-ammonia, n = 14 subjects), respectively, were found to be 0.70 ± 0.19 and 3.51 ± 0.84. In a larger study of similar subjects ( n = 56), which employed 82 Rb and dipyridamole stress, very similar values were obtained for rest MBF (0.72 ± 0.17) though stress MBF was less 2.89 ± 0.50. The difference likely reflects a number of factors including tracers, tracer kinetic models, vasodilator stimulus, arterial input function and instrumentation to name a few.
In contrast in one study of patients with chronic IHD ( n = 13 (11 male); age 63 ± 11, including 11 with prior MI, 8 with 3 VD) myocardial segments were classified functionally as normal, abnormal or “steal” based in MBF response to adenosine (normal ≥2; abnormal <2; steal ≥0.15 decline vs rest). Vasodilator responses to adenosine and dobutamine at maximally tolerated dose (34 ± 7 µg·kg·min × 7 ± 3 minutes) were compared (Figure 1 ). Rest MBF in abnormal segments (0.50 ± 0.23) was reduced ( P < 0.001) vs normal and steal (0.90 ± 0.45 and 0.92 ± 0.60, respectively). Responses to dobutamine and adenosine were blunted but increased significantly ( P < 0.001) in abnormal segments (0.83 ± 0.43 and 0.90 ± 0.49, respectively). In normal segments, MBF with dobutamine (2.16 ± 0.99) was roughly 70% that of adenosine (3.10 ± 0.90; both P < 0.001 vs rest). In “steal” segments MBF by definition declined vs rest both with dobutamine (0.68 ± 0.46) and adenosine (0.50 ± 0.45) though, in keeping with its greater vasodilator effect, the absolute level was lower (~36%) with adenosine. Figure 1 Shown are myocardial blood flow (MBF) responses to dobtuamnine (DBTM) and adenosine (ADO) in myocardial segments defined by functional response to adenosine (see text for details). In normal segments MBF response to DBTM is ~70% that of ADO. Abnormal segments have reduced rest MBF compared with that of normal and steal (STL) and have blunted responses both to DBTM and ADO. Steal segments by definition exhibits reduced MBF vs rest with DBTM and ADO though ~36% less with DBTM. Data from Skopicki H, et al: Circulation. 1997; 96(10):3346-3352 (Ref #70)
The study though small illustrates several important points. Low rest MBF in abnormal segments likely reflects inclusion of patients with prior MI (11/13, patients). The fact that these segments were able to increase flow with adenosine, albeit blunted, may well reflect the combination of viable epicardial layer with preserved, though perhaps not normal, vasodilator capacity and endocardial scar beneath. The spatial resolution of the reconstructed PET image(~8-12 mm) is insufficient to adequately separate the layers and so in effect averages them. Recognition of collateral dependent segments, subject to coronary steal, by definition requires quantitative measurement of rest MBF but more importantly cannot be appreciated by simple visual interpretation of summed uptake images. Finally, in daily clinical practice, patients will be encountered who cannot be given dipyridamole, adenosine, or regadenoson and so, at present, are candidates for dobutamine stress. Accordingly, it is important to recognize that the coronary vasodilator response to a maximally tolerated dose in normal segments will be roughly 30% less than that to adenosine (and presumably regadenoson and dipyridamole) and so metrics based on maximal MBF response to these drugs must be adjusted accordingly.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the potential for PET MBF studies to guide clinical management as well as provide prognostic information for patients with IHD (recent ACS as well as chronic disease) requires its use as a quantitative tool for measurements of absolute MBF, rest, and stress. The optimal use of the primary data in terms of deriving various physiological indices of conduit and microvascular dilator capacity (MBF STRESS , FFR PET , MPR, MVR) remains to be determined and will depend at least in part on the clinical question(s) to be answered. While a number of studies indicate MPR provides useful prognostic information in stable patients with known or suspected IHD, , as noted above, IMR/HMR has proved more informative in other studies, especially in the acute or sub acute post MI setting. , , , , , Neither metric is available from simple visual interpretation of summed uptake images but may be approximated by the ratio mean aortic pressure/PET MBF, especially given typical minimal residual stenosis following successful PCI. Finally, PET quantitative measurements of MBF are required to identify potentially high-risk pathophysiology such as coronary steal , , , and more generally patients at increased risk of cardiac death or myocardial infarction who may benefit most from coronary revascularization.