Introduction
Recent technical advances in computed tomography (CT) and specifically the development of multi-detector (MD) CT scanners have made it feasible to assess, in addition to coronary artery anatomy, regional myocardial perfusion. Furthermore, dynamic CT imaging methods have been developed to estimate coronary flow reserve (CFR). - Such integrated assessment of coronary anatomy and coronary pathophysiology has substantial promise for improving the diagnostic and risk stratification yield of cardiac CT. -
Traditionally CFR is measured invasively by intracoronary Doppler technique. However, positron emission tomography is also well established as an accurate noninvasive imaging modality for quantifying CFR. In recent years, dynamic single-photon emission tomography (SPECT) using Tc-99m labeled radiopharmaceuticals has been proposed as a possible alternative method to estimate CFR. -
In the present study, we aimed to compare estimates of CFR by dynamic SPECT and by dynamic MDCT and relate CFR values to coronary artery anatomy.
Methods
Study Cohort
The study included 38 consecutive patients referred to our institution for evaluation of suspected coronary artery disease. Risk for cardiovascular events was calculated using published tables on the basis of gender, age, cholesterol levels, blood pressure, diabetes mellitus, and smoking habit. Patients with greater than average Framingham risk score for coronary heart disease were eligible for the study. Exclusion criteria were low Framingham risk score, pregnancy, severe allergy to iodinated contrast agent, renal dysfunction, inability to follow instructions, active asthma, second- or third-degree AV block without pacemaker, atrial fibrillation, and systemic diseases affecting prognosis.
All study patients had dipyridamole vasodilator stress and rest myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) by dynamic SPECT and by dynamic contrast MDCT within a 4-week period of each other. The Institutional Ethics Committee approved the study protocol. All participants signed informed consent.
Radionuclide SPECT MPI and Pharmacological Vasodilator Stress
Radionuclide MPI was performed using a dual-head SPECT gamma camera (Discovery NM630, GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA) equipped with parallel hole low-energy high-resolution collimators. The energy window (10%) was centered over 140 keV. An automated body-contour orbit was used, with 60 stops at 30 seconds per stop, through a 180° arc. No attenuation correction was applied.
Pharmacologic vasodilator stress was administered by infusing dipyridamole (0.56 mg/kg) intravenously over 4 minutes. During and after the infusion, the patient was monitored for symptoms and changes in blood pressure and ECG. The radionuclide MPI protocol involved two parts. First, dynamic planar cardiac imaging in the anterior view (2 frames/s for 60 seconds) was started 2 minutes after the beginning of dipyridamole infusion and a first bolus injection of 150-250 MBq of 99m Tc-tetrofosmin. When dynamic image acquisition was completed, all patients received 80-120 mg IV of aminophylline to reverse the effects of dipyridamole. Second, ECG-gated (8 frames per cardiac cycle) static SPECT MPI was performed 60 minutes after radiotracer injection.
When stress SPECT MPI was completed, a second rest dynamic planar anterior image (2 frames/s for 90 seconds) was acquired, and 600-700 MBq of 99m Tc-tetrofosmin was injected at 30 seconds into the dynamic acquisition. Rest ECG-gated static SPECT MPI was started at 60 minutes after the second radiotracer injection, using the identical acquisition parameters as for stress imaging.
Input Function Analysis and SPECT Image Reconstruction
As described previously, - a region of interest (ROI) was positioned over the main pulmonary artery on the summed dynamic stress image to record radioactivity during the first transit. Next, the ROI was copied and positioned in the same anatomic location on the summed dynamic rest image. Time-activity curves were generated from the two ROIs and the integrals of the curves represented the stress, respectively rest, input functions. The rest time-activity curve was corrected for residual (stress) activity by subtracting the activity measured in the first 30 seconds.
SPECT image reconstruction was performed using filtered back projection. The cut-off of Butterworth filters varied from 0.32 to 0.4 cycles/cm depending on the frequency spectrum in the image; the order was set at 10. These parameters were left unchanged in rest and stress images of the same patient.
For the analysis of regional radiotracer distribution, polar maps (Cedars QPS, Los Angeles, CA, USA) were generated and divided into 17 myocardial segments. Count rate in each myocardial segment of the stress images was recorded. On the other hand, segmental count rate on the rest images was first corrected for residual activity from the stress image by subtracting decay-corrected activity on a segment-by-segment basis. -
Finally, the radiotracer uptake in each polar map segment was divided by the appropriate input function in order to obtain a segmental myocardial blood flow index. Regional MBF reserve, a surrogate of regional SPECT CFR, was defined as the ratio between the dipyridamole and resting MBF index.
Multi-detector CT MPI Imaging and Pharmacological Vasodilator Stress
MDCT scans were acquired using a 128-slice second-generation dual-source MDCT scanner (Somatom Definition Flash, Siemens Medical Solutions, Forchheim, Germany), with gantry rotation time of 280 ms, 64 × 2 × 0.6 mm collimation with Z-flying focal spot for both detectors, resulting in 2 × 128 sections.
For vasodilator stress, 0.56 mg/kg of dipyridamole was infused intravenously over 4 minutes. Two to four minutes, thereafter, the patient was moved into the gantry, and a dynamic MDCT perfusion scan was acquired according to a previously published protocol. , Briefly, a total of 50 mL of iodinated contrast agent (Ultravist 370; Bayer Schering Pharma, Berlin, Germany) was injected at a flow rate of 5 mL/s. The patient’s chest was scanned for 30 seconds with both tubes set at 80 kV for BMI ≤ 27 and 100 kV for BMI > 27, a gantry rotation time of 0.28 second, and a total tube current of 290 mAs per rotation with a scan coverage of 73 mm. After the completion of the MDCT scan, 80-120 mg of aminophylline was intravenously administered to reverse the effect of dipyridamole. Resting MDCT MPI was performed ≥30 minutes later according to the same protocol used for stress imaging.
Finally, MDCT coronary angiography (CTCA) was performed using standard system set-up (32 × 1.2 mm collimation, 120-kV tube voltage, 40 mAs current time product, and 3-mm slice thickness with increment 1.5 mm), injecting iodinated contrast agent at a rate of 5-6 mL/s.
Input Function Analysis and MDCT Image Reconstruction
Stress and rest CT myocardial perfusion images were reconstructed with 3-mm slice thickness and 2 mm increments using a dedicated medium-smooth convolution kernel (B23f) and then processed on a standard workstation with commercially available software (MMWP, Syngo VPCT body-myocardium, Siemens Healthcare).
As described by Mahnken et al, two elliptical ROIs were placed over the descending aorta in the cranial and caudal parts of the image stack. The data from both ROIs were combined for double temporal sampling of arterial input function. A dedicated parametric deconvolution technique, based on a two-compartmental model (intra- and extravascular space), was used to generate three-dimensional parametric maps of estimated MBF, expressed in mL/100mL /min. CFR was calculated as the ratio of dipyridamole and baseline MBF.
CT coronary artery images were reconstructed with a slice thickness of 0.5 mm and 0.3 mm increments, using medium-to-smooth convolution kernels for noncalcified lesions and sharp convolution kernels for calcified lesions. Coronary arteries were analyzed in orthogonal views and curved multiplanar reconstructions on a dedicated workstation (Syngo.via, Siemens Healthcare). Coronary arteries were categorized as either normal or showing atherosclerotic plaques. Plaques with luminal narrowing <50% were categorized as non-obstructive, whereas plaques with ≥50% luminal narrowing were categorized as obstructive.
MDCT-SPECT Image Co-registration
For image co-registration, MDCT slices were scaled down to the 64 × 64 SPECT matrix. Transaxial sections of the heart were reoriented using the Cardiometrics cardiac suite (GE, Milwaukee, US) and processed using QPS/QGS software (Cedars QPS, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA) to generate 17-segment myocardial polar maps. Coronary artery vascular territories were assigned according to standardized published criteria.
The severity of myocardial perfusion defects was assessed using the conventional five-point scoring system. Accordingly, each of the 17 segments was scored as (0 = normal uptake, 4 = absent uptake). Abnormal myocardial perfusion was defined as a segmental score of ≥2 and defect reversibility (reflecting inducible ischemia) was defined as a stress-rest difference score ≥2. The same semi-quantitative scoring method was used for both imaging modalities. Thus, this analysis permitted to assess the degree of agreement in perfusion defect identification and estimation of CFR between SPECT and MDCT. Agreement between the two techniques was assessed on a segment-by-segment basis in the same coronary territories.
Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as mean ± SD. Paired and unpaired t tests were used, as appropriate. Linear regression analysis was performed by the least squares method. A probability value p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Bland-Altman analysis was used to evaluate agreement between SPECT and MDCT-derived CFR values. The presence of proportional bias was evaluated by regression analysis of the scatterplot of differences.
Finally, the strength of agreement of segmental myocardial perfusion scores at SPECT and MDCT was tested using kappa statistics. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software Advanced Models 15.0 (Chicago, Illinois).
Results
Patient Characteristics
SPECT and MDCT imaging was completed in 38 patients; however, three patients were excluded because of incomplete visualization of at least one segment of the inferior wall due to respiratory motion on MDCT. Accordingly, complete stress and rest myocardial perfusion data by both techniques were available for analysis in 35 patients or a total of 595 segments.
Table 1 shows the clinical characteristics and medications of the 35 patients. There was no change in medications or other clinical variables during the time period that the two imaging studies were performed. Hemodynamics at rest and during dipyridamole stress were not significantly different during the two imaging sessions. ST-segment depression during dipyridamole infusion occurred in the same 7 subjects during both studies. Table 1 Clinical characteristics and medications of study patients Age 66.4 ± 11 Male sex 29 (83%) Typical angina 15 (44%) Diabetes mellitus 6 (18%) Dyslipidemia 17 (48%) Hypertension 23 (66%) Obesity 3 (8%) Peripheral arteriopathies 7 (20%) Smoking 4 (11%) NYHA class (I/II) 30/5 (86%/14%) Framingham 10 years risk score (%) 11 (31%) Total cholesterol (mg/dL) 164.5 ± 51 HDL (mg/dL) 45.75 ± 11.5 Betablockers 21 (60%) Aspirin 21 (60%) Calcium-channel blockers 8 (22%) Nitrates 6 (18%) Diuretics 8 (22%) ACE inhibitors or AR blockers 17 (48%) Statins or fibrates 19 (54%) Other cardioactive therapies 28 (81%)
The overall patient radiation exposure from the complete MDCT evaluation, i.e., stress and rest perfusion CT MPI and CTCA, was 15.6 ± 4.3 mSv using a 0.014 conversion factor. On the other hand, overall effective dose for the one-day stress and rest SPECT studies was 6.1 ± 0.7 mSv. Thus, the total effective dose of the study protocol was 22.2 ± 5.9 mSv per patient (Table 2 ). Table 2 Dosimetry of study protocol Weight (Kg) 79 ± 9 SPECT Total activity (MBq) 850 ± 103 Effective dose (mSv) 6.1 ± 0.7 MDCT Total DLP (mGy/cm) 1114 ± 305 Effective dose (mSv) 15.6 ± 4.3 Total effective dose (mSv) 22.2 ± 5.9 DLP dose length product
CT Coronary Angiography
The presence of CAD and severity of stenoses were evaluated in 35 patients with 105 major coronary arteries. The left main was normal in all patients. On a patient-by-patient basis, 12 (34%) patients had a normal CTCA, 11 (31%) had non-obstructive lesions, and 12 (34%) had obstructive (≥50%) coronary stenoses. Of the latter, 9 patients had single-vessel, 2 had two-vessel, and 1 had triple-vessel CAD. Of 105 major coronary arteries available for analysis, 55 arteries were normal, 34 had non-obstructive, and 16 had obstructive CAD.
Regional Myocardial Perfusion on SPECT and MDCT
Of 35 patients, 3 had normal SPECT MPI and 13 had normal MDCT MPI. A fixed perfusion defect was observed in only 1 patient on MDCT. Reversible perfusion defects were present in 19 patients on SPECT and in 8 patients on MDCT. Finally, partially reversible perfusion defects occurred in 13 patients with both imaging techniques. When comparing dipyridamole and rest SPECT and MDCT images of the same patients, polar perfusion maps were similar, although not identical. Representative examples are shown in Figures 1 and 2 . Figure 1 Polar maps and three-axis tomographic slices of MDCT ( left panels ) and SPECT ( right panels ) MPI. Both techniques show a perfusion defect in the inferolateral wall ( green arrows ) at dipyiridamole ( upper ) which is largely reversible at rest scan ( lower ). By contrast, MDCT displays a reversible perfusion defect in the anterolateral wall that is less evident at SPECT imaging ( white arrows ) Figure 2 CTCA, MDCT, and SPECT MPI 3D-reconstructions. Panel A CT Coronary angiography. A significant stenosis of proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) is present. Panel B 17-segment polar plot with the territories of the three major coronaries shown in color. Panel C stress and rest SPECT and MDCT myocardial perfusion polar maps. A large reversible anteroseptal and apical myocardial perfusion defect can be appreciated on both the SPECT and MDCT images. Panel D Comparison of CRF in 17 segments by SPECT and MDCT. A fair agreement can be appreciated. Mean LAD CFR is 1.05 by MDCT and 0.98 by SPECT; significantly lower than in the 2 other coronary arteries
Table 3 compares segmental perfusion scoring on SPECT and MDCT. On dipyridamole SPECT 109 of 595 (18%) segments were abnormal (score ≥ 2), whereas 486 (82%) segments were normal. Segmental scoring on dipyridamole MDCT MPI was very similar: 122 (21%) segments were abnormal and 473 (79%) segments were normal. On rest, SPECT and rest MDCT MPI 94% and 95% of segments, respectively, were normal. Table 3 Agreement between segmental perfusion scores on SPECT MPI and MDCT flow parametric maps in 595 segments Segmental dipyridamole score SPECT 0 1 2 3 4 Total Value p value MDCT 0 336 21 0 0 0 357 Pearson chi-square 1467,936 .0000 1 62 46 8 0 0 116 Likelihood ratio 610,012 .0000 2 18 3 59 7 0 87 Linear-by-linear association 430,065 .0000 3 0 0 2 26 0 28 Agreement 4 0 0 0 0 7 7 Kappa statistic 0.62 .0000 Total 416 70 69 33 7 595 Exact agreement 80% Segmental rest score SPECT 0 1 2 3 4 Total Value p value MDCT 0 474 24 0 0 0 498 Pearson chi-square 1122,002 .0000 1 23 33 10 0 0 66 Likelihood ratio 318,926 .0000 2 7 0 9 3 0 19 Linear-by-linear association 402,291 .0000 3 0 0 3 3 0 6 Agreement 4 0 0 0 0 6 6 Kappa statistic 0.58 .0000 Total 504 57 22 6 6 595 Exact agreement 88%
Exact agreement of segmental scoring by the two imaging techniques was observed in 80% and 88% for dipyridamole and rest images, respectively (Table 3 ). The relative strength of agreement by Kappa statistics was 0.62 for dipyridamole stress scores and 0.58 for rest scores, indicating substantial agreement beyond chance ( p < 0.001).
There was a general concordance between segmental MPI findings and coronary artery anatomy on CTCA. Of 80 myocardial segments subtended by 16 coronary arteries with obstructive plaques, 30 (37%) segments showed myocardial perfusion defects on SPECT and 33 (41%) segments on MDCT.
Coronary Flow Reserve by SPECT and MDCT
Figure 3 A shows the correlation between CFR estimated by SPECT and MDCT in 595 individual segments of the polar maps. Overall, mean CFR values estimated by SPECT and MDCT were not different (1.51 ± 0.46 vs. 1.50 ± 0.37, p = ns). By linear regression, there was a significant correlation between the CFR estimates of the two techniques ( R 2 = 0.39, p < 0.001) (Figure 3 A). However, Bland-Altman analysis of limits of agreement (Figure 3 B) shows a proportional bias between the two methodologies. At higher CFR values, MDCT significantly underestimated CFR compared to that estimated by SPECT ( p < 0.01). Figure 3 Correlation of CFR by MDCT and SPECT. The upper panel shows the linear regression of the two techniques in measuring CFR, r 2 = 0.39. The lower panel shows the Bland-Altman plot of the same CFR data. At higher CFR values, there is an increasing difference between the two techniques. There is a proportional bias with a relative underestimation of CFR by MDCT in comparison to that by SPECT. CFR , coronary flow reserve
Downstream CFR varied depending on the upstream angiographic plaque characteristics (Figure 4 ). In segments subtended by normal coronary arteries, mean SPECT CFR was 1.64 ± 0.31. In territories downstream from non-obstructive plaques, mean CFR was significant lower (1.50 ± 0.32, p < 0.05) and was again significant lower (1.33 ± 0.22) in segments downstream of obstructive plaques ( p < 0.05 vs. non-obstructive plaques and p < 0.01 vs. normal CA). Figure 4 Relationship between CFR and coronary artery stenosis severity. Both dynamic SPECT ( black ) and dynamic MDCT ( dashed ) shows a progressive decrease of mean estimated CFR from normal vessels to non-obstructive and obstructive coronary stenosis. Only SPECT-derived CFR shows also a significant difference between arteries with non-obstructive and obstructive coronary plaques
Mean CFR estimated by MDCT in segments subtended by normal arteries was 1.65 ± 0.32. Mean MDCT CFR was significantly lower in segments subtended by non-obstructive plaques (1.40 ± 0.33 p < 0.01) and to a similar degree in segments subtended by obstructive plaques (1.36 ± 0.26, p < 0.01 vs. normal CA and p = ns vs. non-obstructive plaques) (Figure 4 ). A representative example is shown in Figure 2 .
Discussion
The present study was designed to investigate whether two different imaging techniques—i.e., widely available dynamic SPECT and recently introduced dynamic MDCT—provide similar estimates of regional CFR. This head-to-head comparison showed a reasonable segmental agreement, although MDCT tended to underestimate high CFR values compared to SPECT. Importantly, both techniques revealed significantly decreased CFR values in segments subtended by atherosclerotic coronary arteries compared to segments subtended by normal ones. On the other hand, SPECT and MDCT showed a substantial semi-quantitative agreement in myocardial uptake of radiotracer and iodine contrast at baseline and after dipyridamole vasodilation. Thus, MPI and estimation of CFR by dynamic SPECT and MDCT appear to add clinically useful pathophysiological information to coronary artery anatomy.
Measurements of CFR by SPECT and MDCT
Measuring or estimating CFR has become of considerable clinical interest since MPI relies on the analysis of relative regional distribution of a radiotracer. This approach intrinsically assumes that myocardium with the highest uptake is supplied by a normal coronary artery. This may at times be erroneous because apparently normal areas may in fact be supplied by coronary arteries with significant stenoses. Absolute quantification of coronary blood flow and CFR may solve this problem. Assessment of CFR was initially developed using intracoronary Doppler flow measurement and also PET imaging. However, because of the invasive nature or expense of these techniques, the clinical use is largely restricted to research purposes or used in selected patients.
In the present study, we aimed to verify the relative concordance of two alternative techniques that potentially may estimate CFR in larger patient populations. Sugihara et al described a radionuclide imaging method that derived an estimate of myocardial perfusion reserve using dynamic and static SPECT imaging. CFR is derived as the ratio between stress and rest MBF. Since this seminal study, a number of reports confirmed the feasibility of this approach in comparison to invasive Doppler, H 2 O 15 PET , or transthoracic Doppler monitoring in the left anterior descending coronary artery.
The MDCT iodine contrast methodology is a relatively recent development and is validated to a lesser extent. Ho et al observed that using this technique estimated CFR values were significantly lower in patients with obstructive CAD in comparison to a low-risk control group. However, the absolute values of CT-derived CFR during pharmacological vasodilator stress were unexpectedly low in both experimental animals and humans. Whereas one would expect values for CFR to be in the range of 3.5 to 6.0, - CRF derived by dynamic MDCT using the same stress agent was only about 1.5. , , There are important technical differences regarding both techniques that should be considered and that may explain the observed lower values for CFR.
Estimations of MBF and CFR by SPECT and dynamic MDCT are derived from two distinctly different phenomena: myocardial cellular radiotracer extraction vs. intravascular transit of iodinated contrast medium.
Myocardial uptake of radiotracers depends on the first-pass cellular extraction by myocardial cells. At baseline blood flow levels, radiotracer extraction fraction and myocardial uptake are directly proportional to myocardial blood flow. However, at higher blood flow levels, the extraction fraction of radiotracers progressively decreases and the flow-uptake relationship deviates from linearity. As a consequence maximal flow may be underestimated. Although this is true for most MPI agents, it is particular relevant for Tc-99m-labeled tracers and constitutes a well-recognized limitation of SPECT imaging. ,
The theoretical basis of MDCT-derived CFR estimates is different. The passage of an iodinated contrast agent through the coronary microvascular space is analyzed using a hybrid approach of the indicator dilution technique. The maximal slope of the contrast time-concentration curve is measured during its first pass through coronary circulation and uses a two-compartmental model deconvolution technique to account for aortic input function. This technique assumes that blood volume during the passage remains relatively constant. However, using iodinated contrast material blood volume actually increases. - In addition, rather than remaining in the intravascular space, some contrast material may actually leave the intravascular space and enter the interstitium. , These two occurrences simultaneously affect the distribution volume and intra/extravascular exchanges of iodinated molecules and may increase myocardial transit time and result in an underestimation of maximal MBF. Finally, all iodinated contrast agents have an immediate and direct vasodilatory effect. For this reason, Gould et al used Iodine contrast as early as 1974 as a vasodilator to perform his first measurements of CFR.
These theoretical considerations may explain in part the observation that CFR was underestimated by MDCT at higher CFR values even in comparison to SPECT CFR estimates. Thus, CFR estimates by MDCT should be interpreted with caution. - Despite the observed differences, SPECT and MDCT CFR showed a reasonable agreement in identifying flow-limiting coronary obstructions.
Limitations
Our study is limited by the inclusion of a relative small number of patients. We did not apply attenuation correction. The findings are nevertheless encouraging and should stimulate further investigation. Another limitation is that estimation of CFR by both SPECT and MDCT is still investigational. Neither is fully validated or clearly defined as the better comparator. Criteria for interpretation of SPECT images are well standardized, whereas because of its recent introduction the analysis of MDCT parametric maps is still operator dependent. Finally, comparing CFR with coronary anatomy on CTCA is flawed since anatomy and pathophysiological significance are not identical. More investigation in larger number of patients is needed and ultimately outcomes studies may shed light on the clinical relevance of estimation of CFR by these methodologies.
New Knowledge Gained
It is feasible to estimate CFR by MDCT MPI. CFR estimated by MDCT shows reasonable agreement beyond chance with SPECT MPI. CFR is underestimated in higher CFR ranges in comparison to SPECT MPI. The observed differences are likely in part explained by differences in kinetics of radiotracers and x-ray contrast agents.