Introduction
Coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA), a noninvasive method for assessing anatomic atherosclerotic disease, represents an alternative to cardiac stress testing for the noninvasive work-up of patients with chest pain. Accordingly, this technique has quickly become the subject of prolific comparative effectiveness research, with publication of seven prospective randomized trials, including four which evaluated the utility of CCTA vs stress testing in the emergency department, - two which evaluated the effectiveness of CCTA vs stress testing or usual care in the outpatient setting, , and one which has compared CCTA vs stress testing among telemetry patients. Stress testing has predominantly been performed using cardiac imaging procedures, usually relying on myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI). To date, these trials, along with other retrospective analyses, - have produced an inconclusive picture as to the relative effectiveness of CCTA. Moreover, these studies have generally neglected to report data which may suggest potentially more inexpensive means for risk stratifying patients, such as coronary artery calcium (CAC) scanning.
Accordingly, we have conducted a prospective randomized trial to compare CCTA vs stress testing in another common clinical setting: patients admitted to a hospital for chest pain work-up following enzymatic exclusion of acute coronary syndromes (akin to patients admitted to hospital observation units). Our trial comprehensively assesses the impact of CCTA vs cardiac stress testing on all of the central management decisions that follow cardiac testing, including length of hospital stay, change in medications, downstream testing, cardiac interventions, and repeat cardiac hospitalizations within 1 year. In addition, however, we report pertinent additional clinical data such as the frequency of ischemia and distribution of CAC scores that have not generally been reported in most prior trials, in order to consider whether such data might provide insights into current assumptions and future design of comparative effectiveness research concerning the work-up of patients with chest pain.
Methods
Study Design
The study was a randomized, controlled, and comparative effectiveness trial that was applied to a cohort of patients (age ≥ 45 years) without known coronary artery disease who presented to the emergency department with chest pain and were determined to require hospital admission for further evaluation of chest pain after a negative initial troponin I and an electrocardiogram which was not diagnostic for acute coronary syndrome. Both stress testing and CCTA were available Monday through Friday 8AM-5PM. We designed our study so that a protocol-driven prescreening was first performed to exclude ineligible patients and written informed consent was then obtained in the eligible patients. Exclusion criteria included age <45 years, known coronary artery disease, a serum creatinine >1.5 mg·dL −1 , the presence of atrial fibrillation or a markedly irregular heart rhythm, an allergy to iodinated contrast agents, pregnant women, and the inability to give informed consent. Patients who met criteria for the study were randomized on a 1:1 basis to either CCTA as the initial test in the CCTA group or to a stress test (stress echocardiography, or rest/stress single-photon emission computed tomography MPI) in the stress test group. There were 411 patients randomized over 30 months, between July 2011 and December 2013. Once patients were randomized, subsequent decisions about further diagnostic testing, treatment, and discharge were made by the clinical team. No attempt was made to guide the physicians’ choice of stress tests.
We aimed at comparing these two management strategy groups with respect to resource utilization (time to hospital discharge, medication use at discharge, cardiovascular testing, and hospitalization) and safety (cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality). This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Mount Sinai St. Luke’s and Roosevelt Hospitals.
Initial Evaluation and Hospital Course
Structured data collection was performed using a standardized form. We obtained detailed data on demographic and clinical characteristics, medications and in-hospital treatment, electrocardiogram, laboratory and imaging data, invasive testing, procedures, and discharge.
Stress Testing
Patients in the stress test group underwent either stress echocardiography (exercise or dobutamine echocardiography) or rest/stress single-photon emission computed tomography MPI (exercise or regadenason) at the discretion of the clinical team. Each study was read by an experienced reader who was board certified in the specific imaging modality (echocardiography and nuclear cardiology). Ischemia was defined by stress-induced changes on imaging (either echocardiography or single-photon emission computed tomography MPI) regardless of electrocardiographic changes.
Stress Echocardiography
All echocardiographic images were obtained and viewed on commercially available systems (Acuson Sequoia, Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Inc., Mountain View, CA; GE Vivid 7 and 9, GE Healthcare, Wauwatosa, WI). Stress echocardiography (exercise and dobutamine) protocols were performed to standard methodology as has been previously described. Echocardiographic images were acquired at baseline (rest images), 5- to 10-mg dobutamine infusion (low-dose dobutamine images), and immediately after treadmill exercise or at peak dobutamine infusion (peak images). A normal response to stress was defined as normal wall motion at rest with increases in wall thickening and excursion during stress. Myocardial ischemia was defined as (1) a left ventricular wall segment that did not increase in thickening and excursion during stress, (2) a deterioration in left ventricular segment wall thickening and excursion during stress, and (3) a biphasic response to dobutamine stress. The left ventricle was evaluated on a 16-segment model 5-point scale. Wall motion score index was calculated by dividing the wall motion score by the number of myocardial segments. For the purpose of the study, mild ischemia was reported when less than 3 left ventricular segments were abnormal at stress. Moderate ischemia was defined as 3 or more abnormal segments but no high-risk features. Severe ischemia was defined as 3 or more abnormal segments with high-risk features (transient cavity dilation and/or peak wall motion score index >1.7).
Stress Myocardial Perfusion Imaging
All single-photon emission computed tomography MPI images were acquired and viewed on commercially available software (Ventri GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI). Single-photon emission computed tomography MPI (exercise and regadenason) protocols were performed as previously described. All patients underwent rest/stress single-photon emission computed tomography MPI with 99m Tc-sestamibi. Each single-photon emission computed tomography MPI was analyzed using a 17-segement model and scored on a semiquantitative basis. Attenuation correction was not employed. A single-photon emission computed tomography MPI study was considered abnormal with a summed difference score ≥4. The severity of ischemia was determined based on the summed difference score as follows: summed difference score of 4-8 was considered mild ischemia, a score of 9-13 was considered moderate ischemia, and a summed difference score of ≥13 was considered severe ischemia.
Cardiac Computed Tomography
Prior to CCTA, patients underwent beta blockade using metoprolol 5 mg doses until the heart rate was <65 bpm or until a total of 30 mg of metoprolol was given. All CT scans were performed on commercially available CT scanners (Toshiba Aquillon 64-detector Toshiba America Medical Systems, Tustin, CA, or Siemens Somatoform Sensation 64-detector, Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Malvern, PA). An initial non-contrast ECG-gated scan was acquired for calcium scoring. Images utilized for analyses were non-gated, non-enhanced, and consisted of a slice thicknesses ranging from 1.0 mm to 3.0 mm. Each CT scan was interpreted and scored using commercially available software (Vitrea, Vital Images, Toshiba Medical Systems, Minnetonka, MN, USA).
Patients then underwent a contrast-enhanced ECG-gated scan with 80 mL of contrast. Each coronary artery segment was evaluated by an experienced cardiologist or radiologist for morphology and percent stenosis in the long- and a short-axis views using 0.625-mm slice thickness on a Vitrea workstation (Vitrea, Vital Images, Toshiba Medical Systems, Minnetonka, MN, USA). The degree of coronary artery stenosis was determined visually or when necessary with the use of electronic calipers. Coronary artery stenosis detected on contrast-enhanced CCTA were categorized as follows: mild (≤50%), moderate (50%-70%), and severe (>70%) obstruction; left main artery stenoses ≥50% were considered severe. Coronary plaques that were densely calcified rendering the coronary stenosis not interpretable were considered as part of the 50%-70% stenosis group. CCTA studies that were not interpretable due to significant artifact were reported as such.
Patient Follow-Up
At the time of enrollment, all the patients were asked to provide telephone numbers, home address and e-mail, as well as name and address of their treating outpatient physicians. Patient follow-up after discharge was obtained at 30 days and subsequently at predefined intervals (6 months and 1 year). Follow-up data were obtained via several sources of information including patient interview by phone call, a review of primary care physician medical records, pharmacy records, and hospital medical records. Patients were considered lost to follow-up if there was no follow-up performed. All adverse events, procedures, hospitalizations, and surgeries were confirmed by a review of the medical records.
Outcomes and Definitions
The predefined primary outcomes as defined in the study protocol include length of hospital stay (defined as time of admission to time of discharge), discharge medication use, downstream cardiovascular testing, and re-hospitalization for cardiovascular causes at 1 year. Downstream cardiovascular testing was defined as any of the following tests if performed after the randomized test: stress testing, CCTA, and invasive coronary angiography. Revascularization procedures were defined as percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Re-hospitalization for cardiovascular causes was obtained by patients interview and review of hospital records when available. Cardiovascular causes for hospitalization included: chest pain, dyspnea, angina, myocardial infarction, heart failure, cerebrovascular accident, palpitations, revascularization, syncope, and abnormal ECG.
Secondary endpoints included a composite of acute coronary syndromes, cardiovascular death, and all-cause mortality at one-year follow-up.
Statistical Analysis
All continuous variables are shown as mean ± standard deviation. All categorical variables were examined using Chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test and are reported as counts and percentage frequencies. Continuous variables were analyzed using a 2-sample t test or ANOVA test between 2 or more groups. Kaplan-Meier curve was used to assess the combined end-point of downstream testing, hospitalization, acute coronary syndromes, and death. Sample size calculation was based on predetermined primary outcomes of downstream cardiovascular testing and hospitalization and medication use at discharge. At the time of the development of this study, there were little data available to base a sample size calculation.
Based on the available evidence during the study design, we assumed that CCTA would produce more abnormal test results, including more intermediate or non-diagnostic results requiring further testing and more test results that would require further testing. Goldstein et al reported the rate for test abnormality to be 33% in the CCTA and 5% in the stress test group with these patients undergoing further testing. We also assumed that CCTA would result in intensification of the medical regimen due to detection of both obstructive and non-obstructive coronary disease. We predicted the rate of positive stress test results to be 5%-10%. This study was powered to achieve a 90% probability to demonstrate a 50% difference in the outcomes of downstream testing and hospitalization and medication use at discharge. The sample size was determined at 395 patients but additional patients were recruited to account for loss to follow-up. Comparisons were made according to the intention-to-treat principle.
Results
There were 411 patients (mean age of 60 ± 10 years) who met the study criteria, of which 205 patients were randomized to the stress test arm and 206 to the CCTA arm (Figure 1 ). Of the patients randomized to a stress test, 16 (8%) patients did not undergo stress testing and of the patients randomized to CCTA, 19 (9%) patients did not undergo CCTA. The baseline characteristics of the patients are listed in Table 1 . Three quarters of the patients were either Hispanic or African-American and more than half were female. There was a greater prevalence of diabetes and hyperlipidemia among the patients randomized to the stress test arm. Of the patients who underwent rest/stress single-photon emission computed tomography MPI or stress echocardiography in the stress test arm, 179 (95%) had normal stress tests and 10 (5%) had abnormal stress tests. Stress testing was performed using exercise in 115 (61%) patients and pharmacologic testing in 73 (39%) patients. Stress echocardiography was the primary imaging modality for patients randomized to stress testing. Of the 185 patients who had a CCTA study in the anatomic arm of our study, 94 (51%) had no coronary artery disease, 69 (37.5%) had <50% stenosis, 6 (3%) had 50%-70% stenosis, 15 (8%) had ≥70% stenosis, and 1 (0.5%) patient was not assessable due to artifact. The CAC scores in the CCTA arm were <100 in 80% of the CCTA patient group. Figure 1 Flow chart of study randomization and follow-up Table 1 Baseline demographic and clinical data according randomization group Stress test (n = 205) CCTA (n = 206) P value Age (years) 60 ± 10 59 ± 10 .4 Male 97 (47) 95 (46) .8 Race .6 Hispanic 81 (40) 84 (41) African-American 67 (33) 81 (39) Caucasian 41 (20) 28 (14) Asian 7 (3) 6 (3) Other 8 (4) 7 (3) Hypertension 142 (69) 140 (68) .8 Diabetes 68 (33) 50 (24) .05 Hyperlipidemia 109 (53) 88 (43) .04 Smoking 93 (46) 92 (45) .8 Family history 51 (25) 37 (18) .09 Medications Aspirin 90 (44) 83 (40) .5 Statin 70 (34) 74 (36) .7 ACE-I 40 (20) 50 (24) .2 ARB 30 (15) 26 (13) .5 CCA 58 (28) 48 (23) .2 Beta blockers 34 (17) 34 (17) 1.0 Oral hypoglycemics 55 (27) 38 (18) .3 Insulin 17 (8) 12 (6) .4 Chest pain .6 Non-anginal 108 (53) 99 (48) Atypical angina 63 (31) 66 (32) Typical angina 34 (16) 41 (20) Dyspnea 100 (49) 101 (49) Systolic BP (mm Hg) 146 ± 25 144 ± 23 .4 Diastolic BP (mm Hg) 83 ± 16 83 ± 16 .3 Heart rate, bpm 79 ± 15 80 ± 15 .8 Stress test (n = 189) Exercise echo 112 (54) Pharm echo 68 (33) Exercise SPECT-MPI 4 (2) Pharm SPECT-MPI 5 (2) CAC score CAC = 0 102 (54) CAC 1–99 48 (26) CAC 100–399 15 (8) CAC ≥400 22 (12) Values are n (%) or mean ± SD ACE-I, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; BP, blood pressure; CAC, coronary calcium score; CCA, calcium channel antagonist; CCTA, coronary computed tomography angiography; SPECT-MPI, single-photon emission computed tomography myocardial perfusion imaging
There was no difference in time spent in the hospital between the stress test group and the CCTA group (49 ± 48 vs 48 ± 40 hours, P = .8).
Medication Use
The change in medication use from admission to discharge is shown in Table 2 . In the overall cohort, there was an increase in the use of aspirin, statins, and anti-hypertensive medications of 20, 17, and 10%, respectively. There was minimal or no increase in diabetes therapies at discharge. There was no difference in the increase in medication use between the stress test group and the CCTA group. Systolic blood pressure was significantly reduced during hospitalization in the stress test group (from 146 ± 42 to 129 ± 16 mm Hg, P < .001) and the CCTA group (from 143 ± 23 to 129 ± 17 mm Hg, P < .0001). Similarly, there were significant reductions in diastolic blood pressure during hospitalization in the stress test group (from 83 ± 15 to 79 ± 11 mm Hg, P < .001) and the CCTA group (from 82 ± 15 to 78 ± 13 mm Hg, P < .0001). Table 2 Medication change from admission to discharge from the hospital according to randomization Stress (n = 205) CCTA (n = 206) P value Aspirin Home 90 (44) 82 (40) Discharge 123 (60) 132 (64) Change +33 (16) +50 (24) .3 Statin Home 70 (34) 72 (35) Discharge 105 (51) 109 (53) Change +35 (17) +37 (18) .9 Anti-hypertensive Home 116 (57) 111 (54) Discharge 139 (68) 131 (64) Change 23 (11) 20 (10) .4 Beta blocker Home 34 (17) 32 (16) Discharge 47 (23) 50 (24) Change +13 (6) +18 (8) .7 CCB Home 58 (28) 49 (24) Discharge 63 (31) 60 (29) Change +5 (3) +11 (5) .7 Nitrates Home 2 (1) 5 (2) Discharge 11 (5) 14 (7) Change +9 (4) 9 (5) 1.0 Antiplatelet Home 4 (2) 6 (3) Discharge 11 (5) 12 (6) Change +7 (3) +6 (3) 1.0 Insulin Home 18 (9) 12 (6) Discharge 20 (10) 15 (7) Change +2 (1) +3 (1) .4 Oral hypoglycemics Home 54 (26) 37 (18) Discharge 54 (26) 36 (18) Change 0 (0) −1 (0) .3 Values are n (%)
Downstream Tests, Procedures, and Hospitalizations
Patients follow-up concerning downstream testing, procedures, frequency of cardiovascular re-hospitalizations, and clinical events were obtained in 395 (96%) of our patients, including 197 (96%) of the patients randomized to stress testing and 198 (96%) of the patients randomized to CCTA ( P = 1.0) (Table 3 ). Downstream stress tests were performed in a comparable number of the stress test and CCTA groups (15% vs 21%). By contrast, a significantly higher number of patients underwent invasive coronary angiography in the CCTA group. Similarly, there were more revascularization procedures performed in the CCTA group, but this difference was due to a higher frequency of performed percutaneous coronary intervention. The frequency of coronary artery bypass grafting in the stress test vs CCTA group was 1% in both groups, but 13 CCTA patients underwent percutaneous coronary intervention compared to no percutaneous coronary interventions within the stress test patients. Among these 13 CCTA patients, 2 (15%) underwent a stress test prior to their percutaneous coronary intervention procedure. Table 3 The number of downstream tests, procedures, cardiovascular hospitalizations, and cardiovascular events in the stress test and CCTA groups Number of patients Number of procedures Stress CCTA P value Stress CCTA P value Downstream tests 30 (15) 43 (21) 0.1 44 63 0.2 Stress tests 23 (11) 28 (14) 0.6 29 33 0.7 CCTA 9 (4) 2 (1) 0.4 9 2 0.03 ICA 5 (2) 22 (11) 0.001 6 28 0.001 Revascularization 2 (1) 15 (7) 0.002 2 18 0.001 PCI 0 (0) 13 (6) <0.001 0 16 0.001 CABG 2 (1) 2 (1) 1.0 2 2 1.0 Cardiovascular hospitalizations 33 (16) 28 (14) 0.5 45 46 1.0 Values are n (%) CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; CCTA, coronary computed tomography angiography; ICA, invasive coronary angiography; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention
Cardiovascular Events and Mortality
There were no deaths among any of the patients enrolled in this study. Three myocardial infarctions occurred during the follow period, 1 in the stress test group and 2 in the CCTA group. There was 1 episode of unstable angina in the CCTA group. Figure 2 contrasts the Kaplan-Meier curves for downstream resource utilization (tests and procedures) in the stress test and CCTA groups, as well as for the occurrence of events (unstable angina or death) and repeat hospitalizations. Whereas there was greater downstream testing and procedures in the CCTA group ( P = .06), there was no difference in events or repeat hospitalizations in the two groups. Figure 2 Kaplan-Meier curves for the endpoints of ( A ) downstream testing and procedures and ( B ) cardiovascular hospitalizations, acute coronary syndromes, and death
Downstream Tests, Procedures, and Re-hospitalizations According to Cardiac Test Abnormality
Table 4 presents a sub-analysis in which patients were assessed according to the type of test performed at baseline (CCTA vs stress test) rather than by randomization group. The degree of initial stress test or CCTA abnormality is compared to the frequency of downstream testing, procedures, and re-hospitalizations. In both groups, the frequency of patients undergoing downstream noninvasive testing, invasive coronary angiography, revascularization, and cardiovascular hospitalizations was higher in the subgroups with greater test abnormality (i.e., moderate to severe ischemia or moderate to severe stenosis). Overall, invasive coronary angiography was performed in 5 (2.5%) of the 198 patients who underwent stress testing vs 19 (10.4%) of the 187 patients who underwent CCTA ( P = .001), and revascularization procedures were performed in 3 (1.5%) patients undergoing stress testing vs 13 (7.1%) patients undergoing CCTA ( P = .01). Table 4 The number of patients undergoing downstream testing, revascularization, or hospitalization according to the results of performed stress test (top) and CCTA (bottom) studies No ischemia (n = 188) Mild (n = 5) Moderate (n = 3) Severe (n = 3) Downstream tests 25 (13) 0 (0) 3 (100) 2 (67) Stress tests 20 (11) 0 (0) 1 (33) 1 (33) CCTA 9 (5) 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) ICA 1 (0.5) 0 (0) 3 (100) 1 (33) Revascularization 0 (0) 0 (0) 2 (67) 1 (33) PCI 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 1 (33) CABG 0 (0) 0 (0) 2 (67) 0 (0) CV hospitalization 29 (16) 2 (40) 2 (67) 1 (33) No CAD (n = 95) <50% Stenosis (n = 70) 50–70% Stenosis (n = 6) ≥70% (n = 16) Downstream tests 8 (8) 11 (16) 5 (83) 12 (75) Stress tests 8 (8) 8 (11) 3 (50) 6 (38) CCTA 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 1 (6) Invasive angiography 2 (2) 5 (7) 3 (50) 9 (56) Revascularization 1 (1) 2 (3) 2 (33) 7 (44) PCI 1 (1) 2 (3) 1 (17) 7 (44) CABG 0 (0) 0 (0) 1 (17) 0 (0) CV hospitalization 8 (8) 7 (10) 2 (33) 4 (25) Values are n (%) CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; CCTA, coronary computed tomography angiography; ICA, invasive coronary angiography; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention
Discussion
An increasing number of cardiac imaging modalities, coupled with the escalating cost of cardiovascular healthcare, has led to a new era of research which seeks to establish the comparative clinical effectiveness of cardiac tests. In particular, CCTA has been recently studied in observational studies - , , and randomized trials - but its comparative effectiveness remains unresolved. Thus, in this study, we recruited patients who were admitted to our Institution for a work-up of chest pain and then randomized to either CCTA or to a stress test. Our study cohort was then followed for changes in medications at hospital discharge, length of hospital stay, and the frequency of downstream resource utilization and clinical events over the following year.
Increase in cardiac medications during hospitalization occurred in both groups. This included a 16% increased use of aspirin, 17% increased use of statins, 11% increased use of anti-hypertensive medications in the stress testing arm, 24% increased use of aspirin, 18% use of statins, and 10% increased use of anti-hypertensive medications in the CCTA arm. The increased use of anti-hypertensive medications was accompanied by a noticeable decrease in mean systolic and diastolic blood pressure at discharge in both groups. Thus, an initial strategy of stress testing vs CCTA resulted in comparable increases in cardiac medications in both groups.
Various clinical outcomes were also similar between the two groups, including mean length of hospital stay, frequency of re-hospitalizations during the following year, and frequency of hard clinical events, which were very low in both groups.
During follow-up, the frequency of repeat noninvasive cardiac testing was also similar in the two groups, occurring in 14% of the CCTA group and 13% of the stress test group. In contrast to these parameters, the frequency of invasive coronary angiography and revascularization procedures were more common in the CCTA group. Overall, 11% of the patients in the CCTA group underwent invasive coronary angiography, compared to only 2% of the stress test group. The frequency of myocardial revascularization was also greater in the CCTA group, driven by a higher frequency of percutaneous coronary intervention. Percutaneous coronary intervention was performed in 13 of the CCTA patients compared to none of the stress test patients. This difference in invasive procedure rates persisted when patients were analyzed on the basis of test performed (stress testing vs CCTA) regardless of initial randomization.
Randomization to either stress testing or CCTA did not result in shorter length of stay. The length of stay in or patient population was longer than previously reported. This is likely due to the lack of formal observation units (which only recently became available in NYC), the fact that cardiac testing was not available on the units and the low socioeconomic status of our patient population, which could result in delayed discharge in some instance and account for the wide variation we observed in discharge times.
Comparison to Prior Studies
The clinical effectiveness of CCTA has been assessed by prospective randomized trials in a variety of clinical settings, including the emergency department, among outpatients referred for the work-up of chest pain, and among patients admitted to a telemetry unit. The experience derived from four emergency department trials which randomized patients to CCTA vs either usual care or cardiac stress testing has been summarized in a meta-analysis by Hulten et al. Randomization to CCTA resulted in a decreased length of emergency department stay and decreased emergency department costs, but was associated with a 1.4-fold increase in invasive coronary angiography and 1.8-fold increase in revascularization procedures. Two recent trials examined the relative effectiveness of CCTA in the outpatient setting. In the Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of Chest Pain (PROMISE), 10,003 symptomatic patients were randomized to either CCTA or to cardiac stress testing and then followed for a median of 2 years. There was no difference in clinical outcomes between the two groups. As in the emergency department trials, randomization to CCTA was associated with a higher frequency of cardiac catheterization and myocardial revascularization procedures. In the SCOT-HEART trial, 42% of 9,849 patients who had been referred for the work-up of chest pain were randomly selected to undergo an additional CCTA study at baseline. The majority of patients in both the standard of care group and the standard of care plus CCTA group underwent baseline cardiac stress testing. Randomization to CCTA was associated with an 18% increase in preventive care vs only a 4% increase in the standard of care group and a 38% decrease in the relative frequency of fatal or non-fatal myocardial infarction, although the absolute rate of myocardial infarction was low in this patient cohort. The CCTA group underwent less downstream stress testing during follow-up, but as in the other cohorts, underwent a higher frequency of invasive coronary angiography. One recent study compared the use of stress testing vs CCTA in patients admitted to a telemetry unit, a population most akin to those studied in our trial. In contrast to other trials, this study found no difference in invasive coronary angiography or revascularization procedures between the two arms of the study. Notably, 19% of their patients in their stress test arm underwent subsequent cardiac catheterization, compared to only 2% of our patients. Since the frequency of myocardial ischemia, the primary driver of cardiac catheterization was not reported in their study, we cannot analyze the reasons for this discrepancy. Overall, however, our observation of a higher frequency of invasive coronary angiography and myocardial revascularization procedures among in-hospital patients that were randomized to CCTA parallel the experience with CCTA in most clinical trials conducted to date.
Ancillary Test Abnormalities
Our study also provides important insights into the current frequency of test abnormalities among patients admitted to hospitals for the work of chest pain. With respect to the patients randomized to cardiac stress testing, only 5% had inducible myocardial ischemia, despite their acute presentation to our emergency department with chest pain. This observation is consistent with other recent data concerning the frequency of inducible myocardial ischemia in various patient cohorts. For instance, in a study that examined the temporal frequency of inducible myocardial ischemia over 20 years, the recent frequency of test abnormality was only 8.7% among patients referred for nuclear stress testing. A low frequency of stress test abnormality has also been noted among recent patients undergoing cardiac stress testing in the emergency department. Similarly, in the PROMISE trial, the frequency of stress test abnormality was only 11.7%, and in the WOMEN’S trial involving the comparison of nuclear stress testing to exercise ECG among women with typical angina, the frequency of test abnormality on nuclear stress testing was only 9%.
Despite the fact that our patient population was older , and had a greater burden of coronary artery disease rick factors, , the prevalence of ischemia or significant CAD on CCTA was low among similar to the previous studies. , Thus, one may consider whether our patients could have been accurately assessed with much cheaper approaches. Although clinical decisions were made based on the CCTA results in patients randomized to CCTA in our trial, it is noteworthy that 54% of such patients had a normal CAC scan, 26% had a CAC score of 1-100, and only 20% had a CAC score >100. Notably, information regarding CAC scores has been lacking from other comparative effectiveness research studies involving CCTA, with the exception of the SCOT-HEART trial. Within that cohort, 35% of patients had a CAC score >100. Analysis of CAC scores is potentially relevant because a consistent threshold relationship has been noted between the magnitude of CAC abnormality and the frequency of inducible myocardial ischemia. , In general, the frequency of inducible myocardial ischemia tends to be low among patients with a CAC score <400 and quite low among patients with CAC scores <100. Thus, the findings of both a low frequency of inducible myocardial ischemia among patients randomized to cardiac stress testing and a low frequency of CAC scores <100 among patients referred for CCTA in our randomized trial are highly consistent.
Limitations
Our trial contains important limitations. Although our patients had a sufficient index of suspicion to be admitted to our Institution, their symptom mix was mild, with only 11% having typical angina. Accordingly, we cannot extrapolate from our results to a population with greater angina symptoms. Because of the low-risk and small sample size of our patient population, we were not powered to assess our groups for differences in clinical cardiac events. Finally, since our study protocol did not contain a structured algorithm for patient management after the index test, our results are subject to the varying clinical practices of our Institution’s physicians. However, this limitation is true for nearly all of the recently designed comparative effectiveness research concerning CCTA. , However, because we did not mandate a specific algorithm for patient management, we were able to critically evaluate the current changes in medication and use of downstream medical resources that follow from the use of stress tests and CCTA studies at our Institution, thus permitting the observations concerning medical practice that are described in this study. A cost analysis of the economic impact would place the results in wider context but is unavailable. An additional strength of our trial was the comprehensiveness of our follow-up, which captured the central factors that can drive medical costs after cardiac testing.
Clinical Implications
Our trial further extends the observations regarding the clinical effectiveness of CCTA vs cardiac stress testing within a highly relevant but currently sparsely studied patient cohort: the in-hospital (or observation unit) work-up of patients admitted for chest pain. A general expectancy of randomization to CCTA is that this test, by delineating the presence and extent of atherosclerosis, should result in more aggressive medical management than cardiac stress testing. However, even though the vast majority of stress tests were nonischemic in our trial, the frequencies of downstream initiation of new medical therapies were comparable in this group compared to the CCTA group. This suggests that other clinical factors, such as the presence or magnitude of risk factors and/or presence of chest pain, per se, drove medication usage in our trial. Since the primary impact of cardiac tests in low-risk populations with chest pain is primarily through their impact on medical management, more study is needed to determine what factors optimally drive clinical decision making in such patients.
Second, the low frequency of either stress test abnormality or elevated high CAC scores (i.e., >100) in our trial raise questions as to whether current comparative effectiveness research appropriately evaluates the most cost-effective means for the work-up of chest pain. For instance, in the WOMEN’s trial, with a frequency of test abnormality that was comparable to that in our trial, there was no difference in clinical outcomes among patients who were randomized to a lower cost exercise ECG test as opposed to a nuclear stress test. Similarly, given that CAC scans can also assess the presence and magnitude of atherosclerosis more economically than CCTA, study that examines the relative utility of CAC scanning vs CCTA would be of interest but is currently lacking. In one clinical trial, CAC scanning was able to favorably influence clinical management decisions without increase in downstream testing or invasive cardiac procedures. Future study might also test when cardiac testing may not be necessary in light of a recent retrospective analysis that found no difference in subsequent risk for myocardial infarction among 421,774 patients who did vs did not undergo cardiac stress testing as part of their work-up for chest pain in the emergency department. By contrast, if comparative effectiveness research is merely designed to analyze CCTA vs cardiac imaging procedures, the ability to evaluate lower cost approaches that may be potentially more cost-effective may be inadvertently overlooked.
New Knowledge Gained
The use of CCTA vs stress testing in an inpatient setting did not result in increased use of medical therapies or downstream testing, but did result in an increase in revascularization therapies. This increase use in revascularization therapies was most likely driven by a higher detection of severe coronary artery disease with the use of CCTA.
Conclusions
Randomization of patients admitted to our Institution for chest pain to either a stress test or CCTA-based strategy resulted in similar discharge time, change in medical therapies at discharge, use of downstream noninvasive cardiovascular tests, and frequency of re-hospitalization. However, there was a higher frequency of invasive coronary angiography and revascularization procedures performed in the CCTA arm, with the latter driven by a higher frequency of percutaneous coronary intervention in CCTA patients.