Open image in new window
Introduction: microparticles
Cellular communication is defined as the group of processes that consent for dialog between two or more cells of an organism in response to specific signals. Such communication may be by direct contact between cell and cell. It is the simplest form of intercellular communication because the transfer of chemical signals between two adjacent cells is directly through the “gap junctions” that are protein channels of connection between the cytosol of adjacent cells or through the production of signaling molecules that generate three types of communications: autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine. Recently, a new mechanism of cell communication mediated by microparticles (MPs) was discovered [ ]. Initially considered as inert cellular debris released from activated platelets in human plasma, instead MPs are involved in intercellular communication by acting as vectors of biological messages that could actively participate in the control of physiological and pathophysiological mechanisms [ ]. MPs are now understood to be small vesicles released from the plasma membrane that can be potentially produced from all cell types. They have a diameter between 0.1 and 1 μm and have a heterogeneous composition, which reflects the cell from which they originate. The mechanisms that lead to the formation of MPs are not completely elucidated, but several studies give evidence that the production of MPs takes place following chemical and physical cell apoptosis or activation [ ]. For example during apoptosis, MP formation occurs following activation of Rho-associated protein kinase I (ROCK I) and caspase 3, leading to disruption of membrane skeleton structure and accordingly membrane blebbing (formation of irregular protuberances in the plasma membrane) and MPs formation. Also, MP formation can result from cell activation by different agonists, such as thrombin and/or collagen [ ]. The activation stimulus increases the influx of extracellular calcium and triggers calpain activation, which is associated with calcium-dependent proteolysis of cytoskeletal proteins that appear to be indispensable for the subsequent blebbing. Furthermore, many authors have reported loss of membrane asymmetry as a result of cell-surface exposure of phosphatidylserine that is localized in resting cells at the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane [ ] . The stimulus that originates MPs regulates the selective sorting of specific constituents that determine the composition of MPs and the biological information that they transfer. Thus, MPs transport different nuclear, cytoplasmic, and membrane constituents from the original cell and express an array of surface markers that allow their characterization with respect to their cellular source by the use of specific antibodies [ ]. MP-associated intercellular communication can take place through different pathways. They can directly interact with the ligands present on the surface of target cells and activate cascade signaling, or transfer proteins, mRNA, DNA, and RNA by fusion or internalization with target cell, which can acquire, in this way, new surface antigens and new biological properties [ ].
Biological features of MPs
MPs can transfer biological information between cells. They act as vectors of key messages to maintain cell homeostasis or to favor cell repair. They have important procoagulant properties, which are based on the accessibility of phosphatidylserine, a procoagulant aminophospholipid exposed after stimulation, which is necessary for the assembly of the blood clotting enzyme complexes, and on the possible presence of tissue factor (TF), the major initiator of the coagulation cascade [ ]. In addition, MPs express other molecules that can affect clotting, including von Willebrand factor multimers, which can promote the stability of platelet aggregates, and P-selectin glycoprotein, which interacts with TF and mediates binding to platelets and neutrophils [ ]. There are different types of microparticles: piastrinic (PMPs), endothelial (EMPs), and leucocytes (LMPs) microparticles. Among those, EMPs express adhesion molecules (i.e., E-selectin as well as P-selectin), which can lead to binding and activation of leucocytes and monocytes. EMPs can bear large von Willebrand factor multimers, which promote and stabilize platelet aggregates [ ]. Furthermore, MPs generated from human activated/apoptotic T cells promote angiogenesis through the up-regulation of adhesion proteins and proangiogenic factors in human endothelial cells [ ].
Moreover, MPs show fibrinolytic and proteolytic activity. Recent studies have shown that MPs can provide a catalytic surface for the conversion of plasminogen into plasmin by expressing urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and its receptor (uPAR), thus providing a profibrinolytic function [ ]. Moreover, uPA and uPAR play a critical role in angiogenesis and cell migration by activating matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) zymogens, thus facilitating extracellular matrix turnover. MPs from activated endothelial cells can bind plasminogen and provide a catalytic surface for paracrine plasmin generation [ ]. Several researchers have found diverse species of nucleic acids to be present in MPs. For example, MPs containing miRNAs enable intercellular and inter-organ communication, modifying the resultant expression on the target cells. MiRNAs are present in MPs from healthy donors and seem to be involved in the regulation of homeostasis [ ]; however, the regulatory role of MPs in healthy donors is needed to be confirmed by other experimental evidence.
Role of MPs in rheumatoid arthritis
MPs display important biological properties and can contribute to many different diseases, helping as potentially important mediators of disease pathogenesis. After cell activation or death, elevated MP levels occur in the blood of patients with many different diseases, such as autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA) [ ]. RA is a chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease characterized by chronic synovial inflammation, resulting in cartilage and bone damage, with accelerated atherosclerosis increasing mortality. The disease includes genetics, epigenetic modifications, and environmental factors such as smoking that interact and culminate in the production of specific autoantibodies (i.e., antibodies to citrullinated proteins, ACPAs) involved in joint inflammation and bone destruction [ ]. In this regard, there are few data in literature about MP and autoantibody production. In a study in 2011, Anirudh J. Ullal demonstrated that lupus plasma contains particles able to bind IgG, with numbers correlated with anti-DNA levels. This could indicate that MPs expose DNA and nucleosomal molecules in an antigenic form, representing a source of immune complexes in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) [ ]. In another study, David S. Pisetsky and colleagues demonstrated DNA in the blood has both soluble and particulate components and anti-DNA antibodies can form immune complexes that stimulate cytokine production and deposit in the kidney [ ]. To support these results, a recent review of Nielsen C.T. and colleagues in which the authors asserted that circulating apoptotic cell-derived microparticles are important sources of autoantigens and immune complexes involved in lupus nephritis pathogenesis [ ]. Since the MP formation is by blebbing from the parent cell membrane, we can hypothesize that RA MPs could transport on their surface autoantigens, i.e., citrullinated proteins, leading in this way to the formation of autoantibodies. Furthermore, the bond between MPs and anti-citrullinated protein antibodies could induce the formation of immune complexes that could aggregate and precipitate at synovium or endothelium level contributing to the inflammatory state typical in this pathology.
Moreover various cytokines strongly mediated this process such as TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1, providing the basis of biological therapy. Many studies show that there is a strong relationship between cytokine and MP production by immune cells; so many investigators are now focusing on MPs as important mediators that act locally to drive synovitis and to promote vascular disturbances. Moreover, depending on the stage of the disease, MPs may serve as markers to subset patients and to provide information regarding the activity or the prognosis of the disease. Many researches demonstrated that platelets play an important role in autoimmune diseases [ ]. Pioneering studies by Knifjj-Dutmer and colleagues demonstrated that levels of serum PMPs were directly associated with disease activity in RA. In this study of 19 patients, serum PMPs from clinically active as well as inactive patients with RA were higher than those of healthy subjects and, among patients, PMP levels correlated with disease activity. Finally, because of the known link between PMPs and cardiovascular diseases, the investigators suggested that increased expression of MPs accounts for the increased cardiovascular mortality observed within this population [ ].
Other studies have demonstrated platelets as the source of MPs in synovial fluid, monocytes, and granulocytes as the sources of MPs in the joint [ ]. Moreover, MPs are strongly procoagulant via the factor VII-dependent pathway and could contribute to local coagulation and fibrin deposition in RA joints [ ]. Berckmans RJ et al. showed that synovial fluid MPs from RA patients when incubated with fibroblast-like synoviocytes ( FLS) obtained by synovial biopsy were able to induce mediators such as monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), IL-6, IL-8, and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) [ ]. Also the complement system plays a role in the pathogenesis of RA [ ]. Deposits containing immunoglobulin and C3 are readily detected in the articular cartilage from RA patients. In fact, in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), arthritis development is dependent on the complement cascade (especially C5) [ ]. In this regard, MPs can activate complement via the classical pathway in vitro and possibly in vivo [ ]. Furthermore, leukocyte-derived MPs with bound complement (C1q, C4, and/or C3) were detected in RA synovial fluid [ ]. Finally, another process that induces RA pathogenesis is angiogenesis that is critical for supporting the expanding synovium early during disease [ ]. In vitro studies showed that MPs may play a role in angiogenesis by CD40 expressing PMPs that can induce the production of VEGF [ ]. Also, MPs from synovial fluid of RA patients can strongly induce the expression of pro-angiogenic Glu-Leu-Arg (ELR) + chemokines [ ]. These experimental data suggest that MPs may be mediators of angiogenesis, critical to survival of the inflamed synovium in RA.
Atherosclerosis in RA
Recent studies have shown that the prevalence of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) is increased in patients with RA [ ], and the risk of CV death is 1.5-fold higher among RA patients than in the general population [ ]. A recent meta-analysis including a large cohort of patients from the USA showed that the risk of CVDs is 48% higher in patients with RA than in the general population (relative risk 1.48 CI 95% 1.36–1.62) [ ]. Several studies have examined the prevalence of subclinical atherosclerosis in RA using non-invasive but validated tools to assess vascular function and morphology and most of these noted abnormalities in endothelial function and increases in arterial stiffness and carotid intima-media wall thickness (cIMT) in RA patients compared to healthy controls [ , ]. Atherosclerosis, a complex disease that involves chronic inflammation and vascular remodeling processes, is the leading cause of death and morbidity among adults in developed countries. Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease in which lipids and fibrous elements are deposited in the arterial wall large and medium-sized arteries to activate both the innate and adaptive immune systems. The progression of atherosclerosis includes early accumulation of cholesterol-engorged macrophages in the sub-endothelial matrix, accumulation of lipid-rich necrotic debris, elevated numbers of smooth muscle cells (SMCs), and subsequent development of fibrosis, which leads to the formation of complex plaques with calcification, ulceration, and eventually hemorrhages [ ]. Currently, the accepted pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in inflammatory diseases including RA is the chronic inflammation hypothesis proposed by Ross. In this scenario, the stimulation of endothelial cell (EC) injury is the initial event [ ]. Endothelial dysfunction has emerged as a potentially valuable prognostic tool in predicting the development of atherosclerosis [ ]. The progression from the early endothelial activation and dysfunction to atherosclerosis is complex and multifactorial [ ]. Intact endothelium is a highly selectively permeable barrier and does not promote platelet aggregation and adhesion, or leukocyte adhesion and invasion; however, as the endothelium progresses to a dysfunctional state, vascular homeostasis is impaired, leading to reduced anti-thrombotic, anti-oxidant, and anti-inflammatory properties (due to reduced nitric oxide -NO- bioavailability), enhanced endothelial permeability, upregulated pro-inflammatory cytokine levels, and expression of adhesion molecules such as Intercellular Adhesion Molecule 1 (ICAM- 1) and Vascular cell adhesion protein 1 (VCAM-1), which induce barrier dysfunction and facilitate leukocyte adhesion to the endothelium [ ]. Leukocyte and monocyte adhesion is one of the first steps in the initiation of atherosclerosis and after adhering to the endothelium cells cross the endothelium and migrate into the intima [ ]. Migration to the intima is mediated by chemo-attractants such as MCP-1 [ ]. Upon reaching the intima, monocytes transform into macrophages and express receptors that facilitate uptake of lipids. Accumulation of lipids leads to the transformation of macrophages into foam cells, which start an atherosclerotic lesion and enhance the release of inflammatory cytokines [ ]. So, this cascade of events begins with the formation of an early atherosclerotic lesion, leading to an advanced lesion characterized by a plaque formation ensues [ ].
MPs and atherosclerosis
Since their discovery, many literature data showed that MPs play an important role in atherosclerosis and may provide insights as regards the link between chronic inflammatory conditions and accelerated atherosclerosis. Several studies have been conducted to analyze the involvement of diverse types of MPs in atherosclerotic process, such as EMPs, PMPs, and MPs derived from Tang cells (Tang-MPs). EMPs, released after endothelial cell dysfunction, are able, in turn, to perpetuate the endothelial damage leading the activation of various pathways. Among these: reactive oxygen spices (ROS) formation [ ]; MMP-2 activation and vascular matrix remodeling [ ]; exhibition of TF [ ]; expression of E-selectin, ICAM-1, and VCAM-1 [ ]; and inducible NO synthase (iNOS) activation [ ]. In this regard, Rautou et al. have shown that MPs purified from human atherosclerotic plaques were able to transfer ICAM-1 to endothelial cells to recruit inflammatory cells thus promoting atherosclerotic plaque progression [ ]. Boulanger and colleagues investigated whether EMPs isolated from peripheral blood of patients with non-ischemic (NI) syndromes and patients with myocardial infarction (MI) would affect endothelium-dependent responses. Experimental results showed that rat aortic rings with endothelium treated with circulating EMPs isolated from endothelium-dependent relaxations to acetylcholine were not affected by high concentrations of MPs from NI patients; however, significant impairment was observed in cultures treated with MPs from patients with MI at low and high concentrations [ ]. A number of studies showed that also PMPs are able to activate endothelium through enhancing the adhesion of monocytes to human umbilical vein endothelial cells [ ], enhancing cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and ICAM-1 release [ ], neutrophil aggregation, and enhancing phagocytic activity [ ]. Finally, Rodriguez-Carrio and coworkers demonstrated that absolute number of Tang-MPs, a T cell subset that contributes to endothelial repair through cooperating with endothelial progenitor cells, was increased in RA patients and this increase could account for the decreased Tang cell count previously reported in RA. In this study, the authors showed a DAS28-dependent Tang-MP shedding, thus linking DAS28 with impaired endothelial repair. The disease parameters positively associated with Tang-MP were the same as those found to be negatively associated with Tang frequency [ ]. Furthermore, an association between TNF-α and Tang-MPs levels was found [ ]. So Tang-MPs could be considered as a surrogate biomarker of endothelial damage and vascular repair failure. In turn, all this process conducted by MPs, may contribute to the formation and progression of atherosclerotic plaque.
Role of autophagy in atherosclerosis process
Autophagy is a reparative process by which cytoplasmic components are sequestered in double-membrane vesicles and degraded on fusion with lysosomal compartments [ ]. It has been shown that basal autophagy is an essential in vivo process mediating proper vascular function [ ]. Moreover, stress-related stimuli induce autophagy in the arterial wall to protect ECs and SMCs towards cell death and the initiation of vascular diseases, in particular atherosclerosis. Recently, increasing evidence has indicated that autophagy is impaired during atherosclerotic plaque development and contributes to lipid metabolism dysfunction and vascular EC dysfunction [ ]. During early atherosclerotic stages, basal autophagy seems to be atheroprotective but becomes dysfunctional in advanced atherosclerotic plaques. Effectively, a large number of animal studies and clinical trials have indicated that oral or stent-based delivery of the autophagy inducer rapalogs, i.e., rapamycin or derivatives thereof, inhibits the basic mechanisms that control growth and destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques [ ]. Other autophagy-inducing drugs, such as spermidine or add-on therapy with widely used antiatherogenic compounds, including statins and metformin, are potentially useful to prevent vascular disease with minimal adverse effects [ ]. Inflammatory processes play a crucial role in all stages of atherosclerosis; autophagy impairment, which occurs in atherosclerotic lesions, promotes atherosclerosis at least partially by upregulating inflammation [ ]. Saitoh and coworkers showed that autophagy acts as a negative regulator of inflammation. ATG16L1 −/− mice show high IL-1 β and IL-18 levels in sera in response to lipopolysaccharides (LPS) stimulation or during colitis [ ]. The detailed molecular mechanisms by which autophagy regulates inflammation are not yet fully understood. In general, autophagy protects cells from excessive inflammation in a direct manner by suppressing proinflammatory complexes, e.g., mitochondrial ROS. EC damage is a major step for the pathological progression of atherosclerosis. During injury, EC autophagy may occur to protect the cells from being damaged, while the failure or inhibition of autophagy results in EC apoptosis, leading to the break-down of the integrity of endothelium to facilitate the local lipid deposition into atherogenesis and plaque instability [ ]. Nevertheless, our understanding of the mechanisms that control the autophagy of ECs is still limited. The autophagic machinery also plays an important role in defending ECs from oxidized-LDL (Ox-LDL) and advanced glycation end-products (AGEs)-induced cytotoxicity [ ]. In 2012, three different reports on mouse models of atherosclerosis have conclusively demonstrated the cytoprotective role of autophagy in vivo. In these studies, knockdown of the essential autophagy gene Atg5 has been shown to exert potent proatherosclerotic actions by inducing apoptosis, inflammasome activation, subendothelial formation of cholesterol crystal, and impaired cholesterol efflux from macrophages [ , ]. In another study, accordingly, deletion of a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)-dependent inhibitor of autophagy has been demonstrated to positively modulate lipid metabolism and reduce the development of atherosclerotic plaque [ ]. Another work supporting a protective role of autophagy showed that arginase 2 impairs endothelial autophagy independent of l -arginine ureahydrolase activity through the activation of antibody ribosomal protein S6 kinase beta-1 and inhibition of protein kinase, AMP-activated, α catalytic subunit (PRKAA), which are implicated in atherogenesis [ ].
On the contrary, the inhibition of autophagy by 3-benzyl-5-((2-nitrophenoxy) methyl)-dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one (3BDO), an activator of mTOR, induced the stabilization of atherosclerotic lesions in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice [ ]. Furthermore, autophagy seems to be responsible for ceroid formation in all human atherosclerotic plaques [ ]. Ding and coworkers showed that high concentrations of ox-LDL and EC autophagy could serve to enhance cell death [ ]. The inhibition of autophagy ameliorates atherosclerosis by augmenting apigenin-induced macrophage apoptosis [ ]. Finally, an excessive autophagy may cause autophagic SMC death [ ], which in turn results in plaque destabilization owing to the reduced synthesis of collagen and thinning of the fibrous cap. All these considerations indicated that promoting or inhibiting autophagy of the cells involved in atherosclerosis may be an effective method to ameliorate this process.
Conclusions
Till now, no scientific evidence clearly demonstrated a correlation between atherosclerosis, MPs, and autophagy; however, summarizing our considerations from the literature, MPs are involved in the atherosclerotic process; in turn, autophagy represents an important mechanism in the control of endothelial function as well as in the formation and stability of the atherosclerotic plaque. A possible link between MPs and autophagy that could orchestrate the delicate atherosclerotic process can be hypothesized (Fig. 1 ). Certainly, further studies are needed to confirm this issue, and our group is indeed focused on detailing such correlation. It would be important to confirm this to better understand the atherosclerotic process thus improving its management and therapeutic approach. Fig. 1 A new pathway of endothelial damage. This image is representative of our hypothesis , whereby MPs exert their pathological effect on endothelial cells (ECs), altering apoptosis and autophagy pathway, contributing to atherosclerotic process