Two major theories prevail about the causation of demyelinating diseases: The disease could be caused by retroviruses or it could be caused by inflammation and autoimmunity. In addition, there is epidemiological evidence that vitamin D and EBV play a role. We now propose a way of thinking that combines the two major theories: Retroviruses cause demyelinating diseases not because they themselves cause CNS cell decay but because they cause proliferation of specific immune cells, which provoke a reaction in the CNS. The theory also leaves room for a role of Vitamin D and EBV.
It is certain that retroviruses can cause diseases similar to multiple sclerosis (MS). The classical example is Visna of sheep [ ] caused by a retrovirus related to HIV. Newer examples are hind leg paralysis of mice caused by Lake Casitas virus [ ], and human tropical spastic paraparesis [ ] caused by human T cell leukemia virus (HTLV) in African, Caribbean, and Japanese populations. Indeed, CNS complications are common in patients with infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) [ ]. Visna and TSP appear to involve demyelinization [ , , ], while the situation is more uncertain for Lake Casitas disease and HIV.
Endogenous viruses are retroviral sequences embedded in the host germ-line DNA, presumably as a consequence of past infections of the germ line. The viral loci are now transmitted as Mendelian entities. The human genome contains in the order of 100,000 such loci distributed on all chromosomes but most sequences are grossly defective, and only about 50 loci are able, with one or two mutations, to encode a viral protein [ ]. Very few, if any, human endogenous retroviral sequences are complete. However, recombination between endogenous viruses happens in animals [ , ], and in these, it leads to replication competent and sometimes pathogenic entities.
MS is a severe human demyelinating disease of the central nervous system, often initially occurring in bouts with intervening periods of remission. It affects between two and three mio. persons worldwide. We have found by genetic epidemiology that two human endogenous retroviruses, HERV-Fc1 on chromosome X, and a HERV-K13 located on chromosome 19, contribute to the risk of multiple sclerosis in Scandinavians. Importantly, the viruses cannot be mere bystanders, as the genetic analysis relates the viral loci directly to risk of MS. Bystanders would go unnoticed in the analysis. Thus, we are convinced that the viruses contribute significantly to the disease. Moreover, we have found that the two viruses synergize in disease [ ]. The effect is quite strong; we have observed odds ratios of 10 (see Fig. 1 ). For synergy, we recoded the cases as 1 and controls as 0. Then, synergy was measured as the p value of the product term in an ANOVA ( p = 0.0009) [ ]. Thus, we measured multiplicative synergy and not simply additivity. The odds ratios for the double homozygotes were OR = 0.6 for rs318138 AA rs2435031 GG , OR = 1.3 for rs318138 GG rs2435031 GG , OR = 1 for the reference genotype rs318138 GG rs2435031 TT , and OR = 10 for the risk genotype rs318138 AA rs2435031 TT . It is possible to use other SNPs in or near the viruses with roughly similar results. Fig. 1 Odds ratios for MS for different marker genotypes. Figure 1 was derived as described above. It is obvious that the combination of rs2435031TT with rs318138AA increased the risk of MS considerably. Double heterozygotes were also increased. The p value for the overall synergy was 0.0009
Also, the two viral loci synergized with a locus in the major histocompatibility complex, MHC, known to influence MS [ ] ( p = 0.02). The most extreme genotype rs318138 AA rs2435031 GT rs3135388 CT had an OR = 38, even though we applied continuity correction (i.e., added 0.5 to all numbers) in order to compensate for small numbers. We do not know why it is the heterozygotes that respond the strongest in this analysis but the numbers are low and it may be coincidence.
Importantly, we have found that expression of HERV-Fc1 is increased in plasma and T-lymphocytes (both CD4+ and CD8+) from patients with multiple sclerosis with active disease [ ], suggesting that virus replicates in these cells. The finding that the human gene TRIM5 , which inhibits viral particles entering new cells, plays a role for the risk of MS [ ] corroborates this.
Finally, in pilot experiments, we have found by Southern blotting that purified viral particles from lymphocyte cell strains from Multiple sclerosis patients can transfer HERV-Fc1 gag DNA sequences to monkey and ape cells in culture [Laska et al., unpublished]. We do not yet know if a complete, productive infection can be established in vitro.
We have previously shown that HERV-Fc1 does not play a role in the particular form of MS called primary progressive MS [ ].
Generally, retroviruses are not neuro-tropic; rather, they are immuno-tropic, i.e., they propagate well in cells of the immune system. We think they may perturb such cells and cause clonal expansion. Thus, like many others, we think that MS is an immune disease but we think it is mediated by retroviruses. In other words, could MS be a quasi-neoplastic condition, in which the immune system, transformed by retroviruses, attack CNS?
The mechanism by which retroviruses transform white blood cells is called insertional mutagenesis. In chicken and mouse leukemia, replicating retroviruses integrate at random in the DNA of lymphoid cells, but eventually, a virus integrates in a cell near an oncogene [ , ]. The virus brings with it a strong enhancer that upregulates the surrounding DNA. Via the oncogene, this provides a strong growth-promoting signal to the cell, which starts to proliferate as a clone. The derived clonal cells all carry an extra copy of the retrovirus in question, which is still closely linked to the oncogene, in chicken myc , in mouse pim-1 [ , ].
Insertional mutagenesis could also cause proliferation of autoimmune cells. However, there is an important difference between the cancers and the autoimmune diseases: In the cancers, proliferation of the resulting cells is unrestricted; in the autoimmune diseases, the expansion is limited, and the cells retain differentiated functions. Perhaps, the difference lies in the growth-promoting gene in question. It is too early to say which growth-promoting gene; however, the putative clonal integration of a retrovirus will point us to it. Two intriguing possibilities are that the gene is the nuclear receptor for vitamin D, or that it is an Epstein-Barr virus genome integrated in the T cell chromosomes; could EBV be present but not normally active? Both vitamin D and EBV are known to influence the epidemiology of MS [ , ]. We propose to call the putative growh-promoting or survival-inducing genes aut genes.
Why would retroviral loci play a role in autoimmunity? Endogenous retroviruses span the divide between self and foreign. On one hand, they are latently present in all nucleated cells of the body, and there is no way the immune system can rid the body of them. On the other hand, they still have the ability, if expressed, to activate genes and/or to stimulate the innate immune system and trigger a response like a foreign microorganism. In addition, even in situations where the viruses are not endogenous but horizontally transmitted, retroviral infections have great permanence and generally last for life. Therefore, we believe retroviruses influence many forms of human autoimmunity. A well-known example is human tropical spastic paraparesis, which is caused by a human T-lymphotropic virus, HTLV [ ]. However, retroviruses may not be the only agents having this effect. Other microorganisms establish intimate, long-lasting relationships with the human body, most notably the bacteria of the gut.
It seems that very few, if any, retroviral loci in the genome are complete in the human populations for which there are sequences. Of the approximately 100,000 retroviral sequences, only 51 can with zero to two mutations encode a viral protein. So defined, a few loci encode all three genes, but zero to two breaks in the reading frame may be present, and there may also be point mutations. Thus, we think recombination or complementation between at least two viruses is necessary for infectious viral particles to form. Recombination of viral information could take place by formation of mixed particles containing two different viral genomes, i.e., during complementation [ ]. In successive steps, information from more than two viral sequences may be recruited. Thus, we by no means exclude the contribution of more than two loci. However, the present group sizes investigated (about a thousand persons or less) and techniques applied are probably not sufficient to demonstrate a three-way synergy between viruses. In rheumatoid arthritis, we have seen suggestive evidence that three viruses contribute, but no formal proof. The issue may be resolved if we obtain sequences of recombined viruses.
Single-cell DNA amplification and sequencing of T-receptor sequences from T cells from both active and inactive lesions in the CNS of MS patients have revealed that the CD8+ cells are oligo clonal. In one case, 35% percent of the CD8+ cells studied encoded the same T cell receptor, i.e., which was of clonal origin and presumably attacked the same target. Out of 84 cells, 13 clones with more than one T cell representation were recognized in four MS lesions of this patient [ ]. In two instances, the prominent CD8+ T cell clones could also be detected in the PBMCs. The situation was less clear with CD4+ cells, where the cell population was heterogeneous, but also here, clonality was discernible.
There are two contemporary sets of data for genetic effects in MS: The outcome could be a result of many minor variations in a multitude of genes [ ]. Sawcer et al. analyzed thousands of DNAs from cases and controls recruited in Europe and North America utilizing Illumina chips, which analyze hundreds of thousands of SNPs, and used sophisticated modeling to compensate for different ethnicities. The authors concluded that in the order of a hundred genes influence the risk of MS, many of them are genes in the immune system.
Alternatively, MS could be the result of a few drastic changes (this paper). For several reasons, we favor the second possibility. There is a lot of slack in biological systems, and they are able to accommodate small perturbations gracefully. Of course, one can invoke chaos theories but biological systems, in general, are not chaotic but highly structured. Random molecular processes occur, but unless they affect the genome, they do not tend to produce basic instability. We think a fundamental change in the system is necessary, for instance by mutation, viral invasion, or pharmaceutic or toxic drugs. This leads naturally to a few important genes.
On a technical level, there is no disagreement. We have purposely concentrated on retroviral and related loci. Sawcer et al. [ ] used Illumina chips. These chips were deliberately designed to focus on single-copy coding genes, and have a scant representation of multi-copy sequences, such as retroviruses. Thus, Sawcer et al. could easily have overlooked a retroviral influence. Moreover, they did not investigate SNPs on the X chromosome, and this left out HERV-Fc1.
Result-wise, we observed 10- to 40-fold higher odds ratios than Sawcer et al. did, but they investigated considerably more cases and obtained lower p values. Both sets of results could be true. For instance, one could speculate that the MS-associated variations in the many immune genes described in [ ] increase the level of surviving autoimmune cells, and that activated retroviruses transform one or more of these to proliferating clone(s).
There is a large body of literature describing the presence of retroviral particles, called MS-related virus (MSRV) and related to HERV-W in MS patients (see for instance [ ] and quotations thereof). Unfortunately, these investigators generally based their research on proving Koch’s postulates for the MSRV. However, the endogenous retroviruses are always present in the human body, at least in latent form, and their presence, therefore, does not signify a contagious event. More importantly, the definitive Koch experiment to isolate the agents and infect humans with the purified strains to cause disease cannot be done, as it is unethical. In short, Koch’s postulates cannot be applied to human endogenous retroviruses. Other routes, such as the genetic, may be more productive. If one insists on reconciliation, we study the role of viral proteins, whereas Perron et al. study the viral RNA.
Other diseases
Type 1 diabetes
We identified one SNP as showing association with T1DM, rs7650483 near HERV-K119 encoding gag and env located on chromosome 3 (position 113,024,277–113,033,435) (T allele associated with disease, OR (CI) = 1.25 (1.08–1.43); p = 0.0004). The association with T1DM was significant after Bonferroni correction ( P B = 0.05). Two other SNPs were also found to be associated with disease although they could not withstand the strength of Bonferroni corrections [ ].
Rheumatoid arthritis
Statistical analyses on rheumatoid arthritis (RA) cohorts show two SNPs as being associated with RA after Bonferroni correction; rs5993426 near HERV-K encoding the gag viral gene on Chr. 22 (location 18,938,674–18,947,848) (G allele associated with disease, OR (CI) = 2.87 (2.07–3.99); P G = 7 × 10 −13 ; P B = 1 × 10 −10 ), and rs2096537 near HERV-H encoding pol also on chromosome 22 (position 16,611,308–16,615,149) ( P G = 0.0002; P B = 0.02) (C allele associated with disease, OR (CI) = 1.44 (1.13–1.84)). In addition, HERV-Fc1 on chromosome X (encoding env ) seemed to associate with RA [ ].
Seeing that retroviruses also associate with two other autoimmune diseases, the mechanism here proposed, transformation of lymphocytes, might have general validity.
Postscript
Importantly, the endogenous retroviruses implied in MS, HERV-K13, and HERV-Fc1 cannot be mere bystanders in MS, as the genetic analyses relate the viral loci directly to risk of MS. Bystanders would go unnoticed in the analyses. What we observe is a direct association of the viral genes and MS. Which comes first? Obviously, it is the viral loci which are with us from conception. Could association be due to nearby genes? Hardly, the chromosomal distances involved in linkage disequilibrium mapping are very short and the synergy observed between the viral genes argues against it. Thus, we are convinced that the viral loci contribute significantly to the disease. Could there be other genes? Yes, think of the findings of Sawcer et al. Moreover, there could be environmental factors, such as Epstein-Barr virus and vitamin D. After all, this is a multifactorial disease.
A different line of investigation also suggests retroviruses to be involved in the causation of MS: This disease is relatively infrequent in HIV-positive persons that are regularly treated with antiretrovirals [ , ].