Introduction
Bacterial infections, probably due to molecular mimicry mechanisms, are able to induce self-reactive antibodies, and through this, they can cause a wide variety of severe autoimmune pathologies like rheumatoid arthritis as well as several neurological and neuropsychiatric conditions [ , , ]. The obligate intracellular Gram-negative bacteria Chlamydia trachomatis (CT) and the closely related Chlamydophila species (CS), Chlamydophila pneumoniae (CPn), and Chlamydophila psittaci (CPs) are considered to be major suspects to exploit such mechanisms [ ] to induce post-infectious secondary autoimmune disorders like chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [ ] and inflammatory arthritis [ , , ]. By the induction of neuroreactive antibodies, the chlamydiales are thought also to be able to induce neurological diseases like multiple sclerosis [ ], sporadic Alzheimer’s disease [ ], and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) [ ]. Since the cellular targets and molecular antigens being prone to such an interaction are largely unknown, we have tried here to identify possible candidates by investigating interactions of α-CT and α-CS with protein spots on a fetal brain multiprotein array (hEXselect, Engine, Berlin, Germany) [ ], followed by further identification with recombinant protein samples and identification and functional characterization in a human choroid plexus papilloma cell line (HIBCPP) [ ].
Cells of the choroid plexus epithelium are a likely cellular target for bacteria-induced autoantibodies, since at their basolateral pole, they are directly exposed to the blood serum and thereby to circulating antibodies [ ]. The choroid plexus consists of a highly capillarized epithelial network in the ventricles of the brain, the primary role of which is production of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [ ] and also to filter the CSF by removing drugs, catabolites, and other adverse substances, thereby protecting brain cells from autointoxication [ ]. In addition, the choroid plexus is one of the so-called neurohemal regions, where the capillary endothelium is of the fenestrated type. This provides direct access of the blood serum to the basolateral pole of the choroid plexus epithelial cells making it a preferred target for autoimmune conditions. In order to maintain its functional properties, i.e., production and filtration of the CSF, the choroid plexus needs a functional protein synthesis machinery for which ribosomes play a central role. Four ribosomal RNA (rRNA) species and 79 ribosomal proteins (RP) are involved in the formation of ribosomes [ ]. Interestingly, the function of these proteins is not exclusively limited to protein synthesis; however, many of them as the so-called moonlighting proteins serve also extra-ribosomal functions such that they are involved amongst others in immune signaling [ ], regulation of tumorigenesis [ , ], and development [ ].
Antibodies directed towards ribosomal proteins have been described earlier to play a pathogenic role for autoimmune diseases such as SLE. According to this, sera of patients with SLE have been shown to contain oligoclonal IgG autoantibodies that bind to the ribosomal protein L7 [ ]. Also, the ribosomal proteins P0, P1, and P2 can be recognized by the so-called anti-ribosomal P antibodies [ , ], which are also present in the serum of patients with SLE at different disease stages [ ]. After binding to the P0 phosphoprotein, anti-ribosomal P antibodies penetrate the cells [ ] and by this, they are translocated to the cytoplasm and the nucleus, where they have been shown to inhibit protein synthesis, and they cause cellular dysfunctioning [ ]. Anti-ribosomal P antibodies are correlated with a specific clinical subtype of SLE, i.e., SLE with neuropsychiatric symptomatology (NPSLE) [ ]. Although they have not yet been demonstrated in the serum of SLE patients, autoantibodies to RPS27a have been detected in a mouse model of SLE and therefore could play also a role for this disease [ ].
The etiopathogenesis behind SLE is not fully understood, and therefore, SLE is thought to be a multifactorial disease. Both genetic and environmental factors have been shown to induce changes in the immune system. Some of the main gene candidates with a specific pattern of mutations in SLE patients include the integrin αM, the Fc-γ-receptor for immunoglobulins, the PRDM1-ATG5 intergenic region, and the tumor necrosis factor-α-induced protein 3 (see also [ ] for an overview). These mutations are thought to lead to the production of autoantibodies, such as anti-cardiolipin antibodies, antinuclear antibodies, and anti-DNA antibodies, causing systemic inflammatory responses. By this, they induce the depletion of immune complexes within tissues by several inflammatory factors, including the B lymphocyte stimulators type-I interferon and the tumor necrosis factor [ ].
A large majority of SLE patients suffer also from neuropsychiatric symptoms, and the most common of which include cognitive dysfunction in around 80% and depression in more than 40% of all SLE patients [ ]. Neuropsychiatric involvement in SLE patients is mainly diagnosed by exclusion diagnosis and clinical presentation [ ]. Various mechanisms can lead to unspecific neurological symptoms. These include antibody-dependent inflammation, causing vasculitis, thrombosis, and hemorrhage in the affected areas [ ]. There are 19 different neurological and psychiatric syndromes of SLE classified by the American College of Rheumatology (ACR). This classification covers central syndromes as well as peripheral syndromes. Examples of the central syndromes include cerebrovascular disease, headache, anxiety disorder, and psychosis. Guillain-Barré syndrome (acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy), polyneuropathy, and myasthenia gravis, amongst others, are considered peripheral syndromes of SLE [ ]. In NPSLE also, changes in choroid plexus functioning are an emerging feature [ , , ]. Immune dysregulation similar to NPSLE has been described also in other neuropsychiatric conditions like schizophrenia, where autoantibodies directed towards cardiolipin and nuclear antigens like DNA have been documented [ ].
In the present study, we have now tried to identify possible cellular and molecular targets of CT- and CS-specific antibodies, by testing the interactions of two polyclonal rabbit antisera directed either towards CT (α-CT) or to both CPn and CPs (α-CS), with protein spots on a first trimester prenatal brain multiprotein array (hEXselect, Engine, Berlin). This multiprotein array (MPA) has been already successfully used to identify antibody interaction partners in the human fetal brain [ , ], and also, we have used this earlier to identify protein interaction partners for the Gram-negative bacteria Neisseria ( N .) gonorrhoeae and N . meningitidis [ ]. The spots on this MPA represent more than 10,000 proteins as encoded by 23,806 expression clones derived from a cDNA library of two late first trimester human fetal brains [ ]. The unique pattern of these spots allows a rapid localization and thus identification of the proteins [ ].
The protein interactions identified by the MPA analysis were further tested by Western blotting using protein extracts of HIBCPP, a well-known and widely used cell culture model to study functional properties of the choroid plexus in vitro [ ]. These cells were derived from a choroid plexus papilloma, a rare, in most cases, benign tumor of the human choroid plexus [ ]. They have been shown to share most of the properties of normal choroid plexus epithelial cells and therefore have been already previously used to study effects of bacterial infections on the integrity of the blood-CSF barrier [ , ]. In the present study, we used them as a model to characterize functional effects of antibodies directed towards CT and the closely related CS CPn and CPs. The results demonstrate that both α-CT and α-CS are able to interact with the ribosomal small subunit component RPS27a, a protein that has been previously demonstrated in a mouse model as a putative autoimmune target in SLE [ ].
Results
Detection of proteins with cross-reactivity to α-CT and α-CS on the hEXselect multiprotein array
In order to identify possible interaction partners for α-CT and α-CS in the first trimester human fetal brain, a high-density multiprotein array (hEXselect, Engine, Berlin, Germany) was incubated with these antisera, and immunoreactive spots were then visualized and identified according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For α-CT (Fig. 1 ), several distinct pairs of immunoreactive protein spots could be identified, representing with the albumin precursor (ALB) and the ribosomal small subunit protein RPS27a, two structurally and functionally unrelated protein types (see the inset in Fig. 1 ). A similar pattern could be detected for α-CS (Fig. 2 ), where the cross-reactive pairs of protein spots represented also the albumin precursor (ALB) and the ribosomal small subunit protein RPS27a. However, in this case, immunoreactivity for RPS27a was detected in only three instead of four homologous pairs of protein spots. Fig. 1 Interactions of antibodies directed towards the obligate endobacterium Chlamydia trachomatis (α-CT) with specific protein spots on the hEXselect multiprotein array. This array contains 23,806 spots of both full-length and shorter protein fragments, expressed in an E. coli system, representing a total number of around 10,000 different human proteins [ ]. As revealed by the red stained false color image of an X-ray film exposed to the immune incubation of an hEXselect multiprotein array visualized by ECL-detection, a number of pairwise immunoreactive spots revealed immunoreactivity with α-CT, which subsequently could be identified according to their membrane location as at least two different proteins (see inset) Fig. 2 Interactions of antibodies directed towards the obligate endobacteria Chlamydophila pneumoniae and C. psittaci (α-CS) with specific protein spots on the hEXselect multiprotein array. This array contains 23,806 spots of both full-length and shorter protein fragments, expressed in an E. coli system, representing a total number of around 10,000 different human proteins [ ]. As revealed by the green stained false color image of an X-ray film exposed to the immune incubation of an hEXselect multiprotein array visualized by ECL-detection, a number of pairwise immunoreactive spots revealed immunoreactivity with α-CT, which subsequently could be identified according to their membrane location as two different proteins (see inset)
Identification of specific interactions between commercially available RPS27a and α-CT/α-CS by Western blot analysis
Due to the labeling of several pairs of RPS27a protein spots on the hEXselect multiprotein array, and its putative relevance as a candidate autoantigen for SLE [ ], we selected this protein for further analysis. For this, we tried to confirm the interactions of α-CT and α-CS with RPS27a by an independent experimental setup, testing interactions of these antisera with recombinant samples of RPS27a and the closely related ribosomal protein RPS30 by a series of Western blots (Fig. 3 ). As one would have expected, α-CT revealed also cross-reactivity with recombinant RPS27a, revealing a distinct immunoreactive band of around 27 kDa (Fig. 3 a). In contrast, recombinant RPS30 failed to do so, underlining thereby the protein- and antibody-specificity of these reactions (Fig. 3 a). Furthermore, the identity of the recombinant RPS27a protein sample was confirmed also by cross-reactivity with α-RPS27a, a protein-specific antiserum (Fig. 3 b). Also, the yellow color in the false color overlay image for α-CT (red) and α-RPS27a (green) revealed the detected protein bands to run at the same size and therefore probably to be identical (Fig. 3 c). In a similar series of Western blots (Fig. 3 d), also α-CS revealed cross-reactivity with recombinant RPS27a, but not with RPS30 (Fig. 3 d). Identity of this protein could be further confirmed by incubation with α-RPS27a (Fig. 3 e), and the pink staining on the false color overlay of the images for α-CS (blue) and α-RPS27a (red) (Fig. 3 f) revealed the size similarity of both bands. Fig. 3 Cross-reactivity of antibodies directed towards either Chlamydia trachomatis (α-CT) or to the Chlamydophila species Chlamydophila pneumoniae and C . psittaci (α-CS), with recombinant protein samples of RPS27a and the closely related ribosomal protein RPS30, as revealed by Western blot analysis. a Western blot of recombinant protein samples of RPS27a and RPS30 with α-CT revealing an immunopositive band only for RPS27a, whereas RPS30 revealed no such band. b A similar blot as shown in ( a ), however, in this case incubated with an antiserum directed towards RPS27a, revealing a similar interaction pattern, showing immunopositive bands for RPS27a, whereas RPS30 failed to reveal such a band. c The false color overlay image of the blots shown in ( a ) and ( b ) confirms the bands stained by α-CT (red) and α-RPS27a (green) to run at the same size. d Western blot of recombinant protein samples of RPS27a and RPS30 with α-CS revealing an immunopositive band only for RPS27a, whereas RPS30 revealed no such band. e A similar blot as shown in ( d ), however, in this case incubated with an antiserum directed towards RPS27a, revealing a similar interaction pattern showing immunopositive bands for RPS27a, whereas RPS30 failed to reveal such a band. f The false color overlay image of the blots shown in ( d ) and ( e ) confirms the bands stained by α-CS (blue) and α-RPS27a (red) to run at the same size
Cellular distribution and molecular weight of the epitopes cross-reacting with α-CT and α-CS in cultured HIBCPP cells as revealed by immunocytochemistry and Western blot analysis
To investigate the relevance of the observed interactions of α-CT and α-CS in living cells, cellular distribution and molecular weights of the epitopes with cross-reactivity to these antisera were investigated by immunocytochemistry and Western blot as shown in Fig. 4 . First of all, control staining with secondary antibodies only (SAO, Fig. 4 a, b) revealed only a very weak background labeling. In contrast to that incubation with α-CT (Fig. 4 c, d) demonstrated a granular staining pattern in the whole cytoplasm of HIBCPP cells, typical for intracellular organelles, whereas cell nuclei remained mostly unstained (Fig. 4 c, d). Although distinctly weaker, also α-CS (Fig. 4 e, f) showed a granular cytoplasmic staining in HIBCPP cells and a lack of staining in the cell nuclei (Fig. 4 e, f). The spotty cytoplasmic staining by both α-CT and α-CS suggests their localization in intracellular organelles such as free ribosomes in the cytoplasm or ribosomes bound to the rough endoplasmic reticulum, both preferred localizations for RPS27a. In order to further characterize the proteins in HIBCPP cells with cross-reactivity to either α-CT or α-CS with regard to their molecular weights, Western blot analysis was performed. As shown in Fig. 4 g, with total cell protein extracts of cultured HIBCPP cells, both α-CT and α-CS revealed a typical pattern with a prominent immunoreactive band at a molecular weight above 20 kDa and below 54 kDa and two weaker bands of distinctly lower molecular weights. Fig. 4 Cellular distribution of the epitopes labeled by α-CT and α-CS in HIBCPP cells, as revealed by immunocytochemistry and further molecular characterization by Western blot analysis. a Overview image (10×) of HIBCPP cells incubated with secondary antibodies only (SAO) followed by visualization by DAB-staining. b A similar staining as shown in ( a ), however, in this case at higher magnification (40×). c Overview image (40×) of HIBCPP cells incubated with α-CT, visualized by DAB-staining. d Higher magnification image (63× oil) of HIBCPP cells incubated with α-CT, visualized by DAB-staining. e Overview image (40×) of HIBCPP cells incubated with α-CS, visualized by DAB-staining. f Higher magnification image (63× oil) of HIBCPP cells incubated with α-CS, as visualized by DAB-staining. g Western blot analysis of total cell protein extracts of cultured HIBCPP cells showing prominent immunoreactive bands with both α-CT and α-CS
Identification of 2D Western blot analysis and their subsequent identification by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry
In a next step, we identified the cellular proteins with cross-reactivity to α-CT in HIBCPP cells at a molecular level by 2D Western blot analysis and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis (Fig. 5 ). For this purpose, whole-cell protein extracts of HIBCPP cells were separated on a 2D polyacrylamide gel, according to their isoelectric point for the first dimension and to their molecular weight for the second dimension. The proteins of this gel were then blotted by Western transfer onto a PVDF-membrane, which was then immune incubated with α-CT in order to detect cross-reactive protein spots. Seven distinct immunoreactive spots could be detected (Fig. 5 a, white circles) and were then excised for mass spectrometric analysis, results of which are listed in Fig. 5 b. By this, the interaction of α-CT with proteins like RPS27a and the albumin precursor (ALB) could be confirmed, together with several other proteins like ABCG2, TBB5, ZA2G, EFTU, and SSDH which revealed also cross-reactivity with this antiserum (for more details see also supplementary table 1 ). Fig. 5 Protein identification of molecules interacting with α-CT by 2D Western blot analysis followed by mass spectrometric analysis of excised membrane spots. a Radiography of the ECL-detection of the Western blot of a 2D gel electrophoresis of an HIBCPP total cell extract with α-CT revealing at least seven distinctly immunopositive spots (numbered circles). b List of the numbered immunoreactive spots shown in ( a ), as identified by mass spectrometric analysis (see also supplementary table 1 )
Functional effects of the interactions of either α-CT or α-CS with RPS27a in HIBCPP cells as revealed by different protein synthesis assays
To further investigate the functional effects of the interactions of α-CT and α-CS antisera with RPS27a, two independent assay methods for protein synthesis detection were applied. These included, on the one hand, the surface sensing of translation (SUnSET) technique (Fig. 6 ), an established bench-top method [ ], and on the other hand as shown in Fig. 7 , the Click-IT HPG Alexa Fluor® Protein Synthesis Assay, performed with a commercial Kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Both methods revealed similar results with a significant antibody-dependent decrease in protein synthesis activity (Figs. 6 and 7 ). For the SUnSET method, the incorporation of puromycin into newly synthesized proteins was detected by Western blot analysis with a puromycin-specific monoclonal antibody from mouse (α-PMY, Fig. 6a ), and the diagram of the statistical evaluation of a series of five such experiments revealed both the α-CT- and the α-CS-dependent decrease in protein synthesis activity to be statistically significant (Fig. 6 b). Likewise, the fluorescence intensity of the protein synthesis-dependent reaction product in control cultures of HIBCPP cells, as it has been visualized by the Click-IT HPG Alexa Fluor® Protein Synthesis Assay Kit (Fig. 7 a), was distinctly reduced in either HIBCPP cells treated with α-CT (Fig. 7 b) and in similar cultures treated with α-CS (Fig. 7 c). The diagram of a series of 40 such experiments revealed the decrease in protein synthesis activity as elicited by either α-CT or α-CS to be statistically significant (Fig. 7 d). Fig. 6 Functional effects of antibodies directed towards Chlamydia trachomatis (α-CT) or Chlamydophila pneumoniae and C . psittaci (α-CS) on protein synthesis in HIBCPP cells as revealed by the SUnSET technique. a Western blot of the whole-cell protein extracts of puromycin-incubated HIBCPP cells incubated with a puromycin-specific antibody (α-PMY) in order to detect differences in protein synthesis activity upon treatment with α-CT or α-CS as compared to control conditions. b Diagram of the statistical evaluation of a series of five experiments as shown in ( a ) demonstrating the antibody-dependent reduction in protein synthesis activity shown in these experiments to be statistically significant.* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 Fig. 7 Functional effects of antibodies directed towards either Chlamydia trachomatis (α-CT) or Chlamydophila pneumoniae and C . psittaci (α-CS) on protein synthesis activity as revealed by the Click-IT HPG Alexa Fluor® Protein Synthesis Assay Kit. a Fluorescence Image of the detection of the protein synthesis activity by the Click-IT HPG Alexa Fluor® Protein Synthesis Assay Kit in a non-treated control culture of HIBCPP cells. b Fluorescence Image of the detection of the protein synthesis activity by the Click-IT HPG Alexa Fluor® Protein Synthesis Assay Kit in a culture of HIBCPP cells treated for 12 h with 10 μg/ml α-CT. c Fluorescence Image of the detection of the protein synthesis activity by the Click-IT HPG Alexa Fluor® Protein Synthesis Assay Kit in a culture of HIBCPP cells treated in this case for 12 h with 10 μg/ml α-CS. d Diagram of the statistical evaluation of a series of 40 experiments as shown in ( a – c ) demonstrating the antibody-dependent reduction in protein synthesis activity shown in these experiments to be statistically significant. ** p < 0.01
Discussion
Bacterial infections play a major role in the development of autoimmune diseases through various mechanisms including molecular mimicry. In the latter case, structural similarities between bacterial and eukaryotic proteins, in the case of B or T cell activation, can lead to cross-reactive identification of self-antigens by anti-bacterial antibodies and, by this, to the induction of autoimmune diseases [ ]. Both CT and CPn have been previously shown to be associated with post-infection secondary autoimmune disorders such as sarcoidosis [ ], chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [ , ], and inflammatory arthritis [ , ]. Also, several neurological disorders can be caused by either of these pathogenic agents, probably by the induction of neuroreactive antibodies: For CPn, this has been shown for multiple sclerosis, sporadic Alzheimer’s disease, and SLE (for an overview, see [ ]. Also in schizophrenic patients, previous studies have demonstrated significantly higher serum rates of CT-positive IgG antibodies [ ]. With regard to possible molecular targets, it has been already demonstrated that molecular mimicry during CT infections can lead to the production of autoantibodies against the human heat-shock protein HSP60 and human ribosomal protein RPL7 [ , ]. With RPS27a and the albumin precursor protein ALB, the present study is now able to add two new targets to this list.
An important point regarding the interactions of α-CT and α-CS with RPS27a and ALB revealed in the present study is the question for their specificity. To control for this, we have used different antisera directed either towards CT or both of the closely related Chlamydophila species CPn and CPs. However, both antisera revealed a highly similar pattern of interaction with RPS27a and ALB proteins, which at the first glance could be contradictory to bacterial specificity of the observed patterns. However, this could be explained by the close relationship of these bacteria species, an interpretation that is further corroborated by the findings of a previous study, where antibodies directed towards N . gonorrhoeae and N . meningitidis revealed distinctly different patterns of cross-reactive proteins [ ]. Also, at the functional level, bacterial specificity can be demonstrated, and this has been analyzed in the choroid plexus papilloma derived cell line HIBCPP [ ]. This cell line has been already previously used to identify autoantigens of antisera directed towards other bacterial species [ ] like N . gonorrhoeae and N . meningitidis , and together with these previous findings, our study underlines the bacterial specificity of cellular interaction patterns of the antisera used for these studies. In addition, these findings open the possibility that these specific patterns are of importance for the different pathogenic outcomes, which become manifest in different neurological and/or neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and NPSLE.
Protein arrays are a widely used tool for the identification of possible targets for self-reacting antibodies in various autoimmune disorders [ ], and therefore, we have decided to use here a commercial high-density multiprotein array (MPA) derived from a cDNA bank of two first trimester human fetal brain samples [ ] to identify candidate proteins with cross-reactivity to anti-chlamydial and anti- Chlamydophila antibodies. Similar MPAs have been used also previously to identify candidate proteins with cross-reactivities to other anti-bacterial antibodies directed in this case towards N . gonorrhoeae and N . meningitidis . As one would expect, the obtained results revealed for both antisera almost entirely different patterns of interactive proteins [ ], underlining the bacterial specificity of such interactions. However, despite such promising results, the MPA used here might suffer from some downsides that should be also discussed here: thus, due to differences in some post-translational modifications between prokaryotes and eukaryotes [ ], the bacterially translated proteins of this MPA could differ from the native human proteins, leading in the end to either false positive or negative results. In addition, despite the comparably large number of the around 10,000 developmentally expressed proteins covered by this MPA, another probably even larger number of proteins, expressed either postnatally or in the adult brain, might still remain unrecognized.
Children born to mothers with SLE seem to have a potentially increased risk of neurodevelopmental disorders compared to children born to healthy women [ ]. Recent experimental data suggest in utero exposure to maternal antibodies and cytokines as important risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders [ ]. Interestingly, patients with SLE display high levels of autoantibodies and cytokines, which have been shown, in animal models, to alter fetal brain development and induce behavioral anomalies in offspring [ , ]. Furthermore, subjects with SLE and neurodevelopmental disorders share a common genetic predisposition, which could impair the fetal immune response to in utero immunologic insults [ ]. According to this, SLE pregnancies are at increased risk of adverse obstetrical outcomes and medication exposures, which have been implicated as potential risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders [ , ]. This opens the possibility that the mechanisms observed in the present study could also play a role for such neurodevelopmental pathology. A similar mechanism has also been described for schizophrenia, where children of mothers with gonococcal infections reveal a significantly increased disease risk [ , ]. Supportive of this latter possibility are also the increased frequencies of chlamydial infections in serum samples of schizophrenic patients, especially with C . psittaci [ ].
Immunocytochemistry revealed a distinct cytoplasmic and perinuclear staining for both α-CT- and α-CS antisera, which seems to match the expected intracellular localizations of RPS27a as a typical ribosomal constituent [ ]. In the corresponding Western blot analysis with protein samples of HIBCPP cells, several immunoreactive bands were detected that were further characterized by 2D gel electrophoresis (2-DGE), where one of the most prominent spots was identified by mass spectrometry also as RPS27a. Specificity of the interactions of α-CT- and α-CS with RPS27a was further confirmed by Western blot using commercial samples of both RPS27a and the closely related ribosomal protein RPS30. Both antisera revealed prominent immunoreactive bands with RPS27a, whereas RPS30 remained negative. Also on the functional level, using the SUnSET technique and the commercial Click-iT® HPG Kit, the interactions of the anti-chlamydial antibodies with RPS27a resulted in impaired protein synthesis. The SUnSET technique is a nonradioactive protein labeling and detection assay [ ], which has already previously demonstrated to provide reliable information about protein synthesis in different tissues and cell culture systems [ ]. This seems to be also the case in the present study, despite the fact that the changes detected by the Click-iT® HPG Kit were stronger than the ones revealed by the SUnSET technique. This could be explained by a minor inhibitory effect of puromycin on translation on its own, which might not happen with the Click-It® HPG method.
What could be the functional consequences of impaired protein synthesis in the choroid plexus epithelium at a wider range? The major task of the choroid plexus is production of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF [ ], providing thereby neuronal and glial cells in the brain with a wide variety of macro- and micronutrients [ , , , ], as well as with relevant hormones and growth factors [ ]. Hints for a role of the choroid plexus in the pathogenesis of NPSLE were known for several decades [ , ], being mainly characterized by immunoglobulin deposits at the basolateral side of choroid plexus epithelial cells [ , ]. Also, more recent studies could confirm these early findings and demonstrate that they correlate with the disease-associated cognitive decline found in NPSLE patients [ ] that could be explained by an earlier report on hippocampal damage in human patients and a mouse model of SLE [ ]. Thereby, impaired protein synthesis in choroid plexus epithelial cells could directly impair the described choroid plexus supply functions. Also, the important detoxifying function of the choroid plexus for the cerebrospinal fluid [ ] could contribute to these deficits, however, in this case in a more indirect manner of action.
In the literature, RPS27a is described as a ribosomal protein and as a component of the 40S subunit of the eukaryote ribosome forming a C-terminal extension protein of ubiquitin (Ub) [ ]. After cleavage of the Ub-RPS27a fusion protein [ ], RPS27a is located in several cellular compartments including the cytoplasm [ ]. This raises the question, how possible autoreactive antibodies could reach this protein inside the cytoplasm? Two options could explain this, including on the one hand the possibility that either during synthesis or degradation the whole protein or fragments of it are transported to the cell membrane. On the other hand, RPS27a-specific antibodies could enter the cell via an endocytotic pathway. For other ribosomal proteins, both mechanisms have been already described [ , ]. Thus, ribosomal P proteins tagged by autoantibodies found frequently in SLE patients, were detected at the cell surface of human neuroblastoma cell lines, as demonstrated by both immunofluorescence and by an EM immunogold analysis [ ]. In addition, the finding that several ribosomal proteins as the so-called moonlighting proteins can serve additional extra-ribosomal functions [ ] opens to the possibility that they can reach the cell surface and thereby become exposed to possible autoantibodies. Due to these aspects, the question for the impact of the interactions shown in the present study on such extra-ribosomal functions of RPS27a remains an intriguing question for the future.
Besides the putative role of interaction of Chlamydia and Chlamydophila -specific antibodies with RPS27a in SLE [ ], changes in this protein have been detected also in other diseases [ , , ] and, therefore, the interactions shown in the present study could play a role in their etiology as well. Thus, RPS27a seems to be involved in certain forms of male infertility, since expression of this protein was changed along with several other ribosomal proteins insofar that it was upregulated in sperm of normozoospermic controls, but downregulated in patients suffering from asthenozoospermia [ ]. Also, patients suffering from Diamond-Blackfan anemia, a rare disorder characterized by a congenital pure red cell aplasia in association with several other developmental disturbances, revealed mutations in RPS27a [ ] and other ribosomal proteins [ ]. Together with these findings, as well as the detection of a persistent infection with CPn in bone marrow biopsies of two anemic patients [ ], results of the present study suggest that Chlamydia and Chlamydophila infections and the resulting bacteria-specific antibodies could account for at least some cases of idiopathic anemia. Recent studies showed an association between chlamydial infections and the development of certain types of cancer diseases [ ]. Interestingly, the proposed mechanisms involving the association between C . trachomatis infection and cervical cancer include the involvement of the MDM2-p53-axis [ , ]. Interactions with the very same protein by RPS27a have been already described [ , ]. Therefore, although highly speculative at the moment, in the future, our findings could provide a functional link between the association between C . trachomatis infections and the development of cervical cancer.
Although we have not analyzed this interaction in detail, binding of α-CT and α-CS to the albumin precursor protein ALB could be of course of importance for SLE pathology. Several previous studies are suggestive of such a possibility [ , , ] demonstrating, amongst others that in patients with SLE, higher disease pathology indices are associated with lower serum albumin levels [ ]. This could be on the one hand due to a loss of albumin at the renal filter unit due to a mild proteinuria [ ]; however, also albumin-specific autoantibodies have been reported for at least a subset of SLE patients [ ], suggesting that an immune-mediated degradation of this protein could be responsible as well. Especially during brain development, the choroid plexus has been demonstrated to be a major extra-hepatic source for albumin synthesis [ , ] and according to this, high levels of plasma proteins like alpha fetoprotein, transferrin, and albumin can be found in the CSF of fetal rats [ ]. An immune-mediated impairment of albumin synthesis or transport by choroid plexus epithelial cells could therefore also be responsible for the neurodevelopmental changes observed in children of mothers suffering from NPSLE and schizophrenia [ , ]. Nevertheless, considering the complex pattern of immunological and cellular changes being associated with SLE pathology, findings of the present study are able to explain only a small subset of the disease-associated symptoms.
In conclusion our study demonstrate for the first time direct interactions of antibodies directed against Chlamydia and Chlamydophila species with the ribosomal small subunit protein RPS27a and the albumin precursor protein ALB, which could be of importance for a mechanistic link between chlamydial infections and at least some of the immune changes associated with systemic lupus erythematosus.
Materials and methods
Antibodies and recombinant proteins
The following antibodies and recombinant proteins were used in this study: anti-C. trachomatis (α-CT): rabbit polyclonal, Antikoerper-online.de, Aachen, Germany, Cat. Nr. ABIN285169; anti- Chlamydia species (α-CS): rabbit polyclonal, Antikoerper-online.de, Aachen, Germany, Cat. Nr. ABIN345968; anti-ribosomal protein S27a (α-RPS27a): mouse monoclonal, Antikoerper-online.de, Aachen, Germany, Cat. Nr. ABIN562738; anti-rabbit IgG, goat polyclonal, peroxidase coupled, Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany, Cat. Nr. A9169; anti-rabbit IgG, goat polyclonal, biotin-coupled, Sigma-Aldrich,Taufkirchen, Germany, Cat. Nr. B8895; anti-mouse IgG, goat polyclonal, peroxidase coupled, Abcam, Cambridge, UK, Cat. Nr. ab6728-1; anti puromycin (α-PMY), mouse monoclonal (clone PMY-2A4, the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank at the University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA); recombinant human ribosomal protein S27a (RPS27a), Acris Antibodies, Herford, Germany, Cat. Nr. TP760193; recombinant human ribosomal protein S27a (RPS27a), Antikoerper-online.de, Aachen, Germany, Cat. Nr. ABIN1318790; recombinant human FAU protein/ribosomal protein S30 (RPS30), Antikoerper-online.de, Aachen, Germany, Cat. Nr. ABIN1353688.
hEXselect multiprotein array analysis
A high-density multiprotein array (MPA) (hEXselect, Engine, Berlin, Germany, Order No. 1003) derived from a cDNA bank of two first trimester human fetal brain samples, containing 23,806 Escherichia coli expression clones representing a total of 10,000 human proteins [ , ], was incubated with α-CT or α-CS according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In brief, prior to the first use of the array, protein spots were fixed on the PVDF-membrane for 10 min with 70% ethanol and rinsed twice with distilled water. After removing excess protein material with tissue paper and Tris-buffered saline (TBS) supplemented with 0.05% Tween-20 and 0.5% Triton X-100 (TBS-TT), the MPA was washed three times for 10 min with TBS-TT and rinsed twice for 10 min with TBS alone, followed by a 2-h blocking step with 3% milk powder in TBS. The MPA was then incubated overnight with the respective primary antibody at a dilution of 1:2000 at 4 °C on a rocking stage. On the following day, the MPA was washed three times for 10 min in TBS, containing 0.05% Tween-20 (TBS-T), before incubating it with appropriate secondary antibodies at a dilution of 1:10,000 for 2 h at room temperature. After four washes with TBS-T and two washes with TBS, location of immunoreactive spots was visualized by exposing the membrane to a SuperRX medical X-ray film (Fuji, Düsseldorf, Germany), during the application of a chemiluminescent peroxidase substrate (0.1 mol/l Tris-HCl (pH 8.6), 0.25 mg/ml luminol, 0.2 mg/ml p- hydroxycoumaric acid, and 0.1% H 2 O 2 ) in a dark room cabinet. For reprobing, the MPA membrane was stripped with 1 mol/l NaOH for 40 min and then processed for a second round of immunodetection as described. All experiments were repeated in duplicate.
Cell culture
HIBCPP cells [ ] were maintained in DMEM-F12 supplemented with 15% FCS, 5 μg/ml insulin and penicillin/streptomycin, in an incubator at 37 °C and under a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO 2 . Medium was exchanged every other day, and shortly before reaching confluency, cell monolayers were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), then mobilized by incubation with trypsin/EDTA (0.05%/0.02%, respectively) and finally seeded at a lower density either on 12-mm glass coverslips (Menzel, Braunschweig, Germany) in a 24-well plastic multiwell plate (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) for immunocytochemistry or on 6-well plastic multiwell plates (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany), for Western blot analysis. For antibody treatment, upon reaching the required density, cells were preincubated for 4 h in serum- and insulin-free DMEM-F12 and subsequently for 12 h with 10 μg/ml of each antiserum, sodium-azide of which has been removed by microdialysis (Amicon-Ultra filter units, Merck-Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany).
Immunocytochemistry
Immunocytochemistry was performed as described earlier [ ]. In brief, cells on glass coverslips (see above) were washed with PBS and fixed for 10 min with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS. After washing, cells were permeabilized for 10 min with a mixture of acetone/methanol (1:1) at − 20 °C. Following three washes with PBS, cells were blocked for 1 h with goat serum (GS) diluted 1:50 in PBS (PBS-GS). Primary antibodies diluted 1:50 in PBS-GS were applied overnight at 4 °C, followed by three washes with PBS and a 90-min incubation with biotin-coupled secondary antibodies (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany), diluted 1:400 in PBS-GS at 37 °C. After three washes with PBS, peroxidase-labeled streptavidin (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany), diluted 1:400 in PBS, was applied for 90 min at room temperature. Afterwards, the cells were washed with PBS, before staining with di-amino-benzidine (DAB). Following three washes with PBS, the cells were then covered with a commercial mounting medium (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark) under standard coverslips (ThermoFisher-Menzel, Braunschweig, Germany). Imaging was performed using an Axiocam digital camera system, mounted on an Axiophot microscope (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany).
Western blot analysis
Western blot analysis was performed as described previously [ ], with either 5 μg of total cellular protein, or 500 ng of human recombinant proteins being electrophoretically size separated on an 8.5% SDS-polyacrylamide gel [ ] using a Mini-Protean Gel System (Biorad, München, Germany). After tank-blot Western transfer onto a polyvinyl difluoride membrane (PVDF; Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany), blocking occurred for 1 h at 4 °C in 3% ( w / v ) nonfat dry milk in TBS with 0.01% Tween-20 (TBS-T). Blots were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies (as listed above), diluted 1:2000 in TBS-T with 0.1% nonfat dry milk. After washing, rabbit-specific peroxidase-coupled secondary antibodies (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany), diluted at 1:10,000 in TBS-T, with 0.1% nonfat dry milk, were applied for 90 min at room temperature. Subsequent visualization occurred by exposing SuperRX medical X-ray films (Fuji, Düsseldorf, Germany), during the application of a peroxidase chemiluminescence substrate (0.1 mol/l Tris-HCl (pH 8.6), 0.25 mg/ml luminol, 0.2 mg/ml p -hydroxycoumaric acid, and 0.1% H 2 O 2 ) to the blots. For reprobing, blots were stripped with 1 mol/l NaOH for 15 min and then processed for a second round of immunodetection as described. Each blot was repeated three times.
Surface sensing of translation
Protein synthesis activity was monitored by surface sensing of translation (SUnSET), as previously published [ ], a nonradioactive protein labeling and detection assay. In brief, cells were incubated with 20 μg/ml puromycin for 30 min and were subsequently harvested in 5× Laemmli sample buffer. After the densitometric determination of the protein concentration, 5 μg of total cellular protein was separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (8.5%). Following the tank-blot Western-transfer on PVDF membranes, they were blocked with dry milk and incubated with α-PMY at a dilution of 1:2000 at 4 °C overnight. After washing, mouse-specific peroxidase-coupled secondary antibodies (1:10.000) were applied for 90 min at RT, and after washing again, ECL-detection was performed for visualization as described above. The intensity of the achieved ECL signal as an indicator for protein synthesis activity was densitometrically evaluated using the Fiji clone of the open source image analysis software ImageJ ( https://fiji.sc/ ).
Click-iT® HPG Alexa Fluor® 488 Protein Synthesis Assay Kit
As an alternative assay for the detection of protein synthesis activity, low-density cultures of HIBCPP cells on glass coverslips (ThermoFisher-Menzel, Braunschweig, Germany) were maintained under low serum conditions and then treated for 24 h with 10 μg/ml α-CT or α-CS. The Na-azide of these antisera was removed by microdialysis using Amicon-Ultra filter units (Merck-Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were then stained using the Click-iT® HPG Alexa Fluor® 488 Protein Synthesis Assay Kit (ThermoFisher, Weltham, MA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and after transfer into PBS, green fluorescence of the reaction product was photographically documented using an Axiophot microscope equipped with epifluorescence (Carl Zeiss, Jena Germany). Fluorescence intensity as an indicator for protein synthesis activity was densitometrically evaluated using the Fiji clone of the open source image analysis software ImageJ ( https://fiji.sc/ ).
2D gel electrophoresis
Isoelectric focusing and 2D gel electrophoresis were performed according to a previously described method [ , ] using a Mini-Protean Gel System (Biorad, München, Germany). In brief, after cultivation on a 6-well plastic multiwell plate (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) and before reaching confluency, cells were harvested in 2× sample collecting buffer (8 mol/l urea, 2% Triton X-100, 1% 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.1% bromophenol-blue), containing also 2.4% of a commercial ampholyte solution (pH 3.5–10; Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany). Protein concentration of the homogenate was determined densitometrically [ ], and for isoelectric focusing, 30 μg of total cellular protein were loaded on 5% polyacrylamide gel slices with 2.4% ampholytes (pH 3.5–10) containing also 50% urea for protein denaturation. Gel slices were then run for 30 min at 150 V followed by 2.5 h at 200 V. After equilibrating the slices for 30 min in electrophoresis sample buffer, they were located on top of an 8% SDS-polyacrylamide gel followed by electrophoretic separation of the proteins according to their molecular weight. After this secondary run, Western transfer onto PVDF-membrane was performed by tank-blot, and the obtained membrane was immunostained with the respective antiserum at a dilution of 1:2000. After photographic documentation, an overlay of the immunoblot with the obtained X-ray film was performed in order to identify the protein spot corresponding to the antibody-specific signal on the X-ray film. Protein spots were then excised from the PVDF-membrane and further processed for mass spectrometric analysis.
Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis
Mass spectrometric analysis and protein identification was done as described previously [ ], after enriching the samples on self-packed pre- and analytical-reversed phase-C18 nano-columns. The eluent was analyzed on a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with a FlexIon nanoSpray source and operated under Excalibur 2.4 software using a data-dependent acquisition method. Protein identification was achieved using the MASCOT software (Matrixscience, London, UK), SwissProt 2015_10 (549,646 sequences; 195,983,064 residues). The search was performed with trypsin as enzyme (up to two missed cleavages) and iodoacetamide and methionine oxidation as a variable modification allowed. Search tolerances were set to 10 ppm for the precursor mass and 15 mmu for fragment masses and ESI-QUAD-TOF specified as the instrument type.