Introduction
The biological behaviors of cell depend on the surrounding microenvironment. It has been demonstrated that molecular constituents regulated by the microenvironment components in both the primary cancer and distant tissue play key roles in the process of cancer metastasis, an important event of estimating therapeutic actions of anticancer drugs. Kynurenine (Kyn), an endogenous substance existing in microenvironment, is generated by catalyzing tryptophan degradation by indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) during tumor or inflammation, or by tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase under physiological conditions in vivo. Recently, it has been reported that the complete response rates and the 3-year overall survival rates of patients, suffering from diffuse large B cell lymphoma and undergoing the R-CHOP therapy, with Kyn ≥ 1.5 μM in serum, were lower than that with Kyn < 1.5 μM in serum, respectively [ ]. This suggests that there is a close relationship between Kyn and cancer metastasis, a main factor of death induced by cancer. Indeed, high levels of Kyn are significantly positively related to lymph node metastasis and tumor size in cervical cancer in vivo [ ]. Therefore, further analyzing the effect of Kyn on molecular constituents of cancer cells contributes to illuminating the mechanism of Kyn-mediated metastasis.
Forkhead box O3 (FOXO3) is implicated in regulation of various cell events, such as longevity, fertility, induction of apoptosis, and protection from oxidative stress. It is also demonstrated that FOXO3 can serve as a therapeutic target in various cancers by mediating the cytostatic and cytotoxic effects of various chemotherapeutic drugs, for example, trastuzumab for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and breast cancer [ ], paclitaxel for breast cancer [ ], doxorubicin for leukemia [ ], and KP372-1 for acute myeloid leukemia [ ]. However, it remains unclear whether Kyn regulates FOXO3 in cancer cells.
MicroRNA (miRNA) regulates gene expression in the post-transcriptional stage by interacting with the 3′-untranslated region (UTR) of the target messenger RNA (mRNA). Growing evidences have demonstrated that aberrantly expressed miRNA can act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors in various types of malignancies [ ]. miR-30b is downregulated in NSCLC tissues [ ]. Furthermore, miR-30b inhibits NSCLC cell invasion and migration by targeting collagen triple helix repeat containing 1 (Cthrc1) [ ]. Most importantly, Ichikawa et al. found that upregulation of miR30b was favorable for the therapeutic actions of trastuzumab, an anticancer drug targeting FOXO3, in breast cancer [ ].
The present study demonstrated that Kyn not only significantly upregulated the FOXO3 protein expression but also markedly reduced the level of miR-30b expression in the lung cancer 95D cells at the same time. In addition, FOXO3 mRNA, a novel target of miR-30b, was also confirmed. More importantly, the downregulation of FOXO3 protein induced by miR-30b was completely abrogated upon Kyn treatment. Lastly, the Kyn-induced increase of migration was significantly reduced when co-administrated with miR-30b, in vitro, which was changed in some degree via regulating FOXO3. These results suggest that miR-30b is involved in the process of Kyn-induced increase of FOXO3 expression.
Materials and methods
Cell culture
The lung cancer 95D cells were cultured in 1640 medium (Hyclone) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibcal), 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and 100 U/ml penicillin. The HEK 293 T cells were cultured in high-glucose DMEM medium (Hyclone) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibcal), 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and 100 U/ml penicillin. All cells were maintained at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO 2 -95% air.
Cell transfection
The transfection experiments in the present paper were performed by the Lipofectamine™ 2000 reagent (11668-019, Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
RT real-time PCR
Total RNA was extracted from the 95D cells, administrated with Kyn (K8625-100MG, Sigma-Aldrich) (30, 50, 100, 200, 500 μM), 50 pmol miR-30b mimics (GenePharma), 50 pmol miR-30b inhibitor (miR-30b i) (GenePharma), 50 μM Kyn + 50 pmol miR-30b mimics, 50 μM Kyn + 50 pmol miR-30b i, or without for 16 h, by Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) or RNeasy kit (Qiagen). The non-administrated cells were considered the control group. Subsequently, EasyScript First-Strand complementary DNA (cDNA) Synthesis SuperMix (Transgen Biotech) was used to synthesize cDNA. CFX96TM real-time system (Bio-Rad) with qPCR software was used to perform real-time PCR analysis. Amplification of cDNA was performed using the TransStart Tip Green qPCR SuperMix (Transgen Biotech) as suggested by the manufacturer’s instructions. Gene names and primer sets are listed in Table 1 . The qPCR cycling conditions were as follows: after an initial denaturation and enzyme activation at 95 °C for 3 min, the amplification was performed by denaturation at 95 °C for 15 s, annealing at 56.5 °C for 15 s, and extension at 72 °C for 30 s. The level of FOXO3 and miR-30b was normalized to GAPDH and small nuclear RNA U6, respectively, in order to control for differences in RNA loading, quality, and cDNA synthesis. Relative gene expression data were analyzed using the 2 −ΔΔCt method. Table 1 Sequences of primers used in this study Gene name Sequences (5′-3′) miRNA-30b RT GTCGTATCCAGTGCAGGGTCCGAGGT ATTCGCACTGGATACGACAGCTGAGT Forward GCCGACTGTAAACATCCTACAC Reverse GTGCAGGGTCCGAGGT snRNA U6 RT/reverse AACGCTTCACGA ATTTGCGT Forward CTCGCTTCGGCAGCACA FOXO3 a Forward CGGACAAACGGCTCACTCT Reverse GGACCCGCATGAATCGACTAT GAPDH Forward TGTTGCCATCAATGACCCCTT Reverse CTCCACGACGTACTCAGCG FOXO3 b Forward GA GAGCTC c AGCAGACCCTCAAAC Reverse CC TCTAGA d ACCCGGAATGGTAACT Mutant forward TGATACCGT A e T T e CAGCTTAACACCT Mutant reverse AAAGGTGTTAAGCTG A e A T e ACGGTATC a Primers for real-time PCR b Primers for plasmid construction c The site of restriction endonuclease Sac I d The site of restriction endonuclease Xba I e The site of mutation
Western blot analysis
Total protein of 95D cells, incubated with Kyn (30, 50, 100, 200, 500 μM), 50 pmol miR-30b mimics, 50 pmol miR-30b i, 50 μM Kyn + 50 pmol miR-30b mimics, 50 μM Kyn + 50 pmol miR-30b i, or without for 16 h, were harvested in RIPA lysis buffer (Pierce) supplemented with PMSF (Solarbio). The non-incubated cells were considered the control group. The sequences for miR-30b mimics: sense 5′-UGUAAACAUCCUACACUCAGCU-3′ and antisense 5′-CUGAGUGUAGGAUGUUUACAUU-3′ were custom synthesized by GenePharma. For miR-30b i: 5′-AGCUGAGUGUAGGAUGUUUACA-3′ was custom synthesized by GenePharma. In brief, samples were loaded per lane of SDS-PAGE gels, electrophoresed, and then transferred onto PVDF membranes (Millipore) using a wet transfer technique. Rabbit anti-FOXO3 antibody (1:1000) (D160364, Sangon Biotech) and mouse anti-β-actin antibody (1:5000) (sc-81178, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were used as the primary antibodies, respectively. Immunoreactivity was detected by incubation with HRP-labeled anti-rabbit/mouse IgG antibody (1:5000) (ab6721, Abcam; sc-2005, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), respectively. Quantitation of FOXO3 expression was done by densitometry and normalized with loading controls (β-actin).
Plasmid construction and luciferase reporter assay
The 3′-UTR wild/mutant fragments containing the predicted FOXO3-miR-30b binding site were amplified by PCR amplification kit (Takara) and PCR site-directed mutagenesis. Subsequently, they were cloned into the pmirGLO dual-luciferase miRNA target expression vector (Promega) using a DNA ligation kit (Takara), respectively. The recombinant plasmids, pmirGLO-FOXO3 (pmirGLO-F) and pmirGLO-FOXO3 mutants (pmirGLO-F mt), and the pmirGLO vector were extracted from LB culture using the PureYield Plasmid Midiprep System (Promega). The related PCR primer sets are listed in Table 1 . HEK 293 T cells were plated in 24-well plates at the concentration of 2 × 10 5 cells/well. miR-30b (20 pmol) and each plasmid (0.4 μg) were co-transfected into the HEK 293 T cells that were used as a vehicle cell to detect the interaction between miR-30b and predicted target. Luciferase activity was measured using the dual-luciferase assay system (Promega) with SYNERGY4 (BioTek®). Firefly luciferase activity was normalized to Renilla luciferase activity to adjust for variations in transfection efficiency among experiments.
Migration assay
Migration assay was conducted in transwell with 8-μm-pore filter inserts. 95D cells, transfected with 50 pmol miR-30b mimics, 50 pmol miR-30b mimics + 4.0 μg pcDNA3.1-FOXO3 plasmid for 24 h, or without, were seeded in the upper chamber at the concentration of 1 × 10 4 /well. The lower chambers were filled with 1640 medium containing selected concentration of Kyn. After 24 h, the inserts were removed, and the cells that migrated to the lower chamber were fixed. The cells were stained with 0.1% crystal violet and captured by a microscope (×64).
Statistical analysis
All the experiments are repeated three times, and data are expressed as the mean ± standard error of mean. Statistical analyses were performed using the professional statistical computer software, SPSS. Differences between groups were determined using a t test. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Upregulation of FOXO3 protein rather than FOXO3 mRNA by Kyn in 95D cells
To analyze the effect of Kyn on FOXO3 expression, real-time PCR and Western blot were performed to detect the change of FOXO3 expression in 95D cells treated with the selected dose of Kyn, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1 a, no significant differences of FOXO3 mRNA in the Kyn (30, 50, 100, 200, and 500 μM) group were found compared to that in the control group. However, a significantly higher FOXO3 protein level was detected in the Kyn (30, 50, 100, 200, and 500 μM) group than that in control group, respectively (Fig. 1 b), which indicated that Kyn promoted the FOXO3 expression due to proteins usually considered as direct executors of biological function in vivo. Fig. 1 Effect of Kyn on FOXO3 and miR-30b expression. Lung cancer 95D cells were administrated with the indicated selected dose of Kyn for 16 h. Real-time PCR ( a ) and Western blot ( b ) were performed to analyze the mRNA/protein level of FOXO3, respectively, as described in the experimental procedures. The miR-30b expression in 95D cells was detected by real-time PCR ( c ). The experiment was repeated three times. * P < 0.05 (versus control), ns not significantly different (versus control)
Downregulation of miR-30b expression by Kyn in 95D cells
In mammalian cells, miRNA tends to result in the change of protein level in the process of gene expression, but it hardly affects the change of transcriptional level in the process of gene expression, which is consistent with the results mentioned above. Meanwhile, upregulation of miR-30b can improve the anticancer actions of trastuzumab [ ], an anticancer drug of targeting FOXO3. Therefore, the effect of Kyn on the miR-30b expression was analyzed by real-time PCR. As shown in Fig. 1 c, the level of miR-30b was significantly decreased in the 50 μM Kyn group compared to that in the control group. By contrast, no significant differences were detected between other Kyn (30, 100, 200, 500 μM) group and control group (Fig. 1 c). These findings indicated that there might be a direct interaction between miR-30b and FOXO3.
FOXO3, a novel target of miR-30b
As described earlier, a negative relationship between FOXO3 protein and miR-30b levels in 95D cells treated with 50 μM Kyn was observed. Thus, luciferase reporter assay system was performed to analyze the direct interaction between miR-30b and FOXO3 mRNA. The result from the web-accessible miRNA database search programs (TargetScan [ ]) showed that the FOXO3 mRNA was a candidate target for miR-30b. The program predicted one miRNA recognition element (MRE) within the FOXO3 3′-UTR for miR-30b (Fig. 2 a). UCSC blat tool ( http://genome.ucsc.edu ) was performed to analyze the conservation status of the MRE among animals, and it was conserved in Homo sapiens , Pan troglodytes , Macaca mulatta , Otolemur garnettii , Canis familiaris , Mus musculus , Cavia porcellus , Oryctolagus cuniculus , and Erinaceus europaeus (Fig. 2 b). Next, the recombinant plasmids, pmirGLO-F and pmirGLO-F mt, were constructed. Related fragments/plasmids—wild FOXO3 fragment, mutant FOXO3 fragment, pmirGLO vector, pmirGLO-F, and pmirGLO-F mt—were examined using agarose gel electrophoresis analysis (Fig. 2 c), and the data from sequencing indicated that the recombinant plasmids—pmirGLO-F and pmirGLO-F mt—were obtained successfully (Fig. 2 d). After co-transfection with pmirGLO/pmirGLO-F/pmirGLO-F mt and miR-30b mimics/miR-30b i to HEK 293 T cells for 48 h, real-time PCR and luciferase reporter assay were performed to analyze the transfection efficiency (data not shown) and the direct interaction between miR-30b and FOXO3, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2 e, compared with the pmirGLO + miR-30b group, luciferase activity in the pmirGLO-F + miR-30b group was significantly reduced, whereas there were no significant differences in luciferase activity between pmirGLO + miR-30b group and pmirGLO-F mt + miR-30b group, which suggested that FOXO3 mRNA was a novel target of miR-30b. Fig. 2 FOXO3 is a novel target of miR-30b. The position of predicted MRE located in FOXO3 3′-UTR sequence and pairing status of miR-30b and predicted MER sequences were shown in a . Conservation status of predicted MRE in Hsa, Ptr, Mml, Oga, Cfa, Mmu, Cpo, Ocu, and Eeu was represented in b . Agarose gel electrophoresis assayed related fragments, plasmids involving in the recombinant plasmids, pmirGLO-F, and pmirGLO-F mt ( c ); DL1000 Marker ( lane 1 ), objective fragment of wild type ( lane 2 ), forward objective fragment of mutant type ( lane 3 ), reverse objective fragment of mutant type ( lane 4 ), completely objective fragment of mutant ( lane 5 ), pmirGLO vector ( lane 6 ), pmirGLO-F ( lane 7 ), double enzyme digestion of pmirGLO-F ( lane 8 ), pmirGLO-F mt ( lane 9 ), double enzyme digestion of pmirGLO-F mt ( lane 10 ), and DL15000 Marker ( lane 11 ). Objective fragments in pmirGLO-F and pmirGLO-F mt were evaluated using sequencing ( d ). Luciferase activity was detected using a dual-luciferase assay system at 48 h after co-transfection ( e ) and repeated three times. The underline indicates the mutant site in this figure. * P < 0.05 (versus pmirGLO + miR-30b), ns not significantly different (versus pmirGLO + miR-30b)
Involvement of miR-30b in the process of Kyn-induced increase of FOXO3 protein
The transfection efficiency of miR-30b mimics and the miR30b i was analyzed using real-time PCR (data not shown). Real-time PCR and Western blot were performed to examine the role of miR-30b in the increase of FOXO3 protein induced by Kyn, respectively. As we expected, no significant differences in FOXO3 mRNA between control group and miR-30b/miR-30b i group were detected, when miR-30b expression level changed (Fig. 3 a). Similarly, FOXO3 mRNA level was not markedly altered in 95D cells administrated with Kyn combined with miR-30b/miR-30b i compared with Kyn alone (Fig. 3 a). However, upregulation of miR-30b significantly attenuated the level of FOXO3 protein (Fig. 3 b). Meanwhile, Kyn-induced upregulation of FOXO3 protein was reduced on miR-30b mimics treatment. More importantly, miR-30b-mediated suppression of FOXO3 protein was significantly attenuated when co-administrated with 50 μM Kyn (Fig. 3 b), which suggested that miR-30b was involved in the process of Kyn-induced increase of FOXO3 protein. Fig. 3 Effect of miR-30b on FOXO3 expression induced by Kyn. 95D cells were incubated with the indicated way for 16 h. Real-time PCR ( a ) and Western blot ( b ) were performed to analyze the mRNA/protein level of FOXO3, respectively, as described in the experimental procedures. The experiment was repeated three times. * P < 0.05 (versus control); # P < 0.05 (versus miR-30b)
Promoting migration by Kyn via miR-30b in 95D cells
Metastasis plays important roles in therapeutic actions of anticancer drugs, while FOXO3 is the therapeutic target of some anticancer drugs. Moreover, it has been confirmed that the change of FOXO3 expression is a positive factor in the cell migration, a measure of tumor metastasis [ ]. Therefore, on the basis of regulating FOXO3 protein by Kyn, the effect of Kyn on migration was further analyzed by Transwell in vitro. As shown in Fig. 4 , the selected concentration of Kyn (30, 50, 100, 200, and 500 μM) in this study promoted migration in 95D cells in vitro, respectively. Furthermore, the Kyn-induced increase of migration was reduced on miR-30b mimics treatment (Fig. 5 ). More importantly, the overexpression of FOXO3 induced by transfecting pcDNA3.1-FOXO3 attenuated the effect of miR-30b on the Kyn-mediated upregulation of migration in 95D cells (Fig. 5 ). These data indicated that miR-30b altered the Kyn-induced increase of migration in some degree via regulating FOXO3. Fig. 4 Effect of Kyn on cell migration. 95D cells were seed in the inserts. Indicated selected concentration of Kyn was supplemented in 1640 medium placed in the lower chambers. Cell migration was determined as described in the experimental procedures. Results were determined in three replicate experiments, and significant upregulation of cell migration was shown Fig. 5 Effect of miR-30b on Kyn-induced increase of migration. 95D cells were transfected with miR-30b mimics, miR-30b mimics + pcDNA3.1-FOXO3, or without, respectively. After 24 h, cells were seed in the inserts. Kyn (50 μM) was added in 1640 medium placed in the lower chambers. Cell migration was analyzed as described in the experimental procedures. Results were determined in three replicate experiments
Discussions
Metastasis is the leading cause of death induced by cancer. Some anticancer drugs, targeting FOXO3, have been applied to clinical practice. Therefore, there is a close relationship between FOXO3 and metastasis. Indeed, FOXO3 as a necessary component for FOXP3 expression, a Treg molecular marker, is found in T cells [ ]. For example, FOXO3 is involved in the process of TGF-β-induced increase of FOXP3 [ ]. These results suggest that FOXO3 expression contributes to the generation of Treg cells that inhibit immune responses in order to cancer cell growth and metastasis, which partly explains the reason why FOXO3 can be used as a therapeutic target for anticancer drugs. Further study also confirmed that FOXO3 promoted tumor cell invasion through the induction of matrix metalloproteinases [ ].
Molecular constituents regulated by the microenvironment components in cancer cells profoundly influence the process of cancer metastasis. Therefore, we analyze whether Kyn, a physiological substance existing in the microenvironment, promoting the lymph node metastasis of cervical cancer cells in vivo [ ], is capable of regulating FOXO3 expression. Firstly, we found that the FOXO3 protein was significantly increased with Kyn concentration elevation, which was consistent with the phenomenon, that the high level of Kyn in the serum of patients suffering from cancer promoted the metastasis of cancer cells and reduced the survival rate of the patients with cancer [ , ]. However, we must recognize that Kyn may be decomposed into other metabolites by related enzymes, such as quinolinic acid. Although the role of regulating FOXO3 by downstream metabolites of Kyn is still not clear, the regulatory action should be not ignored. For example, there is close relationship between quinolinic acid and brain disease, such as Alzheimer’s disease largely induced by β-amyloid precursor protein (APP) [ ]. While, the interaction between APP in cancer cells with strong invasive ability and death receptor 6 in vascular endothelial cells induces endothelial cell death [ ], which promotes cancer cells into the blood in order for them to metastasize in vivo. Meanwhile, regulating physiological and biochemical processes complies with energy-saving principle [ ], so we infer that quinolinic acid probably regulates the FOXO3 expression. Therefore, it is more appropriate that Kyn compounds induce the expression of FOXO3.
However, compared with FOXO3 protein, no similar characteristics in FOXO3 mRNA regulated by Kyn were found, which indicated that miRNA might play a key role in Kyn-mediated increase of FOXO3 due to miRNA’s mechanism that miRNA only induced translational repression when complementarity between miRNA and target mRNA was only partial in mammalian cells, in which the key was the complementarity between the “seed region” located in miRNA and the target mRNA [ , ]. It has been reported that upregulated miR-30b expression was contributable to therapeutic effect of trastuzumab, targeting FOXO3 [ ]. Thus, we further analyzed the effect of Kyn on miR-30b expression. The results showed that only 50 μM Kyn was able to reduce miR-30b in 95D cells, which was supported by the data that downregulation of miR-30b was induced by Kyn in B cells in vitro [ , ]. However, why did other selected dose of Kyn fail to attenuate miR-30b in 95D cells? Firstly, Kyn induced DRE-luciferase activity in glioma cells, with a concentration giving half-maximal response of 36.6 μM [ ]. Therefore, we speculate that the reason that 30 μM Kyn fails to cause significant changes of miR-30b may largely contribute to low concentration. Additionally, when the concentration of Kyn is higher than 50 μM, the increase of DRE-luciferase activity gets in the relative plateau stage [ ], which is partly in accordance with the “tide” model; tight feedback between co-stimulatory factors and co-inhibitory factors maintains that the responses induced by stimulants are tuned and returned to baseline [ ]. So, the phenomenon that higher concentrations of Kyn (100, 200, 500 μM) fail to cause the significant differences of miR-30b may partly contribute to co-inhibitory factors that play a leading role in the effect of Kyn (100, 200, 500 μM) on miR-30b expression.
Although miR-30b suppressing metastasis was also described in NSCLC by regulating Cthrc1 [ ], in hepatoma cells by regulating Snail [ ], and in gastric cancer cells by targeting EIF5A2 [ ], some miRNA may target hundreds of different mRNAs [ ]. Subsequently, bioinformatics was performed to predict the direct interaction between miR-30b and FOXO3. Moreover, the results from the double luciferase reporter system showed that FOXO3 mRNA was the novel target of miR-30b. Besides FOXO3, a necessary component for FOXP3, a classic biomarker of Treg, it was also reported that the key negatively transcriptional factors controlling the B cell terminal differentiation, Bach2 [ , ] and Bcl6 [ ], were also the target of miR-30b. Downregulation of miR-30b will increase the expression of FOXO3, Bach2, and Bcl6, which suppresses immune responses and facilitates cancer cell to evade immune response surveillance and metastasize.
In addition, we analyzed the contribution of miRNA to Kyn-induced increase of FOXO3 and found that Kyn significantly reduced miR-30b-mediated suppression of FOXO3 expression, which demonstrated that miR-30b was involved in the process of Kyn-induced increase of FOXO3. Interestingly, miR-30b inhibitor failed to rescue the FOXO3 expression in the presence of Kyn. The cause may be that the sequence of miR-30b inhibitor is similar to that of miR-30b* strand. Despite the general consensus that miRNA*s have no regulatory activity, recent publications have provided evidence that the abundance, possible function, and physiological relevance of miRNA*s have been underestimated [ ]. Therefore, we speculate that there is an antagonism between miR-30b inhibitor and Kyn, which leads to the phenomenon.
Lastly, promoting migration of 95D cells by Kyn was also confirmed in vitro, which was in accordance with the phenomenon that high concentration of Kyn is markedly positively related to lymph node metastasis in cervical cancer in vivo [ ]. Furthermore, miR-30b was involved in the process of Kyn-induced increase of migration. More importantly, the overexpression of FOXO3 attenuated the effect of miR-30b on the Kyn-mediated upregulation of migration. These findings were consistent with the previous finding that an inverse correlation between expression of SIX1, an epithelial-mesenchymal transition promoting gene, and miR-30b has been observed both in primary colorectal cancer specimens and liver metastasis. Moreover, forced expression of miR-30b inhibited colorectal cancer cell migration and invasion in vitro via its target gene SIX1 [ ].
Taken together, our data indicate that Kyn promotes FOXO3 expression at least partly through downregulating miR-30b in 95D cells, that there is a direct interaction between miR-30b and FOXO3 mRNA, and that miR-30b and FOXO3 was involved in the process of Kyn-induced increase of migration. The results further clarify the regulatory role of Kyn in metastasis of cancer cells.
Abbreviations APP, β-amyloid precursor protein; FOXO3, forkhead box O3; IDO, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase; Kyn, kynurenine; NSCLC, non-small cell lung cancer; pmirGLO-F, pmirGLO-FOXO3; pmirGLO-F mt, pmirGLO-FOXO3 mt