Introduction
Neural tissue inflammation, including acute and chronic neurodegenerative disorders, such as Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, and stroke, seriously affect human’s health. The pathogenesis of neural inflammation is not fully understood [ ]. Microglial cells are the macrophage-like cells in the central nervous system. In the healthy neural tissue, microglial cells fulfill the functions of the immune surveillance [ ]. While in inflammatory environment, microglial cells become active and motile and play a crucial role in the initiation of inflammation in the local tissue [ ]. The activated microglial cells release reactive oxygen species, growth factors, and cytokines, which are involved in the acute and chronic phase of the disease in the neural tissue, and are important during subsequent regeneration [ ]. Although the research in this area advanced rapidly in the recent years, the regulation of microglial cells is not fully understood.
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is one of major proinflammatory cytokines released by activated microglial cells [ ]. TNF is a cytokine involved in systemic inflammation and contributes to the acute phase inflammatory reaction [ ]. TNF is mainly produced by activated macrophages; it also can be produced by most immune cells, such as mast cells, eosinophils, CD4 + T cells, natural killer cells, and microglial cells [ ]. TNF is an endogenous pyrogen and can induce fever, cell apoptosis, and inflammation [ ]. Published data indicate that TNF production is implicated in a large number of human diseases, such as major depression [ ], Alzheimer’s disease [ ], cancer [ ], and inflammatory bowel disease [ ]. The regulation of TNF expression is to be further investigated.
Published data indicate that vitamin D receptor (VDR) is associated with the TNF-related disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease [ ]. Vitamin D3 (VitD3) is one of the fat-soluble vitamins and mainly associated with the absorption of calcium and bone metabolism. In recent years, it has been found that VitD3 is also involved in the immune regulation and multiple biochemical activities (for the intensive review refer to [ , , , ]). VDR mediates the effects of VitD3. Whether VDR is involved in the regulation of TNF in microglial cells has not been investigated.
It was found that Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) regulates the expression of TNF in macrophages [ ]. SEB is an enterotoxin produced by the Gram-positive bacteria Staphylococcus aureus . S. aureus distributed extensively in the human living environment as well as on the surface of the body and the gastrointestinal tract [ ]. After release from S. aureus, SEB may be absorbed into the body to interact with immune cells [ ]. However, whether SEB modulates the expression of TNF in microglial cells is unclear.
Based on the information above, we hypothesize that the VDR plays an important role in the regulation of TNF expression in microglial cells. To test the hypothesis, we carried out this study. The results showed that SEB increased the expression of TNF in microglial cells, which can be attenuated by calcitriol (an active form of VitD3) via a mechanism of modulation of TNF gene transcription.
Materials and methods
Reagents
The shRNA kit for VDR, antibodies to TNF, VDR, and LITAF were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotech (Santa Cruz, CA). The reagents for real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) and Western blotting were purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). The reagents for microglial cell isolation, SEB, IP (immunoprecipitation), and ChIP (chromatin IP) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO).
Mice
C57BL/6 and IL-10 −/− mice were purchased from the Beijing Experimental Animal Center (Beijing, China). The mice were maintained in a specific pathogen-free facility and were allowed to free access food and water. The experimental procedures were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee at China PLA General Hospital.
Preparation of mouse microglial cells
C57B/6 mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation. The brain tissue was collected. Following published procedures [ ] with modification, the brains were homogenized and filtered through 150 and 60 μm cell strainers. The homogenates were digested in 0.5 mg/ml collagenase at 37 °C for 30 min with mild agitation. The cells were collected by centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended in 37% Percoll and added to another conical tube containing an equal volume of 70% Percoll and then an equal volume of 30% Percoll and 2 ml of HBSS were added on top. The samples were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 20 min. Microglial cells were collected from the interphase of the 37%/70% percoll.
Cell culture
Microglial cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium, which was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM l -glutamine, 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin, and 100 U/ml penicillin. The medium was changed every 2 to 3 days. The cell viability was greater than 99% as checked by Trypan blue exclusion assay before using for further experiments.
Real-time quantitative PCR
The total RNA was extracted from the cells with the TRIzol reagents. The first straind of the DNA was synthesized with a reverse transcription kit following the manufacturer instructions. The samples were amplified in a qPCR device with the SYBR Green Master Mix in the presence of primers of interest, which include TNF (aatggcctccctctcatcag and cccttgaagagaacctggga), VDR (tatgacctgtgaaggctgca and ctgcacctcctcatctgtga), and IL-10 (ataactgcacccacttccca and gggcatcacttctaccaggt). The results were normalized into the fold change against that of the housekeeping gene, ACTB (beta-actin).
Preparation of protein extracts
The microglial cells were collected from relevant experiments. The cells were incubated with lysis buffer at 4 °C for 15 min and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected as the cytosolic extract. The pellet was incubated with nuclear extract buffer for 15 min at 4 °C, followed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected as the nuclear extract. The protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford method.
Western blotting
The total proteins were extracted from the cells. The proteins were fractioned by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred onto a PVDF membrane. The membrane was incubated with 5% skim milk, followed by incubating with the primary antibodies of interest overnight at 4 °C before washing with TBST (Tris-buffered saline-Tween 20), incubating with peroxidase-conjugated second antibodies at room temperature for 2 h and washing with TBST. The immune blots on the membrane were developed using enhanced chemiluminescence and photographed with an imaging device.
Assessment of the permeability of the blood brain barrier to SEB in mice
Mice were intraperitoneally injected with SEB at (in μg/mouse) 0, 5, 10, or 20 respectively. The mice were sacrificed 2 h later. The brain tissue was excised and subjected to Western blotting to detect the SEB.
Assessment of the effect of SEB on the expression of VDR in microglial cells
Microglial cells were prepared as described above. The cells were cultured (10 6 cells/ml) in the presence of SEB at gradient concentrations (0–1 μg/ml) together with the presence of calcitriol at 10 nM (to ensure the expression of VDR at detectable levels). After culturing for 48 h, the cells were collected and analyzed by RT-qPCR and Western blotting.
VDR RNA interference in microglial cells
The VDR gene was knocked down in microglial cells with a shRNA kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. The effects of RNA interference (RNAi) were checked by Western blotting.
Immunoprecipitation
The nuclear extracts were precleared by incubating with protein G agarose for 2 h at 4 °C and incubated with antibodies of interest or isotype IgG overnight at 4 °C. The immune complexes were precipitated by incubating with protein G agarose for 2 h at 4 °C and eluted with an eluting buffer. The proteins were quantified with the BCA method and subjected to Western blotting.
Chromatin IP
The microglial cells were collected and fixed with 1% formalin for 15 min and sonicated to shear the DNA to small pieces (200–500 bp). The cell lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation (IP) and followed by recovering the DNA with a DNA recovery kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. The DNA was analyzed by qPCR with the procedures described above and the presence of the TNF promoter primers (gggttagatctcagagcgct and gtccaggtctgacttcccaa). The results were presented as fold change against the input.
Statistics
The difference between groups was determined by Student’s t test. P < 0.05 was set as the criterion of significance.
Results
VitD3 attenuated SEB induced TNF expression by microglial cells
TNF is a critical proinflammatory cytokine in neural inflammation. The regulatory mechanism is to be further investigated. SEB is one of the factors to induce TNF expression in immune cells [ ]. Whether SEB induces TNF in microglial cells has not previously been investigated. In the first approach, we treated mice with SEB by intraperitoneal injection. SEB was detected in the brain tissue as shown by Western blotting (Fig. 1a ), indicating that SEB can pass across the blood-brain barrier. We then exposed microglial cells to SEB in the culture at gradient concentrations for 48 h. The microglial cells were collected from the culture and analyzed by RT-qPCR and Western blotting. The results showed that SEB increased the expression of TNF at both mRNA and protein levels in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1b ). Since VitD3 has immune regulatory functions [ ], we wondered if VitD3 could attenuate the effects of SEB on the SEB-induced TNF expression in microglial cells. To this end, we exposed microglial cells to both SEB and calcitriol in the culture for 48 h. Indeed, the presence of calcitriol, the active form of VitD3, inhibited SEB-induced TNF expression in the microglial cells in a VitD3 concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 1c ). The results indicate that SEB can upregulate TNF expression in microglial cells, which can be attenuated by VitD3. In addition, exposure to SEB did not affect the expression of VDR in microglial cells (Fig. 2F-G ). Fig. 1 Calcitriol blocks the SEB-increased TNF in microglial cells. a The levels of SEB in mouse brain tissue ( n = 3/group) after SEB injection with one of the doses denoted below the gel image. b The levels of TNF in microglial cells after exposure to SEB in the culture for 48 h. c The levels of TNF in microglial cells after exposure to both SEB and calcitriol in the culture for 48 h. The data are presented as mean ± SD. * p < 0.01, compared with the dose 0 group. The data represent three independent experiments Fig. 2 VDR mediates the effects of calcitriol in suppressing TNF in microglial cells. a, b VDR expression in microglial cells after exposure to calcitriol in the culture for 48 h. c The results of VDR RNAi. d, e TNF expression in microglial cells after exposure to SEB and calcitriol in the culture for 48 h. f, g The expression of VDR in microglial cells after exposure to SEB for 48 h in the presence of calcitriol in the culture. The data of bars are mean ± SD. * p < 0.01, compared to the 0 group ( a ) or the wild type ( d ). The data represent three independent experiments
VDR mediates the effects of VitD3 on suppressing SEB-induced TNF expression by microglial cells
Published data indicate that VDR is also involved in immune regulatory functions [ ]. We next tested the role of VDR in SEB-induced TNF expression by microglial cells. Microglial cells were cultured in the presence of calcitriol at gradient concentrations for 48 h. As analyzed by RT-qPCR and Western blotting, exposure to calcitriol increased the expression of VDR in microglial cells in a calcitriol concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 2a , b). The results implicate that VitD3 increases the expression of VDR and blocks SEB-increased TNF expression in microglial cells. To test the inference, we knocked down the VDR gene expression in microglial cells by transducing the cells with the VDR shRNA-carrying lentivirus (Fig. 2c ). The VDR-deficient and VDR-sufficient microglial cells were stimulated with SEB in the culture in the presence of calcitriol for 48 h. Indeed, the presence of calcitriol did not block SEB-induced TNF expression in VDR-deficient microglial cells (Fig. 2d , e). These data suggest that VDR mediates the effects of calcitriol in the suppression of the SEB-induced TNF expression in microglial cells.
VDR modulates the activities of the TNF promoter to prevent TNF expression in microglial cells
We next sought a further insight into the mechanism by which VitD3 inhibits the TNF expression in microglial cells. The data reported above imply that VDR may inhibit the TNF promoter activities in microglial cells. To test this, after exposure to SEB and calcitriol in the culture for 48 h, the microglial cells were collected and analyzed by chromatin IP (ChIP). The results showed that the transcription factor for TNF, LITAF, bound to the TNF promoter locus in microglial cells after exposure to SEB in the culture in a SEB concentration-dependent manner. The presence of calcitriol inhibited the binding of LITAF to the TNF promoter (Fig. 3a ). The results indicate that VitD3 can prevent LITAF from binding the TNF promoter in microglial cells. To elucidate if VDR mediates the effects of calcitriol on suppressing the binding, we exposed VDR-deficient microglial cells to SEB and calcitriol in the culture for 48 h. The inhibitory effect of calcitriol, on suppressing the LITAF binding to the TNF promoter, was abolished (Fig. 3a ). We further found a complex of VDR and LITAF in microglial cells after exposure to calcitriol (Fig. 3b ). These data suggest that VDR can bind LITAF to prevent LITAF from binding to the TNF promoter in microglial cells. Fig. 3 VitD prevents LITAF from binding the TNF promoter in microglial cells. a The levels (mean ± SD) of LITAF at the TNF promoter locus in microglial cells after the treatment denoted on the X-axis. b The complex of VDR and LITAF in microglial cells. The data represent three independent experiments. * p < 0.01, compared with the 0 group
VitD3 induces IL-10 expression by SEB-primed microglial cells to partially suppress TNF expression
Published data suggest that IL-10 can inhibit TNF [ ], and calcitriol increases IL-10 formation [ ]. We wondered whether VitD3 also increases IL-10 expression in microglial cells; the IL-10 contributes to the suppression of TNF. Thus, we further tested the expression of IL-10 by microglial cells after exposure to SEB and/or calcitriol. The results showed that exposure of microglial cells to SEB decreased the expression of IL-10, exposure to calcitriol or SEB/calcitriol increased the expression of IL-10, which was abolished by knocking down the VDR gene in microglial cells (Fig. 4a ). The results demonstrate that activated VitD3 can increase the expression of IL-10 in microglial cells even in those primed by SEB. To elucidate if the VitD3-induced IL-10 expression contributes to the suppression of TNF in microglial cells, we exposed IL-10 −/− microglial cells to calcitriol and/or SEB in the culture for 48 h. The microglial cells were analyzed by RT-qPCR. The results showed that the anti-TNF effects of calcitriol were partially abolished in the IL-10 −/− microglial cells (Fig. 4b ). Fig. 4 Induction of IL-10 is involved, in part, in calcitriol-modulated TNF expression in microglial cells. The bars (mean ± SD) indicate the levels of IL-10 mRNA ( a ) and TNF mRNA ( b ) in microglial cells after the treatment denoted on the X-axis. SEB, 1 μg/ml. Calcitriol, 10 nM. VDR −/− VDR-deficient microglial cells. Control : Microglial cells were treated with control shRNA. IL-10 −/− : IL-10-deficient microglial cells. The data were summarized from three independent experiments
Discussion
To elucidate the regulation of TNF expression in microglial cells is of significance in further understanding the pathogenesis of inflammatory disorders in the neural system. The present study observed that exposure to SEB increased the expression of TNF in microglial cells in the culture, which could be blocked by the presence of VitD3.
Although the primary role of microglial cells is to maintain the homeostasis of the neural tissue, upon activation, microglial cells can release a variety of immune cytokines, including interferon-γ, IL-1α, IL-1β, cytotoxic mediators, and TNF. Microglial cells express Toll-like receptors (TLR) and are able to recognize and respond to microglial stimuli to release proinflammatory cytokines [ ]. Our data are in line with published data [ ] by showing that, after exposure to SEB in the culture, the expression of TNF was found in microglial cells. Others also found that SEB induced TNF expression in macrophages [ ] and CD4 + T cells [ ]. TNF is one of the major proinflammatory cytokines in some neural diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease [ ] and Parkinson’s disease [ ]. Whether or how much SEB can contribute to the pathogenesis of these diseases is worth being investigated.
Recent reports indicate that VDR is associated with immune regulation [ ]. Our data are consistent with this statement by revealing a novel aspect in the regulation of TNF expression in microglial cells. Supportive data have been reported. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, VDR was found binding to 1541 protein coding genes out of 2997 genes in B cells and monocytes, indicating a pivotal role of VDR in the regulation of protein expression in these cells [ ]. VDR also bound RXRα, the gene transcription factor of RelB, one of the members of the nuclear factor-κB, to form a complex to repress the expression of RelB [ ]. Our study also showed that VDR bound LITAF to form a complex to repress the expression of TNF in microglial cells. The information above suggests that VDR can modulate the gene expression in a number of cell types, including microglial cells.
The data show that VitD3 can regulate the expression of TNF in microglial cells, in which VDR is a critical molecule to mediate the effects of VitD3. VitD3 deficiency or insufficiency is associated with the pathogenesis of a number of diseases, such as low VitD3 concentration is associated with depression [ ], and VitD3 deficiency is found in a large part of women with asthma. The severity of VitD3 deficiency is correlated with poor asthma control [ ]. The VitD3 deficiency also causes the low expression of VDR, which plays a role in the development of airway immune disorders [ ]. Our data also show that the presence of VitD3 efficiently prevented the SEB-induced TNF expression. Therefore, it is necessary to further investigate to use VitD3 supplements to attenuate or inhibit the microglial cell-derived TNF-related neural disorders.
In summary, the present data show that VDR can suppress the expression of TNF in microglial cells.