Introduction
It is critical to understand both the innate and adaptive arms of the immune system in order to explore the pathogenesis of HIV infection. Once in contact with the sites of infection or circulating in the blood, HIV is detected or captured by immune cells which express the necessary receptors and co-receptors needed for infection.
When the host comes in contact with the viral particle, mucosal DCs, tissue macrophages and mucosal resident T cells are among the first cells to be infected. They express the co-receptors CXCR4 or CCR5, key molecules in the fusion of the virus with the cell membrane [ , , ]. The initial interaction between the viral protein gp120 and the CD4 receptor induces conformational changes in the viral protein, exposing a region capable of interacting with a co-receptor (CCR5 or CXCR4). Next, the gp41 viral fusion peptide is inserted into the membrane, allowing the virus particle into the cell. Then, the partial cleavage of the viral capsid occurs and it results in the release of viral genetic material and proteins in the cytoplasm of infected cells [ ].
At the beginning of infection, the tissue-resident cells elicit innate immune responses and release cytokines and chemokines that result in the recruitment of new cells to the tissue, such as neutrophils and NK cells. Resident DCs and newly recruited infected cells migrate to the draining lymph nodes and interact with CD4 + CCR5 + T lymphocytes, thus spreading the infection. Therefore, despite starting the adaptive immune response against the newly installed infection, APCs promote viral spread in the secondary lymphoid organs and contribute directly to the establishment of systemic infection. The free circulating virus may also be captured or directly infect circulating cells such as eosinophils, γδ T cells, monocytes and neutrophils, and it may even reach the bone marrow and infect progenitor cells, establishing new viral reservoirs. Due to the increased viral load in the plasma, as well as the establishment of a viral reservoir and sustained activation of the immune response, the spread of infection is characterized by an increased number of newly infected cells and the progressive reduction in the number of CD4 + T cells present in the peripheral blood and mucosa [ ].
This review will focus on the phenotype and function of innate immune cells during HIV infection and disease progression. We will describe how monocytes, DCs, eosinophils, neutrophils, basophils, NK cells, NKT cells and γδ T cells contribute to the primary infection and/or disease progression. We cannot exclude the relevance of other innate cells during infection and disease progression, such as macrophages, CD34 + progenitor cells, innate lymphoid cells (ILCs). Figure 1 summarizes the role of these cells in the pathogenesis of HIV infection, as well as altered functions of these cells, and indicates when the frequency of these cells can be altered. However, our discussion relied on the eight cell types mentioned above, which allows a more thorough discussion of the chosen cells. Fig. 1 Schematic representation of HIV infection effects and action on innate immune system. Each innate immune cell reacts in a unique manner following HIV infection, early or late in pathogenesis. Here, we described differences in cell frequency, showing whether cell types are increased or reduced and whether there are alterations in specific cell subsets. We also pointed the main altered functions of each innate cell and their role in HIV pathogenesis, indicating their major contribution to the disease progression, N . R .: not reported
Monocytes: key cells in HIV pathogenesis
Monocytes are circulating mononuclear cells from the myeloid lineage that play a crucial role in tissue homeostasis and immunity. In humans, they represent approximately 10 % of nucleated cells in the blood and are also numerous in the spleen and lungs [ , ]. Different monocyte subsets are described according to their expression of CD14 and CD16. In healthy subjects, 80–90 % of circulating monocytes are CD14 high CD16 − CCR2 high CX3CR1 low , known as classical monocytes. The remaining monocytes express CD16 and are subdivided into intermediate monocytes (CD14 high CD16 + CCR2 mid CX3CR1 high ) and non-classic or patrolling monocytes (CD14 dim CD16 + CCR2 low CX3CR1 high ) [ , ]. Part of the mononuclear phagocyte system, these cells are strategic players during inflammation and pathogen challenge [ ].
Monocytes are key cells in HIV pathogenesis, since their activation is fundamental to the systemic inflammation that leads to end-organ damage and multimorbidity. Nevertheless, the effects of HIV on monocytes are mostly indirect, since these cells are not frequently infected. Instead, they are affected by immune overstimulation caused by the typical intestinal bacterial translocation that occurs during viral infections [ ]. Less than 0.1 % of blood monocytes harbor HIV [ ]; however, specific cell subsets increase in the blood, and this event may be related to the AIDS-associated symptoms including neurological disorders [ , ]. In fact, studies in macaque models reveal that the increased monocyte turnover in the bone marrow was correlated with disease severity and progression [ , ]. Between the identified subsets of monocytes, the CD16 + population, characterized as a transitional stage between monocytes and macrophages [ , ] or DCs [ , , , ], is elevated in untreated and treated HIV-infected patients [ , , , , ], and the intermediate subset is found to be correlated with plasma inflammatory biomarkers that predict morbidity and mortality [ ]. The initial CD16 + subset accumulation is believed to result from the immune system dysregulation, rather than from a direct consequence of HIV infection. Ellery et al. [ ] described that CD16 + cells are more permissive to infection and preferentially harbor HIV-1 when compared to other monocytes subtypes. The susceptibility of these cells is associated with higher CCR5 expression, suggesting that they are better supporters of HIV-1 replication after entry. The authors also found that high molecular mass inactive complexes of apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like 3G (APOBEC3G) were observed in CD16 + monocytes, similar to those observed in highly permissive T cells. On the other hand, CD14 high CD16 − monocytes contained low molecular mass active APOBEC3G, suggesting this is a mechanism of resistance to HIV-1 infection in these cells [ ]. Therefore, this specific CD16 + population, rather than other monocytes subtypes, is a source of viral persistence and plays an important role in HIV-1 dissemination [ , ].
The monocyte surface molecules have also been implicated in HIV pathogenesis. The co-receptor CD14, which recognizes LPS along with TLR4, and CD163, the monocyte- and macrophage-specific scavenger receptor for hemoglobin, are frequently shed in their soluble forms sCD14 and sCD163 during monocyte activation. Both are important biomarkers of microbial translocation and immune activation in HIV infection and are associated with disease progression, morbidity and mortality [ , , ]. Furthermore, CD53 and CD81, membrane-organizing proteins from the tetraspanin family, have been implicated in HIV permissiveness on CD14 + CD16 + cells [ , , ].
In addition to the role played by monocyte surface protein expression in the pathogenesis of AIDS, cellular function is also altered in multiple ways during HIV infection. TLR expression is increased in chronic viraemic HIV-1 [ , ], inducing higher responsiveness to pathogenic stimuli. As consequence, these cells display aberrant cytokine production in different ways. IP-10 production by monocytes via TLR7/9-dependent pathways is strongly enhanced in vitro after virus stimulation [ ], and TNF-α production by a specific CD14 + CD16 high M-DC8 monocyte population is increased in response to LPS [ ]. When CD16 + monocytes isolated from untreated HIV-1 infected patients are stimulated in vitro with commensal enteric Escherichia coli , IL-23 levels are significantly increased [ ]. However, IFN-γ and type-1 IFN responses are impaired after ex vivo CpG ODN stimulation of monocytes during viral infection [ , ]. Further, some reports have been shown that monocytes could have a prominent dysfunction on their ability to phagocyte and kill opportunistic pathogens such as T. gondii , Candida pseudotropicalis , Porphyromonas gingivalis , Fusobacterium nucleatum , C. neoformans and S. aureus [ , , , , , , , , , ]. Altogether, these events may contribute to the immune dysfunction, which induces and perpetuates the systemic immune activation that underlies HIV pathogenesis and disease progression.
Dendritic cells: a strategic reservoir for the virus
As well as monocytes, dendritic cells originate from the common granulocyte–monocyte progenitors. But once in periphery, DCs are professional APCs where they capture and process antigens, mature and then migrate to T cell-rich areas of lymphoid organs resulting in the activation of naïve and resting T cells, thus initiating the adaptive immune response [ ]. DCs are present in most tissues, but their presence in the skin, in the blood, and particularly in the mucosal surfaces guarantees that these cells have the earliest contact with pathogens (including viruses) during infection [ ].
It is well known that DCs are the primary infected cells during sexual transmission of the virus [ ]. In fact, follicular DCs act as long-term reservoirs, as they are able to trap and maintain large quantities of HIV on their surface for prolonged periods [ , , ]. Follicular DCs located in germinal centers, despite named dendritic cells, are not bone marrow-derived cells, having instead a fibroblast precursor [ ]. These cells have been described to be involved in HIV spread, mainly in CD4 T cells infection; once DCs are infected in lymph nodes, they could pass the virus to other healthy T cells [ ]. In addition, circulating blood CD11c + myeloid and CD11c + plasmacytoid DCs, besides their role in sexual infection by HIV-1, are more permissive to ex vivo infection than CD16 + or CD14 + monocytes or resting CD4 + T cells [ ].
Furthermore, DCs in blood and mucosa have been described as important virus carriers, allowing the virus to reach T cells harbored in the lymph nodes [ ]. Barratt-Boyes and colleagues showed that during acute SIV infection, in rhesus macaques model, the proportion of activated dendritic cells in the lymph nodes increased while reduced the density in the skin, suggesting a migration of DCs to T cells-rich regions, which would facilitate the spread of infection [ ]. The HIV infection from DCs to T cells basically depends on one of two mechanisms, called trans-infection or cis-infection. HIV trans-infection is mediated by DCs that are not infected themselves but transfer captured viruses through infectious synapses mediated by DC-SIGN receptors or exosomes, while cis-infection occurs when infected DCs transfer progeny viruses and involves de novo HIV replication [ ]. Once infected, HIV also alters the recirculation of T cells, and it was already demonstrated that T cells in HIV patients migrate rapidly to lymph nodes and bone marrow [ ]. Furthermore, in a humanized model of HIV infection, using multiphoton intravital microscopy of mice lymph nodes, it was observed that there are two patterns of infected T cells migration. The cells that are producing more viruses migrate in an uncoordinated way in the nodes and can recirculate in the body, while another part of infected CD4 + T cells decreases their motility and constitutes a syncytia in the tissue allowing the formation of virological synapses and consequently cell-to-cell spread of HIV [ ].
Despite these evidences, some authors question the ability of HIV to actively infect DCs and credit only an indirect effect to these cells during the viral spread via trans -infection [ , ]. These findings are based on the ability to DC recognize viral peptides (as CA) and induce the expression of type I interferon and, subsequently, other interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), resulting in the induction of an antiviral state [ , ].
DCs express significant levels of HIV entry receptors that allow gp120 binding and attachment of virions (e.g., high amounts of chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4 and low levels of CD4), which are considered the primary HIV receptors. However, some DC subsets express other receptors that also recognize gp120, facilitating HIV binding and infection. For example, Langerhans cells, a DC subtype, express C-type lectin receptors such as Langerin (CD207), DC-SIGN and DCIR [ ]. The expression of these receptors depends on cell maturation state; upon DC maturation, CCR5 levels are downregulated and CXCR4 is upregulated [ ]. Thus, the binding of HIV depends on the DC subtype, the state of cell maturation, the type of receptor involved in the recognition and interaction with other cells.
The fact that the virus preferentially infects DCs leads to an unbalanced immune response due to the phenotypic alterations when these cells are exposed to HIV. The interaction of DCs with the virus leads to increased expression of CD80, CD86 and CD40, costimulatory surface molecules, and HLA class II molecules, despite a reduction of HLA class I molecules and the appearance of the DC maturation marker CD83 [ ]. A study conducted in the 1990s using Mixed Lymphocyte Reaction assays showed no significant differences in the stimulation ability of DCs from infected patients and controls [ ]. These findings remain controversial, and recent studies have shown a dramatic reduction in the allogeneic stimulation capacity of DCs, which can be considered another important dysfunction of these cells [ , , , ].
Another common observation is that patients infected with HIV have a reduced number of peripheral blood DCs when compared to healthy individuals at any stage of infection, but mainly during primary infection [ , ]. Interestingly, the low frequency of DC found in the blood is correlated with high viral load in the plasma [ ]. Several factors are suggested to be involved in the low frequency of DCs: (1) homing to lymphoid organs [ ]; (2) cell death in the periphery by the virus, CD8 + T cells or via other mechanisms; and/or (3) lack of DC differentiation in bone marrow or blood monocyte precursors [ ]. In addition, Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy (HAART) can restore pDCs on the blood and it is associated with a diminished viral load, indicating a better control of the infection [ ].
In fact, Martyn-Gayo and colleagues illustrated that conventional DCs (cDCs) have a critical role on control of viral replication in HIV-1-infected elite controllers (EC) patients [ ], inducing more intense immune responses and expanding the pool of HIV-1-specific CD8 + T cells. These studies corroborated several data obtained in human and also animal models, which evidenced the role of HLA class I alleles on differential HIV-1 antigen presentation, reducing HIV-infected cells and serum viral load, by consequence [ , ].
In addition to frequency and phenotype changes, HIV infection impairs DC function, which has been well described in the literature, as follows. Briefly, cytokine and chemokine production is reduced, as shown by decreased TNF-α, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5 and mainly IL-12 production upon repeated TLR7/8 stimulation by viral RNA, that may result in impaired differentiation of Th1 cells [ , , ]. Despite reducing the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, type I IFNs such as IFN-α are increased, especially in the early stages of infection [ , ]. Plasmacytoid DCs have the classical property to be refractory to IFN-α production upon repeated stimulation trough TLR7 or TLR9 by viral RNA or DNA, protecting the host against excessive immune activation during infections [ ]. It has been shown that during HIV infection pDCs are uniquely modulated allowing the constant stimulation and releasing high levels of IFN-α in a constant way [ ]. This phenotype favors viral immune escape and promotes the persistent inflammation typical of HIV infection.
Together, these alterations in DC biology indicate that these cells, when infected, are in a state of semi-maturation, characterized by increased expression of costimulatory molecules (i.e., CD80, CD86 and CD40), impaired cytokine production (IL-12 p70) and reduced ability to stimulate an appropriated adaptive immune response [ , , , ]. Therefore, as suggested by Fantuzzi et al. [ ] it is crucial to identify strategies that would interfere and/or block the HIV and DC interactions. Developing ways to manipulate and create a protective immune response instead of facilitating virus spread is a potential therapeutic strategy [ ].
Neutrophils: a controversial role during HIV infection
Comprising around 50–70 % of all circulating leukocytes in the human body, neutrophils are polymorphonuclear leukocytes generated in the bone marrow from the same precursors of monocytes and DCs. Neutrophils constitutively express CD11b, CD16 and CD66b, and some studies suggest the existence of different neutrophil subsets [ , ]. Once these cells are in the circulation, they have a half-live of only a few hours. Acting as the first line of defense against some classes of microorganisms, neutrophils can ingest pathogens and kill them by releasing the content of the cytoplasmic granules or by the action of ROS released into the intracellular space. Another important mechanism driven by these cells to restrict infection and eliminate pathogens is NET formation, in which cellular DNA, histones, cytoplasmic granules, and other proteins, such as myeloperoxidase and elastase, are released into the extracellular space and lead to microorganism death [ ].
It is well established that as a consequence of HIV infection and AIDS progression, about 35–75 % of the patients present neutropenia with multifactorial etiology. In fact, the viruses are able to infiltrate the bone marrow, infect the precursors, and consequently the number of neutrophil in the periphery decreases, suggesting one possible cause of neutropenia [ ]. Another cause of neutrophil loss is the accelerated apoptosis pathway described on HIV patients, possible by an intrinsic defect on G-CSF production during development and maturation in bone marrow [ , ]. Furthermore, the drugs used in HIV treatment are myelosuppressive, contributing to the neutropenia in treated patients [ ].
Neutrophils can express CD4 molecules and also CXCR4 on their cell surface, allowing gp120 to bind and select for X4-tropic strains. During HIV infection, inflammatory mediators such as TNF-α increase the binding and enclosing of HIV to neutrophils through both CCR5 and CXCR4 ligation [ ]. Furthermore, HIV can bind CD4-negative neutrophils independently of gp120 ligation [ , ]. Once entrapped HIV causes in the neutrophils downregulation of cell adhesion molecules and reduces actin polymerization [ ], cytokine production [ ], chemotaxis [ , , ], as well as leukotriene release [ ], resulting in increased host susceptibility to bacterial and fungal infections [ ]. Interestingly, another study showed that inflammatory stimuli of concomitant unrelated infections induce neutrophil activation and co-receptors expression, which also increases HIV binding and facilitates the propagation of infection [ ].
Patients with HIV have reduced ROS production, as well as low phagocytosis and bacterial killing (especially when CD4 + T cell levels are <200 cells/µl) [ , , , ]. Controversially, other authors have shown that increased ROS production may contribute to oxidative injury, which has been implicated in the pathophysiology of the disease [ , , ]. When ROS production is induced by the virus through the recognition by TLR7/8 on the neutrophil membrane, it triggers NET formation to capture and kill the virus by a mechanism dependent on myeloperoxidase and α-defensin. However, as an escape mechanism, the virus can induce dendritic cells to produce IL-10, which suppresses ROS and consequently interrupts NET [ ].
Neutrophils exert direct and indirect effects that affect T cell function. Human neutrophils constitutively express arginase, and during HIV infection, when the patient presents low CD4 + T cell counts, the expression of this compound is increased. Arginase excess in the system enhances l -arginine catabolism, which results in depletion of l -arginine from the blood. Since l -arginine is essential for efficient T cell activation, the decrease in l -arginine results in impaired T cell responses [ ]. In addition, recent data reveal that blood neutrophils from HIV-1-infected individuals express high levels of inhibitory PD-L1 molecule that once recognized by T cells directly suppress their function via PD-L1/PD-1 pathways [ ].
Considering that neutrophils are described as directly infected by HIV, their functions are clearly disrupted, and it remains to be established the activation status of these cells depending on the time course of infection, as this may predispose patients to opportunistic infections.
Eosinophil: a cell to be more explored during HIV infection
Under the signal of cytokines IL-3, IL-5 and GM-CSF, the common granulocyte–monocyte progenitors differentiate in eosinophils [ ]. Eosinophils are granule-containing cells that circulate in the blood with a half-life of approximately 18 h. Under normal conditions, the eosinophil blood count is about 250 per mm 3 . However, during altered states, such as allergies, asthma and parasitic infections, the count may rise from a normal range of 0.3–10 % of total blood cells to >30 % of total blood cells [ ].
Although eosinophilia was detected in some patients independent of other diseases or allergic processes [ ], there are many cases of enhanced eosinophil counts occurring together with parasitic infections in HIV patients [ ]. It is important to note that HIV and parasite infections are co-endemic in developing countries, increasing the probability of co-infections [ ]. Further, eosinophilia has already been reported in HIV infection, mainly in patients with low CD4 + T cells; in this specific study, the increased eosinophil count was associated with cutaneous disease and pruritus without parasite association [ ]. Another study identified that patients on HAART, despite having control of opportunistic infection, are commonly infected with intestinal parasites, which was associated with increased eosinophils [ ].
Human eosinophils express CD4 and CXCR4 receptors, increasing their susceptibility to HIV infection [ , ]. Moreover, many individuals develop eosinophilia concomitant with the progression of clinically latent HIV infection to AIDS, as eosinophil counts increase by approximately eightfold [ ]. Therefore, little is known about the role of these cells during AIDS; however, there is a strong association between HIV progression, tissue damage and increased eosinophil counts, and this association warrants further study.
Basophils and mast cells: possible disseminators for HIV
Mast cells are important innate cells that act as sentinels, mainly in tissues. They have a strong ability to detect pathogens and signs of danger and to quickly release proinflammatory mediators [ ]. Furthermore, equally to eosinophils, they are key cells in pathological conditions including asthma and parasitic infections, through the binding of IgE to its high-affinity IgE surface receptor, FcεRI, that induces extensive degranulation [ ].
Besides their role in allergic inflammation, basophils and mast cells are also involved in host responses against pathogens such as HIV. These cells constitute less than 1 % of peripheral blood leukocytes. Although basophils have many common features with mast cells, they have unique properties such as the rapid and potent expression of IL-4 and IL-13 upon stimulation and are rarely found in tissues [ ].
Some studies have shown that HIV-infected patients with elevated IgE develop a worse prognosis [ , ]. Moreover, gp120 from HIV acts as a superantigen interacting with the V H 3 region of IgE [ ] and inducing the release of histamine, IL-4 and IL-13 from human basophils and mast cells [ , , ]. By interacting with CCR3, the HIV Tat protein is a potent chemoattractant for human basophils and lung mast cells and induces upregulation of CCR3 receptors on these cells [ , ]. Furthermore, basophil/mast cells are also associated with increased allergic and adverse reactions to drugs in HIV-treated patients [ , ]. These reactions have been correlated with an imbalance in the Th1 and Th2 responses in HIV patients [ , ].
Although there is evidence for an important role for mast cells during HIV infection, there are no studies that describe altered mast cell counts. Progenitor and mature basophil/mast cells that express CD4, CCR3, CCR5 and CXCR4 are susceptible to infection by an M-tropic HIV-1 isolate [ , ]. Recently, in vivo findings showed that tissue mast cells developed from infected circulating progenitors became a long-lived inducible reservoir of persistent HIV even after HAART, and these cells are involved in the re-initiation of HIV-1 replication during latent infection [ , ]. Despite crescent evidences showing the role of mast cells as reservoir [ ], Nelson et al. [ ] failed to detect active virus replication in mast cells at tissue sites from HIV patients. On the other hand, as mast cells have increased density in the genital mucosa of HIV-infected women, these cells were shown to be involved in HIV trans-infection of CD4 T cells, so contributing to the virus dissemination [ ] as this was also seen for blood-circulating basophils [ ].
Therefore, it is likely that mast cells and basophils promote the spread of HIV to CD4 T cells and so contribute to the pathogenesis rather than protecting during infection. However, further studies should be performed to better understand the precise role of these cells in HIV infection.
Natural killer cells: a promising target to immunotherapy
So far, we have discussed about some cells of myeloid origin, which are generated from a common precursor in bone marrow. From this point, we will emphasize innate cells that have a common lymphoid precursor in bone marrow. The clonogenic common lymphoid progenitor (CLP) originates ILCs (innate lymphoid cells), B and T lymphocytes, accordingly to the transcriptional factors stimulated [ , ]. ILCs are a set of cells that share the characteristic to be essential in the combat of virus and tumor cells. This cell family is formed by cytotoxic and helper ILCs, that are, respectively, NK cells and ILC1, ILC2 and ILC3 [ ], and in this review we limited our discussion mainly to the NK cells.
ILCs do not have the property to rearrange B and T receptors, so they lack antigen specificity [ ]. However, these cells respond quickly after infection and are important in mucosal integrity and regulation of immune responses to commensal microbiota [ ]. It has been indicated that circulating ILCs were depleted during acute HIV infection and that their numbers were only recovered if the antiretroviral therapy was started before peak viremia. Regarding the important role of these cells in the immune response is crucial to understand their function during chronic viral infections [ ].
NK cells play a pivotal function in the innate immune system and are also involved in the regulation of adaptive immunity by promoting the maturation of DCs and Th1 cell polarization [ ]. These ILCs constitute nearly 10 % of peripheral blood lymphocytes in healthy individuals [ ]. However, in HIV infection and depending to the stage of the disease, some studies described alterations in the function and frequency of this cell population [ , ]. The NK cell subsets are defined according to the expression of the surface markers CD56 and CD16 [ ], and in HIV infection, differences are observed in the proportion of these two surface markers. During the acute phase of HIV infection, before the development of adaptive immunity, NK cell numbers increase, and this appears to be associated with the initial reduction in the viral load. This increase is mainly due to the early expansion of the CD56 dim CD16 + cell subset that represents the majority of NK cells encountered in the blood, nearly 90 % of all NK cells. On the other hand, the minor population of NK cells (i.e., CD56 bright CD16 − cells) is slightly decreased during this initial phase [ ].
As the infection progresses to the chronic phase, the CD56 dim CD16 + NK cell population decreases and a non-functional NK cell subset characterized as CD56 − CD16 + greatly increases [ , ]. This is most commonly seen among patients who do not receive HAART. It has been suggested that HAART can help recover NK cells, although the non-functional subset remains elevated [ ]. In elite controllers, patients that do not display significant detected viremia, the amount of NK cells are comparable to those observed in healthy donors [ ].
It is not clear whether the phenotypic and functional changes in NK cells during HIV infection are due to the direct infection of these cells or whether it is an indirect effect of the disease by affecting other cells in the immune system. In addition to CXCR4 and CCR5 co-receptors, NK cells may express the CD4 molecule, providing ample opportunities for viral infection [ ]. Either directly or indirectly, HIV infection induces phenotypic and functional alterations in NK cells. One of the first studies analyzing NK cell phenotype during HIV infection described that the decrease in CD16 expression might disturb the cytotoxic function of NK cells [ ]. In addition, the persistent viremia has been associated to aberrant expression of NK cell receptors, such as a decrease of natural cytotoxicity receptors, including NKp30, NKp46 and NKp44. Also, some inhibitory receptors such as KIR2DL2/p58.2, KIR2DL1/p58.1 and KIR3DL1/p70 are increased during infection. Although alterations may differ among studies, mainly because of the disease state of the patient and the subset of NK cells analyzed, no changes have been reported in the expression of the following molecules: NKp80, 2B4 and NTB-A [ ]. Altogether, we may imply that increased expression of inhibitory receptors in parallel with the decrease of activating receptors renders NK cells unresponsive and dysfunctional during HIV infection.
Chronic immune activation is an important feature of HIV infection and is strongly associated with disease progression [ ]. A recent study highlighted the association between NK cell activation and HIV disease progression [ ] and found an increase of cell activation markers CD38 and HLA-DR, especially those from the CD56 dim CD16 + subset that correlated positively with plasma viral load and negatively with CD4 + T cell counts. In contrast, another study showed that NK cell activation was not correlated with the improvement of immunological parameters and that the NK cell subset CD56 dim CD16 + remained activated even in patients with reduced viral loads [ ].
Despite the NK cell activation seen in patients with progressive disease, these cells remain nonfunctional as their cytotoxic activity is decreased and the production of some cytokines, such as IFN-γ and TNF-α, is impaired [ , ]. In addition, NK cells increase IL-10 production, which is associated with an increase in the number of inhibitory receptors on these cells [ , ].
A key pathway responsible for the ability of NK cells to suppress HIV replication is through the production of chemokines CCL3, CCL4 and CCL5, ligands for CCR5. These chemokines block the entry of R5 viruses into target cells by competitive inhibition of receptor binding, besides their role of recruiting leukocytes to the inflammation site. These findings are confirmed by the fact that the production of these chemokines by NK cells is largely reduced in viremic patients compared to aviremic ones [ ].
Interestingly, some authors have suggested that the loss of CD4 + T cells in the periphery is partially due to the changes on the NK cells phenotype after virus infection. The studies revealed that a highly conserved motif of the viral protein gp41 induced the expression of the NKp44 ligand on CD4 + T cells during infection, promoting the recognition and killing of CD4 + T cells by NK cells. Therefore, the expression of NKp44L has been correlated to CD4 + T cell depletion and increased viral load [ , ].
In some patients, the relatively better control of viral replication has been associated with the expression of certain NK cell receptors and some HLA molecules. The expansion of NK cells expressing KIR3DS1 and KIR3DL1 in patients who express HLA-Bw4-80I is related to the suppression of virus replication as well as with a more efficient control of the infection [ ]. This observation highlights the influence of the genotype on the control of HIV viremia and disease progression.
Another important function associated with NK cells and with CD16 + cells in general is the ADCC of infected cells expressing HIV antigens on its surface. The increased levels of ADCC inducing antibodies have been correlated to slow progression of disease [ ]. Recently, the Thai RV144 vaccine trial showed a modest protection mainly because of ADCC [ ]. Besides this, it is interesting to investigate NK alterations after vaccine regimens as this innate cell has also demonstrated memory features [ ], indicating a possible target in order to prevent and also treat HIV infection.
Innate T lymphocytes
During T cells ontogeny, there are two types of T cells that originate in the thymus. These cells arise from a common lymphoid precursor, and they are uniquely defined by the expression of different TCRs, which can be composed by αβ or γδ chains. Conventional αβ cells constitute the adaptive immunity and cover the majority of T lymphocytes that express polyclonal TCR on its surface to recognize a range of peptide antigens associated with MHC I or II. Other small subpopulations of αβ or γδ T cells are characterized as innate lymphocytes and are described below.
NKT: a key immunoregulatory cell subset
Natural killer T cells (NKT) are defined as a small subpopulation of innate-like αβ T lymphocyte that co-express natural killer (NK) receptors together with αβ T cell receptors (TCR). NKT develop from double-positive lymphocytes (CD4 + CD8 + ) that interact with endogenous ligands presented by CD1d + cells from thymus. In humans, the majority of NKT cells express a semi-invariant αβ TCR composed of a Vα24-Jα18 TCRα chain that is preferentially coupled with a Vβ11 TCRβ chain. These cells are mainly involved in the innate immunity recognition of glycolipid antigens presented by the MHC class I-related glycoprotein CD1d and may secrete cytokines of both the Th1 and Th2 phenotypes. After thymic emigration, NKT cells represent 0.003–0.78 % of peripheral blood lymphocytes, but are found in greater numbers in the liver, ranging from 5 to 25 % of total lymphoid population in this tissue [ , ].
A subset of NKT cells express the CD4 molecule, which renders it susceptible to HIV-1 infection (mainly the R5-tropic strain) [ ]. Therefore, most CD4 + NKT cells are depleted during acute HIV-1 infection, contributing to the establishment of chronic infection [ ]. The reduction in CD4 + NKT cells has been correlated to higher viremia in infected individuals [ ]. Moreover, NKT cell function is impaired by decreased activation of dendritic cells that downregulate CD1d expression when infected by HIV-1 [ ]. Antiretroviral treatment partially restores NKT cell numbers, but the restoration of NKT CD4 + subset requires more than a year to be complete. As consequence, a disproportionate balance with a large number of NKT CD4-negative subset is observed, characterized by a tolerogenic/atopic profile, which is believed to contribute to the inappropriate immune activation state that leads to the development of opportunistic infections in HIV-1 infected patients [ ].
Since NKT cells are described to be involved in anti-tumor responses and the prevention of auto-immune diseases, it has been proposed that the loss of NKT CD4 + cells in HIV-1-infected individuals strongly impacts these patients immune response. Indeed, AIDS patients seem to have higher incidence of tumors such as Kaposi’s sarcoma and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma [ ].
γδ T cells: massive depletion during acute infection
Gamma-delta T cells are considered innate immune cells because they participate in the initiation of the immune response and are able to respond quickly following stimulation without clonal expansion [ ].
Among innate immune cells, γδ T cells play a critical role in the host response against infectious diseases. They can link innate and acquired responses [ , ], mainly in the presence of non-protein molecules such as glycolipids and phosphoantigens, without the need for antigen-presenting cells [ , ]. The major γδ T cell subset (60–90 %) expresses the Vγ9 variable segment associated with the δ2, and these cells, which play a key role in early HIV infection, are known as Vγ9 Vδ2 T cells. Normally, Vδ2 subsets predominate, with a Vδ1/Vδ2 ratio of 0.35 for healthy donors [ ]. However, in HIV patients, a Vδ1/Vδ2 inversion was observed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells when compared with non-infected individuals. [ ]. This inverted profile is due to a loss of Vγ9 Vδ2 T cells by apoptosis [ ], induced by the direct binding of HIV to CCR5 and integrin α4β7, molecules found on the surface of γδ T cells [ ]. There is a direct correlation between Vγ9 Vδ2 T cell number and CD4 + T cell counts in HIV progression, which was inversely related to the viral load [ ].
Moreover, after HIV infection, the remaining Vγ9 Vδ2 T cells become anergic and were unable to expand or perform their effector functions, i.e., low levels of IFN-γ and TNF-α after TCR stimulation [ ]. The anergy of γδ T cells, that precedes changes in CD4 + T cell numbers, is one of the immune evasion mechanisms described in HIV infection [ ]. The reduced γδ T cells function may be caused by decreased CD3ζ co-receptor expression, as recently observed in HIV patients [ ].
Also, once the interaction of NK and γδ T cells via CD137 induces NK cells to eliminate mature DC and consequently decreases the events of inflammation associated with DC activation [ ]. When Vγ9 Vδ2 T cells are reduced in number during HIV infection it may also contribute to NK cell defects, since less number of functional NK cells would lead to the accumulation of mature dendritic cells and an increased potential for chronic inflammation, a characteristic of HIV disease [ , ]. The Vγ9 Vδ2 T cell numbers and their impaired function are directly dependent on acute HIV replication and could be partially reverted after HAART or via control of virus replication [ ]. Moreover, the lower frequency of γδ T cells has been associated with shorter life expectancy in AIDS patients [ ].
Concluding remarks
In the present review, we addressed the importance of innate immune cells in the context of HIV infection.
Here we showed how innate immune cells are directly or indirectly affected by HIV infection during different stages of disease. Most of cells present dysfunctionalities that even reflect in the adaptive immune response and in the resolution of infection. Therefore, we believe that most of the dysfunctions seen in the immune system during HIV infection are mainly due to the chronic inflammatory state that patients experience during infection. Several studies have shown the persistence of systemic inflammation even during antiretroviral therapy and correlated this state with altered cell phenotype [ , , ]. Some of the cell alterations seen in HIV-infected people could be compared to that observed in the HIV-negative elderly persons, which suggested that cells from HIV+ individuals would present a very well known activation state described as immunosenescence and/or immune exhaustion phenotype [ ]. Considering that immune exhaustion involves the overexpression of inhibitory molecules and the loss of functional response and that cell senescence is characterized by low proliferative capacity and higher expression of activation molecules [ ], we can argue that these processes occur during HIV infection. And even in the absence of systemic virus replication, these changes are observed in cells from HIV-infected individuals [ ], suggesting a considerable role for the residual inflammation in driving the impaired function of the immune system in these patients.
Understanding innate cell–cell alterations in a disease characterized by the loss of adaptive response can help us to understand its pathogenesis. The key effects of HIV on the different innate immune cells are summarized in Fig. 1 . Furthermore, the improvement of the antiretroviral therapy protocols currently used around the world could be based on the knowledge in how the virus affect these cells, and these therapies should aim to completely eliminate the viral reservoirs, reverse and/or prevent the cellular alterations induced by the virus.