Introduction
Neutrophils are the first line of defense in response to invading pathogens and trigger innate immune responses. Although their role has been primarily directed toward defense against bacterial infections [ ], recent evidence suggests that neutrophils also play a key role during viral infections and exhibit both host defense and pathological functions [ ]. Therefore, some viral infections can lead to an increase in absolute neutrophil count in the peripheral blood and their migration to the site of infection [ ]. There is evidence that neutrophil activation by viruses increases the production of chemokines, cytokines [ , ], and ROS [ , ]. Recently, it was reported that neutrophils activated by HIV-1 exhibited a change in Toll-like receptors (TLRs) expression patterns, pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion, and ROS production [ ]. In addition, it was previously demonstrated that neutrophils from HIV-1-exposed seronegative individuals (HESN) present reduced expression of several pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and pro-inflammatory cytokines compared to neutrophils from HIV-1 patients [ ]. Additionally, it was found that neutrophils from HESNs are less sensitive to TLR4 stimulation and produce significantly lower levels of ROS in response to HIV-1. However, the mechanisms underlying recognition or neutrophil activation by HIV-1 or HIV-1 components are unknown. On activated neutrophils, TLRs induce pro-inflammatory cytokine production, CD62L (L-selectin) and CD11b/CD18 expression [ , , ] and regulate the chemotactic response [ ]. Other reports showed an induction of ROS production in neutrophils activated through TLR stimulation [ , ]. Additionally, NK cells recognize HIV-1 ssRNA40 via TLR7 and TLR8 [ , ]. HIV-1-derived ssRNA40 contributes to the immune activation of NK cells and plays an important role in HIV-1 infection [ ]. Since neutrophil activation in response to HIV-1 stimulation has been reported, we evaluated here the potential role of ssRNA40 in mediating the activation of neutrophils both alone and in the presence of PRR agonists. We found that expression of neutrophils CD62L and CD11b, ROS production, and IL-6/TNF-α secretion were induced by ssRNA40. Furthermore, neutrophils were significantly activated in vitro by established TLRs and RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) agonists in combination with ssRNA40. Finally, we observed increased expression of RLRs in response to specific TLR agonists and ssRNA40. Taken together, our data provide insights into the possible mechanism by which HIV-1 activates neutrophils and the roles that neutrophils play during HIV-1 infection.
Materials and methods
Ethics statement
The study was designed and performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Ethics Committee (Universidad de Antioquia).
Study subjects
Healthy individuals voluntarily agreed to participate in this study and signed a written informed consent form prior to participation. The exclusion criteria included any clinical presentation associated with infectious disease and pregnancy. The inclusion criteria included individuals between 18 and 50 years of age that presented a normal leukocyte count (4500–11,000 cells/mm 3 ). The donors declared that they were nonsmokers and were not taking any medication.
Sampling and neutrophil purification
For neutrophil purification, we followed the strategy previously reported [ ]. Briefly, blood samples were collected by venipuncture in tubes containing anticoagulant (citric acid, citrate, and dextrose; BD PharMingen, San Diego, CA, USA). Neutrophils were purified by dextran sedimentation and centrifuged in a Ficoll-Hypaque gradient (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Purified neutrophils were resuspended in RPMI 1640 medium enriched with 10 % FBS (fetal bovine serum). The purity of the neutrophil preparation was greater than 94 %, and the viability was greater than 90 % after up to 10 h of culture.
Monoclonal antibodies
Monoclonal antibodies to CD11b conjugated with PE-Cy5, CD62L conjugated with FITC, and TLR2 (clone TL2.1) and TLR4 (clone HTA125) conjugated to phycoerythrin were described previously [ ]. The FcR blocking reagent was obtained from Miltenyi Biotec (Auburn, CA, USA). Conjugated isotype control antibodies were used as controls.
Neutrophil stimulation in vitro with single-stranded RNA40 (ssRNA40) derived from HIV-1
Immediately after purification, 2.5 × 10 5 neutrophils/ml were plated onto 96-well plates in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % FBS and incubated at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 . Neutrophils were stimulated with 3 ng/μl of ssRNA40 (InvivoGen, San Diego, CA, USA) for 3 h to evaluate mRNA expression and for 8 h to evaluate protein expression; A–U-replaced ssRNA41 (a derivative of ssRNA40) was used as negative control at a concentration of 3 ng/μl (InvivoGen, San Diego, CA, USA) [ ]. Alternatively, to assess the effect of ssRNA40 on PRR expression, neutrophils were challenged with ssRNA40 (3 ng/μl) simultaneously with Pam 2 CSK 4 (20 ng/ml), LPS (0.1 ng/ml), or R848 (1 μg/ml), that are agonists of TLR2, TLR4, and TLR7/8, respectively (InvivoGen, San Diego, CA, USA). To evaluate RLR expression, neutrophils were stimulated with TLR agonists in the presence of ssRNA40. After stimulation, the neutrophils were harvested and assayed for TLR/RLR mRNA expression by real-time PCR.
Flow cytometry analysis
Flow cytometry was used to evaluate the effects of ssRNA40 on the expression of TLR2, TLR4, CD62L, and CD11b on neutrophils as previously described [ , ]. Briefly, freshly isolated neutrophils were surface-stained with the appropriate antibodies for 25 min; acquisition was performed immediately using a FACScan™ flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). The acquired events were analyzed using FACSDiva software version 6.1.2. Receptor expression was expressed as the mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) of the overall cell subpopulation after subtraction of the isotype control.
RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis, and quantitative real-time PCR
The mRNA quantification for TLR2, TLR4, TLR7, TLR8, RIG-I, and MDA5 was performed in neutrophils by real-time PCR as previously described [ , , ]. For total RNA preparation, the RNeasy isolation kit was used (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). cDNA was synthesized using the RevertAid Minus First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The primers used were previously reported [ ]. The relative expression of each target gene was normalized to the unstimulated control and to the housekeeping gene GAPDH ( ΔΔ Ct) and reported as the fold change.
ELISA
The neutrophil culture supernatants were tested for the production of TNF-α and IL-6 using ELISA kits (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Quantification of reactive oxygen species
ROS production was quantified using dihydrorhodamine 123 (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s directions and as described previously [ ]. Briefly, commercial dihydrorhodamine was diluted 1:10 in 1X PBS. Then, the neutrophils were incubated with 10 μl of this dilution in each well (96-well plate) for 8 h at 37 °C. After incubation, the cells were harvested, washed with PBS, centrifuged for 5 min at 1800 rpm, and resuspended in PBS. Acquisition was performed immediately using a FACScan™ flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, Pharmingen, San Jose, CA, USA). Analyses were performed using FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences, Pharmingen, San Jose, CA, USA).
Statistical analyses
All data were plotted and analyzed using GraphPad Prism 5.0 (GraphPad Software Inc. San Diego, CA, USA). Comparisons were performed using the Wilcoxon test between the data of interest as specified in each figure legend. The data are represented as median and range. Significant results are defined as p < 0.05 (*) and p < 0.01 (**), and highly significant results as p < 0.001 (***).
Results
ssRNA40 decreases TLR2 mRNA expression but increases TLR7/8, RIG-I, and MDA5 mRNA expression in neutrophils
To determine whether HIV-1 RNA plays a role in increasing TLR mRNA expression in human neutrophils, we evaluated the effects of short sequences of single-stranded GU-rich RNA derived from HIV-1 (ssRNA40) on the mRNA expression of TLR2, TLR4, TLR7, and TLR8 and the RLRs RIG-I and MDA5. As control, the neutrophils were triggered only with the respective TLR agonists or the ssRNA41 control.
The results showed a significant decrease in TLR2 mRNA upon stimulation with ssRNA40 compared with the ssRNA41 control (Fig. 1 a); however, no effect was observed on TLR4 mRNA expression (Fig. 1 b). In contrast, an increase in TLR7 and TLR8 mRNA expression was observed when the neutrophils were treated with ssRNA40 compared with the control (Fig. 1 c, d) as previously reported [ ]. The TLR2 and TLR4 protein expression levels were assessed, but no changes were observed upon stimulation with ssRNA40 (Online resource 1a, b). Additionally, extracellularly delivered ssRNA40 significantly increased the mRNA expression of the other PRRs involved in the innate immune response to viral agents, such as RIG-I and MDA5, compared with the ssRNA41 control (Fig. 1 e, f). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report to show increased mRNA expression of these two RLRs in response to ssRNA40 treatment. Fig. 1 ssRNA40 down-regulates the expression of TLR2 and increases the expression of TLR7/8, RIG-I, and MDA5 in neutrophils. Neutrophils (2 × 10 5 ) purified from healthy donors ( n = 8) were stimulated in vitro with 3 μg/ml of ssRNA40 or ssRNA41. The specific agonists for each TLR were used as positive controls ( n = 6) as follows: Pam 2 CSK 4 (20 ng/μl) for TLR2, LPS (0.1 ng/μl) for TLR4, or R848 (1 µg/ml) for TLR7 and TLR8. Stimulations were performed for 3 h prior to the determination of TLR2 ( a ), TLR4 ( b ), or TLR7 ( c ) and TLR8 ( d ) mRNA expression by real-time RT-PCR. Additionally, the mRNA expression of RIG-I ( e ) and MDA5 ( f ) by real-time RT-PCR was evaluated. The median and range of each transcript’s relative expression versus that of a housekeeping gene are shown. The data are represented as the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of each specific TLR. Comparisons were performed using the Wilcoxon test. The level of significance was p < 0.05 (*) and p < 0.01 (**)
Activation of neutrophils with ssRNA40 results in enhanced pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion and ROS production
To determine whether treatment with ssRNA40 promoted neutrophil activation, these cells were stimulated with ssRNA40, and CD62L and CD11b were evaluated by flow cytometry after 8 h of treatment. We found that ssRNA40 treatment significantly decreased CD62L expression (Fig. 2 a). No significant changes were observed for the expression of CD11b, but an increasing trend was detected. Next, we examined whether ssRNA40 induced pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion from neutrophils. Figure 2 c and d shows that the ssRNA40 treatment induced a significant increase in both IL-6 and TNF-α expression compared with ssRNA41 stimulation. Finally, we investigated whether ssRNA40 induced ROS production and observed a significant increase compared with the control (Fig. 2 e). Similar results were observed when the neutrophils were stimulated with HIV-1 RNA purified from H9 HTLVIII cells (i.e., HIV-1 RNA), i.e., up-regulated IL-6 (Online resource 2a) and TNF-α (data not shown) secretion and significantly increased ROS production (Online resource 2b). Fig. 2 ssRNA40 regulates the activation and function of neutrophils. Neutrophils (2 × 10 5 ) purified from healthy donors ( n = 8) were stimulated in vitro with 3 μg/ml of ssRNA40, and 3 μg/ml of ssRNA41 was used as control. After 8 h of stimulation, the expression of CD62L ( a ) and CD11b ( b ) was assessed by flow cytometry, the production of IL-6 ( c ) and TNF-α ( d ) was determined by ELISA, and the production of ROS ( e ) was assessed by flow cytometry (presented as the percentage of neutrophils producing ROS). Comparisons were performed using the Wilcoxon test. Median and range are shown. The level of significance was p < 0.05 (*) and p < 0.01 (**)
Co-stimulation of neutrophils with ssRNA40 and TLR agonists leads to TLR and RLR mRNA expression
Because a crossed effect between TLRs was previously reported [ , ], neutrophils were stimulated only with their respective TLR agonist or simultaneously with ssRNA40 to evaluate the effect of ssRNA40 on TLR mRNA expression upon stimulation with specific agonists. Co-stimulation with ssRNA40 and the TLR2, TLR4, and TLR7/8 agonists induced significant up-regulation of the TLR2 and TLR4 mRNAs versus stimulation with the TLR agonists alone (Fig. 3 a, b). Subsequently, we investigated whether TLR2 and TLR4 mRNA expression resulted in the expression of the TLR2 and TLR4 proteins in neutrophils. Flow cytometry analyses demonstrated a significant increase in TLR4 protein expression in neutrophils co-stimulated with Pam 2 CSK 4 and ssRNA40 (Online resource 3b). Following evaluation of the different co-stimuli (ssRNA40 and TLR agonists), we found that neutrophils stimulated with Pam 2 CSK 4 and ssRNA40 exhibited significantly increased TLR7 and TLR8 mRNA levels (Fig. 3 c, d). Based on our results on RIG-I and MDA5 mRNA expression in response to ssRNA40 (Fig. 1 e, f), and on a previous report [ ], we extended our study to evaluate the effects of the TLR agonists on the expression of these PRRs. Therefore, neutrophils were co-stimulated with a TLR2-, TLR4-, or TLR7/TLR8-specific agonist, and ssRNA40 and the RIG-I and MDA5 levels were determined. ssRNA40 significantly up-regulated RIG-I mRNA expression in the presence of Pam 2 CSK 4 and R848 but not LPS (Fig. 3 e). Moreover, co-stimulation of neutrophils with Pam 2 CSK 4 or co-stimulation of LPS with ssRNA40 significantly increased MDA5 mRNA expression levels (Fig. 3 f). Fig. 3 Co-stimulation of neutrophils with ssRNA40 and TLR agonists enhances TLR and RLR mRNA expression. A total of 2.5 × 10 5 neutrophils obtained from healthy donors ( n = 8) were co-stimulated with different agonists (20 ng/μl of Pam2CSK4 for TLR2; 0.1 ng/μl of LPS for TLR4; 1 μg/μl of R848 for TLR7/TLR8) and simultaneously with 3 μg/ml of ssRNA40 or 3 μg/ml of ssRNA4. Expression of TLR2 ( a ), TLR4 ( b ), TLR7 ( c ), TLR8 ( d ), RIG-I ( e ), and MDA5 ( f ) mRNA were evaluated 3 h post-stimulation by real-time RT-PCR. The median and range of each transcript versus the transcript of a housekeeping gene are shown. Comparisons were performed using the Wilcoxon test. Data are represented as median and range. The level of significance was p < 0.05 (*) and p < 0.01 (**)
Co-stimulation with TLR agonists and ssRNA40 results in neutrophil activation, cytokine secretion, and ROS production
We then investigated whether the effect observed in modulation of TLRs and RLRs in neutrophil co-stimulation was reflected in neutrophil activation. Interestingly, neutrophils expressed the lowest levels of CD62L following stimulation simultaneously with ssRNA40 and with Pam 2 CSK 4 or R848 versus stimulation with the respective TLR agonist alone (Fig. 4 a). When CD11b expression was analyzed, a significant increase was observed as a result of simultaneous co-stimulation with ssRNA40 and R848 compared to stimulation with the TLR7/8 agonist alone (Fig. 4 b). Fig. 4 Co-stimulation with TLR agonists and ssRNA40 of neutrophils modulates their activation and functionality. Neutrophils (2.5 × 10 5 ) purified from healthy donors ( n = 8) were stimulated with TLR agonists (20 ng/μl Pam2CSK4; 0.1 ng/μl LPS; or 1 μg/μl R848) and were simultaneously stimulated with 3 μg/ml of ssRNA40 for 8 h. The expression of the adhesion molecules CD62L ( a ) and CD11b ( b ) was measured by flow cytometry and reported as the MFI. Production of IL-6 ( c ) and TNF-α ( d ) was assessed by ELISA, and ROS ( e ) production by flow cytometry (presented as the percentage of neutrophils producing ROS). Comparisons were performed using the Wilcoxon test. The median and range are shown. The level of significance was p < 0.05 (*) and p < 0.01 (**)
Pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion into neutrophil culture supernatants was determined by ELISA. As shown in Fig. 4 c, ssRNA40 resulted in significant down-regulation of IL-6 production in the presence of LPS, but no effect was observed with Pam 2 CSK 4 or R848 (Fig. 4 c). Conversely, there was a significant up-regulation of TNF-α in neutrophils stimulated with ssRNA40 and Pam 2 CSK 4 compared to stimulation with the TLR agonist alone (Fig. 4 d). Finally, ROS production was significantly induced in neutrophils stimulated simultaneously with ssRNA40 and with Pam 2 CSK 4 compared to stimulation with the TLR2 agonist alone (Fig. 4 e).
Discussion
There have been reports that unstimulated neutrophils from HIV-infected patients exhibit high expression of the adhesion molecule CD11b, and low expression of CD62L, when compared with those from healthy donors [ ]. Similarly, spontaneous ROS production was also described in circulating neutrophils [ ]. Although, the role of HIV-1 RNA in neutrophil activation, pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion, and ROS production through signaling of the TLR pathway has not been reported, recently it was shown that the HIV-1–neutrophil interaction triggers neutrophil activation and TLR expression, altering the functions of these cells [ ]. Here, we demonstrate that neutrophils from healthy donors produced significant amounts of TLR7/8, but decreased TLR2 mRNA expression in response to ssRNA40 derived from HIV-1 RNA. This result for TLR7 and TLR8 was expected because ssRNA was described as its natural ligand [ ] and ssRNA40 was previously reported to modulate NK cell activation via TLR7 and TLR8 [ , ]. This result also becomes more important since HIV-1 has been reported to increase TLR4 and TLR7 expression in human neutrophils [ ]. Moreover, a previous study performed on patients with chronic HIV-1 infection reported that increased mRNA expression of TLR6, TLR7, and TLR8 correlated with the HIV RNA load in the plasma [ ], and our results show that ssRNA40 significantly down-regulates TLR2 mRNA expression. Down-regulated TLR2 expression was observed in myeloid dendritic cells obtained from healthy donors and stimulated with HIV-1 [ ]. Here, we found that stimulation of neutrophils with ssRNA40 resulted in decreased TLR2 expression. This finding could indicate differential regulation of TLR and RLR expression mediated by ssRNA40, possibly as a mechanism to evade the innate immune response through this receptor. On the other hand, an increase in RIG-I and MDA5 mRNA expression in response to ssRNA40 derived from HIV-1 RNA was observed. This is the first study to describe this regulation in neutrophils, although previously HIV-1 infection has been reported to result in a significant increase in RIG-I levels in macrophages [ ]. Induction of RIG-I expression was also shown in PBMCs from HIV-1 patients [ ]. Furthermore, RIG-I activation induced the expression of intracellular HIV-1 restriction factors, including ISGs, IFN-α/β, and IRFs, and inhibited HIV-1 replication in macrophages [ ]. These and our results reported here highlight the possible importance of RIG-1/MDA5 signaling in anti-HIV innate immunity.
Activation in neutrophils was evaluated based on changes in the expression of adhesion molecules such as CD62L and CD11b that has been extensively described as activation markers of neutrophils. CD62L is expressed at high levels in neutrophils and is involved in neutrophil rolling on endothelium; when activated, CD62L is rapidly shed giving rise to stronger adhesion mediated by integrins such as CD11b allowing transmigration [ ]. Both CD62L loss and CD11b up-regulation are modulated by TLR stimulation, leading to functional activation, and initiating the inflammatory response [ , , , ]. We observed that HIV-1 RNA regulated the activation of neutrophils in addition to regulating TLR and RLR expression based on changes in the expression of adhesion molecules, such as the down-regulation of CD62L (Fig. 2 a) and the increase in CD11b. This finding is consistent with previous reports showing that HIV-1 ssRNA induced dendritic cell maturation and NK cell activation [ , ]. Another study observed that neutrophils from HIV-1-infected patients exhibited decreased CD62L expression and increased CD11b expression during the acute phase of infection (high replication rate) [ , , ]. It is well known that HIV-1 pathogenesis is characterized by an altered production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α, mediated mainly by mononuclear peripheral blood cells [ , ]. Accordingly, we observed an increased production of IL-6 and TNF-α by neutrophils stimulated with ssRNA40 (Fig. 2 c, d). This suggests that HIV-1 RNA acts as activator of human neutrophils and supports the hypothesis that neutrophils may actively contribute to cytokine dysfunction in HIV infection.
In addition to cytokine production, ssRNA40 also induced a significant increase in ROS production (Fig. 2 e). This phenomenon is one of the main neutrophil mechanisms involved in pathogen control [ ]. However, little is known about the effects of ROS on viral infections. Some viruses, including influenza virus [ , ], hepatitis C virus [ ], and HIV-1, induce ROS production. In addition, an association was reported between HIV-1 Nef and p22-phox, which is a component of the NADPH oxidase [ , , , ]. Based on our results, we propose that neutrophil activation and ROS production may be modulated through the activation of TLRs and RIG-I/MDA5 by HIV-1 RNA. Indeed, a relationship between TLRs and ROS production has previously been demonstrated for HIV-1 [ , , ]. Our hypothesis is supported by the observed neutrophil activation and functional responses under simultaneous stimulation with TLR agonists and ssRNA40. Indeed, we showed that co-stimulation with Pam 2 CSK 4 or R848 and ssRNA40 significantly amplified neutrophil activation based on the significant decrease in CD62L and significant increase in CD11b. Because TNF-α secretion and ROS production were up-regulated in response to the TLR2 agonist and ssRNA40 but not in the presence of R848 (Fig. 4 a, d, e), we suggest that signaling of TLR2 might be involved in ROS production. Accordingly, neutrophils selective for TLR ligands were reported in bovines, and the authors showed that a TLR2 agonist but not LPS induced ROS production [ ]. Moreover, ROS production could be involved in HIV-1 pathogenesis because neutrophils from HIV-1-exposed seronegative individuals challenged with HIV-1 and stimulated with the TLR2 agonist produced lower levels of ROS versus neutrophils from HIV-1 patients [ ].
Cross-regulation was recently reported to exist between PRRs, leading to either a synergistic, additive or antagonistic response [ , ]. Additionally, cross-regulation between TLRs on neutrophils stimulated with HIV-1 and different TLR agonists was previously reported [ ]. Consequently, interactions between various PRRs are suggested to be required to ensure an effective innate immune response [ ]. Here, when addressing potential TLR–TLR and TLR–RLR cross talk, we found that TLR2, TLR4, and TLR7/8 agonists in combination with ssRNA40 had synergistic effects on TLR2 and TLR4 (Fig. 3 a, b). For TLR7/8, a synergistic effect occurred only with TLR2 combined with ssRNA40 (Fig. 3 c, d). Interestingly, TLR2 and TLR7/8 agonists in combination with ssRNA40 synergistically up-regulated RIG-I mRNA expression, whereas TLR2 and TLR4 agonists combined with ssRNA40 synergistically increased MDA5 mRNA expression (Fig. 3 e, f). In concordance with a previous report [ ], our results suggest that cross-regulation occurs not only between TLRs but also between TLRs and RLRs and that this mechanism may help amplify the immune response to HIV-1 infection.
In conclusion, we showed for the first time that TLR and RLR expression was altered in neutrophils in response to ssRNA40 derived from HIV-1, which might result in neutrophil activation, pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion, and ROS production; furthermore, we observed a TLRs and RLRs cross-regulation. This behavior may contribute to immune evasion or immune-pathogenic events. However, there are many exciting avenue of research that remain to be explored to fully understand the true role of neutrophils during HIV-1 infection, for example, to determine whether the RIG-I and MDA5 downstream pathways, or the TLR7/8 up-regulation leads to type I interferon production in neutrophils, in response to viral genome.