Introduction
The progression of HIV-1 infection towards AIDS is characterised by a decrease in the number of CD4 + T cells, predominantly in the gastrointestinal tract [ ], and by a severe immunodeficiency associated with opportunistic infections. Furthermore, hyperactivation of the immune system is observed in the infected individual, which is mainly due to the microbial translocation, the invasion of microorganisms from the gut into the bloodstream [ ]. It is still unknown how HIV-1 inhibits the gut immune system, thus allowing microorganisms to translocate, and why translocation is still observed after treatment of the patients with combination antiretroviral therapy [ , , ]. The scenario of “exhaustion” of immune cells is unlikely to be true, since meanwhile it is accepted that this phenomenon occurs through an active inhibition of T cells by the ligand of the programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1). Preventing binding of the PD-1 ligand by blocking antibodies restores the function of the T cells, and in SIV-infected rhesus monkeys antibodies against PD-1 markedly reduced the microbial translocation and increased the animals’ life expectancy [ , ]. HIV-1-induced immunopathogenesis is a complex process involving numerous factors [ ], and it is still unclear whether the immunosuppressive (Isu) domain located in the HIV-1 TM protein gp41 is involved in these processes. It has been shown that the Isu domain is highly conserved among all retroviruses and that most retroviruses induce immunodeficiencies in the infected host (reviewed in [ ]). Important insights into the possible function of retroviral Isu domains are available from mice injected with murine cells unable to form tumours in immunocompetent hosts. Expression of different retroviral TM proteins allowed those cells to produce tumours by efficiently inhibiting the immune system [ , , , ]. Deletion of the Isu domain or point mutations in the Isu domain abrogated the ability of the TM envelope protein to commit tumour induction [ ]. Other studies have shown that inactivated HIV-1, recombinant gp41 and its corresponding Isu peptide inhibited mitogen-triggered proliferation of human PBMCs and modulated their cytokine release and gene expression including IL-10, IL-8 and IL-6 [ , ]. Single mutations in the Isu domain of the recombinant TM protein of HIV-1 and in the replication competent virus abrogated the induction of IL-10 release [ ].
The mechanism of action of the Isu domain is still unknown, and it is also not clear whether a specific receptor exists, mediating the effect. Using recombinant gp41 produced in bacteria, different binding proteins on the surface of human cell lines were described [ , , , ]. Some other cell surface proteins interacting with recombinant gp41 were also identified, among them a p45 protein, whose binding was inhibited by antibodies directed against interferon-α and β [ , ], the heat shock protein hsp60 [ ] as well as the complement protein C1q [ , ]. Due to the use of recombinant gp41, in addition to the Isu domain, other domains of the molecule may have interacted with the target proteins in these studies. However, Isu peptides conjugated to human serum albumin were found to interact with a 44-kDa protein, which was not characterised any further [ ]. We observed that coupling of 125 I-labelled Isu peptides with the cross-linker DSS (disuccinimidyl suberate) to the surface of human PBMCs allowed detection of binding proteins with a molecular weight of 100, 60 and 40 kDa [ , ]. All these investigations never clearly identified an interaction partner involved in the immunomodulation observed in vitro, and it remained unclear to which cells the Isu domain was binding.
In the present paper, we sought to decipher for the first time the cellular subpopulations of human PBMCs that are involved in binding of the HIV-1 Isu domain and thus express a putative receptor. Therefore, homopolymers of the Isu peptide were used since monomers have been shown to be unable to induce IL-10 in human PBMCs [ ] and to be unable to inhibit proliferation of mitogen-treated human PBMCs [ , , ]. Human PBMCs were incubated with biotinylated homopolymers and specific antibodies characterising the PBMC subpopulations. The specificity of the binding was demonstrated using a scrambled control peptide homopolymer and performing competition experiments using non-biotinylated peptide conjugates.
Materials and methods
Peptides
HIV-1 Isu peptide without and with a C-terminal biotin tag (HIV Isu, KQLQARILAVERYLKDQQL, KQLQARILAVERYLKDQQL-Biotin) or its scrambled version (LAQLRQKRVIDYQAEQLKL, LAQLRQKRVIDYQAEQLKL-Biotin) was synthesised by SynPeptide, China. Their purity was 85 %.
Polymerisation of peptides
Lyophilised peptides were resuspended in DMSO at 20 mg/ml (~10 mM) and then diluted 1:10 in coupling buffer (0.1 M NaPO4, 10 % DMSO, 60 mM EDC, 125 mM Sulfo-NHS, pH 7.0, EDC and Sulfo-NHS from Thermo Scientific, Germany) The coupling buffer was prepared in a sterile bench by mixing 1 M stock solutions of Na 2 HPO4 and NaH 2 PO4 dissolved in endotoxin-free water (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), supplied with DMSO and then directly added to the required amounts of pulverised EDC and Sulfo-NHS to avoid any pH adjustments and possible endotoxin contamination. Polymerisation was stopped after 20 min at room temperature (RT) by transfer of the coupling mixture to a sterile Slide-A-Lyzer cassette with a 10-kDa molecular weight cut-off (Thermo Scientific, Germany) and dialysed extensively against PBS before further use.
Endotoxin measurements
Endotoxin content in samples was measured using the EndoLISA System (Hyglos, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, LPS standards ranging from 50 to 0.05 EU/ml or peptide polymers were mixed with binding buffer in duplicate and incubated on the LPS-specific phage-coated ELISA plates for 2 h at 37 °C under shaking. After washing, recombinant factor C substrate was added and fluorescence was measured after 0 and 90 min.
PBMCs and cell lines
Human PBMCs from healthy donors were isolated from fresh whole blood or buffy coats using Leucosep tubes (Greiner BioOne, Germany) and Histopaque 1077 gradient medium (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. PBMCs were washed twice with PBS, and erythrocytes were lysed by incubation with 0.86 % ammonium sulphate for 20 min at 37 °C. After two consecutive washing steps, cells were resuspended in RPMI to the required cell concentration. The monocytic THP-1 (ATCC TIB-202) and the lymphocytic T cell line C8166 (NIH 404) were grown in RPMI 1640 containing 10 % foetal calf serum (FCS, Biochrom, Germany) under 5 % CO 2 in a humidified incubator. The FCS did not contain endotoxin and did not induce IL-10 in human PBMCs as measured by an ELISA. The cell lines were tested negative for mycoplasma by using the MycoSensor PCR Assay Kit (Agilent Technologies, USA).
Peptide binding to human PBMCs and cell lines
Freshly isolated PBMCs were resuspended in RPMI medium to 1 × 10 7 viable cells per millilitre. Cells were then incubated with 4 µg of biotinylated homopolymer for 2 h at 4 °C to prevent non-specific uptake of peptides through endocytosis. Non-bound material was washed away with PBS, and interactions were stabilised using the primary amine reactive BS3 cross-linker (bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] suberate, Life technologies, USA, 1 mM final concentration). After 30 min at RT, cells were washed extensively with PBS and cell-bound peptides were detected with a streptavidin-Alexa Fluor488 conjugate (Molecular Probes, USA, 2 µg/ml) by staining for 30 min at RT. The washed samples were then analysed by FACS as described below.
Competition experiments
For blocking experiments, 1x10 7 PBMCs in 600 µl PBS were aliquoted in microcentrifugation tubes and preincubated with non-biotinylated Isu or Isu scrambled peptide at onefold, fivefold, tenfold, 20-fold and 50-fold molar excess for 20 min at 4 °C. Afterwards, 4 µg of biotinylated peptide was added for 2 h at 4 °C, followed by cross-linking, washing and staining with streptavidin-Alexa Fluor488 as outlined above.
Viability testing
Before cross-linking and FACS analysis, cells treated with the peptides or polymers were tested for viability by using the Guava ViaCount reagent as recommended by the manufacturer and cells analysed in the Guava Personal Cell Analysis system (Merck Millipore, Germany). In all cases, viability was ≥90 %.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
All samples were analysed in a FACSCalibur device using the CellQuest software (Becton–Dickinson, USA). Fluorescence-labelled antibodies were obtained either from Becton–Dickinson, USA (CD3-PerCP, CD8-PE), Beckmann-Coulter, USA (CD19-PE, CD14-PE, CD56-PE), BD Pharmingen, Germany (CD4-APC) or Biolegend, Germany (CD11c-PE-Cy7, CD16-PerCP) and used as recommended by the respective manufacturer. Surface staining was performed for 20 min at 4 °C before the cells were washed with PBS, 0.05 % BSA and resuspended in 200 µl of the same buffer for analysis. In multicolour experiments, compensation was performed with single stainings of the respective antibodies. Data were analysed using the FlowJo Software (Becton–Dickinson, USA).
Results
Characterisation of HIV Isu peptides and polymers
Homopolymers of peptides corresponding to the Isu domain and to a corresponding scrambled peptide were produced as described in Materials and methods. When the polymerisation products were analysed by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), molecules of different sizes were detected (Fig. 1 ). Western blot analysis using a monoclonal antibody specific for the Isu domain (binding the epitope ILAVERYL, Denner et al., unpublished) revealed binding to the monomer and the polymers of the Isu peptides, but not to the monomer and the polymer of the scrambled peptide (data not shown). When the monomers and the homopolymers were tested for the presence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), the endotoxin content in all samples was below the detection limit of the assay (0.05 EU/ml, Fig. S1). Fig. 1 Characterisation of HIV Isu and Isu scrambled (scr) peptides and homopolymers. SDS-PAGE analysis and staining with Coomassie Blue of biotinylated (biot) and non-biotinylated monomers (−, arrow ) and homopolymers (+) after polymerisation with EDC/Sulfo-NHS and dialysis against PBS. Successful polymerisation is shown by the protein smear appearing above the monomer which is marked with an arrow
Homopolymers of the HIV Isu peptide bind to human PBMCs
When freshly isolated human PBMCs were incubated with biotinylated HIV Isu peptide polymers, with a biotinylated scrambled peptide polymer or with the secondary antibody only, approximately 10 % of the lymphocytes and 46 % of the monocytes were stained with the HIV Isu peptide homopolymer in a representative donor (Fig. 2 a). Analysing binding to PBMCs from different patients ( n = 9), a variation in fluorescence between 27 and 65 % on monocytes and 6–12 % on lymphocytes depending on the donor was observed. The higher binding of the Isu peptide polymers compared with the binding of the scrambled peptide polymers was statistically significant (Fig. 2 b), indicating that the sequence of the polymers rather than electrostatic interactions was responsible for binding. Furthermore, the binding was not related to the uptake of biotin by the cells, since homopolymers of the biotinylated scrambled control peptide polymer did show only weak reactivity. Similarly, incubation with the secondary antibody gave only negligible staining as expected (Fig. 2 ). Additionally, binding through TLR4 via LPS could be ruled out since endotoxin contaminations were not detectable in the homopolymer preparations (Fig. S1). Fig. 2 Specific binding of biotinylated Isu homopolymers to the surface of human PBMCs as measured by FACS analysis. a Representative FACS plots and gating strategy of a single donor. Monocytes and lymphocytes were separated based on their differences in granularity by the forward/sideward scatter (FSC/SSC) and then plotted against SSC and Alexa Fluor 488 fluorescence. Second, secondary antibody control, Isu scr biot, scrambled biotinylated homopolymer of the Isu peptide, Isu biot, biotinylated homopolymer of the Isu peptide. b Average fluorescence measured on the lymphocytes and monocytes of nine different donors. About 45 % of the monocytes but only 10 % of the lymphocytes specifically bind biotinylated HIV Isu (please note the differences in the scale of the diagrams). Means and standard deviations are indicated, and statistical significance was examined by Student’s t test
B cells are the predominant target of HIV Isu among the lymphocytes
In order to investigate which lymphocyte subpopulation was responsible for binding, PBMCs incubated with either Isu peptide polymers or secondary antibody alone were phenotype with specific surface markers for the individual cell subset. By staining B cells (CD16-CD19 + ), CD4 + T cells (CD3 + CD4 + ), CD8 + T cells (CD3 + CD8 + ), dendritic cells (DCs) (CD3 − CD11c + ) and natural killer (NK) cells (CD3 − CD56 + ), about 73 % of the B cells were stained positive in different donors ( n = 4), whereas all other subpopulations showed weak (17.2 % of DCs, 2.70 % of NK cells) or negligible (0.8 % of CD4 + T cells, 1.6 % of CD8 + T cells) fluorescence (Fig. 3 ). These results suggested that B cells express in contrast to the other tested lymphocytes an interacting protein. Fig. 3 Only B cells, but not CD4 + cells, CD8 + cells, DCs and NK cells, carry the binding protein of HIV Isu. a Results of the FACS analysis of human PBMCs of one donor incubated with secondary antibody (second Ab), biotinylated scrambled (Isu scr biot) or biotinylated wild-type Isu polymer (Isu biot). Cells were treated with the peptide samples followed by staining the cells with surface markers specific for CD4 + cells, CD8 + cells, B cells, DCs and NK cells. b Determination of the frequency of Alexa Fluor 488-positive cells in different subpopulations of PBMCs from four donors. Whereas a weak binding of HIV Isu to DCs and NK cells was observed, more than 70 % of the B cell subset stained positive for HIV Isu
Classical and intermediate monocytes are the main target population of HIV Isu
To identify which subpopulation of the monocytes represents the main target population for the Isu peptide homopolymers, markers were used to identify classical monocytes characterised by high-level expression of the CD14 cell surface receptor (CD14 ++ CD16 − ), intermediate monocytes characterised by high expression of CD14 and additional co-expression of the CD16 receptor (CD14 ++ CD16 + ), and non-classical monocytes characterised by expression of CD14 and CD16 (CD14 + CD16 + ) [ ]. By gating the individual subset (Fig. S2), the classical and intermediate monocytes were the populations with the highest binding capacity in PBMCs from four different donors (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 Classical and intermediate monocytes are the main monocyte subpopulations binding Isu peptide homopolymers as measured by FACS analysis. a Representative staining of classical, intermediate and non-classical monocyte subsets of PBMCs from a single donor (see Fig. S2 for details on the gating strategy) incubated with secondary antibody only (second), biotinylated Isu polymers (Isu biot) or biotinylated scrambled Isu peptide polymers (Isu scr biot). b Average percentage and standard deviation of positive cells in each of the monocyte subpopulations from four healthy donors. Abbreviations are the same as in ( a )
Competitive inhibition of HIV Isu binding can be achieved only on monocytes
In order to prove the specificity of the binding of the Isu peptide homopolymers to human PBMCs, competition experiments were performed. Cells were preincubated with different concentrations of non-biotinylated Isu peptide homopolymers or homopolymers of the scrambled peptide and later with the biotinylated homopolymers. Dependent on the dose of the Isu peptide homopolymer, but not of that of the homopolymer of the scrambled peptide, binding of the labelled Isu peptide homopolymer to monocytes was inhibited (Fig. 5 ). For unknown reason, such a clear-cut inhibition was not observed in the case of lymphocytes (Fig. 5 ) (see discussion). Fig. 5 Additional evidence that the Isu peptide homopolymer interacts specifically with the target cells. PBMCs were preincubated with the non-biotinylated Isu peptide homopolymer (Isu) or the non-biotinylated homopolymer of the scrambled peptide (Isu scr) at different concentrations for twenty minutes and later treated with the biotinylated polymers. FACS analysis demonstrated competition for binding only on monocytes and specifically with the Isu peptide. Second Ab, secondary antibody control, Isu scr biot, biotinylated scrambled Isu peptide polymer, Isu biot, biotinylated Isu peptide polymer
Specific binding to monocytic and lymphocytic cell lines
To analyse whether the Isu domain also binds to blood cell lines which are more readily available, a monocytic cell line and a lymphocytic cell line were investigated. When studying binding of the Isu peptide homopolymers to THP-1 cells, which is a human monocytic cell line derived from a male acute monocytic leukaemia patient [ ], binding to 8 % of the cells was observed in three independent experiments. When studying binding of the Isu peptide homopolymers to C8166 cells, a human umbilical cord blood lymphocyte line, indistinguishable from normal IL-2-dependent cells [ ], binding to 63 % of the cells was observed in three independent experiments (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Specific binding of the Isu peptide homopolymer to THP-1 and C8166 cells as measured by FACS analysis. Second, secondary antibody control, Isu scr. scrambled isu peptide polymer, Isu, Isu peptide polymer, means and standard deviation from three experiments are shown; please note the differences in the scale of the axes
Discussion
In this study, we identified for the first time specific cell subsets binding the Isu domain of the TM protein gp41 of HIV-1 using homopolymers of the corresponding Isu peptide. We demonstrated that biotinylated peptides corresponding to the Isu domain of gp41 did bind specifically to the cell surface of human monocytes and lymphocytes. Whereas only around 10 % of the lymphocytes are binding the Isu domain, up to 65 % of the monocytes were stained positive in some donors, indicating that this cell type represents the main target (Fig. 2 ). We observed substantial differences in the binding behaviour depending on the donor. On lymphocytes, the number of fluorescent cells varies between 6 and 12 %, on monocytes even between 27 and 65 %. In both cases, approximately half of the blood donors were “low-binders”, the other half “high-binders”. This suggests differences in the expression of the putative binding proteins in dependence on the genetic background or the general stimulation of the donor´s immune system. Notably, there was no correlation between the intensity of binding to monocytes on one hand and lymphocytes on the other. In addition, a selective competition of binding was observed in the case of monocytes, but not of lymphocytes (Fig. 5 ). Both observations may be explained by different binding partners on monocytes and lymphocytes or by different affinities to this binding partners (see below). It would be interesting to correlate the capacity of binding with the ability to induce IL-10 release, which is also highly donor dependent [ ] or even with disease progression of HIV-infected individuals.
The specificity of the binding of the Isu domain of HIV-1 to human PBMCs was shown by the fact that (1) a scrambled peptide composed of the same amino acids but in a different order was not binding and (2) that a non-biotinylated peptide corresponding to the Isu domain did specifically inhibit the binding of the biotinylated peptide homopolymer (Fig. 5 ). This inhibition was clearly shown in the case of monocytes, strongly arguing for a specific receptor located on these cells. Why a competition was not seen in the case of lymphocytes remains unclear. Since unspecific binding can be excluded through the experimental set-up, differences in peptide affinity might explain this result as mentioned above. In such a scenario, the non-biotinylated peptide might be displaced by the biotinylated Isu polymer, if the latter has a higher affinity to the binding partner. Since mammalian surface receptors can be composed of various side chains dependent on the cellular or environmental context, this situation seems not unlikely. Further experiments would be necessary to analyse the binding of Isu to lymphocytes. Importantly, the absence of endotoxins in all samples was confirmed using an ELISA-based detection method with higher sensitivity and robustness as the classical LAL (limulus amebocyte lysate) assay. Thus, we can exclude an unspecific uptake of the Isu peptide polymer through the LPS receptor complex consisting of TLR4, CD14 and MD-2 (Fig. S1). In addition, the controls with the biotinylated scrambled peptides showed that binding to cells through the biotin receptor can also be excluded.
To identify the specific receptor of the Isu domain may help to confirm its immunosuppressive properties and to study the mechanism of action. For this purpose, large quantities of cells are required for preparative isolation, and therefore, we also examined cell lines for their capacity to bind Isu polymers (Fig. 6 ). Although primary T cells were unable to bind the Isu peptide, the lymphoid cell line C8166 was very effective in binding and up to 63 % of the cells stained positive. In contrast, although up to 60 % of the monocytes of PBMCs bind the Isu domain, the THP-1 cell line was only weakly interacting with the Isu peptide polymer. This apparent discrepancy to the pattern observed with primary cells might be explained by changes in the expression of surface receptors during immortalisation or in vitro cultivation and emphasises the importance of careful selection of target cells when isolating the binding protein.
Overall, these data strongly support specific binding of the Isu domain to PBMCs, mainly to monocytes and B cells, which both may be involved in the immunosuppressive effects induced by the Isu domain reported until now. Previously, an increase in IL-10 production was reported in isolated monocytes but not in B, T or NK cells after incubation with recombinant gp41 produced in bacteria [ ]. The increase in IL-10 release preceded reduction in IL-2 and anti-IL-10 antibodies were reversing the gp41 inhibitory effect on IL-2 production, suggesting a regulatory role of IL-10. The strong binding to monocytes seen here may implicate that these cells release IL-10 to suppress other immune cells, for example T cells when T mitogen-triggered proliferation was measured [ , ]. On the other hand, the fact that the Isu domain binds to B cells may suggest that B cell mitogen-triggered proliferation which has been described [ ] was inhibited also directly. Our results further show that classical and intermediate monocytes bind the Isu peptide polymers (Fig. 4 ). It is interesting to note that such CD14 + CD16 + monocytes are characterised by higher permissiveness for HIV-1 infection [ ] and an increased accumulation of these cells was observed in patients with HIV-1-associated encephalopathy and dementia [ , ]. Through the identification of the target cells involved in binding, we here lay the grounds for the identification of a putative receptor as well as of the potential signal transduction pathway involved. These experiments should thus allow studying the suppressive influence of the Isu domain of HIV-1 on the immune system in more detail.