Introduction
The innate immune system plays an important role in the host’s first-line defense against microbial infections and involves the recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) or danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) [ , ]. PRRs can be activated by microorganisms, toxins, chemical compounds, cytoplasmic PAMPs, and/or endogenous DAMPs triggering intracellular signaling which leads to inflammasome generation. Natural antibodies are mostly IgM isotype directed against highly conserved epitopes and bind to ligands with low affinity prior to exogenous antigenic stimulation [ ]. B‐lymphocyte subsets, B‐1 cells, are committed to natural antibody production and could represent a reservoir being able to mutate their immunoglobulin variable region genes to give rise to higher-affinity antibodies in general [ , ]. Natural antibodies play a role in protection against infectious agents and serve as innate recognition receptors, recognizing various bacterial cell wall components or parasites. They have also homeostatic housekeeping functions, e.g., recognition and removal of senescent cells and other self‐antigens [ , , ]. The homeostatic role of natural antibodies is associated with atheroprotection, which is well demonstrated by marked acceleration of atherosclerosis caused by serum IgM deficiency in low-density lipoprotein receptor-deficient (LDLR −/− ) mice [ ] and is well supported by the presence of IgM against malondialdehyde acetaldehyde-low-density lipoprotein (MAA-LDL) in newborn babies [ ]. Most of the characterized IgM antibodies are against oxidized epitopes from malondialdehyde-LDL (MDA-LDL), oxidized phosphatidylcholine (PC), and copper oxidized LDL (CuOx-LDL), and limited knowledge is available on natural antibodies against MAA-epitope on LDL or molecular mimicry on bacterial pathogens [ , ]. Immunization with homologous MDA-LDL leads to atheroprotection in experimental models [ , ]. The fluorescent adducts of MDA involving the condensation of two or more MDA molecules with lysine to form MAA-type adducts create immunodominant epitopes that lead to atheroprotective responses, and MAA-modified homologous albumin works equally to stimulate a T helper (Th) 2-biased hapten-specific humoral and cellular responses [ ].
Periodontitis is an inflammatory disease leading to loss of tooth-supportive tissue and has been associated with atherosclerosis [ , , , , , , ]. The most important pathogens are gram-negative bacteria, such as Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans ( Aa ) and Porphyromonas gingivalis ( Pg ) [ ]. It has been shown that vaccination against virulence factors of these pathogens and anti-inflammatory therapy may confer disease resistance [ ]. Gingipain of Pg has been identified to share molecular identity with epitopes on MDA-LDL, and immunization with MDA-LDL reduces atherosclerosis in LDLR −/− mice challenged with Pg [ , ]. However, the causal relationship and pathological mechanism still remain.
Currently, no monoclonal natural IgM antibodies against Aa bacteria have been reported. In this study we characterized a natural monoclonal IgM antibody against MAA-epitope on LDL and showed that it cross-reacted with several serotypes of Aa bacteria, but not with Escherichia coli ( E. coli ) or Streptococcus pyogenes ( S. pyogenes ), by binding to chaperonin 60 or heat-shock protein 60, a potent virulence factor of the bacteria for inducing bone resorption and a putative proatherogenic factor.
Materials and methods
Bacteria
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans strains (ATCC 29523, ATCC 43718, ATCC 33384, IDH 781, IDH 1705, CU1000, C59A, representing six serotypes a, b, c, d, e, f and one non-serotypeable strain x) [ ], E. coli , and S. pyogenes were grown on fastidious anaerobic agar (FAA) plates at +37 °C with 5 % CO 2 . Purity of the cultures was checked by colony morphology and gram staining. All bacterial cells were picked from plates and suspended in PBS without heat inactivation, and protein concentrations were measured by DC ™ (detergent compatible) protein assay kit (Bio Rad).
Cloning of mouse monoclonal IgM
Splenocytes from a transcription factor Nrf2-deficient mouse backcrossed to C57BL/6 were fused with P3×63Ag8.653.1 myeloma cells using standard polyethylene glycol method followed by selection in HAT (Sigma) medium for a subsequent 2-week period [ ]. The cells were maintained in DMEM (Sigma) containing 20 % FBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1 % non-essential amino acids, 10 mM HEPES, 50 µM β-mercaptoethanol, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 µg/ml streptomycin (Sigma) at +37 °C with 5 % CO 2 . The hybridoma culture media were screened against mouse IgM subclass by a chemiluminescence immunoassay [ ]. Monoclonal hybridoma cell lines were established by limiting dilution from IgM-producing cell cultures. Monoclonal hybridoma cells were propagated, and cell stocks were made in solution containing 85 % FBS and 15 % DMSO (AppliChem). An IgM isotype control, 3D6 (clone HMC+10_102), was cloned from a C57BL/6 J mouse using similar methods.
Production and purification of mouse monoclonal antibody
Hybridoma cultures were tested for production of IgM against MAA-LDL. Mouse monoclonal IgM, Aa_Mab (clone HMN-08_34), was selected for this study. The hybridoma cells were grown and expanded in 10 % FBS-DMEM. After being washed with PBS, the cells were transferred to serum-free HyClone™ SFM4MAb-Utility Media (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and let to grow for 2 weeks. The media were collected and concentrated by Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units (100 kDa MWCO, Millipore). The antibody purification was carried out using Superose 6 10/300 GL high-performance size exclusion chromatography columns (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). The purity of the antibody was verified by 10 % SDS-PAGE.
Total RNA isolation, cDNA amplification, and sequence analysis
Total RNA from Aa_Mab hybridoma cells was isolated with RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) and used to synthesize cDNA with RevertAid reverse transcriptase and oligo(dT)18 primers included in the RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cDNA from reverse transcription was further amplified by PCR using the following primers [ ]: IgM heavy pair: forward (MH1) 5′-SARGTNMAGCTGSAGSAGTC-3′ reverse (IgM) 5′-GACATTTGGGAAGGACTGACTCTC-3′ IgM light pair: forward (5MK) 5′-GAYATTGTGMTSACMCARWCTMCA-3′ reverse (3KC) 5′-GGATACAGTTGGTGCAGCATC-3′
PCR program for the amplification consisted of following steps: 95 °C × 5 min; 95 °C × 1 min, 45 °C × 1 min, and 72 °C × 2 min for 30 cycles; 72 °C × 10 min; 10 °C × 1 min; 4 °C × overnight.
The amplified PCR products were separated by 1.2 % agarose gel electrophoresis and purified with GeneJET PCR purification kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nucleotide sequences were analyzed at DNA sequencing core facility, Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Finland. The antibody sequences were aligned to the germ-line genes with IMGT/V-QUEST sequence alignment tool ( http://www.imgt.org ).
Chemiluminescence immunoassay with Aa_Mab antibody
Antigens were immobilized overnight at +4 °C to Nunc Microfluor2 96-well plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in PBS. The antigens used were MAA-LDL, MDA-LDL, CuOx-LDL, Native LDL, MAA-BSA, MDA-BSA, PC-BSA, BSA, CWPS, FG-PBS, seven serotypes ( a , b , c , d , e , f , x ) of Aa , E. coli , S. pyogenes , and Aa chaperonin 60. The wells were washed with an automated plate washer with PBS–0.27 mM EDTA three times between each step of the immunoassays. Nonspecific binding sites were blocked with 0.5 % FG in PBS–0.27 mM EDTA for 60 min at room temperature. In the competitive immunoassay, Aa_Mab antibody (0.125–0.25 μg/ml) was incubated with either soluble antigens (MAA-LDL, MDA-LDL, CuOx-LDL, Native LDL, MAA-BSA, MDA-BSA, PC-BSA, BSA, CWPS, FG-PBS) or bacteria (seven serotypes of Aa, E. coli , and S. pyogenes ) as competitors with concentrations at 0–100 μg/ml overnight at 4 °C. The samples were centrifuged at 16,000× g for 30 min at +4 °C before adding to microtiter plates with immobilized MAA-LDL (5 μg/ml) or Aa chaperonin 60 (5 μg/ml). Alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-mouse IgM (Sigma) was used as a secondary antibody and LumiPhos 530 (33 %, Lumigen) as a substrate in the assay. The chemiluminescence was measured as relative light units (RLU) with a Wallac Victor3 multilabel counter (Perkin Elmer).
Flow cytometry analysis of Aa_Mab binding to apoptotic cells
Human Jurkat T cells were grown at +37 °C with 5 % CO 2 in DMEM (Sigma) supplemented with 10 % FBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 µg/ml streptomycin (Sigma). The apoptosis was induced by UV irradiation (10–25 mJ/cm 2 ). Apoptotic cells were identified by DNA staining with SYTOX ® AADvanced™ Dead Cell Stain Kit (Life Technologies) according to the kit protocol. The Jurkat cells (200,000 cells) were washed with 0.1 % BSA in PBS and centrifuged at 1800× g for 5 min at +4 °C. The cells were then incubated with Aa_Mab antibody (0.005–5 µg/ml) with shaking at +4 °C for 60 min. Goat-anti-mouse IgM Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen) was used as secondary antibody at concentration of 0.25 µg/ml. The washing was repeated after antibody incubation. Binding of Aa_Mab antibody to apoptotic cells was analyzed with FACSCalibur instrument (BD Biosciences) and FlowJo 7.6.4 software (TreeStar).
For competition assay, Aa_Mab IgM (0.5 µg/ml) was first incubated with Aa ( f ) bacteria (50 µg/ml) or Aa chaperonin 60 (50 µg/ml) for 90 min at room temperature followed by centrifugation at 16,000× g for 30 min at +4 °C to pellet immunocomplexes. Supernatant was then added to Jurkat cells and incubated for 60 min at +4 °C, and the assay was carried out as described above.
Mass spectrometry
The bacterial protein recognized by Aa_Mab IgM was purified from SDS-PAGE. Coomassie-stained bands were cut from the gel, destained with washing buffer (50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate in 40 % acetonitrile and 60 % water), and reduced by incubating for 30 min at room temperature with 20 mM DTT in washing buffer. After that, a stoichiometric amount of iodoacetamide was added and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. The gel pieces were washed for 5 min with washing buffer and then twice with trypsin buffer (40 mM ammoniumbicarbontae in 9 % acetonitrile and 91 % water). Five microliters of trypsin solution (20 ng/µl Sigma proteomics grade in trypsin buffer) was added to the gel pieces for 20 min, and 15 µl of trypsin buffer was added, followed by overnight incubation at +35 °C. In total 0.5 µl of the supernatant was dried on an 800–384 anchor chip plate (Bruker), and solution of α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid as MALDI matrix was dried on top of the sample. Mass spectra were measured on an UltrafleXtreme MALDI TOF/TOF instrument (Bruker) with an automated method that first acquired peptide fingerprint data in reflectron mode between m / z 700 and 4000, after which up to 10 ions were automatically selected for MS/MS interrogation. Spectra were externally calibrated with peptide calibration mixture (Bruker). Fingerprint and MS/MS data were combined and subjected to search the NCBI non-redundant database with MASCOT (Matrix science) using the following parameters: no species restriction, carbamidomethylation of cysteins as global modification, optional methionine oxidation, 20 ppm mass tolerance for peptide masses and 0.7 Da for MS/MS fragments.
Expression of recombinant Aa chaperonin 60
The construct of Aa chaperonin 60 cDNA in pET28a(+) expression vector was purchased (GenScript) and transformed into BL21 ( DE3 ) E. coli cells (Agilent Technologies). Protein expression was induced with 0.5 mM IPTG (Sigma). The bacterial cells were lysed with lysozyme (1 mg/ml, Sigma) followed by sonication. The cells debris was pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 48,000× g for 30 min at +4 °C. The crude cell lysates were collected, and protein purification was carried out by using HisPur™ Cobalt resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Dot blot and Western blot analysis
Bacterial suspension (10 µg protein/strain/well) in 200 µl of TBS, pH 7.5, was loaded by vacuum onto pre-wet nitrocellulose membrane using dot blot apparatus (Biorad). Same bacterial suspension (17 µg protein/strain/lane) was separated by SDS-PAGE and blotted onto nitrocellulose membranes for Western blotting. All blots were blocked in 5 % BSA-TBS, incubated with antibody in 5 % BSA–0.05 %Tween 20–TBS, and washed by 0.05 % Tween 20–TBS. The binding of Aa_Mab and 3D6 to the bacterial proteins, 2.5 µg/ml in Dot blot and 1 µg/ml in Western blot, was visualized by using goat-anti-mouse IgM IRDye800CW (0.5 µg/ml, LI-COR Biosciences) as secondary antibody. The fluorescent signals were detected with an Odyssey IR imager and Image Studio™ Software (LI-COR Biosciences). In total, 2 µg of protein were loaded per well for WB of recombinant Aa chaperonin 60, MAA-BSA, and BSA. Aa_Mab (0.1 µg/ml) and 3D6 (0.5 µg/ml) were used as primary antibodies, and Alexa Fluor 680 goat-anti-mouse IgM (0.5 µg/ml, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was selected as secondary antibody.
Results
Sequence analysis of Aa_Mab IgM
Aa_Mab antibody was produced in HyClone™ SFM4MAb-Utility Media and purified by high-performance size exclusion chromatography. The purified antibody demonstrated two protein bands of 75 and 25 kDa on SDS-PAGE under reducing condition, which correspond to heavy and light chains of IgM antibody, respectively. No breakdown fragments were detected (Fig. S1). The nucleotide sequences of the IgM clone were analyzed and aligned to the germ-line genes with the IMGT/V-QUEST sequence alignment tool ( http://www.imgt.org ). The data indicate that V region of heavy chain was originated from IGHV1-22*01 gene (Table 1 ). There were two random N nucleotide insertions (N1: gg, N2: g) located in the upstream and downstream of D region, respectively. The length of heavy chain CDR3 was 8 amino acids long (Table 1 ). V region of light chain was derived from IGKV4-55*01gene (Table 1 ). One P nucleotide insertion (P: at) was found between 3′ V region and 5′ J region of the light chain gene. Mutations appeared more often at framework region 1 (FR1) in both heavy and light chains (data not shown). Table 1 Genes encoding V H and V L from Aa_Mab IgM clone Aa_Mab IgM V gene D gene J gene CDR3 Heavy IGHV1-22*01 89.2 % IGHD1-1*01 in reading frame 3 IGHJ1*03 78.9 % CARGYGRDVW Light IGKV4-55*01 95.2 % IGKJ4*01 100 % CQQWSSYPIFTF
Aa_Mab binds to oxidized epitopes of LDL and cross-reacts with Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans
The binding of Aa_Mab IgM to oxidized lipid and protein epitopes was first examined by direct binding (Fig. 1 a) and competitive chemiluminescence immunoassays (Fig. 1 b). Aa_Mab bound to malondialdehyde acetaldehyde-low-density lipoprotein (MAA-LDL), malondialdehyde-LDL (MDA-LDL), and malondialdehyde acetaldehyde-bovine serum albumin (MAA-BSA). Minimal binding to MDA-BSA, copper oxidized LDL (CuOx-LDL), native LDL, phosphocholine-BSA (PC-BSA), BSA, cell wall polysaccharide (CWPS), and fish gelatin in phosphate-buffered saline (FG-PBS) was observed (Fig. 1 a). Competitive liquid-phase immunoassays demonstrated specificity of Aa_Mab IgM to MAA-epitope, as MAA-BSA and MAA-LDL showed powerful competition, respectively, for Aa_Mab IgM binding to MAA-LDL (Fig. 1 b). Partial competition of Aa_Mab to MAA-LDL was also observed with MDA-LDL (Fig. 1 b). Fig. 1 Chemiluminescence immunoassays of Aa_Mab IgM binding to oxidized epitopes. a Direct binding immunoassay to MAA-LDL, MDA-LDL, CuOx-LDL, Native LDL ( solid symbols ), MAA-BSA, MDA-BSA, PC-BSA, BSA, CWPS, and FG-PBS ( open symbols ). b Competitive liquid-phase chemiluminescence immunoassay to test the binding specificity to MAA-LDL. The binding is expressed as the binding in the presence of increasing amounts of soluble competitor divided by the binding in the absence of soluble competitor (Bi/B0)
Dot blot analysis was performed to test Aa_Mab IgM binding to Aa bacteria (Fig. 2 a). Aa_Mab recognized all Aa strains tested (representing serotypes a , b , c , d , e , f , x ) to different extents when equal amount of bacterial proteins was loaded in wells, with the stronger recognition being seen from Aa(f) , Aa(c) , and Aa(d) . No binding was observed to E. coli or S. pyogenes bacteria which were used as controls. An IgM isotype control antibody, 3D6 (clone HMC+10_102), showed no significant binding to any of the bacteria tested when compared with the secondary antibody background control (Fig. 2 a). Fig. 2 Dot blot and chemiluminescence immunoassays of Aa_Mab IgM binding to Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans ( Aa ). a Aa_Mab, clone HMN-08_34; 3D6, clone HMC+10_102, an IgM isotype control antibody; 2ab, secondary antibody alone. MAA-BSA, PC-BSA and bacteria suspension were loaded into wells. 2.5 µg/ml of Aa_Mab and 3D6 were used as primary antibody, respectively. Goat-anti-mouse IgM IRDye800CW (0.5 µg/ml) was used as a secondary antibody. Aa_Mab demonstrated strong binding to positive control MAA-BSA and minimal binding to negative controls PC-BSA, E. coli , and S. pyogenes , indicating that the binding is directed specifically against MAA-epitope or molecular mimicry on bacteria surfaces. b Direct binding immunoassay to different serotypes of Aa , E. coli, and S. pyogenes ( open symbols ). c Specific binding to MAA-LDL in competitive liquid-phase chemiluminescence immunoassay. The binding is expressed as the binding in the presence of increasing amounts of soluble competitor divided by the binding in the absence of soluble competitor (Bi/B0). MAA-LDL and MAA-BSA ( solid symbols ) were used as positive controls, while FG-PBS ( solid symbols ) was used as a negative control ( b , c)
To further investigate the binding specificity of Aa_Mab IgM to different serotypes of Aa bacteria, direct and competitive chemiluminescence immunoassays were carried out (Fig. 2 b, c ). Aa_Mab IgM bound to all Aa serotypes tested ( a , b , c , d , e , f , x ). No binding of Aa_Mab IgM was observed with E. coli , consistently with our previous dot blot results. Figure 2 c shows that Aa_Mab binding to MAA-LDL was effectively competed by Aa(f) and Aa(c) among the tested bacteria. Partial competition was seen from Aa(d) and Aa(x) . Serotypes a , b , and e did not compete for Aa_Mab binding to MAA-LDL (Fig. 2 c). While S. pyogenes bound weakly to Aa_Mab IgM in direct binding assay (Fig. 2 b), no competition was observed in the competitive assay (Fig. 2 c), suggesting that the binding was nonspecific. Aa_Mab IgM was also tested for binding to lipopolysaccharides (LPS) from either Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans ( Aa ) or P. gingivalis , but it bound to neither of them (Fig. S2).
Aa_Mab recognizes 60-kDa chaperonin, a heat-shock protein of Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans
Western blot was carried out to investigate what proteins of Aa bacteria Aa_Mab bound to. The result showed one dominant protein band at molecular weight about 60 kDa from all Aa strains tested, whereas no corresponding protein was observed in E. coli or S. pyogenes (Fig. 3 a). Aa_Mab recognized MAA-BSA but not native BSA, demonstrating again that Aa_Mab recognized specifically MAA-epitope on proteins and molecular structure similar to MAA-epitope on Aa bacteria. Secondary antibody alone or 3D6 IgM isotype control (1 µg/ml) did not recognize any proteins in Western blot analysis (data not shown). Mass spectrometry was used to further identify the recognized protein of Aa on Western blots. The highest match score was obtained for 60-kDa chaperonin or heat-shock protein 60 (HSP60) from Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans . Fig. 3 Western blot of Aa_Mab binding to proteins in whole bacteria ( a ) and to recombinant Aa chaperonin 60 ( b ). a About 17 µg of whole bacteria proteins were loaded per lane. In total 2 µg of MAA-BSA and BSA were loaded as positive and negative controls, respectively. Blot was incubated with Aa_Mab IgM (1 µg/ml). Goat-anti-mouse IgM IRDye800CW (0.5 µg/ml) was used as a secondary antibody. Protein molecular weights were indicated on left . b About 2 µg of recombinant Aa chaperonin, MAA-BSA, and BSA was loaded per lane. Blot was incubated with Aa_Mab IgM (0.1 µg/ml, 3 lanes on left ), 3D6 IgM (0.5 µg/ml, 3 lanes in middle ), and secondary antibody goat-anti-mouse IgM IRDye 680 (0.5 µg/ml, 3 lanes on right ). Protein molecular weights were indicated on left
Aa_Mab binds to recombinant chaperonin 60, and the binding can be competed by MAA-LDL/MAA-BSA
The 60-kDa Aa chaperonin (HSP60) cDNA construct in pET28a(+) expression vector was purchased, and the protein was expressed in BL21(DE3) E. coli cells to verify its binding to Aa_Mab IgM antibody (Fig. 3 b). Aa_Mab recognized purified recombinant Aa chaperonin 60 and MAA-BSA but not native BSA (Fig. 3 b), agreeing with Western blot results from the whole bacteria (Fig. 3 a). IgM control antibody 3D6 and secondary antibody alone did not bind to any proteins in the Western blots analysis (Fig. 3 b), indicating that Aa_Mab binding to Aa chaperonin 60 is specific.
The binding was also tested with chemiluminescence immunoassay (Fig. 4 ). Aa_Mab bound to Aa chaperonin 60 in a dose-dependant manner, whereas 3D6 and FG-PBS did not (Fig. 4 a). To investigate further whether MAA-LDL, MAA-BSA, and Aa bacteria could compete with Aa_Mab binding to recombinant Aa chaperonin, competitive chemiluminescent immunoassay was performed with 0–100 µg/ml of competitors (Fig. 4 b). MAA-BSA and MAA-LDL showed strong competition in the assay, whereas no competition was observed by CuOx-LDL and BSA (Fig. 4 b). Aa bacteria serotypes showed partial competition for Aa_Mab binding to Aa chaperonin. The order from mild to weak competition was c , f , e , x , d , and b . Aa ( a ) did not compete (data not shown). The results are very similar to the ones seen in competitive immunoassay of Aa_Mab IgM binding to MAA-LDL (Figs. 1 b, 2 c). Interestingly, E. coli showed mild competition with the same extent as Aa ( x ). Taken together, the data clearly demonstrate that Aa_Mab specifically binds to Aa chaperonin 60 or HSP60. Fig. 4 Chemiluminescence immunoassays of Aa_Mab binding to recombinant Aa chaperonin 60. a Direct binding of Aa_Mab, 3D6 and FG-PBS to purified recombinant Aa chaperonin 60 (5 µg/ml). Aa_Mab2: 2 µg/ml; Aa_Mab1: 1 µg/ml; 3D6: 1 µg/ml. FG-PBS was used as a negative control. b Specific Aa_Mab IgM (0.25 µg/ml) binding to Aa chaperonin 60 (5 µg/ml) in competitive liquid-phase chemiluminescence immunoassay. The binding is expressed as the binding in the presence of increasing amounts of soluble competitor divided by the binding in the absence of soluble competitor (Bi/B0). MAA-LDL, CuOx-LDL, MAA-BSA, BSA were used as competitors with different concentrations (0–100 µg/ml)
Aa_Mab binds to apoptotic cells, and the binding can be competed by Aa(f) bacteria and recombinant Aa chaperonin 60
PRRs are a class of innate immune response proteins that are expressed to respond to PAMPs associated with microbial pathogens or to DAMPs associated with cell components released during cell damage. Oxidized epitopes that serve as DAMPs are created on cells undergoing apoptosis. To test whether Aa_Mab IgM bound to apoptotic cells, the binding to UV-irradiated apoptotic Jurkat T cells was analyzed by flow cytometry (Fig. 5 ). Apoptotic and viable cell populations were identified with SYTOX ® AADvanced™ Dead Cell Stain Kit (Fig. 5 a). Aa_Mab IgM bound to apoptotic, SYTOX ® AADvanced™-positive (gate 1) Jurkat cells in a dose-dependent manner as shown in Fig. 5 b. Aa_Mab did not bind to viable, SYTOX ® AADvanced™-negative (gate 2) Jurkat cells at any concentration tested (Fig. 5 c). In order to see whether Aa bacteria and recombinant Aa chaperonin 60 could compete with Aa_Mab binding to apoptotic cells, competition assay was also performed. Aa(f) serotype was selected due to its relatively strong and specific binding to Aa_Mab IgM antibody. The data indicated that Aa_Mab IgM binding to apoptotic Jurkat cells could be competed by Aa(f) bacteria and also by recombinant Aa chaperonin 60 (Fig. 5 d). Fig. 5 Aa_Mab binding to apoptotic cells. a UV-irradiated human Jurkat T cells were stained with SYTOX ® AADvanced™ Dead Cell Stain Kit. Apoptotic ( Gate 1 ) and viable ( Gate 2 ) cell populations were gated. Aa_Mab IgM (0.005–5 µg/ml) binding to apoptotic (b) and viable (c) Jurkat cells. 2ab: secondary antibody control. d Aa_Mab IgM (0.5 µg/ml) competition assay with Aa(f) bacteria (50 µg/ml) and Aa chaperonin 60 (50 µg/ml)
Discussion
In this study we cloned and characterized a natural mouse monoclonal IgM antibody (HMN-08_34), Aa_Mab, which recognized malondialdehyde acetaldehyde (MAA) epitopes shared by molecular mimicry on low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans ( Aa ) bacteria using hybridoma technology. The germ-line origin and the binding characteristics of the clone were investigated. Aa_Mab IgM bound not only to MAA-epitopes on LDL/BSA but also to Aa chaperonin 60/HSP60, a member of heat-shock protein family which has been reported as a powerful virulence factor for inducing bone resorption [ , , , , ] and a putative pathogenic factor in atherosclerosis [ , , , ].
Natural antibodies play an important role in the first-line defense against invading pathogens. In addition, they are able to recognize certain altered self-antigens (danger signals) which enable them to clear promptly damaged cells and cellular debris, thus providing important homeostatic housekeeping functions [ , , ]. It is well known that the levels of IgM antibodies to epitopes of oxLDL exhibit an inverse association with cardiovascular disease, [ , , ] and that there is an association between periodontal infection and increased risk of atherosclerotic vascular disease [ , , , , , , ]. However, little is known about natural antibodies against malondialdehyde acetaldehyde (MAA) epitopes and the periodontal pathogen Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans ( Aa ). A pair of natural human monoclonal Fab antibodies cloned from newborns before and at the time of full-term pregnancy have been previously reported. They demonstrated unique binding to MAA-epitopes on oxidized LDL/BSA and to apoptotic endothelial cells and atherosclerotic lesions [ ]. In this study, we cloned and characterized a full-length natural mouse monoclonal IgM antibody (Aa_Mab), which specifically binds to MAA-epitope on proteins and MAA-adducted lipids on oxLDL (Fig. 1 a, b ). Although notable binding and competition were found from MDA-LDL (Fig. 1 a, b ), it was most likely due to the existence of residual MAA-epitope in the MDA-modified preparations. Apoptotic cells have been shown to contain in their membranes multiple oxidation-specific epitopes, e.g., phosphorylcholine (PC), malondialdehyde (MDA), and malondialdehyde acetaldehyde (MAA) [ , , , ], which are dominant targets of natural IgM. Here we demonstrated that MAA-epitope-specific natural monoclonal Aa_Mab IgM recognized apoptotic cells as demonstrated before with other natural antibodies, suggesting that natural antibodies targeting the stress-induced self-antigens provide a general protective response to the consequences of oxidative stress. This may be relevant to the prevention of a wide range of autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, such as atherosclerosis which is characterized by increased levels of oxLDL and apoptotic cells or by their impaired clearance [ , ].
More interestingly, this monoclonal IgM antibody specific for MAA-epitope cross-reacts with Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans ( Aa ) (Figs. 2 , 3 a), a key microbe in periodontitis considered to be a potential risk factor for atherosclerosis [ , ], therefore adding more supportive evidence how the two diseases, atherosclerosis and periodontitis, are associated with each other. Aa is classified into different serotypes based on polysaccharide antigens on cell surfaces [ , , ]. It is known that the distribution of Aa serotypes varies among subjects of different ethnicity and geographic regions. Serotypes a – c occur much more frequently among oral isolates than serotypes d – f [ ]. However, the correlation of different serotypes with various periodontal conditions remains unclear. In this study Aa(f) and Aa(c) were the strong binders to Aa_Mab IgM and demonstrated more effective competition among bacteria tested for Aa_Mab binding to MAA-LDL (Fig. 1 d). These serotypes might have more MAA-epitope molecular mimicry on them, thus being good candidates for Aa_Mab IgM targeting.
Aa possesses many virulence factors with a wide range of activities which enable the organism to colonize the oral cavity, evade host defense, initiate connective tissue destruction, and interfere with tissue repair [ , ]. Chaperonin 60/Hsp60 and LPS are considered to be tissue destruction inducing factors. The former is more potent for inducing bone degradation than LPS by acting as an osteoclast growth factor [ ]. Our data revealed that Aa_Mab recognized chaperonin 60/Hsp60 from strains representing several serotypes of Aa bacteria (Figs. 2 , 3 a), being in line with the fact that the genes encoding for heat-shock proteins are among the most evolutionarily conserved genes in nature [ ]. Aa_Mab showed no binding to LPS in our immunoassays (Fig.S2), suggesting that LPS is not related to recognition of Aa by this antibody.
There are certain bacteria strains whose surface-associated materials (SAMs) are known to stimulate bone resorption, e.g., E. coli , Eikenella corrodens , Pg , Staphylococcus aureus [ , ]. Aa chaperonin 60/HSP60 from Aa has been shown to be a homologous protein to the E. coli molecular chaperonin GroEL, a 62-KDa heat-shock protein in SAMs, and is found to be the only one present in the surface-associated fraction in contrast to other bacteria strains tested [ ]. It has been reported that a polyclonal antibody directed against the purified Aa chaperonin 60 cross-reacts with human fibronectin [ ]. Eight tetrapeptidic sequences were found to be shared by the two proteins. Interestingly six of them were also found in E. coli GroEL [ ]. Despite of high sequence homology, there are still two tetra-peptides specific to Aa chaperonin 60, GQLI and TGLE, which are not present in E. coli GroEL. TGLE locates in a hydrophilic region and therefore is considered to be the critical antigenic component responsible for specific recognition of the anti- Aa chaperonin 60 antibody [ ]. This could explain why Aa_Mab recognized only Aa chaperonin 60, but not E. coli GroEL or homologous HSP in S. pyogenes on Western blot in the current study because small peptides are known to be long enough to induce the production of specific antibodies [ ]. HSP60 of different bacterial species displays greater than 95 % sequence homology at both DNA and protein levels [ ]. It is not known whether Aa_Mab is specific to bacterial strains, and so more investigations would be needed to address on this issue.
It is intriguing to find out that Aa_Mab IgM binds to Aa chaperonin 60, a powerful virulence factor of the bacteria (Fig. 3 b). We confirmed the observation by expressing and purifying recombinant Aa chaperonin 60 in E. coli BL21(DE3) cells and demonstrating that Aa_Mab bound to the protein in chemiluminescence immunoassay, in Western blot analysis, and the binding could be specifically competed by MAA-BSA or MAA-LDL. Recently, it has been reported that serum IgG antibody levels to Aa and HSP60 has a strong positive correlation with each other [ ], and antibody levels to HSPs and oxLDL are also associated with peridontitis and with each other [ ]. However, it is not known whether malondialdehyde acetaldehyde (MAA) modification or its molecular mimicry exists on Aa chaperonin. The underlying mechanism behind the cross-reactivity needs to be further elucidated. HSPs have been identified as dominant antigens in microorganisms [ ]. Immunolocalization by transmission electron microscopy of Aa chaperonin 60 has shown that the protein is located on cell surface, in surface-associated material, and on outer membrane vesicles produced by the organism [ ], thus being able to induce strong humoral and cellular responses due to extracellular localization [ , , , ]. Bacterial HSP60 may act as a “danger signal” for cellular and humoral immune reactions causing cross-reactive immune responses with host HSPs owing to the homology of the molecules [ , ], which results in cell damage and proliferation of smooth muscle cells and leads to initiation and perpetuation of atherosclerotic plaque formation [ ]. Conversely oral administration of full-length HSP60 and a HSP60 peptide (253–268) to LDLR −/− mice before the induction of atherosclerosis resulted in reduction in plaque size in the carotid arteries and at the aortic root [ ]. Patients with higher levels of anti-HSP antibodies had less destruction of periodontal tissues and failure of producing anti-HSP antibodies contributed to tissue destruction induced by pathogens [ ]. These studies suggest that vaccination with HSP60, or more preferably with HSP60 peptides, is a promising approach for the prevention and treatment of atherosclerosis [ , ]. Similarly to HSP60, atherosclerosis vaccines based on different epitopes derived from oxLDL have been developed to modulate the progression of the disease [ ].
Germ-line gene rearrangement, junctional diversity, and somatic hypermutation are the three major mechanisms involved in the formation of the V H repertoire. It has been shown that the usage frequency of IGHV1-72, IGHD1-1, and IGHJ4 are significantly higher than any other genes in the IGHV, IGHD, and IGHJ gene family set, accounting for 43.1, 39.2, and 41.8 %, respectively [ ]. We found that the gene segments encoding V H , D, and J H of Aa_Mab IgM were originated from IGHV1-22*01, IGHD1-1*01, and IGHJ1*03, and the homology percentage of V H and J H were 89.2 and 78.9 %, respectively, when compared to germ-line genes. The results indicate that V H and J H were encoded by rarely used gene segments and that mutations might have occurred in the immunoglobulin variable region genes to give rise to a reservoir composed of high‐affinity poly- and autoreactive antibodies. The third complementarity-determining region (CDR3) of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (V H CDR3) is more diverse and functions as the center of the classical antigen-binding site. CDR3 determines the specificity and affinity of an antibody. The average length of V H CDR3 in mouse (11.5 ± 1.9 amino acid residues) has been reported to be shorter than that in human (15.5 ± 3.2 amino acid residues) [ ]. Furthermore, it has been shown that B-1 cells in mouse carry relatively short V H CDR3 s compared to conventional (B-2) cells from spleen and that a high frequency of the B-1 cells is known to produce poly- and autoreactive antibodies which also bind to many common pathogen-associated molecules [ ]. In this study two random N nucleotide insertions were found in the upstream and downstream of D region (N1: gg, N2: g), indicating that the insertions took place during joining events and contributed to the composition of V H CDR3 of the Aa_Mab IgM clone. It is known that scarce N region addition in mouse might lead to shorter length and narrower distribution of V H CDR3 [ ]. This may explain why the length of Aa_Mab V H CDR3 is only 8 amino acids long (Table 1 ) and implies that the Aa_Mab IgM clone is generated from B1 cells. B1 cells express IgM in greater quantities than IgG and may be atheroprotective although the general concept of involvement of B cells and the role of individual players in atherosclerosis still need to be elucidated [ ].
Taken together, our findings of the natural mouse monoclonal IgM antibody which cross-reacts with MAA-epitope on oxidized LDL and the virulence factor of Aa bacteria will highlight not only the question of whether molecular mimicry between pathogen components and oxLDL could lead to atheroprotective immune activity but also would be of great importance in potential application of immune response-based preventive and therapeutic strategies against atherosclerosis and periodontal disease.