Introduction
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common gastrointestinal (GI) disorder characterized by chronic recurring abdominal pain and discomfort, altered bowel habits, associated with increased anxiety and pain hypersensitivity to symptom-related stimuli [ ]. Accumulated evidence indicates that the prevalence of IBS is gradually increasing over time. Owing to the occurrence of symptoms in the absence of any structural abnormality, the condition is referred to as a functional gastrointestinal disorder [ ]. Its onset is more likely to occur after an infection [ ] or in case of a stressful life events [ ].
Dendritic cells (DCs) are antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in the GI tract that are thought to play a pivotal role in the regulation of mucosal immune responses and development of IBS [ , ]. To initiate immune responses, DCs must be activated by certain stimuli such as lipopolysaccharides (LPSs); activated DCs then capture antigens from peripheral tissues, which up-regulates the production of co-stimulatory molecules and certain pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-12 (IL-12), and interleukin-6 (IL-6). JAWSII cells refer to an immortalized immature DC cell line sourced from the bone marrow cultures of p53−/−C57BL/6 mice. These cells are known to manifest the characteristics of colonic DCs [ ].
Several cytokines secreted by DCs in different situations are believed to be involved in dysregulated immune and T cell responses. Dendritic cells are also known to produce corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), a 41-amino acid peptide that is primarily produced by the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus [ , ]. It is a key regulator of the hypothalamus–pituitary–adrenal axis in response to stress and is involved in the brain–gut axis interactions [ , , ]. CRF might be involved in the pathogenesis of IBS by, for example, altering gastrointestinal motility, visceral sensitivity, and bowel inflammation. CRF is known to activate the immune system and could be one of the factors underlying the characteristic IBS symptoms [ ]. CRF is believed to exert its biological action by binding to two CRF receptors (CRFR): CRFR1 and CRFR2. However, the exact role of CRF in mediating immune responses by JAWSII cells is not fully understood.
In this study, we examined the expression of CRF and its two receptors CRFR1 and CRFR2, in JAWSII cells. Further, the effects of CRF on the altered phenotype and the secretion of cytokines in both immature and LPS-induced mature JAWSII cells were assessed. Understanding the effect of CRF on immune-mediated inflammatory response of JAWSII cells may help elucidate the mechanisms underlying IBS development.
Materials and methods
Reagents
JAWSII cells were provided by Cell Bank, Chinese Academy of Sciences; minimum essential medium-α (MEM-α), fetal bovine serum (FBS), l -glutamine, and trypsin were from Gibco (NY, USA); GM-CSF from Life Technologies (NY, USA); immunofluorescence antibodies CRFR1 and CRFR2, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), Cy3-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L), anti-quenching medium, Tween-20, and ammonium persulfate (APS) from Sigma (St. Louis, USA); DAPI from Southern Biotech Associates; APC-anti-mouse MHC-I, FITC-anti-mouse MHC-II, FITC-anti-mouse CD80, PE-anti-mouse CD86, PE-mouse IgG1 control, APC-mouse IgG2a control, FITC-mouse IgG2b control from eBioscience (CA, USA); CRF from Tocris Bioscience (Bristol, UK); PVDF membrane from Millipore (MA, USA); Beta-actin antibody from CST (MA, USA); RIPA lysis buffer, bovine serum albumin (BSA) standards, and BCA Protein Assay kit from Pulilai Gene Technology Co. Ltd (Beijing, China); ECL kit from Bio-Rad (CA, USA); CRFR1 and CRFR2 antibodies for Western blot from Anbobio (Shanghai, China); RNeasy Mini Kit from OMEGA (Shanghai, China); reverse transcription kit from Roche (Basel, Switzerland); PCR Tli RNaseH Plus from Takara (Kyoto, Japan); ELISA kits for mouse interleukin-4 (IL-4) and mouse IL-6 from Biolegend (CA, USA); and ELISA kits for mouse TNF-α and mouse macrophage inflammatory protein 1α (MIP-1α) from Ray Bio (Atlanta, USA).
JAWSII cell culture
JAWSII cells were maintained in MEM-α containing 20 % (v/v) FBS, 5 ng/mL GM-CSF, and 4 mM l -glutamine. Cells were cultured in an incubator with 5 % CO 2 at 37 °C. JAWSII cells were semi-adherent. Suspended cells were collected by centrifugation, and adherent cells were collected after trypsinization. ~1×10 5 /mL cells were seeded in a 12-well plate and grown until 60–70 % confluence for further use. The cells were divided into four groups: control (without any treatment), CRF (treated with 10 nM CRF for 6 h), LPS (treated with 1 μg/mL LPS for 24 h), and LPS + CRF (treated with 1 μg/mL LPS for 24 h, followed by 10 nM CRF treatment for 6 h). Cells and media were kept at −80 °C for further use.
RNA extraction and semiquantitative RT-PCR analysis for CRF expression
Total RNA from JAWSII cells was extracted using RNeasy Mini Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was then synthesized by reverse transcription kit. Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reactions (RT-PCR) were performed on PCR machine (Bio-Rad, USA). The primers used for mouse CRF were: forward 5′-TCACCTTCCACCTTCTGCG-3′ and reverse 5′-CATTTCCCGATAATCTCC-3′. For a 10-μL reaction, 1 μL of cDNA sample was mixed with 5 μL 2 × SYBR Premix Ex Taq (Tli RNaseH Plus), 0.2 μL each of forward and reverse primers, 0.2 μL 50 × Rox reference dye, and 3.4 μL RT-PCR grade water. The PCR conditions used were: initial denaturation at 95 °C for 30 s, followed by 40 amplification cycles each consisting of denaturation at 95 °C for 5 s, annealing at 60 °C for 34 s, extension at 72 °C for 30 s, final heating at 60–95 °C to produce melting curve. Ten microliters of PCR product was subjected to 2 % agarose gel electrophoresis. The images were captured with Bio-Rad gel imaging system and analyzed by Quantity One software (Bio-Rad, USA). Mouse hypothalamus mRNA was used as positive control in RT-PCR analysis.
Immunofluorescence examination for CRFR1 and CRFR2 expression on JAWSII cell surface
1 × 10 5 /μL JAWSII cells were grown on the chamber slides (100 μL/well). Following media aspiration, cells were promptly dried, fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 10 min at 25 °C, and washed thrice with PBS for 5 min each. The cells were blocked in blocking solution for 30 min, washed thrice with PBS for 5 min each, and incubated with 1:50 CRFR1 or CRFR2 antibody in a humidified chamber at 4 °C overnight. After PBS washes for 10 min each, the cells were incubated with 1:400 Cy3-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h in the dark, washed, counterstained with DAPI for 15 min, and mounted with anti-quencher. The images were captured with BD Pathway 435 High Content Bioimagers (BD Biosciences, USA) and Nikon intensilight C-HGFI Fiber Illuminator (Nikon Corporation, Japan). The images were analyzed using COMOS software (Siemens, USA).
Western blot analysis for CRFR1 and CRFR2 expression
JAWSII cells were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer. Total proteins were extracted, and the concentration was measured by BCA assay. The sample proteins were separated by 10 % SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. Membranes were blocked in 5 % nonfat milk at 25 °C for 1 h and then probed with antibodies against CRFR1 and CRFR2 or beta-actin overnight at 4 °C. The membranes were washed with 1× TBST, exposed to HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h, and washed again. ECL chemiluminescence reagent was used for detection. The images were captured with Bio-Rad gel imaging system and analyzed by Quantity One software. Proteins from mouse hypothalamus were used as positive control.
Flow cytometry for expression of MHCI, MHCII, CD86, and CD80 surface molecules
Following different treatments, JAWSII cells were washed with PBS and centrifuged. Supernatants were aspirated, and cell pellets were re-suspended and incubated with 100 μL antibodies against MHCI, MHCII, CD86, and CD80 at 4 °C for 30 min in the dark. The cells were washed with 1 mL PBS, re-suspended in 350 μL PBS, and then transferred to a flow cytometry tube. 10,000 cells were analyzed by a flow cytometer (FACS Calibur, Becton–Dickinson, USA) and Cell Quest software.
Quantitative RT-PCR for mRNA expression of IL-4, IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α
Total RNA from treated JAWSII cells was extracted using TRIzol according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was then synthesized by reverse transcription kit. Quantitative RT-PCRs were prepared in Bio-Rad PCR machine as per the conditions mentioned above. For a 10-μL reaction, 1 μL of cDNA sample was mixed with 5 μL 2 × SYBR Premix Ex Taq (Tli RNaseH Plus), 0.2 μL each of forward and reverse primers, 0.2 μL 50 × Rox reference dye, and 3.4 μL RT-PCR grade water. PCR was carried out using the following protocol: predenaturation at 95.0 °C for 30 s, denaturation at 95 °C for 5 s, annealing at 60 °C for 34 s, and extending at 72 °C for 15 s, 40 amplification cycles, 60–95 °C slow heating to produce melting curve. The results were analyzed by ABI PRISM 7900HT SDS 2.4 software. GAPDH was used as endogenous control. Relative expression of genes was calculated using delta–delta Ct method and normalized to GAPDH expression. The data were expressed as fold change compared to control group. The primers used in qRT-PCR are listed in Table 1 . Table 1 Primer sequences for qRT-PCR Genes Forward primer Reverse primer GAPDH 5′-AGAAGGTGGTGAAGCAGGCATC-3′ 5′-CGAAGGTGGAAGAGTGGGAGTTG-3′ IL-4 5′-CATCCTGCTCTTCTTTCTC-3′ 5′-CTTCTCCTGTGACCTCGTT-3′ IL-6 5′-ACAACCACGGCCTTCCCTACTT-3′ 5′-CTCATTTCCACGATTTCCCAG-3′ TNF-α 5′-GCCTCTTCTCATTCCTGCTTG-3′ 5′-GTCTGGGCCATAGAACTGATG-3′ MIP-1α 5′-CACTGCCCTTGCTGTTCTTC 5′-TGGAATCTTCCGGCTGTAGG RT - PCR reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, IL - 4 interleukin-4, IL - 6 interleukin-6, TNF - α tumor necrosis factor-α, MIP - 1α macrophage inflammatory protein-1α
ELISA for IL-4, IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α expression in JAWSII cell culture media
JAWSII cell culture media were thawed at 25 °C. The quantity of IL-4, IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α in media was assayed using ELISA kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 100 μL of diluted samples or standard solution was added into a 96-well plate and incubated for 2 h at 25 °C. The plate was washed, and 100 μL biotin-labeled antibodies were added and incubated for 45 min. The plate was washed and incubated with 100 μL working solution of substrate for 15 min in the dark, followed by addition of 100 μL stop solution. The absorbance was measured within 30 min at 450 nm using a microplate reader. The concentration was calculated according to the standard curve.
Statistical analysis
Normally distributed variables are reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for data analysis. P < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 17.0 software (SPSS, USA).
Results
CRF mRNA expression in JAWSII cells
CRF mRNA expression (103 bp) in JAWSII cells was compared with the positive control (mouse hypothalamus tissue; Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 RT-PCR gel electrophoresis for determining CRF mRNA levels in JAWSII cell (103 bp) and positive control (mouse hypothalamus tissue). PCR product was separated by 2 % agarose gel electrophoresis. The images were captured with Bio-Rad gel imaging system. RT - PCR reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, CRF corticotropin-releasing factor
Immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis of CRFR1 and CRFR2 expression in JAWSII cells
Confocal microscopy revealed expression of CRFR1 and CRFR2 on JAWSII cell surface (Fig. 2 a). Further, Western blot indicated expression of CRFR1 and CRFR2 on JAWSII cells surface. However, there was less expression as compared to that observed in the positive control (Fig. 2 b). Fig. 2 Immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis for CRFR1 and CRFR2 expression in JAWSII cells. a CRFR1 and CRFR2 expression on JAWSII cell membrane stained by Cy3-labeled antibodies against CRFR1 and CRFR2 ( red ) (original magnification ×400). DAPI was used to counterstain the nucleus ( blue ). The overlays are also shown. b Western blot analysis for CRFR1 and CRFR2 expression in JAWSII cells using anti-CRFR1 and anti-CRFR2 antibodies. CRFR1 and CRFR2 expression was identified with the help of positive control (mouse hypothalamus). Beta-actin was used as loading control. Cy3 indocarbocyanin, DAPI 4′6-Diamidino-2-phenyl indoldihydrochloride
Flow cytometry for surface molecules MHCI, MHCII, CD86 and CD80 expression
Surface receptors MHCI, MHCII, CD86, and CD80 were expressed in JAWSII cells. After LPS treatment for 24 h, an increased expression of MHCII and CD86, but not of MHCI and CD80, was observed in the mature JAWSII cells (Fig. 3 ). CRF treatment of 6 h did not alter the expression of any of the surface receptors in both immature and mature JAWSII cells (Data not shown). Fig. 3 Expression of surface molecules MHCI, MHCII, CD86, and CD80 in JAWSII cells examined by flow cytometry. The effect of 24-h LPS stimulation on JAWSII cell surface molecule expression was determined by flow cytometry. Red line indicates control group without LPS treatment; blue line indicates LPS-treated group
Quantitative RT-PCR for mRNA expression of IL-4, IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α
qRT-PCR was employed to assess the expression levels of cytokines IL-4, IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α in JAWSII cells (Fig. 4 ). As compared with untreated control group, the 6-h CRF-treated group did not alter expression of IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α ( P > 0.05), while 24-h LPS treatment significantly increased the expression of the same cytokines ( P < 0.05), which indicated the maturation of JAWSII cells. CRF treatment on mature JAWSII cells further augmented the expression of IL-6 and MIP-1 α , but not of TNF- α , suggesting that CRF promoted inflammatory responses in mature JAWSII cells. The expression of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-4 decreased significantly after 6-h CRF treatment; however, it increased slightly after LPS induction in mature JAWSII cells. Co-treatment with CRF led to a significant decrease in the expression of IL-4, as compared to that in the immature CRF-treated JAWSII cells. Fig. 4 mRNA expression of IL-4, IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α in JAWSII cells assessed by qRT-PCR. GAPDH was used as an endogenous control. Relative expression of genes was calculated using delta–delta Ct method and normalized to GAPDH expression. The data are expressed as fold change compared with control group and reported as mean ± SD. One-way ANOVA was performed to analyze data. P < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. Data are representative of three independent experiments. IL - 4 interleukin-4, IL - 6 interleukin-6, TNF - α tumor necrosis factor-α, MIP - 1α macrophage inflammatory protein-1α, qRT - PCR reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, SD standard deviation, ANOVA analysis of variance
ELISA for assessment of IL-4, IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α secretion by JAWSII cells
Culture media of JAWSII cells were subjected to ELISA analysis for determination of levels of secreted IL-4, IL-6, TNF- α , and MIP-1 α (Fig. 5 ). Similar to the results of untreated controls, 6-h CRF treatment did not change the expression level of secreted IL-6, TNF- α , and MIP-1 α ( P > 0.05) in media, while 24-h LPS treatment significantly increased the expression level of the same cytokines ( P < 0.05), although CRF treatment on mature JAWSII cells further augmented increased expression of these cytokines. The expression of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-4 decreased significantly after 6-h CRF treatment, while LPS-induced mature JAWSII cells did not show any change in the expression of IL-4, although co-treatment with CRF significantly reduced the expression of IL-4 in mature JAWSII cells, as compared to that in the immature JAWSII cells after CRF treatment. Fig. 5 ELISA for IL-4, IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α expression in culture media of JAWSII cells. Concentrations were calculated using the standard curve. Data are expressed as mean ± SD. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA. P < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. Data are representative of three independent experiments. ELISA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, IL - 4 interleukin-4, IL - 6 interleukin-6, TNF - α tumor necrosis factor-α, SD standard deviation, ANOVA analysis of variance
Discussion
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional disorder that affects approximately 20 % of the world population [ ]. Stress is considered to be one of the risk factors for IBS. Stress can induce changes in gastrointestinal motility and visceral pain perception, the symptoms that are often observed in IBS patients. Stress is known to induce the release of CRF by the hypothalamus. Therefore, CRF may have an important role in the pathogenesis of IBS [ , , , ].
CRF has been shown to have an anti-inflammatory effect indirectly via cortisol production and a pro-inflammatory effect directly on the immune system cells. CRF expression was reportedly increased in colon tissues of rat models of IBS and ulcerative colitis [ ]. Another study demonstrated association of CRF deficiency with reduced local inflammation in a mouse model of experimental colitis [ ]. Further, CRF was shown to enhance LPS-induced pro-inflammatory cytokine (TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6) production from macrophages [ ]. Thus, CRF is believed to be involved in IBS pathogenesis by altering gastrointestinal motility, visceral sensitivity, and inflammation in the bowel. Dendritic cells are the only antigen-presenting cells, which can directly activate native T cells (Th0). They secrete different cytokines to promote Th1 and Th2 immune responses, which are involved in regulating gastrointestinal tract (GIT) inflammation [ ]. DCs are known to perform variable functions in different conditions [ ]. Antigen presentation by immature DCs induces immune tolerance, whereas mature DCs efficiently activate resting T cells and induce antigen-specific protective immunity.
JAWSII cell is an immortal immature DC line that was established from the bone marrow culture of p53−/−C57BL/6 mice. JAWSII cells with characteristics similar to those of colon DCs were shown to express maturation and activation markers and induce immune responses similar to those of DCs. Elsewhere, LPS stimulation was shown to promote development of immature JAWSII into mature cells [ ].
Till date little is known about the effects of CRF on DCs during inflammation of GIT. The biological effects of CRF are mediated by at least two different receptors, CRFR1 and CRFR2, which belong to the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily [ ]. CRF exhibits ten times greater affinity toward CRFR1 than CRFR2 [ ]. Lee et al. [ ] reported the expression of CRF receptors in the monocyte-derived DC (MoDC) of atopic dermatitis patients and found that exposure of DCs to CRF resulted in a decreased secretion of IL-18. Our observation is consistent with this result, since we too obtained expression of two receptors CRFR1 and CRFR2 in JAWSII cells. In addition, we detected low expression levels of CRF in JAWSII cells. This finding, too, is in agreement with the findings reported by Hojo et al. and Koido et al. [ , ], who reported that CRF was secreted in JAWSII cells and human MoDCs and that the expression of CRF was increased after bacterial infection. Therefore, we reasonably infer the presence of CRF, CRFR1 and CRFR2 in mature JAWSII cells induced by LPS and hypothesize that CRF could modulate immune response by acting directly on DCs.
The limited ability of immature DCs for performing antigen-presenting function and inducing immune response is well acknowledged. However, antigenic stimulus (e.g., LPS) is known to catalyze immature DCs into mature DCs. Mature DCs express high levels of MHC and co-stimulatory molecules (CD80 and CD86), which induce proliferation and differentiation of native T cells (Th0), further enhancing the T cell immune responses [ ]. In this study, immature JAWSII cells treated with LPS for 24 h showed increased expression of surface molecules MCHII and CD86, suggesting the maturation of JAWSII cells. However, the reason for the lack of expression of MHCI and CD80 after LPS treatment remains unclear. The 6-h CRF treatment did not modify the expression of surface molecules, which suggests that CRF neither induced the maturation of JAWSII cells nor influenced its status. These findings suggest a lack of influence of CRF on the behavior of JAWSII cells.
It is known that the balance of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines plays an important role in maintaining homeostasis in GI tract [ ]. The over-expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, e.g., TNF- α , IL-6, and IL-12, and under-expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines, e.g., IL-4 and IL-10, are liable to disturb the normal GIT environment [ ]. TNF- α and IL-6 are pro-inflammatory cytokines that can activate lymphocytes or macrophages and promote inflammation. MIP-1α is one of the CC chemokine family factors, released during the inflammatory process. By binding to its receptor, MIP-1α can generate signaling cascades in cell activation, mediate chemotaxis of inflammatory cells, and thereby promote inflammation [ ]. In addition, MIP-1α can generate an anti-inflammatory response for maintaining homeostasis in GIT, which includes production of IL-4 cytokine. IL-4 is known to regulate the function of lymphocytes or macrophages, down-regulate inflammatory mediators, e.g., TNF- α and IL-1β, and exert immunosuppressive effects [ ].
In the present study, CRF treatment did not have any significant effect on the expression of IL-6, TNF - α , and MIP-1 α in either immature JAWSII cells or their secretion in cell supernatants. LPS treatment increased the expression of IL-6, TNF- α , and MIP-1 α in mature JAWSII cells more than that in the control group. Further, mature JAWSII cells produced higher levels of IL-6 and MIP-1 α when co-treated with CRF. These results suggest that although immature JAWSII cells did not respond to CRF treatment, CRF could augment the increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in mature JAWSII cells. Expression of TNF- α in co-treated JAWSII cells was also found to be increased as compared to that induced by LPS treatment alone, although the difference was not statistically significant. Nevertheless, secreted TNF- α levels in the medium after LPS and CRF treatment increased significantly compared to that seen in the LPS group. This might be due to the secretion of TNF- α into the media, which in turn lowered the TNF level in JAWSII cells. Our results are consistent with those reported by Agelaki et al. [ ] wherein CRF enhanced LPS-induced TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 production from macrophages, both in vitro and in vivo. On the other hand, the expression of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-4 decreased significantly in immature JAWSII cells after CRF treatment. CRF also reduced expression of IL-4 in LPS-induced mature JAWSII cells, although LPS could not significantly increase the expression of IL-4. These results suggest that CRF could promote inflammatory reactions by stimulating mature DCs and further contribute to intestinal immune imbalance via increasing the expression of various pro-inflammatory mediators and inhibiting the production and secretion of anti-inflammatory cytokines.
In conclusion, in this study CRF induced an increase in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6, TNF- α , and MIP-1 α and inhibited the secretion of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-4, after binding to CRF receptors expressed on cell surface of LPS-induced mature JAWSII cells. These findings indicate that CRF could promote the immune/inflammatory reactions in JAWSII cells.