Introduction
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infections are usually acquired early in life and are generally asymptomatic in healthy people, where they establish a lifelong latency in target cells [ , ]. However, in immunocompromised hosts they may give rise to opportunistic infections, which eventually result in systemic or end-organ diseases, thus leading to increased morbidity and mortality [ , ]. Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), namely ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD), are emerging chronic and disabling enteropathies triggered and sustained by a dysregulated immune response toward antigens of the gut microbiota in genetically susceptible individuals [ , ]. The growing use of immunosuppressive therapies, mainly based on thiopurines and biological agents [ , ], has led to an increased risk of opportunistic infections, including those caused by EBV and HCMV [ , ]. Their localization in the gastrointestinal tract [ , ] represents a clinical challenge since it becomes hard to distinguish between a superimposed viral colitis and a relapse of the underlying disease. Recent evidence has highlighted the need to measure mucosal viral load by means of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (real-time PCR) in order to achieve the correct diagnosis and establish the appropriate management of these conditions [ , , , ]. However, despite a clear association between HCMV and EBV infections with severe colitis [ , , , , , , , ], the role of these viruses in IBD, whether as contributors or innocent bystanders [ , ], remains a topic of ongoing controversy. To date, no information is available on their cellular localization in the colonic mucosa of IBD patients, an issue which may greatly contribute to understanding the mutual relationship between the host and the virus/es. Therefore, we prospectively evaluated the presence of EBV and HCMV infection in both epithelial and immune cells of colonic mucosa of IBD patients, both refractory and responders to standard therapies, in comparison with control subjects, by using real-time PCR, immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization (ISH), in order to investigate the localization, DNA load, life cycle phase and possible correlation with disease activity indexes.
Patients and methods
Study population
A cohort of 50 patients diagnosed with UC or CD on the basis of established criteria [ , ], both responders and non-responders to conventional therapies, were prospectively enrolled at the Centre for the Study and Cure of Inflammatory Bowel Disease of the IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation (Pavia, Italy). Specifically, to establish the refractoriness, the following criteria were applied: steroid refractoriness was defined as the persistence of symptoms of active disease despite treatment with prednisolone, or equivalent, of up to 0.75 mg/kg per day over a period of 4 weeks [ , ]; primary and secondary non-response to anti-tumor necrosis factor-α agents (infliximab and adalimumab) was considered as the lack of clinical improvement with induction therapy or recurrence of symptoms of disease activity during maintenance therapy despite an appropriate interval adjustment and dose escalation with exclusion of concomitant condition, respectively [ ]; and resistance to immunosuppressive therapy (Azathioprine) after the dosage adjustment was carried out on the basis of the erythrocyte levels of the active metabolite, 6-thioguanine nucleotide [ ]. For those patients following combination therapies, refractoriness was defined as the persistence of symptoms of active disease despite at least 4-week treatment. In all cases, the Montreal classification was applied to assess the behavior, severity, extent and location of both the illnesses [ ], while the clinical disease activity indexes were assessed according to the Crohn’s Disease Activity Index (CDAI) [ ] and Simple Clinical Colitis Activity Index (SCCAI) [ ]. Remission was defined as a CDAI score lower than 150 points and a SCCAI score of below 3 points. The endoscopic activity scores were evaluated according to the Crohn’s Disease Endoscopic Index of Severity (CDEIS, score ranging from 0 to 44, with a higher score indicating more severe disease) [ ] and Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic Index of Severity (UCEIS, score ranging from 3 to 11, with a higher score indicating more severe disease) [ ]. The control group consisted of 25 sex-/age-matched subjects recruited at the same center and diagnosed as suffering from irritable bowel disease following the Rome III criteria [ ], and who were not taking any drugs. The presence of relevant comorbidities such as metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular diseases, autoimmune diseases, primary immunodeficiencies, cancer, active infection or organ failure was considered exclusion criteria. The demographic and clinical features of the study population including body mass index, current medication/s, disease location and duration are listed in Table 1 . All enrolled patients and controls underwent lower endoscopy with mucosal sampling as standard workup for their condition. Each patient and control gave written informed consent after approval by the Bio-Ethics Committee was obtained (protocol number: 20150010532). Table 1 Demographic and clinical features of study population Responder IBD Refractory IBD Control subjects P values Number of patients 30 20 25 N.S. Male/female 19/11 12/8 11/14 N.S. Body mass index a 22.3 (18.7–25.8) 20.9 (17.2–23.7) 24.1 (19.3–27.6) N.S. Age (years) a 38.5 ± 16.2 49.5 ± 13.7 49.0 ± 17.9 N.S. Number of CD patients 11 4 N.A. p < 0.0001 CDAI score a 127.3 ± 86.0 595.5 ± 17.6 p = 0.0001 Location L1 = 2 L2 = 6 L3 = 3 L4 = 0 L1 = 0 L2 = 2 L3 = 2 L4 = 0 N.S. Number of UC patients 19 16 N.A. N.S. SCCAI score a 4.2 ± 2.8 9.4 ± 2.1 p = 0.0001 Location E1 = 3 E2 = 10 E3 = 6 E1 = 0 E2 = 5 E3 = 11 N.S. Endoscopic activity indexes CDEIS 9.5 ± 6.9 40.5 ± 2.12 N.A. p = 0.0001 UCEIS 3.4 ± 1.1 9.5 ± 1.3 p = 0.0001 Illness duration (years) a 10 ± 6.8 14 ± 2.1 4.3 ± 6.1 N.S. Systemic steroids 3 2 N.A. p = 0.001 Topical steroids 5 5 N.A. N.S. Biological agents 13 9 N.A. N.S. Azathioprine 7 1 N.A. N.S. Biological + systemic steroid 0 4 N.A. p = 0.003 Biological + azathioprine 2 3 N.A. p = 0.001 Azathioprine + systemic steroid 3 1 N.A. N.S. a The values are given as median (±range). For a detailed description of the statistical analyses, please see “Methods” section. L1: terminal ileum; L2: colon; L3: ileo-colon; L4: upper gastrointestinal location; E1: ulcerative proctitis; E2: left-sided UC; E3: extensive UC; N.A. not applicable; N.S. not significant. Systemic steroids included: metilprednisolone and prednisone; topical steroids included: budesonide and beclomethasone dipropionate; biological agents included: infliximab and adalimumab. Abbreviation: CD Crohn’s disease, CDAI Crohn Disease Activity Index, CDEIS Crohn’s Disease Endoscopic Index of Severity, IBD inflammatory bowel disease, SCCAI Simple Clinical Colitis Activity Index, UC ulcerative colitis, UCEIS Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic Index of Severity
Isolation of mucosal cell populations
Fresh perendoscopic colonic mucosal biopsies (at least four samples from each area, whose dimension was 2–3 mm 3 /specimen) were collected from both inflamed and non-inflamed mucosa of each IBD patient and from healthy mucosa of each control subject in order to separate enterocytes, intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) and lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) following a previously described method [ ], albeit slightly modified for this experimental setting. Specifically, during the endoscopic examination, non-inflamed areas were considered those with a normal vascular pattern and intact mucosa, while inflamed areas were those where an abnormal vascular pattern and various combinations of the following lesions were evident: edema, erythema, erosions, ulcers, pseudopolyps, granular and spontaneously bleeding zones, and nodular-cobblestone appearance. After harvesting, the mucosal specimens were immediately rinsed in saline solution (Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline calcium and magnesium free; Biowest, Nuaillé, France, UE) and placed in sterile medium [Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 medium (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, 1 % l -glutamine, 0.25 % gentamicin (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, MO, USA) and 10 % fetal calf serum (Biowest)]. The epithelial layer was separated by adding 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt dihydrate and 1 mM DL-dithiothreitol (both from Sigma-Aldrich). After continuous bland agitation for 1 h at 37 °C, the cellular suspension containing epithelial cells was harvested, washed, stratified on a Percoll density gradient (25–40–75 %; GE Healthcare, Buc Cedex, France, UE) and centrifuged for 30 min at 1600 rpm at room temperature without brake or accelerator. At the end, the cellular ring between the 40 and 75 % fractions was collected as IELs, whereas that between the 40 and 25 % interface was collected as enterocytes. After washing twice, the cellular samples were re-suspended in 1 ml of phosphate-buffered saline, pelleted and stored at −80 °C until use. To release the LPMCs, the remaining tissue samples were digested by collagenase A from Clostridium hystolyticum (1 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) in 10 ml of sterile medium under quick continuous agitation for 2 h at 37 °C. The crude cell suspension was then passed through a 100-µm cell strainer (BD FalconTM; Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) and centrifuged for 10 min at 1400 rpm at room temperature. The cellular population obtained was composed of all the white cells embedded in the mucosa after removal of the epithelial layer, including monocyte–macrophages, T and B lymphocytes, natural killer cells, dendritic cells, myofibroblasts and granulocytes. After washing twice, the cell suspension was re-suspended in 1 ml of phosphate-buffered saline, pelleted and stored at −80 °C until use. An aliquot of each cellular sample was harvested before pelleting, counted and used to assess cell viability (as determined by trypan blue dye exclusion); cells were used only if viability exceeded 90 %. The number of cells recovered, expressed as mean number (range), was as follows: LPMCs from inflamed mucosa 1 × 10 6 (4 × 10 5 –2 × 10 6 ), from non-inflamed mucosa 9 × 10 5 (2 × 10 5 –1.8 × 10 6 ) and from healthy mucosa 1 × 10 6 (5 × 10 5 –1.9 × 10 6 ); IELs from inflamed mucosa 3 × 10 5 (2 × 10 5 –6 × 10 5 ), from non-inflamed mucosa 2 × 10 5 (2 × 10 5 –4 × 10 5 ) and from healthy mucosa 3 × 10 5 (2.4 × 10 5 –4.3 × 10 5 ); enterocytes from inflamed mucosa 3.5 × 10 5 (1 × 10 5 –8 × 10 5 ), from non-inflamed mucosa 4 × 10 5 (3 × 10 5 –1 × 10 6 ) and from healthy mucosa 3 × 10 5 (2 × 10 5 –6 × 10 5 ). The purity of enterocytes, as determined by staining the cytocentrifuge preparations with an anti-pan-cytokeratin antibody (clone PCK-26, Sigma-Aldrich), was found to exceed 93 %, while the purity of IELs and LPMCs populations was invariably higher than 95 and 92 %, respectively, as assessed by flow cytometric analysis with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated mouse antihuman CD3 and CD45 monoclonal antibodies, respectively, and their isotype control (FITC-conjugated IgG1; all by Becton Dickinson–PharMingen; San Diego, CA, USA). The remaining aliquot of each cellular sample was then cryopreserved until use for the measurement of DNA viral load.
Quantitation of viral load
HCMV and EBV DNA load was assessed in each cryopreserved cellular sample by means of quantitative real-time PCR as previously reported [ , ]. Viral DNA extraction was performed by using the NucliSENS ® easyMAG ® kit (BioMérieux, Lyon, France). Normalization of HCMV and EBV DNA load in cellular samples was obtained by determination of the β 2 -microglobulin gene by quantitative real-time PCR [ ]. The lower detection limit was 1 HCMV or EBV DNA input copy [ , , ], and results were expressed as viral DNA copies/10 5 cells.
Immunohistochemistry
Mucosal specimens simultaneously harvested from the same areas as those for the quantitative real-time PCR assay were fixed in 10 % neutral buffered formalin and paraffin-embedded. Sections (4 µm) were transferred to pre-treated glass slides (DAKO, Denmark) and stored overnight at 37 °C. The hematoxylin–eosin staining was performed following standard protocol, while the specific immunostaining for HCMV and EBV was carried out on seriate sections. Automated immunohistochemistry was performed using the OMNIS system (DAKO), according to the manufacturer’s instructions with the following primary mouse monoclonal antibodies: anti-HCMV (clones CCH2 and DDG9, which recognize the early and immediate-early antigens, respectively, at 1:50 dilution; DAKO) and anti-ZEBRA (clone BAM HI Z, reactive to early antigen zeta protein which, together with the Rta factor, controls the expression of several early EBV lytic genes [ ], at 1:50 dilution; LifeSpan Biosciences, Inc.). Appropriate positive controls and non-immune protein-negative controls were used. Positive cases were identified as those containing cells with intense, brown, predominantly nuclear staining and evaluated by a pathologist blinded to patient diagnosis and clinical disease status.
In situ chromogen hybridization
In order to detect the latent phase of the EBV infection, the formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections were pre-treated with proteinase K (DAKO) for 30 min at room temperature, then hybridized with a FITC-labeled peptic nucleic acid probe complementary to EBV-encoded RNAs (EBER-1 and 2; DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark) and incubated overnight at 55 °C. After washing in restricting conditions for 35 min, the hybridized cells were visualized with an ISH detection kit (K5201; DAKO) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The sections were then counterstained with Kernechtrot, dehydrated through graded alcohols, immersed in xylene and mounted with a permanent medium. The present ISH method stained the nuclei of EBV-infected cells dark blue, while the nuclei of non-infected cells appeared red.
Statistical analysis
Descriptive statistics were produced for all variables. Mean and standard deviation are presented for normally distributed variables, median and interquartile range (IQR) for non-normally distributed variables, while number and percentages are presented for categorical variables. Groups were compared with parametric or nonparametric tests, according to data distribution, for continuous variables, and with Pearson’s χ 2 test (Fisher’s exact test where appropriate) for categorical variables. Correlation between continuous variables was assessed by means of Pearson’s or Spearman’s coefficient, according to data distribution. In all cases, two-tailed tests were used. P value significance cutoff was 0.05. Moreover, HCMV and EBV load was log-transformed to achieve normalization. To take into account the nested nature of data (cell types nested in biopsy samples nested in patients), mixed models for repeated measures were used to assess the association between HCMV and EBV infections and patient groups (controls, responders and refractory), status of the mucosa (inflamed versus non-inflamed) and cell type (enterocytes, IELs, LPMCs). Stata computer software version 13.0 (Stata Corporation, 4905 Lakeway Drive, College Station, Texas 77845, USA) was used for statistical analysis.
Results
EBV and HCMV DNA load in mucosal cell populations
As given in Table 2 , EBV DNA was detected in the LPMCs harvested from all refractory IBD patients and most of the responders, while only a few samples of LPMCs from control subjects tested positive. Similar results were obtained when analyzing EBV DNA positivity in the IEL population, while the enterocytes displayed a more peculiar pattern with almost all refractory cases being positive and all controls and the majority of the responders being negative. In parallel, detectable levels of HCMV DNA, as given in Table 3 , were found in LPMCs isolated from the half of refractory IBD patients, less than one-third of responders and one-fifth of controls, with the enterocytes being negative in this latter group and positive in only one case in the responder group and one-third of the refractory IBD group, whereas a variable number of IEL samples were positive in all groups. From a quantitative point of view, if considering the median DNA levels obtained by pooling together the values from both inflamed and non-inflamed mucosa in each IBD group, a statistically significant higher load of EBV DNA was found in all the mucosal cell populations harvested from refractory IBD compared with responder IBD, and they were also higher in this latter group compared with the values found in healthy mucosa of control subjects, where the lack of detectable DNA copies was evident (Table 2 ). In the case of the HCMV, only the cell populations isolated from refractory IBD patients displayed higher values of DNA load in comparison with IBD responders, while no evident difference was found when comparing this latter group with controls, who again showed the absence of detectable DNA copies (Table 3 ). When analyzing the results according to the status of the mucosa, significantly higher median levels of EBV DNA were found in all the mucosal cell populations from inflamed versus non-inflamed mucosa in both the IBD groups (Fig. 1 , panel A). Moreover, the EBV DNA load found in both the epithelial and immune cells from either inflamed or non-inflamed mucosa of refractory IBD patients appeared significantly higher than those found in the correspondent cell population of responder IBD patients, with the exception of IELs and enterocytes in non-inflamed mucosa (Table 2 ). Similar results were obtained for the HCMV where higher median DNA levels were observed in all the mucosal cell populations from inflamed versus non-inflamed mucosa in the refractory IBD group, and in the LPMCs of the responder IBD group (Fig. 1 , panel B). In parallel, only the viral DNA loads observed in the cell populations isolated from the inflamed mucosa of refractory IBD patients displayed significantly higher values in relation to those found in the respective cell populations from inflamed mucosa of responders, whereas the lack of detectable levels in the samples from non-diseased mucosa made it impossible to perform the statistical analysis (Table 3 ). When focusing on the viral DNA load in the enterocytes, varying degrees of EBV DNA quantities were found in the cells from inflamed mucosa of both IBD groups and from non-inflamed mucosa of refractory cases (Table 2 ), while the HCMV displayed a different pattern, since only the enterocytes from the inflamed mucosa of refractory IBD patients showed positivity, occasionally reaching very high levels (Table 3 ). Table 2 Epstein–Barr virus cellular load Localization Responder IBD Refractory IBD Control subjects Overall p -values Post hoc p -values Detectable in LPMCs (number of samples) Percentage 26/39 66 % 25/25 100 % 7/25 28 % 0.0329 NC and 0.033 Detectable in IELs (number of samples) percentage 21/39 54 % 23/25 92 % 9/25 36 % 0.0130 0.013 and 0.27 Detectable in enterocytes (number of samples) Percentage 9/39 23 % 21/25 84 % 0/25 0 % 0.024 0.024 and NC Copies on LPMCs 27 (0–495) 5605 (2259–30,906) 0 (0–2) <0.001 <0.001 and < 0.001 Copies on LPMCs from inflamed mucosa 194 (0–674) 11,950 (3254–48,144) Not done <0.001 NA Copies on LPMCs from non-inflamed mucosa* 18 (0–27) 397 (346–2097) 0 (0–2) <0.001 <0.001 and 0.01 Copies on IELS 0 (0–22.5) 3873 (847–22,206) 0 (0–0) <0.001 <0.001 and 0.03 Copies on IELs from inflamed mucosa 0 (0–55) 4221 (1642–37,545) Not done <0.001 NA Copies on IELs from non-inflamed mucosa* 0 (0–4) 0 (0–0) 0 (0–0) NC Copies on enterocytes 0 (0–0) 2974 (136–13,554) 0 (0–0) <0.001 <0.001 and 0.086 Copies on enterocytes from inflamed mucosa 286.5 (0–334) 3379 (804–34,402) Not done <0.001 NA Copies on enterocytes from non-inflamed mucosa* 0 (0–34) 201 (0–789) 0 (0–0) NC Data are given as median and interquartile range; *for controls, heathy mucosa was sampled (see “Methods” section); p -values are derived from comparisons on the log scale (see “Methods” section); overall p -values refer to the overall analysis of variance between groups of patients, while secondary p -values are the post hoc analyses for comparisons between responders versus refractory and between responders versus controls, respectively. NC not calculated (comparison not feasible for computational reasons); NA not applicable. Abbreviations: IBD inflammatory bowel disease, IELs intraepithelial lymphocytes, LPMCs lamina propria mononuclear cells Table 3 Human cytomegalovirus cellular load Localization Responder IBD Refractory IBD Control subjects Overall p -values Post hoc p -values Detectable in LPMCs (number of samples) Percentage 11/39 28 % 12/25 48 % 5/25 20 % 0.24 NA Detectable in IELs (number of samples) Percentage 10/39 26 % 17/25 68 % 9/25 36 % 0.047 0.014 and 0.46 Detectable in enterocytes (number of samples) Percentage 1/39 2 % 8/25 32 % 0/25 0 % 0.0045 0.0045 and NC Copies on LPMCs 0 (0–34) 0 (0–253) 0 (0–0) <0.001 <0.001 and 0.41 Copies on LPMCs from inflamed mucosa 0 (0–73.5) 72.5 (0–7325) Not done 0.019 NA Copies on LPMCs from non-inflamed mucosa* 0 (0–0) 0 (0–0) 0 (0–0) NC 0.95 and 0.095 Copies on IELs 0 (0–0) 0 (0–2486) 0 (0–0) <0.001 <0.001 and 0.66 Copies on IELs from inflamed mucosa 0 (0–0) 0 (0–2737) Not done 0.039 NA Copies on IELs from non-inflamed mucosa* 0 (0–0) 0 (0–0) 0 (0–0) NC NA Copies on enterocytes 0 (0–0) 0 (0–82) 0 (0–0) <0.001 <0.001 and 0.98 Copies on enterocytes from inflamed mucosa 0 (0–0) 0 (0–2630) Not done 0.005 NA Copies on enterocytes from non-inflamed mucosa* 0 (0–0) 0 (0–0) 0 (0–0) NC NA Data are given as median and interquartile range; *for controls, heathy mucosa was sampled (see “Methods” section); p -values are derived from comparisons on the log scale (see “Methods” section); overall p -values refer to the overall analysis of variance between groups of patients, while secondary p -values are the post hoc analyses for comparisons between responders versus refractory and between responders versus controls, respectively. NC not calculated (comparison not feasible for computational reasons); NA not applicable. Abbreviations: IBD inflammatory bowel disease, IELs intraepithelial lymphocytes, LPMCs lamina propria mononuclear cells Fig. 1 Viral DNA load in mucosal cell populations. This figure shows the Epstein–Barr virus (EBV, a ) and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV, b ) DNA load expressed as log-copies in enterocytes, intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) and lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) isolated from healthy mucosa of control subjects and from both inflamed and non-inflamed mucosa of inflammatory bowel disease patients, either responder or refractory to standard therapies. Results are given as median ( midline ), 25th–75th percentiles ( box ) and extremes ( whiskers ). Higher levels of DNA load of both viruses are present mainly in the cell populations isolated from the macroscopically inflamed mucosa of patients suffering from inflammatory bowel disease, both responders and those refractory to standard therapies
Correlations of viral DNA loads with disease activity indexes
When considering the EBV DNA values found in the inflamed mucosa of UC and CD patients, a positive correlation was determined between all the cell populations and both the clinical indexes of activity, SCCAI and CDAI, respectively, whereas as far as endoscopic indexes are concerned, a significant correlation was found only for the CD endoscopic score (Fig. 2 ). Conversely, in the case of the HCMV, a significant positive correlation was found only between the immune cell populations from diseased mucosa and the SCCAI (IELs: r = 0.42 with p = 0.05, LPMCs: r = 0.46 with p = 0.009). By contrast, no relationship was observed between the viral load in any cell population and the degree of both clinical and endoscopic scores of activity when using samples obtained from non-inflamed mucosa, except for the EBV load in the LPMCs with the UCEIS ( r = 0.73, p = 0.02). Finally, a positive association between the EBV DNA load and the age of IBD patients was found ( p < 0.001). Fig. 2 Correlation between Epstein–Barr virus cellular load and disease activity indexes. A statistically significant positive correlation between the Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) DNA load expressed as log-copies in enterocytes, intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) and lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) isolated from inflamed mucosa of inflammatory bowel disease patients and the Simple Clinical Colitis Activity Index (SCCAI), Crohn’s Disease Activity Index (CDAI) and Crohn’s Disease Endoscopic Index of Severity (CDEIS) is clearly evident
Viral life cycle assessment
The phases of the EBV life cycle were investigated by analyzing the expression of the latency-specific mRNA for EBER-1 and 2 by ISH technique and that of the immediate-early lytic phase antigen BZLF-1 by means of immunohistochemistry. The presence of a variable number of EBER-positive LPMCs was found in the diseased mucosa of seven out of 20 refractory patients (a representative case is shown in Fig. 3 , panel A) and two out of 30 non-refractory IBD patients, with only three refractory cases showing a few positive IELs (a representative case is shown in Fig. 3 , panel B). When evaluating the lytic phase, several Zebra-positive LPMCs (a representative case is shown in Fig. 3 , panel C) and IELs were observed only in four cases of refractory UC. As regards the HCMV, due to the lack of a specific antibody targeting the latent phase, we employed one that recognizes both immediate-early and early nuclear proteins associated with the lytic phase, even though reactivity may persist at later stages when the localization becomes less distinctly nuclear and appears to be cytoplasmic [ , ]. However, although the specimens were harvested from the same mucosal areas as those taken for the real-time PCR, HCMV-positive staining was found only in LPMCs from both inflamed and non-inflamed mucosa of five refractory and four responder IBD patients with a whole cellular localization (a representative case is shown in Fig. 3 , panel D) and in a few IELs from one refractory case. It is worth noting that no cases of positive staining for either virus were found in epithelial cells, regardless of the tissue origin, whether inflamed or non-inflamed, or the presence or absence of refractoriness to treatment (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 3 Correlation between human cytomegalovirus cellular load and disease activity indexes. A statistically significant positive correlation is clearly evident between the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) DNA load (expressed as log-copies) in intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) and lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) isolated from inflamed mucosa of inflammatory bowel disease patients, and the Simple Clinical Colitis Activity Index (SCCAI). Abbreviations: CDAI Crohn’s Disease Activity Index, CDEIS Crohn’s Disease Endoscopic Index of Severity Fig. 4 Viral life cycle assessment. Numerous lymphoid cells within the colonic lamina propria of a refractory ulcerative colitis patient are stained dark blue by using the in situ chromogen hybridization technique with a probe that is complementary to Epstein–Barr virus-encoded RNAs (EBER, a ). Two EBER-positive lymphocytes ( dark blue ), one of which is intraepithelial ( arrow ), in the mucosa of a refractory ulcerative colitis patient ( b ). A single ZEBRA-positive lamina propria mononuclear cell ( brown ), indicating the lytic phase of the Epstein–Barr virus life cycle, is evident within the inflamed mucosa of a patient with ulcerative colitis, by applying the immunohistochemistry ( c ). A human cytomegalovirus-positive lamina propria mononuclear cell within the inflamed mucosa of a patient suffering from ulcerative colitis is stained brown by immunohistochemistry ( d ). Original magnification for all, ×400 (Color figure online)
Discussion
In spite of a considerable number of studies supporting the notion that colonic involvement through opportunistic viral infection in existing IBD is associated with a worsening of symptoms, increased prevalence of refractoriness and surgical intervention [ , , , , , , , ], the role played by EBV and HCMV in tissue damage is still poorly understood [ , , ]. The causes may be identified in the differences among the patients enrolled and the diagnostic methods applied, the lack of control populations and the retrospective design of the majority of studies. However, quantitative real-time PCR assay on fresh mucosal samples has emerged as the best technique [ , , ] as it has the advantage of being highly sensitive, rapid and reproducible compared with immunohistochemistry [ ]. Moreover, the systematic and widespread sampling of colonic mucosa in both refractory, non-refractory IBD and control subjects had allowed us to distinguish between a superimposed viral colitis and viral infection through the identification of a cutoff value of 10 3 copies/10 5 cells [ ]. This information is of meaningful clinical value since a positive result does not necessarily imply that the patient is suffering from an active HCMV or EBV end-organ disease. In addition, a dissociation between the levels of viral load found in mucosal samples and peripheral blood was clearly evident, thus suggesting that viral colitis may exist independently from systemic involvement [ ]. In this regard, a suggested viral tropism to sites of active inflammation and a direct effect on cytokine production may account for the ability of EBV and HCMV to escape the host’s immunological surveillance, especially at mucosal level [ , ]. In fact, while resting memory B cells and monocytes/myeloid progenitor cells serve as the long-term reservoir of latent EBV and HCMV infection, respectively, their differentiation into plasma cells and macrophages/dendritic cells in response to inflammatory stimulation may trigger the lytic phase and subsequent release of viral particles, leading to viral replication and transmission [ , , , , ]. Moreover, the action of T cells in controlling viral replication [ ] may be hampered by concurrent malnourishment and immunosuppressive drugs, thus resulting in an uncontrolled activation of the lytic phase of the viral life cycle which localizes precisely in the target organ [ , ]. However, so far it has been hard to prove whether opportunistic viral infections represent a causative factor in tissue damage or a surrogate marker of severe or steroid-refractory colitis in IBD patients [ , , ]. To this end, we used real-time PCR to investigate the localization and the DNA load of EBV and HCMV in the different cell populations of IBD patients’ colonic mucosa in comparison with that of healthy controls and sought to identify the life cycle phase of the viral infection through immunohistochemistry and ISH. Although our study is not suited to detecting small differences due to the limited sample size, for the first time, we discovered that detectable levels of EBV DNA were found in enterocytes isolated from colonic mucosa of refractory IBD patients, with higher values in macroscopically inflamed areas in comparison with non-inflamed areas, whereas in the responder IBD group a variable degree of DNA load was observed only in the enterocytes from inflamed mucosa. A similar pattern was observed in the LPMCs, whereas the IELs displayed positivity with high viral load only in the inflamed mucosa of refractory IBD, with negligible or undetectable values in the remaining conditions. Notably, a positive correlation was evident between the EBV load in the cellular populations of the IBD diseased mucosa and both the clinical and endoscopic indexes of disease activity. Conversely, detectable HCMV DNA was found only in both epithelial and immune cell populations harvested from diseased areas of refractory IBD patients and in the LPMCs isolated from inflamed mucosa of a few IBD responders. A significant relationship was found only between the viral load in the immune cells of the IBD inflamed mucosa and the SCCAI. Interestingly, no measurable DNA copies of either virus appeared evident in the mucosal cell populations isolated from control subjects. It is conceivable, therefore, that during the latent phase of viral infection, a negligible number of DNA copies may be found only in immune cells related to the cyclic viral reactivation, which usually occurs without triggering symptoms [ , ]. In active IBD, the lytic phase may be triggered by both local and systemic factors which favor the disruption of the delicate balance between the host immune response and viral activity, thus leading to precipitation or exacerbation of mucosal injury. In this condition, a spread of viral particles from LPMCs to enterocytes, possibly through the IELs, is arguable thus contributing to the epithelial shedding and necrosis. In this regard, a fascinating study by Pegtel and co-workers showed that functional EBV-encoded microRNAs are secreted by EBV-infected B cells and transferred to uninfected recipient cells through exosomes [ ]. Exosomes are microvesicles released into the extracellular milieu that provide the horizontal transfer of bioactive molecules including microRNAs, which are thus protected from RNAse degradation [ ]. This potential mechanism of intercellular communication could be responsible for the transfer of EBV microRNAs from B cells to both T cells and enterocytes in the colonic mucosa of IBD patients, where they may activate the lytic phase of the viral cycle. An alternative mechanism used by EBV to enter the epithelial cells is through the binding of viral gHgL with the integrin complex, αvβ6 and αvβ8, of epithelial cells in order to trigger the fusion of the EBV envelope protein with the cell membrane and thus facilitate entry [ ]. Moreover, the EBV glycoprotein BMRF2 was shown to mediate the penetration of the cell-free virus through the cognate interaction with the α5β1 expressed at the basolateral surface of polarized epithelial cells [ ]. Here, unlike B cells where EBV establishes a life-long infection with the possibility of inducing clonal expansion [ ], it results in the expression of the immediate-early lytic gene, BZLF1 and then lytic reactivation [ ]. A confirmation of this finding comes from the paper by Temple and coworkers, who demonstrated that EBV establishes a predominant productive infection in epithelial cells, thus resulting in a direct cytopathic effect [ ]. Our results fit in with this evidence and support the crucial role of EBV in contributing to mucosal lesions in IBD when infecting the enterocytes. In this regard, it is now accepted that the role of epithelial cells in the EBV life cycle is to support the replication and spread of the virus within the host. Therefore, we evaluated the expression of ZEBRA and EBER RNA, in order to distinguish between the lytic and latent phase of EBV infection in the colonic mucosa of our patients. In none of the cases, we found ZEBRA expression on enterocytes, although in a few refractory IBD patients, ZEBRA-positive IELs were occasionally found admixed with crypt epithelial cells, as well as in LPMCs, thus suggesting that the close contact with enterocytes might facilitate the transfer of EBV particles. It appears evident that the lack of ZEBRA staining in those enterocytes carrying a high viral load cannot rule out the presence of the productive viral replication, thus confirming a previous study on infectious mononucleosis where no convincing evidence was found of co-expression of ZEBRA and cytokeratins in the same epithelial cells [ ]. Conversely, a variable number of LPMCs and IELs from refractory IBD patients showed EBER expression. Although this RNA is typically considered latency-associated, its expression was also found to promote cellular growth and modulate innate immunity in EBV-associated cancers [ ]. As far as the HCMV infection is regarded, a very similar overlap between the DNA load in both epithelial and immune cells and the distribution of macroscopically damaged areas in the inflamed mucosa of refractory patients was clearly evident, thus strengthening the hypothesis of a causative role of this virus in tissue damage mainly in UC patients [ ], where it correlated with the clinical disease activity index. Again, at immunohistochemistry, although performed with an antibody that recognizes highly conserved epitopes [ ], only a variable number of LPMCs resulted positive in some cases of IBD colitis, regardless of the inflammatory status of the mucosa, and a few IELs in one case of refractory IBD. Taken together, these findings are expected to have a relevant clinical impact if considering that immunohistochemistry is the most widely used screening method in the decisional algorithm for the management of opportunistic viral infections in IBD [ ].
In conclusion, the use of real-time PCR allowed us not only to confirm EBV as the most prevalent infection [ , , , ], but most of all, that in inflamed IBD mucosa, opportunistic viral infections spread from immune cells to epithelial cells, thus significantly contributing to tissue damage and “apparent” refractoriness to conventional therapies, since the mucosal healing may be eventually achieved by treating the superimposed viral infection. In this regard, our novel findings are also relevant when considering the possible use of anti-viral molecules that target the lytic phase of either virus as a potential, new therapeutic tool in this subset of IBD. Last but not least, since an increased risk of lymphoma has been found in IBD patients undergoing immunosuppressive therapies [ ], especially among young males on thiopurines, where a role for primary EBV infection has been suggested [ ], the possibility that the lymphomagenesis process arises from the systemic spread of the virus following the epithelial infection is a question that deserves further investigation.