Introduction
HEV is considered the most common cause of hepatitis worldwide [ ]. It is transmitted through the fecal-oral route [ ], and contaminated water is the major cause of outbreak in developing countries [ ]. However, the mechanism of HEV replication is still unclear. Liver injury in HEV-infected patients may be mediated by extreme host immune response, not by viral replication [ ], but the mechanism is unclear. Fortunately, efficient HEV culture has been developed in PLC/PRF/5 (human hepatoma cells) and A549 cells (human lung cancer cells) [ ], which facilitates study on the mechanism and pathogenesis of HEV replication.
Innate immunity is the body’s first line of defense against viral infection. Host antiviral responses are initiated through the detection of viral components by host pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). Different classes of PRRs are involved in recognition of virus infections, including membrane-associated TLRs, cytosolic RNA-sensing RIG-like receptors (RLRs), and DNA sensors [ ]. Each of these classes of PRRs activates IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) through unique adaptor molecules, known as TRIF, MAVS, and STING, respectively, to which IRF3 binds to become phosphorylated [ ]. Phosphorylation of IRF3 at specific serine residues in the C-terminal domain leads to dimerization, nuclear localization, and transcription of genes, including IFNs and IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), with antiviral activity. Devhare et al. [ ] found that the expression of IFN-β was inhibited in the early stage of HEV infection. However, the mechanism of HEV inhibits IFN-β, which has not been exploited.
Signal regulator protein α (SIRP-α), also named SHPS-1, is one of the immunoglobulin superfamily transmembrane glycoproteins that are important in the negative regulation of innate immunity [ ]. SIRP-α is a receptor expressed on phagocytes that inhibits phagocytosis when bound to CD47 on the erythrocyte membrane. Ligation with CD47 results in tyrosine phosphatase-1 (SHP-1) recruitment to SIRP-α and dephosphorylation of specific downstream substrates involved in multiple important leukocyte functions, including neutrophil and monocyte migration [ , ], macrophage recognition, and apoptotic cell clearance [ , ]. Furthermore, the alternations of SIRP-α expression may contribute to the pathogenesis of acute and chronic hepatocellular carcinoma [ ]. SIRP-α negatively regulates IFN-I induction [ ], which is the critical fighter of host cells against invading pathogens.
In this study, we have discovered that HEV infection activates SIRP-α from 12 h post-inoculation in HEV-infected A549 cells. Activated SIRP-α by HEV ORF3 protein down-regulated phosphorylation of IRF3 and ultimately inhibited IFN-I (IFN-β) expression. These results illustrate a strategy by HEV that exploited SIRP-α to down-regulate host innate immunity for promoting viral replication.
Materials and methods
Virus and cells
The positive HEV characterized as genotype 4 (GenBank Accession No. KJ155502, KM01 strain), isolated from swine feces in Kunming, Yunnan province of China, was used as inoculum. The fecal suspension (10 %) was centrifuged at 12,000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min, filtered through 0.22 µm microfilters, and treated with penicillin (100 U/mL) and streptomycin (100 µg/mL) for 1 h. The viral genomic titers consisted of 1.0 × 106 copies/ml determined using real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR), as previously described [ ]. Virus was ultraviolet-inactivated (named UV-HEV) as described previously [ ].
Human lung carcinoma cell lines (A549) and human kidney epithelial cell lines (HEK293T) obtained from ATCC were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10 % (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin at 37 °C under 5 % CO2. Cell cultures were replaced every 2 days after passage.
Reagents
Poly (I:C) was purchased from InvivoGen (USA). Protein A/G Plus-Agarose Immunoprecipitation Regent was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (USA). Antibodies to phospho-IRF3 (ser396) and Ras were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (USA). Antibodies to SIRP-α, Flag, and GAPDH were purchased from Abcam (England). HEV ORF2-specific monoclonal antibody (MAB8003) was obtained from Merck Millipore (German). The HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were obtained from Calbiochem (USA).
Plasmids
HEV ORF2, ORF3, D1 domain of ORF3, ΔD1-ORF3, ΔD2-ORF3, and ΔP2-ORF3 fragments were PCR-amplified from KM01 strain and cloned into vector pcDNA3.1 with Flag tag at N-terminus. SIRP-α fragment was PCR-amplified and cloned into vector pcDNA3.1 followed by EGFP reporter gene. All clones were confirmed by restriction digestion and sequencing.
Gene knockdown by short hairpin RNA (shRNA)
ShRNA targeting SIRP-α gene was designed and cloned into pGV298 vector (Genechem, China). After a pilot study, the shRNA vectors exerting optimal gene knockdown were selected. The shRNA sequences are described in Table 1 . Table 1 Sequences of shRNAs targeting SIRP-α No. Sequences shRNA 1 GGTTGCAGCTGGAGAGACA shRNA 2 CGATGACGTGGAGTTTAAG shRNA 3 GGCAGAGAACCAGGTGAAT shRNA 4 AAGAATGCCAGAGAAATAA
Viral inoculation
A549 cells were planted in 12-well microplates 24 h before inoculation. The protocol of the HEV-inoculated A549 cells was previously described [ , , ]. In brief, monolayer cells were washed thrice and inoculated with 0.2 mL of the filtered virus inoculum for 1 h. The solution was removed after inoculation, and fresh maintain medium containing 2 % FBS was added. UV-inactivated HEV (UV-HEV) served as control was also inoculated simultaneously. Cells were harvested for Western blotting detection in indicated times.
Cell transfection
A549 cells were planted in 12-well microplates to achieve 70–80 % confluence, washed twice with PBS, and then transfected using Lipofectamine 3000 Transfection Reagent (Life, USA) according to instruction. To analyze the interaction between HEV and SIRP-α, plasmids pcDNA3.1-Flag-ORF3 and pcDNA3.1-SIRPα-EGFP were co-transfected into the HEK 293T cells.
Immunoblotting and co-immunoprecipitation
Cells were collected in indicated times and lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, pH 8.0, 30 mM NaF, 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 40 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.1 mM PMSF, protease inhibitors, 10 % glycerol, and 1 % Nonidet-P40). The whole proteins were analyzed by 10 % sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and Western blot using specific antibodies. For co-immunoprecipitation studies, whole-cell lysates from HEK293T cells were lysed in 500 μl RIPA buffer and then incubated for 3 h with 1 μg of the indicated antibody at 4 °C. Whole-cell lysates were then incubated with 25 µl of a 1:1 slurry of protein A and G Sepharose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) overnight at 4 °C. The beads were washed five times with lysis buffer, resuspended in equal volume of RIPA buffer, and analyzed by immunoblotting.
Poly (I:C) treatment
A549 cells were seeded into 12-well microplates and incubated overnight. Cells were pretreated with 1 μg/ml poly (I:C) for 6 h to analyze whether ORF3 protein inhibits IFN-β through activation of SIRP-α, then separately transfected with SIRP-α, ORF3, or D1 domain of ORF3 plasmids, or inoculated with HEV (or UV-HEV). The supernatant of cells was collected for analysis of phosphorylated IRF3 by Western blotting or determination of IFN-β by real-time qPCR 24 h post-transfection/inoculation.
Determination of type I interferon by real-time qPCR
The supernatant of cells was collected 24 h after HEV inoculation or plasmid transfection. Total RNA was extracted by Trizol, and cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription kit (TAKARA, Japan) according to the direction. The change of IFN-β in HEV-infected cell supernatants supplemented was analyzed using SYBR green-based qPCR assays. The primers and PCR protocol were according to the previous study [ ]. In brief, the synthesized first-strand cDNA (2 µL) was added as a template. Real-time qPCR was performed under the following conditions: 95 °C for 30 s, followed by 39 cycles of 95 °C for 5 s and 60 °C for 31 s. The housekeeping gene (GAPDH) served as a loading control. Real-time qPCR was performed using an ABI PRISM 7300 Real-Time PCR System. Fold changes in mRNA transcripts of IFN-β were calculated with the formula 2 −(ΔCt of gene − ΔCt of GAPDH) , where Ct is threshold cycle.
Results
HEV infection activates SIRP-α expression
To investigate the relationship between HEV infection and SIRP-α expression, Western blot was performed in HEV-infected A549 cell at 4, 12, 24, 48 and 72 h post-inoculation. In the absence of HEV infection and UV-HEV infection, or in early stage of HEV infection (4 h post-inoculation), SIRP-α was negative expression. However, SIRP-α was significantly expressed 12 h post-inoculation, when progeny viruses were detectable in infected cells (Fig. 1 a). Then, SIRP-α was persistently expressed in a high level during the entire experiment (72 h post-inoculation). In contract, UV-HEV-infected cells or uninfected cells did not activate the expression of SIRP-α (Fig. 1 a). Meanwhile, the ligand of SIRP-α, CD47, was no change in HEV-infected cells. Fig. 1 HEV infection activated SIRP-α persistent expression in HEV-infected cells. a SIRP-α was activated in HEV-infected A549 cells from 12 h post-inoculation and persistently expressed with HEV ORF2 protein. CD47 was no change during HEV replication. b HEV replication was enhanced in cells SIRP-α overexpressed. c Inhibition of SIRP-α expression by shRNAs targeting SIRP-α. d Gene silencing of SIRP-α by shRNA2 reduced HEV replication. e Relative changes in ORF2 and SIRP-α expression analyzed using GraphPad Prism software were indicated and normalized with GAPDH. GAPDH served as loading control
Overexpression of SIRP-α enhances HEV replication
To evaluate the promotion effect of SIRP-α on HEV replication, the SIRP-α was overexpressed in A549 cells. Cells were transfected with pcDNA3.1-SIRPα-EGFP plasmid, and pcDNA3.1–EGFP plasmid served as negative control. Twenty-four hours after transfection, cell were inoculated with HEV and collected at 72 h post-inoculation. As expected, the replication of HEV increased 2.4-fold in cells overexpressed SIRP-α (Fig. 1 b).
Gene silencing of SIRP-α by RNAi decreases HEV replication
To further confirm the direct effects of SIRP-α on HEV, A549 cells were transfected with shRNAs specifically targeting SIRP-α. As shown in Fig. 1 c, d, shRNA2 targeting SIRP-α significantly inhibited SIRP-α expression, resulting in a profound down-regulation of ORF2 protein levels (decreased 32.5 %) 72 h post-inoculation. Results indicated that HEV replication is closely associated with SIRP-α.
HEV ORF3 protein activates SIRP-α expression
To further exploit the promotion effects of SIRP-α on HEV replication, HEV ORF2 and ORF3 eukaryotic expression plasmids were transfected into A549 cells to determine which proteins of HEV activated the expression of SIRP-α. Meanwhile, cell transfected with SIRP-α plasmid or inoculated with HEV or UV-HEV served as control. Western blot analysis indicated that ORF3 protein of HEV was responsible for the activation of SIRP-α (Fig. 2 a). Fig. 2 HEV ORF3 activates SIRP-α expression in A549 cells. a A549 cells were separately transfected with pcDNA3.1-SIRPα-EGFP (SIRPα, positive control), pcDNA3.1 vector (vector, negative control), pcDNA3.1-Flag-ORF2 (ORF2), pcDNA3.1-Flag-ORF3 (ORF3), or inoculated with HEV (UV-HEV) and detected by Western blotting with indicated antibodies 24 h post-inoculation/transfection. GAPDH served as loading control. b The interaction between SIRP-α and ORF3 was identified by co-immunoprecipitation analysis. HEK293T cells were co-transfected with ORF3 and SIRPα plasmids and collected for immunoprecipitation analysis with anti-Flag (or SIRP-α) antibodies to pull down ORF3 (or SIRP-α). Western blotting with specific antibody against SIRP-α (or Flag) was conducted
The direct interaction between ORF3 and SIRP-α was further identified by co-immunoprecipitation analysis in HEK293T cells. Results reflected that ORF3 protein was directly interacted with SIRP-α (Fig. 2 b).
HEV ORF3 D1 domain contributes to the activation of SIRP-α
HEV ORF3 protein contains two hydrophobic domains (D1 and D2) at the N-terminus and two proline-rich domains (P1 and P2) at the C-terminus. ORF3 protein plays a critical regulatory role in HEV replication, but the mechanism remains obscure. Three ORF3 truncation mutants ΔD1, ΔD2 and ΔP2 eukaryotic expression vectors were constructed (Fig. 3 a) and separately transfected into A549 cells to further identify which domain participated in the activation of SIRP-α. Results indicated that D2, P1, and P2 domains did not induce SIRP-α expression, while D1 domain obviously induced SIRP-α expression (Fig. 3 B), which reveal that the D1 domain plays a critical role in activation of SIRP-α expression in HEV-infected A549 cells. Fig. 3 ORF3 D1 domain activates SIRP-α. a Schematic illustration of ORF3 truncation mutants used in this study. ORF3 contains two N-terminal hydrophobic domains (D1 and D2) and two C-terminal proline-rich regions (P1 and P2). PcDNA3.1-Flag-ORF3 plasmid containing the full-length ORF3, encoded 1–114 amino-acid (aa); pcDNA3.1-Flag-ΔD1 ORF3 plasmid lacks D1 domains, encoded 25–114 aa; PcDNA3.1-Flag-ΔD2 ORF3 plasmid lacks D1 and D2 domains, encoded 54–114 aa. PcDNA3.1-Flag-ΔP2 ORF3 plasmid lacks P2 domains, encoded 1–82 aa. b A549 cells were separately transfected with full-length ORF3 or ORF3 truncation plasmids. The expression of SIRP-α was analyzed by Western blotting. GAPDH served as loading control
Activated SIRP-α by HEV infection inhibits IFN-β
SIRP-α negatively regulates IFN-I induction in innate immune system. IFN-I is the most important defense in host against viral infection [ ]. It has been reported that IFN-β was inhibited in the early stage of HEV infection [ ], but the mechanism is still unknown. IRF3 is responsible for the primary induction of IFN-I and is important in response to either viral or microbial infection [ ]. Stimulation with poly (I:C) leads to IRF3 phosphorylation on multiple phosphorylation acceptor sites to produce IFN-I antiviral responses. Suppression of SIRP-α resulted in enhanced activation of IRF3 after poly (I:C) treatment, resulted in up-regulation of IFN-β and IFN-β-inducible gene transcriptional activation [ ].
In the present study, cells infected with HEV or transfected with HEV ORF3, D1 of ORF3 plasmids activated the expression of SIRP-α, resulted in significantly suppression of IRF3 phosphorylation (~50 %, Fig. 4 a, b), and finally inhibited the produce of IFN-β (decrease 49–75 %, Fig. 4 c). In contract, cells infected with UV-HEV barely inhibited the expression of pIRF3 and IFN-β (Fig. 4 a–c). Results demonstrated that IFN-β was suppressed in HEV-infected cells through activation of SIRP-α to reduce the phosphorylation of IRF3. Fig. 4 HEV inhibits IFN-β through activation of SIRP-α. a A549 cells were separately transfected with SIRP-α, ORF3, D1 domain of ORF3, or inoculated with HEV (or UV-HEV) after 6 h pretreatment with 1 µg/ml poly (I:C). Cells were collected for detection of phosphorylated IRF3 by Western blotting with pIRF3 (ser396) antibody. GAPDH served as loading control. b A relative gene expression change in phosphorylated IRF3 was analyzed using GraphPad Prism software and normalized with GAPDH. c Quantitative detection of IFN-β gene expression in the supernatants of A549 cells by real-time qPCR. The relative fold changes were calculated and normalized with mock samples. GAPDH served as loading control
Discussions
Innate immunity is the body’s first line of defense against viral infection and significantly contributes to the acute inflammatory response against infection by viruses or pathogens. SIRP-α is a member of the immunoglobulin family that plays a very important function in immune response. The combination of SIRP-α with its ligand CD47 is an essential step to participate in negative regulation of innate immunity [ ]. CD47-SIRP-α complex negatively regulates the immune system by suppressing both the maturation of immature dendritic cells and the production of cytokines by mature dendritic cells [ ]. In the present study, SIRP-α was highly activated in HEV-infected A549 cells at 12 h post-inoculation and continuously expressed during the whole infection (Fig. 1 a), which resulted in an inhibition of IFN-β (Fig. 4 c) and efficient viral replication. Thus, SIRP-α plays a critical role in HEV replication.
Viruses can alter the host immune system to create a favorable environment for viral survival inside the host, which is important for pathogenesis. The interferon system is an important component of the host response against viruses [ ]. Acute viral infection initiates a type I IFN interferon response that is composed predominantly of IFN-α and IFN-β signaling. Viruses have evolved different mechanisms to inhibit type I IFN responses and block various aspects of the signal pathway to escape the host immune response and cause infection in host cells [ ]. Although IFN-β has been reported to be inhibited in HEV-infected A549 cells previously [ ], the mechanism is unclear. In this study, IFN-β was significantly down-regulated in cells transfected with SIRP-α or infected with HEV, which reveals that the suppression of IFN-β was the consequences of activation of SIRP-α by HEV infection.
ORF3 protein of HEV acts as a regulator takes part in HEV replication cycles. It has the ability to optimize the cellular environment for viral infection and replication by interacting with multiple cellular proteins involved in signal transduction, such as NF-κB, MAPK, STAT1, and CIN85 [ , , , ]. In this study, cells transfected with ORF3 activated the expression of SIRP-α, and the interaction between SIRP-α and ORF3 was detected by Co-IP. Moreover, the IRF3 phosphorylation were inhibited and then suppressed the expression of IFN-β in poly (I: C)-treated A549 cells. Furthermore, we observed that the D1 domain of ORF3 mainly contributed to the activation of SIRP-α and subsequently response to the suppression of IRF3 phosphorylation and eventually down-regulated IFN-β expression.
In summary, we have identified a distinct mechanism by HEV ORF3 protein activation SIRP-α expression to inhibit IRF3 phosphorylation and result in the decrease of IFN-β. The suppression of production of IFN-β facilitates viral replication and develops efficient infection. Results demonstrate that interfering with the functions of SIRP-α should be considered as a potential therapeutic approach to the prevention and treatment of HEV infection.