Introduction
Gastric cancer is the third most common cause of cancer-related death in the world, and it remains difficult to cure in worldwide, primarily because most patients present with advanced disease [ , , ]. In the United States, stomach malignancy is currently the 15th most common cancer [ , , ]. Gastric cancer may spread from the stomach to other parts of the body, particularly the liver , lungs , bones , lining of the abdomen and lymph nodes . The most common cause is infection by the bacterium Helicobacter pylori , which accounts for more than 60% of cases [ , , , ]. Early gastric cancer has no associated symptoms; however, some patients with incidental complaints are diagnosed with early gastric cancer. Gastric cancer is commonly diagnosed at an advanced stage and those patients with advanced disease 5-year survival rate are 24% [ , , ]. All physical signs in gastric cancer are late events. By the time they develop, the disease is almost invariably too far advanced for curative procedures.
Recent gene expression microarray studies have identified a number of gene biomarkers of different types for human cancer. For example, researchers believe that mutations in the genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 cause as many as 60% of all cases of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers. In this study, we used gene expression microarray to detail the gastric cancer program of gene expression in different grade gastric cancer tissues and try to find out some genes associated with the tumorigenesis of gastric cancer [ , , ]. Firstly, we mined published gene microarray data from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), and explored differently expressed genes profiling. The use of this powerful technology has resulted in the identification of a novel biomarker for human gastric cancer, COL1A2, which plays an important role in the progression of human gastric cancer.
Materials and Methods
Microarray Data Processing and Gene Expression Profile Mining
The gastric cancer of microarray data and corresponding clinical data used were downloaded from the publicly GEO databases ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ ): GSE27342 and GSE31789. The raw files of background were adjusted using Robust Multichip Average. Expression Console 1.4.1 and Transcriptome Analysis Console v3.0 was used for microarray analysis. Median levels of transcript expressions were calculated. Gene-level data was then filtered to include only those probe sets with annotations. Probe set annotation mainly reference the new version annotation files (*.transcript.csv) that can be download on affymetrix official website ( http://www.affymetrix.com/support/technical/annotationfilesmain.affx ) The CSV files contain both design-time data, such as the genomic location.
Cluster and co-Expression Network Analysis
Hierarchical Clustering tab was next performed as described in reference [ , ]. We utilize the express profile of difference genes to construct the gene co-expression network. This network distinctly reveal the relation between the genes, find the key gene of regulation and “interaction venation” thoroughly. The co-expression network assimilate the scale-free property of the huge data, and to simulate the scale-free relation by the interaction between genes.
Immunohistochemistry Staining and Evaluation
Seventy-five paraffin-embedded human gastric cancer tissues were cut into 4 μm thick and 2 mm diameter sections to construct tissue microarrays, and then were subjected to heat-induced epitope retrieval in 0.01 mM citrate buffer (pH 6.0). Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked in 3% H2O2 in citrate buffer for 20 min. The rabbit polyconal antibody to COL1A2 (14695–1-AP;Proteintech) was applied to the sections at a dilution of 1:200 and incubated at 4°Covernight. Immunohistochemical staining process was preformed using with 3, 3′-diaminobenzidine for 60s.The final immunoreactive scores were evaluated independently by two pathologists blinded to the clinical parameters, the scores were determined by the sum of intensity and extent of the staining. The intensity of staining was scored as 0(negative),1(weakly positive),2(moderately positive),and 3(strongly positive). According to the percentage of the positive staining area, the extent of staining was scored as 0(0–10%),1(11%–30%),2(31%–50%), 3(51%–70%), and 4(71%–100%). The final staining scores (ranging from 0 to 7) of COL1A2 expression were divided into two groups: high expression groups (scores ≥ 3) and low expression groups (scores <3).
Statistical Analysis
For microarray analysis, differentially expressed genes were confirmed using a p -value threshold and FDR analysis. The threshold of truly significant genes was taken to be p value less than 0.05 and FDR value less than 0.05. IBM SPSS statistics 22 was used for statistical analysis. Chi-square was used to analyze the correlation between COL1A2 expression and clinicopathplogic parameters. P ≤ 0.05 was considered as statistical significant.
Results
Identification of Differently Expressed Genes in Human Gastric Cancer
The human gastric cancer of Affymetrix Human Genome U133plus 2.0 microarray data and corresponding clinical data used were downloaded from the publicly GEO databases. Differently expressed genes of gastric cancer and paired non-tumoral were analyzed using Expression Console 1.4.1 and Transcriptome Analysis Console v3.0. Compared with gastric normal tissue, hierarchical clustering showed a total of 433 genes were differentially expressed ( p < 0.01) in invasive gastric cancer, as shown in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 Gene expression profile of human gastric cancer. ( a ) Heat map hierarchical clustering reveals 433 genes that were differentially expressed in gastric cancer tissues compared with stomach tissues. ( b ) Ranked the first three over-expressed genes in gastric cancer. Up-regulation or down-regulation gene is represented as red or green, respectively
Comprehensive co-Expression Network Analysis and Candidate Biomarker
In order to identify which gene may potentially play a biomarker in the development of human gastric cancer, all significantly different expressed genes then constructed to gene co-expression network, as shown in Fig. 2a . The degree of a node describes the number of links one gene has to others within the gene network. In the gastric cancer co-expression network, we founded the altered gene-expressions in gastric cancer are largely consistent with the previous study, such as the altered expression of CDH1, CKS2, CLDN1 et al. Some novel observations were also made in our study. Interestingly, Central to this network was COL1A2, which directly controlled 20 neighboring genes it interacted with (Fig. 2b ). Fig. 2 Gastric cancer of gene co-expression network. ( a ) From the total differential genes, 211 candidate genes as function of collagen fibril organization by constructing a gene co-expression network with k-core algorithm. The COL1A2 gene localizes at the center of subnetwork in the co-expression network. ( b ) COL1A2 was the key gene in a 20-gene network and directly regulates 37 adjacent genes that network according to their degrees. Because the clustering coefficients of these genes are higher than other genes, these interactions rely strongly on COL1A2. Up-regulation gene is represented as red node; down-regulation gene is represented as green node
Immunohistochemical Evaluation of COL1A2 Protein Expression as a Biomarker
In order to investigate the role of COL1A2 in human gastric cancer progression, the COL1A2 protein expression was examined in normal gastric and grades 2 to 4 gastric cancer by immunohistochemical analysis. We founded that COL1A2 expression is increased in 65 of 75(86.6%) gastric cancer tissues and 17 of 75(22.7%) (Table 1 ) normal stomach tissues. These data indicates that COL1A2 is highly expressed in gastric carcinoma tissues compared to adjacent non-tumor tissues (Fig. 3 ). We also found that COL1A2 is mainly expressed in cytoplasm in non-cancerous tissues, whereas COL1A2 is mainly expressed in nuclear in cervical carcinoma tissues, given that it encodes the pro-alpha2 chain of type I collagen, all this led us to hypothesis that COL1A2 may play an important role in tumorigenesis of gastric cancer. Table 1 Correlation between the clinicopathologic features and expression of COL1A2 Characteristics CAPG (%) P -Value Low expression High expression Age (y) 0.325 < 55 3(6.0) 47(94.0) ≥ 55 7(28.0) 18(72.0) Tumor size(cm) 0.085 <3 4(7.5) 49(92.5) ≥ 3 6(27.3) 16(72.7) Histological type <0.0001 Malignant 10(13.4) 65(86.6) Normal 58(77.3) 17 (22.7) Pathological grading 0.016 I 1(5.3) 18(94.7) II 5(17.9) 23(82.1) III 2(12.5) 14(87.5) IV 2(17.6) 10(83.3) T classification 0.083 T1 3(13.7) 19(86.3) T2 5(17.6) 25(83.3) T3 2(8.7) 21(91.3) N classification 0.126 N0 6(13.3) 39(86.7) N1–3 4(13.4) 26(86.6) Chi-square test (* P <0.05) Fig. 3 Detection of COL1A2 expression in gastric caner and adjacent tissues. Representative images of ( a ) negative staining of COL1A2 in normal stomach tissues. ( b ) positive staining of COL1A2 in gastric cancer tissues
Relationship between COL1A2 Expression and Clinical Features
To further determine COL1A2 expression to gastric cancer progression, relationship of COL1A2 in tumors tissues from 75 patients was analyzed. Each sample was assigned an immunoreactivity score ranging from 0 to 7. Statistical analysis showed COL1A2 expression level was significantly associated with histological type ( P <0.05) and lymph node status. However, there was no correlations between COL1A2 expression and age, lymph node numbers, tumor size, or clinical stage ( P > 0.05), as shown in Table 1 . It suggests that COL1A2 expression may associated with the lymphoid development in cervical carcinoma.
Discussion
Gastric cancer, also known as stomach cancer, is cancer developing from the lining of the stomach . Gastric cancer is the third most common cause of cancer-related death in the world, and it remains difficult to cure in Western countries, primarily because most patients present with advanced disease. In the United States, stomach malignancy is currently the 15th most common cancer. The most common cause is infection by the bacterium Helicobacter pylori , which accounts for more than 60% of cases. About 10% of cases run in families and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person’s parents such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer . Most cases of stomach cancers are gastric carcinomas. This type can be divided into a number of subtypes [ , , ]. Lymphomas and mesenchymal tumors may also develop in the stomach. Most of the time, stomach cancer develops in stages over years. Early gastric cancer has no associated symptoms; however, some patients with incidental complaints are diagnosed with early gastric cancer. Most symptoms of gastric cancer reflect advanced disease.
Previous gene expression microarray studies have identified a number of gene biomarkers of different types for human cancer. For example, researchers believe that mutations in the genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 cause as many as 60% of all cases of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers [ , ]. In this study, we describe an integrated bioinformatics to identify molecular biomarkers for gastric cancer in patients’ cancer tissues. We reports differently expression genes in large gastric cancer cohorts from Gene Expression Ominus (GEO). Firstly, we founded that 433 genes were significantly different expressed in human gastric cancer. Differently expression gene profile in gastric cancer was further validated by bioinformatic analyses, co-expression network construction. In the gastric cancer co-expression network, we founded the altered gene-expressions in gastric cancer are largely consistent with the previous study, such as the altered expression of CDH1, CKS2, CLDN1. Some novel observations were also made in our study. Interestingly, Central to this network was COL1A2, which directly controlled 20 neighboring genes it interacted with.
Furthermore, the COL1A2 protein expression was examined in normal gastric and grades 2 to 4 gastric cancer by immunohistochemical analysis. We founded that COL1A2 expression is increased in 65 of 75(86.6%) gastric cancer tissues and 17 of 75(22.7%) normal stomach tissues. These data indicates that COL1A2 is highly expressed in gastric carcinoma tissues compared to adjacent non-tumor tissues. We also found that COL1A2 is mainly expressed in cytoplasm in non-cancerous tissues, whereas COL1A2 is mainly expressed in nuclear in cervical carcinoma tissues, given that COL1A2 encodes the pro-alpha2 chain of type I collagen, all this led us to hypothesis that COL1A2 may play an important role in tumorigenesis of gastric cancer. Statistical analysis showed COL1A2 expression level was significantly associated with histological type and lymph node status.
In conclusion, the novel bioinformatics used in this study has led to identification of improving diagnostic biomarkers for human gastric cancer and could benefit further analyses of the key alteration during its progression.