Engbers and colleagues from Isala, Netherlands (doi: ) evaluated the need for additional rest SPECT MPI and CCTA and its implications on radiation exposure using an individualized sequential SPECT/CT algorithm in a low- to intermediate-risk population of 5018 patients suspected of having CAD. After initial CAC scoring and normal stress SPECT MPI, additional rest SPECT MPI and CCTA could be omitted in half of the patients (52%), resulting in low radiation exposure (mean dose 4.5 ± 0.3 mSv vs 13.2 ± 3.3 mSv in those needing additional imaging). In those who required additional imaging, CCTA could not be performed in nearly half of the patients (54%) because of contraindications (extensive calcifications, motion artifacts, contrast allergy, etc.). The combination of SPECT and CCTA was able to reduce false-positive SPECT findings resulting in a final diagnosis as normal images in 83% of patients. The related editorial by Min (doi: ) discussed the potential perils of the oversimplified traditional “abnormal” vs “normal,” or “obstructive” vs “non-obstructive” approach to CAD management.
Van Tosh et al. (doi: ) examined the relationship between LV asynchrony and myocardial blood flow (MBF) derived from rest/regadenoson stress 82 Rb-gated PET/CT MPI in 195 patients with known or suspected CAD with largely preserved global LV function. They found a high prevalence of asynchrony in their cohort (34%). By evaluating asynchrony both at rest and with pharmacologic stress, they noted that some patients showed improvement in asynchrony while others worsened. Patients who did not improve had lower stress MBF and coronary flow reserve than those who did improve, with improvement most strongly associated with stress-induced reduction in MBF homogeneity. The editorial by Malhotra and Canty from the University at Buffalo (doi: ) noted few limitations in the Van Tosh study such as the high prevalence of CAD and left bundle branch block, the use of vasodilator stress where supply-demand imbalance and sub-endocardial ischemia are infrequent compared to exercise, and the measurement of global rather than regional perfusion. They identify the need for more randomized prospective studies evaluating the diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic implications of LV asynchrony in a population with hemodynamically significant CAD and preserved LV function.
Townsend and colleagues (doi ) demonstrate the safety and tolerability of repeated doses of regadenoson (given three times for 100 or 200 μg doses and 2 times for 400 μg) or 3 doses of placebo administered at 10 minute intervals to a total of 36 randomized healthy male and female subjects. Dose-related increases in regadenoson plasma concentrations and heart rate were observed. The systolic blood pressure fell by 9-11 mm Hg following each dose of regadenoson 100 μg and increased by 8-9 mm Hg following each dose of regadenoson 400 μg. There were no serious adverse events or deaths, and no clinically significant findings were observed in ECGs or laboratory assessments. The editorial by Thomas et al. from Long Beach Memorial, CA (doi: ) discussed the 3 distinct half-lives of regadenoson (related to its distribution from the vascular compartment into tissues and back into the vascular space) and the unknown potential of tachyphylaxis and thus estimated a reasonable redosing interval of 2.5 hours following an IV or subcutaneous dose of 0.4 mg of regadenoson.
Zafrir and colleagues from Beilinson Hospital, Israel (doi: ) evaluated the predictive value of left ventricular dyssynchrony for major adverse cardiac events in patients with systolic LV dysfunction post ICD placement. Patients with a phase SD of ≥60° were prone to cardiac death and heart failure exacerbation, indicating that patients with LV dyssynchrony who are treated with ICD only, could have a better outcome if treated with cardiac resynchronization therapy in addition to ICD. In addition to phase SD of ≥60°, the authors identified QRS width to be the only other independent predictor of cardiac death. In the editorial, Yoshinaga from Chiba, Japan (doi: ) pointed out that reduced LVEF was not a significant variable in predicting cardiac death in the Zafrir cohort analysis. They also discussed the potential role of untreated myocardial ischemia in the study group, which requires further studies.
Patients with ESRD are at increased risk of adverse cardiac events (more than 3 times compared to those with normal GFR). Doukky et al. (doi: ) investigated the prognostic utility of regadenoson stress SPECT MPI in 303 ESRD patients (i.e., glomerular filtration rate < 15 ml/min/1.73 m 2 or on renal dialysis therapy). The authors showed that an abnormal regadenoson SPECT MPI in ESRD patients was associated with approximately twice the risk of composite cardiac-specific endpoints of cardiac death, MI, or coronary revascularization. Furthermore, they showed a stepwise increase in the risk of adverse cardiac events, proportional with the severity of perfusion abnormality. Regadenoson SPECT MPI also added incremental prognostic value above and beyond traditional risk factors and CAD status. Notably, even patients with normal MPI experienced a relatively high rate of cardiac death or MI (4.9% per year) in agreement with prior studies. The editorial by Miller and Schwartz from the University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY (doi: ) suggested the potential benefits from using quantitative assessment of global myocardial flow reserve with vasodilator stress PET to provide the most effective means of identifying the lowest risk patients who have the best chance of survival with renal transplantation.
De Rosa and colleagues from Naples, Italy (doi: ) studied cardiac autonomic innervation with 123 I-mIBG scintigraphy in Parkinson’s disease patients with either one or two parkin mutations compared to patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (IPD). Their study confirmed that 123 I-mIBG scintigraphy is essentially normal in PD patients carrying two parkin mutations, suggesting that PARK 2 degeneration protects the cardiac sympathetic postganglionic innervations. In some patients with single parkin mutation, there was degeneration of postganglionic myocardial sympathetic fibers similar to that observed in IPD while being preserved in others, suggesting heterogeneity. In the related editorial, Lamotte and Agostini from France (doi: ), discussed the potential role of cardiac 123 I-mIBG scintigraphy as a window into the brain of patients with Parkinsonism not only for diagnosis but also to characterize PD phenotypes and provide insight into the pathology and the pathophysiology of different parkinsonian disorders and in predicting prognosis.
Lee et al. (doi: ) reported that FDG PET could be a “one-stop shop” imaging modality for the diagnosis and assessment of disease burden and treatment response in patients with cardiac and extracardiac sarcoidosis. They showed that serial FDG PET is feasible not only to determine the extent of systemic sarcoidosis but also to quantitatively assess treatment response. Treatment responders had decreases in all measured PET parameters (SUVmax, SUVmean, metabolic volume product, and global metabolic volume product), whereas in patients with disease progression the FDG uptake and measured parameters were higher. There was a good agreement between PET findings and clinical parameters used to assess treatment response. The editorial by Manoushagian and colleagues from Temple University, Philadelphia, PA (doi: ) discussed multimodality imaging for cardiac sarcoidosis with FDG PET, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, and hybrid PET/MR imaging.
Janvier and associates from France (doi: ) demonstrated the ease of implementation, safety, and many other advantages of the addition of isometric handgrip exercise to regadenoson stress test compared to a regadenoson only stress test. The authors noted hemodynamic improvements (i.e., higher heart rates and fewer drops in blood pressure) and fewer side effects in the combined regadenoson and isometric handgrip exercise stress test patients. More images were classified as good in the combined regadenoson and handgrip group than in the only regadenoson stress patients; however, the difference was not statistically significant. In their editorial, Kansal and Holly from Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL (doi: ) advocated performing symptom-limited exercise in able and willing patients to allow for assessment of functional capacity and exercise-induced symptoms and consideration of regadenoson administration soon after peak exercise only when target heart rate is not achieved.
RV function, a major determinant of clinical outcomes in pulmonary hypertension patients can be evaluated not only by measuring systolic function but also by right heart metabolism and mechanical synchronicity. Wang and colleagues (doi: ) demonstrated feasibility of FDG PET to evaluate RV dyssynchrony in 54 Chinese pulmonary hypertension patients. Phase analysis measures of RV dyssynchrony, i.e., RV standard deviation and bandwidth were significantly correlated to RV speckle tracking echocardiographic, systolic function, and clinical measurements (NT-proBNP and 6-minute walk distance). However there was no correlation between dyssynchrony parameters and RV hemodynamics, which was attributed to the heterogeneity of the patient population. The authors concluded that FDG PET allows for the comprehensive evaluation of RV performance with simultaneous assessments of RV function, glucose metabolism, and mechanical dyssynchrony. The Van Tosh and Nichols (doi: ) editorial discussed the rationale and methods of dyssynchrony assessment and called for additional studies looking at the prognostic value of FDG PET measures of RV dyssynchrony.
Reliable hot spot inflammation imaging with FDG PET in suspected cardiac infection, cardiac sarcoidosis, or vulnerable coronary plaque is only possible when physiologic myocardial FDG uptake can be adequately suppressed. Osborne and colleagues (doi: ) reviewed various patient preparation protocols and success rates achieved for cardiac FDG PET inflammation imaging and provided useful practical recommendations. Based on a comprehensive literature review and their own experience, the authors recommended the use of at least two high fat and no carbohydrate meals followed by a fast of at least four hours before FDG injection as the most effective preparation method. Another protocol involving unfractionated heparin administered 15 minutes before FDG injection and following at least one high fat and low carbohydrate meal and an overnight fast is equally effective but requires exposure to an intravenous medication with possible adverse effects. They do not recommend the fasting only method with exception for those who cannot eat or have dietary restrictions precluding the high fat and no/low carbohydrate diets and suggest fasting for at least 18 hours in such individuals.