Introduction
Eimeria tenella is one of seven species of Eimeria that causes intestinal disease and significant economic loss to the poultry industry (Blake and Tomley ; Williams ). It has been estimated to be in excess of US$ 3 billion annually owing to production losses as well as costs of prevention and treatment (Dalloul and Lillehoj ). The major options for coccidiosis control are anticoccidial drugs and vaccination. However, the widespread use of anticoccidial drugs has inevitably led to the development of drug resistance (Chapman ). Vaccination is effectively used to control coccidiosis within the poultry industry, but it is limited because of environmental contamination, high production expenses, and an atavistic possibility of coccidiosis (Sharman et al. ; Vermeulen ). E . tenella is an obligate intracellular parasite and has a complex life cycle including sporogony, merogony, and gametogony, and it must rely on the host cell to complete its life stage. The sporozoites and merozoites are two key developmental stages to invade and develop in intestinal epithelial cells. Blocking zoite invasion of cells may be an effective way to reduce Eimeria infection in host. Therefore, identification of the key molecules related to zoite invasion is of importance for the development of new anticoccidial drugs and vaccines.
Eimeria spp. belong to the apicomplexan parasites and possess a unique complex of organelles (the apical complex) consisting of rhoptries, dense granules, micronemes, conoid, polar rings, and microtubular protrusions (Sam-Yellowe ). The proteins secreted by these organelles play important roles in host invasion by parasite. In recent years, numerous studies have investigated the mechanism of parasite invasion and have identified some invasion-related proteins such as surface antigens, apical membrane antigen, microneme proteins, and rhoptry proteins (Jiang et al. ; Ramly et al. ; Yan et al. ). However, these are parasite related, and there are few reports of host-related proteins. Studies have shown that host cell integrin α2 might be involved in interacting with Cryptosporidium parvum during infection, probably acting as a part of the regulatory elements upstream of the reported recruiting and reorganization of F-actin at the infection sites (Zhang et al. ). Furthermore, E . falciformis can reverse the host interferon (IFN)-γ signaling to promote its growth, since oocyst output is impaired in IFN-γ-R (−/−) and in IDO1 (−/−) mice (Schmid et al. ). These results demonstrate that host proteins play an indispensable role in parasite invasion and intracellular development.
In our previous study, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation coupled with liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry was used to screen the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in chicken embryo fibroblasts infected with E . tenella sporozoites for 72 h. In total, 259 DEPs were identified, including 145 upregulated and 114 downregulated proteins (data unpublished). In the present study, one of the downregulated proteins, fatty acid–binding protein 4 (FABP4), was selected for cloning and expression, and its effect on E . tenella sporozoites invasion of cells were studied.
Materials and methods
Animals, parasites, and cells
Chinese yellow chickens were bought from a farm in Fengxian District, Shanghai, China, and kept in a coccidia-free environment until use. New Zealand rabbits were bought from Shanghai SLAC Laboratory Animal Co., Ltd.
The Shanghai strain of E . tenella was maintained in our laboratory and propagated in 2-week-old coccidia-free chickens, as described previously (Tomley ). Sporulated oocysts were obtained and purified with standard procedures (Han et al. ). Sporozoites were obtained from purified sporulated oocysts by in vitro excystation and purified by chromatography over columns packed with nylon wool and DE-52 cellulose (Xie et al. ).
The chicken embryo fibroblast DF-1 cell line (ATCC CRL-12203) was cultured in our laboratory in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Gibco BRL, Paisley, UK) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco) and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco) and maintained in a 37 °C incubator with 5% CO 2 .
Cloning and identification of FABP4
Total RNA was extracted from DF-1 cells using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). cDNA was generated from the total RNA with SuperScript™ III Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen) and used as the template for further study. The complete coding region of Gallus gallus FABP4 (GenBank accession number: NM_204290.1) was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using a pair of primers based on the published sequence of G . gallus FABP4. The primer sequences were as follows: forward primer, 5′-CG GAATTC CTGCTACCTGGCCTGACAAA-3′, reverse primer, 5′-CC CTCGAG TGTTCGCCTTCGGATCAGTC-3′, containing Eco RI and Xho I restriction sites (underlined), respectively. The amplification conditions were 94 °C for 3 min, 38 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 30 s, 72 °C for 1 min, and 72 °C at10 min. The PCR products were analyzed by 1% agarose gel electrophoresis. The targeted bands were purified (Qiagen, Dusseldorf, Germany) and subcloned into the PMD18-T vector (Takara, Dalian, China). TIANprep Mini Plasmid Kit (Tiangen Biotech, Beijing, China) preparations of the recombinant plasmid were analyzed by gel electrophoresis. Positive recombinant clones were subjected to DNA sequencing by Shenggong (Shanghai, China).
The full-length cDNA sequence of FABP4 gene was analyzed for similarity using the BLAST programs at the National Center for Biotechnology Information ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/ ). The deduced amino-acid sequence and molecular mass were obtained using the translate tool software at the ExPASy server of the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics ( http://www.expasy.org/tools/protparam.html ).
Expression and identification of recombinant FABP4 protein
The PCR product of FABP4 and expression vector pET-28c(+) (Novagen, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) were digested with Eco RI and Xho I, purified with QIAquick Gel Extraction kit (Qiagen), and ligated with T4 DNA ligase (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The recombinant plasmid was confirmed by DNA sequencing by Shenggong and then transformed into Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) (Tiangen). Bacteria containing the recombinant pET-28c(+)–FABP4 plasmid were induced with 1 mM isopropyl thio-α-D-galactoside (IPTG; Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at OD 600 0.6 in 200 mL Luria–Bertani medium (100 μg/mL kanamycin), overexpressed at 16 °C for another 20 h, and harvested by centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 min. The pellet was then suspended in 10 mL phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4), sonicated, and centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was analyzed by 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) to confirm expression. Soluble recombinant FABP4 protein was purified using a Ni-NTA His-Bind Resin (Merck); its concentration was determined with the BCA protein assay reagent (Beyotime, Shanghai, China); and the obtained protein was identified as FABP4-His fusion protein by western blotting. Purified protein (10 μg) was separated by 12% SDS-PAGE and blotted onto polyvinylidene fluoride membranes (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The membranes were blocked with 5% skimmed milk overnight at 4 °C, rinsed three times with PBS, and incubated with mouse anti-His antibody (1:1000; Cusbio, Wuhan, Chnia) at 37 °C for 2 h. After washing with PBS, the membranes were incubated with donkey anti-mouse IgG antibody (1:5000; LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA) at 37 °C for 1 h and washed four times with PBS. Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LI-COR Biosciences) was applied for visualization of membranes.
Polyclonal sera against recombinant FABP4
Two-month-old rabbits were immunized by subcutaneous injection of 0.2 mg purified rFABP4 proteins emulsified with Freund’s complete adjuvant (Sigma). Two weeks later, the rabbits were boosted four times with 0.2 mg proteins emulsified with Freund’s incomplete adjuvant (Sigma) with an interval of 1 week between each boost. A week after the final immunization, polyclonal sera against recombinant FABP4 was collected from the rabbit blood.
Expression of FABP4 in sporozoite-infected cells
DF-1 cells (6 × 10 5 ) were plated into each well of a six-well plate and allowed to reach 80–90% confluence at the time of infection. Fresh sporozoites (1.8 × 10 6 ) were incubated with 10 mL DMEM (10% FBS, 5% penicillin/streptomycin) at 37 °C for 2 h and were added to DF-1 cells (cell/sporozoite ratio 1:3) and incubated at 41 °C for 12 h with 5% CO 2 . Then the cells were washed three times with DMEM to remove the non-invading sporozoites and continue to be incubated for 60 h. Uninfected cells were used as a control group. All experiments were performed in triplicate. Cells infected with sporozoites for 72 h, and uninfected DF-1 cells were collected and washed three times with PBS to remove culture medium, lysed with cell lysis buffer for western blotting and immunoprecipitation (Beyotime) to extract total proteins. Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay reagent and subjected to western blot analysis (10 μg). The primary antibody was polyclonal rabbit antibody against FABP4 (1:200), and the secondary antibody was goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody (1:5000; LI-COR Biosciences). For comparative quantitative protein expression profile analysis, the resulting images were analyzed by Image J software. β-Actin (1:1000; Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA) was used as an internal reference for protein extracts.
Immunohistochemistry
2-week-old coccidia-free chickens were inoculated orally with 3 × 10 4 sporulated oocysts of E. tenella . The uninfected chickens were used as the control group. At 72 h after infection, infected and uninfected chicken cecal tissues were collected and washed in PBS. Tissues were fixed with 10% formalin, rehydrated in 70%, 85%, 95%, and absolute ethanol successively, embedded in paraffin, and cut into 4-mm-thick sections. The sections were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in a graded ethanol series.
The sections were subjected to antigen retrieval with Quick antigen retrieval solution for frozen sections (Biotech Well, Shanghai, China), blocked endogenous peroxidase activity using endogenous peroxidase blocking solution (Biotech Well) and incubated with normal goat serum for 1 h at room temperature (RT) to reduce non-specific binding. Polyclonal rabbit antibody against FABP4 (1:50) was used as a primary antibody, and normal rabbit IgG was used as a negative control. The sections were incubated with primary antibody for 2 h at 37 °C and washed twice with PBS and incubated with biotinylated goat anti-rabbit serum IgG (Biotech Well) for 20 min at RT. After washing, sections were incubated with horseradish-peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin–biotin (Biotech Well) for 20 min at RT. The 3,3-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (Biotech Well) was used to develop the peroxidase reaction for 10 min at RT. Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin (Biotech Well), dehydrated in ethanol, and mounted with resin. A light microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) was used for visualization of sections.
Effect of anti-FABP4 polyclonal antibodies on sporozoite invasion
Polyclonal antibodies were purified with Protein A+G agarose (Beyotime). DF-1 cells (2 × 10 5 cells/well) were seeded in 24-well plates and preincubated with purified IgG against FABP4 with a final concentration of 50, 100, 200, 300, or 400 μg/mL in DMEM (Gibco) with 10% FBS (Gibco) at 37 °C. Cells were cultured overnight at 37 °C in 5% CO 2 until they reached ~80% confluence. The same quantity of purified IgG from naïve rabbit sera was used as a control. Fresh E . tenella sporozoites were labeled using carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE) (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and incubated with 10 mL DMEM (10% FBS, 5% penicillin/streptomycin) at 37 °C for 2 h. Sporozoites were added to DF-1 cells with a sporozoite/cell ratio of 3:1. After incubation at 41 °C in 5% CO 2 for 12 h, cells were washed twice in PBS, digested with trypsin, and collected and analyzed by flow cytometry (Beckman Coulter Inc., Fullerton, CA, USA). All assays were performed in triplicate.
Inhibition and promotion of FABP4 effect on sporozoite invasion
To inhibit the function of FABP4 in DF-1 cells, an FABP4 inhibitor BMS-309403(Okamura et al. ) (MCE, Shanghai, China) was added during cell culture. DF-1 cells (2 × 10 5 ) were seeded in 24-well plates, cultured in RPMI-1640 complete growth medium with BMS-309403 (5 ng/mL) for 2 days. The medium was changed every day and BMS-309403 replenished. Expression of FABP4 was detected by western blotting with primary anti-FABP4 antibody (1:1000; Cusbio).
To promote expression of FABP4 in DF-1 cells, transforming growth factor (TGF)-β3 (Hu et al. ) (Pepro Tech, Suzhou, China) was used. DF-1 cells (2 × 10 5 ) were seeded in 24-well plates, cultured in RPMI-1640 complete growth medium with TGF-β3 (20 μg/mL) for 5 days, and expression of FABP4 was detected by western blotting.
BMS-309403 and TGF-β3 treated DF-1 cells were invaded by E . tenella sporozoites fluorescently labeled with CFSE at a ratio of three sporozoites per cell for 12 h at 41 °C, and then subjected to flow cytometry to detect invasion rate. The non-treated and sporozoites-infected DF-1 cells were set up as the control group.
Statistical analysis
All data were subjected to the software SPSS version 20.0 for Windows (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). The significance of differences in sporozoites invasion rate among the groups were evaluated by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and mean values were compared using Duncan’s multiple range tests. The protein relative expression levels were compared by Student’s t test. The difference was considered significant and extremely significant if p < 0.05 and < 0.01, respectively.
Results
Expression and purification of recombinant FABP4 protein
A 458-bp product was isolated by PCR using cDNA from DF-1 cells and identified as G . gallus FABP4 gene by BLASTN. The sequence displayed 99% homology with the known G . gallus FABP4 gene, suggesting that the G . gallus FABP4 gene had been successfully amplified (NM_204290.1). FABP4 encoded a polypeptide of 132 amino acid residues with a calculated molecular mass of ~14.9 kDa. Recombinant plasmids containing the FABP4 fragment were subcloned into pET-28c(+) for expression in E . coli BL21(DE3) and induced with 1 mM IPTG at 16 °C for 20 h. Recombinant protein was analyzed by 12% SDS-PAGE, and revealed a fusion protein with the expected molecular weight (18.5 kDa), consisting of about 14.9 kDa FABP4 protein and 3.6 kDa tag protein (Fig. 1a ). The fusion FABP4 protein was purified with Ni-NTA His-Bind Resin (Fig. 1b ) and recognized by His antibody (Fig. 1c ), confirming that the obtained protein was an FABP4–His fusion protein. Fig. 1 Analysis of chicken FABP4 in E . coli BL21 (DE3) using SDS-PAGE and western blotting. a Lane M, protein marker; Lane 1, negative control (not induced with IPTG); Lanes 2 and 3, induced with IPTG at 10 and 20 h, respectively. b Lane 1, purified protein detected by SDS-PAGE. c Lane 1, purified protein detected by western blotting
FABP4 protein expression levels in sporozoite-infected cells
FABP4 protein expression in sporozoite-infected and uninfected DF-1 cells was detected by western blotting. In comparison with uninfected cells, expression of FABP4 protein was significantly downregulated in cells infected with sporozoites at 72 h (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Chicken FABP4 protein expression levels in E . tenella sporozoite-infected cells. a Western blotting of the internal reference actin and FABP4 protein. b Relative expression level of FABP4 protein. * p < 0.05 by Student’s t test versus non-infected group
FABP4 protein expression levels in sporozoite-infected cecum tissues
Immunohistochemistry was utilized to determine FABP4 expression in chicken cecum tissues infected by E . tenella oocysts for 72 h. The specific FABP4 immunostaining in infected cells was less than that in uninfected cells (Fig. 3 ), which indicated that FABP4 was reduced after infection. Fig. 3 Immunohistochemical staining of FABP4 in chicken cecal tissue sections. a Normal rabbit IgG staining in uninfected cecal tissue sections. b Normal rabbit IgG staining in infected cecal tissue sections. c FABP4 staining in uninfected cecal tissue sections. d FABP4 staining in infected cecal tissue sections
Effect of rabbit anti-FABP4 antibodies on E. tenella sporozoite invasion of cells
An invasion assay was used to detect the impact of rabbit anti-FABP4 antibodies on the invasion of DF-1 cells by E . tenella sporozoites. Host cell FABP4 function was blocked by preincubation with purified antibody against FABP4. The invasion rate was not significantly different in cells treated with 50, 100, 200, 300, and 400 μg/mL rabbit anti-FABP4 antibodies, compared with the same dose of normal IgG-treated cells and untreated cells (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 Effect of rabbit anti-FABP4 antibodies on E . tenella sporozoite invasion of cells. Non-treated, without any antibodies; FABP4, IgG purified from rabbit antiserum against recombinant FABP4 protein; IgG, IgG from naïve rabbit serum. All assays were performed in triplicate
Effects of low and high levels of FABP4 on E. tenella sporozoite invasion
According to western blotting, FABP4 was significantly inhibited by BMS-309403 in DF-1 cells and extremely significantly promoted by TGF-β3 (Fig. 5a, b ). A sporozoite invasion assay was used to detect the effect of inhibiting and promoting FABP4 expression on the invasion of sporozoites. Compared with the control group, the invasion rate in the BMS-309403-treated group did not differ significantly. In the TGF-β3-treated group, the invasion rate declined significantly from 22.9 to 13.5% (Fig. 5c ). Fig. 5 Effect of chicken FABP4 expression level on E . tenella sporozoite invasion. a Western blotting of the internal reference actin and FABP4 protein in cells treated with BMS-309403 or TGF-β3. b Expression of FABP4 protein in cells treated with BMS-309403 or TGF-β3. c E . tenella sporozoite invasion rate in cells treated with BMS-309403 or TGF-β3. * p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01, by Student’s t test versus non-treated group
Discussion
FABP4, also named adipocyte fatty acid–binding protein (A-FABP), is a member of the FABP family and has been identified as a peripheral membrane protein that binds to long-chain fatty acids (Glatz and van der Vusse ; Hotamisligil et al. ; Makowski et al. ). FABP4 was originally considered to be an adipocyte-specific protein (Baxa et al. ), but was later found to be expressed in many kinds of cells, such as macrophages (Layne et al. ), porcine coronary arterial endothelial cells (Lee et al. ), human bronchial epithelial cells (Shum et al. ), and human uterine endometrial cells (Zhu et al. ). Researchers have shown that FABP4 is critical in lipid and glucose homeostasis as well as inflammation through its actions in adipocytes and macrophages (Elmasri et al. ). In addition, FABP4 has the ability to regulate gene expression, proliferation, and differentiation in some cancer cells. However, the role of FABP4 in parasite infection and in metabolic crosstalk between host and parasite has not been studied.
The coding sequence of chicken FABP4 gene is conserved in humans, pigs, and mice and consists of four exons and three introns. The sequence of the open reading frames (ORFs) encoding the chicken FABP4 showed 74% and 73% similarity to those of pigs and humans, respectively. The similarity was 77%, 28%, and 23% at the predicted amino acid level with human FABP4, human FABP1, and human FABP2, respectively (Wang et al. ). The chicken FABP4 gene is organizationally similar to the mammalian FABP4 gene (Wang et al. ). In this study, we have cloned the 458-bp chicken FABP4 gene, including a 399-bp ORF from DF-1 cells, expressed recombinant FABP4 protein, and harvested rabbit polyclonal sera against recombinant FABP4.
In order to reveal the role of host FABP4 in Eimeria infection, DF-1 cells were chosen as the model because DF-1 cells are derived from chicken, as E . tenella is parasitic in the cecum of chickens. After invading DF-1 cells for 72 h, sporozoites of E . tenella can develop into first-generation schizonts (Scholtyseck et al. ). We detected by western blot and immunohistochemistry the translation level of FABP4 protein in DF-1 cells at 72 h after sporozoite infection. The translation level of FABP4 was downregulated significantly at the stage of first-generation schizonts, indicating that infection of sporozoites results in downregulation of host FABP4 protein.
To explore the effect of FABP4 on sporozoite invasion of host cells, rabbit anti-FABP4 antibodies were used to block the function of FABP4. There was no significant difference in the invasion rate between cells that were incubated and not incubated with rabbit anti-FABP4 antibodies. To study further the function of FABP4, we used BMS-309403 and TGF-β3 to inhibit and promote FABP4 expression in host cells, respectively. BMS-309403 is a potent, selective, and cell-permeable inhibitor of FABP4 and interacts with the fatty acid–binding pocket within the interior of the protein and competitively inhibits binding of endogenous fatty acids (Sulsky et al. ). TGF-β3 induces expression of FABP4 (Hu et al. ). Expression of FABP4 in DF-1 cells was up- and downregulated significantly when treated with BMS-309403 and TGF-β3, respectively. An invasion assay was performed with cells that inhibited or promoted FABP4 expression and showed that the invasion rate of the BMS-309403-treated group was similar to the rabbit anti-FABP4 polyclonal antibody group, and there was no significant difference between both of them and the control group. These results indicated that there may be other proteins that compensate for FABP4 function, but the specific reasons need further study. However, the invasion rate in the TGF-β3-treated group was significantly lower than in the control group, revealing that high levels of host FABP4 can lessen significantly the invasion rate of sporozoites. These results all show that host FABP4 plays an important role in inhibiting the invasion of host cells by sporozoites, so sporozoites reduce host cell resistance by downregulating host FABP4 expression during cell invasion.
To sum up, the expression of host FABP4 was significantly decreased after infection with E . tenella sporozoites for 72 h. The sporozoite invasion assay showed that high levels of FABP4 significantly inhibit E . tenella sporozoite invasion of host cells, whereas low levels of host FABP4 have no significant effect on invasion. These findings suggest that FABP4 plays an important role in inhibiting invasion of host cells by sporozoites, and there may be other proteins that replace the function of FABP4 when FABP4 is absent. However, how does FABP4 play its role in inhibiting the invasion of sporozoites, its mechanism remains to be further studied.