Introduction
The health of the honey bee ( Apis mellifera Linnaeus 1758) is one of the main global environmental emergencies of this century (Neumann and Carreck ). The high annual losses among honeybee colonies have a huge socioeconomic and ecological impact on apiculture, agriculture, and the environment (Neumann and Carreck ; Potts et al. ). Although many pathogens and parasites of honeybees and their effects on the colony population have been characterized, strategies for their control are still unsatisfactory (Martin ; Cox-Foster et al. ; Nazzi et al. ; Higes et al. ). Of these, the parasitic mite Varroa destructor Anderson and Trueman 2000, has the most severe economic/sanitary impacts (Rosenkranz et al. ). In the past decade, the control of this parasite has mainly been carried out using synthetic acaricides which often show different side effects on the honeybee and residues on hive products, and could also lead to Varroa resistance phenomena (Rosenkranz et al. ). Only recently have new interesting control methods based on natural hive products (e.g., propolis) been proposed (Simone-Finstrom et al. ).
Another new challenge is understanding how the natural immune responses (individual immunity) and collective behavioral defenses (social immunity) of honeybees can support bee health and reduce stressors without human intervention.
The social immunity system refers to all collective defense mechanisms that honeybees and other social insects have evolved to combat the increased risk of disease transmission that arises from both social interactions and group living (Cremer et al. ). Some of these defense systems are preventative, keeping parasites and pathogens away from the nest, whereas others are activated as needed, when pathogens and/or pests have already penetrated the hive (Cremer et al. , ).
One form of social immunity in A. mellifera is the formation of a propolis envelope within the nest which acts as a protective antimicrobial layer against pathogens. Currently, there is a scientific hypothesis regarding the possibility that honey bees use propolis not only as a preventive defense, but also as another type of defense that is activated when parasites or pathogens penetrate inside the nest (self-medication) (Simone-Finstrom and Spivak ; Pusceddu et al. ).
Self-medication plays a major role among behavioral defense mechanisms against pathogens and parasites which animals have developed during evolution (Lozano ). The conditions defining this adaptive behavior have been refined over time (Singer et al. ; de Roode et al. ). However, according to Clayton and Wolfe ( ), self-medication must fulfill at least three criteria: (1) the intake or contact with the substance in question must increase during the infestation or infection, (2) the substance must have a negative effect on the fitness of the parasite/pathogen, and (3) the substance must have a positive effect on the host fitness. In addition, according to Singer et al. ( ), self-medication behavior decreases fitness in uninfected animals, since it has a detrimental effect or is a major cost for the host in the absence of parasites or diseases. Recent studies have shown that A. mellifera colonies increase resin foraging rates when infested by V. destructor (Pusceddu et al. ) and in response to deforming wing virus titer (Drescher et al. ), and further investigations are needed for evidence of parasite and host fitness. With regard to the criterion proposed by Singer et al. ( ), an augmented fitness cost for uninfected individuals would translate into a higher energy investment at the expense of resin with respect to pollen foragers (Nakamura and Seeley ; Simone-Finstrom and Spivak ). Indeed, the time and energy consumed to collect resin from the outside environment and to handle it inside the hive represent a cost that does not apparently reward the individual forager, which would be in a better position if compensated with food when collecting nectar or pollen.
The narcoleptic effect, as a temporary inactivity of the mites, and the acaricidal properties of bioactive compounds, recovered from propolis alcoholic extracts , have been well documented against V. destructor (Garedew et al. , ; Damiani et al. ). However, no unambiguous data have been collected on the direct or indirect effect of the crude propolis on the biological cycle of V. destructor (Erler and Moritz ). In the laboratory, Drescher et al. ( ) found no evidence of any effect of volatile compounds released from crude propolis on mite survival. However, a possible effect of the different chemical composition of propolis on V. destructor was suggested by Popova et al. ( ) who found propolis with a higher percentage of some biological active components (caffeic acid and pentenyl caffeates) in Varroa -resistant bee colonies, and a significantly lower resin content, compared with propolis samples from susceptible colonies. Moreover, no results have been collected on the effects of the chemical–physical conditions inside the hive on the release of bioactive substances from the resinous fraction of propolis.
Concerning the third criterion (i.e., the substance must have a positive effect on the host fitness), it is known that propolis inside the nest has an impact on a bee’s immune responsiveness, decreasing the baseline expression of antimicrobial peptide-related genes in individual bees (Simone et al. ; Borba et al. ). Evans and Pettis ( ) showed that a high level of immunity activation on the part of the individual can be costly in terms of colony productivity. In Africanized honeybees, there also seems to be a positive correlation between propolis production and stored pollen and honey (Manrique and Soares ; Padilha et al. ). For the same subspecies, Nicodemo et al. ( , ) reported that colonies selected for high propolis production had a lower brood rate loss, a longer worker lifespan, and more pollen and honey stored in the nest. In addition, colonies that had collected more propolis showed a greater aptitude for hygienic behavior (Garcia et al. ; Nicodemo et al. ; Padilha et al. ).
Borba et al. ( ) found that unchallenged colonies with a natural propolis envelope showed an increased colony strength and vitellogenin levels after overwintering. In fact, the protein status, and in particular, the vitellogenin titer in the bee’s hemolymph play an important role in determining its lifespan (Amdam and Omholt ) and overwintering colony survival (Alaux et al. ; Smart et al. ).
However, little information is available regarding the benefits of propolis in colonies challenged by pathogens or parasites. Simone-Finstrom and Spivak ( ) reported that colonies with an experimentally applied propolis envelope showed significantly lower clinical signs of disease when challenged with Ascosphaera apis (Masenex ex Claussen) L. S. Olive and Spiltoir, 1955. Borba and Spivak ( ) demonstrated that the larval food collected from field colonies with a propolis envelope, challenged with Paenibacillus larvae White 1906 (the causative agent of American foulbrood disease, AFB), had a significantly higher inhibitory activity against P. larvae compared to larval food from challenged colonies without a propolis envelope. The presence of a propolis envelope resulted in a significant reduction in the number of larvae with clinical signs of AFB 2 months after P. larvae infection. In addition, Drescher et al. ( ) found a lower increase in deformed wing virus titers after V. destructor infestation in colonies provided with additional propolis, thus suggesting that it may help to block virus transmission.
In order to understand whether Varroa- infested colonies could benefit from increasing levels of resin, laboratory bioassays were carried out to investigate the effects of propolis on infested worker fitness. The longevity and energetic stress of adult bees kept in experimental cages and artificially infested with the mite were monitored over time. At the same time, in vitro experiments were performed to evaluate the effects on Varroa mites of coming into contact with crude propolis.
Since biological activity and a wide range of pharmacological properties of propolis have been intensively investigated and mainly associated with its phenolic component (da Silva et al. ; Mihai et al. ; Siripatrawan et al. ), specific analyses were carried out to define the total content of polyphenols and flavonoids, together with the main individual phenolic compounds of the propolis used in the bioassays.
Materials and methods
Experimental apiary
The study was performed from May 2017 to November 2017 in an experimental apiary in northwestern Sardinia, at the experimental farm of the University of Sassari, Department of Agricultural Science (latitude 40°46′23″, longitude 8°29′34″). The apiary consisted of 21 colonies of Apis mellifera ligustica Spinola 1806 maintained in Dadan-Blatt hives containing 10 combs each. During the experimental period, the colonies were checked every 2 weeks to check the presence of the queen, as well as the pollen and nectar supplies, and to evaluate the sanitary status (disease symptoms and varroosis). Before each experiment, a sample of about 300 adult bees from at least three different frames per each colony was collected and placed inside a container with a hydroalcoholic solution to facilitate the Varroa separation, and the percentage of infestation was calculated (Pappas and Thrasyvoulou ). The infested colonies were used as sources of V. destructor mites, while the non-infested ones (infestation level < 1%) were used as sources of honey bee brood that were ready to emerge.
Propolis collection, preparation, and analyses
Propolis specimens used in the bioassays were collected in two separate periods (August and September 2015) from seven hives in our experimental apiary using specific collection nets placed above nest combs. After net scraping, each propolis sample was inspected to remove visible impurities, then pre-weighed and stored in a freezer at − 18 °C.
Before starting the experiments, frozen samples were homogenized using a coffee mill (GS Arendo, Germany). The determination of total phenolic and total flavonoid content was carried out using the same methods described in Pusceddu et al. ( ) and they were characterized using an HPLC DAD (Diod Array Detector) according to Pellati et al. ( ) with some modifications. Analyses of phenolic compounds were carried out using an Agilent 1260 series HPLC instrument (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) equipped with a quaternary pump, degasser, column thermostat, auto-sampler, and diode array detector. Identification and peak assignment of polyphenolic compounds were based on a comparison of their retention times and spectra with the analytically pure standards. The concentrations of 12 standards (caffeic acid, p-coumaric acid, ferulic acid, quercetin, isorhamnetin, cinnamic acid, apigenin, kaempferol, chrysin, pinocembrin, and caffeic acid phenethyl ester, galangin) were calculated according to the external standard method curve (four known concentrations for each standard in duplicate, R 2 = 0.99) and expressed in mg per g of dry weight. Data were processed using the Agilent OpenLAB CDS ChemStation (edition 2012).
To verify that the propolis samples had not been contaminated by acaricide residues, the samples were analyzed by gas chromatography-ion trap-mass spectrometry (GC-ITMS analysis). An aliquot of 1 g of propolis was dissolved in 2 mL of acetone (for pesticide analysis, 99.5% purity). The solution was stirred for 5 min in a vortex (Falck, instrument, Milan, Italy) and centrifuged for 10 min at 10 °C and 4000 rpm. The organic phase was recovered and injected into the analytical system.
A gas-chromatograph Varian 3800 (Agilent Technologies, Milan, Italy) was used, coupled with a mass spectrometry Ion Trap system 2000 ITMS and an autosampler Varian 7800. Helium was the carrier gas at 1 mL/min. The injector temperature was set at 150 °C. The column was a Varian VF17 for the GC/MS analysis, and the oven temperature program was as follows: T = 0 50 °C (1 min), till 300 °C (10 °C/min). The ITMS was set in EI mode at 70 eV, with the SCAN range from 50 to 650 amu. Quantitative analyses were carried out in SIS mode using the following m/z rates: tau-fluvalinate m/z 250, 181, coumaphos m/z 362, 226, fenpyroximate m/z 213, 198, amitraz m/z 293, 162, bromopropylate m/z 341, 339, tetradifon m/z 356, 159, and cymiazole m/z 218, 185.
Host and parasite collection
To obtain adult workers and perform the laboratory bioassays, honeybee brood that were ready to emerge were collected from three Varroa -free colonies and kept for 14 h in an incubator at + 35 °C.
Female mites were sampled from Varroa -infested colonies using an inert dust “powdered sugar” (Paneangeli, Cameo) because up to 48 h, there is no difference in mite survival recovered from broods or with powdered sugar (Macedo et al. ). During the time required to set up the experiment (about 2 h), the mites used to test how they were affected by the propolis were kept in Petri dishes together with fresh bee pupae to prevent starvation. Conversely, the mites used to evaluate the propolis effects on infested worker fitness were kept in Petri dishes without bee pupae. Abnormal mites (faded in color, small size, slowly moving) were excluded from the experiment.
Host bioassays
In order to test the effects of propolis on Varroa -infested worker fitness, 30 newly-emerged bees collected from three different colonies with a low level of Varroa infestation (< 1%) were mixed in order to prevent any genotypic effects (10 bees from each colony) and placed in a metal cage (10 cm × 10 cm × 5 cm) whose two inner sides were covered with two sheets of bee wax comb, on which 30 mites had already been placed.
To verify the infestation success in each cage, we observed that the mites flew above the bees. The cages were then kept in an incubator at + 31 °C with ad libitum 50% ( w / v ) sucrose solution administered with a graduated syringe (Williams et al. ). Dead bees were counted and removed from the cages every day (at the same time), to monitor the bees’ longevity. In addition, the bees’ energetic stress in terms of nutritional demand was also monitored by recording the amount of sucrose solution 50% ( w / v ) consumed daily in each cage (Martín-Hernández et al. ). Experiments finished when all the bees were dead.
The following experimental groups were compared: (1) infested bees with raw propolis, (2) infested bees without propolis, (3) non-infested bees with raw propolis, and (4) non-infested bees without raw propolis. In the propolis treatments, 0.5 g of raw powdered propolis was placed inside the cage over the sheets of wax comb. The two propolis samples collected in August and September 2015 were used in two separate experiments performed in May and October 2017, respectively. In each experiment, all treatments were replicated with three independent cages and were set up on the same day.
Parasite bioassays
The effect of raw propolis on Varroa activity was investigated according to Garedew et al. ( ) and Damiani et al. ( ) with various modifications; briefly, 100 μL of distilled water was applied on 3 cm × 3 cm absorbent paper 67 g/mq (APTACA SRL, Canelli, Italy) in a Petri dish and adding 0.25 g of powdered propolis. The propolis thus adhered to the absorbent paper creating a viscous film that prevented the mechanical effect of the powder on the mite. Distilled water was used as a control treatment. Subsequently, six mites were put in each Petri dish corresponding to 36 mites per treatment (six replicates). Mite activity was observed under a stereo microscope every 15 min for the first hour, every 20 min for the second hour, and every 30 min for the next 3 h. The two propolis samples collected in August and September 2015 were used in two distinct experiments performed in July and October 2017, respectively. Mites were considered inactive when they showed no response to the stimulus (Milani ). All experiments were performed at ambient temperature (31 °C).
Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using R statistical software v 3.3.2 (R Core Team ).
Survival analysis was performed in R using a mixed effects Cox proportional hazard model (R package ‘survival’ (Therneau and Grambsch ), and the R package ‘coxme’ (Therneau ), with experimental groups (control vs. control + propolis vs. Varroa infested vs. Varroa infested + propolis) and month (May and October) of experiment as fixed factors and cage (replicate) as a random effect factor. A further post hoc analysis was performed using the R package ‘multcomp’ (Hothorn et al. ), applying a Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. We used linear mixed-effect modeling (LMMs) for repeated measures to investigate the effects of treatment (control vs. control + propolis vs. Varroa infested vs. Varroa infested + propolis) and date (May and October) on the cumulative sucrose consumption per bee. Cage (replicate) was again used as a random effect factor.
We also used LMMs for repeated measures to investigate the effects of propolis and date of the experiment (July and October) on Varroa inactivity. Petri dish was used as a random effect factor. A further post hoc analysis was performed using ‘multcomp’, applying a Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. We used LMMs to investigate the differences in the chemical composition of the two samples (August vs. September) of propolis used in our bioassays. Colony was used as a random effect factor.
When models included several factors, we used automated model selection based on the Akaike information criterion (AIC) using the ‘dredge’ function (R package ‘MuMIn’ (Bartoń ). All mixed models were performed using the R package ‘lme4’ (Bates et al. ) and all model assumptions were checked visually.
Results
Propolis chemical analysis
The two propolis samples used in the separate bioassay showed significant differences in their total polyphenol (LMM: χ 2 = 56.517, P < 0.001, Table 1 ) and total flavonoid content (LMM: χ 2 = 42.961, P < 0.001, Table 1 ) with the highest content in the propolis collected in the first period (16/8/2015 vs. 11/09/2015). Table 1 Total phenolics, total flavonoids, and polyphenolic compounds in propolis used in our bioassays and collected from seven untreated colonies in two different periods Chemical components Sample 1 (August 2015) Sample 2 (September 2015) Total polyphenols a 570.2 ± 20.5 413.5 ± 18.8 Total flavonoids b 74.8 ± 2.6 57.7 ± 2.4 Caffeic acid c 4.95 ± 0.2 3.0 ± 0.1 p-coumaric acid c 0.74 ± 0.04 0.37 ± 0.02 Ferulic acid c 1.39 ± 0.07 0.96 ± 0.05 Quercetin c 1.21 ± 0.08 0.46 ± 0.03 Isorhamnetin c 1.73 ± 0.1 0.87 ± 0.04 Cinnamic acid c 2.12 ± 0.1 1.46 ± 0.1 Apigenin c 2.97 ± 0.1 1.45 ± 0.09 Kaempferol c 2.83 ± 0.1 1.18 ± 0.09 Chrysin c 35.09 ± 1.7 23.0 ± 1.0 Pinocembrin c 19.2 ± 1.1 9.8 ± 0.5 Galangin c 22.59 ± 1.0 13.1 ± 0.7 CAPE c 9.75 ± 0.69 6.7 ± 0.2 a Total polyphenols are expressed in g GAE/Kg DW = g gallic acid equivalent/kg dry weight of plant material b Total flavonoids are expressed in g CE/kg DW = g catechin/kg dry weight of plant material c The individual components are expressed in mg/g
On average, the content of individual polyphenolic compounds was 50% higher in the propolis collected in the first period (August) than that collected in the second period (September). Chrysin was the main component in both propolis samples with values of 35.1 and 23.0 mg g −1 , respectively. Myricetin, acacetin, and rosmarinic acid were not detected in our study.
No acaricide residues were detected in either of the propolis samples.
Host bioassays
Experimental treatment (χ 2 = 322.577, P < 0.001, Fig. 1 ), month (χ 2 = 87.672, P < 0.001, Fig. 1 ), and their interaction (χ 2 = 103.445, P < 0.001, Fig. 1 ) were significant predictors of bee survival. The treatment of Varroa -infested bees with propolis significantly decreased mortality in both May (hazard ratio: z = − 8.996, P < 0.001, Fig. 1 a, c) and October (hazard ratio: z = − 8.876, P < 0.001, Fig. 1 b, d) compared to the respective Varroa -infested groups without propolis. Varroa -infested May and October bees did not differ in their mortality (hazard ratio: z = 1.071, P = 1.00). Similarly Varroa -infested May and October bees treated with propolis did not differ in their mortality (hazard ratio: z = 0.378, P = 1.00). Additionally, there was no difference in mortality between Varroa -infested May bees treated with propolis and control bees (hazard ratio: z = 0.302, P = 1.00, Fig. 1 a, c) and Varroa -infested May bees treated with propolis and control bees treated with propolis (hazard ratio: z = 1.503, P = 1.00, Fig. 1 a, c). However, the Varroa -infested October bees treated with propolis had a higher mortality both compared to control bees (hazard ratio: z = 9.574, P < 0.001, Fig. 1 b, d) and compared to control bees treated with propolis (hazard ratio: z = 10.425, P < 0.001, Fig. 1 b, d). Fig. 1 Kaplan-Meier survivorship curves of A. mellifera workers infested by V. destructor in comparison with non-infested bees (control groups), both maintained with and without propolis (0.5 g of propolis per cage). Instantaneous risk of death (hazard ratio, ± 95% CI) for honeybees in each experimental treatment and month compared with the model average of 0
The experimental group was not a good predictor of bee sucrose consumption (repeated measures LMMs: χ 2 = 3.664, P = 0.300, Fig. S1 ). Varroa -infested bees consumed a similar amount of sucrose compared to control bees (May: Varroa -infested vs. control; z = − 0.396, P = 1.000; October: z = − 1.396, P = 1.000). The amount consumed by the bees significantly increased over time (χ 2 = 6160.100, P < 0.0001, Fig. S1 ) and bees sampled in May consumed a significantly higher amount of sucrose compared with bees sampled in October (χ 2 = 353.590, P < 0.001, Fig. S1 ).
Parasite bioassays
The activity of Varroa mites was significantly negatively affected by the propolis treatment across both experiments (July and October) (LMMs: χ 2 = 40.015, P < 0.001, Fig. 2 a, b). Additionally, we found a significant three-way interaction between the treatment course of the experiment and the month (LMMs: χ 2 = 4.149, P = 0.041, Fig. 2 a, b). The number of inactive mites did not differ between July and October control treatments (LMMs: z = 0.178, P = 0.859). However, the number of inactive mites in the propolis treatment was higher in July compared to October experiments (LMMs: z = 3.906, P < 0.001). Fig. 2 Proportion of inactive Varroa mites treated with raw propolis and in the control. Data represent mean values across cages with standard error bars
Discussion and conclusion
In a previous study, we demonstrated that A. mellifera colonies under stress conditions due to Varroa infestation increase the number of resin foragers, although we found no evidence of a general intensification of foraging activity (Pusceddu et al. ). This result was in line with the first criterion which defines self-medication behavior (Clayton and Wolfe ).
The present paper clearly demonstrates the positive effects of raw propolis on the lifespan of Varroa -infested adult bees. In fact, in both experiments, the infested bees reared with propolis showed a twice median survival time compared with infested bees reared without propolis. This result is in line with the third criterion which defines the self-medication behavior (Clayton and Wolfe ). The longer lifespan observed in the bee workers belonging to Varroa -free groups sampled in October compared to those sampled in May is likely due to the gradual increase in the proportion of winter bees (Mattila et al. ). Another factor that may have influenced the survival rate of bees in the two experiments may have been the seasonal variation of viroses incidence (Tentcheva et al. ). Interestingly, in the first bioassay (May 2017), which was performed using the propolis with the highest content of polyphenols, the survival curve of the Varroa -infested bees treated with propolis was similar to that observed in the control group with and without propolis.
It is still not clear how the propolis influences the adult bee’s fitness. We can speculate an effect on the parasite, on the host or on both assuming that one does not exclude the other. Our study suggests a direct effect on the parasite in line with the second criterion of Clayton and Wolfe ( ). In fact, we found evidence of a narcoleptic effect of raw propolis on phoretic mites after a contact lasting 5 h. However, the effects shown by raw propolis are very low compared with those observed using ethanolic extracts (Garedew et al. , ; Damiani et al. ). In fact, the percentage of inactivated mites varied only between 19 and 22%. The highest number of inactive mites was observed with the propolis with the highest polyphenol content.
However, Simone-Finstrom and Spivak ( ) suggested that a narcoleptic effect could also negatively affect the success of the mites thereby leading to a lower heat production and metabolic rate. Moreover, Drescher et al. ( ) found no acaricide or narcoleptic effects of volatile compounds released from crude propolis on Varroa mites. On the other hand, unlike in Drescher’s experiment, in our bioassays, the direct contact between Varroa and propolis was not prevented. Hence, the contact time as well as the propolis composition and origin may have played an important role in affecting propolis activity in relation to the parasite.
Through its narcoleptic effect, propolis can interfere with the Varroa ’ s ability to feed itself from the host, thus reducing the transmission of the viruses associated with it. It has also been demonstrated that the deformed wing virus (DWV) usually associated with V. destructor infestation (Ball and Allen ; Martin ) can also be transmitted horizontally through feeding and trophallaxis since it has been found to be infectious in larval food, pollen, and honey inside the hive (Yue and Genersch ; Yue et al. ; Mazzei et al. ).
In line with the above studies and considering that propolis is known to help combat human viruses (Marcucci ), the hypothesis that propolis may also have a direct action on the horizontal virus transmission should be considered. Drescher et al. ( ) observed that DWV titers increased to a significantly lower extent in colonies with added propolis than in propolis-removed colonies, whereas SBV titers were similar. This thus supports the hypothesis that propolis may interfere only with the dynamics of V. destructor -transmitted viruses.
Another hypothesis concerning the modality through which propolis could affect the lifespan of Varroa -infested honeybees is the strengthening of the individual immune system. One of the main functions of propolis in the nest is to regulate the costs of the immune system activity by reducing the investment in immune expression when the colony is unchallenged (Simone et al. ; Borba et al. ; Simone-Finstrom et al. ). Since the immune system is one of the greatest physiological costs in animals, a decrease in energetic costs associated with it allows the bees to invest their energy toward vital tasks such as foraging, rearing broods, and maintaining higher protein levels (e.g., vitellogenin) in their hemolymph required for overwintering survival (Borba ).
However, Borba ( ) and Borba and Spivak ( ) demonstrated that nurse bees from colonies with a propolis envelope challenged by P. larvae showed a higher expression of antimicrobial peptides than colonies without a propolis envelope and higher antimicrobial activity of larval food. It is unclear if the increase in antimicrobial activity of the larval food was due to the presence of antimicrobial peptides produced by adult bees and incorporated into larval food, or to the presence of active compounds from the propolis in the food. In terms of the energetic stress, contrary to findings observed in bees infected by the “gut parasite” Nosema spp. (Mayack and Naug ; Martín-Hernández et al. ), we did not detect differences between Varroa -free and Varroa -infested bees in terms of the daily demand for sucrose solution.
In conclusion, our findings seem to confirm the hypothesis that the resin collection and propolis used in the hive may represent an example of self-medication behavior in social insects. However, before drawing definitive conclusions, other important aspects merit careful investigation, particularly the effects of propolis on the mite reproductive phase, and the possible existence in the hive of substances (for example derived from the salivary glands) that could promote the release of an active ingredient from the non-water soluble propolis fraction.