Introduction
Infection with Trypanosoma cruzi and Trypanosoma rangeli can occur in humans, animals, and vectors in the same geographical area, resulting in mixed infections in these hosts (Coura et al. ; Chiurillo et al. ; Saldaña et al. ). T. cruzi is the etiological agent of Chagas disease, and approximately seven million people are infected worldwide (World Health Organization ). Although T. rangeli is not considered pathogenic in vertebrate hosts, it was described as an infectious agent in approximately 3000 people in Central and South America (Stoco et al. ). Chagas disease is usually diagnosed using serological methods. However, T. cruzi and T. rangeli share similar antigens, and cross reactions can occur, making specific diagnosis and treatment of this disease difficult (Moraes et al. ; Parada et al. ). In some clinical situations, serology cannot be used, and molecular tests are becoming an accurate tool to complement serology for the diagnosis of Chagas disease.
Both T. cruzi and T. rangeli have genetic heterogeneity. T. cruzi can be classified into six different typing units (DTU), from TcI to TcVI (Zingales et al. , ). A seventh genotype, TcBat, is associated with bats (Pinto et al. ). T. rangeli can be classified into KP1+ and KP1− groups (Vallejo et al. ). Although T. cruzi DTUs have different geographical distributions, TcI and TcII are the main cause of disease in Latin America (Zingales et al. , ). The geographical distribution of T. rangeli is not fully defined because of cross-reactions between T. cruzi and T. rangeli in serological tests, and cases that are diagnosed as Chagas disease may present T. rangeli infection (Parada et al. ; Ramirez et al. ; Moraes et al. ).
Epidemiological studies have demonstrated the relevance of correctly identifying these two parasites and their genetic groups (Saldaña et al. ; Parada et al. ; Ramírez et al. ; Mantilla et al. ; Sousa ). To date, molecular markers are not completely effective for concomitantly detecting and identifying the genetic groups of T. cruzi and T. rangeli directly from biological samples where both parasites are present (Souto et al. ; Vallejo et al. ; Fernandes et al. ; Chiurillo et al. ; Pavia et al. ; Fraga et al. ). Additionally, no study has evaluated mixed infections with different quantities and different mixtures of genetic groups of these two parasites relative to each other, which can occur in different hosts (Campos et al. ; Fraga et al. ).
Sá et al. ( , ) reported that the restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis of cytochrome oxidase II (RFLP-COII) can distinguish T. cruzi from T. rangeli and simultaneously identify the genetic groups of these species in reconstitution experiments with DNA samples and fecal material from experimentally infected triatomines. In the present study, we evaluated the limit of detection of PCR/RFLP-COII for the identification of genetic groups of T. cruzi and T. rangeli in blood and tissue from vertebrate hosts.
Materials and methods
Reconstitution experiments
Human blood
For the experiments with human blood (donated by one of the authors of the present report), only epimastigote forms of strains of T. cruzi (PR-150/TcI, PR-1256/TcII) and T. rangeli (Choachí/KP1+ and SC-58/KP1−) were used. These genetic groups more frequently circulate in vertebrate and invertebrate hosts. By limiting the number of DTUs used in this analysis, we were able to test different amounts of parasites that were mixed in various proportions, thus simulating mixed infections that occur in nature. To analyze the limit of detection of T. cruzi and T. rangeli , different amounts of parasites were diluted in human blood in decreasing amounts, from 100 to 1 parasite (100, 50, 25, 10, 5, 2, and 1 pa). To evaluate the limit of detection of mixed infections for each amount, the parasites were mixed in different proportions (90, 75, 50, 25, and 10%; Fig. 1 ). Epimastigote forms of TcI, TcII, KP1+, and KP1− were counted in a Neubauer chamber. The average of the lateral quadrants (number of parasites/4 mm 3 ) was used as a reference for the dilution calculations according to Uda-Shimoda et al. ( ). Each amount of the parasites and their proportions were placed in 5 μl of liver infusion tryptose (LIT), to which 195 μl of human blood in the presence of guanidine/ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (G/E; 6.0 M/0.2 M) was added. For each sample, a total volume of 200 μl was processed (i.e., an amount that is frequently used in molecular diagnostic assays; Gomes et al. ). Fig. 1 Schematic representation of different proportions (90 to 10%) and estimated amounts (100 to 1 pa) of T. cruzi and T. rangeli that were used for PCR/RFLP-COII in human blood reconstitution experiments on 6% polyacrylamide gel. a Limit of detection for mixtures of Trypanosoma cruzi (TC = TcI/TcII) and Trypanosoma rangeli (TR = KP1+/KP1−) with 10 to 2 pa. Lane 1a indicates 100% of T. cruzi , a mixture with 50% TcI and 50% TcII. Lane 1b indicates 100% of T. rangeli , a mixture with 50% KP1 + 50% KP1−. Lane 2 (90% TcI/TcII +10% KP1 +/KP1−) followed successively by different ratios between T. cruzi and T. rangeli genotypes until to lane 6 as shown in the table. The black arrow indicates the detection limit of T. rangeli (400 bp). The white arrow indicates the detection limit of T. cruzi (80 bp; also visualized with 2 pa). b Limit of detection and identification of Trypanosoma cruzi TcI and TcII in mixtures that contained 2 and 1 pa. Lane 1c indicates 100% epimastigotes of TcI and lane 1d 100% of TcII. Lane 2 (90% TcI + 10% TcII) followed successively by different ratios between T. cruzi I and T. cruzi II DTUs until to lane 6 as shown in the table. The white arrow indicates the limit of detection of TcI (90 to 25% proportions). The black arrow indicates the detection of TcII (75 and 90% proportions). c Identification of KP1+ and KP1− of Trypanosoma rangeli in mixtures that contained 100 to 25 pa. Lane 1e indicates 100% epimastigotes of KP1+ and lane 1f 100% of KP1−. Lane 2 (90% KP1+ more 10% KP1−) followed successively by different ratios between T. rangeli KP1+ and T. rangeli KP1− until to lane 6 as shown in the table. The black arrow shows the limit of detection (25 pa) for KP1+ and KP1− at all proportions (100 to 10%). Reference strains: PR-150 (TcI), PR-1256 (TcII), Choachí (KP1+), and SC-58 (KP1-). NC, negative control for DNA extraction; NCPCR, negative control for polymerase chain reaction; 100 bp, molecular weight (Invitrogen); C+, positive control (PR-1256 strain for TcII and Choachí strain for KP1+) with 200 pa; pa, parasite
Following this protocol, three groups were formed. In group 1, four genetic groups of T. cruzi and T. rangeli (TcI, TcII, KP1+, and KP1−) were evaluated simultaneously from 100 to 1 pa in the cited proportions (Fig. 1 a). In group 2, the mixture of TcI and TcII was evaluated, from 100 to 1 pa in the same proportions (Fig. 1 b). In group 3, the detection of KP+ and KP1− was performed from 100 to 1 pa in the cited proportions (Fig. 1 c). The experiments were performed in duplicate.
Blood in G/E (donated by one of the authors of the present report) was used as negative control in these reconstitution experiments. The positive control for each genetic group contained 200 pa/5 μl of TcII (PR-1256) and Choachí (KP1+) in 195 μl of blood in G/E. These parasites were used as controls because they were more easily cultivated compared with the other parasites that were used in the experiments. After 7 days of rest at room temperature, the samples were boiled for 7 min and stored at 4–8 °C for 72 h until DNA extraction. The experiments with human blood were approved by the Standing Committee on Ethics in Research with Humans (Comitê Permanente de Ética em Pesquisa com Seres Humanos [COPEP]) of the State University of Maringá (Universidade Estadual de Maringá [UEM]; protocol no. 012/2010).
Animal tissue
In 12 samples of cardiac tissue from proven negative animals (male Swiss mice, 21–28 days old), 100 to 2 pa (epimastigotes) was added, eluted in 50 μl of LIT. These reconstitution experiments used epimastigotes of TcI in six cardiac tissues and epimastigotes of TcII in another six cardiac tissues. The samples were processed according to the protocol of Caldas et al. ( ) and Gruendling et al. ( ) with modifications. Briefly, for each tissue, 300 μl of lysis buffer (0.5 M ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid/50 mM NaOH) was added, and DNA was extracted with 300 μl of chloroform and precipitated in 600 μl of isopropanol. To avoid interference from PCR inhibitors, the DNA samples were diluted in a ratio of 1:10 in sterile water and stored until PCR/RFLP-COII was performed. The experiments were approved by the Committee of Ethical Conduct on the Use of Animals in Experimentation (Comitê de Conduta Ética no Uso de Animais em Experimentação [CEAE]) of UEM (protocol no. 076/2013).
Clinical samples
Blood samples from 12 patients who were in the chronic phase of Chagas disease (reactive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, hemoculture-positive, and PCR-positive for T. cruzi ) were analyzed. DNA was extracted from blood from these patients, and PCR/RFLP-COII was performed. The use of these samples from patients and the use of human blood that was donated by one of the authors of the present report in G/E (negative control) were approved by COPEP, UEM (protocol no. 012/2010).
Blood and tissue from mice infected with different T. cruzi DTUs
Male Swiss mice ( n = 23), 21–28 days old, were separated into three groups: G1 (six animals infected with each of the strains or clones [PR-150/TcI, PR-1256/TcII, 222/TcIII, CANIII/TcIV, SO3cl5/TcV, and CL Brener/TcVI]), G2 (five animals infected with combinations of these six DTUs [TcI × TcII-TcVI]; four animals infected with TcII × TcIII-TcVI]; three animals infected with TcIII × TcIV-TcVI; two animals infected with TcIV× TcV-TcVI; one animal infected with TcV × TcVI), and G3 (two animals without infection, serving as negative controls). The inoculum for murine infection was 2 × 10 6 metacyclic trypomastigotes/0.1 ml of acellular culture in LIT medium according to Araújo et al. ( ).
In the acute phase (15 days after infection [dai]) and chronic phase (30 dai), 0.1 ml of blood was collected from the orbital vein of each animal in the presence of G/E ( v / v ). The samples were processed, and infection was confirmed by the amplification of a 330-bp fragment of the minicircle of T. cruzi kDNA according to Miyamoto et al. ( ). For the collection of tissues (heart, spleen, liver, thigh muscle, abdominal wall, diaphragm, brain, and large intestine), the animals were euthanized at 32 dai by deep anesthesia with an intraperitoneal injection of ketamine hydrochloride (300 mg/kg) and xylazine (30 mg/kg; Dopalem, CEVA, Paulínia, São Paulo, Brazil). The tissues were collected without preservatives and stored at − 20 °C until use. DNA extraction was performed as described previously. Total DNA was diluted 1:10 and 1:100 and tested. The 1:10 dilution was the best preparation for detection of the parasite by PCR/RFLP-COII.
PCR-COII and PCR/RFLP-COII
Polymerase chain reaction was performed as described by Sá et al. ( ) in a final volume of 15 μl with Tcmit-10 and Tcmit-21 primers and 1 U platinum Taq polymerase (Invitrogen) in buffer that was provided by the manufacturer. For amplification, the annealing temperature was increased from 48 to 50 °C to improve specificity and sensitivity. The amplified product (10 μl) was digested for 16 h at 37 °C with the Alu I restriction enzyme (New England BioLabs) in NEB 4 buffer that was provided by the manufacturer. The fragments were analyzed on 6% polyacrylamide gel, revealed by silver nitrate, and digitally recorded. The 280 + 80-bp fragments are characteristic of TcI. The 250 + 80-bp fragments are characteristic of TcII. For T. rangeli , the 280 + 120-bp fragments are characteristic of KP1+, and the 400 bp fragment is characteristic of KP1−.
Results
Detection and identification of TcI, TcII, KP1+, and KP1− in human blood reconstitution experiments
Five parasites were sufficient to detect both species simultaneously, the 80-bp band for T. cruzi (Fig. 1 a, white arrow) and the 400-bp band for T. rangeli in a 10%/90% proportion of T. cruzi / T.rangeli (Fig. 1 a, black arrow). T. cruzi could be detected with only 2 pa (Fig. 1 a; 80 bp). To identify the genetic groups of both species, at least 50 pa was necessary, but the presence of T. rangeli was directly related to T. cruzi / T.rangeli proportions of 75%/25% to 10%/90% (proportions in which the 400-bp band was still detectable; data not shown).
Detection and identification of TcI and TcII in reconstitution experiments with human blood and animal tissue
In human blood, T. cruzi could be detected with 1 pa, depending on the DTU and proportion of T. cruzi (75 and 90%), with better detection when TcII was involved. Better analytical performance was observed for this DTU compared with TcI (Fig. 1 b, black arrow). For the identification of TcI and TcII, at least 2 pa was necessary, depending on the proportion of each DTU (90%/10% to 25%/75%; Fig. 1 b, white arrow). Only amplification of the COII gene was necessary, and enzymatic restriction was not required, thus simplifying the methodology. In mouse tissue, TcI and TcII were detected when at least 25 pa was present in the sample (Fig. 2 ). Lesser amounts yielded unsatisfactory results. Fig. 2 Limit of detection of TcI and TcII by PCR-COII in a reconstitution experiment with verified negative cardiac tissue that contained 100 to 2 pa (epimastigotes) of each DTU on 6% polyacrylamide gel, revealed by silver nitrate. Reference strains: PR-150 (TcI), PR-1256 (TcII). 100 bp, molecular weight (Invitrogen); pa, parasite
Detection and identification of KP1+ and KP1− in human blood reconstitution experiments
From 10 to 2 pa, only KP1− was detected by amplification of the COII gene without enzymatic restriction, with better detection of KP1− relative to KP1+ (data not shown). Above 10 pa, enzymatic restriction was necessary to identify these genetic groups (Fig. 1 c). The minimum number of parasites for the detection of KP1+ alone and for the identification of admixtures of KP1+ and KP1− was 25 pa, regardless of the proportion (Fig. 1 c, black arrow).
PCR-COII analysis of clinical samples
The PCR-COII analysis of blood samples from patients who had chronic infection did not detect or identify T. cruzi DTUs. The presence of T. cruzi in these samples was confirmed by the amplification of a 330-bp fragment of the kDNA minicircle, demonstrating the difference in performance between these two markers based on the parasite load of these patients (data not shown).
In animal blood and tissue, T. cruzi was not detected by PCR-COII, even when total and 1:10-diluted DNA were tested, indicating that the low parasite load in these hosts was below the limit of detection and genotyping, which was consistent with the human samples. Infection in mice that were inoculated with the six T. cruzi DTUs and mixtures was confirmed in blood and tissue that were collected at 15 and 30 dai by the amplification of a 330-bp fragment of the kDNA minicircle (data not shown).
Discussion
Mixed infections with T. cruzi and T. rangeli and their genetic groups are frequently reported in vertebrate and invertebrate hosts (Solari et al. ; Spitzner et al. ; Marquez et al. ; Rozas et al. ; Pineda et al. ; Burgos et al. ; Mantilla et al. ; Ramírez et al. ; Abolis et al. ; Xavier et al. ; Gottdenker et al. ), which makes the specific identification of T. cruzi and T. rangeli relevant in epidemiological and social contexts.
Sá et al. ( , ) showed that T. cruzi and T. rangeli and their main genetic groups can be identified and differentiated by PCR/RFLP-COII directly from invertebrate host material and in DNA reconstitution experiments. In the present study, we evaluated the limit of detection of PCR/RFLP-COII for identifying genetic groups of T. cruzi and T. rangeli in biological materials from vertebrate hosts. We found differences in detection between species ( T. cruzi and T. rangeli ) and their main genetic groups (TcI/TcII and KP1+/KP1−, respectively). These differences were directly related to the amounts and proportions of parasites that were present in the mixtures. We are aware of no other reports of the limits of simultaneous detection of T. cruzi and T. rangeli and their major genetic groups using different amounts and proportions of parasites in the mixtures. Studies that have been performed to date have not considered that mixed infections that occur in vertebrate and invertebrate hosts present different amounts and proportions of parasites, based on the species and genetic groups (Campos et al. ; Ramirez et al. ; Chiurillo et al. ; Pavia et al. ; Fraga et al. ).
When these two species are mixed in human blood, more parasites are needed in the samples to detect and identify the genetic groups compared with analyses of only T. cruzi (TcI and TcII) or T. rangeli (KP1+ and KP1−). For both species in the mixture, 5 pa was necessary for the detection of T. cruzi (regardless of the T. cruzi / T. rangeli proportion), and 5 pa was necessary for the detection of T. rangeli when it was found in greater proportions (50–90% T. rangeli ). In combined infection with T. cruzi and T. rangeli , PCR/RFLP-COII detected T. cruzi with fewer parasites (2 pa) when considering the 80-bp fragment compared with T. rangeli . T. cruzi infection alone could be detected with 1 pa, depending on the T. cruzi / T. rangeli proportion, especially when TcII was involved. Hernández et al. ( ) also reported the better detection of TcII by DNA satellite analysis using quantitative PCR, detecting 4.68 pa/ml, corresponding to an average of 1 pa/200 μl of blood. T. rangeli alone was detected with 2 pa, indicated by the presence of the 400-bp band of KP1−, which also depended on the T. cruzi / T. rangeli proportion. These results indicate that PCR/RFLP-COII has a better detection capability for TcII and KP1− when they are present in admixtures or alone in blood. This may be attributable to (i) the higher copy number of the T. cruzi kDNA maxicircle compared with T. rangeli , (ii) the greater DNA content of T. cruzi (Naves et al. ), or (iii) better annealing and competition of the primers in the T. cruzi COII region. The experimental analysis also showed that the limit of detection of these parasites by PCR/RFLP-COII was similar to previous studies that investigated the detection and differentiation of T. cruzi and T. rangeli in mixed infections (1–10 pa in 200 μl of blood) based on kDNA (Murthy et al. ; Chiurillo et al. ; Pavia et al. ; Fraga et al. ).
To identify the genetic groups of T. cruzi and T. rangeli in the mixtures, more parasites (50 pa) were necessary. Other results from our laboratory also showed that molecular markers for typing require more parasites compared with molecular markers for detection (Uda-Shimoda et al. ; Silva ). Silva ( ) found that the typing of TcI and TcII by PCR-RFLP required 65.1 flagellates, which was similar to the present study. Unlike T. cruzi , the identification of T. rangeli is directly related to the proportion of parasites in the mixture. The identification of T. cruzi DTUs alone requires fewer parasites compared with T. rangeli . For both parasites, however, identification is directly related to their proportion. Our results indicated that PCR/RFLP-COII presented better performance for T. cruzi than for T. rangeli . Notably, depending on the number of parasites that are present in the mixture and the genetic groups, amplification of the COII gene alone was sufficient to identify genetic groups, and enzymatic restriction was unnecessary. In situations in which the molecular diagnosis of Chagas disease is restricted to reference laboratories using expensive and complex techniques, easier and less expensive diagnostic tools are needed.
The performance of PCR/RFLP-COII is directly related to the number and proportion of parasites in the mixture, but it may also be related to the biological material and evolutionary form of the parasite. The analysis of human blood that contained epimastigotes of T. cruzi revealed that it could be detected with only 1 pa. In mouse tissue that contained epimastigotes, 25 pa was necessary. The rearrangement of kDNA during the differentiation of T. cruzi is accompanied by differential distributions of proteins that are associated with kinetoplasts in different evolutionary stages of the parasite (Cavalcanti et al. ). There are also differences in the number of nucleotides (G, C, T, A) when the parasite changes from the epimastigote form to the metacyclic trypomastigote form. During metacyclogenesis, the number of C and G nucleotides decreases by 7%, indicating a lower amount of DNA of the parasite (Nozaki and Dvorak ; Naves et al. ). This rearrangement of nucleotide bases can decrease the gene copy number and consequently hinder specific binding of the primers. This may explain the difficulty using PCR-COII to detect the presence of T. cruzi in blood and tissue from experimentally infected animals and patients with Chagas disease in the chronic phase of infection. In reconstitution experiments, epimastigotes are used, which have a greater number of G and C nucleotides (i.e., increase from 4 to 8%) compared with trypomastigotes (Nozaki and Dvorak ). The 330-bp fragment of the kDNA minicircle was used as another molecular marker to confirm T. cruzi infection in these hosts, which had satisfactory results in all of the biological samples that were analyzed here in. kDNA minicircles are a classic and sensitive marker that is able to detect less than 1 pa (10 fg; Gomes et al. ). The different results between these two markers may be related to the target of the kDNA of T. cruzi (i.e., the number of copies of the maxicircle [20–50 copies per cell] relative to the minicircle [10,000–30,000 copies per cell]; Westenberger et al. ).
The present results may contribute to further advances of methodologies that are used to detect and differentiate T. cruzi (TcI and TcII) and T. rangeli (KP1+ and KP1−) in biological samples. The performance of PCR/RFLP-COII was directly related to the amount and proportion of parasites that were present in the mixtures, indicating that these variables should be considered during molecular analysis. The present study demonstrates the ways in which different evolutionary forms of the parasite and different types of biological material influence analytical performance.