Introduction
Plasmodia , the causative agents of malaria in many vertebrates, are transmitted mostly by Anopheles mosquitoes. In mammals, Anopheles injects 10–100 Plasmodium sporozoites into the skin, where the parasites migrate to enter the blood or lymph vessels (Amino et al. ; Hopp et al. ). Those entering the blood can reach the liver, where they further differentiate into red blood cell-infecting merozoites (Prudêncio et al. ). Infection of the red blood cells ultimately leads to the symptoms of the disease, which can be caused by five different species of Plasmodia in humans. Malaria is still the most deadly parasitic disease of humans with most lethal cases associated with infection by Plasmodium falciparum in Sub-Saharan Africa (World Health Organization ). Rising resistance against the currently used drugs necessitates research into new medications and possible vaccines (malERA Consultative Group on Vaccines ). Two kinds of vaccines are currently intensively investigated: sub-unit vaccines comprising entire proteins, mixture of proteins, or antigenic peptides (Alonso et al. ; Hodgson et al. ; Sirima et al. ; Rampling et al. ) and attenuated whole parasite vaccines (Bijker et al. ). Attenuated parasites are usually generated by inhibiting the capacity of the parasite to replicate in the liver through either genetic means, radiation, or by inhibiting wild-type parasites with drugs leading to an arrest before pathogenic blood stage replication. To this end, infected mosquitoes can be irradiated, and the attenuated sporozoites are then isolated and injected intravenously to humans or rodents (Hoffman et al. ; Seder et al. ). Alternatively, genetically attenuated parasites that lack one to hundreds of genes can be generated (Mueller et al. ; Singer et al. ; Kumar et al. ; Singer and Frischknecht ; Vaughan and Kappe ). These attenuated parasites arrest their development within the liver, which leads to a sterile protective immune response after several injections of attenuated sporozoites (Mueller et al. ; Labaied et al. ; van Schaijk et al. ). Despite the principle successes in experimental and clinical studies, a number of challenges still need to be overcome before vaccines based on attenuated parasites can be widely applied. These include amongst others the identification of the safest way of attenuation without compromising vaccine efficacy and the generation of protection against the high genetic diversity of P. falciparum as well as a cheap and efficient way of vaccine production and application. Here, we refer to maximum efficiency as achieving the best protective effect using the lowest dose of sporozoites with the least number of immunizations. Radiation-attenuated parasites arrest early during liver-stage development, which renders them safe but not very efficient (Butler et al. ; Seder et al. ). Genetically attenuated parasites that arrest late during liver-stage development come with the risk of “break-through infections” during the vaccination scheme (Spring et al. ; Kumar et al. ). It is currently not clear whether early or late arresting parasites confer better strain-transcending immunity. Safety of genetically attenuated parasites can be increased by the deletion of multiple genes, but this can come at the cost of efficiency (Kumar et al. ). Sporozoites can be applied either by mosquito bite or by manual isolation from mosquito’s salivary glands and subsequent injection (Nussenzweig et al. ; Seder et al. ). Cryopreservation of isolated sporozoites allows centralized production of the vaccine and wide distribution, but cryopreservation may impact sporozoite viability, infectivity, and hence vaccine efficiency.
Here, we test a recently established cryopreservation protocol (Singh et al. ; Singh et al. ) on experimental vaccine efficiency of a genetically attenuated Plasmodium berghei parasite line lacking the gene encoding LISP2 (liver-specific protein 2) (Kumar et al. ). Sporozoites were highly viable (> 90%) after cryopreservation as determined by their capacity to actively move on a flat substrate but showed only 20% liver invasion capacity compared to freshly isolated sporozoites. The reduced invasion capacity went along with reduced liver-stage burden and experimental vaccine efficiency. This suggests that optimization of cryopreservation procedures and/or adjustments of immunization schedules should be implemented to improve the capacity of attenuated Plasmodium sporozoite vaccines.
Materials and methods
Animals
All animal experiments were performed according to the FELASA guidelines and approved by German authorities. C57Bl/6 mice were purchased from Charles River Laboratories, and NMRI mice were purchased from Janvier and used at an age of 6 to 10 weeks for all studies.
Mosquito maintenance and infection
Anopheles stephensi mosquitoes were reared and maintained at 28°C and 80% humidity on 1% salt and 10% sugar supplemented with 0.05% para-aminobenzoic acid (Sigma-Aldrich). NMRI mice were infected by injecting cryopreserved blood-stage parasites intraperitonally. Four to six days post-infection parasitemia was checked via Giemsa-stained blood smears. When 2–3% exflagellation of male gametocytes was observed by incubating a drop of infected blood for 10 min at room temperature on a glass slide covered with a coverslip, mice were anesthetized by injecting ketamine/xylazine intraperitoneally and fed to mosquitoes for 20 min.
Sporozoite cryopreservation
Plasmodium sporozoites were isolated from infected Anopheles salivary glands on day 17 to 25 post-infection. After determination of sporozoite numbers via counting in a Neubauer chamber, the concentration was adjusted to 10,000 sporozoites/μL RPMI. The sporozoite solution was mixed with the cryopreservant solution CS2 (Sigma Aldrich) in a ratio of 1:3, transferred into a cryogenic vial (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and incubated on ice for 30 min. The sample was further cooled to − 80°C for 1 hour before being transferred to liquid nitrogen. For thawing, the same volume of 6% BSA/RPMI was pipetted to the sample directly after removal from the liquid nitrogen. After complete thawing at RT, the sporozoite solution was washed by centrifugation at 4650 g for 2 min in a table-top centrifuge followed by resuspension of the pelleted sporozoites in 100 μL RPMI.
In vitro and in vivo liver cell infection assays
HepG2 cells were maintained at 37°C, 80% relative humidity, and 5% CO 2 in complete DMEM (DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS, 1% l -glutamine (2 mM), 1% penicillin/streptomycin 100 U/mL; Gibco). For in vitro liver-stage development assays, 2 days prior to the experiment, 20,000 HepG2 cells were seeded per well into an 8-well Permanox Lab-Tek chamber slide (Nunc). Each time point (24, 48, and 72 h) was assessed in duplicates for each independent experiment. The following day, the sporozoites were isolated from infected mosquitoes and cryopreserved. On the next day, 10,000 freshly isolated or thawed sporozoites were added per well, the volume adjusted to 100 μL with complete DMEM, and incubated for 90 min at 37°C, 5% CO 2 . After washing twice with complete DMEM, the liver cells were incubated for 24, 48, or 72 h in complete DMEM supplemented with Antibiotic-Antimycotic (1×, Gibco), respectively (37 °C, 5% CO 2 ). At the indicated time points, cells were fixed with ice-cold methanol for 10 min then washed twice with 1% FCS/PBS and blocked 2 h at 37°C with 10% FCS/PBS. Incubation with primary αHSP-70 antibodies (cell culture supernatant 1:500 diluted in 10% FCS/PBS) was performed at 4°C overnight. After two washing steps with 1% FCS/PBS, incubation with secondary antibodies goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor® 488 (1:300 diluted in 10% FCS/PBS; Life Technologies) was performed for 1 h at 37°C. DNA was visualized by adding Hoechst 33343 (1 μg/mL; Life Technologies) for 5 min at RT. After two washing steps with 1% FCS/PBS, the immunofluorescence assays were mounted and assessed at a Zeiss Axiovert 200M inverted microscope. Liver-stage sizes were measured using Fiji.
Determination of liver burden was performed by injecting 20,000 or 100,000 freshly isolated or cryopreserved sporozoites intravenously into four C57Bl/6 each, leading to four experimental groups of four mice. Forty-two hours later, the mice were anesthetized; their livers were perfused with PBS, harvested, and homogenized in 4 mL QIAzol (QIAGEN); RNA was isolated; DNA contamination is minimized (Ambion Turbo DNA-free™); and cDNA is synthesized using the First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (ThermoFisher) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Quantitative RT-PCR was performed with an ABI7500 (Applied Biosystems) and 2× SYBRgreen Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) in triplicates for each sample and an H 2 O control using GAPDH as a housekeeping gene for normalization and Pb 18SrRNA to detect parasite-specific nucleic acids. Relative copy numbers of parasite material were calculated via the ΔΔCt method.
In vitro invasion assay
Two days prior to infection, 100,000 HepG2 cells in complete DMEM medium were seeded in each well of an 8-well Permanox Lab-Tek chamber slide (Nunc). The following day, about 50,000 PbA sporozoites were isolated from infected mosquitoes (days 17 to 25) and cryopreserved. On the next day, 10,000 freshly isolated or thawed sporozoites per well were incubated with the cells in a total volume of 100 μL complete DMEM (90 min at 37 °C). Afterwards, the cells were washed twice with 1% FCS/PBS and fixed with 4% PFA for 20 min at room temperature. Incubation with α Pb CSP primary antibody (mAb 3D11 1:50 diluted in 10% FCS/PBS) at 37°C for 1 h to stain extracellular parasites was followed by two washing steps and incubation with a secondary antibody goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor® 546 (1:300 diluted in 10% FCS/PBS; Life Technologies) for 1 h at 37°C. Two washing steps in 1% FCS/PBS preceded permeabilization with ice-cold methanol for 10 min at RT. Staining of intra- and extracellular parasites with primary antibodies against parasite CSP (mAb 3D11 1:50 diluted in 10% FCS/PBS) for 1 h at 37°C was followed by two washing steps with 1% FCS/PBS. Incubation with a secondary antibody goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor® 488 (1:300 diluted in 10% FCS/PBS; Life Technologies) for 1 h at 37°C was followed by addition of Hoechst 33342 (1 μg/mL; Life Technologies), incubation for 5 min at room temperature, and three subsequent washing steps with 1% FCS/PBS. Samples were mounted with 50% glycerol in PBS and analyzed with a Zeiss Axiovert 200M inverted microscope. Area of liver stages was determined as described in Kumar et al. .
Assessment of gliding motility on glass
Approximately 2000 to 10,000 fresh or cryopreserved sporozoites in a total volume of 100 μL 3% BSA/RPMI were pipetted into a 96-well plate (ThermoFisher) and centrifuged for 3 min at 200 g to promote sporozoite settling and attachment. Motility was assessed with a Zeiss Axiovert 200M inverted microscope and a × 25 objective using the appropriate fluorescent channel or DIC at 1 Hz for 2 min. The analysis was performed using Fiji. The total number of sporozoites was counted, and every sporozoite completing at least one whole circle during recording as seen in the maximum projection was considered as productively gliding. Speed approximation was obtained by determining the number of circles; 50 representative sporozoites completed over the duration of the recorded video.
Assessment of gliding motility on elastic substrates
Polyacrylamide gels were prepared according to (Pelham and Wang ). To this end, APS and TEMED were added to a prepolymer solution containing acrylamide and bis-acrylamide. The solution was pipetted onto a silanized glass coverslip immediately and covered with a second glass coverslip. After polymerization, the top coverslip was removed in a medium. The gels were prepared to have an elasticity of 9 kPa (Tse and Engler ).
About 40,000 to 100,000 fresh or cryopreserved sporozoites in 15 μL 3% BSA/RPMI were incubated on a 9-kPa PAA gel for 7 min. Eighty microliters 3% BSA/RPMI were added, and imaging with a Zeiss Axiovert 200M inverted microscope and a × 25 objective was performed. Images were recorded at 1 Hz for 2 min per field of view and over a total duration of maximal 50 min. Movies were analyzed using Fiji. After counting the total number of sporozoites, every sporozoite completing at least a semi-circle over the duration of the movie was considered as gliding productively. With the manual tracking plug-in, the speed of 50 representative sporozoites moving for at least 50 s was determined.
Data analysis
Data analysis and statistic analysis (Student’s t test, a value of p < 0.05 was considered significant) were performed with Fiji (Schindelin et al. ) and GraphPad Prism 5.0 (GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA).
Results
Cryopreserved sporozoites are highly viable and can infect liver cells
We first assessed if cryopreserved P. berghei sporozoites are viable by placing them on a glass in medium containing motility-activating serum albumin. This readily revealed the typical circular motility pattern of sporozoites (Fig. 1 a). Quantification of the number of motile sporozoites in two different parasites lines expressing fluorescent proteins demonstrated that there was no detectable difference in the percentage of motile sporozoites whether fresh or cryopreserved sporozoites were imaged (Fig. 1 b). Quantification of the numbers of circles sporozoites described as a proxy measure for their speed (Hegge et al. ) also revealed no difference (Fig. 1 c). This showed that sporozoites are viable after cryopreservation as they are capable of moving literally indistinguishable from freshly isolated sporozoites. Fig. 1 Gliding motility of P. berghei sporozoites is not affected by cryopreservation. a Trajectories of sporozoites gliding on glass in their characteristic circular manner. Scale bars, 10 μm. b Bar graphs showing that similar percentages of cryopreserved sporozoites move as for freshly dissected ones. Sporozoites performing a complete circle in the maximum projection of the 2-min movie were counted as motile. All other sporozoites were scored as non-motile. The two indicated parasite lines “fluo” and “GFP@CS” were used. c Motile sporozoites move at the same speed independently of cryopreservation. Each dot represents the average speed of a single sporozoite estimated by counting the number of completed circles within 2 min. Horizontal bars indicate mean
We next incubated sporozoites together with HepG2 hepatocytes in vitro and investigated the numbers and size of the resulting liver stages at 24, 48, and 72 h post-infection (Fig. 2 a–c). This showed that cryopreserved sporozoites can infect and develop within liver cells in vitro (Fig. 2 a). However, quantification of the numbers of established liver stages revealed that cryopreserved sporozoites only establish about one fifth of the numbers of the liver stages compared to freshly isolated sporozoites (Fig. 2 b). Yet, those developing within the liver cells showed similar growth and thus maturation than the freshly used sporozoites (Fig. 2 c). Note that the two individual experiments shown reveal a statistically significant difference in opposite direction once at 48 hpi and once at 24 hpi. We caution to overinterpret such differences in a highly variable in vitro assay. We also infected mice by injecting 10,000 sporozoites intravenously. This showed that eight out of eight mice injected with freshly dissected sporozoites became infected, while only seven out of eight mice injected with cryopreserved sporozoites became blood-stage positive (Table 1 ). The prepatent period, i.e., the time until a blood-stage infection could be determined by a blood smear, was slightly delayed in the group injected with cryopreserved sporozoites (Table 1 ). Fig. 2 Reduced liver load through infection by cryopreserved sporozoites. a Liver-stage development of infected HepG2 cells. Cells were fixed and stained 24 and 48 h post-infection with an antibody against the heat shock protein 70 revealing the parasite and the DNA-stain Hoechst. Scale bars, 10 μm. b Liver-stage infection assay shows diminished numbers of liver stages at 24, 48, and 72 h post-infection for infection caused by cryopreserved sporozoites. Twenty thousand HepG2 cells were incubated with 10,000 sporozoites, fixed, stained, and counted at the indicated time points. Dots represent average numbers of liver stages per well from two independent experiments performed in duplicates. Numbers were normalized to the arithmetic mean of each sample and time point. Horizontal bars represent mean. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01 (Student’s t test). c Sizes of liver-stage parasites do not differ. Liver-stage size (area) was determined from two independent experiments where cells were fixed and stained 24, 48, and 72 h post-infection. Note that in cryopreserved sporozoites, there was a slight increase in the size at 48 h (left) but a slight decrease at 24 h (right). Such variations are often observed in these assays, and we caution to overinterpret them. d Relative liver-stage burden is significantly decreased in mice infected with cryopreserved sporozoites. The livers of infected mice were harvested 42 h post-infection. 18S rRNA and GAPDH abundance were used to calculate relative levels of parasite load Table 1 Infectivity of cryopreserved sporozoites to mice Parasite strain n positive mice/infected mice Prepatency (dpi) 10,000 PbA Fresh 4/4 4 10,000 PbA Cryopreserved 3/4 4 10,000 PbA fluo Fresh 4/4 4.25 10,000 PbA fluo Cryopreserved 4/4 5 10,000 sporozoites from two different parasite lines (wild-type P. berghei strain ANKA, “ Pb A” and a Pb A line expressing two fluorescent proteins, “fluo”) were intravenously injected into C57Bl/6 mice
We next injected 20,000 or 100,000 sporozoites intravenously into four mice each and investigated the liver burden 42 h post-infection by assessing the amount of 18S rRNA in the extracted livers. This revealed a highly reduced (around 20-fold) level of liver-stage development in mice infected with cryopreserved sporozoites (Fig. 2 d). Taken together, these data suggest that cryopreserved sporozoites can develop regularly into liver stages but might have a defect in entering hepatocytes. To test for this possible defect, we used an “inside-out” invasion assay, where sporozoites are added to HepG2 cells, fixed after 60 min, and stained with an antibody against the circumsporozoite protein (CSP). This allows determining if a sporozoite has entered a hepatocyte or remains extracellular (Fig. 3 a). Two separate assays showed a marked reduction of the cryopreserved sporozoites in entering the hepatocytes compared to the freshly dissected sporozoites (Fig. 3 b). While in the first assay, a reduction of about fivefold was observed; the second assay revealed a reduction of about threefold. This suggests that freezing and thawing of sporozoites decreases their ability to invade the hepatocytes successfully. While several proteins are known to play a role in sporozoite entry of the hepatocytes, the molecular mechanism of invasion is not completely understood (Vaughan and Kappe ). It is therefore complex to investigate the differences on a molecular level between the cryopreserved and freshly isolated sporozoites. It was also speculated that sporozoites switch between a gliding modus and an invasion modus (Ono et al. ). Based on recent data using force measurements on sporozoites (Quadt et al. ; Moreau et al. ), we speculate that sporozoites need to apply more force to cross tissue barrier than they need for gliding on a flat surface. This could also be important for the entry into the hepatocytes. To investigate the gliding motility of cryopreserved sporozoites on a substrate with mechanical properties that are similar to those of the tissues the sporozoites need to cross, we used polyacrylamide gels with an elastic modulus of 9 kPa (Münter et al. ; Hellmann et al. ). On these gels, fresh sporozoites can readily bind to and perform gliding motility, but they do so at a slightly diminished rate when compared to a glass surface (Fig. 4 ). While over half of the sporozoites robustly glide on the glass, fewer than 50% were gliding on the gel. Cryopreserved sporozoites in the same assay showed about 40% gliding on the glass, while only about 20% moved on the gels (Fig. 4 ). However, the speed of the gliding sporozoites was indistinguishable between cryopreserved and fresh sporozoites on gels (Fig. 4 ). Previous work on sporozoites (Hegge et al. ; Hegge et al. ; Bane et al. ) and on the motility of Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites (Whitelaw et al. ) has shown that the first key step in gliding motility is the adhesion to the substrate, which is mediated by the same proteins that are involved in motility. Once adhesion is accomplished, motility ensues. It appears that more force is needed for adhesion than for motility (Bane et al. ; Whitelaw et al. ), and hence, our data could indicate that the decrease of the percentage of adhering (and then gliding) sporozoites in cryopreserved preparations could correspond to a decrease in force during invasion. However, other scenarios are also possible (see the “ Discussion ” section). Fig. 3 Sporozoite entry into the hepatocytes is impaired by cryopreservation. a Inside-out sporozoite invasion assay. Differentially labelling of extra versus intracellular sporozoites using anti-CSP antibodies. Secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa Fluor 546 labeled only extracellular sporozoites whereas intracellular parasites were labed with secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488. Representative pictures are shown. Scale bar, 10 μm. b Two independent assays show a reduction of five- and threefold, respectively, in the capacity of cryopreserved sporozoites to successfully invade the hepatocytes Fig. 4 Force production might be affected by cryopreservation. Freshly isolated or cryopreserved sporozoites were incubated either on glass or on a soft polyacrylamide gel and scored for their capacity to undergo active motility. While on the glass only a 25% reduction was observed, on the gel, 50% less sporozoites were motile after cryopreservation compared to freshly isolated ones. Speed of motile sporozoites was slightly reduced on glass but not affected on gels. Each dot represents the average speed of a single sporozoite gliding for at least 90 s. Horizontal bars indicate the arithmetic mean
Our data so far indicates that cryopreserved sporozoites are about one fifth as infective to livers as freshly isolated sporozoites. To test if this would have an impact on protection after vaccination by genetically attenuated parasites, we next tested two immunization protocols. In one protocol, we applied a one-shot immunization with 20,000 cryopreserved or freshly isolated LISP2(−) sporozoites (Kumar et al. ) and then challenged 14 days later with 10,000 freshly isolated wild-type sporozoites (Table 2 ). In the second protocol, we applied a two-shot immunization scheme with shots of 20,000 sporozoites separated by 2 weeks followed by a challenge with 10,000 freshly isolated wild-type sporozoites 14 days after the second shot (Table 3 ). As controls, non-immunized mice were also challenged. This showed that already a single shot delays the onset of parasitemia in the blood of challenged mice. This effect was seen irrespectively if fresh or cryopreserved sporozoites were used (Table 2 ). However, the delay was consistently longer in mice immunized with freshly prepared sporozoites (5.9 days vs 4.9 days, controls 3.5 days). Yet, all mice became infected. In the two-shot regime, 8 out of 8 mice immunized with freshly isolated sporozoites were fully protected from a wild-type challenge, while only 2 out of 16 mice immunized with cryopreserved sporozoites were protected (Table 3 ). Those immunized mice becoming infected developed a blood-stage infection more than 1 day later than non-immunized controls. This delay was similar to that in the one-shot immunizations. Taken together, these experiments show that cryopreserved LISP2(−) sporozoites have a lower protective capacity (i.e., are less immunogenic) than freshly isolated ones. Table 2 Protection from infection by a one-shot LISP2(−) immunization Exp. 1st shot challenge (day 14, PbA) n protected/challenged mice Prepatency (dpi) Parasitemia day 7 (%) 1 Fresh 2 × 10 4 1 × 10 4 0/4 4.5 1.4 Cryopreserved 2 × 10 4 1 × 10 4 0/8 4 1.6 1 × 10 4 0/4 3 2.3 2 Fresh 2 × 10 4 1 × 10 4 0/4 7.25 0.8 Cryopreserved 2 × 10 4 1 × 10 4 0/8 5.9 1.0 1 × 10 4 0/4 4 1.1 Total Fresh 2 × 10 4 1 × 10 4 0/8 5.9 0.8 cryopreserved 2 × 10 4 1 × 10 4 0/16 4.9 1.3 1 × 10 4 0/8 3.5 1.7 Two independent experimental vaccinations using the one-shot regime were performed by injecting 20,000 sporozoites i.v. into groups of four C57Bl/6 mice. Note that all mice challenged by 10,000 wild-type sporozoites become infected. Prepatency denotes the days post-infection where a blood-stage infection was first detected by a Giemsa-stained blood smear. For comparison, the average parasitemia at day 7 post-infection is also listed Table 3 Protection from infection by a two-shot LISP2(−) immunization Exp. 1st shot 2nd shot (day 14) Challenge (day 28, PbA) n protected/challenged mice Prepatency (dpi) Parasitemia day 7 (%) 3 Cryopreserved 2 × 10 4 2 × 10 4 1 × 10 4 2/8 5.5 0.6 1 × 10 4 0/4 4 1.1 4 Fresh 2 × 10 4 2 × 10 4 1 × 10 4 8/8 – – Cryopreserved 2 × 10 4 2 × 10 4 1 × 10 4 0/8 5.25 1.0 1 × 10 4 0/4 4.25 3.1 Total Fresh 2 × 10 4 2 × 10 4 1 × 10 4 8/8 – – Cryopreserved 2 × 10 4 2 × 10 4 1 × 10 4 2/16 5.4 1.6 1 × 104 0/8 4.1 2.1 Two experimental vaccinations using the two-shot regime were performed by injecting 20,000 sporozoites i.v. into groups of four C57Bl/6 mice. Note that all mice immunized with freshly isolated LISP2(−) parasites were protected from a wild-type challenge. Prepatency denotes the days post-infection where a blood-stage infection was first detected by a Giemsa-stained blood smear. For comparison, the average parasitemia at day 7 post-infection is also listed
Discussion
Dissection of large numbers of Plasmodium sporozoites is a tedious task that currently precedes using sporozoites in many different types of experiments. Efficient cryopreservation of Plasmodium sporozoites for later use would be an asset for those researchers studying sporozoite motility, invasion of the hepatocytes, and liver-stage biology. It would be further advantageous for studies on attenuated parasites that arrest their development during or just after the liver stage as freezing would allow collection of sporozoites from well-infected mosquitoes at a time de-coupled from their use in experiments, e.g., immunizations. The company Sanaria established massive sporozoite isolation under good manufacturing practices and with subsequent freezing, and these sporozoites have already been used successfully in several clinical studies (Roestenberg et al. ; Seder et al. ; Mordmüller et al. ; Mordmüller et al. ). However, the freezing protocol is proprietary and optimized for controlled human malaria infections. Recently, another method was described that allows the efficient cryopreservation of sporozoites and yielded a high percentage (> 90%) of viable P. falciparum and Plasmodium vivax sporozoites after thawing (Singh et al. ) as determined by assessing motility of cryopreserved sporozoite on flat substrates. This could also be transferred to the commonly used rodent malaria model parasite P. berghei (Singh et al. ). This paper compared a series of cryopreservation methods and found a protocol that was the most potent. It also reported a slight loss of infectivity in vitro but not in vivo as measured by infecting ICR mice and determining prepatencies (Singh et al. ). Here, we set out to probe the utility of this cryopreservation method for the use in studies of pre-erythrocytic biology in P. berghei . To this end, we compared cryopreserved sporozoites with freshly isolated ones in their capacity to undergo gliding motility on stiff and soft substrates in vitro as well as their capacity to infect C57Bl/6 mice, which are the mice usually used in testing genetically attenuated parasites (Mueller et al. ).
Our studies revealed an interesting and somewhat unexpected difference. While we could not detect a significant difference in the capacity of sporozoites to glide on glass (Fig. 1 ), we found that cryopreserved sporozoites moved less productively on soft substrates (Fig. 4 ). We also found a fivefold difference in the capacity of cryopreserved and freshly prepared sporozoites to enter the hepatocytes in vitro (Fig. 2 a–c). In vivo, the infection of C57Bl/6 mice appeared only slightly reduced as revealed by an increased prepatent period of half a day (Table 1 ). However, we measured a strongly reduced liver burden (Fig. 2 d). Importantly, this reduced capacity to infect liver cells went along with a reduced capacity of genetically attenuated parasites to protect animals from wild-type infections. Further, it suggests a reduction in the numbers of existing liver stages to induce protecting immunity (Tables 2 and 3 ). This indicates that at least five times more cryopreserved sporozoites are needed to achieve the same protective efficacy as when using freshly isolated sporozoites. The difference between the infectivity might also be due to the centrifugation step or the presence of the cryopreservant during centrifugation as we did not subject fresh sporozoites to centrifugation steps that are not needed for standard infections with these sporozoites. This suggests that there is a potential to improve the thawing procedure, e.g., by using Accudenz purification (Kennedy et al. ) or different centrifugation protocols.
What could be the explanation of the different effects on gliding and invasion? The observation that cryopreserved sporozoites moved poorly on soft substrates could suggest that these parasites struggle traversing the endothelial barrier of the liver (Tavares et al. ) and/or are less capable of producing enough force for transmigration or invasion of the hepatocytes in vivo thus leading to reduced liver burden. This suggestion is based on previous observations that sporozoites lacking the surface adhesin TLP also move worse on soft substrates than wild-type sporozoites (Hellmann et al. ) and produce less force (Quadt et al. ). However, these tlp(−) sporozoites appear to not show any difference in in vivo infectivity when injected intravenously (Hellmann et al. ). An alternative explanation could be that secretion of effectors involved in invasion is affected. Generally, proteins resident in micronemes are involved in motility, and those stored in rhoptries are involved in invasion (Carruthers and Sibley ; Carruthers and Sibley ; Alexander et al. ; Dubremetz ). It could thus be possible that rhoptries or the machinery that discharges them could be more sensitive to the freezing procedure as micronemes. Whatever the reason for the diminished invasion capacity, our data suggests that further improvements of the cryopreservation protocol must be readily tested using both sporozoite gliding and hepatocyte invasion assays before proceeding to in vivo experiments. Our data also denote that these improvements could increase the vaccination efficiency of attenuated parasites. Additionally, we speculate that the reported high doses of P. falciparum sporozoites needed for sterile protection (Mordmüller et al. ) could be decreased if cryopreserved sporozoites with enhanced invasion capacity are utilized.