Introduction
Calcium ion is an essential messenger in signaling pathways involved in the response of eukaryotic cells to various external stimuli. Changes in the intracellular concentration of calcium are used to regulate functions common to all cells, such as metabolism, exocytosis, and gene transcription, among other activities, as well as functions specific to particular cell types, namely, neurons, gametes, and muscle cells (Brini et al. ).
Calcium signals are detected by calcium-binding proteins (CaBPs), including annexins (Moss and Morgan ), proteins containing C2 domains (Corbalan-Garcia and Gómez-Fernández ), and EF-hand proteins. This latter class is both the largest and most diverse (Lewit-Bentley and Réty ). Their distinctive feature is the presence of a structural domain consisting of a loop, which coordinates calcium, flanked by two alpha helices. The affinity of the protein to the ion depends on the loop sequence and other structural motifs present in adjacent helices (Ikura ; Gifford et al. ; Denessiouk et al. ). EF-hand proteins are generally classified as sensors or buffers. Buffer proteins capture calcium to maintain its intracellular concentration at a low level, whereas binding of calcium to the sensor protein triggers a conformational change that allows the activation of other target proteins or effector proteins.
Giardia intestinalis is a single-cell parasite distributed worldwide that causes an intestinal infection in humans, particularly in children (Pires et al. ). This parasite has a simple life cycle, alternating between the replicative trophozoite and the infective cyst. The trophozoite has two nuclei, a complex cytoskeleton with four pairs of flagella, an adhesive disk, and other unique structures, which allow it to move and attach to the cells of the small intestine (Adam ; Elmendorf et al. ). The trophozoite lacks normal mitochondria, peroxisomes, and an identifiable Golgi apparatus (Tovar et al. ; Carranza and Lujan ). The cyst has four nuclei and presents a cell wall (composed of a homopolymer of N -acetylgalactosamine and proteins) that confers resistance to environmental conditions such as oxygen pressure, osmotic pressure, and temperature (Adam ). G. intestinalis is an interesting model to study at the molecular level because it has a simplified genome and performs all the functions of a “typical” eukaryote with a minimal set of components. It is controversial whether this genomic simplicity results from early divergence or secondary losses associated with the adaptation to the lifestyle of a parasite (Best et al. ; Morrison et al. ). In any case, the simplicity of this parasite suggests that the characterization of its biological processes is a good opportunity to elucidate the origins of basic functions (Morrison et al. ; Svärd et al. ). EF-hand proteins are the main sensors of calcium signaling in eukaryotes; however, only four proteins belonging to this family, calmodulin (Reiner et al. ; Alvarado and Wasserman ), centrins 1 and 2 (Meng et al. ; Corrêa et al. ; Lauwaet et al. ), and CaBP2933 (Alvarado et al. ), have been characterized in G. intestinalis . In this work, we conducted an in silico analysis of proteins with EF-hand domains in Giardia and performed transcriptional analysis for some of the found coding genes. Our results indicate that this parasite has a small number of EF-hand proteins and that some of them are proteins unique to this organism.
Material and methods
Computational search and analysis of proteins that may contain EF-hand domains
The database of the genome of G. intestinalis ( http://giardiadb.org/giardiadb/ ) (Aurrecoechea et al. ), specifically the A assembly of the WB(GL50803) strain, was used to extract any sequence with an annotation related to the EF-hand calcium-binding domain. The query terms “EF-hand domain,” “EF-hand,” and “EF hand” were used for that purpose. The InterPro resource ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro ) (Mitchell et al. ) was used in order to corroborate the presence and number of the EF-hand domains in the protein sequences as well as to find additional domains and important sites. Multiple sequence alignments of the EF-hand domains of selected proteins were performed by using Kalign ( http://msa.sbc.su.se/cgi-bin/msa.cgi ) (Lassmann and Sonnhammer ).
Culture and encystation of G. intestinalis
Trophozoites of the WB strain of G. intestinalis were grown at 37 °C in TYI-S-33 pH 7.0 supplemented with 10% bovine serum and bovine bile at 0.5 mg/mL (Keister ). Trophozoites were encysted in vitro following the procedure described by Kane et al. ( ). Briefly, parasites attached to the tube as a monolayer were exposed for 24 h to the encystation medium (TYI-S-33 pH 7.8, supplemented with 10 mg/mL of bile). The medium was then replaced by normal culture medium, and the cells were incubated for 24 h more, for a total of 48 h. The parasites were collected at different times of the process (0, 12, 24, and 48 h) for transcription analysis by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RNA extraction and RT-PCR
Total RNA was isolated from 10 × 10 6 proliferating trophozoites and the same number of encysting cells using TRIZOL reagent (Invitrogen). The extracted RNA was treated with DNase RQ1 (Promega), verified to be free of DNA by PCR and quantified by spectrophotometry. RT-PCR was performed in a single tube with the M-MLV RT enzyme (Promega). Briefly, the RNA (50 ng) was hybridized with the reverse primer (0.5 μM) for 5 min at 70 °C. Reverse transcription was completed for 1 h at 42 °C (0.5 mM de dNTP’s, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl 2 , and 10 mM DTT). Next, the forward primer and Taq polymerase enzyme were added for the amplification step 94 °C/5 min, 30 cycles at 94 °C/45 s, 55 °C/ 45 s, 72 °C/1 min, and 72 °C/7 min. The PCR products were run on agarose gels, stained with ethidium bromide (BrEtd) and photographed with the Molecular Imager® Gel Doc XR Bio-Rad ™ image analyzer. The housekeeping gene ubiquitin was used as a loading control (Gallego et al. ) and cwp1 gene was used as an encystation control (Mowatt et al. ). Primers were designed for gene 2261, g2261F (5’ATGCTCCCCGATTTAGAAG3’), g2261R (5’CGTGGATACGCCAGACGATGC3’). For gene 9894, g9894F (5’ATGAACACACCTACCAAGG3’), g9894R (5’GAGGAGACGCAAGCGATGCG3’). For gene 17157, g1757F (5’ATGACATCTCTGGGTGCCA3’), g17157R (5’AAATCCGTGAGTCAATCAAC3’). For gene 17538, g17538F (5’ATGCCTCCGAAACGAATGA3’), g17538R (5’CCTGTCAATGAGCGCACGCCT3’). For gene 2933, g2933F (5’ATGAACTACCTTTCTTCTAA3’), g2233R (5’GCTTATAC AAACCACAGG CTAA3’). For gene 6439, g6439F (5ATGAATCCCACTGAGTTCAT3’), g6439R (5’GCTCAC TCAGTGAACCACG3’). For gene 7578, g7578F (5’ATGAATCCTAA CGAGATCAAC3’), g7578R (5’GCCTAGCACATTGGCAGTACCAACT3’). For gene 16411, g16411F (5’ATGCGTAGCAGTGAACAGGT3’), g16411R (TCATGCCTGCTGCGC3’). For gene cwp1, Cwp1F (5’GCCTTACTTACCTCAAGA C3’), Cwp1R (5’GTTGTCACTCATGTACCAG3’). For gene ubiquitin, gUbiF (5′ATGCAGATCTTC GTCAA3′), gUbiR (5′CCTTCTGGATGGAGTAGT3′).
Results
Repertory of proteins containing EF-hand domains in G. intestinalis
Using the data mining strategy described in the Methods section, 28 protein sequences were found to be annotated as CaBPs of the EF-hand type in Giardia . Twenty of them are expressed at the protein level as shown by mass spectrometry (see column 5 of Table 1 ). To determine the number of EF-hand domains and the presence of other domains, each of the 28 sequences of G. intestinalis was analyzed using InterProScan (Mitchell et al. ), which detects canonical and non-canonical EF-hand domains. Canonical domains exhibit the typical coordination scheme in which six coordination groups are located in the loop, and their sequence follows the Prosite PS00018 pattern (InterPro ID IPR018247). The most relevant positions correspond to amino acids 1 (X), 3 (Y), 5 (Z), 7 (−Y), 9 (−X), and 12 (−Z). Non-canonical domains can vary significantly in the composition and length of the loop, and since some may be non-functional, calcium binding needs to be experimentally verified. From 28 originally found sequences, only 15 of them have canonical EF-hand domains (see the last column of Table 1 ). Figure 1 a shows a multiple alignment of these sequences highlighting coordinating ligands and X−4 and −Z + 1, which have an important role in the interaction between consecutive EF-hand domains (Denessiouk et al. ). Table 1 EF-hand proteins encoded in the genome of G. intestinalis Open image in new window Proteins are listed with the accession number of their respective gene (column 1) and annotation in the Giardia database (column 2). The number of EF-hand domains and other domains as predicted by InterProScan are shown in columns 3 and 4 respectively. Column 5 indicates whether or not there are mass spectrometry-based expression data. The last column shows a schematic diagram indicating (black rectangles) the localization of the canonical EF-hand sites in these proteins (pattern PS00018 corresponding to InterPro IPR018247) Fig. 1 a Multiple sequence alignment of the canonical EF-hand domain from G.intestinalis . The accession numbers of the coding gene in Giardia DB are shown in the left. In an EF-hand loop, the calcium ion is coordinated in a pentagonal bipyramidal configuration. The six residues involved in the binding are denoted by X, Y, Z, −Y, −X, and −Z (bidentate ligand). Positions X, Y, and −Z are the most conserved. Other positions X−4 and −Z + 1 are highlighted, because they are part of two structural motifs outside of the loop that stabilize the EF-hand domain (Denessiouk et al. ). Multiple alignments of the EF-hand domains were performed by using Kalign ( http://msa.sbc.su.se/cgi-bin/msa.cgi ) (Lassmann and Sonnhammer ). b Presence of EF-hand domains in G. intestinalis proteins. Each bar represents the number of G. intestinalis proteins that have 2, 3, 4, or 8 EF-hand domains respectively
Half of the proteins containing EF-hand domains are annotated as hypothetical proteins, i.e., open reading frames (ORFs) that have no similarity to any protein reported to date. Of the 14 remaining proteins, three of them appear listed as CaM, but only one protein encoded by the 5333 gene has four EF-hand domains and corresponds to CaM of G. intestinalis (Reiner et al. ). The other two sequences, encoded by genes 13231 and 13652, have three and two domains, respectively, and should be annotated as being similar or related to CaM instead as CaM itself. Sequences 6744 (centrin) and 104685 (caltractin) correspond to centrins 1 and 2, respectively (Meng et al. ; Corrêa et al. ; Lauwaet et al. ). The sequence encoded by gene 16829, annotated as calcineurin B (CaNB), has only two EF-hand domains. However, in the vast majority of organisms analyzed or sequenced, CaNB is a highly conserved protein characterized by four EF-hand domains (Rusnak and Mertz ). Whether this assignment is incorrect, or it is an exceptional case, similarly to the CaNB of Trypanosoma cruzi , which only has three domains (Araya et al. ), requires further investigation. Four sequences (encoded by genes 2261, 9894, 17157, and 17538) appear as potential regulatory subunits of phosphatase 2A. The protein encoded by gene 2933 has two EF-hand domains and it is annotated as a “programmed cell death protein-like protein.” However, this protein has been shown to belong to the penta-EF-hand family (Maki et al. ) and has been previously characterized as such in G. intestinalis (Alvarado et al. ), indicating database misassignment.
The sequence encoded by gene 9487 corresponds to a kinase, with a C-terminal calcium/CaM-dependent/calcium-dependent kinase domain and two EF-hand domains at the amino terminus. These kinases are directly regulated by calcium and are not present in mammals, only in plants and alveolates (Holder et al. ). The sequence of G. intestinalis is similar in its structural organization to the atypical PfCDK7 protein of Plasmodium falciparum (Kumar et al. ).
The product of gene 7578 is listed as a dynein light chain, but no domain that would validate this association was detected. Similarly, no additional information was found to support the assignment of 8726 gene as an actin-related protein.
Of the proteins annotated as hypothetical, the protein encoded by the 14481 gene has a dimerization and anchor domain typical of the regulatory chains of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), which surprisingly, has two calcium-binding EF-hand domains instead of the two characteristic cAMP-binding domains (Banky et al. ). This suggests that PKA is directly regulated by calcium, or that an adaptor may exist between PKA and the A kinase anchoring protein (AKAP)-type proteins that anchor PKA to specific sites in the cell (Newlon et al. ). Notably, in a transfectant line (Dawson Lab), g14481 is located in all flagella (in the Giardia database http://giardiadb.org/giardiadb/ ) (Aurrecoechea et al. ), which is consistent with the reported location for the PKA of G. intestinalis (Abel et al. ).
No domain other than the EF-hand domain was detected in the remaining 13 hypothetical protein sequences that could hint at the protein’s function.
The number of EF-hand domains present in the analyzed sequences is summarized in Fig. 1 b. In general, the calcium-binding domains are found in an even number, except for the penta-EF-hand family, which uses an odd number of domains to form dimers (Maki et al. ). In G. intestinalis , there are certain sequences with an apparent odd domain number (3 domains), perhaps the approach used fails to detect a highly divergent fourth domain.
Interestingly, this analysis showed that most of the EF-hand proteins identified are unique to the parasite, suggesting that this organism could have exclusive calcium signaling pathways. However further investigation is required.
Transcription pattern of eight genes encoding EF-hand proteins during Giardia intestinalis encystation
The most suggestive result from the in silico search was the connection between protein dephosphorylation and calcium. Thus, of the eight previously uncharacterized sequences that have EF-hand canonical domains (meet PS00018 pattern), four of them which are additionally annotated as potential regulatory subunits of phosphatase 2A were chosen for transcriptional analyses throughout the parasite encystation process, from the trophozoite stage (replicative form, 0 h) to the cyst stage (quiescent form, 48 h). The selected proteins are those encoded by genes 2933, 6439, 7578, 16411, 2261, 9894,17157, and 17538, and currently annotated in the Giardia database ( http://giardiadb.org/giardiadb/ ) (Aurrecoechea et al. ) as “programmed cell death protein-like protein,” “hypothetical protein,” “Dynein light chain,” and “hypothetical protein” respectively and the last four of them as “protein phosphatase 2A regulatory subunit.” The study of the expression of CaBPs during encystation is relevant since this adaptation allows Giardia to be transmitted to a new host. The results of the RT-PCR are shown in Fig. 2 . In these, the inducible cwp1 gene (Mowatt et al. ) and the ubiquitin gene (Gallego et al. ) were used as controls of encystation and loading respectively. It was found that all the eight genes encoding EF-hand proteins are expressed differentially throughout encystation. The mRNA of the 2261, 9894, 6439, and 16411 genes are scarce in the trophozoite stage and during encystation process. Transcripts of the 17157, 7578, and 2933 genes are clearly detected, almost constitutively, from the onset (0 h) until 48 h. On the other hand, 17538 mRNA levels decrease markedly during encystation. We found a very substantial difference in the transcription pattern of these eight EF-hand genes, even between genes annotated with the same function such as protein phosphatase 2A regulatory subunits (Fig. 2 , compare genes 2261, 9894, 17157, and 17538). This might indicate an important role of the product of these genes during encystation. Fig. 2 Transcription pattern of eight genes encoding EF-hand proteins during Giardia intestinalis encystation. Trophozoites were induced to encyst, and RNA was extracted at different times during the process (0, 12, 24, and 48 h). RT-PCR analysis was performed as described; amplified products for genes 2261, 9894, 17157, 17538, 7578, 6439, 2933, and 16411 are shown after electrophoresis in agarose gel and BrEtd staining. The accession number of the coding gene in Giardia DB is shown in parenthesis and its annotation on that database. The housekeeping gene ubiquitin was used as a loading control (Gallego et al. ) and cwp1 was used as an encystation marker (Mowatt et al. )
Discussion
The search for proteins that display calcium-binding EF-hand domain in the database of the G. intestinalis genome retrieved a very small repertoire of only 28 sequences. This result is hardly surprising given that Giardia is characterized by having a highly simplified molecular machinery (Morrison et al. ). It is also possible that the low number of sequences results from the early divergence of this organism, which may render its EF-hand domains less likely to be identified by the consensus search patterns. Of the 28 sequences studied, half are annotated as hypothetical proteins. The analysis of each sequence with InterPro and a review of the literature allowed us to refine the basic information that appears for each of them and to determine the domains present. However, it is worth mentioning that finding EF-hand domains on a sequence is not sufficient to conclude that the protein is capable of binding calcium. The domains may be non-functional; therefore, we determined which of the 28 sequences meet the PS00018 pattern, which gives a better level of confidence regarding whether the domain can effectively bind calcium. Only 15 sequences were validated using this method. However, even the results of this selection should also be taken with caution since further experimental evidence should be provided to elucidate if the identified EF-hand domains present in a protein actually bind calcium. Considering both, the results of the in silico analysis presented in this paper and from the review of the literature, we propose that in G. intestinalis , calcium via EF-hand proteins may regulate phosphorylation by modulating phosphatases (PP2A and calcineurin) and kinases (calcium-dependent kinase calcium and PKA). On one hand, calcium may be controlling microtubule organization processes and the cell cycle through the centrins 1 and 2 (Lauwaet et al. ) and, on the other hand, calcium could modulate energy metabolism and cytoskeletal dynamics through CaM (Alvarado and Wasserman ) as well as the vesicular trafficking through CaBP2933 (Alvarado et al. ).
Although there is a considerable information obtained from the genome sequencing projects, in our study, it was found that G. intestinalis appear to have sequences specific in this parasite. Thus, an experimental validation approach is necessary to unravel the function of these proteins currently annotated as hypothetical.