Introduction
Over the last decades, more and more people have become aware of the increasing burden and importance of cardiovascular complications associated with cancer therapy. In the USA, there were 13.7 million cancer survivors in 2012, and their number is estimated to reach over 18 million in 2022 [ ]. Along with the devastating nature of this condition [ ], this results in rapid increases in the cardio-oncology program [ ]. Among the many facets of chemotherapy-induced cardiovascular toxicity, this review focuses on echocardiographic evaluation of cardiac function after cancer chemotherapy. In order to understand better echocardiographic assessment, a brief review of the definition, types, and risk factors of cardiotoxicity are initially presented.
The current definition of cardiotoxicity [the Cardiac Review and Evaluation Committee (CREC) criteria], also known as chemotherapy-related cardiac dysfunction (CTRCD), is summarized in Table 1 with some examples [ , ]. If a patient with cancer develops hear failure (HF) symptoms, a drop in the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) with >5% points below 53% is enough to diagnose CTRCD. However, among asymptomatic patients with cancer, >10% points reduction is required to categorize them with CTRCD. Furthermore, it is crucial for healthcare providers who care for patients with cancer to recognize two types of CTRCD (Table 2 ) [ , ], because their management and effects on the heart are totally different. In addition, it is also crucial to familiarize ourselves with risk factors of CTRCD. Table 3 summarizes the known risk factors of this pathology. Appropriate management of patients is expected based on these risks. A more detailed list of risk factors can be found elsewhere [ ]. Table 1 CREC definition CTRCD EF → <53% And Ex. EF CTRCD Symptomatic >5 Percentage points 65 → 52% ◯ 60 → 52% ◯ 75 → 60% × Asymptomatic >10 Percentage points 65 → 52% ◯ 60 → 52% × 75 → 60% × Table 2 Two types of CTRCD Type I Type II Characteristic agent Doxorubicin Trastuzumab Clinical course and typical response to anti-remodeling therapy (β-blockers, ACE-I) May stabilize, but underlying damage appears to be permanent and irreversible; recurrence in months or years may be related to sequential cardiac stress High likelihood of recovery (to or near baseline cardiac status) in 2–4 months after interruption (reversible) Dose effects Cumulative, dose related Not dose related Effect of rechallenge High probability of recurrent dysfunction that is progressive; may result in intractable heart failure or death Increasing evidence for the relative safety of rechallenge (additional data needed) Ultrastructure Vacuoles; myofibrillar disarray and dropout; necrosis (changes resolve over time) No apparent ultra-structural abnormalities (though not thoroughly studied) Table 3 Risk factors Cumulative dose Concomitant chemotherapy Concomitant or previous radiation therapy involving the heart Advanced age (>65 years old) Hypertension Diabetes mellitus Previous myocardial insults Heart failure Coronary artery disease Left ventricular hypertrophy
Historical overview
The story of CTRCD began in 1960 when the first anthracycline was discovered [ ] (Fig. 1 ). Because of its effectiveness with partial or complete hematologic remission from a single dose in pediatric leukemia, daunorubicin became widely used. Within 7 years, however, the first report of cardiotoxicity was published by a New York group [ ], which used (heart failure-related) symptoms to detect cardiotoxicity. Until the early 1980s, the detection and management of cardiotoxicity had been guided by symptoms. One of the difficulties of detecting cardiotoxicity based on symptoms only is that both heart failure and cancer share very similar symptoms, such as dyspnea, fatigue, peripheral edema, etc. In 1981, the usefulness of LVEF to detect cardiotoxicity was reported, initiating an era of using symptoms and LVEF to manage CTRCD for the following three decades. In early 2000, several groups around the world reported the limitation of LVEF in detecting CTRCD [ , , ]. LVEF is an imperfect marker of CTRCD [ ] because it is insensitive to early changes of cardiac function during a potentially cardiotoxic treatment [ ]. Additionally, it is not an accurate predictor of HF in patients who receive anthracyclines [ ] due to the fact that the heart has plenty of reserves and EF starts to deteriorate in the later stage of the disease [ ]. Advances in cardiac imaging, especially in echocardiography, have allowed applying myocardial strain imaging in the diagnosis of this pathology [ , , ]. This technique will be discussed below. Fig. 1 A brief history of cancer therapy-related cardiac dysfunction
Rationale for early detection
Two main reasons support the current rationale for early detection of CTRCD. First, effective treatment options are available [ ], and second, delayed intervention has limited success [ ]. Figure 2 depicts the pooled estimate of effect sizes of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I)/angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) (Fig. 2 a) and beta-blocker (Fig. 2 b). This was adapted from a meta-analysis of cardioprotective medication [ ] with amendment of using a random-effects model (original report used fixed-effects model). Even with a more conservative estimate, ACE-I/ARB had an 80% risk reduction [relative risk (RR) 0.20, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.05, 0.76, Fig. 2 a] and beta-blockade had a 71% reduction (RR 0.29, 95% CI 0.10, 0.84, Fig. 2 b). Our previous report also corroborates the protective effect of beta-blockers [ ]. Table 4 summarizes the results from three randomized clinical trials to determine the benefits of prophylactic intervention with ACE-I/ARB and beta-blockers in these patients [ , , ]. Fig. 2 Meta-analysis of cardioprotective medication with random effect model. a Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I)/angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) and b beta-blocker Table 4 Summary of preventative strategy OVERCOME PRADA MANTICORE 101 Brest Sample size Intervention/control group (total) 45/45 (90) 2 × 2 factorial (130) 30/32/32/32 33/31/30 (97) Medicine ACEi + BB ARB, BB, both ACE, BB ACEi Enalapril Prevent – – Perindopril Prevent ARB Candesartan – Prevent – β-blocker Carvedilol Prevent Metoprolol – Neutral – Bisoprolol Prevent
The other reason is the importance of timing. A study on 201 patients with anthracycline-induced cardiomyopathy, defined as LVEF ≤45%, demonstrated significant heterogeneity in patients outcomes, even if all patients were treated with cardioprotective medications, ACE-I (enalapril) ± beta-blocker (carvedilol). Two pivotal findings were revealed by this study [ ]: (1) only responders who recovered their LVEF >50% showed an excellent event-free survival (~85%) over 2-year follow-up, whereas non-responders or those with partial response had dismal outcomes; (2) the percentage of responders progressively decreased as the time-to-HF treatment increased. In other words, the more delay in the initiation of cardioprotective medicine, the less responders were detected. No responder was found when the medication was started >6 months after the detection of cardiotoxicity. Now that effective cardioprotective medicines are in our armamentarium, the next key question is how to detect these patients early.
Reasons why LVEF is insensitive to early changes
There are three main reasons why LVEF is an imperfect marker for early detection of CTRCD: (1) The normal heart has tremendous recruitable contractile ability, although this is not adequately appreciated [ ]. The myocardium must have undergone sufficient insult as to exceed its ability to compensate before the LV to exhibit a decrease in EF; (2) Inherent variability of LVEF measurement, which is ~10% [ ]. This fact per se significantly reduces the signal-to-noise ratio; (3) LVEF is a load-dependent parameter. Figure 3 a summarizes three measure determinants of LVEF: preload, afterload, and contractility. The goal of echocardiographic assessment for cardiotoxicity is to elucidate intrinsic contractility. However, it is common for cancer patients to develop dehydration due to nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea, leading preload reduction; in addition, they could have hypertension due to emotional/physical stress or direct side effect of chemotherapy (e.g., sunitinib). These modifiers make interpretation of LVEF even more difficult. Thus, a better marker of CTRCD has been sought. Fig. 3 Schematic presentation of factors and components of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). a Factors affecting EF even without alteration in intrinsic contractility. b Preserved EF but decreased longitudinal strain due to compensation by radial and circumferential strains
Myocardial strain assessment for early CTRCD detection
There has been increasing interest in the measurement of global longitudinal strain (GLS) because it is a sensitive and robust index for detecting subclinical myocardial dysfunction [ ] and because it is most close to clinical application. Figure 3 b illustrates one of the mechanisms why LVEF cannot detect what GLS can find. GLS starts to deteriorate from an early stage of myocardial insult. However, circumferential strain compensates the reduction in contractile function, resulting in the preservation of LVEF until a later stage [ ].
Among many deformation indices, the change in GLS had the most accurate prediction of subsequent cardiotoxicity [ ] with a cut-off value of 11% point decrease (95% CI 8.3, 14.6). Figure 4 shows some examples. On the top panel, the patient was a 62-year-old woman without previous medical history and risk factors for cardiovascular disease. She was diagnosed with bilateral breast cancer with human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) (+), estrogen receptor (ER) (−), progesterone receptor (PR) (−). Her LVEF was 63% with GLS 20.9% at baseline (before the initiation of cardiotoxic chemotherapy). Her chemotherapy regimen included epirubicin and cyclophosphamide + trastuzumab and paclitaxel. Three months later, the EF fell to 57%, which did not satisfy the CREC criteria (Table 1 ). However, the GLS reduced to 15.8% with ΔGLS of 24%, which is above the cut-off value of 11% and even higher than upper limit of the 95% CI (14.6%). Six months later, the patient further developed deterioration in LVEF to 47%, which now satisfies the criteria. The prognostic value of ΔGLS is independent and incremental to clinical information and LVEF [ ]. Fig. 4 Example cases with and without early intervention with cardioprotective medication. Top A 62-year-old female was diagnosed with bilateral breast cancer with HER2 (+), ER (−), PR (−). She had been well without risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Her chemotherapy regimen included epirubicin and cyclophosphamide + trastuzumab and paclitaxel. Bottom A 55-year-old female with right-sided breast cancer with HER2 (+), ER (+), PR (+). Without known medical history and risk factors for cardiovascular disease, her chemotherapy regimen included FEC + DH 5-fluororacil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide + docetaxel and trastuzumab (Herceptin ® )
A retrospective analysis demonstrated the possibility that ΔGLS could be utilized to guide an early initiation of cardioprotective intervention [ ]. The bottom case presented in Fig. 4 also had normal EF (62%) and GLS (23.6%) at baseline. The patient was a 55-year-old female without previous medical history and risk factors for cardiovascular disease. She was diagnosed with right-sided breast cancer with HER2 (+), ER (+), PR (+). Her chemotherapy regimen was FEC + DH [5-fluororacil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide + docetaxel and trastuzumab (Herceptin ® )]. The patient’s LVEF and GLS had been stable until 9 months after trastuzumab chemotherapy. At that time, the GLS dropped to 22% (a 22% decrease in ΔGLS), but the LVEF of 58% did not reach the cut-off value of <53%. This deterioration in GLS allowed early intervention before the LVEF dropped <53%, and ACE-I and beta-blocker were initiated and the chemotherapy was continued. Three months later, the LVEF remained stable and GLS recovered. Currently, a prospective international multicenter randomized control trial is on-going to test the hypotheses that information from strain imaging leads to the use of adjunctive cardioprotective therapy that will limit (A) the development of LV dysfunction; (B) interruptions of planned chemotherapy; and (C) development of heart failure during the follow-up. The primary objective is to show that information from strain imaging leads to the use of adjunctive therapy that will limit the development of reduced ejection fraction at a maximum of 3 years [strain surveillance during chemotherapy for improving cardiovascular outcomes: SUCCOUR study, ANZCTR (Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry) number ACTRN12614000341628].
Sources of error and experience
Myocardial strain measurement has some limitations. Among known sources of variety (Fig. 5 ), the primary determinant is post-processing, i.e., strain software [ ]. The issue of vendor difference has been minimized after Strain Standardization Taskforce intervention [ ]. The vendor difference in GLS is at least equivalent or even smaller than that of LVEF [ ]. Fig. 5 Sources of error in strain measurement
It is important to emphasize the fact that practice and experience in strain measurement are keys for assessment, although the precision of GLS is still reasonably high for the novice [ ]. This observation results from combined data (our calibration session for the above SUCCOUR trial, as well as hands-on sessions we provided to cardiology fellows/registrars in Australia). The strain measurements performed by 58 readers with various levels of experience were compared to expert values (>1000 cases of myocardial strain assessment experience). Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) for GLS were significantly greater than that for LVEF, regardless of image quality. Experience with strain measurement affected the concordance in strain values among the readers; the group with the highest level of experience showed significantly better ICC than those with no experience, although the ICC of the inexperienced readers was still very good (0.996 vs. 0.975, p = 0.0002). As experience increased, other indices of variability (mean difference, standard deviation, and coefficient of variance) became significantly smaller. The key tips on myocardial strain assessment are listed in Table 5 [ ]. Table 5 Practical guidance in echocardiographic assessment of global longitudinal strain Steps Step 1 Acquisition/selection of appropriate image(s) Step 2 Assessment of adequacy for strain measurement Step 3 Detection/making of fiducial landmarks (annulus and apex) Step 4 Tracing of the endocardial border Step 5 Adjustment of region of interest (avoid the pericardium) Step 6 Evaluation of tracking quality Step 7 Repeat steps 5 and 6, until adequate tracking is achieved
Current practice guidelines
There are two official documents issued by medical societies with algorithms for management of CTRCD [ , ]: Clinical Practice Guidelines from European Society for Medical Oncology, published in 2012 [ ], and Expert Consensus from the American Society of Echocardiography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging, published in 2014 [ ]. Both recommend the use of echocardiography and cardiac troponins in their algorithms. The latter [ ] incorporates GLS in their algorithms based on our observation [ ]. At the initial assessment before the commencement of cardiotoxic chemotherapy regimen, if LVEF is <53%, GLS is < the lower limit of normal, or troponin is positive, cardiology consultation is recommended. For the lower limit of normal, we use traffic signal-like cut-off, i.e., GLS <16% is red (abnormal); GLS between 16 and 18 is yellow (borderline); and GLS >18% is green (normal) as a rule of thumb in our institution.
The most recently published document on CTRCD by a medical society is ESC position paper 2016 [ ]. This document summarizes broad areas, including pathophysiology and management, as well as strategies for prevention and attenuation of cardiovascular complications of cancer therapy.
Unresolved issues
To achieve our crucial goal of avoiding “the cured cancer patient of today… becoming the heart failure patient of tomorrow [ ],” there are several unresolved issues in CTRCD to be recognized [ ]. Those issues are (1) the real-world frequency of overt heart failure in CTRCD; (2) the optimal diagnostic approach to CTRCD in the context of large numbers of patients requiring repeated testing; (3) the need for better risk prediction; and (4) the need for evidence-based algorithms to guide late follow-up.
Conclusions
Advances in cancer treatment have led to significant and continuous increases in cancer survivors. To tackle this emerging issue, close collaboration between cardiologists and oncologists is required. This new discipline is called cardio-oncology. This situation is very similar to the need for a new subspecialty in cardiology, adult congenital heart disease, reflecting the epidemic of survivors from congenital heart disease thanks to progress in the management of congenital heart disease. In both new disciplines, cardiac imaging, especially echocardiography, has played and will continue to play pivotal role for risk stratification, diagnosis, monitoring, and management.