Introduction
Technological advances in Doppler echocardiography provide noninvasive coronary flow detection by transthoracic Doppler echocardiography. Accuracy of transthoracic coronary flow and coronary flow reserve (CFR) measurements has been validated compared to Doppler flow wire. Transthoracic Doppler echocardiography is widely available in the clinical setting and this technique can be performed in an outpatient setting. Although the majority of the clinical data regarding this technique has been reported by European and Japanese groups, similar feasibility in coronary flow detection was found in a relatively obese American population compared with a Japanese population [ , , , , , , ].
Coronary anatomy
The coronary arteries provide arterial blood to the myocardium. They are the left and right coronaries that originate from the left and right coronary sinus of the aortic root. The left main coronary artery bifurcates into the left anterior descending artery (LAD), which runs over the anterior interventricular sulcus, and the left circumflex artery (LCx) related to the left atrioventricular sulcus. The LAD extends down, ending distal to the apex. In this last situation, the LAD goes up into the posterior interventricular sulcus. The septal branches arise in an acute angle from the LAD, coursing close to the endocardium on the right side of the interventricular septum. The LCx is the other principal vessel originating from the left main coronary artery. It is covered by the left atrial appendage in its proximal portion, and then takes position in the left atrioventricular sulcus. The right coronary artery (RCA) has its origin at the right coronary aortic sinus, and goes into the right atrioventricular sulcus. The posterior descending artery runs into the posterior interventricular sulcus.
Machine settings
There are some important technical issues for detecting coronary flow signals. First, a good high-resolution and high-sensitivity ultrasound system, with a high-frequency transducer would be recommended (12–7 MHz for mid to distal LAD, 5–3 MHz for proximal LAD, RCA and LCx). Second, in color Doppler imaging, the Doppler velocity range should be set in the 10–30 cm/s range to detect coronary flow signal. Of note, a high-frequency transducer is not always necessary to visualize distal LAD flow signal when using recently developed ultrasound equipment. A transducer with frequency for routine cardiac echo examination is often available for the detection of coronary flow signal and coronary flow velocity profile.
Coronary flow detection by color Doppler technique
Left anterior descending artery (Fig. 1)
In short-axis images of the left ventricle, the mid-portion of the LAD can be identified as a cross section of the tubular structure containing the color Doppler flow signal, located in the anterior interventricular sulcus. Color Doppler signal in the LAD (which is seen in a red color) is mainly found in diastole. After confirming its position, rotate the transducer counterclockwise to view the left ventricle in long axis along the intraventricular sulcus under the guidance of color Doppler flow mapping. To visualize the distal portion of the LAD, view the left ventricle in long axis from the apex and search the coronary flow signal around the intraventricular sulcus. Once the LAD is found, rotate the transducer clockwise (toward two-chamber view position) to detect the flow signal in the long-axis section. Fig. 1 Coronary flow detection by transthoracic echo Doppler in the distal left anterior descending artery (LAD). To visualize the distal portion of the LAD, view the left ventricle in the apical long-axis view and search the coronary flow signal around the intraventricular sulcus. Antegrade LAD flow toward the apex appears as a red color signal , and retrograde LAD flow appears as a blue color signal by color Doppler method. Once the LAD flow signal is found, rotate the transducer clockwise to detect the LAD flow in its long-axis section. A high-frequency transducer is recommended to visualize the distal LAD. In color Doppler imaging, the Doppler velocity range should be set in the 10–30 cm/s range to detect coronary flow signal ( a – c ). Intravenous contrast injection helps the detection of coronary signal. Once the LAD flow signal is detected by color Doppler at the anterior interventricular sulcus, the coronary flow velocity profile can be recorded by positioning the sample volume of the pulsed Doppler echocardiography. Biphasic diastolic-dominant flow profile is observed in normal coronary arteries without stenosis ( d ). LV left ventricle, LAD left descending coronary artery, S systole, D diastole. The distal portion of the LAD by color Doppler echocardiography
Right posterior descending artery (Fig. 2a)
After obtaining apical two-chamber images of the left ventricle, angle the ultrasound beam superiorly to view the posterior interventricular sulcus. A lower frequency probe is recommended because this area is relatively far from the transducer. Carefully examine this area using color Doppler flow mapping to locate the right posterior descending coronary artery. Although the success rate in detecting coronary flow velocity profile in the right posterior descending coronary artery is lower compared with the LAD, contrast-enhanced Doppler technique improves the success rate. Fig. 2 Right coronary artery (posterior descending artery) by color Doppler echocardiography ( a ). Left circumflex artery by color Doppler echocardiography ( b )
Left circumflex artery (Fig. 2b)
The circumflex artery can be found in the modified four-chamber view. It is normally distinguished as a color flow signal running along the basal lateral wall. However, visualization of circumflex arteries is relatively difficult because of their anatomical variations and, furthermore, they are running far from the transducer as well as the RCAs.
Left main trunk, proximal LAD, proximal LCx and proximal RCA
To visualize the left main trunk and proximal LAD, locate the transducer at the level of the aortic root, in short-axis view; this could be detected by using a relatively low-frequency transducer (4–2 MHz). The left main trunk is identified as a tubular structure which originates from the left coronary sinus. By adjusting the orientation of the ultrasound beam in the distal side of the left main trunk, the proximal LAD, which runs from the bifurcation toward the anterior wall of the heart, can be visualized in color Doppler flow mapping. At the level of the bifurcation from the left main trunk, the proximal LCx is detected by rotating the transducer clockwise.
The proximal RCA, which originates from the right coronary sinus, can be identified at the aortic root, in short-axis or long-axis view.
Coronary flow recordings by pulsed Doppler
Doppler spectral tracings of coronary flow velocity can be recorded using pulsed Doppler technique by positioning a sample volume (1.5–2.5 mm wide) on the color Doppler signal. Angle correction is needed in each examination. Coronary flow velocity provides some useful clinical information such as coronary flow direction and coronary flow pattern. Normal coronary flow is characterized by a biphasic flow profile, which consists of small systolic and large diastolic flow (Fig. 1 ). It should be noted that pulsed Doppler recordings provide coronary flow velocity, not the absolute coronary blood flow. Coronary flow (velocity) reserve by transthoracic Doppler echocardiography is derived from changes in the velocity of coronary blood flow, which has been shown to correlate with absolute CFR.
Clinical application of noninvasive measurements of coronary flow
Phasic flow characteristics and coronary stenosis
Resting coronary flow pattern is characterized by a diastolic-dominant biphasic flow. In severe coronary stenosis, diastolic flow decreases, and hence diastolic to systolic flow velocity ratio (DSVR) decreases at rest. The cut-off points of 1.6 for peak DSVR and 1.5 for mean DSVR have high sensitivity and specificity in the detection of severe coronary stenosis (>85%) and myocardial ischemia, and positive in thallium-201 (TI 201 ) single-photon emission computed tomography (CT) [ , ].
Coronary flow velocity reserve
CFR expressed as a ratio of maximum flow to resting flow can be seen in Fig. 3 . With progressive coronary stenosis, baseline flow remains normal until the coronary artery is narrowed by 80–85% diameter stenosis. However, CFR begins to decrease at 40–50% diameter stenosis for a vasodilatory stimulus, increasing flow normally to four times baseline. CFR decreases to twice the baseline at approximately 75% diameter stenosis, which indicates myocardial stenosis [ ]. Fig. 3 Coronary flow velocity reserve measurement by pulsed Doppler echocardiography in a patient with a normal coronary artery. The LAD flow profile at rest ( a ), LAD flow profile during hyperemia induced by ATP infusion ( b )
Coronary flow velocity reserve can be alternatively assessed as the ratio of hyperemic to basal coronary flow velocity after drug-induced coronary vasodilatation.
After recording baseline spectral Doppler signals in the distal portion of the LAD, administer a vasodilator (adenosine triphosphate [ATP] 140–150 μg/kg/min div. or dipyridamole 0.56 mg/kg iv.) to record spectral Doppler signals during hyperemic conditions. Next, measure the mean diastolic velocity and peak diastolic velocity of each flow spectrum. Coronary flow velocity reserve by transthoracic Doppler technique is measured from only diastolic mean velocities, not mean velocities throughout the entire cardiac cycle. Previous studies have reported that the ratio of hyperemic to basal mean diastolic velocity and peak diastolic velocity was useful in the evaluation of functional coronary stenosis [ , , , , , , ]. Coronary flow velocity reserve is defined as the ratio of hyperemic to basal peak or mean diastolic coronary flow velocity.
Noninvasive diagnosis of coronary stenosis by coronary flow velocity reserve measurement
Coronary flow velocity reserve calculated by mean diastolic velocity <2.0 had a sensitivity of 91–92% and a specificity of 75–86% for the presence of significant LAD stenosis. Compared with Tl 201 single-photon emission CT, mean CFR ≤2.0 predicted reversible perfusion defects, with a sensitivity and specificity of 92% and 90%, respectively. CFR improved after coronary stenting, and a CFR <2.0 had high sensitivity (91%) and specificity (95%) in the diagnosis of in-stent restenosis after coronary intervention. For coronary stenosis in the right coronary territory, coronary flow velocity reserve measured in the posterior descending coronary artery is useful. Using the cut-off value of 2.0 for coronary flow velocity reserve in the RCA, its sensitivity and specificity in the detection of significant stenosis were 84–91% and 83–91%, respectively. Coronary flow velocity reserve <2 in the left circumflex coronary artery has been reported to have a sensitivity of 92% and specificity of 96% for reversible perfusion defect detected by single-photon emission CT. Although each coronary risk factor influences the result of coronary flow velocity reserve, a cut-off value <2.0 of CFR had a sensitivity of 90%, a specificity of 93% for the presence of significant coronary stenosis in a population that included patients with various coronary risk factors. Other specific clinical background that can affect coronary microvascular dysfunction (i.e., end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis, systemic diseases with connective tissue disorder, etc.) should be a potential limitation of the noninvasive diagnosis of significant coronary stenosis by Doppler echocardiography.
When ATP is used for measuring CFR, coronary flow reaches maximum hyperemia in approximately 1 min after starting intravenous administration of ATP. Because of the lower feasibility of coronary flow detection in the LCx and RCA compared with distal LAD without using contrast medium, CFR measurements in all three major coronary vessels are sometimes not available in the clinical setting. In daily clinical practice, CFR measurements can be practically applied to LAD lesions, i.e., a follow-up examination after coronary stenting in the LAD, or evaluation of functional stenosis of the LAD with borderline anatomical stenosis. Direct measurements of coronary flow by echo Doppler has an advantage in the evaluation of coronary physiology (beyond anatomy) over other imaging modalities such as CT coronary angiography. CFR by echo Doppler should greatly contribute to clinical decision making in combination with other noninvasive and invasive modalities.
Diagnosis of coronary stenosis by prestenotic to stenotic flow velocity ratio
The stenotic site of the coronary artery can be identified with ‘aliasing’ of color Doppler. In the diagnosis of significant restenosis (>50%) after coronary intervention in the LAD, prestenotic to stenotic mean diastolic flow velocity ratio <0.45 had a sensitivity of 86% and a specificity of 93%. Flow velocity measurements were also possible for in-stent stenosis with high sensitivity and specificity. Other studies have investigated three major coronary vessels by color and pulsed Doppler echocardiography; overall sensitivity and specificity were 82 and 92%, respectively, for the detection of >50% stenosis [ , , ].
Detection of total occlusion of the coronary arteries by retrograde coronary flow
Following occlusion of a major epicardial coronary artery, blood flow to the previously supplied myocardium must arrive via coronary collateral vessels. The retrograde blood flow velocity distal to a totally occluded coronary vessel represents collateral flow to the occluded region. Retrograde LAD flow by transthoracic Doppler echocardiography had a sensitivity of 93% and a specificity of 100% for the detection of total LAD occlusion. Retrograde flow in the LAD or septal artery had a sensitivity of 96% and a specificity of 100% for the detection of total LAD occlusion. Retrograde coronary flow detection is also useful in the RCA (Fig. 4 ). Detection of reverse flow in the distal RCA and the inferior septal branches had a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 97.8% for identification of occluded RCA [ , , ]. Fig. 4 Retrograde flow in the right posterior descending coronary artery in a patient with total RCA occlusion. Color Doppler echocardiography ( upper panel ), retrograde flow profile by pulsed Doppler method ( lower panel )
Practical use of noninvasive coronary flow measurements in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS)
Suboptimal coronary reperfusion with thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) grade ≤2 in acute myocardial infarction (AMI) adversely affects patient prognosis and requires additional procedures, such as thrombolysis and/or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Transthoracic Doppler echocardiography enables a rapid noninvasive differentiation of TIMI 3 from TIMI ≤2 coronary reperfusion in patients with AMI in the acute phase before emergency coronary intervention. The diagnosis of TIMI 3 based on diastolic peak distal LAD flow velocity ≥25 cm/s had a sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of 77, 94, and 89%, respectively [ ].
In no-reflow after coronary revascularizaion for AMI, coronary flow velocity shows a characteristic ‘to-and-fro’ pattern, which consists of systolic reversal and rapid diastolic deceleration. Evaluation of the coronary flow profile after revascularization is useful in predicting recovery of regional left ventricular function. Optimal cut-off values to predict viable myocardium were 6.5 cm/s for average systolic velocity and 600 ms for diastolic deceleration time. The persistence of abnormal coronary flow pattern can predict left ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction [ , , ].
Transthoracic coronary flow detection by echo Doppler contributes to the diagnosis of the coronary reperfusion status in the emergency room for patients with ACS, prior to invasive coronary angiography [ ]. Various patterns of LAD flow profile are observed in patients with ACS by echo Doppler (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 5 Case 1 . A 67-year-old male with acute myocardial infarction, 90% stenosis in the LAD. Severe wall motion abnormality was seen in the LAD territory ( a ). Distal LAD flow was detected at the anterior interventricular groove, which appeared as an antegrade red color signal . Pulsed Doppler echocardiography revealed a forward coronary flow signal with systolic dominant/reduced diastolic flow velocity profile, which suggested critical LAD stenosis that still supplies distal flow ( b ). The following coronary angiography showed a 90% diameter stenosis with TIMI II reperfusion at the mid-portion of the LAD ( c ). LV left ventricle, LA left atrium, LAD left descending coronary artery, S systole, D diastole. Case 2 . An 80-year-old female with acute myocardial infarction and no-reflow phenomenon in the LAD, was referred to our hospital for suspected myocardial infarction almost 24 h after onset. Severe wall motion abnormality was seen in the LAD territory. The apical region was widely dyskinetic ( a ). Distal LAD flow could be detected by color Doppler, with retrograde ( blue ) flow in systole and antegrade ( red ) flow in diastole. Pulsed Doppler echocardiography revealed a no-reflow pattern, which is characterized by a to-and-fro coronary velocity profile with rapid deceleration of the diastolic flow ( b ). This finding suggested severe microvascular dysfunction despite the recanalized epicardial coronary artery. The following coronary angiography showed a 75% diameter stenosis at the mid-portion of the LAD with TIMI I reperfusion ( c ). No-flow phenomenon occurred during primary PCI, but TIMI III reperfusion was finally achieved after stent implantation. In this particular patient, LV function did not improve and ventricular aneurysm formation was unavoidable despite successful revascularization. LV left ventricle, LA left atrium, LAD left descending coronary artery, S systole, D diastole. Case 3 . An 89-year-old male with acute myocardial infarction and total occlusion in the LAD. The LAD region was broadly akinetic with aneurysm formation ( a ). Distal LAD flow could not be detected at the anterior interventricular sulcus by color Doppler even with the minimum nyquist limit. Coronary flow profile was absent at the anatomical position of the LAD by pulsed Doppler echocardiography, and only showed wall motion artifact ( b ). The following coronary angiography showed total occlusion of the proximal LAD without collateral channels ( c ). This particular patient suddenly collapsed during coronary angiography because of ventricular free wall rupture, which was fatal even with immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation and percutaneous cardiopulmonary support. LV left ventricle, LA left atrium, LAD left descending coronary artery. Case 4 . An 87-year-old female with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. The mid-to-apical region of the left ventricle was largely akinetic, mimicking myocardial infarction in the LAD territory ( a ). Antegrade LAD flow could be detected by color Doppler echocardiography. Pulsed Doppler echocardiography revealed a biphasic diastolic-dominant coronary flow pattern ( b ). This finding suggested there was no significant flow disturbance in the epicardial LAD in this particular patient. Shortened deceleration time of diastolic flow, which is a typical finding of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy in the acute phase suggested temporary microvascular dysfunction. The following coronary angiography showed no coronary lesions without nitroglycerin injection. Left ventriculography revealed characteristic apical ballooning ( c ). In this particular patient, wall motion abnormality was alleviated in approximately 2 weeks. LV left ventricle, LA left atrium, LAD left descending coronary artery, S systole, D diastole