Background
The Valsalva maneuver is frequently used in echocardiography. It is named after Antonio Maria Valsalva, an Italian anatomist, who introduced the procedure over 300 years ago [ ]. He described it as a maneuver to test the patency of the Eustachian tube. The effect on cardiovascular circulation was first described in 1850 by Ernst Heinrich Weber who demonstrated the provocation of bradycardia on himself at a scientific meeting in Leipzig [ ]. The maneuver consists of forceful expiration against a closed nose and mouth.
Since then, the Valsalva maneuver has gained popularity particularly in cardiovascular medicine; however, correct adequate performance is often missed. Here, we aim to describe the performance of an adequate Valsalva maneuver and the correct interpretation of its effect. The use of the Valsalva maneuver, other than in echocardiography, is beyond the scope of this article.
Hemodynamic effect
During straining, intrathoracic pressure increases and affects the left and right cardiac systems differently. Since the left cardiac system lies completely in the thoracic cavity, i.e., left ventricle (LV), left atrium (LA), and pulmonary veins, no pressure difference change occurs between the two sides of the left system with change in the intrathoracic pressure. Unlike the right cardiac system, where the venous system, i.e., both the inferior and superior vena cava lie outside the thoracic cavity causing a decrease in pressure gradient between the two sides of the right cardiac system during straining resulting in reduced filling. The decrease in the right ventricle (RV) filling affects the left side in two stages—in the first cardiac beat of strain the RV filling and hence, RV volume is decreased allowing the LV filling to increase based on the ventricular interdependence phenomenon. However, when the decrease in RV filling is translated to the left cardiac system in the consequent beats, the LV filling decreases. Those physiological changes were proved echocardiographically by demonstrating an increase in LV E velocity, E / A ratio, E/esept, and E/elat in the first cardiac beat of strain and a decrease thereafter. [ ].
The hemodynamic effect of the Valsalva maneuver can be summarized into four basic phases [ ] (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Blood pressure and heart rate response to Valsalva maneuver
Phase 1. In the first few seconds there is an initial rise in blood pressure due to increased intrathoracic pressure and expel of blood from the left atrium. There is also a drop in heart rate due to baroreceptor activation secondary to an increase aortic pressure.
Phase 2. Between 5 and 15 s there is a decrease in venous return due to increased intrathoracic pressure and therefore a decrease in cardiac output and blood pressure. Heart rate begins to rise as a reflex to decreased aortic pressure.
Phase 3. This is marked by stopping the maneuver. An acute decrease in intrathoracic pressure and left atrial pressure and marked increase in venous return into the right atrium (RA). Therefore, RA pressure increases.
Phase 4. This is characterized by an increase of aortic pressure and a reflex decrease in heart rate.
It is worth mentioning that the Mueller maneuver (inspiratory effort against closed epiglottis) was historically accepted to produce an opposite effect to that of Valsalva strain with an increase in venous return and RV stroke volume [ ]. This hypothesis was disproved both invasively and non-invasively. Instead, the Mueller maneuver was found to produce a similar but much less pronounced effect as Valsalva by decreasing RV stroke volume which was postulated to be due to an increase in venous return impedance to the RV [ ].
Indication of Valsalva maneuver in echocardiography
Valsalva use in echocardiography (Table 1 ) can be divided into those used in phase 2 where a decrease in preload is required and those used in phase 3 where an increase in RA pressure is required. Indications for echocardiographic assessment during phase 2 Valsalva include provocation of dynamic left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction in borderline gradient in hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) and other cases of LVOT dynamic obstruction. Also, as a mean of estimation of elevated LV filling pressure in cases where there are signs of impaired LV relaxation (e.g., septal e’ velocity <7 cm/s, lateral e’ <10 cm/s) and mitral inflow Doppler finding of E / A ratio >0.8. Phase 3 Valsalva indication is to assess for the presence of interatrial shunt. For example, assessment for the presence of patent foramen ovale (PFO), and right to left atrial shunt during agitated saline contrast. Similarly, assessing for cardiac source of paradoxical embolism and unexplained right-sided cardiac dilatation where left to right shunt is suspected. It is worth noting that even in predominantly left to right interatrial shunt, some bubble can still pass from the right to left atrium especially when aided by adequate Valsalva. Table 1 Indications of Valsalva maneuver in echocardiography Indications for Valsalva in echocardiography Details Provocation of dynamic LVOT obstruction (phase 2) Evidence of flow acceleration in LVOT without significant gradient, i.e., dagger-shaped spectral Doppler in LVOT or LV mid-cavity HOCM without significant resting LVOT peak gradient (<30 mmHg) Estimation of LV filling pressure and reversibility of restrictive filling (phase 2) Evidence of impaired LV relaxation and E / A >0.8 To determine whether restrictive filling is reversible or not Assess for interatrial shunt (phase 3) Rule out cardiac source of paradoxical embolism (PFO) Unexplained right-sided cardiac dilatation
Adequate Valsalva
It is crucial to determine whether the Valsalva maneuver was performed adequately or not before interpretation of the results (Table 2 ). Clinical evidence of an adequate Valsalva includes distention of neck veins, flushing of the face, and increased abdominal muscle tone. Echocardiographically, adequate Valsalva is evident by a decrease in mitral inflow peak E velocity of 20 cm/s in the strain phase (phase 2) (Fig. 2 ) [ ] and leftward shift of the interatrial septum in the release phase (phase 3), as an indication of right atrial pressure exceeding that of LA (Fig. 3 ). Table 2 Indications of adequately performed Valsalva Signs of adequately performed Valsalva Clinical Distention of neck veins Flushing of the face Increase abdominal muscle tone Echocardiographical Decrease in mitral inflow peak E velocity of 20 cm/s in strain phase (phase 2) Leftward shift of the interatrial septum in the release phase (phase 3) Fig. 2 PW at mitral inflow. a E / A ratio 1.6 at rest. b E / A ratio 0.6 during strain phase of Valsalva Fig. 3 Transesophageal echocardiogram, modified bicaval view. a Septum secondum (SS), septum primum (SP), right atrium (RA), left atrium (LA). b Agitated saline contrast ( asterisk ) showing interatrial shunt. c During Valsalva, there is a leftward septal shift ( arrow ) and passage of microbubbles to the left atrium through PFO ( asterisk )
Valsalva in dynamic LVOT obstruction
LVOT gradient is an important guide for management in cases of HOCM and should be assessed adequately. At rest, LVOT gradient might not be high enough to explain symptoms. In HOCM, an LVOT peak gradient <30 mmHg necessitates the use of provocation maneuvers which include Valsalva [ ]. Other cases where dynamic LVOT obstruction is suspected by the finding of a dagger-shape late-peaking spectral Doppler signal in LVOT is also an indication for Valsalva which can be seen in cases such as left ventricular hypertrophy after aortic valve replacement and LVOT obstruction complicating acute mid to distal anterior myocardial infarction. Valsalva will increase the gradient of dynamic LVOT obstruction by decreasing the preload (phase 2) (Fig. 4 ). Strain should be held for 10 s while recording LVOT velocity. Pulsed wave (PW) and continuous wave (CW) Doppler should be used. The site of obstruction should be reported. Other maneuvers can be used like amyl nitrite and exercise. Exercise is the preferred provocation modality to Valsalva in symptomatic patients because it often produces a much higher gradient [ ]. Fig. 4 a CW over LVOT. Peak gradient of 32 mmHg at rest. b Peak gradient of 74 mmHg during strain phase of Valsalva
Valsalva in LV diastolic function assessment
Adequate strain phase of Valsalva will decrease preload and allow assessment of accompanying LV filling pattern changes. Adequacy of phase 2 Valsalva should be assessed. A sonographer should maintain correct sample volume location at the tip of mitral valve leaflets. The Valsalva maneuver helps to distinguish normal from pseudonormal filling [ ], as well as whether restrictive filling pattern is reversible or not where irreversible restrictive pattern has a worse prognosis [ ]. A decrease in E / A ratio of ≥50 % (Fig. 2 ) in response to Valsalva, not caused by E and A velocities fusion, is highly specific for increased LV filling pressures and supports the presence of diastolic dysfunction [ ]. Strain should be held while pulsed wave Doppler is being recorded for 10 s [ , , ].
Valsalva in interatrial shunt and PFO
An adequately performed Valsalva maneuver is an important step in diagnosis of PFO during echocardiographic study. In a study of 117 patients who underwent transesophageal echocardiography to rule out PFO, the false negative result rate was 19 % in patients who could not perform Valsalva versus 9 % in patients who adequately performed Valsalva ( P < 0.05) [ ]. Valsalva strain must be held until the RA is filled with microbubbles [ ]. Release from strain (phase 3) should be assessed for adequacy (Fig. 3 ). In sedated patients, the Valsalva maneuver might be difficult to perform and other less effective maneuvers to increase RA pressure should be attempted, e.g., forceful abdominal compression, cough induction by suctioning of throat, raising limb where contrast was injected and raising legs to increase venous return (Table 3 ) [ , , , ]. Table 3 Alternative maneuver to phase 3 of Valsalva can be used in sedated patients or in patients who could not perform Valsalva adequately during evaluation of PFO in agitated contrast study Alternative maneuver used to increase RA pressure Cough (spontaneous or induced) Arm raising after contrast injection Leg raising Abdominal compression
Limitations
Non-adequate Valsalva maneuver is seen in a substantial number of patient. This is partly due to patient education of the correct maneuver performance, the patient being sedated, and the patient being too sick to perform adequate Valsalva. Another limitation might arise with inspiration prior to strain where an adequate imaging window might not be feasible. Moreover, someone should note that inversion of E / A ratio with strain can be seen in healthy individuals [ , ] and should be interpreted in context with other echocardiographic findings. Finally, a positive effect of Valsalva maneuver can be reported with more confidence than a negative effect.
Conclusion
Valsalva is an easily performed maneuver which helps in the diagnosis of dynamic LVOT obstruction, diastolic dysfunction, and PFO. Correct maneuver performance is crucial. Adequacy of Valsalva should be noted prior to reporting. Non-adequate Valsalva should not be considered and is better discarded.