Introduction
The central serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) system plays a role in regulating aggressive behaviors [ , , , ]. In humans, aggressive personality disorders have been associated with alterations of central 5-HT activity [ , , , , ], 5-HT receptor 2A [ , ], and the 5-HT transporter [ , ]. Also, reactive aggression in patients with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder is associated with 5-HT levels in the central nervous system [ , ]. In patients with schizophrenia, the level of serotonin transporter in blood lymphocytes and platelets as well as its genetic variants is associated with an aggressive phenotype [ , , ]. Since enhanced aggressive behaviors are associated with low 5-HT function [ , , , ], 5-HT may suppress aggression. However, there has been controversy regarding whether isolation rearing (IR) increases or decreases the 5-HT level in the central nervous system. Some studies have shown that early maternal deprivation significantly reduces the level of the 5-HT metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) in the brain of infant monkeys throughout their early development from 14 to 150 days of age [ , ]. Low central 5-HIAA concentrations are strongly related to excessive aggression [ , ]. Also, 5-HT immune-reactivity decreases in the anterior hypothalamus of maternally-separated rats and this 5-HT loss is correlated with the display of aggression [ , ]. In addition, in IR rats the terminals of serotonergic neurons disappear from the CA region of the hippocampus [ ] and the basal turnover of serotonin decreases significantly in the nucleus accumbens [ , ]. Although the basal level of 5-HT in the prefrontal cortex is unaffected by IR, 5-HT release in this cortical structure under the condition of amphetamine-challenge becomes attenuated in isolates [ ]. Nevertheless, other studies have shown that IR increases the 5-HT level in all brain regions except for the raphe nuclei [ , ], particularly in the prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens [ ].
IR from weaning in laboratory animals produces a range of persistent behavioral changes in the young adult, including hyperactivity in response to novelty and amphetamine, and altered responses to conditioning; it is an effective stressful manipulation in early life that affects brain development [ , ], causing enhanced aggression [ , , , , , ] and other behavioral and cognitive deficits. This isolation rearing time is a pretty effective early-life stage for the brain development. [ , , , , , , , , , , ]. Since IR also affects brain structures and neurotransmission [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ], some of these changes may underlie the IR-related enhancement of aggression.
To investigate whether 5-HT is responsible for enhanced aggression in IR mice, we investigated the effects of IR on aggressive behavior in both wild type (WT) and 5-HT-deficient mice either lacking the essential enzyme for synthesizing 5-HT (tryptophan hydroxylase 2, Tph2) [ ] or lacking LIM-homeobox-transcription factor 1 β (Lmx1b) [ ]. We also investigated the effects of 5-HT depletion in WT mice and the supply of 5-HT to Lmx1b −/− mice.
Materials and Methods
Animals, Genotyping, and Social Isolation
The animal maintenance and handling followed the regulations of Peking University Animal Care and Use Committee. The experimental procedures were approved by the Peking University Animal Care and Use Committee and followed the NIH Guidelines regarding the care and use of animals for experimental procedures. ePet1 -Cre/ Lmx1b flox / Lmx1b flox ( Lmx1b −/− ), ePet1 -Cre/ Lmx1b flox/+ ( Lmx1b +/− ) and Tph2 −/− mice were kind gifts from Dr. Zhou-Feng Chen (Washington University, St. Louis, MO) [ , ]. Lmx1b +/+ refers to mice that were not crossed with the Cre line. All WT C57BL/6J and knockout mice were maintained under a 12 h/12 h light/dark cycle and housed with their mothers for 27 days after birth and before weaning (usually on day 21 after birth). Food and water were supplied ad libitum . On day 28, male mice were selected for experiments and genotyped. Genomic DNA was extracted from the tail. The primers used to examine the Lmx1b and Tph2 lines were as previously described [ ]. The social-isolation (SI) groups were then singly housed for 4 weeks. The controls were divided into groups of 5 mice per cage (24×17×12 cm) and socially-reared for 4 weeks. Moreover, all the mice were kept in the same room so that they had the same visual, auditory, and olfactory contact with other animals. The handling was kept to the minimum necessary. Mice from the same litter were assigned equally to isolation and social housing conditions.
Resident-Intruder Test
To test the aggression of the group-housed and SI mice, a male intruder mouse (8 weeks of age, socially reared) was put into the resident cages at 17:00–18:00 and the behavior was videotaped (Quickcam, Logitech, Lausanne) overnight for 12 h. The aggression was measured as the frequency of fighting, latency to the first attack, and the average duration of fighting within the first 3 h of recording. The experimenters were blind to the genotype and housing conditions of the mice.
Open Field
Open field tests began after a 30-min acclimation period in the test room in a transparent 43×43×30.5 cm open field box (ENV-520, Med Associates, Fairfax). Each mouse was placed in the center of the box and the travel distance and rearing behavior were recorded for 1 h. The box was cleaned thoroughly after each test.
Elevated Plus Maze
The elevated plus maze apparatus consisted of four 32-cm long, 5-cm wide arms in the shape of a cross, 50 cm above the ground. Two arms were open and the others were closed by 15-cm walls. Illumination of the test room was kept constant with two floor lamps throughout the test (10 lumens). Mice were located in the center of the cross, of which head leaned against the walls at the beginning of the test. The total time the mice stayed in the open and closed arms during 5 min was measured and the numbers of times mice entered the open and closed arms were counted.
Beam Walking
The beam-walking test was conducted using a wooden beam 8 mm in diameter and 1 m long. The beam was placed 30 cm above a table and was horizontally connected to a box at one end for the mouse to escape. The mouse was placed at one end of the beam and allowed to walk to the box in 5 trials/day for 3 training days. After training, the mouse was placed on the beam and the average time to cross the beam and the numbers of hind-paw slips from 5 trials were recorded.
Rotarod
The rotarod test (IITC Life Science, Woodland Hills, CA) was conducted by placing a mouse on the apparatus rotating at 30 rpm for 5 training trials on 5 days. After training, the latency to falling from the rotarod was recorded for 5 test trials.
Acoustic Startle Response
The acoustic startle reflex was measured with an apparatus consisting of a non-restrictive Plexiglas cylinder (4 cm inner diameter, 13 cm long) mounted on a Plexiglas platform. The apparatus was placed in a ventilated, sound-attenuated chamber and cylinder movement was measured by a piezoelectric element mounted under each cylinder. Startle stimuli were presented through a high-frequency loudspeaker located 33 cm above the startle cylinders. The background noise was 70 dB. Startle magnitudes were sampled every millisecond during a 200-ms period beginning at the onset of the startle stimulus. The mice were allowed 5 min at the beginning of the test to become familiar with the environment and then sound stimuli were delivered at random intervals. The stimulus intensities were 90, 100, and 110 dB. All intensities were presented in a pseudo-random order, 10 times each. The maximum peak response in every 200 ms was recorded (startle amplitude) as an index of vigilance or arousal.
Forced Swimming
The forced swimming test was carried out using a Plexiglas cylinder 18 cm in diameter containing 25 cm of water at 21°C–22°C. Each mouse was placed in the water, left for 15 min, and then removed. The same mouse was placed back into the cylinder 24 h after the first test and the total immobility period during 10 min was recorded.
Tail Suspension
The tail-suspension test was performed by suspending a mouse at ~2 cm from the tip of the tail, 30 cm above a table for 10 min. The total immobile time was recorded.
Passive Avoidance Test
In the passive avoidance experiment, the apparatus consisted of two chambers of equal size connected by an arched channel. One chamber was enclosed by white walls and the other by black walls. The floor of black chamber was made up of several electrodes for shocks. Four infrared light beams detect the location of the animal. The mice were placed in the white chamber at the beginning of training, with the middle channel open to allow free movement from one side to the other. When all four paws of a mouse were in the black chamber, the channel was closed and a shock was delivered (0.6 mA for 1 s), then the mouse remained in the black chamber for the time remaining. The whole trial time was 300 s. After 24 h, each mouse was tested in the same manner as training, but without receiving a shock. The latency to the first entry into the black chamber was recorded as a test of inhibitory avoidance memory.
Morris Water Maze
The Morris water maze apparatus consisted of a circular pool 120 cm in diameter and 50 cm in height. The maze was placed in a room in which cues were available on the walls. The pool contained 30 cm of water at 21°C–22°C. The hidden platform was a 10-cm circular plate 2 cm below the water surface. First, all of the animals were placed in the room to become familiar with the environment. On the next day, the mice were trained to escape onto the hidden platform. The pool was conceptually divided into four quadrants of equal area. The hidden platform was placed in the center of one quadrant throughout the experiments. Each of the four cardinal points in the perimeter of the pool was randomly used as a starting point. A trial started when a mouse was placed in the pool facing the cues and ended when the it escaped onto the platform. In each trial, the escape latency, swimming speed, and total swimming distance to the hidden platform were recorded. If a mouse failed to escape within 60 s, the trial was terminated with an escape latency defined as 60 s. All the mice were tested 4 times per day for 5 days. On day 6, a probe trial was carried out, in which the time each mouse spent in each quadrant without the platform was recorded.
Drug Treatments
An indwelling cannula was implanted in the brain. All mice performed behavioral tasks on day 6 after surgery[ ]. 5-HT (500 nmol/L, 10 μL; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was injected intracerebroventricularly. The behavioral tests and measurement of 5-HT/5-HIAA and bioamine levels were performed 30 min after injection. WT mice were injected intracerebroventricularly with para-chlorophenylalanine (pCPA) (200 μg, 10 μL; Sigma) or 1% Tween saline control for 3 days before behavioral tests and the 5-HT/5-HIAA levels were measured. L-DOPA (Sigma) was dissolved in 0.1 mol/L HCl, neutralized by 0.1 mol/L NaOH, and then injected intracerebroventricularly (100 μg, 10 μL). The aggression test was performed 30 min after drug injection.
Measurement of 5-HT/5-HIAA and Bioamine Levels
The levels of 5-HT, 5-HIAA, dopamine (DA), 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC), and homovanillic acid (HVA) in the indicated regions were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). After cervical dislocation, the brain was removed on ice. The indicated regions were dissected out and weighted. For measurement of 5-HT and 5-HIAA, the tissues were homogenized on ice in buffer containing 0.2 mol/L perchloric acid, 100 μmol/L EDTA, and 100 ng/mL isoproterenol. For measurement of DA, DOPAC and HVA, the tissues were put into HeGA buffer (catecholamine/monoamine preservative solution containing 0.1 mol/L glacial acetic acid, 0.1 mmol/L EDTA, 0.12% oxidized L-glutathione, pH 3.7), homogenized, and centrifuged at 15000 g for 30 min at 4°C. After filtering through 0.45 μm membrane, samples were injected into HPLC with electrochemical detection (HPLC-ECD) with an auto-sampler (L-2200, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan). The samples were separated at 25°C with a reversed-phase analytical column (Eicom, Japan) and eluted at 0.5 mL/min at 30°C with 0.1 mol/L sodium acetate, 17% methanol, 190 mg/L sodium L-octanesulfonate, and 5 mg/L EDTA. The levels were measured by an electrochemical detector (2465, Waters, Massachusetts, USA).
Sexual Preference Determination
All mice were sexually naïve. After SI or social rearing for 4 weeks, an 8-week-old female C57BL/6J mouse and an 8-week-old male C57BL/6J mouse were placed into a cage with each experimental male mouse. The mating and mounting behaviors were observed for 10 min. The first mounting choice over male or female was used to determine the sexual preference of the home-caged male mouse.
Statistical Evaluation
Statistical significance was assessed by one-way, two-way, or three-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Sheffé’s test was applied post hoc for significant differences shown by ANOVAs. A P value < 0.05 or < 0.01 was taken to indicate statistical significance.
Results
Central 5-HT-Deficient Mice Showed Enhanced Aggression After SI
Tph2 is the essential synthetic enzyme converting tryptophan into 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) which can then be converted into 5-HT. Tph2 −/− mice showed a remarkable decrease in the brain 5-HT level [ ]. All behavioral experiments were carried out independently on 8-week-old mice. Under social rearing conditions, after the intruder was introduced (Fig. 1 A), Tph2 −/− mice showed more attacks, a shorter latency to the first attack, and a longer fighting time than WT mice (Fig. 2 A, C, E, P < 0.01). In the SI groups, Tph2 −/− mice showed a significant increase in fighting frequency and a decrease in first-fight latency (Fig. 2 A, C, P < 0.01). However, the increase of average attack duration was not significant (Fig. 2 E, P = 0.896). In contrast to Tph2 −/− mice, Tph2 +/− mice did not show significant differences in fighting frequency, first-fight latency and average attack duration compared with the WT in both the socially reared and isolated groups (Fig. 2 A, C, E). There was an interaction between central 5-HT loss and social isolation in the regulation of frequency and duration, but there is no interaction on the regulation of latency (Fig. 2 A, C, E, two-way ANOVA, F fre (2, 42) = 10.45, F lat (2, 42) = 0.2267, F dur (2, 42) = 4.353). There are two types of tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (Tph), Tph1 and Tph2. Although many reports have shown that Tph2 is expressed in the central and Tph1 in the peripheral nervous system, there is also evidence that Tph1 is present in the central nervous system [ ]. Therefore, Tph2 −/− mice could have remaining 5-HT in their central nervous system. To further investigate the role of 5-HT in the development of aggression, we used conditional Lmx1b-knockout mice in which almost all the serotonergic neurons in the central nervous system are deleted from embryogenesis to adulthood [ , ]. Lmx1b −/− mice showed a dramatic increase of aggressive behavior in the SI groups (Fig. 2 B, D, F, P < 0.01 for frequency, first-fight latency, and average duration). There was interaction between central 5-HT loss and social isolation on the regulation of frequency and latency, but is no interaction on the regulation of duration (Fig. 2 B, D, F, two-way ANOVA, F fre (3, 56) = 22.28, F lat (3, 56) = 3.924, F dur (3, 56) = 2.58). Fig. 1 Schematics of experimental methods. A Resident-intruder test. B Open field. C Elevated plus maze. D Beam walking. E Rotarod test. F Acoustic startle response. G Forced swimming. H Tail suspension. I Passive avoidance test. J Morris water maze. Fig. 2 Central 5-HT-deficient mice showed enhanced aggression. Tph2 −/− ( A, C, E ) and Lmx1b −/− mice ( B, D, F ) showed greater aggression as measured by the frequency of attack, latency to first attack, and average duration of fighting than WT mice in both the socially-reared (Ctl) and isolated (SI) groups ( n = 8/group). In the Tph2 group, there was interaction between central 5-HT loss and social isolation on the regulation of frequency and duration, but no interaction on the regulation of latency (F fre (2, 42) = 10.45, F lat (2, 42) = 0.2267, F dur (2, 42) = 4.353). In the Lmx1b group, there was interaction between central 5-HT loss and social isolation on the regulation of frequency and latency, but no interaction on the regulation of duration (F fre (3, 56) = 22.28, F lat (3, 56) = 3.924, F dur (3, 56) = 2.58). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. ** P < 0.01 vs WT mice, ## P < 0.01 vs socially-reared mice.
There is evidence that 5-HT transporter blockade impairs motor activity in mice [ ] and mice with 5-HT 1B receptor-knockout are hyperactive [ ]. We then examined the motor functions of 5-HT-deficient mice. The results of the open field, elevated plus maze, beam walking, and rotarod tests (Fig. 1 B–E) demonstrated no significant differences in Tph2 +/− , Tph2 −/− , Lmx1b +/+ , Lmx1b +/− , and Lmx1b −/− mice compared to WT mice in both socially grouped and isolated animals (Fig. S1A–N), indicating that Tph2 −/− and Lmx1b −/− mice had normal locomotor activity. The acoustic startle reflex (Fig. 1 F) is used as a simple and objective indicator of emotionality and attention in rodents and humans [ ]. Our data on the startle responses of WT and 5-HT-deficient mice to 90, 100, and 110 dB sounds showed no significant differences (Fig. S1 O, P). 5-HT has also been suggested to play roles in emotions such as anxiety and depression [ , ]. Surprisingly, our data on the forced-swimming, tail-suspension, and passive-avoidance tests (Fig. 1 G–I) showed no noticeable differences between Tph2 −/− , Lmx1b −/− , and WT mice in both the socially-reared and SI groups (Fig. S2A–F). Cognitive functions are also influenced by the serotonergic system [ ] and SI [ ]. Our results from the Morris water maze (Fig. 1 J) indicated that spatial learning and memory was not altered in the socially and isolated Lmx1b −/− (Fig. S2G–J), Tph2 −/− (Fig. S2K–N), and WT mice. Taken together, our data suggested that mice with central 5-HT deficiency showed more aggression in SI group than WT mice, which was not due to differences in their locomotor function, emotions, and spatial learning/memory.
Central 5-HT was Responsible for the Aggressive Phenotype
Since 5-HT plays important roles in both the central and peripheral systems, especially the digestive system [ ], we decided to minimize the central 5-HT action in WT mice by intracerebroventricular injection of pCPA (200 µg, 10 µL). This treatment led to a dramatic reduction in the levels of 5-HT and its metabolite 5-HIAA in various brain areas (Fig. 3 A, C, P < 0.01). pCPA-treated mice showed intense enhancement of aggression after SI, similar to that found in 5-HT-deficient mice (Fig. 3 E, F, P < 0.01). In the other hand, when Lmx1b −/− mice were injected intracerebroventricularly with 5-HT (500 nmol/L, 10 µL), the levels of 5-HT and 5-HIAA increased (Fig. 3 B, D, P < 0.01). 5-HT rescued the aggressive phenotype in Lmx1b −/− mice (Fig. 3 H, I, J, P < 0.01). The results of both depletion and rescue experiments confirmed that 5-HT is responsible for the enhanced aggression in Lmx1b −/− mice. Fig. 3 Depletion of 5-HT with pCPA increased aggression in WT mice and 5-HT reversed the enhanced aggression in Lmx1b −/− mice. A, C Levels of 5-HT and 5-HIAA in various brain regions decreased with central pCPA treatment ( n = 3/group). E, F, G Aggression increased in WT mice treated with pCAP centrally (n = 8/group). B, D Levels of 5-HT and 5-HIAA in various brain regions increased with central 5-HT treatment ( n = 3/group). H, I, J Aggression decreased in Lmx1b −/− mice treated with 5-HT centrally ( n = 8/group). Data represent mean ± SEM. ** P < 0.01 vs vehicle-treated group.
5-HT-deficient mice have been reported to exhibit mis-regulated sexual preference [ ]; Lmx1b −/− mice show loss of sexual preference in male-female and male-male mounting [ ]. Since sexual competition is one of the potential drives for aggressive behavior, we investigated whether the sexual preference of Lmx1b −/− mice affects their aggression. By introducing one sexually-naïve male mouse and one female mouse together to the home cage of the tested male mouse and observing the first mounting choice of the tested male mouse, we divided the WT and Lmx1b −/− mice into two groups according to their sexual preference: a group favoring male and a group favoring female. The groups neither showed a significant difference in baseline aggression in the socially-reared condition nor in the enhancement of aggression in the SI condition (Fig. S3 A–C), suggesting that sexual preference did not affect aggression in Lmx1b −/− mice.
DA Signaling Was Involved in Aggression of Lmx1b −/− Mice
The DA system interacts with the serotonin system and mediates various functions. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and 5-HT transporter blockers reduce DA signaling [ , , , , ], and the 5-HT1A receptor is involved in DA release in the frontal cortex of mice [ , , ]. We further investigated whether DA signaling is involved in the enhanced aggression in Lmx1b −/− mice. In the substantia nigra and striatum, the levels of DA as well as its metabolites DOPAC and HVA, significantly decreased in Lmx1b −/− mice, and this was reversed by 5-HT treatment (Fig. 4 A, B, C, P < 0.01; Fig. 4 C, D, E P < 0.01). However, the levels of DA and its metabolites did not change in the hippocampus in WT and Lmx1b −/− mice with or without 5-HT application (Fig. 4 G, H, I), suggesting that 5-HT regulates DA levels, and this might alter the aggressive behavior in Lmx1b −/− mice. To confirm that DA is involved in aggression and that regulation of DA levels modulates aggression, L-DOPA was injected intracerebroventricularly in socially-isolated Lmx1b −/− mice. The aggression was largely reduced with L-DOPA treatment compared to vehicle treatment (Fig. 5 , P < 0.01). Interestingly, applying 5-HT and L-DOPA together further decreased the aggression compared to application of 5-HT or L-DOPA alone (Fig. 5 , P < 0.01), suggesting an additive effect of the 5-HT and DA systems. Fig. 4 Levels of DA and its metabolites were downregulated in Lmx1b −/− mice. The levels of DA, DOPAC, and HVA were measured in the substantia nigra ( A – C ), striatum ( D – F ), and hippocampus ( G – I ). DA and its metabolites decreased in the substantia nigra and striatum but not in the hippocampus ( n = 3/group). Data represent mean ± SEM. ** P < 0.01 vs WT mice, ## P < 0.01 vs vehicle treatment group. Fig. 5 L-DOPA reversed the enhanced aggression, while central delivery of L-DOPA reduced the aggression in socially-isolated Lmx1b −/− mice ( n = 8/group). Data represent mean + SEM. ** P < 0.01 vs vehicle treatment group, ## P < 0.01 vs 5-HT and L-DOPA alone groups.
Discussion
The SI animal model has been used to study the mechanisms underlying schizophrenia for many years [ ]. Aggression is significantly enhanced after SI [ ]. It is widely accepted that the serotonin system is related to the development of schizophrenia and aggression [ , , ]. However, definite confirmation of its causative role in aggression and enhanced aggression under SI condition has not been achieved. By using two mouse lines with deficits in central 5-HT, we demonstrated that depletion of central 5-HT greatly increased aggression in the socially-reared environment and largely amplified the enhancement of aggression in the socially -isolated condition. Pharmacological depletion of central 5-HT in WT mice mimicked the effects in 5-HT-deficient mouse lines. Furthermore, 5-HT successfully rescued the phenotype of increased aggression in Lmx1b −/− mice. We also excluded the possibility that locomotion, emotional state, and learning/memory may influence aggression, since Lmx1b −/− did not differ from WT mice in the above measurements, which is consistent with the findings of the group that originally produced this mouse line [ ]. 5-HT has been suggested to play roles in emotions such as anxiety and depression. Moreover, depression-like behaviors can also change after social isolation [ , ]. Surprisingly, our data from the forced swimming, tail suspension, and passive avoidance tests showed no notable differences between Tph2 −/− , Lmx1b −/− , and WT mice in both the socially-reared and SI groups. Thus, although several mouse lines were used to address the relationship between central 5-HT deficiency and anxiety- and depression-like behaviors, we cannot exclude the possibility that the effects on these behaviors are caused indirectly by compensations or other unknown changes associated with the loss of 5-HT transmitter or serotonergic neurons.
In fact, the anxiety- and depression-like behaviors in Tph2-deficient mice are still a controversial problem [ , ]. The deletion of 5-HT1A receptors increases anxiety, but reduces immobility in the forced swimming test [ ]. However, effects on anxiety- and depression-like behaviors of manipulations of the 5-HT system were not evident in our 5-HT-deficient mice, neither in the socially-reared nor the SI groups. A previous study demonstrated that 5-HT deficiency in the brain may not be sufficient to lead to depression- and anxiety-like behaviors in mice [ ]. Nevertheless, our results link central 5-HT directly to aggressive behavior.
We also found that DA signaling is involved and modulates aggression. A recent study reported that the prefrontal DA and 5-HT systems in male isolation-reared mice are activated by stimulation, and then abnormal behaviors are induced in these mice, such as aggression and hyperactivity [ ]. When the serotonin production is decreased in Tph2-deficient mice, the degradation of serotonin has been reported to decrease so as to maintain the brain serotonin levels. These results suggested that the abnormal behavior found in Tph2-deficient mice is not caused by the decreased TPH2 activity [ ]. Since the primary change in Lmx1b −/− mice is the deletion of central serotoninergic neurons and loss of most of the central 5-HT activity from embryonic day 16.5 [ ] without affecting DA signaling, we conclude that the changes in the levels of DA and its metabolites in various brain areas are secondary to 5-HT modulation. It is possible that the 5-HT system interacts closely with the DA system and the absence of 5-HT neurons and its activity induces the downregulation of DA levels or dopaminergic neurons either during development or adulthood. Like 5-HT, L-DOPA reverses the aggression in Lmx1b −/− mice, indicating that L-DOPA, besides 5-HT, could be a potential treatment to relieve extreme aggressive behavior in human conditions such as schizophrenia. Furthermore, applying 5-HT and L-DOPA together induce an additive response, suggesting that the serotoninergic and dopaminergic systems might be parallel pathways in regulating aggression, so interference with either one or both pathways might improve aggressive conditions.
Further research focused on understanding the differential regulation, modulation, and function of serotoninergic and dopaminergic systems may shed light on the development of effective disease-treatment strategies. Importantly, the development of more specific drugs targeted at this may have considerable application prospects in aggression-related human conditions and in the treatment of clinical and social problems.