Introduction
With neurohormonal regulation, the cardiovascular system primarily transports substances such as amino-acids, electrolytes, O 2 , CO 2 , hormones, and other metabolic products to and from the cells in the body through the blood. Its function is to maintain homeostasis and provide adequate nourishment for fighting various types of diseases. The arterial baroreflex plays an important role in regulating the cardiovascular system [ , ]. In general, when arterial vascular tension triggers a feedback signal, the arterial baroreflex reflexively decreases the excessive arterial blood pressure and heart rate to the normal physiological range. The arterial baroreflex arc is composed of an afferent limb (baroreceptor neurons), a central component (central nuclei), and an efferent limb (peripheral sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons). Arterial baroreceptors, including carotid and aortic baroreceptors, are key afferents of the baroreflex arc. The cell bodies of these baroreceptors are located in the nodose and petrosal ganglia and their terminals innervate arterial blood vessels in the carotid sinus and aortic arch. These terminals sense mechanical changes of the arterial vasculature in the carotid sinus and aortic arch and produce excitatory electrical signals, which are integrated and modulated in the arterial baroreceptors by local modulators. Then the integrated signal is conveyed to the dorsal medial region of the nucleus of the solitary tract (a central component of the baroreflex arc) in the dorsal medulla. Finally, this excitation evokes peripheral sympathoinhibitory and parasympathoexcitatory responses. Therefore, the consequence of arterial baroreceptor activation is to decrease heart rate, cardiac output, and peripheral vascular resistance, and to reflexively neutralize an increase in arterial blood pressure and heart rate [ , , ].
Cardiovascular diseases (such as heart failure and hypertension) and diabetes are major health problems worldwide [ , , ], especially cardiovascular diseases that are the number-one killer in the USA [ ]. Attenuation of arterial baroreflex sensitivity is considered to be a common feature in cardiovascular diseases and diabetes [ , , , , , , ]. Much evidence indicates that decreased baroreflex sensitivity leads to cardiac arrhythmogenesis and sudden cardiac death [ , , ], and is linked with the prognosis and mortality in patients with cardiovascular diseases or diabetes [ , , , , ]. The baroreflex can be modulated by regulatory circuitry at multiple levels including peripheral nerve afferents at the baroreceptors, central components, and efferent components (sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves). In the baroreflex arc, structural and functional changes in each component may attenuate the baroreflex sensitivity. However, two pieces of evidence should be considered. First, recent studies have confirmed that arterial baroreflex dysfunction is attributable to functional impairment of the baroreceptors under pathophysiological conditions [ , , , , , , ]. Second, both animal studies and clinical trials have demonstrated that baroreceptor activation therapy (direct electrical stimulation of the baroreceptor area) markedly attenuates the symptoms and improves the prognosis in cardiovascular diseases and diabetes [ , , , , ]. Therefore, baroreceptor impairment might be an important factor in baroreflex dysfunction, including peripheral sympathetic over-activation and withdrawal of peripheral parasympathetic activity in cardiovascular diseases and diabetes. Direct electrical stimulation of the baroreceptor area is a novel therapeutic approach for patients with cardiovascular diseases or diabetes, and has a strong pathophysiological rationale. However, the surgical procedure for baroreceptor stimulation can have adverse complications, including nerve injury, hematoma, headache, worsening of existing heart failure, and hypertension [ , , ]. Considering these sequelae, exploring the cellular and molecular mechanism(s) associated with the impairment of arterial baroreceptors and identifying effective therapeutic interventions are crucial for improving the development and prognosis of patients with cardiovascular diseases and diabetes. In this review, we mainly discuss the pathophysiological changes of arterial baroreceptors and related mechanisms in cardiovascular diseases and diabetes.
Anatomy and Physiology of Arterial Baroreceptors
Baroreceptors are divided into high-pressure arterial baroreceptors and low-pressure baroreceptors. High-pressure arterial baroreceptors, also known as arterial baroreceptors, have stretch-sensitive terminals, and mainly innervate arterial vasculature in the aortic arch and carotid sinus. Arterial baroreceptors are an important part of the negative feedback regulation of blood pressure and heart rate, although low-pressure baroreceptors also influence blood pressure by adjusting blood volume and the retention of salt and water in the kidney. As the main receptors for the regulation of cardiopulmonary function or blood volume, low-pressure baroreceptors are located in the great systemic veins, pulmonary arteries, and walls of right and left atria.
Arterial baroreceptors, one type of pseudo-unipolar peripheral neurons, have a special structural feature. Each soma of the arterial baroreceptors in the nodose and petrosal ganglia has an initial axon segment that bifurcates into two processes [ , ].
One process is defined as the central process, which terminates in the dorsomedial region of the nucleus of the solitary tract [ , ], while the other is the peripheral process, which innervates the arterial vasculature in the aortic arch and carotid sinus [ , ]. The structure of the aortic baroreceptor neuron is illustrated in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 Cartoon of an aortic baroreceptor neuron including a soma, a central process to the NTS (nucleus of the solitary tract), and a peripheral process to the aortic arch.
The structure of the nerve terminals in the peripheral process innervating the arterial vasculature has been extensively studied using light and electron microscopic techniques [ , , , , , , , ]. Although there are subtle differences among species, the common morphological features are as follows [ , , ]. First, unmyelinated and myelinated fibers in these nerve bundles form a network that pursues a roughly helical course in the adventitia, and also reaches the border of the media to form complex, irregular varicosities (rings or reticula). Second, the afferent axons contain abundant neurotubules. Third, densely-packed mitochondria occur in most of the nerve terminals. Fourth, axoplasmic organelles accumulate in varicosities of the lanceolate terminals, including granular vesicles, glycogen particles, lamellated bodies, and lysosomes. Considering the fast response of electrical impulses to pulsatile arterial expansion, the presence of numerous mitochondria in the nerve terminals supports the high metabolic rate of arterial baroreceptors [ , , ]. Granular vesicles, neurotubules, glycogen particles, lamellated bodies, and lysosomes are possible markers of the continuous reorganization of baroreceptor terminals, which matches the repeated variation in arterial blood pressure [ , ]. A recent study reported that these synaptic-like granular vesicles could be a part of a constitutive glutamate secretory system [ ]. This special system may be involved in maintaining the stretch-sensitivity of arterial baroreceptors [ ].
The nerve fibers of arterial baroreceptors are both myelinated (A-type) and unmyelinated (C-type) afferent fibers [ ]. The different dynamic characteristics of sensory nerve activity are usually used to clarify both A-type and C-type baroreceptor afferents. Serving as the regulators of the arterial baroreflex sensitivity, A-type afferents are activated by lower pressure and present stable and rapid discharges [ ]. On the other hand, C-type afferents primarily regulate tonic levels of arterial blood pressure because these afferents have a high pressure threshold with slow and irregular neural activity [ ].
Both aortic and carotid sinus baroreceptors function as an input to the arterial baroreflex, providing afferent signals to the dorsomedial region of the nucleus of the solitary tract, and subsequently to maintain arterial blood pressure at the normal level through a negative feedback circuit. When arterial blood pressure increases, vascular distension-triggered excitation of these arterial baroreceptors results in reduction of the peripheral sympathetic outflow and activation of the peripheral parasympathetic outflow, and reflexively restores arterial blood pressure to normal levels. Conversely, when arterial blood pressure decreases, unloading arterial baroreceptor excitation leads to peripheral sympathetic over-activation and silencing of the peripheral parasympathetic activity, subsequently normalizing arterial blood pressure [ , , ].
When a mechanical change in the arterial vasculature needs to be translated into an excitatory signal and then transmitted to the dorsomedial region of the nucleus of the solitary tract, three successive functional processes must occur [ ]. Vascular distension and the deformation of arterial baroreceptor terminals are the first step. In the adventitia and part of the media in the aortic arch and carotid sinus, sensory nerve terminals of the aortic and carotid baroreceptors are embedded in vascular wall components that include elastin, collagen, and smooth muscle cells. This specific structure ensures viscoelastic coupling between arterial vascular wall components and the terminals of arterial baroreceptors. Deformation of the baroreceptor terminals is triggered by mechanical distension of the arterial vasculature when blood pressure rises. Mechanoelectrical transduction is the second step: mechanosensitive ion channels are activated by deformation of the baroreceptor terminals, inducing their depolarization. This completes the conversion from mechanical to electrical energy in these terminals. The translation of membrane depolarization into action potentials is the third step: mechanosensitive ion channel-induced membrane depolarization reaches the voltage threshold (a specific voltage level for each excitable cell), and voltage-gated inward and outward ion channels (including Na + , Ca 2+ , and K + channels) are successively activated to generate action potentials. Finally, the action potentials generated in the terminals are conveyed along the peripheral and central processes to the dorsal medial region of the nucleus of the solitary tract.
Influence of Arterial Vascular Wall on Arterial Baroreceptor Sensitivity
Arterial baroreceptor terminals are excited by deformation or strain of the arterial vascular wall but not by intra-vessel pressure per se [ , ]. Multi-faceted experimental methodologies from whole-animal studies to cellular-molecular measurements have been used to evaluate the influence of the arterial vascular wall on baroreceptor sensitivity. Using in-situ and in-vitro preparations of carotid arteries, these studies have demonstrated that the alteration of circumferential strain is larger than that of axial strain when the pressure in the artery is kept in the physiological range [ ]. These results indicate that circumferential deformation of the arterial vascular wall plays a predominant role in baroreceptor sensitivity. In these studies, however, the carotid arteries are usually isolated from surrounding tissues and cannulated in in-situ preparations, and a linear flow path is created by cannulating the brachiocephalic artery and descending aorta in in-vitro preparations [ , , ]. It is possible that the role of axial deformation in the baroreceptor sensitivity has been downplayed, because these preparations cannot maintain the normal anatomical flow path and orientation of the arteries [ ]. Feng et al. combined an in-vitro aortic arch preparation and a traditional three-dimensional finite element modeling method to maintain the normal anatomical flow path and orientation of aortic arteries [ ]. They found that both axial and circumferential strains contribute to pressure-triggered deformation of the arterial vasculature [ ].
Regardless of the influence of axial and circumferential strains in the arterial baroreceptor sensitivity, alteration of the arterial vascular wall deforms the baroreceptor terminals [ , , ]. This process is completed by vascular wall components comprising smooth muscle, elastin, and collagen in the tunica adventitia and the media-adventitia border of the aortic arch and carotid sinus [ , , ]. Much evidence has demonstrated that the aortic and carotid baroreceptor areas are specialized, having more elastin and less smooth muscle in the tunica media than other areas of the arterial wall [ , , , , , ]. In the tunica media of the baroreceptor areas, the high levels of elastin make the vasculature easily distensible in response to changes in intraluminal pressure [ ]. This responsiveness is accompanied by deformation of the baroreceptor terminals [ ]. Both polarized light investigations and electron microscopic studies have revealed that a network of contacts among elastic and collagen fibers maintains the collagen in a folded configuration to terminate at the basement membrane and wrapping around the baroreceptor nerve endings [ , , , ]. When the arterial vascular wall is stretched, this network modulates collagen unfolding to induce mechanical deformation of the baroreceptor terminals by traction on the basement membrane [ , , , ].
Individual arterial baroreceptor nerve terminals have a wide spectrum of stimulus thresholds [ ]. To explain this phenomenon, Rees [ ] noted that the threshold of an individual baroreceptor terminal might depend on the ratio of the particular collagen/elastin admixture surrounding it. This explanation implies that baroreceptor terminals surrounded by more extensive elastic fibers would be more sensitive than those embedded in less extensive elastic fibers. However, studies have demonstrated that both myelinated and unmyelinated baroreceptor terminals form complex, irregular varicosities, and the latter directly contact the basement membrane [ , , , , ]. In addition, physiological studies have shown that unmyelinated baroreceptor fibers in the aortic arch and carotid sinus have higher thresholds and lower sensitivity than myelinated baroreceptor fibers [ , , ]. Therefore, the wide spectrum of thresholds for baroreceptor fibers could be associated with their intrinsic properties, irrespective of the ratio of the particular collagen/elastin admixture surrounding them.
Considering the role of vascular wall components (elastin, collagen, and smooth muscle cells) in the deformation of arterial baroreceptor nerve terminals, increased stiffness of large elastic arteries in the carotid sinus and aortic arch could be associated with a decrease in baroreceptor sensitivity. Earlier studies [ , ] have demonstrated that arterial atherosclerosis in the human carotid sinus and hypertrophy of the aortic vasculature in chronic hypertension increase the stiffness of the arterial vasculature, and subsequently attenuate the arterial baroreceptor activity in response to a change of intravascular pressure. Clinical trials have demonstrated that increased arterial stiffness impairs arterial baroreflex sensitivity as an independent determinant [ , , , , ]. These clinical observations assumed (but did not confirm) that the contribution of arterial stiffness to the arterial baroreflex dysfunction might occur via a decrease in baroreceptor sensitivity, because these clinical trials did not directly measure the baroreceptor sensitivity.
Using an in-vitro aortic arch-aortic nerve preparation and recording from single aortic baroreceptor fibers, Andresen et al. reported that the baroreceptor sensitivity is more closely associated with aortic distensibility when vessel stiffness occurs in spontaneously hypertensive rats [ , ]. Thus far, there have been no reports on whether arterial stiffness is involved in the attenuation of baroreceptor sensitivity in diabetes and chronic heart failure. Based on the findings that arterial stiffness is a shared consequence of diabetes and chronic heart failure, and is an independent risk factor in these diseases [ , , , , , ], arterial stiffness is likely to be an important factor in baroreceptor sensitivity. In addition, circulating angiotensin (Ang) II levels are elevated in patients and animal models with hypertension, diabetes, or chronic heart failure [ , , , , , , , , , ]. A recent study reported that chronic infusion of exogenous Ang II activates Ca 2+ /calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII) in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), and subsequently results in increased aortic stiffness and decreased baroreceptor activity [ ]. Furthermore, transgenic expression of a CaMKII peptide inhibitor in VSMCs prevents the Ang II-induced increase in aortic stiffness and decrease in baroreceptor activity [ ]. Therefore, alteration of the arterial vascular wall could be an important factor in modulating the arterial baroreceptor sensitivity in cardiovascular diseases and diabetes.
Role of Mechanoelectrical Transduction in Arterial Baroreceptor Sensitivity
Mechanoelectrical transduction converts the mechanical deformation of arterial baroreceptor nerve terminals into baroreceptor membrane depolarization. Much evidence has confirmed the presence of mechanosensitive ion channels in aortic baroreceptors [ , , , , ]. Usually, the opening of mechanosensitive ion channels constitutes mechanoelectrical transduction when arterial baroreceptor terminals are mechanically deformed.
In animal studies, direct recording of single-fiber or multi-fiber electrical activity is usually used to measure the function of the arterial baroreceptor afferent nerve and terminals in in-vivo , in-situ , or in-vitro aortic arch or carotid sinus preparations [ , , , , , , , , , ]. The first study focusing on the role of mechanosensitive ion channels in arterial baroreceptor activation investigated the baroreceptor activity in the perfused isolated carotid sinus preparation before and after intraluminal injection of a mechanosensitive ion channel blocker [ ]. This study demonstrated that the inhibition of mechanosensitive ion channels blunts the pressure-induced increase in the baroreceptor activity without changing the carotid sinus compliance [ ]. However, clarifying the contribution of the terminals alone to the baroreceptor sensitivity is very difficult, because of the presence of endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, and other types of cells in the arterial vasculature. In addition, the baroreceptor nerve endings have a complex network structure, and are embedded in the arterial vasculature. These factors do not allow the direct measurement of membrane electrophysiology in the terminals. Nevertheless, an alternative preparation using the isolated somata of arterial baroreceptor neurons has been used as a substitute for terminals in electrophysiological recording [ , ].
So far, it is unclear which type of mechanosensitive ion channel is the mechanoelectrical transducer in arterial baroreceptors. Many types of such channels have been reported to be expressed in sensory neurons, including epithelial Na + channels (ENaCs) [ , , ], acid-sensing ion channels (ASICs) [ ], transient receptor potential (TRP) ion channels [ ], stretch-activated K + channels [ ], mechanically-gated two-pore domain K + channels [ ], and piezo-ion channels [ , , ]. ENaCs, ASICs, and TRP channels have been considered possible candidates for mechanoelectrical transduction in arterial baroreceptor nerve terminals.
ENaCs are members of the amiloride-sensitive degenerin channel (DEG) superfamily identified in mammals [ , , , ]. ENaCs were first identified as mechanosensory in Caenorhabditis elegans [ , , ]. Four subunits of ENaCs (α-, β-, γ-, and σ-ENaC) are expressed in many tissues, including brain, kidney, and aortic baroreceptors [ , , , , , ]. In polarized epithelial cells, they function as an obligate heteromultimer to direct the flow of Na + ions into the cytoplasm via the channel pore in the membrane [ , ]. The function of ENaCs in epithelial cells can be blocked with amiloride [ ]. As vectorial transcellular transporters of Na + ions, ENaCs play important roles in regulating extracellular fluids, and maintaining whole-body salt balance and water homeostasis [ ]. Besides their expression as the Na + transporter in epithelial cells, ENaCs are considered to be mechanosensors in non-epithelial cells. In some mechanosensory neurons, the ENaC protein has the electrophysiological characteristics of a mechanosensory channel [ ]. Experimental evidence has also demonstrated that inward Na + currents activated by membrane stretch or shear force occur in ENaC-expressing Xenopus oocytes [ ]. These ENaC-like currents are totally blocked by amiloride and benzamil (specific ENaC blockers) [ ]. These studies confirm that the ENaC is involved in mechanosensation in non-epithelial mechanosensitive tissues as a mechano/amiloride-sensitive channel [ , , , , ]. Furthermore, studies have also reported the expression of ENaC subunits in baroreceptor cell bodies and nerve terminals [ , , ]. More importantly, in arterial baroreceptors, only the β- and γ-ENaC subunits and not the α-ENaC subunit are expressed [ , , ]. The role of ENaCs in arterial baroreceptor function has been extensively investigated by the application of ENaC blockers including amiloride and benzamil. In the isolated carotid sinus of rabbits, application of benzamil significantly attenuates carotid sinus nerve activity in a dose-dependent manner [ ]. In isolated aortic baroreceptor neurons, amiloride selectively abolishes mechanical stimulation-induced membrane depolarization, while this drug does not attenuate depolarizing current-induced action potentials [ , ].
ASICs are also members of the DEG/ENaC superfamily [ ]. At least seven ASIC isoforms (ASIC-1a, -1b, -2a, -2b, -3, -4, and -5) are highly expressed in the mammalian central and peripheral nervous systems [ , , ]. When the gene for ASIC-1a, -1, -2, or -3 is mutated, neurosensory mechanotransduction is deficient in peripheral tissues including muscle and skin, and in the gastrointestinal tract [ , , , , , , , , ]. Therefore, these ASIC isoforms contribute to neurosensory mechanotransduction in different types of sensory nerves innervating all peripheral tissues and organs. Both ASIC mRNA and protein are also expressed in arterial baroreceptors [ ]. Quantitative RT-PCR has shown that ASIC-1a, -1b, -2a, -2b, and -3 mRNAs are expressed in the cell bodies of nodose neurons [ ]. In addition, immunofluorescent staining has demonstrated that ASIC-1, -2, and -3 proteins are present in the cell bodies, nerve fibers, and terminals of aortic baroreceptors [ ]. To evaluate the role of ASIC2 in aortic baroreceptor sensitivity, baroreceptor activation has been measured in vitro in isolated aortic baroreceptor neurons and in vivo in the aortic depressor nerve [ ]. In isolated primary aortic baroreceptor neurons, mechanical stimulation-induced membrane depolarization is markedly greater in mice with ASIC2 overexpression than in wild-type mice, while mechanical stimulation-induced membrane depolarization is abolished in ASIC2-null mice [ ]. Similarly, in vivo aortic depressor nerve activity is attenuated in ASIC2-null mice compared to wild-type mice [ ].
TRP ion channels are a superfamily of cellular sensors that respond to extra- and intra-cellular stimuli including light, temperature, pheromones, acidity, taste, pain, direct membrane stretching, and osmotic stress [ , , , , , ]. Recent studies reported seven subfamilies of mammalian TRP ion channels: TRPC (canonical 1-7), TRPV (vanilloid 1-6), TRPM (melastatin 1-8), TRPP (polycystin 2, 3, 5), TRPML (mucolipin 1-3), TRPA (ankyrin 1), and TRPN (NOMPC-like 1) [ , , , ]. Many tissues and cells express TRP channels [ ]. Using immunocytochemical and immunofluorescent techniques, studies have demonstrated the expression of TRPV1 and several TRPC (TRPC1 and TRPC3-7) proteins in the somata of aortic baroreceptor neurons, while TRPV1, TRPC1, and TRPC3-5 proteins are expressed in aortic myelinated and unmyelinated axons and baroreceptor terminals [ , , ]. A recent study demonstrated the stretch activation of TRPC5 channels and their involvement in whole-cell ion currents activated by hypo-osmolarity and arterial baroreceptor mechanosensation [ ]. In cell bodies of rat aortic baroreceptor neurons, a mechanosensitive channel has been recorded using whole-cell and single-channel patch-clamp recordings [ ]. This channel activation is antagonized by T5E3 (a TRPC5-blocking antibody) and T5DN (a dominant-negative TRPC5 construct) [ ]. Similarly, this mechanosensitive channel recorded in wild-type mice is undetectable in TRPC5 −/− mice [ ]. In addition, hypo-osmolarity cannot activate whole-cell inward currents in TRPC5 −/− animals, while it does so in the aortic baroreceptor neurons of wild-type animals [ ]. These hypo-osmolarity-activated inward currents are inhibited by T5E3 and T5DN153. Furthermore, pressure-elevated arterial baroreceptor nerve activity is significantly blunted in lentiviral-T5DN-transfected and TRPC5 −/− animals [ ]. More importantly, knockdown of other TRPC isoforms (TRPC-1, -3, -4, and -6) does not change hypo-osmolarity-activated whole-cell currents and pressure-induced frequency increase in arterial baroreceptors [ ]. These data indicate that TRPC5 may be a key mechanotransducer in arterial baroreceptors.
In contrast to studies focusing on the role of mechanosensitive ion channels as the mechanoelectrical transducers in arterial baroreceptors under normal conditions, scant information is available about changes in mechanosensitive ion channels in arterial baroreceptors under pathophysiological conditions. Using immunofluorescent staining and Western Blot analysis, Li et al. [ ] demonstrated that the βENaC and γENaC subunit proteins are expressed, while the αENaC subunit protein is undetectable in aortic baroreceptor terminals and cell bodies. In particular, the expression of βENaC and γENaC proteins is decreased in aortic baroreceptor terminals and cell bodies from animals with chronic heart failure [ ]. Whole-cell ENaC currents recorded by patch-clamp are also reduced in aortic baroreceptor neurons from animals with chronic heart failure [ ]. The decrease in ENaC currents may contribute to attenuation of the pressure-stimulated aortic depressor nerve activity in animals with chronic heart failure [ ]. Although the above evidence supports the potential involvement of stretch-activated ion channels in arterial baroreceptor sensitivity and their important clinical implications, further studies are needed to identify baroreceptor mechanosensors and the related regulatory mechanisms in cardiovascular diseases and diabetes.
Involvement of Voltage-Gated Ion Channels in Arterial Baroreceptor Sensitivity
As noted above, after mechanically-induced membrane depolarization reaches threshold, voltage-gated inward and outward ion channels are successively activated to generate action potentials in baroreceptor terminals. Finally, the action potentials are conveyed to the dorsomedial region of the nucleus of the solitary tract. In 1952, Hodgkin and Huxley provided a fundamental framework for the initiation and propagation of the nerve impulse along axonal processes [ ]. Voltage-gated ion channels [Na + (Nav), Ca 2+ (Cav), and K + (Kv)] are the basis of neuronal electrical excitability [ , ]. Many studies have recorded voltage-gated ion currents in arterial baroreceptor neurons, and analyzed the modulation of voltage-gated ion channels and their contributions to the initiation and propagation of the nerve impulse under normal conditions [ , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. Under pathophysiological conditions, however, only the roles and related modulation of Nav and hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels have been elucidated in detail in arterial baroreceptor neurons [ , , , , , , , , ].
Role of Nav Channels in Arterial Baroreceptors in Chronic Heart Failure
Voltage-gated Nav channels are found in excitable cells and other types of cells. In excitable cells, including primary viscerosensory neurons, voltage-gated Nav channels are essential for the initiation and propagation of action potentials [ , ]. Based on the characteristics of a pore-forming α-subunit, voltage-gated Nav channels are divided into nine functional isoforms (Nav1.1–1.9) [ ]. These isoforms are located in specific tissues, and each isoform has a different function in mammalian physiology [ ]. Tetrodotoxin (TTX) is a voltage-gated Nav channel blocker. Based on the TTX-sensitivity of Nav channels, they have also been separated into TTX-sensitive (Nav-1.1, -1.2, -1.3, -1.4, -1.6, and -1.7) and TTX-resistant (Nav-1.5, -1.8, and -1.9)[ , , ]. In primary viscerosensory neurons in the nodose ganglia, Nav-1.7, -1.8, and -1.9 are abundantly expressed [ , , , ]. Based on the expression of Nav-1.7, -1.8, and -1.9 channels, aortic baroreceptor neurons in the nodose ganglia are divided into A-type and C-type [ ]. Neurons with only TTX-sensitive Nav channels (Nav-1.7) are defined as A-type, whereas neurons with both TTX-sensitive (Nav-1.7) and TTX-resistant Nav channels (Nav-1.8 and -1.9) are defined as C-type [ , , , ].
To evaluate the role of Nav channels in arterial baroreflex sensitivity, it was measured in conscious dogs with chronic heart failure before and after treatment with a Nav channel enhancer [ ] and the attenuation of sensitivity was normalized by the enhancer [ ]. This was the first evidence for a contribution of Nav channels to the maintenance of arterial baroreflex sensitivity under pathophysiological conditions such as chronic heart failure. However, this study did not reveal which component(s) of the arterial baroreflex arc is the target of the enhancer. Using multi-faceted techniques (real-time RT-PCR, Western blot analysis, and immunofluorescent staining), Tu et al. measured the expression of Nav channel mRNAs and proteins in the nodose ganglia, including aortic baroreceptor neurons [ ]. Their study demonstrated the mRNA and protein expression of Nav-1.7, -1.8, and -1.9 channels in the nodose ganglia, and especially their low expression in rats with chronic heart failure [ ]. In addition, decreases in Nav currents (both TTX-sensitive and TTX-resistant) and cell excitability have been found in isolated aortic baroreceptor neurons from rats with chronic heart failure [ ]. In such rats, attenuation of the arterial baroreflex sensitivity is normalized by direct injection of rATX II (a Nav channel activator) into the nodose ganglia [ ]. Similarly, application of rATX II to aortic baroreceptor neurons also restores Nav current density and cell excitability in rats with chronic heart failure [ ]. The results of the above studies demonstrate that neuronal remodeling of arterial baroreceptors, including changes in Nav channel expression and activation, could be involved in attenuated arterial baroreceptor function and the resultant arterial reflex dysfunction in chronic heart failure.
Ang II-superoxide-NFκB signaling is a common signal pathway in a variety of pathophysiological conditions [ , , , , ]. This signaling has also been reported to modulate Nav channel expression and activation in arterial baroreceptors in chronic heart failure [ , , ]. A common endogenous peptide, Ang II is involved in many physiological actions through its binding with Ang II receptors expressed on cell membranes [ , , ]. Circulating and local tissue Ang II levels are increased in experimental animal models and patients with chronic heart failure [ , , , ]. In particular, a recent study found that AT1R mRNA and protein are overexpressed and local tissue Ang II concentration is elevated in the nodose ganglia including aortic baroreceptors from rats with chronic heart failure [ ]. In sham rats, Nav currents in isolated aortic baroreceptor neurons are inhibited by acute treatment with exogenous Ang II [ ]. The inhibitory effect of exogenous Ang II on Nav currents is completely counteracted by pretreatment with losartan (an AT1R blocker) [ ]. In rats with chronic heart failure, however, application of losartan to isolated aortic baroreceptor neurons does not affect Nav currents [ ]. Possible explanations include: (1) chronic heart failure-reduced expression of Nav channels is not modulated by acute treatment with losartan; and (2) acute isolated aortic baroreceptor neurons lose in-vivo environments including elevation of endogenous Ang II levels and paracrine release of Ang II from other adjacent cells after aortic baroreceptor neurons are acutely associated from animals [ ]. Therefore, high levels of endogenous Ang II combined with AT1R overexpression during the progression of chronic heart failure should be considered to modulate Nav channel expression and activation in aortic baroreceptor neurons in chronic heart failure.
In mitochondria, the electron transport chain is mainly involved in ATP production through transferring electrons to molecular oxygen under physiological conditions [ , ]. During the process of electron transport, 1%–2% of the electrons are leaked from mitochondrial complex enzymes (complexes I–IV) to produce a low level of the superoxide anion [ , , , , , ]. Under pathophysiological conditions, imbalance of the mitochondrial oxidative and anti-oxidative systems occurs [ , , , ]. The levels of the mitochondria-derived superoxide anion are elevated due to the inhibition of mitochondrial complex enzymes and/or the inactivation of manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) [ , , , ]. In animals with chronic heart failure, the mitochondria-derived superoxide anion in the nodose ganglia is overproduced through inhibition of the mitochondrial oxidative and anti-oxidative systems [ ]. In this study, the adenoviral MnSOD gene was injected into the nodose ganglia in animals with chronic heart failure to overexpress the MnSOD protein [ ]. This in vivo gene transfection not only reduced the levels of the mitochondria-derived superoxide anion, but also normalized aortic baroreceptor function (such as expression and activation of Nav channels and cell excitability) in rats with chronic heart failure [ ]. Therefore, mitochondria-derived superoxide overproduction triggers a downstream signal to inhibit the expression and activation of Nav channels, and reduce cell excitability in aortic baroreceptor neurons in chronic heart failure.
NFκB is a transcription factor in all types of cells. Although it has 5 structurally-related proteins (RelA (p65), RelB, c-Rel, p50, and p52) the p65/p50 heterodimer is the most important functional form [ ]. In the resting state, a silent form of NFκB exists in the cytosol, because a specific inhibitor of κBα (IκBα) tightly binds with NFκB to limit its activation [ , ]. When multiple stimuli activate IKKβ kinase, IKKβ kinase-phosphorylated IκB is ubiquitinated and degraded [ , , ]. Finally, liberated NFκB is activated in the cytoplasm and translocated to the nucleus [ ]. Once phosphorylated NFκB binds with specific sites on target DNAs, it induces the transcription of numerous target genes [ ]. The IKK–IκB–NFκB signaling pathway is also present in rat nodose ganglia [ ]. More importantly, chronic heart failure increases IKK phosphorylation, IκBα degradation, NFκB p65 phosphorylation, and the binding of NFκB p65 to the Nav1.7 promoter in rat nodose ganglia [ ]. In addition, lentiviral NFκB p65 shRNA transfected into the nodose ganglia in vivo normalizes the phosphorylation of the NFκB p65 protein, and markedly increases the expression and activation of Nav channels and neuronal excitability in aortic baroreceptor neurons isolated from rats with chronic heart failure [ ]. The above results confirm that downregulation of Nav1.7 channels and suppression of neuronal excitability are attributable to a cascade of the IKK–IκB–NFκB signaling pathway in aortic baroreceptors in chronic heart failure.
As discussed above, either the adenoviral MnSOD gene or lentiviral NFκB p65 shRNA transfected into nodose neurons in vivo reverses the attenuation of Nav channel expression and activation and reduction of the neuronal excitability in aortic baroreceptor neurons isolated from animals with chronic heart failure [ , ]. In addition, in animals with chronic heart failure, adenoviral MnSOD gene transfection inhibits the over-phosphorylation of NFκB p65 in the nodose ganglia, while lentiviral NFκB p65 shRNA does not change the levels of the mitochondria-derived superoxide anion in the nodose ganglia [ ]. Therefore, NFκB p65 is downstream of the superoxide anion to mediate aortic baroreceptor dysfunction in chronic heart failure.
Many studies have demonstrated that Ang II is an endogenous biological trigger to stimulate the overproduction of mitochondria-derived superoxide [ , ]. Based on the above, a reasonable conclusion is that the Ang II-superoxide-NFκB signaling pathway contributes to lower expression and inactivation of Nav channels and suppression of the neuronal excitability in aortic baroreceptor neurons in chronic heart failure. This viewpoint is supported by data from other studies, in which Ang II-hydrogen peroxide-NFκB signaling induces down-transcription of Nav1.5 channels in cardiac myocytes [ ].
Role of HCN Channels in Arterial Baroreceptors in Diabetes
HCN channels were first reported in the sinoatrial node of the heart and are composed of four homologous members (HCN-1, -2, -3, and -4) in mammals [ , , , , , , , ]. During the hyperpolarization phase, inward ions pass through HCN channels to modulate cell automaticity [ , ]. The mRNA and protein expression of the four HCN isoforms are found in cell bodies and nerve terminals of aortic baroreceptor neurons [ , , ]. Measurements by immunofluorescent staining have demonstrated that the proteins of all four isoforms are expressed in A-type nodose neurons, while the proteins of HCN-2, -3, and -4 isoforms are expressed in C-type nodose neurons [ , ]. Usually HCN channels initiate pacemaker excitation in the heart [ , , ] and generate sustained rhythmic oscillation in various brain regions [ , , ]. However, HCN channel activation decreases neuronal excitability of aortic baroreceptors by affecting membrane rectification [ ], because HCN channel blockers significantly enhance this excitability [ ]. More importantly, in the streptozotocin-induced type-1 diabetic animal model, HCN channel expression and activation are increased, while excitability is decreased in aortic baroreceptor neurons [ , ]. These data confirm that upregulation of HCN channels decreases the excitability of arterial baroreceptors in diabetes.
Usually, endogenous substances can chronically modulate the expression of ion channels and acutely influence their electrophysiological properties. A whole-cell patch-clamp study has demonstrated that the application of exogenous Ang II to isolated nodose neurons acutely affects their electrophysiological activity via AT1 receptors [ ]. Using radioimmunoassay, single-cell RT-PCR, and western blot analysis, a recent study found a high level of endogenous Ang II and overexpression of AT1 receptor mRNA and protein in nodose neurons from streptozotocin-induced type 1 diabetic rats [ ]. Both exogenous Ang II and diabetes activate HCN channels and suppress the excitability of isolated aortic baroreceptor neurons [ , ]. The effects of exogenous Ang II and diabetes on HCN channels and neuronal excitability are totally inhibited by AT1 receptor antagonists [ , ]. In addition, chronic application of exogenous Ang II to cultured primary nodose neurons induces overexpression of HCN channels [ ]. These experimental data indicate that high levels of endogenous Ang II with overexpression of AT1 receptors modulate HCN channel expression and activation and subsequently attenuate the excitability of aortic baroreceptors in diabetes.
NADPH oxidase is a membrane-bound enzyme with multiple components (gp91phox, P22phox, p40phox, p47phox, and p67phox) [ , ]. This enzyme is thought to be a key downstream target of Ang II-AT1 receptors to produce superoxide in many tissues [ , , , , , , , ]. These NADPH oxidase subunits are overexpressed in the nodose ganglia from type-1 diabetic animals [ ]. Both NADPH oxidase inhibitors and superoxide scavengers markedly blunt either exogenous Ang II or diabetes-induced high levels of superoxide production, HCN channel over-activation, and the suppression of excitability in aortic baroreceptors [ , ]. These studies strongly suggest that Ang II-NADPH oxidase-superoxide signaling is associated with the modulation of HCN channel expression and activation, and the resultant suppression of excitability in aortic baroreceptors in diabetes.
Perspectives and Future Directions
This review summarizes potential mechanisms underlying arterial baroreceptor remodeling in cardiovascular diseases and diabetes (Fig. 2 ). As a major part of the arterial baroreflex arc, arterial baroreceptors are impaired in cardiovascular diseases and diabetes. The impairment of arterial baroreceptors is attributed to alterations in the arterial walls, mechanosensitive ion channels, and voltage-gated ion channels. Endogenous substances (such as Ang II and superoxide anion) modulate these changes through intracellular signaling pathways. These findings are helpful for identifying effective therapeutic interventions, which are crucial for improving the prognosis of cardiovascular diseases and diabetes and reducing their mortality. Although these findings can provide potential therapeutic strategies for improving the prognosis in patients with cardiovascular diseases and diabetes, further studies are needed to address the involvement of other ion channels and endogenous substances. Fig. 2 Schematic of potential mechanisms responsible for the impairment of arterial baroreceptors in cardiovascular diseases and diabetes. Ang II, angiotensin II; ROS, reactive oxygen species; IKK, IκB kinase; IκB, inhibitor of κB; NFκB, nuclear factor kappa B; ENaC, epithelial Na + channel; ASIC, acid-sensing ion channel; TRP, transient receptor potential; Nav, voltage-gated Na + ; HCN, hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated.