Introduction
Acute pulmonary embolism (PE) remains a common and life-threatening condition [ ]. Mortality estimates vary depending on the population being studied [ , ]. To date, the International Cooperative Pulmonary Embolism Registry (ICOPER) remains the largest prospective cohort study of acute PE, having enrolled more than 2000 subjects, and showed a 3-month mortality rate of 17.4 % [ ]. Early diagnosis and identification of intermediate and high-risk patients who may be suitable candidates for treatment with an intravenous thrombolytic agent, catheter-directed thrombolysis, or surgical embolectomy is often challenging due to varying patterns of the clinical presentation. Among available imaging modalities, CT pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) is the most commonly used method to diagnose acute PE [ , ]. In addition to the diagnosis of acute PE (Fig. 1 a), CT angiography has also been used to assess for the presence of right ventricle dilation (Fig. 1 b), which is an important prognostic factor associated with increased mortality from acute PE [ , , ]. However, CTPA as it is commonly performed in the evaluation of patients with PE, does not provide dynamic cardiac function assessment or hemodynamic information. In patients with acute PE, 2D echocardiography provides additional morphological, functional, and hemodynamic information, which helps in the risk stratification and selection of the appropriate treatment strategy [ , , ]. The importance of the assessment of the right ventricular function was recently highlighted in a meta-analysis where the administration of thrombolytic therapy in otherwise hemodynamically stable patients but with right ventricular dysfunction resulted in improved survival [ ]. Recently, the Pulmonary Embolism Thrombolysis (PEITHO) trial showed that there is a role of thrombolytic therapy to prevent hemodynamic deterioration in this subgroup of patients [ ]. It is important to realize that echocardiography is less useful as a diagnostic tool for PE, but is rather very helpful as a prognostic and risk assessment tool. The main role of echocardiography is to risk-stratify the severity of PE for management and prognostic purposes and that the absence of characteristic echocardiographic features in a patient with PE portends a low risk [ , , ]. Our objective is to highlight those features which help in risk-stratification and individualized treatment approaches. Fig. 1 a CT pulmonary angiogram showing saddle embolus in the main branches of pulmonary artery ( arrows ). b 4-Chamber view of the heart demonstrating significant dilation of the right ventricle. RV:LV ratio is measured at the widest dimensions (indicated by black lines )
Pathophysiology of right ventricular hemodynamics in acute pulmonary embolism
The right ventricle and pulmonary arterial vasculature is a low-resistance, high-capacitance system. The right ventricular wall is thinner (<0.6 cm) than that of the left ventricle and the arrangement of the muscle fibers is such that the right ventricle cannot accommodate the acute increase in the afterload, which is seen with acute PE. In experimental studies where gradual pulmonary arterial constriction was performed in dogs, a gradual rise in pulmonary arterial and right ventricular pressure was seen reaching a peak mean pressure of 40 mmHg close to near-total occlusion of the pulmonary artery (Fig. 2 a). At that point, a significant rapid decline in systemic arterial pressure was observed, due to the decreased left ventricular pre-load leading to reduced left ventricular stroke volume [ ]. Fig. 2 a Effect of increasing pulmonary arterial constriction on the mean pressures at different points in the circulatory system (reproduced with permission from Guyton AC et al. [ ]). b Impact of increased afterload on right (RV) and left (LV) ventricular stroke volumes. Acute increases in RV afterload lead to substantial decreases in RV stroke volume compared with that of the LV. PAP pulmonary artery pressure (reproduced with permission from Chin KM et al. [ ])
Furthermore, an increase in mean pulmonary artery pressure up to 30 mmHg leads to a 30 % reduction in right ventricular stroke volume (Fig. 2 b), whereas the left ventricle is able to accommodate increase in pressures without significant decrease in stroke volume [ ]. Obstruction of at least 25–30 % of the pulmonary arteries is associated with an increase in pulmonary pressures. Right ventricular failure is seen when 50–75 % of the pulmonary vasculature is obstructed by thrombi [ ].
In addition to the mechanical blockage of pulmonary arteries, acute PE triggers the release of several vasoactive substances in the pulmonary circulation resulting in increased pulmonary vascular resistance [ ].
Prognostic categorization of acute pulmonary embolism
Hemodynamic instability is seen when more than 30–50 % of pulmonary arterial vasculature is occluded by thromboemboli [ ]. The ICOPER study reported a 17.4 % 3-month overall mortality. This was significantly higher (58.3 %) in hemodynamically unstable subjects compared with in hemodynamically stable patients (15.1 %) at the time of presentation [ ]. Furthermore, the presence of right ventricular (RV) dysfunction on echocardiogram portends a higher risk: In hemodynamically stable subjects with RV dysfunction, the 30-day mortality rate was 16.3 %, compared with 9.4 % in subjects without RV dysfunction [ ]. The Management Strategy and Prognosis of Pulmonary Embolism Registry (MAPPET) reported in-patient mortality rates of 8.1 % in hemodynamically stable patients, 25 % in patients with cardiogenic shock and 65 % in those requiring cardiopulmonary resuscitation [ ]. These registries highlight the importance of early risk stratification of patients with acute PE.
Based on the hemodynamic condition and echocardiographic findings at the time of presentation, acute PE has been categorized into following three types [ ];
Massive/high-risk pulmonary embolism
Systemic hypotension (systolic blood pressure < 90 mmHg), cardiac arrest, shock requiring intravenous vasopressor agents, or syncope.
Submassive/intermediate-risk pulmonary embolism
1. Intermediate-high Absence of systemic hypotension but presence of moderate to severe right ventricular dysfunction and elevation of biomarkers of cardiac injury (Troponin I or T). 2. Intermediate-low Absence of systemic hypotension, presence of either right ventricular dysfunction or elevated cardiac biomarkers or absence of both.
In addition to the above-mentioned acute hemodynamic parameters (blood pressure and RV dysfunction); pulmonary embolism severity index (PESI) provides further prognostic information regarding the 30-day mortality [ ]. This is especially useful in borderline cases. The original version of PESI includes demographic features (age, gender), co-morbidities (cancer, chronic heart failure, and COPD) and vital signs (pulse rate ≥110 bpm, systolic blood pressure <100 mmHg, respiratory rate >30 breaths/min, temperature <36 °C, altered mental status and arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation <90 %). Each parameter is assigned a score from 10 to 60 points and the sum is added to age. Class III (86–105 points) and class IV–V (106–125 points and higher) indicate moderate (3.2–7.1 %) and high (4.0–24.5 %) 30-day mortality risk, respectively [ ]. A simplified version of PESI includes age, co-morbid conditions (cancer, chronic heart failure, and COPD) and vital signs (pulse rate ≥110 bpm, systolic blood pressure <100 mmHg, and arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation <90 %). Each parameter is assigned 1 point (except 0 point for age <80 years). The presence of one or more of the parameters indicates a high mortality risk (10.9 %, 95 % CI 8.5–13.2 %) [ ].
In the absence of systemic hypotension, presence of PESI class III-V or one or more criteria of simplified pulmonary embolism index (sPESI) suggests intermediate risk PE.
Small/low-risk pulmonary embolism
Absence of systemic hypotension, no right ventricular dysfunction, negative biomarkers of cardiac injury and PESI class I-II (mortality risk 0–3.5 %)/sPESI score of 0 (mortality risk 1.0 %, 95 % CI 0–2.1 %) [ , ].
Echocardiographic prognostic criteria in acute pulmonary embolism
Echocardiography is useful for analyzing the structure, function, and hemodynamic consequences of acute PE, which includes right ventricular dilation, McConnell’s sign, reduced tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE), interventricular septal flattening, and abnormal RV hemodynamics due to increased pulmonary vascular resistance (elevated pulmonary artery systolic pressures and decreased pulmonary artery acceleration time, also known as the 60/60 sign, and inferior vena cava dilation). Furthermore, thrombi in the right atrium or ventricle may also be visualized (Table 1 ). Table 1 Summary of echocardiographic findings in acute pulmonary embolism Parameter Normal Abnormal Imaging view Right ventricular morphology and dysfunction RV/LV diameter ratio <0.66 RV/LV ≥ 1.0 Apical 4C view or Subcostal 4C view RV basal diameter in diastole <42 mm >42 mm Apical 4C view or Subcostal 4C view McConnell’s sign RV free wall hypokinesia with preserved apical movement Apical 4C view or Subcostal 4C view TAPSE >20 mm TAPSE < 15 high risk TAPSE > 20 low risk Apical 4C view Interventricular septal flattening Indicates right-sided pressures/volume overload Parasternal short-axis views RV hemodynamics PASP (mmHg) 15–30 mmHg, older or obese normal limit 40 mmHg >30 mmHg but less than 60 mmHg TR jet: RV inflow view, parasternal long-axis or 4C apical view PAAT (ms) >100 ms <60 ms AT: Parasternal short-axis view at aortic valve level IVC dilation 1.5–2.5 cm >2.5 cm and No inspiratory collapse Measure 3 cm from Rt. Atrium in the subcostal view Thrombus Present Examine IVC, RA, and RV for intra-vascular/cardiac thrombi en-route to pulmonary vasculature Assessment of LV function Hyperdynamic LV function is an important associated finding, suggestive of decreased LV filling in the presence of PE. Apical 4C view or Subcostal 4C view
Evaluation of right ventricle size and function
Assessment for the presence of RV dilation
The RV is best visualized in the apical four-chamber view (Fig. 3 a) (Video 1). The subcostal view may be helpful in patients who cannot assume the left lateral decubitus position due to mechanical ventilation or hemodynamic instability or those who have associated comorbidities such as COPD and obesity that preclude the acquisition of optimal images [ ]. Fig. 3 a Apical four-chamber view showing dilated right ventricle. RV-to-LV diameter ratio is measured at end-diastole, 1 cm from the annular plane and perpendicular to the interventricular septum. b Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) is decreased. c Parasternal short-axis view shows interventricular septal flattening and a D-shape appearance of the left ventricular cavity. d Dilated inferior vena cava with free-floating thrombus ( arrow )
The RV-to-left-ventricle (LV) diameter ratio has emerged as the most commonly used and easily obtainable parameter to indicate the presence of RV dysfunction. An RV-to-LV diameter ratio by echocardiography of ≥1.0 is associated with significant RV dysfunction and increased mortality from acute PE [ ]. The echocardiographic RV-to-LV diameter ratio >1.0 was used in the inclusion criteria for the ULTIMA (ultrasound accelerated thrombolysis of pulmonary embolism) and by CT scan ≥0.9 in SEATTLE II (A Prospective, Single-arm, Multi-center Trial of EkoSonic Endovascular System and Activase for Treatment of Acute Pulmonary Embolism) studies, two recent studies of catheter-directed thrombolysis for submassive PE [ , ].
Measurement of RV-to-LV diameter ratio is made at end-diastole (last image before the onset of tricuspid valve closure), 1 cm below the annular plane and perpendicular to the interventricular septum (Fig. 4 ). Acquisition of an optimal four-chamber view is important. Owing to the complex 3D geometry of the right ventricle, off-axis views could easily lead to an erroneous measurement. Fig. 4 Demonstration of method to measure echocardiographic RV-to-LV ratio as performed by ULTIMA trial [ ]. Apical four-chamber view is acquired at end-diastole (last image before the onset of tricuspid valve closure) and RV:LV ratio is measured 1 cm below the annular plane and perpendicular to the interventricular septum
As mentioned earlier, in addition to the diagnosis of acute PE, CTPA is also used for the assessment of RV dilation by measuring the RV-to-LV diameter ratio. However, there are certain limitations of this measurement by CTPA. The cardiac images are non-ECG-gated and an arbitrary selection of a four-chamber image is made at the widest RV and LV diameter. In certain cases, visualization of all four cardiac chambers in one plane may not be possible. Furthermore, variable timing of the contrast injection could also contribute to the suboptimal visualization of the endocardium and hence inaccurate assessment of the ventricular diameters. Since CTPA is usually the initial imaging modality in case of PE, despite the potential limitations current guidelines recommend the use of either modality to assess right ventricular morphology in acute PE.
McConnell’s sign
McConnell’s sign is a visual observation of abnormal RV free wall movement, seen in the apical or subcostal four-chamber views. The basal and mid segments of RV free wall become severely hypokinetic and a hinge point is seen distally where RV apex maintains normal contractility [ ] (Video 2). Normally, the LV apex is the most distal part seen on the four-chamber view but if the RV is severely dilated, then the RV apex wraps around the LV apex. Since this is a visual qualitative assessment, there is a learning curve associated with this echocardiographic sign.
Initially, a sensitivity of 77 % and a specificity of 94 % were reported for the McConnell’s sign for the diagnosis of clinically significant acute PE [ ]. However, recently a study described a sensitivity of 70 % and a specificity of 33 % of the McConnell’s sign for the diagnosis of acute PE [ ].
Reduced tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE)
TAPSE is relatively easy to measure and provides reproducible assessment of the longitudinal function of RV free wall. To obtain TAPSE, the M-mode line is placed over the lateral tricuspid annulus from the four-chamber window and the maximal vertical excursion of the annulus is measured from diastole to systole (Fig. 3 b).
In a recent study including hemodynamically stable patients with acute PE, TAPSE ≤15 mm was associated with increased risk (HR 27.9, 95 % CI 6.2–124.6, p < 0.0001) of 30-day mortality whereas TAPSE ≥20 mm identified patients in the very low risk category [ ].
Interventricular septal flattening
Acute PE-related right ventricular pressure overload results in flattening of the interventricular septum [ ]. This can be best visualized in the parasternal short-axis views (Fig. 3 c) (Video 3). Normally, the septum is concave towards LV in both systole and diastole, since LV is the dominant chamber. However, right ventricular volume and/or pressure overload result in the flattening of the interventricular septum in diastole and/or systole (respectively) and the LV appears D-shaped instead of the normal circular shape. Paradoxical motion of the septum toward the left ventricle in diastole reduces LV filling leading to decreased output.
Hyperdynamic left ventricular systolic function
An important observation in acute PE with moderate-to-severe RV dilation is the presence of hyperdynamic left ventricular contraction due to low LV pre-load secondary to PE and pulmonary vascular obstruction. The left ventricular cavity is seen collapsing in systole (Video 3).
Evaluation of RV hemodynamics
Increased pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP)
Normal PASP range is between 15 and 30 mmHg (mean 9–18 mmHg). In the absence of chronic causes of pulmonary hypertension, acute near-total pulmonary artery occlusion leads to a maximum pressure, which is <60 mmHg. The RV is generally a low-pressure ventricle and is unable to acutely generate systolic pressures higher than 60 mmHg is due to its thin wall (<0.6 mm) and unique anatomy.
In the absence of pulmonary valve stenosis, there is no significant difference between RV systolic pressure (RVSP) and PASP. RVSP is calculated from the tricuspid regurgitation (TR) jet velocity and estimated right atrial pressure using following modified Bernoulli equation [ ]; $${\text{PASP}} = 4 \times \left( {\text{Peak TR velocity jet}} \right)^{ 2} + {\text{mean RA pressure}}$$
Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) jet can be visualized in multiple views: RV inflow from the parasternal window, parasternal short axis at level of aortic valve, apical four-chamber, or subcostal view. The velocity of the jet is measured using continuous-wave Doppler. Mean right atrial (RA) pressure is estimated from the inferior vena cava (IVC) size and respiratory variation as follows: 0–5 mmHg (mean 3 mmHg) if the IVC diameter is ≤2.1 cm and there is >50 % respiratory variation in IVC size 10–20 mmHg (mean 15 mmHg) if the IVC diameter is >2.1 cm and there is <50 % respiratory variation in IVC size
The RA pressure is considered intermediate between 5 and 10 mmHg (mean 8 mmHg) if the above parameters are not met.
Reduced pulmonary artery acceleration time (PAAT)
High pulmonary vascular resistance in the case of acute PE reduces flow acceleration across RV outflow tract, which can be measured in the parasternal short-axis view at the aortic valve level. An acceleration time of less than 60 ms is suggestive of significantly increased pulmonary vascular pressure [ ].
Increased pulmonary artery systolic pressure in the presence of reduced pulmonary artery acceleration time is a common finding in pulmonary artery hypertension. In certain patients, it may indicate hemodynamically significant PE.
A 60/60 sign is a combination of the two hemodynamic abnormalities resulting from increased pulmonary vascular resistance in patients with acute PE; increased pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) >30 mmHg but less than 60 mmHg and reduced pulmonary artery flow acceleration time (PAAT) <60 ms [ ].
Inferior vena cava (IVC) dilation
The IVC is visualized in the subcostal view and its diameter is measured 0.5–3 cm from the right atrium perpendicular to its long axis at end-expiration. Normal IVC diameter is considered to be <2.1 cm [ ]. Under normal circumstances, the inferior vena cava has a phasic flow influenced by respiration. The IVC collapses during inspiration and enlarges during expiration. However, in the case of RV pressure or volume overload, it loses this inspiratory collapse phase and appears dilated (Fig. 3 d). This is mostly a supportive finding in the presence of RV dysfunction and abnormal hemodynamics.
Right-to-left atrial shunt
Incidence of patent foramen ovale (PFO) from 25 to 39 % has been reported depending on the population, higher in patients with cryptogenic stroke [ , , , ]. Right-to-left atrial shunt through patent foramen ovale (PFO) may be seen as a result of right ventricular pressure overload in patients with acute pulmonary embolism [ , ]. This can be visualized by obtaining an apical or subcostal four-chamber view and performing agitated saline contrast study. A persistent significant right-to-left shunting of the blood could lead to refractory hypoxia despite oxygen supplementation. In a prospective study of 139 patients with hemodynamically significant acute pulmonary embolism, presence of PFO by contrast echocardiography was an independent predictor of mortality (odds ratio 11.4, p < 0.001) with a death rate of 33 % as compared to 14 % in patients without PFO [ ].
Visualization of right-sided intra-cardiac thrombi
A less common but significant finding in acute PE is thrombi in the inferior vena cava, right atrium, or ventricular cavity en route to the pulmonary arteries (Fig. 3 d) (Video 4). In the ICOPER registry, data these patients had a significantly shorter duration of symptoms, lower systolic blood pressure, and more frequent evidence of RV dysfunction compared with patients without right heart thrombi. Furthermore, the presence of intra-cardiac thrombi was associated with doubling of the 3-month mortality [ ].
Right ventricular function assessment by myocardial strain measurement in acute pulmonary embolism
Quantification of myocardial deformation by contraction and relaxation is another modality available to assess right ventricular function. The percentage change in the deformation is measured as strain and the rate of deformation over time is called strain rate. Strain measurement can be “global” when all of the myocardial walls are included or “regional” if measured from few selected views or when only part of the wall is included. Strain is called “longitudinal” when myocardial deformation is measured from the long axis of the ventricle and “radial” when a short-axis view of the ventricle is used.
These parameters have been widely studied in the assessment of left ventricular function and recent studies suggest that right ventricular free wall strain and strain rate could be useful in the setting of acute pulmonary embolism.
Adequate visualization of the right ventricular free wall is required for the measurement of strain and strain rate. Following are the methods of right ventricular strain measurement.
Tissue Doppler imaging (one-dimensional strain)
This technique is used to measure right ventricular longitudinal strain. An apical four-chamber view is obtained with special attention to view right ventricular free wall. Tissue Doppler mode is turned on, frame rate is set at ≥150 frames/s, and an area of interest on the RV free wall is selected while keeping the tissue Doppler angle within 10–15° of the angle of tissue contraction. More than three beats are usually recorded with the patient holding their breath to reduce the chances of imaging quality degradation. The software calculates the tissue deformation and provides a percentage value. Depending on the image quality, this technique can be used to assess regional basal, mid wall, and in some cases apical region of the right ventricular free wall.
There are important limitations of this technique. The tissue tracking depends on the quality of the image. Use of the Doppler technique makes it sensitive to the imaging angle. Algorithms to adjust the signal-to-noise ratio vary between different software vendors. All of these factors result in a high degree of variability. In addition, there is a lack of normative data, which limits the use of strain measurements in the patients with acute pulmonary embolism [ ].
Speckle tracking imaging (two-dimensional strain)
Speckle tracking technique for longitudinal strain measurement has largely replaced tissue Doppler technique because of its independence from the imaging angle. However, similar to the tissue Doppler imaging, excellent-quality images are required for strain measurement. An apical four-chamber view is obtained with special attention to view right ventricular free wall. Manual and automatic myocardial border tracing software are available to select regions of interest. Variation in the placement of the basal reference points near the tricuspid annulus and difficulty in excluding the RV pericardium are significant sources of variation. Strain from the single RV view can be measured but since RV is a complex 3D structure, this measurement does not reflect true global right ventricular function. Although, this technique has a better signal-to-noise ratio, significant variation in the measurement reduces the reproducibility and routine use of this modality [ ].
Use of speckle tracking two-dimensional imaging modality to measure RV free wall strain is clinically feasible but due to the lack of normative data from the large studies using multiple vendors, no reference ranges were recommended in the recent guidelines [ ]. Few small-sample-size (less than 100 patients) studies have shown that regional right ventricular longitudinal strain is reduced in patients with acute pulmonary embolism [ , , ]. In a prospective study of 33 patients with low-risk PE and 29 with intermediate-to-high risk PE, a significant decrease in peak right ventricular longitudinal strain was found in patients with intermediate-to-high risk (submassive-to-massive) acute pulmonary embolism compared to low-risk patients, particularly in the apical and mid segments of the right ventricular free wall [ ]. There is a need to develop normal reference values for right ventricular global and regional strain measurement and investigate usefulness of this modality in large sample size using standardized software and technique.
Role of echocardiography in the assessment of the effectiveness of therapy
In several studies, echocardiography has been used to assess the effectiveness of therapy in acute PE. Rapid normalization of regional or global right ventricular dysfunction and improvement in right-sided hemodynamics after thrombolytic therapy are associated with favorable short- and long-term prognosis [ , , , , , , , ]. Furthermore, elevated pulmonary pressure and RV dysfunction usually resolve with anticoagulation therapy within 3 months [ ].
In patients with chronic thromboembolic disease and high thrombus burden, increased right ventricular afterload due to pulmonary hypertension results in right ventricle hypertrophy and ultimately RV dysfunction. In such cases, pulmonary endarterectomy has been shown to restore right ventricular size and function [ , ].
Conclusions
Early risk stratification of patients with acute PE has been shown to reduce mortality and echocardiography plays an important role in this regard. Whereas CTPA has become the diagnostic test of choice in patients presenting with signs and symptoms consistent with acute PE, echocardiography provides both anatomical and physiological data regarding RV function. It is a very useful prognostic tool and can help in planning the treatment pathway. Patients with acute PE should be assessed with echocardiography for signs of RV dysfunction and altered hemodynamics, which provide prognostic information in this population. Multiple echocardiographic characteristics and manifestations can be employed to guide the management of patients presenting with acute PE.