History of takotsubo cardiomyopathy
The first report of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (TC) as a disease entity unrelated to the coronary artery disease published in a peer-reviewed journal in English language is that by Dr. Kanji Iga in [ ]. He first reported a case with pheochromocytoma presenting a transient left ventricular wall motion impairment [ ]. Subsequently, in 1990, he reported a case with tetanus showing a transient apical ballooning documented by left ventriculography, which clearly demonstrates apical ballooning or takotsubo-like shape during systole [ ]. He then summarized eight cases of transient segmental asynergy of the left ventricle unrelated to coronary artery lesions in 1991 [ ]. The first echocardiographic image of the TC was also described as “transient left ventricular aneurysm” [ ]. TC has been named after the description of a case report with stunned myocardium that showed a very unique left ventriculographic appearance mimicking “takotsubo (octopus pot)” by Dr. Sato in [ ]. The term “takotsubo” or “takotsubo-like” has now become widely accepted and used not only in Japan but also throughout the entire world. Dr. Iga’s cases were reported from Tenri Hospital in Nara, one of the eight Japanese prefectures without the sea, and therefore, it is possible that “takotsubo” was not familiar to doctors in Nara.
Pathophysiology, clinical presentation, and diagnostic criteria of TC
Emotional or physical stresses are known triggers of TC. Pathophysiology of TC has not been fully understood. Systemic [ ] or local [ ] catecholamine levels are increased in TC and thus may play some roles during the development of LV asynergy. A recent study suggested that Gi protein, a component of β2-adrenergic receptor, may be associated with epinephrine-induced apical cardiodepression in apical TC [ ].
TC is also known as a stress-induced cardiomyopathy or broken heart syndrome, because of its strong relationship with emotional or physical stress. Clinical characteristics of the previous Japanese registry [ ], a recent meta-analysis [ ], and multicenter registries [ ] as well as our single-center results [ ] are summarized in Table 1 . Mean age was 59–72.7 years and 74–90 % were women [ , , , ]. Physical triggers were documented in 35–55 % and emotional triggers were found in 20–39 %. Clinical presentation includes chest pain (44–76 %) and dyspnea (7–47 %). Table 1 Patient characteristics Type of study Tsuchihashi [ ] n = 88 Citro [ ] n = 227 Pelliccia [ ] n = 1109 Templin [ ] n = 1750 Kagiyama [ ] n = 113 Multicenter Multicenter Meta-analysis Multicenter Single center Mean age 67 years 66 years 59–76 years 66.8 years 72.7 years Female gender 86 % 90 % 86 % 90 % 74 % Emotional trigger 20 % NA 39 % 28 % 33 % Physical trigger NA NA 35 % 36 % 55 % Symptom Chest pain 67 % 71 % 55 % 76 % 44 % Dyspnea 7 % 12 % 26 % 47 % NA Classification Apical 100 % 77.1 % NA 81.7 % 64.6 % Mid-ventricular NA 18.1 % NA 14.6 % 18.6 % Basal NA 4.8 % NA 2.2 % 0 % Focal NA NA NA 1.5 % 0 % Biventricular NA 14.5 % NA NA 16.8 % In-hospital death 1 % 1.7 % NA 4.1 % 3.5 %
Several diagnostic criteria or guidelines have been proposed and reported. Mayo criteria (Table 2 ) [ ] and a Japanese guideline (Table 3 ) [ ] have been often used for the diagnosis of TC. Considering the recent advances in TC, timely modification of these guidelines is required. For example, the Japanese guideline includes only TC with apical ballooning and the Mayo criteria has no description about right ventricular involvement. Table 2 Mayo clinic criteria for TC [ ] 1 Transient hypokinesis, akinesis, or dyskinesis of the left ventricular mid segments with or without apical involvement; the regional wall motion abnormalities extend beyond a single epicardial vascular distribution; a stressful trigger is often, but not always present 2 Absence of obstructive coronary disease or angiographic evidence of acute plaque rupture 3 New electrocardiographic abnormalities (either ST-segment elevation and/or T-wave inversion) or modest elevation in cardiac troponin 4 Absence of: pheochromocytoma, myocarditis Table 3 Japanese guidelines for diagnosis of TC [ ] I. Definition Takotsubo (ampulla) cardiomyopathy is a disease exhibiting an acute left ventricular apical ballooning of unknown cause. In this disease, the left ventricle takes on the shape of a “takotsubo” (Japanese octopus trap). There is nearly complete resolution of the apical akinesis in the majority of the patients within a month. The contraction abnormality occurs mainly in the left ventricle, but involvement of the right ventricle is observed in some cases. A dynamic obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract (pressure gradient difference, acceleration of blood flow, or systolic cardiac murmurs) is also observed Note: There are patients, such as cerebrovascular patients, who have an apical systolic ballooning similar to that in takotsubo cardiomyopathy, but with a known cause. Such patients are diagnosed as “cerebrovascular disease with takotsubo-like myocardial dysfunction” and are differentiated from idiopathic cases II. Exclusion criteria A. Significant organic stenosis or spasm of a coronary artery. In particular, acute myocardial infarction due to a lesion of the anterior descending branch of the left coronary artery, which perfuses an extensive territory including the left ventricular apex (An urgent coronary angiogram is desirable for imaging during the acute stage, but coronary angiography is also necessary during the chronic stage to confirm the presence or absence of a significant stenotic lesion or a lesion involved in the abnormal pattern of ventricular contraction) B. Cerebrovascular disease C. Pheochromocytoma D. Viral or idiopathic myocarditis III. References for diagnosis A. Symptoms: chest pain and dyspnea similar to those in acute coronary syndrome. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy can occur without symptoms B. Triggers: emotional or physical stress may trigger takotsubo cardiomyopathy, but it can also occur without any apparent trigger. C. Age and gender difference: Known tendency to increase in the elderly, particularly females D. Ventricular morphology: apical ballooning and its rapid improvement in the ventriculogram and echocardiogram E. Electrocardiogram: ST segment elevations might be observed immediately after the onset. Thereafter, in a typical case, the T-wave becomes progressively more negative in multiple leads, and the QT interval prolongs. These changes improve gradually, but a negative T-wave may continue for several months. During the acute stage, abnormal Q-waves and changes in the QRS voltage might be observed F. Cardiac biomarkers: in a typical case, there are only modest elevations of serum levels of cardiac enzymes and troponin G. Myocardial radionuclear study: Abnormal findings in myocardial scintigraphy are observed in some cases H. Prognosis: The majority of the cases rapidly recover, but some cases suffer pulmonary edema and other sequelae or death
Echocardiographic findings of TC
Although TC was named after its appearance of the LV gram, echocardiography is now the standard imaging modality to detect LV asynergy, LV function, and various other dynamic findings associated with TC.
Left ventricular wall motion abnormality in TC
Originally, TC was named based on the unique wall motion abnormality sometimes called as apical ballooning (Fig. 1 ). Although a previous Japanese registry as well as Japanese guideline included only TC with apical ballooning [ , ], apical ballooning is not necessarily observed in some subtype of TC [ , ]. A recent large-scale registry shows that classical or apical types of TC were the most frequently (81.7 %) documented, and midventricular type (Fig. 2 ) was observed in 14.6 %. Basal type (2.2 %) and focal type (1.5 %) were less frequently observed among patients with TC [ ] (Table 1 ). In our series [ ], apical type was the most frequently observed type of TC (64.6 %) and mid-ventricular type was observed in 18.6 %. In addition, right ventricular (RV) involvement was documented in 18.6 %. Fig. 1 Left ventriculography and echocardiography of apical TC and mid-ventricular TC Apical TC ( left panel ): Left ventriculography (LVG, upper panel ) shows apical ballooning or takotsubo-like wall motion abnormality ( black arrowheads ). Echocardiography of the same patient shows akinesis of the apex ( white arrowheads ) similar to the LVG ( lower panel ). Mid-ventricular TC ( right panel ): Both left ventriculography (LVG, upper panel ) and echocardiography ( lower panel ) shows akinesis of the mid-ventricle ( arrowheads ). Wall motion of the apex is well preserved. LA left atrium, LV left ventricle Fig. 2 Echocardiography in a patient with biventricular TC. Apical four-chamber view demonstrates akinesis of the both LV and RV apex ( arrows )
Differentiation between apical type of TC and ACS is clinically important because of the difference in the treatment. Presence of the regional wall motion abnormalities extend beyond a single epicardial vascular distribution is a key finding in TC [ ]. On the other hand, mid-ventricular type has more characteristic wall motion abnormality that can be easily differentiated from myocardial infarction or ischemic heart disease according to the unique distribution of the wall motion abnormality totally unrelated to the coronary anatomy. Ejection fraction on admission is reduced and almost normalized within a month.
Right ventricular involvement (biventricular TC)
As mentioned above, TC with right ventricular involvement has become recognized as another variant of the TC observed in 14.5–50 % of TC [ , , , , , ] (Fig. 3 ). TC with right ventricular involvement is first reported in 2006 from both United States [ ] and Germany [ ]. Elesber et al. [ ] reported that eight of 25 (31 %) TC cases had right ventricular systolic dysfunction by transthoracic echocardiography. Patients with RV involvement had significantly lower left ventricular ejection fraction (29 ± 9 vs. 42 ± 14 %, p = 0.021) and higher tricuspid regurgitation velocity (3.2 ± 0.5 vs. 2.7 ± 0.4 cm/s) by continuous wave Doppler. In-hospital complications were more frequently documented in TC with than without RV involvement. Haghi et al. [ ] reported nine of 34 (26 %) had RV involvement by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. They also demonstrated that LVEF was significantly lower in TC with RV involvement than those without (40 ± 6 vs. 48 ± 10 %, p = 0.04). In a large series of multicenter registry of TC, CMR revealed 81 of 239 (34 %) had RV involvement, or biventricular TC [ ]. Patients with biventricular TC were older, and had significantly more frequent prior stressful events. In our single-center registry [ ], echocardiography revealed that 21 of 113 (18.6 %) had RV involvement. TC with RV involvement or biventricular TC tended to be older (76.9 ± 9.4 vs. 71.8 ± 11.7, p = 0.066) and had a higher prevalence of prior history of heart failure (28.6 vs. 3.3 %, p = 0.001). BNP level was significantly higher and eGFR was significantly lower in TC with RV involvement than those without. Echocardiographic examination showed that TC with RV involvement had significantly larger LV size and lower EF (37.9 vs. 47.2 %, p = 0.001), concordant to the previous reports. In addition, RV basal diameter, mid-cavity diameter, longitudinal diameter, end-diastolic area, and end-systolic area were significantly larger and RV fractional area change was significantly lower in TC with RV involvement. Event-free survival was significantly lower in TC with RV involvement. Fig. 3 Left ventriculography and echocardiography in TC with SAM. Left ventriculography ( left panel ) shows apical ballooning, left ventricular outflow obstruction, and severe mitral regurgitation (“dumbbell”-like appearance). Echocardiography shows systolic anterior motion (SAM) ( mid panel , arrow ) and left ventricular outflow obstruction ( right panel , arrowhead ) with an estimated pressure gradient of 49 mmHg
Although correlates of RV involvement have not been clarified yet, RV involvement may develop even without LV asynergy and is named as an isolated RVTC [ ]. By echo, isolated RVTC shows asynergy of the RV free wall without LV involvement.
SAM and left ventricular outflow obstruction
Systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the anterior mitral leaflet is typically observed in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, but similar findings may be observed in patients without HCM. In some patients with TC, SAM and LV outflow obstruction may develop as a result of hyperkinetic LV basal wall motion with or without underlying sigmoid septum (Fig. 4 ) [ , ]. SAM and LV outflow obstruction are usually transient and disappear during recovery. However, in some cases, beta blockers are required to treat hypotension and secondary mitral regurgitation. TC with LV outflow obstruction may have higher rates of complications (congestive heart failure, hypotension, and mitral regurgitation) [ ]. Fig. 4 Echocardiography in TC with mitral regurgitation due to tethering of the mitral leaflets. Mitral leaflets are tethered toward apex due to LV dilatation and akinesis of the apex with tenting height >10 mm ( left panel , arrow ). Color Doppler shows significant functional or secondary mitral regurgitation ( right panel ). LA left atrium, LV left ventricle
Mitral regurgitation
Mitral regurgitation may develop in patients with TC as a result of two different mechanisms, tethering, and SAM [ , ]. Transient LV dilatation with or without mitral annular dilatation may cause tethering of the mitral leaflets apically resulting in decrease leaflet coaptation and mitral regurgitation [ ] (Fig. 5 ). On the other hand, mitral regurgitation may develop as a result of SAM and left ventricular outflow obstruction (Fig. 4 ) [ ]. In such cases, vasodilators or diuretics may be contraindicated because they could worsen SAM and LV outflow obstruction and mitral regurgitation. Echo plays a critical role to assess not only the severity of mitral regurgitation but also to identify pathophysiology of the mitral regurgitation. Fig. 5 Echocardiography in TC with apical thrombus. Apical four-chamber view shows akinesis of the apex with mural thrombus ( arrows ). RA right atrium, LA left atrium, LV left ventricle
Cardiac rupture
TC has been long recognized as a self-limiting and benign disease [ ]. However, recent reports have suggested that TC may be critical in some patients. Congestive heart failure is one of the causes of in-hospital death in TC. Another rare but critical complication of TC is cardiac rupture [ , ]. Kumar et al. [ ] reviewed 12 cases of cardiac rupture including our own case and concluded that higher double product and EF observed in the reported cases suggest higher fluctuation of intracardiac pressure and may cause cardiac rupture in TC [ ]. Detection of pericardial effusion by echo may be important to suspect oozing rupture. In our series, pericardial effusion was detected in 38.1 % of TC patients including one patient who developed cardiac rupture. In patients with pericardial effusion, echo should be repeated to check if pericardial effusion increased or not. They recommended the use of beta blockers to prevent cardiac rupture.
LV thrombus
LV thrombus may develop during acute phase of TC (Fig. 5 ) similar to the acute myocardial infarction. Special care should be taken during echo examination to detect apical thrombus in apical type pf TC. Anticoagulation is indicated until LV wall motion normalizes and LV thrombus dissolves. Although indication of surgery has not been established yet, presence of a large and mobile thrombus may suggest the need for surgical resection to prevent massive embolic event.
Coronary flow velocity measurements
Coronary flow velocity of the left anterior descending artery can be non-invasively measured from transthoracic approach. Coronary flow pattern may be different between TC and ACS due to LAD stenosis. Diastolic to systolic velocity ratio of the LAD flow is decreased in patients with significant LAD stenosis and thus may be useful to differentiate between TC and ACS with severe LAD stenosis [ ]. In addition to the baseline coronary flow velocity pattern, coronary flow reserve measurements may be useful. Coronary flow reserve is transiently and severely impaired in patients with TC [ ].
Speckle tracking
Recent advances in echo allows for more objective and quantitative assessment of the LV wall motion abnormality using strain or speckle tracking methods [ ]. By using speckle tracking, LV apical ballooning and hyperkinetic basal motion can be objectively and quantitatively evaluated. A recent study by Kobayashi et al. [ ] demonstrated that even after LV wall motion recovery by visual estimate, subtle abnormalities of regional LV function detected by 3D speckle tracking persist at 4 weeks and almost normalized at 6-month follow-up. As mentioned, TC is not necessarily a self-limiting disease and may recur as a result of another episode of physical or emotional stress. However, the role of routine echocardiographic follow-up in asymptomatic patients after TC is still uncertain.
Conclusions
Takotsubo-like wall motion or apical ballooning has now become only a part of TC and we should pay more attention to the other side of the wall. Furthermore, various dynamic changes responsible for acute complications and long-term prognosis may be detected. Therefore, echocardiography should be used for the comprehensive assessment of the TC to guide medical treatment for better prognosis.