Introduction
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 21 (SCA21, OMIM #607454) is a rare subtype of autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias (ADCAs) caused by mutations in the transmembrane protein 240 gene ( TMEM240 ). SCA21 is clinically characterized by an early-onset (1–30 years) cerebellar ataxia, frequently associated with delayed psychomotor development, cognitive impairment, behavioral abnormalities, and extrapyramidal signs [ ]. It was originally described in French families, but has not yet been reported in other ethnic origins or in other areas, except for a single Chinese patient [ ].
Here, we report the first Japanese family including six affected individuals with SCA21. We also report neuropathological findings in an autopsied patient.
Case Report
Clinical Presentation
The proband (II-7, Fig. 1 a) is a 71-year-old man with a 35-year history of cerebellar ataxia. His father (I-1, Fig. 1 a) was reported to show ataxic gait and dysarthria in his later years and died in his seventies, but detailed neurological assessments were not done. The proband worked as a car mechanic after graduating from junior high school. At age 36 years, he developed panic attacks with signs of self-harm due to psychological stress, and was diagnosed with a personality disorder. During the same period, dysarthria, staggering gait, and trembling hands were noted. Upon neurological examination, his smooth pursuit eye movements were not disturbed. His saccadic eye movements were not slow, but showed saccadic dysmetria. No nystagmus was found and he did not complain of diplopia. He had scanning speech, postural and intension tremor of both hands, limb ataxia, and ataxic gait. Pyramidal signs, or extrapyramidal signs, such as rigidity and akinesia were not observed. He tested negative to Romberg sign. Brain CT scan showed cerebellar atrophy, but not cerebral or brainstem atrophy. His gait disturbance gradually worsened, and at age 46 years, he became dependent on a cane. He developed left putaminal hemorrhage at age 53 years, and cerebral infarction on the right parietal lobe at age 60 years. These episodes of cerebrovascular diseases caused slight quadriplegia, although it improved much by intensive rehabilitation. At age 63 years, he began to use a wheelchair on moving. At his latest visit at age 71 years, the results of the assessments of cerebellar ataxia and cognitive functions are shown in Table 1 . Brain MRI revealed an atrophy in the cerebellum, but not in the brainstem. Multiple infarctions and microhemorrhages accompanying atrophy in the putamen, caudate nucleus, and cerebral white matter were identified (Fig. 2 ). There was no T2- or T2*-hypointensity suggestive of iron accumulation in the globus pallidus, red nucleus, or cerebellar dentate nucleus (data not shown). Fig. 1 a The family pedigree. The number under the symbol indicates age at examination (age at death for deceased patients). Asterisks indicate those who underwent WES. b Genetic finding of the family. Sanger sequencing confirmed the c.509C > T (p.Pro170Leu) in TMEM240 (NM_001114748.1) in all affected members included in this study Table 1 Assessment of cerebellar ataxia and cognitive functions Patient (age at examination) II-7 (71) III-7 (39) III-1 (57) Age at onset 36 5 31 SARA 28.5 12 19.5 ICARS 77 26 52 MMSE 22 22 19 FAB 7 6 11 WAIS-III VIQ 65 50 64 PIQ 64 52 59 FIQ 62 47 59 TMT-A 347 154 141 TMT-B Impossible Impossible Impossible KWCST CA n.d. 1 1 TE n.d. 26 17 PEN n.d. 5 6 SARA scale for the assessment and rating of ataxia, ICAS international co-operative ataxia rating scale, MMSE mini-mental state examination, FAB frontal assessment battery at bedside, WAIS-III Wechsler adult intelligence scale, VIQ verbal IQ, PIQ performance IQ, FIQ full-scale IQ, TMT trail making test, KWCST Wisconsin card sorting test Keio version, CA category achieved, TE total error, PEN perseverative errors of Nelson, n.d . data not available Fig. 2 MR images. Cerebellar atrophy is more evident in II-7 than in III-7 or III-1. Atrophy in the brainstem is not seen in all the patients
The proband’s daughter (III-7, Fig. 1 a) developed action tremor in both her hands since around 5 years of age. She could not run as fast as her classmates during her childhood. She had never experienced epileptic seizures. She was examined by a pediatrician at age 9 years. Mental retardation, dysarthria, and ataxia with intention tremors in her upper limbs were pointed out. Brain MRI was unremarkable. After graduating from junior high school for handicapped children, she worked in a mushroom factory. However, at age 25 years, she resigned from the work because her tremor became considerably troublesome. Around age 33 years, she first noted unsteadiness and clumsiness of gait. Detailed assessment of cerebellar ataxia and cognitive functions was conducted at age 39 years (Table 1 ). She revealed saccadic dysmetria without nystagmus or slow eye movements, slurred speech, and postural and intention tremor in her four limbs. Decomposition and dysmetria were found in the finger-to-nose test, and her diadochokinesis was poor, but the heel-knee test was normal. She showed slow and staggering gait. Romberg sign was negative. Pyramidal signs, or extrapyramidal signs such as rigidity and akinesia, were not observed. Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy, but there was no brainstem or cerebral atrophy (Fig. 2 ). Abnormal hypointensity in the basal ganglia or cerebellar dentate nucleus was not observed on T2, or T2* images (data not shown), indicating that there was no iron overload in these regions.
The nephew of the proband (III-1, Fig. 1 a) worked in a pharmaceutical company after graduating from high school. At age 31 years, he began to notice staggering in his gait and tremor in both hands. The neurological examination revealed saccadic dysmetria without nystagmus, slurred speech, impairment of coordination in all four limbs, and ataxic gait. Pyramidal signs, rigidity, akinesia, or sensory disturbances were not found. Romberg sign was negative. Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy, and spinal MRI showed a disc hernia between C4 and C7. At age 36 years, his ataxic gait became worse and he needed to use a wheelchair on moving. At age 52 years, muscle weakness appeared in his upper right limb, and a laminoplasty was performed for a cervical disc hernia. The weakness at his upper right limb improved after surgery, but other symptoms did not improve. The assessment for cerebellar ataxia and cognitive functions at age 57 years is summarized in Table 1 . Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy, but not brainstem or cerebral atrophy (Fig. 2 ).
The proband’s elder sister (II-5, Fig. 1 a) first noticed staggering on gait at age 48 years. A neurological examination showed the impairment of both smooth pursuit and saccadic eye movements, downward nystagmus in all directions, scanning speech, impairment of coordination in all four limbs, and wide-based gait. Pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs were not found. No assessment was conducted on her cognitive function. Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy, but there was no brainstem or cerebral atrophy. Her ataxia slowly deteriorated, and she became wheelchair-bound at age 58 years. She suffered from cerebral infarction in her right internal capsule, and later died due to pneumonia at age 76 years. No autopsy was performed.
The proband’s elder brother (II-1, autopsied case, Fig. 1 a) was first noted to have dysarthria at age 40 years. He then developed ataxic gait and became bedridden in his seventies, but the details of his medical history and neurological findings were not available because he did not have a regular medical check-up and had been institutionalized in the nursing home long in his later years. His condition was complicated with diabetes, hypertension, myocardial infarction, and cardiac arrhythmia. He was transferred to hospital with a state of dead on arrival at age 75 years, died on the day after arrival and an autopsy was performed.
Neuropathology (II-1)
Autopsy was done approximately 2 h postmortem. The general pathological examinations showed old myocardial infarcts on the posterior and lateral wall of the left ventricle, atherosclerosis, congestion in several organs, and mucosal hemorrhages in the stomach and bladder. The weight of the brain was 1400 g. For histopathological examination, paraffin tissue blocks were made from the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital cortices, as well as from the Ammon’s horn, basal ganglia, thalamus, midbrain, pons, medulla oblongata, and superior vermis of the cerebellum. Fresh ischemic changes were observed in the entire brain, probably due to recurrent cardiac arrests in his terminal stage. There were small, old infarcts in the putamen, cerebral white matter, and pontine base. The most striking finding was severe loss of Purkinje cells with Bergmann’s gliosis in the cerebellar cortex (Fig. 3 a), examined. The remaining Purkinje cells were severely atrophic without any characteristic morphological changes including intranuclear inclusion formation or somatic sprouts (Fig. 3 b). Iron accumulation was not seen in the globus pallidus, putamen, caudate nucleus, red nucleus, or cerebellar dentate nucleus (data not shown). Fig. 3 Neuropathology. a The cerebellar cortex shows severe loss of Purkinje cells with Bergmann’s gliosis. b The remaining Purkinje cell in the cerebellar cortex is atrophic and lacking somatic sprouts (arrowhead). c and d Purkinje cell loss was conspicuous in the patient ( c ) compared with the control ( d 85-year-old man who died of aortic dissection). e In the cerebellar cortex, many empty baskets (arrows) are observed in the Purkinje cell layer. f The inferior olive shows mild loss of neurons. g The cortical layers III-V of the frontal lobe show no apparent developmental anomalies. h No obvious neuronal loss or architectural abnormality was observed in the CA1 field of the hippocampus. a , b , and f : HE stain; c and d : Immunohistochemistry stained with a rabbit polyclonal antibody against calbindin-D-28K (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA); e : Immunohistochemistry stained with a monoclonal antibody (clone SMI-31) against phosphorylated neurofilaments (Covance, Princeton, NJ, USA); f and g : Klüver-Barrera stain. Scale bars = 50 μm for a , c , d , e and h ; 20 μm for b ; 100 μm for f and g . ML molecular layer, PCL Purkinje cell layer, GL granular layer
Immunohistochemistry for calbindin-D-28K revealed conspicuous loss of Purkinje cells and thinning of the molecular layer in the cerebellar vermis of the patient (Fig. 3 c) compared with the control (Fig. 3 d). A lot of empty baskets, residual neuronal processes of basket cells after Purkinje cell loss, were seen in the Purkinje cell layer (Fig. 3 e). Mild loss of neurons was also seen in the inferior olive (Fig. 3 f). No obvious neuronal loss was observed in the other brain stem nuclei such as the substantia nigra, locus coeruleus, or pontine nuclei. In the cerebrum, no obvious developmental anomalies were observed in the cortex (Fig. 3 g), basal ganglia, thalamus, nor the Ammon’s horn (Fig. 3 h). Neurons were well preserved in these structures, except for their fresh ischemic changes. Although senile plaques were observed in the entire cerebral cortices (Braak stage C), neurofibrillary tangles were restricted to the parahippocampal and hippocampal regions (Braak stage II) [ ]. Amyloid angiopathy was not seen in the meningeal vessels.
Molecular Analysis
Molecular diagnosis for this family was first done in II-1. Repeat expansions for SCA1, 2, 3 (Machado-Joseph disease), 6, 7, 8, 12, 17, and dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) or intronic insertion of expanded repeats specific for SCA31were not identified in this patient. Then, whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed on all four affected members (II-1, II-7, III-1, and III-7) as previously described [ ]. Written informed consent was obtained from all the individuals and molecular analyses were approved by the Committee for Ethical Issues at both Shinshu University School of Medicine and Yokohama City University School of Medicine.
For WES, genomic DNA derived from their leukocytes was captured using the SureSelect Human All Exon V5 or V6 kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2500 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) with 101-bp paired-end reads. Image analysis and base calling were performed using sequence control software with real-time analysis and CASAVA software (Illumina). Reads were aligned to GRCh37 using Novoalign ( http://www.novocraft.com /). Marking PCR duplicates, indel realignment, and base-quality-score recalibration were performed using Picard ( http://picard.sourceforge.net /) and Genome Analysis ToolKit (GATK) ( https://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/index.php ). Variants were called by the GATK UnifiedGenotyper ( http://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/ ) and annotated using ANNOVAR ( http://www.openbioinformatics.org/annovar/ ). The common variants registered in the common dbSNP135 database with minor allele frequency ≥ 0.01 and variants observed in more than five individuals out of 575 in-house normal Japanese exome were excluded from the analysis. Among the rare variants included, we picked up heterozygous variants shared in all four affected individuals, which were only five of them. Among these, c.509C > T (p.Pro170Leu [p.P170L]) in TMEM240 (NM_001114748.1) was the only variant in genes associated with SCA. Sanger sequencing confirmed this variant in all four individuals (Fig. 1 b).
Discussion
Here, we described clinical details of the first Japanese family genetically confirmed as SCA21 including an autopsied case. Neurological presentation was summarized as a slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia associated with psychomotor retardation and cognitive impairment. The low scores of TMT-A, B, and KWCST in three patients examined indicated marked impairment of executive function. These clinical features were very consistent with those of French families with SCA21 [ , , ], but our patients did not have extrapyramidal features including resting tremor, rigidity, and akinesia, which were described in the original French family [ , ]. In several French patients, mild iron overload was detected in the basal ganglia on MRI [ ], whereas signal abnormality suggestive of iron overload was not seen in our patients. This may be associated with an absence of extrapyramidal features in our family.
Neuropathologically, the most striking change was observed in the cerebellar cortex, where Purkinje cells were severely decreased in number. On the other hand, there was no specific change in the cerebrum or brainstem. To our best knowledge, ours is the second neuropathological report of SCA21 next to a French case of a 50-year-old female [ ]. She showed only a mild decrease of Purkinje cells in the cerebellar vermis, but not any intracellular inclusion or extracellular deposits [ ]. These findings were essentially the same as ours, although the degree of Purkinje cell loss was much more prominent in our patient. The distribution of neuronal loss appeared to be concordant with the expression profile of TMEM240 in the brain, where THEM240 expresses highest in the cerebellum, as well as in the dentate gyrus, putamen, and caudate nucleus [ ]. This strongly suggests that TMEM240 is indispensable for the functions and survival of cerebellar Purkinje cells. But the mechanism by which TMEM240 dysfunction leads to degeneration of Purkinje cells need to be further investigated.
We previously reported the p.Val1435Met (p.V1435M) variant in microtubule crosslinking factor 1 gene ( MTCL1 ) in II-1 and III-1 [ ], but this variant was not shared in II-7 and III-7, whom we by chance examined after the publication. Here, we conclude that the primary defect in this family is p.P170L in TMEM240 , but not p.V1435M in MTCL1 , because the former segregated with the disease in all four patients examined. The p.P170Lin TMEM240 was first confirmed as disease-causing in the original French SCA21 family [ , , ], then in additional two French families [ ], and later in a single Chinese patient [ ]. We think this variant could be the most prevalent one in SCA21 patients beyond ethnic origins.
In conclusion, we here report the first Japanese family with SCA21 carrying p.P170L in TMEM240 . The age at onset and clinical features of SCA21 are highly variable [ , , ], but the cardinal combination of cerebellar ataxia of protracted course and psychomotor delay/cognitive impairment will indeed remind us of SCA21, regardless of the ethnic descent of patients.