Introduction
For many cerebellar diseases manifested with neuronal loss, such as a variety of hereditary cerebellar ataxias, currently, no effective treatment that would substantially restore cerebellar functions is available [ , ]. Neurotransplantation could be a promising therapy for such cases (for review see [ , , ]). Nevertheless, there are many unknown factors that must be elucidated and severe limitations for routine clinical use still persist despite years of intensive investigation (for review see [ , ]).
Neurotransplantation could be used for several purposes. First, transplantation of mesenchymal stem cells or neural progenitors could rescue degenerating cerebellar cells if employed in early stages of slowly progressive degeneration. This approach has been shown to be effective in several mouse models of cerebellar degeneration [ , , , ] as well as other neurological diseases (for review see [ ]). Second, transplantation of immature cells might potentially facilitate compensation processes in residual cerebellar tissue [ ]. And third, transplantation could theoretically substitute lost cells, reconstruct neural circuits, and thereby provide specific functional restoration. Nevertheless, for this latter goal, delivery of an adequate number of specific cell phenotypes and their synaptic integration into the host tissue would be needed.
The factors that determine the fate of the graft and its potential to be functionally integrated are not fully understood. They may include signals from the diseased host tissue, host-graft immune response, and many other factors (for review see [ ]). Knowledge of these factors would be crucial for prediction of compatibility of a particular disease of the cerebellum and expected goals of neurotransplantation therapy. Mouse models of hereditary cerebellar degenerations can serve as tools for investigation of graft survival and development under various pathological conditions (for review see [ ]).
Lurcher mutant mice [ ] are among the most studied cerebellar ataxic mutants. Lurcher mice are heterozygous for Grid2 Lc mutation in the δ2 glutamate receptor (GluRδ2) gene [ ] that is expressed at high levels in cerebellar Purkinje cells in parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapses [ ] and at lower levels also in several other central nervous system areas (for review see [ ]). The δ2 subunit shares aminoacid sequence with both NMDA and non-NMDA glutamate receptors and is important for cerebellar long-term depression induction [ , , ]. Heterozygous Lurcher mice suffer from rapid postnatal degeneration of Purkinje cells, which is completed within 3 months of life, substantial reduction of cerebellar cortex interneurons and inferior olive neurons, and moderate degeneration of cerebellar nuclei [ , , ]. Lurcher mice are available in several background strains, and strain-specific traits influence the overall phenotype of the mutants [ ]. Recently, an analogous mutation has been found in human patients with cerebellar ataxia [ ].
In Lurcher mice, embryonic cerebellar grafts can survive for several months and the survival rate was similar to that in normal mice [ , , , ]. Nevertheless, we have observed qualitative differences in graft morphology as compared with grafts in the normal mouse cerebellum, particularly a tendency of the graft to avoid invasion into the host Lurcher cerebellum [ , ]. This complies with only moderate functional benefit of the graft seen in Lurchers [ ]. Our preliminary experiments also suggested strain differences in solid embryonic cerebellar graft survival [ ]. Solid grafts are in less intensive contact with the host tissue than cell suspension grafts, and thus, it could be expected that a specific pathological host tissue niche might have higher impact on the suspension graft’s fate. Furthermore, cell suspension grafts seem to be more suitable for cell substitution in diffuse cerebellar degenerations, and thus, it is more important to study the development of this type of graft under various conditions.
The aim of the work was to assess volume and morphology and functional impact on motor skills of an embryonic cerebellar graft injected in the form of cell suspension in Lurcher mutant and wild-type mice of the B6CBA and C3H strains after a 6-month survival period.
Materials and Methods
Lurcher mutant and wild-type mice were treated by transplantation of EGFP-positive embryonic cerebellar cells (B6CBA Lurcher: n = 18; B6CBA wild type: n = 19; C3H Lurcher: n = 16; C3H wild type: n = 19) at the age of 3–4 months. To investigate the effect of the transplantation on motor abilities, a group of age-matched B6CBA Lurcher mice was subjected to sham-operation ( n = 16) and several B6CBA Lurchers ( n = 20) and wild-type mice were left intact ( n = 18). In C3H mice, motor function was not examined because these mice suffer from retinal degeneration that could interfere with their performance in the test [ ].
Animals
Lurcher mutant and wild-type mice (both males and females in approximately 1:1 ratio) of the C3H and B6CBA strains from the colony maintained at the Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University were used. C3H mice to establish the colony were kindly provided by Dr. K. W. T. Caddy from the University College London, and B6CBA mice were kindly provided by Prof. A. Resibois from the Universite´ Libre de Bruxelles. Mice of both strains were housed in the same room of the breeding facility under identical conditions with temperature and humidity-controlled conditions and 12/12 h light/dark cycle (6 a.m.–6 p.m.). Food (commercial pellet diet) and water were available ad libitum .
Embryos for graft isolation were obtained by cross-breeding EGFP-positive C57BL/6-Tg(ACTB-EGFP)1OSB/J mice with mice of the host strain, i.e., C3H or B6CBA.
All experiments reported here were conducted in full compliance with the EU Guidelines for scientific experimentation on animals and with the permission of the Ethics Commission of the Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen. All efforts were made to minimize discomfort.
Graft Preparation
Donor females with conception-timed pregnancies were euthanized by overdose of thiopental (intraperitoneal administration) on embryonic day 12 (E12). Only EGFP (enhanced green fluorescent protein)-positive embryos were used. Embryonic cerebella were dissected. All manipulations with the embryos and embryonic cerebella were done in a sterile cold aqueous solution of 0.9% sodium chloride and 0.6% glucose used later also as a vehicle for graft injection (vehicle). The embryonic cerebella were treated with trypsine at 37 °C for 10 min, washed at least three times with the vehicle solution, and mechanically dissociated with a pipette to prepare single-cell suspension. The concentration of the suspension was then adjusted to 50,000 cells/μl. The suspension was injected into the host’s cerebellum no later than 5 h after being prepared.
Transplantation
The host mice (B6CBA Lurcher: n = 18; B6CBA wild type: n = 19; C3H Lurcher: n = 16; C3H wild type: n = 19) were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of ketamine (100 mg/kg b. w.) and xylazine (16 mg/kg b.w.). After disinfection, shaving the parietal and occipital area of the head and mounting into the stereotaxic frame (Stoelting Co., Wood Dale, IL, USA), the skin was incised in the midline, and holes were drilled in the occipital bone bilaterally. The graft was injected into the cerebellar hemispheres in the proximity of the cerebellar nuclei bilaterally with a glass microcapillary. Stereotaxic coordinates relative to the bregma were as follows: antero-posterior—6.3 mm, lateral ± 1.7 mm, vertical − 3.3 mm. The volume per site was 3 μl (i.e., 150,000 cells per site). Speed of injection was 0.5 μl/min. After finishing the injection, the capillary was left in situ for 5 min and then slowly extracted. Finally, the wound was sutured with a resorbable sewing material. Sham-operated mice were treated with the vehicle without the cells administered using the same procedure.
Rotarod Test
At the end of the 6-month period after the surgery, B6CBA mice were tested on a rotarod (RotaRod Advanced, TSE Systems GmbH, Germany) with rod diameter of 3.5 cm and slow acceleration from 0 to 60 RPM within 6 min. Five-day sessions each having four trials with 16-min intertrial intervals were done. Fall latencies were measured and mean values for each day session were calculated. Among graft-treated mice, only those with bilateral graft survival were involved in motor function analysis. For technical reasons, one graft-treated Lurcher mouse and one wild-type mouse did not finish the rotarod test and were excluded from the analysis. Thus, groups for the rotarod test were as follows: graft-treated B6CBA Lurcher mice ( n = 14), sham-operated B6CBA Lurcher mice ( n = 16), intact B6CBA Lurcher mice ( n = 20), graft-treated B6CBA wild-type mice ( n = 18), and intact B6CBA wild-type mice ( n = 18).
Histology
Graft-treated mice were euthanized by overdose of thiopental (0.2 ml of 10% solution intraperitoneally) 6 months after the transplantation and transcardially perfused with Ringer’s solution followed with 4% phosphate-buffered paraformaldehyde (pH 7.4). The brains were then left in the paraformaldehyde solution for 2 h. After incubation in 15, 20, and 30% sucrose, the brains were frozen and stored at − 80 °C until further processing. Then, 40 μm frontal frozen sections were made. The graft was identified using EGFP fluorescence in native specimens.
Presence of graft-derived Purkinje cells was verified according to colocalization of EGFP and anti-calbindin fluorescence. For anti-calbindin immunofluorescence, selected specimens were incubated as free-floating sections with anti-calbindin primary antibody (ab11426, produced in rabbit, dilution 1:1000, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) overnight at room temperature and then with AlexaFluor® 594 secondary antibody (ab150076, produced in donkey, Abcam, Cambridge, UK, dilution 1:400) for 2 h at room temperature. Infiltration of the grafts with astrocytes was examined in anti-glial acidic fibrillary protein (GFAP)-stained sections. Selected sections were incubated with anti-GFAP primary antibody (clone G-A-5 Cy3 conjugate, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, USA, dilution 1:800) overnight at 4 °C as free-floating sections.
Microscopic examination and microphotographs were done using a fluorescent Olympus BX41 microscope (Olympus Corporation, Japan) and an Olympus DP70 digital camera (Olympus Corporation, Japan). For detailed examinations and high magnification images an Olympus FV10I-DOC, confocal laser scanning microscope (Olympus Corporation, Japan) was used.
Graft Volume Estimation
The graft volumes were estimated in B6CBA Lurcher mice ( n = 16), B6CBA wild-type mice ( n = 16), C3H Lurcher mice ( n = 12), and C3H wild-type ( n = 10) mice in which all slices containing the graft were available or only single slices were missing. The slices containing the graft were recorded using the above-mentioned fluorescent Olympus BX41 microscope with UPlanFl 4×/0.13 objective and an Olympus DP70 digital camera (Olympus Corporation, Japan). Total volume of EGFP-fluorescing area in histological sections, considered as the graft, was estimated using the point grid method and Cavalieri principle [ , ]. Estimation was done using ImageJ software. Graft volume in the missing single slices was estimated using the previous slice. In order to be sure that a sufficient amount of tissue was selected the coefficient of volume error (CE) was estimated using the methods proposed by Gundersen et al. [ ]. Based on this principle, CE value depends on the number of the grid points over the graft at single slices, number of all points over the whole graft, number of sections, and a coefficient representing graft shape irregularity [ , ]. This technique has been also briefly explained in our previous study [ , ].
Statistics
Statistical analyses were performed using R software [ ]. For all statistical analyses, we applied permutation tests (10,000 Monte-Carlo permutations. This approach is relatively robust to outliers and does not require normal distribution of residuals.
Longitudinal data obtained from the rotarod test were analyzed by permutation test of generalized least squares (GLS) model with AR1 autocorrelation structure modeling serial within-subject autocorrelations [ ]. The GLS was performed using nlme package in R [ ]. Because model did not fit the data well (huge heteroscedasticity), a square root transformation of the response variable was applied and the model was refitted. Post hoc (planned) comparisons were performed using permutation t test followed by false discovery rate correction for multiple comparisons [ ].
Effects of cerebellar degeneration and strain factors and their interaction on graft volume were analyzed by permutation ANOVA. For post hoc (planned) comparisons, permutation t test followed by false discovery rate correction for multiple comparisons [ ] was used.
Data with binomial response variable (qualitative parameters) were analyzed by permutation test of generalized linear models (GLMs) with binomial distribution and logit-link function. Post hoc (planned) comparisons were evaluated by permutation test of differences at groups’ coefficients derived from the binomial GLMs. Then, false discovery rate correction was applied [ ].
The results are presented as number of mice and percentage for qualitative data (graft survival, presence of graft features) and as mean ± S.E.M for quantitative data (graft volume, fall latencies). In all cases, P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Graft Survival and Morphology
The grafts survived in most of the mice bilaterally (Fig. 1 a), and there were only a few mice in which the graft was extinct on one side or completely (Table 1 ). Thus, there were no significant differences in graft survival. In all cases, the surviving grafts were inside the host’s cerebellum or on its surface being at least in partial contact with it. In most of the mice of all experimental groups with surviving grafts, EGFP-positive (grafted or graft-derived) cells having size and shape characteristic for Purkinje cells were found (Fig. 1 b, c and Table 2 ). Immunohistochemistry performed in selected specimens demonstrated calbindin positivity of such cells, suggesting that they are Purkinje cells (Fig. 1 b, c, e) and confirmed presence of calbindin-positive intrinsic (non-grated) Purkinje cells in wild-type mice and their absence in the cerebellum of Lurcher mice (Fig. 1 d, e). Fig. 1 Bilateral graft in the cerebellum of a B6CBA wild type mouse, native EGFP fluorescence ( a ). Anti-calbindin immunostaining ( b ) and EGFP fluorescence of the graft in the same field ( c ) in a C3H wild type mouse. Anti-calbindin staining confirmed presence of intrinsic (non-grafted) Purkinje cells in the wild-type mouse cerebellum ( d ). The cerebellum of a Lurcher mutant ( e ) is devoid of Purkinje cells (left part of the image—white arrow) while the mesencephalon (deviated dorsally in Lurcher mice due to shrinkage of the cerebellum) is infiltrated by graft-derived calbindin-positive cells and fiber tangle (right part of the image—yellow arrow) Table 1 Graft survival. Number of examined mice, number and percentage of mice with presence of EGFP-positive tissue (both, bilateral and unilateral graft presence), and number and percentage of mice with bilateral graft survival No. of mice examined No. of mice with surviving grafts % of graft survival No. of mice with bilaterally surviving graft % of bilateral graft survival B6CBA Lurcher 18 17 94.4 15 83.3 B6CBA wild type 19 19 100 19 100 C3H Lurcher 16 16 100 14 87.5 C3H wild type 19 18 94.7 17 89.5 Table 2 Presence of EGFP-positive (graft-derived) Purkinje cells (PCs) in mice with surviving grafts No. of mice evaluated Presence graft-derived PC % of graft-derived PC presence B6CBA Lurcher 17 17 100 B6CBA wild type 19 19 100 C3H Lurcher 16 14 87.5 C3H wild type 18 18 100
In most of Lurcher mice, the grafts were strictly delimited against the host’s cerebellum with no EGFP-positive fiber sprouting from the graft and no Purkinje cell-shaped cells dispersed in the host’s cerebellar tissue outside the main mass of the graft (Fig. 2 a). Only in 7 (41.2%) B6CBA Lurcher mice and 4 (25%) C3H Lurcher mice were at least one of these phenomena detected (Fig. 2 b, c). On the other hand, colonization of the cerebellum by numerous EGFP-positive cells having size and shape typical for Purkinje cells (Fig. 2 d, for a detail see Fig. 1 b,c) was observed in all of the B6CBA and C3H wild-type mice. Nevertheless, these cells were mostly with disorganized tangle of their dendritic tree and were not arranged in a layer resembling their normal position and orientation (Figs. 2 d and 3 b). In a few wild-type mice, bundles of EGFP-positive fiber sprouting from the mass of the graft to a distance of several hundred micrometers and resembling rather axon-like fibers than dendritic trees was also seen. The frequency of strictly delimited graft having no interactions with the host cerebellum was significantly dependent on the presence of cerebellar degeneration ( P < 0001). On the other hand, the strain factor and strain/degeneration factor interaction did not have any significant effect. Strictly delimited graft presence frequency was significantly higher in Lurcher mice than in wild-type mice due to more frequent colonization of the host’s cerebellum by graft-derived EGFP-positive Purkinje cells (for B6CBA P = 0.0001 and for C3H P < 0.0001, Table 3 ). In frequency of fiber sprouting from the graft into the host’s cerebellum, no significant differences between Lurcher and wild-type mice were found (Table 3 ). There were no significant strain differences in fiber sprouting and graft-derived cell dispersion outside the graft. Fig. 2 A restricted bilateral graft with no invasion into the host’s cerebellum in a C3H Lurcher mouse ( a ), graft surrounded by EGFP-positive cells dispersed in the host’s cerebellum (indicated by an arrow) in a C3H Lurcher mouse ( b ), EGFP-positive fibers (indicated by an arrow) growing from the graft toward the cerebellar nuclei in a C3H Lurcher mouse ( c ), and EGFP-positive Purkinje cells (arrow) colonizing the host’s cerebellar cortex in the proximity of the graft in a C3H wild-type mouse ( d ). Native EGFP fluorescence Fig. 3 Anti-GFAP immunofluorescence ( a ), native EFGP fluorescence ( b ), and merged figure ( c ) in the same field of the graft in a B6CBA Lurcher mouse Table 3 Presence of graft-host interactions in mice with surviving grafts: number and percentage of mice in which EGFP-positive fiber sprouting from the graft and/or host’s cerebellum colonization by EGFP-positive Purkinje cells (PCs) were found and number and percentage of mice in which both these phenomena were detected No. of mice examined Fiber sprouting Colonization by PC Fiber sprouting and colonization by PC B6CBA Lurcher 17 5 (29.4%) 7 (41.2%) 5 (29.4%) B6CBA wild type 19 2 (10.5%) 19 (100%) 2 (10.5%) C3H Lurcher 16 1 (6.3%) 4 (25.0%) 1 (6.3%) C3H wild type 18 1 (5.6%) 18 (100%) 1 (5.6%)
The grafts contained numerous GFAP-positive cells with morphology corresponding to astrocytes (Fig. 3 ). Most of them were EGFP-negative. Thus, they were of the host origin and invaded the graft from the surrounding tissue.
Graft Volume
Graft volume was significantly dependent on interaction of degeneration/strain factors ( F (1, 50) = 9.165, P < 0.005) but not on the single factors. The graft was significantly larger in C3H wild-type mice than in C3H Lurcher mutants (Fig. 4 ). In B6CBA mice, no significant difference between Lurcher and wild-type mice was found. In wild-type mice, a strain difference was found, since C3H wild-type mice had larger grafts than their B6CBA counterparts (Fig. 4 ). Mean CE was 0.067 for B6CBA Lurcher mice, 0.076 for B6CBA wild-type mice, 0.11 for C3H Lurcher mice, and 0.078 for C3H wild-type mice. Fig. 4 Mean graft volume in B6CBA and C3H Lurcher (Lc) and wild-type (WT) mice. Error bars represent S.E.M. * P < 0.05
Rotarod Test
Fall latencies in the rotarod test depended significantly on the day-session ( F (4, 405) = 39.327, P < 0.0005) and experimental group ( F (4, 405) = 390.735, P < 0.0005) factors as well as on their interaction ( F (16, 405) = 7.035, P < 0.0005). Lurcher mice achieved significantly shorter fall latencies than wild-type mice (for all day-sessions D1-D5: P < 0.0001, compare Fig. 5 a, b). Graft-treated Lurcher mice had shorter fall latencies on D3 than intact Lurchers (Fig. 5 a). No significant effect of the transplantation on the performance in the rotarod test was seen in wild-type mice (Fig. 5 b). Fig. 5 Mean fall latencies in the rotarod test (day-sessions D1-D5) in B6CBA Lurcher mice ( a ) and wild-type mice ( b ) mice. Error bars represent S.E.M. * P < 0.05 for graft-treated vs. intact mice
Discussion
We have shown that embryonic cerebellar grafts can survive well for 6 months in both wild-type and Lurcher mutant mice regardless of the strain of host mice. Nevertheless, we have also found marked differences in qualitative parameters of graft morphology between Lurcher and wild-type mice that were not strain-specific since they were found in both B6CBA as well as C3H strain. Furthermore, strain differences in these qualitative parameters were insignificant. Differences in graft volume, on the other hand, were seen only in the C3H strain in which Lurcher mice had smaller grafts than did wild-type animals. Furthermore, C3H wild-type mice had larger grafts than did B6CBA wild-type mice, suggesting that the mouse strain can influence graft growth and/or graft destruction intensity. Strain differences between C3H and B6CBA mice were also found earlier in survival of solid embryonic cerebellar grafts [ ].
We have confirmed that embryonic cerebellar grafts are a good source of Purkinje cells [ , , , , , , , ] that are the main cell type degenerating in Lurcher mice [ ]. From a certain stage of ontogenetic development, the vast majority of cerebellar cells have the potential to differentiate almost exclusively into cerebellar cells with different and more or less wide periods of specification of individual cerebellar cell phenotypes [ , , ]. Therefore, the fate of some of the grafted embryonic cells had been already determined at the time of transplantation to differentiate into mature Purkinje cells that are specified earlier than cerebellar GABAergic interneurons produced by a common pool of progenitors and that retain wide developmental potential up to late ontogenetic stages [ , ]. The origin of EGFP-positive Purkinje cells by fusion between grafted cells and host’s Purkinje cells, as reported, e.g., after bone marrow-derived cell transplantation [ ], is not expected in Lurcher mice because the transplantation was performed at the age at which only a few intrinsic Purkinje cells survive in the paraflocculus, flocculus, and the nodular zone [ ]. Therefore, we suppose that these cells were purely of donor origin.
The main and most marked difference between Lurcher mutant and wild-type mice seen in both B6CBA and C3H strains was found in graft integration into the host’s cerebellum. While in all wild-type mice graft-derived cells dispersed outside the main graft mass were seen, in most Lurcher mice, the grafts had a sharp border against the host’s cerebellum. Although the graft was injected inside the cerebellum close to the cerebellar nuclei, the graft even remained on the surface of the mutant cerebellum in many cases, showing no tendency to invade inside it. Fiber sprouting from the graft into the host’s cerebellum was seen in a minority of both Lurcher mutant and wild-type mice. Thus, less marked delimitation of the graft in wild-type mice was namely due to dispersion of graft-derived cells.
These findings suggest that the impact of the Lurcher cerebellum niche changed by neurodegeneration manifests predominantly in restriction of the graft, while its negative effect on the size of the grafted tissue surviving for 6 months is relatively mild and seen only in one of the mouse strains. The grafts created a large cluster of tissue, just as solid cerebellar grafts did [ , , ]. Inside the cluster or in a graft which remains purely on the surface of the host’s cerebellum, grafted cells are not in direct contact with the cerebellar niche, and thus, it might have milder impact on graft growth or survival. Cells migrating from the graft into the host tissue surrounding the graft could be, however, more targeted by signals from the host tissue.
The reasons why the graft mostly remained separated from the mutant cerebellum but not from the healthy one are still not known. Carletti et al. [ ] observed that grafted Purkinje cells migrate through the hosts’ cerebellar tissue along their natural or unusual migratory routes and that their positioning in the recipient’s cortex is often defective. Although the cells retain capacity for navigating, incorporation into the host’s cerebellum seems to depend on specific constraints of the local tissue [ ]. The importance of signals from the mutant cerebellum has been shown in Purkinje cell degeneration mice in which selective mechanisms favored survival of grafted Purkinje cells [ ]. In Lurcher mice, the impact of the host tissue seems to be rather negative. Recently, we have shown, surprisingly, that the Lurcher mutant cerebellum contains a higher level of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor [ ] and higher densities of the microvascular bed [ ] than healthy mice. One would expect that these factors would increase neurogenicity of the host tissue, resulting in a positive effect on the graft’s development (for review see [ ]). Nevertheless, increased blood perfusion and reduced distance to the blood capillaries might increase intensity of immune response and have a harmful effect (for review see [ ]). There is also possibility of a negative effect of specific pathological proteins on immature cells as shown in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 model [ ]. In the Lurcher mutant cerebellum, expression of pro-inflammatory interleukin 1β is increased [ ]. Accelerated production of reactive oxygen species and oxidative stress are associated with hypermetabolism in overactivated Purkinje cells and loss of inhibitory signaling [ , , ]. Furthermore, increased corticosterone secretion and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines after stress response or inflammation induction has been found in Lurcher mice [ , , ]. All of these factors might substantially change neurogenicity of the Lurcher cerebellum and survival and influence development of grafted immature cells at least during certain stages of the neurodegenerative process.
In our previous study, we have found mild improvement of gait but no amelioration of performance in the rotarod test in Lurcher mice treated with transplantation of embryonic cerebellar cell suspension [ ]. In the present study, we even observed mild impairment of fall latencies in the rotarod test in operated mutant mice, but not in wild-type animals. Thus, we have confirmed that this transplantation approach is not capable of improving rotarod performance in Lurcher mutants.
Marked improvement of motor function with neurotransplantation therapy in Lurcher mice has been reported by Jones et al. [ ]. In that case, mesenchymal stem cells grafted into the cerebellum of newborn Lurcher mice rescued their own Purkinje cells [ ] that were probably responsible for maintaining cerebellar function. Purkinje cells substituted by transplantation of their embryonic precursors, on the other hand, had no or only mild functional effects in adult Lurcher mice [ ]. Substantial reduction of motor deficit by embryonic cerebellar cell transplantation has been observed in pcd mice [ , ] and in SCA1 mice [ ]. On the other hand, substitution of Purkinje cells by grafting of their progenitors has been shown to fail ameliorating cerebellar ataxia in tambaleante mice [ ]. Because graft-derived Purkinje cells remain mostly inside the graft mass and no massive fiber connection between the graft and the host’s cerebellar nuclei develops, we cannot expect any significant specific functional effect of the graft in Lurcher mice. Localization of grafted Purkinje cells in the proximity of cerebellar nuclei and restoration of cortico-nuclear connections have been shown to be crucial for a functional effect to occur [ , ].
Conclusion
We have confirmed good long-term survival of embryonic cerebellar grafts in both wild-type and Lurcher mutant mice. Nevertheless, unlike the wild-type mice, in both C3H and B6CBA Lurcher mice, the grafts showed a tendency to avoid the cerebellum. It suggests that the Lurcher cerebellum niche has a negative impact on integration of grafted cells. This factor seems to be limiting for specific functional effects of the transplantation therapy in this mouse model of cerebellar degeneration. Elucidation of the mechanism of this phenomenon would be crucial for understanding graft integration processes and for future development of effective and safe neurotransplantation therapies for human patients.