Introduction
The histogenesis of the vertebrate central nervous system is critically dependent on the precise and orchestrated developmental migration of its constituent cells. Precursors of neurons and glia are usually generated far from where their descendants are located in the mature nervous system, and they have to navigate a progressively complex cellular environment to assure their proper integration into a functional tissue.
Cerebellar histogenesis is no exception to this. While early-born cerebellar cells, including neurons of the cerebellar nuclei, inhibitory interneurons of the granule cell layer, and, prominently, Purkinje cells migrate radially from the neuroepithelium of the fourth ventricle, granule cell precursors initially migrate through the rhombic and spread over the surface of the cerebellar anlage. There, they extensively proliferate, before they migrate, again radially, but inward, to their adult positions (see, e.g., [ ], and references therein). These cellular translocations have been studied and described in extensive detail; indeed, cell migration within the cerebellar cortex, and notably the final leg of granule cell migration from the outer granule cell layer to their adult positions, has been instrumental to unraveling basic principles and molecular pathways defining neuronal motility and translocation (e.g., [ , , ]).
In striking contrast, our knowledge and understanding of the migration of cerebellar inhibitory interneurons is rather more limited. Later generated members of this group have to navigate an increasingly complex and diversified environment to reach their adult positions. This is particularly true for basket and stellate cells, which will eventually populate the cerebellar molecular layer. These cells go through their last mitosis, i.e., they are “born” in or close to the ventricular epithelium, and also within the nascent deep cerebellar mass/white matter. At about that time, they may be positively identified as they start to express the paired homeobox gene, Pax2 [ , , ]. They then migrate, sequentially, through the nascent white matter, the immature granule cell layer, and through the incipient molecular layer to accumulate at the inner border of the external granule cell layer [ , ]. From there, they redistribute to take up their adult positions. To date, only this last leg of their extensive itinerary has been analyzed quantitatively [ ].
Here, we take advantage of a transgenic mouse line expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) from the Pax2 [ ] locus to monitor, in acute slices, the migration of precursors of molecular layer inhibitory interneurons through the early postnatal cerebellar anlage, and the cerebellar cortex in particular. We aim at giving a quantitative description, hoping to provide a first basis for understanding their interaction(s) with the cellular territories they traverse, and possibly the basis for their orderly distribution within the molecular layer.
Materials and Methods
Mice expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) from the Pax2 locus were originally obtained from Peter Pfeffer and Meinrad Busslinger, Vienna ([ ]; BAC line no. 30). These animals were kept as heterozygotes on a C57Bl/6 background. The development and localization of EGFP-positive cells in the cerebellum of these animals provide a reliable marker for the expression of cognate Pax2 [ ]. We prepared acute, 300-μm-thick, sagittally oriented slices from the cerebellar vermis of 8-day-old pups that had been sacrificed by decapitation. Animals of either sex were used. We recorded over a time span of 3–4 h tracks from three slices obtained from three animals. Initial inspection of these movies did not show any appreciable differences in cell motility patterns, and numerical data presented below were based on track reconstructions from the same slice. In addition, we used shorter, 30-min-long tracks, recorded from three additional slices, again from three independent animals, to verify key statistics that allow to describe movement patterns (see below). All animal handling was done in strict adherence to governmental (Directive 2010/63/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of September 22, 2010) and institutional animal care regulations.
Slices were collected in saline (87 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 0.5 mM CaCl 2 , 7 mM MgCl 2 , 25 mM NaHCO 3 , 1.25 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , 25 mM glucose, and 75 mM sucrose), kept on ice, and gassed with carbogen. The osmolarity of this solution was 347 mOsm. They were then kept for 30 min at 32 °C. Thereafter, they were transferred to 35 °C warm artificial cerebrospinal fluid (132 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl 2 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 20 mM NaHCO 3 , 1.25 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , and 10 mM glucose). Time lapse imaging was performed using a Leica LSM TCS-SP5 microscope and, for two-photon excitation at 980 nm, a pulsed IR laser (Mai Tai BB, Newport/Spectra Physics). Slices were viewed using a 20×/1.00 W HCX APO objective. Time lapse series lasted up to 4 h, and images (image stacks measuring 456 × 456 × 30 μm 3 and consisting of 1024 × 1024 × 15 voxels) were recorded, at 42-s intervals, from the cerebellar cortex bordering the fissure acquired separating lobules IV and V. The Z position of the stage was readjusted if the drift exceeded 4 μm. Image series were corrected off-line for drift based on the positions of stationary, Pax2-positive Golgi cells. We then constructed isosurfaces of EGFP-positive cells using Imaris 7.5.1 (Bitplane), and we used the center of mass of these to assess cell positions in subsequent images. Tracks of mobile cells are thus defined by straight line segments connecting a cell’s center of mass in subsequent images.
For the preparation of fixed sections of cerebella from 8-day-old Pax2 mice, cerebella were fixed by standard procedures as described before [ ]. Image stacks were collected from sagittal vibratome sections with a pinhole size of one airy disc using a Leica TCS SP2 laser scanning microscope (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) fitted with a HCX PL APO CS 40.0 × 1.25 oil objective (xy resolution, 0.37 μm; three optical sections/μm). Overview images were obtained with a HC PL FLUOTAR 10.0 × 0.30 objective.
To assess the spatial distribution of basket and stellate cells within the molecular layer of adult animals, we mapped the positions of cells expressing Gad1 (glutamate dehydrogenase). Images of sections from the vermis of adult animals hybridized with a probe were obtained from the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas [ ]. We used ImageJ to measure the positions (x, y) of all Gad1-positive cells within the molecular layers of lobules IV and V bordering the fissure separating these lobules. The Purkinje cell layer and the fissure were used to define the borders of the regions analyzed. Data were exported to R (R [ ]) for further analysis.
Morphometry, Data Analysis, and Statistics
Data from Imaris, including cell positions and soma sizes and shapes (as defined by the axes of their isosurfaces), were exported to R [ ], and all morphometric and statistical analyses were done in this environment. As a first step, and to account for experimental noise, raw data were smoothed using a weighted repeated median filter [ ] implemented in R package “robfilter” with a window size of 11 data points. We then reconstructed cell tracks by connecting temporally ordered centers of mass of any one cell by straight line segments. We refer to the length of these line segments as the step length. This corresponds to the distance of a cell translocated within 42 s. The (3D) angle between two subsequent line segments is referred to as the turning angle. It may vary from 0° for a straight line translocation to 180° for a full reverse. From these data, we calculated the following summary descriptors for each track: track duration (as number of steps forming the track); the total track length (i.e., the sum of all distances covered between cell positions recorded at subsequent time points); the total distance covered (i.e., the straight line distance between the first and last positions recorded); the average step length; and the average turning angle between subsequent steps. Time-averaged mean square displacement (MSD) was calculated for each track as described by Michalet ([ ]; formula 7). Predictions of MSDs based on the assumption of a pure random movement were based on values up to a delta t of 70 min (i.e., 100 time steps); they are shown in the plots (Fig. 2 ) as dashed lines.
To probe the spatial distribution of molecular layer interneurons, we analyzed patterns of Gad1-positive cells following the approach described by van Lieshout and Baddeley [ ]. This allows to contrast the pattern observed with the one resulting from a random (Poisson) process and to differentiate correlated (clustered) and anti-correlated (regular) point patterns. Edge correction was based on the Hanisch procedure (see the discussion of this topic in the “help” section of the implementation of the J-function in R; see also [ ]).
To formally compare frequency distributions, we used the Kolmogorov-Smirnov procedure for linear data, and Kuiper’s test for angular data ([ ], p. 112f). To compare groups, we used the Mann-Whitney test for linear data to account for their heavily skewed distribution, and the Mardia-Watson-Wheeler test ([ ], p. 101f) for angular data.
Bonferroni’s method was used to adjust p values for multiple testing if indicated.
Results
By the end of the first postnatal week, histogenesis of the murine cerebellar cortex is characterized by extensive formation and migration of granule cells and inhibitory interneurons destined for the molecular layer. The cerebellar cortex is already extensively folded, and all of the characteristic regions and layers of the adult cerebellum are readily recognized. At this age, precursors of molecular layer inhibitory interneurons, distinguished by their robust expression of Pax2, or, presently, of EGFP expressed from the Pax2 locus, may be found throughout the cerebellar anlage, from the nascent white matter to the molecular layer (Fig. 1 ). Notable exceptions are the territories of the deep cerebellar nuclei and the external granule cell layer (cf [ , ]; for the EGL, see also Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Distribution and morphology of Pax2-EGFP-positive cells in the 8-day-old cerebellum. a Low-resolution overview. EGFP-tagged Pax2-expressing cells are labeled in green. The red signal results from counterstaining of nuclei with propidium iodide. The layers surrounding the fissure separating lobules IV and V from which tracks analyzed presently were recorded are labeled (e, external granule cell layer; m, molecular layer, i, internal granule cell layer; wm, white matter). Anterior is to the left. b High-power view reveals the distinct morphologies of slender Pax2 cells and roundish, resident interneurons of the GL that also express Pax2-EGFP. This maximum-intensity projection of a series of optical section shows a tissue volume of 375 × 375 × 24 μm 3 . Note the accumulation of Pax2 -cells at the inner border of the EGL, which is not penetrated by these cells. More mature ML interneurons in the lower ML show only weak remnants of EGFP expression. Note also the extensive differences in cell (soma) density, reflected by nuclear densities. Bar = 200 μm for a , and 50 μm for b
Within the nascent foliar white matter, Pax2-EGFP-positive precursors of molecular layer inhibitory interneurons (henceforth referred to as Pax2 cells) impressed as small, slender (~ 3–5 × 10–12-μm soma size) cells, with their long axis oriented parallel to the baso-apical axis of the foliae. Within the developing granule cell layer (GL), two morphologically distinct types of Pax2-EGFP-expressing cells could be observed. Large (~ 10–15-μm soma diameter), polygonal to roundish cells with several neurites were closely reminiscent of various types of inhibitory interneurons of the granule cell layer, including classical Golgi neurons [ , ]. The second type was typically bipolar, with a small and slender soma oriented perpendicularly or obliquely relative to the folial surface. These cells did not recall the morphology of any known resident cells of the granule cell layer, but rather resembled Pax2 cells in the white matter, except for their orientation (Fig. 1 b). Time lapse imaging further revealed that large, roundish Pax2-EGFP-positive cells were immobile, whereas slender Pax2 cells latter typically moved towards the surface of the cerebellar anlage (see also supplementary movie ).
To characterize the mobility of these cells, we reconstructed a total of 155 cell tracks from time lapse images that allowed to define cell positions in acute cerebellar slices with high spatial and exquisite temporal resolution (one image every 42 s for 4 h). One hundred forty-three cells could be followed for more than 90 min (i.e., 128 time points spaced ~ 42 s), and these were analyzed in detail. Of these 143 cells, 88 could be followed for 325 time points (i.e., 3 h and 47 min), and 98 for more than 300 time points (i.e., 3 h and 30 min). Thirty of the 143 tracks were observed in the granule cell layer (GL), 80 in the molecular layer (ML), and 33 in the upper GL/Purkinje cell layer/lower ML. This transitory zone was delineated based on the positions of the uppermost large, roundish, EGFP-positive interneurons of the granule cell layer, and it was operationally defined as a ~ 30-μm broad band including the Purkinje cell layer and the bordering GL and ML.
While overall tracks appeared quite variable, three basic types could be discerned. Examples of these are shown in Fig. 2 . The first type was essentially smooth, straight, or slightly curved, and results in an effective net displacement (Fig. 2 a, d). In contrast, the second type was highly convoluted and reflects local movement rather than effective migration (Fig. 2 b, e). The third type corresponds to a pattern observed in many tracks, where periods of rather straight and effective migration were interrupted by periods of local, convoluted movements (Fig. 2 c, f). Distinction of these basic types is facilitated by comparing their respective MSDs and the curves detailing how their distance from the origin evolves over time. May we point out that, in order to best convey quantitative differences between tracks and their resulting statistics in Fig. 2 , we opted to use variable scales for representing tracks, and y-axes for representing MSD curves and the time course by which cells moved from the origin. Fig. 2 Three-dimensional reconstructions of typical cell tracks and characterization of the movement patterns they represent. Each panel shows a 3D perspective view of an exemplary track (top), the net distance from the origin reached over time (middle), and the mean square displacement (MSD) curve for this track. The dashed straight line in the MSD plot indicates the expected MSD for a random (Brownian) movement. Note the (extensive) differences in scale between various panels that were allowed since the key information is conveyed by the shape, rather than the scale, of the tracks and curves shown. To facilitate direct comparison of the scale of tracks, those from b , c are also plotted, in gray, in a , and those from e , f in d , where they are visible in the lower left corner of these panels. a – c Tracks recoded in the GL. d – f Tracks from the ML. a , d Long, essentially smooth tracks of cells that effectively migrated in a highly oriented manner, as indicated by the strong upward bending of their MSD. The track shown in a results from a rather rapid movement at the beginning (up to about 20 steps), and a slightly variable speed thereafter, as indicated by the curve depicting the distance from the origin gained over time. The cell in d moved with constant speed indicated by the constant increase of the distance from the origin over time. b , e Examples of rather convoluted tracks reflecting local movement rather than effective migration. The convex MSD curve that bends downward indicates that the mobility of these cells is actually confined. Accordingly, the net distance gained from the origin is minimal. But note that even for these cells, two phases of movement may be discerned, with some gain of distance during the first 100–150 images recorded, and a rather immobile phase thereafter. c , f Examples of tracks characterized by shorter phases of effective, directed movement (indicated by rather straight segments in the tracks, and steep upward stretches in the curves depicting the distance from the origin vs time) and longer phases of immobility or slow translocation (rather flat or low slopes in the distance-from-origin curves). MSD curves clearly underscore the highly directed movement of these cells, which are representative for the majority of tracks we observed
Some quantitative summary descriptors of cell tracks are presented in Table 1 . On average, tracks in the GL were about twice as long and describe a net displacement (distance from the origin) about four times larger than that in the ML. Parameters for tracks with parts in both layers and the interposed Purkinje cell layer (“transitory tracks”) were characterized by intermediate values. Considering that the total duration of migration described by these tracks was rather similar for tracks from the GL, the ML, and transitory tracks, these numbers suggest that overall, tracks in the GL were rather more straight than those in the ML. This interpretation is supported by the observation that average turning angles between individual steps were smaller for tracks in the GL than for those in the ML, and again intermediate for layer-spanning, transitory tracks. It is further supported by the MSD curves obtained. These may be broadly classified as indicating superdiffusive (directed) migration (e.g., as the one shown in Fig. 2 a, d), corralled (restricted) motion (as in Fig. 2 b, e), or rather a combination of both types of movements (say, similar to the MSD curve shown in Fig. 2 c). Using this crude classification, and acknowledging that assignment of curves to the latter category is somewhat difficult, MSDs still reveal clear-cut differences in the way Pax2 cells migrate through the GL and the ML. Whereas 25 cells migrating through the GL could be classified as performing superdiffusive migration, only two showed corralled movement in the GL. Three MSD curves were classified as indicating both kinds of movement. The corresponding numbers for cells migrating in the ML were 31, 22, and 27, and for cells crossing the border between these two layers 16, 9, and 8. Thus, within the time window covered by the tracks recorded here, some 80% of all cells in the GL showed clear signs of directed migration, but only some 40% did so in the ML. Of the remaining ML tracks, about 34% were indicative tracks comprising alternating periods of directed and corralled movement, and the rest (~ 26%) appeared essentially corralled during the observation period. Finally, we note that despite the obvious differences in average (median) values for these parameters observed for cells migrating in or through different layers, no single parameter, or simple combination thereof, suggests itself as a reliable predictor to tell apart individual tracks recorded in distinct environments. This holds also for the MSDs of these tracks (data not shown). Finally, we note that differences in summary statistics that allow us to distinguish tracks in the ML and GL could also be verified by analyzing shorter tracks (~ 30 min; 43–44 data points per track; 108 tracks from the GL, and 202 from the ML; cf. also [ ]) recorded from three additional slices from three p8 animals. In this dataset, again, the distance from the origin reached was considerably larger for cells in the GL (2.8 vs 1.5 μm in the ML), as was the total track length (4.2 vs 3.1 μm) and the mean step length (0.099 vs 0.072 μm). And as in long tracks, the average angle between steps was smaller for tracks recorded in the GL than in the ML (0.601 vs 0.722 rad; all values are medians, and all differences are significant with p < 0.001 by Mann-Whitney test for linear data, and Mardia-Watson-Wheeler test ([ ], p. 101f) for angular data). Absolute differences of these values from those given for long tracks in Table 1 can readily be related to track length and length (duration)-related variability. Table 1 Basic summary descriptors of cell tracks analyzed Molecular layer (ML) Granule cell layer (GL) Transitory zone (GL-ML) Parameter Median 1.IQR 3.IQR Median 1.IQR 3.IQR Median 1.IQR 3.IQR No. of cells 80 30 33 Distance from the origin (μm) 4.878 2.014 9.25 20.976 11.701 34.473 16.197 2.529 22.148 Track duration (no. of data points) 325 269.5 325 325 275 325 325 250 325 Total track length (μm) 18.007 11.789 29.108 36.703 25.051 64.867 27.828 14.896 41.901 Mean step length (μm) 0.067 0.045 0.105 0.129 0.092 0.200 0.106 0.069 0.140 Angle between steps (radians) 0.916 0.831 1.051 0.714 0.598 0.808 0.789 0.653 0.951 Basic numerical characteristics were calculated separately for tracks observed in the granule cell layer (GL) and the molecular layer (ML), and for tracks that started in the GL, passed the Purkinje cell layer, and ended in the ML (transitory tracks). Since distributions for these parameters were typically highly skewed, the median is given as an estimate of location, and the borders of the first and third inter-quartile ranges to indicate data spread and symmetry. In passing, we note that formal testing indicated that all parameters assessed were significantly different when tracks from the ML were compared to tracks from the GL ( p < 0.5 × 10 −5 ; Mann-Whitney test for linear data, and Mardia-Watson-Wheeler test ([ ], p. 101f) for angular data)
While the above summary data give us some impression of the general form and structure of the cell tracks observed, and also about layer-specific differences of Pax2 cell mobility, they cannot be interpreted in terms of any potential generative mechanism(s) underpinning the migration observed. However, the variability of the data holds such information, in particular the distributions for step sizes and turning angles (Fig. 3 a, b). Fig. 3 Distributions for step and turning angle sizes in cell tracks ( a , b ) and adult patterns of interneurons in the molecular layer ( c ). Histograms for step sizes (i.e., distances covered between two 42-s spaced images) and a angles between two subsequent steps ( b ) for cells, plotted separately by the territory the cells were observed in. On average, cells in the GL perform larger steps, and steps in this layer are separated by smaller angles, than those in the ML. Values for cells covering the transitory territory between these two layers are characterized by intermediate values. Note that all distributions are heavily left-skewed. While curves for cells in the three territories follow the same general shapes, they are statistically significantly different by territory (see main text). c Analysis of cell pattern in the adult molecular layer by means of the J-function reveals that cells tend to cluster (i.e., J(r) is smaller than 1). J(r) values greater than 1 observed for distances less than about 8 μm reflect the fact that cells of this size cannot occupy identical positions (see also main text). J(r) vs distance curves for three typical datasets, each comprising some 750 cells, are shown. The dashed horizontal line predicts the J(r) value expected for the null hypothesis that cells are randomly scattered following a Poisson (random). The 95% confidence interval for this null hypothesis is shaded in gray. The insert shows an area from the molecular layer in lobule V of an adult mouse hybridized for Gad1 and exemplifies small clusters of Gad1-positive cells in the molecular layer
For tracks from all three territories (GL, ML, transitory), short step sizes between 0 and 0.1 μm were the most frequent ones (Fig. 3 a). The frequency of longer steps rapidly decreased. However, in tracks from the ML, short steps were more frequent than in tracks from the GL, whereas in the latter longer steps (> 0.1 μm) were more frequent than in the ML. Intriguingly, the distribution of step sizes for transitory tracks fell essentially between those for tracks from the GL and the ML. These differences were statistically highly significant (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, p < 0.01, after Bonferroni correction for multiple testing).
Similarly, the distributions of turning angles differed for tracks recorded from the GL and the ML (Fig. 3 b). While small angles (~ < 0.5 rad, or ~ 30°) were more prevalent in tracks from the GL, larger angles were more frequently observed in tracks from the ML. Overall, both distributions may best be described as highly left-skewed. Again, the distribution for angular changes of cells migrating in the transitory region between the GL and the ML fell more or less in between those obtained for tracks in the GL and the ML, respectively. And again, these differences were statistically highly significant (Kuiper’s test for angular data, p < 0.01, after Bonferroni correction for multiple testing).
These distributions again suggest that the migration of precursors for cerebellar basket and stellate cells may not be explained by a random search strategy, and indeed, they put some qualification(s) on the orientation strategy that might be used by these cells (for a more detailed argument along these lines, see “ Discussion ” section). So if we posit, as suggested by the data presented above, that this migration is non-Brownian, but rather directed, what might be the mechanism(s) or target(s) that might direct or attract these cells? To address this issue, a natural first question might be to ask how ML interneurons (basket and stellate cells) are spatially arranged in the adult molecular layer (for the rationale of this approach, see also “ Discussion ” section). Astonishingly, though, whether the pattern defined by ML interneuron somata positions reflects any regularity has apparently not been probed before.
Therefore, we analyzed the spatial arrangement of Gad1-positive somata within the molecular layer bordering the fissure between lobules IV and V in sagittal sections of adult mice (three mice, 10 sections) and also in coronal sections (one mouse; ML bordering the fissura prima; three sections). Each specimen encompassed a total of 627 to 971 Gad1-positive cells in the ML (median, 757). All of these analyses gave similar results, and results from three sections are together presented in Fig. 3 c. While Gad1-positive cells seemed to repulse each other over short distances (approx. < 10 μm), they showed a strong tendency to cluster when larger distances were considered. Actually, apparent repulsion occurs over a distance which is more or less equal to, or only slightly larger than, the average diameter of the somata of ML interneurons (basket and stellate cell somata in the mouse impress as triangular to roundish, with a diameter of some 5–7 μm [ ]. It thus simply reflects the fact that due to their physical dimensions, two cell somata cannot occur at the same point. This becomes apparent as a repulsive (anti-correlated) pattern because the analysis is based on the pattern of dimensionless points representing the centers of mass of Gad1-positive somata. Thus, the spatial arrangement of molecular layer interneurons is neither regular, nor random, but highly correlated, or clustered. Direct inspection indeed shows that Gad1-positive cells often form small groups of about two to four cells (see inset in Fig. 3 ; and more detailed images available in the Allen Brain Atlas, from which this insert is taken).
Discussion
Our data provide a quantitative perspective on the migration of molecularly identified precursors of basket and/or stellate cells through the nascent cerebellar cortex. They document that migration of these cells is clearly directional. In the following, we will try to interpret these data with the aim to discuss potential generative mechanism(s) underlying directional migration and the patterned distribution of ML interneurons in the adult cerebellum.
A first point to note is that future inhibitory interneurons of the ML (i.e., Pax2 cells) migrate considerably faster in the GL than in the nascent ML. This is true regardless of whether we take the average step size or the total distance covered as a measure for speed. While the former is the measure with the highest temporal resolution we can get, the latter provides a time average for the complete track. The fact that the mean step length suggests an about twofold difference in speed in the GL vs the ML (0.129 vs 0.067 μm/42 s), whereas the total distance covered (distance from the origin) points to an approximately fourfold difference (20.9 vs 4.9 μm/~ 200 min), is not in conflict; rather, it hints at differences in the shape of these tracks. It is well known that effective speed estimates for non-straight line movements are critically dependent on the sampling rate, and the total distance covered, i.e., the straight line distance from start to goal is the lowest sampling rate measure we can get. Actually, this difference in speed ratios indicates that tracks in the ML are rather more curved than those in the GL, a fact borne out by the differences in mean turning angles recorded.
The time integral for speed represented by the total distance covered translates in an average speed of ~ 6.3 μm/h in the GL, and ~ 1.5 μm/h in the nascent ML. Considering the thickness of these layers at postnatal day 8 (GL ~ 90–110 μm; ML ~ 60–80 μm; [ , ]), this suggests that Pax2 cells transit the GL, on average, in about 16 h, and the ML in some 40 h, if they migrate perpendicularly through these layers. As many of the tracks observed, or parts thereof, were rather obliquely oriented, it might be necessary to adequately multiply these numbers to arrive at realistic time estimates. For comparison, immature granule cells have been reported to transit the ML, if in the opposite direction, in about 8.3 h with a speed of some 11–15 μm/h, and migrate at a somewhat lower speed (some 10 μm/h) in the nascent GL at the developmental stage analyzed presently [ , ]. And while the faster Pax2 cells that we observed in the ML migrated with a speed comparable to that reported for ML interneuron precursors in slice cultures (~ 15 μm/h) [ ], the average speed we observed for our large sample was about ten times lower. This may be due to methodological differences between migration in acute slices as used here and slice cultures [ ]. It may also reflect the larger sample size used presently, a notion supported by the considerable variability in or sample.
The distinct differences in speed and directionality observed for Pax2 cells migrating in the nascent GL and ML of our preparation can be directly related to the well-known structural differences between these two layers: the cell-rich GL may be perceived as an (elastic) granular medium permeated by climbing and mossy fibers, and Purkinje and granule cell axons, running predominantly from the base of this layer to the Purkinje cell layer. In contrast, the ML is characterized by a “rigorous geometry” [ ] of tightly packed parallel fibers interwoven with dendrites of Purkinje cells and processes of Bergman glial cells. It thus seems conceivable that differences in the migration of Pax2 cells simply reflect mechanical differences posed by the distinct structure of these two layers. Whether the need to avoid territories occupied by previously arrived and more mature ML interneurons adds to the factors obstructing straightforward migration by newly arrived Pax2 cells in this layer remains to be seen. Lastly, we would like to recall that the elaboration of basket/stellate cell dendrites takes place only after these cells have reached the border between the ML and the EGL, and that the distinct migration behaviors in the GL and ML therefore cannot be related to dendritogenesis of these cells.
A central question brought up by the directional movement of Pax2 cells observed here is, of course, what might direct, or attract these cells, or are they directed at all? It may be worthwhile to recall that migratory patterns characterized by directional persistence that appear goal-directed may well be realized without any knowledge, or perception, or signal from, any such target. Animal search strategies characterized by correlated random walks or Levy walk models are arguably the best characterized and notorious examples in question (see, e.g., [ , ]). Levy walk models are characterized by a uniform distribution of turning angles, and a power law distribution for step sizes. Neither holds for the present data (Fig. 3 a, b). In contrast, we cannot rule out that the motility pattern observed might have been brought about by cells performing correlated random walks, which are characterized by a Gaussian (or other exponential) distribution for step length, and a non-uniform distribution for angles [ ].
Still, the highly characteristic and stereotyped migration of future ML interneurons up to the top of the nascent ML, which transiently results in a rather tight packing of these cells right underneath the external granule cell layer, strongly suggests that Pax2 cells are effectively attracted by this territory. Other than not yet being settled by previously arrived ML interneurons, the uppermost echelon of the nascent ML is particularly enriched in growth cones of granule cell axons ([ ], p. 84). The observation that in explant cultures of the nascent cerebellar cortex Pax2 cells also migrate towards regions containing granule cell axon growth cones [ ] adds to the notion that these may constitute, or liberate, particularly attractive target for Pax2 cells.
Our data on Pax2 cell migration cannot contribute to the question how Pax2 cells transiently clustered underneath the EGL are redistributed into the ML to yield the adult distribution of basket and stellate cells. While Ramon y Cajal argued that these cells do not migrate, but rather become embedded in an increasing number of parallel fibers [ ], observations in slice cultures [ ] suggest that these cells may actively move. Be that as it may, neither observation informs us about any potential patterning mechanism.
This issue may be revived by the present description of the distributional pattern of ML interneurons in the adult, which reveals that their cell bodies tend to form small clusters. Intriguingly, the development of such a pattern can be explained by a rather parsimonious mechanism, which was originally described by Neyman and Scott [ ], and it is known by the name of these authors (see also Yau and Loh [ ] for an accessible explanation and generalization). For the biological problem we deal with, a model based on this mechanism predicts that there exists some kind of pre-pattern that is attractive for Pax2 cells. It further posits that Pax2 cells, upon their maturation in the upper regions of the nascent ML, become repulsive towards each other. The interaction between attraction towards a common goal and the simultaneous mutual repulsion then results in a clustered arrangement, with the size and structure of these clusters dependent on the strength of attractive and repulsive agents involved, and the ratio between targets and target-seeking cells. Thus, this model predicts a limited set of experimentally testable, cellular interactions, which should help to focus future work to address this issue. Conveniently, the formal description available for the Neyman-Scott process also provides a framework to evaluate eventual data. The experimental evaluation of this model may also profit from recent advances in our understanding of the molecular [ ] and functional [ ] organization of molecular layer interneurons.
In conclusion, we interpret the present findings to indicate that the upper part of the nascent molecular layer, and possibly granule cell axon growth cones located there, constitutes an attractive target for migratory precursors of molecular layer inhibitory interneurons. Differences in speed and tortuosity of the path these cells take through the granule cell layer and the molecular layer, respectively, reflect differences in the structure of these layers and also beg the question how interaction(s) of migrating Pax2 cells with their environment may be molecularly realized. Finally, we posit that the spatial arrangement of basket and stellate cells in the adult cerebellar cortex may hint at a generative mechanism which predicts biologically realistic and testable cellular interactions.