“Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed” Deuteronomy 25:3.
The brain is highly modular, ranging from nuclear cell clusters in the brain stem to the elaborate cytoarchitecture of the neocortex. The ways that neural modules form and the mechanisms that determine the connectivity between them is one of the most complex problems in neuroscience. It is also one of the most important. Two distinct processes interact to create order in the brain. First, intrinsic mechanisms (signaling centers, morphogen gradients, migration pathways, etc.) establish coarse-grained maps. Secondly, extrinsic activity-dependent mechanisms refine them. For example, in the neocortex, intrinsic mechanisms create a protomap in the ventricular zone that specifies major cortical areas (e.g., visual or somatosensory), after which thalamocortical afferent projections further sculpt them into their characteristic adult forms (ocular dominance columns in the visual cortex, whisker barrel fields in the somatosensory cortex, etc.).
This review focuses on the modular structure of the cerebellar cortex. Cerebellar architecture is extraordinary. Far from being homogeneous and repetitious, the cerebellar cortex is composed of more than 200 parasagittal stripes in 5 distinct transverse zones. Zones and stripes are built around Purkinje cells (PC) of many different phenotypes. The canonical set is revealed by expression of the antigen zebrin II/aldolase C ([ ]: why aldolase? Not at all clear—presumably a moonlighting function unconnected to its role as an enzyme—this is commonplace for glycolytic enzymes). Many molecular markers co-localize with the zebrin II+/− PC subsets, and other markers reveal further complexity. This complexity is highly reproducible between individuals and conserved across species from fish (e.g., [ ]), to birds (e.g., [ ]), to mammals (e.g., [ , ]).
In sum, the data imply that the cerebellar cortex is patterned with exquisite precision such that a typical module is built around only a few hundred PCs [ ]! In turn, the PCs in the cerebellum are the scaffold around which all else is organized (reviewed in [ ]). Thus, climbing fiber (CF) and mossy fiber (MF) afferent projections target their terminal fields to specific stripes (reviewed in [ ]); both excitatory and inhibitory interneurons are restricted at zone and stripe boundaries ([ ]; functional boundaries align with stripe boundaries (e.g., [ ]); cerebellar mutant phenotypes are restricted at expression boundaries (reviewed in [ ]); and pathological PC death is almost always restricted to stripes (reviewed in [ ]). Given the pivotal role for PC architecture in cerebellar structure, connectivity, function, and pathology, it is imperative to understand its origins. Cerebellar pattern formation is a protracted process that can be divided into three broad stages: 1. E10–E13 (in mice): PC birth, and positional and subtype specification; 2. E14–E18: reorganization of the cerebellar plate into a stereotyped PC cluster array that musters the incoming afferent projections, migrating interneurons, etc.; and 3. E18–P15: PC cluster dispersal to form the adult stripes.
Cerebellar Development Before Pattern Specification
The cerebellar primordium forms in the rostral metencephalon at E8.5–E9.5 (reviewed in [ ]). It houses two distinct germinal matrices–the rhombic lip (glutamatergic) and the ventricular zone (VZ) of the 4th ventricle (GABAergic). All cerebellar cells are generated from the neuroepithelium of the alar plate of rhombomere 1 ([ ] and references therein). Rostral rhombomere 1 contains the isthmic organizer, which lies close to the mid-hindbrain boundary as defined by Otx2 and Gbx2 expression. Cerebellar development is triggered by FGF8 signaling from the isthmic organizer, which triggers a complex cascade of transcription factor expression ( Lmx1b , Wnt1 , SHH, TGF-β etc.) and results by ~E9 in the specification of the cerebellar neuroepithelium.
The Cerebellar Ventricular Zone
The story of pattern formation likely begins at ~E10. The basic-helix-loop-protein PTF1a is critical (reviewed in [ ]). Genetic fate mapping shows that a Ptf1a -expressing progenitor domain in the VZ gives rise to all PCs between E10.5 and E13.5: Ptf1a is expressed in the VZ progenitors, Ptf1a deletion results in the loss of all cerebellar GABAergic neurons, and mis-expression of PTF1a results in the ectopic production of GABAergic neurons.
During the same interval, the cerebellar anlage undergoes a 90 o rotation, which converts the embryonic rostrocaudal axis into the mediolateral axis of the cerebellar primordium [ ]. This suggests the possibility that the adult mediolateral stripe array derives from anteroposterior patterning of dorsal rhombomere 1.
PC subtype specification also occurs between E10.5 and E13.5, as PCs undergo terminal mitosis in the VZ and migrate into the cerebellar plate. Birthdating studies have identified two distinct PC populations: an early-born cohort (E10–E11.5) destined to become zebrin II+ and a late-born cohort (E11.5–E13) destined to become zebrin II− [ ]. It is unclear if positional information (i.e., which zone or stripe) is also specified in the VZ (akin to the “protomap” model of the neocortex, whereby the regional identity of pyramidal neurons along the tangential plane is specified in the VZ [ ]), but the direct correlation between PC birthdates, PC subtype, and adult PC stripe location suggests that all are acquired early. However, lineage studies (e.g., embryonic stem cell chimeras [ ]) give no reason to believe that either transverse zones or individual PC stripes have a clonal origin. Rather, subtype specification may be orchestrated upon cell cycle exit by the spatially discontinuous expression of “selector” genes, such as Ebf2 . The atypical basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Early B-cell factor 2 ( Ebf2 ) is critical for PC subtype specification [ ]. In the adult cerebellum, Ebf2 expression is restricted to a subset of late-born PCs destined to constitute the zebrin II− parasagittal stripes. Upon cell cycle exit, early-born PCs (~E10.5–E11.5) do not express Ebf2 and thus become zebrin II+ in the adult. Late-born PC progenitors (~E11.5–E13) express Ebf2 . Ebf2 acts to repress the zebrin II+ phenotype in late-born PCs [ , ], and hence, the late-born PCs generate the adult zebrin II− stripes. Consistent with this interpretation, in Ebf2 -null mice PCs normally zebrin II− transdifferentiate to express positive markers of both the zebrin II+ (e.g., zebrin II, sphingosine kinase 1a) and the zebrin II− phenotype (e.g., phospholipase cβ4 (PLCβ4), neuroplastin [ ]). To date, Ebf2 deletion is the only genetic manipulation shown to subvert PC subtype specification. Otherwise, no experimental intervention—afferent lesions, sensory deprivation, in vitro slice and dissociated cultures, cerebellar transplants, etc.—has ever altered a PC phenotype (reviewed in [ ]). The pathways that lead to the specification of other PC subtypes (e.g., the HSP25+/− distinction within the zebrin II+ family [ ]) have not yet been explored.
The Embryonic PC Cluster Stage
Postmitotic PCs migrate dorsally from the VZ and stack by ~E14 to form a mass several cells thick—the PC plate—with the earliest-born ( Ebf2− ) PCs located more dorsally. This transient structure reorganizes such that by E18 a reproducible array of > 50 PC clusters of multiple molecular phenotypes is generated [ , ]. The processes that guide cluster formation are not understood, but grafts of dissociated PCs also organize into discrete zebrin II+/− compartments [ ], pointing to cell-cell adhesion molecules as possible organizers: cadherins are plausible candidates [ ].
PC Clusters as Topographical Organizing Centers
As the PC plate rearranges into the PC cluster stage, other cerebellar elements also become topographically ordered, using the cluster architecture as a mustering yard.
Cerebellar Afferents
Afferent terminal fields in the adult cerebellum form an elaborate, highly reproducible map (indeed, afferent stripes were the first evidence of the complexity underlying the ostensibly homogeneous cerebellar cortex: e.g., [ ]). Remarkably, all evidence suggests that the PC cerebellar map develops independently of afferent input (reviewed in [ ]). Both CF and MF afferent systems invade the cerebellar anlage by <E14 [ , ]. The generally accepted hypothesis is that specific afferents terminate on specific PC clusters and thereby establish the afferent topography (the so-called chemospecific “matching hypothesis”—reviewed in [ ]). For instance, at the cluster stage both the CF projections and their target PC clusters are biochemically heterogeneous and both heterogeneities are present before the axons enter the cerebellum. Consistent with the matching model, mouse mutants that display disrupted PC stripes have congruous alterations in their terminal fields (e.g., [ ] and references therein). Little is known of the molecular mechanisms that encode the positional cues.
Cerebellar Inhibitory Interneurons and Granule Cells
Interneurons also conform to PC stripe boundaries—stellate/basket cells, Golgi cells, unipolar brush cells—which is evident in the adult cerebellum and seems to arise through prenatal interactions between migrating interneurons and the nascent PC cluster architecture [ ]. The same applies to granule cells. Granule cell progenitors in the rhombic lip are specified by Atoh1 , induced by BMP signaling from the choroid plexus and the roof plate and maintained by the roof plate organizer and TGFβ and Delta-Notch signaling. Atoh1 is expressed in granule cell progenitors, and targeted Atoh1 disruption results in the loss of granule cells (reviewed in [ ]). From E13, granule cell progenitors proliferate and migrate from the rhombic lip across the dorsal surface of the cerebellum to form the external granular layer (EGL), completely covering the cerebellar anlage by ~E16. The pathways of EGL spreading are not well understood, but generally, early-born progenitors migrate preferentially to the anterior, late-born ones to the posterior [ , ]. This is important in the context of pattern formation because several EGL/granule subtypes are known, and their distribution aligns with the underlying PC architecture (transverse expression boundaries in the EGL include Otx2 , En2 , Tlx3 , and Lmx1a : reviewed in [ ]). EGL transverse boundaries might arise in two ways—intrinsically, through lineage (by which EGL subpopulations would be differentially guided by molecular cues in the underlying PC substrate), or inductive epigenetic mechanisms (i.e., different PC clusters would induce different phenotypes in an overlying, homogeneous, EGL). In most cases, either possibility might apply. However, in embryonic stem cell chimeras in which a β-Gal marker is constitutively expressed in one partner, a transverse lineage boundary is consistently located in the region of the primary fissure ([ ]: the so-called AZ/CZ boundary). Multiple mutation phenotypes— lurcher ( Grid2 Lc-J ), weaver ( Kcnj6 wv ), meandertail ( mea J ), rostral cerebellar malformation ( Unc5c rcm ), disabled1 ( Dab1 scm ), NeuroD1 −/− , etc.—also respect a transverse boundary at this location (reviewed in [ ]). A second EGL transverse lineage boundary may lie in the posterior vermis near the PZ/NZ boundary (~lobule IX). The mechanisms that restrict EGL subsets at embryonic cerebellar transverse boundaries are unknown.
Finally, Bergmann glial fiber phenotypes correlate with specific zebrin II+/− stripes [ , ]; indeed, 5′-nucleotidase restriction—expressed in the cerebellar cortex by Bergmann glia—was the first demonstration of molecular compartmentation in the cerebellar cortex [ ]. In this case, it seems probable that this does not involve matching of pre-specified PC and glial phenotypes but rather PC subtypes inducing differential expression in the glia.
From Clusters to Stripes
From ~E18, the embryonic PC clusters transform into stripes, triggered by Reelin (RELN) secreted by the EGL (recently thoroughly reviewed in [ ]). RELN is critical as its deletion in the reeler mouse ( Reln rl ) blocks cluster dispersal. Secreted RELN binds two surface receptors on PCs—apolipoprotein E receptor 2 ( Lrp8 tm2Her ) and the very low density lipoprotein receptor ( Vldlr tm1Her ). Deletion of either receptor produces a selective partial disruption of cluster dispersal: deletion of both receptors blocks dispersal more or less completely. In turn, RELN binding induces receptor clustering and activates two Src-family kinases—Fyn and Src—which tyrosine phosphorylate the intracellular adaptor docking protein Disabled1 (DAB1): phosphorylation is essential and key tyrosine point mutations phenocopy reeler . DAB1-phosphorylation results, at least in the neocortex, in neuronal dispersal [ ]. Ectopic PCs (e.g., Reeler , disabled1 , weaver ) express their normal subtype phenotypes although trapped at the cluster stage, suggesting that cluster dispersal is not a prerequisite for phenotypic maturation. As a result, during postnatal development the cerebellar cortex widens by ~ 50% but increases along the rostrocaudal axis > 20X, driven by lobulation and the expansion of the granular layer (Beierbach and Hawkes—unpublished data). The upshot is that by ~P20 the PC clusters have strung out to become the adult array of long parasagittal stripes.
We have a basic understanding of the mechanistic question—how clusters transform into stripes—but which clusters form which stripes is more opaque. Expression mapping at the cluster stage, usually involving single-label studies, suggests that all embryonic markers conform to a common schema with ~ 50 clusters (e.g., [ ]). The challenge is that there appear to be fewer clusters in the embryo than stripes in the adult. This highlights a fundamental gap in our knowledge: are embryonic clusters mixtures of multiple PC subtypes that segregate into neighboring stripes of different phenotypes, or do individual homogeneous clusters interdigitate to yield multiple stripes of the same phenotype? In fact, all possibilities seem to occur: in some cases, one cluster yields a single stripe (e.g., neurogranin [ ]; IP3R1-nls-lacZ [ ]), but in others, single stripes derive from the fusion of several clusters (e.g., PLCβ4 [ ]) or single clusters split into multiple stripes (e.g., Pcp2-CreER-IRES-hAP [ ]).
Finally, do secondary mechanisms refine the zone and stripe architecture? Because adult PC ectopia, for example, zebrin II+ PCs in zebrin II− stripes, is remarkably rare (error rate < 1 × 10 4 ), a role for refinement might be anticipated. However, this is unclear. First, there seems to be no topographical role for programmed cell death. Apoptosis certainly acts at the embryonic cluster stage to prune excess PCs, but blocking apoptosis results in a bigger cerebellum but not additional PC ectopia [ ]. Secondly, while stripe formation is disturbed when PC neurotransmission is selectively silenced [ ], this does not result in ectopia per se, and whether defects reflect an editing failure or issues with migration itself remain to be determined. Finally, while activity-dependent pruning of excess collaterals is important in cerebellar maturation, this only seems to occur within individual stripes, not as a means to refine the stripe boundaries [ ].
Beyond Zones and Stripes?
Transverse zones and parasagittal stripes reveal a structural complexity in the cerebellum such that the cerebellar cortex consists of several hundred stripes in four to five transverse zones, with the average cerebellar module comprising fewer than 10 3 PCs. But is this the limit of cerebellar complexity? Actually, there is diverse evidence that stripes are further subdivided into small patches. This derives from structural and functional mapping of the granular layer. First, several molecules are expressed, reproducibly, in thousands of small patches (NADPH-diaphorase/nNOS, acetylcholinesterase, CD15, synaptophysin, dysbindin, etc.: e.g., [ ]). Secondly, tactile receptive field mapping in crus II reveals a mosaic of small functional patches (e.g., [ , , ]). Thirdly, when sections of paraffin-embedded cerebellum are rehydrated, an elaborate pattern of “blebs” is revealed in the granular layer [ ]. Correlations between different granular layer markers have scarcely been made, but the possibility lies open that cerebellar modules may be counted in thousands, not hundreds.
Coda
I am honored to present the 2017 Ferdinando Rossi Memorial Lecture. I first met Ferdinando in Paris in 1993, where he was a postdoc with Constantino Sotelo. We met again the next year when I was a visiting lecturer in Turin. He was back as part of Piergiorgio Strata’s illustrious cerebellar group, and we began a collaboration to look at the topography of CF sprouting in mice following unilateral lesions of the olivocerebellar tract. Subsequently, our paths crossed frequently, sometimes for collaboration, more often for dinner and gossip. We last met in 2013 when I again gave a lecture in Turin and we stayed up late, eating and talking. We had agreed to dine in Florence in 2014 but sadly I had to cancel: who knew what the future held. He was a good friend and a creative scholar. He died much too young and is greatly missed.