Introduction
It has been 40 years since the discovery of protein kinase C (PKC) by Nishizuka and his colleagues [ , ] at Kobe University School of Medicine. After the initial discovery of PKC in 1977, his group struggled to clarify its activation pathway. After making many efforts in investigating frozen brain stocks, they found that PKC was activated by a membrane-associated factor in the presence of a low Ca 2+ concentration [ ]. In 1980, Nishizuka’s group demonstrated diacylglycerol (DAG) as the membrane-associated factor [ ] involved in PKC activation, which brought the conceptual breakthrough that the lipid produced by receptor-stimulated phosphoinositide hydrolysis could be a novel second messenger. This idea was validated soon by Nishizuka [ ].
At that time, a Ca 2+ ionophore was used to increase the intracellular Ca 2+ concentration, while the physiological origin of Ca 2+ elevation remained unclear. In 1983, Berridge et al. [ ] found that inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP 3 ), another product of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate (PIP 2 ) hydrolysis, could trigger intracellular Ca 2+ mobilization from the internal stores. Thus, the traditional pathway regarding cell surface stimulation to activate cytoplasmic PKC through DAG and IP 3 -mediated Ca 2+ mobilization was established in the early 1980s [ ]. In those days, researchers at Kobe University and students including Shinya Yamanaka (who was later awarded a Nobel Prize for the discovery of induced pluripotent stem [iPS] cells) were enthusiastic regarding the striking discovery of the new kinase and continuous progress of the intracellular signaling pathways. During this period, I learned biochemistry from Professor Nishizuka who was also a referee of my doctoral thesis.
PKC in the Cerebellum
Takai et al. [ ] used bovine cerebellum to purify PKC, suggesting the abundance of PKC in the cerebellum. Spatial differences of the enzymatic activity of PKC in the central nervous system (CNS) were later examined, confirming the highest distribution of PKC in the cerebellum, among all CNS regions examined including the cerebrum, hippocampus, and spinal cord [ ]. The PKC that Nishizuka’ group originally discovered was activated by Ca 2+ and DAG, which is now called conventional (classical) PKC. Conventional PKC consists of four isoforms, namely PKCα, PKCβI/βII, and PKCγ. PKCα and PKCβI/βII are expressed in cells of various tissues including the brain, whereas PKCγ is specifically expressed in neurons [ ]. The cerebellar cortex expresses all four types of conventional PKCs, among which PKCγ is most abundantly expressed [ , ]. Cerebellar granule cells express PKCα and PKCβI/βII, while Purkinje cells express PKCα and PKCγ. The PKCβI/βII and PKCγ are granule cell-specific and Purkinje cell-specific isoforms, respectively, and PKCα is present in both types of neurons. The PKC signaling pathway in Purkinje cells is initiated by the stimulation of Gq protein-coupled metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 1 (mGluR1) located at the perisynaptic sites of parallel fiber to Purkinje cell synapses [ ] (Fig. 1 ). Glutamate spilt over from the synaptic cleft can reach and activate mGluR1, leading to the production of DAG and IP 3 . Both PKCα and PKCγ are then activated upon binding of the DAG and Ca 2+ released from the internal store. Fig. 1 Activation of PKC by mGluR1 stimulation and expression of cerebellar LTD. Postsynaptic AMPA receptors are stabilized by a cytoplasmic anchoring protein, GRIP1. mGluR1 is located at the perisynaptic sites of dendritic spines that receive excitatory parallel fiber inputs. Glutamate spilt over from the synaptic cleft binds to mGluR1, leading to the production of DAG and IP 3 via PLCβ4 (or PLCβ3) activation. IP 3 triggers Ca 2+ release from the ER. Subsequently, DAG and Ca 2+ bind to and activate both PKCα and PKCγ (not depicted here). PKCα, which contains the PDZ-binding motif, associates with PIKC1 carrying the PDZ domain. The PKCα–PICK1 complex accesses and phosphorylates GluA2 subunit of AMPA receptors at Ser-880. The phosphorylation triggers dissociation of GRIP1 from GluA2, which makes a motif available for PICK1 to bind with GluA2, leading to the internalization of the AMPA receptor. This is a brief outline underlying cerebellar LTD expression, although other various molecules and signals are involved in the actual LTD induction pathway. AMPA α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid, DAG diacylglycerol, ER endoplasmic reticulum, GluA2 ionotropic glutamate receptor subunit 2, GRIP1 glutamate receptor-interacting protein 1, IP 3 inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate, LTD long-term depression, PDZ post-synaptic density-95/discs large/zonula occludens-1, PICK1 protein interacting with C kinase-1, PLCβ phospholipase C β, PKC protein kinase C, Ser-880 serine 880
Involvement of PKCγ in Climbing Fiber Pruning from Developing Purkinje Cells
Developing Purkinje cell receives multiple climbing fiber inputs, which are gradually eliminated, and one-to-one relationships between Purkinje cells and climbing fibers are established by the end of the third postnatal week in rodents [ ]. This pruning process in Purkinje cells is impaired in PKCγ-deficient mice [ ] (Fig. 2 ), indicating that PKCγ plays a pivotal role in climbing fiber pruning from developing Purkinje cells. Subsequent studies revealed that the mGluR1–Gq–phospholipase C (PLC) β4 (or PLCβ3)–PKCγ cascade is involved in this process [ ]. PKCγ-deficient mice showed mild ataxia without gross morphological alterations in the cerebellum. Moreover, long-term depression (LTD) at parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapses (cerebellar LTD) was clearly induced in PKCγ-deficient mice [ ], suggesting that PKCγ is dispensable for the expression of cerebellar LTD. Fig. 2 A critical role of PKCγ for pruning supernumerary climbing fibers. Immature Purkinje cells receive multiple climbing fiber inputs, which are gradually eliminated to establish one-to-one relationships between Purkinje cells and climbing fibers by the end of the third postnatal week in rodents. This elimination process is significantly impaired in PKCγ-deficient Purkinje cells. PKC protein kinase C
PKCα cannot compensate climbing fiber pruning in PKCγ-deficient Purkinje cells. However, the mechanism behind this lack of compensation has remained unclear. We recently demonstrated that of the PKCs expressed in Purkinje cells, the expression of PKCγ is the highest, and PKCα expression accounts for a minimal fraction [ ]. In addition, lentiviral vector-mediated overexpression of PKCα in PKCγ-deficient Purkinje cells rescued pruning of climbing fibers [ ]. These results suggest that PKCα is capable of pruning climbing fibers from developing Purkinje cells, but the expression of PKCα in PKCγ-null Purkinje cells is too low for climbing fiber pruning. Thus, the total activity of conventional PKCs, irrespective of PKC isoforms, is thought to be critical for the pruning event.
A Critical Role of PKCα in the Cerebellar LTD Expression
Previously, we have shown that PKC phosphorylates GluA2 subunit of the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor at serine (Ser)-880, which is located in the intracellular carboxyl-terminal domain [ ]. The PKC isoform responsible for the GluA2 phosphorylation in Purkinje cells was only later proven to be PKCα [ ]. PKCα, but not PKCγ, has a post-synaptic density-95/discs large/zonula occludens-1 (PDZ)-binding motif, and therefore, is capable of binding to protein interacting with C kinase-1 (PICK1), a PDZ domain-containing protein [ ]. The PKCα–PICK1 complex can access the postsynaptic AMPA receptors and phosphorylate the Ser-880 of GluA2. The intracellular C-terminal region of GluA2 that involves the Ser-880 has a PDZ-binding sequence but is pre-occupied by a different PDZ domain-containing protein, glutamate receptor-interacting protein 1 (GRIP1), which is a subcellular anchoring protein of the AMPA receptor [ ]. However, the Ser-880 phosphorylation by PKCα disrupts the binding of GRIP1 to GluA2 [ , ], leading to the binding of PICK1 to the available motif at the GluA2 C-terminus. Eventually, a clathrin-mediated endocytosis of AMPA receptors for LTD induction is initiated [ , , ] (Fig. 1 ). Since cerebellar LTD was expressed in PKCγ-knockout mice [ , ], it was suggested that PKCγ is not essential for the expression of cerebellar LTD as described above.
Mutation of PKCγ Causes Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 14 (SCA14)
SCA14 is an adult-onset autosomal dominant hereditary disorder characterized by slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia, dysarthria, and nystagmus. The disease is caused by mutations in the PKCγ gene ( PRKCG ). We have previously shown that the lentiviral vector-mediated expression of mutant PKCγ (S119P) in wild-type mouse Purkinje cells resulted in aggregates in the soma and dendrites, leading to significant behavioral deficits [ ]. Given that SCA14 is an autosomal dominant disorder, the half of PKCγ is wild-type in most of the patients. Therefore, it is important to know whether or not mutant PKCγ makes the aggregates together with wild-type PKCγ . To address this issue, green-fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged mutant PKCγ was expressed with red-fluorescent protein (DsRed)-tagged wild-type PKCγ or DsRed-tagged wild-type PKCα in cultured Purkinje cells. We found a co-localization of mutant PKCγ with wild-type PKCγ, but not with wild-type PKCα, in the aggregates [ ], suggesting that mutant PKCγ works as a dominant-negative form for PKCγ, but not for PKCα. This notion was confirmed by electrophysiology, where the viral vector-mediated expression of mutant PKCγ in Purkinje cells of 1-week-old wild-type mice resulted in persistent innervation of Purkinje cells by multiple climbing fibers, likely by disruption of endogenous PKCγ activity. Collectively, Purkinje cells expressing PKCγ (S119P), a mutation responsible for the SCA14, share properties with those defective for PKCγ, which, at least partially, explains the motor symptoms observed in patients with SCA14.
Remaining Conundrums
Does PKCα Have a Specific Role in Developing Purkinje Cells?
A previous study demonstrated impaired development of dendritic trees in cultured Purkinje cells from PKCγ-deficient mice [ ]. In contrast, the morphology of cultured Purkinje cells from PKCα-deficient mice appeared almost comparable to that from wild-type mice [ ], suggesting that PKCα is not involved in development of Purkinje cell dendrites. As discussed above, PKCα plays a critical role in LTD induction in mature mice, but whether this is true during development has not been proven yet. Thus, a (patho-)physiological role of PKCα during development remains unidentified (Fig. 3 left). Further studies are needed to clarify whether PKCα in developing Purkinje cells serves only as a reserve pool for PKCγ, plays a key role in LTD induction as in mature animals, or is involved in different cellular events. Fig. 3 Major remaining questions as to the conventional PKC isoforms expressed in Purkinje cells
What Is the Role of PKCγ in Mature Purkinje Cells?
The cerebellum expresses the highest levels of PKCγ, which is expressed solely in Purkinje cells, exceeding the average expression in the whole brain by almost four times [ ]. Purkinje cells express two conventional PKC isoforms, PKCγ and PKCα, most of which is PKCγ [ ]. In spite of such high levels of expression, a role of PKCγ in mature Purkinje cells remains unclear (Fig. 3 right). Although PKCγ-deficient mice show mild ataxia and impairment of adaptive learning of horizontal optokinetic response eye movements [ ], this might be due to developmental deficits, such as a persistent multiple climbing fiber innervation of Purkinje cells (Fig. 2 ). Thus, elucidating the physiological significance of PKCγ and the phosphorylation targets in mature Purkinje cells remains a big challenge. Our preliminary data showed that viral vector-mediated restoration of PKCγ specifically in Purkinje cells of adult PKCγ-knockout mice rescued the ataxic phenotype, while the multiple climbing fiber innervations of Purkinje cells remained; hence, PKCγ is highly likely to play a critical role also in the mature cerebellar function.