Introduction
Auditory verbal hallucinations (AVH), defined as sensory experiences in the absence of a corresponding external stimulus [ ], are a highly relevant feature of schizophrenia and related spectrum disorders. Hallucinations are the most common psychotic symptom affecting 70% of patients with schizophrenia [ ]. Usually, they occur as voices conducting a dialog or commenting, which are often negative and derogatory in content [ ]. Moreover, in about 20–25% AVH are resistant to antipsychotic drugs [ ].
Although substantial progress has been made in identifying altered brain structures underlying AVH, there is still not sufficient evidence to completely understand their neural substrates [ ]. Structural imaging studies have shown correlations between the severity of hallucinations and gray matter volume (GMV) reductions within the left superior temporal gyrus (STG) and middle temporal gyrus (MTG) [ , , , , ]. Functional imaging studies investigating AVH-associated neural activity showed increased activation likelihoods in a distributed bilateral frontotemporal network comprising speech and language processing areas such as Broca’s area, anterior insula, precentral gyrus, frontal operculum, MTG, STG, and the parietal cortex [ ]. A comparison between activation patterns of the inferior frontal and temporoparietal language areas during AVH and normal language production shows a lack of lateralization associated with AVH activity [ ]. The importance of the right cerebellum in language processing has been shown by previous studies [ , ]. Specifically, an interaction between the right cerebellum and left frontal regions, which underlies the execution of not just language tasks but also verbal working memory, has been proposed to be part of a “prearticulatory verbal code” (“inner speech”) being involved in speech perception [ ]. Current AVH models suggest a disrupted neural circuit involved in the generation, monitoring, and perception of speech [ , , ].
There is increasing evidence that the cerebellum subserves a variety of cognitive functions as well [ , , , ]. In particular, the majority of the human cerebellum maps to cerebral association areas, including those linked to sensorimotor integration, cognitive control, and the so-called “default mode network” (DMN) [ , , , ].
In schizophrenia, cerebellar abnormalities have also been observed in terms of brain structure and function [ ]. The majority of functional studies focused on changes in the fronto-thalamo-cerebellar circuit as theorized by the concept of “cognitive dysmetria” (e.g., , , ). The cognitive dysmetria theory comprises that the cognitive abilities, similar to the motor functions, are supported by a cortico-cerebellar-thalamic-cortical circuit (CCTCC) feedback loop which normally monitors and controls mental activity [ ]. In schizophrenia, this CCTCC is thought to be disrupted leading to cognitive dysfunction. Such deficits refer to difficulties in prioritizing, processing, coordinating, retrieving, and expressing of information, which in turn might explain the broad variety of symptoms [ , , , , ]. Surprisingly, however, hypothesis-driven studies, which specifically aimed at investigating relationships between cerebellar integrity and AVH, are scarce at present. In particular, these studies did not account for the convoluted morphology of the cerebellum [ , ]. To overcome these methodological constraints, this study sought to investigate cerebellar contributions to persistent AVH in patients with schizophrenia using a cerebellum-optimized voxel-based segmentation technique.
Importantly, voxel-based morphometry (VBM) methods using conventional whole-brain templates for data normalization have been shown to be suboptimal for cerebellar imaging [ ]. Cerebellar segmentation may be particularly vulnerable to inaccurate normalization, where poor alignment of cerebellar subregions can occur as a consequence of standard template use. Given considerable cerebellar variability between individuals and relatively small sizes of cerebellar subdivisions, this also leads to neuroanatomical imprecision [ , ]. The Spatially Unbiased Infratentorial Template (SUIT; http://www.diedrichsenlab.org/imaging/suit.htm ) toolbox provides a high-resolution atlas template of the human cerebellum, which is spatially unbiased [ ]. The cerebellar template preserves anatomical detail of cerebellar subregions using automated nonlinear normalization methods, thus achieving a more accurate intersubject alignment compared to whole-brain methods. SUIT has been successfully used to identify changes in cerebellar subdivisions in both psychiatric and neurological patient samples [ , ], and in some cases, SUIT has been shown to be more sensitive to cerebellar change compared to conventional whole-brain VBM [ , ]. Applying algorithms provided by SUIT, we predicted that patients with pAVH would exhibit decreased gray matter volume in cerebellar subregions associated with cognition, such as the vermis, posterior parts of the right cerebellar hemisphere (lobules VIIb, VIIIa, and VIIa and Crus I and Crus II). We also sought to establish structure-symptom relationships using well-validated psychometric instruments for the assessment of different phenomenological aspects of AVH and overall positive symptoms.
Materials and Methods
Participants
We tested explicit hypotheses with respect to putative cerebellar contributions to AVH symptom expression in a data set previously published by Kubera and co-workers [ ]. An overview of the demographics and clinical scores of all participants is given in Table 1 . Twenty right-handed German-speaking patients with schizophrenia (paranoid subtype according to DSM-IV) who were treated at the Departments of Psychiatry II and III, Ulm University, Germany, were examined. The Edinburgh Handedness Inventory [ ] was used to confirm right-handedness. Patients were screened for comorbid axis-I (excluding nicotine abuse or dependence) and/or axis-II disorders according to DSM-IV, neurological disorders, as well as an insufficient command of the German language. Symptoms were rated using the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) [ ] and the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) [ ] along with corresponding subscores. Table 1 Demographics and clinical scores Characteristic Controls ( n = 14) pAVH ( n = 10) nAVH ( n = 10) p value Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Controls vs. pAVH Controls vs. nAVH nAVH vs. pAVH Age (years) 33.7 8.6 36.5 9.0 32.1 6.2 0.45 0.62 0.22 Gender (m/f) 7/7 6/4 8/2 0.23 a 0.05 a 0.18 a Laterality (EHI score) 88.9 13.5 99.2 10.0 88.3 9.7 0.52 0.76 0.39 Education (years) 14.9 2.8 13.5 1.6 13.7 2.7 0.18 0.32 0.84 Duration of illness (years) 9.9 6.3 5.9 5.8 0.16 CPZ equivalents 457.3 342.1 569.8 361.9 0.48 BPRS score 48.7 10.7 38.3 9.5 0.03 BPRS-THD 13.0 3.7 6.5 2.3 <0.001 BPRS AVH item 5.5 0.8 1.0 0 <0.001 PANSS-P 16.0 3.4 11.2 3.2 0.004 PANSS-P AVH item 4.6 0.5 1.0 0 <0.001 PANSS-N 22.0 5.5 18.8 5.7 0.22 PsyRatS total score 24.4 8.1 PsyRatS-emo 9.1 4.1 PsyRatS-phys 8.5 2.3 PsyRatS-cog 9.2 3.5 Demographics and clinical scores for healthy controls, patients with persistent (pAVH), and without (nAVH) auditory verbal hallucinations BPRS Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale ( THD thought disturbance), EHI Edinburgh Handedness Inventory, CPZ chlorpromazine, PANSS Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale, PsyRatS-AHS Psychotic Symptoms Rating Scale ( emo emotional characteristics, phys physical characteristics, cog cognitive characteristics) a χ 2 test
Patients with persistent AVH (pAVH, n = 10) included in this study were classified as medication resistant for AVH, when symptoms kept persisting during at least two clinically ineffective drug trials (each >6 weeks of treatment) with different antipsychotics at adequate dosage. Moreover, only patients who did not exhibit pronounced formal thought disorder symptoms and who had sufficient insight into their hallucinatory experience were included. Periods of symptom persistence of at least moderate degree, as defined by the BPRS and PANSS-P hallucination items, ranged from 8 to 72 months (median = 21 months). At the time of MRI, scores of the BPRS and PANSS-P hallucination items indicated moderate to severe symptoms (BPRS hallucination item range 4–7; PANSS-P hallucinations items range 4–6). Furthermore, the severity of AVH in pAVH patients was assessed using the Auditory Hallucinations Scale (AHS), as provided by the Psychotic Symptoms Rating Scales (PsyRatS) [ ]. To characterize different dimensions of AVH, a three-factor solution [ , ] from the PsyRatS-AHS was used: (1) emotional (amount and frequency of negative content and anxiety experienced by hallucinatory symptoms), (2) physical (symptom duration, location frequency, and intensity), and (3) cognitive features (degree of control and repercussion, belief, and location). Non-hallucinating patients (nAVH, n = 10) included in the study either never experienced AVH during the course of the illness ( n = 2) or they experienced AVH in the past but were fully remitted from AVH at least 12 months before being included in the study ( n = 8). At the time of MRI, scores of the BPRS and PANSS-P hallucination items indicated complete symptom absence (score = 1). All patients were on stable doses of antipsychotics. All pAVH patients were treated with clozapine, either as monotherapy or in combination with amisulpride, aripiprazole, haloperidol, paliperidone, quetiapine, and risperidone. NAVH patients received amisulpride, aripiprazole, clozapine, haloperidol decanoate, olanzapine, paliperidone, quetiapine, and risperidone.
The healthy control group included 14 unmedicated right-handed participants matched for age and education. Controls were screened for axis-I and/or axis-II disorders according to DSM-IV, first-degree relatives with a psychiatric disorder, a history of dependence on illicit drugs or alcohol, and current use of psychotropic medication.
The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of Ulm University and was performed in accordance with ethical standards laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants after a complete description of the study.
Structural Neuroimaging Data Acquisition and Analysis
High-resolution structural data, i.e., T1-weighted images, were obtained using a 3T Magnetom ALLEGRA (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) head MRI system. The MRI parameters of the three-dimensional magnetization prepared rapid gradient-echo sequence were as follows: TE = 3.93 ms, TR = 2080 ms, TI = 1100 ms, FOV = 256 mm, slice plane = axial, slice thickness = 1 mm, resolution = 1 × 1 × 1 mm 3 , and number of slices = 256 [ ].
Analyses performed using Statistical Parametric Mapping software package version 8 (SPM8; http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ ) running on MATLAB 2012a (The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA). For data preprocessing, the SUIT toolbox ( http://www.diedrichsenlab.org/imaging/suit.htm ) was used. The advantages of SUIT for VBM are mainly achieved through an improved overlap of cerebellar structures and by masking the image before reslicing it into SUIT space in order that no supratentorial gray matter (GM) can bias the results [ ]. After visually checking for data artifacts and setting the image origin at the anterior commissure in each subject, we isolated the infratentorial structures, namely, the cerebellum and brainstem, from the surrounding tissue by using the isolate function within the SUIT toolbox. The isolation procedure includes the unified segmentation approach [ ] as implemented in SPM8, which segments the brain into tissue types, specifically GM, white matter (WM), and cerebrospinal fluid. To exclude any tissue outside the brainstem or cerebellum, which was included by the isolation algorithm, we hand-corrected the isolated maps using Caret ( http://www.nitrc.org/projects/caret/ ) [ ]. Subsequently, GM and WM segmentation maps were normalized to the SUIT template, using the Diffeomorphic Anatomical Registration using Exponentiated Lie algebra (DARTEL) registration method [ ]. Using the ImCalc function of SPM8, we calculated the mean image of all modulated normalized GM segmentation maps of all participants. Lastly, before the between-group analyses at the second level, the modulated normalized GM segments were smoothed using a full width at half maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel of 6 mm.
Between-group comparisons at the second level were computed using two-sample t tests as implemented in SPM8. Age and gender were included as nuisance variables. The mean image of all modulated normalized GM segments was included as explicit mask in order to exclude all voxels with NaN values or zero from the analysis. Between-group differences were assessed using a significance threshold of p < 0.005 (uncorrected at the voxel level). An empirically determined extent threshold according to the expected number of voxels per cluster within the respective contrast was utilized. To determine anatomical locations of the peak voxels of the clusters resulting from the second level analysis, we used the SPM Anatomy Toolbox v2.1 ( http://www.fz-juelich.de/inm/inm-1/EN/Forschung/_docs/SPMAnatomyToolbox/SPMAnatomyToolbox_node.html ) [ ], which includes the probabilistic atlas of the human cerebellum by Diedrichsen [ ]. All coordinates are reported in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space.
Structure-Symptom Relationships
We sought to establish relationships between cerebellar abnormalities and specific symptom dimensions in patients, i.e., AVH. In addition, we tested whether such putative relationships may exclusively exist for AVH or whether they may also apply to the full spectrum of positive symptoms, as captured by the PANSS-P total score and the BPRS thought disturbance subscore (BPRS-THD, including unusual thought content, conceptual disorganization, and hallucinatory behavior), or to the negative symptom dimension, as assessed by the PANSS-N score. To test for such relationships, mean parameter estimates ( ß values) in clusters of interest were extracted using MarsBaR Release 0.44 ( http://marsbar.sourceforge.net/ ) [ ]. Next, two-sided Pearson’s product moment correlations were calculated between the extracted β values of the patients with pAVH and the clinical scores, i.e., BPRS score and corresponding AVH item as well as BPRS thought disturbance (THD) subscore, PANSS-N score, PANSS-P score and corresponding AVH item, and PsyRatS-AHS scores (total, emo, phys, and cog), using SPSS 23.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY). Furthermore, we included the β values of the nAVH group in following computation of the two-sided Pearson’s product moment correlations between the β values of the total patient group (pAVH and nAVH patients) and the PANSS-P score, PANSS-N score, and BPRS-THD score. The significance threshold of the correlations was set to p < 0.05 (uncorrected for multiple comparisons). In a second step, complementary partial correlations were computed, where we further controlled for duration of illness and CPZ equivalents (uncorrected for multiple comparisons).
Results
Demographic and Clinical Data
There were no significant differences in patients and healthy controls regarding age, education, and handedness scores. The difference of gender between pAVH and nAVH patients as well as between pAVH and healthy controls was not significant. With respect to duration and illness and chlorpromazine (CPZ) equivalents, pAVH and nAVH patients did not significantly differ. PANSS-P, total BPRS score, and corresponding AVH subscores differed significantly in pAVH compared to nAVH patients, while PANSS-N score did not differ significantly between these two groups.
Cerebellar Gray Matter Volume Differences
Lower GMV in pAVH patients compared to controls was found in right lobule VIIb ( x = 20, y = −77, z = −53, T = 4.77, p = 0.000059, k = 1635) with a submaximum in right lobule VIIIa ( x = 12, y = −72, z = −52, T = 3.70, p = 0.001). Clusters below the empirically determined extent threshold k = 586 voxel were excluded. For visualization of these results, see Fig. 1 . Lower GMV in pAVH compared to nAVH patients was found in right lobule VIIIa ( x = 31, y = −63, z = −58, T = 3.92, p = 0.001, k = 639) as visualized in Fig. 2 . In this contrast, clusters below the empirically determined extent threshold k = 529 voxel were excluded. Fig. 1 Regions exhibiting lower GMV in pAVH patients compared to healthy controls. Shown are results of second level t tests, p < 0.005 uncorrected for height, k > 586 voxels. The color bars represent T values. a Lobule VIIb. b Lobule VIIIa Fig. 2 Lower lobule VIIIa GMV in pAVH patients compared to nAVH individuals. Shown are results of second level t tests, p < 0.005 uncorrected for height, k > 529 voxels. The color bar represents T values
Structure-Symptom Relationships
There was a significant negative correlation between right lobule VIIIa GMV ( x = 31, y = −63, z = −58) and PANSS-P scores ( r = −0.530, p = 0.016) as well as BPRS-THD scores ( r = −0.476, p = 0.034). Other significant structure-symptom relationships were not found. For an overview of the results of the computed correlations, see Table 1 supplementary material. For a visualization of significant correlations, see Fig. 1 supplementary material.
When controlling for duration of illness and CPZ equivalents, there was a significant negative correlation between right lobule VIIIa GMV ( x = 31, y = −63, z = −58) and PANSS-P scores ( r = −0.529, p = 0.024) as well as BPRS-THD scores ( r = −0.470, p = 0.049). See Table 2 supplementary material for an overview of relevant calculated partial correlations.
Discussion
In this structural MRI study, utilizing cerebellum-optimized VBM in patients with schizophrenia with persistent AVH, patients with schizophrenia without AVH and healthy controls, we found decreased GMV in the right cerebellar hemisphere in pAVH patients compared to healthy controls as well as in pAVH compared to nAVH patients. However, no structural changes in the vermis were found. In pAVH patients compared to healthy controls, lobules VIIb and VIIIa were affected. Further, in pAVH compared to nAVH patients, lobule VIIIa was affected. The present finding of cerebellar volume change in AVH in schizophrenia is in line with previous studies elucidating the importance of “cognitive” parts of the cerebellum [ , ]. For example, a recent meta-analysis of functional MRI studies reported activation in lobules VI–VIII and Crus I associated with working memory, other executive functions, and emotion processing [ ]. The posterior regions (including lobules VI–IX, Crus I and Crus II, and the midline vermis) have been suggested to play a crucial role in cognitive and emotion function also in schizophrenia [ , ].
At present, there is striking paucity of data addressing the specificity of cerebellar structural changes for patients presenting with persistent AVH. Noteworthy, the majority of structural findings in patients with AVH have been derived from VBM. Importantly, VBM methods using conventional whole-brain templates for data normalization have been shown to be suboptimal for cerebellar imaging [ ]. Cerebellar segmentation may be particularly vulnerable to inaccurate normalization, where poor alignment of cerebellar subregions can occur as a consequence of standard template use. Given considerable cerebellar variability between individuals and relatively small sizes of cerebellar subdivisions, this also leads to neuroanatomical imprecision [ , ]. Regarding meta-analyses of structural MRI data specifically in hallucinating patients [ , , ], there is a lack of cerebellar findings. Former studies focused their a priori hypotheses on cortical regions, and so far, in the last decade, a range of higher-order cognitive and affective functions of the cerebellum have been elucidated.
Although using a VBM approach with focus on the cerebellum, lower GMV was demonstrated in both hemispheres, in the left superior temporal gyrus and the left thalamus correlating with higher scores in the hallucinations item of the BPRS in schizophrenic patients [ ]. Using semiautomated procedures, Shin and colleagues could not detect structural changes in the cerebellum but in frontal and temporal cortices specifically in hallucinating patients in comparison to non-hallucinating patients [ ]. In contrast to previous reports, our study represents the first explicit investigation of cerebellar anatomy in AVH. Furthermore, the present findings are not contradictory to our former structural data which show that there is a specific pattern of structural loss which defines pAVH patients but not those without AVH compared to controls including regions which have been repeatedly shown to be altered in pAVH patients such as medial and inferior frontal, insular, and bilateral temporal regions [ ]. The present findings further suggest that there is a pattern of cerebellar structural loss, which defines pAVH patients in comparison to healthy controls. Although we could not find a correlation to specific AVH measures, these regions of reduced GMV are involved in different cognitive and language processes. Regarding functional MRI studies, VIIb of the right hemisphere has previously been shown to be activated in a verbal working memory task and more precisely to play a role in phonological storage together with the inferior parietal lobule (BA 40) in a cerebrocerebellar loop [ , ]. Altered BA 40 volume was also found in the current pAVH patients, as shown in our previous report [ ]. In addition, VIIb and VIIIa of the right hemisphere were shown to be engaged in verb generation [ ]. Inferring from this, patients with pAVH possibly exhibit a structurally altered cerebrocerebellar circuit that is functionally relevant in processing speech. Concerning the implication of the cerebellum in AVH in schizophrenia, a recent study suggests that schizophrenia is characterized by aberrant interhemispheric connectivity of several brain regions, including speech-related brain areas, regions of the DMN, subcortical structures, and cerebellar regions [ ]. Interestingly, a significant decrease in interhemispheric functional connectivity of the anterior cerebellum in AVH patients compared to healthy controls was found [ ]. Shergill et al. investigated the neural mechanism of inner speech and auditory verbal imagery in patients with pAVH in schizophrenia. In comparison to healthy controls, an attenuated activation in a cortical-subcortical network including the posterior cerebellar cortex during imagining external speech was demonstrated suggesting a dysfunction in verbal self-monitoring [ ]. In a single case study, Garg et al. (2013) report that high frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) in the cerebellar vermis increased the AVH experienced by the patient [ ]. The authors assumed that the cerebellar vermal rTMS might modulate neuronal networks causing activation in temporoparietal areas, which may result in an increased experience of AVH [ ].
The cerebellum, specifically lobules VI, VIIb, VIII, and VIIa and Crus I, has also previously been shown to be connected to the “salience network” [ , ], which is composed of the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the anterior insula, and its function is to identify internal and extra-personal stimuli to guide behavior [ ]. Lower insular volume in pAVH patients was observed in our previous study on structural patterns in AVH [ ], and the present findings are in good accordance to the theory that abnormal salience processing together with cognitive and attentional control and abnormal language pathways forms a potential pathophysiological basis of AVH [ ].
Although unique cerebellar contributions to AVH symptom expression may exist, in the present sample, we could not confirm significant relationships between cerebellar volume and AVH-specific scores. In contrast, correlations between parameter estimates from regions of interest and PANSS-P scores as well as BPRS-THD scores showed a significant negative correlation, i.e., patients with schizophrenia with less GMV tend to have a higher PANSS-P score and BPRS-THD score. Contrary to our expectation, this is remarkable supporting a specific contribution on cerebellar functions to formal thought disorder in schizophrenia [ , ]. It is worth noting that when controlling for duration of illness and CPZ equivalents, partial correlations between GMV and PANSS-P scores remained significant, suggesting that clinical markers of disease course and treatment may not substantially mediate these structure-symptom relationships.
Potential limitations of this study are the relatively small patient sample sizes and antipsychotic drug treatment in patients. Structure-symptom correlation analyses were not corrected for multiple comparisons, which we considered as inappropriately conservative given the modest sample size and the associated risk of false negatives. This said, independent replication of our findings in larger samples is essential. With respect to drug treatment, to ensure symptom stability, i.e., the persistence of AVH in an individual patient, we included only patients with drug-resistant symptoms treatment. Thus, the inclusion criteria per se prevented us from enrolling drug-free patients. Although the patient groups did not significantly differ in terms of CPZ equivalents and although it is unlikely that antipsychotics alone may explain regionally specific changes between similarly treated patient subgroups, drug effects cannot be entirely excluded [ , , ]. Eventually, the nAVH subgroup included both individuals who never experienced AVH during the course of their illness and patients who had AVH in the past but were fully remitted at least 1 year prior to scanning. This subgroup is phenotypically less stable compared to pAVH patients, since those patients who never experienced AVH in the past may or may not experience verbal hallucinatory symptoms during the course of their illness. We are also aware that we are inferring from structural data alone, and that specific functional contributions of the cerebellum to AVH symptom expression may well exist. Future studies could take advantage of multimodal data acquisition, such as a combination of structural MRI with cerebellum-optimized resting-state functional neuroimaging.
Conclusion
Keeping the limitations of this study in mind, we show that there are structural changes in the “cognitive” regions of the cerebellum that are linked to a clinical phenotype presenting with persistent positive symptoms such as AVH. The results suggest that the cerebellum and its associated neural circuits do play a role in the emergence of positive symptoms in schizophrenia, but probably not exclusively in the emergence of AVH. Future studies specifically investigating the role of the cerebellum in AVH are warranted, potentially combining structural with cerebellum-optimized functional MRI in order to fully capture cerebellar contributions to auditory verbal psychotic phenomena in individuals affected by schizophrenia.