Introduction
Jan Evangelista Purkyně, the most formidable figure in Czech physiology in the world brought many scientific discoveries into the biological, physiological, and biomedical sciences. Among them, he paid attention primarily to the nervous system and particularly the cerebellum. Purkyně was the first scientist to see and describe the largest nerve cells in the brain, de facto in the cerebellum. He hand-illustrated them at a memorable lecture in Prague in 1837 and named them ganglial bodies [ ]. Later, S. R. y Cajal, one of the most distinguished researchers of the nervous system, suggested designating these large neurons according to the author who described them for the first time [ ]. Since that time, also other researchers used this eponym and the Purkinje cell (in English-language texts) represents one of the most cited scientific terms in the neuroscientific literature. On the basis of experiments with animals of many species and also by examination of human brains, Purkyně and later his followers attributed to the function of the cerebellum a share in the control and precision of motor skills [ , , , , , , ].
Further significant discoveries came in the early 1990s, when it was found that the cerebellar cortex contains more neurons than the cerebral cortex [ ] and that the cerebellum has bi-directional connections with almost all significant structures of the brain [ , , , ]. As an example can serve, the cerebellar–hypothalamic axis with impact on visceromotor, i.e., autonomous and endocrine regulations [ , ].
Shortly thereafter, it was revealed that such an enormous number of nerve cells, as well as functionally highly potential cerebellar connections, have an impact on many further brain functions. It means that the cerebellum, along with its traditional role in motor skills, participates not only in the visceromotor control, but also still plays an important role in the higher nervous functions [ , ].
Pathophysiological Characteristics of the Cerebellum: the Cerebellar Disorders
Although the human cerebellum represents only 1/10 of the entire brain volume, recent research has shown that the number of neurons in this structure represents 80% of all neurons in the brain. The same is true for agouti and galago, whereas, e.g., in the mouse the cerebellum contains 60%, while in the rat, guinea pig, and macaque, it represents 70% of all brain neurons [ , , , , , ]. Because of such huge functional potential, it was not surprising that along with its traditional role in maintaining balance, posture control and motor function, the cerebellum participates in homeostatic, endocrine, biorhythmic (visceromotor) processes [ , ], cognition, language, learning, memory, and emotions, which are at the core of a new concept of cerebellar structure and function [ , , , ].
Within the framework of this conception, it is possible to summarize that the cerebellum receives sensory and predictive stimuli, which include signals from receptors of muscles, tendons and joints (proprioceptors). These then integrate with motor commands so that they lead to precise control of movements and proper modulation of cognitive-emotional activities [ ]. The cerebellar disorders therefore include mainly motor deficits, but mental and behavioral abnormalities as well.
Inhibitory cerebellar syndrome arises as a consequence of the destruction of this structure due to injuries, ischemia, hemorrhage, tumors, inflammation, intoxication, and inherited neurodegenerative conditions. It is characterized by the following: increased muscle passivity and weakness, intention tremor and ataxia, asynergy of movements (lack of movement coordination), dysmetria, (inability to perform accurate movements); overshooting (hypermetria) or undershooting (hypometria) the aimed target during voluntary goal-directed tasks, adiadochokinesia (inability to perform rapid alternating movements), and speech disorders (slow, incoherent, slurred) [ , , ].
Cognitive-affective syndrome , newly named as Schmahmann’s syndrome [ ], represents the cerebellar disorders known in humans, characterized by the following: deficit in the formation of words, diminished ability for planning and abstraction, disorders of working memory, and altered personality, with blunted emotions and inappropriate behavior [ ].
In connection with the cerebellum, there is a further probable pathogenic relationship with schizophrenia (findings of small vermis and asymmetric hemispheres in these patients) and with autism [ , ].
Irritative cerebellar syndrome— less frequent cerebellar disorders characterized by abnormalities in the sense of hyperfunction due to pathologic irritation. It is typical with the following: muscle hypertonia, resting tremor, flexion posture, and hypokinesia.
These symptoms resemble the hypertonic–hypokinetic syndrome in parkinsonism [ , ].
It is useful to stress, that unilateral cerebellar lesions cause functional disorders on the ipsilateral side in contrast to cerebral defects when motor abnormalities are contralateral. This is because the cerebellar efferent fibers traverse the superior cerebellar peduncle, cross in its decussation, and influence the contralateral thalamus and motor cortex. The motor cortex, in turn, influences the opposite spinal motor neurons (via corticospinal fibers), and the red nucleus (via corticorubral and rubrospinal fibers) which also influences spinal motor neurons after rubrospinal axons cross in the ventral tegmental decussation [ ].
Methods of Examination and Research of the Cerebellum
It is obvious that the knowledge for formulation of the new conception of the cerebellum, as well as further knowledge, would not be obtained without the incredible efforts of clinical and experimental researchers, thanks to modern devices as well as the introduction of new special clinical and laboratory methods put into praxis.
Clinical and Neuro-imaging Procedures
Clinical medical examination of the cerebellar function is performed as a routine part of a standard neurologic examination and regularly in persons suspected of alcohol intake as a complement to the determination of blood alcohol levels. It involves the assessment of posture and gait with eyes closed, coordination and accuracy of movements, quality of speech, and handwriting. Further, common studies with psychologists on cerebellum-injured patients deal with cognitive-behavioral disorders. Very significant progress was then made in both diagnostics and research, thanks to modern imaging methods, e.g., PET and MRI (positron emission tomography and magnetic resonance imaging). For example, using these methods, the participation of the cerebellar dentate nucleus in tasks related to planning was proved in healthy subjects tested in procedural learning abilities [ , , , ].
The Experimental Research on Animals
Experiments on animals play an irreplaceable role in neuroscience research. In particular, the use of animal models of cerebellar disorders brought valuable insights into the physiology and pathophysiology of the cerebellum [ , , ]. The first was the confirmed participation of the cerebellum in different types of learning and memory [ , , , , , , , , , , ]. The second offered the clarification of some pathogenic mechanisms of cerebellar disorders including the possibilities of influencing them (e.g., by means of non-invasive procedures, forced motor activity, enriched environment, pharmacologically, or by transplantation of embryonic cerebellar tissue, as well as stem cells). It was possible to provide important new insights on cerebellar function, thanks to a battery of sophisticated behavioral tests that electrophysiological investigations used along with classic neurohistologic procedures and modern immunofluorescence methods [ , ].
There are two groups of these models of various cerebellar dysfunctions, known also in human beings, used in this research: 1. Mouse models were derived from naturally arising mutations in the genome of individuals that were then further bred and prepared for experimental research. These mice differ in more or less serious types of cerebellar degeneration and its consequences. Most famous are Lurcher mice (m), pcd (Purkinje cell degeneration) m., Hoot foot m., further then Nervous m., Staggerer m., Weaver m., Scrambler m., Toppler m., Reeler m., and Pogo m. 2. Mouse models developed by means of genetic engineering as genetically modified organisms (GMO). Animals of this group mainly represent transgenic mice arising from the same type of hereditarily determined neurodegeneration in humans resulting from repeating CAG triplets in the genetic information. Besides other neural diseases (Huntington chorea, dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy, spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, Niemann-Pick disease, Friedreich ataxia), also seven types of mouse models of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 17, 23) belong to this group [ ] from more than many scores of those in humans [ ]. The aforementioned triplet codes for polyglutamine in each respective gene, resulted in mutants to the expansion of these sections mutated proteins. The severity of disability depends on the number of CAG triplet repeats [ , ]. In any case, these transgenic animals represent more precise models of the above-mentioned diseases.
Conclusion
As mentioned above, our understanding of cerebellar structure, connections, and functions (actually a new conception of the cerebellum as a whole) has significantly advanced over the years. This progress is directly related to the advent of many new and innovative investigative techniques, both basic science and clinical, including sophisticated procedures on experimental animals. And clearly this explosion in our understanding regarding the cerebellum can be traced as far back as the discovery of J. E. Purkyně and his cell.
First of all, both naturally arising and artificially by genetically engineering prepared animal models, created the basis for such enormous progress in cerebellar research. Because of these advances, it is indisputable that studies mainly on cerebellar mutants provided much valuable information concerning cerebellar function and the manifestation of cerebellar disorders, as well as pathogenesis and therapy, though there are also some limitations that prevent a direct translation of these findings to humans.
Therefore, verification of the conformity of the mouse models with human diseases on the morphological, functional, and molecular level is crucial for the translation of the results of experimental research to human medicine to thereby aid in its progress.