Introduction
Many studies have found that altered structural and functional connectivity between adjacent and distant brain regions may play a role in the neuropathology of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). It is now known that there are structural and functional abnormalities in the cerebellum and connected brain regions in both people diagnosed with ASD and in mouse models like the Lurcher chimera that display autistic-like behavioral phenotypes (such as deficits in behavioral flexibility and spatial learning and memory) and cerebellar neuropathology [ , , , , ]. Examples of structural abnormalities in human cases of ASD include the following: decreased numbers of neurons in the cerebellum, altered migration patterns of neurons, and abnormal synaptogenesis between neurons [ ]. In humans diagnosed with ASD, histological changes in the brain include variable loss of cerebellar Purkinje cells (PCs), abnormal clustering of neurons in the inferior olivary nucleus (ION), and decreased thickness of the cortical grey matter as subjects aged [ , , ]. The Lc /+ mutant mouse also demonstrates cerebellar pathology with the death of PCs in the first 2–3 weeks of life due to a gain-of-function mutation in the Grid2 gene (GluRδ2 ionotropic receptor), which induces a constitutive leak current through the GluRδ2 receptor triggering increased depolarization of neurons [ , , ]. In addition to the primary loss of PCs, there is also secondary loss of up to 90 % of cerebellar granule cells (GCs) and up to 70 % of inferior olivary neurons in the medulla [ , ]. To study the relationship between cerebellar pathology and subsequent changes in the structure and function of cerebellar neurons and glia, we generated Lurcher chimeric mice that display variable functional and histological abnormalities in the cerebellum.
Mouse chimeras can be composed of both wildtype and mutant cell types, and they have been used extensively to study the roles of genes in tissue-specific development and in numerous cell lineage studies [ , , ]. Lurcher chimeras were originally developed to study the site of gene action of the Lurcher mutation, and when it was discovered that a mutation in the Grid2 gene led to the intrinsic death of cerebellar PCs, researchers were able to look at the effect of variable PC death on afferent GCs and inferior olivary neurons during cerebellar development [ , ]. Lurcher chimeras are composed of a variable number of cells derived from a wildtype embryo or Lc /+ mutant embryo resulting in mice with a variable number of cerebellar PCs derived from either genotype (ranging from ∼1 to 99 %). The more PCs that are derived from the mutant embryo, the higher the percentage of PC death in each chimera [ , ].
The current study uses a mouse model with behavioral abnormalities, such as deficits in behavioral flexibility, decreased exploration of novel environments as a measure of restricted interests/behaviors, and deficits in spatial learning and memory on the Morris water maze [ , , ], to investigate neurobiological and functional changes in cerebellar neural circuits in order to better understand the corresponding neurodevelopmental mechanisms that contribute to abnormalities in cerebellar circuit structure and function. A primary aim of the current study is to document pathological changes in cerebellar neurons and glial cells and to explore the relationship between cerebellar pathology and behavioral abnormalities seen in the Lurcher chimeric mouse model to gain insights into the development and plasticity of cerebellar neural circuits following variable PC loss. Another aim of the study is to determine if variable loss of PCs leads to compensatory or pathological changes in neural activity in surviving cerebellar neurons in a mouse model exhibiting variable cerebellar pathology and behavioral abnormalities such as behavioral inflexibility.
Since PC death is one of the most common pathologies seen in the brains of autistic individuals [ , , ] we predicted that Lurcher chimeras which exhibit variable PC loss display correlated changes in cerebellar neuronal activity (using cFos as an indirect reporter of neural activity) following PC death. As changes in neuroglia have been well documented in a subset of autistic individuals [ , ], we predicted that there would be similar changes in neuroglial structure and function in Lurcher chimeras that would be correlated with cerebellar pathology.
Materials and Methods
Animals
Lc /+ mutant mice (B6CBACa A w - J / A - Grid2 Lc ) and wildtype (+/+) controls were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine) and maintained at the Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics (CMMT) at the University of British Columbia (UBC) in Vancouver, British Columbia, according to UBC and Canadian Council on Animal Care (CCAC) standards and guidelines.
Generation of Aggregation Lurcher Chimeras
Aggregation Lurcher chimeras (+/+↔ Lc /+ chimeras) were generated based on previously published methods [ ] by fusing two four-to-eight-cell embryos derived from matings of Lc /+ mutant and +/+ wildtype mice of the same Lurcher strain background followed by implantation of the fused embryos into pseudo-pregnant ICR female mice. When generating chimeras, we expected to produce mice of different genotypes at a specific ratio. One quarter of our chimeric mice were expected to be +/+↔+/+ wildtype mice; half were expected to be +/+↔ Lc /+ chimera; and one quarter of the mice were expected to be Lc /+↔ Lc /+ mutants with no surviving PCs. We used a total of 41 Lurcher chimeras with 24 male chimeras and 17 female chimeras. All chimeras used in the experiments were adults, 60 and older (for more information about each chimera, please see Supplementary Table 1 )
All procedures including animal care, breeding, rotarod, and histology were in accordance with UBC and CCAC guidelines for animal care (protocol numbers A12-0190 and A13-0177).
Rotarod Activation in Lurcher Chimeras
Lurcher chimeras were run on a rotarod (Ugo Basile Biological Research Apparatus, Comerio, Italy) to trigger neural firing in cerebellar neurons. Activation of cerebellar neurons was to enhance cFos expression, which was used as an indirect reporter of neural activity [ , , , ]. The rotarod was of the accelerating type where rotations per minute were increased from 4 to 40 rpm during the activation period. All chimeras spent 90 s on the rotarod, and if any mice fell off the rotarod, the experimenter placed the chimera back on the rotarod until the 90 s target time had been reached.
Preparation of Brain Tissue for Immunohistochemical Analysis
Following stimulation of the cerebellum, elevated cFos protein expression can be seen in cerebellar GCs within 15 min and elevated expression of cFos in the cytoplasm of PCs can be seen within 90 min of cerebellar activation [ ]. Since it has been previously documented that 90 min is a sufficient time period for increases in cFos protein expression to occur in cerebellar neurons, we perfused our mice 90 min after cerebellar rotarod activation.
Lurcher chimeras received an Avertin overdose and were trans-cardially perfused with 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (0.1 M) followed by 4 % paraformaldehyde (PFA) in the same buffer. Following perfusion, brains were removed from the skull and bisected in the mid-sagittal plane. Brain tissue was then post-fixed in PFA overnight and transferred to PBS with 0.01 % sodium azide for preservation storage at 4 °C. Two days before sectioning, brain tissue was placed in 30 % sucrose plus sodium azide until the brains had sunk to bottom of the glass jars. Finally, brains were embedded in Optimal Cutting Temperature (Tissue Tek OCT Compound, Sakura Finetek) compound using isopentane and dry ice. The embedded brain tissue was then stored in the −80 °C freezer in preparation for sectioning.
Embedded brain tissue was sectioned in the sagittal plane using a cryostat. The left brain halves were used for Calbindin-D28K staining to quantify cerebellar PCs and were also used for cFos, GFAP, and Iba1 immunofluorescence staining. This tissue was sectioned at 25 μm. The right halves of brain tissue were sectioned at 40 μm and used for free-floating cFos staining. Sections were placed into cell culture well plates containing PBS and 0.01 % sodium azide for free-floating immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Immunohistochemistry and Immunofluorescence
To quantify PC number, sections were examined and visualized by immunohistochemistry. For immunohistochemical analysis, sections were rinsed with 1× PBS (0.1 M) and then incubated with blocking buffer containing 0.3 % bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Sigma Aldrich, Oakville, Ontario) and 10 % normal goat serum (NGS) (Bethyl Laboratories, Montgomery, TX, USA) for 20 min. Sections were then incubated overnight with mouse monoclonal anti-Calbindin-D28K antibodies (1:1000 dilution; Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA). Sections were then incubated with anti-mouse secondary antibody (1:200 dilution; Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA) for an hour following three washes in 1× PBS-T (0.1 M). Immunoreactivity was then visualized by using an ABC reaction (Vectastain kit; Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA) and diaminobenzidine (DAB) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Slides were counterstained with cresyl violet to visualize cytoarchitecture of the internal granular layer (IGL) and dehydrated using ascending alcohol concentrations prior to being cleared with xylene. Glass coverslips were then applied with Permount solution.
Double staining was used to visualize combinations of cFos, Calbindin-D28K, Iba1-positive microglia, inducible Nitric Oxide Synthase (iNOS)-positive cells and/or GFAP-positive astrocytes, and Bergmann glia in the left cerebellum. Slides were washed three times in 1× PBS (0.1 M) and then incubated for 30 min in a humid chamber at room temperature in blocking buffer containing 10 % NGS (Bethyl Laboratories, Montgomery, TX, USA) and 0.3 % BSA (Sigma Aldrich, Oakville, Ontario). Slides were then incubated in various 1° antibodies overnight in a humid incubation chamber at 4 °C (1. Mouse monoclonal Anti-Calbindin antibody, 1:1000 dilution, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA; 2. Rabbit polyclonal Anti-cFos antibody, 1:500 dilution, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA; 3. Mouse monoclonal Anti-GFAP antibody, 1:200 dilution, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, Massachusetts, USA; 4. Rabbit polyclonal Anti-Calbindin antibody, 1:500 dilution, EMD Millipore Canada, Etobicoke, Ontario, Canada; 5. Rabbit polyclonal Anti-Iba1 antibody, 1:500 dilution, Wako, Osaka, Japan; 6. Mouse monoclonal Anti-iNOS antibody, 1:500 dilution, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA). The next day, slides were washed three times in 1× PBS (0.1 M) and then incubated for 1 h in a humid incubation chamber with appropriate 2° antibodies and DAPI (Goat Anti-Mouse Alexa 594 Abs (Red), Goat Anti-Rabbit Alexa 488 Abs (Green) or Goat Anti-Mouse Alexa 488 Abs (Green), Goat Anti-Rabbit Alexa 594 Abs (Red), Life Technologies, Burlington, Ontario, Canada). Slides were then washed three times in the dark with 1× PBS (0.1 M), and then coverslips were applied using FluorSave reagent (EMD Millipore). Slides were then stored in the dark at 4 °C for downstream analysis.
cFos Free-Floating Immunohistochemistry
Free-floating sections from the right halves of brains were selected, and immunohistochemistry was performed to identify and analyze cFos expression in cerebellar GCs and cerebellar nucleus (CN) neurons. Sections used for immunohistochemical analysis were washed in 1× PBS (0.1 M) and incubated with blocking buffer (containing 10 % NGS (Bethyl Laboratories, Montgomery, TX, USA) and 0.3 % BSA (Sigma Aldrich, Oakville, Ontario)) prior to being incubated in polyclonal anti-cFos antibodies at 4 °C overnight (1:500 dilution, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA). Sections were then rinsed three times in 1× PBS-T (0.1 M) and incubated for 1 h in anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (1:200 dilution; Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA). cFos immunoreactivity was visualized using the VectaStain ABC reaction (Vectastain kit; Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA) and DAB (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Free-floating sections were then mounted onto slides and allowed to adhere to the slides overnight in a humid incubation chamber. Sections were then dehydrated in ethanol of increasing concentrations and cleared in xylenes prior to being coverslipped.
Visualization and Quantification of Cerebellar Purkinje Cells
For PC counts, five brain sections spaced 20 sections apart were used for estimation of the total number of PCs in the left cerebellum of each mouse. PC counts were done manually using a standard brightfield light microscope equipped with a ×10 eyepiece and a ×25 objective lens. PCs were only counted if the nucleus was visible, which was easily identifiable since it appeared light against the dark, Calbindin-immunopositive cytoplasm. The total number of PC cells from each of the five representative sections was summed, and we calculated an average number of PCs per brain section. The average number of PCs per brain section was then multiplied by the total number of brain sections used in the PC analysis (last section counted minus the first section counted) to obtain the total uncorrected number of PCs in the left cerebellum. The Abercrombie correction factor was then calculated to account for split PC nuclei, section thickness, and the average diameter of each PC [ ]. The Abercrombie correction formula used was N = n × (( t / ( t + D )) where N is the corrected total number of PCs in the left cerebellum, n is the uncorrected total number of PCs in the left cerebellum, t is section thickness (25 μm), and D is the average diameter of a PC measured to be 16.39 μm at ×40 magnification using the ImageJ64 program (NIH ImageJ Software). Lurcher chimeras were assigned to groups based on the total number of PCs in the left cerebellum. Left cerebellum PC counts provided a robust measure of cerebellar pathology in the Lurcher chimeric mouse model.
Quantification of cFos-Positive Cells and Fluorescent Immunocytochemistry
cFos-positive cells were visualized and quantified using a light transmission microscope equipped with a camera. We took pictures of the IGL and the cerebellar nuclei (CN) at ×20 magnification and then quantified the cFos-stained neuronal cell bodies using the ImageJ64 program (NIH ImageJ Software). We used four representative brain sections (from each mouse) spaced 20 sections apart to estimate the average number of cFos-positive cells/mm 2 as a measure of the average density of cFos staining in each brain region of interest. We first measured the total area of each brain region (IGL and CN) in each of the four representative brain sections and then counted the total number of cFos-positive neurons (number of circular particles) in the measured area of the IGL and CN to obtain the density of cFos-positive cells for each section (expressed as the number of cFos-positive cells/mm 2 ). Finally, we calculated the average number of cFos-positive cells/mm 2 in each brain region of interest, which was derived from averaged cell counts of the four representative brain sections of each animal.
We used ImageJ64 (NIH ImageJ Software) to perform cell counts for immunofluorescent staining of cFos-positive cells and Iba1-positive microglia in the left cerebellum. We took pictures of cFos-positive neurons and Iba1-positive microglia at ×20 magnification using an immunofluorescent microscope equipped with a camera. cFos-positive neurons and Iba1-positive microglia were counted in ×20 magnification images of various brain regions using an automated cell counting program included as an application with ImageJ64 (NIH ImageJ Software). The average densities (cells/mm 2 ) of cFos-positive cells and Iba1-positive microglia in each brain section were calculated by measuring the area of analysis and dividing the total number of cells counted by the area of analysis to obtain the density of cFos-positive cells and microglia (cells/mm 2 ). Average densities (cells/mm 2 ) of cFos-positive neurons and Iba1-positive microglia for each animal were derived from four representative brain sections (spaced 20 sections apart).
Definition of Experimental Groups and Assignment of Lc Chimeras to Groups
We first defined five experimental groups based on percentage of chimerism (percentage of wildtype numbers of PCs found in the left cerebellum of each chimera) based upon prior work that found an analytical benefit to pooling chimeras into groups based on the percentage of cells derived from one genotype in order to investigate the effects of the local microenvironment on differential cell survival in three groups of chimeras [ ]. Since each chimera represents a sample size of 1, it was necessary to define experimental groups in an a priori manner to conduct standard statistical analyses. Five such categories were defined for PC number. After performing PC counts in the left cerebellum of 41 Lurcher chimeras ( n = 24 males and n = 17 females ), each chimera fell into one of the five groups based on PC numbers in the left cerebellum to study the relationship between left cerebellum PC numbers, changes in the expression of cFos in cerebellar neurons, and changes in neuroglial markers.
We first analyzed and counted PCs from two Lurcher wildtype (+/+) mice from the breeding colony to obtain an estimate of the average number of PCs found in the left cerebellum of a wildtype animal to serve as a control for PC counts performed in individual chimeras. After averaging PC counts from the left cerebellum of two +/+ mice, we found that the average wildtype mouse had 48,149 PCs in the left cerebellum. We also analyzed two Lc /+ mutant mice as controls to confirm that the mutants had 0 PCs in the left cerebellum.
After establishing controls for PC counts, as expected, we found that some of the Lurcher chimeras had no surviving PCs in the left cerebellum and resembled Lc /+ mutants (group no. 1, 0 % wildtype numbers of PCs in the left cerebellum n = 7). Another group (group no. 5) of mice resembled wildtype animals (+/+) with higher numbers of PCs in the left cerebellum. (Group 5, >70–100 % wildtype numbers of PCs in the left cerebellum n = 4). The other chimeras fell into three clusters (groups no. 2–4) that had intermediate PC numbers. Group no. 2 consisted of ataxic Lc /+ mutant-like mice with few surviving PCs (group no. 2, >0–5 % wildtype PC numbers in the left cerebellum n = 9). A third group of Lurcher chimeras had an intermediate number of PCs (group no. 3, >5–40 % wildtype PC numbers in the left cerebellum n = 9) with no ataxia. A fourth group of mice consisted of chimeras with a higher percentage of PCs in the left cerebellum (group no. 4, >40–70 % wildtype PC numbers in the left cerebellum n = 12) (see Fig. 1a ). Fig. 1 Lurcher chimeras demonstrate variable cerebellar pathology. a Bar graph showing variability in the number of surviving PCs in the left cerebellum of 41 Lurcher chimeras which included seven group no. 1 chimeras that resembled Lc /+ mutants (0 Purkinje cells in the left cerebellum) and four group no. 5 Lurcher chimeras that resembled +/+ mice (with the highest numbers of PCs in the left cerebellum). Also shown are two Lc /+ mutant ( Lc /+ A and Lc /+ B ) and two Lurcher wildtype (+/+ A and +/+ B ) mice from our breeding colony to act as controls for comparing left cerebellum PC numbers with individual Lurcher chimeras. b Photomicrographs showing variable cerebellar gross morphology in three different chimeras. Roman numerals indicate the different cerebellar lobules in the three Lurcher chimeras. c Photomicrographs showing changes in the morphology and cytoarchitecture of the cerebellar cortex in three different Lurcher chimeras. In the top panels, sections were stained for Calbindin-D28K to show differences in the morphology of the PCL in three different chimeras. In the bottom panels, sections were stained with cresyl violet to highlight differences in the morphology of the internal granular layer (IGL) in three different chimeras. Black arrows in the top panels are pointing at PC bodies in the PCL and white arrows in the bottom panels are within the IGL highlighting differences in the appearance of the IGL in three different chimeras
Statistical Analyses
For analyzing the density of cFos-positive cells in the IGL and CN neurons of the cerebellum and the density of Iba1-positive microglia in the cerebellar cortex of Lurcher chimeras, we assigned Lurcher chimeras to five experimental groups as described above. For statistical analyses between the five groups of Lurcher chimeras, we conducted multiple comparisons of the mean analyses by performing ANOVA statistical tests. We looked at the relationships between PC numbers in the left cerebellum and the average density of cFos-positive cells in the IGL, the average density of cFos-positive cells in CN neurons, and the average density of Iba1-positive microglia in the cerebellar cortex. It is important to note that we did not find any significant relationships between factors such as age and sex and differences in cFos expression or differences in the density of Iba1-positive microglia in Lurcher chimeras (Please see Supplementary Table #1 for more information on the age and sex of chimeras used in this study). In addition to performing ANOVA tests to compare differences in the density of cFos-positive cells and Iba1-positive microglia, we also performed regression analyses to look at the relationships between left cerebellum PC numbers, the density of cFos-positive cells in the IGL, the density of cFos-positive CN neurons, and the density of Iba1-positive microglia in the cerebellar cortex of Lurcher chimeras. The results of the regression analyses are presented in Supplementary Fig. S3 . All statistical analyses for this study were performed using the GraphPad Prism software (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA).
Results
Lurcher Chimeras Display Variable Cerebellar Pathology
Each chimera analyzed had a different number of surviving PCs, and the size and morphology of the cerebellum varied widely from animal to animal (see Fig. 1b ). The chimera with the highest number of PCs had 41,358 PCs in the left cerebellum and the chimera with the lowest number of PCs had <1000 PCs in the left cerebellum. In previous studies using Lurcher chimeras, it was estimated that chimeras with fewer than 5–10 % surviving PCs (as compared to wildtype numbers of PCs) had cerebellar ataxia as seen in Lc /+ mutants [ ]. Our study confirmed these findings as chimeras with <5 % wildtype numbers of PCs had cerebellar ataxia and had a cerebellum with similar appearance and morphology to the cerebellum of Lc /+ mutants, characterized by its small size and drastic loss of cerebellar neurons. Finally, we also found extensive loss of cerebellar GCs (as shown by CV staining) in those chimeras with the fewest PCs (see Fig. 1c ).
Our reported left cerebellum PC counts are lower than previous reports on PC numbers in the cerebellum of Lurcher chimeras. Previous studies by Wetts and Herrup have estimated PC numbers in the half cerebellum of wildtype control mice to range between 80,000 and 100,000 PCs [ , ]. As noted in the “ Methods ” section, we estimated PC numbers in the left cerebellum of two wildtype mice from our breeding colony to be between 47,000 and 49,000 PCs. PC numbers in this study could be lower than previously reported PC counts for several reasons. First, brain sections used for PC counts and cFos and neuroglial analyses were sectioned at 25 μm on a cryostat instead of 8 μm used in earlier studies [ , ]. Second, multiple experimental factors could affect estimates of absolute PC numbers including the following: fixation, the method of embedding and sectioning (frozen vs. paraffin), and the sampling procedure used for counting PCs. However, since PC analyses and quantification were performed in a standardized manner for all mice in this study, the relative number of PCs between individual chimeras would not be affected by counting or sampling methods even though the reported absolute number of PCs in the left cerebellum was lower than previous studies.
Density of cFos Staining in Cerebellar Granule Cells Is Inversely Correlated with the Number of Surviving PCs in Lc Chimeras
We were interested in determining if there is a relationship between the degree of cerebellar pathology (death of PCs and GCs) seen in Lurcher chimeras and neuronal activity in surviving GCs. Cerebellar GCs form numerous synaptic connections with post-synaptic PCs and GCs appear to be dependent on PCs for their survival, as it has previously been demonstrated that PCs regulate GC proliferation and GC survival by producing neurotrophic and survival factors such as sonic hedgehog (Shh) [ , ]. We were interested in determining if the loss of a population of post-synaptic target neurons in the adult cerebellum can lead to intrinsic changes in the firing of pre-synaptic neurons as reflected by cFos staining [ ].
As described above, Lurcher chimeras fell into five experimental groups based on left cerebellar PC counts as a quantifiable measure of cerebellar pathology. We used immunohistochemistry to look at the density of cFos staining (cFos-positive cells/mm 2 ) in the cerebellum of the same Lurcher chimeras used for Calbindin-D28K staining to determine the PC number in the left cerebellum. This allowed us to analyze the relationship between neuronal activity (as shown by cFos staining) and the number of PCs in different chimeras. We found that there is an inverse relationship between the number of PCs and the density of cFos staining in the cerebellar IGL, suggesting that chimeras with fewer PCs have increased neuronal activity in surviving GCs. There is a statistically significant difference in the average density of cFos-positive cells in the IGL between group no. 2 and group no. 3 chimeras ( p < 0.05, F = 44.40, df = 38), group no. 2 and group no. 4 chimeras ( p < 0.0001, F = 44.40, df = 38), and group no. 3 and group no. 4 chimeras ( p < 0.0001, F = 44.40, df = 38) (see Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 The density of cFos staining in the cerebellar IGL (as a molecular marker of neuronal activity) is inversely correlated with the number of cerebellar PCs in Lurcher chimeras. a Relationship between the number of PCs in the left cerebellum and the average cFos staining density (cFos-positive cells/mm 2 ) in the IGL of the cerebellum. Thirty-nine Lurcher chimeras were selected for cFos analysis in the IGL. Lurcher chimeras with the fewest PCs have the highest neuronal activity in the IGL as shown by cFos staining. There is no significant difference in the density of cFos staining in the IGL between wildtype-like chimeras (group no. 5, >70–100 % wildtype numbers of PCs) and group no. 4 chimeras (group no. 4, >40–70 % wildtype numbers of PCs) or between group no. 1 Lc /+ mutant-like chimeras (0 PCs in the left cerebellum) and group no. 2 ataxic chimeras (group no. 2, >0–5 % wildtype numbers of PCs), but there is a statistically significant difference in the density of cFos staining in the IGL between group no. 4 chimeras, group no. 3 chimeras, and group no. 2 ataxic chimeras with <5 % wildtype numbers of PCs. b Photomicrographs illustrating differences in cFos expression in the cerebellar IGL in three different Lurcher chimeras. Boxed areas are shown in Fig. 3c at higher magnification. c Higher-magnification photomicrographs illustrating differences in cFos expression in the cerebellar IGL in three different Lurcher chimeras
Density of cFos Staining in Cerebellar Nuclei Neurons Is Inversely Correlated with the Number of PCs in Chimeras
To explore the downstream effects of losing inhibitory cerebellar PC outputs, we analyzed the density of cFos staining in CN neurons. CN neurons receive direct synaptic connections from axons of cerebellar PCs, and we predict that there should be corresponding changes in the density of cFos-positive cells in the CN depending on the amount of inhibition that CN neurons receive from PCs. When we looked at the density of cFos staining within CN neurons, we found that the number of cFos-positive cells/mm 2 was inversely correlated with the number of PCs in chimeras, suggesting that neuronal activity in CN neurons is inversely related to the amount of inhibition received from PCs (see Fig. 3 ). Those chimeras with the highest number of cerebellar PCs and presumably increased inhibition of CN neurons had the lowest density of cFos-positive CN neurons indicating lower levels of neural activity within the CN. We found a statistically significant difference in the average density of cFos-positive cells in CN neurons between group no. 2, group no. 3, and group no. 4 chimeras ( p < 0.0001, F = 63.00, df = 12 for all groups). Fig. 3 The density of cFos-positive CN neurons is inversely correlated with the number of cerebellar PCs in Lurcher chimeras. a Bar graph showing the different average densities of cFos-positive CN neurons (cFos-positive cells/mm 2 ) in three different groups of Lurcher chimeras. Thirteen different Lurcher chimeras (group no. 2, group no. 3, and group no. 4 chimeras) randomly selected from the larger group of 39 Lurcher chimeras used for IGL cFos analysis are shown. Differences in the density of cFos-positive CN neurons are significant when comparing one group of chimeras to another ( p < 0.0001 between group no. 2 and group no. 3 chimeras, p < 0.0001 between group no. 2 and group no. 4 chimeras, and p < 0.0001 between group no. 3 and group no. 4 chimeras). Group no. 1 and group no. 5 chimeras are not shown as there were no significant differences in the density of cFos-positive CN neurons between group no. 1 and group no. 2 chimeras or between group no. 4 and group no. 5 chimeras. b DAB and immunofluorescence staining showing differences in the density (cells/mm 2 ) of cFos-positive CN neurons in three different Lurcher chimeras. The upper panels show cFos staining in CN neurons in the left cerebellum using immunofluorescence, and the lower panels show DAB visualization of cFos-positive CN neurons in the cerebella of a group no. 4 chimera with mild cerebellar pathology, a group no. 3 chimera with intermediate cerebellar pathology, and in a group no. 2 ataxic chimera with severe cerebellar pathology
Changes in the Number, Morphology, and Distribution of Cerebellar Glia Following Purkinje Cell Death in Lc/+ Mutant, Wildtype, and Chimeric Mice
In addition to neuronal death and changes in neuronal activity (as reported by cFos staining) in surviving GCs, PCs, and CN neurons, we also observed a change in the morphology, number, and distribution of cerebellar glial cells. In wildtype mice, microglia have thin and spindly processes and non-descript cell bodies, but in the Lc /+ mutant cerebellum microglia have thicker processes with a more prominent cell body (see Fig. 4a ). In the Lc /+ mutant cerebellum there is a higher density of Iba1-positive microglia located in the grey matter of the cerebellar cortex as compared to wildtype mice, which have a lower density of Iba1-positive microglia in the grey matter. We found that the average density of Iba1-positive microglia (cells/mm 2 ) is 69 % higher in the grey matter of the cerebellar cortex in the Lc /+ mutant cerebellum as compared to the average density of microglia in the grey matter of the cerebellar cortex of a wildtype mouse (data not shown). However, the density of Iba1-positive microglia in the cerebellar white matter is comparable between the Lc /+ mutant and wildtype cerebellum. The distribution of microglia is also altered in the Lc /+ mutant cerebellum where there are more microglia located in the IGL and molecular layer (ML) of the cerebellar cortex as compared to the wildtype cerebellum where microglia are more evenly distributed throughout the ML, PCL, and IGL (see Fig. 4b ). The distribution of Iba1-positive microglia is similar in the cerebellar white matter in both Lc /+ mutant and wildtype mice. Fig. 4 Increased numbers of amoeboid-like microglia in the cerebellar cortex of Lc /+ mutants and chimeras are inversely correlated with cerebellar PC number. a Immunofluorescence photomicrographs showing differences in cerebellar microglial morphology in a wildtype (+/+) mouse ( left panel ) and an Lc /+ mutant mouse ( right panel ). b Immunofluorescence photomicrographs demonstrating differences in the number and morphology of microglia in the cerebellar cortex of a wildtype mouse ( left panels ) and in the cerebellar cortex of a Lc /+ mutant mouse ( right panels ). c Immunofluorescence photomicrographs showing differences in cerebellar microglial morphology and numbers in the cerebellar cortex of three different Lurcher chimeras. The upper left panel shows staining of Calbindin-D28K-positive PCs and Iba1-positive microglia in the cerebellum of a group no. 4 chimera with mild cerebellar pathology; the upper right panel shows staining of Calbindin-D28K-positive PCs and Iba1-positive microglia in the cerebellum of a group no. 3 chimera with intermediate cerebellar pathology and the lower panel shows the absence of Calbindin-D28K-positive PCs and large numbers of Iba1-positive microglia in the cerebellum of a group no. 2 ataxic chimera with severe cerebellar pathology. d Bar graph showing the average density of Iba1-positive microglia (cells/mm 2 ) in the cerebellar cortex of three different groups of Lurcher chimeras ( p < 0.0001 between group no. 2 and group no. 3 chimeras, p < 0.0001 between group no. 2 and group no. 4 chimeras, and p < 0.01 between group no. 3 and group no. 4 chimeras). Nineteen different Lurcher chimeras (from groups no. 2, no. 3, and no.4) randomly selected for Iba1 microglia analysis from the larger cohort of 41 chimeras used for PC counts in the left cerebellum are shown in Fig. 4 . Group no. 1 and group no. 5 chimeras are not shown as there were no differences in the density of Iba1-positive microglia between group no. 1 and group no. 2 chimeras or between group no. 4 and group no. 5 chimeras
Similar changes in the morphology, density, and distribution of microglia can be observed in cerebella of Lurcher chimeras (see Fig. 4c ) and appear to be correlated with cerebellar PC number. In ataxic chimeras with the fewest PCs, we observed an increased density of microglia in the cerebellar cortical grey matter, and these microglia had altered cell morphologies including thicker cell processes and fatter, amoeboid-like cell bodies. In Lurcher chimeras with the highest number of PCs, there was a lower density of microglia in the cerebellar cortical grey matter, and microglia had thinner processes with less prominent cell bodies. These morphological differences may reflect a change in the activation state of the microglia in response to cerebellar neuropathology.
To further study the activation state of microglia in the cerebellar cortex of chimeras with variable PC numbers, we used iNOS as a pro-inflammatory marker of microglial activation. In a Lurcher wildtype (+/+) mouse and group no. 4 chimera (with mild cerebellar pathology), we found no co-localization of iNOS- and Iba1-positive microglia in the cerebellar cortex, although we did find expression of iNOS in cerebellar PCs. However, in a Lc /+ mutant and group no. 2 chimera (with severe cerebellar pathology), we found co-localization of iNOS and Iba1 positivity in some microglia in the cerebellar cortex, suggesting that some amoeboid-like microglia seen in chimeras with the fewest PCs are in an activated state and may be contributing to further cerebellar pathology (see Supplementary Figs. S1 and S2 ). Interestingly, expression of iNOS in chimeras with the fewest PCs is not microglia-specific and iNOS is also expressed throughout the molecular layer of the cerebellum.
There also appeared to be a difference in the distribution of microglia in the three cell layers of the cerebellar cortex in different chimeras. In group no. 4 chimeras with higher numbers of PCs, there were only a few microglia with thin processes and cell bodies equally distributed throughout the ML, PCL, and IGL of the cerebellar cortex. In group no. 3 chimeras with intermediate numbers of PCs, there were more microglia with prominent cell bodies located adjacent to the PCL. In group no. 2 ataxic chimeras with the fewest PCs, there were numerous amoeboid-like microglia located in the cerebellar IGL as compared to wildtype-like or intermediate chimeras (see Fig. 4c ).
Increased microgliosis appeared to be coupled to the severity of cerebellar pathology in Lurcher chimeras and with decreased numbers of PCs in the cerebellar cortex; we saw increased numbers of microglia with prominent cell processes and cell bodies in the cerebellar cortex. There was a statistically significant difference in the average density of Iba1-positive microglia between group no. 2 and no. 3 chimeras ( p < 0.0001, F = 154.8, df = 18), group no. 2 and group no. 4 chimeras ( p < 0.0001, F = 154.8, df = 18), and group no. 3 and group no. 4 chimeras ( p < 0.01, F = 154.8, df = 18) (see Fig. 4d ).
While the density of microglia is significantly higher in the grey matter of the cerebellar cortex of Lc /+ mutant mice and chimeras with fewer surviving PCs as compared to +/+ wildtype mice and chimeras with higher numbers of PCs, the total number of cerebellar microglia is actually reduced when accounting for tissue shrinkage in the Lc /+ mutant and mutant-like chimeras. We found that the total number of cerebellar microglia is ∼4 times higher in the +/+ wildtype cerebellum as compared to the Lc /+ mutant cerebellum (data not shown). However, differences in the morphology and distribution of microglia in the cerebellar cortex of chimeras appear to be along a continuum with the extent of microglial changes correlated with left PC number.
We also analyzed GFAP expression in Lc /+ mutant, wildtype (+/+), and chimeric mice to determine if there was an appreciable difference in the appearance or morphology of cerebellar astroglia between the three groups of animals. We found that Bergmann glia in Lurcher mutants have markedly increased GFAP expression in the ML of the cerebellum as compared to wildtype littermates (see Fig. 5a ). This increased GFAP expression in Bergmann glia within the cerebellar cortex is consistent with previous descriptions of astrogliosis following neurodegeneration in numerous brain regions [ , ]. In wildtype mice compared to mutants, the density of GFAP staining was less in the ML of the cerebellar cortex. Fig. 5 Increased GFAP expression in cerebellar Bergmann glia in the molecular layer of Lc /+ mutants and Lurcher chimeras with the fewest cerebellar PCs. a GFAP, Iba1, and DAPI immunofluorescence in the cerebellar cortex of a wildtype (+/+) mouse ( upper panels ) and a Lc /+ mutant mouse ( lower panels ) showing cerebellar microglia and Bergmann glia. Roman numerals indicate cerebellar lobules in the lower magnification photomicrographs in the left panels . b Immunofluorescent images of GFAP, Iba1, and DAPI staining revealing differences in microglia and astroglia staining in the cerebellar cortex of three different chimeras with differing severity of cerebellar pathology. c Immunofluorescent images of GFAP, Calbindin-D28K, and DAPI staining revealing the relationship between Purkinje cells and Bergmann glia in the cerebellar cortex of a Lurcher wildtype (+/+) mouse and three different Lurcher chimeras with differing severity of cerebellar pathology. The white arrow in the lower right panel is pointing to the soma of a PC in a group no. 2 chimera with very few surviving PCs. Images were taken at 2600 μm from the midline along the medio-lateral axis of the left cerebellum although patterns of Calbindin and GFAP staining were similar in other sections along the medio-lateral axis of the cerebellum in the same Lurcher chimeras. With decreasing PC numbers in Lurcher chimeras, there is also a corresponding reduction in the size and volume of the cerebellum. In a wildtype cerebellum and Lurcher chimeras with higher numbers of PCs, we see one cerebellar lobule as compared to seeing two cerebellar lobules in Lc /+ mutant and mutant-like chimeras when viewed at the same magnification
The appearance and morphology of Bergmann glia in the ML of the cerebellar cortex in chimeric mice were also variable, and the density of GFAP staining in Bergmann glia was inversely correlated with PC number in individual chimeras. In group no. 4 chimeras with higher numbers of PCs and GCs, we saw low levels of GFAP expression in Bergmann glia within the ML. In group no. 3 chimeras with a significant loss of PCs (without cerebellar ataxia), we observed a much higher intensity of GFAP staining in Bergmann glia within the ML of the cerebellum. In ataxic Lurcher chimeras with >95 % PC loss, we observed an even higher intensity of GFAP staining in Bergmann glia in the ML (see Fig. 5b, c ).
Discussion
Although autism is characterized by core behavioral symptoms such as impaired and disordered language, decreased social interactions, extreme fixation on certain objects or activities, and impaired fine and gross motor activity [ , ], the phenotype of autism consists of a heterogeneous collection of disorders, varying widely between individuals. In human ASD cases, it is becoming increasingly clear that a subset of autistic subjects also have deficits in executive functions that require integration of neural inputs from many cortical and subcortical structures, including the cerebellum [ , ]. Research in humans has shown that autistic individuals have deficits in behavioral flexibility, a type of executive function, which is the ability to adapt one’s behavior to changing tasks and environments [ ]. However, the exact role of cerebellar pathology in producing ASD-like behavioral phenotypes has not been fully characterized in human cases of autism or in mouse models used to study the bases of neurodevelopmental disorders.
Over the past few years, many different experimental mouse models such as the inbred strain Black and Tan Brachyury (BTBR) mouse and Scn1a +/− mouse have been used to study the anatomical, functional, molecular, and behavioral correlates of ASD-like phenotypes [ , ]. However, only a limited number of mouse models exhibit cerebellar pathology and related behavioral abnormalities that can be used to study the underlying neurobiological changes and plasticity of cerebellar circuits to gain a better understanding of the cerebellum and its role in complex neurodevelopmental disorders. For this reason, we chose to use the Lurcher mutant and chimeric mouse model, which is characterized by variable developmental PC loss, to investigate pathological and functional changes in the cerebellum.
Using approaches that have been modified from testing behavioral flexibility in humans, it was possible to test behavioral flexibility and the role of PCs in producing and modifying this behavior in Lurcher chimeras with variable PC numbers [ ]. Lurcher chimeras with fewer surviving PCs had deficits on a serial reversal-learning task (which measures lower-order behavioral flexibility), suggesting that the cerebellum may also play an important role in attention and cognition in tasks assessing higher brain functions and that cerebellar pathology may contribute to deficits in cognitive functions associated with ASD-like phenotypes in both mouse models and humans [ ].
Developmental PC Loss Leads to Functional Changes in GCs and CN Neurons
Since Lc /+ mutants and chimeras exhibit primary pathological changes within cerebellar PCs, we examined changes in cFos expression, as an indirect marker of neural activity, within cerebellar GCs and CN neurons in adult chimeras following variable PC loss. These three neuron types form a neural circuit within the cerebellar cortex, and, following the degeneration of PCs, we predicted there should be functional changes within this circuit. To evaluate changes in neuronal activity in GCs and CN neurons, we quantified the density of cFos staining in cerebellar neurons as a histological marker of neural activity. Smeyne et al. have previously shown in a transgenic mouse model that various stimuli such as light, neurotransmitters, and seizure activity can lead to transient expression of Fos in neurons making cFos a reliable histological marker of neural activity following exposure to a wide variety of different stimuli [ ].
With increasing PC death in Lurcher chimeras, there is a corresponding increase in the staining density of cFos within pre-synaptic GCs. Increased cFos staining in GCs suggests that with the loss of their post-synaptic targets, surviving cerebellar GCs increase their neural activity, perhaps to maintain a threshold of synaptic transmission within the cerebellar cortex. This phenomenon has also been observed in a previous study that reported changes in the intrinsic firing rates and changes in neuronal excitability of hippocampal neurons following the death of their post-synaptic targets in Dlx1 −/− mice [ , ]. This phenomenon has been termed “homeostatic plasticity” whereby surviving pre- and post-synaptic neurons modify their excitability and firing rates in order to maintain a balance in excitatory and inhibitory neural transmission [ , ].
Alternatively, increased neural activity in GCs could represent a pathological change in GC activity whereby the loss of PCs leads to an imbalance in excitation and inhibition within the cerebellar cortex. Evidence for pathological alterations in GC activity following PC degeneration in Lc /+ mutant mice has come from the work of Caddy, Martin, and Biscoe [ ]. They discovered that the numbers of spinocerebellar mossy fibre projections are comparable between Lc /+ mutants and wildtype littermates, showing that neural inputs from mossy fibres to GCs are maintained in Lc /+ mutants and chimeras [ ]. Therefore, in Lc /+ mutants and chimeras where up to 90 % of cerebellar GCs are lost following PC degeneration, there are an increased number of neural inputs from pre-synaptic mossy fibres to surviving GCs [ ]. Increased numbers of neural inputs to GCs would result in an increase in GC activity as reflected by an increased density of cFos staining in the IGL of chimeras with decreasing PC numbers. However, it must be noted that cFos does not capture the temporal aspects of neural firing in populations of cerebellar neurons and the functional changes observed in GCs could be defined as homeostatic and/or pathological alterations in neural activity [ ].
Following rotarod activation of the cerebellum in group no. 4 chimeras, we observed a low density of cFos staining in post-synaptic CN neurons reflecting lower levels of neural activity in CN neurons. In group no. 3 chimeras with intermediate PC numbers, there is a higher density of cFos staining in CN neurons representing increased neural activity in CN neurons as compared to group no. 4 chimeras. In group no. 2 mutant-like chimeras with cerebellar ataxia, there was an even higher density of cFos staining in CN neurons suggesting that with decreasing PC number there is increased neural activity in CN neurons due to the loss of PC inhibition. These results highlight that the density of cFos-positive CN neurons is inversely correlated with the total number of cerebellar PCs, suggesting that with increasing PC death there are pathological changes in the neural activity of CN neurons (similar to changes that we documented in cerebellar GCs) due to decreased numbers of inhibitory inputs from the cerebellar PCL.
Previous studies of PC function have shown that, under basal conditions, PCs are spontaneously active and can fire at a rate of 50 Hz leading to significant inhibition of post-synaptic CN neurons [ ]. In wildtype mice, PCs outnumber CN neurons by a factor of 11:1, providing an anatomical substrate whereby PCs can exert powerful influence over the excitability and firing rate of post-synaptic CN neurons [ ]. During a behavioral task that triggers cerebellar activation, it was confirmed that synchronized patterns of action potential (AP) spikes in PCs exert powerful inhibitory control over the activity of CN neurons [ , ]. Together, these results support our findings that inhibitory PC number is inversely correlated with the density of cFos staining in CN neurons as a measure of CN neuronal activity in cerebella of Lc chimeras.
Knowledge of the mechanisms underlying changes in CN neuronal activity following PC degeneration has come from past studies conducted in Lc /+ mutant mice. Using histological, electrophysiological, and molecular techniques, it was found that the number of inhibitory neurons within the CN increases with corresponding increases in the size of inhibitory synaptic nerve terminals; from P8 to P22, there are increases in the size of both miniature IPSCs (mIPSCs) and spontaneous IPSCs (sIPSCs) and there is increased aggregation of GABA A receptors (GABA A Rs) and gephyrin (a protein that frequently clusters with GABA A Rs at inhibitory synapses) in CN neurons of Lc /+ mutants [ , , ]. These findings highlight that there may be both pathological and compensatory changes in the structure and function of cerebellar neurons following PC degeneration in Lurcher chimeras and support our findings of significant changes in a marker of neuronal activity in cerebellar neurons following the death of PCs.
Cerebellar Gliosis is Associated with PC Loss
Following PC degeneration and the secondary loss of GCs, we also observed widespread changes in microglia and astroglia in cerebella of Lc /+ mutants and chimeras. With decreasing PC numbers, we observed increased numbers of amoeboid-like Iba1-positive microglia in the IGL and ML of the cerebellar cortex of chimeras and corresponding increases in GFAP expression in Bergmann glia in the ML of the cerebellum. Microgliosis and astrogliosis observed in Lc /+ mutants and chimeras were restricted to the cerebellar cortex as there were no discernable differences in staining in hippocampal microglia and astroglia among any of the chimeras with varying degrees of PC loss. The degree of reactive gliosis observed in cerebella of Lurcher chimeras was tightly associated with the number of PCs in each chimera and suggests that PC death triggers persistent changes in the structure and function of cerebellar neuroglia that may contribute to further cerebellar pathology.
Lc /+ mutants and chimeras with the fewest PCs demonstrate co-localization of the pro-inflammatory marker iNOS within some Iba1-positive amoeboid-like microglia, whereas Lurcher wildtype mice and chimeras with higher numbers of PCs do not exhibit co-localization of iNOS and Iba1 in microglia of the cerebellar cortex. Interestingly, we found coincidental expression of iNOS in cerebellar PCs in wildtype (+/+) and Lurcher chimeric mice with higher numbers of PCs. A previous study has shown that iNOS can be transiently expressed in cerebellar PCs and that iNOS can be expressed within different subsets of neurons during different phases of development and aging [ ]. The role of iNOS expression in neurons including PCs under physiological conditions is still not fully understood. Studies have found that activated microglia express increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as IL-6 in addition to iNOS under pro-inflammatory conditions in the CNS [ , ]. It has been well established that iNOS is the enzyme responsible for creating nitric oxide (NO) in macrophages and microglia in order to degrade phagocytosed pathogens or cellular debris, but in conditions of prolonged and chronic inflammation, iNOS may also lead to further tissue damage and cell death [ ].
Previous evidence suggesting that cerebellar neuroglia play a bigger role in producing neuropathology has come from looking at other mutant mouse models. One of these models is the Purkinje Cell Degeneration ( pcd ) mouse, which is characterized by an autosomal recessive mutation in the nna1 gene leading to the death of cerebellar PCs as seen in Lc /+ mutants, although with a later and more prolonged time course of cell loss [ , ]. At P15 before the onset of PC death, microglia in pcd mice have non-descript cell bodies and processes with a similar cerebellar distribution as seen in age-matched wildtype mice, but following the onset of PC death, microglia undergo morphological and functional changes and migrate to the site of neuronal degeneration in the PCL and ML [ ]. These changes in microglial morphology and localization in the cerebellum are similar between the Lc /+ mutant and pcd mouse models, which are characterized by cerebellar pathology, and suggest that changes in the structure and function of microglia may be a common pathological hallmark in the brains of mice exhibiting PC loss.
We also characterized qualitative changes in the expression of GFAP in cerebellar astroglial cells with a particular focus on Bergmann glia. Bergmann glia are a type of protoplasmic unipolar astrocyte, and in the adult brain, they are closely intertwined with the cell bodies and dendrites of cerebellar PCs and appear to participate in important protective and supportive functions at PC synapses [ , , ]. Therefore, in Lurcher chimeras that exhibit variable loss of PCs, we expected that the enhanced expression of GFAP (as a marker of astrogliosis) in Bergmann glia would be tightly associated with the extent of developmental PC death. We observed low expression of GFAP in Bergmann glia in the ML of group no. 4 chimeras with higher PC numbers, moderate increases in GFAP expression in the Bergmann glia of group no. 3 chimeras with intermediate cerebellar pathology, and large increases in GFAP expression in Bergmann glia were found in the ML of group no. 2 Lc /+ mutant-like chimeras.
Markedly increased levels of GFAP mRNA have been found in the Lc /+ mutant cerebellum at two time points: from P22 to P25 following the majority of PC degeneration and from P36 to P110 during the subsequent loss of cerebellar GCs [ , ]. Together, our results and the results of the study above show that astrogliosis seen in the cerebellar cortex is dependent on the degree of developmental PC loss in Lurcher chimeras and that changes in neuroglia morphology and function may contribute to further pathological events within the cerebellum even after the initial degeneration of cerebellar neurons.
Conclusion
The results from this study provide insights into neuroanatomical and histological changes in cerebellar neurons and neuroglia following PC death and how these changes in neuron and glia structure and function relate to cerebellar pathology in a mouse model with behavioral abnormalities like behavioral inflexibility. Furthermore, by using Lurcher chimeras as a model of variable developmental PC loss, the current findings demonstrate a quantitative relationship between pathological changes in the cerebellum and altered neuronal activity as reflected by changes in cFos within cerebellar neurons. These results are valuable because Lurcher chimeras demonstrate a wide range of neurobiological and behavioral phenotypes, which models some of the variability seen in human cases of ASD that have cerebellar pathology. Although Lc /+ mutants and chimeras can only model a subset of neurobiological and behavioral phenotypes, this study adds to our understanding of how changes in cerebellar neurons and glia may contribute to the development of ASD and related neurodevelopmental disorders in humans. Finally, mouse models like the Lurcher chimera provide insights into how changes in cerebellar structure and function during normal brain development (such as physiological PC death) are involved in the formation and remodeling of cerebellar neural circuits [ ].