Introduction
Motor inhibition is a fundamental component of executive control, allowing to actively suppress a movement to the environmental demands. Motor inhibition is a critical symptom of many neurological and psychiatric disorders and it is actually considered as a high-horder function beyond the simple muscle response [ ]. In recent years, a big effort has been made to identify which cortical and subcortical areas are involved in these processes. The contribution of right inferior frontal gyrus (r-IFG) and pre-supplementary motor area (r-preSMA) has been repeatedly shown during the execution of inhibitory tasks such as the Go/NoGo or the Stop Signal task [ , , ]. Very recently, the mechanism by which these areas transmit the inhibitory command to the primary motor cortex in response to an external NoGo signal was identified. By using double-coil transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), we showed that a conditioning prefrontal TMS pulse delivered on the r-IFG or on the r-preSMA modulates motor cortex excitability with a specific temporal pattern that was evident particularly during motor inhibition. This coincided with a sustained beta activity increase recorded by electroencephalography at the same time points after the presentation of the NoGo cue [ ].
A role for the cerebellum in motor inhibition has been recently suggested by imaging and neuropsychological studies conducted on disinhibited patients, hypothesizing the existence of a functional interaction between the cerebellum and the prefrontal cortex finalized to the fine motor control of action inhibition (see, for a review, [ ]). For instance, it was reported that patients affected by cerebellar atrophy presented delayed and attenuated evoked potentials during NoGo trials and lower frontal activity compared to the controls [ ]. Patients with multiple sclerosis showed poor inhibitory performance to the Go/NoGo task related to anomalous cerebellar activity than healthy participants in functional MRI (fMRI) investigations [ ]. A similar overactivation of the cerebellum and underactivation of the prefrontal cortices were reported in patients with drug addiction during the execution of the Go/NoGo task [ , ]. Furthermore, it was suggested that the functional adjustment of the cerebello-prefrontal connections may be responsible of the age-related maturation of the motor inhibitory system [ ] and of the training-induced improvement in inhibitory performance in healthy subjects [ ].
In spite of the amount of neuroimaging evidence showing the involvement of cerebello-prefrontal pathways in movement inhibition, to our knowledge no study had yet investigated directly how in healthy brain the effective connectivity between the prefrontal sites and the primary motor area could functionally depend on cerebellar excitability during motor inhibitory performance. To this end, non-invasive brain stimulation techniques offer the opportunity to study the healthy brain both online [ ] and offline [ ] to the execution of tasks. As described above, double-coil TMS was successfully employed to study prefrontal to motor connectivity during the execution of the Go/NoGo task finalized to inhibitory control [ ].
In the present study, double-coil TMS was applied to test prefrontal-motor connectivity during the execution of the Go/NoGo task in healthy subjects as previously done [ ] with the novelty that these measures of cortical connectivity were collected following real or sham continuous theta burst stimulation (cTBS) of the right cerebellar hemisphere. The right cerebellar hemisphere was chosen as site of stimulation since a recent fMRI work showed functional changes related to a Go/NoGo in the right cerebellum both in control and in autistic participants [ ].
Theta burst stimulation (TBS), a form of repetitive TMS, when applied over the lateral cerebellum has been proved to modulate the contralateral M1 by long-lasting increasing or decreasing the activity of the cerebello-thalamo-cortical networks [ ].
Here we investigated how cerebellar TBS interfered with the functional interactions between the prefrontal sites and M1 assessed by double-coil TMS during a Go/NoGo task. Starting from the hypothesis that movement inhibition could be at least partially controlled by the interchange between the cerebellum and the prefrontal cortex, we expected that modulating the activity of cerebellum through real cTBS can induce a change in prefrontal to motor connectivity during Go/NoGo task as measured by motor evoked potential amplitude.
Materials and Methods
Participants
A sample of ten healthy subjects [five males (50 %); mean age ± SD = 28.1 ± 2.5 years; range 23–31; schooling >13 years] was recruited from universities and hospital personnel by local advertisement. All participants were right-handed as assessed with the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory. Subjects reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The study was approved by the Local Ethics Committee of the IRCCS “Santa Lucia” Foundation, and written consent was obtained from all participants after a full explanation of the procedures of the study.
Procedure
Double-coil TMS was delivered over the r-IFG/l-M1 and over r-preSMA/l-M1 before (100 ms after the fixation cross onset) and 50, 75, 100, 125, and 150 ms after the presentation of visual stimulus of a simple Go/NoGo task. The same double-coil protocol was applied following sham or real cerebellar continuous theta burst stimulation (cTBS) to test prefrontal connectivity in relation to the cerebellar activation state for motor inhibition (Fig. 1a, b ). Fig. 1 a Schematic drawing of coil positioning and cTBS protocol for the off-line cerebellar stimulation. b Schematic drawing of paired-TMS protocol. A single test pulse was applied over l-M1 either alone or proceeded by a conditioning stimulus delivered 6 ms earlier over the r-IFG/r-preSMA. Single or paired-pulse TMS was applied during the fixation cross-presentation (pre) or during different delays (SOAs) after the Go/NoGo cue onset. Four types of white isosceles triangles pointing upward, downward, rightward, or leftward against a black background were presented. Subjects were instructed to press a key with the right index finger whenever a white triangle pointed either up or down (Go stimulus) and to refrain from pressing the key whenever the triangle pointed toward the right or left (NoGo stimulus)
Go/NoGo Task
Response inhibition was measured using a simple visual Go/NoGo paradigm thorough Psyscope software. The present task is a modified version of a previous test used by Pandey et al. entailing the presentation of four types of white isosceles triangles pointing upward, downward, rightward, or leftward against a black background [ ]. At the beginning of each trial, a fixation cross was presented at the center of the computer screen for 500 ms, and after a blank of 200 ms, the cue stimulus was shown for 100 ms. The cue subtended a visual angle of approximately 1°. In an initial training phase, involving a subset of trials, participants were familiarized with the task until stable performance was reached. The experimental phase consisted of 128 stimuli, 32 of each type. Subjects were instructed to press as quickly as possible a key with the right index finger whenever a white triangle pointed either up or down (Go stimulus) and refrain from pressing the key whenever the triangle pointed toward the right or left (NoGo stimulus). The probability of occurrence of Go and NoGo stimuli was equal in order to ensure a sufficient and equal number of motor evoked potentials (MEPs) recordings in all conditions. The order of stimulus presentation was pseudo-randomized. The inter-trial interval was 3000 ms with a variation of 10 % randomized between trials (Fig. 1b ).
Double-Coil Stimulation Protocol
Double-coil TMS was applied to investigate within millisecond time scale the effective connectivity between r-IFG/l-M1 and r-preSMA/l-M1, by testing whether their activation could modulate l-M1 output as measured by MEP amplitude. Double-coil TMS was performed by means of two high-power Magstim 200 machines (Whitland, Dyfed, UK). The magnetic stimulus had a nearly monophasic pulse configuration, with a rise time of ~100 μs, decaying back to zero over ~0.8 ms. Electromyographic (EMG) traces were recorded from right first dorsal interosseous (FDI) muscle by using 9-mm-diameter surface cup electrodes. The active electrode was placed over the muscle belly and the reference electrode over the metacarpophalangeal joint of the index finger. The ground electrode was placed over the right wrist. Responses were amplified with a Digitimer D360 amplifier through filters set at 20 Hz and 2 kHz, with a sampling rate of 5 kHz and then recorded by a computer with the use of Signal software.
The test stimulus (TS) was applied over l-M1. In one half of the trials, l-M1 TMS was preceded by a conditioning stimulus (CS) delivered 6 ms earlier over a contralateral prefrontal site (r-preSMA or r-IFG; Fig. 1b ). This fixed interstimulus interval was selected according to recent studies reporting relevant modulation of MEP amplitude at rest following the application of paired pulses between prefrontal areas and M1 spaced 6 ms [ , ]. The intensity of TS was adjusted to evoke a MEP of ~1 mV peak to peak in the relaxed right FDI, as a baseline of connectivity measures. The CS intensity was set at the 90 % of the resting motor threshold (RMT) [ ]. The test and the conditioning stimulator were connected to a small custom-made figure-of-eight-shaped coil (external diameter, 70 mm). The coil over M1 was always placed tangentially to the scalp at the 45° angle from midline of the central sulcus, inducing a posterior-anterior current flow. The coil position for the r-IFG and for the r-preSMA was identified and monitored during all the experiments through the SofTaxic Navigator system (Electro Medical Systems). The r-IFG and r-preSMA were determined using individual structural MRI to localize the sites and adjusted with respect to individual sulcal landmarks in each participant [ , ].
The coil was positioned over the caudal portion of the pars opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus, handle pointing forward to target r-IFG. The mean Talairach coordinates for r-IFG were x = 50.2 ± 2.2, y = 9.8 ± 12.5, and z = 18.9 ± 4.6 (Brodmann area 44). The coil was positioned over the dorso-medial frontal cortex close to the paracentral sulcus approximately in line with the vertical commissure anterior and was kept with the handle pointing laterally to induce a medially directed current in the stimulated cortex to target r-preSMA [ ]. The mean Talairach coordinates used were x = 1.4 ± 1.2, y = −12 ± 5.6, and z = 58 ± 5.1 (Brodmann area 6).
The conditioning sites (r-IFG and r-preSMA) were tested in two different sessions spaced 1 week apart in a pseudo-randomized order. Each session consisted of three blocks of 128 trials each. In these trials, TS alone or CS + TS TMS was applied during the fixation cross-presentation (pre) or at 50, 75, 100, 125, and 150 ms after the visual cue onset with a number of eight trials collected for each Go/NoGo condition and stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA). The mean peak-to-peak amplitude of the conditioned MEP was expressed as a percentage of the mean peak-to-peak amplitude size of the unconditioned TS recorded at the same SOA.
Cerebellar Continuous Theta Burst Stimulation
A MagStim Super Rapid magnetic stimulator (Magstim Company, Whitland, Wales, UK) connected with a figure-of-eight coil with a diameter of 90 mm was used to deliver TBS over the scalp site corresponding to the posterior and superior lobules of the lateral cerebellum [ ]. The magnetic stimulus had a biphasic waveform with a pulse width of about 300 μs. Three-pulse bursts at 50 Hz repeated every 200 ms for 40 s were delivered at 80 % of the active motor threshold (AMT) [ ] over the right lateral cerebellum (600 pulses) [ ].
For real cTBS, the coil was positioned tangentially to the scalp, with the handle pointing superiorly over the left lateral cerebellum using the same scalp coordinates (1 cm inferior and 3 cm right to the inion) adopted in previous studies. For sham cTBS, the coil was positioned in the same scalp coordinates used for real stimulation but angled away so that no current was induced in the brain [ ]. Participants were blinded for the real or sham cTBS protocol applied. The time between the end of cTBS and the start of double-coil stimulation protocol was a standardized temporal interval of 2 min that was necessary for preparing the equipment.
Statistical Analysis
For all data, the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was employed to confirm the normality of the distribution. Furthermore, the Mauchly test was applied to confirm the data sphericity. The Greenhouse–Geisser epsilon correction factor was applied, where appropriate, to compensate for possible effects of non-sphericity in the measurements.
Conditioned MEP amplitudes were analyzed by a four-way repeated measures ANOVA with Site (r-IFG vs. r-pre-SMA), cTBS (sham vs. real), Condition (Go vs . NoGo), and SOA (pre, 50, 75, 100, 125, 150 ms) as within-subject factors.
Go reaction times (RTs) were analyzed by four-way repeated measures ANOVA with Site (r-IFG conditioning vs. r-preSMA conditioning), cTBS (sham vs. real), Stimulation (TS vs . CS), and SOA (pre, 50, 75, 100, 125, and 150 ms) as within subjects factors.
Two distinct repeated measures two-way ANOVA with Site (r-IFG conditioning vs . r-preSMA conditioning) and cTBS (sham vs. real) as within-subject factors were performed on the overall omission and the false alarm numbers. The small percentage of errors did not allow to perform separate analyzes for SOA and Stimulation factors.
Post hoc Duncan’s comparisons were performed when appropriate for all data. The threshold of significance was set at p < 0.05.
Results
Four-way repeated measures ANOVA on MEP amplitude revealed a Condition × SOA ( F 5,45 = 5.91; p = 0.0003) interaction and a Site × cTBS × Condition ( F 1,9 = 10.48; p = 0.0102) interaction. No main effects of Site ( F 1,9 = 0.03; p = 0.8671), cTBS ( F 1,9 = 1.21; p = 0.2987), and SOA ( F 5,45 = 2.02; p = 0.0937) factors emerged (Fig. 2 ). The Condition factor was near to significance ( F 1,9 = 4.87; p = 0.0547). No other interactions reached significance. Fig. 2 a , b MEP amplitudes for r-preSMA ( a ) and r-IFG ( b ) conditioning site, expressed as percentage of change in comparison to l-M1 alone, at different SOAs for NoGo trials following sham or real cTBS of the right cerebellar hemisphere. c , d Mean MEP amplitudes collapsed across all SOAs, expressed as percentage of change in comparison to l-M1 alone, for r-preSMA ( c ) or r-IFG ( d ) conditioning site for Go and NoGo trials following sham or real cTBS of the right cerebellar hemisphere. Asterisks indicate p < 0.05. Here and elsewhere, graph bars represent mean SEs
Post hoc comparisons performed on Condition × SOA interaction indicated that MEPs collected during NoGo trials were increased at 50 ( p = 0.02), 100 ( p = 0.04), and 150 ms ( p = 0.04) compared to those during the NoGo pre-cue period, and this was not the case for the Go condition (Fig. 2a, b ). Furthermore, NoGo MEPs were increased at 50 ( p = 0.003), 100 ( p = 0.02), and 150 ms ( p = 0.04) than Go MEPs collected at the same SOAs.
Post hoc comparisons performed on Site × cTBS × Condition interaction showed that r-IFG conditioned MEPs were reduced following cerebellar cTBS for NoGo condition in respect to the same sham condition ( p = 0.005). No other comparison resulted significant ( p ranging from 0.078 to 0.995; Fig. 2c, d ).
Four-way repeated measures ANOVA on Go RTs showed a main effect of SOA ( F 5,45 = 19.67; p = 0.0000). No main effect of Site ( F 1,9 = 1.00; p = 0.3425), cTBS ( F 1,9 = 0.00; p = 0.9358), and Stimulation ( F 1,9 = 0.13; p = 0.7217) factors occurred. No interaction reached significance.
Post hoc comparisons on SOA factor revealed that at 100 ( p = 0.00003) and 150 ms ( p = 0.00002) from the stimulus onset, Go RTs were slowed down than in pre-condition. Furthermore, RTs recorded when TMS was delivered at 100 ms from the Go cue onset were longer than those recorded when TMS was delivered at 50 ( p = 0.00005), 75 ( p = 0.00006), and 125 ms ( p = 0.0002) from the cue onset. Also, Go RTs recorded when TMS was delivered at 150 ms from the cue onset were markedly slower than those recorded at 50 ( p = 0.00003), 75 ( p = 0.00006), and 125 ms ( p = 0.00007) from the cue onset. Conversely, Go RTs recorded when TMS was delivered at 100 and 150 ms from the cue onset did not significantly differ between them ( p = 0.90623; Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 RTs expressed in milliseconds for r-IFG conditioning, r-preSMA conditioning, and l-M1 alone following sham and real cerebellar cTBS at different SOAs for Go trials. Go RTs were slowed down at 100 and 150 ms from the stimulus onset than in pre-condition, 50, 75, and 125 ms from the cue onset, regardless of cerebellar cTBS or prefrontal conditioning. Asterisks indicates p < 0.05
Two-way ANOVAs on the overall omission and false alarm numbers showed negative results. Namely, the analysis performed on the omissions showed no effect of Site ( F 1,9 = 0.13; p = 0.7269) and cTBS ( F 1,9 = 0.48; p = 0.8309) factors and their interaction ( F 1,9 = 1.74; p = 0.2196). The analysis performed on accuracy scores showed again no effect of Site ( F 1,9 = 2.57; p = 0.1427) and cTBS ( F 1,9 = 0.99; p = 0.3453) factors and their interaction ( F 1,9 = 2.02; p = 0.1881).
Discussion
The present study confirms that, in the early temporal stages following the presentation of a NoGo cue, prefrontal to motor effective connectivity presents a definite pattern characterized by peaks and of activation regularly repeated every 50 ms [ ]. Once again, this result shows increased MEP amplitudes at specific time intervals after the NoGo cueing, although the final output was inhibiting the action. However, it is unlikely that this result may have a direct link with the final required output, since an alternating pattern of increasing and decreasing MEP amplitudes was found following NoGo cue and MEPs were collected at very early time points (from 50 to 150 ms after the cue onset) compared to the actual motor execution that occurs between 400 and 500 ms after the cue onset, as shown by reaction times. In a previous work, we have shown that this pattern of activation in NoGo MEP amplitudes perfectly fitted with the beta rhythm, and it is the trace of undergoing beta oscillatory activity mediating movement inhibition (for a more extended discussion, see [ ]).
cTBS of right cerebellar cortex induced a task-related modulation of prefrontal to motor connectivity providing novel evidence that cerebello-cortical interactions are likely involved in movement inhibition. In fact, prefrontal to motor connectivity decreased following cerebellar cTBS with respect to sham stimulation only for MEPs collected in NoGo trials through the conditioning of the r-IFG site. Indeed, the present data suggest that the activity of the right cerebellar hemisphere is able to influence motor connectivity only when the motor command is to be inhibited for NoGo trials, while no difference emerged in respect to sham condition following cerebellar cTBS when the motor command is to be executed for Go trials. Moreover, the effect of cerebellar cTBS on cortical connectivity emerged only if motor evoked potentials were conditioned by the activity of the r-IFG, while no effect was observed through r-preSMA conditioning. This result could imply that the cerebellum exerts its influence on cortical inhibitory activity not only at the level of M1, as classically thought [ ], but also through interactions with prefrontal and premotor areas. This hypothesis finds support in primates with retrograde virus tracing studies showing that cerebellar efferents project through the thalamus to several neocortical areas, including premotor and prefrontal cortex forming segregated closed loops devoted to distinct cognitive function [ , ]. Furthermore, many experimental findings suggested that cerebellum and r-IFG could mediate motor inhibition. For instance, the development of inhibitory control from childhood to adulthood is mediated by the functional maturation of fronto-cerebellar neural pathways that showed grater activation in adults than in adolescents during successful inhibition [ ]. Moreover, a very recent fMRI study showed that in healthy subjects, an improvement in motor inhibitory performance obtained after 2 days of training to a Go/NoGo task correlated precisely with a change in the interaction between the right inferior frontal cortex and the cerebellum [ ]. Besides, in a sample of healthy older subjects, an increased cerebellar contribution was described to compensate for decreased frontal activity affected by an acute tryptophan depletion to maintain the same level of successful performance in an interference inhibitory task [ ].
According to standard text books on neuroscience, cTBS on the right cerebellum should have modulated primarily the left (contralateral) side of the cerebral cortex and not the right (ipsilateral) cerebral cortex, if not at all. According to this traditional view, the interaction between the right cerebellum and the right IFG would be difficult to interpret. However, recent findings demonstrated that through the application of TBS over the lateral cerebellum, it is possible to alter bilaterally parieto-frontal networks by inducing functional changes in the interconnected areas of both hemispheres [ ]. Thus, it is possible that, in our study, right cerebellar cTBS influenced not only the left hemispheric cortical areas (directly connected to the right cerebellum) but also other nodes of the same functional network within the right hemisphere, including the right IFG.
Furthermore, our findings perfectly fitted with a recent study that showed in healthy subjects as well as in patients mutual relationship between the right cerebellar hemisphere and the ipsilateral prefrontal area related to the execution a Go/NoGo task [ ]. However, there is no consensus in the literature on what specific cerebellar site is involved in motor inhibition [ , , ], and the present data do not allow to definitively address this issue. To this aim, further investigation will be necessary to assess the role of the left or right cerebellar hemisphere in motor inhibition [ ]. Anyhow, the present results propose a selective effect of cerebellar cTBS on the r-IFG versus r-preSMA for motor inhibition that merits consideration. Cognitive control involves the parallel use of different but partially overlapping abilities such as reactive inhibition, proactive inhibition, and working memory [ ]. Despite that the key areas in cognitive control are surely identified, both IFG and preSMA in the right prefrontal cortex, their specific contribution is still unclear [ ]. From an anatomical point of view, cerebellar projections toward both IFG and preSMA as well as toward other non-motor areas in the prefrontal cortex have been identified [ , ]. From a functional point of view, being still debated the role of the respective prefrontal sites in inhibitory control, it is especially difficult to understand their specialization with respect to the cerebellar structures. On the basis of the present results, it is possible to hypothesize that although in baseline (sham) condition r-IFG and r-preSMA are similarly involved in motor inhibition exhibiting the same functional pattern of interaction with the primary motor cortex in NoGo trials, only the IFG could be specialized for the interchange with cerebellar areas for inhibitory control. In support of this, a recent neuroimaging study already described no significant preSMA-cerebellar but notable IFG-cerebellar interactions in the brain activation recorded in healthy subjects during NoGo trials [ ]. However, the present results are insufficient to provide a definitive position on the topic which will require further investigations.
Regardless of cerebellar cTBS, we found a general slowing for Go RTs as in our previous study [ ]. The RT varied according to the SOA at which TMS was delivered, increasing at 100 and 150 ms from the presentation of the Go signal. This slowing down of the motor response occurred regardless of the prefrontal conditioning even when a single test pulse alone was applied to the primary motor cortex. Therefore, it seems that even a single pulse applied to the motor area at optimal stimulus onset asynchronies is able to induce an interference with the go process. Namely, these specific time points correspond to the critical moments when the motor cortex receives from the prefrontal areas the highest inhibitory signals, as indicated by the prefrontal to motor connectivity peaking. This result is in correspondence with those showing a tight relation between beta oscillation and motor performance [ , , ]. In fact, direct evidence has been already reported that in healthy subjects the application of transcranial alternating current stimulation entraining cortical activity at 20 Hz slows the execution of voluntary movement [ ] and induces “antikinetic” modulation of Go/NoGo performance [ ].
Regarding the absence of a cerebellar effect on behavioral performance, it is possible that the sample size used was not being sufficient. Another possible explanation is that the task was too easy to detect a cTBS-induced behavioral modification considering a sample of young healthy subjects who performed it with great mastery (mean accuracy = 99 %).
In conclusion, our results suggest that the cerebellum exerts inhibitory control over the contralateral motor cortex through the right inferior prefrontal cortex, according to environmental cues.