Introduction
The tricuspid valve is often called a “forgotten” valve, because tricuspid regurgitation (TR) is usually a secondary, not primary disease. Recently, however, moderate to severe TR has been reported to be associated with a poor prognosis [ , ] and the degree of TR influences the functional status in patients after cardiac surgery [ ]. Therefore, more attention has been paid to the tricuspid valve and it is no longer a “forgotten” valve. However, clinical data about tricuspid valve disease is limited compared with left-sided valve diseases.
Severe TR may often appear and progress late after left-sided valve surgery without left-sided valve dysfunction, significant left heart failure, and pulmonary hypertension (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 A representative case of severe isolated TR developing 8 years after mitral valve replacement. Severe TR progressed without left-sided valve dysfunction, significant left heart failure, and pulmonary hypertension
This article discusses the clinical features, echocardiographic evaluation, treatment, and prognosis of isolated TR late after left-sided valve surgery, reviewing previous reports and presenting some of our data. Here, “isolated TR” is defined as TR without left-sided valve dysfunction, left ventricular dysfunction, prominent pulmonary hypertension, transvenous pacemaker implantation, primary tricuspid valve disease, and constrictive pericarditis.
Incidence and risk factors
Table 1 shows previous reports on the incidence and clinical features regarding isolated TR after left-sided valve surgery [ , , , , , ]. Because there are differences in the study population, follow-up period, and definition of significant TR, the incidence of significant TR varies among reports, from 9 to 43 % after mitral valve surgery and from 6 to 27 % after left-sided valve surgery including aortic valve surgery. Table 1 Previous reports about incidence and risk factors of severe isolated TR late after left-sided valve surgery References Number of patients Follow-up period (years) Study population Patients with PH Incidence of severe TR Risk factor Serial data of TR Porter et al. [ ] 65 11.3 MV rheumatic Included 43 % Age No data Izumi et al. [ ] 208 13.0 MV rheumatic Excluded 14 % AF, prior TAP TR appears 10.4 years after MV op Matsuyama et al. [ ] 175 8.2 MV any cause Included 28 % AF, LAD, 2 + TR No data Dreyfus et al. [ ] 311 4.8 MV any cause Included (moderate 26 %) No prior TAP No data Kwak et al. [ ] 335 11.6 MV, AV any cause Included 7.5 % (moderate 27 %) AF No data Izumi et al. [ ] 372 9.4 MV, AV any cause Excluded 6.2 % (9.2 % in MV op) AF, EF, LAD TR appears 8.6 years after MV op MV mitral valve, AV aortic valve, AF atrial fibrillation, TAP tricuspid annuloplasty, TR tricuspid regurgitation, MVR mitral valve replacement
Atrial fibrillation (AF) has been identified as a predictor of severe TR in many previous studies [ , , , ]. According to changes in the etiology of mitral valve disease from rheumatic to degenerative disease, widespread use of the Maze procedure, and guidelines’ recommendation of early operation for organic mitral regurgitation [ , , ], there is a possibility that the incidence of severe TR late after left-sided valve surgery may change.
Our data [ ] showed that severe isolated TR developed 3–18 years, at a mean of 8.6 years, after left-sided valve surgery. Therefore, long-term follow-up is needed in order to detect isolated TR late after surgery.
Possible mechanisms of severe isolated TR: echocardiographic evaluation
As mentioned before, AF strongly relates to development of isolated TR late after left-sided valve surgery. Actually, severe TR is occasionally found in patients with lone AF [ ], which may indicate a strong relation between the development of TR and annular dilatation. Our study [ ] demonstrated that the tricuspid annular diameter and the right atrial area were already enlarged early after left-sided valve surgery and both of these increased prior to the progression of TR (Fig. 2 ). The tenting area was not large in patients with severe isolated TR and it did not increase despite the progression of TR. In addition, right ventricular (RV) dysfunction due to chronic pressure overload before left-sided valve surgery may persist even after surgery. AF and/or RV dysfunction promotes dilatation of the tricuspid annulus, leading to the development of TR, which in turn accelerates dilatation of the tricuspid annulus. TR begets TR, thus it is somewhat like a vicious cycle (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 2 Chronological changes in TR jet area, tricuspid annular diameter, right atrial area, and tenting area of the tricuspid valve. The tricuspid annular (TA) diameter and the right atrial (RA) area increased prior to the progression of TR. Closed triangle TR jet area, closed circle RA area, closed square TA diameter, open square tenting area. Mo months, yr years. Adapted from Ref. [ ] (permitted to reuse) Fig. 3 Possible mechanisms of progression of isolated TR late after mitral valve surgery. The part below the green line shows a vicious cycle of late progression of isolated TR after mitral valve surgery. MS mitral stenosis, MR mitral regurgitation, LA left atrial, LAP left atrial pressure, PH pulmonary hypertension, AF atrial fibrillation, RA right atrial, RV right ventricular
On the other hand, there are several reports about three-dimensional echocardiographic data of functional TR. Ton-Nu et al. [ ] showed that normal tricuspid annulus has a bimodal shape but the annulus becomes larger, more planar, and circular in patients with functional TR. Other previous papers [ , ], using three-dimensional echocardiography, showed that tricuspid valve tethering was an important mechanism for functional TR. These studies assessed the mechanisms of functional TR using three-dimensional full-volume images. A full-volume image of three-dimensional echocardiography is composed of multiple consecutive beats; therefore most patients with isolated TR after mitral valve surgery were not included in these previous studies because most of them were afflicted with AF. Mechanisms of isolated TR after left-sided valve surgery may be different from that of functional TR associated with left heart failure or pulmonary hypertension. Different study populations may give different results for the mechanisms.
Three-dimensional echocardiography is a very important tool for evaluating the three-dimensional structure of the heart valve [ , ], and three-dimensional evaluation of the tricuspid valve has been reported [ , , , ]. Recent advancements in three-dimensional echocardiography make single-beat full-volume images possible [ ]. Three-dimensional images without stitch artifact can be obtained even from patients with AF (Fig. 4 ), which make it possible to evaluate valve anatomy three-dimensionally with this new technique even in patients with AF. Fig. 4 Three-dimensional echocardiographic images of the tricuspid valve ( left mid-diastole, middle late diastole, right end-diastole). Three-dimensional images without stitch artifact can be obtained even from patients with AF with a single-beat full-volume method
Treatment and prognosis: why timing of tricuspid valve surgery is late?
Guidelines [ , , ] suggest the surgical indications for severe isolated TR late after left-sided valve surgery. Isolated tricuspid valve surgery is recommended for symptomatic patients. Recommendation level is class IIa according to the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and Japanese Circulation Society (JCS) guidelines and class IIb according to the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines [ , , ] (Table 2 ). A recent paper from Korea [ ] showed better prognosis in patients who underwent surgical treatment for severe isolated TR than those who were treated medically; however, the timing of isolated tricuspid valve surgery is often too late. Why? Table 2 Guidelines for isolated tricuspid regurgitation after left-sided valve surgery JCS guidelines Class IIa After left-sided valve surgery, surgery should be considered in patients with severe TR who are symptomatic in the absence of LV/RV failure ESC guidelines Class IIa After left-sided valve surgery, surgery should be considered in patients with severe TR who are symptomatic or have progressive RV dilatation/dysfunction in the absence of left-sided valve dysfunction, severe RV or LV dysfunction and severe pulmonary vascular disease ACC/AHA guidelines Class IIb Reoperation for isolated tricuspid valve repair or replacement may be considered for persistent symptoms due to severe TR in patients who have undergone previous left-sided valve surgery and who do not have severe pulmonary hypertension or significant RV systolic dysfunction TR tricuspid regurgitation, RV right ventricle, LV left ventricle, ESC European Society of Cardiology, JCS Japanese Circulation Society, ACC/AHA American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
First, symptoms of right heart failure are often latent. In addition, right heart failure is usually controllable for a long period with diuretic drugs. The degree of TR changes dynamically (Fig. 5 ). However, this dynamic change may cause a delay in surgical treatment for isolated TR. Fig. 5 The degree of TR before ( left ) and after ( right ) diuretic therapy. TR markedly decreased after diuretic therapy
Another important reason for a delay in surgical treatment is that isolated tricuspid valve surgery has been reported to be associated with a high mortality rate. Previous reports [ , , , , ] showed an 8.8–50 % early mortality rate and an 11–53 % late mortality rate of isolated tricuspid valve surgery. The operative risk was high compared with left-sided valve surgery. However, it is difficult to determine whether a high surgical mortality rate causes a delay in surgery, or a delay in surgery causes a high surgical mortality rate.
Finally, the most important reason for a delay in surgical treatment is that RV dysfunction is difficult to evaluate by conventional echocardiography. Reading the guidelines (Table 2 ), RV function is a key word. Several echocardiographic parameters of RV function are listed in the guidelines [ ]; however, none of them are established for an evaluation of RV function in patients with severe TR. Kwon et al. [ ] demonstrated that preoperative systolic tricuspid annular velocity evaluated by tissue Doppler method was the only factor which could predict clinical outcome after tricuspid valve surgery for patients with severe isolated TR. However, data about echocardiographic parameters of RV function as a predictor of outcomes of tricuspid valve surgery is very limited. In addition, the words “significant,” “progressive,” and “severe” RV dysfunction are used in the guidelines. Statements in the guidelines are also ambiguous. In order to predict the outcome of isolated tricuspid valve surgery, one of the serious issues in the future will be how to accurately evaluate RV function.