Executive dysfunction is amongst a range of deficits associated with CGG trinucleotide expansions of the fragile X mental retardation ( FMR1 ) gene, located on the long arm of the X chromosome at position Xq23.11. While deficits in executive function are evident in those with fragile X syndrome (FXS), a consequence of full mutation expansions of over 200 CGG repeats [ ], carriers of premutation expansions (55 to 199 CGG repeats) who have fragile X-tremor ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) are also at risk [ ]. FXTAS has a penetrance rate of approximately 45 % in male and 16 % of female premutation carriers over 50 years of age [ ] and is a severe progressive neurodegenerative disorder [ ] (for updates on the FXTAS phenotype see the review by Hall et al. in this edition). There is now, however, increasing evidence of executive dysfunction amongst premutation carriers without FXTAS (see reviews [ , , ]).
Executive functions refer to the set of skills used to organise and act on information, including the initiation of behaviour, inhibiting a prepotent response, planning, cognitive flexibility and retaining information in working memory [ , ]. Premutation males without FXTAS have executive function deficits, which have been found in tasks assessing processing speed, working memory and inhibition [ , , , , ]. Moreover, an age-related decline in performance on response inhibition [ ] and working memory [ ] tasks has been found in male premutation carriers without FXTAS during the third and fourth decades of life, respectively. This suggests that for male premutation carriers, executive dysfunction could be an early biomarker of neuropathology and progression to FXTAS.
Deficits of executive functions have also been reported in female premutation carriers, specifically during processing speed [ , ] and response inhibition tasks [ , , ]. There is also preliminary evidence of working memory impairments [ ], yet this has not been consistency found. However, few studies have employed a comprehensive battery of testing to examine executive dysfunction in female premutation carriers. Thus, the full extent of executive dysfunction, across multiple executive function skills, in female premutation carriers is currently unknown.
Whether there is a decline with age in executive function in female premutation carriers is also unclear. Our previous report found that response inhibition (assessed through the Haylings sentence completion test) was correlated with increasing age, but this did not survive Bonferonni correction [ ]. However, age-related cognitive decline has been found in measures of visuospatial perception (during a quantitative magnitude comparison task), even though performance was equivalent for female premutation carriers and controls [ ], and for a range of language dysfluencies [ ]. Given that female premutation carriers appear to have similar executive deficits as males, yet a lower prevalence rate of FXTAS, little is known about the effect of ageing of executive functions for female premutation carriers.
This study aims to expand understanding of the phenotypic characteristics of executive function in female premutation carriers, by using a battery of tests of executive functions targeting attention, processing speed, response inhibition and working memory processes. Furthermore, this study aims to ascertain the consequence of ageing on these functions. This will provide preliminary evidence for the utility of executive function tasks as early biomarkers of FXTAS.
Methods
A total of 41 female participants between the ages of 22 and 54 years (20 premutation carriers, 21 healthy controls) were recruited from support groups, population-based fragile X carrier screening studies [ ], as well as local networks and via online advertisements. This sample included 16 premutation carriers and 14 healthy controls who had completed prior cognitive investigations [ , ]. Five families were included (4 with 2 premutation carriers, and 1 with 2 premutation carriers and 1 healthy control).
All participants were English speaking with no history of any serious neurological damage/disease and had normal (or corrected) vision and hearing. No participant reported any signs of symptoms indicative of FXTAS, and this was confirmed with all participants being screened with the FXTAS Rating Scale [ ]. CGG repeat size was analysed for all participants to confirm premutation status (CGG between 55 and 199 repeats) and normal allele size in healthy controls (less than 45 CGG repeats), using DNA from peripheral blood and the Asuragen® AmplideX™ FMR1 PCR Kit (Asuragen: Austin, TX, USA). Participants were matched for age [premutation carriers: M = 40.10, SD = 9.77; controls: M = 39.76 SD = 9.00; t (39) = 0.115, p = 0.901] and full scale IQ [premutation carriers: M = 110.85, SD = 9.56; controls: M = 114.62 SD = 8.87; t (39) = −0.131, p = 0.198] as determined using the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI) [ ]. Ethics approval for this study was granted by the Monash University and Southern Health Human Research Committees (Project Number 10147B); all participants gave their informed consent prior to inclusion in the study in accordance with the declaration of Helsinki.
Executive Function Tasks
A range of cognitive tasks were selected to examine executive dysfunction. The behavioural dyscontrol scale (BDS) [ ] was used to provide a global measure of executive dysfunction. The BDS has nine test items that assess simple motor responses, procedural motor learning, working memory, attention and self-insight. Each item is scored individually (0–3), and then combined to create a total BDS score.
The Haylings sentence completion test [ ] was used to evaluate response inhibition. Participants are required to provide a word to finish 15 sentences, which had the last word omitted, as quickly as possible. Responses were classified as either correct (the word provided was completely unconnected to the sentence), a category ‘A’ error (the word provided logically completed the sentence) or as a category ‘B’ error (the word provided was somewhat connected to the sentence). A total error score (Hayling AB error) was calculated by combining the raw scores of category A and category B errors together, thus providing a measure of response inhibition.
The symbol digit modality test (SDMT) written version was used to assess attention and processing speed [ ]. The SDMT required participants to pair abstract symbols with specific numbers, as quickly and as accurately as possible. The total number of correctly paired numbers was calculated for each participant during 90 s.
The paced auditory serial addition Test (PASAT) was used to measure processing speed, as well as to assess working memory capability [ ]. During the PASAT, participants were audibly presented with a series of numbers at a rate of one every 3 s. They were instructed to add the two most recently spoken words together and vocalise the number, before the next number was said.
The digit span task was used to further examine verbal working memory ability [ ]. It required participants to repeat a sequence of numbers aloud, either as they heard it (forward condition) or in reserve order (backward condition). The total number of correct responses for both conditions was combined to form a digit span total score.
Lower scores on all tasks except for the Haylings sentence completion task indicate impaired executive functionality.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using Stata Statistical Software, Release 14 2015. Each cognitive variable for controls and premutation carriers was assessed separately for normality distribution (via skewness and kurtosis tests)—for all non-normally distributed variables an appropriate transformation was applied (square root). Levene’s test of equal variance was then assessed for each task. To assess whether scores were related to age, least squares regression analyses were used for all participants combined. If age was not related to a particular score, an independent samples t test was used (equal or unequal variances), to assess group differences. When age was related to a score, ANCOVA analysis was used, where age was the covariate. Finally, least squares regression analyses with 10,000 permutations were used to assess the relationship of age on test score performance for both control and premutation carriers separately. A significance level of p < 0.05 was set for all analyses.
Results
The test scores of female premutation carriers were compared to controls (see Table 1 for statistics). Independent samples t tests found that premutation carriers exhibited impaired performance compared to controls for the BDS ( p = 0.001), Haylings AB score ( p = 0.034), and PASAT ( p = 0.030), but not for the digit span total score ( p = 0.566). Age was found to associate with the SDMT, whereby increasing age was related to decreased processing speed through reduced test item completion for all participants ( r = −0.39, p = 0.045). Therefore, when covarying for age in a between group analysis (ANCOVA), no interaction between group (premutation or control) and age was seen ( p = 0.69). However, significant effects for group ( p = 0.019) (see Table 1 ) and age ( p = 0.015) were revealed. Thus, premutation carriers made fewer correct number-symbol matches in the allocated time of the SDMT, showing impaired performance compared to controls. Table 1 Summarised statistics (mean and standard deviation) and comparison ( p value) between controls and premutation carriers Control Premutation carriers p value Mean SD Mean SD BDS 25.619 1.071 23.500 2.395 0.001 b Haylings AB error a 4.650 4.987 8.900 7.907 0.034 c SDMT 64.952 11.500 57.100 9.851 0.019 d PASAT 86.905 10.945 74.872 21.037 0.030 b Digit span total 19.238 3.859 18.450 4.828 0.566 c Figures in italics show that p < 0.05 a p value computed using square root transformation, raw mean and standard deviation values shown b Unequal variance c Equal variance d Comparison adjusted for age (covariate) using ANCOVA
Analysis of age amongst premutation carriers yielded no significant associations between increasing age and scores on the BDS ( p = 0.983), SDMT ( p = 0.108), PASAT ( p = 0.297), Haylings AB ( p = 0.353) and digit span ( p = 0.517) tasks (see Table 2 for statistics). Similarly, age was not found to significantly predict scores on any tasks for controls: BDS ( p = 0.992), SDMT ( p = 0.070), PASAT ( p = 0.798), Haylings AB error ( p = 0.079) and digit span ( p = 0.383) (see Table 2 ). Table 2 Least squares regression analysis between age (predictor) and executive function tasks (outcome) for healthy controls and premutation carriers Healthy controls Premutation carriers β S.E p β S.E p BDS −0.001 0.025 0.992 0.001 0.024 0.983 SDMT −0.045 0.023 0.070 −0.038 0.022 0.108 PASAT 0.007 0.025 0.798 −0.025 0.023 0.297 Haylings A+B errors a 0.053 0.028 0.079 0.030 0.031 0.353 Digit span total −0.023 0.025 0.383 −0.016 0.024 0.517 a p value computed using square root transformation β standardised coefficient, S.E standard error
Discussion
The primary aim of this study was to determine executive function deficits in female premutation carriers, using a battery of tests assessing attention, processing speed, response inhibition and working memory processes. Executive dysfunction was found across a range of cognitive processes, previously identified in studies of female premutation carriers without FXTAS [ , , ], specifically reduced processing speed, impaired response inhibition, reduced attention and working memory. These results indicate that specific deficits in executive functions were best delineated when temporal response stress was involved (SDMT, PASAT and Haylings), rather than tasks with undefined response time frames, such as the digit span task. Similar deficits in executive functions have been found on tasks that limit response time, namely the Haylings test [ , , ], excluded letter verbal fluency [ , ], the SDMT [ ] and an ocular motor n-back task [ ], in female premutation carriers.
Executive functions rely on the integrity of nodes within prefrontal and parietal cortices as well as the cerebellum (see reviews [ , , , ]), while the integrity of the white matter connecting these regions subserves the speed of neural processing [ , , ]. Diffuse reductions in white matter integrity within these neural tracts have been found in premutation carriers without FXTAS [ , , , , ]. Temporally limiting responses is likely to exacerbate any underlying executive deficits, due to increased demand on neural resources. Together, these results reinforce the notion that some male and female premutation carriers, have a cognitive ‘signature’ that is quantifiable in terms of executive dysfunction, which is best studied when tasks are reliant on quick responses.
This proposition is evidenced by the conflicting results on the PASAT and digit span tasks, both explicitly working memory tasks, seen in this study. Previous studies have shown that number manipulation-repetition tasks that have no temporal limits on responses, such as digit span [ , , , ] and letter-number sequencing [ , , ] tasks, may not be sensitive to impairment in male and female premutation carriers. To our knowledge, this is the first time the PASAT has been used to assess group differences in a premutation cohort. The PASAT is a number calculation task that not only relies on working memory, but also relies on efficient processing speed as well as mathematical ability. We cannot exclude that arithmetic skills may influence PASAT findings; however, such skills are not impaired in female premutation carriers [ , ]. The temporal stress experienced during the PASAT is likely to exacerbate working memory weaknesses within this population. Especially given that psychological affect (anxiety) and executive dysfunction have been found to be correlated in female premutation carriers [ , ]. Thus, impaired working memory, along with other executive functions, may be best investigated using tasks with high temporal demand, thusly increasing anxiety and stress, amongst premutation carriers.
The second aim of the study was to examine the association between increasing age and executive functions. Regression analysis did not reveal any significant associations between age and task scores for either controls or premutation carriers in this study, yet age was found to be associated with SDMT performance when assessing all participants together. Although ageing has been associated with reduced cognitive ability more generally [ , ], no study has found age-related changes in executive function in female premutation carriers. This is in contrast to findings with male premutation carriers. However, these findings in male premutation carriers comprised participants up to the age of 69 years of age [ , , ]. We therefore attribute the absence of an age effect in this study to the restricted age of our female participants (all less than 55 years of age), a relatively small sample size and cross-sectional nature of the study. Therefore, it is conceivable that age-related decline in executive function may begin later in female premutation carrier and hence not detected in this study due to limited statistical power. To rigorously delineate the impact of ageing on executive functions in female premutation carriers, repeating the current study, as well as longitudinal follow-up analysis, with a larger cohort inclusive of participants up to 70 years of age would be advantageous.
Evidence of executive dysfunction is not a novel finding within the premutation literature. However, our results demonstrate that female premutation carriers, like males, may experience a range of executive function impairments, particularly in tasks of attention, processing speed, response inhibition and working memory. To our knowledge, this is the first study to provide evidence that executive function deficits of premutation carriers are best delineated using tasks that require the efficient and rapid temporal resolution of responses. Replicating these findings in a larger sample of male and female premutation carriers will provide further support for the reliance on temporally based cognitive tasks, when assessing the cognitive phenotype of FMR1 premutation carriers in the future. Together, these preliminary findings provide a comprehensive assessment of executive dysfunction in female premutation carriers, further establishing the cognitive phenotype and demonstrating similar cognitive weakness between male and female premutation carriers. Critically, this study shows the utility of executive functions tasks with limited temporal response time for refining the premutation carrier cognitive phenotype, critical for the development of early biomarkers indicative of FXTAS.