Introduction
Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the most common form of inherited autism and intellectual disability, is caused by a trinucleotide repeat expansion (CGG) in the 5′-untranslated region of the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR-1) gene located at chromosome X. Patients with FXS carry the full mutation CGG-repeat expansions (>200 repeats), which are generally accompanied by hypermethylation of the promoter region, with the consequent transcriptional silencing of the FMR1 gene and absence of the encoded FMR-1 protein (FMRP) [ ]. The normal population comprises between 6 to 44 CGG repeats, and 55–200 CGG repeats is classified as a premutation. Between 45 and 54 repeats is classified as intermediate or gray zone as this is when some level of instability was reported. Premutation women carriers are at risk of expansion to a full mutation in the next generation [ ]. Although once thought to be asymptomatic, it is now well documented that both female and male premutation carriers might suffer from associated medical morbidities [ , , ]. The main concern regarding a premutation carrier state is the risk of expansion to a full mutation when transmitted from a mother to her offspring. Once the premutation is >90 CGG repeats, the risk of expansion to a full mutation (>200 repeats) is close to 100 %. Full expansion of the fragile site occurs only during meiosis in oocytes and not in sperm; therefore, only FMR-1 premutation women carriers can pass the full mutation to their offspring. Fathers with premutation pass the FMR-1 gene in a relatively stable fashion to all of their daughters.
Epidemiological Discrepancies
To date, FXS has been identified in all the ethnic groups studied. However, there are large discrepancies in incidence among different ethnic groups around the world ranging from 1:178 in the USA [ ] to 1:1674 in Taiwan [ ]. In Israel, there are large discrepancies among different ethnic groups, with a total incidence of 1:120–1:140 [ ].
Population Screening in Israel
Carrier screening in Israel is available since 1994, and from 2013 screening for FMR-1 premutation is free of charge and recommended to all women in their reproductive years. Nevertheless, some women still find out about their carrier state only after one of their children is diagnosed with FXS. About 20–30 % of women do not perform screening for FMR-1 due to religious reasons.
Detailed Description of the Clinical Disorders in Premutation Carriers
Fragile X-Associated Primary Ovarian Insufficiency
Fragile X-associated primary ovarian insufficiency (FXPOI) is defined as cessation of menses prior to age 40 [ ] and affects 20–35 % of fragile X premutation carriers compared with only 1 % in the general population [ ]. The highest risk for FXPOI is among women with premutation sizes in the 80 to 120 CGG range [ ].
Fragile X Tremor-Ataxia Syndrome
Fragile X tremor-ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) occurs among 45 % of male and 8–16 % of female premutation carriers in their 5th–6th decade of life. FXTAS is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by ataxia, parkinsonism, memory loss, impairment of executive function, and intention tremor [ ]. Symptoms are associated with specific white matter lesions of the brainstem and/or in the middle cerebellar peduncles as can be seen on magnetic resonance imaging.
Learning Disabilities and Autism Spectrum Disorders
Whether fragile X premutations have a subtle effect on cognition has been under debate for several years. Recent papers point to specific learning disabilities, including significant dyscalculia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), mainly inattentive subtype [ ]. The range of full fragile X-associated developmental problems, including autism spectrum and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, has been seen with increased frequency in male premutation carriers [ ], but the effects, if they exist, are much more subtle than in those seen in individuals with a full expansion and probably correlate with increased number of repeats. The issue of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and male carriers is still debatable, since the prevalence of ASD is quite high (reported as 1:57 males), and as such it might represent a coincidental finding [ , ].
Endocrine Disorders
These disorders occur more frequently among premutation females. Autoimmune diseases especially thyroid abnormalities, both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism, can affect 20 % of carriers and 50 % of carriers with FXTAS [ ]. In addition, there is a higher risk for diabetes and hypertension [ ]. Premutation main medical morbidities are summarized in Table 1 . Table 1 FMR-1 premutation carrier features Cognitive—normal intelligence, learning disabilities especially ADHD, dyscalculia Psychiatric—OCD, autistic features Neurologic—FXTAS—fragile X-associated tremor-ataxia syndrome (in males may be accompanied by dementia)—risk increases with number of CGG repeats Reproductive—FXPOI—fragile X-associated primary ovarian insufficiency in females—highest risk at 80–120 CGG repeats Endocrine—thyroid disorders, diabetes, hypertension, and autoimmune diseases
Methods
The Weinberg Child Development Center is the first and largest referral center for severe disabilities including FXS. As in other centers, we perform a nesting approach to acquire data regarding direct relatives of all fragile X cases referred to our center.
Methods of Collecting Preliminary Data from a Referral Center Database
Seventy-nine women were referred to our center due to a related FXS patient, mainly offspring or sibling. Variable data was collected from index cases and relatives using structured questionnaires. This is an ongoing project. The information included structured and semi-structured questionnaires including demographic information, ADHD, ASD and learning disabilities screening tools, genetic information, and a questionnaire in regard to knowledge about specific carrier symptoms and disorders. Patients who reported symptoms consistent with ASD were evaluated using a formal evaluation including DSM-5 criteria and ADOS testing.
Preliminary Results
Among 79 women referred as “FMR-1 premutation carriers”, 82 % were within 60–190 CGG repeat (mean 101 ± 34 SD). However, 17 % of the women were proven to be full mutation (FM) with more than 200 CGG repeats on one of the X chromosomes. One case had one FM X chromosome and a second premutation X chromosome. Five women reported having a parent or sibling suffering from FXTAS; 30 women reported other relatives with FX phenotype.
Reported Symptoms Associated with ADHD and Learning Disabilities
Of the women with premutation, 26 % reported symptoms consistent with learning difficulties, mainly dyscalculia and 13 % reported ADHD symptoms. Of the women with FM, 80 % had findings consistent with learning disabilities and 46 % had ADHD symptomatology.
Symptoms and Validation of ASD
None of the premutation women had ASD, compared with 17 % ASD in FM females.
Awareness Regarding Carrier Symptoms
All mothers reported that they were aware about the risk of a male fetus with FXS in a subsequent pregnancy. Only 50 % raised some concern about risk to a female fetus and the rest did not report any risks to a female offspring. Concerning carrier symptomatology, 25 % knew about FXPOI and 10 % knew about FXTAS. Results are summarized in Table 2 . Table 2 Demographic and clinical characteristics of the sample Clinical characteristics N (%) 60–200 CGG repeats 65 (82) More than 200 CGG repeats 14 (17) Parent or sibling with FXTAS 5 (6) Other relatives with FX phenotype 30 (38) Not screened for FMR-1 premutation state before pregnancy 70 (88) Performed FMR-1 screening but continued pregnancy 4 (5) Misdiagnosis of FMR-1 prenatal screening 5 (6) Learning difficulties 21(26) ADHD symptoms 10 (13) Demographics Below average income 28 (36) Average income 25 (31) Above average income 26 (32) Askenazi Jews 30 (50) Sephardi Jews 28 (35) Mixed origin 7 (8)
Discussion
Following a nationwide Israeli prenatal and preconceptional screening, it was noted that below 58 repeats the risk of expansion to a FM is low enough to refrain from prenatal recommendations. Therefore, in Israel for the purpose of prenatal diagnosis, women with 58–200 CGG repeats are considered premutation carriers. This Israeli Geneticists consensus is based on risk for offspring and does not take into account carriers’ symptomatology.
The association between the carrier rate and the disease prevalence needs further analysis in different populations. Phenotypic description of carriers as derived from index cases with FM may represent a more symptomatic population with higher prevalence of more than 90 CGG repeats. Nevertheless, a common phenotype emerges, including learning disability and ADHD symptoms, without ASD features.
Based on international recommendations and on our study, we recommend to the Israeli Genetics Association to lower the threshold for prenatal counseling to 55 CGG repeats and up, in order to include the carrier’s risks, in addition to the risk to offspring.
Conclusions
Despite a free national screening program for women in their reproductive years, FXS is still a matter of concern in Israel. Therefore, an active pursuit of FXS should be performed in developmental centers in all children with specific symptoms, especially from high-risk ethnic groups. Moreover, when a family member is diagnosed, the search for additional premutation carrier’s relatives should be continued, including genotype–phenotype correlations. In addition, it is important to elucidate in all mothers of FXS patients whether they carry premutation or FM alleles. Our pilot study suggests high prevalence of carrier symptomatology, such as learning disabilities and ADHD. Those findings might increase the burden of raising one or more children with disabilities, and addressing those symptoms might help the family become more organized and focused. According to our findings, there is a misunderstanding of premutation versus FM in women. There is also a misconception of FM symptomatology as being attributed to males only. Most of the carrier symptomatology other than FXPOI is unrecognized.
The main caveat of our study, except for the sample size, which we are planning to increase, is that it is biased to a more severe phenotype, since the population stems from a cohort of fully mutated children. As such, the results should be regarded as the extreme of symptomatology as the number of repeats is higher than that of other permutation evaluations and the symptomatology represents a more severe involvement. In terms of knowledge, it has to be taken into account that this population was already educated by genetic counselors, physicians, and at the family support group, even though there is a large gap of knowledge. Increased awareness and knowledge dissemination with regard to premutation symptomatology and risks are warranted. We suggest a national registry to be installed in different countries that will accumulate genetic and clinical information in regard to fragile X carrier state.