Introduction
The spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a group of autosomal dominant disorders characterized by progressive degeneration affecting the cerebellum and its connections [ ]. The SCAs are classified according to the clinical features and genetic locus of the mutation. SCA type 3 (Machado-Joseph disease (MJD)) is the most common among 40 known subtypes [ , , , ]. The CAG repeat in the MJD gene leads to a polyQ expansion in the gene product ataxin-3 [ ].
Common ocular motor abnormality in MJD includes gaze-evoked nystagmus, saccadic dysmetria, impaired ocular pursuit, impaired vestibulo-ocular reflex cancellation, ophthlamoplegia, and blepherospasm. Diplopia is the common symptom affecting up to 80 % of MJD patients [ , ]. Acquired strabismus, one of the most common causes of diplopia, was only occasionally described in MJD [ , ]. Rare reports of strabismus in MJD had emphasized esotropia, which might be a consequence of coexisting ophthlamoplegia or vergence abnormalities [ , ]. We describe two novel findings in MJD—(1) vertically incomitant horizontal strabismus (pattern strabismus) with exotropia on upgaze and (2) multi-axial micro-saccadic oscillations (micro-opsoclonus) characterized by back-to-back saccades without intersaccadic interval.
Patients and Methods
The institutional review boards at the Emory University and the Cleveland Clinic approved all investigations. The participants signed informed consent forms before the session. We studied 12 patients (eight women and four men) with genetically proven MJD.
The presence of strabismus was assessed with prism and alternate cover test in the appropriate diagnostic fields of gaze at 6 meters as well as at one-third meter in the primary position. We used gold-slandered guidelines recommended by the pediatric ophthalmology and strabismus subsection of the American Academy of Ophthalmology to assess strabismus [ ]. In addition to clinical examination, the severity of ataxia was graded using the scale for assessment and rating of ataxia (SARA). We were unable to obtain SARA score in one patient who had actively healing lower extremity fracture.
The eye movements were objectively measured in six patients. In four patients, the eye movements were measured with the corneal curvature tracker (Jazz Novo, Ober Consulting TM , Poland). This device measures horizontal and vertical eye positions and head velocity at 1000 Hz sampling rate. We used high-resolution video-oculography (Eyelink 1000 TM , SR Research, Mississauga, ON) to measure eye movements in two patients. The video-oculography independently measures horizontal and vertical positions of both eyes at 500 Hz sampling rate.
We followed the same experimental protocol in both data acquisition techniques. The experiments were performed in a dark room. The subjects viewed a red visual target that was projected straight ahead, at 5° and 10° to the right, left, up, and down. Known size of isolated eye and head movements were used to calibrate the head and eye position signal. Data was collected during two trials, each lasting approximately 60 seconds. This duration was sufficient for our primary goal to characterize eye movements in patients with MJD.
Many abnormalities can lead to impairment in gaze-holding function. Gaze-evoked nystagmus is a common abnormality leading to such impairment in eccentric gaze position. Rebound nystagmus appears when the gaze returns straight ahead. In the authors’ experience, the gaze-evoked nystagmus or rebound nystagmus with rapid slow-phase velocity and frequent quick phases gives (false) clinical appearance of opsoclonus. However, in quantitative eye position traces, the jerky sawtooth waveforms clearly distinguish the jerk nystagmus from the opsoclonus. Furthermore, the frequency of osposlonus is typically higher (10 Hz or more) compared to the beat frequency of nystagmus. Hence, we implemented shape and frequency criteria to identify the epochs of micro-opsoclonus in the eye position and eye velocity trace. These oscillations are back-to-back saccades without intersaccadic intervals. Therefore, they have sinusoidal appearance in the eye position or velocity trace. Typical frequency of sinusoids comprising saccadic oscillations is between 10 and 40 Hz. Further analysis was done in eye velocity waveform. In such cycle-by-cycle analysis, we aligned eye velocity on the abscissa with the peaks of the cycles remaining positive and troughs negative. Then, we recorded the point of intersection of the velocity trace to the zero line, moving from a negative value to a positive value (positive zero-crossing). The inverse of the durations between two positive zero-crossings yields the cycle frequency. We identified visually guided saccades in eye position trace. We used velocity threshold of 5°/ second to determine the offset and onset of visually guided saccades. We measured the relationship of visually guided saccade amplitude with the corresponding peak velocity in an analysis called main sequence. The main sequence quantitatively measures the severity of saccade slowing.
Results
We studied 12 patients (eight women and four men) with genetically proven diagnosis of MJD. The mean age at the time of assessment was 49.6 ± 17.1 years (range 18–74 years). The mean disease duration at the time of assessment was 10.3 ± 3.4 years (range 4–15 years). Table 1 depicts the summary of pertinent demographics and clinical findings. Table 1 Demographic summary and clinical findings of eye movements and vestibular exam, and strabismus in patients with MJD Patient # Age Gender Disease duration Age of onset Family history of SCA3 Total SARA score SARA distribution (gait, stance, sit, speech, finger chase, finger-nose, rapid alternating movement, heel to shin) Dystonia CAG repeats Gaze-evoked nystagmus Saccadic dysmetria Saccadic pursuit Impaired VOR cancellation Ophthalmoplegia Blepharospasm Micro-opsoclonus Strabismus type and severity (in prism diopters (PD)) 1 47 M 7 40 + 16 3, 2, 1, 2, 1, 1, 2, 4 − + + + + + + − V-pattern 2 46 F 15 31 + 13 3, 2, 1, 2, 1, 1, 1, 2 − 76 + − + + + − − Exophoria 3 24 M 4 20 + * * Limbs * − − + + + + − − 4 53 F 11 42 + 21 3, 2, 1, 1, 2, 1, 2, 2 Limbs 53 + + + + − + + Exotropia 20–25 prism diopters (no pattern) 5 18 F + 15 3, 2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 2 − 80 + − + + − + − 6 60 F 14 46 + 31 4, 4, 2, 4, 3, 3, 3, 3 − + + + + + + − Left hypertropia in downgaze 7 52 M 10 42 + 12 2, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 3 − + + + + + + + Esotropia 8 55 M 13 42 + 17 3, 2, 2, 2, 2, 1, 3, 3 − 74 + + + + + + + V-pattern, 35 prism diopter in up gaze, 20 prism diopter in primary gaze, no exotropia in downgaze. 9 45 F 9 36 − 17 4, 3, 1, 1, 1, 1, 3, 2 Neck 73 + + + + − + + V-pattern 10 F − 15 3, 2, 1, 2, 1, 1, 2, 4 Lip 63 − − + + + − − Esotropia 11 74 F 12 62 + 19 3, 2, 1, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2 − 64 − + + + + − + Esotropia 12 72 F 8 64 + 24 3, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 3 Foot 65 − + + + − − − − * Patient #3 was a biological son of patient #2. Hence, his diagnosis was based on clinical examination (genetic testing was not performed). Patient #3 had leg injury; hence, SARA score was not performed
Ophthalmoplegia and Strabismus
Eight out of 12 patients had ophthalmoplegia causing mild bilateral abduction deficits. Ten out of 12 patients had strabismus. Three patients had esotropia with an associated abduction deficit, one patient had skew deviation, and one patient had hypotropia accompanying the asymmetric upward deficit. Four patients had poorly controlled mild to moderate intermittent exotropia. One patient had moderate exophoria in primary position. Three patients had vertically incomitant horizontal strabismus. In these patients, the horizontal deviation from the midline position in up gaze was different as compared to down gaze. The exotropia was worse in upgaze and minimal in downgaze—hence causing a V-pattern strabismus. We did not find any clinical evidence of over-elevation or over-depression of the eye in adduction position. One patient had distance near disparity in the strabismus measurements. This patient also had difficulty with convergence, moderate exotropia during distant viewing, and further worsening of exotropia at near viewing. The convergence was normal on clinical testing in all other patients. None of our patients had esotropia that worsened at distance, hence excluding a possibility of divergence insufficiency.
Micro-Opsoclonus
Figure 1a depicts an example of micro-opsoclonus in a patient with MJD. The illustrated example has 8000-ms-long epoch of micro-opsoclonus characterizing back-to-back horizontal and vertical saccades without intersaccadic interval. In this example, the oscillations have sinusoidal waveform and 12 Hz frequency. Fig. 1 a This panel depicts example of micro-opsoclonus in a patient with MJD. Blue lines depict vertical eye movements, while red lines are horizontal eye movements. Eye positions are plotted on y-axis , and corresponding time is plotted on x-axis . b Box and whisker plots summarize the frequency of micro-saccadic oscillations from all four patients. Red box and whisker plot depict horizontal oscillation frequency, while blue illustrates the frequencies of vertical oscillations. Notch represents 95 % confidence interval, horizontal line in the center of the notch is median frequency, length of the box is interquartile interval, while whiskers depict the range. c This panel depicts box and whisker plots summarizing the intensity (peak to trough velocity difference) of micro-opsoclonus. Blue box and whisker plot depicts vertical oscillations, while red is horizontal. d This panel summarizes slow saccades in two patients. Each data point depicts one saccade. The eye velocity during given saccadic is plotted on y-axis , while x-axis depicts the corresponding saccadic amplitude. Negative sign is for downward or leftward saccade; positive sign is for upward or rightward saccade. Lines depict normal range, blue lines are low normal values, and red lines are high normal values
Five patients had micro-opsoclonus. The frequency and amplitude of micro-opsoclonus were quantified from all patients. Box and whisker plots in Fig. 1b depict the summary of oscillation frequency. The length of whiskers depicts frequency range, the height of box depict interquartile interval, the notches in the box depict 95 % confidence interval, and the center of the notch is median frequency. Median frequencies of horizontal and vertical oscillations were 20.5 and 20.6 Hz, respectively. The notches of the red and blue box-whisker plots overlapped, suggesting lack of statistical difference in the frequency of horizontal and vertical oscillations (ANOVA, p > 0.05). Median intensities of horizontal and vertical oscillations were 21.1°/s and 20.6°/s, respectively. The difference in intensity was not significant (ANOVA, p > 0.05) (Fig. 1c ).
Slow Saccades
Two patients had slow saccades in both horizontal and vertical direction. Saccade speed was quantitatively assessed with main sequence analysis depicting the relationship between saccade amplitude and corresponding velocity. Figure 1d depicts a summary of slow saccades from patients with MJD in main sequence analysis. Data points, each depicting one saccade, fell below the lower limit of normal (blue line) confirming reduced saccade velocity.
Other Ocular Motor Deficits
We examined all patients for evidence of ocular motor abnormalities during fixation, saccades, and smooth pursuit. Eight patients had saccadic dysmetria, four had post-saccadic drift, and two had post-saccadic macro-oscillations. Gaze-evoked nystagmus was present in eight patients. Pursuit eye movements had frequent saccadic interruptions in all patients.
Discussion
We evaluated ocular motor deficits and strabismus in 12 patients with MJD. We found that 83 % of our patients with MJD had strabismus. All but one patient had subjective diplopia. The incidence of strabismus in our study was comparable to previously reported rate of diplopia [ , ]. Strabismus in patients with MJD is traditionally attributed to ophthlamoplegia or vergence abnormalities [ ]. These subjects would have esotropia associated with abduction weakness or divergence insufficiency. The esotropia would worsen at distance, and rarely, they would have exotropia at near if there were coexisting convergence insufficiency [ ]. In contrast, we commonly found exotropia at distance with no distance-near disparity in 11 out of 12 patients. Ophthalmoplegia was present in 66 % of patients, but the patients with abduction weakness also had exotropia excluding ophthalmoplegia as a cause of their strabismus. Only one of our patients had severely limited convergence during clinical examination, but this patient also had intermittent exotropia with mild bilateral abduction deficit in both eyes.
There is clear evidence for brainstem and cerebellar degeneration in MJD [ , , , , , , ]. We propose that the pathophysiology for strabismus seen in our patients is due to involvement of brainstem and cerebellar structures vital for binocular coordination of eye movements. Cerebellar disorder can present with various forms of ocular misalignment, such as alternating skew deviation [ , , ] and esotropia [ , , ]. We hypothesize that the involvement of the deep cerebellar nuclei, the superior cerebellar peduncle, and the brainstem might lead to strabismus in MJD. In strabismic non-human primates, the cells in the supraoculomotor area also encode the strabismus angle [ ]. These neurons from supraoculomotor area receive major afferent projections from the deep cerebellar nuclei and project monosynaptically to the medial rectus motoneurons [ ]. Perturbation of the activity of this pathway, carried in the superior cerebellar peduncle, with chemical inactivation of the posterior interpositus nucleus increases the esotropia whereas inactivation of the caudal fastigial nucleus increases the exotropia [ ]. All of our patients except one had no vergence deficits. The intermittent nature of exotropia, the most common type of strabismus in our cohort, suggests partially preserved ability to use disparity cues to drive vergence and motor fusion. Based on the elegant neurophysiology experiments of strabismic non-human primates [ , ] in corroboration with the clinical findings in MJD patients, we hypothesize that involvement of the deep cerebellar nuclei, the superior cerebellar peduncle, and the midbrain structures may account for the strabismus seen in MJD patients. Figure 2 summarizes anatomical connections of putatively affected areas in MJD that can cause strabismus. Fig. 2 Summary of the neural circuit that putatively causes strabismus, micro-opsoclonus, and slow saccades in MJD. The same circuit leads to micro-opsoclonus and slow saccades. OPN omnipause neurons, IBN inhibitory burst neurons, EBN excitatory burst neurons, FOR fastigial ocular motor region (caudal fastigial nucleus), OMV ocular motor vermis, SOA supraocular motor area, OMN oculomotor nucleus
The single deficit affecting the midbrain reticular formation can explain the phenomenology of slow saccades and micro-opsoclonus in MJD. The excitatory burst neurons (EBNs) within the pontine reticular formation provide the saccadic drive to the agonist eye muscles, and inhibitory burst neurons (IBNs) inhibit the drive to the antagonist muscles [ , , , , ]. This arrangement facilitates Sherringtonian second law of reciprocal innervation for high velocity of saccadic eye movement. The reciprocal inhibition between IBNs on both sides, however, produces a premotor circuit that is inherently unstable and cause intrusive saccades when stable fixation is desired [ , , ]. The omnipause neurons (OPNs), via their inhibitory projections to the EBNs and IBNs, prevent intrusive saccades [ , , , , , ]. Abrupt removal of the OPN inhibition from the burst neurons can cause a rebound increase in the burst neuron firing rate in a phenomenon called post-inhibitory rebound (PIR) [ , , , , , ]. PIR is presumed to ensure a rapid increase in burst neuron discharge leading to high acceleration and velocities of the saccades. In non-human primates, pharmacological inactivation of the OPNs causes slow saccades with irregular trajectories [ , ]. The conductance-based computational model of saccadic burst neurons attributed slow saccades to reduced PIR and saccadic oscillations to lack of OPN inhibition [ , ]. Sustained eye closure, putatively leading to sustained inhibition of OPNs, lead to slow saccades and micro-opsoclonus in healthy subjects [ ]. Lack of OPN inhibition to the burst neurons due to putative degenerative lesions in MJD can explain both slow saccades and micro-opsoclonus. Figure 2 summarizes anatomical connections of putatively affected areas causing micro-opsoclonus in MJD. The same areas can also cause slow saccades.
Conclusion
We report frequent prevalence of exotropia and micro-opsoclonus in patients with MJD. We attribute these deficits to dysfunction at the level of the cerebellar nuclei, superior cerebellar peduncle, pontine tegmentum, and midbrain reticular formation. These novel ocular motor deficits provide objective measure of the disease severity and potentially objective outcome measures for future therapeutic trials.