Introduction
In this survey, we address whether animal models offer clues that tremor of ET may arise from dysfunction within the cerebellar system. There is no transgenic model of ET, and the cause of ET is unknown; thus, the evidence from animal models can only be suggestive. We start by discussing the harmaline model, the only widely tested model of ET, and consider the hypothesis that excess synchrony and rhythmicity of inferior olivary (IO) neurons may underlie tremor of ET. Next, we examine the notion that Purkinje cell (PC) loss underlies ET, considering animal models of PC loss that do or do not have tremor. Finally, we survey an array of animal models involving cerebellar lesions, neurotransmitter perturbations, or ion channel anomalies. While some may be relevant to ET, others appear to represent models of ataxic tremor or of tremor due to mistiming of neuronal signaling within the cerebellum. We will not include models that involve dysmyelination, lesions of multiple brain areas, or a number of tremorigenic drugs or infectious agents, but instead focus on models in which the cerebellum has been implicated.
The Harmaline Model and the Inferior Olive Hypothesis of Et
Harmaline tremor has been the most studied ET model. It has been shown to have a pharmacologic profile similar to that of ET, and it has a specific action within the olive-cerebellar system that results in tremor. Harmaline and the similar compound harmine are β-carboline alkaloids that produce 8–16 Hz tremor in rodents, cats, and monkeys that, like ET, is postural and kinetic, involving appendicular and axial musculature, and lasts hours, as previously reviewed [ ]. Early observations showed that harmaline produces rhythmic IO firing, rhythmic PC complex spike discharges with suppression of simple spikes, and rhythmic discharges of fastigial, interpositus, reticular nucleus, red nucleus, nucleus reticularis tegmenti pontis, lateral vestibular nucleus neurons, and spinal motoneurons [ , ]. After cerebellectomy or cutting the cerebellar peduncles, rhythmic activity persists in the IO, but not in PCs, deep cerebellar nuclei (DCN), other bulbar nuclei, or in spinal motoneurons, indicating that the olivo-cerebellar system is responsible for the rhythmic activation of other structures [ , ]. Harmaline microinjection elicits rhythmic firing only in the caudal medial and dorsal accessory olivary nuclei (MAO and DAO) [ ]. Similarly, glucose utilization mapping after harmaline reveals increased metabolism in the MAO, caudolateral DAO, molecular layer of the vermis and paravermis, and several brainstem nuclei. Activation of all structures outside the IO is abolished by sectioning the inferior peduncle [ ]. Moreover, genetically dystonic rats, which do not show normal climbing fiber-induced complex spikes, fail to show harmaline tremor or PC rhythmicity although IO neurons do fire [ ]. When the retrograde tracer wheat germ agglutinin-horse radish peroxidase (WGA-HRP) is injected into the cerebellar cortex of Lurcher mice, there is virtually no IO staining, consistent with lack of climbing fibers and degeneration of IO neurons. Harmaline elicits no tremor in these mice. Similarly, nervous mice, which show only faint WGA-HRP staining in IO after cerebellar cortex injection, show only intermittent harmaline tremor, lasting seconds. In contrast, in pcd/pcd mice, which show moderate WGA-HRP IO staining, harmaline elicits low-amplitude, low-frequency tremor [ ]. These findings indicate that harmaline induces tremor by activating IO neurons with intact climbing fiber projections.
IO neurons usually fire at approximately 1 Hz, the timing of this firing being governed by subthreshold oscilllations that are synchronized among IO neuronal clusters. The aggregate action of such synchronized clusters produces synchronous complex spikes within an ensemble of PCs to which the IO cluster projects. Harmaline causes increased rebound of low threshold (T-type) calcium spikes, creating a sodium action potential burst with each rebound so that IO cells now engage in rhythmic 8–12 Hz burst-firing [ ]. Harmaline's mechanism of action may involve complex effects on T-type calcium channels [ ] or alternatively may trigger tremor by attenuating calcium conductances and calcium-sensitive potassium conductances, leading to burst-firing [ ].
Tremor Circuit in ET
Dynamic coherence mapping in ET patients with magnetoencephalography has revealed an oscillatory network that includes cerebellum, premotor and primary motor cortex, thalamus, and brainstem [ ]. In general correspondence, strokes that abolish tremor in ET can involve cerebellum, thalamus, motor cortical or subcortical areas, and pons. These structures are suggested to form a circuit for tremor expression [ ]. With regard to the components of the cerebellum involved in ET, metabolic or blood flow imaging studies have shown activation of the cerebellar cortex, DCN, red nucleus, and thalamus [ , ]. It is of interest to compare to what extent components of the ET circuit have been implicated in the harmaline animal model.
Cerebellar Cortex and PCs
Harmaline increases blood flow and glucose utilization in the cerebellar cortex [ ]. Cooling of the cerebellar cortex reduces but does not abolish harmaline-induced rhythmic motoneuron firing [ ]. Pcd/pcd mice do show tremor in response to harmaline, but it is intermittent and of lower frequency and amplitude than normal [ ]. These observations have suggested that PCs promote harmaline tremor but are not absolutely necessary, as the IO-DCN pathway can mediate tremor. Interestingly, Kv3.3 ( Kcnc3 ) KO mice fail to show harmaline-induced tremor, a deficit that has been ascribed to lack of Kv3.3 in PCs, as only the PCs express solely Kv3.3 without Kv3.1. Kv3.3 KO mice show reduced complex spikelet frequency and number, and a doubling of action potential duration [ , ]. Reduced spikelet number within complex spikes is associated with less synchrony [ ]. These features may interfere with expression of harmaline tremor through a feeble complex spike response or mistiming.
Granule Cells and DCN
Harmaline induces c-Fos activation in granule cells, molecular layer neurons, IO subnuclei, and DCN large output and GABAergic nucleo-olivary neurons [ , ], suggesting that all are involved in tremor expression. However, the specific role of each of these in tremor expression has not been studied.
Extracerebellar Pathways
Relatively few studies have been performed. Early work showed that decerebrate cats manifest harmaline tremor, suggesting that the brainstem and spinal cord are sufficient. However, as in ET, high frequency electrical stimulation or local muscimol infusion in the thalamus suppresses harmaline tremor in mice [ ], suggesting a role for the DCN-thalamus-motor cortex-pons-cerebellum loop, as implicated in ET.
In summary, the involvement of granule cells, PCs, DCN, and thalamus in harmaline tremor overlaps with the circuit implicated in ET. However, lesions or silencing of parts of this circuit, such as pons, motor cortex, or granule cell layer, have not been performed in the harmaline model.
Pharmacology of Harmaline Tremor Compared to ET
We have discussed this in detail previously [ ]. In summary, propranolol and other β-adrenergic blockers suppress harmaline and harmine tremor, with β2 blockade more potent than β1 antagonism. Primidone suppresses harmaline tremor, as do gabapentin and benzodiazepines, all used to treat ET. Alcohol, highly effective in many ET patients, suppresses harmaline tremor effectively. Agents reported as effective in ET clinical trials that also suppress harmaline tremor in rodents include zonisamide, octanol, γ-hydroxybutyrate, and weakly memantine. Agents effective neither for ET nor harmaline tremor include levetiracetam, phenoxybenzamine, and anticholinergics. Several agents that worsen ET also exacerbate harmaline tremor, including citalopram, imipramine, caffeine, and cyclosporin. Several agents reportedly suppress harmaline tremor but are ineffective in ET, including dopamine replacement drugs, certain antiepileptic drugs, and others. Overall, harmaline tremor has a pharmacologic profile that is similar to that of ET so that all drugs that suppress ET also suppress harmaline tremor. These observations support the notion that the circuitry involved in harmaline tremor expression substantially overlaps that of ET.
The Inferior Olivary Theory of ET
As discussed previously, harmaline is an unusual drug that acts very specifically on part of the IO to induce rhythmic synchronous complex spikes in PCs, with the behavior consequence of action tremor. This leads to an IO hypothesis of ET which is based not only on the harmaline model, similar in many ways to ET, but also on the IO's distinctive physiology. IO neurons fire spontaneously, and their firing rate is affected only slightly by GABA or glutamate, despite rich innervation by GABAergic and glutamatergic afferents. Instead, the primary role of these neurotransmitters is to influence the degree of coupling among clusters of IO neurons and, hence, the degree of synchrony of complex spikes among PC populations. The extent of synchrony is highly dynamic from moment to moment according to the varying balance of glutamatergic and GABAergic afferent activity in IO [ ]. Because of the membrane characteristics of IO neurons, the synchronized firing of IO neurons and PCs is rhythmic at approximately 10 Hz. The IO theory of ET postulates that excessive synchrony of IO neurons promotes the occurrence of tremor. Several lines of evidence for this notion are summarized in Table 1 . Table 1 Effect of agents that affect synchrony or rhythmicity and tremor: a comparison Mechanism of action Inferior olive Harmaline model Essential tremor AMPA receptor Intra-IO NBQX reduces synchrony Systemic NBQX suppresses tremor Topiramate reduces tremor T-type channels Essential for IO rhythmic oscillations Intra-IO mibefradil or systemic T-type antagonists reduce tremor Zonisamide reduces tremor Gap junctions Intra-IO carbenoxolone reduces synchrony Systemic carbenoxolone or mefloquine suppress tremor Case of ET with reduced tremor when taking mefloquine
AMPA/GABA Balance
Intra-IO injection of an AMPA receptor antagonist, NBQX (2,3-dioxo-6-nitro-1,2,3,4-tetrahydrobenzo[ f ]quinoxaline-7-sulfonamide), reduces synchrony of non-aligned PCs [ ]. Conversely, PC synchrony and rhythmicity are increased by intra-IO injection of the GABA antagonist picrotoxin [ ], whereas optogenetic activation of GABAergic nucleo-olivary fibers suppresses IO coupling and rhythmicity [ ]. In the harmaline model, AMPA receptor antagonists suppress tremor [ , ]. An allosteric activator of the AMPA receptor, PF-4778574, known to increase cerebellar cortical cyclic GMP as does harmaline, causes spontaneous tremor in multiple species, including primates [ ]. Clinically, topiramate, which blocks AMPA receptors, has efficacy for ET [ ].
T-Type Calcium Channels
IO rhythmicity depends on low-threshold (T-type) calcium channel opening. Drugs that block these channels suppress harmaline tremor whether administered systemically or intra-IO [ , ]. Clinically, zonisamide, a T-type calcium channel antagonist, has efficacy for ET [ ].
Gap Junctions
Open gap junctions are required for IO coupling. Intra-IO injection of the gap junction blocker carbenoxolone reduces complex spike synchrony and firing among PCs [ ]. Systemic administration of carbenoxolone or the gap junction blocker mefloquine suppresses harmaline tremor [ ]. Clinically, we are aware of a case whose ET improved while taking mefloquine.
The IO hypothesis of ET does not require pathologic changes in the IO; indeed, damage, as in Lurcher and nervous mice, would be expected to prevent tremor. Anomalies that promote IO synchrony and rhythmicity could be intrinsic to IO, such as altered calcium or calcium-activated potassium channel expression, gap junction expression, or receptor responses to GABA or glutamate. Alternatively, alterations in glutamate or GABA afferent activity could shift the balance towards excessive, tremorigenic synchrony. Eye-blink conditioning depends on dentate and interpositus DCN and on parts of the IO connected to these nuclei [ ]. ET subjects display impaired eyeblink conditioning, but thalamic deep brain stimulation restores performance to normal [ ], suggesting that the olivo-cerebellar projection is functioning abnormally in ET due not to an immutable intrinsic IO alteration, but to abnormal afferent activity. Thus, excessive IO rhythmicity and synchrony may be required for tremor expression, but the etiology may lie upstream in cerebellar circuitry.
The Double Inhibition Pathway
The source of GABA input to IO is from DCN afferents. DCN neurons are in turn inhibited by PC GABAergic afferents. These two neurons form a “double inhibition” pathway. When picrotoxin is applied to the rat cerebellar cortex, local PCs not only display increased simple spike firing but also more complex spike synchrony. This is due to the double-inhibitory pathway in which unopposed parallel fiber glutamate release increases PC simple spike firing, leading to more PC GABAergic inhibition of GABAergic nucleo-olivary neurons, in turn causing a shift towards AMPA effect in the balance between opposing AMPA/GABA effects on IO synchrony so that enhanced synchrony of IO neurons that project back to PCs occurs, leading to greater complex spike synchrony (Fig. 1a ). If muscimol is applied to the cerebellar cortex, the opposite occurs: simple spike firing is reduced, and local complex spike frequency is reduced due to greater activity of disinhibited nucleo-olivary neurons [ ] (Fig. 1b ). Fig. 1 The double inhibition pathway in which simple spike frequency correlates with local cerebellar cortical complex spike synchrony, as described by Marshall and Lang [ ]. a With application of picrotoxin to local cerebellar cortex, the excitatory glutamate ( glu ) input from granule cells ( GC ) is unopposed, leading to increased PC simple spike frequency. The enhanced GABA release by PC axon terminals in DCN inhibits GABAergic nucleo-olivary activity so that synchrony is increased within a restricted IO region that projects climbing fibers (CF) to local PCs, leading to increased PC complex spike synchrony. As these connections are highly organized topographically, the enhanced synchrony is localized to the area exposed to picrotoxin. b With local application of muscimol, which reduces simple spikes, the opposite occurs, resulting in a reduction of local PC complex spike synchrony
Potential evidence to support this scenario has been provided in a blood flow imaging study in ET. Low-dose alcohol suppresses harmaline tremor via an action that likely is mediated by GABA receptors, like muscimol, as the anti-tremor effect is blocked by the alcohol antagonist Ro15-4513 [ ], which binds to a site on the GABA receptor. Boecker et al. [ ] demonstrated with blood flow imaging that when an ET subject consumes a dose of alcohol sufficient to suppress tremor, cerebellar cortex hypermetabolism is reduced, and the IO becomes metabolically more active. In the interpretation of this finding, Boecker et al. invoked the double inhibition pathway. ET subjects with hypermetabolism of the cerebellar cortex likely have excessive PC simple spike firing, leading to a higher degree of inhibition of DCN nucleo-olivary neurons. Upon the administration of low-dose alcohol, acting on GABA receptors in muscimol-like fashion, the inhibition of granule cell, and PC activity would lead to a reduction of PC simple spike firing. This would then disinhibit GABAergic nucleo-olivary neurons. Boecker et al. postulated that the positive IO signal on blood flow imaging was due to heightened activity of nucleo-olivary terminals [ ]. By the IO hypothesis of tremor (Table 1 , Fig. 1 ), this would lead to a reduction of IO and PC complex spike synchrony and suppression of tremor. On the other hand, it may be conjectured that alcohol does not cause an increase in IO blood flow in normal subjects because, in normal subjects, nucleo-olivary neurons already have a high firing rate prior to the administration of alcohol, and any further increase secondary to alcohol is insufficient to produce a blood flow signal.
In a later section, we will identify several neurotransmitter and ion channel perturbations that may result in tremor through an IO mechanism (Table 2 ). Table 2 Potential mechanisms of tremor in animal models Mechanism of action Examples Excessive IO synchrony and rhythmicity harmaline, probably AMPA receptor activator, possibly double Kv3.1/Kv3.3 KO, possibly mGluR1 KO, serotonin transporter deficiency Chronic partial PC loss, possibly associated with PC axonal sprouting probably Weaver mouse; possibly scrambler , sticky , toppler , WDR81 mice, shaker rat, PC degeneration in cats Ataxic tremor from severe disruption of cerebellar functioning Cerebellectomy, combined DCN ablation, possibly severe granule cell loss, possibly acute inflammatory PC loss and SCA5 mice, possibly Scn8a , Scn1a , wriggler mice Mistiming in cerebellar circuits, from altered action potential conduction, ion channel, or neurotransmitter kinetics GABA receptor α1 KO or gain of function, GAT! KO mice, BK deficiency or inhibition, glycine receptor mutations, dysmyelination tremor models
Purkinje Cell Loss and the PC Hypothesis of ET
A major hypothesis in the ET field, based on studies of human tissue, is that ET is related to the loss of PCs [ ]. If this is the case, it should be possible to detect a reliable relationship between PC loss and tremor in animal models. In the following sections, we discuss models with PC loss that do or do not display tremor and attempt to explain the variable findings (Table 2 ).
First, it should be noted that the occurrence of tremor in association with PC loss is not likely to be a simple matter of reduced release of GABA by PC neurons. If mice with cre expressed solely in PCs under the control of the Pcp2/L7 promoter are crossed with mice with floxed exons of the vesicular GABA transporter (VGAT), the offspring show progressive loss of VGAT with age and ataxia, but no tremor [ ]. This suggests that if tremor is associated with PC loss, some aspect related to degeneration is required for tremor to occur.
We should also note that the survey of degenerative models below has major limitations. In these studies, tremor was generally not the primary interest. Knowledge about the extent to which various cerebellar or extra-cerebellar cell types is affected by the mutation, either functionally or pathologically, is frequently lacking. Detailed stereology or analyses of microstructure to detect changes not apparent by gross pathology usually have not been performed. Mechanistic experiments have rarely been conducted. In none of these models has tremor been tested with anti-ET drugs as in the harmaline model.
Inflammatory PC Loss
Guinea pigs receiving intracisternal modified diphtheria toxin develop delayed ataxia, tremor, and gait abnormalities associated with selective 77–90 % PC loss [ ]. Rats injected intraventricularly with a monoclonal antibody to Thy1 coupled to saporin, a treatment that causes specific PC loss, develop head tremor starting 24 or more hours later, followed by truncal ataxia [ ].
PC Degeneration in Cats
Head tremor and ataxia occur with adult onset cerebellar degeneration in cats, in which PCs are selectively and severely affected [ ].
Scrambler
( Dab1 scm ) mice have a deficiency in disabled-1 protein, resulting in ectopic cell positioning in cerebellar cortex, hippocampus, and neocortex, with lower numbers of granule and PCs although DCN appear normal. These mice show ataxic gait and whole body tremor [ ].
The sticky ( sti/sti ) mouse has a mutation disrupting the editing domain of the alanyl-tRNA synthetase ( Aars ) gene, leading to accumulation of misfolded protein. PC loss becomes apparent at 3 weeks of age and is marked in rostral cerebellum. At 6 weeks, mild tremor appears, followed by ataxia. Progressive PC loss slowly occurs over the course of the subsequent year [ ].
The staggerer mouse, sg/sg , has an autosomal recessive rora sg mutation causing a truncated protein. These mice show mild tremor and ataxia, with a staggering gait. They have 60 % PC loss in the vermis and 90 % PC loss in the cerebellar hemispheres. They also have massive granule cell loss and 60 % inferior olivary (IO) cell loss. The remaining PCs are innervated by multiple climbing fibers [ , ].
In WDR81 mice, a mutation in the gene encoding the WD repeat-containing protein 81 is associated with progressive PC loss after P21 and granule cell loss after P35. These mice show tremor and an ataxic gait [ ].
Toppler mice are normal in the first weeks after birth, then develop tremor and severe ataxia. PCs show abnormal morphology by P14, and many cells are lost by P30. The granule cell layer is relatively preserved [ ].
SCA5 is due to a deletion mutation of the β-III spectrin gene. This structural protein is primarily expressed in brain, with the highest expression in PC soma and dendrites. Homozygous β-III-deficient mice display ataxia, incoordination, tremor, and progressive loss of PCs with molecular layer thinning. PC numbers are normal at 3 weeks but reduced by 27 % at 6 months, with many of the remainder showing degenerative features. There is no loss of DCN neurons. PCs show a reduction of simple spikes, but complex spikes are preserved. Spontaneous firing is reduced [ ].
In the shaker rat, ataxia and whole body tremor develop in the first months of life. Degeneration of PCs and the IO occurs. The severity of symptoms appears related to degree of PC loss, which is most marked in the anterior cerebellum [ ].
Mice expressing the Doppel protein in PCs under the control of the PC-specific promoter Pcp2/L7 begin losing PC neurons at ages 8 to 15 days, with progression to severe loss with time. Secondary granule cell loss occurs. These mice are described as having ataxia and a trembling gait [ ].
The Weaver ( wv/wv) mouse has a mutation of the KCNJ6 ( Girk2 Wv ) gene for the inwardly rectifying potassium channel, a semi-dominant mutation. They show ataxia, tremor, gait instability, and hypertonia. There is 50 % PC loss in the vermis and 25 % loss in the cerebellar hemispheres. These mice show granule cell, but not IO degeneration, and atrophy of DCN. There is multiple climbing fiber innervation of PCs [ , , ].
Some of the above models display multiple climbing fiber innervation of PCs ( staggerer , Weaver ), loss of IO neurons ( staggerer mouse, shaker rat), or loss of granule cells ( scrambler , staggerer , WDR81 , Weaver , Doppel-expressing PCs), but only PC loss is the common shared feature. It appears plausible that some of the models that involve slow and partial PC loss may represent models of ET, such as PC degeneration in cats, the shaker rat, and mice with Weaver , scrambler , sticky , toppler , and WDR81 mutations. Motion power frequency analysis to detect a consistent tremor peak and pharmacologic validation with anti-ET drugs are needed to delineate the similarity to ET. On the other hand, tremor in staggerer mice, which have extensive granule cell and IO loss, the SCA5 mice, which have reduced simple spikes, and in the acute inflammatory models may more likely represent ataxic tremor rather than ET-like tremor.
Next, we consider examples of marked PC loss yet without tremor, a potential problem for the PC hypothesis of ET. For example, consider the Purkinje cell degeneration ( pcd/pcd ) mouse. These mice, mentioned previously in the harmaline section, have a mutation of the Agtpbp 1 pcd gene that encodes ATP/GTP binding protein. PC degeneration starts at P15 to P18 and proceeds rapidly so that by P35, most PCs are gone. Gait ataxia is apparent at 3–4 weeks. With PC loss, DCN GABA levels fall by 50 % and do not recover. The lost PC axon terminals on DCN neurons are replaced, not by other axon terminals, but by astrocytic glial leaflets [ ]. IO neurons are reduced 23–30 % by P23-P24 [ ]. Tremor is absent. The question arises: Why do pcd mice not show tremor whereas many strains listed above with PC degeneration do show tremor?
In considering more specifically the paradox that pcd mice show less severe ataxia and no tremor compared to Weaver mice, despite more severe PC loss, Grüsser-Cornehls et al. [ ] conjectured that partial innervation of the DCN by PC axon terminals in Weaver mice may be more disruptive than no innervation, as in pcd mice. They noted that pcd mice show an increase in parvalbumin binding in the DCN and vestibular nuclei (both are targets of PC terminals) compared to wild-type mice. Parvalbumin was considered to represent a marker of increased numbers of glycinergic somata, previously shown to occur in the DCN of pcd mice [ ]. Hypothesizing that complete removal of Purkinje motor afferents might render Weaver mice more like pcd mice, they performed vermectomy. Weaver tremor was abolished! Gait stability was also improved. In addition, vermectomy induced the appearance of parvalbumin-positive somata in the DCN and the lateral vestibular nucleus, suggesting an increase in glycinergic interneurons. They postulated that complete loss of Purkinje afferents, whether by degeneration in pcd mice or by surgery in Weaver mice, enables the formation of inhibitory glycinergic connections within the DCN that reduce ataxia and tremor [ ]. Moreover, on studying a number of ataxia genotypes, it was noted that the presence of increased DCN parvalbumin staining was correlated with severe PC loss but milder ataxia (and absent tremor), as in pcd/pcd , nervous and Lurcher mice. There is, however, no rationale why increased glycinergic somata in DCN would suppress tremor. Indeed, their tonic activity on DCN nucleo-olivary neurons would be expected to promote tremor according to the IO hypothesis of ET.
Tremor in ET can be abolished by cerebellar hemisphere infarcts [ ], a phenomenon comparable to vermectomy-induced abolition of tremor in Weaver mice. However, clinically, the tremor is immediately lost, whereas any re-modelling changes in DCN would be expected to take time. In considering the relationship between PC loss and tremor, an alternative explanation that we find attractive is that compensatory PC axon terminal collateral sprouting in the DCN in the context of partial PC loss may promote tremor. This notion that terminal sprouting occurs is indirectly supported by the finding that although in the Weaver mouse vermis PC neurons are reduced 50 %, there is no reduction in PC terminal numbers in the vestibular nucleus, indicating that re-sprouting by the remaining PC axons has occurred. By inference this is also occurring in the DCN [ ]. Moreover, GABA levels remain normal in Weaver mice DCN [ ], in contrast to the severe loss in pcd mice.
Similarly, the lack of tremor in the Lurcher mouse ( Grid2 Lc ) may be explained by very early and severe PC loss, with 92 % lost from vermis and 97 % from the cerebellar hemispheres, so that significant PC axon sprouting in the DCN cannot occur. These mice also have massive loss of granule cells, 60–75 % loss of IO neurons, and 30 % loss of DCN neurons. The Lurcher mouse has a mutation in the GluR δ2 gene, and only heterozygotes survive [ , ].
The leaner mouse ( Cacna1 la/la ) with a mutation of the P/Q calcium channel α1A subunit gene [ ] has severe ataxia but not tremor. PC loss is most severe in the anterior lobe and occurs in zonal fashion [ ]. This pattern of loss would not be conducive to PC axon terminal sprouting in the DCN, as preserved PC neurons are seldom next to lost neurons. This inference is supported by the finding that in the vestibular nuclei that receive PC fiber input, there is a massive (80 %) loss of GABA terminals [ ].
The nervous mouse, nr/nr , shows mild ataxia and nervous looking agitation, with no mention of tremor. They have 50 % PC loss in the vermis and 90 % in the cerebellar hemispheres, with granule cell degeneration, and loss of one third of IO neurons [ ]. It is likely that PC axonal sprouting in DCN is quite limited in view of the overall severe PC loss.
The hyperspiny purkinje mouse, an autosomal recessive condition, has large numbers of spines on PC dendrites. Although the PC neuron loss is only partial, at 27 %, these mice have massive degeneration of PC terminal axons so that PC axon sprouting is not possible. There is 12 % loss of IO neurons. These mice show ataxia, but tremor is not described [ ].
In models of SCA1 and SCA2, human ataxin-1 and ataxin-2 genes with high numbers of CAG repeats have been expressed selectively in PCs under the control of the promoter of the Purkinje cell specific gene Pcp2/L7. Mice in these models develop ataxia and impaired coordination, but no tremor, at an age when PC dendritic trees show degeneration; PC cell body loss occurs later [ , ]. In transgenic ataxin-2 mice with 58 CAG repeats, half of PCs were lost by 24–27 weeks [ ]. It is likely that the early disease in PCs in these models prevents axonal sprouting or, if it occurs, the integrity of the PC is too disrupted to permit participation in tremor physiology.
Monkeys and mice have partial PC loss with advanced age [ , ], yet do not show tremor. Careful comparisons between the brains of these aged animals and those of humans with ET may reveal whether the nature of PC pathology differs among these species, for example in the degree of terminal sprouting.
Another explanation why some mouse mutants with severe PC loss do not show tremor may be that concomitant severe IO loss may preclude tremor expression, as in Lurcher and nervous mice. IO loss may have reduced tremor severity tremor in staggerer mice. However, this explanation is unlikely to prevail for pcd or hyperspiny mice, in which IO loss is mild.
In conclusion, we have considered examples of mutant mice with partial to severe PC loss that do not show tremor. A common feature is a severe loss of PC axons to DCN. This may lead to failure to have tremor in one of two ways. One is a loss of potential to form compensatory terminal sprouting that may have occurred in Weaver and other mice with partial PC loss and tremor. The notion that PC terminal axonal sprouting is related to tremor would explain the immediate abolition of tremor with large cerebellar hemisphere lesions in patients with ET. Of interest, brains of ET patients show increased PC terminal axon sprouting in the cerebellar cortex [ ]. The other possible mechanism by which PC loss may occur without tremor, perhaps less likely, involves inhibitory re-modelling in the DCN.
A PC hypothesis is not incompatible with the IO hypothesis of ET. PC terminal axonal sprouting that occurs with partial PC loss might, by innervating larger groups of nucleo-olivary neurons, disrupt the control of synchrony so that when a movement is coordinated, there is an excessive recruitment of PC complex spikes, leading to tremor. Much research is needed to evaluate these postulates as potential tremor mechanisms.
Tremor in Association with Other Cerebellar Damage: Ataxic Tremor
Primates
Large ablative lesions of the DCN in monkeys, involving interpositus and dentate nuclei, produce tremor that never occurs without ataxia and is termed ataxic, cerebellar, or intention tremor. It is a coarse action tremor of variable amplitude, force, and frequency (3–7 Hz) that prominently involves the upper extremities and occurs immediately after surgery, but the amplitude gradually diminishes with time. On distal grasping at 2–12 weeks after surgery, the tremor is irregular at 4 Hz, but during proximal positioning is regular at 7 Hz [ , ]. Cooling of the dentate and interpositus also produces an ataxic tremor in which tremor frequency increases with limb flexion and decreases on holding a mass [ ]. Combined interpositus and dentate ablation produces tremor lasting months, whereas lesions confined to dentate produces tremor lasting days to weeks [ , ].
Unilateral cerebellectomy in monkeys produces ipsilateral upper limb ataxic tremor and dysmetria, and head and truncal tremor that is most severe soon after the operation, but improves with time. Ablation of the motor cortex arm area reduces the cerebellar tremor but does not abolish it, whereas lesions of premotor cortex exacerbate dysmetria and ataxic tremor, suggesting that area 4 may be involved in the expression of cerebellar tremor and area 6 in the compensation for it [ ].
The variability of the tremor frequency with position, its reduction by mass, and improvement with time in monkeys is unlike ET and thus should not be considered a model for ET, except that it may be relevant to the intention tremor that more severe ET cases display [ ]. Ataxic tremor likely represents the type of tremor seen with a variety of animal models (Table 2 ).
Non-primates
When rats are irradiated within the first 7 postnatal days, or given methylazoxymethanol, an anti-mitotic drug, during the first 3 days, there is subsequent development of ataxia and tremor. PCs are normal in number but misaligned, with multiple innervation by climbing fibers. Granule and basket cell loss is severe, and parallel fibers and PC dendrites disrupted [ ]. Similarly, cats given whole head irradiation at birth subsequently show ataxia and tremor, associated with 83 % granule cell loss, while PCs and molecular layer interneurons are less affected [ ]. The toxin l -2-chloropropionic acid causes in rats massive loss of granule cells, 5 % loss of PCs, and sparing of Golgi, stellate, and basket cells. Despite severe ataxia, there is no tremor, possibly due to damage to the IO and pontine gray [ ].
Selective severe granule cell degeneration with PC preservation in Bavarian mountain dogs or Italian hounds is associated with severe ataxia and head or whole body tremor [ ]. In an entity variously called idiopathic generalized tremor, canine shaker, or little white shaker syndrome, small dogs or cats develop generalized body tremor and ataxia in the absence of exposure to any toxins. On the basis of inflammatory signs in the CSF, and a good therapeutic response to steroids, an autoimmune process directed against the cerebellum is suspected [ ].
In the IO hypothesis of tremor, a loss of granule cell activity would not be expected to cause tremor. Given the severe general impairment of cerebellar function, tremor in these non-primate models may represent ataxic tremor, not relevant to ET. Ataxic tremor has not been studied sufficiently in lower species, and it is not clear why some degenerative conditions show ataxia alone, and others show ataxia plus ataxic tremor.
Tremor with Increased Synaptic GABA Action: Due to Mistiming?
Tremor has been described in three mutations involving the GABA A receptor. Here, we consider what they have in common and whether they are related to ET.
GABAA Receptor α1 Subunit Gain of Function
The most common GABA A receptor α subunit found in the brain is α1. An α1 gain of function mutation is associated with enhanced startle, impaired rotarod performance, and postural tremor [ ].
GABA Transporter type 1 (GAT1) Deficiency
Mice with GAT1 deficiency show gait abnormality, impaired rotarod performance, and tremor at 25–32 Hz. Tremor is exacerbated by flunitrazepam. Tonic inhibition in granule and PCs is increased. These mice show a number of similarities with α1 KO mice, discussed below, such as the fast frequency and exacerbation of tremor by a benzodiazepine [ ]. The notion that enhanced or prolonged synaptic GABA action due to impaired uptake promotes tremor is reinforced when it is considered that the clinical medication tiagabine, which blocks GABA re-uptake and increases extracellular GABA, frequently causes tremor as an adverse symptom, and exacerbates tremor in ET patients [ ].
GABAA Receptor α1 Subunit Knockout
Without this subunit, GABA A receptors are reduced 46 % in the cerebellum [ ]. PCs are normal in number but functionally severely affected, as they normally express predominantly α1-containing receptors [ ] so that they have markedly diminished GABA currents. Mice show impaired rotarod performance and difficulty swimming. Tremor is life-long from an early age and occurs during actions but not at rest. Whole body tremor, at 19–24 Hz, is reliably elicited by suspending by the tail. Tremor is suppressed by low doses of alcohol and by the anti-ET medications primidone, propranolol, and gabapentin. On the basis of these similarities to ET, this mouse has been suggested as a model of ET [ ]. However, diazepam greatly exacerbates α1 KO tremor, in contrast to amelioration of ET by benzodiazepines. In addition, allopregnanolone, which likely activates GABA A receptors, also worsens α1 KO tremor [ ]. A search for associations of ET with α1 subunit mutations was negative [ ]. Given several similarities between the pharmacologic profile of this animal model and of ET, it is probable that they share some common circuitry. On the other hand, the high tremor frequency and exacerbation by benzodiazepines suggest fundamental dissimilarities between this model and ET.
In α1 KO mice cerebellar cortex synaptic GABA levels are increased due to downregulation of GABA transporter activity, resulting in markedly enhanced tonic inhibition on granule cells [ ]. Such changes may be present elsewhere in cerebellum as well. This feature likely underlies similarities between these mice and the GAT1-deficient mice considered above such as the high frequency tremor and exacerbation by benzodiazepines.
The enhancement and prolongation of GABA tonic inhibition due to impaired uptake might cause mistiming during the coordination of motor acts, leading to tremor. In the olivocerebellar system, timing is critical for controlling movement. The delicate interplay of feedback and feedforward loops can only be thrown awry if movement-associated volleys are excessively brief or prolonged, or arrive too late or too soon. The concept of tremor due to mistiming may underlie tremor due to impaired GABA uptake, certain ion channel mutations (see below), and dysmyelination within central pathways, as in shiverer , jimpy , zitter mice (Table 2 ). Tremor due to mistiming is considered not likely to be relevant to ET.
Tremor Associated with Neurotransmitter or Ion Channel Alterations: a Survey
The harmaline model and the GABA receptor α1 knockout model are the only animal tremor models subjected to motion power frequency analysis to detect a specific tremor frequency and also to pharmacologic profiling with anti-ET medications. However, there are numerous other models in which tremor occurs, which may offer opportunities to obtain valuable insights into tremor mechanisms. We thus catalog models with tremor associated with neurotransmitter or ion channel alterations.
It needs to be stressed that, at the present time, much is lacking in our understanding of tremor mechanisms in these functional models. In many models, it is not known what alterations may have occurred in the DCN or elsewhere in the olivocerebellar system. Although PC physiology has been studied in various mutations involving ion channels or transmitter receptors, the physiology of other critical players in the cerebellar system, such as granule, DCN and IO neurons, and their role in tremor, remains unexplored. Much more needs to be learned about the DCN in particular as it is the final arbitrator of cerebellar outflow. However, the local connections of intrinsic DCN neurons remain unclear, and it is not yet possible to create a DCN circuit diagram [ ].
Most of the genetic mutations described here for receptor and ion channels are expressed in multiple brain regions and are not cerebellum-specific. Invaluable information would be obtained if cell-specific genetic manipulations to knock out or over-express mutations were performed, for example, in PC, DCN subtypes, granule cells, IO or interneurons. Such techniques and optogenetic approaches would provide insights in how the physiology of specific cells contributes to tremor and address mechanisms such as those postulated by the IO hypothesis.
Metabotropic Glutamate Receptor 1
Paraneoplastic cerebellar ataxia with tremor rarely may be due to a blocking IgG antibody to mGluR1, with intense binding to PCs [ ]. All known mutations of mGluR1 in mice cause action tremor and ataxia. For example, the cervelet-4 mutant mouse, which lacks mGluR1, displays whole body tremor and ataxia, but no brain lesions, and PCs are normal in number, size and distribution [ ]. The lack of mGluR1 receptor results in overexpression of mGluR5 in granule cells, leading to excessive glutamate release [ ]. This would be expected to increase PC simple spike activity that through the double inhibitory pathway would lead to increased IO synchrony, PC complex spike synchrony, and tremor that may be relevant to ET. This hypothesis has not been tested, but it is supported by the finding that a selective antagonist of the mGluR1 receptor exacerbates tremor induced by low-dose harmaline in rats [ ].
AMPA Receptor
An allosteric activator of the AMPA receptor, PF-4778574, causes tremor in mice, rats, dogs, and non-human primates [ ]. As it increases cyclic GMP in the cerebellar cortex, like harmaline, it is probable that it acts by promoting excess IO synchrony, as discussed in a previous section on the IO hypothesis of ET.
Serotonin Transporter Deficiency
Mice with disruption of the SERT gene have tics, backwards gait, and tremor [ ]. It is possible that increased synaptic serotonin results in tremor through an IO mechanism, as intra-IO injection of serotonin increases PC synchrony [ ]. Tremor in this model is potentially relevant to ET within the framework of the IO hypothesis.
Glycine Receptor
Mice with glycine receptor mutations, such as spastic mice ( spa/spa ), that model hyperekplexia, show abnormal startle, rigidity, and tremor [ ]. The tremor is quite fast, at 25–30 Hz, and may be due to mistiming, not relevant to ET.
BK Potassium Channel
BK channels are large conductance, voltage-, and calcium-activated potassium channels intensely expressed in PCs and Golgi neurons. They limit axon potentials, regulating excitability and transmitter release. Penitrem A and lolitrem B, potent BK channel inhibitors [ ], are mycotoxins that cause long-lasting tremor, ataxia, and convulsions in cattle when moldy food is consumed. They and the BK inhibitor paxiline can induce tremor lasting days to weeks in mice without causing structural damage [ ]. The IO is not required for penitrem A-induced tremor, as 3-acetylpyridine, which destroys the IO, does not abolish the tremor [ ]. BK KO mice, which lack the pore-forming α subunit, show action tremor, ataxia, impaired gait, and impaired eye blink conditioning, although the brain is morphologically normal [ ]. BK KO mice and mice given paxiline show a field potential oscillation in which PCs display 15 Hz burst-firing that is time-locked to the oscillation. Local injection of paxiline into the vermis also produces rhythmic PC burst-firing time-locked to beta oscillations. PC neurons in BK KO mice show impaired GABA release in the DCN, resulting in disinhibition of nucleoolivary neurons, so that complex spikes in PC cells are reduced [ ]. It is possible that BK inhibition causes mistiming within the DCN-granule cell-PC-DCN loop, leading to tremor.
SK Channels
Small conductance calcium-activated potassium (SK) channels contribute to the afterhyperpolarization potential, thereby controlling the firing pattern and excitability of neurons. Frissonnant mutant mice ( fri ), with a deletion in the Kcnn2 gene that encodes SK2, display rapid tremor, impairment on the rotarod test, and unstable gait [ ]. The relevance of tremor in this model to ET is not known.
Kv3.1 and Kv3.3 Channels
Mice null for both these channels, but not either alone, show spontaneous tremor, myoclonus, and marked ataxia. In the olivocerebellar system, granule cells and glutamatergic DCN output neurons express both, PCs express only Kv3.3, whereas IO neurons and GABAergic DCN neurons express neither. The lack of both ion channels in double-KO mice increases action potential duration and glutamate release at the parallel fiber-PC (PF-PC) synapse, enhancing the excitability of PC neurons [ ]. It is possible that this may lead to tremor via the double inhibitory pathway (Fig. 1a ) according to the IO hypothesis of ET.
Scn8a Channel
The Scn8a (Na V 1.6) sodium channel is widely distributed in the brain. In mice, 15 mutant alleles have been identified. The most severe mutations, resulting in null gene expression, result in ataxia and tremor by 2 weeks and death by 3 weeks. Severe mutations, including medJ and nmf58 , cause tremor and ataxia followed by muscle weakness and dystonia. Mildly hypomorphic alleles, including medjo , jolting2J , clth , 9J , tremorD , are associated with tremor, ataxia, reduced body size, and sometimes other features [ ]. Levin et al. selectively deleted Na V 1.6 from PCs, granule cells, or from both, and found that PC KO or granule KO mice had evidence of mild ataxia without tremor whereas the double KO had worse ataxia and action tremor by 5–6 weeks of age. The effect was to severely reduce PC efferent activity [ ]. A search in a large ET sample did not uncover Na V 1.6 mutations [ ]. In view of the severe derangement, it is possible that tremor in this model is ataxic tremor, not related to ET.
NaV1.1
The lack of Na V 1.1 ( Scn1a ) results in substantial loss of sodium currents in PCs and greatly reduced firing rate. Mice null for Na V 1.1 show seizures, ataxia, mild tremor, and death by P15 [ ]. Tremor is this model is likely ataxic in view of the severe derangement.
Plasma Membrane Calcium ATPase Isoform 2 Gene
Mice with the wriggler mutation ( wri/wri ) have a deficiency of the plasma membrane calcium ATPase isoform 2 gene ( PMCA2 ), which is expressed only in PCs, heart, and organ of Corti. These mice have hearing loss, severe tremor, gait ataxia, and writhing, yet show no structural changes in the brain. Cerebellar slices show a severe reduction of calcium influx, although PCs are morphologically normal. Voltage-gated calcium influx down-regulation leads to impaired PC function and the motor phenotype [ ]. In view of the severe global impairment of PC functioning, it is probable that tremor in this interesting model is ataxic rather than related to ET, but further examination of this model is warranted.
Cacna1a
Previously, we noted that leaner mice, with a mutation of the α1A subunit of the voltage gated calcium channel (P/Q, Ca V 2.1), have zonal PC loss and no tremor. In contrast, in rocker mice, rkr/rkr , with another mutation in the α1A subunit gene, the cerebellum does not show cell loss. PCs are present, but display reduced PC dendritic branching, and greatly reduced numbers of post-synaptic AMPA receptors at PF-PC synapses, whereas PCs still respond to climbing fibers. These mice have ataxia and action tremor [ ]. In rolling Nagoya mice, with a different α1A subunit mutation, PF-PC synapses are also abnormal, but with multiple PC spines contacting the same parallel fiber varicosity [ ]. These mice display selective atrophy of the anterior vermis, with loss of granule, stellate, and basket cells but preservation of PCs. Rolling Nagoya mice have severe ataxia but no tremor [ ]. Similarly, tottering ( tg/tg ) mice, with yet another α1A mutation, have abnormal PF-PC synapses and partial granule cell loss with relative PC preservation, and display ataxia but not tremor [ ]. The reason why rocker mice show tremor whereas rolling Nagoya and totterer do not is unclear, but is possibly related to the nature of the abnormal PF-PC connections. Comparative studies of these genotypes may provide insights into the tremor mechanism in rocker mice.
Conclusion
Previously, we have attempted to resolve apparent contradictions among animal models of tremor. Some models with chronic severe loss of PCs show no tremor, yet animals with acute severe loss or chronic partial loss may display tremor. In some mutant models with increased activity of PCs, tremor occurs, yet some models with impaired granule cell or PC function also display tremor.
Despite our enormous lack of understanding of tremor mechanisms in these models, we have suggested that they tentatively can be sorted into four categories (Table 2 ). The first two, the IO and PC hypotheses, are considered related to ET. The other two, ataxic tremor, and tremor due to mistiming, are deserving of attention and are felt to be related to clinical diseases affecting the cerebellum but not to ET.
Excessive IO Synchrony and Rhythmicity
Excessive IO Synchrony and Rhythmicity underlie harmaline tremor. As serotonin and AMPA each promote IO synchrony, this mechanism may underlie tremor in serotonin transporter deficiency and in animals given an AMPA receptor activator, respectively. As mGluR1 deficiency is associated with increased glutamate release at PF-PC synapses, IO synchronization and tremor may be promoted through the double inhibition pathway. Similarly, increased glutamate release at the PF-PC synapse may account for spontaneous tremor in the double Kv3.1/Kv3.3 KO mouse. Research to test the predictions of the IO hypothesis is justified.
Chronic Partial PC Loss
Chronic Partial PC Loss is associated with tremor and ataxia in a number of models. In the case of Weaver mice, vermectomy abolishes tremor. As Weaver mice likely have PC terminal sprouting in the DCN, we suspect that PC axonal terminal sprouting promotes tremor through greater IO synchronization so that when the PCs are destroyed by a large lesion, tremor stops due to the loss of this synchronizing effect. This mechanism may also prevail in scrambler , sticky , toppler , WDR81 mice, shaker rat, and PC degeneration in cats. The lack of tremor in several models with severe chronic PC loss, as in pcd or Lurcher mice, has several potential explanations, such as changes in DCN circuitry, the inability to form PC terminal sprouting, or co-existent damage in other nuclei such as the IO. Research is needed to explore the PC hypothesis, and whether there is correspondence between animal models and ET brain findings.
Ataxic Tremor
In monkeys with cerebellectomy or extensive DCN lesions, tremor is ataxic, with the frequency varying according to position and load, and it improves with time, unlike ET. It is possible that tremor from acute inflammatory PC loss or granule cell degeneration is similarly ataxic in lower species, but this remains to be established. Mouse mutations that disrupt PC functioning. as in Scn8a , Scn1a , wriggler , SCA5, and rocker mice may also fall into this category, insofar as this functional deficit would not be expected to cause tremor according to the IO hypothesis, and mice with VGAT knocked out in PCs do not show tremor. However, much needs to be learned about the physiology of IO and DCN neurons and their role in tremor in these mutants, whether the tremor is indeed ataxic, and if so, why some models with ataxia show more tremor than others.
Mistiming
Tremor occurs when synaptic GABA action is prolonged or accentuated, as in GABA receptor α1 KO or gain of function, and in GAT! KO mice, when action potentials are prolonged due to BK deficiency or inhibition, and when there is dysmyelination within central pathways. Mistiming in cerebellar pathways is the likely common denominator, but more research is required to examine this hypothesis. Tremor from mistiming is not likely related to ET, but deserves exploration with potential relevance to clinical conditions such as multiple sclerosis tremor.