Introduction
Stress echocardiography was first established as a useful clinical tool for the detection of significant coronary artery stenosis in the late 1980s and the early 1990s. Although echocardiographic equipment was still rudimentary, the technique became increasingly popular in many echocardiography laboratories in the United States and Europe. Several landmark manuscripts were published regarding its usefulness for detecting coronary artery disease, diagnosing myocardial viability and predicting future cardiac outcomes [ ]. Initially, stress echocardiography relies on eye-ball assessment for evaluation of stress-induced wall motion abnormalities which is subjective. Its accuracy depends heavily on experience. However, the advent of contrast echocardiography and coronary flow imaging provided other ways for detecting myocardial ischemia, including myocardial perfusion [ , ] and coronary flow velocity reserve [ ]. Strain and strain rate imaging by tissue Doppler and speckle tracking analysis makes wall motion analysis more objective, with less observer variability [ , ]. Stress echocardiography became the method of choice for detecting coronary artery disease during the 2000s; however, its role and application seems to be slightly but definitely declining over recent years. This is because (1) coronary angiography is becoming less invasive and, therefore the threshold for the application is substantially decreasing, and (2) other imaging modalities such as coronary computed tomography (CT) and cardiovascular magnetic resonance has been shown to be a more easy and reliable way to diagnose coronary artery disease [ , , , ]. The questions arise as to whether stress echocardiography is not needed any more and whether or not outpatients with chest pains should be referred for coronary CT.The current situation regarding stress echocardiography is discussed below
Coronary artery disease
Visualization of stress-induced wall motion abnormalities is the hallmark of stress echocardiography to detect significant coronary stenosis in the corresponding territory. Current ultrasound machines have the capability of being able to simultaneously display multiple images that facilitates side-by-side comparison of wall motion between at rest and peak (or immediately after) stress in equivalent views. Irrespective of different stressors used, sensitivity and specificity of stress echocardiography for detecting significant coronary artery stenosis has been reported to be approximately 80 and 80 %, respectively [ , ]. However, several factors could affect the interpretation and accuracy of stress echocardiography (Table 1 ). Of note, inexperienced personnel are associated with lowered sensitivity and specificity. Since stress-induced wall motion abnormality is usually transient, timely acquisition of multiple images is prerequisite for an accurate diagnosis. Misalignment of the cutting plane at rest and peak stress could produce errors of under or over-estimation of wall motion abnormalities in patients with resting wall motion abnormalities. Stress echocardiography puts stress on the patients as well as the operators. Table 1 Factors affecting stress echocardiography interpretation and accuracy Lowered specificity (false positive errors) Lowered sensitivity (false negative errors) Basal inferior wall abnormalities as abnormal Poor image quality Tethered segments as abnormal Excessive post-exercise delay to imaging Lack of hyperdynamic response as abnormal Single vessel disease Early septal relaxation as abnormal Patients with lower pretest disease probability Interventricular conduction delay or paced rhythms Inadequate workload Valvular heart disease with loss of contractile reserve Multivessel disease with balanced ischemia Cardiomyopathies Mild to intermediate severity stenosis Inexperienced personnel Inexperienced personnel
To overcome these problems, several technologies have emerged. Intravenous contrast echocardiography is a useful modality to improve left ventricular (LV) border delineation in patients with poor image quality, resulting in the enhanced diagnostic accuracy and feasibility [ ]. Although still investigational, it also has the potential to assess myocardial perfusion like nuclear myocardial perfusion scintigraphy [ ]. Unfortunately, there are no ultrasound contrast agents currently available in Japan.
Real-time 3D echocardiography allows visualization of all LV segments simply by cropping the volumetric 3D datasets, which have been useful for delineating stress-induced wall motion abnormalities during stress echocardiography [ ]. There are two types of imaging mode that are practical and useful for stress echocardiography. Multi-plane mode is the simultaneous on-line visualization of two or three 2D views with a high frame rate using a matrix array transducer. This method permits shorter acquisition time, and is therefore especially useful for treadmill exercise echocardiography. The multi-slice mode provides 9 equidistant short-axis views from the apical to the basal part of the LV extracted from full-volume datasets. The assessment of wall motion with multi-slice mode allows evaluation of the spatial extent of wall motion abnormalities both horizontally and vertically (Fig. 1 ). Multiple short-axis views are perpendicular to the LV long-axis direction and it therefore completely eliminates the risk to display oblique short-axis views that may produce artificial wall motion abnormalities. Several studies performed a direct comparison of the diagnostic accuracy between 2D and 3D echocardiography for detecting coronary artery disease, and found equivalent diagnostic accuracy between 2D and 3D echocardiography. Therefore, although 3D echocardiography is theoretically better than 2D echocardiography for the diagnosis of coronary artery disease, the current limitation of temporal and special resolution precludes significant improvements of its accuracy over 2D echocardiography. Fig. 1 3D dobutamine stress echocardiography using multi-slice mode in a patient with inferior wall motion abnormality. a Baseline 9 slice views. There was small inferior wall hypokinesis. b Equivalent 9 slice views at peak stress. Inferior wall motion abnormalities worsened. c Coronary angiography of the right coronary artery. Tight proximal right coronary stenosis was presented ( arrow )
Since wall motion assessment is subjective and interpreter dependent, objective assessment of wall motion should be more reliable and has been gaining much interest. 2D strain derived from 2D speckle tracking echocardiography analysis provides multi-directional regional and global strain, including longitudinal, circumferential and radial strain [ , ]. Although some researchers demonstrated the utility of 2D strain for diagnosing coronary artery disease [ ], accuracy of speckle tracking analysis depends heavily on image quality and frame rate. The most critical limitation for the application of 2D strain on stress echocardiography is that strain value does not increase progressively during sequential stages of stress testing. Strain value may decrease compared to earlier stress stage even in normal subjects. There is also no definite cut-off value regarding how much strain value is reduced to reflect the development of obvious myocardial ischemia. Conceptually, strain rate progressively increases according to the addition of the work load. However, the current 2D frame rate does not always guarantee whether peak strain rate can be tracked accurately, especially at a higher heart rate (>100 bpm).
Although transient wall motion abnormalities quickly disappear, some mechanical and metabolic abnormalities still persist after the stress has subsided. Ishii et al. [ ] established the concept regarding diastolic stunning, e.g., post-systolic shortening (PSS) at ischemic territory. They showed that diastolic relaxation abnormalities persisted at least 10–15 min after stress-induced myocardial ischemia and could be clearly visualized by 2D speckle tracking echocardiography. The same findings were also proved in experimental studies by Asanuma et al. [ ]. This methodology is interesting and clinically relevant, because even though detection of stress-induced wall motion abnormalities may be missed, we are able to observe diastolic stunning (PSS) after the stress. A key point is that the time frame is appropriate for the acquisition of high-quality images from lower heart rate and no respiratory artifacts. Validation of the potential use of this method warrants further multi-center study.
During the past decades, other competitive imaging modalities have also made great strides. Among them, coronary CT has become the standard screening tool for detecting coronary artery disease in patients with chest pain in Japan because (1) multidetector CT is usually available in medium and larger hospitals, (2) the acquisition and analysis time has progressively shortened and the dose of radiation exposure has therefore reduced remarkably, and (3) the interpretation of the presence or absence of coronary stenosis has also become intuitive and straightforward. Some authorities claim that coronary CT is just lumenology, and therefore does not provide functional information regarding coronary artery stenosis. However, recent advances in CT technology makes functional assessment possible, including simultaneous assessment of myocardial perfusion and fractional flow reserve [ , ].
Considering the aforementioned current situation in Japan, it is not thought that stress echocardiography will be the gatekeeper for screening patients with suspected coronary artery disease in place of coronary CT.
Valvular heart disease
Aortic stenosis
Due to the rapid increase in the aged population, senile aortic stenosis (AS) is prevalent in Japan. The severity of AS is usually estimated by standard echocardiographic criteria, including peak velocity across the aortic valve (AV), mean pressure gradient (PG) and aortic valve area (AVA). We sometimes encounter a patient showing a discrepancy in severity criteria, such as low mean PG but severe stenotic AVA [ ]. Dobutamine stress echocardiography (DSE) is a useful modality to discriminate between pseudo-severe and true severe classical low-flow low-pressure gradient (LFLPG) AS with reduced LV ejection fraction (LVEF) [ ]. Under the condition of an increase in stroke volume (SV) >20 % during graded dosing of dobutamine infusion compared to rest, true severe LFLPG AS is characterized by (1) an increase in mean PG >30 mmHg, (2) AVA <1.0 (1.2) cm 2 at every stage of dobutamine infusion, and (3) an increase in effective orifice area assessed by continuity equation <0.3 cm 2 . Figure 2 a shows the flow velocity response of dobutamine infusion in a patient with LFLPG severe AS and reduced LVEF. During graded dosing of dobutamine infusion, peak velocity across the aortic valve increased from 3.4−4.6 m/s with an increase in mean PG >30 mmHg. Although AVA increased from 0.8−1.1 cm 2 , the change still fulfilled the criteria for true severe AS. Fig. 2 Low-dose dobutamine stress echocardiography in a patient with low-pressure gradient severe aortic stenosis with reduced left ventricular function. a During graded dose of dobutamine infusion, peak velocity across the aortic valve progressively increased in conjunction with improved left ventricular contraction. b Calculation of projected aortic valve area in the same patient. Projected aortic valve area was 0.87 cm 2 ; the value reconfirmed true severe aortic stenosis
One major limitation of DSE is that SV and flow response during dobutamine infusion varies in each patient, and cannot be predicted. Specifically, the change in mean PG and AVA during stress largely depends on the magnitude of flow augmentation achieved during DSE, which may vary from one patient to another. To overcome this limitation, Pibarot et al. [ ] proposed the concept of projected AVA (AVA proj ) at a normal flow rate. Flow rate is calculated as the ratio of SV and ejection time, and normal flow rate was defined as 250 ml/s. During each stage of dobutamine infusion, AVA is plotted against flow rate, from which a regression line is drawn. The slope of the regression line is called valve compliance (VC). Projected AVA is determined by the following formula: $${\text{AVA}}_{\text{proj}} = {\text{AVA}}_{\text{rest}} + {\text{VC}} \times \left( {250 - Q_{\text{rest}} } \right).$$ AVA proj < 1.0 cm 2 discriminated true severe AS from pseudo-severe AS with an 83 % accuracy in patients with LFLPG severe AS with reduced LVEF. Figure 2 b shows AVA proj in the same patient in Fig. 2 a. AVA proj was 0.87 cm 2 , and this finding reflects true severe AS.
Symptomatic severe AS is a class I indication for AV surgery. However, even meticulous history taking in asymptomatic severe AS patients may not be completely reliable in an aged population because comorbidity often restricts a patient’s physical activity. In this situation, DSE has the potential to reveal exercise-induced pulmonary hypertension in these patients.
Mitral regurgitation
Although controversy exists regarding early mitral valve (MV) surgery versus watchful waiting in asymptomatic patients with severe mitral regurgitation (MR) [ , , ], a previous study demonstrated the utility of exercise stress echocardiography for predicting future cardiac events in asymptomatic degenerative MR. Magne et al. [ ] performed bicycle stress echocardiography in 61 asymptomatic patients with degenerative MR, and assessed the effective regurgitant orifice (ERO) at rest and exercise. They found that patients who showed an absolute increase in ERO >15 ml during exercise were associated with significantly lower symptom-free survival compared to those with an absolute increase in ERO <15 ml. The same authors also demonstrated the potential utility of exercise stress echocardiography in patients with functional MR. Lancellotti et al. [ ] performed bicycle stress echocardiography in 98 functional MR patients, and found that an increase in ERO by ≥13 mm 2 is an independent predictor for future cardiac death. Both of these studies clearly demonstrated the importance of exercise-induced change in MR severity to predict future cardiac events.
3D echocardiography has the potential for more reliable assessment of change in MR severity during stress echocardiography, because it directly provides vena contracta area (VCA) extracted from 3D full-volume datasets [ ]. Figure 3 shows bicycle stress echocardiographic findings in a patient with cardiac sarcoidosis and functional MR. It is difficult to assess the change of MR severity on 2D images since subtle changes in the 2D cutting plane in the apical 4-chamber view produce artificial change in vena contracta width (Fig. 3 a). However, 3D full-volume acquisition of color Doppler allows measurement of VCA at each stage of exercise (Fig. 3 b), and verified that VCA increased at bicycle exercise compared to at rest. In summary, 3D stress echocardiography is a useful modality to quantify MR severity during exercise. Fig. 3 Color Doppler mitral regurgitation at rest and during graded bicycle exercise in a patient with cardiac sarcoidosis. a Mitral regurgitation in the apical 4-chamber views. Severity of functional mitral regurgitation seemed to be the same. b Color Doppler anterior-posterior, commissure–commissure and short axis views of mitral regurgitation extracted from 3D datasets. Vena contracta area increased from 0.12 cm 2 at baseline to 0.40 cm 2 during stress
Heart failure
Although several therapeutic advancements, such as beta-blockade, adaptive servo-ventilation therapy and cardiac resynchronization therapy have improved survival of heart failure patients, their prognosis remains poor. A representative case highlighting stress echocardiography as an excellent modality to determine specific cause of several hospital admissions following heart failure exacerbation is reported below.
Case 1
A 72-year-old male with a previous history of anterior wall myocardial infarction was admitted to hospital due to heart failure exacerbation. He had regularly taken his cardiac medication, but had three episodes of hospital admission due to heart failure during the previous 6 months. Electrocardiogram showed left bundle branch block, and routine echocardiography after diuretic treatment revealed apical akinesis with moderately reduced LV function (LVEF 35 %) with functional MR. Supine bicycle stress echocardiography was performed before discharge. Functional MR was of a moderate degree at baseline, and increased in severity at 25 W of exercise (Fig. 4 ). More remarkable findings were observed in Doppler flow profiles across the MV and tricuspid valve. The envelope of MR velocity changed from round to triangular shape with a reduction of peak velocity across the MV. These findings reflected elevated left atrial pressure with the development of a large v wave secondary to exacerbation of MR. Exercise-induced pulmonary hypertension also developed. Thus, deterioration of functional MR with subtle stress was the primary cause of multiple episodes of aggravation of heart failure symptoms in this patient. This case clearly showed dynamic changes in valvular regurgitation and/or pulmonary arterial pressure developed even with light exercise. Fig. 4 Bicycle exercise stress echocardiography in a patient with functional mitral regurgitation. a Severity of mitral regurgitation increased at 25 W of exercise compared to the baseline. b Doppler echocardiographic findings in the same patient. Note change in profile of mitral regurgitation velocity as well as increase in tricuspid regurgitation velocity. MR mitral regurgitation, TR tricuspid regurgitation, TDI tissue Doppler imaging at the septal corner of the mitral annulus
Recently, Yamada et al. [ ] investigated the utility of pre-load stress echocardiography. The authors demonstrated that pre-load stress echocardiography with leg-positive pressure provides incremental prognostic information over conventional echocardiographic parameters obtained at rest in patients with mild heart failure. Acute increase of LV preload was induced by a more simple procedure—passive leg lifting. During the passive leg lift, LV end-diastolic volume, SV, LVEF, E-wave and A-wave velocities increased in healthy subjects [ ]. However, the cardiovascular response against passive leg lifting might be different in patients with heart failure.
Case 2
A 78-year-old female with shortness of breath came to the echocardiography laboratory to check her heart function. Electrocardiogram showed left bundle branch block. Resting echocardiography revealed mildly dilated LV with LV dyssynchrony and diffuse hypokinesis. LVEF was 25 %. E-wave and A-wave velocities were fused. There was mild MR. Estimated pulmonary artery pressure was upper normal (35 mmHg). During passive leg lifting, fused E and A-velocity increased. However, there were no change in LA and LV volumes, resulting in no apparent change in LVSV and LVEF. She developed pulmonary hypertension (46 mmHg) (Fig. 5 ). Thus, an increase in fused E- and A-velocity during passive leg lifting reflects elevated left atrial pressure that could be a trigger to induce secondary pulmonary vasoconstriction and subsequent pulmonary hypertension. These results suggest that her pre-load reserve was already exhausted. Specifically, the Frank–Starling law of the left atrium no longer operated adequately, and a further increase in pre-load would be accompanied with no increase in LA volume, hence no augmentation of forward flow across the MV. However, it produces further elevation of left atrial pressure, resulting in the development of pulmonary edema. This case illustrates how a simple stress maneuver might unmask an underlying abnormality that could not be detected at rest in some heart failure patients. Fig. 5 Echocardiographic findings before and during leg lifting in a patient with heart failure. Left panels show 3D volumetric data and speckle tracking on the left atrial wall in the apical 4-chamber view. Right panels show LV inflow velocity ( upper ), tissue Doppler velocity on the septal corner of the mitral annulus ( middle ) and continuous wave Doppler of the tricuspid regurgitation ( bottom ). Although there was no apparent change in left atrial and left ventricular volumes, LV inflow velocity increased in conjunction with elevated pulmonary arterial pressure. LAVx maximum left atrial volume, LAVn minimum left atrial volume
Other indications for stress echocardiography
Stress echocardiography is also useful to predict future outcome in patients with dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Of special concern is the application of stress echocardiography in patients with pulmonary hypertension. Irrespective of the causes of pulmonary hypertension, the severity of pulmonary hypertension is closely coupled with a patient’s functional capacity and future prognosis. However, assessment of pulmonary hypertension only at rest is insufficient. The change in pulmonary arterial pressure during graded bicycle exercise can provide additional information that could not be predicted at rest [ ]. The effectiveness of anti-pulmonary hypertension drugs is also evaluated by stress echocardiography. Right ventricular mechanics during exercise assessable by 2D speckle tracking and 3D echocardiography is a fruitful field for future research [ ].
Conclusions
Although primary indications of stress echocardiography for coronary artery disease do not seem to be relevant, especially in Japan, novel indications of stress echocardiography in other fields of cardiovascular disease are rapidly expanding in conjunction with the advent of new technology. Stress echocardiography is not a special tool for limited researchers, but rather a fundamental and routine method of choice that every sonographer should be familiar with.