Introduction
Who has not already experienced the unpleasant feeling, when, for example, you were called to the board in school and could not answer the teacher’s question? You don’t know what to say anymore, but nevertheless cannot escape the eyes of the others. The pulse rises, blood flows into your face, you feel blushing and each whisper of the others in the room is registered attentively.
The feeling of embarrassment, when a mishap happens to us in public, we make a mistake or behave inappropriately, is well-known to everyone. The expectation of negative evaluation by the others, whose consent is so important to us as social beings, lets us experience this unpleasant, nearly painful feeling. Embarrassment belongs to the class of the so-called social emotions. Social emotions, which include for example guilt, pride, shame or jealousy, are differentiated from so-called basic emotions such as anger, fear, joy or disgust [ ]. Contrary to basic emotions, social emotions are always socially conveyed, whereby they can also be regarded as interpersonal emotions [ ]. This can be more precisely illustrated by the above introduced example of experiencing embarrassment: The strong emotional experience is a reaction to the inability to answer the teacher’s question and be disgraced before the audience. There are also many other situations, which can cause embarrassment, and mishaps or inability can be of physical nature (e. g. running against a locked glass door), of cognitive nature or can be related to appearance (e. g. open trousers) and the loss of body control ([ ]; Miller 1996; Miller and Leary 1992). In the example situation presented here, it is important that the predicament takes place in public and the person does not want to attract negative attention in front of the present classmates. The embarrassment can be thereby conceptionally compared to experiencing physical pain: Like physical pain signals a threat to the physical integrity, because we, for example, cut our finger, the feeling of embarrassment signals a threat to the social integrity of a person (Eisenberger et al. 2003; Macdonald and Leary 2005b; [ ]). Our public mishaps cause us to reflect on them, as to how others evaluate us and whether they may think not as well about us as we wished.
Embarrassment, however, in principle is a useful emotion. If we experience embarrassment, we notice that we are in the center of attention of our surroundings, while we, in an unwanted moment, have violated etiquettes and norms. And if we express the experience of embarrassment by blushing, lowering our gaze or smiling embarrassedly, the people around us know that we have recognized our error and that we eventually regret it. The people watching are appeased by our gestures and our behavior. They perceive us as more likeable and rank us more social (Feinberg et al. 2012). Thus, with the expression of embarrassment our relationship with the environment can be adjusted and the social integrity be restored. Therefore, embarrassment has an important function by regulating social interactions in our everyday life. Excessive fear of embarrassing situations, however, can take on proportions causing severe impairments in everyday life. With people suffering from a social anxiety disorder, this leads in the worst case to a withdrawal from social life and contributes to the formation of depressive symptoms (Schneider 1992).
The meaning of publicity for the experience of embarrassment
As described in the introduction, the interaction of two factors is decisive for the experience of embarrassment: A mishap must have happened, and it must have taken place in a public context, i. e. in interaction with others [ ]. During social interactions we always have a representation of what our interaction partners and others might think of us. This thinking about the point of view of others and their perception and intentions is also described as the process of perspective taking or “mentalizing” [ ]. Thinking about how others assess and evaluate us and how they will possibly behave as a consequence, is associated with brain activations of the so-called mentalizing network which includes the medial prefrontal cortex, parts of the temporal lobe up until the temporal pole and the transitional areas between the temporal lobe and the parietal cortex. Thus, every time we try to put ourselves into another person’s position, this network of brain regions is active and creates a mental simulation of the internal conditions of another person. This is highly relevant for embarrassment, because a mishap, which takes place in social isolation, e. g. running against a door when you are at home on your own, might be painful, but is not accompanied with taking the perspective of others’ and therefore does not lead necessarily to blushing and to the proper experience of embarrassment. Our social image we want to maintain remains untouched in that case, because there is nobody who notices the norm violation and could evaluate us in any form.
Interpersonal emotions in the social neurosciences
Due to the complexity of interpersonal emotions, in the last few decades the focus of affective neuroscientific research lay mainly on the description of the neural mechanisms of basic emotions such as fear, anger or joy. The research area of social neurosciences, which puts a special focus on the dynamics and interactivity of interpersonal experiences, developed only in the last few years. At first, still using rather classical experimental paradigms (see excursion 1), brain activities during the experience of interpersonal emotions such as embarrassment ([ , ]; Takahashi et al. 2004), envy (Takahashi et al. 2009), gloating (Shamay-Tsoory et al. 2007; Takahashi et al. 2009), shame (Finger et al. 2006), pride (Takahashi et al. 2008) or guilt (Wagner et al. 2011) were examined. Due to the limited possibilities in the research laboratories, e. g. it is not possible to simultaneously examine several persons in an MRI scanner, however, an essential component of experiencing “interpersonal” emotions in these studies was missing: namely the actual or felt presence of others within a common interaction framework. By means of innovative experimental arrangements, recent approaches within the social neurosciences try to create common spaces for interaction between two or more individuals in order to approach an authentic experience of these socially conveyed emotions and cognitions (see excursion 2 as an example). Particularly the idea to create, with the help of engaged individuals, a staged social framework into which the subjects can be immersed and in which social emotions can be elicited, offers some crucial advantages for neuroscientific approaches: 1) group processes can be precisely controlled in these interactions, among other things the exclusion of a person from a group, effects of majorities or minorities etc.; 2) repeated causation of authentic emotional experiences with all their facets is possible in a controlled environment; 3) the dynamics of the interactive environment requires active participation which makes the research paradigm appear interesting.
Experiencing embarrassment on behalf of others
Referring to the initial example, the question arises whether thoughts about the potential endangerment of one’s own social integrity are justified. What do the other people represent and experience, when they observe that someone stands in front of a group and does not understand the question of the teacher? Studies on the so-called “spotlight effect” show that subjects wearing e. g. a t-shirt with a distinctive imprint clearly overrated how much this unusual piece of clothing was registered by others and how many people could ultimately remember the imprint [ ]. This should be actually reassuring when looking at the development of the internet as well as commercially very successful formats of reality TV (e. g. “I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here!”, “Farmer Wants a Wife”), with those, deliberately or otherwise, private details have been brought to the public’s attention and have been visible to a mass audience—including norm violations, inappropriate self-manifestations and embarrassing situations. Are the social consequences of publication of private photos or videos underestimated thereby and do they lead to an endangerment of the social integrity of the individuals affected or not?
The observed feeling of mishaps made public on the side of the consumers is called colloquially “Fremdscham” and in the scientific literature “vicarious embarrassment ” [ ]. Vicarious embarrassment describes the unpleasant emotional state that people experience, when they register that a mishap happens to somebody else in public or he/she violates a specific norm or etiquette relevant in this context. It is not important whether the observed person actually feels embarrassed (e. g. when forgetting the words in a speech and starting stuttering) or not (e. g. when giving a lecture with open trousers). It is sufficient that empathic persons in the public register that the integrity of the person speaking is endangered, i. e. the person is in a situation, in which his/her social image is concretely endangered. The vicarious feeling of embarrassment thereby has similarities with the empathic experience of pain and it is more strongly pronounced, the more empathic the observers are and the better they are able to put themselves in the emotional state of the person whose social integrity is at stake [ ].
In this context there are many influential factors that modulate the experience of vicarious embarrassment. Behavioral studies suggest that the social connection to the observed person influences the vicarious feeling of physical pain (Cheng et al. 2010; Singer et al. 2006). Also, the experience of embarrassment (Chekroun and Nugier 2011; Fortune and Newby-Clark 2008) and of vicarious embarrassment from the observer’s perspective are affected by social relationships [ ]. Who is not more ashamed, when the own child throws a tantrum in the pedestrian zone instead of the neighbor’s child?
Brain activation during the experience of embarrassment and vicarious embarrassment
The experience of embarrassment is linked to activation in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the anterior insula (AI). The same network is also involved, when we feel physical pain on our own body, but also in the case of vicarious experiences of physical or social pain [ , , ]. It should be noted that the overlap between the involved brain regions has corroborated the idea of similar neural processes underlying social and physical pain which, however, could not be finally clarified yet. Recent studies suggest that many different forms of negative affect are encoded in this network, which are all associated with very different emotional qualities. In more precise analyses, for example by means of machine-learning algorithms, it can also be shown that the activation patterns of social pain including embarrassment and physical pain can be differentiated [ ]. Despite these restrictions, it can be assumed that the AI/ACC network plays a crucial role, not only in encoding your own emotions, but also in obtaining access to the experiences of others via the vicarious experience of these emotions. This supports the assumption of so-called shared circuits—brain regions, in which both one’s own as well as the emotional experience of others are represented and thus become consciously accessible and available [ ]. This is confirmed by a strong association of subjectively perceived intensity of the vicarious embarrassment and the activity in the AI/ACC network [ ]. Furthermore, on a neural level, the effects of social proximity on the vicarious experience of physical and social pain are shown by an upregulation of the ACC/AI network (Beeney et al. 2011; Cheng et al. 2010; Meyer et al. 2012). This can be explained by the fact that we care more strongly about others, the closer our relationship is. The same applies for the experience of vicarious embarrassment, where the experience of embarrassment is additionally assumed to be regulated by increased self-reflection and activity in the mentalizing network, because the behavior of friends reflects on us more unfavorably than norm violations of unknown people [ ].
Furthermore, the multifactorial explanatory model, in line with a constructivist understanding of the neural bases of emotions (Lindquist et al. 2012), is reflected in the data of the imaging studies. Embarrassment is not accompanied by a specific activation of a set of brain regions, but requires the coordinated activation of different neural networks, which, taken in isolation, fulfill a specific function. Thus, it could be observed that the occurrence of a mishap in a potentially threatening context leads to a simultaneously increased coupling of regions of the mentalizing system and the ACC/AI network with the ventral anterior insula and the amygdala [ ]. The amygdala and ventral anterior insula are functionally and structurally closely coupled and play a crucial role for the experience of embarrassment and in integrating the information of the participating networks.
Clinical relevance of social neuroscientific studies on the experience of embarrassment
In everyday life the above described processes run automatically. Only in exceptional cases do we notice the complexity of these processes and how those enable us to understand the essence of a social situation (you could call it a “social gist”). If there are disturbances in the participating neural networks, the effects can be manifold. In clinical research experimental paradigms explicitly manipulating the interactivity and dynamics of social processes are increasingly important. Such experimental paradigms can make it possible to examine aspects of human experiences and underpinnings of disorders which would otherwise remain hidden. Furthermore, approaches such as social immersion are very attractive for participants and have, by means of greater social integration and the interactive character, a larger participatory potential than experimental paradigms in “social isolation” (Becchio et al. 2010). Their importance is further justified by the fact that many psychiatric and neurological disorders are accompanied by particular difficulties in the social interaction. That applies not only to disorders, where the core symptoms manifest in the social domain like autism or social anxiety disorders, but also e. g. to depression, schizophrenia and certain forms of epilepsy. A comprehensive understanding of how altered social behavior is mediated by changes in the neural architecture and could be treated is essential to reduce problems in everyday life, which is shaped by social interaction. For example, in the context of subclinical social anxiety, a greater focus on the audience accompanied by an increased activity of the mentalizing network was shown during the induction of embarrassment (see excursion 2) [ ]. This points to a shift of attention and stronger processing of social cues in the environment, which are considered threatening by participants with social anxiety disorders. The examination of autism spectrum disorders by means of social neuroscience methods seems to be particularly promising. Autism spectrum disorders are pervasive neurodevelopmental disorders persisting across the lifespan and are among others characterized by impairments in the area of social interaction and communication. At present, there is evidence that autism spectrum disorders are accompanied by deficits in the domain of perspective taking with reduced abilities to dynamically react to others in social interactions, to predict their thoughts and feelings and to adjust social behavior accordingly [ ]. So far, there is only little research on autism in the area of interpersonal emotions using social interactive experimental paradigms and behavioral studies on the experience of embarrassment in autism had inconsistent results: Although an early study reported that individuals with autism spectrum disorders focused less on the audience during embarrassing situations than control subjects (Capps et al. 1992), other studies showed that children with this diagnosis understood the concept of embarrassment and reported to experience this interpersonal emotion in everyday life (Hillier and Allinson 2002). A recent study suggests that individuals with autism spectrum disorder take note when a social etiquette is violated and report to experience vicarious embarrassment. The self-report, however, is not related to psychophysiological markers and neural activation in the ACC/AI network, which conveys this emotional experience in control subjects (Krach et al. 2015). The assessment and evaluation of norm violations in autism patients were, however, associated with activation in the hippocampus, which suggests rather a connection with memory processes. The discrepancy between self-report and physiological indicators of emotional experience is supported by clinical observations: In order to be able to behave more appropriately in a social situation, autism patients are trained early to memorize the social rules of everyday life. During complex everyday situations the assessment of the own emotional experience is thus based less on an actual introspective representation than on an inquiry of the learned norms and rules. De Vignemont and Frith (2007), for example, describe patients with autism spectrum disorder not to have difficulties to assess how others should behave, however the reasons why persons show a certain behavior are less accessible (“People with Autism Spectrum Disorders do not provide any description of how people do behave, but how people should behave. They live in a very normative social world”; (De Vignemont and Frith 2007)).
Concluding remark
Research on the neural bases of the experience of embarrassment and other interpersonal emotions is still at the very beginning. Only in the last few years has a stream of research developed within the social neurosciences to describe the complexity of interpersonal experiences by means of interactive experimental paradigms. The studies summarized in this article show the potential of such experimental paradigms with the characterization of the neural bases of the experience of embarrassment. The examination of neuropsychiatric disorders accompanied by impairments in social interaction offers particularly interesting insights. Future studies should also pay more attention to these disorders in order to better understand fundamental mechanisms of interpersonal emotions. This enables the development of new therapeutic approaches which could reduce the affected individuals’ problems in everyday life.
Excursion 1 Experimental procedures for the induction of social emotions in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
a. Vignettes methods: Subjects read short stories in the MRI which outline a social situation, e. g. “You are at a dinner party. Suddenly you feel sick and you need to throw up. You soil the precious carpet of the hosts”. The task of the subjects is to imagine the situation as graphically and vivid as possible before the “inner eye”. Subsequently, subjects are asked about their subjective feeling having experienced in the respective situation. b. Picture method: Subjects attend to pictures or sketches of social situations. Their task is to look at the situations as accurately as possible and empathize with the situation. The depicted situations are partly accompanied by written explanations. Subsequently, the subjects are also asked about their subjective feeling having experienced in the respective situation. c. Video method: Hereby either self-filmed videos or video clips from the internet (e. g. youtube.com) are used to illustrate emotional situations in the most realistic context possible. The advantage of the video footage filmed by the researchers themselves is that, in this way, certain requirements to the stimulus material (inter alia dynamics, number of featuring persons, color intensity etc.) can be specifically controlled. The advantage of using video clips from the internet is their greater “authenticity”. The methods specified under a. to c. represent still today the method of choice in large-scale multicenter studies. Because they are very easy to use, the stimulus material is highly controlled and there is comparatively low personnel and time expenditure, they dominate the current research landscape in the field of affective neuroscience. d. Re-experience method: With this variant the subjects are asked detailed questions about emotionally charged experiences in their life before the actual measurement in the MRI (e. g. exclusionary experiences, embarrassing moments). These situations are subsequently described during the measurement and subjects have the task to re-experience the episode of their lives. After each episode the subjects are asked about their subjective feeling having experienced in the respective situation. e. Game method: Within this paradigm, the subjects are involved in a game situation in such a way that certain emotions can be selectively released by certain events during the game. These games can be arranged in social isolation or social interaction with others.
Excursion 2 The social immersion idea
In order to induce “authentic” experiences of social emotions, such as embarrassment, envy or guilt it must be guaranteed that the subjects are not informed about the actual goal of the examination. Therefore, subjects must be “immersed” into a social situation and the actual goal of the examination must be covered up by means of a pretended story, a so-called cover story. The following experiment illustrates the procedure in a study on the neural bases of embarrassment and pride:
First a social interaction must be created. Thereby, the subject as well as the other persons brought into the scenario (the so-called confederates) are invited to an experiment on “cognitive estimation” (Fig. 1 a, top left ). The subject believes that all invited persons participate just as equals in the experiment. After an initial moderated phase of getting to know each other, different questionnaires on personality as well as on momentary experience and condition are filled in by all participants. In order to inconspicuously select the subject for measuring the brain activation while “estimating” properties in the MRI, an IQ test is carried out. After a short evaluation of the test, it will be announced that the actual subject performed best and thus was chosen to carry out the following part of the examination in the MRI (Fig. 1 a, top right ). Before the actual measurement begins, the “cognitive estimation” task is rehearsed together in the preparation room and the principle of the task is explained. Each “cognitive estimation” phase (e. g. estimating the weight of a fly or the number of matches in a box) follows a feedback phase, during which the subjects will receive an evaluation of their performance as compared to a reference group (Fig. 1 b shows the process of a trial and the columns in Fig. 1 c illustrate the three stages of the reported achievement in factor 1). Besides, it becomes evident in the feedback phase whether the other participants are informed about the result of the subject in the MRI or not (the lines in Fig. 1 c show the two stages of the second factor, namely publicity and privacy). As such, it is a classical experimental design, in which on the one hand a public failure should cause embarrassment and on the other hand a positive feedback should cause pride. While from the view of the subject in the MRI the whole experiment apparently continues, a previously defined program is actually implemented and the confederates outside of the MRI can relax (Fig. 1 a, bottom left ). After completion of the measurement, the subjects returns to the original situation prior to the measurement and is led back to his/her seat. Thus the subject is still made believe that all participants were actual equal participants of the experiment. Afterwards the subject is asked in detail about his/her experience during the examination in a different room and is finally informed about the examination and the role of the other participants (Fig. 1 a, bottom right ). Fig. 1 See excursion 2 for more information
Excursion 3 Neural networks of the experience of embarrassment in the brain
The medial proportion of the prefrontal cortex and the precuneus are simultaneously involved, when we try to take the perspective of others and think about their evaluations (see “mentalizing”, Fig. 2 a). This applies particularly to situations, in which we are in the center of attention, thus are potentially facing a public situation. Dorsal aspects of the anterior insula and the anterior cingulate cortex are activated, when we feel arousal when suffering a misfortune (Fig. 2 b). These two networks show an increased functional connectivity with the ventral part of the anterior insula and the amygdala in the paralimbic system, when we fail in a public situation—the key criterion for experiencing embarrassment (Fig. 2 c). Fig. 2 See excursion 3 for more information