Introduction
Chemical synapses are specialized junctions through which two neurons (or one neuron and one non-neuronal cell) communicate with each other and which allow neurons to form functional circuits within the central nervous system (CNS). While many different types of inhibitory and excitatory chemical synapses exist, they all share some structural and functional characteristics (Fig. 1 ). The presynaptic compartment contains small, membrane-bounded organelles (synaptic vesicles) filled with signaling molecules (neurotransmitters). Upon arrival of an action potential, those vesicles that are docked at a specific presynaptic release site (active zone) and primed for fusion with the plasma membrane release their neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft in a process called synaptic vesicle exocytosis. Released neurotransmitters diffuse through the synaptic cleft, a small space of 20–50 nm that separates the pre- and the postsynaptic membrane, and eventually binds to neurotransmitter receptors that are located in the postsynaptic membrane where they are anchored by an elaborate protein complex called the postsynaptic density (PSD). Receptor binding of neurotransmitter induces ion flow across the postsynaptic membrane thereby altering its membrane potential and/or induces signaling cascades in the postsynaptic neuron.
Fig. 1 a left Primary embryonic hippocampal neuron 14 days in culture expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP)-actin, right : higher magnification images are depicted from the axon ( a ) and from a dendritic shaft ( d ), GFP-actin is shown in green whereas presynaptic terminals are labeled via an anti-synapsin immunostaining in red , note that GFP-actin is highly enriched in the presynaptic bouton and in postsynaptic spines ( closed arrows ) and to a lesser extent present in the axon or the dendritic shaft ( open arrows ); b electron microscopic micrograph of an excitatory synapse in the stratum radiatum of the hippocampal CA1 region from an adult mouse; c schematic representation of the excitatory synapse shown in b that also includes actin filaments (F-actin; red ). F-actin distribution within the presynaptic terminal and the dendritic spine is in accordance with current literature
Actin is highly abundant at chemical synapses, and actin filaments (F-actin) are present in presynaptic terminals and in postsynaptic compartments (Fig. 1a , c ; for review: [ , ]). As a major structural component, F-actin determines the morphology of chemical synapses. This is particularly evident for dendritic spines, which are specialized, tiny protoplasmic protrusions that cover the dendritic surface of many neurons and that mediate most of the excitatory synaptic transmission in the brain [ ]. Accordingly, early studies demonstrated the relevance of actin dynamics, the dynamic and fast assembly and disassembly of F-actin (see excursion on actin dynamics), for the morphology and ultrastructure of chemical synapses. As an example, F-actin depolymerization induced by treatment with latrunculin A, a natural toxin produced by certain sponges including Latrunculia that sequesters monomeric actin (G-actin) and prevents it from polymerization, causes morphological changes of presynaptic terminals and eliminates dendritic spines [ ]. Notably, these pharmacological studies revealed defects in neurotransmitter release and in postsynaptic mechanisms such as long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD), which are long-lasting changes in the strength of excitatory synapses mediated among others by persistent increases (LTP) or decreases (LTD) in the surface expression of postsynaptic glutamate receptors and which are widely considered as the major cellular mechanisms underlying learning and memory formation. Together, these studies demonstrated that actin dynamics are relevant not only for the morphology of chemical synapse, but also for pre- and postsynaptic physiology. Moreover, they led to the suggestion that regulators of actin dynamics, e.g. actin-binding proteins (ABPs) and their upstream regulatory pathways, are important regulators of synapse physiology and of brain functionality. Indeed, studies on neuronal cultures or the analysis of knockout mouse models unraveled the synaptic function of several ABPs in the past years, among them actin dynamics regulating proteins that are under investigations in our labs and are therefore topic of this review article, namely actin depolymerizing proteins of the ADF/cofilin family and profilins that rather promote F-actin assembly. Moreover, some of the strongest candidates for human neurodevelopmental disorders such as schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders (ASD) or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) have been shown to specifically modulate actin dynamics [ , , , ], thereby highlighting the relevance of actin dynamics for synapse physiology and brain function, and underlining the need for a better understanding of the mechanisms that control actin dynamics in chemical synapses.
Synaptic functions of ADF/cofilin
Actin depolymerizing proteins of the ADF/cofilin family are key regulators of actin dynamics that accelerate G-actin dissociation from the filaments’ minus ends and sever F-actin (Fig. 2a ; for review: [ ]). Moreover, at high ADF/cofilin-to-actin ratios, ADF/cofilincan promote F-actin polymerization by nucleating G-actin and by stabilizing F-actin. In mammals, the ADF/cofilin family comprises three proteins, namely cofilin1 (non-muscle cofilin, n-cofilin), cofilin2 (muscle cofilin, m-cofilin), and ADF (actin depolymerizing factor, destrin), and cofilin1 and ADF are both broadly expressed in the brain and present at excitatory synapses [ , , , , ]. Actin binding of ADF/cofilin is controlled by phosphorylation of a conserved serine residue at position 3 (Ser3), and LIM kinases (LIMK) that inactivate ADF/cofilin by Ser3 phosphorylation has been recognized as important regulator of ADF/cofilin activity [ ]. Indeed, a role of ADF/cofilin in synaptic actin dynamics and synaptic function has been hypothesized from the phenotype of mutant mice lacking LIMK1 [ ]. In these mutants, ADF/cofilin phosphorylation levels were strongly reduced and they displayed synaptic defects including a reduced spine size and impaired synaptic plasticity. Subsequently, several others studies on neuronal cultures corroborated a role of cofilin1 in spine morphology and synaptic plasticity by exploiting short synthetic peptides mimicking active and inactive cofilin1 or by altering its expression levels [ , , , , , ]. Together, these studies led to the conclusions that cofilin1 is an important regulator of actin dynamics in dendritic spines that controls dendritic spine morphology and synaptic plasticity in an actin-dependent mechanism (for review: [ ]).
Fig. 2 a Illustration highlighting the function of ADF/cofilin and profilin in actin treadmilling. ADF/cofilin preferentially binds ADP-actin and thereby accelerates monomer dissociation and F-actin severing. Profilin accelerates ATP for ADP exchange on monomeric actin and funnels monomers to the filaments’ growing plus end; b microscopic image of a single spine (circle diameter 1 µm) from a GFP-actin-expressing hippocampal neuron, false color mode indicates differences in fluorescence intensity (see adjacent scale). The spine was imaged before and at various time points after the 405 nm laser bleaching impulse, FRAP (fluorescence recovery after photobleaching) can be observed over time; c the fluorescence recovery curve indicates a dynamic and a more stable F-actin fraction within the spine head
To study the synaptic function of ADF/cofilin in vivo and to unravel its relevance for behavior, we exploited knockout mouse models for cofilin1 and ADF. These mutants have been generated in WalterWitke’s lab at the EMBL—Mouse Biology Unit (now Institute of Genetics, University of Bonn) to unravel the function of ADF/cofilinin neuron migration and differentiation [ , ]. Consistent with the proposed function of cofilin1 in dendritic spine actin dynamics and morphology, the F/G-actin ratio was increased in synaptosomes (isolated nerve terminals generated from fresh brain tissue) from cofilin1 mutants, and they displayed an abnormal large spine profile [ ]. Moreover, synaptic plasticity was impaired in cofilin1 mutants (reduced LTP, absence of LTD), while presynaptic physiology was fully preserved [ , ]. Hence, excitatory synapses in cofilin1 mutants lost their ability to respond with structural and functional adaptations to changes in synaptic transmission. As a consequence of these synaptic defects, cofilin1 mutants performed significantly weaker in paradigms of associative learning, e.g. cofilin1 mutants did not learn the association of a painful foot-shook with the operant chamber or a specific tone in the contextual and cued fear conditioning, and they did not learn the location of a hidden platform in the Morris water maze [ ]. Conversely, cofilin1 mutants performed similar to controls in working memory tests and, apart from moderately decreased anxiety-related behavior, they did not show any other obvious behavioral abnormality [ , , ]. In agreement with the aforementioned in vitro studies, our analysis of cofilin1 mutant mice points to a specific role of cofilin1 in structural and functional plasticity, and it demonstrates its relevance for learning and memory.
Apart from cofilin1, we found ADF to be present in the pre- and postsynaptic compartment of excitatory synapses [ ]. Since both proteins share very similar biochemical activities, we hypothesized that ADF is critical for synaptic plasticity and learning, similar to cofilin1. Surprisingly, spine morphology and synapse physiology was unchanged in systemic ADF mutants, and these mice did not display any obvious behavioral abnormalities or learning deficits [ ]. However, we found enhanced synaptic cofilin1 levels in ADF mutants and, vice versa , enhanced synaptic ADF levels in cofilin1 mutants, and we therefore assumed compensatory mechanisms in single mutant mice. Indeed, when compared to cofilin1 single mutants, the F/G-actin ratio was strongly increased in double mutant mice lacking ADF and cofilin1 [ ]. Impaired synaptic actin dynamics in double mutants resulted in presynaptic defects that were not present in single mutants, including an elevated number of docked synaptic vesicles and an altered distribution of synaptic vesicles within the presynaptic terminal. These defects impaired presynaptic physiology in double mutants, in which synaptic vesicle exocytosis was increased, while vesicle recruitment to the active zone upon prolonged synaptic stimulation was reduced [ ]. Together, our analyses of cofilin1 and ADF single and double mutant mice led us to conclude that cofilin1 and ADF are equally important for presynaptic physiology, while cofilin1 emerged as the limiting factor in dendritic spine morphology and synaptic plasticity.
Interestingly, double mutants displayed behavioral abnormalities including strongly increased locomotion in familiar (home cage) and novel environment, impaired working memory, impulsive traits, and a paradoxical calming effect of pharmacological treatment with psychostimulants such as methylphenidate (Ritalin) [ ], thus closely modelling typical clinical symptoms of ADHD for which methylphenidate is widely prescribed in clinical practice. Mechanistically, our pharmaco-behavioral analysis revealed a dysregulation of dopaminergic transmission in double mutants, and our physiological experiments led us to suggest that the nigro-striatal dopaminergic pathway is over-activated because of enhanced glutamate activity in the striatum, the primary input of the basal ganglia system which is crucial for modulating locomotion. Together, our behavioral analysis of cofilin1 and ADF mutant mice revealed specific defects in associative learning in cofilin1 mutants, while loss of ADF has no adverse effect on behavior [ , ]. Conversely, compound inactivation of cofilin1 and ADF causes a more complex behavioral phenotype reminiscent of ADHD core symptoms, suggesting that dysfunctional synaptic actin dynamics can cause or contribute to the pathology of human neuropathies.
Synaptic functions of profilins
Profilin is another key regulator of actin dynamics that enhances the ATP for ADP exchange on G-actin and provides it to the plus end of F-actin (Fig. 2a ; for review: [ , ]). However, depending on the concentration, profilin can also sequester G-actin and therefore restrict F-actin elongation [ , ]. Different profilin genes are expressed in phylogenetically disparate organisms as yeast, plants or vertebrates [ , ]. In mammals, profilin1 expression has been shown to be ubiquitous and essential for embryonic development [ , ], while profilin2a shows its highest expression in the brain, and other tissue-specific profilins can be found in kidney or testis [ ]. Besides binding actin, profilins are characterized by their interaction with actin-related proteins and two other types of protein-binding domains: poly-L-proline (PLP) stretches in proteins of e.g. the Ena/VASP family, WAVE or the formins, and membrane-bound phospholipids like phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) [ ].
Although a variety of specific interaction partners are known, the role of different profilin isoforms and especially of brain-specific profilin2a remains poorly understood [ ]. Recent evidence has been provided for both pre- and postsynaptic localization of profilin1 and profilin2a [ , ]. Both profilins have been implicated in dendritic spine stability in vitro and in vivo : experiments in cultured hippocampal neurons showed activity-mediated targeting of both profilin1 and profilin2a into spines [ , ]. Furthermore, Lamprecht and colleagues showed a fear conditioning-dependent accumulation of profilin (without further isoform specification) in spines of the rat amygdala [ ]. In addition, profilin2a has been shown to indirectly interact with the small GTPase RhoA through the RhoA-specific kinase ROCK to affect spine morphology in an activity-dependent manner involving NMDA receptor activation [ ]. On the other hand, Witke et al. recently showed that profilin2a acts presynaptically by controlling vesicle exocytosis and neuronal excitability leading to increased novelty-seeking behavior in mutant mice [ ]. In our work, by exploiting an acute RNAi-mediated loss-of-function approach in cultures neurons, we could show that exclusively profilin2a is important for dendrite stabilization, whereas both profilin isoforms mediate spine growth and spine stabilization [ ]. It is therefore somewhat surprising that in knockout animals for profilin1 and profilin2a, spine number and synaptic plasticity were normal [ , ]. One explanation might indeed reside in partially overlapping functions of both proteins leading to compensational effects in knockout animals. This is supported by work from our group showing that an acute knockdown of profilin2a actually revealed an important function in dendritic spines, and that recombinant expression of profilin1 could compensate for the RNAi-mediated loss of spines in profilin2a-deficient neurons [ ]. In general, functional redundancy of ABPs and re-adjustment of actin dynamics might be a compensational mechanism to prevent deleterious and otherwise most likely fatal effects for an organism, a fact that may hinder analysis in knockout animals.
By again taking advantage of the acute RNAi-mediated knockdown approach, we wanted to investigate the isoform specific function of profilins in the CNS even further. Interestingly, we could show that profilin1 is of great importance for spine formation, and that the expression of profilin1 is developmentally downregulated in the hippocampus. In contrast to this, we found profilin2a to be involved in spine stabilization and activity-dependent structural plasticity. Interestingly, both isoforms were differentially engaged in regulating actin dynamics in dendritic spines (unpublished data).
Changes in spine shape are directly associated with the dynamic actin cytoskeleton [ , , ], which is highly enriched in dendritic spines (Fig. 1 ). In fact, up to 80 % of F-actin turn over in less than 2 min in the spine head (Fig. 2 ; [ ]). Hence, an understanding of the detailed molecular machinery and identification of key molecules which control F-actin assembly in space and time will help to reveal details of spine function and might eventually also provide a better understanding of neurological disorders characterized by defects in spinogenesis and spine maintenance [ , ]. In this respect, it is interesting to note that in Drosophila the expression of the profilin homolog chickadee is regulated by the fragile X mental retardation protein [ ], which in humans has been associated with hyperactivity, hypersensitivity, and cognitive impairment. In fact, Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is considered to date the most common monogenetic cause for autism, and a hallmark of this syndrome is a defect in spinogenesis and spine maturation [ ]. Future studies therefore will hopefully be able to reveal the isoforms-specific contribution of profilin dysregulation in the context of FXS and the impact on spine morphology and function. This may indeed direct the spotlight of attention more and more towards the central importance of tightly regulated actin dynamics at the synapse and their potential dysregulation in the course of neurological disorders.
Concluding remarks
‘Form follows function’ or ‘function follows form’—in the CNS, synapse structure and functionare sointimately linked that this question seems impossible to answer. F-actin as a central structural element is not only responsible for the morphology of both pre- and postsynaptic structures, but F-actin dynamics also modulate presynaptic vesicle tethering and neurotransmitter release as well as receptor clustering at the PSD [ , ]. We and others could already provide intriguing evidence that ABPs are crucial for synapse function and structure with experiments involving electrophysiology, monitoring activity-dependent spine plasticity, and eventually even mouse behavior. However, the precise role of each ABP at the synapse yet needs to be elucidated. Determining the detailed function of different ABPs in space and time will only be possible using high-resolution imaging techniques which allow to monitor actin dynamics at different sub-compartments within the dendritic spine, for instance at the PSD compared to the base of the spine head or the spine neck. FRAP experiments do not allow to distinguish between F-actin populations that differ in size nor do they provide information about actin dynamics within spinous sub-compartments. Photoactivatable green fluorescent protein (GFP)-actin, which can be switched on using a 2-Photon laser pulse within single spines only at the PSD or in the spine neck, can be used together with high-resolution stimulated emission of depletion (STED) microscopy to monitor F-actin turn-over in the presence or absence of ABPs as profilin or ADF/cofilin. This will allow in addition investigating the activity-dependent localization of ABP at various time intervals after for instance LTP induction. Thereby, we will not only get information about whether and when an ABP moves into a stimulated spine, but also where in the spine head it is localized precisely and how it modulates F-actin dynamics at this time-point.
Excursion on actin dynamics
Actin is highly abundant and one of the most conserved proteins in eukaryotes. Acting as a structural protein, the ability of G-actin to assemble into F-actin is of vital importance for a plethora of cellular processes in all cell types. F-actin polymerization occurs in three steps consisting of a nucleation phase, an elongation phase and the steady state. Although G-actin will spontaneously assemble into oligomers if the concentration is high enough, additional ‘nucleation factors’ such as formins and the Arp2/3 complex are needed to form a stable actin nucleus consisting of three monomers. Subsequently, the elongation of F-actin is promoted by several factors especially at the ‘plus end’. During this step, profilin is needed to provide polymerization competent ATP-actin to the growing filament by catalyzing the exchange of ATP for ADP (Fig. 2a ). Dissociation of monomers predominantly occuring at the ‘minus end’ is the result of ATP hydrolysis and is further promoted by depolymerizing factors such as ADF and cofilin1. Both proteins in addition have the ability to sever F-actin, thereby creating new polymerization sites. During the steady state, assembly at the ‘plus end’ and disassembly at the ‘minus end’ occur at similar rates—a process known as ‘actin treadmilling’.
In cultured neurons, actin treadmilling can be visualized by the expression of fluorescently labeled GFP-actin (Fig. 2b ). The strong signal which results from an accumulation of GFP-actin in the spine head is bleached using a 405 nm laser impulse. Subsequently, fluorescence recovery can be monitored over time (FRAP, F luorescence R ecovery A fter P hotobleaching). Bleached GFP-actin within F-actin is exchanged by new monomers entering the spine via diffusion, thereby leading to a partial recovery of fluorescence during the investigated time window. Therefore, different fractions of F-actin within the single spine can be distinguished as up to 80 % is highly dynamic with a turnover time of 2 min or less, whereas the remaining 20 % show a turnover rate of more than 20 min. Monitoring activity-dependent changes in actin dynamics at single synapses following weak or strong stimulation protocols thus allows to further understand processes of structural remodeling which are crucial during memory formation in highly plastic brain regions as the hippocampus or neocortex.