1 Introduction
Narcolepsy is an incurable chronic neurological sleep disorder impacting about one person per every 2000 worldwide [ ], and 0.05% of the U.S. population [ ]. Narcolepsy symptoms present in the first two decades of life for most individuals, typically before age 25, and is found equally among men and women [ ]. Most individuals with the debilitating symptoms undergo an arduous journey involving numerous medical appointments in seeking accurate diagnosis and treatment, with an average of 10–15 years until they receive an accurate diagnosis [ ]. Once diagnosed, persons with narcolepsy typically encounter noteworthy personal and economic consequences, such as increased medical appointments and costs, and potential unemployment [ ].
Hallmark features of narcolepsy include excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS), cataplexy (sudden loss of voluntary muscle control when a person is awake), sleep paralysis, hypnagogic hallucinations, automatic behaviours, and fragmented/interrupted night-time sleep [ ]. It is a non-progressive disorder with lifelong symptoms that are developmental in nature, and only 10–15% of individuals with narcolepsy experience ‘full-blown’ symptoms of narcolepsy, including cataplexy [ ]. Two subtypes of narcolepsy have been identified: type 1 (Na-1) and type 2 (Na-2) [ ]. Na-1 is defined by EDS and the presence of cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency, and Na-2 is defined by EDS, absence of cataplexy, and normal or undocumented hypocretin levels [ , , ].
Table 1 outlines the American Academy of Sleep Medicine’s (AASM) [ ] International Classification of Sleep Disorders - Third Edition ( ICSD - 3 ) diagnostic criteria for Na-1 and Na-2. For clinicians who are not experts in sleep medicine, the American Psychiatric Association’s (APA) [ ] Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders - Fifth Edition ( DSM - 5 ) also includes narcolepsy diagnostic criteria with specifiers that have greater clinical practicality [ ]. Table 1 ICSD - 3 Diagnostic criteria for narcolepsy type 1 and type 2 Narcolepsy type 1 Narcolepsy type 2 ICD-9 CM code: 347.01 ICD-10-CM code: G47.11 ICD-9-CM code: 347.00 ICD-10-CM code: G47.419 Diagnostic criteria Criteria A and B must be met: A. Daily periods of irrepressible need to sleep or daytime lapses into sleep occurring for at least last 3 months a B. The presence of 1 one or both of the following: 1. Cataplexy and a mean sleep latency of ≤ 8 min and 2 or more sleep onset REM periods (SOREMPs) on an MSLT performed according to standard techniques. A SOREMP (within 15 min of sleep onset) on the preceding nocturnal PSG may replace one of the SOREMPs on the MSLT b 2. CSF hypocretin-1 concentration, measured by immunoreactivity, is either ≤ 110 pg/mL or < 1/3 of mean values obtained in normal subjects with the same standardized assay Criteria A–E must be met: A. Daily periods of irrepressible need to sleep or daytime lapses into sleep occurring for at least 3 months B. A mean sleep latency of ≤ 8 min and 2 sleep onset REM periods (SOREMPs) are found on an MSLT performed according to standard techniques. A SOREMP (within 15 min of sleep onset) on the preceding nocturnal PSG may replace one of the SOREMPs on the MSLT C. Cataplexy is absent c D. Either CSF hypocretin-1 concentration has not been measured or CSF hypocretin-1 concentration measured by immunoreactivity is either > 110 pg/mL or > 1/3 of mean values obtained in normal subjects with the same standardized assay d E. The hypersomnolence and/or MSLT findings are not better explained by other causes (e.g., insufficient sleep, OSA, delayed sleep phase disorder, or the effect of medication or substances or their withdrawal) REM rapid eye movement, MSLT multiple sleep latency test, PSG nocturnal polysomnogram, OSA obstructive sleep apnea, CSF Hcrt-1 cerebrospinal fluid hypocretin-1 a In young children, narcolepsy may sometimes present as excessively long night sleep or as resumption of previously discontinued daytime napping b If narcolepsy type 1 is strongly suspected clinically but the MSLT criteria of B1 are not met, a possible strategy is to repeat the MSLT c If cataplexy develops later, then the disorder should be reclassified as narcolepsy type 1 d If the CSF Hcrt-1 concentration is tested at a later stage and found to be either ≤ 110 pg/mL or < 1/3 of mean values obtained in normal subjects with the same assay, then the disorder should be reclassified as narcolepsy type 1
2 Methods
A comprehensive search of the literature in electronic databases was conducted to find data on the duration of the diagnostic delay of narcolepsy and potentially contributing factors. Keywords used for the search include ‘diagnosing narcolepsy,’ ‘delayed diagnosis of sleep disorders,’ ‘narcolepsy comorbidities,’ etc. The search resulted in approximately 50 articles, 15 of which were included in this review due to their relevancy. Article inclusion was determined by quantitative reports of the duration of diagnostic delay as well as discussion of potential contributing factors and/or implications of the delay. Furthermore, inclusion was based on utilization of the Strength of Recommendation Taxonomy (SORT) system [ , ] to determine the level of evidence of individual articles. Importantly, the context and scope of the study when assigning a SORT level was important for this review due to research on various aspects of narcolepsy remains somewhat limited. The articles along with their SORT level of evidence are listed in Table 2 . Table 2 Articles reporting on factors likely contributing to the diagnostic delay of narcolepsy References Type of study ( N ) SORT level Reported factors Dx delay (years) Baumann et al. [ ] Consensus (N/A) 3 Absence of cataplexy a – Bayard et al. [ ] RCT (44) 1 Comorbidities b – Black et al. [ ] Case control (55,871) 2 Comorbidities – Carter et al. [ ] Retrospective cohort (252) 2 Awareness c , comorbidities, dx methods d 2.0–5.0 Dunne et al. [ ] Cross-sectional (551) 2 Awareness, dx methods – Flygare et al. [ ] Case report (1) 3 Awareness – Frauscher et al. [ ] Retrospective cohort (100) 2 Awareness, comorbidities, dx methods 6.5 Jara et al. [ ] Prospective cohort (86) 1 Comorbidities – Jennum et al. [ ] Case control (757) 2 Comorbidities – Kim et al. [ ] Cross-sectional (1008) 2 Awareness, comorbidities – Maski et al. [ ] Cross-sectional (1699) 2 Age of onset e >1.0 Morrish et al. [ ] Cross-sectional (219) 2 Absence of cataplexy, age of onset, awareness 10.5 Rosenberg et al. [ ] Survey/Qualitative (1400) 2 Awareness – Taddei et al. [ ] Cross-sectional (52) 2 Awareness, comorbidities 8.9 ± 11.0 Ueki et al. [ ] Retrospective cohort (181) 2 Age of onset, awareness 9.9 ± 10.1 SORT strength of recommendation taxonomy, Dx diagnosis/diagnostic, RCT randomized controlled trial a Absence of cataplexy: there is a greater diagnostic delay in diagnosis particularly if cataplexy is not present b Comorbidities: except for cataplexy, other hallmark features of narcolepsy resemble those of other medical and psychiatric conditions, thus complicating the diagnosis process c Awareness: lack of knowledge and underrecognition of narcolepsy by patients as well as providers; this results in a delay in referral which then delays the diagnosis d Dx methods: lack of consistency or adherence to guidelines among providers when testing for narcolepsy e Age of onset: earlier age of onset (< 18 years) associated with greater delay
3 Duration of Diagnostic Delay
Of the studies included in the review, six of them reported quantitative data regarding the number of years from symptom onset to definite diagnosis [ , , , , , ]. The duration in diagnostic delay, on average, was reported to be 7 years and ranged from 2 to 11 years (see Table 2 ). It is important to note that it is possible to collect such data only from the patient as historians, which leaves room for bias. Nevertheless, the duration of diagnostic delay has consistently been reported in the literature and the length of delay also appears to be on the decline over the last few decades [ , ].
4 Contributing Factors of the Delay
4.1 Absence of Cataplexy
Diagnosing narcolepsy when cataplexy is present is straightforward due to its distinguishable presentation, which is not found in most other conditions [ ]. However, in the absence of cataplexy, narcolepsy is quite challenging to diagnose even for highly skilled clinicians [ ]. Narcolepsy without cataplexy does not have a specific biomarker and its symptoms closely represent those of psychiatric and other sleep disorders. Moreover, diagnostic tests are limited and symptom presentation of narcolepsy in the absence of cataplexy is developmental in nature. Notably, the absence of cataplexy has been regarded as the key factor leading to delayed diagnosis [ , ].
4.2 Awareness
In Table 2 , the word awareness was used to indicate a general lack of knowledge and underrecognition by clinicians as well as patients, which has been widely documented in the literature [ ]. Importantly, Rosenberg and Kim’s study [ ] was included in this review, as it is one of the very few, if not only, published article characterizing the awareness and perceptions of narcolepsy among primary care physicians (PCPs), sleep specialists, and the general population. The Awareness and Knowledge of Narcolepsy (AWAKEN) [ ] survey results revealed that there exists a significant gap in understanding narcolepsy, even among sleep specialists. Though physicians and most (70%) of the general population reported having heard of narcolepsy, only 22%, 7%, and 0 of the sleep specialists, PCPs, and general population, respectively, could identify all 5 symptoms of the condition [ ]. Many researchers have underscored the lack of awareness of narcolepsy and how this may act as a significant contributing factor to the diagnostic delay [ , ]. This lack of awareness can also be evidenced by patients’ report of the long referral process and having to visit multiple providers (e.g., at least two or more) on their journey to receiving a diagnosis of narcolepsy [ ]. In contrast, there exists a risk of misdiagnosis of narcolepsy, as researchers have found that almost as much as 50% of patients referred for further evaluation were misdiagnosed with the condition [ ].
4.3 Comorbidities
With the exception of cataplexy, other hallmark symptoms of narcolepsy closely resemble those of other medical and psychiatric conditions, especially sleep disorders [ , ]. Compared to the general population, people with narcolepsy experience more comorbid conditions and are more likely to be taking two or more medications concurrently (e.g., stimulants and antidepressant), which may influence symptom presentation and potentially mask symptoms [ ]. Frequent comorbidities found alongside narcolepsy include obesity, headache/migraine, sleep apnea, hypersomnia, restless leg, as well as depression, anxiety, and/or other mood disorders [ , , , , , ]. Living with narcolepsy also requires continuous allocation of cognitive resources in monitoring and maintaining vigilance [ ]. Such efforts may be a primary reason people with narcolepsy exhibit symptoms including increased cognitive deficits and reduced working memory—features that characterize other conditions such as attention-deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD) and more. The elusiveness of narcolepsy symptoms also lead to the risk of misdiagnosis of other conditions [ , ].
4.4 Current Diagnostic Methods
Diagnostic methods utilized by providers—which are largely influenced by availability of materials/tests, awareness of narcolepsy, and comorbidities—may be another contributing factor to the diagnostic delay [ ]. Along with adjunctive diagnostic tools (e.g., genetic testing, actigraphs, and self-report measures), the primary tools used in diagnosing narcolepsy include nocturnal polysomnogram (PSG) followed by a multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), and hypocretin-1 measurements, and importantly, a thorough clinical interview [ ]. It is important to note, however, that currently available diagnostic methods for narcolepsy come with their own limitations; for example, the low sensitivity of nocturnal polysomnogram (PSG) [ ]. A PSG is an overnight sleep study used to continually assess REM sleep cycle data and rule out other potential causes of narcolepsy symptoms [ ]. Furthermore, most patients reported making multiple visits to two or more providers and there was a lack of consistency in the diagnostic methods employed, suggesting that patients had a long journey getting to the correct provider and the diagnostic measures (e.g., PSG followed by MSLT) with the highest evidence [ ]. Though MSLT is regarded as the primary diagnostic tool for narcolepsy, patients reported more commonly undergoing an overnight PSG than an MSLT [ ]. Importantly, the AWAKEN Survey [ ] revealed that when narcolepsy was suspected, diagnostic tests were administered or ordered by less than half the physicians in the study, including sleep specialists [ ].
4.5 Age of Onset
An earlier age of symptom onset (< 18 years) has been associated with double the amount of time between onset and diagnosis [ ]. Furthermore, a more recent year of symptom onset when visiting the provider was linked with less of a diagnostic delay [ ]. Narcolepsy is prevalent in 0.05% of the population and because its symptoms closely resemble those of other conditions commonly found among children (e.g., ADHD), it becomes difficult to diagnose in individuals < 18 years of age. Moreover, individuals are misdiagnosed with conditions that are more common than narcolepsy among individuals in their age group. Children are also known to require more sleep than adults, thus increasing the risk for symptoms to be regarded as typical childhood behaviour [ ]. Finally, the longer time between symptom onset and initial doctor visit, the more difficult it may become to report accurate medical history and symptoms. Importantly, Morrish et al. indicated that if individuals experienced symptom onset during the 1960s or later, it may increase their likelihood of being diagnosed with narcolepsy potentially due to increased awareness of the condition [ ]. However, this has yet to be empirically examined.
5 Discussion
5.1 Limitations
With the aim of delivering recommendations with the highest level of evidence in the literature, the articles included in this review were determined based on their relevancy and level of evidence, as determined by the SORT system [ , ]. Given the focus of this article and the limited number of studies examining the diagnostic delay of narcolepsy, however, the included articles involved methodologies that were largely retrospective in nature and investigated patient medical records and/or survey data. The SORT system regards research designs such as randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and meta-analysis of RCTs as being the highest-quality and the studies in this review may fall ‘outside the scope of SORT’ [ ]. Nevertheless, they are important to report on until higher-quality study designs are available on narcolepsy and related areas.
5.2 Implications for Clinicians
Accurate and timely diagnosis of narcolepsy is critical due to the substantial impact it has on overall quality of life, personal factors, health, and employment for those affected [ , ]. When cataplexy is absent, the condition becomes especially difficult to diagnose, even for more experienced clinicians [ ]. Lack of awareness/recognition about narcolepsy, the elusive nature of its hallmark symptoms, the presence of comorbidities, and limitations of diagnostic methods for narcolepsy all contribute to the challenges in making an accurate and timely diagnosis. Hence, these data underscore very important implications for clinicians to consider when working with patients.
5.2.1 Learn and Disseminate Information About Narcolepsy
Increased education among clinicians, including paediatricians and others working with children, and the general population about narcolepsy and the wide range of symptoms is imperative for accurate and timely diagnosis of narcolepsy. Online education for providers may be a time- and cost-effective method, as it has been found to result in an overall increase in knowledge and competence [ ]. Providing patients and/or their guardians with psychoeducation on the features and consequences of narcolepsy, treatment options, and available resources, is also essential.
5.2.2 Learn and Disseminate Information About What Narcolepsy Is NOT
Equally important to the first recommendation, learning and disseminating information about what narcolepsy is NOT is another important avenue to accurate and timely diagnosis of narcolepsy. Comorbid disorders and co-medications are commonly found among those with narcolepsy, thus deserving considerable attention by clinicians. The elusive nature of narcolepsy symptoms resembles those of other conditions, especially among children, which may or not may not actually be present (i.e., comorbidities). For example, major depressive disorder (MDD) is the most common mood condition found alongside narcolepsy and five of nine MDD symptoms are found in narcolepsy, including fatigue, feelings of worthlessness, helplessness, guilt, and pessimism, and having difficulty concentrating, remembering details, and making decisions [ , ]. Furthermore, interrupted sleep and difficulty with memory, thinking, attention, arousal, and alertness characterize both attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and narcolepsy [ ], and researchers estimated 18.9% of those with narcolepsy experience ADHD or ADHD-related symptoms [ ]. Moreover, sleep apnea and upper respiratory tract diseases are commonly found with narcolepsy and the conditions share similar features [ ]. For an OSA diagnosis, however, the presence of five or more predominantly obstructive respiratory events (e.g., obstructive or mixed apneas, hypopneas, etc.) are necessary [ ].
5.2.3 Employ Evidence-based Diagnostic Procedures OR Refer to Appropriate Specialist
When narcolepsy is suspected, patients should always be referred to appropriate clinicians specializing in sleep in a timely manner. Diagnostic tools in determining the presence of narcolepsy include a comprehensive clinical history, PSG followed by MSLT(s), and testing for cerebrospinal fluid hypocretin-1 levels, as well as ancillary tools such as sleep logs and actigraphs [ , ]. Due to the considerable variability in patients’ sleep patterns, conducting multiple MSLTs as follow-up to PSGs, along with comprehensive clinical interviews, is regarded as ‘best practice’ [ ]. Nonetheless, it is important to note that even patients who saw a sleep physician and underwent objective testing including an MSLT and PSG were reported to have been misdiagnosed with narcolepsy [ ]. Due to the limitations of existing diagnostic tools and the variability in narcolepsy symptom presentation [ ], increased continuing education (e.g., CEUs) on narcolepsy and other sleep medicine topics for physicians, including primary care physicians as well as sleep specialists, is recommended.
EDS is often the first symptom to present in narcolepsy, but it is also found in many other disorders; therefore, gathering exhaustive patient history during the clinical interview is critical for differential diagnosis [ , , ]. Overeem et al. [ ] outlined important topics to cover during a clinical interview with a patient suspected to have narcolepsy, which include the following: general information (e.g., age of symptom onset, triggers), sleepiness (e.g., factors that impact sleepiness, dreams, sleep attacks), cataplexy (e.g., typical attack, pattern of weakness, frequency, duration), nocturnal sleep (e.g., sleep–wake schedule, sleep duration, nocturnal awakenings, sleep hygiene), hypnagogic hallucinations (e.g., duration, frequency), weight change (e.g., current, during symptom onset), eating habits (e.g., patterns in appetite, meals impact on sleepiness), mood/anxiety (e.g., presence of current mood disturbance, history of depression, anxiety, etc.), automatic behaviour (e.g., examples, circumstances, frequency), other symptoms (e.g., memory complaints, sexual problems, fatigue), psychosocial aspects (e.g., impact of symptoms on social interactions at school/work or driving), and family history (e.g., history of narcolepsy or related conditions and symptoms among relatives). Readers should refer to Overeem et al. [ ] (Table 3) for additional information on important topics to cover in the clinical interview. In addition, for comprehension guidelines in diagnosing narcolepsy, readers can refer to Baumann et al. [ ] and Ruoff et al. [ ].
6 Conclusions
Based on the current review, the duration of time between symptom onset and definite diagnosis of narcolepsy was reported to be 7 years, on average. Clinicians’, especially those in primary care and paediatrics, awareness of the disorder, its varying presentations, and comorbidities, is necessary to reduce the diagnostic delay of narcolepsy and its associated costs. Although the knowledgebase regarding narcolepsy remains limited, scientists have made great strides in recent years in our understanding of this condition. Ensuring that information is emphasized in family practice, internal medicine, and paediatric residencies is imperative, as is continuing education efforts related to diagnosis, psychosocial impacts, and treatment options are key to clinicians providing the best practice to their patients.