1 Introduction
The obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is today known as the most frequent and clinically most important form of sleep-related respiratory diseases. It is characterized by an intermitted reduction (hypopnea) or cessation (apnea) of breathing through a narrowing or total closure of the upper respiratory airway during sleep. The cessation of airflow during an apnea or hypopnea can lead to a respiratory arousal reaction. The arousal is usually not perceived by the patient, although it interrupts the current stage of sleep and therefore, causes a fragmentation of sleep.
In some patients, upper airway dysfunctions appear mostly or solely in the supine position and several studies have shown that the Apnea–Hypopnea index (AHI) is generally higher when the individual is in a supine sleeping position [ ]. The term positional obstructive sleep apnea (POSA) was first introduced by Cartwright [ ] and is used to describe patients with OSAS that shows a difference of 50% or more in the AHI between supine and non-supine sleeping positions. According to this definition, the prevalence of POSA in the population of patients with OSAS is estimated at an average of 55–60% [ ]. In 30% of OSAS patients, the AHI is higher in the supine position than in other positions, but not twice as high [ ]. POSA is more frequent in younger patients and in those with a lower body mass index (BMI) [ ]. Weight reduction can, in some cases, turn a constant severe OSAS into a distinct POSA [ ].
It is further discussed to what extend rapid eye movement (REM) sleep can influence the severity of symptoms in patients with OSAS. During REM sleep, pharyngeal muscle tone is lowest and the genioglossus reflex diminished, resulting in a higher susceptibility for upper airway collapse [ , ]. It has been shown that apneic events are prolonged, higher in frequency and associated with stronger hypoxia during REM sleep compared to other sleep stages [ , ]. Due to inconsistent definitions and findings, it is still unclear whether REM-related sleep-disordered breathing forms an own entity in the clinical definition of OSAS [ ]. Still there is evidence that the influence of sleeping positions on OSAS is generally greater in REM than in non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep stages [ ]. Furthermore, successful treatment with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy can lead to REM rebound [ ].
Several methods with different success rates were designed to prevent patients with OSAS from laying on their back, e.g., an upright sleep posture, positional alarms, verbal instructions, tennis balls attached to the patient’s back, vests worn during sleep, or special pillows. However, the devices invented for positional therapy are often hampered by poor patient adherence. Regarding non-adherence, patients mainly report discomfort, frequent awakenings, restless sleep, backache, prevention of the preferred sleeping position, and a lack in improvement of sleep quality or daytime alertness [ ].
There is evidence that instruments that emit a vibrational alarm when in the supine sleeping position can successfully prevent OSAS patients from sleeping on their back [ ]. The current study was designed to evaluate an electronic supine alarm device designed by Bayan and Bayan [ ] for the treatment of patients with OSAS. The alarm device hampers patients from sleeping on their back by emitting a combination of a vibrational alarm with an acoustic signal during a supine sleeping position. It shall, therefore, alert and discourage the patient from sleeping in a supine position, while providing comfort and minimal disturbance. Therefore, we expected a decrease in the AHI and an improvement in self-reported sleep quality, blood pressure and oxygenation following the use of the supine alarm device. We further evaluated changes in the patient’s sleep structure, thereby expecting an improvement of deep sleep and REM sleep.
2 Method
2.1 Participants
The study was conducted with eight male and five female participants aged between 26 and 74 years ( M = 55.23, SD = 13.32) who were diagnosed or reported positional sleep apnea. They were recruited through an open announcement on the University of Duesseldorf’s website and via telephone inquiries at regional self-help groups for patients with sleep apnea. OSAS symptoms, self-reported height and weight, chronic and pre-existing illnesses or conditions and demographic data were assessed via an in-house questionnaire. Participants with diagnosed OSAS were asked to report the time when they received a clinically confirmed diagnosis. In case they had no clinically confirmed diagnoses, they were asked to give an estimate of when symptoms were first noticed. Individuals who were using CPAP prior to enrollment in the study did not use CPAP during both experimental and control nights. All participants gave informed consent and received a financial compensation of EUR 50 for their participation.
2.2 Material
2.2.1 Supine Alarm Device
The supine alarm device used in this study was designed and patented by Dr. Hamid Bayan in 2014 for the registration and prevention of a person’s unhealthy body position while laying down or sleeping [ ]. The prototype comprised of a black fabric belt with a hook-and-pile fastener and is positioned around the wearer’s abdomen. The wearer is, therefore, able to sleep in all sleeping positions. A box for energy supply was attached in the front of the device; the box contained a power button and a vibration device, which was connected to a position transducer on the backside. The position transducer had a push button, which was activated through the body mass of the person wearing the device. Activating the push button for at least 10 s would close the electric circuit and the vibration device would start sending vibrating pulses. If after three vibration pulses, the push button was still activated, the vibration device would start sending an acoustic alarm. Vibration and signal tone were deactivated as soon as the push button was released through a change of body position.
2.2.2 Sleep Quality
Sleep quality was assessed with the Sleep Questionnaire A (SF-A) [ ], which captures subjective aspects of sleep quality from the preceding night. It is used for the diagnosis of general and current sleep disorders and is generally administered upon awakening in the morning. It comprises of 22 items about events from the previous day, neuropsychological phenomena, sleep quality, dreaming, estimates of time being awake, and mental state before going to sleep and in the morning after waking up. For analysis purposes, 15 of the 22 items are assigned into the five-subscale ‘sleep quality’ (SQ), ‘feeling refreshed in the morning’ (GES), ‘well-being in the evening’ (PSYA),
‘exhaustedness in the evening’ (PSYE), and ‘psychosomatic symptoms during sleep’ (PSS) such as muscle twitching, headache, cardiac arrhythmia or perspiration during sleep. The items are administered as 5-point Likert Scales (1 = not present, 5 = strongly), and therefore, the composite scores range from 1 to 5. The five subscales were confirmed by factor analysis and validated in several independent samples and exhibit sufficient–very high internal consistency, except for in one study [ ].
2.3 Polysomnography
Polysomnography is used as the golden standard for the diagnosis of sleep-related breathing disorders and for measuring the AHI [ ]. The current study included an EEG recording based on the international 10/20-System [ ] with the EEG Channels C3/A2 and C4/A1, a reference electrode on Cz and a ground electrode on the participant’s forehead. Electrodes for recording electrooculogram (EOG) were placed on the left and right sides besides the eyes, for recording horizontal eye movements.
The electromyogram (EMG) was conducted with two electrodes on the mentalis muscle. Snoring sounds were recorded with a microphone, positioned on the upper section of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Nasal airflow was conducted via a nasal cannula. A finger pulse oximeter continuously measured arterial oxygen saturation, SpO 2 , and pulse rate. Blood pressure was recorded by a digital blood pressure meter using the Riva-Rocci method.
For all recordings and data acquisition, the mobile polysomnography system SOMNOScreen ™ plus from SOMNOmedics was used. The SOMNOscreen ™ plus works wirelessly, so the patient is free to move during data acquisition. Data were analyzed visually within the analyses software DOMINO from SOMNOmedics.
2.4 Experimental Procedure
The experiment took place in the sleep laboratory of the Institute for Experimental Psychology at the University of Duesseldorf. In the first of the two experimental nights, participants received information about the study and gave informed written consent. Demographic data were acquired through a questionnaire. Before starting with the application of the polysomnographic devices, participants received the opportunity for personal hygiene.
During the experimental night, the wake-up belt was switched on before application. During the control night, the wake-up belt was worn by the participant but remained in off mode. The sequence of conditions was counterbalanced between participants. Participants were neither informed whether the wake-up belt was switched on or off, nor did they receive information about the general function of the belt until the end of the second experimental night. After the application of the polysomnographic devices and the wake-up belt, blood pressure was measured. It was ensured that impedances of the electrodes were less than 10 kΩ before starting the online measurement.
Lights were turned off between 10:30 and 11:00 p.m. Participants were woken by the investigator at 7:00 a.m. or, by request, at 6:00 a.m. Within participants, wake-up times were the same for both conditions. During the online measurement, the investigator remained in a separate adjacent room to supervise the recording and to be available in case of any medical emergency.
Immediately after waking up, blood pressure was measured again, the polysomnographic devices were removed and participants received an opportunity for personal hygiene. Participants were then asked to fill out the sleep questionnaire SF-A. At the end of the second night, they received financial compensation for their participation and were debriefed about the function of the wake-up belt.
2.5 Data Analysis and Design
Polysomnographic recordings were divided into epochs of 30 s and visually analyzed. Sleep stages were rated according to the standard criteria of Rechtschaffen and Kales [ ] with respect to the revised AASM guidelines [ ]. Therefore, sleep stages N1, N2, N3, and R (REM) were classified. Movement time (MT) was counted as wakefulness (W).
To measure the severity of the respiratory symptoms, the AHI and the number of oxygen desaturations were used as dependent variables. For analyses of sleep quality, the arousal index, composition of sleep stages and evaluation of the SF-A were taken into account.
The AHI describes the mean number of apneas and hypopneas per hour of night sleep and classifies OSAS into 3 levels of severity: mild (AHI = 5–15 events per hour), moderate (AHI = 15–30 events per hour), and severe (AHI ≥ 30 events per hour). The AHI was established via visual analysis. Apneas and hypopneas were identified according to the recommended criteria of the AASM Manual for the Scoring of Sleep and Associated Events [ ]. A respiratory event was marked as a hypopnea when a ≥ 30% reduction in nasal pressure signal from baseline was accompanied by a ≥ 4% oxygen desaturation from pre-event baseline. To calculate the AHI, the sum of apneas and hypopneas was divided by total sleep time.
A desaturation event was marked if the level of oxygen saturation dropped at least 4% from a minimum of 8 s to a maximum of 180 s. Blood pressure was assessed in the evening before sleep and in the morning after sleep. For each night, the difference between evening and morning values of systolic and diastolic blood pressure was calculated. The arousal index was calculated by dividing the total number of arousals by total sleep time.
A within-subject repeated measurement design was used, with experimental night and control night as the independent variables. Statistical analysis of the data was performed using IBM SPSS statistics 22. T tests (one sided) were used for differences between experimental and control nights. All statistical tests were performed at α = 0.05. For the estimation of effect size, Cohen’s d [ ] was applied.
3 Results
3.1 Demographic Data
Participants had been suffering from sleep-related breathing disorders ranging between 7 months and 39 years ( M = 164.09 months, SD = 159.88). Three participants reported the use of a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) mask. The remaining participants were not in medical attendance for sleep apnea during the conduction of the study. The mean BMI was 27.72 kg/m 2 (SD = 4.45), which falls into the WHO classification of overweight. Five participants had diagnosed hypertension and took medication to control their blood pressure. Two patients reported suffering from diabetes mellitus.
3.2 Apnea–Hypopnea Index
The mean AHI was lower in the experimental night than in the control night (Fig. 1 ). In the control night, six participants showed mild, two had moderate, and four had severe sleep apnea. One participant showed a subclinical AHI of 3.88 in the control night. In the experimental night, three participants had a subclinical AHI, six patients had mild, three had moderate, and one had severe sleep apnea. The difference in AHI between experimental ( M = 13.40; SD = 10.80) and control night ( M = 20.25, SD = 15.56) was statistically significant, t (12) = − 3.58, p < 0.001, d = 0.99. The mean AHI reduction in the experimental night compared to the control night was 32.66% (SD = 21.41%). Fig. 1 AHI in experimental and control night. a AHI in experimental and control night. Data are shown for each participant in experimental and control night. Dashed lines indicate the AHI thresholds for mild–moderate and moderate–severe sleep apnea. b Average AHI is shown for experimental and control night. Error bars indicate the +/− standard error of the mean (SEM). N = 13. *** p < 0.001, one tailed
3.3 Blood Pressure
Blood pressure was measured in 8 of the 13 participants as five participants suffered from hypertension and took medication for the regulation of their blood pressure. The analyses revealed a significant reduction in systolic blood pressure (difference between evening and morning values) between the experimental ( M = − 7.50; SD = 17.73) and control night ( M = 5.80; SD = 12.71), t (7) = 4.79, p < 0.001, d = 1.52. Further, systolic morning blood pressure differed was significantly lower in the experimental ( M = 132.88; SD = 14.26) compared to the control night ( M = 142.38; SD = 14.76), t (7) = 4.60, p = 0.002, d = 0.65. No significant influence was found on the diastolic blood pressure (Table 1 ). Table 1 Blood-pressure difference and oxygen saturation Variable n Treatment Control t p BP difference Systolic 8 − 7.50 (17.73) 5.80 (12.71) 4.79 < 0.001 Diastolic 8 0.80 (11.69) 4.40 (8.73) 0.77 0.46 Oxygenation SpO 2 base (%) 13 94.62 (1.04) 94.31 (1.25) 1.48 0.08 SpO 2 min (%) 13 86.62 (4.98) 84.54 (5.30) 2.51 0.01 Desaturations 13 48.54 (66.01) 82.46 (107.75) − 2.06 0.03 Mean values of blood-pressure differences, blood oxygenation and desaturations for treatment and control night Data are given as mean (SD). Boldface indicates significance for a one-sided t test for paired comparisons at α = 0.05 BP difference = (morning value − evening value) in mmHg. A value greater than zero indicates higher blood pressure the next morning. SpO 2 base = mean oxygen saturation over all nights; SpO 2 min = mean minimal oxygen saturation over all nights
3.4 Blood Oxygenation
Baseline blood oxygenation was slightly higher in the experimental compared to the control night, but the difference did not reach statistical significance. The minimal oxygen saturation was significantly higher in the experimental ( M = 86.62; SD = 4.98) than in the control night ( M = 84.54; SD = 5.30), t (12) = 2.51, p = 0.01, d = 0.83. Likewise, participants had more oxygen desaturations in the control night as compared to the experimental night, t (12) = − 2.06, p = 0.03, d = 0.57 (Table 1 ).
3.5 Sleep Architecture
Mean time in bed was 6:36 h (SD = 1:01) for the experimental night and 6:38 h (SD = 0:42) for the control night. As expected, total sleep time, time awake, and sleep latency did not differ significantly between experimental and control nights. The arousal index was lower in the experimental night ( M = 9.71, SD = 4.78) than in the control night ( M = 11.04, SD = 4.04), though the group difference fails to meet the level of significance by a small margin, t (12) = 1.68, p = 0.06, d = 0.30. For sleep stages N1, N2 and N3, no significant difference between experimental and control group was found. However, participants showed significantly more REM sleep in the experimental night ( M = 15.74%; SD = 6.01%) compared to the control night ( M = 10.70%; SD = 4.27%), t (12) = 2.21, p = 0.03, d = 0.61 (Table 2 ). Table 2 Sleep architecture Variable Treatment Control t p Sleep latency, h:min 0:14 (0:16) 0:17 (0:14) − 1.0 0.17 Time awake, h:min 0:54 (0:50) 1:05 (1:06) − 0.79 0.22 N1, h:min% 0:53 (0:18) 1:00 (0:18) − 0.95 0.18 13.84 (5.60) 16.83 (7.70) N2, h:min% 3:19 (0:45) 3:19 (0:56) −0.03 0.47 50.31 (8.10) 50.60 (12.20) N3, h:min% 1:21 (0:38) 1:26 (0:42) − 0.51 0.27 20.12 (8.34) 21.88 (9.96) REM, h:min% 1:02 (0:25) 0:42 (0:17) 2.13 0.03 15.74 (6.01) 10.70 (4.27) Total sleep time, h:min 6:36 (1:01) 6:39 (0:42) − 0.17 0.43 Sleep architecture for control and experimental night Data are given as mean (SD). Boldface indicates significance for a one-sided t test for paired comparisons at α = 0.05. N = 13
3.6 Sleep Quality
Mean values of the SF-A subscales, used for assessing sleep quality, are illustrated in Fig. 2 . Subjective sleep quality (SQ) was significantly higher following the experimental night, compared to the control night, t (12) = 2.16, p = 0.03, d = 0.59. Participants had a significantly higher feeling of being recovered in the morning (GES) after the experimental night than after the control night, t (12) = 2.49, p = 0.01, d = 0.69. The mental exhaustion before going to bed (PSYA) did not differ between both nights ( t (12) = 0.98, p = 0.17), as well as the mental exhaustion before going to bed (PSYE) ( t (12) = −0.58, p = 0.29). Participants reported significantly lower psychosomatic symptoms during sleep (PSS) in the experimental night than in the control night, t (12) = − 1.86, p = 0.04, d = 0.51. Fig. 2 Sleep architecture in experimental and control night. Mean proportion of sleep stages in the experimental and control night measured by whole night polysomnography. Error bars indicate the +/− standard error of the mean (SEM). N = 13. * p < 0.05, one tailed
4 Discussion
The aim of this study was to assess the impact of the supine alarm device designed by Bayan and Bayan [ ] on sleep architecture and subjective sleep quality. Participants had significantly fewer respiratory events when wearing the activated supine alarm device than with the deactivated device. Blood pressure in the morning, compared to the evening, was lower in participants with the supine alarm device compared to the control night. Fewer observed apneas and hypopneas when wearing the activated supine alarm device were related to a higher baseline blood oxygenation and fewer oxygen desaturations. Sleep architecture showed a significant increase in REM sleep under the treatment with the supine alarm device, while the arousal index tended to decrease. Furthermore, subjective sleep quality improved, whereas psychosomatic symptoms during sleep decreased.
Treatment with the supine alarm device significantly reduced respiratory events in patients with OSAS, as virtually all participants showed a decrease in the AHI in the experimental night. Precisely, two patients with moderate sleep apneas had mild OSAS in the experimental night and two patients with mild OSAS had a subclinical AHI when treated with the supine alarm device. Nevertheless, three participants who showed severe sleep apneas in the control condition still had a moderate AHI in the experimental night and one patient still showed severe apnea. One participant did not seem to benefit from the treatment with the alarm device, showing a slight AHI increase in the experimental compared to the control night. For a satisfying treatment, the scope of application of the supine alarm device should, therefore, be carefully evaluated in future study. The findings in the present study suggest that the supine alarm device should preferably be used for patients with mild to moderate OSAS.
The effects of treatment with the supine alarm device on blood pressure were highly significant. Though, due to the small sample size, long-term effects and outcomes in a larger sample still need to be evaluated.
Participants reported a significant increase in subjective sleep quality, feeling more refreshed in the morning, and having less psychosomatic symptoms during the night when wearing the activated supine alarm device. The subjective improvement of sleep quality is especially important in the issue of long-term patient adherence, as a lack in improvement of sleep quality or daytime alertness is, besides lacking sleep comfort, one of the main reasons for non-adherence in patients with OSAS who receive positional training [ ]. Though the supine alarm device may wake the patient when taking a supine sleeping position, the arousal index did not increase under treatment but even tended to decrease. Taken together, these findings suggest that the alarm itself does not hamper sleep comfort. However, even participants did not comment or complain about the supine alarm device, tolerability and comfort of the device were not formally assessed in this study. This issue should be addressed in future studies among the collection of data concerning long-term patient adherence of the supine alarm device.
Participants in the present study showed a significant increase in REM sleep when treated with the supine alarm device. Research has shown that for patients with mild OSAS, a selective decrease in the proportion of REM sleep can be the main cause for excessive daytime sleepiness [ ]. On the other hand, CPAP adherence among REM-only OSA patients has shown to be lower than in those with non-stage-specific OSAS [ ]. Our findings underline the role of REM sleep-related breathing disorders in the treatment for patients with mild–moderate sleep apnea and shed further light on the relationship of sleeping position and REM sleep-associated OSAS.
To assess the impact of the wake-up device on patients with different forms of OSAS, participants in the current study were included independently to the extent to which apneas occur in the supine sleeping position. As only 55–60% of OSAS patients show positional dependent sleep apnea (POSA) [ ], treatment outcomes may even improve if the supine alarm device is evaluated in patients with distinct POSA. The extent to which participants had apneas in the supine, compared to the non-supine, sleeping position was not assessed in this study. This aspect needs to be considered in future research to evaluate outcomes in treatment with the supine alarm device for different subgroups of OSAS patients. Furthermore, the long-term effects, patient acceptance and long-term adherence to the treatment in the home setting are still issues to be evaluated. Overall, this study highlights the effects of the supine alarm device on sleep architecture by significantly increasing the amount of REM sleep in OSAS patients compared to a non-treatment condition.