1 Introduction
Several sleep-related population-based studies have been performed in the last decades, presenting important epidemiological data regarding sleep disorders [ , , , , , ]. In general, these studies highlight the great prevalence and incidence of these disturbances and sleep-related complaints. Moreover, recent studies have discussed these characteristics as effects of modern lifestyle [ , , ]. The pervasiveness of sleep disorders and its temporal evolution allow the analysis of sleep disorders from a public health perspective. In this sense, sleep medicine has been consistently addressed as an important public health issue [ , , ].
The current prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) reflects the scenario of increasing sleep disorders rates. Decades ago, Young et al. [ ] described an OSAS prevalence ranging between 2 and 4%. However, a more recent epidemiological study by Tufik et al. reported a prevalence of 32.9% [ ]. Some factors can be pointed as explanations for these discrepancies: the development of more precise methods to assess sleep-disordered breathing; the updates in diagnostic criteria for sleep disorders; and the increasing rates of individuals under risk factors, such as obesity [ ]. Consequently, sleep apnea became a relevant topic under a public health perspective. The main evidences underlying this statement rely on three important issues related to OSAS: (1). the causal relationship between sleep apnea and morbidity and mortality, especially when considering cardiovascular diseases [ , , , , , ]; (2). the association with elevated risk of accidents due to daytime sleepiness and lack of attention, both outcomes of OSAS [ , , ]; and (3). the high costs to treat sleep apnea [ , ].
The success of strategies for prevention and treatment of OSAS in public health policies depends on epidemiological and population-based surveys, since it requires an overall knowledge regarding the target population for which the public health policies would be directed. Most of the studies have discussed the association of OSAS and public health in a theoretical framework, rather than in an epidemiological scenario [ , , , , , ]. Moreover, even those studies that address OSAS in epidemiological representative samples restrict their analyses to reports of its prevalence, as well as reports of the associated descriptive characteristics and co-morbidities [ , ]. To the best of our knowledge, no study has been conducted to analyze how these descriptive characteristics interact each other in a qualitative way. This approach would be useful to compose population profiles associated with OSAS, which would allow a more directed and specific interventions in public health.
The present study aimed to analyze a population-based sample to provide qualitative epidemiological profiles related to OSAS. To do so, we used the São Paulo Epidemiological Sleep Study ( EPISONO) database, using key descriptive variables to perform a correspondence analysis and compose such epidemiological profiles.
2 Methods
The EPISONO was a population-based survey conducted to draw the sleep-related profile of the city of São Paulo, addressing the prevalence of sleep disorders, their risk factors and several secondary outcomes in São Paulo, Brazil. The design, sampling, and complete methodology were described in detail elsewhere [ ]. Briefly, this study was carried out with 1101 individuals randomly selected through a three-stage cluster sampling technique. Each volunteer was submitted to a complete full-night polysomnography as well as to a wide series of exams, and answered specific questionnaires. Polysomnography configuration, the exams and tests performed, and the questionnaires applied are described in detail by Santos-Silva et al. [ ]. The current study took the database of EPISONO as source. The following variables were extracted from this database: OSAS diagnosis, gender, age, self-reported ethnicity, and body mass index (BMI). All these variables were categorized to allow statistical analysis. The categories for each variable are presented in Table 1 . Table 1 Prevalence of variables considered for analysis ( n = 1042) OSAS n % Age n % Ethnicity n % No OSAS 700 67.18 18–30 262 25.14 Asiatic 29 2.78 Mild 166 15.93 31–45 367 35.22 White 585 56.14 Moderate 104 9.98 46–60 288 27.64 Indigenous 32 3.07 Severe 72 6.91 61–75 104 9.98 Mulatto 127 12.19 >75 21 2.02 Black 140 13.44 Other 129 12.38 BMI n % Sex n % Normal weight 417 40.02 Male 466 44.72 Overweight 400 38.39 Female 576 55.28 Obesity 224 21.50 OSAS obstructive sleep apena syndrome, BMI body mass index. OSAS classification based on Apnea–Hypopnea Index (AHI). Mild OSAS: AHI ≥ 5 and daytime sleepiness; Moderate OSAS: AHI ≥ 15; Severe OSAS: AHI ≥ 30
With these variables, a correspondence analysis (ANACOR) was performed to investigate qualitatively the profiles associated with OSAS in this population. Briefly, this test allows evaluating the association of more than two categorical variables in a qualitative way. This is an important statistical tool for refined analyses, going beyond more traditional tests such as the Chi square test (which is able to analyze quantitatively only two categorical variables per time) and other multivariate tests (multiple ways ANOVA, regressions, GLM, etc., which require at least one numeric variable). Additionally, it allows composing profiles by associating different categories within multiple non-numeric variables. This analysis generates a bi-dimensional correspondence map, which plans the multidimensional relations of X 2 distances between the considered categories. In this map, the smaller the distance between two categories of different variables, higher is the association between them. On the other hand, when two categories of a same variable are plotted near each other, they can be considered equal regarding the total data distribution. Thus, the correspondence map allows visualizing association profiles between the variables, analyzing the distances between the categories. Of note, correspondence analysis is a subjective and qualitative statistical test, and profile generation is made based on the visual analysis of the correspondence map. For a more detailed explanation of correspondence analysis, see Greenacre [ ] and Batista et al. [ ].
3 Results
From the primary sample, 59 individuals did not undergo polysomnography. Consequently, our analysis considered a final sample of 1042 individuals, which is described in Table 1 .
Figure 1 presents the correspondence map regarding the correlation of variables considered in this study. This correspondence analysis generated a mean Cronbach’s alpha of 0.951. A visual evaluation of this map indicates that mild, moderate, and severe OSAS were distributed in the right side of the graph, sharing common characteristics, while the category “No OSAS” was placed in the left side of the chart, keeping proximity to specific variables. In general, obesity and higher age ranges (> 46 years) were associated with OSAS, regardless of its severity, while normal weight and lower age ranges (< 45 years) were closely related to the absence of OSAS. Regarding the self-reported ethnicity, the categories Mulatto and Asiatic seem to be closer to “No OSAS” category; however, it cannot be stated that other self-reported ethnics are related to OSAS, since the distances between the points are too large to provide any association. Both genders do not seem to present strong association with any OSAS category; however, this may reflect the higher relevance of obesity and age in comparison to gender in our sample. Fig. 1 Correspondence map. The proximity between the categories indicates its association. BMI body mass index, OSAS obstructive sleep apnea syndrome
The performed correspondence analysis presented two different profiles related to OSAS: (1) non-apneic adults were younger, non-obese, and presented Mulatto or Asian ethnicity, and (2) apneic individuals (regardless of the severity of the disease) were older adults or elderly, obese, and did not display any association with specific self-reported ethnicities. Moreover, based on the distances between the points, the first profile is largely more specific than the second one, which presents bigger distances between categories. Due to these distances, it is inaccurate to create specific profiles for each class of OSAS, as they seem to share the same characteristics.
4 Discussion
Quantitative analyses of the variables approached herein have already been reported [ , ]. Nevertheless, for the first time, this sample was evaluated from a qualitative standpoint. Moreover, the employment of a correspondence analysis is an innovation in the field of sleep medicine.
The data obtained by the correspondence analysis partially corroborate with classic data of descriptive characteristics regarding OSAS. However, two findings are slightly different from what was expected. First, the low association of gender with any category calls attention, since several studies have addressed a higher prevalence of OSAS among men [ , ]. This discrepancy can be explained by the absence of a socio-economic status variable, which is closely related to gender [ , ], or by the central and biased equidistant male category point. Indeed, these data do not preclude those which state a higher prevalence of OSAS in men, but rather reflect the higher impact of obesity and age in our sample. Second, the peculiar ethnical distribution regarding OSAS should be highlighted. Genetic surveys conducted with the same sample have already demonstrated a low association between West African ancestry and OSAS phenotype [ ]. Interestingly, the self-reported Asian and Mulatto ethnicities were related to the absence of OSAS. Comparing with data from other regions, these results are in accordance to some authors, but disagreeing with others [ , , ]. However, the studies with inter-ethnic comparative data regarding OSAS are limited, with distinct samples and variable results [ ]. Thus, our results are related to the peculiar Brazilian self-reported ethnic distribution and it might reflect the strong and characteristic miscegenation of Brazilian population [ ].
In Brazil, some efforts have been done to incorporate sleep medicine into governmental public health policies [ , ]. The understanding of profiles related to OSAS could be an additional tool to help aggregate sleep medicine and public health, allowing more directed efforts, and promoting more efficient prevention and treatment efforts, with a better cost-efficacy relationship. For instance, our data show that obese and elderly individuals are in more risk for OSAS. Although this knowledge is already considered in daily clinical practice, our results suggest that these characteristics should be taken into account also in public health efforts, mainly by policymakers and health administrator, to provide optimized healthcare service.
Since this is the first report in which a qualitative analysis of correspondence was applied, data should be interpreted carefully and some limitations should be considered. Correspondence analyses are an innovative approach in sleep research, and reason why the strengths and limitations of this technique should be properly understood. This technique has a main benefit: the possibility to associate different categories from multiple categorical variables. This is an important benefit if compared to Chi square tests, which are limited to only two categorical variables per comparison, and to other multivariate analyses (multiple ways—ANOVA, regressions, GLM, etc.) which require at least one numeric variable. By allowing an association of multiple categories within different categorical variables, it is possible to define research profiles, composed by characteristics of a sample that are closely related to each other. This is especially interesting for epidemiological sleep studies, cases in which disease phenotypes are being increasingly discussed. On the other hand, one might take into account that the evaluation of the correspondence analysis is completely based on a visual interpretation of the correspondence map. The lack of proper statistical references and the need for a critical visual appraisal subjects conclusions to interpretation biases. In any case, we do believe this is a useful complimentary technique for epidemiological studies and it should be encouraged for future sleep medicine surveys.
Regarding the results achieved, some additional considerations should be taken into account. First, one might consider including additional variables into the analysis, to provide a better sample description. However, given the aims of this study, we deliberately chose to keep with the most basic descriptive data, to compose general profiles associated with OSAS. Although there is no formal limit on the number of variables to be included in an analysis of correspondence, the inclusion of additional variables would represent a technical problem since the more variables we have, the more imprecise and biased the results will become. A second limitation regards the use of EPISONO database in other studies. This same sample has already been used in other studies evaluating OSAS and related factors [ , , , ]. However, this is the first time this sample is evaluated under a qualitative perspective by means of an analysis of correspondence. The repetitive usage of a same representative sample for multiple studies and purposes is not exclusive for EPISONO; being actually the norm for the most important epidemiological studies, related or unrelated to sleep medicine (e.g., the Framingham Study, the Sleep Heart Health Study, the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort Study, etc.). In this sense, the current study is not redundant or overlapping in comparison to the previous ones using this sample, but rather as a complementary study, providing more information for a better understating of the factors underlying OSAS prevalence. As a final limitation, it should be kept in mind that the profiles described are specific to the São Paulo population, reflecting the epidemiological profile of this city. São Paulo is a cosmopolite city, being the largest city in the southern hemisphere and the fifth biggest metropolis in the world. The extrapolation of these results beyond the Brazilian frontiers should be done with caution, since they reflect the particular characteristics of the analyzed sample.
In conclusion, two distinct epidemiological profiles emerged from the qualitative analyses: the absence of OSAS, which is related to lower age ranges (< 45 years), normal weight, and Asian and Mulatto ethnicities; and the presence of OSAS, related to higher age ranges (> 46 years) and with overweight and obesity. Variables related to gender were equidistant to the OSAS profiles, thus not being considered as risk factor on this analysis. Finally, all the three categories of OSAS (mild, moderate and severe) were equidistant to and sharing most of the characteristics. In this sense, it is not possible to describe specific profiles associated with each of these levels of OSAS. The current analysis was the first to apply a quantitative approach on the current sample, as well as pioneer on the usage of correspondence analysis on sleep medicine. The usage of new quantitative techniques should be encouraged on the field of sleep medicine, to provide additional data on the epidemiology of OSAS and other sleep disorders.