1 Introduction
Melatonin is known as a sleep-promoting hormone released predominantly at night by the pineal gland [ , , , ]. It is secreted into the circulation and also, via the pineal recess, into the third ventricle of the brain [ , , , ]. Although additional brain structures have been shown to also synthesize melatonin [ , , ], the fraction originating from the pineal gland seems to determine the intracerebral rhythmicity of this hormone. Likewise, other extrapineal sources usually contribute poorly to levels and the circadian rhythm of melatonin in the mammalian blood. As far as known, an exception from this rule exists only for extreme conditions of gastrointestinal melatonin release under the influence of unphysiologically high doses of tryptophan [ ]. Interestingly, this treatment caused, in humans, supranormal elevations of circulating melatonin not only at night, but also during the day, and was capable of inducing diurnal sleep. These findings underline the soporific potential of melatonin.
However, treatment of humans with melatonin is affected by some limits that are related to the method of administration, pharmacokinetics and some other, to date poorly understood physiological properties. Nocturnally active rodents can be easily exposed to elevated melatonin levels in the appropriate circadian phase by supplementation via the drinking water. However, this is impossible in humans. Intake of melatonin pills does not generate a melatonin pattern in the circulation that is close enough to the physiological profile. Prolonged-release formulations such as Circadin© developed and produced by Neurim Inc. have not yet revealed fully convincing results in terms of improving sleep maintenance. This may indicate insufficient elevations throughout the entire night [ ]. Future developments may overcome this problem. Moreover, the possibility may be considered that the blood levels of melatonin may be less decisive in the regulation of sleep maintenance than the levels in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) as determined by secretion into the third ventricle [ , ].
A general difficulty concerning sustained effects of melatonin consists in the short half-life of this hormone in the circulation, which may be as short as 20–30 min, but can attain maximally 45 min [ , ]. Solutions to this problem have been sought in the development of longer-acting synthetic melatonergic agonists. Although this requirement is fulfilled by many of these drugs, and although some of them display higher receptor affinities than melatonin, the effects on sleep maintenance have remained relatively moderate [ , , , ]. It seems important to remain aware that statistically significant increases in total sleep time (TST) in the range of 15–30 min may not be relevant to insomniacs with sleep deficiencies in the range of some hours, and that some improvements of subjective parameters such as sleep quality may not be sufficiently reliable for concluding on substantial efficacy. It is also necessary to distinguish between conditions under which extensions of sleep duration have been obtained. The example of tasimelteon shows that sleep was prolonged after circadian phase shifts, whereas TST improvements in nonshifted individuals remained statistically nonsignificant [ , ]. Among the various synthetic melatonergic agonists that moderately prolong TST, ramelteon seems to be the most efficient one [ , , , ], although its effects were relatively variable, especially in elderly individuals [ ]. However, it might be precocious to relate this to the higher receptor affinities of this compound. The somewhat better outcome may instead result from the ramelteon metabolite M-II, which retains some—reduced—melatonergic properties, but accumulates in the circulation to about 30-fold, in the extreme 100-fold levels of the parent compound [ , ].
These examples shed light on the importance of the nocturnal time profile of melatonergic agonists, which should approximate that of the natural hormone, melatonin. However, it would be a misconception to interpret all effects of melatonin or its synthetic analogs in terms of area under curve (AUC) and receptor affinity. It is of particular relevance to be aware of the different rules of melatonergic actions in a chronobiological context, in which classic pharmacokinetics are frequently not applicable. Circadian phase shifting and synchronization follow other rules and frequently do not require sustained actions or high doses [ , , , ]. Instead, an increase in dose may not improve effects, what might be assumed from traditional pharmacology, but, on the contrary may cause losses in efficacy. It is the aim of this contribution to explain the basis and differences of these chronobiological rules, to arrive at a better understanding of requirements for successful treatments.
2 Different Requirements for Sleep Onset and Sleep Maintenance
As mentioned in the previous section, melatonin as well as synthetic melatonergic agonists exert relatively modest effects on sleep maintenance. In normal pharmacological thinking, one would be inclined to enhance the strength of the action by increasing the dose. However, changes of this type remained astonishingly poor in their outcome. The paucity of improving sleep duration as well as the weak dose–effect relationships contrast strongly with the efficacy of melatonin and other melatonergic drugs in inducing sleep onset [ , , ]. All tested melatonergic agonists with sufficient receptor affinity have been shown to reliably reduce sleep latency. A remarkable fact is the low dose required for this effect. In the case of melatonin, 0.1–0.3 mg/day have been reported to suffice for stimulating sleep onset [ ], notably, doses much below the amounts of melatonin present in commercial pills, whether approved by medical agencies or sold over-the-counter. Therefore, there is no good reason to use synthetic melatonergic agonists for this purpose, at even higher recommended of doses, such as 4 or 8 mg in the case of ramelteon and 25 or 50 mg in the case of agomelatine. It seems rather preferable to take a low dose of the natural hormone, melatonin, which is anyway extremely well tolerated [ ].
The decisive difference to effects on sleep maintenance consists in the absence of a requirement for sustained action. A short, rapidly decaying pulse of melatonin is already sufficient for inducing sleep onset, when given in the appropriate circadian phase. One might assume that, in contrast, improvements of sleep maintenance have to be based on a longer persistence in the blood. However, the reasons for why melatonergic drugs are to date poorly efficient in augmenting TST are not fully understood. The time course of exogenous, orally applied melatonin or other melatonergic drugs may not sufficiently mimic the natural, endogenous pattern in the blood. Especially, the primary rise of melatonin after intake can strongly exceed, dose-dependently by one or more orders of magnitude, the levels that are physiologically attained in the first hours of night [ ]. However, the interindividual variation in the pharmacokinetics of exogenous melatonin is remarkably high [ ]. Moreover, observations made already about two decades ago indicate that exogenous melatonin can cause sleep fragmentation [ ], findings that are not yet understood in mechanistic terms. The assumption of receptor downregulation by high melatonin, which has been occasionally demonstrated under largely uncomparable conditions [ ], would be too speculative to be relatable to melatonin-induced sleep disturbances. In a context concerning extended exposure times, losses of melatonin sensitivity were associated with elevated melatonin levels and interpreted in terms of reduced melatonin metabolism [ ], findings that would require further analysis. Another difference between orally administered and endogenous melatonin may concern the release of melatonin via the pineal recess into the third ventricle [ ], which has been recently more strongly related to brain physiology and circadian effects of the pineal hormone [ , ]. Should this difference be of importance to sleep maintenance, pharmacokinetic data on brain levels of melatonin and melatonergic drugs would be required to understand the necessities for a successful treatment. However, such data may not be easily obtained in humans, since melatonin is not equally distributed in the cerebrospinal fluid and determinations from lumbar puncture may not be meaningful [ ].
3 Nonparametric Resetting Contrasts with Classic Pharmacokinetics
The statement that melatonin may be effective for specific purposes when giving low doses of immediate-release formulations that cause brief, pulse-like elevations is not only relevant to sleep onset, but even more so to the synchronization of circadian rhythms. This has to been as a consequence of resetting mechanisms, which are relatively—though not totally—insensitive to long-term elevations of a synchronizing time cue. Changes induced by extended elevations of a synchronizing signal are known as parametric effects, whereas entrainment by a step or pulse of a time cue is called nonparametric [ ]. This difference, originally described for the light/dark zeitgeber, reveals that nonparametric resetting is much more relevant than parametric effects. With regard to melatonin or other melatonergic drugs, the consequence should be that a short, pulse-like elevation is sufficient for achieving a desired synchronization with an external cycle and, not rarely, more efficient. Therefore, attempts of improving effects by elevating dose and/or duration of action, as followed by AUC, may fail as long as the necessary property of a synchronizing signal, namely, a rapid rise is missed. An unfavorable temporal shape of the signal cannot be compensated by a longer duration or higher extended level.
As mentioned in the previous section, immediate-release melatonin usually causes a rapid increase of the hormone in the serum, which may, in the case of commercial pills, exceed the physiological levels at the respective time by orders of magnitude. Consequently, much lower amounts of melatonin that generate peaks in the physiological range will be entirely sufficient for synchronization. In fact, this has been observed. Studies in blind individuals revealed that relatively small amounts of melatonin (0.5 or 0.3 mg) were effective, whereas higher doses such as 10 mg failed to entrain [ , , ]. Notably, these findings are well in accordance with the low doses of melatonin required for sleep initiation [ ]. Although the sleep latency reduction and circadian resetting are mechanistically different, the common property is the requirement of an only short action at a low dose.
The chronobiological basis of entrainment is also of relevance to sleep research. Circadian rhythm sleep disorders (CRSDs) have an etiology of deviating period lengths of the endogenous circadian oscillations, deviations that have to be corrected by entraining signals. As recently discussed, several psychiatric disorders such as bipolar disorder, seasonal affective disorder and, perhaps, some subforms of major depression are also related to circadian abnormalities, especially deviating period lengths [ ]. These mood-related pathologies are, again, relevant to sleep research, because of their characteristic connections with sleep disturbances [ , ]. Therefore, improvement of entrainment is a requirement for correcting sleep difficulties in both CRSDs and mood disorders with circadian etiology. Notably, resetting of rhythms is the main basis of synchronization, whereas tonic changes that act by only moderately influencing period lengths are not particularly relevant to melatonergic treatment.
However, the practical application of nonparametric resetting for purposes of successfully synchronizing rhythms requires the consideration of additional chronobiological rules. It is of utmost importance to be aware that a synchronizing time cue, whether light or melatonin, is not equally effective in any phase of the circadian cycle. Instead, resetting signals act according to a phase response curve (PRC), which describes the phase shifts exerted by a specific signal in their dependence on the phase position at which the signal is given within the circadian cycle. A typical PRC is composed of different phases distinguished by the extent and direction of phase shifts. In a relatively large part of the PRC usually referred to as the silent zone, phase shifts are relatively small or totally absent. This is typically followed by a delay part, thereafter a transition phase in which the system switches from delays to advances, and an advance part (Fig. 1 ). In humans, PRCs for melatonin have been obtained under various conditions and in different populations, including blind people [ , , , ]. Under these premises, it is entirely obvious that entrainment can be only achieved when melatonin is given in suitable parts of the PRC. Moreover, in cases in which deviations in the circadian period length can be assumed to differ from normal, these deviations should be identified and suitable phase positions should, at least, be tentatively selected. In other words, just to follow prescription advices for applying melatonin half an hour before bedtime, which is reasonable for inducing sleep onset, may fail when successful resetting is required. Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the human phase response curve for melatonin. The curve is based on data by Lewy et al. [ ]. For purposes of more easily understandable principles of the curve, original data have been omitted. The extent of phase shifts and some other details of the curve also depend on the dose of melatonin. The original curve had been obtained with a dose of 0.25 mg immediate-release melatonin
Moreover, it is important to be aware that a single synchronizing signal may not be sufficient for a stable entrainment. Although this is theoretically possible, two practical problems have to be considered. First, it may be that a delay or advance phase of the PRC, as desired in the respective case, has not been fully hit. This would require repetitions of the signal over a number of consecutive days. The second problem may consist in a strongly deviating spontaneous period length, which may exceed the normal range of entrainment or cause the rhythm to return to undesired phase positions. In any case, it is recommendable to monitor the rhythmicity after treatment using circadian markers such as time points of awaking, of sleep onset or DLMO (=dim light melatonin onset).
4 Circadian Disorders: Necessity of Identifying the Deviations
Circadian rhythms sleep disorders (CRSDs), such as familial advanced sleep phase syndrome (FASPS) and delayed sleep phase syndrome (DSPS) should be known before treatment. Usually, these deviations have already been diagnosed, but it is also important to know the approximate period lengths, in other words, how many hours the spontaneous rhythm is shorter or longer than 24–26 h. Although this deviation may not be easily identified under normal-life conditions, at least a rough idea about the extent of the abnormalities would help to select appropriate changes for treatment with synchronizing time cues. Notably, such a treatment may not be restricted to melatonin or other melatonergic drugs, but can comprise an additional light treatment, however, under consideration of efficacy and limits by discomfort or visual impairments caused by intense light or, specifically, blue light selected for acting via melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) [ , ].
Poor synchronization by deviating period lengths has to be distinguished from poor sensitivity to time cues. A typical case for this would be blindness in those individuals who do not possess melanopsin-containing RGCs and are, therefore, not sensitive to a light/dark cycle. In many cases, such persons have been successfully treated by melatonin [ , , , , , , ]. Visual blindness in patients possessing these RGCs does not require additional synchronizing time cues, provided that their period length is in the range of entrainment. Of course, it is also possible that other causes lead to an insensitivity to light treatment, e.g., degenerative changes in the neuronal connections to and from the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) or in this master clock itself. Nonresponders to melatonin have been also found in the general population. However, the reasons have often remained unknown and may, in a number of cases, reflect misinterpretations because of disregard of the chronobiological rules of entrainment. Theoretically, melatonin receptor deficiencies would be a reason for absence of responsiveness.
The knowledge of approximate period lengths is also of high relevance in cases of mood disorders, as far as they are associated with sleep disturbances, which is a frequent observation. Of course, this is especially important in disorders with a circadian etiology. As recently discussed [ ], a major error of psychiatric treatment is the use of drugs that lengthen the circadian period in patients who have already an extended period length, as in a bipolar subgroup. A frequent example is the inappropriate treatment with lithium, which lengthens the circadian period and would, therefore, only be promising in the subgroup with shortened periods, but leads to the expectable lack of response in those with a prolonged period [ ]. Although this is known since long, it is still disregarded by many psychiatric practitioners. Therefore, a melatonergic treatment, including sleep promotion, can only be successful under consideration of effects by other drugs prescribed against mood disorders, with the eventual necessity of discontinuation.
5 Consequences of the Phase Response Curve
The consideration of the PRC leads to several important consequences that are not generally perceived by all researchers and may, sometimes, appear surprising. As already indicated in the previous section, information on the requirements of either delaying or advancing the rhythm is a prerequisite for successful entrainment. As depicted in Fig. 1 , a major surprise consists in the phase position of DLMO, which is located around the day/night transition, but still in the silent zone [ ]. This may be unexpected, since melatonin exhibits other effects at this timepoint. For instance, it can promote sleep onset in a relatively reliable fashion when given in this phase. Whether or not certain peripheral oscillators, some of which are partially or almost fully independent of the SCN [ ], may already be influenced by melatonin remains to be clarified. Further nonchronobiological actions [ ] around the DLMO are also highly likely. However, what precisely happens concerning the readjustment of the circadian master clock largely depends on the dose of melatonin. At a low dose, which does not generate a long presence of enhanced melatonin in the blood, no phase shift will occur at DLMO because of the silent zone, although the dose would suffice for synchronizing when given in the delay or the advance part of the PRC. As mentioned, commercial pills can generate strong, supraphysiological levels of circulating melatonin [ ]. If the doses are high enough, melatonin may spill over from the silent zone into the delay part of the PRC. As far as delays are desired, it may be considered to use these higher doses at a clock hour that is more convenient than an application later at night. However, an open point remains, namely, the possibility of disturbances by supraphysiological levels. This is not so much a matter of nontoxicity of the hormone, which is generally well tolerated at even much higher doses [ , ], but rather that of other effects on sleep, which may consist in fragmentation [ ], perhaps via receptor desensitization [ ] or other processes in the brain related to aftereffects by modulation of excitatory neurotransmitters and ion channels [ ].
Theoretically, a sufficiently high dose of melatonin, when given in the delay part may also spill over into the advance part, which would be counter-productive. However, because of the inconvenient phase of application in the second half of the night, this will usually not occur with melatonin. In principle, it may be possible to reach both the delay and advance parts of the PRC, if long-acting synthetic melatonergic agonists are given in high doses in the evening. Moreover, it should be kept in mind that the low sensitivity of circadian oscillators to tonic, parametric signals may result in poor resetting by long-term presence of a melatonergic drugs. This may also play a role at the normal nocturnal maximum of melatonin. However, this has not been directly studied. Nevertheless, the long persistence of especially the ramelteon metabolite M-II in the circulation, which has retained some melatonergic activity, but attains 30–100-fold higher concentrations than the parent compound [ , ], might exert such effects. All these considerations are made under the premise of a lack of melatonin receptor desensitization. Under conditions of desensitization, which should, in the future, be studied more in detail, phase shifting effects should be strongly reduced in any case.
6 Conclusion
Melatonin can exert sleep-promoting effects either directly or indirectly via the circadian clock. Direct effects are rather reliable in terms of reducing sleep latency, but relatively poor with regard to sleep maintenance, under basal conditions in the absence of circadian phase shifts. Similar conclusions can be drawn for synthetic melatonergic drugs [ ]. The induction of sleep onset requires only low doses of melatonin, below 1 mg, and is achieved by immediate-release formulations. Sleep disturbances can be also caused by circadian dysfunction that results in either prolonged or shortened spontaneous oscillation periods, with the consequence of difficulties in entrainment. Synchronization may be also impaired by blindness or neuronal defects in the SCN-related light transmission pathways. Deviating period lengths may not only result in circadian rhythm sleep disorders, but also in mood disorders that additionally lead to sleep difficulties. In all cases with a circadian etiology, circadian entrainment should be the major aim of treatment to correct the causes of complaints. However, rhythm synchronization requires the consideration of chronobiological rules. First, the deviations in period lengths should be, at least approximately, identified to select circadian phases for a promising treatment. Next, the administration of melatonin can only be successful on the basis of the PRC for melatonin. Notably, the phase position of the DLMO is still in the silent zone of the PRC and, therefore, does not warrant successful synchronization. Disregard of the PRC can lead to wrong conclusions on inefficacy or cases of nonresponders. If circadian phases for a presumably successful treatment are too inconvenient to the patient, other means of entrainment may be selected, such as light treatment or well-timed sleep withdrawal [ ]. Moreover, other, especially antidepressive, treatments should be critically analyzed with regard to possible adverse chronobiological effects. For instance, lithium treatment, which lengthens the circadian period, should be avoided in patients with an anyway prolonged spontaneous period. Continuation with lithium would counteract any successful chronobiological therapy in such cases. Concerning the synchronizing doses of melatonin, lower amounts (again below 1 mg) are most promising. Higher doses have been repeatedly shown to be less effective. Again, immediate-release formulations of melatonin are not only sufficient, but rather recommendable, because circadian oscillators are particularly sensitive to nonparametric resetting signals. The differences between circadian entrainment and classic pharmacokinetics aiming at long persistence of a drug in the circulation should be perceived as an important key to a successful chronotherapy.