Highlights
Anti-Xa monitoring was most commonly performed in patients with active cancer or obesity and for a venous thromboembolism prophylaxis indication. The majority of anti-Xa levels were in the laboratory-defined therapeutic range. Over half of the anti-Xa levels were drawn inappropriately in relation to the LMWH administration time. Out-of-range anti-Xa levels did not consistently prompt a LMWH therapy change. Further research should explore whether anti-Xa -guided LMWH dosing improves clinical outcomes in at-risk populations such as patients with obesity or cancer.
Introduction
Low molecular weight heparins (LMWH) are commonly used injectable anticoagulants for venous thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis and treatment [ ]. LMWH forms an inhibitory complex with antithrombin to inactivate activated factor X (Xa). An anti-factor Xa assay quantitatively measures the pharmacodynamic effect of the inhibition of factor Xa by LMWH. The amount of factor Xa remaining in the anti-Xa assay sample is inversely proportional to the amount of LMWH used and can describe the anticoagulant effect of LMWH [ ].
Due to the predictable pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of LMWH, it is not necessary to routinely monitor anti-Xa levels. However, LMWH pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics may be less predictable in certain patient populations including renal impairment, obesity, malignancy, or pregnancy [ , ].
Both increased risk of bleeding and suboptimal efficacy are possible in obese patients. LMWHs distribute into lean body mass, therefore, obese patients with a lower proportion of lean body mass to adipose tissue receiving LMWH dosed according to actual body weight may achieve supratherapeutic drug concentrations which could increase bleeding risk [ , , , ]. On the other hand, fixed-dose VTE prophylaxis regimens do not account for higher body weight associated with obesity potentially resulting in subtherapeutic drug concentrations increasing the risk for therapeutic failure [ , , , , , ].
As LMWH are primarily renally eliminated, impaired renal function can contribute to drug accumulation and increased risk of major bleeding [ , , , , , , ].The prolonged LMWH monotherapy used in cancer-associated VTE treatment also raises concerns about drug accumulation and increased bleeding, especially in those with fluctuating renal function [ , , , ]. In addition, pregnancy can potentially increase the clearance and volume of distribution of LMWH, increasing the potential for subtherapeutic anti-Xa levels [ , ]. Thus, anti-Xa level assays are often performed for these specific patient populations in an attempt to provide optimal LMWH therapy [ , , , , , , , , , , , ].
In order to provide meaningful clinical information, anti-Xa levels must be collected to reflect a steady-state peak, approximately 4 h after at least the third dose of LMWH [ , ]. Anti-Xa levels drawn incorrectly should not be used to make LMWH dosing decisions [ , ]. In addition, LMWH assays vary by laboratory and evidence regarding the current published anti-Xa therapeutic ranges and their correlation with bleeding and thromboembolic outcomes is lacking. As such, there is no evidence-based method of adjusting LMWH regimens based on anti-Xa levels [ , ]. These factors were cited in recent clinical guidelines that recommended against routine anti-Xa level monitoring for patients receiving LMWH, including patients with obesity or renal impairment and during pregnancy [ , ].
As the data regarding anti-Xa monitoring and its utility in real-world clinical practice is limited, as part of a multi-phase project we conducted a retrospective descriptive study at the University of Utah Health (UUH) to describe anti-Xa monitoring practices in patients receiving LMWH therapy.
Methods
Patients of UUH were included if they were ≥ 18 years of age, had documented administration of LMWH (enoxaparin or dalteparin), and had at least one documented anti-Xa level measured between July 1, 2017 and December 31, 2017. All laboratory tests were processed through Associated Regional and University Pathologists (ARUP) Laboratories, a national reference laboratory. Patients were excluded if they were enrolled in another clinical study requiring anti-Xa monitoring. This study was approved by the University of Utah Institutional Review Board.
The anti-Xa level target range at UUH was 0.5–1.1 units/mL for twice-daily treatment-dose LMWH, 1.1–2.0 units/mL for once-daily treatment-dose LMWH, and 0.1–0.4 units/mL for prophylactic-dose LMWH according to the anti-Xa assay and target ranges established by ARUP. Each patient’s anti-Xa level was categorized as therapeutic (within target range), subtherapeutic (below target range), or supratherapeutic (above target range). The timing of each anti-Xa level was rounded to the nearest 30-min mark and was assessed in relation to a steady state LMWH dose (at least third LMWH dose). Therapy changes were defined as any of the following: an increase or decrease in LMWH dose, temporarily holding LMWH therapy, discontinuation of LMWH therapy, or switching to alternative therapy.
Results were summarized using descriptive statistics such as proportions for categorical variables and mean with standard deviation (SD) for continuous variables. An odds ratio with associated 95% confidence interval (CI) was calculated to determine the odds of the LMWH dose being changed as a result of an out-of-range anti-Xa level.
Results
During the 6-month study period, 224 adult patients on LMWH (all enoxaparin) who had 359 anti-Xa levels measured were identified (mean of 1.6 anti-Xa levels per patient). Patients were mostly Caucasian (87%), with a mean age of 52 (SD 17.4) years (Table 1 ). The most common indications for LMWH therapy were VTE prophylaxis (59.4%) and VTE treatment (33.0%). Patients were frequently overweight or obese, with a mean weight of 94.6 (SD 34.3) kg and a mean body mass index (BMI) of 31.6 (SD 10.1). Obesity was present in 48.1% and 46.0% of patients receiving prophylactic and treatment LMWH doses, respectively. Active cancer was present in 24.1% of patients and 57.4% of these were receiving treatment LMWH doses. Renal impairment and pregnancy were present in 0.9% and 1.8% of patients, respectively. Table 1 Characteristics of patients receiving Anti-Xa monitoring during low molecular weight heparin therapy Characteristics Total patients with at least one documented anti-Xa level (n = 224) Age, mean (SD), years 52 (17.4) Male n (%) 121 (54) Race/ethnicity (%) Caucasian 194 (86.6) African-American 2 (0.9) Hispanic 0 (0) Asian 1 (0.4) American Indian or Alaska native 7 (3.1) Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander 3 (1.3) Other 14 (6.3) Pt refused/unknown/not reported 3 (1.4) Weight in kg, mean (SD) 94.6 (34.3) Weight category (%) < 50 kg 10 (4.5) 50–100 kg 125 (55.8) > 100 kg 89 (39.7) BMI, mean (SD) 31.6 (10.1) BMI category (%) < 18.5 (underweight) 10 (4.5) 18.5–24.9 (normal) 60 (26.8) 25–29.9 (overweight) 50 (22.3) 30–34.9 (obese class I) 28 (12.5) 35–39.9 (obese class II) 30 (13.4) ≥ 40 (obese class III) 46 (20.5) Pregnant (%) 4 (1.8) Active cancer (%) 54 (24.1) Renal impairment (CrCl < 30 mL/min) a (%) 2 (0.9) Indication for LMWH b (%) VTE treatment 74 (33.0) VTE prophylaxis 133 (59.4) NSTEMI treatment 1 (0.4) Stroke prevention in mechanical heart valve 1 (0.4) Other indications 15 (6.8) BMI body mass index, CrCl creatinine clearance, LMWH low molecular weight heparin, NSTEMI non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction, SD standard deviation, VTE venous thromboembolism a Calculated with Cockcroft–Gault method using actual body weight b Patients may have multiple indications for LMWH
Most anti-Xa levels were within the therapeutic range (71.9%) (Table 2 ); however, 54.6% of anti-Xa levels were drawn incorrectly (Table 3 ) including 61.2% that were drawn after the anticipated peak concentration. Subtherapeutic levels were least likely to be drawn correctly (44.0%) whereas therapeutic and supratherapeutic levels were drawn appropriately 87% and 82% of the time, respectively. No changes to LMWH doses were made based on the anti-Xa result in most cases (66.6%). However, a change in LMWH dose was four times more likely following out-of-range anti-Xa levels compared with therapeutic anti-Xa levels (odds ratio 4.16; 95% CI 2.53 to 6.84). When the first anti-Xa level was supratherapeutic or subtherapeutic, no LMWH dose adjustments were made 32% and 50% of the time, respectively, and only a third of those patients had a second level drawn (Fig. 1 ). Table 2 Classification of anti-Xa levels during low molecular weight heparin therapy Anti-Xa level classification, n (%) Anti-Xa levels (n = 359) Therapeutic 258 (71.9) Subtherapeutic 54 (15.0) Supratherapeutic 39 (10.9) Undeterminable a 8 (2.2) Target therapeutic ranges for anti-Xa levels were classified as follows: 0.5–1.1 units/mL (LMWH twice daily treatment dose), 1.1–2.0 units/mL (LMWH once daily treatment dose), and 0.1–0.4 units/mL (LMWH prophylactic dose) LMWH low molecular weight heparin a Intermediate or unusual dose of LMWH with no anti-Xa level target range to classify as therapeutic, subtherapeutic, or supratherapeutic Table 3 Timing of peak Anti-Xa levels in relation to LMWH dose Time drawn, (%) Total anti-Xa levels (n = 359) Appropriately a drawn ~ 4 h after at least the third dose of LMWH 163 (45.4) Inappropriately drawn 196 (54.6) Drawn > 4 h after third dose of LMWH 120 (61.2) Drawn < 4 h after third dose of LMWH 62 (31.6) Drawn before third dose of LMWH 14 (7.2) LMWH low molecular weight heparin a Based on the half-life of LMWH, steady state concentrations should be achieved after at least the third dose of LMWH, so appropriateness of anti-Xa timing was based on the level representing steady state Fig. 1 Treatment pathways for patients receiving Anti-Xa monitoring
Discussion
In this single-center descriptive study evaluating anti-Xa level monitoring practices in patients receiving LMWH therapy, the majority of anti-Xa levels were within our laboratory’s established therapeutic range and resulted in no change to LMWH therapy, even in theoretically high-risk patients (e.g., obesity, active cancer). These findings support recent expert guidelines that suggest against anti-Xa monitoring for most patients receiving LMWH therapy, including those with renal impairment, obesity, pregnancy, and cancer [ , ].
Anti-Xa monitoring was performed most frequently in obese patients receiving LMWH for VTE prophylaxis or in patients with active cancer receiving full doses of LMWH for VTE treatment. The observation that anti-Xa monitoring is most often performed in patients receiving LMWH for VTE prophylaxis, which is generally perceived as a lower-risk scenario than VTE treatment, was unexpected. However, one study evaluated anti-Xa levels in medically-ill obese patients receiving three different dosing regimens and concluded fixed-dosing did not achieve therapeutic levels as well as weight-based dosing regimens for VTE prophylaxis [ ]. The need for higher doses as opposed to a fixed-dosing regimen to achieve therapeutic anti-Xa levels may explain the frequent anti-Xa monitoring during VTE prophylaxis in our study sample. It is also possible that concern for suboptimal effectiveness prompted clinicians to monitor anti-Xa levels in these patients.
Our results indicated anti-Xa monitoring was rarely performed in renal impairment and pregnancy. The lack of anti-Xa monitoring in renal impairment patients may reflect the utilization of the labeled renally-adjusted dose of enoxaparin in patients with creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min or the preferential use of unfractionated heparin in this patient population.
We found when the anti-Xa level was out-of-range, clinicians were four times as likely to change LMWH therapy even though there are no established protocols for adjusting LMWH therapy based on anti-Xa levels and the lack of evidence correlating anti-Xa levels with clinical outcomes like bleeding or thromboembolism. We also observed that many out-of-range anti-Xa levels did not prompt clinicians to change LMWH dosing. Thus, even when clinicians felt compelled to order an anti-Xa level in perceived high-risk patients, they frequently chose not to respond to an out-of-range result with either a therapy change or repeat anti-Xa level calling into question the utility of anti-Xa testing in the first place.
Another important finding in our study was that anti-Xa levels were frequently drawn inappropriately relative to the LMWH administration time, especially in patients who had subtherapeutic levels. Recognition of this error may have been a reason LMWH therapy was not changed in response to out-of-range anti-Xa levels. In this case, a logical course of action would be to repeat the level to obtain an accurate result, but this occurred infrequently. The inaccurate timing of anti-Xa monitoring also calls into question the entire practice of anti-Xa guided LMWH dose adjustment, as inaccurate anti-Xa values may have been used to change LMWH therapy, or conversely, levels assumed to be therapeutic may, in fact, not have been.
A strength of this study was the broad inclusion criteria which permitted evaluation of many different types of patients and provided a snapshot of anti-Xa monitoring practices across our healthcare system. Limitations include the single-center setting, and a relatively short observation time period. In addition, with the retrospective descriptive study design, data collection was limited to what was documented in the electronic medical record. Finally, this study did not assess rates of thromboembolic or bleeding outcomes.
In conclusion, anti-Xa levels were most frequently measured in patients categorized as obese who were receiving LMWH for VTE prophylaxis or in patients who had active cancer receiving LMWH for VTE treatment. Most anti-Xa levels were within the therapeutic range and resulted in no LMWH therapy changes, indicating anti-Xa monitoring may not be necessary even in perceived higher-risk patient populations. Many out-of-range anti-Xa levels did not prompt a change in LMWH therapy or a follow-up level, which questions the clinical utility of anti-Xa monitoring. Further research is needed to determine whether using anti-Xa monitoring for LMWH dose adjustment reduces thromboembolic or major bleeding outcomes.