Highlights
Anticoagulation therapy is likely a necessary component of therapy in a patient that presents with both a VTE and a pericardial bleed. Pericardial bleeding risks in malignancy are probably related more to the tumor itself rather than the presence of anticoagulation. Clinical registries, prospective collaboration projects, and case adjudication are necessary to establish the safety and timeline of antithrombotic therapy in CAT and malignant pericardial hemorrhage.
Introduction
Venous thromboembolism, which some studies have indicated occurs in almost 15% of patients with a malignancy, has a substantial impact on morbidity and mortality [ , ]. Certain types of VTEs, such as acute pulmonary embolism, have mortality rates as high as 30% if left untreated [ ]. Different factors—including a patient’s postoperative state, use of chemotherapy, limited mobility, and history of prior VTE—account for its incidence [ ]. In patients with VTE, long-term anticoagulation therapy is indicated [ ]. However, occasionally patients present with both VTE and hemorrhagic pericardial effusion; this rare event presents a tough clinical dilemma, in that treatment guidelines for cancer-associated thrombosis (CAT) define bleeding in the pericardium as severe and typically consider it an relative contraindication for anticoagulation therapy [ , , , ].
Neoplastic pericardial disease occurs in about 7–12% of patients with malignancy, most of whom are asymptomatic, and portends a poor prognosis [ ]. Lung cancer is the most common malignancy causing symptomatic pericardial effusions [ ]. Decisions on how and whether to treat patients immediately after presentation are based on patients’ symptoms and whether or not there is evidence of tamponade physiology [ ]. Standard treatment includes some form of percutaneous drainage or surgery [ ]. Anticoagulation is usually avoided in patients with acute hemorrhagic pericardial effusions who have had pericardial drainage [ ], but the existing VTE guidelines do not indicate when or if anticoagulation should begin in patients presenting with both a VTE and a symptomatic hemorrhagic pericardial effusion.
Our objective in this study was to compile the published clinical evidence on the occurrence of coexisting pericardial hemorrhage and VTE in cancer patients and to describe the clinical presentations and bleeding and thrombosis outcomes before and after the initiation of antithrombotic therapy.
Methods
We conducted an electronic search of case reports, published through April 11, 2019, on patients who had presented to the hospital with findings of both a symptomatic hemorrhagic pericardial effusion and a VTE. Metastatic disease to the pericardium had been confirmed by pericardial fluid studies, and VTE had been diagnosed by computed tomography, ventilation/perfusion scans, or Doppler studies. To locate these case reports, we searched PubMed and Google Scholar using a combination of search terms that included “pericardial effusion”, “pericardial tamponade”, “thromboembolism”, “pulmonary embolism”, “cardiac tamponade”, “hemopericardium”, “hemorrhagic pericardial effusion”, and “malignancy.”
Patient variables collected were age, sex, comorbidities, prior cancer history, history of VTE, history of arterial thrombosis, primary tumor location, previous malignant pericardial disease, cancer therapy given (hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, tyrosine kinase inhibitor, or chest radiation), history of pericardial surgery, type of VTE, inferior vena cava (IVC) filter placement, anticoagulation use before pericardial bleed, time on anticoagulation before pericardial bleed, antiplatelet use within 7 days before pericardial bleed, type of VTE at presentation, anticoagulation agent for VTE (if given), anticoagulation start date after treatment for pericardial bleeding, date of last anticoagulation, last follow up note, cause of death, recurrent VTE, type of recurrent VTE, recurrent pericardial bleeding after anticoagulation, treatment with pericardiocentesis/drainage, treatment with a pericardial window, and laboratory data at presentation (creatinine, platelet count, basic coagulation studies). Seven cases were found [ , , , , , , ].
Results
The median age at diagnosis for the seven patients was 50 years (range 36–64 years), and five of the seven patients were female. The population had a severe degree of other medical comorbidities (Table 1 ), with a median Charlson Comorbidity Index of 7 at the time of diagnosis. All patients had a pulmonary embolism. None had other previous diagnoses of cancer, and because only one patient had a history of VTE prior to hospitalization, most of the pericardial hemorrhage events had occurred before initiation of any antithrombotic therapy (Table 2 ). Table 1 Baseline demographics and clinical characteristics Case Reference Age (yr) Sex ECOG performance status a Comorbidities Primary tumor Hospital complications Patient 1 10 50 F 1 GERD/psoriasis/metastatic cancer Adenocarcinoma (EGFR positive, most likely lung) Acute renal failure/acute liver failure Patient 2 11 64 F 1 Metastatic cancer/stroke/diverticulitis/IBS Non-small cell carcinoma Acute abdomen/CVA/Death Patient 3 12 63 F 1 Metastatic cancer Lung adenocarcinoma None Patient 4 13 49 M 1 Metastatic cancer/unprovoked DVTs/heterozygous factor V Leiden mutation Adenocarcinoma (most likely pancreatic based on tumor markers) None Patient 5 14 40 F 1 Metastatic cancer Lung adenocarcinoma None Patient 6 15 53 F 1 HTN/heavy smoker (100 pack years)/metastatic cancer Lung adenocarcinoma None Patient 7 16 36 M Unknown Dyslipidemia/metastatic cancer/CVA/PFO Lung sarcomatoid carcinoma None CVA cerebrovascular accident, DVT deep vein thrombosis, ECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, GERD gastroesophageal reflux disease, TN hypertension, IBS irritable bowel syndrome, PFO patent foramen ovale a Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Scale: 0 = asymptomatic, 1 = symptomatic but completely ambulatory, 2 = symptomatic and less than 50% in bed during the day, 3 = symptomatic and greater than 50% in bed but not bedbound, 4 = bedbound, 5 = death Table 2 Venous thromboembolism and anticoagulation management Cases IVC filter placement Anticoagulation before pericardial bleed Antiplatelet use within 7 days before pericardial bleed Anticoagulation Anticoagulation agent Patient 1 Yes No No Yes Heparin Patient 2 Yes No No No N/A Patient 3 No No No Yes Unknown Patient 4 No Yes No Yes Fondaparinux Patient 5 No No No Yes Unknown Patient 6 No No No No N/A Patient 7 No No No Unknown Unknown All patients had pulmonary embolism as index event. None had deep vein thrombosis or recurrent venous thromboembolism
All seven patients had echocardiographic evidence of tamponade physiology requiring pericardiocentesis. Aspiration of the fluid revealed mostly frank blood that ranged from 350 to 1300 ml. Two patients (29%) also had a pericardial window procedure (Table 3 ). Confirmation that the pericardial effusion was related to malignancy was made based on the cytological results of pericardial fluid studies. Primary cancers included adenocarcinoma of the lung (three patients), suspected adenocarcinoma of the lung (one patient), non-small cell carcinoma (one patient), suspected adenocarcinoma of the pancreas (one patient), and lung sarcomatoid carcinoma (one patient). None of the patients had a known history of malignant pericardial disease. Table 3 Management and outcomes of pericardial hemorrhage Case Anticoagulation-start date Recurrent pericardial bleeding Pericardial window Patient 1 4 days after pericardial drainage No No Patient 2 N/A No No Patient 3 Unknown No No Patient 4 Unknown Yes Yes Patient 5 Unknown No No Patient 6 N/A No No Patient 7 Unknown † Unknown Yes All patients were treated with pericardiocentesis/drainage † It is unknown whether Patient 7 received anticoagulation
The management of VTE was variable within the patient group (Table 3 ). One patient had an inferior vena cava filter placed and was not treated with anticoagulation. Four patients (57%) were started on anticoagulation for the pulmonary embolism, but the therapy began at different times after pericardial drainage. One patient had an inferior vena cava filter placement during anticoagulation therapy. Of the four patients who were started on anticoagulation, three did not have recurrent pericardial bleeding and survived the event. The other patient, who had been on anticoagulation for a VTE at the time of his initial hospital presentation, had recurrent pericardial bleeding 6 months after pericardiocentesis and had a pericardial window procedure. He died 7.5 months after the index event. Two patients (29%) who were not started on VTE therapy did not have recurrent pericardial bleeding, but one died during their hospitalization after a cerebral ischemic event. The anticoagulation status of one of the patients was unknown. None of the patients had recurrent VTE after hospitalization.
Discussion
Hemorrhagic pericardial effusions and pulmonary emboli are relatively more common in malignancy than in other disease states. However, the concurrent presentation of both conditions is extremely rare and poses a clinical challenge.
Symptomatic pericardial bleeding requiring pericardiocentesis occurred in the six of the patients who had never taken anticoagulation. Three of the four patients who were treated with anticoagulation after pericardiocentesis did well afterwards and did not require a pericardial window. The one patient who had recurrent pericardial bleeding after being started on anticoagulation had previously been on anticoagulation for a prior VTE; however, he survived 7.5 months after pericardiocentesis and 1.5 months after the pericardial window. In contrast, the overall median survival in patients with malignant cells in the pericardium has been reported as 7 weeks [ ].
Anticoagulation in a patient with neoplastic pericardial effusion is a relative contraindication because of the concern of cardiac tamponade secondary to bleeding, and it is not clear if anticoagulation would increase that risk. After a pericardial bleeding event in a patient with cancer, the initiation of anticoagulation might be indicated if the CAT event was recent and the hemorrhage complication has been treated. Among three of the four patients described in this review who were treated with anticoagulation, there were no recurrent venous thrombi or acute pericardial bleeding events after anticoagulation initiation, indicating that the therapeutic index might favor the use of anticoagulation when clinically indicated for patients at high risk of VTE. This observation needs to be confirmed in future prospective studies.
Five of the patients had some form of primary lung cancer. One patient was suspected to have lung adenocarcinoma. In patients with neoplastic pericardial disease, lung cancer accounts for up to 40% of primary malignancies [ ]. Most of the patients with pericardial bleeding had tumors that typically metastasize into the pericardial space; therefore, the risk of bleeding might be inherent to the tumor rather than to the presence of anticoagulation. This hypothesis should be confirmed in future studies.
The major limitation of this study was its small sample size, which limited the power and generalizability of the findings. Also, because many of the cases did not mention the timeline between the pericardial bleed treatment and the initiation of anticoagulation for the VTE, the optimal time to begin anticoagulation remains uncertain. In addition, although most patients who were started on anticoagulation after pericardial drainage fared well during hospitalization, most of the case reports did not mention how patients fared during long-term follow-up. Therefore, it is unclear what the risk–benefit ratio was in the long term. Since patients with major bleeding (including pericardial bleeding) are typically excluded from anticoagulation clinical trials, future directions to resolve this clinical dilemma are to study the problem through clinical registries, prospective collaboration projects, and case adjudication.