Highlights
Platelet adhesion and spreading are mainly modulated by α IIb β 3 dependent signals. Platelet spreading on fibrinogen significantly decrease during storage. Integrin activation correlated with platelet spreading is reversely related to P-sel expression. Spreading of stored platelets on fibrinogen is correlated with their activation and metabolic state. Platelets spreading on fibrinogen can be considered as a functional marker of PSL.
Introduction
The quality and efficacy of platelet transfusion are generally complicated with some unwilling deleterious alterations which may begin from the isolation steps of platelet while these changes progressively increase during platelet storage. This so-called platelet storage lesion (PSL) can mainly affect platelet functional activities through time-dependent distinct stages, starting from a reversible pro-aggregatory changes leading to the irreversible phase of pro-inflammatory/pro-coagulant activation which might finally result in platelet apoptosis [ , , ].
The pro-aggregatory phase of platelet activation is associated with platelet shape change and reversible aggregation, which can be restored in the absence of triggering stimuli. Experimentally, in vitro stimulation of platelets by the addition of a weak agonist such as ADP can induce this condition [ , ]. Similarly, in the early stage of platelet product preparation, centrifugation steps might be associated with ADP release leading to minor shape change and aggregation of platelets. These changes are generally restored by keeping platelets under resting condition with mild agitation [ ]. However, within longer storage, platelets inevitably receive different activating signals which induce their granule release, receptor ectodomain shedding and integrin activation. These are irreversible changes which are mainly manifested by the expression and release of granule contents including platelet pro-inflammatory molecules, P-selectin and CD40L, shedding of adhesive receptors such as GPIbα and GPVI as well as expression of activated forms of integrin α IIb β 3 . Traditionally, the expression and release of P-selectin and CD40L are accounted as valid markers of platelet irreversible activation during storage [ , , , ].
In earlier studies, the expression of α IIb β 3 (CD41, α IIb and/or CD61, β 3 ) was also evaluated to follow different stages of PSL. Nonetheless, these studies showed that unlike other adhesive receptors such as GPIbα, the total expression of CD41 and CD61 did not significantly change during storage [ , , ]. The reason is that, contrary to those receptors, α IIb β 3 have not reported to be modulated by ectodomain shedding which usually reduces receptor expression [ , ]. In addition, the partial constant pattern for the expression of either CD41 or CD61 in stored platelets may rule out significant clustering of α IIb β 3 during storage. In other studies, by introducing a new set of antibodies that recognizes epitopes on activated integrin, scientists applied PAC-1 antibody to detect the levels of activated α IIb β 3 on platelet surface during storage. In these studies, the highest levels of activated α IIb β 3 were detected at early stages while decreasing during storage [ , , , ]. However, whether this pattern is relevant to PSL or higher levels of α IIb β 3 activation at the earlier stages of storage might be due to the reversible pro-aggregatory function of platelets, requires to be further investigated. Given this, in our study we applied an alternative experimental method in which for the first time platelet spreading on fibrinogen matrix were evaluated during storage. Generally, platelet activation is triggered by inside-out signaling pathway induced by the vast arrays of soluble ligands including several agonists and pro-inflammatory molecules as well as immobilized adhesion proteins [ ]. Notably, whilst passing through platelets, almost all of these signals serve to modulate the affinity of integrin α IIb β 3 to its major ligand, fibrinogen. The interaction of these two molecules is considered as the main step of activation state by which the induction of outside-in signals begins to orchestrate major functional activities of platelets including platelet aggregation, granule release, firm adhesion, spreading and thrombus formation [ , ].
Experimentally platelet spreading on fibrinogen is a curtail step in platelet activation which can reflect the bidirectional signaling capacity of platelets. On one side, it shows the proper response of integrins to the inside-out stimuli which enhance these molecules affinity to its specific ligands [ , ]. Whilst on the other side, following fibrinogen ligation, platelet spreading also reflects the capacities of the second waves of “outside-in” activatory signals leading to elevated intracellular calcium associated with the enhancement of integrin avidity (clustering), prominent cytoskeletal rearrangements and spatial reorganization [ , ]. Thereby, considering the critical role of fibrinogen-induced signals in platelet activation, we evaluated the adhesion and spreading of stored platelet on fibrinogen matrix to interpret the functional capacity of platelets during storage.
Materials and methods
Reagents
Mouse IgG1, κ Isotype controls (PE conjugated) were from Miltenyi Biotec (Germany). Monoclonal antibodies against human, CD42b (FITC or PE conjugated), CD62P (FITC or PerCP conjugated) and PAC-1 (activation-specific anti-GPIIb/IIIa antibody FITC conjugated) were from BD Pharmingen (USA). Other reagents and chemicals were from Sigma Aldrich (USA).
Sample preparation
The study was approved by the local ethical committee and the informed consent was obtained from the blood donors by Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization (IBTO). 5 Platelet rich plasma-platelet concentrates (PRP-PCs) were prepared from whole bloods donated by volunteers according to IBTO’s standard protocol (random- donor platelets).
Each bag included 50–60 mL PCs with more than 1 × 10 9 platelets/mL. Under sterile condition, 5 mL of product was taken from the cord for the base-line study on day 0 of storage and after sealing back, the PCs were kept in a shaker incubator at 20–24 °C. At each time points (day 0, day 1, day 3 and day 5) and under sterile condition, samples were taken from each bag via the cord. For this purpose, after returning cord content to the original bag and mixing the bag, the cord was opened while a small amount of platelet (~ 1 mL) was first discarded, then 4 mL of the sample was collected in a sterile falcon tube. At the end, the cords was sealed a few centimeters closer to the bag which then returned to the shaker incubator at 20–24 °C for future use. For each sample adding a designated amount of Tyrode buffer (10 mM Hepes, 12 mM NaHCO 3 , 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 5 mM glucose, 1 mM CaCl 2 ; pH 7.4), platelets were washed and isolated as described previously [ ]. For flowcytometry and adhesion analysis, platelet counts were adjusted to 2 × 10 7 /mL.
QC parameters of PCs
Assessment of total volume, platelets count (per unit), WBC count (per unit) were carried out on PCs after preparation and during storage at each time points. Platelets and WBC count were measured using a hematology full blood analyzer (XE-2100, Sysmex, Milton Keynes, UK).
Bacterial cultures
Bacterial cultures were performed on day 1 and 5 for each bag of platelets, including both aerobic and anaerobic cultures.
Platelet metabolic analysis during storage
Measurement of pH was performed on a pH meter (826 pH mobile/827 pH lab, Metrohm AG, Switzerland) for stored PCs at each time points. Glucose and LDH activity were also measured by colorimetric methods (kits obtained from Randox, UK) using a Chemistry Analyzer (Hitachi 911, Japan). For glucose, the samples were incubated in the appropriate reaction mixture for 10 min at room temperature, and the absorbance was measured at 570 nm, while LDH activity was evaluated at 340 nm with pyruvate-lactate method [ ]. Standard curves were applied to assess the values of these parameters.
Static platelet adhesion
Glass coverslips (12 mm in diameter) were coated with fibrinogen (100 μg/mL) for 2 h at room temperature or overnight at 4 °C. Unbound proteins were removed by washing the coverslips three times with Tyrode’s buffer and the uncoated glass surface was blocked with 2% human serum for 30 min at room temperature. Excess blocking solution was removed by three washes with Tyrode’s buffer and coverslips were kept immersed in Tyrode’s buffer until required. Washed platelets (2 × 10 7 /mL) were then allowed to adhere and spread on coverslips for 30 min at 37 °C. Non-adherent platelets were aspirated and adherent platelets fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde for 15 min at same temperature. Adherent platelets were visualized by either Differential Interference Contrast (DIC) microscope (63 × water objective) or fluorescence microscope (40 and 100 × objectives). Generally fluorescence microscopy was applied for the analysis of stored platelet. For this purpose prior to each experiment platelet were labeled with fluorescence dye, DIOC6 and then platelets were subjected to adhesion assays. The percentage of spread/adhered platelets was quantified during platelet storage (10 microscopic fields were observed and the average percentage of total cells per field were calculated as final result).
Flow cytometry analysis
Whaled Platelets (2 × 10 7 /mL) were incubated with either anti P-selectin (CD62P), GPIbα (CD42b) or PAC-1 antibody for 30 min at 37 °C (with the designated amount according to manufacturer’s instructions). After incubation time, cells were then fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde in PBS and subjected to flow cytometer (CyFlow Space, Partec GmbH, Germany) where a total of 20,000 platelet events were acquired. The flow cytometer settings were optimized for the acquisition of platelets by logarithmic signal amplification in all four detectors (forward and side scatter channels and fluorescence channels FL1/FL2). For analysis, the gate was set around intact platelet population as defined by forward and side scatter characteristics and confirmed by the presence of platelets expressing GPIbα. The percentage of positive platelets expressing P-selectin above the background (negative control) was recorded while GPIbα, CD61 and PAC-1 binding quantified as the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI). Data were analyzed with FLOWJO software (Tree Star Inc, OR, USA).
Statistical analysis
To compare the expression of platelet surface molecules and cells adhesion/spreading in different days, data were analyzed by Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparison tests. For correlations, linear regression analysis was applied. P values of less than 0.05 were considered to be significant, using GraphPad Prism software (San Diego, CA).
Results
Quality control (QC) parameters and platelet metabolic measurements
Platelets count and size were measured on days 1, 3, and 5. Although the platelets counts showed decrease after 5 days, the decrease is too small to have any major influence on the quality of the products. The pH revealed a slight, gradual decrease from day 0 to the last day of storage; however, the pH was always in an acceptable range designated by QC protocol. (data not shown). A progressive decrease in glucose concentration during storage of PCs was also observed, while on the last day of storage glucose levels were significantly (p < 0.05) lower than day 0 of storage. The activities of LDH also gradually increased during storage (Data not shown).
Platelet adhesion and spreading on fibrinogen matrices
Figure 1 illustrated a time course assay for platelet adhesion and spreading. To characterize the adhesion pattern of platelets and also to find the best incubation period with the highest level of spreading events, fresh washed platelets were incubated for 5, 10, 15 and 30 min on fibrinogen matrix while the adhesion and spreading of platelets were visualized by DIC microcopy. As showed in Fig. 1 a, from the earlier stage of incubation, platelets started to simply adhere to the fibrinogen while with further incubation; cellular protrusions extending around platelets appeared as filopodial or lamellipodial formation (Fig. 1 b). These changes were then promoted to fully spread platelets after 30 min (Fig. 1 c). Considering 30 min as optimum incubation time, the adhesion and spreading of stored platelets on fibrinogen matrix were quantified by fluorescence microscope. Figure 1 d–f compared the adhesion patterns during platelet storage with the majority of platelets experiencing full spreading in day 1 of storage. For 3 day-stored PCs, although the number of fully spread platelets is reduced, the majority of platelets still show dramatic shape change (including filopodial or lamellipodial formation and spreading). Notably, 5 days after storage, the number of platelets with dramatic shape change is very low with no obvious evidence of spreading in platelets. As showed in Fig. 2 a, the total number of adhesion events (including simply adhered platelet, platelet with cellular protrusions and spread one) gradually decreased during storage with the significant fall on day 5 (p < 0.01). However, the percentage of spread platelets began to decrease significantly from day 3 of storage (p < 0.01) while reaching its lowest levels at day 5 (p < 0.001). Fig. 1 Platelet adhesion and spreading on fibrinogen matrix during storage. Platelets (2 × 10 7 /mL) obtained from PCs were incubated on a coverslip coated with fibrinogen (100 µg/mL). a – c Illustrates a time course study of fresh platelet adhesion and spreading on fibrinogen matrix visualized by DIC microscopy (× 63 objective) a mainly simple adhered platelets after 5 min incubation, b semi-spread platelets mainly with filopodial or lamellipodial protrusions after 15 min incubation, c fully spread platelets after 30 min incubation). d – f Respectively show one day, 3 day and 5 day-stored PRP-platelets stained with DIOC6 and visualized by fluorescence microscopy, while adhering and spreading on fibrinogen matrix after 30 min incubation (squared panels: × 40 objective and round magnified panels: × 100 oil objective). PCs platelet concentrates, Plts platelets, PRP platelet rich plasma. n = 5 PRP-PCs Fig. 2 Platelet adhesion and spreading on fibrinogen matrix and their correlation with integrin activation and platelet metabolic states during the storage. Platelets (2 × 10 7 /mL) obtained from PCs were stained with fluorescent dye, DIOC6 and then incubated on a coverslip coated with fibrinogen (100 µg/mL). The mean numbers of adhered cells and/or the percentage of spread cells per 10 microscopic fields were calculated. a Illustrates the number of adhered platelets to fibrinogen matrix and the percentage of spread platelets on this matrix for stored PCs. Graph b demonstrates the total expression of integrin and activated GPIIb/IIIa during storage. Platelets obtained from PCs (2 × 10 7 /mL) were stained with either anti CD61 or PAC-1 antibody (against activation-site of GPIIb/IIIa) and subjected to flow cytometry. Although the expression of CD61 was constant, PAC-1 binding showed to be decreased during storage. Graph C also shows the correlation of both adhesion (r = 0.52; p = 0.02) and spreading (r = 0.66; p = 0.001) with PAC-1 binding as a marker of integrin activation. Graph d demonstrates a direct correlation of either platelet adhesion (r = 0.51; p = 0.018) or spreading (r = 0.95; p = 0.0001) with glucose concentration during storage. PCs platelet concentrates. Note: correlation analysis was obtained from 5 independent samples (PCs) during storage (day0, day1, day3 and day5). ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, ns not significant p > 0.05. n = 5 PRP-PCs
As showed in Fig. 2 a, the total number of adhesion events (including simply adhered platelet and spread one) gradually decreased during storage with the significant fall on day 5 (p < 0.01). However, the percentage of spread platelets began to decrease significantly from day 3 of storage (p < 0.01) reaching its lowest levels at day 5 (p < 0.001).
Platelet receptors expression during storage
Considering the spreading and adhesion results which are relevant to the activation status of platelet integrin α IIb β 3 , flow cytometry assays were also applied to evaluate the expression and function of this integrin during storage. In term of integrin expression, the levels of CD61 (β3 fraction of α IIb β 3 ) did not experience significant changes during storage, however the evaluation of activated integrin with PAC-1 antibody showed a significant decrease started from day 3 of storage (Fig. 2 b).
Given the expression results obtained from flow cytometry, further analysis showed a direct correlation between PAC-1 binding and either platelet adhesion (r = 0.52; p = 0.02) or spreading (r = 0.66; p = 0.001) during storage (Fig. 2 c). Similarly, as shown in Fig. 2 D, both platelet adhesion (r = 0.51; p = 0.018) and spreading (r = 0.95; p = 0.0001) were correlated with the glucose concentration in stored platelets. Notably platelet spreading on fibrinogen matrix showed the highest levels of correlation with glucose concentration compared to all other markers which examined in this study (correlation results for P-selectin and GPIbα expression were also less than spreading but data was not shown).
As common markers of platelet activation, the expression of P-selectin and GPIbα were also evaluated during storage. As depicted in Fig. 3 a, P-selectin expression was gradually increased during storage with a significant rise started from day 3 of storage whereas the expression of platelet adhesive receptor, GPIbα showed a decreasing pattern. Results also illustrated direct correlation of P-selectin (r = − 0.88; p < 0.0001) and GPIbα (r = 0.76; p = 0.0001) expression with platelet spreading during storage, which were more significant than those observed for simple adhesion. Fig. 3 Platelet spreading and adhesion compared with other markers of platelet activation during storage of PRP-PCs. Platelets obtained from PCs (2 × 10 7 /mL) were stained with either anti P-selectin or anti GPIbα and subjected to flow cytometry. Graph A shows the increasing levels of P-selectin expression versus decreasing expression of GPIbα in PRP-PCs during 5 day storage. Graph B demonstrates a reverse correlation of either platelet adhesion (r = − 0.52; p = 0.017) or spreading (r = − 0.88; p < 0.0001) with P-selectin expression. Both platelets adhesion and spreading were also in a direct correlation with GPIbα expression (r = 0.48; p = 0.03) and (r = 0.76; p = 0.0001) respectively. PCs; platelet concentrates, PRP; platelet rich plasma. Note: correlation analysis was obtained from 5 independent samples (PCs) during storage (day0, day1, day3 and day5). **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05, ns not significant p > 0.05. n = 5 PRP-PCs
Discussion
Earlier studies have applied flow cytometric techniques to evaluate fibrinogen binding capacity to platelet as a marker of platelet integrin activation during storage. However, various patterns obtained by different studies make the results difficult to be interpreted. Using agonist-induced fibrinogen binding, Di Minno et al. [ ] demonstrated a significantly lower response in 5 day-stored platelet than that in fresh one. Other studies using different types of platelet concentrates (PCs) including platelet concentrates derived from platelet-rich plasma (PRP), buffy coat (BC) and apheresis (AP), showed that in a spontaneous experimental setting (without using agonists), fibrinogen binding did not alter during storage [ , ]. However, these findings were different from other observations that either showed decreasing fibrinogen binding (using PRP-PCs) [ ] or increasing levels of platelets bound to fibrinogen and fibronectin during storage while peaking on day 3 and then decreasing on day 5 [ ] (using either PRP- or BC-PCs). Most recently, Tynngard et al. evaluated spontaneous and TRAP-6-induced adhesion of stored platelets (AP-PCs) to fibrinogen-coated beads by flow cytometry where they showed the increasing levels of platelet adhesion to fibrinogen beads by day 7 of storage [ ]. Taken together, with such a large discrepancy in the results obtained by different studies, it seems that considering an alternative method for the evaluation of integrin activity during storage of platelet would be much appreciated, especially if we consider the fact that both platelet released fibrinogen and plasma sources of this molecule may also interfere in any fibrinogen based assay [ ]. As an alternative experiment using PAC-1 antibody (against active conformation of the α IIb β 3 ), recent studies directly examined integrin activation during storage. All of these studies, which include either standard or refrigerated PCs and PCs with different additive solutions, indicated some levels of integrin activation following preparation until the first day while gradually decreasing during storage [ , , , , ]. Similarly, we also found decreasing levels of PAC-1 binding within 5 days of storage while its significant reverse correlation with P-selectin expression during storage may validate PAC-1 binding as a marker of PSL [ ]. Furthermore, direct correlation of PAC-1 binding with decreasing expression of GPIbα may also suggest the relevance between the receptor shedding and the storage-dependent loss of integrin activating capacity. Nonetheless, like several other studies [ , ], we did not find any significant changes in total levels of integrin expression (detected by the CD61 expression) during storage. This finding suggests that integrin α IIb β 3 does not experience activation-based clustering or shedding within 5 days of platelet storage. Although α IIb β 3 does not experience ectodomain shedding, following platelet activation calpain-dependent proteolytic cleavage of cytoplasmic part of β 3 [ ] may affect α IIb β 3 activation during storage. Several lines of evidence showed a time dependent pattern of platelet adhesion and spreading on fibrinogen matrix [ , ]. We also showed the full spreading of platelet within 30 min of platelet incubation with fibrinogen matrix, while platelet adhesion was achieved in 5 min. It seems that, while adhesion of platelet to fibrinogen matrix may simply reflect a ligation process similar to that observed in fibrinogen binding assay, platelet shape change and spreading on fibrinogen represent the capacity of outside-in signaling pathway induced by full activation and clustering of integrin α IIb β 3 [ , , ]. This process which is associated with a dramatic cytoskeleton rearrangement and cell surface development, requires adequate source of energy [ , ]. Thereby, considering the fact that spreading of platelets can reflect their metabolic state, we hypothesized that platelet spreading could be dramatically affected during storage while it is directly correlated with the alternation of metabolic status of stored platelet. As many other studies [ , , , , ], we showed a gradual decrease in glucose concentration during storage with a significant fall in 5 day-stored platelets. In our previous study, we also showed decreasing levels of platelet adhesion to fibrinogen matrix (any pattern of adhesion) with a mild slope, which reached significant fall in day 5 of storage [ ]. However, in this study further analysis of adhered platelets showed that platelet spreading on fibrinogen experienced much greater attenuation compared to that of observed for total adhesion, with a significant fall starting from 3rd day of storage. We also found a direct correlation of both adhesion and spreading with PAC-1 binding as a specific marker of platelet integrin activation during storage. However, the correlation of platelet spreading and PAC-1 binding was more significant than the corroboration observed for total adhesion. In addition, correlation study between these adhesive patterns with specific markers of PSL including the expression of P-selectin and GPIbα also indicated the more significant correlation for platelet spreading compared to simple adhesion. Nonetheless the most striking finding in this study is still rapid loss of spreading capacities of platelets during storage especially for 5 day-stored PCs. This observation highlights the status of platelet functional capacity during storage while raising an important question mark about the platelet quality in older product since the incapability of platelet to properly spread on a reactive matrix is considered as a serious dysfunction.
Conclusion
The study presented here has examined for the first time, the levels of platelet spreading on fibrinogen matrix during storage. For this purpose, we introduced a homemade platelet spreading assay with a simple experimental design while validating our method with the parallel evaluation of other markers of platelet activation and PSL. While DIC microscopy is generally applied to examine platelet spreading, here we applied fluorescence microscopy to simplify the technique and make it more accessible for blood bank laboratories to monitor platelet function during storage. Our results confirmed that compared to simple adhesion to fibrinogen matrix, the evaluation of platelet spreading not only can reflect the functional capacity of platelets but it also promotes the significance of the traditional adhesion assay for monitoring platelet storage lesion. Notably, this study indicated that the rapid reduction of platelet spreading during storage can overshadow other markers of platelet storage lesion while lacking appropriate spreading in 5 day-stored platelets may also raise serious questions about the quality of long-stored products. Taken together, the study presented here introduced platelet spreading on fibrinogen matrix as an important functional assay to monitor platelet QC during storage while suggesting its potential application as a diagnostic clinical test alongside with other markers of platelet activation in the variety of cardiovascular and hemostatic diseases.