Introduction
Stroke causes sudden neurological deterioration and sometimes death. From 2009 to 2012 an estimated 6.6 million Americans ≥20 years of age had a stroke and 1.2 million Japanese suffered stroke in 2014 [ , ]. The stroke death rate has been decreasing for decades; thus, the number of patients with a neurological deficit has been increasing. Also, the number of elderly stroke patients is increasing, in particular in a society with progressively advancing aging [ , , ]. The estimated, overall prevalence of stroke is 2.6% in the USA [ ]. Previously, elderly patients were considered out of the indication for intensive rehabilitation due to diminished treatment efficacy as compared to younger patients [ , , , ]. But recent analyses suggest that inpatient neurorehabilitation provides benefits to all stroke patients, even patients over 80 years old [ ]. We also found that early ambulation produces favorable outcomes and the nondemential state in elderly subarachnoid hemorrhage patients [ , ]. Of course, even young stroke patients will not all achieve full recovery. Young stroke patients also feel a greater burden of poor self-perception than do aged patients, because their estimated life expectancy is long [ ].
Neurological deficits depend on the severity and the region of stroke, not on the type of stoke. While new medical treatments show adequate effectiveness in animal experiments, in humans, we cannot achieve complete recovery after stroke [ , , , , , ]. Neuronal recovery from stroke in humans is very complicated [ , ]. Some patients experience spontaneous recovery, but the degree of such cannot be estimated at the onset of stroke [ ]. In simple terms, the goal of neurorehabilitation is to return to normal neurological functioning. No one doubts the effectiveness of rehabilitation in counteracting a deficit, but the mechanism thereof was controversial before the twenty-first century.
In this review, we summarize progress in rehabilitation and discuss recent clarifications of the mechanisms of rehabilitation and neural network remodeling. We searched for original articles published between 2014 and October 2016 and selected papers using the keywords “stroke,” “rehabilitation,” “mechanism,” “neural network,” and “remodeling” in MEDLINE and PubMed. We also reviewed related articles.
Timing and Dosage of Rehabilitation in a Clinical Setting
The start and dose of rehabilitation have previously been controversial. In 2013, the AHA guideline for ischemic stroke recommended early mobilization of less severely affected patients, and measures to prevent subacute complications of stroke were recommended (class I; level of evidence C) [ ]. In 2015, the AHA guideline for spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage recommended that rehabilitation can be beneficial when started as early as possible and is continued in the community as part of a well-coordinated program of accelerated hospital discharge and home-based resettlement to promote ongoing recovery (class IIa; level of evidence B). The definition of “early” was controversial. “A very early rehabilitation trial for stroke” referred to early mobilization as within 24 h, while intensive rehabilitation for nonsevere ischemic and spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage patients actually decreased favorable outcome at 3 months by 4 % compared to typical care (46 vs. 50%) [ ]. We should pay attention to the time of mobilization, and in this randomized controlled trial (RCT), the starting time for the usual care group was from 16.5 to 29.3 h after the stroke. Neurorehabilitation should generally be carried out within 1 or 2 days after stroke.
Dromerick AW et al. compared three rehabilitation protocols in a single-center RCT: traditional occupational therapy involving 1 h of activities of daily living (ADL) retraining, a group with 1 h of upper extremity bilateral training activities and standard constraint-induced movement therapy (CIMT), including 2 h of shaping therapy per day and wearing a padded constraint mitten for 6 h per day, and a high-intensity CIMT group, which underwent 3 h per day of shaping and wearing the mitten for 90% of waking hours [ ]. All groups continued therapy for 2 weeks, and the high-dosage group had significantly less improvement on day 90 [ ]. Another nonrandomized, parallel-group, dosage-controlled study of aphasia therapy with distributed therapy (6 h per week; 8 weeks) showed significantly greater improvement than with intensive therapy (16 h per week; 3 weeks) [ ].
In 2016, the AHA guideline for adult stroke rehabilitation and recovery did not recommend a high-dosage, as very early mobilization within 24 h of stroke onset can reduce the odds of a favorable outcome at 3 months (class III, evidence A) [ ]. We need to decide on the beginning and the dose of rehabilitation for patients from the combination of evidence and the neurological condition of the patient (Fig. 1 ). Our previous clinical trials revealed that early ambulation produces physically and psychologically favorable outcomes in elderly SAH patients [ , , ]. Elderly patients lose their physical abilities abruptly during the acute phase of stroke. At the same time, full recovery of physical and psychological functioning is difficult for elderly patients because aging diminishes tissue stem cell functions that regenerate the central nervous system, muscle, and other organs [ ]. Fig. 1 Time axis for treatment and regeneration of neural network. Column shows suitable treatment periods. Rehabilitation produces intercommunication between each treatment method. All treatments act cooperatively. TMS transcranial magnetic stimulation
Sarcopenia
Loss of muscle strength is associated with physical disability and functional limitation [ ]. In an analysis of females, reduction of fat-free soft tissue and fat mass was associated with cognitive impairment [ ]. Grip strength was also significantly related to dementia in an aged population, especially in women [ , ]. We lack available biomarkers for sarcopenia and its association with clinically meaningful outcomes [ ]. Careful clinical observational evaluation and treatment of muscle volume, however, are important for management. Tolea MI et al. showed that individuals with sarcopenia were six times more likely to experience combined cognitive impairment/physical impairment compared with a normal control, and the effect of sarcopenia on cognition is related to low muscle strength rather than low muscle mass [ ]. Sarcopenia, however, is not irreversible, and we do not avoid starting rehabilitation in the chronic state. Intensive inpatient neurorehabilitation is beneficial for all stroke patients, even patients over 80 years of age [ ]. CIMT for 2 weeks yielded superior functional outcome for patients who started therapy within 9 months after stroke compared to patients who did so more than 12 months post-stroke [ ]. Also, the transcranial magnetic stimulation motor map shifted posteriorly in the late stroke group, and cortical reorganization did occur in those late treatment patients [ ].
Muscle Influence on Neural Networks
Muscles and bone are organs not under the direct control of the brain, but they communicate with other organs, including the brain, exerting mutual influence [ , ]. Muscle is not only a physical organ but also a secretary organ; it secretes several hundred peptides (e.g., interleukin (IL)-4, IL-6, IL-7, IL-15, myostatin, leukemia inhibitory factor 1, irisin, insulin-like growth factors 1, fibroblast growth factors 2, and brain-derived neurotrophic factor) [ ]. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is secreted by skeletal muscle, and muscle atrophy induces dementia, depression, diabetes, and malignancies [ , , , ]. BDNF protein is stored in human platelets and is released upon agonist stimulation [ ]. Physical exercise training significantly increased resting concentrations of BDNF in peripheral blood, and resting concentrations of peripheral blood BDNF were significantly higher after intervention, especially in the aerobic state, but not so with resistance training [ , ]. BDNF is a contraction-inducible protein in skeletal muscle that is capable of enhancing lipid oxidation in skeletal muscle via activation of AMP-activated protein kinase [ ]. Stranahan AM et al. revealed that a combination of exercise and caloric restriction increased levels of BDNF in the hippocampus, combined with an increase in dendritic spine density on the secondary and tertiary dendrites of dentate granule neurons in diabetic mice [ ]. Dendrites transfected with the BDNF gene showed rapid turnover of spines, which may be a demonstration of the translation of activity patterns into specific morphological changes [ ]. Rehabilitation increases circulating and intramuscular BDNF concentrations and produces neuro-reorganization in the central nervous system.
Verbal and Auditory Rehabilitation
Evaluation of verbal or auditory rehabilitation is complex and difficult. Recent advanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology has revealed objective findings for such rehabilitation. For example, separate neuronal systems support each grammatical class in post-stroke aphasia patients, motor areas for verbs and perception areas for nouns, based on functional MRI [ ]. Semantic, feature-based rehabilitation consistently significantly modulated the left inferior frontal gyrus in chronic post-stroke aphasia patients and in healthy volunteers [ ].
Music therapy also represents a reduction in abnormal contralesional activity, an enhancement in f-MRI activity in the auditory and motor areas, and an increase in functional connectivity among several regions of the auditory-motor network in individuals suffering chronic stroke over several months [ ]. Listening to music daily also significantly produced structural gray matter changes as compared to a group listening to an audiobook and a group without any listing material following middle cerebral artery stroke [ ]. The gray matter reorganization in the frontal areas correlated with enhanced recovery of verbal memory, focused attention, and increased language skills, whereas the gray matter reorganization in the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex correlated with reduced negative mood [ ].
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation for Stroke Patients
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is available for the analysis of axonal integrity and to produce neuronal recovery after stroke. Lefebvre S. et al. performed a double-blind, cross-over randomized, sham-controlled experiment with transcranial direct current stimulation [ ]. Dual transcranial direct current stimulation applied during motor skill learning with a paretic upper limb resulted in prolonged shaping of brain activation, which supported behavioral enhancements in stroke patients [ ]. Repetitive, continuous TMS improved spatial neglect in stroke patients, and the effect can be evaluated by fractional anisotropy and mean diffusivity in MRI [ ]. Kakuda W et al. reported that combination rehabilitation with repetitive TMS and intensive occupational therapy produced significant long-term upper limb functional recovery after stroke in humans [ ]. And in post-stroke aphasia patients, low-frequency repetitive TMS combined with intensive speech therapy increased cerebral blood flow and speech ability [ ].
Animal Experiments
Animal experiments have been done to clarify among the possible mechanisms of rehabilitation. In rats with ischemic infarct in the endothelin-1-induced cortical focal ischemic model, early rehabilitation induced rapid improvement in motor function, and the forelimb motor maps were significantly enlarged compared with the no-rehab group 38 days after the stroke [ ]. The authors concluded that early motor training after stroke can help shape the evolving post-stroke neural network [ ]. Training in a forelimb reaching task leads to rapid (within an hour) formation of postsynaptic dendritic spines on the output pyramidal neurons in the contralateral motor cortex in a mouse model [ ]. The accelerated rotarod test also produced new dendritic spines within 2 days, and intense sensory stimulation accelerated new dendritic spine formation in mice [ ]. Additionally, daily changes in dendritic spines in the barrel cortex in vivo in adult mice as well as spine sprouting and retraction are associated with synapse formation and elimination [ ]. Only 0.04% of total spines survived the first few weeks in synaptic circuits, and novel experience produced pruning of a small fraction of existing spines, which promoted an integrated and stable structural basis for lifelong memory storage [ ]. Forelimb skilled grasping rehabilitation did not influence the number of neurons in adult rats, but the spine density of neurons increased 22.5 ± 2.3% [ ]. Intensive rehabilitation significantly enhanced both dendritic architecture and spine numbers in the adjoining rostral forelimb area in adult rats when the caudal forelimb region of the motor cortex was destroyed [ ]. This synaptic plasticity contributes to neural circuits and neuro-rehabilitative outcome. Also, in the rodent focal ischemic model, neurons that were situated in the stroke perilesional cortex were controlled electrically and resulted in neuronal function improvement [ ]. This neuronal control was even achieved in animals with poor motor recovery, suggesting that neuroprosthetic control is possible even in the absence of motor recovery [ ]. The limitation to dendritic sprouting is 18 days after the neocortical damage [ , ]. The immobilization of the ipsilateral forelimb (i.e., forced overuse of the impaired limb) after neocortical damage also prevents dendritic growth of contralateral normal cortex, and this deficiency extends beyond mobilization of the ipsilateral forelimb [ , ]. Rehabilitation started at 5 days after the ischemic stroke achieved significant favorable outcome as compared to starting the rehabilitation at 14 or 30 days after the stroke in the rat model [ ]. An early start to rehabilitation increased the number of branches and the complexity of layer V neurons in the undamaged motor cortex [ ]. High-dose rehabilitation treatment started at 15 days after middle cerebral artery occlusion induced improving forelimb motor function and enhanced dendritic growth of neurons at layer V in the undamaged motor cortex [ ]. Rehabilitative training for caudal forelimb area (CFA) ischemic stroke induced motor map reorganization of the rat rostral forelimb area (RFA) significantly after 2 weeks, while rehabilitative training increased the number of neurons projecting from the RFA to both the upper cervical cord and the lower cervical cord [ ]. Four weeks of rehabilitative training after CFA ischemic stroke also increased functional recovery and expansion of RFA due to endogenous neurogenesis in a rat model [ ]. In primate focal cortical ischemic injury, 12-week rehabilitation starting 2 weeks after the stroke led to recovery to near-baseline levels, and this recovery relied on a small change in the contralesional primary motor cortex and significantly increasing motor outputs from the ipsilateral pontomedullary reticular formation [ ]. Evidence from animal experiments confirms the starting time and intensity of rehabilitation in individual clinical practices.
Concept of the Cortical Network via Fasciculi
Before the twenty-first century, neurological deficit was discussed in terms of the concept of the “eloquent” or “noneloquent” nucleus and specific fasciculi (i.e., the arcuate fasciculus, corpus callosum). Microsurgical tractographic anatomy and advanced MRI came to represent three-dimensional white matter networks of fasciculi throughout the brain [ , , , , , , ]. These findings suggested that a reconsideration of pathophysiology and the mechanism of neurological deficit were in order. Several researchers made full use of state-of-the-art diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) technology to determine the potential neural network connectivity not only by fractional anisotropy (FA), but also using several other parameters [ , , , ]. Steiner CM et al. were the first to report on the complementary nature of TMS and MRI [ ]. They showed that stroke patients with a muscle-evoked potentials (MEPs) reaction achieved meaningful functional recovery, but patients without MEPs, combined with FA asymmetry that exceeded a value of 0.25, did not achieve functional recovery [ ]. DTI correlated with functional recovery, and brain-computer interface training also influenced the contralesional corticospinal tract [ ]. Stewart JC et al. compared chronic, left hemisphere stroke in ten individuals with 16 age-matched controls with respect to brain activation during right-hand motor tasks by DTI [ ]. The control group showed increased activation in the left inferior parietal lobule (IPL), while the stroke group showed increased activation in several right/contralesional regions, including the right IPL [ ]. DTI permits an estimation of the functional recovery of patients and an evaluation of the outcome of rehabilitation [ , ].
The semantic anatomical networks can be evaluated with MRI [ ]. White matter integrity in the frontoparietal network was significantly related to haptic performance in chronic stroke, so the thalamus to the primary motor cortex and the precuneus interhemispheric tracts were appropriate targets for rehabilitation [ ]. In an EEG experiment, weaker cortical connectivity in thalamic ischemic stroke patients suggested functional impairment of information transmission in cortical connections [ ]. Both the intercortical network and the thalamus to the primary motor cortex can be targets for sensory rehabilitation training.
New Approach to Significant Recovery
Low-dose GABA A antagonism treatment at 7 days after focal cortical ischemic injury produced 25% better functional outcome and a significant reduction in the stroke volume compared to placebo in the rat model [ ]. Left vagal nerve stimulation (VNS) paired with an isometric force task produced significant forelimb functioning in an endothelin-induced focal motor area ischemic aged rodent model [ ]. The authors speculated that the mechanism of this result is that the VNS drives neural activity in proplasticity neuromodulatory centers of the brain, including the noradrenergic locus coeruleus and the cholinergic basal forebrain [ ]. VNS increases BDNF and fibroblast growth factor in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex and activates the BDNF binding receptor (TrkB) in the hippocampus [ , ]. A γ-secretase inhibitor that is used as anti-parkinsonism medicine (DAPT), or VGF that is one type of growth factor, has the ability to promote neurogenesis after stroke [ , ].
Stem cell transplantation is considered to be one of the candidates for the fundamental treatment of stroke [ , , , , , , ]. Several types of stem cells, the application route of transplantation, the scaffold for neurogenesis, and brand-new neural networks have been discussed [ , , , , , ]. Combination therapy with G-CSF and stem cells has the ability to accelerate favorable effects due to enhanced endogenous stem cell activity [ , , ]. Uchida H et al. reported early and delayed functional recovery by multilineage differentiating stress enduring (Muse) cell treatment in the rat ischemic model [ ]. We also reported Muse cell treatment in the ICH mouse model; Muse cells significantly improved neurological functioning after the early state [ ]. Transplanted stem cells sprouting new axons into the cortex and spine, combined in the future with the transplantation of stem cells and neurorehabilitation, will become the fundamental treatment for stroke.
Conclusion
Neurorehabilitation is an essential part of the treatment of stroke. We now have clinical evidence and clarification of the mechanisms. Active control of axonal sprouting, functional compensation through the reorganization of intercortical connections, reorganizing through the influence of other organs, especially muscle, and regeneration therapy are all important for the required breakthrough in stroke outcome.