Highlights
1. This study was intended to compare the risk of venous thrombosis in rivaroxaban- and LMWH-treated patients with femoral venous catheters. We hypothesize that rivaroxaban is associated with a significantly lower rate of VTE happened compared to LMWH. 2. Secondary objectives are to assess the safety of preventive doses of rivaroxaban and LMWH reduction in risk of major bleeding 3. We have concluded that oral rivaroxaban 20 mg/day was able to reduce the incidence of lower VTE compared with LMWH. 4. Although those clinical data was anthologized in the interim enrollment accounting for 25% of targeted patient volume ,We had summarized such preliminary results, which could guide subsequent research and could provide important theoretical foundation for our subsequent efforts to prevent deep vein catheterization-induced thrombosis.
Background
There are increasingly data to demonstrate the efficacy that delivery of ex vivo activated autologous T cell therapies has been valued as promising method for the management of many malignancies [ , ]. The resources of acquiring the adequate inducible lymphocytes has been the vital initials to continue the cell ex vivo expansion since the success of adoptive T cell yield is developed in an amount dependent manner. The limited lymphocytes could encounter cell vitality and cytokines extra consumption and potential risk in lasting cell division cycle and thus give rise to insufficiently cell induction and affect the final clinical outcomes etc. The apheresis could be performed through a femoral vein catheter placement has been popularized procedure for collecting the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from which these cellular products are generated; We have been aware of the evitable existing risk for cancer patients to develop the thrombosis which risen from the complicated molecular mechanism, we might assume that the apheresis as the concomitant intervention could deteriorate the risk of thrombosis occurrence represented by deep vein thrombosis (DVT) as a morbidity during the venous catheterization. It is estimated that 2–6% of patients who have a deep vein puncture may develop a symptomatic DVT and that more than 40% may harbor an asymptomatic thrombus [ ]. Various anticoagulants have been compared to prevent and treat cancer related thrombosis which some controversies were existed. This situations have been stated converting the prophylaxis of catheter- related thrombosis, catheter structure and physical anatomic variations affecting the thrombosis development. In consideration of prophylactic thrombosis, warfin could exert biological functions but dosage adjudgment limited warfin application [ , , ]. Lee et al. reported that dalteparin was more effective than an oral anticoagulant in reducing the risk of recurrent thromboembolism without increasing the risk of bleeding [ ]. There was few report to femoral vein catheter related thrombosis in the event of apheresis preparation for adoptive T cell immunotherapy among cancer patients. More recently, a new class of anticoagulant, which directly inhibits a clotting factor and is not a vitamin K antagonist (VKA), has emerged for the prevention and treatment of acute VTE. Those agents as direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) include rivaroxaban and apixaban, acting at inhibiting activated factor X [ , , , , ]. However, there was an increased risk of anticoagulant-induced bleeding in patients with cancer [ , ]. Therefore, we were encouraged to conduct the clinical study to identify the most suitable dose for use of the anticoagulant during the process of apheresis for peripheral blood lymphocytes collection. Specifically, this study was intended to compare the prophylactic functions and risk of venous thrombosis development between rivaroxaban- and LMWH-treated patients with femoral venous catheters.
Methods
Participants and study design
This was a prospective, randomized, open-label study, performed in the Department of Oncology, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Capital Medical University Cancer Center, Beijing, China. All patients enrolled were eligible for allocation of autologous adoptive T cell immunotherapy regardless of combined with chemotherapy, molecular target therapy, radiotherapy or immunotherapy alone. The age ranged from 18 to 85 years old with histologically or cytologically confirmed advanced or metastatic solid tumors. Subjects were required to have a predicted life expectancy more than 3 months and consent with expeiencing femoral vein puncture for apheresis through cell separator. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group(ECOG) performance status of less than 2, with adequate hematologic, hepatic, and renal functions, PT-INR < 1.5 (unless patient is receiving warfarin in which case PT-INR must be < 3). Exclusion criteria included the coexistence of physical or symptomatic thrombosis from the vessel, brain metastasis, active hemorrhage and/or dysfunction of coagulation, autoimmune diseases, allergic disease, obstructive jaundice, myelofibrosis, hypersplenism and pregnant or lactating woman. The protocol (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier, NCT03282643) was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Boards for Capital Medical University Cancer Center and all subjects were given informed consent for participation in the study. All included participants were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1 ration to LMWH 0.4 ml/days, 10 mg/days rivaroxaban and 20 mg/days rivaroxaban as protocol descriptions.
Treatment protocol
All patients were placed deep venous catheter via formal vein and purposed for the PBMC apheresis at the same day and the next day until the subsquent apheresis delivery for ex vivo expansion. The size of catherter is 8Fr purchased from Arrow International Inc, USA and model CS-15802-E. Each patient was experienced a apheresis per day for 2 days and the scheduled mean circulation blood flow was 6000 ml with the continuous mixture of ACD-A(C 6 H 5 Na 3 O 7 ·2H 2 O, C 6 H 8 O 7 ·H 2 O, C 6 H 12 O 6 ·H 2 O) anticoagulant amount of 500 ml and the 10% calcium glucose 10 ml iv prior to PBMC collection and additional 1–2 times were applied if the patient has symptomatic lip tingling. Apheresis was performed using the COBE Spectra cell separator (COBE BCT, Lakewood, CO, USA) until CD34 + cells reached ≥ 4.5 × 106/kg. The intubation time of each patient is approximately 15 min and it was removed after the apheresis was completed followed by compression hemostasis for 6 h. For subjects assigned to LMWH (Fraxiparine), 0.4 ml/day(3800 IU) was administered subcutaneously on the first day followed the catheterization and second day before the catheter removal. For subjects assigned to rivaroxaban, 10 mg tablet was administered orally with food once daily after the apheresis procedure in first days and take one tablet at 8 a.m in the next day. 20 mg rivaroxaban group assigned 10 mg tablet was administered orally with food twice daily after the apheresis procedure in first days and take one tablet at 8 a.m/8 p.m twice daily in the next day. The acute thrombosis was defined as the physical and symptomatic presence within 1 month after the removal of femoral catheter. Those patients who were hospitalized in 30 days of post apheresis, all blood and veins ultrasonic exams were recorded.
Follow-up
The regular physical and radiological exams were given for all subjects in after approximately 2 days and as well as the lower limbs once a week until 1 month. If the radiological imaging discovered DVT, patients were administrated to continue to receive anticoagulant therapy. Physical examination and routine hematology and biochemistry were performed at each visit. The primary endpoint was thrombosis occurrence in 30 days after removal of deep venous catheterization. The second endpoint was to compare the rate/incidence of major and minor bleeding episodes in each arm.
Outcomes definition
The outcome of the trial was defined as the phenomenon occurred of any VTE and other sites of thrombosis event diagnosed by compression ultrasonic exam and computed tomography scans. Although the study protocol did not specify central adjudication of suspected VTE events, reported VTE events were subsequently adjudicated by a central committee blinded to treatment allocation after the study was completed.
Statistics
Continuous variables were expressed as mean ± SD (standard deviation) and compared using a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test; categorical variables were compared using χ 2 or Fisher analysis. Life-table estimates of survival time were calculated according to the Kaplan and Meier methodology [ ]. The Greenwood formula was used for the standard deviation. A Cox proportional hazards regression approach [ ] was chosen for the evaluation of VTE as the primary end-point. Potential prognostic variables were analyzed both univariately with one factor taken at a time, and then in a multivariate model combining all factors. Results are reported as hazard ratios (HR) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI). A HR > 1 indicated an elevated risk with respect to the reference category. A confidence interval which did not include the value 1 indicated statistical significant at the 5% level. All statistical evaluations were carried out using SPSS software (Statistical Package for the Social Science, version 15.0, SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL). A value of P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant in all the analyses.
Results
Patient population
Between February 2016 to August 2017, a total of 74 eligible subjects were enrolled (Fig. 1 ). The baseline characteristics were comparable between treatment arms except that there were more subjects with ECOG 2 (Table 1 ) in the LMWH group. A broad range of malignancies was represented, but colorectal cancer was the most common (18% of subjects). 65 percent of subjects presented with metastatic disease and 53 were receiving anticancer treatment before adoptive T cell immunotherapy, a majority of whom (66%) were receiving chemotherapy. There were also 15 subjects who were undergoing concomitant chemotherapy (n = 9) and endocrine therapy (n = 4) during the trial.
Fig. 1 CONSORT Flow Chart, including enrollment and analysis. VTE, venous thromboembolism
Table 1 Patient baseline characteristics by trial arm Characteristic No. Daltepain Rivaroxaban 10 mg/day Rivaroxaban 20 mg/day P value Total 23(31) 26(35) 25(34) Male sex 7(30) 10(38) 14(56) 0.198 Age, years Median 56 56 55 0.864 Range 24–79 27–76 20–72 BMI, Kg/m 2 Median 21 22 22 0.438 Range 15–26 15–27 15–27 ECOG scoring 0 10(43) 14(54) 13(52) 0.038 1 8(35) 10(38) 10(40) 2 5(22) 2(8) 2(8) Stage of disease Early/locally advanced 6(26) 9(35) 11(44) 0.918 Metastatic 17(74) 17(65) 14(56) Platelet count ≤ 350,000/µl 16(73) 18(69) 20(80) 0.832 Circulating cell flow Median 2905 ml/h 2852 ml/h 2768 ml/h 0.364 Range 2384–3600 ml/h 1521–3429 ml/h 1500–4519 ml/h Previous receiving cancer treatment a Chemotherapy 12(55) 13(50) 10(40) 0.855 Radiotherapy 4(17) 3(12) 2(8) 0.405 Endocrine therapy 1(4) 2(8) 1(4) 0.97 Surgery 9(39) 10(38) 6(24) 0.742 Currently receiving cancer treatment Chemotherapy 2(9) 4(15) 3(12) 0.822 Radiotherapy 0 0 0 Endocrine therapy 2(9) 2(8) 2(8) 0.955 Primary tumor type Lung cancer 2(9) 5(19) 4(16) 0.354 Breast cancer 4(17) 5(19) 1(4) Esophageal/gastroesophageal 3(13) 4(15) 4(16) Hepatocellular carcinoma 0 1(4) 2(8) Colorectal malignant tumor 4(17) 4(15) 5(20) Other malignant tumors b 10(43) 7(28) 9(36) BMI Body mass index, ECOG PS Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status a Patients could receive more than one treatment. These treatment in one year before start this Trial b Other malignant tumors includes Gynecologic Oncology, Pancreatic cancer, Thyroid cancer, Laryngeal cancer, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, lymphoma, cholangiocarcinoma, kidney cancer
Fewer VTE events occurred with rivaroxaban
The qualifying event was a symptomatic DVT within the first month in 5 patients (7%) and no patient had incidental PE (Table 2 ). Four cases of thrombosis occurred in the LMWH group (0.4 ml/day LMWH subcutaneously injection once daily for 2 days), 1 case in the rivaroxaban 10 mg group (oral once daily for 2 days), and none in the rivaroxaban 20 mg group (oral once daily for 2 days). When taken as a group (including 20 mg and 10 mg rivaroxaban oral once daily for two days), the rivaroxaban-treated subjects had a lower statistically significant rate of VTE compared with the LMWH group ( P = 0.018) (Fig. 2 B). When taken separately, the rivaroxaban 20 mg group had a statistically significant reduction in the number of VTE events compared with LMWH ( P = 0.02), but the rivaroxaban 10 mg group did not ( P = 0.13).
Table 2 VTE events Thrombosis No. (%) Rivaroxaban 20 mg/day Dalteparin Rivaroxaban 10 mg/day VTE (n) 4 1 0 Location of VTE Lower extremity 4(100) 1(100) 0 Intermuscular vein 2(50) 0 0 Femoral vein 1(25)* 0 0 Popliteal vein 1(25) 1(100) 0 Lower extremity edema 1(25) 0 0 VTE Venous thromboembolism *The patient has a common femoral vein, deep femoral vein, and superficial femoral vein thrombosis
Fig. 2 Risk factors for thrombosis
The thrombosis occurred in the rivaroxaban follow-up at 1 week after the day the catheter was placed, and at days 9, 11,15, and 23 of follow-up from the day the catheter was placed in the LMWH group. One case of thrombosis in the LMWH group resulted in lower extremity edema. Regarding safety, there was no bleeding in any of the three groups, nor were other side effects such as skin pigmentation, pulmonary embolism, and myocardial infarction observed in either group.
Risk factors for thrombosis
We have conducted a risk analysis for some objective factors that easily affect thrombosis, which includs ECOG, other anti-tumor treatments, circulating cell flow, PLT conuting, D-Dimer, INR, CHOL level, Tumor stage, BMI, Gender and age. We have adapted the single factor regression analysis to observe differences between the thrombus group (n = 5) and the nonthrombotic group (n = 69) and the results shown that in addition to different medication can affect thrombosis, ECOG scores could also affect the occurrence of thrombosis, At the same time, we found that the patient’s gender in the study, especially female patients were more likely to develop thrombosis. If more amount of DC-CIK cells infused intravenoulsy, it might also affect the formation of thrombus, although the P value of both is 0.08 which such small population was still closed to significance. While other objective factors were not affect the production of thrombosis (Fig. 3 ).
Fig. 3 Time to venous thromboembolism. a Four cases of thrombosis occurred in the LMWH group, 1 case in the rivaroxaban 10 mg group, and none in the rivaroxaban 20 mg group. 20 mg rivaroxaban group can reduce thrombus events compared with LMWH group ( P = 0.02). b When taken as a group, the rivaroxaban-treated subjects had a lower statistically significant rate of VTE compared with the LMWH group ( P = 0.018)
Discussion
Major vessel catheterization which has been taken place has been deployed to conduct the apheresis procedure for collecting PBMC to generate adoptive T cell therapy products, but the risk of DVT/VTE could also be complicated due to the process and led to subsequent morbidity such as chronic lower extremity edema or PE. Previously we had chosen as a prophylactic measure to reduce the risk of VTE, but directly acting oral anticoagulants would be more convenient. Therefore, we have performed this study to compare the effect of short term exposure to the low molecular weight heparin (fraxiparine)with medication to rivaroxaban on the risk of DVT/VTE in patients with femoral venous catheterization for cellular immunotherapy at our center. Low molecular weight heparin and rivaroxaban have been compared for their effects on reducing thrombosis recurrence in cancer patients [ , ]. Rivaroxaban had a lower rate of thrombosis recurrence, but increased risks of hemorrhage. We found that rivaroxaban at the oral dose of 20 mg/day produced a significantly lower rate of thrombosis than that with the heparin therapy and no hemorrhage was observed in any of the study groups. This was possibly due to the dosages and duration of therapy. In contrast with heparin in other clinical studies (200 IU/kg daily during month 1, then 150 IU/kg daily for months 2–6) or rivaroxaban (15 mg twice daily for 3 weeks, then 20 mg once daily for a total of 6 months), the dosage we used was mainly for prevention of venous thrombosis and were applied for 2 days only. Our results are consistent with other research [ , ] in which heparin therapy had significantly higher rates of thrombosis than that with rivaroxaban therapy, which could reflect differences in their mechanisms of action. LMWH accelerates the inhibition by antithrombin of activated factor X in the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin [ ]. Rivaroxaban binds directly and reversibly to factor Xa and competitively inhibits factor Xa. It is 10,000-fold more selective for factor Xa than other related serine proteases, and it does not require cofactors to exert its anticoagulant effect. Rivaroxaban also inhibits both free and clot-bound factor Xa, as well as prothrombinase activity [ ]. It is possible that the enhanced antithrombotic effect of rivaroxaban was associated with greater inhibition of femoral vein-catheter related clots [ ].
In order to control for other factors associated with thrombosis, besides the therapeutic regimens, we have compared the differences between the two patient groups (with or without thrombosis occurrence) in age, gender, BMI, platelet counts, D-dimer, INR, total cholesterol, tumor staging, currently therapy and previous types of therapy. No significant differences were obtained, indicating that these factors might have had no significant effects on the thrombosis associated with PBMC separation after the catheterization. Although the proportion of tumor staging is not uniform in those three groups (74% vs. 65 and 56%), we have combined rivaroxaban group and then perform multiple logistic regression analysis to suggest that tumor staging should have less effects on thrombosis. However, we found that ECOG performance status was statistically different among the three groups and also among the thrombosis presence or thrombosis absence groups, which was likely to reflect that patients in poor physical condition might have prolonged bed rest or other risks associated with formation of blood clots. This risk factor might have also influenced thrombotic events reported in other research [ ]. In addition, gender may have an effect on the production of thrombosis, although not as obvious as ECOG. Some studies have reported that female patients might increase stroke and thrombosis due to issues with hormone secretion levels, which may be one reason for the above results in this experiment [ ]. The amount of cell re-infusion seems to affect the formation of thrombosis, which may be related to blood viscosity, but the specific reasons need further research in the future.
Although those clinical data was anthologized in the interim enrollment accounting for 25 percent of targeted patient volume and the limited patients reached the statistical difference, providing the insight into understanding the potency of comparative anticoagulants, unfortunately the registered clinical trial was discontinued as the government regulatory amend action, which revoked the standard adoptive T cell immunotherapy as the clinical research category. To ensure the systemically consistency of patient enrollments qualifications, we were able to terminate this clinical trial when the interim data was collected. Although the primary endpoint was to prospectively compare the efficacy of LMWH versus rivaroxaban in the prevention of catheterization associated thrombosis, the rivaroxaban 20 mg/day could apparently decline the acute thrombosis incidence. In short we have recommended that the rivaroxaban 20 mg/day could be used to prevent acute thrombosis in the occasion of catheterization condition.