Introduction
Sirtuins (SIRTs), or s ilent i nformation r egulator t wo-like prote ins , are mammalian ortholog of silent information regulator 2 (Sir2) protein in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae [ ]. The yeast SIR2 gene plays a transcriptional silencing role in heterochromatin regions (area which genes are mostly silenced), including the ribosomal gene cluster (ribosomal DNA (rDNA)), telomeres, and the hidden mating type loci HML/HMR [ ]. Sir2 protein is a NAD + -dependent enzyme called histone deacetylase (HDAC) class III, which uses NAD + as a cofactor to remove an acetyl group from the epsilon amine of lysine on a histone protein, allowing histones to wrap the DNA more tightly [ ]. Subsequent studies discovered homologs of Sir2 in prokaryotes and in all eukaryotes including mammals [ ], establishing a family of highly conserved enzymes known as sirtuins. Sirtuins have received widespread attention, and they have been well accepted not just as energy sensors but also as transcriptional effectors by regulating the acetylation state of many histones and non-histone targets, thereby controlling their activities. Modulation of sirtuins has been shown to impact the progression of several neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Huntington’s disease (HD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and ischemic stroke, where the neuroprotective effects of SIRT1 are well documented. The role of SIRTs 2–7 in ischemic stroke, however, has largely remained elusive. In this review, we will provide an overview on the physiological and brain-associated roles of mammalian sirtuins. We will further discuss on the recent discoveries and the emerging roles of sirtuins in ischemic stroke, including the protective or detrimental effects of sirtuins in ischemic stroke, and finally on the prospect for modulating sirtuin function and expression as therapeutic approach to ameliorate the damaging effect of ischemic stroke.
Overview of the Mammalian Sirtuin Family
The mammalian sirtuin family consists of seven distinct proteins (SIRT1 to SIRT7), each with a highly conserved central NAD + binding site and common catalytic domain [ ]. Sirtuins are localized in different subcellular compartments: SIRT1 is a nuclear protein [ ] whereas SIRT2 is a cytoplasmic protein [ ], and both SIRT1 and SIRT2 can shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm under different stimuli [ , ]; SIRT3–5 are mitochondrial sirtuins whereas SIRT6 and SIRT7 are associated to the heterochromatic regions and nucleoli [ ]. Sirtuins target both histone and non-histone proteins (Fig. 1 ; Table 1 ) such as p53 [ , , ], forkhead box class O (FOXO) family of transcription factors [ , , , ], and peroxisome proliferative activated receptor-γ (PPAR-γ) co-activator 1α (PGC-1α) [ , ] to regulate activities ranging from cellular stress resistance, senescence, survival, genomic stability, metabolism, inflammation, and carcinogenesis [ ]. This section describes some of the known physiological roles of mammalian sirtuins. Fig. 1 Overview of the physiological functions of the mammalian sirtuin family. There are seven members in the sirtuin family, with SIRT1, SIRT2, SIRT6 being localized to the nucleus, SIRT7 in the nucleolus, and SIRT3, SIRT4, and SIRT5 being mitochondrial sirtuins. Here, we describe some of the important regulatory roles of sirtuin in several physiological processes, including metabolism, apoptosis, mitochondrial biogenesis, ROS detoxification, autophagy, cell cycle progression, and genomic stability. 53BP1 p53 binding protein 1, α-KG alpha-ketoglutarate, AFP a-fetoprotein, ACLY ATP citrate lyase, AceCS2 acetyl-CoA synthetase 2, LXR liver X receptor, ABCA1 ATP-binding cassette transporter 1, APC/C anaphase-promoting complex C, Bax Bcl-2-like protein 4, Bcl-xL B cell lymphoma-extra-large, BDNF brain-derived neurotrophic factor, Bim Bcl-2-like protein 11, BRCA1 breast cancer type 1 susceptibly protein, CDC20 cell division cycle 20, CDC27 cell division cycle 27, CDH1 cadherin 1, CREB cAMP-responsive element binding protein, COPS2 COP9 constitutive photomorphogenic homolog subunit 2, CPS1 carbomyl phosphate synthetase 1, CtIP C-terminal binding protein interacting protein, CypD cyclophilin D, DNA-PK DNA-dependent protein kinase, ELK4 ETS domain-containing protein 4, ERRα estrogen-related receptor alpha, FOXOs forkhead box O, FOXO3a forkhead box O3a, G6Pase glucose 6-phosphatase, GADD45 growth arrest and DNA damage 45, GDH glutamate dehydrogenase, Gln glutamine, Glu glutamate, H3K18 histone H3 lysine 18, H3K56 histone H3 lysine 56, H4K16 histone H4 lysine 16, H4K20me histone H4 lysine 20, monomethylated, HIF-1α hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha, HOXA10 homeobox A10, IDH2 isocitrate dehydrogenase 2, LCAD long-chain specific acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, MnSOD Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase, mTOR mechanistic target of rapamycin, NcoR nuclear receptor co-repressor, NF-κB nuclear factor kappa B, NME1 NME/NM23 nucleoside disphosphate kinase 1, NRF1 nuclear respiratory factor 1, PAF53 RNA polymerase 1-associated factor 53, PARP1 poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1, PEPCK phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, PDC pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, PGC-1α peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha, Pol1 RNA polymerase 1, Pol III DNA polymerase 3, Pol-β DNA polymerase beta, PPAR-α peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha, PPAR-γ peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, PR-SET7 PR/SET domain containing protein 7, Prdx-1 peroxiredoxin-1, PUMA p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis, SDH succinate dehydrogenase, SMRT silencing mediator of retinoid and thyroid hormone, SNF2H sucrose non-fermenting 2 homolog, SOD2 superoxide dismutase 2, SREBP2 sterol regulatory element-binding protein 2, TNFα tumor necrosis factor alpha, TORC1 transducer of regulated CREB 1, TRPM2 transient receptor potential melastatin, TFIIIC2 transcription factor III2, UBF upstream binding factor Table 1 Overview of the mammalian sirtuin family Sirtuin Class Localization Activity Targets and Substrates Biological Functions SIRT1 I Nucleus, Cytosol Deacetylation P53, Ku70, FOXOs, LXR, PGC-1α, NcoR, SMRT, CREB, PGC-1α, H1K26, H4K16, Notch, NF-κB, HIF-1α, TORC1, PPAR-γ Apoptosis, lipid metabolism, glucose metabolism, cell cycle regulation, DNA repair, antioxidation, mitochondrial biogenesis, neuroprotection, hepatoprotection, cardioprotection SIRT2 I Nucleus, Cytosol Deacetylation H4K16, PR-SET7, HOXA10, SREBP2, α-Tubulin, FOXO1, FOXO3, CDH1, CDC20, PGC-1α, Prdx-1, PEPCK, PAR-3 Cell cycle regulation, lipid metabolism, glucose metabolism, regulation of microtubule structure, antioxidation, nerve myelination SIRT3 I Mitochondria Deacetylation LCAD, Glu, GDH, HMGCS2, AceS2, SOD2, CypD, Ku70, FOXO3a Lipid metabolism, metabolic homeostasis, antioxidation, apoptosis, cardioprotection SIRT4 II Mitochondria ADP-ribosylation GDH, NF-κB DNA repair, tumor growth, inflammation, lipid metabolism SIRT5 III Mitochondria Deacetylation, demalonylation, desuccinylation CPS1, SDH, PDC, IDH2 Apoptosis, mitophagy, NADPH production, ROS production SIRT6 IV Nucleus Deacetylation, ADP-ribosylation H3K9, H3K56, PARP1, Jun, HIF-1α, TRPM2, p53, NF-κB, CtIP, DNA-PK DNA repair, insulin signaling, glucose metabolism, mitochondrial respiration SIRT7 IV Nucleolus, Nucleus Deacetylation H3K18, PAF53, mTOR, UBF, RNA Pol I, RNA Pol III, NME2, COPS2 RNA synthesis, autophagy, tumor suppression Refer to Fig. 1 for detailed signaling pathways and main text for detailed explanation and references
SIRT1 is the closest mammalian homolog of the yeast Sir2 protein, and it is the most extensively studied sirtuins. SIRT1 is predominantly a nuclear sirtuin and deacetylates H1K26 and H4K16 [ , ], as well as many non-histone targets. SIRT1 suppresses apoptosis by deacetylation and hence deactivation of p53 in the presence of oxidative stress and DNA damage [ , ]. The tumor suppressor p53 is upregulated after ischemic injury and leads to p53-dependent apoptotic cell death [ ]. SIRT1 also involves in the regulation of metabolism and stress response via deacetylation of FOXO transcription factors such as FOXO1, FOXO3a, and FOXO4 [ , ]. FOXO transcription factors are important regulators of cell fate as they are downstream targets of insulin-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt signaling pathway [ , ], which is involved in the regulation of apoptosis, oxidative stress, DNA repair, and cell proliferation and differentiation [ ]. Interestingly, depending on the specific cell growing conditions and requirements, FOXO3a can be differentially regulated by SIRT1-mediated deacetylation. For example, SIRT1 may activate FOXO3a and enhance oxidative stress resistance while inhibiting the pro-apoptotic function of FOXO3a [ , ]. SIRT1 also deacetylates and activates PGC-1α to upregulate mitochondrial biogenesis [ ] and regulates several metabolic pathways such as gluconeogenesis, thermogenesis, and fatty acid oxidation [ ]. SIRT1 is highly expressed in tissue with high metabolic rates such as brain and it is noted for its role in upregulating many ROS-detoxifying proteins such as glutathione peroxidase, catalase, and SOD2 [ ]. More recently, SIRT1 was also noted for its novel roles in neuroprotection [ ], hepatoprotection and regeneration [ ], and cardioprotection in myocardial ischemia [ ]. The neuroprotective roles of SIRT1 will be further discussed later in the review.
SIRT2 , the closest homolog of SIRT1, is the mammalian ortholog of yeast HST2 [ ]. SIRT2 resides mainly in the cytoplasm and deacetylates α-tubulin upon co-localization with microtubules to regulate skeletal muscle differentiation [ ]. This had been the default function of SIRT2, until Vaquero and colleagues demonstrated that SIRT2 can transiently migrate to the nucleus to deacetylate histone H4K16 and modulate chromatin condensation [ ]. SIRT2, like SIRT1, has also been shown to deacetylate FOXO transcription factors, FOXO1 and FOXO3a, which are involved in multiple cellular processes ranging from DNA repair to apoptosis [ ]. In addition, SIRT2 maintain nerve myelination and regeneration by deacetylating PAR-3 in Schwann cells [ ]. SIRT2 is also involved in metabolic regulation in adipocytes via deacetylation of FOXO1 and PGC-1α [ ], as well as modulation of cellular response to glucose via deacetylation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 (PEPCK1), in which the deacetylation will prevent its ubiquitylation-dependent degradation [ ]. Interestingly, SIRT2 is both tumor suppressor and promoter. SIRT2’s role as tumor suppression is demonstrated in gliomas and melanomas [ , ], as well as human breast cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma tissue where the levels of SIRT2 are greatly reduced [ ]. Dan and colleagues has demonstrated pro-oncogenic side of SIRT2 in which the inhibition of SIRT2 induces apoptosis of acute myeloid leukemia cells in vitro [ ]. The same study also revealed a higher level of SIRT2 in leukemic cells compared to normal bone marrow cells. Recent studies and unpublished work from our laboratory revealed some important roles of SIRT2 in ischemic stroke-induced neuronal cell death, which will be discussed in the later part of this review [ , ].
SIRT3 primarily presents in the mitochondria. As a major mitochondrial deacetylase, SIRT3 targets numerous enzymes to regulate and maintain metabolic homeostasis. Acetyl-CoA synthase 2 (AceCS2), the essential mitochondrial enzyme required to generate acetyl-CoA from acetate, was the first to be identified as substrate for SIRT3 deacetylation [ ]. Subsequently, SIRT3 has been found to deacetylate and activate long-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase (LCAD) in the fatty acid oxidation pathway [ ]. SIRT3 also deacetylates other enzymes involved in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, such as glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl–CoA synthase 2 (HMGCS2), resulting in the formation of α-ketoglutarate from amino acid glutamate and ketone body by-products from acetyl-CoA, respectively [ , ]. SIRT3 is also involved in the removal of ammonia from amino acid catabolism by deacetylating an important enzyme in the urea cycle, ornithine transcarbamylase [ ], suggesting an important role of SIRT3 in promoting metabolic homeostasis and detoxification during fasting state. Apart from these metabolic enzymes, SIRT3 confers anti-oxidative protection by deacetylating antioxidant enzyme SOD2 [ ] and mitochondria matrix protein isocitrate dehydrogenase 2 (IDH2), which convert isocitrate to α-ketoglutarate while producing NADPH [ ]. SIRT3-mediated deacetylation of cyclophilin D, a regulatory component of mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP), was noted for the suppression of cardiac hypertrophy and mitochondrial dysfunction during aging [ ].
SIRT4 is a mitochondrial sirtuin highly expressed in the pancreatic beta cells, brain, liver, kidney, and heart [ , ] and predominantly involved in metabolic roles. Unlike SIRT3, SIRT4 does not possess deacetylase ability but instead equipped with mono ADP-ribosyltransferase activity [ ]. SIRT4 interacts with and represses GDH activity to downregulate the metabolism of glutamate and glutamine to limit ATP production [ ]. As a well-known glutamine gatekeeper and tumor suppressor, SIRT4-mediated blockade of glutamine catabolism is an essential component of DNA repair response. Therefore, SIRT4-deficient animals show unscheduled proliferation and genomic instability due to upregulation of glutamine-dependent tumor cell growth and proliferation [ ]. More recently, SIRT4 has been identified as an important regulator of lipid homeostasis, in which SIRT4 overexpression suppresses hepatic fat oxidation [ ] and reduces mitochondrial oxidative capacity and fatty acid oxidation in hepatocytes and myocytes [ ]. In contrast, SIRT4-deficient mice express higher level of malonyl CoA decarboxylase activity, and SIRT4 knockout animals displayed dysregulated lipid metabolism and are protected against diet-induced obesity [ ]. A recent study by Tao and colleagues revealed a novel role of SIRT4 as the mediator of inflammatory responses in endothelial cells [ ]. The loss of SIRT4 elevated the expression levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and COX2, whereas overexpression of SIRT4 attenuated the expression levels of such cytokines. The anti-inflammatory nature of SIRT4 can be explained by the fact that SIRT4 prevents the nuclear translocation of NF-κB and thereby interferes with its signaling pathway [ ].
SIRT5 is localized to mitochondria [ ]. It is a rather weak deacetylase [ ], and unlike its cousins SIRT4 and SIRT6, it does not appear to possess ADP-ribosyltransferase activity [ ]. Interestingly, SIRT5 is the only sirtuin with NAD + -dependent demalonylase and desuccinylase activities [ , ]. For years, carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1, the key regulator of the urea cycle for ammonia detoxification) is the sole target described for SIRT5 deacetylase activity [ ]. However, subsequent studies have uncovered additional targets for its additional role as protein desuccinylase, in which SIRT5 interacts with pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) and succinate dehydrogenase (SD), resulting in the suppression of their biochemical activities and the subsequent mitochondrial respiration driven by these complexes [ ]. More recently, SIRT5 has been shown to be key regulators in apoptosis [ ] and mitophagy [ , ], and these newly discovered roles of SIRT5 will be discussed in detail later in this review.
SIRT6 is a nuclear sirtuin and it is the only sirtuin which clearly contributes to DNA repair. SIRT6 has been shown to specifically bind to telomeric chromatin and deacetylates histone H3K9 and H3K56 to maintain genome stability and telomere function [ , ]. SIRT6 is also involved in the repair of DNA damage via the regulation of base excision repair (BER), in which the DNA damage sites are exposed by BER factors by modulation of chromatin density [ ]. Apart from BER, SIRT6 also facilitates the repair of DNA double-strand break (DSB) by promoting the joining of fragmented chromatin via the stabilization of DNA-dependent protein kinase on chromatin [ ]. Deletion of SIRT6 resulted in genomic instability, metabolic defects, and aging-related degenerative pathologies [ ]. In face of oxidative stress, SIRT6 operates as an ADP-ribosylase for PARP1 and stimulates PARP1 to support DSB repair [ ]. Interestingly, SIRT6 has been shown to be related to longevity, in which the overexpression of SIRT6 lowered the serum levels of insulin-like growth factors 1 (IGF1) and ultimately extends the lifespan of male mice [ ].
SIRT7 is localized to the nucleolus and activates RNA polymerase I (Pol I) transcription [ ]. It has been reported to deacetylate p53 in vitro and correspond to cardiac hypertrophy and inflammatory cardiomyopathy in SIRT7 −/− mice [ , more details below]. More recently, it has been identified to be an important regulator of Pol I transcription by interacting with Pol I, rDNA transcription factor UBF, and chromatin remodeling complex WICH [ ]. Lastly, SIRT7 has also been found to deacetylate histone H3K18, which is important for the maintenance of cancer cell transformation [ ].
Expression and Functions of Sirtuins in the Brain
The sirtuin family is known to have distinct cellular and tissue distribution across many organs in the body, but to date, we have limited knowledge on the anatomical distribution of these sirtuins throughout the brain. Given that the brain is one of the most metabolically active organs in our body which consumes approximately 20% of the total body energy expenditure, an understanding of sirtuin expression in the brain could help in deciphering their role in both normal physiological processes and pathophysiological conditions [ ] (Table 2 ). In this part of the review, we will discuss on the expression pattern of sirtuins in the brain and examine their role and functions in developing, adult, and aged brain. Table 2 Sirtuins and associated brain functions Sirtuins Cellular and Tissue Localization Brain Functions References SIRT1 Neurons and glial cells in the Cb, Ctx, Hpc and Hpt Neurodevelopment, learning and memory, promotes LTP induction and synaptic plasticity [ , , ] SIRT2 Neurons, oligodendrocytes and astrocytes in the Ctx, Hpc, Sc and Str Neurodevelopment, deacetylates microtubules, regulates neuronal cholesterol [ , , ] SIRT3 Neurons in the Ctx Mitochondrial metabolism [ , ] SIRT4 Astroglial cells in the Ctx and Hpc during early developmental stages Development of radial glia to astroglial cells [ , ] SIRT5 Neurons in the frontal lobe Mitochondrial metabolism and preserving mitochondrial antioxidant activities [ , ] SIRT6 Neurons and astrocytes in the Hpc, frontal, temporal and occipital lobes. Enriched in the synaptosomal membrane fraction Synaptic plasticity and memory, neuronal maturation and regulation of neuronal survival [ , , ] SIRT7 Neurons in the frontal lobe May not have major roles in the brain, expressed in much lower levels compared to peripheral tissues [ ] Cb cerebellum, Ctx cortex, Hpc hippocampus, Hpt hypothalamus, Sc spinal cord, Str striatum
SIRT1 is widely expressed in the adult brain, especially in the cortex, cerebellum, hippocampus, and hypothalamus and mostly localized in neurons [ , , ]. SIRT1 can also be found in neural stem cells (NSCs), neural progenitor cells (NPCs) [ ], cultured microglia and astrocytes [ ], as well as glial cells [ ]. SIRT1 peaks during E4.5 in the spinal cord and dorsal root ganglion, suggesting a major role of SIRT1 in neurodevelopment [ ]. Resveratrol-induced upregulation of SIRT1 resulted in reduced proliferation of multipotent NPCs in vitro, reduced survivability of hippocampal NPCs in the dentate gyrus [ ], and the self-renewal of hippocampal NSCs in the adult brains [ ]. SIRT1 is also implicated in learning and memory as SIRT1 KO animals displayed reduction in dendritic branching, branch length, and complexity of neuronal dendritic arbors, resulting in impaired cognitive abilities [ ]. Further studies by Gao and colleagues uncovered a molecular mechanism behind SIRT1’s involvement in synaptic plasticity. It was observed that SIRT1 downregulates miR-134 expression via a complex consisting of transcriptional factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1). MiR-134 represses LTP induction via downregulation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and in the absence of SIRT1, miR-314 downregulates CREB and BDNF, causing an impairment in synaptic plasticity [ ].
SIRT2 expression is more concentrated in the brain than all the other organs studied, particularly in the cortex, striatum, hippocampus, and spinal cord [ ]. Interestingly, the messenger RNA (mRNA) expression level of SIRT2 was found to be particularly high during early developmental stages but the protein expression was largely absent [ ]. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed that SIRT2 protein was being robustly expressed in neurons, moderately expressed in oligodendrocytes, and minutely expressed in astrocytes [ , , ]. In contrast to the neuroprotective effects of SIRT1, excessive expression of SIRT2 could be neurotoxic [ ]. It was shown that microtubule acetylation is essential for normal neuronal function and development [ ], and high levels of SIRT2, which is a well-known microtubule deacetylase, could elicit profound effects on many of the downstream pathways controlled by acetylated microtubules, including neurite outgrowth and synaptic remodeling [ , ]. In fact, it was noted that a specific isoform of SIRT2, SIRT2.3, accumulated in aging mouse brain and spinal cord, resulted in reduced acetylation level of α-tubulin [ ]. SIRT2 is also a regulator of neuronal cholesterol, in which inhibition of SIRT2 suppressed the nuclear trafficking of sterol regulatory element binding protein-2 (SREBP-2) transcription factor and ultimately leads to reduced total cholesterol in primary striatal neurons and brain slices [ ]. Lastly, Pais and colleagues has demonstrated the anti-inflammatory function of SIRT2, in which reduction of microglial SIRT2 upregulated inflammatory markers and free radical production and promoted neurotoxicity while SIRT2 overexpression inhibited microglia activation through NF-κB deacetylation [ ].
Mitochondrial sirtuins SIRT3, SIRT4, and SIRT5 varied significantly in expression levels and displayed a substantial spatial and temporal divergence in developing and adult brains. Sirt5 and Sirt3 mRNA levels were the second and third most abundant ( Sirt2 being the most abundant) sirtuin transcripts in the brain [ ]. At protein level, studies reported reduced level of SIRT3 in aged rat auditory cortex [ ] and an acute nutrient deprivation-induced reduction of SIRT3 protein levels in aging mouse cortex compared to their younger counterpart [ ], indicating the aging-related mitochondrial dysfunction may be caused by lowered levels of SIRT3, the sirtuin which is responsible for mitochondrial metabolism and anti-oxidative defense system. Moreover, SIRT3 was also noted for its neuroprotective effects, in which the overexpression of SIRT3 rescued mutant SOD1-induced neuronal cell death [ ], and also protected mice against noise-induced hearing loss [ ]. More recently, Cheng and colleagues revealed the mechanisms on how SIRT3 mediates the adaptive responses of neurons to bioenergetic, oxidative, and excitatory stress, in which exercise and synaptic activities upregulated SIRT3 expression in the hippocampus and the subsequent acetylation level of mitochondrial protein, resulting in the bolstering of neuronal resistance to oxidative stress and apoptotic cell death [ ].
SIRT4 mRNA is the least expressed among all the sirtuin members, albeit having notably higher cortical and hippocampal expression levels during late embryonic stage, suggesting a role of SIRT4 in embryonic brain development [ ]. Indeed, a recent study revealed the involvement of SIRT4 in the development of astroglia from radial glia, in association with glutamate dehydrogenase-1 [ ]. It was observed that SIRT4 is mostly expressed in radial glia during embryonic stage and in astrocytes at the postnatal stage and eventually decreases at later developmental stages [ ]. More recently, it was reported that SIRT5 expression in the frontal lobe and hippocampus decreases in an age-dependent manner, and consistent with the low levels of SIRT3 and SIRT4 observed in aging brains [ ]. Additionally, SIRT5 is preferentially expressed in neurons despite having mRNA expression in both astrocytes and neurons [ ]. The reduced level of SIRT5, an important regulator of mitochondrial metabolism and numerous enzymes in the TCA cycle, fatty acid oxidation, and ketogenesis [ ], may contribute to the mitochondrial and energy dysregulation in aging brain, particularly in the neurons where it is highly expressed.
The expression level of chromatin-associated nuclear sirtuin SIRT6 was reported to decrease with age, particularly in the regions of hippocampus, frontal, temporal, and occipital lobes of aging rat brain [ ]. The mRNA level of Sirt6 in 3- and 24-month-old rats is also relatively lower compared to their younger counterparts in the late embryonic and early postnatal stages [ ]. SIRT6 immunoreactivity was detected in both neuronal and astrocytic cells, albeit the neuronal expression of 36-kDa isoform is much higher than the 39-kDa isoform [ , ]. Loss of neural SIRT6 has been linked to dramatic hyperacetylation of H3K9 in purified brain nuclei, as well as brain regions such as the hypothalamus, cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum [ ]. The age-dependent decline in SIRT6 levels also induced similar increase in H3K9 acetylation in several brain regions, indicating SIRT6 as the major deacetylase of H3K9 in the brain and a major regulator of aging-related genes [ ].
Unlike other sirtuins, not much is known about the role of SIRT7 in the brain. SIRT7 is upregulated in the frontal lobe of aging rat brain, so as the interacting partner Pol I [ ]. Pol I transcribes rDNA and is highly coordinated with cellular metabolism and cellular proliferation [ ]. The mRNA level of Sirt7 is much lower in the brain when compared to the levels in peripheral tissues [ ]. This expression pattern is suggesting that Sirt7 may not have prominent role in the largely postmitotic brain compared to its role in the tissues with high cell proliferation [ ].
Implication of Sirtuins in Ischemic Stroke
Stroke is the second leading cause of death worldwide and a major cause of permanent disability [ ]. Ischemic stroke, the most common form of this neurological disorder, is caused by the sudden reduction or cessation in blood flow to the brain that fails to meet the metabolic demand of this tissue, resulting in cell death or infarction. The brain ischemia mostly leads to necrotic cell death as a result of excitotoxicity, severe disruption of ion homeostasis, calcium dysregulation, and eventually energy failure [ ]. The clinical management of stroke is proven difficult at this stage, in which the only clinically approved stroke treatment, the recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA, a thrombolytic agent), must be administered within a limited time window after the onset of ischemia to provide clinical benefit from the restoration of blood flow [ ]. Post-ischemic reperfusion, however, will trigger the onset of hyperoxygenation that leads to overproduction of toxic free radical, cellular swelling, and tissue edema due to ionic imbalances and a series of signaling cascades, resulting in apoptotic cell death [ ]. The infarct region can continue to expand due to ongoing neuroinflammatory processes in the surrounding penumbra region as the cells are dying a slow death in the days, weeks, and months after ischemic insult [ ]. To address this issue, various molecular targets have been identified to confer neuroprotection from ischemia/reperfusion (I/R), and among the growing list of candidates, the sirtuin family has emerged as an important player in the progression of ischemic stroke. While we have acquired substantial advancement in the understanding on the molecular mechanisms of ischemic stroke using various animal models, the knowledge about sirtuins in ischemic brain and neuronal cell death remain largely elusive. This section below will specifically discuss the known roles of sirtuins in ischemic stroke.
There is a substantial amount of evidence showing the neuroprotective properties of SIRT1 in cerebral ischemia (Fig. 2 ). SIRT1-deficient animals suffered worst outcomes after permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO) procedures and displayed larger infarct volume along with significantly increased acetylation levels of NF-κB [ ] whereas overexpression of SIRT1 showed less post-stroke hippocampal damage [ , ]. Wang and colleagues also reported similar upregulation of NF-κB in an in vitro model of OGD reperfusion [ ]. Apart from the NF-κB pathway, SIRT1 also confers neuroprotection by regulating several important signaling pathways in the progression of cerebral ischemia. SIRT1 forms the defense against oxidative stress and promotes mitochondrial biogenesis by activating PGC-1α, which will promote its interaction with co-activator PPARγ to trigger a cascade of signaling events that will upregulate several anti-oxidative genes. For example, activation of SIRT1 by alpha-lipoic acid resulted in increased PGC-1α level and subsequent increase in superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity [ ]. Fig. 2 Implication of sirtuins in ischemic stroke. SIRT1 confers antioxidant protection by activating peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha (PGC-1α) to upregulate genes responsible for mitochondrial biogenesis such as nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and estrogen related receptors (ERRs). The activation of PGC-1α will also promote its interaction with co-activator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ) to upregulate several antioxidative genes like uncoupling protein (UCP), catalase, and Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase (MnSOD). The activation of forkhead box O1 (FOXO1) and forkhead box O3a (FOXO3a) by SIRT1, which will result in the production of similar antioxidants, also partly contributed to the elevated anti-oxidative capacity. SIRT1 is also responsible to the suppression of FOXO3a during ischemic stroke, which will result in the downregulation of pro-apoptotic factors such as Fas ligand (FasL), TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis (Puma), Noxa, and Bcl-2-like protein 11 (Bim) and ultimately reduction in apoptotic neuronal cell death. Another major regulator of apoptosis, p53, is also suppressed by SIRT1 and thereby downregulating its downstream pro-apoptotic targets such as Bim, BH3-interacting domain death agonist (Bid), Bcl-2-like protein 4 (Bax), and microRNA-34a (miR-34a). MiR34a is known to inhibit anti-apoptotic protein B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2), which in turn loses its ability to inhibit the release of cytochrome C (Cyto C) from mitochondria and ultimately trigger the caspase cascade leading to apoptotic cell death. SIRT1 is also shown to protect the brain from neuroinflammation by downregulating nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) and thereby suppressing the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β), interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), and high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1). SIRT2 is known to deacetylate and activate FOXO3a, which will promote the expression of pro-apoptotic proteins. SIRT3 is largely neuroprotective in ischemic stroke by upregulating proteins responsible for reactive oxygen species (ROS) detoxification (e.g., catalase and superoxide dismutase (SOD)) and mitochondrial biogenesis (e.g., NRF1 and ERRs). However, SIRT3 is also known to upregulate ceramide synthase (CerS) and lead to mitochondrial accumulation of ceramide, a pro-apoptotic lipid molecule. Ceramide inhibits anti-apoptotic protein B cell lymphoma-extra-large (Bcl-xL) and thereby promoting the release of cytochrome C and subsequently the caspase cascade leading to apoptosis. SIRT4 on the other hand is reported to promote and maintain adequate glutamate transportation via upregulation of glutamate transporter-1 (GLT-1). SIRT5 has been reported to be anti-oxidative and anti-apoptotic during ischemic stroke but the direct or intermediately signaling pathways leading to the reported neuroprotection are largely unknown. The expression level of SIRT6 is downregulated during ischemic stroke, resulting in the stabilization of NF-κB and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as HMGB1. SIRT6 is also shown to suppress phosphorylated-protein kinase B (p-Akt, at Ser473) that ultimately leads to necrotic cell death due to reduced inhibitory signals on the autophagy pathway and possibly the FOXO3a pathway as well. SIRT7 is known to be upregulated during ischemic stroke but the consequence of such upregulation is still unknown
Additionally, SIRT1 activation is also noted for deacetylation and upregulation of hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha (HIF-2α), leading to increased erythropoietin production, which is an important adaptation mechanism to low oxygen by increasing red blood cell production [ ]. The NAD + insufficiency during hypoxia/ischemic condition suppresses SIRT1 activity and subsequently lead to activation of HIF-1α [ ]. Upon activation, HIFs initiate cellular and molecular compensatory mechanisms responsible for glycolysis, cell survival, angiogenesis, and oxygen transport. However, reversal of NAD + insufficiency during ischemia, for instance by means of overexpressing nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferasse (NAMPT), activates SIRT1 and hence reduces ischemic injury [ ]. Apart from increasing levels of NAD + , NAMPT-induced neuroprotection coincides with liver kinase B1 (LKB1) deacetylation and adenosine monophosphate kinase (AMPK) activation and can be reversed by knocking out SIRT1 in the neurons [ ]. Together, these studies established the positive feedback loop for SIRT1 and NAD + through NAMPT and AMPK and demonstrated the neuroprotective effects of NAD + in maintaining energy and substrate for SIRT1 activity.
More recently, Hu and colleagues reported that hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) treatment activated the ATP/NAD + /SIRT1 pathway in hyperglycemic MCAO rats [ ]. HBO increased the levels of ATP and NAD + , which subsequently upregulated SIRT1 activity, resulting in attenuated hemorrhagic transformation and brain infarction as well as improved neurological scores. This study corroborated with previous studies on the significance of sustaining the fuel for SIRT1 during ischemic stroke and enables it to regulate transcription factors involved in apoptotic and inflammatory pathways. In addition, a separate study into the neuroprotective effect of estrogen further established the central role of SIRT1-AMPK pathway in ischemic stroke [ ]. It was noted that estrogen upregulated both SIRT1 and AMPK activity in OGD neurons, and the neuroprotection was abolished in SIRT1 −/− animals or in the presence of AMPK inhibitor. In face of ischemic stress, SIRT1, together with other cellular energy sensors such as AMPK, plays an essential role to defend against the energy exhaustion to promote cell survival and ultimately improve the outcome of acute ischemic brain injury.
One of the earliest implications of SIRT2 in ischemic stroke was reported by Krey and colleagues when they noted improved neurological scores in SIRT2 −/− animals undergone MCAO procedure [ ]. In another study using a potent SIRT inhibitor AGK2, Xie and colleagues reported a drastic reduction in infarct size and improvement on neurological scores when the animals were treated with AGK2 or when SIRT2 is completely ablated [ ]. In a cellular model of H 2 O 2 -induced apoptosis in PC12 cells, the levels of SIRT2 was significantly elevated in response to oxidative stress and treatment with AGK2 has significantly reduced the expression level SIRT2, and hence the resultant programmed cell death [ ]. In fact, our laboratory has demonstrated that treatment with AGK2 or another SIRT2 inhibitor AK-1 can lead to significant reduction in apoptotic cell death in OGD-treated primary cortical neurons (unpublished data). Collectively, SIRT2 appears to be pro-apoptotic in nature, and pharmacological inhibition or knockdown of SIRT2 may be beneficial for neurons that are experiencing apoptotic cell death during ischemic stroke (Fig. 2 ).
SIRT3 has been implicated in the neuropathology of ischemic stroke in several studies. Wang and colleagues reported the anti-apoptotic effects of SIRT3 in an in vitro model of cerebral ischemia, in which the level of SIRT3 was increased after 6 h of oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) in PC12 cells and a siRNA knockdown of SIRT3 worsened the outcome of the simulated hypoxic injury [ ]. Treatment with recombinant SIRT3 resulted in reduction of both neuronal cell death and ROS production, and these neuroprotective effects are correlated with elevated level of PGC-1α and manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD). These findings had warranted subsequent studies into the detailed regulatory mechanism of SIRT3 in in vivo ischemic stroke models to explore the possibility of using SIRT3 activators in the treatment of stroke.
SIRT3 has also been shown to be an important mediator of the ketone bodies-conferred neuroprotection after ischemic stroke, in which ketone treatment reduced infarct volume by reducing oxidative stress and enhanced mitochondrial function [ ]. The levels of SIRT3 and its downstream targets FOXO3a and SOD2 were found to be upregulated in the penumbra region, while knocking down of SIRT3 diminishes the protective effects, suggesting that SIRT3-FOXO3a-SOD2 complex plays an essential role in mediating ketone’s protective effects in cerebral ischemia. It is noteworthy that SIRT3 remains localized at mitochondria upon formation of the complex as FOXO3a, a well-known nuclear transcription factor, can also be found in mitochondria of mammalian cells and tissues, although the significance of such localization remains unclear [ ]. A similar complex made of SIRT3, FOXO3a, and mitochondrial RNA polymerase (mtRNAPol) was also found in the skeletal muscles, and the elevated level of such complex in animals under fasting conditions indicates a recovery mechanism to sustain energy metabolism in the local area during energy deficiencies [ ]. It would be of great interest to further study the SIRT3-FOXO3a-SOD2 complex in the brain tissues undergone cerebral ischemia, especially if the overexpression of SIRT3 can enhance the protective effects of the complex in the penumbra region.
Not all experimental evidences corroborated the protective nature of SIRT3 in cerebral ischemia; a study by Novgorodov and colleagues, for instance, revealed the destructive side of SIRT3 [ ]. The group established a correlation between SIRT3 and ceramide synthase, an enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of pro-apoptotic lipid molecule ceramide, in which the presence of SIRT3 leads to deacetylation and activation of ceramide synthase and accumulation of ceramide in the mitochondria, whereas the ablation of Sirt3 gene significantly reduced ischemic reperfusion brain injury in stroke models. In contrary to the anti-apoptotic and anti-oxidative damage effects demonstrated in other studies, this is the first time where SIRT3 was showed to be detrimental in the pathophysiology of ischemic stroke as it promoted both mitochondria dysfunction and brain damage after ischemic reperfusion injury [ ]. Clearly, more studies are required to elucidate the precise protective/destructive mechanism of SIRT3 in stroke.
Recent studies have demonstrated anti-excitotoxic effect of SIRT4, in which the loss of SIRT4 decreases GLT-1-dependent glutamate uptake and worsened the neurological outcomes of animals treated with potent excitotoxin kainic acid [ ]. It was noted that SIRT4 is upregulated in response to kainate stimulation and SIRT4 knockout leads to decreased glutamate transporter GLT-1 expression and overall brain function. The ability to promote proper glutamate transport capacity is highly beneficial in many neurological disorders, including stroke, as glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity is well known to be a major contributor in the neuropathology of stroke. The neuroprotective role of upregulated GLT-1 transporter in ischemic stroke is well documented [ , ], and therefore the possibility that SIRT4 overexpression may confer similar protective effect should be explored further in ischemic stroke models.
Although SIRT5 is one of the least studied sirtuins, considerable efforts have been made to decipher its normal physiological role and possible involvement in various disease and disorders. Liang and colleagues had recently demonstrated the neuroprotective role of SIRT5 in cultured SH-EP neuroblastoma cells [ ]. It was noted that SH-EP cells with overexpressed SIRT5 have significantly reduced level of cell death in response to staurosporine- and nutrient deprivation-induced apoptosis. The level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was also significantly downregulated as a consequence of SIRT5 overexpression in SH-EP cells, and therefore suggesting an anti-apoptotic role, which in part contributed by its anti-oxidative activity, that worth subsequent exploitation as a potential therapeutic target to reduce apoptotic cell death and oxidative damage due to ischemic reperfusion after a stroke attack. Experimental findings from Morris-Blanco and colleagues further supported the neuroprotective role of SIRT5 in ischemic stroke, in which the protein kinase C epsilon (PKCε)-mediated SIRT5 upregulation and activation protected OGD-induced cell death in cortical cultures and reduced cortical degeneration following MCAO in WT animals [ ]. The same observation could not be reproduced in SIRT5 −/− animals and thereby demonstrated the importance of SIRT5 as a neuroprotective mitochondrial enzyme during ischemic conditions.
SIRT5 also recently emerged as a key regulator of mitophagy [ ]. It was observed that mitochondria elongate during nutrient deprivation to escape autophagic degradation, and the deletion of SIRT5 reversed the elongation and resulted in increased mitophagy, suggesting a role of SIRT5 in the regulation of starvation-induced mitochondrial elongation and the reduced mitophagy. Mitophagy, a process where impaired mitochondria are selectively removed by autophagy, is a double-edged sword in the context of cerebral ischemic injury. Although several studies has demonstrated the protective effects of mitophagy in ischemic stroke [ , , ], the amount of scientific evidence that suggested detrimental consequence of excessive mitophagy is equally convincing [ , , ]. Therefore, the newly discovered anti-mitophagic role of SIRT5 should be further studied in different phases or types of cerebral ischemic stroke models, and this energy sensor may emerge as new therapeutic target for stroke.
Nuclear sirtuin SIRT6 is generally regarded as neuroprotective. SIRT6 expression levels were reported to be significantly lower in HD mouse brain and mutant Huntingtin(HTT)-expressing cells before receiving treatment with a neuroprotective PPAR-γ agonist rosiglitazone, which restored the SIRT6 protein levels and improved motor neuron function [ ]. Other studies also reported similar reduction in SIRT6 expression in stroke patient samples and experimental stroke models [ , ]. In a recent study on the neuroprotective effects of hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S) in OGD- and I/R-stimulated brain endothelial cells, Hu and colleagues found significant reduction of SIRT6 mRNA, protein, and activity levels in endothelial cells undergone I/R injury, and subsequent application of sodium sulfide (Na 2 S, an exogenous H 2 S donor) upregulated SIRT6 expression level and rescued the cells from I/R-induced cell death, whereas SIRT6 knockdown abolished H 2 S-mediated cytoprotection in I/R-stimulated cells [ ]. More recently, Shao and colleagues reported some interesting findings on the detrimental effects of SIRT6 in cerebral ischemia, in which SIRT6 overexpression has resulted in elevated level of ROS and increased necrotic cell death [ ]. It was noted that SIRT6 promoted autophagy via the suppression of Akt signaling. However, most of the scientific evidences presented a collective impression that SIRT6 expression level is usually downregulated in the progression of neurodegenerative disorders, and the level restored upon application of neuroprotective compound or treatment. These findings highlighted the importance of SIRT6 in mediating various aspects of neuroprotection, such as maintaining cell viability, increasing antioxidative capacity, reducing ROS production, and protecting cells from DNA damage. Further studies should focus on the effects of SIRT6 overexpression or explore the possibility of using SIRT6 activator for the treatment of stroke.
Very little is known about the biological role of SIRT7. Vakhrusheva and colleagues demonstrated the anti-apoptotic and anti-inflammatory role of SIRT7 in cardiomyocytes, in which SIRT7 knockdown leads to hyperacetylation of p53 and promoted cell death in myocardium of mutant mice [ ]. In a separate study using proliferative gastric cancer cell, a similar protective effect was observed where SIRT7 depletion inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis via upregulation of pro-apoptotic proteins and downregulation of anti-apoptotic proteins [ ]. It was also noted that SIRT7 can inhibit apoptosis by epigenetically suppressing miR-34a. The involvement of SIRT7 in the progression of stroke was recently discovered in a study using systems biology framework on stroke to identify stroke-related biomarker genes, where SIRT7 is highly associated with ischemic stroke at 24-h post-stroke [ ]. Lastly, SIRT7 has been identified as a negative regulator of HIF-1α and HIF-2α, which are transcriptional factors essential in mediating adaptive responses to hypoxia. The SIRT7-induced inhibition appears to rely on a mechanism independent of prolyl-hydroxylation and its catalytic function [ ]. Interestingly, the presence of sirtuin inhibitor nicotinamide or deletional mutation of its deacetylase domain has no effects on HIF-1α and HIF-2α but ablation of SIRT7 caused an upregulation of both HIF-1α and HIF-2α protein levels and HIF-1 and HIF-2 transcriptional activity. Clearly more studies are needed to decipher the role of SIRT7 in stroke models as the scientific evidences accumulated to date in other disease models clearly pointed the anti-apoptotic role of SIRT7 and data from systems biology studies strongly indicated that SIRT7 can be an important regulator in the pathogenesis of ischemic stroke.
Sirtuins as Potential Therapeutic Targets for Ischemic Stroke
A separate collection of evidence showed that the modulation of sirtuins could either achieve neuroprotection or worsen the stroke outcome (Fig. 2 ; Table 3 ). In this section of the review, we will discuss the evidence and observations surrounding the application of pharmacological modulators of sirtuins, mainly SIRT1 and SIRT2, on the outcome of ischemic stroke. Table 3 Pharmacological modulators of sirtuins with neurological effects Sirtuins Modulation Drugs / Compounds Reported Effects on Neurological Diseases Reported Effects on Stroke References SIRT1 Activator Tetrahydroxystilbene glucoside (TSG) Improved learning and memory ability in both APP transgenic mice and aged rats Reversed OGD-R-induced cell injury by displaying reduced release of LDH, reduced neuronal nuclear condensation, and reduced mitochondrial membrane depolarization [ , , ] Activator III Reduced oxidative damage, neuroinflammation and neuronal apoptosis to protect against subarachnoid hemorrhage-induced early brain injury in rats Reduced infarct volume after pMCAO [ , ] Alpha-lipoic acid (ALA) Preserved blood-brain barrier permeability, reduced brain edema in rat model of traumatic brain injury Reduced infarct volume and brain edema and improved neurological scores 24-h after pMCAO [ , ] Icariin Improved spatial learning and memory retention, brain metabolism, reduced deposition of beta-amyloid plaque and preserved the expression of key mitochondrial enzymes in 3xTg-AD mice Reduced infarct volume and brain edema and improved neurological scores 7-days after MCAO; reduced cell death in OGD-treated neurons [ , ] Melatonin Improved sleep and suppressed sundowning in AD patients Reduced infarct volume and brain edema and improved neurological scores 24-h after MCAO [ , ] Resveratrol Improved learning and memory in normally aged mice Reduced infarct volume and brain oedema and improved neurological scores 7-days after MCAO; reduced loss of microvessels by upregulating angiogenic factors MMP-2 and VEGF [ , , , ] Protected against peripheral deficits in brown adipose tissues but no significant improvements on weight loss, motor performance, striatal atrophy, and survival in HD mouse model Resveratrol preconditioning for 14-days reduced infarct volume and brain edema and improved neurological scores SRT1720 Reduced neurological deficit and striatal lesion due to malonate-induced cerebral oxidative stress in rats None reported [ ] SRT3657 Increased synaptic density, increased brain weight, and reduced neuronal loss at the hippocampus in transgenic CK-p25 mice None reported [ ] Selisistat (EX527) Protected against mutant HTT -induced neurotoxicity in cellular and animal models of HD, also increased survival and improved psychomotor behavior in HD models. Abolished neuroprotective effects of melatonin [ , ] Inhibitor Inhibitor III None reported Abolished icariin-induced neuroprotection from OGD [ ] Nicotinamide Reversed dopamine depletion in MPTP-induced neurotoxicity when used in combination with Coenzyme Q10 Elevated brain NAD + levels and reduced infarct size in MCAO animals [ , , ] Restored cognitive and memory deficit in 3xTg-AD mice via the reduction of a specific phospho-species of tau (Thr231) Sirtinol Reduced neurological function, disrupted blood brain barrier, increased brain edema, increased endothelial cell apoptosis, and increased MMP-9 gelatinase activity in rat model of subarachnoid hemorrhage Increased infarct volume compared to vehicle control in MCAO animals [ , , ] SIRT2 Inhibitor AK1 Reduced expression of mutant tau protein in mouse model of frontotemporal dementia Reduced apoptotic cell death in OGD-treated primary cortical neurons (unpublished data) [ , ] Rescued neuronal dysfunction in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans models of Huntington’s Disease (HD) AK7 Reduced α-synuclein toxicity in vitro, prevented MPTP-induced dopamine depletion and dopaminergic neuronal cell loss in PD models No significant differences in mortality, infarct volumes and neurological deficit scores between control and treatment groups in MCAO mice [ , ] Improved motor function, extended survival, reduced brain atrophy, and reduced mutant huntingtin accumulation in HD model AGK2 Reduced H 2 O 2 -induced apoptotic cell death in PC12 cells Reduced infarct volume and improved neurological scores in MCAO model [ , , ] Reduced α-synuclein toxicity and dopaminergic cell death in cellular and Drosophila model of PD Reduced apoptotic cell death in OGD-treated primary cortical neurons (unpublished data) SIRT3 Activator Oroxylin A Reversed memory impairment caused by transient bilateral carotid artery occlusion (2VO) in mice None reported [ , ] Reversed scopolamine-induced memory and cognitive impairments in mice SIRT4 – None reported – – – SIRT5 Inhibitor Suramin None reported None reported – SIRT6 – None reported – – – SIRT7 – None reported – – –
Pharmacological modulation of SIRT1 can exert pronounced effects on the outcome of ischemic stroke. Inhibition of neuroprotective SIRT1 generally worsens the outcome, for example, treatment with SIRT1 inhibitor sirtinol resulted in increased infarct volume compared to vehicle-treated group [ ]. The same treatment also reversed the protective effects exerted by ischemic preconditioning and resveratrol preconditioning in OGD-treated organotypic hippocampal slices [ ]. In a separate study, SIRT1-specific inhibitor EX-527 abolished the protective effects of melatonin on the enhancement of mitochondrial function, in terms of stabilization of mitochondrial membrane potential, mitochondrial complex I activity, and mitochondrial cytochrome c level [ ]. In contrast, activation of SIRT1 demonstrated substantial neuroprotective effects in several studies. Resveratrol is a potent SIRT1 activator and it has demonstrated significant neuroprotection effects in MCAO-treated animals, in which the neurological scores and infarct volume of resveratrol-treated groups are significantly lower than those of the control group at 7 days after MCAO [ ]. The same study also showed the ability of resveratrol to reduce the loss of cortical microvessels in MCAO animals by upregulating mRNA and protein levels of angiogenic factors MMP-2 and VEGF. More recently, it was noted that resveratrol preconditioning, in which resveratrol was administered 14 days prior to MCAO, showed robust neuroprotection by reducing infarct volume and improving neurological scores [ ]. SIRT1 activator TSG is a naturally occurring compound similar to resveratrol and improved outcomes of OGD and MCAO treatment in cultured neurons and animals, respectively [ ]. Likewise, treatment with alpha-lipoic acid (ALA) at 30 min prior to pMCAO procedure has improved neurological deficit, reduced infarct volume, and edema at 24 h post-injury [ ]. Daily treatment with icariin for 7 days following ischemic reperfusion has significantly improved neurological score and reduced infarct volume and brain edema [ ]. Icariin increased the expression of SIRT1 and its downstream target PGC-1α in both MCAO mouse model and OGD-treated neurons, but the neuroprotection was reversed by SIRT1 inhibitor III. These pharmacological studies provided further evidence to support the role of SIRT1 as the key mediator in ischemic injury and valuable insights into the possibility of SIRT1 as target for ischemic neuroprotection.
Apart from SIRT1, the modulations of other sirtuins can also alter the progress or outcome of cerebral ischemia. Administration of AGK2, a potent inhibitor of SIRT2, was noted for its neuroprotective effects in MCAO model, in which the infract volume and neurological scores were improved when compared to control group [ ]. In contrast to a previous study based on another SIRT2 inhibitor AK7 which showed no neuroprotection in MCAO model [ ], this new finding further fueled the controversies surrounding the potential therapeutic role of SIRT2 inhibition in cerebral ischemia [ , ]. Oroxylin A, a major active component of Chinese traditional medicinal plant Scutellaria baicalensis , was recently discovered to be a SIRT3 activator [ ]. To date, there is no report on the neuroprotective effects of oroxylin A in cerebral ischemia, but its anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative ability is well documented [ , , ], thus suggesting oroxylin A as a promising candidate for stroke treatment. Modulators for other sirtuins were studied in much lesser extent and to date there has been no reported evidences on the efficacies of pharmacological modulators of SIRT3–7 in cerebral ischemia.
Concluding Remark
Stroke is a disease in dire need of new therapies, especially when all the current acute neuroprotective stroke therapies in the development pipeline have failed in clinical trials. Here, we have presented a body of evidence that outlined the implication of sirtuins in ischemic stroke and demonstrated the potential of pharmacological manipulation of sirtuins as a therapy for ischemic stroke. There is little doubt that sirtuins have emerged as a pivotal modulator of many biological processes in the normal physiology of the body as well as the pathophysiology of ischemic stroke. However, the true colors of lesser known sirtuins remained elusive and more studies are warranted to elucidate the precise protective/destructive mechanism of sirtuins in ischemic stroke.