Introduction
Hyperglycemia occurs in 30–40% of patients with acute ischemic stroke, including patients without known diabetes, and it is associated with a poorer functional outcome [ , , ]. Although the benefit of lowering blood glucose has not been demonstrated in clinical trials, evidence-based treatment protocols recommend glucose control in patients with acute stroke [ ]. The effects of acute hyperglycemia might differ depending on the stroke subtype, as it worsens the outcome of cortical infarction but not lacunar stroke [ , ]. Hyperglycemia has also been associated with more hemorrhagic complications following thrombolytic therapy [ ] as well as with lower recanalization rates [ ]. The worsening effects of hyperglycemia have extensively been demonstrated in experimental models of focal ischemia/reperfusion [e.g., , , , ].
Oxidative stress and inflammation are involved in hyperglycemia-induced impairment of endothelial injury in transient ischemia [ ]. Oxidative stress mediates pro-inflammatory effects of high glucose in cultured cells [ , ]. Furthermore, acute hyperglycemia exacerbates tPA-induced hemorrhagic transformation in stroked rats by enhancing superoxide production [ ]. Accordingly, antioxidants attenuate hyperglycemia-mediated brain endothelial cell dysfunction and BBB disruption [ ]. Administration of the natural antioxidant uric acid (UA) was associated with a reduced infarct growth and improved outcome in stroke patients with hyperglycemia during acute stroke [ ]. In this work, we studied the effect of hyperglycemia on inflammation and brain injury after transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAo) in mice and tested whether treatment with UA after ischemia/reperfusion reduced the volume of infarction in hyperglycemic mice.
Methods
Animals
Adult (3–4 months of age) male C57BL/6J mice were obtained from Charles River (Lyon, France). Mice were kept in standard animal house conditions with controlled temperature and humidity with access to food and water. Animal work was conducted following the ARRIVE guidelines and in compliance with the local and European legislation with approval of the ethical committee of the University of Barcelona (CEEA).
Induction of Hyperglycemia
Hyperglycemia was induced by i.p. injection of dextrose (2 g/kg of body weight in 200 μL per mice) (Sigma-Aldrich Quimica, S.L., Madrid, Spain) 45 min prior to ischemia. Normoglycemic mice received the vehicle (water). Blood samples were withdrawn before induction of ischemia and after reperfusion (15 and/or 75 min) to measure glucose levels (Accu-Check Sensor glucometer, Roche Diagnostics). Treatment was carried between 9:00 and 11:00 a.m.
Brain Ischemia
Transient focal brain ischemia was induced by 45-min occlusion of the right middle cerebral artery (MCAo) followed by reperfusion, as reported in [ ]. Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane by the aid of a facial mask. A filament (nylon monofilament 7/0, Suturas Aragó, Spain) heat blunted at the tip was introduced (11 mm) through the external carotid artery to the level where the MCA branches out. In addition, the ipsilateral common carotid artery (CCA) was clamped out. CBF was not measured in this study since in preliminary experiments, we detected that implantation of the laser Doppler probe generated some artifacts in the T2* Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images. Mice were allowed to recover from the anesthesia, and 45 min later, the mice were anesthetized again, the filament was cautiously removed, and the suture of the ipsilateral CCA was taken off to allow reperfusion. For sham operation, all surgical procedures were carried out but the filament was not inserted. Animals were allowed to recover from the anesthesia, and 24 h later, they were studied by MRI.
Uric Acid Administration
A group of hyperglycemic mice received a 20-min i.v. infusion of UA (16 mg/kg body weight) ( n = 12) or vehicle (Locke’s buffer) ( n = 12) through the femoral vein starting 45 min after reperfusion. The dose of UA was chosen based on previous reports of UA treatment in ischemic rats [ , , , ]. Treatment was prepared and blinded every day and was randomly allocated to the mice. Investigators blinded to treatment allocation carried out the administration and obtained the outcome measures. Blood glucose concentration was measured before induction of hyperglycemia and 75 min following reperfusion, after verifying in a subgroup of mice ( n = 6 UA and n = 3 vehicle) that the treatment did not modify blood glucose levels from 15 to 75 min of reperfusion (not shown).
Preparation of Antibody-Functionalized MPIO
Antibody-functionalized micron-sized particles of iron oxide (MPIO, 1.05 μm in diameter) were prepared as previously described [ ]. Briefly, MPIOs (ProMag™ 1 Series, Bind-IT™ MPIO; 25 mg MPIO/mL with a 26.5% iron content; Bangs Laboratories, Inc., Fishers, IN, USA) were resuspended in coupling buffer (50 mM 2-(N-Morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid; pH 5.2). A monoclonal antibody against mouse intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) (αICAM-1, YN1/1.7.4) or isotype-matched control IgG (IgG, RTK4530) (BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA) was buffer exchanged to coupling buffer by centrifugation, resulting in a final antibody concentration of 1.0 mg/mL. MPIO and αICAM-1 or IgG (control) were mixed in a 1:1 ( v / v ) ratio and incubated for 60 min at room temperature. Following incubation, antibody–MPIO was buffer exchanged to storage solution (150 mM NaCl, 0.002% azide) by magnetic separation and kept at 4 °C.
MRI
Imaging experiments were carried out 24 h after MCAo. The femoral vein was cannulated for injection of conjugated antibodies during the MRI acquisitions. MRI was conducted in a 7.0 T BioSpec 70/30 horizontal animal scanner (Bruker BioSpin, Ettlingen, Germany), equipped with a 12-cm inner diameter actively shielded gradient system (400 mT/m). The receiver coil was a phased array surface coil for mouse brain. Mice were placed in a supine position in a Plexiglas holder with a nose cone for administering anesthesia (isoflurane in a mixture of 30% O 2 and 70% N 2 O); fixed with a tooth bar, ear bars, and adhesive tape; and maintained under controlled temperature during the acquisition period. Tripilot scans were used for accurate positioning of the animal’s head in the isocenter of the magnet. For measures of infarct volume, T2 relaxometry maps were acquired with a multi-slice multi-echo acquisition sequence with 16 effective echo times increasing from 11 to 176 ms, slice thickness = 0.5 mm, number of slices = 18, repetition time (TR) = 4.764 ms, field of view = 20 × 20 mm 2 , matrix size = 256 pixels, and in-plane spatial resolution = 0.078 mm. Two consecutive T2*-weighted data sets were acquired (before and 1 h after i.v injection of αICAM-1–MPIO or IgG–MPIO conjugated antibody) using gradient echo sequence with the following acquisition parameters: field of view = 2.0 × 2.0 × 0.4 cm 3 , matrix = 256 × 256 × 64, spatial resolution = 78 × 78 × 200 μm 3 , TR/TE = 508/18 ms, number of slices = 19, number of averages = 30, and excitation pulse angle = 30°. Data were processed using the Paravision 5.1 software (Bruker). Infarct volume was calculated from the T2 maps using the NIH ImageJ software ( http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij ).
The area of infarction was measured in each brain slice by manual outlining the zone with abnormally hyperintense tissue, and the total infarct volume was obtained by summation of the infarcted areas multiplied by the slice thickness. A correction for edema was made in each area by multiplying the infarct area by the ratio of the contralateral to the ipsilateral hemisphere. The extent of edema was assessed by calculating the difference between the ipsilateral and the contralateral hemisphere volumes and expressing it as the percentage of the contralateral hemisphere volume. Mean signal intensity (SI) of T2*-W images from ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres were calculated. Signal intensity 1 h after contrast injection was expressed relative to signal intensity before contrast. The volume of contrast-enhanced voxels (CE) per hemisphere was calculated considering voxels with more than two SD signal difference from the initial T2*-weighted SI, expressed as a percentage of total hemispheric volume. Mice were assigned a code that did not reveal the identity of the groups, and images were analyzed in a blind fashion.
Immunofluorescence
At 24 h post-ischemia and immediately after T2 w MRI, a group of mice was anesthetized with isoflurane and transcardially perfused with saline followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. The brain was removed and kept overnight with this fixative; then, it was cryoprotected in 30% sucrose and frozen at −80 °C. Cryostat brain sections (14-μm thick) were fixed with acetone, blocked with rabbit serum, and incubated overnight at 4 °C with either a mouse monoclonal primary antibody against ICAM-1 (no. 14-0542, eBioscience) diluted 1:500, rat monoclonal antibodies against the neutrophil antigen NIMP-RP14 (no. ab46154, Abcam), or Ly6G (clone 1A8, BioLegend) or a rabbit polyclonal antibody against pan-laminin (no. Z0097, Dako) diluted 1:100. Then, sections were incubated for 2 h at room temperature with appropriate secondary antibodies (Alexa Fluor 488; Alexa Fluor 546; Molecular Probes; Life Technologies S.A.). Immunoreaction controls were carried out by omission of the primary antibodies. Sections were counterstained with TO-PRO®-3 (Life Technologies) to visualize the cell nuclei and were observed under a confocal microscope (TCS SPE, Leica Microsystems, Barcelona, Spain). For neutrophil cell counting, pictures of Ly6G (green) and pan-laminin (red) immunostaining were taken through the lesion zone of the ipsilateral cortex ( n = 5) and striatum ( n = 3) in three different brain sections for each mouse (×40 objective) sampling the whole affected tissue, including core and periphery. The number of neutrophils extravasated to the brain parenchyma and associated to the blood vessels was counted in each picture. The average of the cell numbers obtained in the different pictures for each brain region was taken as representative of each mouse. Superimages of whole brain sections were generated after taking pictures with the ×20 objective through all the sectional area in a stereologic microscope (Olympus BX51) using the VIS 3.2.4 software.
Flow Cytometry
Another group of mice was anesthetized, perfused through the heart with saline, and the brain was removed at 24 h post-ischemia. The ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres were dissected out and separately processed for flow cytometry. Brain cells were isolated and processed as described in [ ] and were incubated with the following primary antibodies: rat antimouse CD11b (clone M1/70, Alexa Fluor 647, BD Pharmingen), CD45 (clone 30-F11, FITC, BD Pharmingen), and Ly6G (clone 1A8, PE-Cy7, BD Pharmingen). Isotype controls were rat IgG2bκ (clone A95-1, Alexa Fluor 647 or FITC, BD Pharmingen), rat IgG2a (FITC, Hycult Biotech), and rat IgG2aκ (clone R35-95, PE–Cy7, BD Pharmingen). Data acquisition was carried out in a BD FACSCanto II cytometer (BD Biosciences) using the FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences). Data analysis was carried out with the FlowJo software (version 7.6.5, Tree Star Inc., Ashland, OR, USA). Flow-Count fluorospheres (Beckman Coulter) were used for absolute cell number quantification.
Statistical Analyses
Comparisons between two groups were carried out with the Mann–Whitney U test or the t test as appropriate. Group comparisons by condition (normoglycemia vs. hyperglycemia) and antibody treatment (IgG or αICAM-1) were carried out with two-way ANOVA. For flow cytometry data, multiple group comparisons were carried out with the Kruskal–Wallis test followed by the Dunn’s test. The relationship between blood glucose and infarct volume was studied by linear regression analysis. Statistical analyses were carried out with GraphPad Prism v5 or the SPSS software. Sample size for the experiment comparing UA and vehicle was calculated using the G*Power 3.1 software (University of Düsseldorf) with an alpha level of 0.05 and a statistical power of 0.95 by estimating the effect size ( d = 1.38) based on the group mean and standard deviation values of untreated hyperglycemic mice where the expected infarct volume reduction was set at 25%.
Results
High Blood Glucose Increases Infarct Volume
Basal (mean ± SD) plasma glucose of the mice was 127.5 ± 36.3 mg/dL. The basal blood glucose (mean ± SD) was 117.8 ± 29.3 ( n = 13) and 128.9 ± 30.9 ( n = 14) mg/dL in the groups that later received vehicle (normoglycemic) or dextrose (hyperglycemic), respectively (Mann–Whitney test, p = 0.20) (Fig. 1 a). After treatment, blood glucose was 89.1 ± 41.2 mg/dL in the vehicle group ( n = 13) and 372.5 ± 84.5 mg/dL in the dextrose group ( n = 14) (Fig. 1 b). The difference was highly statistically significant (Mann–Whitney test, p < 0.001). Fig. 1 Ischemia/reperfusion under hyperglycemic conditions exacerbates the brain lesion. a Basal levels of blood glucose were similar in the groups of mice that later received dextrose administration for induction of hyperglycemia ( hyper , n = 14) and in the normoglycemic mice ( normo , n = 13). b Dextrose administration strongly raises the blood glucose concentration (Mann–Whitney test, *** p < 0.001). c Hyperglycemia significantly increases the volume of infarction 24 h after ischemia/reperfusion as assessed by T2 w MRI (Mann–Whitney test, *** p < 0.001). d Infarct volume is positively correlated to blood glucose concentration (linear regression r 2 = 0.5, *** p < 0.001)
Infarct volume (mean ± SD) at 24 h was significantly larger (Mann–Whitney test, p < 0.001) in the hyperglycemic group than in the normoglycemic group (Fig. 1 c). Mortality was 12.5% in the normoglycemic group and 29.0% in the hyperglycemic group. Differences showed a trend to statistical significance (chi-square = 2.17, p = 0.07). Infarct volume was significantly correlated to blood glucose concentration (linear regression, r 2 = 0.5, p < 0.001) (Fig. 1 d).
Hyperglycemia Increases the Expression of ICAM-1 in Brain Vessels of the Ischemic Tissue and Exaggerates Neutrophil Recruitment
The intensity of ICAM-1 immunostaining in the cerebral vasculature of the ischemic hemisphere was more prominent in hyperglycemic than normoglycemic mice 24 h after MCAo (Fig. 2 a). For in vivo assessment and quantification of vascular ICAM-1 induction, αICAM-1-MPIOs or control-MPIOs were injected i.v. 24 h following MCAo or sham operation in normoglycemic and hyperglycemic mice. Mice received a T2* scan immediately before and 1 h after MPIO administration. αICAM-1-MPIOs, but not control-MPIOs, caused T2* hypointensities (dark spots) in the ipsilateral hemisphere of the ischemic group but not in the sham-operated group (Fig. 2 b). Measurement of the percentage of hemispheric area showing αICAM-1-MPIO-induced contrast enhancement showed higher values in the hyperglycemic mice (Fig. 2 c). αICAM-1-MPIO, but not control-MPIO, also lowered the normalized T2* w signal intensity value in the hyperglycemic group versus the normoglycemic group (two-way ANOVA, p < 0.05) (Fig. 2 d), indicating higher binging of the αICAM-1-MPIOs in the hyperglycemic compared with the normoglycemic group. Fig. 2 Hyperglycemia increases vascular ICAM-1 expression. a Immunofluorescence using anti-ICAM-1 antibodies and confocal microscopy shows higher intensity of staining in the blood vessels of the ischemic hemisphere of hyperglycemic mice ( n = 5) than normoglycemic mice ( n = 3), as illustrated in representative images of each group. b Molecular MRI of vascular ICAM-1 expression was studied following administration of αICAM-1-functionalized MPIOs or IgG-bound MPIOs (control) ( n = 3–5 mice per group) in normoglycemic and hyperglycemic mice 24 h after MCAo or sham operation. T2*w MRI images of representative mice per group are shown before (pre-contrast) and after (post-contrast) MPIO administration to illustrate the presence of zones with lower signal intensity ( darker spots ) in the right (ischemic) hemisphere after administration of αICAM-1 MPIOs (αICAM-1) but not of control MPIOs (IgG). c Quantification of the volume of contrast enhancement (expressed as % of hemispheric volume) and statistical analysis (one-way ANOVA followed by the Bonferroni tests) shows significant increases after αICAM-1 MPIO administration in ischemic mice versus sham-operated mice and versus ischemic mice receiving the control MPIOs ( ampersand indicates p < 0.05), both under normoglycemic and hyperglycemic conditions. However, hyperglycemic ischemic mice show higher increases than normoglycemic ischemic mice following αICAM-1 MPIO administration (** p < 0.01). d Furthermore, αICAM-1 MPIO administration causes a larger drop of the T2*w signal intensity (SI) in hyperglycemic mice than normoglycemic mice, whereas administration of control IgG MPIOs shows no effect (two-way ANOVA and Bonferroni test, * p < 0.05). For each mouse, signal intensity values after MPIO administration were normalized to the corresponding signal intensity values prior to MPIO administration (pre-contrast administration, pre-CA) and data are expressed as percentage of pre-CA
ICAM-1 is involved in neutrophil adhesion to the vasculature [ ], suggesting that hyperglycemia-induced ICAM-1 could promote neutrophil recruitment to the ischemic tissue. Accordingly, hyperglycemic mice showed a significant increase in the number of extravasated neutrophils compared to normoglycemic mice 24 h post-ischemia (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Hyperglycemia increases neutrophil infiltration after ischemia/reperfusion. The presence of neutrophils in the ischemic tissue was examined by immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy using anti-NIMP-RP14 or anti-Ly6G antibodies ( green ) in normoglycemic ( a , c ) and hyperglycemic ( b , d , f , g ) mice 24 h following MCAo (images are representative of n = 3–4 mice per group). The basal lamina of the blood vessels is stained with an antibody anti-laminin ( red ), and the nuclei are visualized with TO-PRO-3 ( blue ). Arrows point to neutrophils associated to the vasculature, and arrowheads point to neutrophils extravasated to the brain parenchyma. Quantification of the number of neutrophils per area shows a significant increase in neutrophils infiltrated in the parenchyma in hyperglycemic versus normoglycemic mice (two-way ANOVA and Bonferroni test, ** p < 0.01). Scale bar a , b : 40 μm; c , d : 15 μm; f , g : 7 μm
UA Was Protective in Hyperglycemic Mice
Oxidative stress is recognized as a main mechanism mediating the detrimental effects of hyperglycemia [ , ]. We investigated whether the worsening effects of hyperglycemia in brain ischemia could be attenuated by treatment with the potent natural antioxidant UA [ ]. Mortality after ischemia/reperfusion in hyperglycemic mice was similar in both groups, i.e., 35% in the vehicle group and 33% in the UA group. Hyperglycemic mice treated with UA ( n = 12) showed smaller infarct volumes ( p < 0.001) (Fig. 4 a, b) and less edema ( p < 0.05) (Fig. 4 c) than hyperglycemic mice receiving the vehicle ( n = 12). The percentage of decrease in lesion volume was 26% (mean infarct volume ± SD was 72.3 ± 9.1 mm 3 in the vehicle group and 53.5 ± 14.0 mm 3 in the uric acid group). For the vehicle group that exhibited a mean glucose concentration higher than the UA group (Fig. 4 d), we assessed the effect of UA adjusted for blood glucose concentration showing that UA treatment was inversely correlated to infarct volume ( p = 0.007), thus supporting a beneficial effect of UA regardless of the differences in blood glucose levels between groups. An exploratory analysis in mice with comparable blood glucose concentrations (ranging between <390 and >260 mg/dL) (Fig. 4 e, f) further confirmed that the infarct volume was significantly lower (18%) in the UA subgroup compared to the vehicle subgroup ( p = 0.01) (Fig. 4 g) (infarct volume ± SD was 70.3 ± 7.7 mm 3 in the vehicle group and 57.6 ± 10.5 mm 3 in the uric acid group) and showed a trend to reduction of edema in the UA group ( p = 0.07) (Fig. 4 h). Fig. 4 Uric acid reduces the brain lesion in hyperglycemic mice. Hyperglycemic mice received i.v. administration of the vehicle or uric acid 45 min following reperfusion after 45-min MCAo ( n = 12 per group), and T2 w MRI was performed at 24 h. a Images illustrate three different brain levels of a representative mouse per each group. b Infarct volume is significantly smaller in the uric acid group than in the vehicle group (Mann–Whitney test, *** p < 0.001). c The degree of edema is also smaller in the uric acid compared with the vehicle group (Mann–Whitney test, * p < 0.05). d Blood glucose in the vehicle group is higher than in the uric acid group ( t test, *p < 0.05). e For a subgroup analysis, we set an inclusion criteria based on blood glucose within a defined range (>260 and <390 mg/dL) in order to compare group infarct volumes at similar blood glucose levels. Accordingly, three animals per group were excluded from the subanalysis. Nine animals per group with similar blood glucose levels ( t test, p = 0.98) were included in the subanalysis. f In the latter groups of mice, infarct volume is smaller in the uric acid group than in the vehicle group (Mann–Whitney test, * p < 0.05). g The corresponding degree of edema tends to be smaller in the uric acid group than in the vehicle group (Mann–Whitney test, p = 0.07)
UA Did Not significantly Prevent the Higher Expression of ICAM-1 in the Brain Vasculature and Neutrophil Infiltration Induced by Hyperglycemia
We then studied by confocal microscopy whether UA altered the expression of vascular ICAM-1 (Fig. 5 a) and the presence of neutrophils (Fig. 6 b, c) in the ischemic tissue of hyperglycemic mice. UA treatment did not prevent the hyperglycemia-exaggerated expression of ICAM-1 in the brain vasculature of ischemic mice (Fig. 5 ). UA also did not significantly reduce the numbers of neutrophils extravasated to the ischemic brain tissue (Fig. 6 a, b). To verify this latter finding, we quantified the neutrophils in the ischemic tissue by flow cytometry (Fig. 6 c, d). Hyperglycemia increased the percentage of Ly6G + neutrophils in the ischemic brain tissue versus that in the normoglycemic mice (Kruskal–Wallis test, p < 0.05) but UA did not significantly reduce this effect (Fig. 6 d). Fig. 5 Blood vessels in the ischemic tissue of hyperglycemic mice show ICAM-1 expression in both treatment groups. After 45-min ischemia in hyperglycemic mice, the animals received i.v. administration of either the vehicle ( a , c , e ) or uric acid ( b , d , f ) ( n = 7 mice per group). Brain sections were obtained at 24 h for immunofluorescence. a , b Images show brain sections reconstructed from ICAM-1 immunofluorescence ( green ) pictures obtained with the ×20 objective of a stereologic microscope. ICAM-1 positive vessels are prominent in the ischemic tissue (indicated with a dashed line ) in both treatment groups. c – f Representative confocal microscopy images of the ischemic tissue of mice treated with the vehicle ( c , e ) or uric acid ( d , f ) are shown. Immunostainings are ICAM-1 ( green ) and pan-laminin ( red ), and cell nuclei are stained with TO-PRO-3 ( blue ). Blood vessels strongly positive for ICAM-1 are seen in both treatment groups. Scale bars : a , b 1 mm; c – f 15 μm Fig. 6 Uric acid does not significantly reduce neutrophil infiltration in hyperglycemic mice after MCAo. Neutrophil infiltration in the ischemic tissue of hyperglycemic mice treated with either the uric acid or the vehicle was studied by immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy ( a , b ) or flow cytometry ( c , d ) 24 h post-ischemia. a Ly6G + ( green ) neutrophils associated to the blood vessels, indicated by arrowheads , or free in the brain parenchyma, indicated by arrowheads , are seen in the ischemic tissue of hyperglycemic mice receiving the vehicle or uric acid. The basal lamina of the blood vessels is stained with pan-laminin ( red ), and the cell nuclei are stained with TO-PRO-3 ( blue ). b Quantification of the number of neutrophils per area ( n = 7 mice per group) shows no statistically significant differences between treatment groups in vascular or parenchymal neutrophil numbers (two-way ANOVA). c Neutrophils (CD45 hi CD11b hi Ly6G + cells) in the ischemic tissue were studied by flow cytometry. A representative plot is shown to illustrate the neutrophil gate (CD11b hi Ly6G + ). d Analysis of flow cytometry data shows a higher proportion of neutrophils (one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni test) among the infiltrated cells (CD45 hi CD11b hi cells) in the ischemic tissue of hyperglycemic ( n = 10) than of normoglycemic ( n = 10) mice (* p < 0.05). Uric acid treatment in hyperglycemic mice ( n = 7) does not significantly reduce the percentage of neutrophils in the ischemic brain tissue. Scale bars : 15 μm
Discussion
This study shows that the natural antioxidant UA is protective following ischemia/reperfusion in hyperglycemic mice thus extending previous studies performed under experimental normoglycemic conditions [ , , , ]. Hyperglycemia increased the expression of vascular ICAM-1 and neutrophil infiltration to the brain tissue and exacerbated brain damage following ischemia reperfusion. UA reduced the volume of infarction in hyperglycemic mice, but UA therapy failed to show a significant reduction in the recruitment of neutrophils to the ischemic brain tissue induced by hyperglycemia. Yet, identification of the latter effect would have required larger studies given the high variability of neutrophil numbers in this experimental model.
Stress hyperglycemia is associated to reperfusion injury in experimental models of MCAo [e.g., , , , ] since it impairs vascular function [ , ] and increases blood-brain barrier damage and matrix metalloproteinase-9 activation [ , ]. High glucose concentration stimulates the pro-inflammatory transcription factor nuclear factor-κB and triggers inflammation [ ], increasing the expression of endothelial adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1, P-selectin, and E-selectin [ ]. Diabetic rats also show higher ICAM-1 expression after transient global ischemia [ ]. In vivo MRI molecular imaging of ICAM-1 induction in the brain using ICAM-1-functionalized contrast agents based on T2*-shortening micron-sized iron oxide particles (MPIO) [ ] showed an increased adhesion of αICAM-1 MPIOs to the cerebral vessel walls after tMCAo in hyperglycemic compared with normoglycemic mice. ICAM-1 is recognized as a crucial molecular determinant for neutrophil adhesion to the vessel wall [ ]. In a previous study, we showed that blocking ICAM-1 in vivo with antibodies abrogated the presence of myeloperoxidase in the rat brain after tMCAo, suggesting that ICAM-1 was involved in neutrophil adhesion to the brain vasculature after ischemia/reperfusion [ ]. In the current study, the increased ICAM-1 expression in the brain vessels of hyperglycemic mice was accompanied by an increased infiltration and extravasation of neutrophils to the ischemic brain parenchyma. This finding is in agreement with larger infarct volume in hyperglycemic mice and with previous reports showing enhanced neutrophil adhesion to cultured human endothelial cells under hyperglycemic conditions [ ] and increased neutrophil recruitment to the ischemic brain tissue after tMCAo in hyperglycemic rats [ , ].
Oxidative stress is a main detrimental effect of hyperglycemia in ischemia/reperfusion [ ]. Hyperglycemia favors the production of superoxide by NADPH oxidase, particularly at reperfusion [ ]. UA is a potent natural antioxidant that has been claimed to exert preventive actions in the development of age-related neurodegenerative diseases [ ]. Administration of UA to rats after cerebral ischemia/reperfusion reduces brain damage and improves the behavioral outcome [ , , , , ]. UA protects against vascular damage mediated by oxidative stress following ischemia/reperfusion in rats [ ] and shows additive benefits to the protective action of tPA in a rat thromboembolic stroke model [ ]. UA has been taken to the clinic in the URICO-ICTUS trial, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2b/3 trial that recruited 421 acute ischemic stroke patients [ ]. Notably, UA reduced infarct growth and improved significantly the clinical outcome in patients with hyperglycemia during acute stroke [ ]. Accordingly, the current findings demonstrate beneficial effects of UA in cerebral ischemia/reperfusion in hyperglycemic mice. Overall, the infarct volume reduction by UA after ischemia/reperfusion in hyperglycemic mice was relatively small (26%) but robust. Further, UA only showed a non-significant reduction in the recruitment of neutrophils to the ischemic brain tissue induced by hyperglycemia that might be attributable to the smaller infarct size in this group. While UA does not seem to play a major role preventing neutrophil infiltration, it might attenuate the potential pro-oxidant effects of neutrophils [ ]. UA could also have contributed to reduce the volume of infarction in hyperglycemic mice through mechanisms independent of neutrophil infiltration including a more efficient clearance of peroxynitrite-derived free radicals that limits glucose toxicity and secondary cell death [ ].
Our study has some limitations, notably, the fact that we only measured the outcome in the acute phase of stroke. Behavioral studies were not performed because the treatment administered through the femoral vein involved intervention on the hind limb that precluded an accurate behavioral assessment. Further studies are required to validate long-term benefits of UA in experimental animals. Also, in the current study, UA was administered 1.5 h after MCAo. Studies with drug administration at later time points after ischemia are required for clinical translation.
Conclusions
In conclusion, high blood glucose increases vascular ICAM-1 expression and neutrophil infiltration and exacerbates brain damage following ischemia/reperfusion. While oxidative stress does not seem to mediate the exaggerated vascular ICAM-1 expression and recruitment of neutrophils to the ischemic tissue under hyperglycemic conditions, it is involved in the worsening effects of hyperglycemia since treatment with UA after ischemia/reperfusion reduces the size of the brain lesion in hyperglycemic mice.