Highlights
The thromboembolism (TE) incidence rate was quite low among children with cancer. However, the incidence rate was higher than in the general pediatric population. Special attention should be provided the first few months after cancer diagnosis.
Introduction
Thromboembolism (TE) rarely occurs in children, but its prevalence rate is increasing with advancements in the treatment and supportive care of critically ill children [ , , ]. The incidence of TE in children is known to be lower than that in adults, and predominantly includes venous thromboembolism (VTE) rather than arterial TE (ATE) [ , ].
In more than 80% of cases, TE in childhood develops secondary to underlying diseases such as cancer, trauma, surgery and congenital heart disease [ , ]. Cancer is a major underlying disease in children with TE, accounting for approximately 25–40% of children with thromboses [ , , ]. Children with cancer are often at a risk for developing TE due to disease-related factors such as inflammation and abnormal blood flow, and treatment-related factors such as central venous catheter (CVC) use and surgery [ ]. The presence of cancer may provoke hypercoagulation processes due to several mechanisms, such as the stasis of blood due to immobility, secretion of procoagulant, fibrinolytic and proteolytic substances, secretion of inflammatory cytokines by tumor cells, vessel damage as a result of catheterization, chemotherapy and direct tumor invasion [ , , , ].
Recently, the survival rate associated with childhood cancer has increased dramatically to over 80% owing to multimodal cancer treatment and supportive care [ , ]. Therefore, it is important to prevent the development of complications such as TE due to cancer and cancer treatment [ , ]. A majority of studies investigating the epidemiology of thrombosis as a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in the setting of cancer focused on adult populations [ , ]. Guidelines for adults recommend thromboprophylaxis use for high-risk inpatients including those with cancer [ ]. There is a need for accurate epidemiological studies to identify the magnitude and characteristics of TE in childhood cancer patients to better understand the risk factors for TE and establish optimal screening and thromboprophylaxis strategies for children [ , ].
Despite the increasing trend, the incidence of VTE in Asian populations is significantly lower than that in Western populations [ , ]. Therefore, ethnic differences should be considered to evaluate the risk of TE in children as well as adults. The incidence and risk factors of TE in the Korean pediatric oncology population are largely unknown. Thus, we conducted a retrospective study to determine the epidemiology of TE in Korean children with cancer.
Materials and methods
Patients
During the period between January 2000 and July 2015, we retrospectively analyzed data of pediatric patients (0–18 years of age) newly diagnosed with cancer at six tertiary hospitals in Korea. Medical records were reviewed to evaluate the incidence, risk factors, treatment, and outcomes associated with TE.
Diagnosis of TE
Symptomatic TE was defined as any objectively confirmed arterial or venous thromboembolic event detected as a result of investigations prompted by typical clinical symptoms. Asymptomatic TE was defined as TE discovered on routine radiologic studies directed at cancer or therapy evaluation and not associated with the typical signs or symptoms. Thrombosis location was classified as central nervous system (intracranial veins and sinuses), upper venous system (superior vena cava, right heart, pulmonary vessels, neck and upper limb veins), or lower venous system (inferior vena cava and all subsequent venous branches).
TE was confirmed by a variety of imaging techniques including Doppler ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Thrombophilia testing was performed using commercially available clinical assays. Standard radiological methods, as described previously, were used to confirm the diagnosis of TE. Screening for asymptomatic TE was not performed.
Data analyses
Data on demographics, clinical presentation, risk factors including CVC and CVC-related problems, and details on TE diagnosis, treatment, and complications were obtained through a review of patients’ electronic medical records.
Results
Patients characteristics
During the 15-year study period, 3611 pediatric cancer patients were registered. The baseline and clinical characteristics are shown in Table 1 . The most common cancers were brain tumors (n = 776), acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) (n = 602), bone/soft tissue sarcomas (n = 579) and lymphoma (n = 296). TE was observed in 33 (0.91%) of the 3611 cancer patients. The male/female ratio was 17/16. The median age at TE diagnosis was 10 years and 2 months (range 2 months to 18 years and 1 month) (Fig. 1 ). TE was detected a median of 2 months (range 0.1–21 months) after cancer diagnoses (Fig. 2 ). VTE was observed in 31 of the 33 patients (93.9%) and ATE in 2 (6.1%). A higher number of patients with ALL (n = 12), brain tumors (n = 6), lymphoma (n = 4), and bone/soft tissue sarcomas (n = 4) tended to develop TE (Table 1 ).
Table 1 Characteristics of the pediatric cancer patients with thromboembolism No. of TE patients/total pediatric cancer patients 33/ 3611 (0.91%) Age at diagnosis, median (range) 10 years and 2 months (2 months to 18 years and 1 month) Interval from cancer diagnosis to TE, median (range) 2 months (0.1–21 months) Male/female 17/16 Cancer type (TE/total number) Acute lymphoblastic leukemia 12/602 (1.99%) Acute myelogenous leukemia 1/237 (0.04%) Lymphoma 4/296 (1.35%) Brain tumors 6/770(0.78%) Sarcoma 4/579 (0.69%) Neuroblastoma 1/219(0.46%) Wilms tumor 0/100 Hepatoblastoma 1/70 (1.43%) Germ cell tumors 2/166 (1.2%) Langerhans cell histiocytosis 0/178 Others 2 a /394 (0.51%) Symptoms 19/33 (57.6%) Pain 6 Swelling 4 Pain & swelling 2 Pain & vomiting 1 Dyspnea 2 Dysarthria 1 Nausea 1 Chest X-ray abnormality 1 Chemoport obstruction 1 TE thromboembolism a Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
Fig. 1 Age distribution of TE in cancer patients
Fig. 2 Time of detection of TE from cancer diagnosis
Thrombotic events
ATE
Two patients had arterial thromboses; a 7-year old girl with ALL had dysarthria due to brain embolism and a 13-year old girl with ALL had an asymptomatic non-occlusive right renal artery thrombus and left ventricle thrombus (Table 2 ).
Table 2 Location of thromboembolism according to cancer type Cancer type No of patients VTE ATE CNS Upper Lower Combined CNS Other ALL 12 2 3 5 1 1 a AML 1 1 Lymphoma 4 4 CNS tumors 6 4 1 1 Sarcoma 4 3 1 Neuroblastoma 1 1 Hepatoblastoma 1 1 Germ cell tumors 2 2 Others 2 2 Total 33 2 19 8 2 1 1 CNS central nervous system, VTE venous thromboembolism, ATE arterial thromboembolism, ALL acute lymphoblastic leukemia, AML acute myeloid leukemia a Right renal artery
VTE
Among the 31 patients (93.9%) with VTE, two intracerebral (cerebral venous sinus), 19 upper venous system (pulmonary vessel, 4; pulmonary vessel and internal jugular vein, 1; subclavian vein, 2; internal jugular vein, 11; internal jugular vein and superior vena cava, 1), 8 lower venous system (inferior vena cava and iliac vein, 2; iliac vein, 3; iliac vein and femoral vein, 1; femoral vein, 2), and 2 combined upper and lower venous system (pulmonary vessel, inferior vena cava and iliac vein) TEs were observed (Table 2 ). Symptoms including pain and swelling were present in 19 of the 33 patients (57.6%). Vomiting, dyspnea, dysarthria, nausea, chest X-ray abnormalities, and Chemoport obstruction were also some of the observed symptoms (Table 1 ).
Risk factors of TE
Additional risk factors for TE other than cancer were observed in all 33 patients, including CVC use in 12, steroid and/or L-asparaginase use in nine patients, and CVC and steroid and/or L-asparaginase use in seven (Table 3 ). Thrombophilia tests including protein C, protein S, and antithrombin level measurements were performed in eight patients. One case of transient protein S deficiency and one of transient antithrombin deficiency were observed.
Table 3 Risk factors of thromboembolism other than cancer Cancer type TE S and L S/L and CVC CVC Immobilization Others ALL 12 7 4 1* (*1 low AT III) AML 1 1 Lymphoma 4 2 2 CNS tumors 6 1 † 3 2 ( † 1 PS deficiency, transient) Sarcoma 4 3 1 Lung metastasis Neuroblastoma 1 1 Hepatoblastoma 1 1 Germ cell tumors 2 2 Others 2 1 1 Lung metastasis, tumor thrombi Total 33 9 7 12 3 2 S steroid, L L-asparaginase, CVC central venous catheter, AT III antithrombin III, PS protein S, TE thromboembolism, ALL acute lymphoblastic leukemia, AML acute myeloid leukemia, CNS central nervous system
Diagnosis and treatment of TE
CT was the most frequently used diagnostic method, followed by Doppler ultrasonography and MRI. Pulmonary embolism was diagnosed by chest CT, ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan, and echocardiography. Intracranial VTE, including cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, was diagnosed by MRI with magnetic resonance venography.
Treatments included the use of unfractionated heparin (UFH), low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), and warfarin according to the protocols of each institute. Initial anticoagulant therapy for the acute phase of thrombosis was performed in 30 of the 33 patients. UFH or LMWH, followed by warfarin was used in 17 patients. Aspirin and rivaroxaban were combined in two patients, and LMWH or warfarin was used in three. Surgical treatment including thrombectomy followed by anticoagulation was performed in four patients, and catheter removal and anticoagulation were performed in two (Table 4 ). Six ALL patients and one lymphoma patient received steroids or L-asparaginase during anticoagulation. In one ALL patient, Escherichia coli L-asparaginase was changed to PEG-L-asparaginase and LMWH was administered as thromboprophylaxis.
Table 4 Treatment of thromboembolism Treatment Total n = 33 Anticoagulation UH/warfarin 10 LMWH/warfarin 6 UH/ LMWH/warfarin 1 LMWH/ASA 1 LMWH/DOAC 1 LMWH 2 Warfarin 1 Surgical Thrombectomy/UH/warfarin 2 Thrombectomy/UH/warfarin and catheter removal 1 Thrombectomy/LMWH/warfarin 1 Catheter removal UH/warfarin/catheter removal 3 LMWH/warfarin/catheter removal 1 Removal only w/o anticoagulation 2 No treatment 1 UH unfractionated heparin, LMWH low-molecular weight heparin, ASA acetylsalicylic acid, DOAC direct oral anticoagulant
Outcome of TE
Of the 33 patients with TE, the condition was completely resolved in 23, six showed partial resolution, and two displayed persistent disease. One glioblastoma patient and one mesenchymal chondrosarcoma patient had recurrent disease. Aggravation of chronic subdural hemorrhage occurred in one patient following warfarin treatment. None of the patients developed post thrombotic syndrome. None of the patients died of thrombosis or anticoagulation-related complications.
Discussion
In the present study, of the 3611 children with cancer, TE occurred in 33 (0.91%), including 31 VTE and two ATE cases. Similar to another report [ ], cancer-associated thromboses tended to be VTE rather than ATE. The incidence of VTE was 86 cases per 10,000 cancer patients, which is much lower than that reported in Western countries, but substantially higher than that in the general pediatric population (0.06 cases per 10,000 individuals) [ ] and children hospitalized for diseases other than cancer (3.27 cases per 10,000 patients) in Korea (Fig. 3 ) [ ].
Fig. 3 Comparison of the incidence of VTE in children: general population, hospitalized patients, and cancer patients. VTE venous thromboembolism. The incidence of VTE was 0.06 cases per 10,000 children in the general population [ ], 3.27 cases per 10,000 hospitalized children [ ], and 86 cases per 10,000 childhood cancer patients, as observed in this study, in Korea
In a nationwide epidemiologic study in the Korean population, the annual incidence of VTE from 2009 to 2013 was 23.4 cases per 100,000 individuals [ ], which increased steadily every year; however, this is much lower than the annual incidence observed in the Caucasian population (143 cases per 100,000 individuals) [ ]. Furthermore, the incidence of VTE in Korean youths was even lower, reported at 0.56 cases per 100,000 individuals aged 0–19 years [ ]. In accordance with this trend, this study showed that the incidence of TE in pediatric cancer patients was lower in Korea than in Western countries. Two studies in Canada reported that VTE occurred in 73 out of 939 patients (7.8%) and 85 out of 1210 patients (4.8%) with childhood cancer [ , ].
Genetic mutations such as factor V Leiden and factor II G20210A, have been suggested as an explanation for the significant differences between Asians and Caucasians in adults [ ]. These mutations are virtually absent in the Asian population. However, the impact of these prothrombotic disorders on the development of VTE in children remains controversial [ ].
Despite the lower incidence of TE observed in the pediatric cancer patients in our study, the other clinical features were comparable to those in previous reports. Nineteen of the 33 (57.6%) patients had symptomatic TE. The most commonly experienced symptom was pain followed by swelling. The most common location of thrombosis was the upper venous system. The most common risk factor was CVC use only or in combination with the use of drugs including steroids and L-asparaginase, similar to results of other reports [ , ].
A number of studies demonstrated the association between cancer type and TE [ , , ]. The most common type of cancer among children with VTE was leukemia. However, TE is not limited to leukemia, and various pediatric cancer patients are at a risk of developing TE. A majority of related studies focused on childhood ALL, probably due to the association of L-asparaginase and TE [ ]. The incidence of TE in childhood ALL varies from 1.1 to 36.7% with an overall average of 3.2% [ , ]. The presence and type of CVC, concomitant L-asparaginase and steroid therapy, thrombophilia, older age, non-O blood group, and presence of high-risk disease are identified as prothrombotic risk factors in children with ALL [ , ].
In this study, patients with ALL (2.16%) had the highest incidence of TE followed by lymphoma (1.35%), brain tumor (0.78%) and bone/soft tissue sarcoma (0.69%) patients. Similar to previous reports, the most common type of cancer associated with TE was ALL, and about 60% of the patients had diagnoses other than leukemia such as brain tumors, sarcomas, and germ cell tumors. Confirmation of this observation in large patient groups may aid improvements in the TE risk stratification of pediatric cancer patients in Korea.
The known risk factors associated with TE in childhood cancer patients included age, type of cancer, use of L-asparaginase, CVC use, and inherited thrombophilia [ , ]. In our study, the additional risk factors for TE included CVC use in 12 patients, steroid and/or L-asparaginase use in nine patients, and CVC and steroid and/or L-asparaginase use in seven patients. Similar to previous studies, catheter-related TE was the most commonly occurring type. Older children are presumed to be at a higher risk of developing TE [ ]. Asyyed et al. [ ] reported that age higher than 10 years at the time of diagnosis was independently associated with VTE. They argued that older children with cancer are at an increased risk of VTE and may benefit from screening or interventional studies to mitigate VTE. In this study, the median age at TE diagnosis was 10 years and 2 months and the number of patients older than 10 years was similar to that of patients under 10 years old.
CVC use is the single most important risk factor for TE development in children. CVC-related VTE occurred in more than 50% of patients, including patients with all types of pediatric cancers [ , , ]. As the veins most commonly used for CVC insertion are within the upper venous system, VTE occurred specifically within the subclavian and jugular veins [ ]. In this study, CVC use alone was a risk factor for VTE in 12 patients, and in combination with steroid or L-asparaginase use was a risk factor in seven. Overall, CVC use was associated with VTE in 19 of the 33 cancer patients (57.6%), which was comparable to the value observed in previous reports.
The use of thromboprophylaxis including LMWH in pediatric cancer patients is not routine practice, as the incidence of TE in children is very low. Efforts are underway to identify at-risk patients for TE development and recurrence, and establish guidelines for thromboprophylaxis use in pediatric cancer [ , , ]. In this study, TE was detected a median of 2 months after cancer diagnosis. Considering that most TEs occurred within the first few months after cancer diagnosis, special attention is required during this period [ ].
Even though this study is the first in Korea to focus on TE in pediatric cancer patients, it has several limitations. First, detailed data including those on the demographic characteristics and treatment protocols of the entire population of cancer patients were not available. Second, since this is a retrospective study, the data collection and analyses, including those pertaining to hereditary thrombophilia cases, may be incomplete. Third, since most of the TE patients were symptomatic and screening tests were not performed in asymptomatic patients, it is possible that the number of TE cases was underestimated. Finally, the sample size was small as patients were enrolled from a limited number of institutions in Korea.
In conclusion, the incidence of TE is higher in children with cancer than in the general pediatric population and children hospitalized for diseases other than cancer in Korea. However, the absolute risk of TE is quite small and the benefit of prophylactic anticoagulation is not clear. Considering that most TEs occurred within the first few months after cancer diagnosis, special attention is required during this period. Further investigation of a larger pool of patients is warranted to determine the most effective strategies to prevent and treat TE in Korean children with cancer.