Highlights
Peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line associated thrombosis is common, with little evidence to guide management. Current recommendations on the management of PICC line-associated thrombosis are extrapolated from studies of extremity venous thrombosis, and data specific to their management is lacking. In this retrospective series, we found that catheter removal alone without anticoagulation is feasible and may have favorable risk/benefit profile in hospitalized patients where bleeding is common with the use of anticoagulation. Prospective validation of a catheter removal alone strategy is warranted.
Introduction
Current guidelines from three different professional societies all recommend treating catheter related thrombosis (CRT) with 3–6 months of anticoagulation following catheter removal [ , , ]. These recommendations, however, are extrapolated from observations of lower extremity thrombosis, with no currently published prospective data comparing treatment strategies for CRT. There exist several differences between CRT and lower extremity thrombosis, which suggests that divergent management of the two entities may be reasonable. (i) CRT commonly goes undiagnosed and these undiagnosed instances of CRT are unintentionally treated with catheter removal alone without obvious clinical consequences. One prospective study of cancer patients with PICCs, for instance, found that 51.4% of patients developed CRT on ultrasound, of which 45.6% were asymptomatic [ ]. (ii) Anticoagulation may not change its natural history of CRT over catheter removal alone. Studies involving follow up ultrasound have shown that anticoagulation does not increase thrombus resolution rates any more then catheter removal alone [ , ]. (iii) The risk of pulmonary embolism is significantly diminished in the case of CRT compared with lower extremity thrombosis (3% vs. 16% in one study); thus, any potential risk reduction from anticoagulation would be less substantial [ ]. (iv) the population of patients in whom PICC lines are placed are medically complex, and therefore, more likely to be predisposed towards bleeding. Indeed, a systematic review of multiple studies of patients with CRT treated with anticoagulation found rates of major hemorrhage up to 4.9% [ ]. Other reports have noted significant bleeding approaching 25% [ ].
Given that CRT is common and often unintentionally treated with catheter removal alone, the risks from CRT are small, and treatment carries associated bleeding risks, many practitioners at our institution treat PICC line-associated CRT with catheter removal alone. It is currently unknown how catheter removal alone compares to anticoagulation in terms of efficacy and safety. To better describe the risks and benefits of each strategy, we performed of retrospective review of hospitalized patients at our institution with PICC line-associated CRT.
Methods
This study was approved by the Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU) Institutional Review Board prior to initiation (OHSU IRB study number 00005391). We performed a retrospective review of patients diagnosed with CRT at OHSU from April 2012 to April 2018 during hospitalization. Patients diagnosed with CRT were identified through billing records and confirmed through chart review. We included only patients over the age of 18 with PICC-associated thrombosis confirmed by ultrasound during a hospitalization. We excluded patients with centrally inserted catheters, those diagnosed outside of a hospitalization, those with concurrent VTE at CRT diagnosis, those admitted with trauma, a known thrombophilia (HIT, APLA, etc.), or known bleeding diathesis, those undergoing vascular surgery during the same admission (however all other surgeries were included), and patients who underwent catheter-directed thrombolysis. Demographic data was recorded at the time of CRT diagnosis and the medical record was evaluated in its entirety to determine the rate of secondary VTE after PICC removal, and major bleeding as defined by International Society of Thrombosis and Hemostasis criteria (fatal bleeding, critical organ bleeding such as CNS bleeding, or bleeding causing a fall in hemoglobin of 20 g L − 1 or more) [ ].
Results
After review of 397 individual medical records, 83 patients were included in the study. The most common reasons for exclusion includes a diagnosis other than PICC-associated thrombosis (i.e., incorrect coding), age under 18, and patients with a preexisting VTE (Fig. 1 ). Among the included patients, 62 (74%) were treated with PICC removal alone, while 21 (26%) were treated with PICC removal plus anticoagulation. Demographics at time of CRT diagnosis are outlined in Table 1 . Patients treated with PICC removal alone were more likely to have hematologic malignancy, receive chemotherapy during admission, develop a platelet count < 50 × 10 9 /L during admission, and have brachial vein thrombosis, as opposed to more proximal thrombosis. Efficacy and safety outcomes are listed in Table 2 . In total, 6.4% of patients treated with catheter removal alone developed a VTE, including 1 patient with a subsequent pulmonary embolism (1.6%), and 3 of whom developed a subsequent DVT (4.8%). 5 Patients had progression of symptoms warranting the initiation of anticoagulation (8%). One patient (4.7%) had progression of symptoms leading to clinical evaluation in the anticoagulation arm. Major bleeding occurred in 6 patients in the PICC removal + anticoagulation arm (28.5%) versus 3 patients in the PICC removal alone arm (4.8%) p = 0.007. No patients in the study died from thrombosis or bleeding.
Fig. 1 Inclusion/exclusion schema. Three hundred and ninety-seven charts were reviewed for potential inclusion of which three hundred and fourteen were excluded for various reasons
Table 1 Characteristics of the included patients PICC removal plus anticoagulation PICC removal alone Number/mean (%) Number/mean (%) Total 21 62 Mean LOS (days) 31.2 23.9 Sex Male 15 28 Female 6 34 Mean age 54.4 58.3 Comorbidities Atrial fibrillation 4 19.0 7 11.2 Prior history of VTE 2 9.5 3 4.8 Diabetes 5 23.8 12 19.3 PAD 0 0 1 1.6 Obesity 9 42.8 13 20.9 Surgery while admitted 5 23.8 10 33 Estrogen use before admission 1 < 1 2 3.2 Malignancy Leukemia 3 14.2 27 43.3 Lymphoma 2 9.5 6 9.6 Myeloma 0 0 6 9.6 Solid tumor 4 19.0 2 3.2 Received chemotherapy 4 19.0 30 48.3 Platelets < 50K 3 14.2 31 50 Anticoagulation status at VTE diagnosis None 13 61.9 45 72.5 Prophylactic 8 38.0 17 27.4 Platelet count (mean) 245 132 Clot location Internal jugular 5 23.8 4 6.4 Subclavian 10 47.6 22 35.4 Axillary 4 19.0 18 29.0 Brachial 2 9.5 18 29.0 Treatment Enoxaparin 9 42.8 – Warfarin 5 23.8 – DOAC 7 33.3 – VTE venous thromboembolism, DOAC direct oral anticoagulant
Table 2 Efficacy and safety in the included patients PICC removal plus anticoagulation PICC removal alone p Number/mean (%) Number/mean (%) Total 21 62 Progressive thrombosis Total 1 4.7 9 14 0.43 Pulmonary embolism 0 0 1 1.6 1.00 Secondary DVT 0 0 3 4.8 0.57 Progression of clot 1 0 5 8.0 1.00 Bleeding Major bleeding 6 28.5 3 4.8 0.007 Gastrointestinal bleed 5 0 Intracranial bleed 0 0 Unknown source 1 0 DVT deep vein thrombosis
Discussion
In this retrospective review of hospitalized patients who developed CRT, we found that PICC removal alone resulted in a small increased rate of secondary VTE events and progression of symptoms warranting the initiation of anticoagulation as compared to patients who received PICC removal plus anticoagulation. However, significantly higher rates of major bleeding were observed among those who received PICC removal plus anticoagulation, highlighting a notable risk with this strategy in certain populations. This study suggests that PICC removal alone may be a viable treatment option for certain patients, particularly those at high risk of bleeding. Our institutional practice has shifted to PICC removal alone along with the use of standard prophylactic dose anticoagulation as recommended for hospitalized medical patients [ ]. There are several specific concerns with the treatment of CRT, namely amelioration of patient symptoms, prevention of further VTE, and bleeding risk that this study highlights.
Treatment of the symptoms associated with CRT is an important consideration. The majority of patients in the PICC removal only arm experienced resolution of symptoms after PICC removal, with only a small minority experiencing recurrent symptoms warranting anticoagulation. Unfortunately, given the limitations of retrospective review, we were unable to determine the percentage of patients with symptomatic CRT at diagnosis, but presuming that symptoms served as the basis for pursuing an initial workup, this was likely the majority. Thus, PICC removal appears to be a reasonable strategy for the majority of patients with symptomatic CRT with the understanding that a small minority of patients will have progressive symptoms that will then prompt anticoagulation. The extent to which CRT can lead to chronic symptoms such as post-thrombotic syndrome is unclear with a wide range of incidence reported in the literature [ ]. Our current analysis suggests persistent symptoms to be uncommon in patients treated with PICC removal alone as evidenced by the low rate of anticoagulation initiation. However, our study excluded patients who received catheter directed thrombolysis who were more likely to be symptomatic at presentation.
The second consideration regarding CRT treatment is the prevention of secondary VTE events. While we observe patients with secondary VTE events in the catheter removal only arm, the rate was small, with no observed episodes of fatal VTE events. Within the hospitalized population we studied, there exists a high rate of thrombosis at baseline [ ]. Guidelines recommend the routine use of prophylactic dose anticoagulation in this population during hospitalization given data showing efficacy at preventing VTE, and it seems reasonable to revert back to this strategy after PICC removal in patient selected for PICC removal alone if the bleeding risk is not prohibitive [ ].
Lastly, bleeding is a major concern with the use of anticoagulation. Our study included medically complex patients, many of whom had cancer and received chemotherapy during admission leading to resultant thrombocytopenia. Anticoagulation use is challenging in such patients, with no clear consensus on how to adjust anticoagulation strategies and utilize platelet transfusion in the setting of chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia [ ]. It is important to note that our major bleeding rates were higher than reported in previous studies of cancer patients with catheter associated thrombosis (IE the Catheter and Catheter 2 trials) [ , ]. This discrepancy is likely attributable to key differences in our patient population, as both of the aforementioned trials were outpatient studies that excluded patients with severe thrombocytopenia and were composed of a patient population at lower bleeding risk (IE more solid tumor patients vs hematologic malignancies undergoing active treatment, which were mostly excluded from their trials). Other retrospective reports of CRT in a general population has noted similar bleeding rate approaching 25% [ ]. Given the observational data presented above, PICC removal alone seems to be a reasonable strategy in this population given the inherent risks associated with anticoagulation.
This study has several limitations that should be addressed including its small size and retrospective nature. The population chosen for PICC removal alone was significantly different than those selected for anticoagulation, likely representing concern on the part of providers for a higher risk of adverse consequences associated with active treatment given prevalence of thrombocytopenia. Nevertheless, this data suggests that PICC removal alone may be a viable option for certain hospitalized patients with PICC-associated thrombosis. A future prospective study assessing the efficacy and safety of PICC removal alone should be undertaken.