Highlights
GIB in patients with CF-LVADs is associated with significant in-hospital resource utilization. A decrease in antiplatelet regimen, but not target INR, on discharge was associated with decreased readmission rates. Strategies to reduce the risk of recurrent GIB in patients with CF-LVADs are needed.
Introduction
Continuous flow left ventricular assist devices (CF-LVADs) such as the HeartMate II or 3 (Thoratec Corp., Pleasanton, CA) have largely replaced traditional pulsatile flow (PF) devices as the standard of care for end stage heart failure. Despite improved clinical outcomes and durability, there has been concern for increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding (GIB) [ , ]. The lifetime incidence of GIB in patients with CF-LVADs has been reported to be as high as 40%, which has been attributed to the use of anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy, an increased risk of developing arteriovenous malformations, platelet dysfunction from shear stress, and an acquired von Willebrand disease state [ , ].
LVAD therapy is associated with substantial medical resource utilization, with GIB representing a significant contributor to morbidity and incremental cost [ , ]. Strategies to decrease hospitalization and limit in-hospital resource utilization are lacking. We sought to describe in-hospital resource utilization associated with overt GIB in CF-LVAD patients and identify factors associated with reduced rates of readmission.
Materials and methods
Patients
Subjects were identified from a prospectively compiled registry of patients who underwent LVAD implantation at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, MA. Only patients with durable, continuous flow LVAD support (HeartMate II) were included in the analysis. Patients with HeartWare ventricular assist devices (HVADs) (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) were not included as our first implant did not take place until March 2014. Patients with biventricular assist devices, percutaneous mechanical circulatory support or pulsatile ventricular assist devices were excluded. Records were retrospectively reviewed to identify admissions with a primary diagnosis of overt GIB between July 2011 and April 2014. GIB events occurring during index implant admission or during admissions for reasons other than GIB were not included in the analysis in order to limit confounding by factors such as length of stay. Follow up data were collected through March 2015. All patients were enrolled in the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Anticoagulation Management Service for protocol-directed international normalized ratio (INR) monitoring and warfarin dose adjustment. Routine post-implant antithrombotic therapy included aspirin 81–325 mg once daily and warfarin adjusted to a target INR of 2.0–3.0. The institutional review board approved data collection and analysis.
INR reporting
Time in therapeutic range (TTR) for INR data are reported as weighted TTR, which is a weighted arithmetic mean defined by the percentage of total patient–days during which INR was within the target therapeutic range. Weighted TTR was calculated using INR values for 90 days preceding the date of GIB for each patient’s first GIB. A critically elevated INR value was defined as an INR ≥ 4.0. Outpatient laboratory data were reviewed to identify critical INR values occurring within 2 weeks preceding each admission.
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Admissions were classified as having a primary diagnosis of overt GIB by review of the admission history and physical examination note. Presenting symptoms including melena, bright red blood per rectum, tarry stool, bloody stool, hematochezia, coffee-ground emesis, or gastrointestinal hemorrhage were considered as supporting a primary diagnosis of overt GIB. Date of GIB was defined as the date that the patient or health care providers first observed any of these symptoms. GIB episodes in patients with LVADs were managed according to an institutional clinical guideline, which is included in the online supplementary appendix (Fig. S1).
Imaging and endoscopy
Diagnostic imaging studies included computed tomographic (CT) angiography, mesenteric angiography, technetium-99m-tagged red blood cell scan, and video capsule endoscopy (VCE). Endoscopy included esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), push enteroscopy, colonoscopy, and flexible sigmoidoscopy. Study authors retrospectively reviewed endoscopy reports to determine whether a source of bleeding was identified, whether a therapeutic intervention was delivered, and whether any intervention delivered was successful. Bleeding sources were described as definite if active bleeding was visualized during endoscopy or probable if there was evidence of recent bleeding. Successful endoscopic therapy was defined as endoscopic visualization of bleeding cessation immediately prior to withdrawal of the endoscope. Endoscopic therapies delivered included placement of hemostatic clips, thermal coagulation, and argon plasma coagulation. The duodenal-jejeunal junction was considered to be the demarcation between the upper and lower gastrointestinal tracts.
Statistical analysis
Continuous variables are expressed as n (%), median (interquartile range [IQR]), or mean ± standard deviation. Odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated to determine the risk for readmission associated with successful endoscopic therapy, decreasing antiplatelet regimen on discharge, and decreasing INR target on discharge. Readmission rates at 30, 90, and 180 days were calculated based on readmissions occurring after each individual admission without censoring patients with multiple admissions (i.e., patients with > 1 admission were more heavily represented in the analysis). Kaplan–Meier curves were generated to describe readmission for GIB and any cause after each patient’s initial admission for GIB. For both readmission rates and Kaplan–Meier analyses, patients were censored from the analysis after death or heart transplantation and therefore not considered to be at risk for readmission occurring after censoring. Statistical analysis was performed using STATA (StataCorp. 2015. Stata Statistical Software: Release 14 . College Station, TX).
Results
Baseline characteristics
Between July 1, 2011 and April 30, 2014 a total of 63 HeartMate II LVADs were implanted at our institution. A total of 57 admissions in 23 patients were included in the analysis. Baseline patient characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . Our study included predominantly male patients (83%) with ischemic cardiomyopathy (52%) that received LVADs for destination therapy (57%). The overall rate of GIB in patients implanted with LVADs at our institution is 0.73 episodes per 100 patient–months of follow up, which is comparable to the overall GIB rate in the Interagency Registry for Mechanically Circulatory Support (1.11 episodes per 100 patient-months).
Table 1 Baseline characteristics of individual patients (n = 23) Patient characteristics n (%) or median (IQR) Male 19 (82.6) Age at LVAD implant (years) 62 (57–66) Age at first GIB episode (years) 62 (57–67) Interval between LVAD implant and first overt GIB episode (days) 255 (101–462) Etiology of heart failure Ischemic 12 (52.2) Non-ischemic 11 (47.8) Smoking Former 16 (69.6) Current 1 (4.3) Comorbidities Atrial fibrillation 18 (78.3) Hypertension 19 (82.6) Hyperlipidemia 16 (69.6) Coronary artery disease 14 (60.9) Chronic kidney disease 17 (73.9) Diabetes mellitus 13 (56.5) CVA/TIA 4 (17.4) Peripheral arterial disease 6 (26.1) Pre-LVAD GIB history History of GIB 4 (17.4) Peptic ulcer disease 2 (8.7) Diverticulosis 12 (52.2) Therapy type Bridge to transplant 8 (34.8) Bridge to decision 2 (8.7) Destination 13 (56.5) Weighted TTR a 59.2% CVA/TIA cerebrovascular accident/transient ischemic attack, GIB gastrointestinal bleeding, IQR interquartile range, LVAD left ventricular assist device, TTR time in therapeutic range a Weighted TTR was calculated with a median of 91 days (IQR 56–92)
Medications, laboratory values, and blood products
At the time of admission for GIB, all patients were taking warfarin. The target INR range was 2.0–3.0 in most admissions (84%). The majority of patients (81%) were taking at least one antiplatelet medication and 16% were taking > 1 antiplatelet medication (Table 2 ). Weighted TTR for INR over a median interval of 91 days (IQR 56–92) prior to the first admission for GIB was 59.2%. At the time of admission, 40.4% had supratherapeutic INRs. Vitamin K, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), or 4-factor prothrombin complex concentrate were given in 14%, 12%, and 7% of admissions, respectively (Table 2 ). The mean INR on admission for patients who received a reversal agent versus those who did not was 3.3 versus 2.5, respectively (p = 0.001).
Table 2 Baseline characteristics of all GIB episodes (n = 57) Admission characteristics n (%) or median (IQR) GIB per patient 2 (range 1–9) Antiplatelet medications Any antiplatelet agent 46 (80.7) Aspirin (81 mg) 38 (66.7) Aspirin (325 mg) 5 (8.8) Clopidogrel 1 (1.8) Dipyridamole 11 (19.2) > 1 antiplatelet agent 9 (15.8) Gastrointestinal medications Aminocaproic acid 4 (7.0) H2 blocker 3 (5.3) Octreotide 24 (42.1) Proton pump inhibitor 51 (89.5) Thalidomide 2 (3.5) Bridging within prior 7 days Heparin 1 (1.8) LMWH 5 (8.8) Hematocrit on presentation 20.7 (18.9–24.1) Platelets on presentation 216 (187–276) INR At goal 23 (40.4) Above goal 23 (40.4) Below goal 11 (19.3) Critical INR within preceding 14 days 10 (17.5) Reversal agent given Vitamin K 8 (14.0) Fresh frozen plasma 7 (12.3) Prothrombin complex concentrate 4 (7.0) Blood products given PRBC 50 (87.7) PRBC units per episode a 3 (range 1–16) Platelets 8 (14.0) Platelet units per episode a 2 (range 1–4) FFP 7 (12.3) FFP units per episode a 2 (range 1–2) IV iron 5 (8.8) FFP fresh frozen plasma, GIB gastrointestinal bleeding, INR international normalized ratio, IV intravenous, LMWH low molecular weight heparin, PRBC packed red blood cells a Median number of units among patients who received PRBCs, platelets, or FFP
Transfusion of at least one blood product occurred in the majority (87.7%) of admissions (Table 2 ).
Imaging
A total of 30 diagnostic imaging studies were performed, with at least one study in 27 (47.4%) admissions and multiple (> 1) studies in 3 (5.3%) admissions (Fig. 1 ). VCE was most common. The overall diagnostic yield of imaging, defined as identification of either a definite or probable source, was 23%.
Fig. 1 Diagnostic imaging studies performed during hospitalization for GIB. CT computed tomography, RBC red blood cell
Endoscopy
A total of 76 endoscopies were performed, with at least one endoscopy in 45 (79%) admissions and > 1 endoscopy in 24 (42%) admissions (Fig. 2 ). Definite or probable sources of bleeding were identified in 19 (25%) and 9 (12%) endoscopies, respectively, with bleeding most commonly identified from an upper GI source (n = 18; 78.3%). Multiple sources were identified in 3 (5.3%) admissions. The overall diagnostic yield of endoscopy was 37%. Individual diagnostic yields were 50% (22/44) for EGD, 25% (3/12) for push enteroscopy, and 11% (2/18) for colonoscopy. Endoscopic therapy was successful in 16 cases (21%). When compared to patients who had a single endoscopy, those who underwent multiple (> 1) endoscopies were no more likely to have a bleeding source identified (OR 1.48; 95% CI 0.50–4.32; p = 0.59) or to have successful endoscopic therapy (OR 1.91; 95% CI 0.45–8.02; p = 0.47).
Fig. 2 Invasive endoscopy performed during hospitalization for GIB. EGD esophagogastroduodenoscopy
Among all admissions included in the analysis, a definite or probable source of bleeding was identified by either imaging or endoscopy in 40.4%.
Hospital stay and readmission
The mean hospital length of stay was 9.2 ± 5.2 days (range 1–27). Transfer to the intensive care unit (ICU) was required during 4 (7.0%) admissions, with a mean ICU length of stay of 1.7 ± 1.0 days (range 1–3). Having multiple (> 1) endoscopies within a single admission was associated with increased mean length of hospital stay (11.1 vs. 7.8 days, p < 0.02).
Readmission rates for GIB at 30, 90, and 180 days were 32.7%, 52.9%, and 52.2%, respectively (Table 3 ), with a median time to readmission of 41 days (IQR 14–90). Readmission rates were slightly lower at 180 days than at 90 days given that some patients went on to die or undergo transplantation before 180 days, thereby leading to a lower number at risk. Freedom from readmission for GIB after the initial GIB admission is shown in Fig. 3 . A decrease in antiplatelet regimen on discharge was associated with decreased rates of readmission for GIB at 30 and 90 days (Fig. 4 , left). Neither successful endoscopic therapy nor a reduced INR target range upon discharge was associated with decreased rates of readmission for GIB at any timepoint.
Table 3 Discharge and readmission characteristics Discharge/readmission characteristic n (%) or median (IQR) Decrease in INR target 16 (28.1) Decrease in antiplatelet therapy Discontinued 9 (15.8) Dose reduced 9 (15.8) Readmission for GIB 30 days 18 (32.7) 90 days 27 (52.9) 180 days 24 (52.2) Time to readmission for GIB (days) 41 (14–90) Readmission for any cause 30 days 21 (38.2) 90 days 32 (61.5) 180 days 33 (68.6) GIB gastrointestinal bleeding, INR international normalized ratio. Readmission data calculated with censoring after death or heart transplantation but without censoring after first readmission
Fig. 3 Risk of readmission for GIB (red line) or any cause (blue line) following index admission for GIB using Kaplan–Meier analysis
Fig. 4 Forest plots showing the risk of readmission for GIB (left) and for any cause (right) associated with decrease in antiplatelet regimen on discharge (top), decrease in INR target on discharge (middle), and successful endoscopic therapy during hospitalization (bottom)
Readmission rates for any cause at 30, 90, and 180 days were 38.2%, 61.5%, and 68.8%, respectively (Table 3 ). Freedom from readmission for any cause after the initial GIB admission is shown in Fig. 3 . A decrease in antiplatelet regimen on discharge was associated with decreased rates of readmission for any cause at 30 and 90 days (Fig. 4 , right). Neither successful endoscopic therapy nor a reduced INR target range upon discharge was associated with decreased rates of readmission for any cause at any timepoint.
A total of five patients experienced LVAD pump thrombosis during the study period and three patients died. One patient died during an admission for GIB that was complicated by myocardial infarction, pump thrombosis and stroke. The second died from right heart failure. The third died after LVAD pump thrombosis, at which time she was not a candidate for pump replacement due to multiple comorbidities. Details regarding the three remaining patients who experienced pump thrombosis during the study period are as follows: one presented 2 months after LVAD implantation but > 1 year prior to initial GIB, one presented 5 months after initial GIB (during which both the INR target and antiplatelet therapy were reduced), and one presented 10 months after his 6th admission for GIB (during which he was off antiplatelet therapy and the INR was reduced). A total of six patients underwent heart transplantation during the follow up period.
Discussion
In our study, we observed high rates of resource utilization associated with hospitalization for GIB in patients supported with CF-LVADs. Diagnostic imaging and endoscopy were common, but identification of a bleeding source was uncommon. Readmission rates for GIB and for any cause in our study were high. Reduced antiplatelet therapy on discharge was associated with decreased rates of readmission for GIB and for any cause at 30 and 90 days, while neither successful endoscopic therapy during admission nor decreasing INR target on discharge was associated with decreased rates of readmission.
GIB is common in patients with LVADs and frequently leads to hospital admission. Joy et al. [ ] describe an increase in annual incidence of GIB requiring hospitalization from 5% in the PF-LVAD era to 10% in the CF-LVAD era, with odds of GIB 3.24 times greater for patients with CF-LVADs [ ]. Readmission rates after index hospitalization for LVAD implantation are estimated to be > 50% at 6-months and 65% at 1 year [ ], with GIB being the most common reason for readmission in patients with CF-LVADs, accounting for 10–27% of readmissions [ , ]. The risk of GIB attributable to LVAD therapy in this population is remarkably high, compared to 2.5% of admissions for GIB in an elderly population with medically-managed heart failure [ ]. The prevalence of GIB in patients with LVAD support is likely to increase as destination therapy emerges as the most common strategy for LVAD implantation [ ].
As the number of patients with LVAD support grows [ ], so too does concern over cost and resource utilization. GIB during index admission for CF-LVAD implantation has been associated with significantly increased median length of stay (44 vs. 29 days; p < 0.001) and an increase in hospital charges by approximately 11%, though with no significant increase in mortality [ , ]. Akhter et al. [ ] report the median direct hospital cost associated with readmission for bleeding at any site as $11,886. The frequent need for blood product transfusion in these patients is also concerning given its association with reduced survival, increased infectious complications, and increased risk of readmission [ ]. Furthermore, blood product transfusion has been associated with increased rates of HLA sensitization pre-transplant and allograft rejection after cardiac transplant with a trend towards increased mortality [ ]. This point is particularly important in predominately bridge to transplant or bridge to decision populations.
Diagnostic imaging is commonly performed in this population, however the degree to which imaging studies influence management and outcomes is unclear. One proposed algorithm for management of acute GIB in patients with CF-LVADs suggests imaging patients in whom initial invasive endoscopy does not reveal a bleeding source [ ]. However, the use of imaging modalities such as VCE in this population is supported only by case reports and small feasibility studies [ ]. The test characteristics and role for various imaging modalities in patients with CF-LVADs with acute GIB have yet to be determined.
Invasive endoscopy was performed at a high rate in our study, similar to prior studies [ ]. The overall diagnostic yield for invasive endoscopy (37%) was consistent with prior reports ranging from 29 to 55% [ , ]. Colonoscopy had a particularly low diagnostic yield in our study, which differs from prior findings [ ]. This finding could be due to sampling error given the relatively low number of patients included in our and other published analyses. Pooled data from a 2014 meta-analysis revealed upper GI sources to be more than twice as common as lower GI sources (48% vs. 22%, respectively) [ , ]. Given the higher diagnostic yield of EGD in our study, this represents a likely explanation for the low diagnostic yield produced by colonoscopy.
A substantial number of patients with LVAD-associated GIB require multiple endoscopies. Dakik et al. [ ] report the need for 2nd and 3rd endoscopies in 64% and 39% of patients, respectively. A smaller percentage of patients in our study required 2nd (42%) and 3rd (11%) endoscopies during a single hospital stay. We observed a significantly longer length of hospital stay for those requiring multiple endoscopies, which is likely due to the severity of the underlying disease and logistical challenges in performing inpatient endoscopy.
Post-implant antithrombotic regimen may represent a key modifiable risk factor that can be manipulated to minimize risk for complications. Clinicians commonly prescribe dual therapy with warfarin and antiplatelet agents after LVAD implantation to minimize the risk for pump thrombosis. However, prior reports suggest that dual therapy with aspirin and warfarin offers little additional antithrombotic effect over warfarin alone and is associated with higher rates of bleeding [ , , ]. Prospective, randomized studies are needed to further elucidate the need for antiplatelet therapy in this population.
Strategies for restarting antithrombotic therapy after cessation of GIB are institution/clinician-specific and not supported by evidence. Prior studies have demonstrated an association between GIB and subsequent thromboembolic events, which may be attributable to reduction in anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy after admission for GIB [ ]. Most clinicians restart aspirin after cessation of bleeding [ ]. Warfarin is restarted in the majority of patients, often with a decrease in the target INR [ ]. There remains no high-quality evidence to support these practices. Patients in our study who restarted warfarin with a lower INR target did not have significantly lower rates of readmission for GIB; however, our sample is not powered to detect a modest effect size. A decrease in antiplatelet regimen was however associated with decreased rates of readmission for GIB and for any cause. The standard practice at our institution is now to permanently discontinue antiplatelet agents at the first episode of significant GIB if the bleeding occurred in the setting of therapeutic or subtherapeutic anticoagulation (assuming no separate indication for antiplatelet therapy). Despite this change, we have observed no increase in the rate of pump thrombosis leading to pump exchange or death (event rate 0.013 events per patient-month prior to strategy change; event rate 0.029 events per patient–month after strategy; p = 0.35 for comparison).
Additional medications such as thalidomide and lenalidomide (anti-angiogenic agents), danazol (synthetic steroid), and octreotide (somastatin analog) have been studied in patients with CF-LVADs and recurrent GIB refractory to standard medical therapy [ , , ]. While these treatments are promising, their use is supported only by small case series and all are associated with considerable toxicities. Use of these therapies remains of unclear benefit and may add substantial unnecessary cost to patient care. None of the patients in our study population were treated with any of these medications during the study period.
Our study has limitations. Details of admissions were retrospectively collected by electronic chart review at a single center raising questions of generalizability. HVADs were not included in our analysis, thus our results may not be applicable to patients with centrifugal flow LVADs, however no difference in GIB rates between HeartMate II and HVAD has been reported. Our sample size is small and provides limited statistical power that may be susceptible to type II error. All patients were closely followed by an anticoagulation management service (a team of specialized anticoagulation pharmacists and staff). These services may not be broadly available to LVAD patients. Our analysis was not powered to detect a difference in pump thrombosis events after discontinuation or dose reduction of antiplatelet therapy. Clinicians should use caution when considering adjustment in antiplatelet therapy, as the exact extent to which this may contribute to pump thrombosis is unknown. Finally, data regarding care received at outside hospitals prior to transfer and costs of total inpatient care were not included in our analysis.
Conclusions
GIB in patients supported with CF-LVADs is associated with significant in-hospital resource utilization and high rates of readmission. Diagnostic imaging and invasive endoscopy are commonly performed during hospitalization for GIB, but may have low diagnostic and therapeutic yield. A decrease in antiplatelet regimen, but not target INR, on discharge was associated with decreased readmission rates. More effective strategies to prevent readmission and reduce resource utilization are needed.