Highlights
There are limited data on how to utilize direct oral anticoagulant assays in clinical practice We assessed the use of 150 direct oral anticoagulant assays for apixaban, rivaroxaban, and dabigatran at University of Washington Medicine We found DOAC assays are generally used in situations where it is helpful to confirm the absence or presence of drug, most commonly prior to an urgent invasive procedure There is still a lack of understanding of when levels should be drawn and how to interpret DOAC assay results Further research is needed to better understand the relationship between DOAC levels and clinical outcomes in order to establish complete guidelines for DOAC monitoring and assay use
Introduction
Since the approval of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) for prevention of stroke in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation and treatment of venous thromboembolism (VTE), their use has increased rapidly and now matches that of warfarin [ ]. DOACs include the direct thrombin inhibitor dabigatran and the direct factor Xa inhibitors apixaban, rivaroxaban, and edoxaban. Unlike warfarin, these agents have more stable pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, so routine laboratory monitoring is unnecessary [ ].
There are instances in which laboratory measurements of drug activity may be useful. The absence of drug effect may need to be assured prior to urgent surgeries or invasive procedures, or before the use of thrombolytic therapy. The presence of drug effect may need to be confirmed in patients who appear to have failed therapy, in the setting of acute hemorrhage while on anticoagulant therapy, or in patients with questionable adherence or concern for gastrointestinal malabsorption. Laboratory measurements may also be desirable in special patient populations such as extremes of body weight, renal impairment, or drug interactions. However, DOAC levels are not useful for quantification of drug effect. Observed drug levels at peak and at trough in patients on established doses of DOACs have been published, but the range is very wide, with overlap between peak and trough values, and they do not represent targets for dosing adjustments (Table 1 ). No correlation has been identified between specific drug levels and clinical outcomes, and therapeutic ranges have not been established [ , ].
Table 1 Observed on-therapy concentrations for DOACs [ , , , ] DOAC dose and indication Peak concentration (ng/mL) Trough concentration (ng/mL) Dabigatran 150 mg BID 64–443 31–225 Apixaban VTE prophylaxis 2.5 mg BID 41–146 23–109 VTE treatment 2.5 mg BID 30–153 11–90 5 mg BID 59–302 22–177 10 mg BID 111–572 41–335 Atrial fibrillation 2.5 mg BID 69–221 34–162 5 mg BID 91–321 41–230 Rivaroxaban Atrial fibrillation 20 mg daily 160–360 4–96 VTE treatment 20 mg daily 175–360 19–60 VTE prevention 10 mg daily 91–196 1.3–38
Currently, there are no FDA approved tests to measure the anticoagulation activity of DOACs. The thrombin time assay is readily available and a normal thrombin time can be used to exclude clinically relevant dabigatran levels. However, clinically insignificant dabigatran levels can prolong thrombin time, making this assay less useful for quantification [ ]. The dilute thrombin inhibitor assay for dabigatran and calibrated chromogenic anti-Xa assays for apixaban, rivaroxaban, and edoxaban can be used to accurately estimate DOAC concentrations. However, these assays are not widely available, and there are no clear guidelines on how to interpret and respond to assay results [ ]. Furthermore, real world experience is limited as only two small studies have reported on the use of DOAC laboratory monitoring in clinical practice [ , ]. The primary objective of this study was to analyze why DOAC levels are ordered at our institution, how the results affect clinical decision-making, and to determine if DOAC assays are utilized appropriately.
Methods
This single health system, retrospective chart review study was conducted at University of Washington Medicine. At our institution, DOAC concentrations are extrapolated using chromogenic anti-Xa activity for apixaban and rivaroxaban assays and dilute thrombin inhibitor clotting times for dabigatran assays. Patients with a DOAC assay performed between April 2013 and August 2017 were identified using University of Washington laboratory records. Patients were included if they were ≥ 18 years old and excluded if the level was ordered by an outside institution or ordered in error.
Laboratory records were used to collect level results and the clinical setting where each assay was ordered. Chart review was performed by one investigator to collect the following information for eligible subjects: gender, age, body mass index, weight, serum creatinine, DOAC indication and dose, indication for DOAC assay, hematology consult, timing of level (trough, peak, or random), priority of level (stat or routine), and clinical decision based on assay result. Peak levels were defined as being drawn within 1 h of the time of maximum concentration of drug. Levels were considered troughs if they were drawn within 2 h of when the next dose was due or when anticoagulation was held prior to a planned surgery. All other levels were considered random. Peak levels were defined to be ideal in situations where the presence of drug was being confirmed such as obesity, determining adherence, and questionable drug absorption. Trough levels were considered ideal when confirming the absence of drug such as prior to invasive procedures or alteplase and in situations where clearance of the drug is impaired such as in renal impairment or certain drug interactions. Random levels were considered appropriate in emergent situations such as acute hemorrhage, thrombosis, or urgent invasive procedures. Descriptive statistics were used to evaluate all endpoints.
Results
Drug Assays
A total of 168 DOAC levels were ordered at University of Washington Medicine from April 2014 to August 2017 (Fig. 1 ). For our analysis, we excluded 17 duplicate entries and one ordered in error where the provider meant to order an anti-Xa assay for low molecular weight heparin. This resulted in 150 DOAC levels from 96 patients that were included in the study. There were 76 (51%) apixaban levels, 42 (28%) rivaroxaban levels, and 32 (21%) dabigatran levels. Baseline characteristics of patients included in this study are presented in Table 2 . The primary indications for anticoagulation were VTE (n = 49) and atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter (n = 42). The clinical settings where DOAC assays were ordered included inpatient (n = 67), outpatient (n = 60), and emergency department (n = 23) (Supplementary Table 1). The most common medical services that ordered DOAC assays were cardiology or cardiac surgery (n = 46), internal medicine (n = 19), hematology and oncology (n = 16), and advanced heart failure and transplant cardiology (n = 15).
Fig. 1 DOAC levels ordered at University of Washington Medicine between April 2013 and August 2017
Table 2 Baseline characteristics of patient population Variable Patient population (n = 96) Gender, n (%) Male 54 (56) Female 42 (44) Age, median years (range) 66 (19–95) Body mass index ≥ 30 kg/m 2 , n (%) 36 (38) Creatinine clearance ≤ 30 mL/min, n (%) 21 (22) Indication for anticoagulation, n (%) Atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter 49 (51) VTE 42 (44) Other a 5 (5) a Other indications for anticoagulation included antiphospholipid syndrome, embolic stroke, Gore-Tex vascular graft, and post hip replacement deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis
Indications for Ordering
The most common reasons for ordering DOAC assays were prior to invasive procedure (n = 78), acute hemorrhage (n = 16), assessment of adherence (n = 15), and acute thrombosis (n = 11) (Fig. 2 ). When levels were checked prior to an invasive procedure, 38 were ordered in the outpatient setting, 34 were inpatient, and 6 were in the emergency department. DOAC levels ordered prior to a procedure in the outpatient setting were primarily for cardiac biopsies; three of these patients had a creatinine clearance < 50 and none were over the age of 80. Reasons for ordering levels that were not indicated included determining if within therapeutic range (n = 7), unjustified repeat testing where providers appeared to forget to discontinue standing lab orders (n = 8), and adverse drug reaction in one patient where there was concern for apixaban induced vasculitis. Overall, 96 (64%) assays were ordered for reasonable indications, 16 (11%) were not indicated and 38 (25%) were ordered for a questionable indication (prior to outpatient procedure).
Fig. 2 Indications for ordering DOAC assays. White bars indicate DOAC levels ordered for reasonable indications. Dark gray bars indicate assays ordered for reasons that are not indicated. Light gray bars represent levels ordered for questionable indications
Timing of Assays
Out of the 150 DOAC assays, 90 (60%) were drawn as random levels, 54 (36%) were troughs, and 6 (4%) were peaks. Based on the indication for ordering, 71 levels ideally should have been random levels and all were appropriately timed (Fig. 3 ). Out of the 66 levels that should have been ordered as a trough, 52 were appropriately timed as troughs, 13 were random levels, and one was a peak. Of the 13 levels that should have been ordered as peaks, five were appropriately timed, six were random levels and two were timed as troughs. Overall, 85% of assays were timed appropriately.
Fig. 3 Number of DOAC assays that ideally should have been ordered as a trough, random level, or peak. Light gray sections represent levels that were timed appropriately. Dark gray sections indicate assays that were timed inappropriately compared to what should have been ordered
Clinical Decisions Following Assay Results
Clinical decisions following results of the 78 assays performed prior to an invasive procedure included confirming the absence of drug and performing the procedure (n = 44), detecting the presence of drug and continuing the procedure (n = 20), and detecting the presence of drug and holding the procedure (n = 12) (Supplementary Table 2). In two patients, the procedure was cancelled after the level was ordered for reasons unrelated to DOAC level results. Of patients who continued with the procedure despite having detectable drug levels, seven DOAC levels were < 50 ng/mL and 13 were > 50 ng/mL; 13 assays were ordered in the inpatient setting, 5 were outpatient, and 2 were in the emergency department. In one patient requiring an urgent procedure with an apixaban level of 140 ng/mL, hematology recommended using fresh frozen plasma. Otherwise, no patients received procoagulants, including prothrombin complex concentrate.
When assays were utilized in the setting of acute hemorrhage, the absence of drug was confirmed in six patients and idarucizumab was held in one of these patients for a dabigatran level < 50 ng/mL (Supplementary Fig. 1). The presence of drug was detected in 10 instances, for which two patients with dabigatran levels of 81 ng/mL and 221 ng/mL were given idarucizumab and one patient was switched to another anticoagulant at discharge.
When DOAC levels were ordered in the setting of thrombosis, the absence of drug was confirmed in three patients, for which one patient was switched to another anticoagulant while a second patient’s rivaroxaban dose was increased from 15 mg daily to 20 mg daily (Supplementary Fig. 2). The presence of drug was confirmed in eight instances and clinical outcomes included no change (n = 5), switching to another anticoagulant (n = 1), adding aspirin (n = 1) and holding alteplase in one patient with a confirmed pulmonary embolism and rivaroxaban level of 329 ng/mL. Of the patients who did not have a change in anticoagulation therapy despite detectable levels, four of the patients had a thrombotic event ruled out. However, in one patient with documented thrombosis, anticoagulation regimen remained unchanged.
When assays were ordered for drug interactions affecting DOAC clearance, one patient had a rivaroxaban trough of 71 ng/mL, leading to a change in dosing frequency from 20 mg daily to 20 mg every other day (Supplementary Fig. 3). When DOAC levels were ordered for renal impairment, the results also led to a change in DOAC therapy for one patient, where apixaban was decreased to 2.5 mg twice daily for a level of 199 ng/mL. All seven assays ordered to determine if the DOAC was within therapeutic range did not result in any change in therapy in response to assay results.
Of the 139 DOAC assays where a clinical decision was made based on the results, the clinical outcome was reasonable in 115 (83%) cases, whereas in 24 (17%) cases, it was unclear if the clinical decision was appropriate.
Discussion
Our retrospective study adds to the limited data on DOAC assay use in clinical practice, and to our knowledge, is the largest of its kind. In addition to characterizing indications for ordering levels and clinical decisions based on the results, we also analyzed the appropriateness of these decisions. This information can provide guidance to clinicians on how to utilize and respond to DOAC laboratory measurements in their clinical practice.
We found the majority of DOAC assays were ordered in situations or special patient populations where confirming absence or detecting presence of drug may be useful. The most common indication for ordering assays, in both the inpatient and outpatient setting, was prior to an invasive procedure. Although it may be useful to assess for presence of drug prior to urgent invasive procedures, the utility of laboratory monitoring before elective procedures, such as in the outpatient setting, is less clear. Routine monitoring is not required as discontinuation of drug prior to the procedure based on pharmacokinetic properties and procedural bleeding risk is sufficient in minimizing adverse events [ , , ]. Patients with decreased renal clearance, such as the elderly, may benefit from additional drug level monitoring prior to procedures but this is still a matter of debate [ , ]. Other reasonable indications for checking DOAC levels at our institution included acute hemorrhage, thrombosis, questionable drug adherence, renal impairment, drug interaction, obesity, determining which DOAC patient is taking, and questionable drug absorption. Although DOAC assays were generally ordered for appropriate reasons, there was still a small group of assays ordered to determine if the patient was therapeutically anticoagulated, despite lack of an established therapeutic range.
Clinical decisions in response to assay results depended on the indication for ordering. Most clinical decisions appeared to be appropriate based on the results of the assays. When DOAC levels were ordered prior to an urgent invasive procedure, the results were used to either hold or proceed with the procedure after confirming the presence or absence of drug, respectively. There were a few cases where the procedure was performed despite detecting drug presence, and one patient was given fresh frozen plasma as a result. However, it is unclear whether the use of fresh frozen plasma was appropriate based on drug level, and for other patients who were not given any pro-coagulants, it is unclear how the results were interpreted. Additionally, providers documented targeting a pre-procedural DOAC level < 50 or < 100 despite a lack of consensus on an appropriate cut-off [ , ]. Following DOAC assay results in the setting of thrombosis, the presence of drug was used to indicate treatment failure, leading to a change in anticoagulation therapy. However, in one patient, their anticoagulation regimen remained unchanged despite possible treatment failure. It is possible in this instance, the presence of drug indicated a new thrombotic event was unlikely. DOAC levels were also used to make decisions on administering alteplase for pulmonary embolism. In the setting of acute hemorrhage, dabigatran levels were used to determine whether or not to administer idarucizumab; these decisions were appropriate based on International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis recommendations to give reversal agents to patients with serious bleeds and drug levels > 50 ng/mL [ ]. As reversal agents are now available for all DOACs, the use of DOAC assays in the setting of acute hemorrhage may become increasingly relevant. When DOAC levels were assessed in obese patients or those with drug interactions or renal impairment, the presence of drug was used to validate current anticoagulation management. However, in a couple cases, the DOAC dose was decreased in response to detectable drug levels, despite no existing target range for dose adjustments.
Our study found most DOAC levels were reasonably timed based on indication. However, documentation of the type of level ordered primarily occurred prior to invasive procedures in the outpatient setting. For all other indications, the timing was usually ignored in documentation, indicating there may be a lack of understanding of when DOAC levels should ideally be drawn based on indication. Peak levels were most likely to be timed incorrectly in our study. Currently, ideal situations for when peak, trough, and random levels should be drawn have not been defined in literature, which may have contributed to the lack of awareness of DOAC assay timing in this study. In addition, in the outpatient setting, it may be difficult to document timing of last DOAC dose taken, so assays actually drawn as peaks or troughs may have been considered to be random levels.
Previous studies assessing DOAC laboratory measurements in clinical practice found levels were primarily used in the inpatient setting to help determine timing of invasive procedures, whereas in the outpatient setting, they were used to affirm current anticoagulation therapy [ , ]. While our study found similar indications for ordering DOAC assays and impact on clinical decisions, our results did not differ based on clinical setting. In addition to characterizing the use of DOAC levels, we further analyzed the appropriateness of how levels were ordered and whether clinical decisions based on the results were reasonable.
This study has a number of limitations. As a retrospective chart review study, the indication for ordering DOAC assays and clinical decisions would often have to be inferred when there was incomplete provider documentation. Furthermore, due to incomplete documentation, it is difficult to determine if providers actually analyzed assay results prior to making subsequent clinical decisions. If any patients were on heparin, the presence of heparin might have interfered with assay results, and this was not assessed for in this study. However, most patients had assays ordered prior to an invasive procedure or in the setting of an acute hemorrhage where they are unlikely to have been anticoagulated with heparin. Although we included more DOAC assays compared to previous studies, this study was conducted at a single health-system so the results may not reflect DOAC level practices at other institutions.
In conclusion, this study adds to the limited data on DOAC assay use in real-world practice. We found DOAC assays are generally used in situations where it is helpful to confirm the absence or presence of drug, most commonly prior to an urgent invasive procedure. The results of our study suggest there is still a lack of understanding of when levels should be drawn and how to interpret DOAC assay results, and additional education for clinicians is needed. Our analysis helps provide insight as to how DOAC assays can be utilized in clinical practice, but further research is still needed to better understand the relationship between DOAC levels and clinical outcomes in order to establish complete guidelines for DOAC monitoring and assay use.