Background
Intraneuronal inclusions named Lewy bodies (LBs), mainly consisting of aggregated α-synuclein, can be commonly found in patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD), characterized by motor disturbances known as Parkinsonism or non-motor symptoms, including cognitive impairment as well as dementia (PD with dementia, PDD) and dementia with LBs (DLB) [ , , ]. DLB patients are clinically characterized by almost simultaneous occurrence of Parkinsonism, cognitive impairment, and progressive dementia [ ]. Levels of disease-relevant α-synuclein proteins in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are modified not only in α-synucleinopathies but also in sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (sCJD) patients [ , ]. The current criteria for clinical diagnosis of prion diseases include a combination of CSF biomarkers, magnetic resonance imaging, electroencephalography, and clinical symptoms [ , , ]. However, it must be taken into consideration that in the context of differential diagnosis of sCJD from DLB patients, there might be an overlap in clinical symptoms. Approximately 40% of DLB subjects meet the clinical neurological signs/symptoms of sCJD, such as extrapyramidal signs, myoclonus, and a common fluctuation of the cognitive symptoms which may mimic a rapid progression [ , , ].
In this regard, CSF biomarkers might be useful for differential diagnosis of neurodegenerative dementias [ , , , , ]. The use of new technologies, such as chemiluminescent-based platforms or mass spectrometry, allowed the discrimination of sCJD from other neurodegenerative diseases with a high diagnostic accuracy [ , , ]. In particular, CSF α-synuclein may become especially useful in the differentiation of sCJD from DLB cases because its concentration is highly increased in sCJD patients [ , , ]. In contrast, meta-analysis studies suggested only a slight to moderate decrease of CSF α-synuclein in the spectrum of α-synuclein aggregation disorders [ , , ]. However, consensus for the latter is missing, resulting in an unclear role for total α-synuclein or non-aggregated synuclein. Recently, increased CSF phospho-serine-129 α-synuclein (p-α-synuclein) levels were reported in PD cases [ , ], but its potential value in the differential diagnostic context has not been investigated yet. To our knowledge, only limited information is available on the concentration of CSF p-α-synuclein in synucleinopathies (i.e., PDD and DLB).
In order to assess whether CSF total α-synuclein (t-α-synuclein) and p-α-synuclein levels or their ratio might improve the diagnostic accuracy to detect sCJD, we have measured isoforms in a cohort of neurological controls (NC), sCJD, PDD, and DLB cases. To reach this goal, two new colorimetric enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) were qualified for this purpose.
Methods
Patients
The present study includes sCJD samples ( n = 42) that fulfilled the WHO criteria for diagnosis of probable ( n = 28) or definite sCJD ( n = 14) (confirmed by autopsy) [ , ]. Patients with α-synucleinopathies were classified as PDD ( n = 16) (criteria based on [ ]) and DLB ( n = 27) (criteria based on the McKeith criteria [ ]; autopsies were not available). A neurological control group (NC) ( n = 42) was composed of neurological diseases and neurodegenerative conditions (such as vascular dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, vasculitis, hypoxia) in which prion disease and synucleinopathy diagnosis were excluded.
Collection and Pre-Analytical Sample Treatment
Lumbar puncture was performed for diagnostic purposes as previously described [ ]. Samples were routinely analyzed for cell counts, total protein, hemoglobin, and immunoglobulins to rule out ongoing inflammatory processes or contamination of CSF with red blood cells. Routine investigation of the CSF did not reveal any abnormalities on the basis of these parameters.
Determination and Characterization of T-α-Synuclein by ELISA
The test protocol for the t-α-synuclein ELISA, using antibodies ADx301 and ADx302, was already described before [ ]. Analytical performance data were extended with info on monoclonal antibodies (mAb) characteristics, specificity of the assay for detection of α-, ß-, or γ- isoform of the protein, and parallelism.
Determination and Characterization of P-α-Synuclein by ELISA
The p-α-synuclein prototype assay is designed using a combination of a p-α-synuclein specific mAb as capture mAb (Clone 81A, provided under license from University of Pennsylvania) and a pan-synuclein polyclonal antibody (FL140; Santa Cruz) as detection Ab. The test procedure is done at room temperature (18–30 °C) under static conditions. The assay procedure is initiated by adding 80 μL of undiluted CSF to 20 μL of the biotinylated capture Ab, followed by incubation for 3 h. Afterwards, wells are washed 5 times with 300 μL of wash solution. Next, 100 μL of peroxidase-labeled streptavidin (SV) is added and incubated for 30 min. For the colorimetric reaction, 100 μL of substrate solution was added into each well (after a second wash step) and incubated for 30 min (protected from light). The reaction was stopped by pipetting 100 μL stop solution (0.9 N sulfuric acid) to each well. After gently mixing, microplates were measured in a microplate reader for photometric measurement of the absorbance at a wavelength of 450 nm and a reference wavelength of 630 nm.
The phospho-dependency was assessed only for mAb ADx301 (Epitope, amino acid 110–120) where potential phosphorylation sites have been identified. No phosphorylation sites have been described in the region of the epitope of mAb ADx302 (amino acids 90–100) [ ]. For this purpose, plates were coated with 100 μL of SV at a concentration of 5 μg/mL. The SV-coated plates were incubated with biotinylated peptides (non-modified, phosphorylated on tyrosine at position 125, 133, and 136 or on serine at position 129) (more details on the selected peptides are provided in Suppl. Fig. 2 A). Biotinylated full-length synuclein, containing no phosphorylated amino acids (α-synuclein (1–140); Anaspec Cat#AS-55581), was used as a positive control. After a wash step, ADx301 and FL-140 antibody (Santa Cruz Cat#FL-140; positive control for the assay) were incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Excess of antibody was removed by wash steps. Finally, a peroxidase-labeled detector antibody was added for another 30 min at room temperature. After the wash step, substrate solution was added for 30 min. At the end of the test procedure, 0.9 N sulfuric acid is added to stop the reaction. Measurement was done in a microplate reader (wavelengths 450 nm, 630 nm).
Statistical Methods
All statistical evaluation of the data was performed by using the statistical software GraphPad Prism for Windows (version 6.01). Multiple comparisons were conducted with Kruskal–Wallis test followed for correction by Dunn’s post-test. Area under the curve (AUC) values were obtained from receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. Spearman’s rank 2-tailed coefficients were calculated to measure correlations between t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein. Best-fit lines in scatter plots were adjusted using linear regression. Statistical significance was considered at 5%.
Results
Part A: Analytical Performance
In the present study, we have partially qualified the analytical and clinical performance of two new colorimetric ELISAs for measurement of α-synuclein isoforms in CSF.
The α-synuclein immunoassay is specific for detection of the α-isoform (no immunoreactivity was obtained with the β- or γ-isoform of the protein) (Suppl. Fig. 1 ). The assay quantifies the monomeric, non-aggregated form of the protein. We confirmed the phospho-independency of the capture antibody of the t-α-synuclein ELISA (ADx301) by using a set of biotinylated peptides (Suppl. Fig. 2 a). Experiments indicated that (hyper)-phosphorylation of synuclein in the CSF will not affect the t-α-synuclein concentration in CSF as measured with the t-α-synuclein ELISA (Suppl. Fig. 2 b, c), although phosphorylation of S125 lowered the signal, as this is closer to the epitope of the detector antibody. Total variability (%CV) was below 10%. Good parallelism was shown for a set of CSF samples ( n = 5; see Suppl. Fig. 3 ).
Part B: Diagnostic Performance
To evaluate the clinical performance of the ELISA methods, we measured the concentration of t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein in CSF of sCJD, PDD, DLB, and NC patients. T-α-synuclein concentrations were elevated in sCJD, as compared to NC ( p < 0.001), PDD ( p < 0.001), and DLB ( p < 0.001) (Fig. 1 a–d; Table 1 ). The levels of t-α-synuclein in PDD and DLB cases were not significantly different to those detected in NC ( p > 0.05) (Fig. 1 a, d). CSF concentrations of p-α-synuclein were higher in the sCJD group, compared to those in NC ( p < 0.001), PDD ( p < 0.05), and DLB ( p < 0.01) (Fig. 1 b, d). Mean p-α-synuclein values were higher in PDD and DLB compared to that in NC, but these differences did not reach statistical significance (Table 1 and Fig. 1 b). The ratio of t-α-synuclein/p-α-synuclein was significantly increased in the sCJD group (Fig. 1 c). In addition, we observed a significant decreased ratio in the PDD group in comparison to NC ( p = 0.02), but not between PDD and DLB (Fig. 1 c, d). Fig. 1 CSF total t-α-synuclein, p-α-synuclein CSF levels, its ratio in the diagnostic groups, and its clinical value (ROC curve analysis). a – b CSF levels of t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein were measured a colorimetric ELISAs. c Ratio of t-α-synuclein/p-α-synuclein in the diagnostic groups. d Diagnostic accuracy (ROC analysis) for the discrimination between each disease group. *** p < 0.001; * p < 0.02. Four cases with p-α-synuclein cases close to 0 were excluded. SE, standard error; 95% CI, confidence interval at 95%; sCJD, sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob Disease; DLB, dementia with Lewy bodies; NC, neurological control; PDD, Parkinson’s disease with dementia Table 1 Demographic features of the analyzed cohort and data corresponding to CSF biomarkers. Results are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. A.U. , arbitrary units n Sex (f/m) Age (years) T-α-synuclein (pg/mL) P-α-synuclein (A.U.) Controls 42 22/20 67 ± 12 2100 ± 343 36.6 ± 0.55 synucleinopathies Parkinson’s disease dementia 16 10/6 71 ± 9 1593 ± 298 4.42 ± 1.50 Dementai with Lewy bodies 27 16/11 70 ± 9 1973 ± 423 4.10 ± 0.69 Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease 42 21/21 67 ± 9 8929 ± 3645*** 5.66 ± 0.88*** *** p < 0.001 (compared to controls)
In order to assess the diagnostic accuracy for each α-synuclein isoform, the AUC values were calculated, and ROC curves had been created (Suppl. Fig. 4 a–c). Significances were obtained for the differentiation of sCJD from PDD (AUC = 0.99; p < 0.001), DLB (AUC = 0.95; p < 0.001), and NC (AUC = 0.94; p < 0.001) (Fig. 1 d). For these comparisons, AUC values were not statistically different between each other, indicating that t-α-synuclein was not a better discriminator of sCJD from NC, as for LB dementias.
T-α-synuclein was better than p-α-synuclein for the discrimination of sCJD patients with the other diagnostic groups (Fig. 1 d). Indeed, for the discrimination of sCJD from NC, p-α-synuclein rendered an AUC of 0.77 ( p < 0.001); while for t-α-synuclein, it amounted to 0.94. In this context, the sensitivity of t-α-synuclein for sCJD diagnosis was 85.7%, and the specificity varied between 90.5–97.5%. In contrast, p-α-synuclein merely exhibited a sensitivity of 57.1% and specificities between 75.0 and 85.7% (Table 2 ). A combination of t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein increased the sensitivity up to 90.5% (Table 2 ). Table 2 Diagnostic accuracy of t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein. Sensitivity and specificity values were calculated for t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein from the numbers of classified samples. A combination of t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein increased the diagnostic accuracy for sCJD to 90.5% sensitivity and 97.6% specificity. A.U. , arbitrary units; PDD , Parkinson’s disease with dementia; DLB , dementia with Lewy bodies T-α-synuclein (> 3300 pg/mL) P-α-synuclein (> 4.85 A.U.) Ratio t-α-synuclein (> 1000) Combination of t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein sCJD 36/42 85.7% sensitivity 24/42 57.1% sensitivity 26/42 61.9% sensitivity 38/42 90.5% sensitivity PDD + DLB 1/40 97.5% specificity 10/40 75.0% specificity 10/40 75.0% specificity 0/40 100% specificity Controls 4/42 90.5% specificity 6/42 85.7% specificity 10/42 76.2% specificity 1/42 97.6% specificity
Low AUC values were detected for p-α-synuclein in the discrimination of PDD and DLB cases (AUC = 0.62 for both) from NC (Fig. 1 d). Similar findings were obtained for the t-α-synuclein/p-α-synuclein ratio (Fig. 1 d). Age or gender was excluded as a confounding factor for the CSF analysis of t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein (Suppl. Fig. 5 a, b).
Finally, correlations between t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein were computed for the different disease groups. While no correlation between both synuclein isoforms was found in the groups of NC ( p = 0.490), PDD ( p = 0.628), or sCJD ( p = 0.581), an inverse correlation ( p = − 0.463, p = 0.015) was observed in DLB (Fig. 2 a–e). Fig. 2 Correlation of CSF t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein in function of the disease group. a – d Non-parametric Spearman correlation study was performed for NC, DLB, PDD, and sCJD patients. e Spearman’s correlation coefficients between t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein levels for each diagnostic group revealed a significant correlation only in the DLB group
Discussion
In the present work, the analytical and clinical performance of colorimetric ELISAs for detection of t-α-synuclein or p-α-synuclein in CSF were qualified. We evaluated differences in CSF concentrations of t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein in sCJD as compared to NC and to the spectrum of some LB pathologies [ , ]. T-α-synuclein levels in PDD and DLB were comparable to those detected in NC, as described previously [ , , , , ]. Concentration of CSF t-α-synuclein in synucleinopathies has been extensively analyzed using a variety of methodological approaches, assays, and patient cohorts. Many publications reported a modest reduction compared to healthy or NC. However, conclusive data have not yet been obtained (see Eusebi et al. for a recent meta-analysis [ ]). Altogether, it suggests that quantification of changes in levels of t-α-synuclein levels in synucleinopathies (if any) has (i) a low to moderate clinical significance and/or (ii) is highly dependent on the patient cohorts, most probably linked to the type of controls that are integrated in the study design. In addition, the presence of confounding factors was not always taken into account during sample analysis [ ]. Nevertheless, our methodology is able to discriminate NC from sCJD cases with a higher accuracy (sensitivity of 85.7% and a specificity > 90%) than other colorimetric assays for t-α-synuclein detection [ , ].
In comparison to our previous electrochemiluminescence-based assay for t-α-synuclein detection (more costly and technical requirements), which showed a sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of 96% [ ], the diagnostic assay accuracy of the colorimetric system was lower. Nevertheless, the diagnostic accuracy of the colorimetric t-α-synuclein detection is comparable to other biomarkers, such as 14-3-3 or tau detection [ , ], being a good diagnostic alternative.
Regarding CSF p-α-synuclein levels, significant differences with less diagnostic impact were detected between sCJD and the other groups. In brain tissue, α-synuclein phosphorylation at position 129 occurs under normal physiological conditions [ ], as well as in pathological conditions, not directly associated to an underlying synucleinopathy, as it has been shown in sCJD [ ]. Thus, elevated p-α-synuclein in sCJD may reflect massive synaptic damage and, therefore, basal p-α-synuclein levels could be detected in the CSF of these patients. On the contrary, the higher mean p-α-synuclein values in PDD and DLB compared to that in NC were not statistically significant. Although our data are not in line with previous findings concluding that p-α-synuclein is slightly increased in PD compared to healthy controls [ , ], it should be noted that none of these studies included DLB and PDD and that our control group was composed of neurological and neurodegenerative diseases cases instead of healthy individuals.
A limitation of our study is that our findings still need to be confirmed in a larger patient cohort. Also, the robustness of p-α-synuclein detection needs to be further documented. It is worthwhile to note that we did not observe any difference in CSF α-synuclein species between DLB and PDD, supporting the idea that these two disorders are strongly related with a very thin boundary defined by the temporal sequence of appearance of motor and cognitive symptoms [ , ]. Taken together, we can assert from our analyses that quantification of p-α-synuclein alone or the t-α-synuclein/p-α-synuclein ratio does not provide additional value in the discrimination between these disease groups. In this regard, it is also worth noting that we found that the ratio of t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein decreased in PDD when compared to that in NC which still needs to be confirmed in a larger cohort.
A final interesting finding of our work is the inverse correlation in DLB between t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein. The fact that this correlation is not observed in the other diagnostic groups, nor in the NC group indicates an underlying disease-specific mechanism. Importantly, a very similar correlation was recently found between CSF t-α-synuclein and p-α-synuclein at early stages of PD [ ]. It shold be noted that the number of PDD cases analysed might be too low to detect a significant correlation in this diagnostic group. In synucleinopathies, it is believed that t-α-synuclein concentration in the CSF results from the balance of synaptic damage (increased levels) and sequestration of α-synuclein in LBs (decreased levels). This, together with the fact that α-synuclein phosphorylation in the brain tissue is directly associated with its aggregation capacity, could explain the inverse correlation between both α-synuclein species seen in DLB.
Conclusion
Overall, our study qualified colorimetric ELISAs for two α-synuclein isoforms. We have detected elevated CSF t-α-synuclein levels in sCJD and reported for the first time increased p-α-synuclein levels in sCJD patients, which may be important for diagnostic purposes. However, our data do not support the use of α-synuclein forms for the discrimination of LB dementias.