Introduction
Glucose is a monosaccharide aldose carbohydrate, which corresponds to the molecular formula C 6 H 12 O 6 , in a cyclic structure. Animals store glucose as glycogen, the major metabolite of glycolysis, gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis metabolic pathways, for storage and production of energy as ATP.
In humans, the brain represents approximately 2% of the total body weight. Human brain cortex, the major region of mammalian brain, oxidizes and consumes glucose at a rate of approximately 0.4 μmol/min/g of tissue as determined by in vivo 13 C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) [ ]. Brain glucose is necessary for the maintenance of cell activity, neurotransmitter synthesis, and nerve synapses [ , ]. Complications, such as damage to the blood vessels, eyeballs, kidneys, and nervous system, may appear as a consequence of acutely or permanently low glucose levels (hypoglycemia) [ , ]. Conversely, under excessively high glucose levels (hyperglycemia), microvascular complications arise, including retinopathy, nephropathy, and many forms of neuropathy, as well as macrovascular issues [ ].
In order to regulate levels of blood glucose, the endocrine system (ES) is aided by the autonomic nervous system, particularly neuronal nuclei sensitive to metabolic changes. Such changes modulate complex processes, such as eating behavior and hormonal secretion of insulin and glucagon (produced in β- and α-pancreatic cells), adrenaline and cortisol (produced in the adrenal medulla and the adrenal cortex, respectively) and other hormones derived from the hypothalamic-pituitary axis, including growth hormone and thyroid hormones, T 3 y T 4 , that control blood glucose levels and energy expenditure [ , ].
Glucose-Sensing Mechanisms in the Brain
As a physiological homeostasis determinant of energy, glucose directly induces changes in the activity of pancreatic cells to modulate secretion and self-regulate plasma levels as well as in the intestinal tract, producing signals that are indicative of the metabolic state. However, most physiological processes regulated by glucose levels have a central control driven by nutrient-sensing cells [ ].
The presence of glucose-sensitive neurons in the brain was first described in the 1960s, differentiating two populations of neurons: “glucose-excited” (GE) neurons and “glucose-inhibited” (GI) neurons [ , ], found mainly in the brain regions of the hypothalamus [ , ] and the brainstem [ , ]. These neurons are essential in the onset of counterregulatory response to hypoglycemia, thereby controlling activation of the sympathetic autonomic nervous system (SANS) and parasympathetic autonomic nervous system (PANS) [ ]. The involvement of both regions in glycemic control and energy homeostasis will be further described in the “ Energy Homeostasis and Neuroendocrine Control ” section.
Glucose-Excited (GE) Neurons
Elevated glucose levels activate GE neurons, producing a seemingly inhibitory effect on the response systems to hypoglycemia [ ] and activating the response to hyperglycemia primarily by stimulating the release of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neurotransmitter in the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (VMN) [ ] and nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) [ ] or anorexigenic neuropeptides in the arcuate nucleus (ARC) of the hypothalamus [ ].
Most GE neurons display a trigger mechanism associated with metabolism and energy levels due to the entry of glucose through the glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2), initiating a signaling cascade that results in increased intracellular ATP, similar to the response of pancreatic β-cells (β-cells) in stimulating insulin secretion (at least in the canonical pathway), with which they share pathway components [ , ]. However, glucose is also able to induce changes in the excitatory activity of GE neurons independent of intracellular metabolism through various identified mechanisms depending on sodium-dependent glucose transporters (SGLT) [ ] or sweet taste receptor binding [ ].
Metabolism-Dependent Glucose Sensing
GLUT2/3-GK-KATP Mechanism
The main glucose-sensing mechanism described in the brain is similar to that employed by β-cells when inducing insulin secretion in response to hyperglycemia. It relies on three main components: (1) low-affinity GLUT2; (2) glucokinase (GK), which catalyzes a limiting step of glycolysis through glucose to glucose 6-phosphate (G-6-P) phosphorylation; and (3) octameric ATP-sensitive K + channels (KATP) formed by four sulfonylurea receptor subunits (SUR1 or SUR2) and four Kir6.1 or Kir6.2 subunits.
GLUT2 expression has been identified in several nuclei of the hypothalamus and brainstem, mostly associated with astrocytes [ ] and concrete neurons in the brainstem [ ], the hypothalamus [ , ], as well as ependymal-glial α- and β-tanycytes surrounding the median eminence (ME) [ ]. Of the glucose-sensing neurons in the VMN, few express GLUT2; thus, a shared role of GLUT3, with a lower Km, is assumed in glucose sensing [ ]. Furthermore, GK expression is distributed in hypothalamic nuclei and brainstem neurons [ , ], and SUR1 and Kir6.1 subunits of K ATP channels are detected in glucose-sensing neurons in the VMN [ ] along with SUR1 and Kir6.2 subunits of K ATP channels in glucose-sensing neurons of the dorsal vagal region of the brainstem [ ].
The glucose-sensing mechanism consists of glucose entry through the low-affinity GLUT2. Then, glucose is rapidly phosphorylated by GK to G-6-P, the substrate for glycolysis and subsequent tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA), resulting in an increased ATP production. Binding of ATP to K ATP channels promotes channel closure and prevents the transfer of K + from the cell interior to the cell exterior [ ]. The intracellular accumulation of K + causes membrane depolarization, which triggers the opening of voltage-dependent calcium channels (VDCC), resulting in Ca 2+ entry into the cell (Fig. 1 a) [ , , ]. Fig. 1 Glucose-sensing mechanisms in GE neurons. a GLUT2/3-GK-K ATP glucose-sensing mechanism. Glucose enters the cell through GLUT and is converted by GK to G-6-P (not shown), the substrate for glycolysis. The increase in ATP synthesis results in closure of K ATP channels, inducing a depolarization of the membrane that allows VDCC opening, resulting in the entry of Ca 2 + required for neurotransmitter release. b SGLT glucose-sensing mechanism. Glucose induces Na + entry into the cell through co-transport by SGLT1 or binding in the active site of SGLT3. Increased intracellular Na + induces membrane depolarization, activating the VDCC. c T1R2/3 glucose-sensing mechanism. Binding of glucose to T1R2/3 actives a G protein-coupled receptor; its βγ subunit activates PLCβ2, cleaving PIP2 membrane phospholipids into DAG and IP3, which activates the IP3R3 in the ER, inducing Ca 2 + output into the cytoplasm. Increased Ca 2 + levels activate the TRPM5 channel, inducing Na + entry. Consequently, depolarization of the membrane causes opening of Panx1 and the output of ATP, which acts as a neuromodulator. DAG diacylglycerol, GE glucose-excited, GK glucokinase, GLUT2/3 glucose transporters, IP 3 inositol triphosphate, IP 3 R3 inositol triphosphate receptor, K ATP ATP-sensitive K + channels, PanX1 ATP channel, PIP 2 phosphatidylinositol-2-phosphate, SGLT1 sodium-glucose cotransporter 1, SGLT3 sodium-glucose cotransporter 3, T1R2/3 sweet taste receptors, TCA tricarboxylic acid cycle, TrpM5 transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M member 5, VDCC voltage-dependent Ca 2+ channel, Βγ-α G-protein subunits
Unlike β-cells, increased neuronal activity by K ATP closure and Ca 2+ entry does not lead to the release of insulin, but neurotransmitter secretion, mainly stimulating the secretion of GABA as seen in the VMN, which decreases the secretion of glucagon and epinephrine [ , ]. Nevertheless, GABA is not the only neuromodulator found in GLUT2/3-GK-K ATP GE neurons [ , ].
In individuals suffering from obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus, there is an increase in the mRNA expression of mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) protein in β-cells, as well as in proopiomelanocortin (POMC)- or melatonin-concentrating hormone (MCH)-producing GE neurons in the hypothalamus [ , ]. Overexpression of UCP2 uncouples and reduces mitochondrial ATP production [ ], decreasing the rate of neuronal depolarization in response to the presence of glucose. This leads to a direct and parasympathetic-mediated loss of insulin secretion by β-cells [ , , , ]. This effect was demonstrated through treatment of POMC neurons with the UCP2 inhibitor, genipin, producing an increase in the depolarization rate in response to glucose [ ].
In addition, reactive oxygen species (ROS) may have a role in neuronal excitatory activity, given that they are able to regulate and inhibit voltage-gated K + channels (VGKC) [ ] and K ATP channels in dopaminergic neurons of the striatum [ ]. UCP2 activity reduces production of ROS during mitochondrial ATP synthesis. Intracarotid injection of antimycin and rotenone, both inducers of ROS formation, produces an effect similar to hyperglycemia in hypothalamic GE neurons, causing the closure of K ATP channels and subsequent parasympathetic insulin release [ ].
Metabolism-Independent Glucose Sensing
Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter (SGLT) Mechanism
The mere presence of glucose can produce an excitatory activity in certain neuronal populations in an ATP-independent manner. This mechanism requires the recognition of glucose by a secondary glucose transporter, which depends on the entry of one or two molecules of Na + through SGLT1 [ ], which is present in the hypothalamus, amygdala, the cerebellum, the cortex, and the striatum [ ], and SGLT3 [ ], which is present in the hypothalamus and peripheral cholinergic neurons [ ] (Fig. 1 b).
SGLT1 couples the transport of Na + and glucose. Since glucose is electroneutral, Na + entry mediated by SGLT1 is enough to produce depolarization and increase neuronal activity. Binding of glucose (with less affinity for SGLT1) and other carbohydrates to SGLT3 results in the entry of Na + and membrane depolarization without cotransport of glucose, suggesting that SGLT3 acts not as a carrier but as a specialized glucose sensor.
The different affinities between SGLT3 and SGLT1 for glucose are due to a glutamine-to-glutamate change at amino acid 457 of SGLT3, directly altering the binding site for glucose [ ] .
The role of SGLT in neuronal glucose sensing was demonstrated experimentally by exposing rat hypothalamic neuronal cultures to α-methyl-D-glucose pyranoside (α-MDG), a nonmetabolizable glucose analogue. Specifically, α-MDG increased the excitability of neurons that were also excited by glucose by up to 67%, producing greater neuronal excitability than glucose itself. Both responses to glucose and α-MDG were blunted by phlordizin, a competitive SGLT inhibitor. Moreover, 3-O-methyl-D-glucopyranose (3-O-MD), a nonmetabolizable glucose analogue transported by SGLT1 but not SGLT3, produced a response in almost half of the GE neurons tested, suggesting a role for SGLT1, either separately or together with SGLT3 in activation of GE neurons. However, the presence of lactate decreased neuronal response to α-MDG, possibly by a yet unknown feedback mechanism that depends on energy production, reducing SGLT transporter activity [ ].
Sweet Taste Receptor (T1R2/3) Mechanism
The heterodimeric sweet receptor, T1R2/3, senses the sweet taste stimulated by glucose, sucrose, and other carbohydrates. The expression of these proteins is ubiquitous in various hypothalamic nuclei, the brainstem, the hippocampus, the habenula, and choroid plexus epithelium [ , ]. T1R2/3 is a metabotropic (G protein-coupled) receptor that can modulate neuronal activity in the presence of glucose [ ] in a manner that is similar to T1R2/3 located in taste buds through Gβγ and Gα-gustducin subunits [ ].
The βγ subunit induces a signaling cascade that comes together in the release of Ca 2+ out of the endoplasmic reticulum. Released Ca 2+ activates the Na + channel, TrpM5 (transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M member 5), and promotes secretion of ATP, which interacts with purinergic receptors in neurons and glia, inducing intracellular changes [ ] and activating an afferent signaling pathway [ , ] (Fig. 1 c). The α subunit promotes the expression and activity of SGLT1 in a fashion similar to gastrointestinal T1R2/3, thus enhancing glucose transport [ ].
q-PCR analysis has shown that nutritional status can also induce transcriptional changes in T1R2/3 mRNA. In addition, ischemia caused by glucose restriction induces receptor expression [ ]. Likewise, inhibition of the receptor results in increased T1R2/3 gene expression [ ], suggesting that the presence of T1R2/3 may be essential for permanent nutritional information sensing.
Glucose-Inhibited (GI) Neurons
The activity of GI neurons increases when glucose levels fall, and is mostly associated with secretion of glutamate and noradrenaline neurotransmitters [ , ], mainly in ventral regions of the hypothalamus, where neuronal populations with higher levels of expression of the vesicular glutamate transporter (vGLUT2) are found [ ]. GI neurons are most likely shut in hyperglycemic and hyperinsulinemic conditions, modulating sympathetic and hormonal activity as counterregulatory responses to hyperglycemia [ ].
Metabolism-Dependent Glucose Sensing
Na+/K+ ATPase Mechanism
This pathway is based on the detection of energy products in the glycolytic cycle, such as ATP. Na + /K + ATP ase GI neurons have certain similarities with GLUT2-GK-K ATP GE neurons, sharing the expression of GK and GLUT2 [ , , ].
A decrease in extracellular glucose leads to reduced availability of ATP generated in the glycolytic cycle, necessary for maintaining the activity of the Na + /K + ATP ase pump [ , , ]. Deactivating the pump generates an intracellular accumulation of Na + , resulting in depolarization of the plasma membrane [ ] (Fig. 2 a). Fig. 2 Glucose-sensing mechanisms in GI neurons. a Na + /K + ATPase glucose-sensing mechanism. A decrease in glucose leads to lower ATP production, thus inhibiting the activity of the Na + /K + ATPase and resulting in membrane hyperpolarization and closure of VDCC. b GLUT-AMPK-nNOS-sGC-CFTR glucose-sensing mechanism. Low glucose causes an increase in the AMP/ATP ratio, which partially activates AMPK. AMPK phosphorylates nNOS, which produces NO, inducing the formation of cGMP required for full activation of AMPK. AMPK phosphorylates and induces the opening of CFTR, thus producing membrane depolarization and inducing the VDCC opening. c GLUT-AMPK-nNOS-sGC-CFTR glucose-sensing mechanism. Similar to the GLUT-AMPK-nNOS-sGC-CFTR pathway, reduced glucose levels induces AMPK activation, which in this case leads to the closure of K2P channels, resulting in membrane depolarization and activation of VDCCs. d K2P glucose-sensing mechanism. Low glucose is detected by a membrane receptor, which induces the closure of K2P channels through a metabolism-independent signal transduction cascade, increasing the membrane depolarization rate and thus, opening VDCCs. AMPK AMP-activated protein kinase, CFTR cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (Cl − channel), cGMP cyclic GMP, GI glucose-inhibited, GK glucokinase, GLUT2/3 glucose transporters, K2P two-pore domain K + channel, Na + /K + ATPase ATP-dependent Na + /K + pump, nNOS neuronal nitric oxide synthase, NO nitric oxide, sGC soluble guanylate cyclase, TCA tricarboxylic acid cycle, VDCC voltage-dependent Ca 2+ channel
Neurons, which exhibit the Na + /K + ATPase mechanism, are distributed throughout the lateral hypothalamic region (LH) and ARC, where reduced blood glucose concentrations induces the intracellular accumulation of Na + and a decrease in cytoplasmic K + levels, likely due to inhibition of Na + /K + ATP ase [ , ]. This ionic imbalance produces a net stimulatory effect in neuronal activity. The same effect is observed with the addition of ouabain, an inhibitor of Na + /K + ATP ase , which increased intracellular Ca 2+ in rat ARC GI neurons, also inducing feeding behavior [ ].
GLUT-AMPK-nNOS-sGC-CFTR Mechanism
This mechanism is widely described in GI neurons of the VMN [ ]; it depends on the entry of glucose through GLUT, ATP production in glycolysis mediated by GK and the presence of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS), soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC), and the Cl − channel, cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator channel (CFTR).
Glucoprivation decreases ATP synthesis, leading to an imbalance in the AMP/ATP intracellular ratio, so that the increased levels of AMP in proportion to ATP cause partial activation of AMPK. AMP binding to the AMPKγ subunit predisposes the AMPKα subunit for phosphorylation by several kinases and later activation [ , , ]. When partially activated, AMPK phosphorylates nNOS, increasing NO levels [ , , ]. NO binds to sGC receptors, boosting the synthesis rate of cyclic GMP (cGMP). Higher levels of cGMP promote AMPK phosphorylation through positive feedback. When fully activated, AMPK phosphorylates and blocks CFTR channels, causing accumulation of intracellular Cl − and, ultimately, depolarization of plasma membrane and neurotransmitter release [ ].
Exposure of rat VMN GI neuronal cultures to 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR), an AMPK activator, mimicked the effects of low glucose conditions, enhancing neuronal activity and NO production [ ]. Moreover, the presence and activation of CFTR by AMPK has also been determined in the hypothalamus [ ].
However, hypoglycemia also increases ROS levels. The combination of NO and ROS production may provoke S-nitrosylation of sGC, decreasing its activity. Recurrent hypoglycemia causes the formation of ROS, leading to a decreased sensitivity of VMN GI neurons to hypoglycemic stimulus [ , ] (Fig. 2 b).
GLUT2-AMPK-nNOS-sGC-K2P Mechanism
This mechanism has been described in a population of neurons found in the NTS of the brainstem also with a described role for GLUT2 [ ]. A decrease in glucose is followed by AMPK activation, leading to the closure of two-pore-domain potassium channels (K 2P ) [ , ], encoded by genes of the KCNK subfamily, which consist of heterodimers of TWIK-related acid-sensitive K + channel (TASK) subunits sensitive to acidity with a TASK3 subunit [ ].
As with GLUT/AMPK/nNOS/sGC/CFTR neurons, a reduction in glucose levels further decreases ATP levels, increases the AMP/ATP ratio, and activates AMPK. K 2P channel closure is likely induced by AMPK activity as shown in other TASK3 channels inhibited by AMPK, thereby inducing membrane depolarization [ ] (Fig. 2 c).
After the addition of AICAR, an AMPK activator, and oligomycin, a mitochondrial ATPase inhibitor, the same effects are observed in NTS neurons during hypoglycemia, inducing an increase in depolarization rate [ ]. Characterization of K 2P channels as determined by current and voltage tests at different glucose concentrations was indicative of activation kinetics similar to that shown by K + channel leakage [ ].
Metabolism-Independent Glucose Sensing
Extracellular Receptor-K2P Mechanism
This metabolism-independent glucose-sensing mechanism was determined within the population of orexin neurons found in the lateral hypothalamus [ ]. As in GLUT2-AMPK-nNOS-sGC-K 2P neurons, this mechanism involves closure of K 2P channels (Fig. 2 d). When glucose levels rise, K 2P remains open, maintaining a low rate of depolarization.
Exposing these neurons to halothane (1%), a specific K 2P activator, reproduced the effects of glucose on channels and membrane excitability, resulting in hyperpolarization [ ]. Furthermore, application of glucose and ATP intracellularly did not inhibit orexin GI cells, suggesting that the activity of these neurons is dependent on extracellular glucose, but independent of the metabolic rate [ ].
Channel composition was demonstrated by IC50 (inhibition of 50% of channels) analyses at a given pH, which varied between the different acid-sensitive TASK subunits. IC50 reached a pH value of 6.9, similar to that shown by TASK3 and homodimers and heterodimers containing at least one subunit of TASK3 (pH ∼ 6.7) [ , , ]. Channels were found to be TASK3 heterodimers, showing no effect after addition of red ruthenium, a TASK3 homodimer-specific inhibitor [ , ]. No response of the channel to higher intracellular ATP suggests that this K2P might be unaffected by AMPK, as is also seen for TASK1, TASK3 and heteromeric TASK1/3 channels [ ]. We suggest that the differences in K 2P sensitivity between GLUT2-AMPK-nNOS-sGC-K2P neurons and extracellular receptor-K 2P neurons could be due to different subunit conformation or lack of a yet-unknown intermediate between AMPK and K 2P activation, since phosphorylation of the channel has not been demonstrated.
In summary, the brain has developed mechanisms to detect rises and falls in glucose levels. Since it depends on glucose as fuel, it is foreseeable that more than one mechanism has been developed, either with specific functions or as redundant or overlapping systems that permit the precise control of glucose levels in the internal environment. The relationship of these mechanisms is observed in the repetition of common elements, such as APMK, GLUT, GK, or K2P. Its importance in the neuronal glucose-sensing depends on the physiological context, where glial cells may play an essential role in the metabolic coupling of glucose. These issues are discussed in the “ Glial Cells as Energy Supporters ,” “ Involvement of Metabolic State in Glucose-Sensing ,” “ Involvement of GLUT in Glucose Sensing and Transport Kinetics ,” and “ Possible Mechanisms of Glucose Sensing in Tanycytes ” sections.
Glial Cells as Energy Supporters
Astrocytes
Astrocytes are the most abundant glial cells in the brain, present in the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Immunohistochemical analysis has identified some likely astrocyte cell bodies and processes labeled with GFAP and GLUT2 in the ARC of rat brain [ ]. In addition, a great number of gomori-positive astrocytes, a subset of astrocytes specifically abundant in the ARC, express GLUT2 as determined by immunocytochemistry [ ]. Gomori staining is biased to mitochondrial-derived cytoplasmic granules, which are generated under metabolic stress conditions, likely due to high-capacity transport of large amounts of glucose via GLUT2. Immunocytochemistry and electron microscopic observations have also showed GLUT2 localization in a restricted population of astrocytes in the NTS [ ].
GLUT2 knockout (glut2 −/− ) mice reexpressing GLUT1 or GLUT2 in β-cells (Ripglut1; glut2 −/− or Ripglut2; glut2 −/− ) show almost normal insulin secretion but defective glucagon secretion [ ]. However, reexpression of GLUT2 in astrocytes, but not neurons restored glucagon secretion in Ripglut1; glut2 −/− mice [ ]. In addition, injection of antisense oligodeoxynucleotide to GLUT2 mRNA into the ARC of Wister rats altered feeding pattern and abolished insulin response to glucose load [ ]. These findings suggest that, at least certain subpopulations of astrocytes expressing GLUT2 could be involved in glucose sensing, likely along with neuronal activity either in hyperglycemic or hypoglycemic responses.
Generally, astrocytes are considered metabolic and signaling supporters of neuronal activity. Glycogen is stored mainly in astrocytes in the brain, and hypoglycemia is known to lead to glycogenolysis and astrocytic lactate production [ ], which is essential to maintain neuronal activity under low-glucose conditions [ , ].
The “astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle” hypothesis states that under conditions of energy demand due to high neuronal activity or hypoxia, astrocytes boost nonoxidative metabolism of glucose to lactate, which is released and taken up by neurons to meet substrate requirements for aerobic glycolysis [ , ]. Supporting this role, astrocytes express mainly lactate dehydrogenase isoform 5 (LDH5) mRNA, which favors pyruvate-to-lactate conversion, whereas expression of LDH1 mRNA, which favors pyruvate-to-lactate reaction, has been determined in neurons and in hypothalamic nuclei among other regions [ , ]. Lactate would then be released into the extracellular space likely through monocarboxylate transporter isoform 1 (MCT1) present in astrocytes [ , , , ], after which it would be transferred to neurons through neuronal-specific MCT2 [ , , ]. However, MCT4 is also expressed in astrocytes in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN) [ ] and in the ARC [ ]. Interestingly, immunocytochemistry analysis detected MCT4 in astrocytes, a different region apart from astrocytic MCT1 in the ARC [ ]. MCT1 has also been detected in cultures of hypothalamic GE neurons, in which lactate induced K ATP channel closure and membrane depolarization [ ]. Since the ARC is a glucose-sensitive region, distribution of different isoforms of astrocytic or neuronal MCT could be linked to different metabolic coupling and sensing mechanisms.
Lactate release in vitro by astrocytes but not by neurons has been shown to be increased in higher glucose concentrations [ ]. The importance of lactate supply in glucose sensing has been shown in that it induces membrane depolarization of GE but not non-GE neurons in the VMN of rat brain slices [ ]; the counterregulatory response against hypoglycemia in vivo is also blunted after perfusion of lactate in the VMN [ ]. Intraperitoneal injection of methionine sulfoximine (MSO), a xenobiotic amino acid that interferes with the metabolism of carbohydrates in astrocytes, leads to loss of hypothalamic GE neuronal excitability during hyperglycemia and decreased pancreatic insulin secretion [ ]. This suggests that at least certain subpopulations of astroglia could be involved in glucose regulation and sensing in the brain through internalization of glucose and lactate production as a metabolic supply.
Bolanos et al. [ ] described the importance of nitric oxide (NO) signaling in astrocytic lactate production in 2006. Fioramonti et al. [ ] later reported NOS activity during hypoglycemia in VMN GI neurons [ ]. NO increases expression of GLUT1 and GLUT3 in astrocytes and neurons, respectively [ ]. Moreover, NO affects astrocyte mitochondrial respiration by inhibiting the cytochrome C chain in the electron transport chain [ ], initially decreasing the formation of ATP and increasing the AMP/ATP ratio and partial activation of glial AMPK much like GI neurons with a GLUT/AMPK/sGC/NO/CFTR mechanism [ ]. AMPK phosphorylates and activates phosphofructokinase 2 (PFK2), which, in turn, catalyzes the conversion of fructose-6-phosphate (F-6-P) to fructose-2,6-bisphosphate (F-2,6-P), the allosteric activator of phosphofructokinase 1 (PFK1), and a limiting step in glycolysis [ ]. Anaerobic glycolysis is thus enhanced, generating ATP and lactate. This process is specific to astrocytes, whereas neurons have low expression of PFK-2 and cannot induce the formation of ATP and NO-mediated lactate [ ].
The hypothesis of enhanced lactate production and release in astrocytes by VMN GI neurons proposed by Fioramonti et al. [ ] could be linked to recurrent hypoglycemia and increased diabetes-associated GABAergic tone in the VMN, contributing to a defective counterregulatory response against hypoglycemia after several courses of decreased glucose [ ]. The role of GABA, lactate, and K ATP sensing mechanism has been assessed in vivo in the VMN of rats [ , ], while infusion of lactate increased VMN GABA levels, which was accompanied by suppression of glucagon and epinephrine release. In addition, the MCT2 inhibitor, 4CIN, and the LDH inhibitor, OX, decreased VMN GABA levels, restoring the counterregulatory response. Moreover, the counterregulatory response was also restored following injection of the GABA A receptor antagonist, bicuculline methiodide, which decreases the postsynaptic effect of GABA, and the K ATP channel opener, diazoxide, which decreased VMN GABA levels. This was linked to higher VMN GABA and lactate concentrations in recurrent hypoglycemia and diabetic rats, both of which were decreased after OX and 4CIN treatment, restoring previously seen defective counterregulatory responses to normal [ ].
Although lactate levels have not been measured during acute hypoglycemia linked to increased NO production, increased lactate levels in vivo associated with recurrent hypoglycemia in the VMN could explain defective counterregulatory responses. This would likely sustain ATP production in GE and GI neurons, thereby increasing and decreasing neuronal responses to low-glucose concentrations, respectively.
Fioramonti et al. [ ] observed increased constitutive NOS activity following acute but not recurrent hypoglycemia, suggesting a link between the absence of NO production and impairment of counterregulatory responses in recurrent hypoglycemia. NO inhibition of mitochondrial activity has been described as either reversible or irreversible. Irreversible inhibition of astrocytic mitochondria could explain the lactate-enhanced production even with decreased VMN GI neuron NO production after recurrent hypoglycemia as mentioned by the group. Correlations have been reported between recurrent hypoglycemia decreasing nNOS activity, which is essential for VMN GI neurons via a GLUT/AMPK/sGC/NO/CFTR mechanism, and enhanced astrocytic lactate production, which increases activity of VMN GABAergic GE neurons via a GLUT2/3-GK-K ATP mechanism . It has been reported that NO inhibits cytochrome c oxidase rapidly and reversibly while competing with O 2 in astrocytes [ ]. However, a possible conversion of NO to peroxynitrite (ONOO − ) exists for irreversible damage of cytochrome c oxidase [ ]. While astrocytic metabolism is robust against NO and its derivatives, neurons could suffer from damage under high concentrations of NO [ ].
In vitro studies have indicated that under hypoglycemic conditions, cultured neurons have a higher survival rate when co-cultured with glial cells although it is dependent on the glycogen content, suggesting that it likely supports neuronal activity by glycolysis-derived lactate supply [ ]. Along with glycolysis in astrocytes during hypoglycemia, lactate transport across the BBB is also enhanced during recurrent hypoglycemia as a result of the varying lactate concentration gradient between the plasma and brain [ ]. Contribution of either astrocyte-to-neuron lactate shuttle or brain lactate uptake could maintain neuronal activity but impair the counterregulatory responses during recurrent hypoglycemia and diabetes.
A proposed model for ventromedial hypothalamus glucose sensing in recurrent hypoglycemia is shown (Fig. 3 ), encompassing GI neuron-lactate-GE neuron metabolic coupling and brain lactate uptake. However, the interplay of NO with increased lactate and reduced GABAergic tone and counterregulatory responses should still be evaluated. Fig. 3 Representation of astrocyte and tanycyte lactate shuttle to neurons. Both astrocytes and tanycytes uptake and metabolize glucose to lactate, which is released by MCT1 or MCT4, and internalized by ventromedial and arcuate nuclei neurons through MCT2. In high-glucose conditions, GK is internalized by GKRP in the nuclei of tanycytes. Hypoglycemia leads to NO production in GI neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus. NO inhibits Cyt c in astrocytes, producing an increase in AMP and activating AMPK, which leads to higher anaerobic glycolysis and lactate production and release through MCT1. In recurrent hypoglycemia, high accumulation of lactate increases ATP synthesis as in hyperglycemia, enhancing GE neuronal activity and consequent GABA release, inhibiting the counterregulatory response to hypoglycemia. AMPK AMP-activated protein kinase, CFTR cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (Cl − channel), cGMP cyclic GMP, Cyt c cytochrome c, GE glucose-excited, GI glucose-inhibited, GK glucokinase, GKRP glucokinase regulatory protein, GLUT2/3 glucose transporters, LDH lactate dehydrogenase, MCT1/4 monocarboxylate transporter, nNOS neuronal nitric oxide synthase, NO nitric oxide, sGC soluble guanylate cyclase, and TCA tricarboxylic acid cycle. Scheme based on “Fioramonti et al. (2011). Antioxidants and signaling, 14 (3), 505-517”
Tanycytes
Tanycytes are specialized ependymal glia located in the lateral and lower areas of the third ventricle; their apical parts face the ventricular lumen. Similar to astrocytes, tanycytes express MCT1, MCT4 [ ], GLUT2 [ , ], and GK [ , ].
There is a proportional relationship between plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) glucose levels [ , , ]. CSF is the only cerebral fluid that shows elevated glucose concentrations of about 15 mM in hyperglycemic conditions. Due to their location, tanycytes may play a key role in signal transduction related to changes in glucose concentration in CSF, forming a link between CSF and glucose-sensitive neurons located in the hypothalamus, where there is no direct access to the CSF. Tanycytes are classified as α tanycytes or β tanycytes according to their position around the endothelial wall of the third ventricle [ ]. α Tanycytes form an interface between the CSF and hypothalamic nuclei and come in two types: (1) α1 tanycytes send projections to the VMN and dorsomedial nucleus (DMN), and (2) α2 tanycytes send projections into the ARC. β Tnycytes are located on the floor of the third ventricle, and there are also two types: (1) β1 tanycytes, which send projections to the ARC and the ME of the hypothalamus, and (2) β2 tanycytes, which send their projections closely in the ME, accessing fenestrated capillaries of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis [ , ].
Both α and β tanycytes possess functional GLUT1 and GLUT2 [ ]. Interestingly, GLUT2 localization is polarized to the apical membrane in tanycytes in close contact to the CSF in a similar manner as GLUT1 specifically in β tanycytes; GLUT1 is also localized to cellular processes [ ]. Polarization is also observed for MCT1 and MCT4 expression in tanycytes [ ]. Multilabeling immunohistochemistry showed MCT1 in the ventricular cellular membranes of α tanycytes and, more interestingly, in end-feet processes contacting the endothelial cells of blood vessels. In contrast, predominantly β1 tanycytes showed MCT1 polarization to the apical membrane and cellular processes contacting ARC neurons, blood vessels, and external region of the brain [ ]. However, MCT4 expression was predominantly detected in a subpopulation of β tanycytes, associated with long cellular processes contacting the lateral region of the ARC and with anti-GFAP staining (β1 dorsal or β1d tanycytes) and less significantly associated with short cellular processes contacting the periventricular region of the ARC and with anti-vimentin staining (termed β1 ventricular or β1v tanycytes) [ ].
Tanycytic GLUT localization at the vasculature suggests its participation in incorporating glucose from the CSF. MCT2 expression has been observed in neuropeptide Y (NPY)/agouti-related protein (AgRP) GI neurons in the same region as MCT1-expressing β1v tanycytes [ , ] and also in POMC/cocaine-amphetamine related transcript (CART) GE neurons close to MCT4-expressing β1d tanycytes [ , ]. Thus, it is likely that a tanycyte-neuron lactate supply occurs. Hence, glucose may be directly incorporated by tanycytes and released as lactate, which could also induce either activation or inhibition of GE and GI neurons through metabolism-dependent glucose-sensing mechanisms (Fig. 3 ).
The role of tanycytes as metabolic support in the response of glucose-sensitive neurons has been reproduced by injection of lactate into the third ventricle, a region with the greatest presence of tanycytes. Lactate mimicked the effects of glucose supply by decreasing feeding and other hyperglycemia response mechanisms [ ].
Specific expression of GK in tanycytes has also been evaluated. Confocal microscopy, immunocytochemical detection and quantitative immunoreaction analysis revealed that GK is expressed in both the nuclei and cytoplasm of β1 tanycytes [ ]. In another study, immunocytochemistry revealed the presence of GK in tanycyte cultures, showing no expression of GFAP, a marker expressed by astrocytes and α tanycytes [ , ]. RT-PCR and Western blot analyses also confirmed the presence of liver-isoform of glucokinase regulatory protein (GKRP) in cultured tanycytes [ ]. Immunocytochemistry and immunoblot analysis of nuclear extracts also showed higher GK and GKRP nuclear localization after increasing doses of glucose [ ]. Therefore, it has been proposed that β1 tanycytes can regulate its response to increased glucose concentrations through the nuclear translocation of GK, mediated by GKRP, which could lead to a decrease in glucose metabolism and lactate production in an opposite manner to the hepatic GK and GKRP switch, whose translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus is induced in hypoglycemia [ ].
Tanycytes also express the deiodinase II enzyme (D2), which converts T 4 into T 3 . D2 activity is enhanced during fasting, increasing T3 production. T3 increases hypothalamic UCP2 mRNA in vivo. Interestingly, T3 induces mitochondrial uncoupling in NPY/AgRP neurons in the ARC, and lacking of UCP2 blunts the response of NPY/AgRP neurons to fasting. Also, electron microscopy showed that D2-positive tanycytes make contact with NPY/AgRP neurons, suggesting that tanycytes could control GI neuronal activation during hypoglycemia by producing T3 [ ]. Since UCP2 mRNA was elevated in the hypothalamus, it is likely that D2-expressing tanycytes could also contact POMC GE neurons in the ARC, and expression of UCP2 diminishes ROS production, likely decreasing their activity [ ].
Involvement of Metabolic State in Glucose-Sensing
The fact that there are two mechanisms to sense blood glucose variations (one based on glucose internalization and metabolism by altering the level of ATP and the other mechanism capable of modulating excitatory activity solely due to the presence of glucose as detected by extracellular proteins) suggests that distinct populations of glucose-sensitive neurons may have a different and synergistic role in controlling glycemia.
Taking account of the above, metabolism-dependent neurons may be the main cell metabolic state sensors, while their depolarization rate varies gradually according to an increase or progressive decrease in intracellular ATP or AMP levels. These cells have the energy support of glial cells, capable of generating lactate from glycogen reserves in situations of glucoprivation. Lactate is internalized by neurons as an energy source by holding mitochondrial ATP production, at least in a short period of time. As suggested by González et al. [ ], it is likely that the primary role of these neurons is to act as an emergency response system, detecting major changes in the level of energy substrates available, preferably glucose as main neuronal fuel. Importantly, these neurons are capable of responding to small changes that compromise the cellular metabolic state, such as reduced expression of glucose transporters, which require larger amounts of glucose for cellular demand. It has also been observed that inactivation of Glut2 gene expression in the nervous system was associated with hypoinsulinemia, lower β-cell proliferation rates, reduced sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve response to glucose and reduced parasympathetic nerve activity in the basal state during postnatal development in mice. Thus, GLUT2 metabolism-dependent glucose sensing in the nervous system is necessary to establish parasympathetic nervous stimulation, which is essential for normal pancreatic activity and β-cell mass [ ]. However, as previously stated, recurrent hypoglycemia has also been linked to increased brain lactate, which could serve as a metabolic supply for hypothalamic GE neurons with a metabolism-dependent glucose-sensing mechanism, therefore increasing their activity and decreasing the counterregulatory response [ ]. In the same way, GK mRNA is increased in the VMN after insulin-induced hypoglycemia, decreasing responsiveness of ARC neurons to low-glucose conditions [ ]. Inhibition of GK also decreases and increases VMN GE and GI neurons responsiveness, respectively [ ]. This issue will be discussed further in the “ Energy Homeostasis and Neuroendocrine Control ” section.
On the other hand, metabolism-independent neurons, especially those not requiring glucose transport of GK activity, could be postulated as the main sensors of extracellular glucose fluctuations, while they are able to generate a response against a milder hypoglycemia, maintaining normal cell activity by using lactate as an energy source. They would also have an advantageous position with respect to the metabolism-dependent neurons in certain pathological conditions, being able to respond to recurrent hypoglycemia (likely in diabetic patients) as mentioned before. Moreover, González et al. [ ] has described a certain subpopulation of GI orexin neurons that have an adaptive non-metabolic threshold for glucose, which could allow the brain to sense changes in glucose levels and avoid slight changes in glucose to induce neuronal firing [ ].
Involvement of GLUT in Glucose Sensing and Transport Kinetics
Despite the current study to determine the composition, dynamics, and kinetics of brain glucose transport, there are still several issues that need to be resolved. One of them is the aforementioned possible dual role between GLUT2 and GLUT3 in neuronal glucose-sensing mechanisms.
GLUT2 expression has been determined in different hypothalamic regions, being present along with other components of the glucose-sensing mechanisms proposed (i.e., GK or K ATP ). Nevertheless, GLUT2 possesses high capacity kinetics for glucose transport, but with low affinity; a Km value between 11 and 17 mM as determined with 2-DG has been observed in Xenopus laevis oocytes [ , ].
As a component of the pancreatic glucose-sensing mechanism, it is plausible to consider that the neuronal system behaves similarly to promote insulin secretion, preceded by a reduction in glucose levels.
Even so, it should be noted that interstitial glucose levels in the brain correspond with approximately 30% of blood glucose concentration. Glucose-sensing neurons are often exposed to interstitial glucose levels, varying between 0.7 mM in fasting conditions and 1.5–2.5 mM following feeding in rats, although differences in threshold glucose levels could be due to the use of different strains of rats (Sprague-Dawley vs. Wistar) or anesthesia [ , ]. Nevertheless, interstitial glucose reaches values ​​of between 0.16 mM in insulin-induced hypoglycemia and 4.6 mM following intraperitoneal glucose injection reproducing hyperglycemia [ ].
The main transporters in the brain include GLUT1, expressed mostly in microvascular endothelial and glial cells [ , , , ], and GLUT3, found almost exclusively in neurons [ , , ]. Xenopus oocytes expressing GLUT3 and GLUT1 show Km values of 1.4–1.8 mM and 6.9 mM, respectively, for 2-DG, confirming that GLUT1 has a more favorable kinetic profile for glucose entry [ , ].
The role of GLUT2 expression in glucose-sensitive neurons in the hypothalamus is currently unclear, keeping in mind that glucose levels in the CSF would never be high enough to be transported by GLUT2 to the interior of the cell.
One option that would shed light on this issue could be that these neurons respond in cases where the derivative hyperglycemia incurred with increased permeability of the BBB, allowing diffusion of higher levels of glucose. Most experiments associated with central detection of glucose in vitro or glucose injections in vivo, as well as analogs thereof, are produced with glucose concentrations higher than those presupposed in the CSF, waiting for a response of increased activity. GLUT3 is, therefore, the likely glucose transporter involved in glucose-sensing mechanisms, since its Km value is approximately similar to glucose concentration in the CSF. At present, the role of GLUT2 in these neurons remains unknown. Also, it remains unknown how glucose-sensing neurons could exert a gradual neuroendocrine control on the energy reservoir and organism behavior under physiological conditions.
This question opens another theory to develop, giving more importance to glial cells as the main glucose sensors. Both astrocytes and tanycytes can incorporate glucose and metabolize it to lactate. As previously mentioned, tanycytes express GLUT2 [ ]. Since tanycytes are surrounding the ME, glucose levels may be sufficient and suitable to be transported through GLUT2. Thereby, the tanycytes would be the first glucose sensors initiating a response. In fact, it has been determined that tanycytes are able to respond themselves to changes in glucose with intracellular increases of Ca 2+ , which propagate as waves through other tanycytes, giving them the ability to respond independently and synergistically with neuronal responses (releasing gliotransmitters as ATP), which might modulate the behavior of the organism in response to glucose levels [ , ]. This issue will be discussed further in the “ Energy Homeostasis and Neuroendocrine Control ” section.
Another possible role for GLUT2 in glucose sensing could be due to its possible role as both transporter and receptor. GLUT2 presents an intracellular loop located between transmembrane domains 6 and 7 that is implicated in intracellular signaling [ ]. Blocking the intracellular loop properties of GLUT2 in mice generated defects in glucose homeostasis, such as increased feeding pattern or lower c-Fos activation of the ARC in response to glucose [ , ]. Cell-specific inhibition of GLUT2 “transceptor” properties in the brain should be assessed to acknowledge its role in glucose-sensing mechanisms as well as determine possible intermediates interacting with its intracellular loop.
Possible Mechanisms of Glucose Sensing in Tanycytes
Like glucose-sensitive neurons, tanycytes have recently become more important as possible glucose sensors possessing their own sensing mechanisms, in addition to their role of suppliers of lactate to neurons. In fact, tanycytes have been suggested to have both metabolism-dependent and metabolism-independent glucose-sensing mechanisms. However, the components of the latter have yet to be elucidated.
In addition to expressing GLUT2, the presence of Kir6.1 subunit of the K ATP channel has been shown in tanycyte cultures by immunocytochemistry. Also, detection of GK, MCT1 and MCT4 as well as low detection of GFAP suggests that the tanycyte culture was enriched with β1 tanycytes, indicating that the Kir6.1 subunit was present, at least in β1 tanycytes [ ]. Furthermore, it has been observed that intracellular Ca 2+ levels arise in α and β1 tanycytes in response to increased glucose and ATP levels, which is probably related to activation of hemichannels composed of six oligomerized connexin 43 (Cx43) subunits [ , ].
In the presence of diazoxide, an activator of K ATP , intracellular Ca 2+ was reduced significantly in β1 tanycytes [ ]. GLUT, GK, and K ATP blockers reduced Cx43 hemichannel activity, and tanycytes bathed in a divalent cation-free solution (DCFS), known to induce hemichannel opening, exhibited higher glucose kinetics of transport. Since Cx43 hemichannels have been reported to mediate ATP release [ ], the response of tanycytes to increased ATP concentrations was determined; it exhibited a similar response to increased glucose concentration, inducing a rise in Ca 2+ signal [ ]. This suggests that a K ATP -mediated mechanism is necessary for hemichannel activity, which, in turn, would allow the entry of glucose into the cell together with GLUT transporters, as well as the release of ATP.
These elements compose a possible glucose-sensing mechanism in tanycytes, involving Ca 2+ waves capable of traveling and transmitting to other tanycytes. Based on the model described by Orellana et al. (2012) [ ], higher glucose concentrations accessed by tanycytes lining the third ventricle are incorporated into the cell via GLUT2 and Cx43-hemichannels, being phosphorylated by GK, leading to increased intracellular ATP through anaerobic glycolysis, which induces the closure of K ATP channels. This creates, through a yet-unknown mechanism, an increase in Cx43 hemichannel expression. Intracellular ATP is transferred out of the cell through hemichannels, binding to P2Y1 purinergic receptors. Both P2Y 1 and inositol triphosphate (IP3) receptor blockers inhibited the rise in Ca 2+ signal, suggesting that P2Y1 activation could be involved in IP3 activity, which is also likely to be necessary for intracellular Ca 2+ release [ ].
The intracellular increase of Ca 2+ propagates similar waves among other tanycytes, through P2Y1 receptor activation. An extracellular Ca 2+ -free solution exerted almost no effect on tanycyte response to glucose on the Ca 2+ signal, suggesting that Cx43 hemichannels (whose inhibition decreased the Ca 2+ signal) do not participate in the influx of extracellular Ca 2+ , hence postulating the involvement of Ca 2+ release from intracellular reservoirs as the main molecule responsible for the Ca 2+ signal [ ] (Fig. 4 a). Fig. 4 Schematic representation of the proposed glucose-sensing mechanisms in tanycytes. a Metabolism-dependent mechanism. Glucose is internalized via GLUT and Cx43 hemichannels and enters the glycolytic cycle, producing ATP, which leads to closure of K ATP channels. By a yet unknown mechanism, K ATP channels enhance ATP output through Cx43 hemichannels. Binding of ATP to P2Y1 receptors induces intracellular Ca 2+ release from the internal storage in an IP3-dependent manner. b Metabolism-independent mechanism. Either binding of glucose or glucose analogs to T1R2/3 or another extracellular receptor produces a Ca 2+ signal, possibly inducing ATP output through Cx43 hemichannels. P2Y1 activation induces intracellular Ca 2+ release from the internal storage and, possibly extracellular Ca 2+ internalization. Cx43-HC connexin 43 hemichannels. GK glucokinase, GLUT2/3 glucose transporter, IP 3 R3 inositol triphosphate receptor, K ATP ATP-sensitive K + channel, P2Y1 purinergic receptor, SGLT sodium-glucose cotransporter, T1R2/3 sweet taste receptors, TCA tricarboxylic acid cycle. Scheme based on “Orellana et al. (2012). Glia, 60(1), 53-68” [ ]
Although ATP is essential to trigger the activation of P2Y1 receptors, not only glucose favors this process. The addition of the glucose analogues, such as 2-DG and α-MDG, evokes a similar response to glucose in α tanycytes [ ]. It is possible that the metabolism-independent mechanism in tanycytes is similar to the SGLT mechanism shown in neurons, although the lack of data about the expression of SGLT in tanycytes has hampered this to go beyond a mere hypothesis. It is also likely that glucose binds a membrane receptor producing an increase in intracellular Ca 2+ , which may be mediated by ATP release and PY21 activation as seen in the metabolism-dependent mechanism. Supporting this idea, expression of the sweet taste receptor T1R2/3 has been identified in 58% of tanycytes in hypothalamic slices, being activated by nonnutritive sweeteners [ ]. However, activation of metabolism-independent tanycytes was reduced by removing either extracellular and intracellular Ca 2+ , suggesting a mechanism of activation that is different than metabolism-dependent tanycytes [ ] (Fig. 4 b). Differences in procedures (i.e., tanycyte cultures vs. brain slice tanycytes) could be responsible for the conflicting reports regarding the requirement for extracellular Ca 2+ .
Together, the data presented in this section clarify the importance of the environment surrounding glucosensitive neurons. Metabolism-dependent glucose-sensing seems to be closely linked to the glia, essentially to astrocytes and tanycytes. Astrocytes are the main source of lactate, which, on the one hand, could promote a more sensitive response to increased glucose levels, but also decrease the neuronal response by maintaining ATP levels in cases of recurrent hypoglycemia. Tanycytes surround the ME and ventricular walls of the hypothalamus. In addition to directly accessing glucose in the CSF and delivering it as lactate, they may have their own glucose-sensing mechanisms. To couple all this information, it is necessary to describe which regions or neuronal nuclei are involved in glucose-sensing and each individual role in the responses to glucose variations, as will be seen in the “ Energy Homeostasis and Neuroendocrine Control ” section.
Energy Homeostasis and Neuroendocrine Control
Two brain regions cooperate in regulating glucose levels: (1) the hypothalamus and (2) the brainstem (consisting of the midbrain, pons, and medulla oblongata) [ ]. Both are involved in the counterregulatory response to hypoglycemia through activation of the SANS, hormone secretion of the anterior pituitary, and regulation of behavioral patterns, such as control of appetite and food intake, energy expenditure, thermogenesis, and circadian rhythms.
Brain Regions
The Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus is an ensemble of interconnected heterogeneous nuclei, allowing a fine control of glucose levels by integrating and scattering signals with projections to different regions, especially to the brainstem. Specifically, it has been established that various nuclei help maintain energy homeostasis, including the ARC, LH, VMN, PVN, and the dorsal medial hypothalamus (DMH), regions demonstrated to contain populations of glucose-sensitive neurons [ , ] (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 5 Stereotactic location of hypothalamic nuclei in the mouse brain. Green: arcuate nucleus (ARC), first-order center. Blue: lateral hypothalamus (LH) and dorsomedial nucleus (DMN), orexigenic or hunger centers. Red: paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and ventromedial nucleus (VMN), anorexigenic or satiety centers. Modified from “Paxinos, G., & Franklin, K. B. (2004). The mouse brain in stereotaxic coordinates. Gulf Professional Publishing “ [ ]
The central control of homeostasis is established by a balance in the secretion of orexigenic peptides (stimulators of food intake and inhibitors of body energy expenditure) and anorexigenic peptides (inhibitors of food intake and stimulators of body energy expenditure) by different neurons responsive to glucose and other metabolic signals. Since the hypothalamus is adjacent to the third ventricle, where the BBB becomes slightly permeable, hypothalamic nuclei have access to different peptides and hormones produced by adipose tissue (leptin), the pancreas (insulin, glucagon), and the gastrointestinal tract (polypeptide YY and cholecystokinin). All of these metabolic signals access the brain through the blood supply, modulating neuronal response according to nutritional status and body energy demand [ ].
The Arcuate Nucleus (ARC)
The ARC is the closest structure to the hypothalamic ME. Due to its location, the ARC is considered the center for integration of peripheral metabolic information and control of the energy state of the body. Control of energy homeostasis in the ARC resides in the activity and secretion of two distinct neuronal populations: (1) GI neurons that produce NPY and AgRP to promote body mass increase and suppress appetite and (2) GE neurons that produce POMC and CART, which cause weight loss by inhibiting food intake and stimulating energy expenditure (Table 1 ). Balance in the secretion of these neuropeptides is essential in controlling behavior intake [ , ]. Table 1 Neurosecretory phenotype of glucose-sensitive neurons in the arcuate nucleus (ARC) and lateral hypothalamus (LH) and effects on energy homeostasis Nucleus and phenotype Glucose-sensing mechanism Metabolic effects Receptors Experiments supporting and other issues Refs. ARC: NPY/AgRP Nt: GABA Glucose-inhibited (GI) AMPK/nNOS/sGC/CFTR Mechanism Orexigenic ↑Food intake Thermogenesis modulation NPY: Y 1 , Y 2 , Y 4 , Y 5 , Y 6 G protein-coupled (G i inhibitory subunit) AgRP: MC3R, MC4R (antagonist) Inhibition of 40% of isolated NPY neurons by glucose. c-Fos expression and increased depolarization rate in hypoglycemia. ICV injection of NPY and AgRP stimulates food intake. GABA vesicular transporter ( vgat ) knockout mice in AgRP neurons induces a lean phenotype. [ ] [ , ] [ , ] ARC: POMC/CART (release of α-MSH) Nt: glutamate and GABA Glucose-excited (GE) GLUT3/GK/K ATP mechanism Anorexigenic ↓Food intake Thermogenesis modulation α-MSH: MC3R, MC4R (agonist) Lower depolarization rate in hypoglycemia. Biphasic phenotype discovery: decrease and later increase of depolarization rate in acute hypoglycemia. Expression of K ATP subunits SUR1 and Kir6.2 and glycemia-insensitive Kir6.2 knockout mice. Inhibition of UCP2 with genipin and higher response to glucose. Suppression of MC4R, leading to hyperphagia and obese phenotype. [ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] [ , ] LH: Orexin A and/or Orexin B Nt: acetilcholine Glucose-inhibited (GI) K2P mechanism Orexigenic ↑Food intake ↑Gastric motility Wakefulness Orexin A, orexin B: OxR1, OxR2 Depolarization rate was decreased in 80% of orexigenic neurons with > 5 mM glucose. Depolarization rate decreased in 95% of LH orexigenic neurons with 0.2–5 mM glucose. Food intake was stimulated after ICV injection of orexin. Orexin knockout mice and decreased food intake. [ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] LH: MCH Nt not determined Glucose-Excited (GE) GLUT3/GK/K ATP mechanism Orexigenic ↑Food intake (only caloric nutrients) Anabolic processes Sleepness MCH: MCH-R1, MCH-R2 Depolarization rate increased in 80% of MCH neurons in normoglycemia, depending on dosis. MCH and MCH1R knockout mice and increased metabolic rate with lean phenotype. MCH1R antagonist administration and lower appetite for glucose (no changes observed for saccharin). Appetite for glucose maintained in TrpM5 (Na + channel) deficient mice. [ ] [ , ] [ ] [ , ]
The Lateral Hypothalamus (LH)
The LH is a hypothalamic region with orexigenic function, considered a “hunger center”. It is the most interconnected hypothalamic nucleus, sending projections to other hypothalamic nuclei, in addition to the thalamus, hippocampus, brainstem, and spinal cord. An injury at the LH causes a decrease in food intake, body weight loss, and increased energy expenditure [ , , , ].
These effects reside in the activity and secretion of two neuronal populations in the LH: GI neurons that produce orexin A and/or orexin B neuropeptides, and GE neurons that produce MCH (Table 1 ). Both peptides are essential in the melanocortin pathway as well as the onset of the pancreatic and adrenal sympathetic response in conditions of hypoglycemia [ ].
The Ventromedial Nucleus of the Hypothalamus (VMN)
As opposed to the LH, the VNM is preferably anorexigenic and considered a “satiety center”. It is one of the most studied hypothalamic regions for glucose-sensing mechanisms, despite not having neuronal populations with neurochemical markers defined as NPY/AgRP neurons and POMC/CART neurons of the ARC or orexin neurons and MCH neurons of the LH. A bilateral injury in the VMN in rodents induces an increase in food intake and subsequent obesity, confirming its role as an anorexigenic regulator [ , ] (Table 2 ). Table 2 Neurosecretory phenotype of glucose sensitive neurons in the ventromedial nucleus (VMN), paraventricular nucleus (PVN), and dorsomedial nucleus (DMN), and effects on energy homeostasis Nucleus and phenotype Glucose-sensing mechanism Metabolic effects Experiments supporting and other issues Refs. VMN: Neuropeptide not defined Nt: Glutamate Glucose-inhibited (GI) AMPK/nNOS/sGC/CFTR mechanism Sympathetic response activation and release of glucagon and epinephrine SF1 neurons in the VMN necessary to set the sympathetic response. Vesicular glutamate transporter ( vglut2 ) knockout mice and suppression of glucagon release. Loss of GABAergic afferent projections on BDNF1 knockout mice depending on MCH-R4 and inhibition of glucagon release. [ ] [ ] [ ] VMN: Neuropeptide not defined Nt: GABA Glucose-excited (GE) GLUT3/GK/K ATP mechanism Sympathetic response inhibition Inhibition of GABA A receptors with the antagonist, bicuculline, and activation with the agonist, muscimol. Induction and inhibition of sympathetic response on hypoglycemia, respectively. [ ] VMN: Neuropeptide not defined Nt not definied Glucose-excited (GE) SGLT1 mechanism Sympathetic response inhibition and lower release of glucagon and epinephrine Lower expression of SGLT1 mRNA in the VMN increases the counterregulatory response against hypoglycemia with increased secretion of glucagon and epinephrine. [ ] PVN: Neuropeptide not defined Nt not defined Glucose-inhibited (GI) AMPK/nNOS/sGC/? mechanism Depolarization of 26% of PVN neurons in glucopenia (0.2 mM glucose). [ ] PVN: Neuropeptide not defined Nt not defined Glucose-excited (GE) Metabolism-independent mechanism Hyperpolarization of 24% of PVN neurons in glucopenia (0.2 mM glucose). Addition of K ATP blockers tolbutamide and glibenclamide as well as addition of K ATP activator diazoxide with no glucose-like response in PVN neurons. [ ] [ ] DMN: Neuropeptide not defined Nt not defined Glucose-inhibited (GI) K2P (adaptative) mechanism ↑Food intake Basal membrane potential was restored faster in DMN GI neurons than in LH GI neurons. Injury of the DMN decreases food intake and produces a lean phenotype. [ ] [ ]
The Paraventricular Nucleus of the Hypothalamus (PVN)
Located at the upper portion of the third ventricle, the PVN is one of the most important centers in the regulation of glycemia through the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. It harbors populations of parvocellular neurons secreting corticotrophin releasing hormone (CRH) [ ] and thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) [ ], both of which suppress appetite and food intake, suggesting that the PVN is also a “satiety center” [ , ]. In fact, bilateral lesions of the PVN in animals generated an increased dietary intake along with obesity [ ].
Neurosecretory neurons are preferentially located in the medial part of the PVN and have no intrinsic glucose-sensing mechanism. Thus, they depend on afferent signals provided by other neuronal populations. The neural regulation of food intake and body energy homeostasis lies in GE and GI neurons of the PVN, mostly distributed in the dorsal area of the PVN [ ] (Table 2 ). These neurons are connected via projections to the brainstem, as well as to ANS neurons in the spinal cord, which innervate endocrine organs, the liver or adipose tissue, regulating hormone secretion and metabolic activity associated with plasma glucose levels [ , ].
Dorsomedial Hypothalamic Nucleus (DMN)
The DMN is a hypothalamic nucleus involved in the control of circadian rhythms; it receives projections from other hypothalamic nuclei involved in glucose sensing.
Like the LH, the DMN has orexinergic GI neurons. However, the DMN orexinergic neurons present an adaptive phenotype with the ability to retrieve the baseline membrane potential quickly after being inhibited in the presence of glucose [ ] (Table 2 ).
This structure also has NPY neurons. The presence of neuronal populations secreting orexigenic peptides gives the DMN a role as a “hunger center,” dependent on other hypothalamic nuclei. Indeed, bilateral injury of the DMN in animals generates a decrease of both food intake and body weight [ ].
The Brainstem
The brainstem is the most caudal part of the brain, consisting of the medulla oblongata, pons, and midbrain. Several neuronal nuclei of the brainstem are involved in the control of heart rate, blood pressure and energy expenditure. The existence of glucose-sensitive neuronal populations in the medulla oblongata have been described, particularly in the rostral ventrolateral region of the medulla (RVLM) and the dorsal vagal complex (DVC), the latter being composed of the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV) and the area postrema (AP) (Fig. 6 ). These regions surround the aqueduct and the fourth ventricle, allowing diffusion of plasma glucose to the brain parenchyma [ , , ]. Fig. 6 Stereotactic location of the brainstem nuclei in the rat brain. Area postrema (AP), nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV), and rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM). Modified from “Paxinos, G., & Franklin, K. B. (1998). The rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates. Academic Press” [ ]
The Nucleus of the Solitary Tract (NTS)
The NTS is a set of neuronal nuclei pierced by the fiber bundle of the solitary tract, bringing together glucose-sensitive neurons among different neuronal groups. Specifically, glucose sensing is defined by a subpopulation of GI neurons in the NTS, sending GABAergic projections to DMV neurons in order to initiate the counterregulatory response in hypoglycemia [ , ].
Acting as an integrating center, the NTS receives peripheral hypoglycemic signals detected by glucose-sensitive cell bodies in the hepatic portal vein, which project on the intermediolateral nucleus (IML) of the spinal cord, contacting the NTS [ ].
The NTS also encompasses catecholaminergic A2 (noradrenergic) and C2 (adrenergic) neurons, which both express NPY and send axonal projections on the PVN, exercising control over the secretion of CRH in hypoglycemia. Reciprocally, CRH neurons project onto the A2 neurons, establishing a feedback loop [ ].
Many other hypothalamic nuclei innervate the NTS, and the amygdala innervates the ARC, which sends projections on the A1 neurons and non-catecholaminergic neurons in the RVLM [ ].
The Dorsal Motor Nucleus of the Vagus (DMV)
The soma of the preganglionic neurons of the vagus nerve are located in the DMV, which activates the parasympathetic pathway, exercising control over pancreatic secretion. At least a subpopulation of these neurons is glucose-sensitive, decreasing their depolarization rate in conditions of hypoglycemia [ , ].
The Area Postrema (AP)
The AP is considered to be the “trigger” of the emetic response and harbors both GE and GI neurons. Ablation of the AP in rats causes an increase in food intake, demonstrating that this area has a role in glucose homeostasis [ , ].
The Rostral Ventrolateral Medulla (RVLM)
The RVLM harbors spinal metabolism-dependent GI neurons, producing a hyperglycemic response against hypoglycemia. The sympathetic-adrenal response is mediated by A1/C1 catecholaminergic neurons, inducing the secretion of epinephrine in the adrenal medulla. The destruction of C1 neurons by immunotoxins results in a decrease in the secretion of epinephrine and an increase in glucagon secretion as a compensatory mechanism [ , ].
Given the complexity involved in glucose-sensing, it is expected that most of the regions responsible for this process surround the cerebral ventricles, such as the hypothalamus and brainstem. According to their proximity to the ME and their distribution, hypothalamic nuclei present specialized glucosensitive neuronal populations, which control homeostatic processes in the brainstem, as a link with the autonomic nervous system. Understanding the interactions of these nuclei may shed light on how they occur and the responses involved in the control of physiological processes related to both metabolic and energy balance.
The Autonomic Nervous System and the Response to Hypoglycemia
During hypoglycemia, the nervous system initiates three main mechanisms that mediate the hormonal release of glucagon followed by epinephrine, arising systematically and increasing in magnitude as blood glucose decreases.
The first of the mechanisms described sets up the activation of the parasympathetic branch of the pancreas, mediating glucagon secretion by pancreatic α-cells when glucose levels fall to between 85 and 75 mg/dL (4.7 and 4.2 mM). The second mechanism, which starts before a more pronounced glucose drop to between 75 and 65 mg/dL (4.2 and 3.6 mM), involves a sympatho-adrenal response and the release of epinephrine from the adrenal medulla, which, in turn, stimulates the release of glucagon in the pancreas. The third mechanism arises after the appearance of the first clinical symptoms of hypoglycemia, about 50 mg/dL (2.8 mM), and involves the activation of the sympathetic branch innervating the β-cells [ ].
Central Glucose Sensing and Pancreatic and Adrenal Secretions
The pancreas is an essential organ in glucose regulation, widely innervated by the ANS. Parasympathetic activation induces insulin secretion by β-cells and glucagon by α-cells. Conversely, sympathetic activation inhibits insulin secretion and promotes glucagon and epinephrine secretion, the latter being in the adrenal medulla [ ].
Anterograde virus neuronal tracing with pseudorabies virus (PSV) has shown that pancreatic parasympathetic innervation is established by DMV neurons in the brainstem, and sympathetic innervation comes from preganglionic motor neurons in the spinal cord. Motor neurons, in turn, receive projections of neurons placed in different hypothalamic and brainstem nuclei, the so-called “second order” neurons, which are connected with other “third order” neurons in relation to the pancreas [ ]. A complete sagittal scheme representing these marked neuronal nuclei is available in Buijs et al. [ ].
Parasympathetic Branch
The DMV is the main effector of the parasympathetic response, stimulating insulin secretion directly by β-cells and glucagon by α-cells. The DMV is innervated by the NTS, home of GLUT2-AMPK-nNOS-sGC-K2P GABAergic GI neurons. In hypoglycemia, these neurons inhibit DMV GABAergic neurons, the latter ones being presynaptic in relation to premotor neurons in the vagus nerve [ ].
Regarding the hypothalamus, the DMV is directly innervated by the LH, ARC, DMN, and PVN. The PVN is, in turn, innervated by the VMN [ , , ]. The control over glucose levels exercised by these nuclei is essential to inducing the parasympathetic response (Fig. 7 ). Insulin secretion is dependent on hypothalamic GLUT2-GK-K ATP GE neurons. A central loss of GLUT2 expression results in decreased insulin secretion. In fact, it was shown in knockout models for GLUT2 that parasympathetic activity induces proliferation of β-cells in the first months of life, resulting in poor insulin secretion at later stages and subsequently glucose intolerance and diabetes [ ]. Fig. 7 Representation of the neuronal circuit controlling parasympathetic innervation in the vagus nerve to the pancreas and sympathetic innervation in the spinal cord to the pancreas and the adrenal medulla. A1/C1 catecholaminergic neurons of the rostral ventrolateral medulla, AP area postrema, ARC arcuate nucleus, DMN dorsomedial nucleus, DMV dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, LC locus coeruleus, LH lateral hypothalamus, NTS nucleus of the solitary tract, PVN paraventricular nucleus, VMN ventromedial nucleus
Sympathetic Branch
Hypothalamic control of the SANS relies on MCH and orexin neurons in the LH and neurons in the PVN, which send axonal projections to sympathetic preganglionic motor neurons as well as to A1/C1 catecholaminergic neurons located in the RVLM. This group of neurons is also innervated by NTS neurons and the locus coeruleus (LC). In addition, the presence of presumably GLUT2-GK-K ATP GE neurons within A5 neurons has been described [ , ].
Anterograde and retrograde virus neuronal tracing verified the latter efferent projections [ , ]. In addition, systemic glycoprivation increases the depolarization rate as well as c-Fos and dopamine-β-hydroxylase expression in C1 neurons, while ablation of this group of neurons reduces sympathetic counterregulatory response to hypoglycemia simulated by the injection of 2-DG (nonmetabolizable glucose analog) in the hypothalamus [ , ].
Hypoglycemia induces orexin secretion by GI neurons in the LH, producing a stimulating effect on the C1 neurons of the RVLM. Both C1 and glutamatergic neurons in the RVLM make connections with adrenal sympathetic preganglionic neurons, stimulating the secretion of glucagon and epinephrine [ ] (Fig. 7 ).
Control by Hypothalamic and Brainstem Glucose-Sensing Neurons over the ANS
Metabolites and hormonal signals, including ghrelin, insulin, and leptin, contact the ARC directly from the bloodstream, given its proximity to the ME. Ghrelin is produced in fasting periods and has an orexigenic effect, while insulin and leptin are produced in response to increased glucose and adipose tissue respectively, producing an anorexigenic effect. Anorexigenic NPY/AgRP GI neurons in the ARC are stimulated by ghrelin and inhibited by glucose, insulin and leptin, while orexigenic POMC/CART GE neurons are stimulated by insulin, leptin, and glucose, and inhibited indirectly by ghrelin through activation of NPY/AgRP neurons, exercising GABAergic transmission over POMC/CART neurons [ , , ].
Establishing a simple model for energy control, under conditions of hypoglycemia and low energy availability, activation of anorexigenic GI neurons leads to a response in the SANS, ending in the release of glucagon from the pancreas and adrenaline from the adrenal medulla, as well as the hypothalamic release of CRH followed by ACTH and glucocorticoids [ , , ].
Under conditions of hyperglycemia or high levels of energy, orexigenic GE neurons respond by activating the PANS and releasing insulin, in addition to the sympathetic activation of thermogenesis [ , ] (Fig. 8 ). Fig. 8 GE and GI neurons in the hypothalamus (green) and the brainstem (pink) respond to metabolic signals, establishing the autonomic response. High energy signals (leptin, insulin, glucose) enhance activation of GE neurons, setting a parasympathetic response (blue). Low energy signals (ghrelin) enhance activation of GI neurons, inducing a sympathetic response (red) and the release of glucocorticoids. ACTH adenocorticotropic hormone, CRH corticotrophin releasing hormone, GE glucose-excited, GI glucose-inhibited, PANS parasympathetic autonomic nervous system, SANS sympathetic autonomic nervous system, T 3 triiodothyronine, T 4 tetraiodothyronine, TSH thyroid-stimulating hormone
Appetite Control
Two neuronal nuclei are essential for the central control of appetite: (1) the ARC as the “starter,” defining the synaptic connections that reach the parabrachial nucleus (PBN) in the brainstem, which is the other neuronal nucleus and (2) the “end effector” of anorexigenic signals, suppressing appetite [ ] (Fig. 9 ). Fig. 9 Wiring diagram established in the regulation of food intake control. Red: anorexigenic neurons and nuclei. Blue: orexigenic neurons and nuclei. Green: first-order nucleus. The ARC is the main controller of the anorexigenic response by sensing energy status from the periphery. In turn, the ARC receives signals from the LH. The PVN receives inhibitory projections from NPY/AgRP GI neurons and excitatory projections from POMC/CART GE neurons in the ARC. Furthermore, the PVN innervates the PBN, the final anorexigenic effectors. The PBN also receives inhibitory projections from NPY/AgRP GI neurons in the ARC and glutamatergic excitatory projections from the NTS, which is, in turn, innervated by serotonergic Raphe projections. 5-HT serotonin (5-HT), AgRP agouti-related protein, ARC Arcuate nucleus, CART cocaine amphetamine regulated transcript peptide, LH lateral hypothalamus, NPY neuropeptide Y, NTS nucleus of the solitary tract, PBN parabrachial nucleus, POMC proopiomelanocortin, PVN paraventricular nucleus, α-MSH alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone
In situations of hyperglycemia after food intake, activity of POMC/CART GE neurons increase. These neurons secrete α-MSH, activating the PVN glutamatergic neurons. Successively, PBN is activated, inducing an anorexigenic effect, thus suppressing appetite.
Moreover, during hypoglycemia, NPY/AgRP GI neurons suppress anorexigenic behavior sending GABAergic projections on PVN glutamatergic neurons and the PBN. In fact, chronic injection of bretazenil (partial agonist for GABA A receptors) into the PBN prevents starvation [ ].
In addition, the NTS, which contains glutamatergic neurons that integrate metabolic signals from the gastrointestinal tract, acts as a modulator and integration center, receiving excitatory projections from the PVN (glutamatergic) and the Raphe (serotonergic), inducing activation of the PBN [ , ].
The LH, considered the most important “hunger center,” is essential to induce food intake. Establishing a scheme to fully understand the orexigenic effect generated is hardly feasible due to the diverse and biased innervation from the LH to the brainstem nuclei. In turn, the ARC is one of the areas innervated by the LH. Orexin secretion produces excitatory effects on NPY/AgRP GI neurons and inhibitory effects on POMC/CART neurons. Addition of an NPY antagonist only partially reduces intake, confirming that the LH induces food intake complementarily to the ARC [ , , ].
In addition to neurotransmitters, astrocytes and tanycytes have also been reported to modify the appetite of the organism, mainly by secreting gliotransmitters [ ]. The best known in this role are endozepines, such as the diazepam-binding inhibitor (DBI) and its active fragment, octadecaneuropeptide (ODN). When administered directly, ODN acts as an anorexigenic factor, reducing food intake in rodents [ ]. In addition, post-glucoprivation hyperphagia is suppressed after central injection of an ODN agonist. However, anorexigenic signaling by endozepines involves MC3R and MC4R and binding the GABA A receptor, but not the benzodiazepine receptors [ ]. Thus, GABAergic inhibitory tone would be enhanced to reduce appetite (Fig. 9 ).
Conclusion and Future Perspectives
In this work, we have reviewed the various mechanisms through which glucose changes in the internal environment of the brain are detected from a molecular and anatomical-functional perspective. The existence of such diverse mechanisms, both dependent and independent of glucose metabolism, leaves open the question of what is the specific function of each and is reflective of the variety of processes used to sense this molecule. Accordingly, glucose fluctuations are detected by GE and GI neurons, which are distributed in several hypothalamic and brainstem nuclei. Many components of these glucose-sensing mechanisms contribute to diabetes development, such as gene variants of GLUT2 [ ], glucokinase [ ], or AMPK activity [ ]. Understanding the specific role of these elements in the brain glucose-sensing elements has the potential to identify novel therapeutic targets.
Several of the mechanisms described are subject to the transport kinetics of glucose, especially those dependent on GLUT2. It has been previously questioned if the entry of glucose through the ME reaches sufficient levels for its transport through GLUT2 in the hypothalamus. Therefore, it has been suggested that glucose uptake by glial cells and its subsequent metabolism to lactate as a source of ATP to neurons, could imply a direct relationship between both cell types in glucose sensing. A subtype of glial cell of special relevance are the tanycytes surrounding the ME and ventricular walls. In addition to forming the initial barrier for glucose entry (tanycytes beta2), tanycytes alpha and beta 1 could also present their own glucose-sensing mechanism analogous to those described in neurons.