Introduction
GBM is most common primary malignant brain cancer. It accounts for 12–15% of all brain cancers and it constitutes 50–60% of astrocytomas [ ]. Along with high incidence, it is also very aggressive tumor with grave prognosis. Even after resection and chemotherapy, median survival is 12–15 months, and 2-year and 5-year survival is 26.5 and 9.8% respectively [ ]. Genetic and molecular studies have shown that GBM is a highly mutable and heterogeneous tumor, which makes it resistant against conventional chemotherapy [ ]. Another major reason for limited success of chemotherapy is the blood-brain barrier (BBB), which limits the drug concentration in tumor vicinity [ ]. Immune-suppressive nature of tumor microenvironment also inhibits cytotoxic T cell proliferation and therefore restricts tumor cell lysis [ ]. GBM patients with post-surgical residual tumor, even after getting adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy, had poor prognosis [ ]. Along with radiotherapy, current treatment options for GBM are temozolomide and bevacizumab. These alkylating and anti-angiogenic agents have shown limited clinical benefit and improvement in survival [ ]. Therefore, we do not have enough treatment options to manage this catastrophic cancer.
Due to high mutational load and heterogeneous nature of GBM, it can provide us with antigens which are highly specific for malignant cells. Therefore, adoptive T cell therapy (ACT) can be a novel therapeutic option for GBM patients. ACT consists of redirected genetically engineered T cells which are specific for target and can enhance antitumor immunity. CAR T cell therapy is a type of ACT in which genetically engineered, HLA-independent, antigen-specific receptors are inserted into T cells. Therefore, it can mount cancer-specific and persistent anticancer immune response. CD-19 CAR T cell therapy has shown outstanding results in hematological malignancies like chronic lymphocytic leukemia, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and B cell lymphoma which lead to their FDA approval [ , , , ]. But their success is limited in solid tumors [ , , ]. But, recently, research is showing some promising results of CAR T cell therapy in GBM patients with some modifications [ ].
CAR T Cell Therapy
The critical regulator of cancer biology is the immune system; it has the capacity to suppress or promote the tumor proliferation. Malignant cancer cells have the potential to curb the immune response in their favor, so that tumor cells can grow and metastasize unrestricted. The immune escape mechanism of cancer is dependent on three main properties: loss of antigenicity, loss of immunogenicity, and immune-suppressive environment. Loss of immunogenic cancer antigens, defect in antigen processing or presentation [ , ], immunosuppressive properties like secretion of inhibitory cytokines (IL-10, TGF-β), genetic alteration in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, and overexpression of immune checkpoints (CTLA-4 and PD-1) are some of the common mechanism of immune-evasion of cancer cells. Therefore, cancer cells exploit the immune system for their proliferation and metastasis. CAR T cell therapy is developed to counteract this property.
CAR T cells are genetically modified T cells which expresses chimeric antigen receptor on their surface that recognize and degrade tumor cells. The CAR consists of four components, extracellular target binding domain also known as ectodomain, spacer domain (hinge domain), transmembrane domain, and intracellular T cell activation/signaling domain. The extracellular domain consists of a single-chain variable fragment (scFv) which is derived from light and heavy chains of an antibody. This domain helps in recognizing tumor-specific antigens in a HLA-independent manner [ , ]. Hinge domain is the connector of extracellular and transmembrane domain and it is derived from IgG4 or CD8 molecule. The intracellular domain consists of CD3ζ and it triggers and activates immune response. The conventional T cell receptor (TCR) activation process is complex, as it has to go through multiple steps of antigen processing and presentation; MHC-dependent T cell activation and along with that T cell response is also limited to peptide antigens. But, CARs are genetically engineered receptor which are independent of HLA and antigen presentation and can have immune response against non-peptide antigens also [ ]. Therefore, with CAR T cells, we can have HLA-independent, tumor-specific, T cell activation and proliferation, which can cause lysis and degradation of cancer cells. CAR T cell therapy is autologous cell-based therapy; first, T cells are collected from patient’s peripheral blood with leukapheresis. Then retroviruses or lentiviruses are used for genetic transduction. These T cells can be transiently or permanently modified for CAR expression depending on whether RNA or DNA was used for transduction. Then, these genetically modified T cells undergo amplification by in vitro cell culture systems. Different systems produce different proportions of effector, naïve, or memory T cells; therefore, by changing the conditions, we can control the phenotype and can generate a defined subset of T cells [ ]. These genetically engineered CAR T cells are transfused back in patients therefore creating a customized immunotherapy for cancer patients. CAR T cells recognize tumor-specific antigens (TAAs) and binds to them; this led to phosphorylation of immune receptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) and activates T cells [ ]. Generally, CD8 T cells are cytotoxic cells that cause lysis and degradation of cancer cells; CD4 T cells are helper in action and enhance the cytotoxicity of CD8 T cells [ ]. CAR T cells induce cytotoxicity by activation of death receptor with help of fas/fas ligand and by secretion of perforin enzymes which destroys tumor cells [ , ]. In clinical studies, four generations of CAR T cells have been studied, and it depends on the intracellular signaling domain. In first-generation CAR T cells, only CD3ζ is used as intracellular domain. In second and third generations, co-stimulatory molecules have been added like 4-1BB (CD137), CD 28, OX40 etc. The second generation consists of one co-stimulatory domain and the third generation has two. Fourth-generation CAR T cells have additional genes that encode antitumor cytokines like IL-12 and IL-15 [ , ].
Rationale for CAR T Therapy in GBM
In recent years, management of advanced cancers is shifted more toward immunotherapy. Currently, there are various forms of immunotherapy like dendritic cell vaccine, immune checkpoint inhibitors (ipilimumab, nivolumab), and ACT. ACT further includes tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), cytokine-induced killer cells (CIK), TCR-engineered T cells (TCR-T), and CAR T cell therapy.
Brain tumors generally show inadequate response to chemotherapy, as drugs are unable to reach the targets due to various physiological barriers. Some of them are export pumps, the blood-brain barrier (BBB), and ATP-binding cassette [ ]. BBB restricts the transfer of large hydrophilic molecules in the brain. Therefore, various hydrophilic chemotherapeutic agents are unable to pass this and show sub-therapeutic response [ ]. Some of the studies have shown there is disruption of BBB that takes place in cancers but that also differs depending on type, location, and activity of tumor [ ]. Therefore, efficacy of chemotherapy in brain tumors is extremely variable. But CAR T cells are genetically engineered patients’ own T cells which can easily cross BBB. Therefore, there should be no variability in their response. Another rationale to use immunotherapy in GBM is based on the fact that memory and effector functions can be used to specifically degrade invasive cancer cells [ ]. This immune-responsive nature of brain cancers have been shown in animal studies. Brain tumor antigens can activate T cells by use of cervical lymph nodes [ ]. In rodent model, it was shown that improving TAA-specific immune response can even eradicate GBM [ ]. This indicates that GBM can generate potent antitumor activity with little help from immunotherapy which makes it a potent target for immunotherapy. GBM is highly mutagenic and genetically variable tumor. Due to this nature, it creates various antigens which are specific to cancer cells and are absent on surrounding stroma cells. This provides highly specific T cell response without any local or systemic side effects. CAR T cell therapy seems to be more relevant and feasible in brain tumors, as there is ex vivo development of TAA-specific genetically engineered T cells in comparison with in vivo as in vaccine therapy and Immune checkpoint inhibitors [ ]. Anticancer response of endogenously activated cytotoxic T cells is generally not sufficient to kill cancer cells as TAA are also self-antigens and they may not be able to evade the immunosuppressive environment generated by cancer cells. Therefore, CAR T cell therapy can be a promising approach for GBM.
Antigen Targets for CAR T Cell Therapy
EGFRvIII
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a 170-kDa transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor that is a part of the ErbB oncogene family [ , , ]. EGFR is normally expressed on a wide variety of normal and cancer cells. Dysregulation of this receptor can lead to various malignancies like breast cancer, lung cancer, pancreatic cancer, and colorectal cancers [ , ]. The most common mutation, i.e., deletion of 267 amino acids of extracellular domain of EGFR leads to formation of EGFRvIII [ ]. This mutation was first identified in GBM with the help of structural analysis of EGFR [ ]. It has been shown in studies that this mutation is commonly expressed on GBM cancer cells. EGFRvIII causes tumor growth through various mechanisms like interacting with c-met and forming a heterodimer therefore activating and enhancing tumor-promoting growth factors [ ]; it secrets excessive amount of leukemia-inhibitory factor and IL-6 [ ] and it also activates STAT3 which promotes tumorigenesis [ ]. Therefore, EGFRvIII can cause proliferation and invasion of cancer cells; along with that, it reduces apoptosis and creates resistance to standard therapy. EGFRvIII is extremely tumor specific and generally not expressed on normal cells, it is highly expressed on GBM cells and it can induce transformation in phenotype. These characteristics make EGFRvIII a potent target for CAR T cell therapy in GBM patients.
IL13Rα2
Interleukin-13 receptor chain variant 2 (IL13Rα2) is another important target for CAR T cell therapy for GBM. It is a monomeric IL-13, high-affinity receptor which is commonly expressed on GBM. With increase in malignancy grade, expression of IL13Rα2 increases; therefore, it is a prognostic indicator also [ ]. Along with blockage of normal apoptotic pathways, it also upregulates B cell lymphoma 2 and STAT3 in GBM cells [ , ]. With the help of signal-regulated kinase/activator protein 1, it promotes metastasis in pancreatic and ovarian cancers [ , ]. Immune cells with IL13Rα2 expression promotes immune escape of cancer cells and upregulates tumor-promoting transforming growth factor b (TGF-β) [ ]. Therefore, therapy targeting IL13Rα2 will eradicate IL13Rα2-expressing cells and reduce tumor burden. Along with it, it will also modify the tumor microenvironment and dampens its immunosuppressive nature. In addition to these properties, IL13Rα2 is overexpressed on GBM without much expression on normal brain cells [ , ]. This specificity makes it an ideal target for CAR T cell therapy.
HER2
It is another attractive target for CAR T cell therapy. It is a transmembrane glycoprotein and belongs to EGFR family [ , ]. HER2 oncogene is present on the long arm of chromosome 17 which encodes HER2 protein [ ]. This protein is responsible for development and progression of various cancers like breast cancer, ovarian cancer, GBM, osteosarcoma, and medulloblastoma [ , , ]. In animal studies, it was shown that CAR T therapy targeting HER2 in GBM can exhibit enhanced antitumor activity and better survival [ ]. Therefore, it is another important target for CAR T cell therapy in GBM patients.
Clinical Studies on EGFRvIII CAR T Cells in GBM
As mentioned above, EGFRvIII is specifically expressed on GBM cells; therefore, CAR T cell therapy targeting EGFRvIII is a new therapeutic option for this dreadful malignancy. Initially, in preclinical studies, Morgan et al. [ ] developed competent CARs and assessed their ability to recognize and bind to EGFRvIII. As target cell lines, they selected glioblastoma stem cells which express EGFRvIII so it will have characteristics of human glioblastoma. They showed that CAR T cells can recognize EGFRvIII cell lines without having any effect on co-cultured normal cells. Miao et al. [ ] also showed that EGFRvIII CAR T cell therapy can effectively cross BBB and mediates anticancer immunity. Therefore, these preclinical studies suggest that EGFRvIII CAR T cell therapy carries potent antitumor effect and should be studied further.
O’Rourke et al. [ ] conducted first in human study of intravenous delivery of EGFRvIII CAR T cell therapy in GBM patients. It was a phase 1 study conducted to assess the safety and feasibility of manufacturing and administering EGFRvIII CAR T cell therapy. A total of ten patients with recurrent GBM were enrolled in this study. A total seven out of ten patients after CAR T cell therapy underwent craniotomy at some point of time, which provided us with histo-pathological specimens to better understand the response of this immunotherapy at the molecular level. Selected patients underwent leukapheresis and their T cells were transduced with EGFRvIII CAR with lentiviral vector. CAR used in this study consists of two co-stimulatory molecules, i.e., 4-1BB and CD3ζ with scFv fused with hinge and transmembrane domains. All patients were transfused with one dose of EGFRvIII CAR T cells, and after 4 weeks, MRI was performed. As per results, manufacturing and infusion were safe and feasible with no side effects. There was no radiological response seen on imaging but one patient had residual stable disease for around 18 months. But it was difficult and complex to assess the response on imaging and tissue sample will be ideal. In peripheral blood, all patients showed transient expansion of CAR T cells. Five out of seven patients who had craniotomy, trafficking of EGFRvIII CAR to GBM was seen with a decrease in antigen. Tumor microenvironment showed an increase in regulatory T cells and inhibitory molecules after transfusion of EGFRvIII CAR T cells, and on the basis of expression of EGFRvIII, there was a decrease in tumor burden. Therefore, EGFRvIII CAR T cell therapy has shown promising results in early-phase study and further research need to be conducted to completely understand the clinical response. Further studies are going on which are summarized in Table 1 . Table 1 Clinical trials of CAR T cell therapy in glioblastoma multiforme No. NCT trial Recruitment Intervention Phase Outcome No of patients 1 NCT03389230 Not yet recruiting Anti HER2 CAR T cells Phase 1 AE, DLT, CAR T cells in CSF, PFS, DR by RANO criteria, CAR T cells in tumor, HER2 antigen expression 81 2 NCT03383978 Recruiting Anti HER2 CAR T cells Phase 1 TRAE, MTD, ORR, PFS, OS 30 3 NCT02442297 Recruiting Anti HER2-specific CAR T cells Phase 1 DLT, median amount of HER2-specific T cells, TR 14 4 NCT01109095 Active, not recruiting Anti HER2 CAR T cells Phase 1 DLT, decrease in tumor 16 5 NCT03283631 Not yet recruiting Anti-EGFRvIII CAR T cells Phase 1 MTD, assessment of T Cell trafficking, PFS 24 6 NCT03170141 Enrolling by invitation Anti-EGFRvIII CAR T cells Phase 1 and 2 AE, TR, OS, PFS, persistence of CAR T cells, 20 7 NCT02844062 Recruiting Anti-EGFRvIII CAR T cells Phase 1 AE, TR, OS, PFS, persistence of CAR T cells, 20 8 NCT02664363 Recruiting Anti-EGFRvIII CAR T cells Phase 1 MTD, DLT 48 9 NCT02209376 Active, not recruiting Anti-EGFRvIII CAR T cells Phase 1 AE 12 10 NCT01454596 Recruiting Anti-EGFRvIII CAR T cells Phase 1 and 2 AE 107 11 NCT02208362 Recruiting Anti IL13Rα2 CAR T cells Phase 1 AE, DLT, change in cytokine and CAR T cell level, PFS, OS, QOL 135 12 NCT00730613 Completed Anti IL13Rα2 CAR T cells Phase 1 AE, IR 13 DLT dose-limiting toxicities, AE adverse events, CAR chimeric antigen receptor, CSF cerebrospinal fluid, PFS progression-free survival, RANO Response Assessment in Neuro-Oncology criteria, TRAE treatment-related adverse events, MTD maximum tolerated dose, ORR objective response rate, PFS progression-free survival, OS overall survival, TR treatment response, QOL quality of life, IR immune response
Clinical Studies on IL13Rα2 CAR T Cell Therapy
In clinical studies initially, a case report was published by Yaghoubi et al. [ ] regarding use of CAR T cells in GBM patients. In this study, a 57-year-old male with GBM underwent resection of his tumor but it reoccurred after 9 months. The recurrent tumor was also resected and Rickham reservoir was inserted to infuse CAR T cells. The patient underwent leukapheresis and CD8+ cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) were isolated and electroporated. CTLs were transduced with plasmid DNA encoding IL-13 zetakine to form CAR T cells. Then, patient was infused with CAR T cell therapy through a Rickham catheter. He was infused for 3 days per week for 5 weeks initially but he developed progression of disease so he underwent chemotherapy and radiotherapy with additional doses of intralesional CAR T cell therapy. After 14 weeks, he showed signs of tumor regression. Imaging showed CAR T cells were also present at sites of progression along with infusion site which depicts local trafficking of CAR T cells.
Later on, Brown et al. [ ] conducted a phase 1 trial for efficacy and safety of CAR T cells targeting IL13Rα2 for recurrent GBM. A total of three patients who had recurrent GBM after surgical resection were enrolled in this study. These patients were treated with intracranial delivery of CAR T cell therapy with the help of a Rickham catheter. As per protocol of this study, a total of 12 CAR T cell therapy doses were given intracranially in 5 weeks. Dose escalation strategy was used for the first week and CAR T cell doses were 10 7 , 5 × 10 7 , and 10 8 on 1, 3, and 5 days respectively, and after that, nine doses of 10 8 were given in the next 4 weeks. Along with the safety, toxicity, and efficacy, expression of IL13Rα2 was also measured with the help of polymerase chain reaction (PCR), immunohistochemistry (IHC), and flow cytometry. In this study, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography and computed tomography (PET-CT) was also used for measuring tumor volumes. After receiving the first two doses, there were no adverse effects but one patient had headache after receiving the third dose. One of the patients had shuffling gait and tongue deviation 1 day after the last CAR T cell infusion that patient was admitted to the hospital and also got one dose of 10 mg intravenous dexamethasone. At 4 days follow-up, that patient was stable and did not require any additional dexamethasone doses. It was anticipated that a high level of IL13Rα2 expression can elicit a T cell response which can contribute to these neurological symptoms. Another explanation can be tumor recurrence, which was confirmed by a third surgery after 14 weeks of therapy. Post-surgical additional tumor cells were analyzed with the help of IHC, PCR, and flow cytometry which showed decreased expression of IL13Rα2 as compared to before. Therefore, the most likely recurrence was from non-IL13Rα2 subtypes. On post-treatment imaging, two out of three patients did not have any recurrence of tumor on resection site. Therefore, this study showed initial promising results; the only drawback was that it did not study about the long-term survival and persistence of CAR T cells in the body.
After this, Brown et al. [ ] conducted another study regarding CAR T cell therapy targeting IL13Rα2 in one patient with multifocal recurrent GBM, comparing the two different delivery methods. As compared to the previous one, they incorporated 4-1BB (CD137) co-stimulatory molecule and an IgG4-Fc linker in CAR T cells. The patient is a 50-year-old male with GBM in the temporal lobe; he got surgical resection, radiotherapy, and temozolomide as standard therapy. After 6 months, the tumor reoccurred on MRI and then patient was enrolled in this study. While IL13BBζ-CAR T cells were manufactured, he developed rapidly progressing multifocal GBM with involvement of both cerebral hemispheres. Out of five intracranial lesions, three of them were resected and he was started on CAR T cell therapy. He got 2 × 10 6 CAR T cells initially, followed by five infusions of 10 × 10 6 CAR T cells into the cavity of resected tumor through a catheter device. At the local treated site, there was no disease progression, but at two previous resected sites, new lesions reoccurred. Therefore, to improve the CAR T cell trafficking, a second catheter was placed in the right lateral ventricle and he received a total of ten intraventricular doses. After the first three intraventricular infusions, spinal and intracranial tumors reduced in size. After the fifth dose, the tumor reduced by 77%, and on completion of infusion, there was no measurable tumor with MRI and PET. This response was seen during 25 weeks of therapy, but after completion of therapy, new metastases were diagnosed at four sites which were nonadjacent to original or recurrent tumors. After every intraventricular infusion, CAR T cell persistence was measured and there is an increase in concentration by 7 cells/mm 3 . CAR T cell persistence was around 7 days after the first five infusions with peak at 2 days. Inflammatory cytokine levels were also increased by tenfold as compared to pre-infusion levels. Therefore, CAR T cells have shown significant results; the only drawback was poor persistence after finishing the therapy.
Clinical Studies of HER-2 CART Cell Therapy
Ahmed et al. [ ] conducted an open-label, phase 1, dose-escalation study of CAR T cell therapy in 17 patients with HER2-positive GBM. Primary end points of the study were safety and feasibility and the secondary end points were angioblastoma activity and T cell persistence. Out of 17 patients, ten patients were more than 18 years of age and seven patients were below it. All these patients were treated with monotherapy of virus-specific T cells (VSTs) which are specific for cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and adenovirus, and they are genetically engineered to express HER2 CAR receptor with CD28ζ signaling endodomain. Intravenously, CAR T cell infusion was given and patient got the first dosage in the range of 10 6 /m2 to 10 8 /m2 without any lymphodepletion. If there is a response, then additional doses are given at 6–12 weeks interval. There was no dose-limiting toxicity and infusions were well tolerated. However, there was no expansion of CAR T cells in blood but a low level was detectable until 12 months in six patients with PCR. Radiological partial response was seen in one patient; seven had stable disease and a total eight patients had progression of disease after infusion of CAR T cells. Median overall survival from the first infusion and from diagnosis was 11.1 and 24.5 months respectively. From this study, it was concluded that HER2-CAR VSTs is safe with no dose-limiting toxicity; clinical benefit is present and peripheral infusion improves T cell persistence without any T cell expansion. Therefore, this study showed promising results but further studies are required to assess the efficacy of this novel therapy.
Conclusion
Initial studies of CAR T therapy have shown promising results for treatment of advanced GBM. There are some issues like a lack of antigen specificity, poor trafficking, hostile microenvironment, and no T cell expansion. Different strategies are under research to cater to these problems like targeting multiple antigens to increase specificity and response, combining with immune checkpoint inhibitors, intraventricular infusion for direct effect, and use of third-generation and fourth-generation CAR T cells. Therefore, results of phase 1 studies of CAR T therapy are positive but further research is needed to improve the efficacy and clinical outcome of this novel therapy.