Introduction
Synaptic impairments and deficits in normal neuron-to-neuron connectivity are both proximal events in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) neuropathology [ ] and strongly correlate with the severity of dementia [ , , , , ], whereas frank neurodegeneration becomes more relevant only in the later stages of the disease [ , ]. Strong evidence has shown that, other than Aβ species, tau protein(s) also plays a physiopathological role in interneuronal signaling [ , , ] and in synaptic plasticity [ , , , ]. In particular, its soluble and NH 2 -truncated form(s) lacking the microtubule-binding domains has been proved to have a downstream, indispensable role in AD pathogenesis and progression [ , , , , ] mainly at synaptic terminals [ , ] that are the subcellular compartments where AD pathology early takes place [ ]. Relevantly, in addition to the serial “amyloid hypothesis” in the AD etiopathogenesis, a more unifying “dual pathway” model of causality has been also proposed whereby Aβ and tau co-localizing in affected synaptic terminals [ , ] can operate by separate but even converging mechanisms driven by a common upstream trigger [ , ]. However, since the neurofibrillary tangle degeneration—but not senile plaques—is better linked to the degree of synaptic failure [ , , ] and to cognitive decline [ , ], the identification of molecular mechanisms underlying the early tau-mediated synaptic damage in AD has been recently highlighted as an important breakthrough in the successful development of disease-modifying therapeutic approaches aimed to prevent and/or delay the onset/progression of this illness. Consistent with the physiopathological role of tau in the regulation of interneuronal signaling [ , , , ], compelling evidence has demonstrated that the soluble, nonfilamentous extracellular tau species are per se toxic on synaptic function [ , , ] supporting their clearance at the earlier stages of the disease, when cognitive impairments are still not evident, as the most successful strategy to achieve a greater clinical efficacy in the cure of tauopathies [ ]. Considering that (i) among abnormal posttranslational modifications of tau, truncation on N-terminal extremity of protein occurs at very early stages during the symptom progression of AD and other non-AD tauopathies [ , , , ]; (ii) soluble and unaggregated C-terminally truncated tau species are preferentially secreted from synaptosomes of AD brains [ ] and mainly detected in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [ , , , ] and in conditioned media from patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) cortical neurons of affected subjects [ , ], clinical trials with a set of monoclonal tau antibodies binding to and clearing the extracellular and/or intracellular pathological species—including the extreme N-terminal region of human protein—are currently in progress [ , ]. To this regard, passive immunotherapy with antibody targeting the N-terminal projection domain of human tau has shown to be beneficial in improving cognitive deficits in AD transgenic mice [ , , ]. Consistently, both intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) infusion and peripheral administration of anti-tau antibodies specific for N-terminal 25–30 epitopes are curative in P301S mice model of tauopathy by preventing the brain atrophy and improving the motor/sensorimotor functions [ , ]. Interestingly, the levels of amyloid precursor protein (APP), Aβ40, and Aβ42 are also significantly reduced in the CA1 region of AD animal models following immunization with tau antibodies directed against the N-terminal end of protein [ ], suggesting that tau-based immunotherapy is actually able to restore the Aβ-dependent and/or Aβ-independent synaptic dysfunction(s) occurring in early AD and in other related tauopathies associated to dementias [ ].
In search of specific epitopes located in the N-terminus of pathogenic tau which could be antibody-targetable for therapeutic treatment of human tauopathies, we have recently reported that extracellular-applied human NH 2 tau 26–44 (aka NH 2 htau)—which is the minimal active moiety of neurotoxic 20–22 kDa tau peptide accumulating in vivo at AD presynaptic terminals [ , , , ] and present in CSFs from living patients suffering from AD and other non-AD neurodegenerative diseases [ ]—is able to negatively impact on normal synaptic function(s) [ ]. In particular, significant presynaptic deficit in K + -evoked glutamate release takes place in purified hippocampal nerve terminals acutely exposed to subtoxic doses of soluble NH 2 htau in parallel with dynamic perturbations of membrane fluidity and alterations in local Ca 2+ dynamic [ ]. Given that the in vivo validation of structural molecular determinants of pathological tau, which are causally involved in synaptic failure at presymptomatic stages of AD, is a mandatory prerequisite to design better-targeted and, then, more effective immunological strategy, in the present study, we investigated whether exogenous administration of harmful NH 2 htau in healthy wild-type mice is able to elicit a neurodegenerative phenotype resembling human tauopathies. By means of combined morphological, biochemical, behavioral, and electrophysiological measurements, we addressed the in vivo consequences on normal hippocampal memory/learning function(s) and on related signaling pathways following continuous infusion of the monomeric/unaggregated pathological NH 2 htau over 6 days into the lateral ventricle of two different lines of young (2-month-old), nontransgenic mice (C57BL/6 and B6SJL).
Results
NH2htau Impairs In Vivo the Memory Encoding/Consolidation in Hippocampal-Dependent Cognitive Function Task
To identify structural molecular determinants located in the N-terminal of human tau protein which are essential for its pathological effect in vivo on normal synaptic functions, synthetic NH 2 htau and its reverse counterpart were delivered to hippocampal regions from two different strains of healthy, nongenetically modified wild-type young C57BL/6 and B6SJL mice (2 months old). The prevailing molecular form of both tau injected peptides—which were checked prior to any administration via stereotaxic surgeries by SDS-PAGE analysis and biophysical methods—appeared to be soluble and monomeric/unaggregated under current experimental conditions (Suppl. Fig. 1 ), in keeping with our previous analytical observations [ ]. A subchronic i.c.v. infusion of approximately 20 μg/animal (100 μM) of either NH 2 htau or its reverse peptide, used as a negative control, was carried out over a 6-day period by means of osmotic minipumps, followed by investigation of its effects on cognitive function and cellular pathology. This is consistent with the experimental design (total amount of injected tau, injected volume, age and number of animals for group) from previous studies using direct injection of pathological tau species into mice brains in order to mimic their gradual and continuous diffusion/accumulation within the surrounding parenchyma [ , , , ]. After 6 days of surgical pump implantation (6 days postinoculation, d.p.i.), NH 2 htau and reverse-injected animals were evaluated on cognitive performance in selected behavioral task and, subsequently, sacrificed to examine a few characteristic regional hallmarks of AD neuropathology by means of combined morphological, biochemical, and ex vivo electrophysiological measurements (Fig. 1 a). The hippocampal parenchyma, which is known to be associated to preferential deposition of pathological tau in AD pathogenesis [ ], was analyzed since this vulnerable cerebral area (i) selectively and disproportionally degenerates at early stages of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) prior to the clinical diagnosis of full-blown dementia [ , , , , , ]; and (ii) is devoted in human and primates to the object recognition ability which is the first type of learning/memory to be early and severely impaired in affected subjects [ , , ]. In a set of preliminary experiments, we first confirmed the successful delivery/dissemination of exogenously applied NH 2 htau to hippocampal areas of C57BL/6 and B6SJL mice—and its persistence during the time frame of our in vivo experimental conditions—by performing immunofluorescence staining on slice preparations from both experimental groups (i.e., NH 2 htau- and reverse-injected animals) with mAb NH 2 21–36 tau, a commercial human-specific polyclonal antibody which does not recognize murine endogenous tau [ ]. As shown in Fig. 1 b, a strong and specific intensity in immunoreactivity signal was evident above the background noise in hippocampal sections from NH 2 htau-treated mice of both strains up to 6 days after its intracerebral infusion, whereas control slices from the animal group which were infused with reverse peptide and examined under the same experimental condition displayed no specific labeling. Interestingly, in line with prolonged lifespan of extracellular tau species [ , ] and with the propensity of monomeric and/or aggregated exogenous tau of being successfully uptaken by neurons [ , ], the staining of exogenously applied NH 2 htau within hippocampal structures was not diffused but appeared to be rather compartmentalized along the perikarya, neuritic processes, and nuclei suggesting that, after its penetration through the ependymocyte barrier bordering ventricles and gradual diffusion into the surrounding brain parenchyma, this peptide was adsorbed/trapped by local neurons where it eventually accumulated and remained stable up to 6 days after infusion (Suppl. Fig. 2 ). These findings are also consistent with our previous ex vivo and biophysical observations [ ], indicating that the extracellularly added NH 2 htau—but not its reverse counterpart—is able to interact with authentic hippocampal plasma membranes, in both synaptic and nonsynaptic areas, and to be internalized by dynamic penetration of the lipid bilayer following its initial surface absorption. Fig. 1 Impaired performance in short-term recognition memory task is linked to the accumulation of exogenous NH 2 htau into CA1 hippocampal region from healthy, nontransgenic injected mice. a Diagram of experimental design. On day 1, nongenetically modified wild-type young (2-month-old) mice were implanted with Alzet minipumps containing NH 2 htau or reverse peptide for subchronic intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injection (20 μg; 100 μl; 100 μM). Six days after surgery, Alzet-implanted and nonimplanted (naive, age-matched, home-cage) mice were evaluated for short-term memory processing in the novel object recognition task (NOR) and, then, sacrificed for the following biochemical, morphological, and electrophysiological analyses. Details of NOR behavioral test are also shown. Numbers refer to objects presented during sample and test trial. FO = familiar object, NO = novel object. b Hippocampal accumulation/distribution of exogenous NH 2 htau after its 6 days of injection into the mice cerebroventricule. Infused trained animals from the two different genetic backgrounds (wild-type, 2-month-old, C57BL/6 and B6SJL mice, respectively) were sacrificed 6 d.p.i. for the following immunofluorescence analysis aimed to check the successful diffusion of peptide(s) to hippocampal CA1 regions. Exogenously delivered NH 2 htau was detected by probing with human-specific NH 2 21–36 tau, a polyclonal antibody which does not cross-react with murine endogenous tau [ ]. Sections from reverse-infused treated animals, which were treated and examined in parallel under the same conditions, displayed no specific labeling. Note that, in addition to its localization along perikarya and neuritic processes, the injected NH 2 htau is largely detected into the nuclei from hippocampal neurons of C57BL/6 mice, likely due to an enhanced genome vulnerability of this strain to tau-induced DNA damage. On the contrary, only one or two nuclei from hippocampal neurons of B6SJL genetic background appear to be positive for NH 2 htau staining. Scale bar = 20 μm. c – f Six days after subchronic inoculation of tau peptides via surgical implantation of minipumps, the in vivo effect of NH 2 htau on cognitive performance was investigated in two different genetic backgrounds (wild-type, 2-month-old, C57BL/6 and B6SJL mice, respectively) in the novel object recognition (NOR) task. On the left: Histograms ( c – e ) represent the total time (s) spent to explore the object during training among the different experimental groups (home-cage, reverse, and NH 2 htau-injected mice) from both analyzed strains (C57BL/6 and B6SJL, respectively). On the right: Histograms ( d – f ) represent the discrimination/preference index (%) of corresponding values measured during the test trial from home-cage, reverse-treated, and NH 2 htau-treated mice of both analyzed strains (C57BL/6 and B6SJL, respectively). The columns’ color refers to objects presented during sample (gray = object 1; black = object 2) and test trial (gray = familiar object 1; black = novel object 3). Analysis of preference index (%) measured as time spent in the exploration of the novel object/(time spent in the exploration of novel object + time spent in the exploration of familiar object) × 100. Data were expressed as means ± SEM ( n = 4). Statistically significant differences were calculated by a two-way ANOVA analysis (treatment object × discrimination) in both mice strains ( F (2, 36) = 16.705; p = 0.00001 for C57BL/6; F (2, 10) = 5.03; p = 0.03 for B6SJL) with the novel object being preferred in home-cage and reverse-treated animals (Fisher post hoc test NO vs FO home-cage: ** p < 0.01, reverse: *** p < 0.0001, NH 2 htau: p = 0.89 for C57BL/6; Fischer post hoc analysis NO vs FO home-cage: * p < 0.05, reverse: ***p < 0.0001, NH 2 htau: p = 0.79 for B6SJL). Notice that NH 2 htau significantly impaired short-term memory, as shown by the inability of the infused mice to recognize the familiar object despite the equal time spent in investigating both objects
Having established that the hippocampus is successfully targeted in vivo following subchronic infusion of NH 2 htau into the lateral cerebroventricle, cognitive functioning of injected mice was tested 6 d.p.i. in the novel object recognition task (NOR), a behavior paradigm which is considered an appropriate readout for measures of learning/memory impairment in transgenic and nontransgenic animal models of tauopathies, including AD [ , ]. Relevantly, the NOR behavioral test (i) involves brain areas such as transentorhinal/entorhinal/perirhinal cortices and hippocampus which are pathologically relevant in this field, being affected by neurofibrillary tau changes at early stages of disease [ , , , , ]; and (ii) is a nonaversive learning paradigm, avoiding the potential confounds of using differential rewards or punishments, able to test the hippocampal-dependent episodic memory [ , ] which is the first type of memory affected in AD patients [ , , ]. Owing to innate and spontaneous preference of mice toward novelty, any increase in exploration of the novel object (NO) during the test session is to be ascribed to the animal’s ability in discriminating it from the familiar one (FO), and this parameter was quantified as preference/recognition index (RI), which is calculated as the percentage of time spent exploring the new object over the total time spent exploring the two objects. In the recognition session, a preference index for the NO above 50% indicated that the NO was preferred, below 50% that the FO was preferred, and at 50% that no object was preferred [ ]. Interestingly (Fig. 1 c–f), we found that mice from two genetic backgrounds (C57BL/6 and B6SJL, respectively) receiving NH 2 htau showed severe short-term memory deficits in this hippocampal-dependent task, being unable to distinguish both objects with no significant preference either for NO or for FO (C57BL/6 RI = 49.59%; B6SJL RI = 48.11%). On the contrary, reverse-treated and untreated/naive home-cage controls spent greater time exploring the NO, thus displaying an intact process of memory encoding/consolidation (C57BL/6 home-cage RI = 65.0%; C57BL/6 reverse RI = 76.59%; B6SJL home-cage RI = 73.94%; B6SJL reverse RI = 78.09%, respectively). Accordingly, a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) statistical analysis of behavioral data (treatment × object discrimination) indicated significant difference between the three experimental groups in both animal strains analyzed ( F (2, 36) = 16.705; p = 0.00001 for C57BL/6; F (2, 10) = 5.03; p = 0.03 for B6SJL) with the novel object being preferred in home-cage and reverse-treated cohorts (Fisher post hoc test NO vs FO = home-cage: ** p < 0.01, reverse: *** p < 0.0001, NH 2 htau: p = 0.89 for C57BL/6; Fischer post hoc test NO vs FO home-cage: * p < 0.05, reverse: ** p < 0.01, NH 2 htau: p = 0.79 for B6SJL). Finally, an adequate paired comparison also confirmed that preference for the NO was significantly reduced in NH 2 htau-injected animals compared with those from home-cage (Student’s t test * p < 0.05) and scramble-injected (** p < 0.01) groups.
Furthermore, despite the fact that several aspects of mouse behavior, including memory/learning function(s), are known to be affected by genetic background [ , , , ], the pattern of cognitive deficits observed among three experimental groups in the two different wild-type strains was comparable. In fact, even though the average exploration time was slightly reduced in NH 2 htau- and reverse-injected mice in comparison with untreated home-cage (i.e., age-matched and naive) controls which did not undergo pump implant, no significant difference (treatment × object discrimination) was measured during the training phase among the three experimental groups from different wild-type strains which explored both objects for the same length of time regardless of peptide-based treatment and without any particular preference toward a side of the cage (two-way ANOVA analysis F (2, 38 = 0.54; p = 0.59 for C57BL/6; F (3, 18) = 0.039; p = 0.98 for B6SJL mice; Fisher post hoc test NO vs FO = home-cage: p = 0.38, reverse: p = 0.89, NH 2 htau: p = 0.59 for C57BL/6; Fischer post hoc test NO vs FO home-cage: p = 0.70, reverse: p = 0.91, NH 2 htau: p = 0.94 for B6SJL). Importantly, the NH 2 htau-induced memory impairment was completely antagonized by preincubation (1:10 M ratio) with our ad hoc devised specific 12A12 monoclonal antibody directed against the extreme N-terminal 26–36 aa of human tau protein (epitopes 26–44) [ ], because the inability of injected mice in discriminating between the familiar and novel objects was fully prevented by its immunoneutralization prior to in vivo administration. Likewise, heat-denatured 12A12 antibody, being unable to bind NH 2 htau, did not antagonize its deleterious effect in vivo on behavioral performance of treated mice (data not shown).
Consistent with the prominent role of nonfibrillar soluble forms of extracellular human tau in AD neuropathology [ , , , , ], these findings demonstrate that: (i) an exogenous injection of soluble/diffusible NH 2 htau is able to disrupt the mnestic functions assessed in hippocampal-dependent NOR cognitive task in otherwise healthy nontransgenic mice from two different genetic backgrounds, resembling the early cognitive deficits observed in human AD staging; (ii) the NH 2 htau-induced cognitive impairment is specific because its reverse sequence is actually inactive in perturbing recognition memory in treated mice which perform just like home-cage untreated controls; and (iii) preincubation with specific 12A12 anti-N-tau antibody completely abrogates the memory deficits in NH 2 htau-treated mice, indicating that the immunotherapeutic approach aimed at targeting the pathological NH 2 htau might lead to recovery in performance of cognitive functions in vivo.
Reduced Synaptic Connectivity and Reactive Gliosis Are Early Detected in NH2htau-Injected Mice in Correlation with Behavioral Deficits
Loss in synaptic integration—either through a decrease in apposition of pre- and postsynaptic sites or because of increased dendritic spine elimination especially within selective brain network such as the neocortex and hippocampus subserving the learning/memory processes [ , , , , ]—disrupts neurochemical function [ ] and is one of the earliest and best-correlated pathologic hallmarks of AD [ , , , , , , , , ] in strong correlation with cognitive decline [ ]. Reduced synaptic connectivity, in particular in hippocampal glutamatergic circuits, is also recapitulated in transgenic mice models of tauopathies [ , , , , , ] consistent with a prominent role of soluble pathological tau at nerve terminals [ , , , , ]. In view of these findings, to gain insights into the molecular mechanism underlying the NH 2 htau-induced in vivo memory deficits, we first carried out on hippocampal CA1 region from 2-month-old C57BL/6-injected animal cohorts a quantitative evaluation of the proportion of excitatory intact synaptic boutons which are currently considered the best neurobiological correlate of behavioral deficits observed in AD transgenic mice [ , , ]. Because the establishment/maintenance of a functional synapse requires a stable neurochemical connection between a single axonal afferent and its appropriate cellular target, morphological assessment by confocal double-immunofluorescence analysis of phenotypic-specific pre- and postsynaptic markers was performed on slice preparations from the three experimental groups (NH 2 htau- and reverse-treated animals in comparison with age-matched and naive home-cage controls). As presynaptic marker, we chose the vesicular glutamate transporter 1 (vGlut1)—the principal glutamate transporter in adult pyramidal neurons [ ]—whereas the postsynaptic density protein (PSD95)—a major constituent of postsynaptic density [ ]—was selected to label postsynaptic sites. As shown in Fig. 2 a, b, immunostaining displayed a densely packed, dot-like signal pattern resembling the characteristic distribution of intact synaptic boutons (arrow) with the number of co-labeled puncta being comparable between reverse-injected and home-cage control mice but significantly reduced in NH 2 htau-injected mice (one-way ANOVA analysis F (2, 24) = 3.52, p = 0.045; Fisher post hoc tests: reverse-injected vs home-cage p = 0.63, NH 2 htau-injected vs home-cage * p < 0.05, NH 2 htau-injected vs reverse-injected * p < 0.05). Interestingly, by single immunocytochemistry for neuronal marker NeuN, no significant difference was contextually detected among the three experimental groups (NH 2 htau- and reverse-injected in comparison with age-matched and naive home-cage controls), suggesting that NH 2 htau-induced memory impairment assessed in behavioral task was associated with a subtle hippocampal damage but without any overall reduction in the extent of neuronal population (Fig. 2 c, d; one-way ANOVA analysis F (2, 8) = 1.11, p = 0.37; Fisher post hoc tests: reverse-injected vs home-cage p = 0.26, NH 2 htau-injected vs home-cage p = 0.62, NH 2 htau-injected vs reverse-injected p = 0.18). Likewise, no evident sign of neurodegeneration was also detected in NH 2 htau-infused animals following Western blotting analysis of activated caspase-3 (Asp 175) level on total protein extracts (Suppl. Fig. 3 ). Fig. 2 Structural integrity of synaptic connections (dendritic spines and axonal boutons) is severely compromised in C57BL/6 wild-type NH 2 htau-injected mice in the absence of overt neuronal loss. a , b Representative images ( n = 4) of double immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy analysis for presynaptic marker vesicular glutamate transporter 1 (vGlut1) (red channel) and the postsynaptic marker PSD95 (green channel) carried out on CA1 hippocampal sections from C57BL/6 wild-type (2-month-old) NH 2 htau- and reverse-injected mice. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue channel) ( a ). The number of intact excitatory synapses (vGlut1/PSD95-positive puncta) from the three experimental groups (reverse, NH 2 htau-injected and age-matched home-cage controls) was quantified and results are shown ( b ). Note that the loss of glutamatergic synaptic connectivity is due both to reduction per se in the density of both vGlut1- and PSD95-positive dots and to anatomical and, likely, functional mispairing into the synaptic area consistent with the global displacement of synaptic proteome detected in NH 2 htau-injected mice. Statistically significant differences were calculated by a one-way ANOVA analysis followed by Fisher post hoc test (one-way ANOVA analysis (2, 24) = 3.52, p = 0.045; Fisher post hoc tests: reverse-injected vs home-cage p = 0.63, NH 2 htau-injected vs home-cage * p < 0.05, NH 2 htau-injected vs reverse-injected * p < 0.05). Scale bar = 10 μm. c , d Representative images ( n = 3) of CA1 hippocampal region from NH 2 htau- and reverse-injected C57BL/6 wild-type mice (2-month-old) stained for neuron-specific nuclear marker NeuN ( c ). No statistical difference in the number of NeuN positive neurons (one-way ANOVA analysis (2, 8) = 1.11, p = 0.37; Fisher post hoc tests: reverse-injected vs home-cage p = 0.26, NH 2 htau-injected vs home-cage p = 0.62, NH 2 htau-injected vs reverse-injected p = 0.18) was calculated among the three analyzed experimental groups (reverse, NH 2 htau-injected, and age-matched home-cage controls). Scale bar = 0 μm. e , f Representative blots ( n = 5) of SDS-PAGE Western blotting analysis on isolated synaptosomal preparations from hippocampal region of NH 2 htau- and reverse-injected wild-type C57BL/6 mice (2-month-old) to assess the content of presynaptic (α-synuclein, synapsin I, syntaxin, synaptosomal-associated protein 25 (SNAP-25), synaptophysin, and postsynaptic proteins N -methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor subunit NR1 and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor subunit mGluR2 and mGluR5). β-Actin and GAPDH (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase) were used as loading controls ( e ) and densitometric quantification was shown ( f ). Values are means of at least three independent experiments, and statistically significant differences were calculated by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test (* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01). g , h Comparative photomicrographs ( g ) of Golgi-stained hippocampal CA1 neurons showing dendritic segments from reverse- and NH 2 htau-injected (2-month-old) nontransgenic C57BL/6 mice (top-left, black square refers to CA1 pyramidal neurons, scale bar = 250 μm), (top-right, refers to CA1 pyramidal neurons dendrites, scale bar = 5 μm). Histograms ( h ) depict the morphometric analysis of the dendritic spine density from the two experimental groups (at least 15 neurons from three mice for the experimental group were used for quantitative analysis). Values are expressed as number of spines (mean ± SEM) per 1-μm segment. Statistically significant differences were calculated by one-way ANOVA analysis followed by Fisher post hoc test ( F (2, 22) = 4.80 p = 0.019; reverse- vs NH 2 htau-injected * p < 0.05; home-cage vs NH 2 htau-injected ** p < 0.01). Notice that the density of dendritic spines of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons—which appeared to be atrophic (shrinkage) and reduced in size—is significantly lower in the NH 2 htau-injured group than in the reverse-treated one
Similar results were also found in B6SJL genetic background after double staining for pre- and postsynaptic markers—synaptophysin and PSD95, respectively—to detect the unbroken/undamaged synaptic connections (Suppl. Fig. 4 A, arrow). As shown in Suppl. Fig. 4 A–D, the NH 2 htau-injected experimental group displayed a significant decrease in the number of co-labeled punctate synaptic clusters in comparison with reverse-treated and home-cage control mice (one-way ANOVA analysis F (2, 23) = 27.5 p < 0.001; Fisher post hoc test home-cage vs NH 2 htau-injected:** p < 0.01; reverse-injected vs NH 2 htau-injected: *** p < 0.0001) in the absence of any overt reduction in neurons number (one-way ANOVA analysis, F (2, 23) = 1.62 Fisher post hoc test reverse- vs NH 2 htau-injected p = 0.22; home-cage vs NH 2 htau-injected p = 0.74; reverse-injected vs home-cage p = 0.08).
Consistently, biochemical analysis by Western blotting SDS-PAGE carried out on purified synaptosomal preparations confirmed a marked dysregulation of hippocampal synaptic proteome in NH 2 htau-injected mice when compared to reverse-treated and home-cage untreated controls, in line with their poor behavioral performance in NOR cognitive task (Fig. 1 c, d). As shown in Fig. 2 e, f, a significant decrease in the expression levels of selected presynaptic proteins which are involved in local turnover of synaptic vesicles and/or Ca 2+ -triggered neurotransmitter release—such as α-synuclein, synapsin I, syntaxin, synaptosomal-associated protein 25 (SNAP-25)—was noticed between the two experimental groups analyzed (unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01). Furthermore, a pronounced upregulation in the expression levels of N -methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor subunit NR1 and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor subunit mGluR2 was contextually detected (unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test * p < 0.05) just mimicking the in vivo conditions in AD brains [ , , ]. Conversely, the steady-state levels of other pre- and postsynaptic proteins, such as synaptophysin and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor subunit mGluR5, were unchanged [ , , , ], consistent with the notion that the general loss of functional/neurochemical connectivity in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons in AD brains and in transgenic mice models is more likely to be a multivariate event, including both neurodegenerative and maladaptive compensatory responses in structural remodeling of the remaining surviving synapses [ , , , , ]. No significant alterations in synaptic proteins expression were detected between the reverse-injected and home-cage untreated control, in line with previous results from behavioral performance in cognitive task (Fig. 1 c, d) and with the assessment in stability of synaptic network (Fig. 2 b). Finally, similar results were obtained in B6SJL genetic background showing an imbalanced protein expression level in selected hippocampal pre- and postsynaptic markers (Suppl. Fig. 4 E-F).
Hippocampal spines—which protrude from dendritic shafts and undergo dynamic remodeling in number, size, and shape in response to short- and long-term memory/cognition [ , , ]—are early and severely targeted by pathological tau in neurons [ , , , ]. Therefore, the dendritic spine density (number of spines per unit length) of pyramidal hippocampal CA1 neurons from the three experimental groups (NH 2 htau- and reverse-treated animals in comparison with age-matched and naive home-cage controls) of C57BL/6-injected animals was evaluated by Golgi-Cox impregnation (Fig. 2 g) and data quantification is shown in Fig. 2 h. Consistent with previous in vivo results from well-established transgenic mice models of tauopathies including AD [ , , , , , , , , ], spine protrusions along dendritic trees were significantly reduced in hippocampal pyramidal neurons from NH 2 htau-injected mice in comparison with reverse-treated and home-cage controls (one-way ANOVA analysis F (2, 22) = 4.80 p = 0.019; Fischer post hoc test reverse- vs NH 2 htau-injected * p < 0.05; home-cage vs NH 2 htau-injected ** p < 0.01). Furthermore, the dynamic changes of spine shapes in stubby (short without neck, arrowhead), thin (thin with a small head and a long neck, arrow), and mushroom (bulbous head with a narrow neck, asterisk)—which is usually regarded to critically impact on synaptic circuit connectivity [ ]—was not clearly discernable in dendrites from NH 2 htau-injected animals whose protrusions appeared to be strongly reduced in size and atrophic (shrinkage). In particular, we found that the majority of spines in CA1 hippocampal region from reverse-injected mice was mature, as indicated by their larger mushroom-like size (asterisk), whereas cerebral infusion with NH 2 htau markedly enhanced spine shrinkage/retraction, in line with their poor performance when tested in hippocampus-dependent NOR behavioral task. Consistently, the dendritic spine score was also significantly lower in NH 2 htau- treated mice than in the other two experimental groups of animals from the B6SJL strain (Suppl. Fig. 4 G-H one-way ANOVA analysis F (2, 23) = 7.4 p = 0.003; Fischer post hoc test reverse- vs NH 2 htau-injected: ** p < 0.01; home-cage vs NH 2 htau-injected: ** p < 0.01).
Dendritic spines are highly enriched in polymerized F-actin which drives their formation (size, number, and morphology/shape) and maturation. A key regulator of actin dynamics is cofilin, a filamentous F-actin-severing protein which increases the turnover of F-actin by severing the filaments and creating new barbed ends for F-actin growth [ , , , , , , ]. In keeping with a crucial role of actin remodeling in spine plasticity/integrity and, then, in memory and learning processes [ , ], pathological inclusions of cofilin-actin rods detected in AD transgenic mice and human brains have been accepted to contribute to cognitive deficits at early stages of dementia [ ]. In view of these considerations, we assessed whether the reduction of spine density detected in the NH 2 htau-injected mice was also correlated to corresponding changes in the phosphorylation (inactivation) cofilin (Ser-3), a posttranslational modification which crucially controls its functional state [ , ]. As shown in Fig. 3 a, b and in line with morphological reduction of spine density and atrophy (Fig. 2 g, h), Western blotting analysis on hippocampal synaptosomal preparations from (2-month-old) C57BL/6-injected mice revealed that the phosphorylated form of cofilin (Ser-3) was robustly decreased in NH 2 htau-treated animals in comparison to reverse-applied experimental group (unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test * p < 0.05). Again, similar results were obtained in animals from the B6SJL strain which were analyzed and treated under the same experimental conditions (Suppl. Fig. 5 A-B). Fig. 3 Inflammatory response is strongly activated in C57BL/6 wild-type NH 2 htau-injected mice. a , b Representative blots ( n = 3) of Western blotting analysis on isolated synaptosomal preparations from the hippocampal region of NH 2 htau- and reverse-injected wild-type C57BL/6 mice (2-month-old) to assess the level of phosphorylated (inactive) form of cofilin (Ser-3) and total cofilin. β-Actin and GAPDH (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase) were used as loading controls and densitometric quantification was shown. Data are mean ± SEM and statistical significance was calculated by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test (* p < 0.05). c , d Representative images ( n = 3) of confocal microscopy analysis of immunofluorescence for two classical markers of active astrogliosis and microgliosis—glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and Iba1, respectively (green channel)—carried out on CA1 hippocampal sections from C57BL/6 wild-type (2-month-old) NH 2 htau- and reverse-injected mice. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue channel). Notice the extensive proliferation and morphological changes of astrocytes and microglia (reactive gliosis) in the hippocampal region from NH 2 htau-infused mice. Scale bar = 50 μm. e – h Western blotting analysis for inflammatory proteins (GFAP, Iba1, e – g , respectively) were performed on hippocampal extracts from NH 2 htau- and reverse-injected wild-type C57BL/6 mice (2-month-old) to check the extent of inflammatory response. Relative densitometric quantification ( f – h ) indicates increased levels of GFAP and Iba1 in NH 2 htau- compared to reverse-injected wild-type C57BL/6 mice (2-month-old). GAPDH serves as loading control. Data are mean ± SEM and statistical significance was calculated by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test (*** p < 0.01; ** p < 0.01)
Along with hippocampal synaptic pathology, inflammation is also one of the earliest manifestations of neurodegenerative tauopathies [ , , , ]. Therefore, to check whether the inflammatory response was activated by hippocampal accumulation of exogenously infused NH 2 htau in mice, immunofluorescence analysis for two classical markers of active astrogliosis and microgliosis—glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and Iba1, respectively [ ]—was performed on CA1 slices from NH 2 htau- and reverse-treated young (2-month-old) wild-type C57BL/6 animals. As shown in Fig. 3 c, d, the NH 2 htau-injected group showed a pronounced hippocampal astrocytosis and microgliosis with increased number of both GFAP-positive activated astrocytes and Iba1-positive microglia, indicating a strong neuroinflammatory response. In addition to extensive proliferation, reactive astrocytes in NH 2 htau-infused cohort also showed significant changes in morphology characterized by an increase in GFAP-stained surface area and volume, along with more copious and thicker processes (hypertrophy) (arrow), in contrast to more round-like aspect detected in reverse-treated experimental group (arrowhead). Likewise, the majority of microglia from NH 2 htau-injected animals exhibited a typically activated morphology featured by enlarged cell bodies with retracted and thickened and retracted branches (arrow) in striking contrast with the resting phenotype detected in the hippocampus of reverse-treated experimental group displaying a ramified morphology with polygonal/more elongated somata and thin cellular processes (arrowhead). Similar results were obtained in B6SJL genetic background which were analyzed and treated under the same experimental conditions (Suppl. Fig. 5 C-D). Finally, the upregulation of GFAP and Iba1 expression levels in the hippocampus of NH 2 htau-treated groups was also confirmed by Western blotting analysis on total protein extracts from both animal strains (Fig. 3 e–h; Suppl. Fig. 5 E–H), favoring the findings that a strong activation of neuroinflammatory occurred in vivo in response to 6 d.p.i. accumulation of the injected toxic tau specie(s).
Taken together, these in vivo biochemical and morphological data indicate that (i) memory deficits in hippocampal-dependent behavioral NOR test observed in NH 2 htau-injected mice are early associated with sublethal damage in subserving CA1 region which leads to global reduction in synaptic connectivity (diminution in the proportion of intact synaptic contacts and in the dendritic spine density) along with a dysregulation and/or maladaptive compensatory rearrangements of remaining excitatory synapses; (ii) synapse loss in NH 2 htau-treated animals occurs in concomitance of prominent neuroinflammation (microgliosis and astrogliosis) but in the absence of frank neuronal loss; and (iii) this global deterioration in synaptic neural network is specific, because its reverse counterpart is unable to induce any pathological alterations when infused in mice from two different genetic backgrounds which do not significantly differ from untreated home-cage controls.
Soluble pathological NH2htau Affects Neurotransmitter Release Probability at CA1 Hippocampal Synapses and In Vivo Disrupts Normal Synaptic Function
In vitro and in vivo evidence supports the notion that, in addition to its classical postsynaptic actions [ , ] and prior to frank neuronal loss, pathological tau can directly or indirectly contribute to early synaptic dysfunction by affecting presynaptic neurotransmission [ , , , , , , , ]. In line with recent findings indicating that immunological targeting the N-terminal domain is sufficient to alleviate the presynaptic deficits caused by local accumulation of pathogenic human tau [ ], we have previously reported that subtoxic doses (picomolar) of extracellularly applied NH 2 htau—but not of its reverse counterpart—acutely provoke presynaptic deficits in K + -evoked Ca 2+ -dependent glutamate release from hippocampal synaptosomes [ ]. In view of these findings, we performed ex vivo electrophysiological recordings of synaptically driven neuronal activity on hippocampal sections from NH 2 htau- and reverse-treated C57BL/6 mice to assess whether the relative differences in integrity and/or connectivity of excitatory synapses detected (Figs. 1 and 2 ) could also be linked to corresponding functional aberrations in normal neuronal communication, in particular at the presynaptic level.
To this aim, we first examined the basal synaptic transmission by stimulating the Schaffer collateral pathway every 30 s at increasing intensities and generating input/output (I/O) curves from measures of fiber volleys and field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) elicited in the stratum radiatum of the CA1 area. As shown in Fig. 4 a calculated by plotting fEPSP slopes against fiber volley amplitude, no noticeable change was found between the two experimental groups (unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test p > 0.05), indicating that fast glutamatergic transmission was not strongly compromised in NH 2 htau-injected animals despite global deterioration observed in their synaptic connectivity. Fig. 4 Neurotransmitter release probability is severely compromised in the hippocampus from NH 2 htau-injected wild-type C57BL/6 mice. a Input/output curves are shown as plots of the field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) slopes against the corresponding presynaptic fiber volley amplitudes. No significant difference (unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test p > 0.05) was detected on hippocampal slices from no-transgenic C57BL/6 (2-month-old) reverse- ( n = 9) and NH 2 htau-injected mice ( n = 10). b Comparison of paired-pulse facilitation (PPF) on hippocampal sections from nontransgenic C57BL/6 (2-month-old) reverse- ( n = 9) and NH 2 htau-injected mice ( n = 10). Paired-pulse ratios (slope of second EPSP/slope of first EPSP) were plotted as a function of the interpulse interval (20–50–100–200–500 ms). At least 11 slices from 3 different mice are shown for each experimental condition, and the average paired-pulse ratios at each interstimulus interval were obtained. Data are presented as the mean (±SEM) facilitation of the second response relative to the first response. Significant values were detected at 50 and 100 ms interval (unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test * p < 0.05). c Superimposed pooled data representing normalized changes in the field potential slope (±SEM) induced by HFS (100 Hz, 1 s) are shown. The magnitude of potentiation was measured 50–60 min after the conditioning train. For each condition, fEPSP recordings from baseline and 60 min post-HFS were calculated. At least 7 slices from 4 different mice were recorded for each experimental condition. Time plot of fEPSP responses showed that no change in magnitude of CA1-LTP was found between 2-month-old nontransgenic reverse- ( n = 9) and NH 2 htau-injected mice ( n = 10) (unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test * p > 0.05)
Next, we investigated the presynaptic function by assessing paired-pulse facilitation (PPF), a short-term plasticity paradigm which inversely depends on presynaptic changes in neurotransmitter release probability at nerve endings [ , , , , , ]. Interestingly and in line with our ex vivo observations [ ], NH 2 htau-injected mice exhibited a significant increase in PPF ratio when compared to reverse-treated cohort (unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test * p < 0.05) at 50 and 100 ms interpulse interval (Fig. 4 b), indicating a presynaptic inhibitory modulation on glutamatergic Schaffer collateral fibers.
Of importance, since this experimentally induced animal model itself does not express human tau, any deficit in presynaptic transmission in the CA3–CA1 hippocampal synapses is more likely to reflect the detrimental consequences of exogenously delivered NH 2 htau diffusion followed by its internalization and accumulation into presynaptic nerve endings of this selected brain region [ , ]. The NH 2 htau-mediated modulation of glutamatergic transmission at CA3–CA1 synapses was also consistent with marked downregulation in the steady-state levels of important presynaptic proteins involved in local turnover of synaptic vesicles and/or Ca 2+ -triggered neurotransmitter release, as we detected by Western blotting analysis on isolated fractions (Fig. 2 e, f).
Finally, we evaluated long-term potentiation (LTP), a widely employed model of synaptic plastic changes occurring during learning and memory [ ]. Interestingly and in support of the robust pathological effect caused in vivo by NH 2 htau at the presynaptic rather than at the postsynaptic compartment, no difference in the magnitude of LTP was contextually detected between the two experimental groups as evidenced by the findings that the averaged synaptic potentiation measured 60 min after application of high-frequency stimulation (HFS) was 1.44 ± 0.1 in NH 2 htau- and 1.52 ± 0.11 in reverse-infused mice, respectively (unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test p > 0.05; Fig. 4 c). Intriguingly and regardless of the reduction assessed in spine counts in CA1 apical dendrites by Golgi staining, the postsynaptic responsiveness appeared not to be attenuated in NH 2 htau-injected cohort, likely due to compensatory rearrangements in their remaining excitatory synapses which showed an increased expression level of several postsynaptic protein markers (Fig. 2 e, f, Suppl. Fig. 4 E-F).
Remarkably, we did not detect any apparent effect of genotype on evoked hippocampal neuronal activity because similar results were obtained when electrophysiological recordings were replicated on isolated hippocampal slices from B6SJL mice strain (Suppl. Fig. 6 A–C).
Overall, in line with our previous results showing that sublethal (picomolar) doses of extracellular NH 2 htau are able to inhibit Ca 2+ -evoked presynaptic release of glutamate from isolated hippocampal synaptosomes [ ], these findings demonstrate that 6 d.p.i. hippocampal accumulation of extracellularly delivered NH 2 htau in vivo is able to selectively decrease neurotransmitter release probability at the Schaffer collateral to CA1 pyramidal cell synapses without any alteration in basal transmission and in CA1-LTP.
The Experience-Induced, Plasticity-Related CREB/c-Fos Pathway(s) Is Repressed in NH2htau-Injected Mice in Correlation with Functional and Behavioral Deficits
Having established that experimentally induced delivery/accumulation of NH 2 htau in hippocampal regions of wild-type young C57BL/6 and B6SJL mice was able to induce cognitive deficits associated with severe structural and functional local weakening of nerve terminals, we set about to investigating the in vivo molecular mechanisms directly and/or indirectly involved in tau-induced impaired neurotransmission. Disrupted calcium homeostasis and, then, deregulation of calcium-mediated signaling—including an imbalance in activities of Ca 2+ -calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII) and Ca 2+ -dependent phosphatase calcineurin (CaN)—are causally associated to synaptic failure and/or memory loss in AD pathogenesis [ , , ]. In particular, a shift from the CaMKII-dependent pathway(s)—controlling the synaptic maintenance—in favor of the CaN-mediated one—regulating the synaptic weakening—has been proposed to lead to synaptic loss and cognitive decline at early stages of AD neurodegeneration [ , ]. Furthermore, by conveying information from synaptic compartments to nucleus, the Ca 2+ -calmodulin-dependent protein kinase cascade is crucial for adjusting the synaptic strength in response to experience and, then, for the activity-dependent control of neuronal gene expression occurring during the learning/memory processes [ , ]. In view of these considerations, Western blotting analysis was carried out on hippocampal cytosol/nuclear-enriched preparations from NH 2 htau- and reverse-injected young (2-month-old) C57BL/6 mice to measure the steady-state levels and/or the posttranslational modifications of intracellular signaling mediators of AD-relevant Ca 2+ -dependent cascade(s) required for activity-dependent modulation of synaptic plasticity and learning/memory processes. As shown in Fig. 5 and in line with previous observations from AD mice models and human brains [ , , , , , , ], we found that a significant dephosphorylation (T286)/inactivation in nuclear signaling of the CaMKII was inversely correlated to an upregulation in the CaN pathway following truncation of its cytosolic regulatory A-subunit in a constitutively active 42-kDa cleaved fragment (Fig. 5 a–d, unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test * p < 0.05) in NH 2 htau-cognitive injured mice sacrificed 1 h after the test acquisition. Fig. 5 In vivo accumulation of exogenous NH 2 htau into C57BL/6 hippocampus shifts the intracellular balance from the CaMKII- toward the CaN-stimulated signaling pathway(s) leading to nuclear dephosphorylation/inactivation of CREB and to parallel downregulation in c-Fos expression. a – i The protein levels of total CaMKII, pCaMKII ( a ), CN-A full length, CN-A active truncated form ( c ), and CREB/pCREB ( e ) and the expression profile of 62-, 49-, and 41-kDa c-Fos ( g ) immunoreactive bands were assessed by SDS-PAGE Western blotting analysis on cytosol/nuclear enriched preparations of hippocampal regions from NH 2 htau- ( n = 3) and reverse-injected ( n = 3) young (2-month-old) C57BL/6 mice which were sacrificed immediately at 1 h after the test acquisition. Bar graphs show the densitometric quantification of the relative averaged signal intensity ( b , d , f , h ). Superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) and neuron-specific neuronal nuclei (NeuN) proteins were used as cytosolic and nuclear markers, respectively ( i ). * p < 0.05 (unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test)
Disruption of key intraneuronal signaling cascades subserving the experience-dependent synaptic plasticity is known to contribute to cognitive and memory defects in different transgenic animal models of tauopathies, including AD [ , , , , , , ]. Therefore, to gain deeper insights on the molecular mechanism(s) underlying the disruptive in vivo effect of NH 2 htau on synaptic plasticity, we also investigated the hippocampal expression level and/or posttranslational modification of c-Fos and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), two signaling proteins which are considered to be specific markers at the single cell level of transynaptic neuronal activity occurring during the maintenance/remodeling of normal memory acquisition/consolidation [ , , , ] and are strongly dysregulated in AD pathogenesis [ , , , , ]. Of relevance, the constitutive transcription factor CREB is controlled by CaMKII-phosphorylation in an activity-dependent manner during the learning process and, when phosphorylated at Ser133 (pCREB Ser133), is able to rapidly [ , , ] induce the transcription of selected downstream genes with a CRE site in their promoter, including the immediately early gene (IEG) c-Fos [ , ]. Moreover, the CREB-stimulated c-Fos transcription is considered to characterize the recently activated neurons [ ] and is crucially needed for the establishment of synaptic plasticity since its in vivo deletion impairs learning and memory [ , ]. In agreement with the behavioral alterations contextually detected in cognitive performance in the NOR task (Fig. 1 ), the stimulus-driven induction in the nuclear expression of pCREB and c-Fos was significantly repressed (unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01) after exogenous administration of NH 2 htau in the hippocampus of nontransgenic C57BL/6 (Fig. 5 e–h) strain, indicating that this peptide when extracellularly delivered exerts a potent and specific adverse amnestic effect on experience-dependent memory processes in vivo. Conversely, no difference was detected in immunoreactivity signal of the pCaMKII/CaMKII, CN-A cleaved/full-length, pCREB/CREB ratios and in the c-Fos steady-state level when hippocampal nuclear fractions from reversed-infused mice were compared to parallel ones from home-cage controls of both genetic backgrounds treated and examined under the same experimental conditions (data not shown). Finally, similar results were found by means of quantitative immunofluorescence when CA1 hippocampal sections from injected mice of the three experimental groups were processed and nuclear pCREB and c-Fos were defined as that signal which overlapped with DAPI staining for heterochromatin (data not shown).
Again, we did not detect any apparent effect of genotype because similar results were replicated on hippocampal cytosol/nuclear isolated fraction from B6SJL mice strain (Suppl. Fig. 7 ).
These data strongly suggest that local hippocampal accumulation of NH 2 htau in wild-type mice from two different genetic backgrounds is able to interfere with the activity-driven, Ca 2+ -dependent, CREB/c-Fos signaling pathway whose activation is critically required for the formation and/or maintenance of memory and, then, for consolidation of synaptic plasticity.
A 2.0-kDa Peptide Which Biochemically and Immunologically Resembles the Pathological Injected NH2htau Is Present in Hippocampal Synaptosomes from Human AD Subjects but not from Age-Matched Nondemented Cases
As previously reported, the NH 2 26–44 aa (i.e., NH 2 htau) is the smallest biologically active moiety of parental 20–22-kDa NH 2 -truncated form of human tau (NH 2 26–230 aa) which is secreted in vivo from AD nerve terminals [ ], detectable in presynaptic ends of diseased subjects [ , , ] and present in CSF of living patients affected from tauopathies [ ]. A conserved calpain-I cleavage site is located at 44 residue in the longer 20–22-kDa NH 2 26–230 tau fragment [ , , ], and the 17-kDa NH 2 45–230 tau fragment is also detected in cellular and animal AD models [ , ] and in human tauopathies [ , ] in correlation with enhanced calpain-I activity. In view of these considerations, we hypothesized that the AD-relevant neurotoxic 20–22-kDa NH 2 -truncated form of human tau could be more likely further degraded in vivo following calpain-I proteolysis at 44 residue into the smaller harmful 2.0-kDa NH 2 htau [ , ] which, unfortunately, is usually challenging to be detected under common biochemical procedure likely due to its rapid sequestration by autophagosomes or inclusion bodies and/or its great susceptibility to wash off the membrane during the revelation step [ , , ]. In the present paper, we describe a novel, simple, and reproducible protein extraction/detection protocol from human diseased brains which greatly enriches for the naive NH 2 htau and/or its apparent low molecular weight assemblies that, for the first time, can be clearly detected by means of SDS-PAGE Western blotting analysis with an ad hoc devised 12A12 monoclonal antibody which is specifically directed against the extreme N-terminal 26–36 aa of human tau protein [ ]. Due to its strong ability to interact with authentic neuronal plasma membranes [ ], we attempted to identify the endogenously produced NH 2 htau by taking advantage of the crosslinking capturing method, a valuable tool which turned out to be successful in detecting the membrane-associated free monomer and/or genuine multimers of α-synuclein from primary neurons [ ] and autopsy-derived human brains [ , ]. In particular—in order to improve the yield of protein extraction and, then, the detection limit of Western blotting—we performed in parallel two newly modified five-step protocols (Fig. 6 a) based on incubation of frozen brain tissues with the lysine-reactive disuccinimidyl glutarate (DSG), a cell-permeant crosslinking compound which was added before (method a) or after (method b) the step homogenization but prior to enrichment fractionation of crude synaptosome preparations, a subcellular compartment in which the parental 20–22-kDa NH 2 26–230 tau fragments was found to be largely present [ , ]. As shown in Fig. 6 b, Western blotting analysis carried out on DSG-treated synaptosomal samples from human hippocampi with specific 12A12 anti-N-terminal tau monoclonal antibody (epitopes 26–44) [ ] revealed that an immunoreactivity band of 2.0 kDa calculated mass with electrophoretic mobility akin to that of synthetic NH 2 26–44 tau peptide was clearly detected in AD subjects but not in age-matched nondemented controls following the two alternative experimental procedures (a, b). Consistent with our previous biophysical and biochemical observations [ ], we found that under pathological conditions the prevailing molecular form of naive, endogenously generated NH 2 htau appeared to be unaggregated, although longer exposure of the blot showed additional and less abundant 12A12-positive tau species of 4.0 and 6.0 kDa in size. Importantly, the 12A12-positive 2.0-kDa monomer resembled the synthetic NH 2 26–44 tau peptide [ ] which was loaded on the same gels as control of electrophoretic mobility and immunospecificity. Finally, to rule out the possibility of nonspecific staining, the secondary antibody was also employed alone as negative control, and no staining was detected in Western blotting analysis by omission of primary antibody 12A12 (Fig. 6 b). Fig. 6 High levels of endogenous NH 2 htau are detectable as 12A12-positive 2.0-kDa species in isolated synaptosomes from AD subjects. a Scheme of the two alternative experimental strategies (a, b) used for the in vivo crosslinking enrichment of endogenous NH 2 htau from human brain tissues. b Representative blots ( n = 3) of SDS-PAGE Western blotting analysis with our specific 12A12 anti-N-terminal tau monoclonal antibody (epitopes 26–44) [ ] carried out on DSG-crosslinked synaptosomal preparations isolated from hippocampal regions of AD subjects and age-matched nondemented controls following the two different experimental protocols (a, b) in order to estimate the steady-state levels of endogenous 2.0-kDa NH 2 htau. The 12A12-positive synthetic NH 2 26–44 tau peptide [ ] was also included in the gel as control of electrophoretic mobility and immunodetection. β-Actin was used as a loading control. Incubation with anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody alone was used to show the signal specificity of the 12A12 primary antibody
Overall, these findings indicate that a 2.0-kDa tau peptide which biochemically and immunologically resembles the injected NH 2 htau was actually endogenously produced in vivo under pathological settings, being detected in hippocampal synaptosomal preparations from AD subjects but not from age-matched nondemented controls.
In conclusion, our morphological, biochemical, electrophysiological, and behavioral studies showing that hippocampal accumulation of AD-linked NH 2 htau in healthy wild-type mice is able to phenotype crucial neuropathological and amnestic hallmarks observed in this selected region at the early stages of pathogenesis in human AD brains are particularly important in the field of AD immunotherapy by highlighting the 26–44 immunogen located in the N-terminal of human tau as a novel molecular determinant crucially involved in tau pathobiology at synapses.
Discussion
Tau-based immunotherapy has recently come into focus as prominent target for the cure of AD and other non-AD human tauopathies [ , , ] in part because of the recent concerns and limitations showed by Aβ immunotherapy in clinical research trials [ ] and in part because tau pathology is more strongly and directly correlated to the symptoms, progression, and severity of disease than the distribution of Aβ plaque deposition [ , , , ]. Cortical tau degeneration without amyloidosis is also a major index of suspected non-Alzheimer disease pathophysiology (SNAP) which likely represents the earliest stage of AD, indicating that tau might be the initial pathological event, with amyloid pathology developing independently of, and possibly accentuating, tauopathy [ , ]. Interestingly, the antibody-mediated targeting of the extreme N-terminal half of tau located in the membrane-bound projection domain—which plays a necessary causal role in AD neuropathology [ , , , , , ]—turns out to be currently the most promising disease-modifying approach for human tauopathies [ , , , , ], in agreement with recent findings indicating that soluble and unaggregated C-terminally truncated tau fragments—which are the most abundant extracellular species secreted from synaptosomes of AD brains [ ]—are preferentially detected in CSF [ , , , ] and in conditioned media from patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) cortical neurons of affected subjects [ , ].
In the present study, we report two main findings. First, we confirm and further extend our recent in vitro observations about the potent presynaptic effect of extracellularly added NH 2 26–44 aa (i.e., NH 2 htau) on Ca 2+ -evoked glutamatergic neurotransmission [ ] by showing that its successful diffusion in vivo to hippocampal parenchyma following subchronic injection into the cerebroventricle from two different lines of young (2-month-old) wild-type mice (C57BL/6 and B6SJL) is able to recapitulate a few crucial morphological, biochemical, and neurophysiological hallmarks of human preclinical AD. In particular, 6 d.p.i. NH 2 htau-treated nontransgenic animals exhibit (i) reduced number of intact excitatory synapses and dendritic spine instability, (ii) decreased neurotransmitter release probability at vulnerable synapses, (iii) neuroinflammatory response with sustained activation of microglia and astrocytes, (iv) abnormalities in Ca 2+ -dependent intracellular signaling cascades which critically control the downstream expression of immediate early genes CREB and c-Fos required for memory/learning processes, and (v) deficits in hippocampal-dependent episodic memory evaluated in behavioral NOR task. Second, we report that a 2.0-kDa tau peptide resembling the pathologically injected NH 2 htau—which we initially identified as the minimal biologically active moiety of longer 20–22 kDa NH 2 -truncated form of human tau secreted from presynaptic terminals [ , , , ] and detectable in CSF [ ] from AD patients, is actually endogenously produced in hippocampal synaptosomes from AD subjects but not from age-matched nondemented cases.
Dysregulation of synaptic proteome/connectivity and imbalanced glutamatergic neurotransmission in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons are both early pathological hallmarks in AD pathology [ , , , , ] which precede neuronal loss and closely correlate with cognitive impairment and/or the severity of clinical signs in affected patients [ , , , , ]. Calcium signaling fluctuations/abnormalities—because of imbalance in activities of Ca 2+ -calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII) and Ca 2+ -dependent phosphatase calcineurin (CaN)—along with downregulation in plasticity-related gene expression and reduction in spine density and dendritic complexity in vulnerable hippocampal brain regions are also causally associated with impaired neurotransmission, synapse weakness/elimination, and memory decline in the AD etiopathogenesis, in humans and in animal models as well [ , , , , , , , ]. In addition to synaptic decay, remarkable inflammatory processes (reactive gliosis) have been also demonstrated to occur early in affected subjects from neurodegenerative tauopathies [ , , , ] and in transgenic mice [ , , ] and to further contribute to exacerbating the neuropathological and cognitive deficits [ ]. In particular, hippocampal synapse loss along with compromised synaptic plasticity and gliosis is detected early in young (2/3-month-old) P301S tau transgenic mice, and immunosuppressive treatment of these animals with FK506 compound is able to significantly attenuate the neuropathological profile and increase the lifespan [ ]. Consistent with these findings, our studies show that intracisternal infusion with the AD-related NH 2 htau into the hippocampus of young (2-month-old) wild-type mice from two different genetic backgrounds is sufficient to trigger in vivo the downregulation in Ca 2+ -dependent, activity-driven pCREB/c-Fos nuclear pathways involved in proper synaptic maintenance and/or brain network formation (Fig. 5 , Suppl. Fig. 7 ). These events occur in concomitance with (i) dramatic reduction in synaptic boutons and dendritic spine density (Fig. 2 , Suppl. Fig. 4 ), (ii) diminished behavioral performance in hippocampus-dependent task aimed to evaluate the object recognition ability which is the first type of learning/memory to be early and severely impaired in affected subjects [ , , ] (Fig. 1 ), (iii) electrophysiological changes of paired-pulse ratio (PPR) indicative of inhibition in presynaptic neurotransmitter release (Fig. 4 , Suppl. Fig. 6 ), and (iv) marked increase of astrocytic and microglia activity (Fig. 3 , Suppl. Fig. 5 ). Moreover, our morphological, biochemical, and neurophysiological analyses showing a prominent reduction in synaptic connectivity and impaired presynaptic short-term plasticity (increased PPR) in the NH 2 htau-injected group are also consistent with previous [ , ] and more recent [ , , ] findings from other transgenic tauopathy models which show a disruptive role of pathological tau at synapses at early stages of disease progression, in particular on the presynaptic side [ , , , , , , , ]. In this regard, it has been reported that pathological hippocampal accumulation of human tau in transgenic mice leads to cognitive deficits in object discrimination, assessed in NOR behavioral task, in concomitance with increased paired pulse facilitation at the Schaffer collateral to CA1 pyramidal cell synapses as suggestive of presynaptic deficits in glutamate release [ ]. Functional presynaptic failure accompanied by marked reduction in a few key presynaptic markers along with changes in CA1 dendritic spines is also found in mice engineered to express the A152T tau mutation which lies in the N-terminus of protein and is genetically associated to human neurodegenerative tauopathies, including AD [ ]. Furthermore, in another transgenic animal model which expresses ΔK280 mutation linked to frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17 (FTDP-17), a strong presynaptic effect of pathological N-tau has been reported on the hippocampus in concomitance with severe reduction in synaptic vesicle density, impaired presynaptic plasticity at mossy fiber pathway, and cognitive deficits in behavioral tests [ ]. Additionally, decreased levels of glutamate have been detected in vivo in the hippocampus of mouse model of tauopathy overexpressing the human P301L mutation found in FTDP-17 patients [ , ] and in the CA subregions of the hippocampus of transgenic animals carrying the P301S mutant tau in close correlation with synapse loss [ ]. Finally, FTDP-17-linked tau mutations (R406, V337M, and P301L) have been recently found to localize in presynaptic compartments and locally lower neurotransmission by indirectly interfering with vesicle mobility via its N-terminal domain [ ].
In addition to provide a novel target for rescuing tauopathies, another important aspect of the present study is that we give additional insights into the potential mechanism(s) underlying the human tau-induced synaptic toxicity by showing that the CaN-mediated inactivation of the nuclear CaMKII/CREB/c-Fos signaling in the hippocampus is a crucial mediator of memory impairment in this nontransgenic animal model of tauopathies. Interestingly and in keeping with our biochemical data (Fig. 5 , Suppl. Fig. 7 ), inhibition in experience-induced and plasticity-related transcriptional activity of CREB and c-Fos known to cause a rapid hippocampus-dependent mnestic decay [ ] has been found to be causally correlated with synaptic alterations in quite a lot of transgenic animal models of tauopathies, including AD [ , , , , , , ]. In line with these findings, pathological accumulation of human tau via stereotaxically injection of AAV-expressing vector in the hippocampus of young (2-month-old) wild-type mice is able to induce structural and functional alterations of synapses and dendritic spines in concomitance with CaN-dependent dephosphorylation and/or inactivation of CaMKIV/CREB signaling and memory deficits [ ]. Also, the density of c-Fos-positive puncta is greatly diminished in the hippocampus from mice expressing P301L human tau mutation in comparison to controls, consistent with suppression of evoked presynaptic neurotransmitter release at the perforant path fiber-dental gyrus synapses and severe deficit in hippocampus-dependent memory detected in this well-established transgenic animal model [ ]. Moreover, mismatched alterations in turnover of both pre- and postsynaptic compartments detected at early stages of neuropathology in rTg4510 transgenic mouse line (P301L-mutated human tau) have been proved to be causally correlated with a persistent reduction in both spontaneous and evoked synaptic-driven neuronal activity [ ]. Finally, pathological tau has been reported to selectively impair excitatory compared to inhibitory neurons leading to global disruption in balanced network activity and memory deficits in a way reminiscent of early human AD [ ].
Overall, considering that (i) the identification of the molecular determinants underlying the tau pathology is mandatory to develop a better-targeted and, then, more effective immunotherapeutic approach [ ]) and (ii) the deleterious effects of neurotoxic soluble/unaggregated tau species on synaptic structure and/or functions are reversible because the antibody-mediated immunodepletion of pathological intracellular/extracellular tau ameliorates synapse loss and preserves memory capacities [ , , ], the present study may have important implications in the field of human tauopathies helping to develop novel disease-modifying approaches aimed to mitigate or delay the cognitive deficits associated with these devastating neurological disorders, including AD. In addition, our results, showing that the in vivo delivery of AD-relevant NH 2 htau is sufficient to induce severe neuropathological changes in otherwise healthy mice leading to functional deficits in specific hippocampal signaling pathways which critically subserve the synaptic and memory functions, prospect that the passive immunization with our newly developed 12A12 monoclonal antibody targeting the N-terminal sequence of human protein which encompasses the 26–44 amino acidic stretch could actually represent a valid therapeutic opportunity for AD and other non-AD tauopathies. Finally and consistent with rapid and reversible impairment of memory/learning performance in hippocampal-dependent behavioral tasks evoked by i.c.v. injection of soluble (monomeric or oligomeric) and diffusible species of Aβ 1–42 into normal rodent brains [ ], our data confirm the findings that the nontransgenic AD animal models based on the exogenous administration of AD-related neurotoxins can be a useful tool in the identification of molecular mechanisms underlying their detrimental effect(s) on synaptic plasticity and/or in the development of novel therapeutic targets and drug screening aimed at improving cognitive deficits in affected patients.
Conclusions
Consistent with a large body of evidence reporting that soluble extracellular tau species are neurotoxic likely by gain of function mechanism(s) [ , , , , ], this study demonstrates for the first time that the 2.0-kDa NH 2 htau peptide, which is endogenously generated in AD pathological settings at synapses, is sufficient to cause a severe hippocampal neuropathology in vivo which is accompanied by reduced synaptic connectivity, compromised presynaptic plasticity, and functional cognitive deficits in a way which is highly reminiscent of the early stages of human tau physiopathology. Remarkably, one of the most immunogenic epitopes in the N-terminal domain of tau (amino acids 23–32 RKDQGGYTMH)—which overlaps the present NH 2 htau (amino acids 26–44 QGGYTMHQDQEGDTDAGLK) and introduces a caspase-cleavage site linked to tau pathology [ , ]—is found to be exclusively conserved in primates, suggesting that the evolutionary insertion of this sequence in tau gene could, at least in part, account for the selective vulnerability of human beings to develop full-blown AD neurodegeneration [ , , ]. Finally, the peptide profiles provided by a comprehensive mass spectrometry (MS)-based screening carried out on CSF samples from patients affected from AD and other tauopathies have confirmed that the first NH 2 26–44 amino acids of human tau are epitopes potentially targetable for promising immunotherapeutic interventions, being largely represented into proteomic profile of diseased secreted proteins [ ].
Taken together, these findings prospect that immunological therapies targeting the AD-linked pathological 2.0-kDa NH 2 htau by means of our 12A12 mAb could be beneficial for contrasting early cognitive alterations in human AD and non-AD tauopathies.
Materials and Methods
Reagents and Materials
The following primary antibodies were used: human-specific NH 2 21–36 tau-antibody rabbit AHB0371, Invitrogen; synapsin I antibody rabbit AB1543P, Millipore; synaptophysin antibody (D-4) mouse sc-17750, Santa Cruz; syntaxin 1 antibody mouse S1172, Sigma-Aldrich; SNAP-25 antibody (clone SMI 81) mouse 836301, Biolegend; α-synuclein antibody (clone 42) mouse 610786, BD Transduction Laboratories; vGlut1 antibody guinea pig 135302, Synaptic System; metabotropic glutamate receptor 2 (mGluR2) antibody rabbit 07-261, Millipore; metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) antibody (EPR2425Y) rabbit ab76316, Abcam; NMDAζ1 antibody (C-20) goat sc-1467, Santa Cruz; PSD95 antibody (clone 7E3-1B8) mouse MAB1598, Millipore; β-actin antibody mouse S3062, Sigma-Aldrich; GAPDH antibody (6C5) mouse sc-32233, Santa Cruz; phospho-CREB antibody (Ser 133) rabbit 06-519, Millipore; CREB-1 antibody (D-12) mouse sc-377154, Santa Cruz; phospho-CaMKII (Thr286) antibody rabbit (D21E4), Cell Signaling; CaMKII antibody mouse (6G9), Cell Signaling; calcineurin pan A antibody rabbit 07-1490, Millipore; c-Fos antibody rabbit ab209794, Abcam; NeuN antibody (clone A60) mouse MAB377, Millipore; phospho-cofilin antibody (Ser3) rabbit 3311, Cell Signaling; cofilin antibody rabbit 3312, Cell Signaling; cleaved caspase-3 (Asp175) antibody rabbit 9661, Cell Signaling; glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) antibody rabbit Z0334, Dako; Iba1 antibody rabbit Wako 016-20001 (for WB) and 019-19741 (for IF); and neuronal marker β III tubulin antibody mouse ab78078 (clone 2G10), Abcam.
Animals
All protocols involving animals were performed in accordance with the guidelines established by the European Communities Council (Directive 2010/63/EU of 22 September 2010). Experiments involving animals were performed in accordance with the relevant approved guidelines and regulations accepted by the Italian Ministry of Health and approved by the Ethical Committee on Animal Experiments of EBRI “Rita Levi-Montalcini” Foundation (Rome, Italy).
Brain Material
Human brain material was provided via the rapid autopsy program of the Netherlands Brain Bank (NBB), which provides postmortem specimens from clinically well-documented and neuropathologically confirmed cases. Tissues (hippocampus and superior frontal cortex) derived from AD cases and age-matched cognitively intact nondiseased (ND) cases were used. For details (ethics statement declarations and subjects’ demographics), see [ , ].
Synthesis, Purification, Labeling, and Preparation of Tau Peptides
Synthesis, preparation, and characterization of tau peptides were performed according to our previous paper [ ]. In brief, NH 2 htau 26–44 aa and its reverse sequence control peptide were synthesized and purified using reverse-phase HPLC (D.B.A., Milan, Italy). Peptide mass and purity (> 99%) were confirmed by reverse-phase HPLC and electrospray/ion trap mass spectrometry. A lyophilized powder of peptides was dissolved into sterile PBS in a stock concentration of 1 mM by brief stirring. Aliquots were stored at − 80 °C prior to use. Peptide preparations were analyzed by Sypro Ruby protein staining and SDS-PAGE Western blot for each experiment. NH 2 htau 26–44 aa: NH 2 ­QGGYTMHQDQEGDTD AGLK-COOH Reverse sequence control peptide: NH 2 ­KLGADTDGEQDQHM TYGGQ-COOH
Generation of the N-Terminal Tau 12A12 Antibody (26–36 aa)
Affinity-purified mouse monoclonal antibody directed against the extreme N-terminal 26–36 aa of human tau protein (12A12) was produced, purified, and characterized by the Monoclonal Antibodies Core Facility (MACF) at EMBL-Monterotondo, Rome, Italy (Dott. Alan Sawyer).
12A12 was generated by immunizing mice with a peptide of amino acids 26–36 of hT40 D25(NH 2 ­QGGYTMHQDQ-COOH epitopes). The specificity of this mAb (IgG isotype) was verified by Western blot analysis [ ] and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test (95% sensitivity and 90% specificity).
Surgery and Alzet Mini-Osmotic Pump Implant
Two-month-old male C57/BL6 mice and B6SJL (Charles River Laboratory, Italy) were administered with NH 2 htau or reverse control peptides in the lateral ventricle for 6 days. NH 2 htau or reverse control peptides were continuously delivered by the use of micro-osmotic pumps Alzet (model 3cs-732, Charles River Laboratories, Calco, Italy) which were filled according to procedures provided by the manufacturer. Pumps were subcutaneously implanted and i.c.v. delivery was obtained by a catheter implanted at the following stereotaxic coordinates: DV = − 2, L = + 1, and AP = 0 (adjusted to 0.4 in case of bleeding). A separate group of age-matched mice, which were left undisturbed in their home-cage, was used as an untreated control. The peptides’ concentration within the pumps was adjusted to achieve a mean targeted concentration of 100 μM for NH 2 htau 26–44 or reverse control sequence. A total volume of 0.5 μl/h was delivered to each mouse over the 6-day period. Upon recovery from surgery, animals were housed in groups of 4 in transparent Plexiglas cages placed in an air-conditioned room (22 °C) with light-dark 12/12-h cycle and with food and water ad libitum. Mice showing any signs of misplaced injections or brain hemorrhage (about 5% of animals throughout our study) were excluded from further analysis. No mortality was found in all the experimental groups.
Novel Object Recognition Task
Six days after Alzet minipump implantation, mice run the NOR test [ ] to check the hippocampal-dependent episodic memory [ , ]. The entire task was performed in three consecutive sessions during the same day. Mice were first transferred to the experimental room and left undisturbed in their home-cage for 30 min acclimation in the new environment. During the first habituation session, each mouse was placed for 10 min in the testing arena (empty cubic box 50 × 50 × 30 cm made of white opaque plastic material) and then returned to the home-cage for a 10-min interval. Then, each mouse was placed in the testing arena for sample trial, which consisted in the exposition of two identical objects (objects 1 and 2) for a 10-min period. Objects were either two colored plastic cubes (5 × 5 × 5 cm) or two glass cylinders (8 cm high and 5 cm diameter) and were presented according to a random schedule. The objects were cleaned with 10% ethanol before the third session. Mouse’s interest for the objects was measured as exploration, which was defined as time mice spent sniffing or touching the objects with nose and/or forepaws. At the end of the sample trial, mice were back in their home-cage and were left undisturbed for 60 min intertrial interval. During the following test trial, each mouse was back in the testing arena where one of the two objects remained unvaried (object 1, FO) while the other one was replaced with a different one (object 3, NO). In this session, object exploration was measured as above and the interest for the NO was inferred by calculating the preference index (NO/FO + NO ratio). A preference index above 50% indicates that the NO was preferred to FO, while a preference index of 50% indicates that mice spent the same amount of time in exploration of the two objects. The mice were allowed to explore the apparatus for a total of 5 min while being recorded by an overhead camera positioned above the testing arena, and then removed from the apparatus. An experimenter blind to experimental conditions manually assessed mice exploratory behavior toward the objects. General exploratory and locomotory activities were assessed through the Noldus Ethovision system (the Netherlands).
Immunodepletion
Tau immunodepletion was performed according to [ ]. In brief, tau immunodepletion was performed from brain extracts using Dynabeads Protein G Immunoprecipitation Kit (Invitrogen, Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modifications; 0.75 mg of Dynabeads Protein G was incubated with 2 μg of 12A12 tau antibody or control IgG diluted in binding and washing buffer for 10 min with rotation at room temperature. After washing with 100 μl of binding and washing buffer, the Dynabeads-antibody complex was incubated with 100 μM of synthetic NH 2 htau 26–44 for 10 min with rotation at room temperature. Dynabeads-antibody-antigen complex was isolated using a magnetic holder and the supernatant was collected.
Immunofluorescence Detection and Image Analysis
After 60 min of the behavioral session, mice were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde and their brains were immediately collected and postfixed overnight at 4 °C. The day after, brains were cryoprotected in 30% sucrose in PBS; afterward, coronal sections of 40 μm were prepared for immunofluorescence. Brain slices were then incubated with primary antibodies in PBS 1X, 3% Triton X-100 at 4 °C. Primary antibodies used were c-Fos (anti-rabbit 1:200 O/N, Calbiochem), phosphorylated CREB (anti-rabbit, 1:1000 O/N, Millipore), CREB (anti-rabbit, 1: 600, O/N, Cell Signaling), NeuN (anti-mouse, 1:200 O/N, Millipore), PSD95 (anti-mouse, 1:100 O/WE, Abcam), vGlut1 (anti-guinea pig, 1:800 O/WE, Synaptic System), SYN (anti-rabbit, 1:100 O/N, Abcam), neuronal marker βIII tubulin (anti-mouse 1:200 O/, Abcam), and human-specific NH 2 21–36 tau antibody (rabbit 1:200 O/N, Invitrogen). When PSD95 antibody was used, slices were washed in cold methanol (10 min, methanol 100%) before incubation and then further washed in PBS 1X to improve the detection of PSD95 signal, as we reported in our previous work [ ]. Slices were next washed three times with PBS 1X and incubated with appropriate fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies (room temperature, dark, 2 h). Sections were further washed three times in PBS 1X and counterstained with DAPI (1:1000, 10 min; Enzo Life Science) after the final PBS wash. Lastly, sections were mounted with Fluoromount (Sigma Aldrich) and cover-slipped. Images from brain slices were acquired using a confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM700). Hippocampal CA1 region was first identified under low magnification (×10). Subsequently, images for c-Fos, pCREB, CREB, and NeuN signals were acquired at ×20/zoom ×1 magnification; images for PSD95, vGlut1, and SYN signals were acquired at ×63 magnification. Two to four images were collected from each brain of the animals (three for each group). Immunofluorescent signals were identified and measured by IMARIS software (version 7.6.5). For c-Fos, pCREB, CREB, and NeuN level quantification, four to seven nonoverlapping regions of interest (ROIs, 45 × 45 μm squares) were randomly selected from each image; IMARIS software was used to automatically count the number of c-Fos and pCREB spots in each ROI and reported as c-Fos or pCREB-positive neurons on NeuN- or CREB-positive neurons, respectively.
From each image, signals for PSD95, vGlut1, and SYN were detected separately from ten nonoverlapping ROIs (10 × 10 μm squares) which were randomly selected avoiding DAPI-labeled cell bodies. IMARIS software was used for automatic detection and counting of PSD95, vGlut1, and SYN puncta and for identification of PSD95/vGlut1 or PSD95/ SYN colocalizations as overlapping signals. For all the experiments, ROIs were analyzed after establishing a detection threshold, which was kept constant within each measurement. All values were averaged per group.
Electrophysiological Recordings
Electrophysiological recordings were performed using standard procedures [ , ]. Mice were anesthetized with halothane and their brains removed and placed in ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid solution (ACSF) containing 124 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.3 mM MgSO 4 , 1.25 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , 26 mM NaHCO 3 , 2.4 mM CaCl 2 , and 10 mM glucose. Preparation of hippocampal slices was performed in accordance with the European Communities Council Directive (86/609/EEC). Hippocampal parasagittal slices (350 μm) were cut with a Vibroslice (VT 1000S; Leica) and kept for 1 h in oxygenated medium at room temperature (20–22 °C) before recordings. A single slice was then placed on a nylon mesh, completely submerged in a small chamber (0.5 ml), and superfused with oxygenated ACSF (30 °C gassed with 95% O 2 and 5% CO 2 ) at 3 ml/min constant flow rate. Experiments were performed in the CA1 region, and fEPSPs were recorded in the stratum radiatum by stimulating Schaffer collaterals using glass microelectrodes (1–5 MΩ) filled with ACSF. Input-output curves were examined by plotting the initial slope of the fEPSP against the amplitude of the presynaptic fiber volley. PPF was assessed at interpulse intervals ranging from 20 to 500 ms. An additional 20-min baseline period was obtained before attempting to induce LTP. LTP was induced by a HFS protocol (1 train, 100 Hz, 1 s) applied to the Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapses, and the effect of conditioning train was expressed as the mean (±SEM) percentage of baseline EPSP slopes measured at 60 min after stimulation protocol. Statistical analysis was evaluated by unpaired Student’s t test (significance was set at * p < 0.05).
Golgi-Cox Staining and Dendritic Spine Analysis
Sixty minutes after the retention test, mice were treated with a lethal dose of anesthetic (Zoletil/Rompun 800 mg/kg and 100 mg/kg, respectively) and perfused transcardially with 0.9% saline solution ( n = 2 mice per group). Brains were dissected and immediately immersed in a Golgi-Cox solution (1% potassium dichromate, 1% mercuric chloride, and 0.8% potassium chromate) at room temperature for 6 days according to a previously described protocol [ ]. On the seventh day, brains were transferred in a 30% sucrose solution for cryoprotection and then sectioned with a vibratome. Coronal sections (100 μm) were collected and stained according to the method described by [ ]. Sections were stained through consecutive steps in water (1 min), ammonium hydroxide (30 min), water (1 min), developer solution (Kodak fix 100%, 30 min), and water (1 min). Sections were then dehydrated through successive steps in alcohol at rising concentrations (50, 75, 95, and 100%) before being closed with coverslip slide. For quantification of dendritic spines, images of pyramidal neurons from the CA1 region of the hippocampus were captured by selecting well-stained neurons randomly at ×40 magnification with water immersion, and for the analysis of dendritic spine density, images were acquired randomly at ×100 magnification with oil immersion. At least 5 neurons within each hemisphere were taken from each animal. On each neuron, five 30–100-μm dendritic segments of secondary and tertiary branch order of CA1 dendrites were randomly selected [ ]. Spine density was measured online using the software Neurolucida (Microbrightfield) connected to an optical microscope DMLB Leica, counted using Neurolucida software. The criteria used for analyzing neurons are as follows: the pyramidal neurons had to be fully impregnated and located in the CA1 region of the hippocampus without truncated branches and the soma located centrally within the 120-μm section depth. The criteria for spines included impregnation intensity allowing visibility of spines, a low level of background, and spines counted only on dendrites starting at more than 85 μm distal to the soma and after the first branch point. Only protrusions with a clear connection of the head of the spine to the shaft of the dendrite were counted as spines [ ]. Statistical comparisons were made on single neuron values obtained by averaging the number of spines counted on segments of the same neuron. Analysis was performed blindly, with the analyzer unaware of the experimental conditions. Spine density was calculated by quantifying the number of spines per measured length of dendrite and expressed as the number of spines per micrometer length of the dendrite. The length of each dendritic segment used for spine densitometry was at least 20 μm but not greater than 50 μm in length.
Synaptosome Preparation
Mouse hippocampal purified synaptosomes were prepared by homogenizing tissue in 10 volumes of 0.32 M sucrose, buffered to pH 7.4 with tris-(hydroxymethyl)-amino methane [Tris, final concentration (f.c.) 0.01 M]. The homogenate was centrifuged at 1000 g for 5 min, and the supernatant was stratified on a discontinuous Percoll gradient (2, 6, 10, and 20% v / v in Tris-buffered sucrose) and centrifuged at 33,500 g for 5 min. The layer between 10 and 20% Percoll (synaptosomal fraction) was collected and washed by centrifugation. The synaptosomal pellets were resuspended in a physiological solution with the following composition (mM): NaCl, 140; KCl, 3; MgSO 4 , 1.2; CaCl 2 , 1.2; NaH 2 PO 4 , 1.2; NaHCO 3 , 5; HEPES, 10; and glucose, 10; pH 7.2–7.4. To ascertain whether fractionated preparations were really enriched in synaptic terminals and free of any contaminations from neuronal perikarya, Western blotting analysis was carried out to check the purity of samples by probing with antibodies against the presynaptic protein synaptophysin and cytosolic GAPDH, as previously reported [ , ].
Nuclei Cytosol Isolation
Sixty minutes after the retention test, mice were sacrificed by means of cervical dislocation for brain dissection. Hippocampi were isolated and lysed according to the protocol previously described (modified by [ ]). Hippocampi were treated in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.8, 0.2 mM EDTA, 20% glycerol, 10 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl 2 , 0.1% Triton, phosphatase and protease inhibitor) and homogenized with 25G needle five times. After incubation for 30 min on ice, protein extracts were centrifuged at 800 g for 3 min at 4 °C (supernatant S1: cytosol; pellet P1: nuclei).
The supernatant S1, the cytosolic fraction, was centrifuged again at 14,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C, and the resulting supernatant was considered as the cytosolic fraction. For nuclei isolation, the pellet P1 was washed with lysis buffer and centrifuged again at 800 g for 3 min at 4 °C. After removal of the supernatant S2, the pellet P2 was resuspended in lysis buffer, sonicated, and centrifuged at 17,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C, and the resulting supernatant S3 was considered as the purified nuclear fraction.
Protein Cellular Lysate Preparation
Total proteins were extracted by scraping the cells in SDS-reducing sample buffer or lysis in ice-cold RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS plus protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, P8340) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, P5726/P2850)) and centrifuged at 4 °C for 15 min at 1000 g . The supernatant was then collected and boiled for 5 min.
In Vivo Crosslinking of Human Brain Tissues
Two alternative experimental approaches were used to enrich for the naive endogenous NH 2 htau in hippocampal synapses of human brain. These newly developed methods entail an in vivo crosslinking step with commercial amine-reactive DSG [ ] followed by synaptosome isolation protocol [ , ].
Method (a): Human hippocampi were sliced and crosslinked with disuccinimidyl glutarate (DSG, Thermo Fisher) according to manual instructions. After crosslinking, human tissues were homogenized in 3.5 ml of homogenization buffer (320 mM sucrose/4 mM Hepes, pH 7.4/1 mM EGTA/0.4 mM PMSF/plus protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma P8340) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, Oakville, Ontario, Canada P5726/P2850)) with 30 strokes of a glass Dounce tissue grinder (Wheaton). The homogenate was then centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and recentrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min, and the second pellet was resuspendend in 2 ml of homogenization buffer and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 15 min. The resulting pellet was resuspended in homogenization buffer.
Method (b): Human hippocampi were sliced and homogenized in 3.5 ml of homogenization buffer (320 mM sucrose/4 mM Hepes, pH 7.4/1 mM EGTA/0.4 mM PMSF/plus protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma P8340) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, Oakville, Ontario, Canada P5726/P2850)) with 30 strokes of a glass Dounce tissue grinder (Wheaton). The homogenate was centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was crosslinked with DSG (Thermo Fisher) according to manual instructions. After crosslinking, the supernatant was recentrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min, and the second pellet was resuspendend in 2 ml of homogenzation buffer and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 15 min. The resulting pellet was resuspended in homogenization buffer.
Western Blot Analysis and Densitometry
Equal amounts of protein were subjected to SDS-PAGE 7.5–15% linear gradient or Bis-Tris gel 4–12% (NuPage, Invitrogen). After electroblotting onto a nitrocellulose membrane (Hybond-C Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ), the filters were blocked in TBS containing 10% nonfat dried milk for 1 h at room temperature or overnight at 4 °C. Proteins were visualized using appropriate primary antibodies. All primary antibodies were diluted in TBS and incubated with the nitrocellulose blot overnight at 4 °C. Incubation with secondary peroxidase coupled anti-mouse, anti-rabbit, or anti-goat antibodies was performed by using the ECL system (Amersham, Arlington Heights, IL, USA). In a few experiments, multiple normalizations of the same filter on different loading controls, such as β-actin and GAPDH (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase), were carried. Final figures were assembled by using Adobe Photoshop 6 and Adobe Illustrator 10, and quantitative analysis of acquired images was performed by using ImageJ ( http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/ ).
As previously described for α-synuclein monomers [ , , ], in order to increase the immunodetection of the 2.0-kDa NH 2 htau, gels were electroblotted onto 0.2-μm PVDF membranes which were then incubated in 0.4% paraformaldehyde, PBS for 30 min at RT, rinsed twice with PBS, and finally, blocked in 5% nonfat dried milk in PBS containing 0.1% ( v / v ) Tween 20 (PBS-T) for either 30 min at RT or overnight at 4 °C. After blocking, filters were incubated in primary antibody in 5% milk in PBS-T overnight at 4 °C. Membranes were then washed 3 times for 10 min in 1% milk in PBS-T at RT and incubated in secondary antibody in 1% milk in PBS-T for 45 min at RT. Membranes were then washed 3 times for 10 min in PBS-T and developed with ECL Plus (GE Healthcare-Amersham Biosciences) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Statistical Analysis.
Data were expressed as means ± SEM and were representative of at least three separate experiments ( n = independent experiments, including at least 3 or 4 animals for each experimental condition). Statistically significant differences were calculated by unpaired independent (two-tailed) Student’s t test for two-group comparison and one-way or two-way ANOVA followed by Fisher post hoc test for multiple comparisons among more than two groups as indicated in the figure legends. p < 0.05 was accepted as statistically significant (* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.0001). All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 6 software.