Introduction
Carbonic anhydrase (CA) plays an important role in many physiological functions, including pH regulation. In the brain, several CA isoforms have been shown to be expressed on the surface and in the cytosol of neurons, oligodendrocytes, and myelin sheath. [ ] As CAs are involved in the reversible hydration/dehydration of CO 2 /HCO 3 − (CO 2 + H 2 O ⇋ HCO 3 − + H + ), they contribute to the availability of protons and bicarbonate required for neuronal signaling. This in turn regulates the kinetics and concentration of pH transitions in both intra- and extracellular compartments [ , , ], thereby influencing the function of proton-sensitive membrane proteins involved in neuronal signaling such as gamma-aminobutyric acid agonist receptors (GABA A Rs) [ , ], N -methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDAs) [ , ], and ion channels [ , ]. Previously, it has been shown in the rat hippocampus, GABA A R-mediated excitation is dependent on HCO 3 − concentrations, which are regulated by cytosolic CA activity and suppressed by membrane-permeant inhibitors of CAs [ , , , , ].
The brain’s information processing and memory storage require synchronized neuronal activity, commonly known as hippocampal theta rhythm. In adult rat hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells, theta rhythm was shown to be associated with GABAergic postsynaptic depolarization with the potential reversed from Cl − toward HCO 3 − , a process regulated by CA activity. In addition, the theta activity was shown to be abolished by GABA A R antagonists and CA inhibition. Moreover, CA inhibition was also shown to impair the spatial learning of rats in a water maze without affecting other sensory/locomotor behaviors. These observations taken together imply that CA activity effects both theta rhythm and memory consolidation via HCO 3 − mediated signaling [ ].
CA activators have also been shown to increase the efficacy of temporally-associated activity of the cholinergic and GABAergic inputs in switching the hyperpolarizing GABAergic postsynaptic potential (PSP) from inhibitory to excitatory, implying a CA “activator-mediated” synaptic switch [ , , ]. A recent study using CD1 mice confirmed these findings and demonstrated that the CA activator (CAA) D-phenylalanine enhanced special learning through the activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathways in the cortex and hippocampus. The study also showed that administration of the CA inhibitor acetazolamide to the mice caused amnesia in a non-spatial recognition memory test, thus confirming CAs as modulators of learning and memory [ ].
The catalytic mechanism of CA is a two-step process. In the hydration direction, the first step is the conversion of CO 2 to HCO 3 − , via the nucleophilic attack of a Zn-bound hydroxide on CO 2 , with the subsequent displaced of the newly formed HCO 3 − by a water molecule [ , ]. The second step is the regeneration of the Zn-bound hydroxide via a proton transfer process through a series of well-ordered waters (W1, W2, W3a, W3b) and His 64 (human CA II numbering) that resides on the edge of the active site cavity [ , , , ]. His 64 has been observed in multiple CA II crystal structures (for example, PDB: 3KS3 [ ]) to occupy two conformations—an “in” and an “out” state that allow efficient transfer of a proton. This transfer of a proton from the active site to the surrounding aqueous environment has been established as the rate-limiting step in the catalytic mechanism [ ].
Classical CA inhibitors utilize a sulfonamide group to interact with the zinc to displace the catalytic Zn-bound hydroxide/water and disrupt the active site water network. Conversely, studies have shown the rate of catalysis can be increased by changing the active site amino acids and/or the addition of small-molecule ligands. Phenylalanine (PDB: 2FMG [ ]), histamine (PDB: 1AVN [ ]), histidine (PDB: 2ABE [ ]), and other imidazole-based compounds [ , , , , , , , ] do not interfere with the conversion of CO 2 to HCO 3 − and active site water network, instead providing an alternative or secondary site for proton transfer to speed up the reaction. Extensive studies have been performed with ligands utilizing imidazole moieties, in particular 4-methyl imidazole, which binds in several locations in the active site with increasing concentration (PDB: 4HEY [ ]). Two of these sites were shown to mimic the “in” and “out” conformations of His64 in a H64A CA II mutant (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 CA II in complex with ligands. Superposed structures of CA II in complex with 4-methylimidazole (pink, PDB: 4HEY), phenylalanine (blue, PDB: 2FMG), histamine (yellow, PDB: 1AVN), and histidine (orange, PDB: 2ABE). His 64 in CA II shown as stick model, in its out conformation. Zinc in active site shown as grey sphere. Note that for PDB: 4HEY, H64A mutation is not shown here. Figure made using Pymol [ ]
These findings and others have initiated studies to develop imidazole-based compounds that bind in the CA active site, so as not to inhibit the hydration/dehydration of CO 2 /HCO 3 − and also preserve the active site water network. In this study, a small-molecule ligand, referred to as carbonic anhydrase activator 12i (CAA12i), identified as the most potent CA II activator within a larger series of compounds in [ ] (K A CA II = 9 nM), is presented in complex with CA II in a crystal structure that demonstrates preservation of the active site water network (Fig. 2 ). Furthermore, the ligand density in the active site demonstrates plausible dynamics of the compound’s tail, which offer insights into the mechanism of its activating function. Overall, this structure advances our knowledge of the basic enzymatic function of CA as well as the implications of CA activation in the field of neuronal signaling. Fig. 2 Structural formula of carbonic anhydrase activator 12i (CAA12i). The pyridinium anchor with a methyl and two isopropyl groups (green), the ethylene linker (grey), and proton-shuttling imidazole tail (blue). Compound was synthesized with hexafluorophosphate counterion, which was also bound in crystal structure
Materials and Methods
CA II Expression and Purification
The CA II containing plasmid was expressed in E. coli using BL21DE3 competent cells and purified using a p -aminomethylbenzenesulfonamide agarose affinity column. Purity was assessed by SDS-PAGE and staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Protein concentration was determined by UV/Vis spectroscopy at a wavelength of 280 nm with a molar extinction coefficient of 54,800 cm −1 mol −1 . Protein was concentrated using Amicon Centricon MWCO 10 kDa filters to achieve a final protein concentration of 10 mg/mL.
Co-crystallization and Ligand Soaking
Prior to crystallization, a 10 mM solution of CAA12i in 25% DMSO:water was added to CA II to produce a final concentration of 0.2 mM ligand. This solution was incubated for 10 min. Co-crystallization trays were prepared using the hanging drop vapor diffusion method with pre-greased 24-well crystal trays and 18 mm glass cover slips. Wells contained 50 mM Tris HCl, 1.3 M sodium citrate, pH 7.4 and drops contained 10 mg/mL CA II in 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.8 and well solution at a ratio of 1:1. Trays were stored at 23 °C without agitation, and crystals formed after 7 days. The crystals were soaked with 0.2 mM CAA12i for 1 h prior to rapidly being dipped in 20% glycerol and flash cooled in liquid nitrogen for data collection.
Data Collection and Structural Refinement
X-ray data was collected at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) on beamline F1 using a 24-pole wiggler with an X-ray energy of 12.68 keV (0.98 Å) and a Dectris Pilatus 6 M CCD detector. Collection was performed with a crystal-to-detector distance of 190 mm with a 1 o oscillation angle and an exposure time of 2 s per image for 360 images. Crystal was kept under cryogenic cooling at 100 K during data collection using an Oxford CryoStream cooling system. Collection was performed remotely using an ALS-style BAM-1 crystal automounter and the ADX data collection GUI.
Data were indexed, integrated, and scaled using HKL2000 [ , ]. Data were scaled to the monoclinic P2 1 space group, the highest resolution shell data having 90% completeness. Molecular replacement (MR) was performed using Phenix Phaser-MR One-Component Interface [ ] on the data using CA II PBD:3KS3 as the search model with 1 component copy. The search model edited to remove the solvent molecules and Zn atom to avoid phase bias.
Refinement was performed using Phenix phenix.refine [ ] and visualized using Coot [ ]. During the first refinement cycle, R free values were generated by setting aside 5% of the measured reflections. The CAA12i ligand was added using Coot LigandBuilde r and Phenix Ligands REEL to develop geometric restraints [ , ]. The PF 6 − counterion was built and geometric restraints generated using Phenix Ligands REEL . The ligand was built into the Fo-Fc electron density map and refinement was performed using tail occupancy values that satisfied the observed electron density.
Results
The X-ray structure of CA II in complex with CAA12i was determined to a resolution of 1.6 Å with 96.8% overall completeness, signal to noise ratio of 23.3, and overall redundancy of 6.0 (Table 1 ). The CAA12i ligand density was clearly visible in the active site, along with the PF 6 − counterion used for synthesis and stabilization of the compound (Fig. 2 ). The structure of CA II in complex with CAA12i was superposed onto wildtype CA II and compared. The root mean square deviation between the two structures was 0.1 Å, indicating no significant protein changes were induced upon ligand binding. The ligand was anchored via the pyridinium group on the hydrophobic side of the active site (Fig. 3 ) that it thought not to play a role in the proton transfer step mechanism. Interestingly, the CAA12i imidazole tail exhibited two conformations that were positioned also along the hydrophobic side of the active site, with the imidazole positioned in two regions of the hydrophobic pocket that are separated by Phe 131 (orange, Fig. 4 ). Table 1 The X-ray structure of CA II in complex with CAA12i Sample CA II: CAA12i PDB ID 5W8B Space group P2 1 Cell dimensions (Å;°) a = 42.3, b = 41.3, c = 72.1; β = 104.1 Resolution (Å) 41.01–1.61 (1.64–1.61) Theoretical reflections 62,207 Unique measured reflections 54,244 R.M.S.D.: bonds (Å), angles ( o ) 0.007, 1.283 R pim a (%) 3.3 (24.8) I/Iσ 23.35 (3.40) Completeness (%) 96.8 (97.1) R work b (%) 15.6 (19.1) R free c (%) 18.3 (19.6) d Redundancy 6.0 (6.3) # of protein atoms, solvent, PF 6 − ligand, CAA12i ligands 2065, 151, 7, 92 Ramachandran stats (%): favored, allowed, outliers 97.63, 2.37, 0.00 Avg. B factors (Å 2 ): main-chain, side-chain, solvent, PF 6 − ligand, CAA12i ligands 13.9, 18.5, 23.7, 15.6, 44.1 a \( {\mathrm{R}}_{\mathrm{pim}}=\left(\sum \sqrt{1/\left(n-1\right)}\left||-<\left|>\right.|/\sum <\left|>\right.\right.\right)\times 100 \) b R work = (∑|F o − F c |/ ∑ |F o |) × 100 c R free is calculated in the same way as R work but represents 5% of reflections omitted from refinement d Values in parenthesis correspond to the highest resolution shell Fig. 3 Crystal structure of CAA12i (purple) and PF 6 − counterion (blue/orange). Shown the active site water (red spheres) network and surrounding residues (sticks). Waters (pink spheres) form an extended network associated with the binding of CAA12i. Black dotted lines indicate network of H-bond interactions and red arrows indicate postulated proton transfer mechanism with extended water network Fig. 4 Surface representation of CAA12i bound to CA II. Active site waters shown as red/pink spheres with F o -F c density shown as blue mesh contoured to sigma 1.0. CAA12i is shown in its two conformations, A and B. Conformation A has the imidazole tail moiety within Van der Waals interactions with Leu 47, Ile 91, Leu 189 (orange) and conformation B has the tail moiety interacting with Val 135, Val 207, Leu 198 (orange). Phe 131 is shown as protrusion between the two pockets
The dual conformational nature of CAA12i occupying two 50:50 conformations (A and B, Supporting Fig. 1 ) is reminiscent of the observed in and out conformation of His 64, and implies dynamic flipping of the imidazole tail moiety between conformation A and B in the active site. Of note, was the wildtype CA II ordered water network was completely intact (Fig. 3 ). The binding of CAA12i having little effect on the wildtype CA II proton wire.
Discussion
Conservation of the active site water network indicates that CA II can perform its catalytic function unimpaired with CAA12i, as all its interactions occur solely on the hydrophobic side of the active site cleft. In addition, only one CAA12i was observed bound, indicating that at the high concentrations used for ligand co-crystallization and soaking (mM range), this ligand has a single unique binding site, which has no inhibitory effect.
The flipping of the imidazole proton-shuttling group between the A and B conformations of CAA12i was particularly interesting because it demonstrated a potential mechanism of action for the activator. It is possible that CAA12i acts by creating a secondary proton transfer site, which allows for protons to be shuttled via both the His 64 and the CAA12i imidazole moiety. Two water molecules were located within 2.5 Å of the tail moiety, one near the tail in position A and the other near the tail in position B. These solvent molecules may play a role to extend the proton wire by not only extending the proton wire away from His 64 but also inducing the hydrophobic side of the active site to be hydrophilic in nature and recruiting more waters into the active site. Since proton transfer is the rate-limiting step of the CA reaction, it implies that this functionality may enhance the activity of CA, and therefore, CAA12i can be deemed an enzyme “activating” ligand.
In addition, the location of the imidazole moiety in both conformations of CAA12i was particularly interesting as it flipped between two small hydrophobic cavities flanking Phe 131. This movement may be analogous to the movement observed with His 64 as it performs its proton-shuttling function. Conformation A may represent the “in” conformation of His 64, as this position forms an extension of the proton wire network. In conformation B, the CAA12i tail moiety is extended away from the proton network, and this may be analogous to the “out” conformation of His 64. Overall, the crystal structure of this CAA12i ligand indicates possible transient motion that could be essential to its activation function.
Conclusion
CAs affect both the kinetics and rates of pH transitions in neurons and extracellular space through regulation of bicarbonate ionic gradients. This action has downstream effects on GABAergic postsynaptic depolarization, changing the function of the GABAergic synapses from excitation filter to amplifier, with beneficial effects toward enhancing memory and learning. Activation of CA in a rat aging model shows recovery from symptoms of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease, marking the importance of further development of activating drugs. In this study, the structure of CAA12i in complex with CA II revealed preservation of the active site water network and demonstrate the possible movement of the compound’s imidazole tail, which offer insights into its activating function. Overall, this structure improves our understanding of both the basic enzymatic function of CA as well as the implications of CA activation in the field of neuronal signaling.