Introduction
The discovery of exosomes was reported in 1983 by two scientists, Bin-Tao Pan and Rose M. Johnstone, in a research article published as “Fate of the transferrin receptor during maturation of sheep reticulocytes in vitro: selective externalization of the receptor” [ ]. They were researching the in vitro properties of transferrin receptors in maturing sheep reticulocytes exposed to anti-transferrin-receptor antibodies. They concluded that transferrin receptors located within reticulocytes were linked with 50-nm-sized vesicles. These vesicles were expelled into the extracellular space by maturing blood reticulocytes. The term “exosome” was not used until several years after their initial discovery [ ]. In recent years, the examination and impact of sub-cellular vesicles in various pathophysiological conditions have increased significantly. Table 1 summarizes the various terms used for describing sub-cellular vesicles in the existing literature. Table 1 Summary of various terms used for sub-cellular vesicles and other components Terminology Particle size Brief description Reference Extracellular vesicle Heterogeneous in size—diversified functions and sources Formed within the cell and secreted by all cell types to deliver macromolecules for intracellular communication; general term to represent any secreted lipid membrane vesicle [ ] Exosome 30–120 nm diameter Type of extracellular vesicle—formed when plasma membrane fuses with multivesicular bodies (MCB) [ , ] Multivesicular bodies (MCB) 250–1000 nm diameter Intracellular endosomal organelles containing ≥ 2 smaller vesicles within its lumen [ ] Microvesicle/microparticle 100–1000 nm diameter Type of extracellular vesicles shed from the plasma membrane; formed by the outward budding of the membrane [ , ] Endosome (late) 250–1000 nm diameter Type of extracellular vesicle that fuses with the plasma membrane to release exosomes [ ] microRNA (miRNA) Differ in length Small, non-coding RNA molecules that can affect gene expression [ , ]
Exosomes are extracellular vesicles (EVs) that are derived from the in-budding of endosomes. The process of in-budding forms a multi-vesicular body containing smaller intra-luminal vesicles. When the multi-vesicular body of a donor cell comes in contact with the cell membrane, the multi-vesicular body fuses to the plasma membrane and the contents are expelled into the extracellular space [ , ]. Following release, exosomes are known to fuse their membrane with the cell membrane of target cells via several specific or non-specific mechanisms [ ]. Exosomes typically range from 30 to 120 nm in size and are excreted by several cell types [ , ]. Due to their ability to carry functional small RNA known as microRNA (miRNA), protein, lipids, and tRNA, exosomes are capable of regulating several pathophysiological processes including, but not limited to, inflammation, infectious and immune responses, and tumor growth [ ]. Over the past decade, several studies have been conducted to decipher the exact role of exosomal content, particularly miRNA. miRNAs are a non-coding form of RNA, usually 18–22 nucleotides in length [ ], which play a role in silencing the translation of genetic information and, therefore, function of proteins within cells [ ]. EVs, in physiological and pathophysiological conditions, are capable of shuttling a plethora of miRNAs, thus exerting a dominant influence in the clinical management and treatment outcomes of various disease states [ ].
Exosomes, a subset of EVs secreted by cells, have been identified as important mediators of cell-cell communication and other signaling pathways. A main feature that makes exosomes appealing in neurological research is their ability to penetrate the blood-brain barrier (BBB), serving as potential drug delivery vesicles in neurological diseases. In addition, exosomes and exosomal miRNAs derived from neurons and astrocytes were found to have significant roles in recent investigations [ , ]. Intuitively, attempts have been made to manipulate exosomes for neuronal protection and regeneration, as well as to aid in synaptic plasticity. These properties have led to the investigation of exosomes as both a drug delivery tool and as biomarkers for diseases [ , ]. Recently, several articles have reviewed the involvement of EVs in the pathophysiology of various neurodegenerative diseases in detail [ , ].
EVs are known to facilitate cross-talk between the central nervous system (CNS) and other organ systems. Peripheral inflammation, for instance, is associated with changes in shuttling of EVs across the BBB to the brain. During peripheral inflammation, studies have demonstrated the ability of the hematopoietic system [ ] and choroid plexus [ ] to impact neuronal cells via delivery of miRNAs packaged within the secreted EVs. In a different study, the systemic administration of mesenchymal stromal cell-derived exosomes in rats, subjected to stroke, was found to significantly improve the recovery and remodeling of neurons [ ]. Alternately, brain-derived EVs have also been shown to impact peripheral organs. In adoptive transfer animal studies exploring acute phase response to central inflammation, brain-derived EVs were shown to undergo selective liver uptake and induce an acute hepatic response to central inflammation [ , ]. Overall, while currently lacking, similar studies focusing on drug addiction can help confirm the drug-induced changes in cross-talk between the CNS and peripheral organs through modulation of EV secretion.
While the role of EVs in cancer pathophysiology [ , ], neurodegenerative diseases, and viral infections [ , ] has been reviewed previously, analysis of the existing knowledge regarding EVs in the field of drug addiction is missing. Hence, in the present work, we have reviewed the literature for studies which delineate the significance of EVs and their contents (particularly, miRNAs) in the development and/or maintenance of drug dependence. Furthermore, based on the growing relevance of miRNAs and EVs in various pathophysiological studies, we have provided our perspective regarding the significance of studying the effects of EV cargo in the field of drug addiction.
Drugs of Abuse
Ethanol
Approximately 12% of Americans suffer from alcohol use disorder (AUD), a multifactorial disorder that is associated with changes in brain gene expression. Several genes identified to play a critical role in neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease, are also affected significantly in alcoholic brains. This connection suggests a common link between neurodegenerative conditions and alcoholism [ ]. Translation of mRNAs allows cell to remodel their synaptic structure and function, and such persistent changes may have a causal role in alcohol addiction. The translational regulation by miRNAs may facilitate the shift of recreational drug use into compulsive drug use and addiction [ ].
In human alcoholics, miRNAs can serve as both drug targets and biomarkers due to their ability to alter gene regulation [ ]. Delivery of miRNA via EVs may play a key role in the development of alcoholism. In non-neuronal cells, for instance, a definite role for alcohol-mediated changes in the cargo of EVs was demonstrated [ , ]. Intuitively, examining the neurological role of miRNAs packaged within EVs in alcoholism may further enhance the current understating of alcohol dependence. In the past, several studies have highlighted the effect of alcohol in regulating the expression of specific miRNAs in both animal models and human studies. For instance, increased expression of miR-9 was reported in cultured striatal neurons and postulated to serve a key role in the development of alcohol tolerance [ ]. Researchers found that when neuronal cells were exposed to alcohol, there was a rapid increase of miR-9 expression in these cells. The miR-9-induced changes in expression of calcium and voltage-gated potassium channels, in turn, were postulated to assist the development of tolerance for alcohol. Furthermore, a comprehensive study explaining the effects of alcohol on brain miRNAs in human alcoholics was reported by Lewohl et al. [ ]. The microarray analysis revealed that approximately 35 human miRNAs were upregulated in the prefrontal cortex of alcoholics compared to control samples. Additionally, the over-expression of these miRNAs was found to be inversely correlated with the expression of their target mRNAs. In future studies, a detailed analysis of EV-mediated transport of miRNAs identified in the aforementioned studies may help address alcohol dependence.
Besides being a widely abused drug, ethanol is also a known teratogen that can lead to fetal alcohol spectrum diseases (FASD) when consumed during pregnancy. The potential involvement of miRNAs in governing ethanol-induced changes in fetal development has been reviewed earlier [ ]. While the role of exosomes in pregnancy-related disorders and their potential to serve as biomarkers is known [ , ], the contribution of exosomal miRNA in the pathophysiology of FASD is unknown. Further efforts are required to assess the precise role of exosomal miRNAs in the pathophysiology of FASD.
Nicotine or Tobacco
Upon exposure, cigarette constituents are also known to cause specific changes in the packaging and release of EVs from various cell types. Studies have reported that treatment with cigarette constituents is associated with varied responses including the increased release of EVs [ ], selective packaging of proteases [ ], and an enhanced packaging of autophagy suppressor miRNA, miR-210 [ ]. Given the direct delivery of cigarette constituents to the pulmonary system, a significant role of EVs in the pathophysiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and lung cancer has been demonstrated [ ].
In the context of development of cigarette and tobacco use dependence, however, the precise role of EVs has not been delineated. While studies have clearly identified the role of miRNAs in governing the effects of nicotine, the packaging and delivery of these miRNAs within EVs upon nicotine exposure needs further investigation. The addictive property of nicotine is attributed to the activation of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor expressed throughout the brain, particularly in the habenula region [ ]. Employing a self-administering mice model, Lee et al. demonstrated critical changes in expression of more than 40 miRNAs in the habenula region following nicotine exposure, suggesting a putative role of these changes in nicotine addiction [ ]. In a different study, nicotine administration in rodents was associated with downregulation of miR-542-3p and enhanced expression of β2 subunit of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) within the mesocorticolimbic pathway [ ]. Importantly, increased expression of nAChRs, following exposure to nicotine, has been long known to be a feature of tobacco smoking [ ]. The growing evidence for miRNA-mediated control of nAChR expression further highlights the intricate effects of nicotine consumption. Instinctively, EVs may serve as a potential source of delivering behavior-altering miRNAs to critical brain regions controlling nicotine dependence and therefore, require a closer examination.
Opiates
With the enhanced understanding of miRNAs, the impact of small non-coding RNAs on the μ-opioid receptor (MOR) system has also been studied previously [ , ]. Opioids are a class of drugs which include both illegal drugs (heroin, fentanyl etc.) and legally prescribed pain medications (oxycodone, hydrocodone, morphine etc.). In addition to exerting a potent analgesic effect, opioid use is also associated with euphoria, which promotes the continued use and dependence. MORs are the major pharmacological target for opioid drugs, and these receptors are involved in the pathophysiology of opioid addiction. Interference in the translation of key proteins, via miRNA, can therefore precipitate the deleterious effects associated with chronic opioid abuse. Several miRNAs—miR-15b, miR181, miR-125b, and the let-7 family of miRNAs—have been implicated in the development of opioid tolerance as well as the regulation of MOR expression. Chronic morphine treatment, for example, was associated with a time-dependent increased expression of the miRNA let-7 in both in vitro and in vivo experimental models [ ]. Moreover, increased expression of let-7 family of miRNAs, upon morphine treatment, was associated with a decrease in the expression of the MORs and was postulated to contribute towards the development of opioid tolerance. Importantly, let-7 family of miRNAs and other miRNAs which are thought to regulate the neurological effects of opioids have been isolated from EVs secreted by neuroblastomas [ ]. While miRNA delivery-driven pathophysiological role for EVs in opioid abuse cannot be ruled out, direct in vivo and ex vivo studies establishing a causal relationship are required. Alternately, delivery of exosome packaged silencing RNA (siRNA) to inhibit the MOR has been proposed as a suitable strategy to treat morphine relapse [ ].
Interestingly, the precise effect of morphine treatment on exosomal shuttling of miRNA and the associated effects on neurons and astrocytes were demonstrated in relation with the HIV transactivation (tat) protein [ ]. Morphine treatment, in conjunction with HIV-tat, was associated with an upregulation of exosomal miR-29b derived from astrocytes (A-172 cells) compared to the control cells. Furthermore, the exposure of neuronal (SH-SY5Y) cells to the astrocytic exosomes containing miR29b resulted in an attenuation of expression of platelet-derived growth factor BB (PDGF-BB) and increased neuronal cytotoxicity. Importantly, morphine treatment in simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)-infected rhesus macaques was also associated with an enhanced expression of miR-29b and decreased expression of PDGF-B. Lack of the neurotropic factor, PDGF-B, was proposed to contribute towards the observed neuronal damage. Overall, the ability of morphine to directly influence the exosomal delivery of miRNAs, attenuate the neuronal protein expression, and impact the neuronal survival was confirmed in this study. A detailed examination of the effects of opiates on EV-mediated delivery of miRNAs is warranted to establish the long-terms effects of these drugs on the reward pathway and the development of opioid addiction.
Cocaine
Cocaine is a naturally occurring, stimulant drug, which is highly addictive. As per the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), “cocaine use has remained relatively stable since 2009.” Cocaine acts by blocking the functions of the dopamine transporter, thereby increasing synaptic concentrations of dopamine in the reward pathways of the brain. Similar to the reported observations with alcohol and nicotine, cocaine exposure is also known to exert specific effects on miRNA expression and synaptic plasticity, resulting in an increased propensity for cocaine consumption. The effects of cocaine on miRNA expression were reviewed recently [ ]. Among the numerous miRNAs affected, miR-212, for instance, has garnered much attention in rodent models of cocaine addiction. miR-212 was found to be downregulated in rodents prone to cocaine addiction and overexpressing miR-212 resulted in an attenuation of cocaine-self administration [ ]. Similarly, following cocaine exposure, brain-region specific changes in expression of several miRNAs—miR-101b, miR-137, miR-431, and miR-132—were reported in a rodent model [ ]. In particular, expression of miR-431 was found to be significantly elevated in the dorsal striatum region of cocaine susceptible rats compared with the cocaine-resilient rats. Importantly, a functional response linked to elevated miR-431 expression was the downregulation of the activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein (Arc), a key synaptic plasticity molecule.
The effect of cocaine on miRNAs delivery via EVs, however, has not been examined in detail. Interestingly, two studies have reported the effects of cocaine exposure on EV secretion. Protein profiling of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collected from conscious mice revealed that exposure to cocaine, compared to other acute stress conditions, was associated with a preferential upregulation of proteins related to EVs [ ]. An in vitro study later revealed that cocaine treatment increased both the time-dependent release of EV and a concentration-dependent secretion of exosomes by glioblastoma cells [ ]. Based on the prevailing literature support for EVs serving as efficient carriers of miRNAs, cocaine exposure can be speculated to increase not only the secretion of EVs but also the delivery of EV-sheltered miRNAs contributing to cocaine addiction.
Marijuana/Cannabinoids
The endogenous cannabinoid (eCB) system is known to affect the brain’s response to drugs of abuse and, hence, may serve as a target for treating drug dependence [ , ]. As part of the eCB system, the cannabinoid CB 1 receptor serves as a target for both endogenous cannabinoids and the psychoactive constituent of cannabis, Δ-9-tetra-hydrocannabinol (THC). The expression and function of the CB 1 receptor are controlled by an array of signaling molecules including miRNAs. A recent study revealed the interplay between CB 1 receptor activation, expression of miRNA let-7d, and influence of miRNA let-7d on further CB 1 receptor signaling [ ]. While activation of CB 1 receptor was associated with an increased expression of miRNA let-7-d, subsequent effects of let-7-d included the disruption of proteins which control CB 1 expression and/or function and the inhibition of cross-talk between CB 1 receptor and MOR. While let-7d is not the only miRNA affected by the CB 1 receptor activation or capable of influencing the CB 1 receptor signaling, this study provides a possible rationale for the clinical synergism of antinociceptive effects observed with marijuana and opioid analgesics.
Interestingly, EVs released by microglial cells have been shown to serve as transporters of active endocannabinoids [ ]. Moreover, in this study, the endocannabinoids were found to be located on the surface of EVs facilitating the activation of neuronal CB 1 receptors by the microglial EVs. While much focus has been directed towards the miRNA cargo contained within EVs, the impact of exogenous cannabinoids on the transport of active endocannabinoids by EVs is an unexplored area of research. In addition to having a direct impact on miRNA expression and delivery via EVs, THC and other cannabinoids may also influence the packaging and/or delivery of endocannabinoids to neurons.
Discussion
The existing literature supports a causal effect between exposure to drugs of abuse and specific changes in miRNA expression leading to significant changes in synaptic plasticity and continued drug abuse. Table 2 summarizes some of the significant changes in miRNA expression reported in drug addiction research. EVs are well-known carriers of miRNA, proteins, and other small cellular components and are recognized key sub-cellular elements that mediate cell-cell communication. While studies clearly demonstrate a drug-mediated enhancement in EV secretion, the direct influence of drug abuse on the delivery of EV-packaged miRNAs has not been fully explored. A detailed analysis of contents carried by EVs, both protein and miRNA, following exposure to drugs of abuse is a scientific extension of the available studies and is essential to decipher the precise role of EVs in drug addiction. Figure 1 summarizes the possible influence of drugs of abuse on the neuronal secretion of EVs and altered delivered of EV contents to other central and peripheral cells. The EV-mediated changes in delivery of miRNAs and proteins, following drug abuse, are rationalized to have a direct impact on gene expression/other effects and thus, the pathophysiology of drug addiction. Table 2 Summary of discussed miRNAs in drug addiction studies Drugs of abuse miRNA upregulated miRNA downregulated Discussed role of miRNA in addiction biology Ethanol miR-9 – Change in expression of large conductance Ca 2+ and voltage-gated K + ion channels linked to a growing tolerance to ethanol Nicotine – miR-542-3p Increased expression of β2 subunit of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the mesocorticolimbic (reward) pathway promoting nicotine addiction Opioids Let-7a, Let-7c Let7-g – Decrease in the mu-opioid receptor expression leading to an increase in opioid tolerance Cocaine miR-431 miR-212 miR-431 upregulation is associated with lack of Arc expression in the dorsal striatum miR-212 is downregulated in rodents prone to cocaine addiction Marijuana Let-7d – Altered CB 1 receptor signaling/expression and crosstalk between CB 1 and μ-opioid receptors Fig. 1 A schematic representation of the possible role of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in the pathophysiology of drug addiction. Given the significance of EVs in mediating cell-cell communication, chronic drug abuse has the potential to impact the crosstalk between brain cells and other brain/peripheral cells. The functional changes may be a result of enhanced delivery of extracellular vesicular cargo, in particular, the packaged microRNAs (miRNAs). As demonstrated by several studies, miRNAs may govern the pathophysiology of drug addiction by affecting gene expression in both central and peripheral cells in response to drugs of abuse
The significance of studying EVs in the context of neuropharmacological effects of commonly abused drugs is further bolstered by observations which report the specificity of EVs for cellular interaction. For instance, a recent study demonstrated that exosomes secreted by neurons were found to interact specifically with other neurons upon release, emphasizing their exclusive contribution towards interneuronal communication [ ]. Similarly, the astrocyte-specific EV release and EV cargo have been identified to serve a critical role within the CNS [ ]. In addition, exosomes have been successfully employed for both the CNS delivery of miRNAs to treat an underlying pathophysiological condition [ ] and as a diagnostic marker to assess the extent of neurological damage in a pathophysiological condition [ ]. These observations further support the need to test similar strategies to ascertain the utility of exosomal cargo in addressing drug addiction.
Overall, a systematic and comprehensive analysis of drug abuse-mediated changes in secretion of EVs and delivery of extracellular vesicular cargo is warranted. Future studies are expected to delineate the exact role of EVs in drug addiction and the drug-specific effects on EV secretion, thereby possibly unraveling new avenues for managing drug addiction. Moreover, cellular components responsible for the secretion and/or packaging of miRNAs within EVs may also serve as novel drug targets for minimizing the impact of EVs in the pathophysiology of drug addiction.