Introduction
Malignant gliomas are the most common primary central nervous system (CNS) tumors in adults and comprise a group of extremely heterogeneous tumors with glial origin. Glioblastoma (GBM, WHO Grade IV Astrocytoma) is the most aggressive glial tumor, accounting for more than 50% of the malignant gliomas. This astrocyte-derived tumor presents a very invasive, angiogenic, and proliferative behavior and is characterized by its cellular and genetic heterogeneity [ , , , ]. Despite the aggressive standard treatment with surgical resection and radiotherapy with concurrent and adjuvant chemotherapy with Temozolomide (a DNA alkylating agent), virtually all patients evolve with early tumor recurrence, leading newly diagnosed patients to a poor overall survival of 14.6 months. Although novel approaches such anti-angiogenic agents (Bevacizumab), new chemotherapy protocols, and more recently the Tumor Treating Fields (NovoTTF-100A) have been deeply investigated, we are still far away from an efficient treatment [ , , , , ].
Drug repurposing is an emerging strategy to face challenges towards cancer therapy. It bypasses several steps of traditional drug development which are very dispendious and time-consuming. This strategy takes advantage of the well-recognized adverse effects and toxicity of old drugs to propose new therapeutic applications. In recent years, several old drugs have had their activities reevaluated in order to redefine their uses facing recently discovered mechanisms of action [ ].
Sulfasalazine (SAS), a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) developed in 1950s, belongs to the class of salicylates. SAS is currently used for the treatment of chronic inflammatory conditions such as ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, and rheumatoid arthritis [ , ]. Despite its notorious mechanism of cyclooxygenase inhibition and NF-κB activity suppression, SAS has also been described as an efficient inhibitor of xc- system, a heterodimeric cystine/glutamate antiporter [ ]. This system is composed by the catalytic xCT protein, which is related to glutamate release and cystine uptake, and by 4F2hc, a regulatory subunit [ , , ]. Noteworthy, xc- system is associated with astrocyte cysteine intracellular concentrations and, once inside the cell, cysteine is driven to enzymatic glutathione (GSH) synthesis, the main anti-oxidant molecule. In gliomas, xCT activity has been described as the rate-limit step for GSH synthesis [ , , ]. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that gliomas contain high concentrations of GSH, which matches the described overexpression of xCT and 4F2hc in gliomas [ , , ]. GSH exerts its antioxidant effects directly, as a reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger, or indirectly, as an enzymatic detoxification substrate for glutathione peroxidase (GPx) or glutathione S-transferase (GST) [ ]. Indeed, SAS is able to diminish cystine uptake and subsequently GSH content in different glioma cell lines via xCT inhibition, leading to the reduction of cell viability [ , , , , , , , ].
Still in the drug repurposing context, Valproic acid (2-propylvaleric acid; VPA) is an old anticonvulsant drug and mood stabilizer which exerts a myriad of known effects. VPA has been associated to activation of glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), inhibition of both GABA transaminase/succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase, and prolonged recovery of voltage-activated sodium channels from inactivation [ ]. Over the last years, an intriguing discussion concerning GSK-3β and/or Wnt/β-catenin inhibition placed VPA mechanisms in a different prism without any definite conclusion about its central role [ ]. Nowadays, the most accepted mechanism of action of VPA is through the inhibition of classes I and II histone deacetylases (HDAC), a well-known regulator system of chromatin compaction [ ]. This mechanism opens a new window of opportunity to repurpose VPA in the context of pathological conditions involving epigenetic mechanisms. It has been recognized that histone acetylation/deacetylation imbalance, as well as other histone epigenetic modifications, is a preponderant factor that contributes to pathogenesis of several tumors including gliomas [ , , ].
Concerning gliomas, HDAC inhibitors (iHDAC) such as trichostatin A, sodium butyrate, and VPA promote growth inhibition and apoptosis in various glioma cell lines [ , ]. Additionally, Fu and colleagues showed that VPA induces autophagy in U87MG, T98G, and SF295 malignant glioma cell lines enhancing intracellular peroxide concentrations after 96 h of treatment [ ]. Other studies have shown a decrease in angiogenesis and invasiveness potential in vivo using several rat and human glioma cell lines [ , , , , , , , , ]. Indeed, VPA and other iHDAC drugs (vorinostat and romidepsin) were tested in clinical trials and VPA may be preferred among other anticonvulsant drugs for prophylaxis and treatment of seizures in GBM patients [ , , , ].
Drugs that contribute selectively to boost oxidative microenvironment in the tumor would be good candidates for anticancer strategy. Thus, the inhibition of xc- system and the increase of ROS levels by available known old molecules seem to be a reasonable strategy on repurposing drugs for GBM treatment. In this context, based on the fact that SAS and VPA are well tolerated and largely used in the clinical practice for treating chronic illnesses such as inflammatory bowel disease [ , ] and epilepsy [ , , ], respectively, this work evaluates the effect of the combination of both drugs in GBM in vitro models. We observed that SAS and VPA exhibit synergistic effect upon glioma diminishing viability through impairment of GSH intracellular concentration maintenance and ascorbate uptake with no damage to healthy CNS cells.
Materials and Methods
Reagents
Penicillin, streptomycin, L-glutamine, fetal bovine serum (FBS), fetal calf serum (FCS), trypsin, Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium: nutrient mixture F-12 (D-MEM/F-12), neurobasal medium, B27 supplement, Alexa488 and Alexa568 conjugated secondary anti-rabbit and anti-mouse antibodies and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Carlsbad, CA, USA). HEPES, dimethyl sulfoxide, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), and sulfasalazine and valproic acid (VPA) were purchased from Sigma/RBI Chem. Co. (St Louis, MO, USA). Bovine serum albumin was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA, USA). Enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) kit was purchased from GE Healthcare (Buckinghanshire, UK). Primary antibodies against xCT(SLC7A11) and KI67 were bought from Abcam (Cambridge, MA, USA). Primary antibody against cyclin B (Cyc B) was bought from Cell Signaling (Beverly, MA, USA). Primary antibody against GFAP was purchased from DAKO (Glostrup, Denmark). Primary antibodies against GLAST and betaIII-tubulin were acquired from Millipore (MA, USA). All other reagents were of analytical grade.
Maintenance of GBM Cell Lines
The primary human glioblastoma cell lines GBM95 and GBM02 were established in Dr. Vivaldo Moura-Neto’s laboratory [ ] from patients’ surgical specimens provided by Dr. Jorge Marcondes, from the Neurosurgery service of Clementino Fraga Filho University Hospital (HUCFF-UFRJ). This research had written informed consent from the patients and was approved by the Brazilian Ministry of Health Ethics Committee, under Institutional Review Board (IRB-Research Ethics Committee of Hospital Universitário Clementino Fraga Filho) consent CEP-HUCFF No. 002/01. The human glioma cell lines U87MG and rat C6 were acquired from ATCC.
Cells were grown and maintained in DMEM/F-12 medium supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 1.2 g NaHCO 3 , gentamycin (200 g/mL), streptomycin (100 mg/L), and penicillin (6 mg/L), 10% FBS. Culture flasks were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 and 95% air atmosphere. Cells displaying exponential growth were detached from the culture flasks with 0.25% trypsin/ethylene-diamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) and seeded.
Mice Astrocyte Primary Culture
Cortical astrocytes were prepared from the cerebral cortex of newborn (P0) Swiss mice as previously described [ , , , ]. Briefly, after removal of the meninges, single-cell suspensions were obtained by mechanically dissociating cells from the cerebral cortex in 10 mL DMEM-F12. Cells were allowed to decant for 5 min and the supernatant was put apart in a 15-mL falcon tube. This procedure was repeated once more, and the falcon tube with the supernatants was centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min; supernatant was discarded, and pellet was re-suspended in DMEM-F12 supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) and plated at pre-coated poli-L-ornitine plates. Cells were washed and culture medium was changed every 2 days, until cells reached confluence. Identity of the astrocyte primary cultures was assessed by immunocytochemistry using an anti-GFAP antibody and cells presented more than 95% purity. Confluent astrocytes were harvested using trypsin-EDTA solution (0.25% trypsin with EDTA; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and plated on 24-well plates pre-coated with poli-L-ornitine at 10 4 cells per well for the drug treatments.
Mice Neuron Primary Culture
Neuron primary cultures were prepared from the cerebral cortex of 14-day-old embryonic (E14) Swiss mice as previously described [ ]. Briefly, single-cell suspensions were obtained by dissociating cells from the cerebral cortices in neurobasal medium supplemented with B27, penicillin, streptomycin, L-glutamine, and fungizone. Neurons were incubated at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 and 95% air atmosphere for 7 days in poli-L-lisine pre-coated plates. Identity of the neuronal primary cultures was assessed by immunocytochemistry using an anti-betaIII-tubulin antibody and cells presented purity higher than 95% [ ]. Primary neurons were plated on 24-well plates pre-coated with poli-L-lisine at 10 4 cells per well for the drug treatments.
Maintenance of the Human Astrocyte Cells
Adult primary human astrocytes were isolated from surgically resected anterior temporal lobe tissue, from patients selected for surgical treatment of temporal-lobe epilepsy associated with hippocampus sclerosis. The pathological tissue targeted in surgery for these cases is the gliotic hippocampus, and the anterior temporal lobe resection is used merely as a surgical pathway to the diseased area. All patients gave written consent to the use of their surgical specimens for isolation of cortical cells (including astrocytes) in the study, and the procedures were approved by the Brazilian Ministry of Health Ethics Committee under IRB consent (CEP-HUCFF No. 060/05). As previously described [ ], only healthy cortical tissue was used to produce astrocyte cultures. Briefly, tissues were washed in DMEM medium, mechanically dissociated, chopped into small pieces with a sterile scalpel, and incubated in 10 mL of 0.25% trypsin solution at 37 °C for 10 min. After centrifugation for 10 min, the cell pellet was resuspended in DMEM/F12 growth medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) and plated onto tissue culture plates in a humidified 5% CO2, 95% air atmosphere at 37 °C for 2 h in order to achieve adherence of microglial cells. The non-adherent astrocytes were transferred into other culture plates, previously coated with poly-L-lysine. Adherent astrocytes were allowed to grow by replacing the medium once a week. New passages of cells were generated by harvesting confluent astrocyte cultures using trypsin-EDTA solution (0.25% trypsin with EDTA; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Human astrocytes from up to the third passage were used in this study and expressed the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) and typical astrocyte markers, such as GFAP and glutamate-aspartate transporter (GLAST) attesting to their human and astrocytic nature. Confluent astrocytes were plated on 24-well plates pre-coated with poli-L-ornitine at 10 4 cells per well for the drug treatments.
Cell Growth Assay and Isobologram Graphs
Glioblastoma and primary CNS cells were plated at 10 4 cells/well in 24-well (15.6 mm diameter/well) tissue culture plates in DMEM/F-12 supplemented with 2 mM glutamine and 10% FBS (complete medium) for 24 h. Drug treatments were proceeded 24 h after cell plating in 5% FBS fresh complete medium for different time points. For all SAS conditions, DMSO was used in final concentration of 0.1% as well as its respective control condition. After 6-, 24-, or 48-h treatments, cells were re-suspended using PBS/EDTA 0.04% (15 min) following mechanical resuspension, stained with a 3% Trypan Blue solution (1 min) for death cell exclusion and counted using a hemocytometer. The average number of cells on five delimited squares was considered. The presented concentration-effect curves were generated using GraphPad Prism version 6.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, USA). Isobologram graphs were generated using concentration-effect data plotted by CalcuSyn2.0 software.
Panoptic Staining
After the above mentioned treatments, cells were fixed and stained following adapted Panóptico Rápido™ LB protocol (LaborClin, Pinhais, Parana, Brazil). Briefly, cells were fixed with parafolmaldehyde 4% (PFA 4%, 15 min), then stained with acidophil and basophil solutions for 30 min each. Cells were then washed and air-dried. Phase-contrast images were acquired using a Nikon Eclipse TE300 microscope.
Flow Cytometry Analysis of Cell Apoptosis
U87MG and GBM02 cells were plated and treated as described above for 24 h. After, supernatant was collected in microtube. Samples were then washed twice with PBS solution, harvested with TrypLE® Thermo Fisher Scientific (Carlsbad, CA, USA), and transferred to the microtube containing supernatant following 3 min/206G centrifugation. After, supernatant was discarded and pellet was washed once with PBS and re-centrifuged as before. Next, PBS was removed and cells were incubated for 20 min at 37 °C with Annexin V-FITC/Propidium Iodide (PI) solution (5 μL Annexin V-FITC solution and 1 μL/mL P.I. per 100 μL cell suspension in Annexin Binding Buffer®-10 mM HEPES, 140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl 2 pH 7.4) following manufacturer instructions (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). Following, 200-μL assay buffer was added and cells were immediately conducted to BD FACS Verse® (BD Biosciences) flow cytometer set for 20,000 event analysis. Equipment voltages were set using GBM02 cells with no stain (387 mV for FSC; 354 mV for SSC; 303 mV for PI; 382 mV for Annexin V-FITC). Fluorescence was adjusted using annexin V/P.I. non-stained cells; control cells stained with annexin V-FITC or control cells stained with P.I. Cells exhibiting fluorescence peak smaller than 10 3 were considered as unstained.
Cell Population Doubling Protocol
A total of 15,000 U87MG or GBM02 cells were plated at 12-well plate and, 24 h later, treated with SAS, VPA, or both drugs (1 mM) for 48 h. After, cells were counted and re-plated at the same density with fresh medium in new wells. This procedure was repeated four times over 28 days. Cumulative population doubling was measured following instructions [ ] and adapted for hemocytometer cell counting [ ]. Data were plotted as dot-plot graphs showing mean ± SEM of three different experiments for each cell line. We used the linear regression of treated and control groups to obtain relative proliferation ratio (RPR) and relative time to cross a threshold (RTCT). Linear regressions were calculated considering the higher angular coefficient of the two last CPD time-lapses. RPR is represented by the ratio of angular coefficient of control and treated cells. For RTCT, a CPD threshold was set considering the time lapse when both control and treated cells were faster at cell growth. After, ratio between the time to surpass the delimited threshold was determined and named RTCT. Relative end CPD (RendCPD) parameter was used as a ratio between end points of control and treated conditions after treatments, and relative area under curve (rAUC) was considered to describe the chronic treatment effects after 28 days.
Ethidium Homodimer Assay
For dead cell staining, the already described cell plating and drug treatment protocol were followed using glass coverslips. After 48-h treatment, cells were examined for cell death using the ethidium homodimer stain from Live/Dead Viability/Cytotoxicity kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Eugene, OR) following instructions of the manufacturer and co-stained with DAPI. The percentage of dead cells was determined by immunofluorescence, using OptiGrid microscope (Qioptiq), and we quantified double EtHd + /DAPI-stained cell nuclei/total number of DAPI stained nuclei.
Immunofluorescence
After 48-h treatments, glass coverslips with platted cells were fixed with PFA 4% for 15 min, washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at pH 7.4, and covered with a PBS/BSA 5% (30 min) solution to block unspecific binding sites. After, cells were permeabilized with PBS and 0.01% Triton X-100 and/or incubated with the primary antibodies anti-KI67 at 4 °C (1:200 v / v PBS/BSA 1%, made in rabbit; Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA,USA) followed by three washes with PBS and incubation with secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa-488 (1: 400 v / v PBS/BSA 1%, anti-rabbit) for 120 min at room temperature. The coverslips were washed twice with PBS and the nucleus stained with DAPI (1 mM, 30 s), washed twice with PBS, and slides were mounted using N-propyl-galate. Images were acquired using OptiGrid microscope (Qioptiq) and we quantified double KI67 + /DAPI-stained cell nuclei/total number of DAPI-stained nuclei.
Nuclear Morphometric Analysis Method
For the analysis using NMA method [ ], the same images obtained for immunofluorescence were used. Cell nuclei were analyzed using DAPI stain following the parameters found in plugin’s tutorial and worksheet.
Western Blot for xCT and SVCT2 Proteins
Primary cultured cells were washed twice with cold PBS and lysed in 1% NP40, 1% Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mmol/L Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 100 mmol/L NaCl, and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 5 mM EDTA, supplemented with complete protease and phosphatase inhibitory cocktails for protein extraction. The same procedure was followed for glioblastoma cells (both treated and untreated with SAS and VPA). Samples were separated by 9% SDS-PAGE gel and transferred to PVDF membranes. Membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat milk in Tris buffer saline (TBS)-Tween (1000:1 v / v ) at room temperature, and primary antibodies (anti-xCT 1:1000 made in mouse, Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA; anti-SVCT2 1:200 made in goat; Santa Cruz Biotech, Dallas, TX, USA) were incubated overnight at 4 °C. Next, membranes were washed three times/10 min with TBS-Tween and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (for anti-xCT, we used 1:2000 and for anti-SVCT2 we used 1:500; GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) were incubated for 2 h at room temperature. Then, membranes were washed three times/10 min with TBS-Tween and developed using ECL plus (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Chemiluminescence was captured using ChemiDoc MP System (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). Western blots were carried out primarily using alpha-tubulin (1:100,000 primary made in mouse, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA; 1:10,000 anti-mouse secondary antibody, GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) or cyclin B (Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA, USA) as loading control. Optical density was analyzed with ImageJ software (version 1.38, NIH, USA).
Glial-to-Mesenchymal Transition Evaluation
GBM02 and U87MG cell samples were collected for Western blot technique as mentioned above. Primary antibodies against vimentin (1:1000 made in mouse, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) and against N-cadherin (1:1000 made in rabbit; Milipore, St. Charles, MO, USA), two GMT markers, were used following the same protocol already described. Next, membranes were incubated with secondary antibodies (for anti-vimentin, we used 1:2000, and for anti-N-cadherin, we used 1:2000, anti-rabbit; GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA), and chemiluminescence labeling was captured as mentioned at previous session. Tubulin (1:100,000 primary made in mouse, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA; 1:10,000 anti-mouse secondary antibody, GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) was used as loading control.
Detection of GSH Levels
After 48-h treatments, U87MG and GBM02 had their medium washed twice with PBS pH 7.4 at room temperature and incubated for 30 min with fresh PBS or PBS + DMSO (0.1% v / v ) when SAS was present at 37 °C. Cells were then lysed with trichloroacetic acid 5% (TCA 5%), the volume was centrifuged at 4 °C, 15,000 RPM, 10 min, and pellet was used for accessing protein levels using Lowry’s method. The supernatant was used for GSH content measurements as described before [ ]. Briefly, iodoacetic acid and ortho-phthalaldehyde (both, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) were used for GSH derivatization in samples and standards. Samples were properly diluted for measurement in the linear portion of the standard curve. GSH concentrations were determined after on-line derivatization by high-performance liquid chromatography with fluorescence detection (HPLC-Fluo) using a chromatographic system, a ZORBAX SB C18 (150 × 4.6 mm × 5 μm; Agilent, EUA) column and a mobile phase composed of sodium acetate solution at pH 7.3 and a mixture of acetonitrile, methanol and water (40:30:30, v / v ). The excitation and emission wavelengths were 356 and 445 nm, respectively.
[14C]-Ascorbate Uptake
For [ 14 C]-ascorbate uptake studies, 48-h drug-treated cells were washed three times in PBS pH 7.4 at 37 °C. For SVCT transport system activity, 0.1 mM dithyothrehytol (DTT) was added in regular HBSS (NaCl 0.14 mM, KCl 5 mM, HEPES 20 mM, MgCL 2 1 mM, CaCl 2 2 mM, 4 mM glucose) for preserving AA degradation. Saline composition includes also [ 14 C]-ascorbate (0.1 μCi/mL) and 500 μM of SAS and/or VPA. To ensure the SVCT activity, control condition using Na + -free DTT-HBSS was used to verify the absence of radioactivity incorporation. Uptake assays were performed at the equilibrium stage (previously determined as 20 min) in the presence or absence of the drugs. Then, cells were washed three times at 0 °C after the removal of uptake salines. Following, cells were incubated in TCA 5% and submitted to a thaw-freeze cycle. Cell lisate was then transferred to tubes and submitted to a centrifugation at 4 °C, 20,600 g 10 min. Supernatants were used for determination of intracellular radioactivity through liquid scintillation while pellets were used for accessing protein levels using Lowry’s method.
System xc- [3H]-L-Glutamate Uptake
For system xc- glutamate uptake assays, 48-h drug-treated cells were washed three times in PBS pH 7.4 at 37 °C and incubated in a proper uptake saline to discard EAAT activity and ensure the xc- system activity. For that, NaCl was replaced in HBSS for LiCl and T-BOA (100 μM) was added (LiCl 0.14 mM, KCl 5 mM, HEPES 20 mM, MgCL 2 1 mM, CaCl 2 2 mM, 4 mM glucose). Saline composition includes also [ 3 H]-L-glutamate (0.1 μCi/well), glutamate 100 μM, and 500 μM of SAS and/or VPA. Uptake assays were performed for 20 min in the presence of the drugs, and the following processes were the same as described for [ 14 C]-ascorbate uptake assays.
Statistics
Results were expressed as means ± standard error media ( n = 3 minimum). Data were analyzed using Student’s t test when only two groups were compared. When three or more groups were compared, one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc test was applied. Statistical significance was considered when p < 0.05 using GraphPad Prism version 6.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, USA).
Results
SAS and VPA Reduce Glioblastoma Cell’s Viability in a Time and Dose-Dependent Manner
We first analyzed the effect of SAS and VPA in the growth rate of GBM02 cells. Twenty-four hours after plating, cells were treated with SAS, VPA, or a combination of both drugs for 6, 24, or 48 h (Fig. 1 a). Consonant with the literature, we observed that treatment with isolated drugs was able to diminish GBM cell number. Noteworthy, the combined treatment decreased cell’s viability even more, especially after 48 h. Subsequently, we obtained concentration-effect curves after treating GBM02 and U87MG cells with 0.1 to 2 mM of drugs alone or in combination (Fig. 1 b, c). We observed a similar response in reducing cell number for both cell lines when treated with SAS/VPA. In addition, we tested SAS/VPA treatment in C6 rat glioma cell line, and although VPA exerts a significant effect, the presence of SAS shows a robust decrease in such parameter in combination or alone (Online Resource 1 ). The apparent EC50 for GBM02, U87MG, and C6 cells are compiled in Table 1 . Significantly, the apparent potency was enhanced in SAS/VPA treatment of U87 and GBM02 cells. Fig. 1 a Time lapse growth curve of GBM02 cells treated or not with SAS, VPA, or SAS + VPA 500 μM. b , c Dose-response curves (100–2000 μM) for SAS and VPA treatment on GBM02 and U87MG cells, respectively. d , e Isobologram graphs showing EC 50 parameter for combined treatment (small X in the plot) in GBM02 and U87MG cells. f GBM02 and U87MG cell morphology assessed by panoptic stain 24 h after plating or following 48-h treatment with drugs alone or in combination. In all types of cells, VPA points were normalized to CT condition and compared to it; SAS and SAS + VPA conditions were normalized and compared to DMSO 0.1% condition. Expressed values in each point are equivalent to mean of five experiments ± standard error media. CT GBM02: 173.800 ± 13.361 cells; U87MG: 99.140 ± 5.540 cells. Bar scale: 20 μm Table 1 Apparent EC50 (μM) of U87MG, GBM02, and C6 cells treated with SAS, VPA, or SAS + VPA for 48 h Cell line/drug GBM02 U87MG C6 SAS 405.1 ± 1.2 436.7 ± 1.6 155.7 ± 1.2 VPA 480.5 ± 1.3 1.086 ± 1 540 ± 1.4 SAS + VPA 193.3 ± 1.1 210.8 ± 1 144.8 ± 1.2
In order to estimate a possible synergism between SAS and VPA, we used isobologram’s plots showing the reduction of EC 50 value of combined drugs (plotted points below additivity line) (Fig. 1 d, e). Moreover, CalcuSyn software calculated a combination index (CI) presenting 0.6 and 0.52 for GBM02 and U87MG, respectively. According to CI theorem [ ], values below 1 indicate synergism between drugs. Following, we performed a panoptic stain microscopic visualization in order to confirm the calculated data (Fig. 1 f). Additionally, we observed that SAS or VPA-treated cells exhibited different morphology compared to control conditions, showing retraction of cell borders and fusiform appearance for both cell lines in a concentration-dependent manner (Online Resource 2 ). Thus, taken together, these data suggest that combined treatment with SAS and VPA was able to reduce GBM cell’s viability and modify their apparent morphology more effectively than these drugs alone.
SAS and VPA Induce Cell Death and Reduce Proliferation
Further, we analyzed if the loss of viable cells was due to cell death or decrease of proliferative capacity. For the first parameter, we performed the ethidium homodimer (Etd-1) assay after 48-h SAS/VPA treatments. As shown in Fig. 2 , we observed an enhancement on Etd-1 incorporation in three tested GBM cell lines after SAS and VPA treatments. The combined treatment shows a two-fold increase in Etd-1 incorporation compared to drugs alone, showing that combination of both drugs is capable of potentiate cell death. To evaluate the toxicity of these drugs in healthy neural cells, we chose three different controls: mice cortex, mice cortical astrocytes, and human astrocytes. As described in “ Materials and Methods ” session, experiments using mice or human astrocytes were characterized using GFAP glial marker to ensure culture purity (Online Resource 3 ). Interestingly, there was no effect of the treatments on these cells, revealing a GBM cell-specific death mechanism involving SAS and VPA. Fig. 2 Combined treatment with SAS and VPA enhances GBM cell’s death in culture, but treatment with isolated or both drugs is not able to alter astrocytes or cortical cell’s viability. Cells were treated for 48 h with drugs alone or in combination (500 μM for U87MG, 1000 μM for GBM02 and GBM95) and stained for ethidium homodimer-1 (EtD-1) 40 μM for later cell quantification of EtD-1 positive cell nuclei/total nuclei. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001 in comparison to control conditions; + p < 0.05; ++ p < 0.01 in comparison to SAS + VPA. Expressed values in each bar are equivalent to mean of four experiments ± standard error media
Furthermore, we evaluated the drug capacity of inhibiting cell proliferation using the proliferation marker KI67. As shown in Fig. 3 a, b, drugs alone were able to diminish KI67 labeling. Once more, combined drugs were more effective regarding this effect. Moreover, we could not observe any significant changes on human astrocytes, indicating a tumor selective effect. Thus, we observed that both SAS and VPA were able not only to inhibit GBM proliferation but also to induce GBM cell death. Moreover, the combined treatment was capable to increase this effect in GBM cells while showing no effect in the viability of non-tumor CNS cells. Fig. 3 Treatments with SAS, VPA, and SAS + VPA diminish GBM cell proliferation in culture. Cells were treated for 48 h with drugs alone or in combination (500 μM for U87MG, 1000 μM for GBM02, and GBM95). a Panel showing KI67 stain of U87MG, GBM02, GBM95, and human astrocytes. b Cell quantification of KI67 positive cell nuclei/total nuclei. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001 in comparison to control conditions; + p < 0.05; ++ p < 0.01; +++ p < 0.001 in comparison to SAS + VPA. Expressed values in each bar are equivalent to mean of four experiments ± standard error media. Bar scale: 20 μm
In order to improve cell death investigation, we performed annexin V-propidium iodide stain and cells (GBM02) were analyzed by flow cytometry technique. For that, we chose 24-h treatments to ensure the characterization of early or late apoptosis (Fig. 4 ). First, we observed that all treatments induced a reduction of non-stained cells with significant difference when drugs were combined. The measurement of early apoptosis indicated by annexin V-FITC (+)/ P.I. (−) doubled compared to control condition in combined treated cells. Late apoptosis (annexin V-FITC (+)/P.I.(+)) was increased in SAS (around 3 times) and SAS + VPA (around 4.5 times) treatments. These results confirmed synergistic-induced death effects when both drugs act together. Fig. 4 Flow cytometry analysis for apoptosis determination using Annexin-V FITC/PI after 24-h treatments in GBM02 cells. Representative dot plot of control condition (0.1% DMSO) ( a ), SAS ( b ), VPA ( c ), and SAS + VPA ( d ) conditions showing mean ± standard error media of three experiments. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001 in comparison to control conditions
Once apoptosis was determined at experimental time 24 h, we decided to evaluate nuclear morphology patterns of 48-h treatment resistant cells. For that, we decided to apply the nuclear morphometric analysis (NMA) method described by Filippi-Chiela and coleagues [ ] with the purpose to evaluate any possible difference between the treatments. Following this method, characteristics such as aspect, roundness, radius ratio, and area box are used to generate a nuclear irregularity index (NII) and classify cell nuclei by area and NII. Figure 5 a summarizes the graphs generated by NMA method and their biological meanings. We observed that VPA and SAS/VPA treatments were able to augment the percentage of irregular nuclei of GBM02 and U87MG cells (Fig. 5 b, c). These data suggest that cells are undergoing mitotic catastrophe (MC) showing high NII due to their elliptic or varied shapes instead of regular and round shapes. Fig. 5 a Nuclear morphometric analysis diagram showing nuclear area and NII. The round shape reflects the distribution of normal cells. Put apart from them, senescent, apoptotic, irregular, and L.I. cells are separated by draw lines. b , c VPA and SAS + VPA (500 μM each) enhance the percentage of irregular nuclei in GBM02 and U87MG cells, respectively. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01 in comparison to control conditions. For GBM02: irregular VPA: 14.83 ± 5.86%; irregular SAS + VPA: 12.33 ± 2.16%. For U87MG: irregular VPA: 16.867 ± 5.885%; irregular SAS + VPA: 20.467 ± 3.583%. Expressed values in each bar are equivalent to mean of three experiments ± standard error media
Glial-to-Mesenchymal Transition
Another important aspect to consider is that the surviving glioma may develop GMT, a process characterized by the presence of more aggressive phenotype cells. Once GBM02 cells were obtained from a patient biopsy who had not yet been treated with radio- or chemotherapy, it is a good model to assess if treatments induced malignancy increase. Nevertheless, we also used U87MG. It is known that vimentin and N-cadherin increase their expression when GMT occurs, so they were used as markers. As shown in Fig. 6 , no treatments were able to induce significant alterations in both protein levels. Fig. 6 Vimentin and N-cadherin (glial-to-mesenchymal transition markers) are not altered after cell treatments in GBM02. a , c Representative data of three Western blot experiments showing vimentin and N-cadherin protein expression in GBM02 and U87MG cells, respectively, after 48- h treatments with sulfasalazine (SAS), valproic acid (VPA), both drugs in combination (SAS + VPA) or vehicles (CT for VPA and DMSO 0.1% for SAS and SAS + VPA). b , d Quantification of Western blot for glial-to-mesenchymal transition markers (vimentin and N-cadherin). Expressed values in each bar are equivalent to mean of three experiments ± standard error media
SAS, VPA, and Combined Treatments Induce Long-Term Cell Doubling Impairment
In order to assess if 48-h drug treatments were capable to modify GBM02 and U87MG cell doubling over longer periods, we performed the cumulative cell doubling (CPD) method [ , ]. Briefly, CPD consists on re-plate treatment resistant cells in culture and perform cell counting over different periods. It is important to highlight 48-h treatment resistant cells receive no more treatments along time. RendCPD quantifies the final time points as a ratio of control and treated conditions; rAUC shows the global effects of alone or combined treatments; RPR is related to proliferation capacity of control and treated cells and RTCT is a ratio of the proliferation delay on treated cells compared to control.
We observed cells trough 4 weeks and concluded that all treatments were capable to reduce all cited parameters (Fig. 7 ), although SAS treatment was not statistically significant in U87MG. Interestingly, VPA treatments were capable to reduce long-term parameters more than SAS. For GBM02, combined treatments showed a more robust effect compared to drugs alone. U87MG exhibit a different profile and the presence of SAS was unable to add effects to VPA alone. These data showed us that even at the absence of the drugs for long periods after treatment, SAS, VPA, or both drugs previously sensitized glioma cells and future cell doubling was impaired. Fig. 7 SAS, VPA, and combined treatments alter GBM02 and U87MG cell doubling along time at the absence of drugs. Cells were treated for 48 h and, after, remaining cells were counted and plated at the density of 15,000 cells/4 cm 2 with new fresh medium without drugs. a , c Cell population doubling (CPD) graphs, respectively, showing GBM02 and U87MG capacity of proliferation after 48-h drug treatments along 28 days. b , d Treatments decrease RendCPD, rAUC, PRP, and RTCT parameters for GBM02 and U87MG, respectively. *, **, and *** p < 0.05, 0.01, or 0.001, respectively, compared to vehicle condition. #, ## p < 0.05, 0.01, respectively, compared to SAS. +, ++ p < 0.05, 0.01, respectively, compared to VPA
Sulfasalazine Is Able to Disrupt xc-/Glutathione System and Ascorbate Uptake
In order to correlate the reduction of cell viability induced by treatments with antioxidant defense mechanisms, two uptake systems were evaluated. First, the total content of xc- catalytic protein xCT was determined in three human GBM cell lines, C6 rat glioma cells, mice primary neurons, and human astrocytes. Figure 8 a is divided into two groups: rodents (light gray) and human cells (dark gray). In both cases, it was observed that GBMs express higher levels of xCT protein compared to non-tumor cells. Noteworthy, C6 cells expressed the highest levels of xCT among all glioma cells. Fig. 8 a Western blot showing xCT protein expression in C6 rat glioma cell lines, primary cortical mouse neurons and astrocytes, human astrocyte lineages, GBMs 02, 95, and U87MG human glioblastoma cells. All glioma cells expressed significant higher levels of system xc- catalytic subunit. b [ 3 H]-L-glutamate uptake levels were reduced after 48-h treatment with SAS or SAS + VPA in GBM02 and U87MG cells. c Intracellular GSH content was significantly diminished after same treatments in both cell lines. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001 in comparison to control conditions. [ 3 H]-L-glutamate CT levels: U87MG 0.133 ± 0.029 fmol/mg protein; GBM02 0.149 ± 0.028 fmol/mg protein. Intracellular GSH levels: GBM02 0.088 ± 0.023 μmol/mg protein; U87MG 0.05 ± 0.009 μmol/mg protein. Expressed values in each bar are equivalent to mean of three experiments (minimum) ± standard error media
In sequence, the activity of xc- system was measured using L-[ 3 H]-glutamate in a Na + -free incubation saline in the presence of TBOA in order to exclude EAAT uptake contributions. Importantly, SAS treatments were able to impair glutamate uptake by around 75–80% in GBM02 and U87MG cells. The presence of VPA did not alter the uptake patterns even in combination with SAS (Fig. 8 b). Further, as a parameter of xc- system function, we measured total intracellular GSH content. As expected, SAS diminished GSH in both cell lines with no observable effects of VPA (Fig. 8 c).
As SAS treatment reduces the GSH content in gliomas and GSH is directly implicated in vitamin C recycling [ ], we decided to evaluate whether vitamin C uptake system could be altered by the treatments. Vitamin C is a widespread term that defines its oxidized (dehydroascorbate—DHA) and its reduced forms (ascorbate). While GLUTs mediate the facilitative transport of DHA [ , , ], ascorbate, the reduced form, is transported by a high-affinity protein, called sodium vitamin C transporter (SVCT) [ , , ], which transports ascorbate in a sodium-dependent manner. So, we evaluated how treatments could interfere with ascorbate uptake [ , , , , ]. In accordance with Fig. 9 , SAS but not VPA was able to reduce ascorbate uptake around 60%. As GLUT mediates Na + independent transport of vitamin C, we performed a Na + -free condition to evaluate a possible contribution of GLUTS, but no activity was detected. As shown in Fig. 9 b, no alterations in SVCT2 protein levels were detected after any 48-h treatments. This way, we observed that treatments were able to disrupt GBM antioxidant machinery by decreasing intracellular GSH contents and inhibiting vitamin C uptake in both cells. Fig. 9 SAS inhibits ascorbate uptake in glioma cell lines. a [ 14 C]-ascorbate uptake levels were reduced after 48-h treatment with SAS or SAS + VPA in GBM02 and U87MG cells. Sodium-free saline significantly reduced ascorbate uptake. Acute treatments with the same drugs had the same pattern (data not shown). b Western blot showing SVCT2 protein expression GBM 02 and U87MG human glioblastoma cells. None of the treatments was able to affect the transporter expression levels. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001 in comparison to control conditions. [ 14 C]-ascorbate CT levels: U87MG = 0.0304 pmol/μg protein; GBM02 = 0.016 pmol/μg protein. Expressed values in each bar are equivalent to mean of three experiments (minimum) ± standard error media
Discussion
Recently, many studies have already proposed the antitumoral effects of SAS [ , , , , , ] and VPA [ , , , ] in GBM cells in vitro and in vivo. In a seminal work, Gout and colleagues described that clinically relevant concentrations of SAS were able to compromise a non-Hodgkin lymphoma cell line viability in vitro and in vivo paradigms [ ]. Further, Chung and co-workers showed that GBM cells overexpressed the xc- regulatory subunit 4F2hc and downregulated EAAT2 protein. Both studies have unequivocally shown that inhibition of system xc- activity by SAS relates to the decrease of intracellular amounts of GSH with consequences on cell viability loss [ , , , ]. In fact, authors proposed that disruption of intracellular antioxidant systems, such as GSH, could be extremely harmful for tumor cells, since their high oxidative metabolism requires efficient ROS elimination systems. Regarding VPA as an anti-tumor drug, Chen (2010) and Fu (2011) showed an increase in ROS in glioma cell lines after VPA treatment, which is related to cell death trough apoptosis and autophagy [ , ]. Gathering this information about SAS and VPA, this study aimed to assess whether the combined treatment of two drugs could have a synergistic effect on the induction of cell death.
Using several GBM cell lines, a commercial (U87MG) and two others obtained from patient biopsies (GBM02 and GBM95), we were able to replicate the effects of cell death and inhibition of cell proliferation induced by SAS or VPA. When these cells were treated with both drugs, the effects were amplified. In fact, some studies have already shown that SAS is able to increase cell death [ ] and enhance the percentage of GBM cells in G 0 /sub-G 1 [ , ]; meanwhile, the same parameter remains inconclusive for VPA [ , , , ]. In our study, the lower expression of KI67 on GBM leads us to infer that both treatments diminished the percentage of GBM in active phases of the cell cycle [ ]. This way, we were able to show that VPA could reduce GBM proliferation and potentiate the previously described SAS effect. It is important to report that GBM02 cells have been obtained from biopsy before treatment with radio and chemotherapy. GBM95 are original from a biopsy of a relapse glioma patient. Interestingly, we observed a more expressive effect of combined treatment in the relapse GBM95 cells (Fig. 2 ). Noteworthy, no treatment conditions presented cytotoxic effects in cultures of mouse cortex, mouse astrocytes, or human astrocytes. KI67 assay also did not reveal cytostatic effects of SAS and/or VPA on human astrocytes. Based on these observations, a selectivity of deleterious effects of these drugs can be proposed for gliomas.
To obtain further details about glioma cell death, we investigated the presence of apoptosis during treatments. Using Annexin V-FITC/PI labeling at flow cytometry, the synergistic effect on early and late apoptosis was evident. The combined treatment doubled the percentage of cells in early apoptosis and increased 4.5-fold the percentage of cells in late apoptosis. This was a robust increase, since SAS and VPA alone increased about 1.40 and 1.45 times (respectively) to early apoptosis and about of 2.85 and 1.20 times (respectively) late apoptosis.
Searching for characteristics that could reveal differences between each treatment, we applied the NMA method described by Filippi-Chiela and colleagues [ ]. Following this work, many other used this methodology and its NII parameter to categorize cell processes such as apoptosis, senescence, and mitosis catastrophe (MC) in tumor cells including gliomas [ , , ]. Applying this method, VPA and its association with SAS were able to induce MC in glioma cell lines. MC is suggested as a step before cell death and can be caused by a myriad of events, such as genomic instability, abnormal mitosis, and alterations in checkpoint proteins in cell cycle—specially associated with G 2 phase [ , ]. Morphologically, cells under MC exhibit multiple micronuclei after a failure of mitosis and present some identical biochemical features such as mitochondrial disruption and activation of caspase pathways [ , , ].
Haberland and colleagues [ ] show that deletion of HDAC1/2 genes drives tumor cells to nuclear fragmentation and mitotic catastrophe, suggesting that pharmacological inhibition of these HDAC proteins offers a rational anticancer activity. Consistently with our data, Cornago and colleagues [ ] described that VPA and suberanilohydroxamic acid (SAHA), two HDAC inhibitors, induce MC in U87MG and U251MG glioma cells by diminishing G 2 checkpoint kinase levels. Moreover, both drugs augment ROS levels and activate apoptotic pathways in glioma mitochondria. Summarizing, there are evidences that iHDAC drugs induce MC in cancer cell action upon HDAC proteins. Notably, there are no reports that SAS exerts equivalent effects in tumor cells.
Another point to be considered is the potential for increased malignancy of remaining cells after 48-h treatments. It can be noticed that glioma morphology presents a more evident fusiform profile (Fig. 1 f and Online Resource 2 ). It is well described that GMT involves cellular morphology alterations and a variety of signaling pathways related to cancer cells. GMT is also related with a more aggressive and therapy resistant profile. Proteins like Slug/Snail and cell adhesion molecules like N-cadherin show increased expression in GMT process [ ]. As a matter of fact, Noh and colleagues [ ] showed that low N-cadherin expression in glioma-bearing patients led to an increase of progression-free survival. In our study, we observed that SAS and VPA did not alter N-Cadherin nor vimentin expression.
We must consider that the vast majority of culture cell treatments are performed at short periods, no longer than 7 days. Concerning this, some information can be lost regarding long-term treatments in glioma cells. In this context, CPD method is a valuable tool to be used in tumor models once demonstrate potential long-term effects of previously treated cells. Noteworthy, cells received no more treatments after the initial 48-h period and only remaining cells were re-plated. Thus, if any treatments were capable to impair future cell growth of the treatment resistant cells, CPD method would be able to make those aspects evident. In this work, we observed that all treatments impaired long-term cell population increase, although U87MG and GBM02 show different profiles when analyzing CPD parameters. Treatments induced delay of cells’ doubling through reduction of proliferation rate and velocity. General population doubling capacity along time is measured using AUC parameter, which was decreased by all treatments although statistical significance for SAS in U87MG could not be observed. Interestingly, VPA was more efficient than SAS in reducing CPD-derived parameters. Its mechanism of inhibition of HDAC may be responsible for epigenetic changes that remain and affect the ability of gliomas to proliferate. Once again, combined treatment proved to be more effective, especially in GBM02 cells.
Regarding antioxidant systems, we observed that human and rat GBM lineages used on this study exhibit higher levels of xCT compared to healthy neural cells. Indeed, the higher expression of xCT found in C6 in this study may be related to the higher potency of SAS to reduce these cells’ viability as displayed in Table 1 . Moreover, the activity of xc- system measured by [ 3 H]-glutamate Na + -independent uptake was completely abolished when SAS was present with or without VPA. The same observation was perceived when GSH levels were determined. So, the anti-glioma VPA effect is clearly not related to xc-/GSH pathway.
The dehidro-ascorbate/ascorbate intracellular balance represents another important antioxidant system in CNS. Gliomas take up vitamin C mainly through its oxidized form DHA using GLUT 1,3 and 4 (glucose transporters) and its reduced form, ascrobate, by SVCT2, although it has been described that SVCT2 has little capacity in gliomas [ ]. Once inside the cells, DHA is reduced to AA using the GSH-consumption enzyme DHA reductase (DHAR). Here, we found that SAS but not VPA was capable to decrease [ 14 C]-ascorbate uptake after 48-h treatments with no alterations in SVCT2 protein levels. Thus, we have two possible interpretations for it. The first one is a direct inhibition of SVCT2 by SAS and the other relies on an indirect mechanism. Once xc- system is inhibited, the amount of total glutathione is diminished and less DHA is less reduced by DHAR. Consequently, intracellular [ 14 C]-ascorbate could be oxidized to [ 14 C]-DHA and be transported to extracellular medium in an equilibrative fashion by GLUTs. In consequence of GSH consumption and vitamin C efflux, total cell antioxidant capacity is weakened.
As shown in this and other works, SAS and VPA are emerging with new antitumoral approaches. This is the first work that revealed a synergist effect between SAS and VPA. Both drugs are used in numerous clinical conditions and their pharmacokinetic and toxicological parameters are well established. Indeed, VPA is already used for convulsing control for patients bearing CNS tumors.
Nowadays, one of the most preoccupying challenges in drug development is to find low-cost drugs with low toxicity with high efficacy. This system based on the design of new molecules finds huge difficulties regarding patentability, which claims novelty and inventive steps. The main challenge of this process is due to the exhaustion of novelty in new molecular entities that lead to high opportunity cost for any well-succeeded drug. An alternative way to skip these issues is to revisit old drugs with the purpose of pursuing new mechanisms. This strategy is known as drug repurposing which exhibits the advantage of reducing the time cost of clinical trials [ ]. In this context, SAS and VPA are patent-free and easily affordable, and therefore can be readily incorporated in therapeutic guidelines once they are broadly prescribed in current medicine for several medical conditions, especially those that involves continuous uses. Yet, they would still need to go through PH2 and PH3 clinical trials before being released for prescription to GBM patients.
Considering that SAS and VPA are commonly used in high doses clinically, concentrations up to 1 mM used on in vitro studies could be a reasonable amount to be tested for conceptual proof of efficacy concerning new uses for these drugs. As a matter of example, SAS is used 3 to 4 g/day for ulcerative colitis and other chronic inflammatory bowel diseases [ , ] while VPA is daily administrated from 10 to 15 mg/kg/day for seizures [ , , ], both for long periods.
Moreover, it is suggested to be very cautious when interpreting the effects of drugs based on in vitro concentrations. Indeed, this is an approximation that does not ensure accuracy, once factors like access to tissue, vascularization, metabolism, and the natural microenvironment confer imponderability to this relation. For SAS and VPA, because of their already known toxicity profiles, efficient doses for a certain effect can be checked up to its safety threshold without pre-established limitations by molar concentrations.
Our study confirmed the hypothesis of increased effect of combined treatments, by showing a synergic effect of the combination of SAS and VPA. Using the EC 50 parameter on concentration-effect curves, we observed a significant reduction in the dose required for treating cells with combined drugs. Therefore, we must highlight that our study provides proof of concept for probable lower doses offered to the patient to achieve the same effects.
The therapeutic options for GBM patients remain a dreadful challenge. Once the actual state of the art of treating GBM is still harmful, expensive, and inefficient, there is a natural claim for new and more efficient alternatives. Nowadays, the standard of care for GBM is the maximum possible surgical removal, since complete resection is virtually impossible due to its highly infiltrative behavior. The surgical resection is then followed by radiotherapy and concurrent and adjuvant chemotherapy using the DNA alkylating agent Temozolomide (TMZ) for 6 cycles [ , , ]. Also, in the last 11 years, very little advance was made in the first-line treatment for GBM, except to a modest increase of 4.6 months in the overall survival with the addition of the Tumor Treating Fiels device (NovoTTF-100A) to the current standard of care, which was shown not to be cost-effective due to the prohibitive cost of this device [ , ]. After recurrency, new surgical procedures and use of different chemotherapy protocols and anti-angiogenic agents lead to a small enhancement in patient’s survival with the burden of high costs to the patients. Therefore, we urge to find new efficient and cost-effective alternatives to increase GBM patients’ survival and quality of life.
Summing up, over the past decade, many authors have evaluated the antitumor effects of SAS and VPA achieving consistent and reliable data concerning repurposing strategies. To our best knowledge, this work is the first to evaluate the combined effects of SAS and VPA upon glioma cells with no healthy parenchyma toxicity. Thus, we recognize combined treatment as a promising further strategy once both drugs are available and already used in the clinical setting.