Highlights
GPVI plays an important role in platelet firm adhesion to the site of injury Increasing levels of GPVI shedding during storage were in a reverse correlation with collagen-induced platelet aggregation Decreasing levels of platelet adhesion to collagen during storage were reversely correlated with the levels of GPVI shedding Whether the therapeutic efficacy of banked platelets is influenced by GPVI shedding, remains to be answered in future studies.
Introduction
Platelet activation has been shown to be associated with shedding of surface proteins [ , ] including P-selectin [ ], CD40 ligand [ ], GPVI [ ], GPIbα [ ] and GPV [ ]. Shedding events are commonly mediated by a group of proteases which is referred to as sheddases. The most important of these are the zinc-dependent metalloproteinases including matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) and the “a disintegrin and metalloproteinase” (ADAM) family of proteases. ADAM10 and ADAM17 act to regulate ectodomain shedding of platelet adhesive receptors GPVI and GPIbα, respectively. While ectodomain shedding has been suggested as a mechanism to down regulate platelet reactivity or control thrombus growth and stability [ , ], in some conditions such as platelet isolation and storage for medical purposes, extensive loss of platelet receptors may affect its proper function required for therapeutic uses [ , ]. So far, several lines of evidence indicated that unwilling activation of platelet during storage can induce substantial shedding of platelet surface molecules including important receptors, GPIbα and GPVI, which play a critical role in platelet adhesion and thrombus formation [ , ]. When the injury occurs, platelets are initially captured from free flowing blood through the binding of GPIb/V/IX to immobilized vWF expressed at sites of vascular damage. While this interaction slows down platelet movement and allows GPVI to engage the exposed collagen and induces stable adhesion, the major signaling events downstream of GPVI can also trigger the activation of the integrin α IIb β 3 which substantially promotes platelet firm adhesion, spreading and subsequent aggregation of platelet through binding to vWf and fibrinogen. These are the events which lead to the formation of a stable thrombus at the site of injury and as described the interaction of GPVI with collagen plays an important role in this process [ ]. In our currently published paper, we already showed that platelet storage lesion can significantly reduce GPVI expression by the enhancement of this receptor shedding [ , ], however whether this phenomenon actually affects GPVI-dependent platelet functions is a more important issue which will be discussed here. To achieve this, we first investigate platelet adhesion to collagen matrix as the main ligand of GPVI while then examining the collagen induced platelet aggregation during storage; we also evaluate the capacities of GPVI downstream signals in the induction of platelet integrin activation.
Method and materials
Reagents
Mouse IgG1 κ Isotype controls (PE and FITC conjugated) were from Miltenyi Biotec (Germany). Monoclonal antibody against human GPVI (clone HY101) and anti-mouse IgG1 HRP were from eBiosciences Inc (USA). PE mouse anti-human GPVI was from BD Pharmingen (USA). Other reagents and chemicals were from Sigma Aldrich (USA).
Sample preparation
The study was approved by the local ethical committee and the informed consent was obtained from the blood donors by Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization (IBTO). 6 Platelet rich plasma-platelet concentrates (PRP-PCs) were prepared from whole bloods donated by volunteers according to IBTO’s standard protocol.
Each bag included 50–60 mL PCs with more than 1 × 10 9 PLT/mL. Under sterile condition, 5 mL of product was taken from the cord for the base-line study on day 0 of storage and after sealing back, the PCs were kept in a shaker incubator at 20–24 °C. At each time points (day 1, day 3 and day 5) and under sterile condition, samples were taken from each bag via the cord. For this purpose, after returning cord content to the original bag and mixing the bag, the cord was opened while a small amount of platelet (~ 1 mL) was first discarded, then 4 mL of the sample was collected in a sterile falcon tube. At the end, the cords was sealed a few centimeters closer to the bag which then returned to the shaker incubator at 20–24 °C for future use. For each sample adding a designated amount of Tyrode buffer (10 mM Hepes, 12 mM NaHCO 3 , 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 5 mM glucose, 1 mM CaCl 2 ; pH = 7.4), platelets were washed and isolated as described previously [ ]. For flow cytometry and adhesion analysis, platelet count was adjusted to 2 × 10 7 /mL. Platelet poor plasma (PPP) obtained from PRP with the platelet count of 5 × 10 8 /mL was subjected to two steps ultracentrifugation (2 × 10 4 g for 30 min each time) and microparicle (MP)-free supernatant was separated and kept in − 20 °C to be analyzed by western blotting for the evaluation of shed proteins. To prepare resting platelets for control study, blood sample was drawn from healthy consenting individuals who had not taken any anti-platelet or anti-inflammatory medication in the 2 weeks prior to venesection and platelets were isolated as already described [ ].
QC parameters of PCs
Assessment of total volume, PLT count (per unit), WBC count (per unit) were carried out on PCs after preparation and during storage at each time points. PLT count and WBC count were measured using a hematology full blood analyzer (XE-2100, Sysmex, Milton Keynes, UK).
Western blotting
Micro-particle-free samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and western blotting analysis to identify soluble GPVI. To prevent interfere with the proteins bands, albumin was fractionated from samples before experiments [ ]. Proteins were then Immunoblotted using primary specific monoclonal antibody, HRP-conjugated secondary antibody and enhanced chemiluminescence reagent. Finally, bands were visualized by ChemiDoc XRS+ system using image Lab software (Bio-Rad Laboratories, inc. USA). For each run of shedding analysis, the MP-free supernatants of samples obtained from PRP-PCs (with the same count of platelets) were subjected to western blot analysis along with a positive control of shedding. For each run, the ratio of sample to control intensity was calculated in order to semi-quantitatively analyze and compare the amounts of shed receptors from day 1 to day 5 of storage.
Platelet adhesion to collagen matrix
Glass coverslips (12 mm in diameter) were covered with 100 µg/mL collagen type I in PBS for 1 h at room temperature and then followed by washing steps, the coverslips were coated with 2% bovine serum albumin (as blocking solution) for 30 min at room temperature. Excess solution was removed by three washes with Tyrode’s buffer and coverslips were kept immersed in Tyrode’s buffer until required. Human platelets (2 × 10 7 /mL) were then allowed to adhere on coverslips under mild stirring condition for 30 min at 37 °C. Non-adherent platelets were aspirated and adherent platelets were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde for 15 min. Adherent platelets were visualized by fluorescence microscope (×100 objectives). For this purpose prior to each experiment, platelets were labeled with fluorescence dye, DIOC6 [ ] and then subjected to adhesion assays.
Platelet aggregation
Aggregation tests were conducted by a Lumi-Aggregometers (CHRONO-LOG 700-X, USA). For this purpose, the aggregometer was calibrated to 100% and 0% light transmittance with the PPP and PRP, respectively. Designated PRP samples in presence of collagen (5 µg/mL) were then subjected to aggregometer while allowing the aggregation pattern to be generated for 10 min under stirring condition.
Statistical analysis
To compare the expression of platelet surface molecules and cells adhesion/aggregation in different days, data were analyzed by Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparison tests. For correlations, linear regression analysis was applied. P values of < 0.05 were considered to be significant, using GraphPad Prism software (San Diego, CA).
Bacterial cultures
Bacterial cultures were performed on day 5 for each bag of platelets, including both aerobic and anaerobic cultures.
Results
PLT count, size, and pH
PLT count and size were measured on days 1, 3 and 5. Although the PLT counts showed decrease after 5 days, the decrease is too small to have any major influence on the quality of the products. The MPV of PLTs did not change significantly and the pH was generally stable during storage (Table 1 ).
Table 1 Average of platelet count, MPV and pH during storage Variable Day 1 Day 3 Day 5 Platelet count × 10 3 /µL 1269 ± 401 1086 ± 315 991 ± 336 MPV (fL) 8.27 ± 0.55 8.46 ± 0.6 8.14 ± 0.42 pH 7.24 ± 0.1 7.32 ± 0.06 7.39 ± 0.09 Results shown as mean ± SD (n = 10). Difference from the baseline (day 1) is considered statistically significant at the *p < 0.05 using Mann–Whitney U test MPV mean platelet volume
GPVI shedding of platelets during storage in PRP-PCs
As showed in Fig. 1 a, western immunoblot analysis of PRP-PCs on day 1, 3 and 5 revealed significantly increasing levels of the shed adhesive receptors, GPVI during storage. According to data obtained, the levels of GPVI shedding significantly increased on day 3 (p < 0.05) and 5 (p < 0.001) compared to day 1 (Fig. 1 b).
Fig. 1 Shedding levels of platelet surface GPVI during storage in PRP-PCs. PPP obtained from PRP-PCs with the platelet count of 5 × 10 8 /mL was subjected to two steps ultracentrifugation (2 × 10 4 g for 30 min each time) and microparticle-free supernatant obtained from each bag on day 1, 3 and 5 was subjected to SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and western blotting analysis using anti-GPVI. A pooled of washed platelets obtained from volunteer donors at the same count was also prepared and incubated with 2 µM ionophore for 30 min and then subjected to ultracentrifugation. For each run, as a positive control, this sample was also subjected to western blot analysis alongside with other samples from PRP-PCs. a Representative western blotting images of sGPVI. b For each run, the ratio of intensity of sample to control was calculated and depicted in graphs to compare the amounts of shed receptors from day 1 to 5 of storage. Graph represents results as the mean ± SD from six independent experiments. c Representative images of platelet aggregation curve in response to 5 µg/mL collagen on day 1, 3 and 5 of storage within 10 min incubation time of PRP-platelets (n = 6). Graph d shows that the percentage of aggregation reduced during storage with a significant (p < 0.05) decrease started from day 3 of storage. PCs platelet concentrates, PPP platelet poor plasma, PRP platelet rich plasma, s soluble. *** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; * p < 0.05
Collagen-induced platelet aggregation
Figure 1 c shows the representative images of platelet aggregation curve in response to collagen on day 1, 3 and 5 of PCs storage. As showed in Fig. 1 d, the percentage of aggregation reduced during storage with a significant (p < 0.05) decrease started from day 3 of storage.
Platelet adhesion to collagen matrix
Figure 2 a illustrated representative images of platelet adhesion to collagen matrix on day 1, 3 and 5 of storage. As showed in Fig. 2 b, the total number of adhered platelets attenuated during storage with a significant (p < 0.01) decrease started from day 5 of storage.
Fig. 2 Platelet adhesion to collagen matrix during storage. Platelets (2 × 10 7 /mL) obtained from PRP-PCs (n = 6) were incubated on a coverslip coated with collagen (100 µg/mL). a Illustrates representative images of platelet adhesion on day 1, 3 and 5 of storage visualized by fluorescence microscopy. Graph b shows that the number of adhered platelets/field reduced during storage with a significant (p < 0.01) decrease started from day 5 of storage. ** p < 0.01, ns not significant p > 0.05. PCs platelet concentrates, PRP platelet rich plasma
As demonstrated in Fig. 3 a, platelet aggregation during storage was in a direct correlation with platelet adhesion to collagen matrix (r = 0.8, p = 0.0001).
Fig. 3 The correlation studies between platelet adhesion to collagen, GPVI shedding and platelet aggregation in response to collagen in stored platelets. PRP-PCs (n = 6) were subjected to assay including collagen induced aggregation, platelet adhesion to collagen matrix and western blot analysis for GPVI shedding according to the methods that described. Graph a demonstrates that platelet aggregation during storage is in a direct correlation with platelet adhesion to collagen matrix (r = 0.8, p = 0.0001). Graph b shows a significant reverse correlation between GPVI shedding and platelet aggregation in response to collagen (r = − 0.82, p = 0.0004). The levels of shedding were also reversely relevant to the amount of platelet adhesion to collagen matrix (r = − 0.69, p = 0.002). PCs platelet concentrates, PRP platelet rich plasma
The correlation between GPVI shedding and collagen-dependent platelet adhesion/aggregation
Data showed a significant reverse correlation between GPVI shedding and platelet aggregation in response to collagen (r = − 0.82, p = 0.0004). The levels of shedding were also reversely relevant to the amount of platelet adhesion to collagen matrix (r = − 0.69, p = 0.002) (Fig. 3 b).
Discussion
The storage of therapeutic platelets is commonly complicated with some unwilling deleterious changes, so-called as platelet storage lesion (PSL). PSL is developed by progressive platelet activation which finally leads to the structural and functional damages in platelets [ , ]. It has been shown that along with platelet activation, the increased levels of intracellular calcium act as the main modulator of signaling events which results in platelet receptor ectodomain shedding and membrane loss due to micro-particulation. Both of these phenomena cause progressive loss of adhesive receptors during platelet storage [ ]. Several major platelet receptors have been shown to be cleaved during platelet activation [ ]. Several studies already confirmed that the 55 kDa fragment created during platelet activation or apoptosis [ , ] is the product of GPVI cleavage by ADAM10 [ ]. Currently, using the surface biotinylation approach in the presence of different types of agonists with various doses, we suggested that in stored platelets the shedding of the important platelet adhesive receptors, GPIbα and GPVI is mainly modulated by platelet activation states which are dictated with levels of calcium [ ].
We also detected increasing levels of soluble GPVI during storage of platelet concentrates. Considering the fact that functional interplay between GPVI [ ] and other adhesive receptors induces the synergic signaling pathways which lead to platelet activation and α IIb β 3 -dependent aggregation [ , ], whether the observed loss of GPVI during storage can render integrin activation was one of the first functional interest of our current study. Activation of integrin α IIb β 3 is tightly regulated through a process termed inside out signaling. Agonists, such as ADP and thrombin, which engage GPCRs, or adhesive proteins, such as collagen or vWF, which interact with GPVI or GPIb-IX-V, respectively, initiate intracellular signaling events that influence integrin affinity by modifying the cytoplasmic tail of α IIb and or β 3 . These modifications propagate the conformation of the ligand binding site of integrin, which leads to platelet aggregation [ , ]. Given this, collagen-induced aggregation during platelet storage not only provides precise information about the potentiating signaling capacities of the cell, but it also represents the functional activities of the main collagen receptor, GPVI in stored platelets [ , ]. Intriguingly, results presented here showed that attenuating level of platelet aggregation in responses to collagen during storage was in a significant reverse correlation of GPVI shedding. However, as an important limitation, this observation may not reflect the exact correlation of receptor expression or shedding with its functional states due the fact that integrin activation per se (detecting by PAC-1 binding) can be also affected by the activation and metabolic state of platelets during storage [ ]. This is evidence that makes the interpretation of correlation results, more complicated. Thereby ruling out any misjudgment about the correlation of GPVI shedding and its functional capacities, we also evaluated direct adhesion of stored platelets to collagen matrix as a main ligand of this receptor. However, so far, handfuls studies that examined platelet adhesion capacity to collagen have somewhat presented paradoxical results in stored platelets. In one study, Boomgaard et al. examined platelet adhesion capacity to collagen in a rectangular perfusion system under flow conditions on days 1, 3 and 7 of storage. They showed constant platelet adhesion capacity to collagen until day 3 of storage whereas it decreased to about 80% of the starting value on day 7 of storage [ ]. Although these findings may indirectly suggest the loss of platelet adhesive receptors, mainly GPVI during the storage, in a most recent study, Tynngard et al. using collagen-coated polystyrene beads and flow cytometry have shown a different finding. They showed that platelet adhesion to collagen beads had increased by day 7 of storage of PCs [ ], the data that may not be in line with the decreased expression of functional GPVI during platelet storage. Considering these two studies with two different techniques which they applied, our study of stored platelet adhesion to collagen matrix under mild stirring condition has provided results which better matched with those of Boomgaard et al. Here we showed the decreasing levels of platelet adhesion to collagen during storage with a significant loss which started from day 5 of storage. Intriguingly, we also showed a significant reverse correlation between platelet adhesion to collagen matrix and GPVI shedding.
Conclusion
Taken together, in line with our studies that demonstrated progressive shedding and loss of surface expression of adhesion receptor GPVI during platelet storage, we also present some evidence that can directly attribute our finding to decreasing functional activities of this receptor in stored platelets. Thereby considering the crucial role of GPVI in platelet adhesion to the injury site, whether such a loss in platelet surface expression and function of this receptor during storage can affect the therapeutic use of platelet transfusion, is an important question to be answered in future studies.