Introduction
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common debilitating disorder with a lifetime prevalence rate of 6–30% (Waraich et al. ; Kessler et al. ; Wilhelm et al. ). The disease could seriously affect the quality of life (Wells et al. ) and result in numerous days lost from work (Broadhead et al. ; Lopez and Murray ; Craddock and Forty ). It is also associated with an increased mortality (Berglund and Nilsson ) and suicide rate (Cavanagh et al. ). The disease causes $43.7 billion in US alone (Greenberg et al. ). Therefore, a better understanding of depression is essential to the prevention and the treatment of the disease.
Despite of high prevalence, the etiology of the disease is still poorly understood. The disease has been observed with high familial aggregation (Sullivan et al. ; Kendler et al. ) and women have twice of risk than men (Weissman et al. ; Kendler et al. ). An affected sibling would increase the risk of MDD by threefold to ninefold (Farmer et al. ; Sullivan et al. ). Family and twin studies estimated a heritability of depression ranging from 17 to 75% (McGuffin et al. ; Craddock and Forty ; Sullivan et al. ). However, genome-wide association studies and candidate gene association studies only found a handful candidate genetic loci (Lopez-Leon et al. ; Boomsma et al. ; Muglia et al. ; Sullivan et al. ; Shi et al. ; Shyn et al. ; Lewis et al. ). Another reason might due to the interplay between genetic and environmental factors in the development of depression. Given that gene expression is regulated by both genetic and environmental factors, it is of interest to examine the association of gene expression with depression.
The objective of this study is to perform transcriptome-wide association study and identify gene expression associated with depression. We further built a gene interaction network to investigate potential gene regulation underlying depression.
Materials and Methods
Study Samples
Participants were enrolled in the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), a longitudinal study of Alzheimer’s disease launched in 2003 (Petersen et al. ). More than 1500 participants have been recruited and followed up regularly. The primary goal of ADNI is to test whether serial magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, clinical and neuropsychological assessment can be combined to measure the progression of mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease. All participants provided written consent, and the institutional review boards of all participating approved the study protocol.
Measurement of Depression
The Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) is a quantitative measure of symptoms of depression in the elderly (Marc et al. ). Participants were asked to answer “Yes” or “No” to 15 questions. Each question had a score of 1. The total score was used as the measurement of depression. A higher score represents a higher possibility of depression. The current study was restricted to tests that were performed within 6 months when the blood was collected for gene expression profiling. All the data were obtained from the ADNI database (adni.loni.usc.edu).
Gene Expression Profiling
Details about gene expression profiling in ADNI have been described previously (Saykin et al. ). In brief, the whole blood samples were collected using Qiagen PAXgene tubes (Germantown, MD, USA). Total RNA was extracted using Qiagen QIAcube according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The RNA expression was profiled by Affymetrix Human Genome U219 Array (Affymetrix Inc, Santa Clara, CA) at the Bristol-Myers Squibb laboratories. Stringent quality controls were performed. Sixty-four samples were excluded from further processing because of inferior quality. The raw signal was processed using Robust Multi-chip Average (RMA), and the expression of 49,386 transcripts was summarized. Additional quality checks were performed to verify sample identity and sex match. Samples of non-European ancestry were excluded. Five pairs of samples were found as first-degree relatives and thus only one sample in each pair was kept.
Statistical Analyses
The association of gene expression with GDS was assessed by linear regression, whereas gene expression was treated as the outcome, and GDS was treated as the predictor. The model was adjusted for age and sex. Bonferroni correction was used to account for multiple testing, and the significance cutoff was defined as P < 0.05/ N , where N is the total number of genes. The analyses were performed using R software package version 3.4.2 ( https://www.r-project.org/ ).
Construction of GDS-Related Interaction Network
A dense module searching strategy (Jia et al. ) was employed to construct a depression-related interaction network. Gene interactions were obtained from the PINA database v2.0 (Cowley et al. ). Any interactions involved in a non-human gene were excluded. A score was assigned to each gene to indicate its association with GDS. The score was equivalent to the absolute value of Wald test statistic from the association test. Seed genes were defined as those that were significantly associated with GDS. For each of the seed genes, a module was created that initially contained only the gene itself. The overall score (Ideker et al. ) of the module is defined as \({Z_{\text{m}}}=\frac{{\sum {g_i}}}{{\sqrt k }}\) , where k is the number of genes in the module, and \({g_i}\) is the score of the gene i . Neighboring genes were then sequentially added if (1) it interacts directly with at least one gene already in the module; (2) it could increase the overall score of the module. The searching of neighboring genes continued until no more significant genes could be added. We repeated such process for each of the seed genes and merged all the resulting modules together to build an interaction subnetwork. Potential function of the subnetwork was assessed by the enrichment analysis using WebGestalt (Wang et al. ). Gene sets with false discovery rate less than 5% were considered as significant (Miao et al. ).
Identification of Key Drivers of the Network
Some genes in the network are connected to more GDS-related genes than expected from a randomly selected gene set with an equal number of genes. These genes were defined as key drivers, and they were pivotal to the structure of the network. In order to identify key drivers, for each gene in the network, we calculated the association of its neighboring genes with GDS. The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to assess the deviation of the associations from random distribution. Bonferroni adjustment was used to correct for multiple testing.
Results
The clinical characteristics of study participants are shown in Table 1 . A total of 671 participants who had gene expression profiles and GDS measures were included. Most of participants were old (mean age 75 ± 8 years), and 43.2% were women. The distribution of GDS among all participants is shown in Supplemental Fig. 1. The majority had GDS scores less than 5. Only four participants had GDS scores higher than 10.
Table 1 Clinical characteristics of participants Characteristics ( n = 671) Women, n (%) 290 (43.2%) Age, years 75 ± 8 Education, number of school years 16 ± 3 APOE e4 carrier, n (%) 269 (40.1%) Cognitive status Clinical normal (%) 236 (35.2%) Mild cognitive impairment (%) 394 (58.7%) Alzheimer’s disease (%) 41 (6.1%) Marriage status Married (%) 517 (77.0%) Widowed (%) 77 (11.5%) Divorced (%) 59 (8.8%) Never married (%) 16 (2.4%) NA (%) 2 (0.3%)
Association of Gene Expression with GDS
Figure 1 is the volcano plot showing the association of 49,386 genes with GDS. After correction for multiple testing, three genes reached the Bonferroni significance ( P < 1.0 × 10 −6 ), including COL1A2 ( P = 8.9 × 10 −8 ), RNF150 ( P = 1.4 × 10 −7 ) and CTGF ( P = 8.3 × 10 −7 ). Table 2 shows the association of these genes with GDS. All of them had positive beta values, suggesting the increased expression was associated with increased GDS scores. We also examined the expression of these genes in brain and blood tissues using data from the GTEx database (GTEx Consortium ). As shown in Supplemental Fig. 2, all of them tended to express higher in brain than in blood.
Fig. 1 Volcano plot of genes associated with GDS. Each dot represents one gene. The x-axis represents the beta estimation (β) of each gene, whereas the y-axis represents the log 10 ( P ). Positive effects represent that genes were positively associated with GDS, whereas negative effects represent that the genes were negatively associated with GDS. The red dash line represents the significant cutoff ( P < 1.0 × 10 −6 ). Three genes that reached significance cutoff were highlighted
Table 2 Genes significantly associated with GDS ( P < 0.05/48,157 = 1.0 × 10 −6 ) Affymetrix ID Gene Beta SE P value 11715353_s_at COL1A2 0.027 0.005 8.9 E −08 11730677_a_at RNF150 0.047 0.009 1.4 E −07 11715440_a_at CTGF 0.019 0.004 8.3 E −07 SE standard error
In our sensitivity analysis, we additionally adjusted the model for psychiatric and neurologic medications. As shown in Supplemental Table 1, the association of three genes remained significant although slightly attenuated. Similar pattern was also observed for the adjustment of adverse events.
GDS-Related Interaction Network
Many GDS-related genes could interact with each other to form a complex interaction network. We thus built an interaction network by integrating known gene interactions. As shown in Fig. 2 , the subnetwork is comprised of 88 nodes and 122 edges, whereas each node represents one gene, and each edge represents the interaction between two genes. We further performed pathway analysis to examine potential function of the interaction network. Table 3 shows the top enriched biologic pathways. Neurotrophin signaling pathway was one of the top pathways enriched with GDS-related genes ( P = 2.1 × 10 −7 ).
Fig. 2 Gene interaction network associated with depression derived from protein–protein interaction. Each node represents one gene, whereas each edge represents the interaction between two genes. The nodes were colored to represent their association with depression: red color represents genes that were positively associated with depression, whereas green color represents genes that were negatively associated with depression. The node size is proportional to the number of edges that the node connects to
Table 3 Top 10 biological pathways enriched with genes associated with GDS KEGG pathway #Genes in pathway Ratio of enrichment P value False discovery rate GDS-related genes in the pathway Focal adhesion 203 7.27 2.0 E −07 3.1 E −05 COL1A2, COL4A1, COL4A2, CRK, CRKL, EGFR, FN1, GSK3B, PAK2, PIK3R1, CDC42 Neurotrophin signaling pathway 121 9.98 2.1 E −07 3.1 E −05 CRK, CRKL, RPS6KA6, GSK3B, NFKBIB, PIK3R1, CALM1, CAMK2A, CDC42 AGE-RAGE signaling pathway in diabetic complications 101 10.63 6.5 E −07 5.4 E −05 COL1A2, COL3A1, COL4A1, COL4A2, FN1, SMAD3, PIK3R1, CDC42 Pathways in cancer 397 4.73 7.2 E −07 5.4 E −05 COL4A1, COL4A2, CRK, CRKL, EGFR, FN1, GSK3B, SMAD3, MAX, PIK3R1, PML, CXCL12, TCF7L2, CDC42 ErbB signaling pathway 88 10.68 3.4 E −06 2.0 E −04 CRK, CRKL, EGFR, GSK3B, PAK2, PIK3R1, CAMK2A Wnt signaling pathway 143 6.57 8.1 E −05 3.9 E −03 DKK1, GSK3B, LRP6, SMAD3, CTNNBIP1, TCF7L2, CAMK2A Amoebiasis 100 8.05 8.9 E −05 3.9 E −03 COL1A2, COL3A1, COL4A1, COL4A2, FN1, PIK3R1 Shigellosis 65 10.32 1.1 E −04 4.2 E −03 CRK, CRKL, NFKBIB, CD44, CDC42 Renal cell carcinoma 67 10.02 1.3 E −04 4.3 E −03 CRK, CRKL, PAK2, PIK3R1, CDC42 Bacterial invasion of epithelial cells 78 8.60 2.6 E −04 8.0 E −03 CRK, CRKL, FN1, PIK3R1, CDC42
Key Drivers of Depression-Related Network
We also performed key driver analysis by examining the structure of the depression-related network. These genes could be potential targets for further functional characterization. The most significant key driver was SMAD3 . The gene was only moderately associated with GDS ( P = 1.6 × 10 −3 ) but did not reach the transcriptome-wide significance cutoff. However, it was connected with ten other genes, many of which were associated with GDS, which was much higher than what would be expected from the random distribution ( P = 7.8 × 10 −8 by the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test), suggesting that SMAD3 might be involved in the regulation of depression-related genes.
Discussion
Depression is a complex condition, and the etiology is still poorly understood. Our current study aims to examine the association of blood gene expression with GDS, which is a quantitative measure of depression. We found three genes were significantly associated with GDS. A gene interaction network was also built to investigate potential molecular interactions related to depression.
The most significant GDS-related gene was COL1A2 , which encodes type I collagen. Collagens are widely found in multiple tissues in the body, which provide key support for the body shape and thus function. Mutations in collagen were associated with fragile cerebral arteries (Pope et al. ). Another gene associated with GDS was RNF150 that encodes a ring finger protein. Genetic variants within RNF150 were associated with increased risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (Ding et al. ). A third GDS-related gene was CTGF . It encodes the connective tissue growth factor that is involved in cell proliferation and migration. Genetic mutations in CTGF were associated with a variety of diseases including cancer (Chu et al. ; Jacobson and Cunningham ), pulmonary hypertension (Bryant et al. ) and systemic sclerosis (Fonseca et al. ; Granel et al. ).
An earlier genome-wide association study of major depression disorder (Wray et al. ) found that a genetic variant (rs17400379) was associated with major depressive disorder although did not reach genome-wide significance. The SNP, located within 5 kb downstream of SGCE , was associated with SGCE expression in tibial nerve ( P = 2.4 e −13)(GTEx Consortium ). Interestingly, the expression of SGCE in blood was also associated with GDS in our current study ( P < 0.05). SGCE is a maternally imprinted gene that encodes the epsilon-sarcoglycan protein. Studies have found that mutations in SCGE were associated with myoclonus dystonia syndrome, a young-onset movement disorder (Peall et al. ; Zimprich et al. ; Schule et al. ). Another SNP rs3732293 was also associated with major depressive disorder (Wray et al. ). The SNP was associated with the expression of MOGS in cerebellum. The expression of MOGS in blood was also associated with GDS in our current study ( P < 0.05).
We acknowledge several limitations of our study. Less than 1000 samples were included, so the statistical power to detect genes with small effects is limited. The analysis was also restricted on relatively old participants of European ancestry, and the generalization of our findings to other ethnicity/age groups is unknown. Although ADNI is a longitudinal study with multiple measures of clinical and imaging phenotypes, gene expression was only measured from blood drawn in a single visit. It is thus unclear whether the increased expression of these genes caused depression or vice versa. No causality between gene expression and depression could be inferred. The network analysis provides some insights into the interactions between GDS-related genes. It, however, cannot infer causality either. Therefore, our findings should be considered as exploratory for hypothesis generating. Future studies with larger sample sizes and functional investigations are necessary to validate our findings and further investigate molecular mechanisms underlying depression.
In conclusion, we identified three genes that were significantly associated with depression. Our study suggests that neurotrophin signaling pathway might be one of pathways involved in the regulation of depression interaction network. Future studies would be needed to validate our findings and identify potential therapeutic targets for depression.