Highlights
Direct thrombin inhibitors including bivalirudin have been described to treat LVAD thrombosis; however the long-term efficacy of these treatments remains undetermined Our report highlights our center’s experience of bivalirudin use to treat LVAD pump thrombosis, both in markers of hemolysis and the clinical outcomes associated with each treatment Our follow-up analysis of the responder group indicates the incidence of recurrence of pump thrombosis is high in patients who initially responded to bivalirudin therapy Surgical therapies including LVAD pump exchange or heart transplant are often necessary to effectively treat LVAD pump thrombosis
Introduction
Left ventricular assist device (LVAD) therapy has emerged as an effective treatment option for select patients with advanced heart failure, offering improved survival and quality of life compared to medical management [ , , , ]. Despite the apparent benefits of these devices, patients may be subject to complications including infections, gastrointestinal bleeding and thrombotic events including pump thrombosis. Prevention of thrombosis necessitates the use of antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and anticoagulation with warfarin per currently accepted practice guidelines [ , ]. Despite these measures, according to data from the INTERMACS registry, pump thrombosis occurs in up to 5% of patients at 6 months post-implant and in up to 21% of patients remaining on support for 60 months [ ]. Additionally, the incidence of pump thrombosis with HeartMate II may be increasing in recent years [ ]. A recently published algorithm to manage LVAD pump thrombosis describes a series of proposed interventions based on the presence of pump power elevations, serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) elevation, other evidence of hemolysis and symptoms of heart failure [ ]. This algorithm of management includes intensification of anticoagulation and the use of non-heparin agents, including direct thrombin inhibitors like bivalirudin, prior to consideration of surgical interventions in patients whose symptoms do not resolve with intravenous heparin. The recommendation to consider direct thrombin inhibitors in patients unresponsive to unfractionated heparin is supported by a very limited amount of available published data describing their use in ventricular assist device patients [ , , , , ]. The purpose of the current study is to investigate the utility of bivalirudin as the primary treatment strategy in patients with suspected LVAD pump thrombosis.
Materials and methods
This is a single-center, retrospective observational study of LVAD patients with suspected pump thrombosis that were treated with bivalirudin. This study was approved by the local institutional review board (IRB protocol number HSC-MH-15-0678) to evaluate the off-label use of bivalirudin for this indication. Patients were screened for inclusion from a comprehensive list of patients who have undergone implantation of LVAD between April 2012 and June 2016 at the study institution. Of patients undergoing LVAD implantation, all patients who developed suspected pump thrombosis and received bivalirudin treatment ≥ 24 h were included in this analysis. The hospital’s institutional protocol was used to guide bivalirudin therapy, which targets an activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) of 50–80 s per internal and US laboratory standards. To be considered for inclusion, patients must have had an elevation of LDH > 600 IU/L with evidence of hemolysis or other clinical features that support the diagnosis of pump thrombosis (pump power elevations, echocardiographic findings, and urinalysis changes indicative of hemolysis). The LDH level was chosen as a surrogate marker to assess the efficacy of bivalirudin therapy to resolve the suspected thrombus as it has been used in previous studies [ ]. Only initial treatment courses of bivalirudin therapy were included in this analysis as some patients may have received more than a single treatment course. Patients were excluded if they were on bivalirudin due to heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT).
Baseline characteristics collected for subjects include age, gender, type of LVAD, aspirin use, INR time in therapeutic range (TTR), time from initial implant to development of pump thrombosis, INR at time of pump thrombosis, baseline LDH, and estimated creatinine clearance, calculated by the Cockcroft-Gault equation. TTR was calculated using the Rosendaal method [ ]. Regarding bivalirudin treatment, the starting dose and duration of therapy were also collected as data points. Recorded clinical outcomes included pump exchange, transplantation and death. Treatments were considered successful if subjects (1) experienced a reduction in LDH and (2) were deemed suitable to be discharged from the hospital by the treating physician following treatment. Those that were successful were classified as “responders.” Further analysis of recurrence of pump thrombosis was reported in this subgroup of subjects initially treated successfully. Within this subgroup of successfully treated subjects, time in therapeutic range (TTR) was calculated between discharge and recurrence of thrombosis (up to 1 year) [ ].
Statistical analysis
Student’s t test was used to compare differences between continuous variables. Kaplan–Meier survival curves were constructed to illustrate the time from initiation of bivalirudin to surgical pump exchange, death or transplant among all subjects included in the study and the time to recurrence of pump thrombosis from hospital discharge among the subgroup of subjects who experienced successful initial treatment.
Results
A total of 15 cases of bivalirudin treatment for pump thrombosis were identified for inclusion in the study period. The mean age was 55-years-old, and the cohort was predominately male [10/15 (66.6%)]. Subject demographics and clinical characteristics including aspirin use prior to treatment and INR at the time of treatment initiation are reported in Table 1 . Mean starting dose of bivalirudin was 0.12 ± 0.04 mg/kg/h, and treatment courses ranged anywhere between 2 and 39 days in duration with a mean of over 14 days. Prior to thrombosis diagnosis, 12 of 15 subjects were outpatient on warfarin; in this subset, INR TTR was 48.45% in the time leading up to diagnosis (up to 3 months).
Table 1 Patient characteristics N = 15 subjects Age (years) 55.1 ± 13.3 Male sex 10 (66.7) Type of LVAD HeartMate II 15 (100) Time from implant to initial pump thrombosis (days) 264.4 ± 254.6 INR time in therapeutic range in previous 3 months (%) a 48.5 ± 29 Aspirin use prior to presentation 13 (86.7) Dipyridamole use prior to presentation 1 (6.7) INR at time of presentation 1.84 ± 0.46 LDH (IU/L) 1079.2 ± 323.9 Estimated CrCl at time of bivalirudin initiation (mL/min) 78.9 ± 41.3 Bivalirudin treatment Starting dose (mg/kg/h) 0.12 ± 0.04 Duration of therapy (days) 14.7 ± 10.6 Values presented as mean ± standard deviation or n (%) a Only 12 of 15 patients were included in calculation due to three patients developing thrombosis early post-implant
Overall, six subjects (40%) had successful initial outcomes (responders), while nine (60%) were considered unsuccessful (non-responders) (Fig. 1 ). Among the nine non-responders, six underwent surgical pump exchange, one received a heart transplant and two expired. It should be noted that both subjects who expired in this group were critically ill and were not deemed to be suitable candidates for surgical intervention. Of the six responders, five experienced recurrence within 6 months. Three of these ultimately underwent surgical pump exchange, one received a heart transplant and one suffered a fatal ischemic stroke while outpatient. Of the total 15 subjects included in the study, one subject remains free of pump exchange, transplantation or death at 1 year.
Fig. 1 Clinical outcomes of subjects
LDH analysis on these patients revealed the mean LDH at beginning of bivalirudin therapy was 1079.2 ± 323.9 IU/L; the mean at the end of therapy was 1169.9 ± 518.6 IU/L. A comparison of means did not show any statistical difference (p = 0.58). The initial LDH trends of all subjects in the first 10 days of therapy are displayed graphically in Fig. 2 . Among the subgroup of subjects discharged from the hospital successfully (responders), the LDH trend was more favorable than the non-responder group, which should be expected (Fig. 3 ). The responders group received a mean 20.2 days of bivalirudin therapy, ranging from 7 to 39 days. There was no significant difference in the INR TTR prior to diagnosis of pump thrombosis in responders compared to non-responders. Follow-up analysis of the responder subgroup after treatment indicates a high rate of early recurrence [5/6 (83.3%)], ultimately requiring surgical intervention in most cases (Fig. 4 ). The TTR of the INR between discharge and recurrence (or up to 1 year) was 64.9% (individuals ranged from 32.2 to 100%) for the responder subgroup.
Fig. 2 Initial trends of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) associated with bivalirudin therapy observed in all subjects
Fig. 3 Mean LDH at baseline and end of therapy in responders (n = 6) and non-responders (n = 9); p < 0.001
Fig. 4 Survival free of recurrence of pump thrombosis following discharge from the hospital among the responder subgroup (n = 6)
In the cohort reported here, there were no observed bleeding events observed that were unrelated to LVAD pump exchange or heart transplantation in those respective patients. Any blood products including packed red blood cells that were transfused were transfused as a result of gradual declines in hemoglobin attributed by investigators to be related to acuity of illness and necessary blood collections for lab analysis. There were no patients in whom bivalirudin was discontinued due to bleeding.
Discussion
Previous reports of bivalirudin for pump thrombosis indicate mixed results of efficacy [ , ]. The largest experience previously included six subjects (ten cases), of whom three underwent pump exchange and two were transplanted [ ]. These results appear to reflect similar clinical outcomes to what we observed in our experience, although the authors of this study reported a more favorable and consistent response of the patients’ LDH trend to bivalirudin therapy [ ]. A key difference between their report and the larger cohort explored in this manuscript is the mean length of treatment days. They reported a mean duration of therapy of 42 days while in the present study, the overall mean duration was just over 14 days [ ]. Possible explanations for this could include decisions to opt for earlier surgical intervention by our treatment team or other unaccounted for differences between the patient populations. It is difficult to ethically set a parameter for treatment length as multiple factors can impact the duration. Although the authors of this study conclude this to be a reasonable option for initially conservative therapy, only one of the six patients they reported did not ultimately receive a pump exchange or heart transplant due to recurrence or worsening hemolysis and pump thrombosis within 1 year of treatment [ ]. The only other report of bivalirudin use for LVAD pump thrombosis published to date was in a patient with a HeartWare LVAD, who presented to their center with classic signs of hemolysis and pump thrombosis (LDH 621 U/L, dark tea colored urine, elevated plasma hemoglobin and LVAD flow readings above the normal readings for the patient) [ ]. Bivalirudin therapy was initiated in this case, the LDH improved from day 4 of therapy to day 16, and the patient was successfully transitioned back to warfarin therapy with a higher INR goal of 2.5–3.5. The response to bivalirudin therapy may be different between the HeartWare LVAD and that of the HeartMate II, which was the device that was exclusively reported in our experience. Additionally the long-term outcome of the patient from this case was not reported, making it unclear the durability of the patient’s response to therapy.
Among the subjects in this study who experienced initial improvement in the LDH, the subsequent high recurrence rates suggest that the durability of response and definitive resolution of thrombus is not achieved with bivalirudin therapy, even in cases where the LDH demonstrates initial improvement to normal or near normal ranges. This finding suggests that one should anticipate recurrence of pump thrombosis even if improvement in LDH and pump function is initially noted with bivalirudin therapy.
This study did not include a comparison group of other therapies to treat pump thrombosis. As a result, we cannot draw any conclusions on the relative efficacy of bivalirudin to heparin, antiplatelet agents or thrombolytic agents, which have all been used in varying dosing regimens and administration techniques to treat these patients with variable, yet limited, success [ , , ]. A recent meta-analysis comparing medical therapy with surgical device exchange indicated that of all literature available in this challenging area, surgical device exchange when appropriate had a greater success rate for resolution of pump thrombosis, a lower incidence of thrombosis recurrence and a lower mortality [ ].
Limitations of this study include its retrospective and observational nature, lack of comparator group, and small sample size. These limitations inhibit the ability of the data to determine the comparative efficacy of bivalirudin to earlier surgical strategies or other anticoagulant therapies, including unfractionated heparin. Based upon the trends and data herein, a future prospective study could include control group (such as conventional heparin therapy) that would provide more insight into the comparative efficacy of bivalirudin therapy. The data presented here does however provide a baseline of informative data that can be used to strengthen the treating clinician’s understanding of outcomes that can be expected of this therapy. Importantly all subjects in this analysis were implanted with HeartMate II devices; therefore, it is not possible to ascertain any information on the efficacy of bivalirudin to treat pump thrombosis of other devices based solely on this experience. Finally, US standards use aPTT to monitor bivalirudin levels; ecarin clotting time (ECT) was been reported to be a more sensitive monitoring technique, but is not available for use at our center [ ]. Future studies could employ ECT in an effort to improve monitoring sensitivity of direct thrombin inhibitors.
In conclusion, bivalirudin therapy for suspected pump thrombosis of LVAD subjects was not found to prevent the need for surgical pump exchange or transplant, although select subjects did see improvement in LDH and pump function allowing for successful discharge from the hospital and delay of surgical treatment. Among subjects initially responding to therapy, bivalirudin may have a role to delay surgical intervention, but it should be noted that there was a high frequency of recurrence requiring surgical intervention within the first 6 months of hospital discharge.