Background
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6 n-3) is an essential omega-3 (ω-3) long chain polyunsaturated fatty acid (LCPUFA) involved in a wide range of cellular processes in mammalian cells (Heras-Sandoval et al. ). Approximately 60% of PUFA in neuronal membranes consist of DHA (Belkouch et al. ) and is a precursor for bioactive compounds that modulate cell signaling and gene expression (Calder ). The majority of DHA is provided by dietary intake or its precursors, α-linolenic acid (αLNA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), in order to fulfill bodily requirements (SanGiovanni and Chew ; Williams and Burdge ). DHA and its precursors are present in oils from microalgae (Pereira et al. ) and in relatively large quantities from cold water fish (Calder ). DHA is the most predominant fatty acid found at the second position in phospholipids on neuronal and synaptic membranes (Glomset ) and participates in normal growth, development, and function (Tu et al. ), acting as a neurotrophic factor (Kim et al. ) and modulating synaptic activity (Cao et al. ).
Chronic activation of inflammatory signaling cascades in the brain and overproduction of reactive oxygen species can cause a neurotoxic injury and play a critical role in the development of many neurodegenerative disorders, like Alzheimer Disease (Lefkowitz and Lefkowitz ) (Sriram et al. ; Qian et al. ). DHA has been proposed to reduce the deleterious effects of inflammation (Galland ; Dinarello ). Several studies show that cellular molecules such as resolvins, protectins, peroxisome proliferator activated receptor γ (PPAR-γ), AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) are potential targets of DHA’s anti-inflammatory action (Chang et al. ; Marcheselli et al. ; Xue et al. ) (Marcheselli et al. ; Zuniga et al. ). In addition, a recent study demonstrated that ω-3 PUFAs promoted a phenotypic shift of microglia from pro-inflammatory to anti-inflammatory and reduced cognitive deficits in an animal model of demyelination induced by the copper chelator cuprizone (Wang et al. ). Besides, a decreased level of DHA in hippocampus synapses is characterized by altered synaptic transmission which is restored after DHA supporting the central role in normal neuronal function (McGahon et al. ; Latour et al. ). Antioxidant effect of DHA has been reported in previous studies showing reduced cerebral reactive oxygen species and prevented age-related cognitive dysfunction in an aged rat model (Hashimoto et al. ) and decreased oxidative stress and c-Jun N-terminal kinase/factor activator protein 1 (JNK/AP-1) signaling as well as enhanced Nrf2 expression in rats subjected to permanent cerebral ischemia (Chang et al. ), amongst others. However, there are still some inconsistencies in findings from clinical and pre-clinical studies with DHA as a therapy in neurological diseases, in particular Alzheimer disease (Cole et al. ).
Standard DHA supplements contain high concentrations of the branched-chain phytanic acid (3,7,11,15-tetramethylhexadecanoic acid, PhA) which has been found to disturb the integrity of neural cells (Schonfeld and Reiser ). PhA is a saturated branched-chain fatty acid of 20 C atoms with a poly-isoprenoic structure formed by bacterial activities from the phytol side chain of chlorophyll in the stomach of ruminants (Wanders et al. ). Some of the inconsistencies that have been reported in DHA treatment could be due to the presence of PhA in standard DHA supplements from microalgae and fish oils (Schonfeld and Reiser ). It has been demonstrated that PhA has an important cytotoxic and pro-oxidant activity and induces apoptosis in neurons, photoreceptors, astrocytes, cochlea, Purkinje cells, vascular endothelium, and hepatocytes (Kruska and Reiser ; Schonfeld and Reiser ) (Schonfeld and Wojtczak ). In neurodegenerative diseases such as Refsum disease, it has been suggested that the supraphysiological concentration of PhA exerts cytotoxic activities, which are most prominent in tissues with a high oxidative ATP generation, such as brain and heart (Jansen et al. ). Patent WO 2010/118761 collected data supporting the use of a DHA with content in phytanic acid below 90 µg. Clinical studies showed that increased levels of PhA found in DHA treatments were related to the aggravation of Refsum disease symptoms whilst patients treated with a DHA with content in phytanic acid below 90 µg showed a regression in the progression of the disease. Besides, in an epidemiological study conducted with 10,556 patients for 11 years (Wallstrom et al. ), it was proposed a direct relationship between DHA consumption and a higher incidence in the risk of prostate cancer despite of described DHA treatment beneficial effects.
Microglial cells are the immune central nervous system (CNS) competent cells and the primary phagocytic cell responding to brain alterations and have emerged as key players in regulating neuronal network excitability (Heras-Sandoval et al. ; Schonfeld and Wojtczak ). Microglia releases multiple pro- and anti-inflammatory immunoregulators, and a shift in the balance to the pro-inflammatory state contributes to neuroinflammation and concomitant neurodegeneration (Hao et al. ; Wu et al. ). A large amount of evidence, in cellular and animal models under neurotoxic stimuli, has suggested that DHA can prevent neurodegeneration by modulating glial cell activity (Li et al. ; Lu et al. ). In the presence of factors potentially harmful, microglia undergo morphological and functional alterations collectively identified under the term of “microglia activation” (Ferrini and De Koninck ). Thus, cultured microglia constitutes a powerful tool to study how different agents can modify microglial activation in response to known CNS active agents (Okun et al. ).
In view of the aforementioned data collected in the literature, in the present study, we aimed to analyze and compare the effects of a low phytanic acid-concentrated DHA with a standard phytanic acid-concentrated DHA under different neurotoxic conditions in BV-2 activated microglial cells. Effect and comparison of the treatments on cell viability, superoxide anion (O 2 − ) production, pro-inflammatory, antioxidant factors, and the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) under lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) stimuli were explored. Protein expression of marker of microglial activation, Microglial CD11b, the alpha M subunit of the MAC1 D11b β2 integrin, and arginase I, marker of the M2 phenotype in microglial cells was also measured in order to evaluate microglia activation.
Methods
Cell Culture and Treatment
Mouse microglial BV-2 cells provided by Centro Trasfusionale Banca Biologica and Cell Factory IRCCS AOU (San Martino, IST L.go R. Benzi, 10 16132 Genoa, Italy) were used. Cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, Invitrogen, CA, USA), 100 IU/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 37 °C in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO 2 gas. Cells were seeded at a density of 5 × 10 5 cells/mL and medium was replaced every 7 days.
Cultures were stimulated with either LPS (0.1 µg/mL) or H 2 O 2 (0.08 mM) during 24 h. Microglial cultures were incubated with DHA 50 ppm of PhA (DHA (PhA:50)) or DHA 500 ppm of PhA DHA (PhA:500), before stimulation with LPS 0.1 µg/mL or H 2 O 2 0.8 mM, the optimal stimulation conditions (Virgili et al. ; Coombes et al. ). Control wells contained the same final concentration of vehicle (RPMI-1640 medium) as the compound containing wells. The “ n ” per experiment was 7 wells and all in vitro experiments are representative of three independent experiments. All reagents were purchased from Aldrich Corp., St. Louis, USA.
Cell Viability Assays
Cell Number
The cells were seeded at a density of 5 × 10 5 /well in 24-well to carry out cell viability assays. After 2 days, cells were co-incubated with DHA (PhA:50) or DHA (PhA:500) one hour before stimulation with LPS 0.1 µg/mL or H 2 O 2 , 0.08 mM. Cell viability was measured 24 h after, using the Scepter 2.0 Cell Counter following the manufacturer instructions (Millipore, Massachusetts, USA).
XTT Assay
XTT (2,3-bis-(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide) assay (PanReac AppliChem, Barcelona, Spain) was carried out in BV-2 cells. Briefly, 10 × 10 4 cells per well were seeded in a 96-well plate. After 24 h, medium was removed and cells were co-incubated with DHA (PhA:50) or DHA (PhA:500) 1 h before stimulation with LPS 0.1 µg/mL or H 2 O 2 , 0.08 mM. The XTT reagent solution was applied to each well, and the plate was incubated for 30 min at 37 C under 5% CO 2 . Following the incubation, optical density of each well was measured at 490 nm, with correction at 630 nm, with a photometrical plate reader (Reader UVM-340, ASYS Hitech GmbH, Eugendorf, Australia). Data were expressed as percentage of mean versus control group (% of control).
LDH Assay
Activity of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in the medium is used as an index of cell injury and death. Lactate Dehydrogenase Activity Colorimetric Assay Kit (Biovision, USA) was used to measure LDH activity of each experimental conditions according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Medium was collected after centrifugation at 1200 rpm for 5 min. 10 µL of the supernatant was transferring to a new 96-well plate and 100 µL LDH reaction mix (BioVision) was added. Following an incubation of 30 min at room temperature, LDH activity was measured at 450 nm. LDH activity was expressed as percentage of mean versus control group (% of control).
Detection of Superoxide Anion Production
The oxidative fluorescent dye dihydroethidium (DHE 5 µM; Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) was used to evaluate O 2 − production. Cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 10 5 /well in 48-well for O 2 − production assays. Images were acquired by fluorescent laser scanning microscope (×40 objective in a Leica DMI 3000 microscope). Quantitative analysis of O 2 − production was performed using an analysis system (Leica LAS, 4.3; Leica AG, Germany). The mean fluorescence densities in the target region were calculated. Results are expressed as an n-fold increase over the values of the control group.
Western Blot Analysis
Isolation of Total Proteins
The cells were seeded at a density of 5 × 10 6 in P100 plate for subculture and protein extraction. Cells were collected at 4 °C in PBS, incubated on ice for 15 min, and then vortexed for 1 min. After centrifugation, the supernatant was removed and the obtained pellet was mixed in cold buffer containing 150 mM Tris pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 3 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride, 3 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma, Madrid, Spain), and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Berlin, Germany) to obtain purified proteins.
Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation for 10 min at 4 °C; the supernatant containing proteins was collected. The extracts were aliquoted and stored at − 80 °C for Western blotting analysis.
Western Blot Analysis
Proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE gels under reducing conditions and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad, USA). The membranes were blocked for 1 h with 5% (w/v) BSA as blocking agent (Sigma, Madrid, Spain) in PBST (1% PBS, 0.1%Tween 20 v/v) at room temperature. After PBST washing, the membranes were probed over-night at 4 °C with the primary antibodies: arginase 1 (1:300), integrin αM (1:500), superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1, 1:2500), caspase-3 (Cas-3, 1:1000) (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF, 1:200) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Heidelberg, Germany), interleukin-6 (IL-6, 1:100) (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), glutathione peroxidase (GPx, 1:1000), glutathione reductase (GRd, 1:1000), inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS, 1:300), and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2, 1:750) (CellSignaling, USA). After washing, membranes were incubated for 1 h with peroxidase-conjugated rabbit or mouse anti-goat IgG secondary antibody (1:10,000). β-actin (1:10,000, Sigma Aldrich, Madrid, Spain) and GAPDH (1:10,000, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) were used as loading control. After washing, detection was made through incubation with peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody, and developed using an ECL chemiluminescence kit (Millipore-Bedford, MA, USA), using the GeneGnome5 (Syngene Bio Imaging; Synoptics Ltd. CB, UK) obtaining a chemiluminescence imaging. Quantification was expressed as percentage of relative protein expression versus control group (% of control).
Statistical Analysis
Results are expressed as mean values ± SEM. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 6 (version 6.07; Graph Pad Software Inc. San Diego, CA, USA). The data were analyzed using a One-Way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by a multiple comparison Bonferroni test if differences were noted. Values of p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Results
DHA (PhA:50) Improves LPS or H2O2-Induced Microglia Cell Viability Reduction Compared to DHA (PhA:500)
Both neurotoxic stimuli, LPS and H 2 O 2 , decreased cell viability when compared to control group ( p < 0.05). Stimulated cells treated with DHA (PhA:50) showed increased cell viability when compared to LPS and H 2 O 2 ( p < 0.05). On the other hand, DHA (PhA:500) was not able to protect against cell viability loss induced by stimuli ( p < 0.05) and when compared with DHA (PhA:50), cell survival was significantly lower ( p < 0.05) (Fig. 1 a, b). LPS and as well as H 2 O 2 groups ( p < 0.05), showed decreased cell viability when metabolically active cells were measured by XTT assay. DHA (PhA:50) cells group showed increased cell viability when compared to LPS and H 2 O 2 ( p < 0.05). On the other hand, DHA (PhA:500) was not able to protect against metabolically active cells loss induced by stimuli ( p < 0.05) and when compared with DHA (PhA:50), cell survival was significantly lower ( p < 0.05). LPS and H 2 O 2 and DHA (PhA:500) LDH activity increased ( p < 0.05) when compared to Control group (Fig. 1 e, f). DHA (PhA:50) did not change the LDH release from exposed cells compared to control group. Overall, levels of LDH activity release confirmed the results of cell viability.
Fig. 1 DHA (PhA:50) and DHA (PhA:500) effects on a LPS-activated cell viability by counting using the Scepter 2.0 cell counter, b H 2 O 2 -activated cell viability by counting using the Scepter 2.0 cell counter, c LPS-activated cell viability by XTT assay, d H 2 O 2 -activated cell viability by XTT assay, e LPS-activated Bv-2 cell LDH activity, f H 2 O 2 -activated Bv-2 cell LDH activity, g relative protein expression levels by western-blot of Caspase-3 in LPS-stimulated Bv2 microglia cell cultures and h on relative protein expression levels by western-blot of Caspase-3 in H 2 O 2 -activated Bv2 microglia cell cultures. Data are expressed as percentage of mean ± SEM vs. control group. * p < 0.05 vs. control; # p < 0.05 vs. LPS or H 2 O 2 $ < 0.05 vs. LPS + DHA (PhA:50). Control control group, LPS lipopolysaccharide 0.1 µg/mL group, H 2 O 2 hydrogen peroxide 0.08 mM group, DHA (PhA:50) DHA 5 µM with 46 parts per million of phytanic acid group; DHA (PhA:500) DHA 5 µM with 500 parts per million of phytanic acid group. ( n = 7)
Protein expression of caspase-3 was significantly increased in LPS and H 2 O 2 groups ( p < 0.01) respect to control group. Co-incubation with either DHA (PhA:50) or DHA (PhA:500) was able to reduce ( p < 0.05) increased protein expression of caspase-3 (Fig. 1 g, h).
DHA (PhA:50) Attenuates LPS or H2O2-Induced Microglial Superoxide Anion Production Compared to DHA (PhA:500)
Increased ( p < 0.05) O 2 − production by Bv2 cells after LPS or H 2 O 2 stimulation was reduced ( p < 0.05) with DHA (PhA:50) co-incubation. Co-incubation of DHA (PhA:500) with either LPS or H 2 O 2 maintained elevated O 2 − production when compared to DHA (PhA:50) cells group ( p < 0.05) (Fig. 2 a, b).
Fig. 2 DHA (PhA:50) and DHA (PhA:500) effects on a LPS-activated cell superoxide anion production and b H 2 O 2 -activated cell superoxide anion production, and representative images of LPS-activated Bv2 microglia and H 2 O 2 -activated Bv2 microglia cell cultures, co-incubated with DHA 50 ppm of PhA (DHA (PhA:50)) or DHA 500 ppm of PhA DHA (PhA:500), and stained with the superoxide-sensitive dye DHE. Data are expressed as percentage of mean ± SEM vs. control group. * p < 0.05 vs. control; # p < 0.05 vs. LPS or H 2 O 2 $ < 0.05 vs. LPS + DHA (PhA:50). Control control group, LPS lipopolysaccharide 0.1 µg/mL group, H 2 O 2 hydrogen peroxide 0.08 mM group, DHA (PhA:50) DHA 5 µM with 46 parts per million of phytanic acid group, DHA (PhA:500) DHA 5 µM with 500 parts per million of Phytanic acid group. ( n = 7)
DHA (PhA:50) Exerts Anti-inflammatory Effect on LPS and H2O2-Activated Microglia Compared to DHA (PhA:500)
COX-2 protein expression of stimulated Bv-2 cells (LPS or H 2 O 2 ) increased ( p < 0.05) when compared to Control group. Co-incubation of stimulated cells with DHA (PhA:50) normalized ( p < 0.05) COX-2 expression ,whereas stimulated BV-2 cells treated with DHA (PhA:500) showed increased ( p < 0.05) levels of COX-2 compared to DHA (PhA:50) (Fig. 3 a, b). Both stimuli induced increased ( p < 0.05) IL-6 protein expression compare to control group ( p < 0.05). Even though both treatments were able to reduce ( p < 0.05) increased protein expression of IL-6, DHA (PhA:50) showed greater anti-inflammatory effect than DHA (PhA:500) (Fig. 3 c, d). Protein expression of iNOS was increased ( p < 0.05) under both neurotoxic stimuli compared to control group. Co-incubation of LPS-stimulated cultured cells with the two treatments decreased ( p < 0.05) iNOS protein expression in a similar extent. When BV-2 cells were stimulated with H 2 O 2 , no significant differences were found, although DHA (PhA:50)-treated cells showed a tendency to reduced iNOS levels (Fig. 3 e, f).
Fig. 3 Effect of DHA (PhA:50) and DHA (PhA:500) on relative protein expression levels by western-blot of a and b cyclooxygenase- 2 (COX-2), c and d interleukin-6 (IL-6), e and f inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), g and h Integrin αM (CD11) and i and j Arginase 1 in LPS-activated Bv2 microglia and H 2 O 2 -activated Bv2 microglia cell cultures. Data are expressed as percentage of mean ± SEM vs. control group. * p < 0.05 vs. control; # p < 0.05 vs. LPS or H 2 O 2 $ < 0.05 vs. LPS + DHA (PhA:50). Control control group, LPS lipopolysaccharide 0.1 µg/mL group, H 2 O 2 hydrogen peroxide 0.08 mM group, DHA (PhA:50) DHA 5 µM with 46 parts per million of phytanic acid group, DHA (PhA:500) DHA 5 µM with 500 parts per million of phytanic acid group. ( n = 7)
DHA (PhA:50) Decreases LPS Microglial CD11b Protein Expression Compared to DHA (PhA:500)
CD11b protein expression of stimulated Bv-2 cells (LPS) increased ( p < 0.05) when compared to control group. Co-incubation of stimulated cells with DHA (PhA:50) normalized ( p < 0.05) CD11b expression, whereas LPS-stimulated BV-2 cells treated with DHA (PhA:500) showed increased ( p < 0.05) levels of CD11b compared to DHA (PhA:50) (Fig. 3 g). When BV-2 cells were stimulated with H 2 O 2 , no significant differences were observed. Nevertheless, DHA (PhA:50) treated cells showed a tendency to reduced CD11b levels (Fig. 3 h).
DHA (PhA:50) Upregulates M2 Phenotype Marker Arginase 1 in LPS and H2O2-Activated Microglia Compared to DHA (PhA:500)
Microglial cell cultures stimulated with LPS or H 2 O 2 showed a decrease ( p < 0.05) of arginase 1 protein expression compared to control group. Co-incubation with DHA (PhA:50) was able to increase ( p < 0.05) arginase 1 protein expression. Co-incubation of DHA (PhA:500) with either LPS or H 2 O 2 maintained lower levels of arginase 1, when compared to DHA (PhA:50) cells group ( p < 0.05) (Fig. 3 i, j).
DHA (PhA:50) Decreases LPS or H2O2-Induced Microglial Antioxidant Response Compared to DHA (PhA:500)
Protein expression of GtPx was increased ( p < 0.05) in Bv-2 cells incubated with LPS and significantly increased with H 2 O 2 , when compared to control group. Co-incubation of stimulated cells with DHA (PhA:50) normalized ( p < 0.05) GtPx expression, whereas stimulated BV-2 cells treated with DHA (PhA:500) showed increased ( p < 0.05) levels of GtPx compared to DHA (PhA:50) (Fig. 4 a, b). LPS and H 2 O 2 stimulated Bv-2 cell cultures induced significant overexpression of GtRd compared to control group. Co-incubation with DHA (PhA:50) was able to decrease ( p < 0.05) the protein expression of GtRd whilst DHA (PhA:500) reached elevated values compared to DHA (PhA:50) (Fig. 4 c, d). Microglial cell cultures stimulated with LPS or H 2 O 2 showed an increase ( p < 0.05) of SOD-1 protein expression compared to control group. Even though both treatments were able to reduce ( p < 0.05) increased protein expression of SOD-1, DHA (PhA:50) showed greater effect decreasing the antioxidant protein than DHA (PhA:500) (Fig. 4 e). Similarly, co-incubation of Bv-2 cells with DHA (PhA:50) stimulated with H 2 O 2 decreased SOD-1 expression. Moreover, H 2 O 2 + DHA (PhA:500) group showed increased SOD-1 protein expression compared to the H 2 O 2 + DHA (PhA:50) group (Fig. 4 f).
Fig. 4 Effect of DHA (PhA:50) and DHA (PhA:500) on relative protein expression levels by western-blot of a and b glutathione peroxidase (GtPx), c and d glutathione reductase (GtRd) and e and f superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD 1) in LPS-stimulated Bv2 microglia and H 2 O 2 -activated Bv2 microglia cell cultures. Data are expressed as percentage of mean ± SEM vs. control group. * p < 0.05 vs. control; # p < 0.05 vs. LPS or H 2 O 2 $ < 0.05 vs. LPS + DHA (PhA:50). Control control group, LPS lipopolysaccharide 0.1 µg/mL group, H 2 O 2 hydrogen peroxide 0.08 mM group, DHA (PhA:50) DHA 5 µM with 46 parts per million of phytanic acid group; DHA (PhA:500) DHA 5 µM with 500 parts per million of phytanic acid group. ( n = 7)
DHA (PhA:50) Decreases LPS or H2O2-Induced Microglial BDNF Protein Expression Compared to DHA (PhA:500)
Protein expression of BDNF was reduced ( p < 0.05) in LPS-treated group compared to control group. Co-incubation with either DHA (PhA:50) or DHA (PhA:500) was able to reduce ( p < 0.05) increased protein expression of BDNF in a similar extent (Fig. 5 a). H 2 O 2 -stimulated group showed a tendency to reduce BDNF protein expression and co-incubation with DHA (PhA:50) highly increased ( p < 0.05) its expression. Moreover, H 2 O 2 + DHA (PhA:500) group showed reduced ( p < 0.05) levels of BDNF expression when compared to H 2 O 2 + DHA (PhA:50) culture group (Fig. 5 b).
Fig. 5 Effect of DHA (PhA:50) and DHA (PhA:500) on relative protein expression levels by western-blot of a brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in LPS-stimulated Bv2 microglia cell cultures and b brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in H 2 O 2 -activated Bv2 microglia cell cultures. Data are expressed as percentage of mean ± SEM vs. control group. * p < 0.05 vs. control; # p < 0.05 vs. LPS or H 2 O 2 $ < 0.05 vs LPS + DHA (PhA:50). Control control group, LPS lipopolysaccharide 0.1 µg/mL group, H 2 O 2 hydrogen peroxide 0.08 mM group, DHA (PhA:50) DHA 5 µM with 46 parts per million of phytanic acid group, DHA (PhA:500) DHA 5 µM with 500 parts per million of phytanic acid group. ( n = 7)
Discussion
The study provides data supporting the beneficial effect of low PhA-concentrated DHA in neurotoxic injury when compared to a standard PhA-concentrated DHA in activated microglia. Low PhA-concentrated DHA protected against LPS or H 2 O 2 -induced cell viability reduction in BV-2 activated cells accompanied by superoxide anion production reduction. Both treatments decreased caspase 3 in a similar extent. Low PhA-concentrated DHA also decreased COX-2, IL-6, iNOS, GtPx, GtRd, and SOD-1 protein expression. Furthermore, low PhA-concentrated DHA increased BDNF protein expression.
Low PhA-concentrated DHA protected against LPS or H 2 O 2 -induced cell viability reduction in BV-2 activated cells. It has been proposed that PhA may be exerting its negative effects by replacing long chain fatty acids in phospholipids and triglycerides which eventually would disrupt membranes integrity resulting in an accelerated cell death (McColl and Converse ). Studies on isolated mitochondria revealed that PhA increases the mobility of phospholipids in the mitochondrial membrane and alters the conformational state of membrane proteins (Ronicke et al. ). Low micromolar concentrations of PhA are able to disturb the integrity of neural cells by impairing the Ca 2+ homeostasis, enhancing oxidative stress or de-energizing mitochondria (Schonfeld and Reiser ). PhA could increase the membrane fluidity because of the branched three-dimensional structure leading to decreased cell viability (Schonfeld and Struy ). Furthermore, it has been observed that increased cytosolic Ca 2+ concentration and mitochondrial depolarization as well as opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) induced by PhA are key events in the induction of apoptotic and necrotic events (Kahlert et al. ) (Budd et al. ; Desagher and Martinou ). A cellular overload of PhA in hippocampal astrocytes, neurons and microglia leads to a complex array of toxic activities, including mitochondrial dysfunction and Ca 2+ deregulation via involvement of the intracellular InsP3–Ca 2+ signaling pathway (Schonfeld et al. ; Reiser et al. ). In the present study, we measured the protein expression of the apoptotic mediator, caspase-3. Low PhA-concentrated DHA and standard PhA-concentrated DHA reduced caspase-3 protein overexpression when cells were stimulated with LPS. Even though both treatments also reduced caspase-3 protein overexpression in H 2 O 2 -activated cells, low PhA-concentrated DHA showed a bigger reduction when compared to standard PhA-concentrated DHA. In a post-Traumatic brain injury model, it was shown that DHA was able to decrease calpain/caspase activation enhancing the therapeutic potential of neonatal neural stem cell transplantation (Ghazale et al. ). Our data suggest that a DHA low concentrated in PhA protects against cell death in activated microglia under pro-inflammatory or pro-oxidant stimuli, compared to a standard DHA.
O 2 − production was also reduced by low PhA-concentrated DHA co-incubation with LPS or H 2 O 2 in BV-2 stimulated cells. However, standard PhA-concentrated DHA was not able to reduce it. Once activated, either by injury or an immune stimulus, microglia secrete inflammatory cytokines, nitric oxide (NO), superoxide, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and glutamate (Chao et al. ; Qin et al. ; Laurén et al. ). In traumatic brain injury models, DHA administration notably increased the expression of the downstream factors NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase (NQO-1) and heme oxygenase 1(HO-1) exerting neuroprotective influence through activating the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2-antioxidant response element (Nrf2-ARE) pathway (Zhu et al. ). Thus, in sight of our results, reduction of O 2 − production by DHA (PhA:50) might be mediated, at least in part, by Nrf2. Furthermore, low PhA-concentrated DHA inhibited the protein expression of pro-inflammatory mediators COX-2, IL-6 in LPS or H 2 O 2 -stimulated Bv-2 microglial cells showing a tendency to decrease iNOS protein expression in H 2 O 2 -stimulated Bv-2 microglial cells. Standard DHA was not able to reduce COX-2 and iNOS protein expression, whilst decreased IL-6 but reaching higher values than low PhA-concentrated DHA. The analyzed pro-inflammatory agents contribute to the neurotoxicity induced by reactive microglial cells and the inhibition of their production has been shown to protect against the neurotoxicity induced by reactive glial cells (Gresa-Arribas et al. ; Pettit et al. ). Microglial IL-6 secretion has been directly associated to neuronal damage (Stewart and Heales ) and leukocyte activation within the CNS (Moncada and Bolanos ). COX-2 is one of the main inflammatory mediators produced by activated microglia during brain injury (Lei et al. ; Minghetti ). iNOS is intimately involved in neurodegenerative diseases producing NO as an inflammatory messenger, and consequently induces NO-mediated neuronal toxicity (Doherty ). Excessive NO synthesis under neuroinflammation is widely accepted to result in the formation of reactive nitrogen species and neuronal cell death (Wen et al. ). There is a strong interplay between oxidative stress and inflammatory molecules which generates an environment prone to develop neurodegenerative alterations. Oxidative stress induced by excess of O 2 − generation and neuroinflammation are major factors in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders (Yan et al. ). In response to various neuronal injuries and immunological stimulus, activated microglia release neurotoxic factors including superoxide anion production, NO and inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-α and IL-6, which can reduce cell viability (Salemme et al. ). In several neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative conditions, it has been found that the integrin CD11, is overexpressed in microglia, possibly responding to CNS damage (Butovsky et al. ; Remington et al. ; Wlodarczyk et al. ). CD11 has been shown to be reduced by DHA treatment in dendritic cells preventing expression of Il-12 cytokine family (Kong et al. ). In our study, we observed increased D11b protein expression of stimulated Bv-2 cells (LPS) when compared to control group and, co-incubation of stimulated cells with DHA (PhA:50) normalized CD11b expression, whereas LPS-stimulated BV-2 cells treated with DHA (PhA:500) showed increased levels of CD11b compared to DHA (PhA:50). Once again, PhA seems to be blunting neuroprotective effects induced by DHA in activated microglia.
In the same line of thought, activated phenotype (M2) also occurs when microglia are exposed to anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13 and is characterized by the expression of arginase (arg1), which is primarily involved in tissue remodeling and healing (Cherry et al. ). Our data suggest that DHA (PhA:50) reduced microglial M1 pro-inflammatory response by promoting the conversion to M2 phenotype, compared with DHA (PhA:500). Therefore, modulating microglia activation states may be a potential therapeutic targeting of neuroinflammatory diseases.
Previous studies have shown that together with Ca 2+ increase, PhA induces superoxide generation and cell death in hippocampal neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes (Ronicke et al. ). Additionally, it has been found that PhA enhances the generation of reactive oxygen species in brain cells (Ronicke et al. ). It is recognized that the activation of microglia and resulting elevated levels of neurotoxic and pro-inflammatory mediators is associated with neurodegenerative disease, including Alzheimer disease and acute cerebrovascular stroke, characterized by increased oxidative stress and neuroinflammation (Kim et al. ; Salemme et al. ). Thus, decreased PhA presence in DHA treatments seems to be highly interesting in terms to reduce deleterious effects as inflammation and oxidative stress induced by PhA.
Furthermore, low PhA-concentrated DHA decreased antioxidant response in microglia activated cells. SOD-1, GtPx, and GtRd protein expression were reduced with DHA low concentrated in PhA when BV-2 were activated by LPS or H 2 O 2 . Altered levels of GSH-related enzymes have been described in brain disorders and/or with clinical samples from humans with neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disorders (Gu et al. ). Previous studies have shown the potent antioxidant capacity of DHA (Heras-Sandoval et al. ; Chang et al. ). On the contrary, as previously described PhA has been demonstrated to exert high oxidative effects (Gibson et al. ; Lauritzen et al. ). Thus, it could be proposed that due to high antioxidant capacity of low PhA-concentrated DHA, activated microglia cells seem to be protected against oxidative processes. In this case, antioxidant response would not be necessary against pro-oxidant activation with LPS or H 2 O 2 group. On the contrary, increased production of oxidant agents by PhA would be inducing a potent antioxidant response by Bv-2 activated cells. The lower antioxidant enzyme activities of the DHA (PhA:50) cells may be attributed to the ROS scavenging properties of DHA and not a detrimental decrease in the antioxidant enzyme activities. In this study, our results suggest that DHA (PhA:50) imparts its antioxidant protection in the microglia cells as an ROS scavenger rather than the enhancement of antioxidant enzyme activity. Previous studies have demonstrated that DHA down-regulates superoxide dismutase (SOD) 1 gene expression in human cancer cells or is able to deplete GSH concentrations (Tuller et al. ; Cobourne-Duval et al. ).
Low PhA-concentrated DHA increased protein expression of BDNF in activated BV-2 cells, especially in LPS-stimulated cells. BDNF is a neurotrophin with important functions in neuronal survival and differentiation. However, beyond its classical neurotrophic role, BDNF is directly involved in the control of neuronal activity and synaptic plasticity as a neuromodulator (Kim et al. ; Hong et al. ). Microglial BDNF was first shown in microglia cultures (Heneka et al. ; Lian et al. ) and soon confirmed in different regions of the CNS during the course of various neurological alterations (Batchelor et al. ; Dougherty et al. ; Lee et al. ). The release of BDNF by microglia can be considered as a part of a neuroprotective strategy, being neurotrophins classically involved in neuronal survival process and is becoming a useful biomarker for assessing neurologic disorder (Ulmann et al. ; Ferrini and De Koninck ). Our results showed elevated BNDF protein expression in H 2 O 2 -stimulated cells co-incubated with low PhA-concentrated DHA. On the contrary, co-incubation with the standard PhA-concentrated DHA was not able to increase the protein expression of this neurotropic factor. DHA has been widely reported to increase BDNF expression in experimental studies such as neurodegenerative aged mice (Jiang et al. ), traumatic brain injury rats (Wu et al. ), and deprivation of 15-week PUFA-deprived rats (Rao et al. ), amongst others. It has been proposed that free DHA released from membrane phospholipids not only is a precursor for divers bioactive docosanoids (Kuda ), but also regulates BDNF transcription. It has been shown that DHA enhances BDNF synthesis through activation of CREB (cAMP response element binding protein) phosphorylation (Tyagi et al. ). DHA is also proposed to increase the transcription of BDNF by inhibiting hypermethylation of the promoter region of BDNF gene, which silences BDNF transcription (Tyagi et al. ). Another possible mechanism is that since BDNF level decreases with oxidative stress (Jain et al. ), and since DHA is known to induce antioxidant enzymes (Hashimoto at al. ), the BDNF increase is a consequence of the induction of antioxidant enzymes which decrease the oxidative stress (Sugasini et al. ). PhA might be blocking the neuroprotective effects exerted by DHA as reflected in decreased BDNF protein expression on activated microglia.
Even though evidences of DHA supplementation have been attributed beneficial effects in normal growth, development and brain function, the presence of PhA in DHA supplements might be not only reducing or blunting omega-3 positive effects but also stimulating deleterious effects itself. Therefore, since PhA is usually found in DHA compositions, reduction of PhA content would highlight a novel pathway for the regulation of inflammatory and oxidative responses by activated microglia. Moreover, low PhA-concentrated DHA is able to increase neuroprotective factor BDNF in neurotoxic situations as pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidant stimuli represented in the present study. Therefore, in addition to the strengthening of anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and in addition to the strengthening of survival mechanisms, we would like to further emphasize the neuroprotective role of low PhA-concentrated DHA when compared to a standard PhA-concentrated DHA. These findings suggest that DHA (PhA:50) may be utilized as an effective therapeutic agent for delaying the onset and/or slowing/preventing the progression of microglia-derived neurodegeneration.