Introduction
Aging is a physiological process that occurs in all organisms and is associated with multiple metabolic and biochemical modifications (Rattan ). Several such modifications occur in the brain, including neuron shrinkage, loss of myelination, and decreased dendritic branching, cerebral blood flow, and neurotransmitter levels (Koscak Tivadar ). Aging is also characterized by impaired cognitive functioning, such as locomotor activity, learning, and memory (Cooper et al. ; Belviranlı et al. ). The aging-induced decrease in cognitive functioning is primarily associated with structural and functional modifications in the hippocampus, particularly the dentate gyrus (DG) (Fan et al. ).
A sedentary lifestyle is one of the most important risk factors for cognitive impairment during aging. In contrast, regular exercise training can protect against such impairment (Miyawaki et al. ). Animal studies on normal aging show that exercise training can protect against the loss of neuroplasticity, is beneficial for preserving hippocampal function and maintaining memory function, and reverses age-related long-term potential (LTP) impairment in the DG (Duzel et al. ). Additionally, there is an association between an increase in exercise capacity and increased hippocampal volume (Erickson et al. ). In aged rodents exercise training improves hippocampal-dependent memory, including object recognition, Morris water maze (MWM) performance, inhibitory avoidance, and contextual fear conditioning (Fan et al. ).
Fibronectin type III domain containing 5 (FNDC5) is a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1 alpha (PGC-1α)-dependent myokine that is released primarily from muscle in response to contraction. Cleavage of FNDC5 produces irisin—a 12-kDa peptide (Boström et al. ) that plays a role in oxygen consumption, transition of white fat into brown fat, and thermogenesis (Boström et al. ). FNDC5 is also expressed in the brain (Teufel et al. ), especially the hippocampus (Wrann et al. ). Neuronal FNDC5 gene expression is regulated by PGC-1α and it was reported that PGC-1α −/− mice exhibit low FNDC5 expression in the brain. FNDC5 deficiency impairs neuronal development (Hashemi et al. ), whereas exercise training increases FNDC5 mRNA expression in the hippocampus (Wrann et al. ).
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is an important neurotrophin that is primarily expressed in multiple regions of the brain, especially the hippocampus (Leal et al. ). BDNF is secreted from neurons at or near synapses in response to synaptic activity and plays an important role in neurogenesis, synapse formation, plasticity, learning, and memory, as it is associated with growth and differentiation of newly generated hippocampal neurons (Marosi and Mattson ). The BDNF level in the hippocampus decreases with age (Erickson et al. ), and it was reported that regular exercise increases the BDNF levels in the hippocampus of rodents (Cooper et al. ). Additionally, exercise training enhances BDNF mRNA expression in the DG, rather than the CA1 region of the hippocampus (Farmer et al. ).
Recent research (Eldomiaty et al. ; Wrann et al. ) shows that FNDC5 can modulate BDNF expression and release in the hippocampus. Wrann et al. ( ) observed that following exercise, BDNF gene expression was selectively increased in the hippocampus, as was PGC-1α and FNDC5 expression. Moreover, they reported that BDNF, in turn, negatively regulates FNDC5 gene expression, indicating the existence of a homeostatic FNDC5/BDNF feedback loop. It has also been suggested that the PGC-1α/FNDC5/BDNF pathway might be physiologically relevant to exercise-induced BDNF gene expression in the hippocampus (Jodeiri Farshbaf et al. ; Wrann ; Xu ).
Based on the assumption that myokines can regulate BDNF expression and release in the hippocampus, several studies (Eldomiaty et al. ; Wrann et al. ) investigated hippocampal BDNF expression and release in young and middle-aged rodents; however, to the best of our knowledge, the effect of exercise training on hippocampal FNDC5 expression and its relationship to cognitive functions in aged rats has not been studied. The present study hypothesized that PGC-1α, FNDC5, BDNF, and some cognition-related genes expression would be lower in aged rats and that exercise training would cause an increase. Accordingly, the present study aimed to measure hippocampal gene expression in young (3 months old) and aged rats (20 months old) that voluntarily exercised for 90 days. We evaluated the expression of hippocampal genes linked to cell growth, proliferation, and survival, including FNDC5, BDNF, PGC-1α, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK), sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), c-Fos proto-oncogene (c-Fos), nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB), activity-regulated cytoskeletal-related gene (ARC), and forkhead box (FOXO). In addition, hippocampal expressions of the proteins BDNF and FNDC5 were analyzed via Western blot. Additionally, cognitive functioning, based on locomotion, anxiety-related behavior, learning, and memory were analyzed via the open field (OF), elevated plus maze (EPM), and MWM tests.
Materials and Methods
Animals and Housing Conditions
The study included 16 young (age: 3 months) and 14 aged (age: 20 months) female Wistar rats weighing 350–450 g. The rats were housed individually in polycarbonate cages and maintained on a 12:12-h light–dark cycle in a low-stress environment (22 ± 2 °C, 50% humidity, and low noise). The rats had ad libitum access to regular rodent chow and tap water. The Selçuk University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all experiment procedures (protocol no.: 2015/82) and National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines for laboratory animal care were followed during all study procedures.
Experimental Protocol
Rats were randomly divided into four groups, as follows: young control (YC; n = 8), young exercise training (YT; n = 8), aged control (AC; n = 7), and aged exercise training (AT; n = 7). The percent lifespan of 20 months for female Wistar rats is almost 75% in our lab. Figure 1 shows a summary of the study design.
Fig. 1 Experimental design
Exercise Protocol
To provide for voluntary free wheel running exercise, rats in the YT and AT groups were individually housed in standard cages equipped with an unlocked stainless-steel running wheel (MAY RW2508 Running Well, Commat, Ltd., Ankara, Turkey). Rats in the YC and AC groups were individually housed in standard cages without a running wheel. Rats were exercised for 90 days.
Behavioral Testing
OF and EPM tests were administered on day 91 and 92, respectively. Then, all four groups were exercised in a MWM on days 95–98, followed by a MWM probe trial on day 99. All behavioral tests were performed following methods previously described (Okudan and Belviranlı ; Belviranlı and Okudan ).
All behavioral data were collected via a computerized video tracking system positioned above the test area. Data were analyzed using specialized software (Ethovision XT 10.0, Noldus Information Technology, Wageningen, The Netherlands). The test room was ventilated and maintained at 23 ± 1 °C. The OF and EPM equipment were cleaned with 70% ethyl alcohol and aired after each test. To reduce daily impact all tests were administered by the same experimenter at the same time of day (0900–1200).
Open Field (OF) Test
The OF test is commonly used to evaluate locomotor activity, the level of anxiety, and exploratory behavior. OF equipment used in this study consisted of an 80 × 80-cm black box with walls 40 cm high. Each rat was placed in the center of the box and allowed to explore the environment freely for 5 min. The number of times each rat defecated, groomed, and reared, time spent in the center (s), total distance traveled (cm), and number of entries into the center were recorded.
Elevated Plus Maze (EPM) Test
The EPM test is used to assess the level of anxiety in rodents. The EPM used in this study was a plus sign-shaped apparatus with two open and two closed arms (each 50 cm × 10 cm) that was placed 50 cm above the ground. Each rat was placed at the intersection of the four arms facing one of the open arms and was permitted to explore the maze for 5 min. Total distance traveled (cm), the number of entries into the closed arms and open arms, and mean velocity (cm s −1 ) were recorded.
Morris Water Maze (MWM) Test
The MWM test was used to assess the rats’ spatial learning and memory function. The MWM experiment was administered in a circular galvanized steel pool (150 cm diameter × 60 cm depth) filled with water (25 ± 1 °C). During the MWM test , the rats performed two primary tasks.
Training Task
The rats performed the training task first. The pool was conceptually divided into four quadrants (north east, north west, south east, and south west). A hidden square platform was placed approximately 2 cm below the surface of the water and was always located in the same quadrant. The rats performed 16 trials, which were averaged and presented as a daily block of 4 trails for four consecutive days. On each training day, four starting positions were randomly used at once. For each trial, the animals were given 60 s to find the platform. If a rat could not find the platform within 60 s, it was placed on the platform by the experimenter for 30 s. During the test, total distance (cm) traveled, time (s) to find the platform (latency), duration (s) of thigmotactic behavior (time the animals spent swimming close to the wall of the maze), and mean swimming speed (cm s −1 ) were recorded.
Probe Task
Next, 24 h after the training task each rat performed a single 90-s probe trial task in which the platform was removed from the pool. Time spent in each quadrant (s) and the number of times the area that formerly contained the platform was crossed were recorded.
Sample Collection and Tissue Preparation
The rats were anesthetized with ether and sacrificed via cervical dislocation 24 h after the last behavioral test. Hippocampal tissue was removed immediately, cleaned using ice-cold saline, and then separated into two pieces (one for gene expression assays and one for protein expression assays). Next, tissue samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at − 80 °C until analysis.
Real-Time Quantitative Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) analysis
Measurement of hippocampal gene expression was performed for BDNF, FNDC5, PGC-1α, mTOR, ERK, SIRT1, c-Fos, NF-κB, Arc, and FOXO using specific primers, and housekeeping genes β-actin and GAPDH (Table 1 ). Optimized and validated primers were purchased from realtimeprimers.com (Elkins Park, PA, USA). Expression of rat exon II splice variant was used for analysis of BDNF expression, as it was reported that BDNF mRNA variants encoding the 5′ exons I, II, IV, and VI represent 95% of the total BDNF mRNA in rats (Aid et al. ) and that variant II is the most abundantly expressed BDNF mRNA splice variant in hippocampal dendrites (Boulle et al. ).
Table 1 Primer sequence details of the analyzed gene Genes Primer sequence GenBank accession no. Size (pb) Temp. BDNF F: CATTTCATGACACTCGTGGA NM_012513 202 58 °C R: ATTTCAGTGGCAGTGTGGAT FNDC5 F: CCTGGACACAGGGTGAAAGT NM_001270981 239 58 °C R: CAAAGAGGAAGCCAGTCCAG PGC-1α F: AATGAATGCAGCGGTCTTAG NM_031347 139 58 °C R: GTCTTTGTGGCTTTTGCTGT mTOR F: GGCTTCTGAAGATGCTGTCC NM_019906 153 58 °C R: GAGTTCGAAGGGCAAGAGTG ERK (MAPK1) F: CCGCGCTACACTAATCTCTC NM_053842 195 58 °C R: ATTGATGCCGATGATGTTCT ARC F: TGGAGTCTTCAGAGCCAGGT NM_019361 238 58 °C R: GCTGGCTTGTCTTCACCTTC c-FOS F: GTGGACCTGTCTGGTTCCTT NM_022197 250 58 °C R: GCGAGCTCAGTGAGTCAGAG SIRT1 F: GTGAGAAAATGCTGGCCTAA XM_003753475 161 58 °C R: CTGCCACAGGAACTAGAGGA NF-κB F: CCCCACACTGTAAACCAAAG XM_342346 243 58 °C R: GAAAAGCTCAAGCCACCATA ACTB F: AAGAGCTATGAGCTGCCTGA NM_007393 160 58 °C R: TACGGATGTCAACGTCACAC FOXO1 F: GTGAACACCATGCCTCACAC NM_001191846 211 58 °C R: CACAGTCCAAGCGCTCAATA GAPDH F: AGACAGCCGCATCTTCTTGT NM_017008 207 58 °C R: CTTGCCGTGGGTAGAGTCAT BDNF brain-derived neurotrophic factor; FNDC5 fibronectin type III domain containing 5; PGC - 1α peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha; mTOR mechanistic target of rapamycin; ERK (MAPK1) mitogen-activated protein kinase 1; ARC activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein; c-FOS Fos proto-oncogene, AP-1 transcription factor subunit; SIRT1 sirtuin 1; NF-κB1 nuclear factor of kappa light chain gene enhancer in B-cells 1; ACTB actin, beta; FOXO1 forkhead box O1; GAPDH glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase
Total RNA was isolated from hippocampal tissue using RiboZol RNA extraction reagent (#N580, AMRESCO, VWR International, Solon, ON, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The purity and concentrations of the isolated RNA were determined using 260/280 nm ratios read using a BioTek Take3 microvolume microplate and BioTek PowerWave XS microplate reader (BioTek Instruments Inc., Winooski, Vt., USA). Then, complementary DNA (cDNA) was reverse transcribed using an iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (#1708891, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Samples were run in duplicate using the CFX Connect Real-Time System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) and SYBR Green Super Mix (#1708880, iQ SYBR Green Supermix, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) in a 96-well format, and samples were counterbalanced within and across plates. The RT-PCR conditions utilized were as follows: step 1: 3 min at 95 °C; step 2: 10 s at 95 °C and 45 s at 58 °C (step 2 was repeated 49 times); step 3: 10 s at 95 °C; step 4: 2 s at 65 °C. C(q) values were determined automatically by CFX Manager™ v.3.1 (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Quantification of transcripts of interest relative to the internal housekeeping control genes β-Actin and GAPDH were determined using the 2 −ΔΔ C q method (Schmittgen and Livak ).
Western Blot Analysis
To 20 volumes of freshly prepared ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (NaCl 137 mM, KCl 2.7 mM, and phosphate buffer 10 mM; pH: 7.4) (#E404-100TABS, AMRESCO, VWR International, Solon, ON, USA), 50 mg of frozen tissue was added. Tissue samples were homogenized using the FastPrep®-24 system (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA, USA). Following centrifugation at 4 °C (12,000× g for 10 min), supernatants were assayed for protein concentration using the Colorimetric Bradford Protein Assay (#5000205 and #5000206, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). All samples were subsequently diluted to a standard concentration, and then diluted with 2× Laemmli buffer (#1610737, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) and incubated for 5 min at 95 °C. Next, 20 mg of cytoplasmic proteins was separated on TGX-Stain-Free Gels (#4568123, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) for 5 min at 50 V and then for 35 min at 200 V. The gels were activated using a ChemiDoc MP imaging system, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA), and transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride membranes (PVDF) (#1704156, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) using the Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) and then visualized again using the ChemiDoc MP imaging system. Membranes were blocked in TBS-Tween (Tris 20 mmol and NaCl 500 mmol); pH: 7.5 (#1706435, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) and 0.2% Tween 20 (#1706531, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) containing 5% (w/v) dry milk powder (#1706404, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) for 1 h at room temperature, which were also used for antibody incubation. PVDF membranes were incubated for 2 h at room temperature using a 1:1000-concentration of primary antibodies against BDNF (#25699-1-AP, Proteintech Group Inc, Chicago, IL, USA) and FNDC5 (#23995-1-AP, Proteintech Group Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). Then, the membranes were washed three times with TBS-Tween. After washing, the membranes were incubated with a 1:5000-concentration of an anti-species horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (#SA00001-2, Proteintech Group Inc, Chicago, IL, USA) for 1 h at room temperature. Next, membranes were washed three times in TBS-Tween, and then exposed to an enhanced chemiluminescent solution (#1706531, Clarity™, Western ECL Blotting Substrates, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) for 5 min. Next, membranes were exposed using a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc system, and band densities were measured using image-analysis software (Image Lab v.5.2.1, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Stain Free® (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) blot image was used as a total protein loading control. Data were analyzed according to Western Blot normalization, using the Image Lab software guide, as previously reported (Gürtler et al. ). Briefly, quantification was performed according to the intensity of specific bands obtained via chemiluminescence that were normalized to the entire UV intensity of the corresponding sample representing the total protein content on the membrane.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows v.21.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY). Data are expressed as mean ± SD. The normality of the distribution of the variables was determined using the Shapiro–Wilk test. MWM data were analyzed via two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for repeated measures (age × exercise). OF, EPM, MWM probe trial, RT-PCR, and Western Blot data were also analyzed via two-way ANOVA (age × exercise), followed by Tukey’s HSD post hoc test. The level of statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.
Results
Change in Body Weight
Change in body weight in each group is shown in Fig. 2 . During the study period, body weight increased with time in the YC and YT groups, and decreased with time in the AC and AT groups ( F 3,27 = 16.905; P = 0.000). When the study began, body weight in the AC group was higher than in the YC and YT groups ( P < 0.05); at all other time points, there was not a significant difference between the groups.
Fig. 2 Change in body weight during the study period, according to group. YC: young control group; YT: exercise-trained young group; AC: aged control group; AT: exercise-trained aged group
Behavioral Analysis
The Effect of Exercise Training on Locomotor Activity and Exploratory Behavior
Total distance traveled during the OF and EPM tests is a measure of locomotor activity, as is average velocity during the EPM test. OF test total distance traveled was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, and was lower in the AC group than in the YC, YT, and AT groups ( F 3,27 = 47.752; P = 0.000) (Fig. 3 e). EPM test total distance traveled was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, and was lower in the AC and AT groups than in the YT group ( F 3,27 = 15.166; P = 0.000) (Fig. 4 a). EPM test mean velocity was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, was lower in the AC group than in the YC, YT, and AT groups, and was lower in the AT group than in the YT group ( F 3,25 = 18.380; P = 0.000) (Fig. 4 d). These findings indicate that locomotor activity decreases with aging and improves with exercise training.
Fig. 3 Number of times the rats defecated ( a ), groomed ( b ), and reared ( c ), and time spent in the center ( d ), total distance traveled ( e ), and number of entries in the center ( f ) during the OF test. The tables above the bar graphs show two-way ANOVA results using age and training as the two factors. Data are shown as mean ± SD. a P < 0.05 compared to the YC group, b P < 0.05 compared to the YT group, and c P < 0.05 compared to the AC group. YC: young control group; YT: exercise-trained young group; AC: aged control group; AT: exercise-trained aged group
Fig. 4 Total distance traveled ( a ), number of entries into closed arms ( b ) and open arms ( c ), and mean velocity ( d ) during the EPM test. The tables above the bar graphs show the two-way ANOVA results using aging and training as the two factors. Data are shown as mean ± SD. a P < 0.05 compared to the YC group, b P < 0.05 compared to the YT group, and c P < 0.05 compared to the AC group. YC: young control group; YT: exercise-trained young group; AC: aged control group; AT: exercise-trained aged group
The number of times a rat rears and enters the center during the OF test are measures of exploratory behavior. During the OF test, the number of times each rat reared was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, and was lower in the AC group than in the YT and AT groups ( F 3,27 = 10.755; P = 0.000) (Fig. 3 c). The OF test number of times each rat entered the center was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, was lower in the AC and AT groups than in the YT group, and was higher in the AT group than in the AC group ( F 3,27 = 21.143; P = 0.000) (Fig. 3 f). These findings indicate that exploratory behavior decreases with aging and increases with exercise training.
The Effect of Exercise Training on the Severity of Aging-Induced Anxiety-Like Behavior
The number of times a rat defecates and grooms, and the time spent in the center during the OF test are measures of anxiety-like behavior, as are the number of times a rat enters the closed and open arms during the EPM test. The OF test number of times each rat defecated was lower in the YT group than in the YC group, and was higher in the AC group than in the YC, YT, and AT groups ( F 3,27 = 32.627; P = 0.000) (Fig. 3 a). The OF test number of times each rat groomed was lower in the YT group than in the YC group, and was higher in the AC and AT groups than in the YT group ( F 3,27 = 7.073; P = 0.002) (Fig. 3 b). OF test time spent in the center ( F 3,26 = 8.715; P = 0.000) (Fig. 3 d) was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, but was lower in the AC group than in the YT and AT groups.
The EPM test number of times each rat entered the open arms was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, and was lower in the AC and AT groups than in the YT groups ( F 3,25 = 26.128; P = 0.000) (Fig. 4 c). The EPM test number of times each rate entered the closed arms was lower in the YT and AT groups than in the YC group, and was higher in the AC group than in the YC, YT, and AT groups ( F 3,25 = 9.398; P = 0.000) (Fig. 4 b). These findings indicate that aging induces an increase in anxiety, which is attenuated by exercise training.
The Effect of Exercise Training on Age-Related Spatial Memory Impairment
MWM exercise session total distance traveled ( F 3,27 = 2.505; P = 0.019), latency ( F 3,27 = 5.226; P = 0.006), and thigmotactic behavior ( F 3,27 = 4.422; P = 0.013) did not differ significantly between the groups, but did decrease with time in all groups (Fig. 5 a–c). Additionally, total distance traveled, latency, and thigmotactic behavior were higher in the AC group, as compared to the YC, YT, and AT groups. Swimming speed did not change with repeated trials, did not differ significantly during the tests, and did not differ significantly between the groups ( F 3,27 = 1.804; P = 0.173) (Fig. 5 d). These findings indicate that the rats in each group improved over the course of the training trails.
Fig. 5 The effect of aging and exercise training on total distance traveled ( a ), latency to find the platform ( b ), thigmotactic behavior ( c ), and mean swimming speed ( d ) during the MWM training sessions. Data are shown as mean ± SD. YC: young control group; YT: exercise-trained young group; AC: aged control group; AT: exercise-trained aged group
Figure 5 shows MWM probe trail results in each group. Total time spent in the SE quadrant (target quadrant) was higher than in the other quadrants in all groups, ( F 3,27 = 5.226; P = 0.006) (Fig. 6 a). The number of platform crossings was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, was lower in the AC and AT groups than in the YT group, and was higher in the AT group than in the YC and AC groups ( F 3,27 = 23.222; P = 0.000) (Fig. 6 b). These findings indicate that aging negatively affected spatial memory, which was improved by exercise training.
Fig. 6 Time spent in each quadrant ( a ), and number of platform crossings ( b ) during the MWM probe trial. The table above the bar graphs shows the two-way ANOVA results using aging and training as the two factors. Data are shown as mean ± SD. a P < 0.05 compared to the YC group, b P < 0.05 compared to the YT group, and c P < 0.05 compared to the AC group. YC: young control group; YT: exercise-trained young group; AC: aged control group; AT: exercise-trained aged group
Biochemical Observations
Quantification of Hippocampal mRNA Expression
The above findings indicate that exercise training can improve rat locomotor activity, exploratory behavior, anxiety, and learning and memory. To help determine the underlying mechanism of the observed benefits of exercise training, hippocampal expression of the genes BDNF, FNDC5, PGC-1α, mTOR, ARC, c-Fos, ERK, SIRT, FOXO, and NF-κB was measured (Fig. 7 ). BNDF gene expression was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, was lower in the AC group than in the YC, YT, and AT groups, and was lower in the AT group than in the YT group (Fig. 7 a) ( F 3,26 = 31.489; P = 0.000). FNDC5 gene expression was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, was lower in the AC and AT groups than in the YT group, and was higher in the AT group than in the YC and AC groups ( F 3,26 = 49.249; P = 0.000) (Fig. 7 b). PGC-1α gene expression was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, was lower in the AC and AT groups than in the YT group, and was higher in the AT group than in the AC group ( F 3,25 = 17.326; P = 0.000) (Fig. 7 c). mTOR gene expression was lower in the AC and AT groups than in the YT group ( F 3,27 = 4.410; P = 0.001) (Fig. 7 d). NF-κB gene expression was higher in the AC group than in the YC, YT, and AT groups ( F 3,25 = 6.747; P = 0.002) (Fig. 7 e). ARC gene expression was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, and was lower in the AC group than in the YT and AT groups ( F 3,27 = 3.032; P = 0.000) (Fig. 7 f). c-Fos gene expression was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, and was lower in the AC and AT groups than in the YT group ( F 3,27 = 6.776; P = 0.002) (Fig. 7 g). ERK ( F 3,25 = 7.493; P = 0.001) (Fig. 7 h) and SIRT ( F 3,25 = 11.127; P = 0.000) (Fig. 7 i) gene expressions were higher in the YT group than in the YC group, and were lower in the AC group than in the YT group. FOXO gene expression was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, was lower in the AC and AT groups than in the YT group, and was higher in the AT group than in the AC group ( F 3,26 = 20.420; P = 0.000) (Fig. 7 j). These findings indicate that aging-induced cognitive dysfunction is primarily associated with decreased hippocampal expression of the genes PGC-1α, FNDC5, and BDNF, and that exercise training might improve cognitive functions via activating these genes.
Fig. 7 The effect of aging and exercise training on hippocampal BDNF ( a ), FNDC5 ( b ), PGC-1α ( c ), mTOR ( d ), NF-κB ( e ), ARC ( f ), c-Fos ( g ), ERK ( h ), SIRT ( i ), and FOXO ( j ) gene expression. The tables above the bar graphs show the two-way ANOVA results using aging and training as the two factors. Data are shown as mean ± SD. a P < 0.05 compared to the YC group, b P < 0.05 compared to the YT group, and c P < 0.05 compared to the AC group. YC: young control group; YT: exercise-trained young group; AC: aged control group; AT: exercise-trained aged group
The Effect of Exercise Training on Hippocampal Expression of the Proteins BDNF and FNDC5
The effects of aging and exercise training on hippocampal expression of the proteins BNDF and FNDC5 are shown in Fig. 8 . Black vertical line between gel bands indicates gel band splicing. The BDNF level was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, and was lower in the AC group than in the YT and AT groups ( F 3,26 = 12.464; P = 0.000) (Fig. 8 a). The FNDC5 level was higher in the YT group than in the YC group, was lower in the AC and AT groups than in the YT group, and was higher in the AT group than in the AC group ( F 3,26 = 18.669; P = 0.000) (Fig. 8 b). These findings indicate that aging induces a decrease in hippocampal BDNF and FNDC5 levels, which is reversed by exercise training. Additionally, elevated hippocampal BDNF and FNDC5 levels might mediate exercise training-induced improvement in cognitive functioning.
Fig. 8 The effect of aging and exercise training on hippocampal BDNF ( a ) and FNDC5 ( b ) protein expression. Expression of BDNF and FNDC5 was analyzed via Western blot in homogenates of rat hippocampus. The tables above the bar graphs show the two-way ANOVA results using aging and training as the two factors. Black vertical line between gel bands indicates gel band splicing. Data are shown as mean ± SD. a P < 0.05 compared to the YC group, b P < 0.05 compared to the YT group, and c P < 0.05 compared to the AC group. YC: young control group; YT: exercise-trained young group; AC: aged control group; AT: exercise-trained aged group
Discussion
The present study investigated the effect of aging on cognitive functions and hippocampal FNDC5 and BDNF levels in rats, as well as the effect of exercise training on these variables. The findings show that exercise training improved locomotor activity, anxiety-related behavior, and spatial learning and memory in aged rats. Additionally, it was observed that hippocampal expressions of the genes BDNF, FNDC5, PGC-1α, mTOR, ARC, c-Fos, ERK, SIRT, and FOXO decreased, and that NF-κB expression increased in aged rats. Exercise training improved the expression of these genes in both the young and aged rats. Another important finding is that hippocampal expression of the proteins BDNF and FNDC5 measured via Western Blot decreased in aged rats, and that exercise training increased hippocampal BDNF and FNDC5 levels in both young and aged rats. Although earlier studies (Zigmond and Smeyne ; Marosi et al. ) have examined the neuroprotective effects of exercise training in both young and aged rats, to the best of our knowledge the present study is the first to investigate hippocampal expression of FNDC5, and its possible association with the BDNF level and expression of other related genes in the hippocampus of aged rats, as well as the effect of exercise training.
During the course of the present study, body weight in the YC and YT groups increased, whereas it decreased in the AC and AT groups, which might have been due to the difference in metabolic responses to exercise between the young and aged rats. Stranahan and Mattson ( ) reported that exercise and caloric restriction not only have an effect on cognition, but also preserve and maintain brain structure; however, in the present study, caloric intake was not restricted, as the rats had ad libitum access to food and water, which is considered a limitation of the study.
In the present study, indices of locomotor activity measured during the OF and EPM tests (total distance traveled and mean velocity), as well as OF test measures of exploratory behavior [the number of times the rats reared and number of zone transitions (number of times the center is entered)] were affected by age and training. In addition, locomotor activity and exploratory behavior scores were lower in the aged female rats than in the young female rats, and exercise training improved both locomotor activity and exploratory behavior scores in both the young and aged female rats. Findings in the literature regarding the effect of aging on locomotor activity and exploratory behavior has showed contradictory results are inconsistent; some studies report that locomotor activity and exploratory behavior decrease with age (Belviranlı and Okudan ; Küçük et al. ; Pardon et al. ), whereas others report that they increase (Pietrelli et al. ). In the present study, lower levels of locomotor activity and exploratory behavior in the aged rates might have been associated with physiological decline of the locomotor and musculoskeletal systems that occurs with aging. In contrast to the present study’s OF test findings, EPM test total distance traveled did not differ between the YC and AC groups, which might have been due to housing and lighting conditions during the test. Exercise training in the present study improved locomotor activity and exploratory behavior scores in both young and aged rats. Similarly, Pietrelli et al. ( ) reported that exercise training improved locomotor activity and exploratory behavior in middle-aged and old rats; however, although measures of exploratory behavior in the present study were generally lower in the AC group than in the YC group, the difference was not significant, which might have been related to the small number of rats in each group. The present findings indicate that locomotor activity and exploratory behavior decrease with age and that exercise training increases locomotor activity and exploratory behavior via activation of the locomotor and musculoskeletal systems.
In the present study, the severity of anxiety increased with aging during the OF and EPM tests. Additionally, during the OF test, the number of times the aged rats groomed and defecated increased, but time spent in the center decreased, and during the EPM test, the number times the aged rats entered the closed arms increased, but the number of times they entered the open arms decreased. Findings in the literature on the effects of aging on anxiety are inconsistent. It was reported that the severity of anxiety increases (Hovens et al. ), decreases (Torras-Garcia et al. ), and does not change (Bergado et al. ) with age. This inconsistency might be due to several factors, including differences in environmental conditions (housing and lighting), test protocols (timing and duration), and handling procedures (Rodgers and Dalvi ). Additionally, in the present study some of the markers of anxiety-related behavior, such as the number of entries in open arms, number of groomings, and time spent in the center, were generally higher in the AC group than in the YC, but not significantly, which might have been due to the small study population. Exercise training in the present study reduced the severity of anxiety-like behaviors in both young and aged rats during the OF and EPM tests. Findings in the literature on the effect of exercise on anxiety are also inconsistent. It was reported that the severity of anxiety-like behavior decreased (Salehpour et al. ; Pietrelli et al. ) and did not change (Burghardt et al. ) during the OF and EPM tests. These differences might be due to factors such as differences in exercise protocols (forced or voluntary, duration, intensity, and frequency) and the behavioral tests used for evaluation.
In the present study, hippocampal-dependent spatial learning and memory were assessed via the MWM test. Earlier studies reported that the aging process is associated with short-term and long-term memory impairment (Haider et al. ; Belviranli et al. ; Bergado et al. ). During the MWM training period in the present study latency to reach the platform, total distance traveled, and thigmotactic behavior significantly decreased with time in all groups. The training procedure was used to familiarize the animals with the concept of the maze task, as it is thought to reduce the impact of swimming stress on performance. The present findings indicate that spatial memory improved during the course of the training trials in each group. In addition, the neuroprotective effect of exercise was more clearly observed during the MWM probe trial session with the significantly increased amount of platform crossings with the exercise training in both young and aged rats. During the MWM probe trial, spatial memory was measured according to the number of times the rats crossed the area that formerly contained the platform (target quadrant) (D’Hooge and De Deyn ). As reported earlier (Vanzella et al. ; Belviranlı and Okudan , ; Küçük et al. ; van Praag et al. ), the present findings show that aging is associated with memory impairment that can be ameliorated with exercise training and that exercise training reverses the age-induced decrease in spatial memory.
Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain exercise-induced cognitive improvement, including an increase in the production and release of neurotrophic factors, increased activation of adaptive cellular stress, and an increase in peripheral signals, such as muscle-derived factors (Zhao et al. ). Transcriptionally, exercise training increases the expression of genes involved in cell growth and immune function (Kohman et al. ). In the present study’s aged rats hippocampal BDNF, FNDC5, PGC-1α, mTOR, ARC, c-Fos, ERK, SIRT1, and FOXO gene expression were lower, but NF-κB gene expression was higher. These findings are in agreement with earlier studies that have reported that in aged rats hippocampal BDNF (Luellen et al. ), mTOR (Yan et al. ), ARC (Qiu et al. ), c-Fos (Peters et al. ), ERK (Wu et al. ), SIRT1 (Braidy et al. ), and FOXO (Jenwitheesuk et al. ) gene expression are lower, and that NF-κB gene expression is higher (Lovatel et al. ). Yet, to the best of our knowledge, the present study is the first to report that hippocampal expression of FNDC5 and PGC-1α are lower in aged rats than in young rats. Additionally, in the present study it was observed that exercise training increased hippocampal FNDC5 and PGC-1α expression in both young and aged rats. Furthermore, exercise training in the present study improved hippocampal expression of the genes BDNF, FNDC5, PGC-1α, mTOR, ARC, c-Fos, ERK, SIRT1, FOXO, and NF-κB in both young and aged rats, which is similar to earlier findings that exercise training improved expression of hippocampal BDNF (Chen and Russo-Neustadt ), FNDC5 (Wrann et al. ), PGC-1α (Steiner et al. ), mTOR (Lloyd et al. ), ARC (Wrann et al. ), c-Fos (Wrann et al. ), ERK (Bruel-Jungerman et al. ), SIRT1 (Steiner et al. ), FOXO (Bruel-Jungerman et al. ), and NF-κB (Lovatel et al. ) in young and aged rodents.
There is a complex relationship between the genes that up- or down-regulate BDNF and FNDC5 expression. Wrann et al. ( ) observed that following exercise, PGC-1α, FNDC5, and BDNF gene expression increased in the hippocampus of young mice. They further noted that BDNF in turn negatively regulated FNDC5 gene expression, thus identifying a homeostatic FNDC5/BDNF feedback loop. They suggested that this novel biochemical pathway might be physiologically relevant to exercise-induced BDNF gene expression in the hippocampus (Xu ). It was also reported that the role of BDNF in regulation of synapse formation is dependent on PGC-1α (Torma et al. ); therefore, PGC-1α might be a positive regulator of not only FNDC5, but also BDNF. Additionally, Wang et al. ( ) observed that SIRT1 is a positive regulator of PGC-1α. Other transcription factors, such as NF-κB, are also thought to mediate exercise-induced hippocampal BDNF gene expression (Mattson ). A recent study by Li et al. ( ) suggests that irisin’s neuroprotective effects are associated with activation of the ERK1/2 signaling pathways in the brain. It was also reported that ERK1/2 are involved in BDNF-mediated neuroprotection in rat cerebellar neurons (Bonni et al. ). Furthermore, BDNF can increase mTOR signaling via TrkB receptors (Zhao et al. ). Wrann et al. ( ) showed that FNDC5 expression upregulated other important activity-induced genes, including ARC and c-Fos. These findings lend support to the present study’s hypothesis that the PGC-1α/FNDC5/BDNF pathway might mediate the beneficial effects of exercise on hippocampal learning and memory.
In the present study it was also observed that hippocampal expression of the proteins BDNF and FNDC5, measured via Western blot, was lower in the aged rats and that exercise training increased the level of both proteins in both young and aged rats. Previous research (Vanzella et al. ; Aguiar et al. ) showed that aging-induced cognitive impairment is associated with a decrease in the BDNF level, and that exercise training upregulates expression of BDNF and modulates aging-induced synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus (Vivar et al. ; Cotman et al. ). Moreover, Wrann et al. ( ) showed that there might be a link between exercise, and PGC-1α, FNDC5, and BDNF expression in the hippocampus. Interestingly, a recent study (Liu et al. ) reported that quercetin administration to hyperbaric hypoxic rats increased PGC-1α, FNDC5, and BDNF expression in the hippocampus. Moreover, Hashemi et al. ( ) demonstrated that FNDC5 regulates neural development and differentiation in embryonic stem cells. A recent study by Belviranli et al. ( ) showed that cognitive performance, and circulating BDNF and irisin concentrations were higher in endurance-trained athletes than in sedentary controls, and that there is a positive correlation between cognitive performance, and BDNF and irisin.
In conclusion, to the best of our knowledge, the present study is the first to show that aging-induced cognitive impairment, including a decrease in locomotor activity, an increase in the severity of anxiety, and impaired learning and memory, is primarily associated with a decrease in hippocampal expression of PGC-1α, FNDC5, and BDNF. Exercise training improves cognitive functions via activation of FNDC5 and BDNF gene and protein expression in the hippocampus. Nonetheless, additional research is needed to identify the mechanism of action of irisin in the hippocampus and other brain regions, and further clarify the relationship between BDNF and FNDC5.