Introduction
Despite the fact that no neuroprotectants are currently clinically available for stroke and other acute brain injuries, there is widespread recognition that neuroprotection remains a legitimate and achievable therapeutic target (Tymianski ; Henninger and Fisher ; Hoque et al. ). Given this, it is imperative that the search for novel neuroprotective agents continues with the goal of developing future neuroprotective therapeutics. To this end, we have recently established that cationic arginine-rich and poly-arginine peptides possess potent neuroprotective properties and have proposed that they represent a new class of neuroprotective agent (Meloni et al. , , ; Milani et al. , , ). Arginine-rich and poly-arginine peptides also possess cell-penetrating properties, a feature which appears to correlate with neuroprotective efficacy (Meloni et al. , ).
Our research has demonstrated in cortical neuronal cultures exposed to glutamic acid that arginine-rich peptides are highly neuroprotective with efficacy increasing with increasing arginine content and peptide charge and have identified poly-arginine R18 as one of the most potent poly-arginine peptides (Meloni et al. , ). Moreover, we have established that poly-arginine peptides exert a pre-conditioning neuroprotective effect lasting up to 4 h post-treatment and have the capacity to reduce excitotoxic calcium influx (Meloni et al. ). In support of a mechanism whereby poly-arginine peptides act by reducing calcium influx, we have observed that R12, as well as the TAT-fused neuroprotective peptide TAT-NR2B9c (also known as NA-1), reduces neuronal cell surface expression of the glutamate receptor subunit protein, NR2B (MacDougall et al. ). Consistent with the findings of in vitro studies, we have also demonstrated that peptides R9, R12 and R18 reduce infarct volume in permanent and/or transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) stroke models and that our lead peptide, R18, is consistently more effective than the extensively characterised NA-1 neuroprotective peptide (Meloni et al. ; Milani et al. , ).
Given the evidence we have amassed of the neuroprotective effects of different poly-arginine and arginine-rich peptides both in vitro and in vivo, the primary aim of the present study was to identify additional and potentially more efficacious arginine-rich peptides. As the presence of other amino acids in arginine-containing peptides is known to influence the degree of neuroprotection (Meloni et al. ), and given that neuroprotective efficacy appears to correlate with peptide cell-penetrating properties (Meloni et al. ), we were particularly interested in exploring the influence of tryptophan residues on the degree of neuroprotection, as this amino acid is known to increase peptide endocytosis and cellular uptake (Bechara et al. , ; Jobin et al. ; Rydberg et al. ; Walrant et al. ). In addition, protamine, which is an arginine-rich peptide consisting of approximately 30–32 amino acids (20–21 arginine) and has been in clinical use for over 50 years, was also examined. Protamine is administered intravenously to reverse the anti-coagulant effects of heparin, as well as added to an insulin preparation known as neutral protamine Hagedorn to slow the absorption of insulin. Furthermore, we also examined a low molecular weight protamine (LMWP) peptide derived from protamine, which has been described as a potential alternative heparin reversal agent, as well as a cell-penetrating carrier peptide (He et al. ).
Therefore, this study examines the neuroprotective efficacy of arginine–tryptophan-containing peptides or arginine-rich peptides containing other amino acids (i.e. phenylalanine, tyrosine, glycine or leucine), as well as arginine-rich protamine peptides, a cyclic poly-arginine peptide (R12-c) and the poly-arginine R22 peptide, in vitro following glutamic acid excitotoxicity. Following the neuroprotective assessment of peptides using the in vitro excitotoxicity model, protamine and the most neuroprotective arginine–tryptophan-containing peptide were assessed for neuroprotective efficacy following permanent MCAO in the rat. In addition, selected peptides were examined for their capacity to reduce glutamic acid-induced neuronal calcium influx. Previously characterised poly-arginine peptides, R11, R12, R15 or R18 were used as benchmarks for efficacy in the different studies.
Materials and Methods
Neuronal Cultures
Establishment of rat primary cortical cultures in Neurobasal/B27 supplement (Life Technologies, Australia) using cortical tissue obtained directly from E18 day embryos was as previously described (Meloni et al. ); however, some cultures were established from cortical tissue stored in Hibernate-E (Life Technologies)/2% B27 supplement for 2–7 days at 5 °C. Neurons were seeded into 96-well plastic plates (Nunc, Australia) or 96-well glass wells (7 mm diameter, ProTech, Australia) and maintained in a CO 2 incubator (5% CO 2 , 95% air balance, 98% humidity) at 37 °C until use on days in vitro 10 to 14. Under these conditions, cultures routinely consist of >95% neurons and 1–5% astrocytes.
Peptides
Details of the peptides used in this study are provided in Tables 1 and 2 . The poly-arginine, low molecular weight protamine and arginine-containing peptides also containing tryptophan, phenylalanine, tyrosine, glycine or leucine residues were synthesised by Mimotopes (Australia). Protamine sulphate for injection (referred to as protamine) was purchased from Sanofi-Aventis, and other protamine peptides (protamine 1–5; Ptm 1–5) were synthesised by Pepmic (China). All synthesised peptides were purified by high-performance liquid chromatography to 93–99% purity, with the exception of the cyclic R12 peptide (R12-c), which was 84% pure. An arginine–tryptophan peptide (R10W4D) was also synthesised containing D-isoform amino acids. All peptides were prepared as 100× stocks (500 µM) in water for irrigation (Baxter, Australia). Table 1 Protamine peptides used in study Peptide a Sequence b Arginine residues/amino acids Net charge at pH 7 Protamine sulphate; Protamine Mixture of protamine peptides Ptm 1–4 ≈21/32 21 Protamine 1; Ptm 1 P RRRRR SSS R PI RRRRR P R AS RRRRR GG RRRR 21/32 21 Protamine 2; Ptm 2 P RRRR SS RR PV RRRRR P R VS RRRRR GG RRRR 21/31 21 Protamine 3; Ptm 3 P RRRR SSS R PV RRRRR P R VS RRRRR GG RRRR 20/31 20 Protamine 4; Ptm 4 P RRRR AS RR I RRRRR P R VS RRRRR GG RRRR 21/30 21 Protamine 5; Ptm 5 P RRRR SSS R PV RRRRR P R VS RRRRRR GG RRRR 21/32 21 Low molecular weight protamine; LMWP VS RRRRRR GG RRRR 10/14 10 a Ptm 1–4 were identified following high-performance liquid chromatography and peptide sequence analysis of commercial preparations of protamine sulphate produced from salmon milt (Hoffmann et al. ). Protamine sulphate is likely to consist of Ptm 1–4 as the sulphate salt. Ptm 5 is the protamine peptide sequence provided in the SwissProt database. The LMWP sequence is derived from Ptm 5 (sequence underlined). Ptm 1–5 peptides have H and OH amino and carboxyl terminals b Arginine residues are indicated in bold text, while other amino as are indicated in regular text. R arginine, S serine, A alanine, V valine, G glycine, P proline, I isoleucine Table 2 Arginine peptides used in study Peptide Sequence a Arginine residues/Amino acids Net charge at pH 7 R11 RRRRRRRRRRR 11/11 11 R12 RRRRRRRRRRRR 12/12 12 R12-c RRRRRRRRRRRR 12/12 12 R15 RRRRRRRRRRRR 15/15 15 R18 RRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR 18/18 18 R22 RRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR 18/18 22 R2W6 WW R WW R WW 2/8 2 R3W8 WW R WW R WW R WW 3/11 3 R11W2 RRR W RRRR W RRRR 10/13 11 R13W2 RRRR W RRRRR W RRRR 12/15 13 R10W4D ww rrrrr ww rrrrr- NH2 10/14 11 R10W5 W RRR W RRRR WW RRR W 10/15 10 R10W8 WW RRR WW RRRR WW RRR WW 10/18 10 R10W10 WW RRR WW RRR WW RR WW RR WW 10/20 10 R15W10 W RRR WW RRR WW RRR WW RRR WW RRR W 15/25 15 R12W8a WW RRRR WW RRRR WW RRRR WW 12/20 12 R12W8b RRR WW RRR WW RRR WW RRR WW 12/20 12 R12W8c W RRR WW RRR WW RRR WW RRR W 12/20 12 R14W6 RR W RR W RR W RR W RR W RR W RR 14/20 14 R14W8 WW RRRRR WW RRRR WW RRRRR WW 14/22 14 R12F8 FF RRRR FF RRRR FF RRRR FF 12/20 12 R12Y8 YY RRRR YY RRRR YY RRRR YY 12/20 12 R12L8 LL RRRR LL RRRR LL RRRR LL 12/20 12 R12G8 GG RRRR GG RRRR GG RRRR GG 12/20 12 a Unless indicate all peptide have H and OH amino and carboxyl terminals. Arginine residues are indicated in bold text, while other amino as are indicated in regular text. R arginine, W tryptophan, F phenylalanine, Y tyrosine, L leucine, G glycine. R12-c is a cyclic peptide. D-isoform amino acids indicated by lower case
Glutamic Acid Excitotoxicity Model and Peptide Treatments
Peptides were added to culture wells 10 min prior to glutamic acid ( l -glutamic acid; Sigma-Aldrich) exposure by removing media and adding 50 µL of MEM/B27 (Minimal Essential Medium plus 2% B27 supplement; Life Technologies) containing the specific peptide. To induce excitotoxicity, 50 µL of MEM/B27 containing glutamic acid (200 µM; final concentration 100 µM) was added to the culture wells and incubated at 37 °C in the CO 2 incubator for 5 min. After the 5-min exposure, media were replaced with 100 µL of Neurobasal/B27 and cultures incubated for a further 24 h at 37 °C in the CO 2 incubator. Untreated controls with or without glutamic acid treatment underwent the same incubation steps and media additions. Note that in this model neurons are exposed to peptide for 10 min prior to, and during (half-peptide concentration) the 5-min glutamic acid insult.
Intracellular Calcium Kinetics
Intracellular calcium influx was monitored in neuronal culture wells (glass wells) using Fura-2 AM in real-time using a fluorescent plate reader. The aim of these experiments was to determine the relative change in intracellular calcium before and after glutamic acid exposure. Cells were loaded with the fluorescent calcium ion indicator Fura-2-AM (5 µM) in 50 μl MEM/B27, 0.1% Pluronic F-127, for 20 min at 37°C in the CO 2 incubator. Fura-2-AM solution was removed from wells, replaced with 50 µl MEM/B27 containing peptide (0.02–5 µM) or glutamate receptor blockers (5 µM MK801/5 µM CNQX) and incubated for 10 min at 37°C in the CO 2 incubator. Control cultures received 50 µl of MEM/B27 only. Following the 10-min incubation period, media in wells were replaced with 50 µl of balanced salt solution (116 mM NaCl, 5.4 mM KCl, 1.8 mM CaCl 2 , 0.8 mM MgSO 4 and 1 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , pH 7) and wells were transferred to a spectrophotometer (BMG Labtec, CLARIOstar) while maintaining the temperature at 37 °C. Fifty microlitres of MEM/B27 containing glutamic acid (200 µM; 100 µM final concentration) was added to wells, and every 5 s starting 30 s before and for 2 min after glutamic acid addition, spectrophotometer measurements (excitation: 355 nm/emission 495 nm) were recorded. Experiments were performed in triplicate and fluorescent intensity data were converted to percentage change in fluorescence. The average non-glutamic acid control well readings were taken as baseline (0%), and the average glutamic acid-treated control well readings after glutamic acid addition were taken as 100% calcium influx.
Neuronal Viability Assessment
At different times after treatments (e.g. 0.5–4 h and 18–24 h), cultures were examined by light microscopy to qualitatively assess neuronal cell viability. Neuronal viability was quantitatively measured using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxy-phenyl)-2-(4-sulphophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium salt (MTS) assay (Promega, Australia). MTS absorbance data were converted to reflect proportional cell viability relative to both the untreated (no insult) and treated (glutamic acid) controls, with the untreated control taken as 100% viability. Based on light microscopy, neuronal cell survival in glutamic acid-treated control wells typically ranges from 2 to 15%. All data are presented as mean ± standard error (SE). As previously reported, in some studies different concentrations of peptide increased the ability of neurons to reduce the MTS substrate above no insult control levels following glutamic acid excitotoxicity (Meloni et al. ; Meloni et al. ) and likely represent a direct or indirect effect of the peptide to increase the capacity of neurons to reduce MTS and/or to reduce background cell death in neuronal cultures.
Permanent Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion Rat Stroke Model
This study was performed in accordance with the Animal Ethics Committee of the University of Western Australia and the guidelines outlined by the Australian Code for the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes. Healthy male Sprague–Dawley rats weighing 275–340 g were housed under controlled conditions with 12 h light/dark cycle and had ad libitum access to food and water. Experimental animals were fasted overnight and subjected to permanent MCAO induced using an intraluminal filament as described previously (Milani et al. ). Briefly, rats that had been fasted overnight underwent facemask anaesthesia with 4% of isoflurane (mix 30% oxygen/70% nitrous oxide) and maintenance with 1.5–2% isoflurane. The tail artery was cannulated to allow for blood pressure monitoring and withdrawal of blood samples for measurement of arterial blood gases (PaO 2 , PaCO 2 ), pH (ABL5, Radiometer, Copenhagen, Denmark) and plasma glucose levels (MediSense Optium, Abbott Laboratories, USA). The MCAO procedure was considered successful if there was a >25% decrease from baseline in cerebral blood flow after insertion of the filament to occlude the right middle cerebral artery, as measured by laser doppler flowmetry. During surgery, body temperature was closely monitored using a rectal probe (Physitemp Instruments, Clifton, USA) and maintained between 37 and 37.8 °C, with fan heating or cooling, as required.
Thirty minutes after MCAO, treatments were administered (600 μl over 6 min) intravenously through the right internal jugular vein using an infusion pump. In one study, treatment groups consisted of the vehicle (0.9% sodium chloride) and protamine 1000 nmol/kg (Protamine study). In a second study, treatment groups consisted of the vehicle (0.9% sodium chloride), and R12W8a or R18 peptides at 30 nmol/kg (R12W8a study). In addition, two animals were treated with R12W8a at the 300 nmol/kg dose and one animal at 100 nmol/kg dose. Treatments were randomised and all procedures were performed while being blinded to treatments.
Post-surgical Analgesia and Monitoring
At the conclusion of surgery, pethidine was administered intramuscularly (1 mg in 0.2 ml saline) and bupivacaine was administered subcutaneously (0.1 mg in 0.2 ml saline per site) to tail and head surgical wounds. The body temperature of animals was measured every 30–60 min using a rectal probe for at least 2 h after surgery and maintained between 37 and 37.8 °C. To avoid hypothermia, rat cages were placed on a heating mat during the post-surgical monitoring and housed in a holding room maintained at 26–28 °C. If necessary, additional heating or cooling was performed by applying fan heating or a cold water spray.
Animals Used and Sample Size
Protamine study: Twenty-five rats underwent surgery for permanent MCAO. Five animals were excluded from the study: two animals died shortly after surgery due to subarachnoid haemorrhage, one animal was excluded due to an insufficient decrease in cerebral blood flow following insertion of the monofilament, one animal was excluded due to pyrexia, and one died during surgical recovery for an unknown reason. The vehicle treatment group consisted of twelve animals, and the protamine treatment group consisted of eight animals.
R12W8a study: Twenty-three rats underwent surgery for permanent MCAO. Two animals were excluded from the study due to an insufficient decrease in cerebral blood flow following insertion of the monofilament. The vehicle treatment group consisted of seven animals, the R18 treatment group consisted of six animals, and the R12W8a treatment group consisted of eight animals.
In order to use the minimum number of animals to achieve our aims in the protamine and R12W8a studies, we used an adaptive sample size trial design (Mehta and Patel ). After processing 6–7 animals per treatment group, interim analysis of infarct volume data uncovered statistically significant treatment effects, therefore achieving the main aims of the study without the need for the inclusion of additional animals.
Infarct Volume Measurement and Functional Assessment
Infarct volume was assessed 24 h after MCAO as previously described (Campbell et al. ). Briefly, 2-mm-thick cerebral coronal brain slices were stained with 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and digital images analysed using ImageJ software (3rd edition, NIH, Bethesda, USA) by an operator blind to treatment status. The total infarct volume was determined by measuring the areas of infarcted tissue on both sides of the 2-mm slices. The ratio of contralateral to stroke affected hemisphere areas was used to determine and correct for cerebral oedema. In order to determine if peptide treatment improved sensorimotor outcomes, three functional tests were undertaken, as previously described (Milani et al. ), namely neurological assessment, the adhesive tape removal test and the rota-rod test. An operator blind to treatment status performed the functional tests 24 h after MCAO.
Statistical Analysis
Neuronal viability data were analysed by ANOVA, followed by post hoc Fisher’s PLSD test, with P < 0.05 values considered statistically significant. At least four wells were used in all assays and usually repeated a minimum of two times independently. Physiological parameters, mean total infarct volume measurement and data from adhesive tape removal and rota-rod tests for each treatment group were evaluated by analysis of ANOVA followed by Fisher’s post hoc analysis. Data from the neurological assessment measurements were analysed using Kruskal–Wallis test. A value of P < 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
Effects of Different Arginine-Rich Protamine Peptides on Cultured Neurons Exposed to Glutamic Acid Excitotoxicity
Protamine consists of four highly homologous arginine-rich peptides (Ptm 1–4; Table 1 ) and is used intravenously to reverse the anti-coagulant effects of heparin. In addition, a closely related protamine peptide (Ptm 5) has been described, as well as a low molecular weight protamine (LMWP) peptide derived from the last 14 carboxy-terminal amino acids of Ptm 5. We observed that protamine, Ptm 1–5, and to a lesser extent LMWP were neuroprotective following glutamic acid excitotoxicity (Fig. 1 a–c). In addition, protamine was neuroprotective when neuronal cultures were pre-treated with peptide for 10 min 1 or 2 h before glutamic acid exposure (Fig. 1 d. In contrast pre-treatment with LMWP 1 or 2 h before the glutamic acid insult was not neuroprotective (Fig. 1 d). Fig. 1 Glutamic acid excitotoxicity model; protamine peptide dose response ( a – c ) and pre-treatment experiments ( d ). a – c Peptides present in neuronal cultures for 10 min before and during 5-min glutamic acid exposure. R15 peptide used as a positive control. d Peptides present in neuronal cultures for 10 min only at 0, 1 or 2 h before glutamic acid exposure. Neuronal viability measured 20–24 h following glutamic acid exposure. Concentration of peptide in μM. Glut. cont. glutamic acid control. MTS data were expressed as percentage neuronal viability with no insult control taken as 100% viability. Values are mean ± SE; n = 4; * P < 0.05
Effects of Cyclic R12 (R12-c), Poly-Arginine R22 and Arginine–Tryptophan-Containing Peptides (R11W2, R10W4D) on Cultured Neurons Exposed to Glutamic Acid Excitotoxicity
We first assessed whether peptide cyclisation, increasing poly-arginine peptide length beyond R18 (current lead peptide) to R22, or the addition of tryptophan residues (R11W2), would significantly enhance peptide neuroprotective efficacy. We observed that the R12-c, R22 and R11W2 peptides displayed a high degree of neuroprotection, but that efficacy did not appear to be significantly greater than the R12 and R18 peptides (Fig. 2 ). However, the high degree of neuroprotection observed with R11W2, which contains only 11 arginine residues, appears to suggest that tryptophan residues are beneficial in terms of improving peptide efficacy (e.g. R11W2 versus R18 at 0.5 µM; Fig. 2 ). In addition, the D-isoform peptide, R10W4D, displayed a level of neuroprotective similar to that with R11W2 (Fig. 4 a). Fig. 2 Glutamic acid excitotoxicity model; poly-arginine and arginine–tryptophan peptide dose response experiments ( a , b ). Peptides present in neuronal cultures for 10 min before and during 5-min glutamic acid exposure. R12 and R18 peptides used as a positive control. Neuronal viability measured 20–24 h following glutamic acid exposure. Concentration of peptide in μM. Glut. cont. glutamic acid control. MTS data were expressed as percentage neuronal viability with no insult control taken as 100% viability. Values are mean ± SE; n = 4; * P < 0.05
Effects of Increasing Tryptophan Content in Arginine-Containing Peptides on Neuroprotection in Cultured Neurons Exposed to Glutamic Acid Excitotoxicity
Given the level of neuroprotection obtained with R11W2 and R10W4D, we examined the neuroprotective efficacy of peptides containing increasing numbers of tryptophan and/or arginine residues. Peptides containing 2–3 arginine residues and 6–8 tryptophan residues did not display any neuroprotection following glutamic acid excitotoxicity (Fig. 3 a). Peptides containing 10–13 arginine residues and 2–5 tryptophan residues displayed a neuroprotective effect similar to R18 (Fig. 3 b, c). In contrast, peptides containing ≥10 arginine residues and ≥6 tryptophan residues displayed a high degree of neuroprotection, in most cases achieving 80–100% neuroprotection at 0.2 µM (Fig. 3 d, e). In comparison, R18 showed little to no neuroprotection at 0. 2 µM following glutamic acid excitotoxicity (data not shown). To assess if the sequence arrangement of arginine and tryptophan residues influences peptide neuroprotective efficacy, the efficacy of peptides R12W8a, R12W8b and R12W8c was compared following glutamic acid excitotoxicity. While all three arginine–tryptophan-containing peptides displayed a high degree of neuroprotection, R12W8a showed the greatest efficacy, with the peptide achieving 100% neuroprotection at 0.01 and 0.02 µM concentrations, while R12W8b and R12W8c peptides only achieved around 20% neuroprotection at 0.01 µM and 50–60% neuroprotection at 0.02 µM (Fig. 3 e). Fig. 3 Glutamic acid excitotoxicity model; poly-arginine and arginine–tryptophan peptide dose response experiments ( a – e ). Peptides present in neuronal cultures for 10 min before and during 5-min glutamic acid exposure. R11, R15 and R18 peptides used as a positive controls. Neuronal viability measured 20–24 h following glutamic acid exposure. Concentration of peptide in μM. Glut. cont. glutamic acid control. MTS data were expressed as percentage neuronal viability with no insult control taken as 100% viability. Values are mean ± SE; n = 4; * P < 0.05
Effect of Substituting Tryptophan Residues in R12W8a with Phenylalanine, Tyrosine, Leucine or Glycine on Neuroprotection in Cultured Neurons Exposed to Glutamic Acid Excitotoxicity
Given the positive results obtained with arginine and tryptophan-containing peptides, we examined the effect of substituting tryptophan residues in R12W8a with phenylalanine (R12F8), tyrosine (R12Y8), leucine (R12L8) or glycine (R12G8) residues on neuroprotective efficacy following glutamic acid excitotoxicity. The results revealed that R12F8, and to lesser extent R12Y8, displayed high neuroprotective efficacy, but not to the same level as displayed by R12W8a. In contrast, R12L8 and in particular R12G8 displayed significantly reduced neuroprotective efficacy compared to R12W8a (Fig. 4 a, b). Fig. 4 Glutamic acid excitotoxicity model; dose response experiments of peptides containing arginine–tryptophan, arginine–phenylalanine, arginine–tyrosine, arginine–glycine or arginine–leucine ( a and b ). Peptides present in neuronal cultures for 10 min before and during 5-min glutamic acid exposure. Neuronal viability measured 20–24 h following glutamic acid exposure. Concentration of peptide in μM. Glut. cont. glutamic acid control. MTS data were expressed as percentage neuronal viability with no insult control taken as 100% viability. Values are mean ± SE; n = 4; * P < 0.05
Calcium Influx Studies
To investigate the mechanism of action of neuroprotective peptides, we compared the effects relative to controls (no peptide) of protamine, R18, and R12W8a on intracellular calcium levels follow glutamic acid exposure. In line with our previous findings (Meloni et al. ), all peptides to varying degrees were shown to reduce intracellular neuronal calcium levels when administered for 10 min before glutamic acid exposure (Fig. 5 a–c). Fig. 5 Intracellular calcium assessment using Fura-2 AM following glutamic acid exposure in neuronal cultures treated with protamine, R18 or R12Wa ( a – c ). Data represent percentage change in fluorescent Fura-2 AM tracers from baseline (based on the average Control Fura-2 AM fluorescence readings over 120 s) of neuronal cultures 30 s before and following addition ( arrow ) of glutamic acid (100 µM final concentration), taken as 100% calcium influx (average Fura-2 AM fluorescence readings post-glutamic acid addition). Protamine (5 µM), R18 (5 µM), R12W8a or glutamate receptor blockers (5 µM MK801/5 µM CNQX) were added to neuronal cultures for 10 min and removed (time = 0) before glutamic acid addition. Values are mean ± SE; n = 3
Animal Neuroprotection Studies
Based on the positive results obtained for protamine and tryptophan–arginine-containing peptides following glutamic acid excitotoxicity, we undertook studies to assess the neuroprotective efficacy of protamine (protamine study) and R12W8a (R12W8a study) following permanent MCAO in the rat. In the R12W8a study, the R18 peptide was included as a positive benchmark. Note that the R18 peptide had already been assessed at the 1000 nmol/kg dose when administered 30 min after permanent MCAO (Milani et al. ) and therefore was not included as a positive control in the protamine study.
Physiological Data, Infarct Volume, Cerebral Oedema and Adverse Events
Protamine study: data from 20 animals were available for the study. Animal physiological parameters measured before and during MCAO did not show significant differences between treatment groups (Table 3 ). When compared with the vehicle treatment group, infarct volume was reduced by 22.5% in the protamine treatment group ( P = 0.018) (Fig. 6 a, b), while cerebral oedema was reduced by 38.6% ( P = 0.001; Fig. 6 c). Table 3 Protamine study: physiological parameters Parameter Vehicle (saline) Protamine PaO 2 , before MCAO 115.1 ± 33.51 122.0 ± 16.66 PaCO 2 , before MCAO 42.92 ± 5.82 40.63 ± 4.53 pH, before MCAO) 7.44 ± 0.09 7.36 ± 0.05 Glucose, before MCAO 7.74 ± 1.27 6.56 ± 1.2 BP, average during surgery 89.0 ± 8.44 76.06 ± 28.96 Temp, average 2 h after surgery 37.48 ± 0.18 37.5 ± 0.2 PaO 2 , PaO 2 , and BP in mmHg, glucose in mmo/L and temperature in °C. BP mean arterial blood pressure, Temp temperature. Data are mean ± SD Fig. 6 Infarct volume measurements, representative images of coronal brain slices, cerebral oedema and functional assessment data 24 h after permanent MCAO for protamine study (A-H). Treatments were administered intravenously (saline vehicle or protamine peptide at 1000 nmol/kg; 600 µl volume over 6 min) 30 min after MCAO. Unless indicated, values are mean ± SD. * P < 0.05 when compared to the vehicle control group. a Mean total infarct volume. b Representative images of TTC-stained coronal brain slices. c Percentage increase in cerebral oedema as compared to contralateral hemisphere. d Neurological grading scores (0 = no deficit, 5 = major deficit). Lines on graph indicate range and median for neurological scores. e Rota-rod performance. f – h Adhesive tape removal test. Protamine = Ptm; (F) time to detect tape, (G) time to remove tape, and (H) number of attempts to remove tape. Maximum time allowed for adhesive tape removal was 120 s
R12W8a study: Data from 21 animals were available for the study. Animal physiological parameters measured before and during MCAO did not show significant differences between treatment groups (Table 4 ). When compared with the vehicle treatment group, infarct volume was reduced in the R18 treatment group by 20.4% ( P = 0.034), while R12W8a was ineffective in reducing infarct volume (Fig. 7 a, b). In contrast, cerebral oedema was significantly reduced in both the R18 and R12W8a treatment groups by 42.2% ( P < 0.001) and 19.8% ( P = 0.027), respectively, compared with the vehicle treatment group (Fig. 7 c). Table 4 R12W8a study: physiological parameters Parameter Vehicle (saline) R18 R12W8a PaO 2 , before MCAO 117.33 ± 9.79 122.50 ± 10.67 121.33 ± 19.82 PaCO 2 , before MCAO 41.85 ± 1.46 41.83 ± 1.94 42.42 ± 0.78 pH, before MCAO 7.33 ± 0.02 7.33 ± 0.06 7.34 ± 0.06 Glucose, before MCAO 5.67 ± 1.7 6.21 ± 2.05 5.42 ± 1.0 BP, average during surgery 82.6 ± 10.28 84.20 ± 5.44 86.25 ± 6.67 Temp, average 2 h after surgery 37.24 ± 0.28 37.38 ± 0.3 37.21 ± 0.33 PaO 2 , PaO 2 , and BP in mmHg, glucose in mmo/L and temperature in °C. BP mean arterial blood pressure, Temp temperature. Data are mean ± SD Fig. 7 Infarct volume measurements, representative images of coronal brain slices, cerebral oedema and neurological grading scores 24 h after permanent MCAO for R12W8a study ( a – d ). Treatments were administered intravenously (saline vehicle or R18 and R12W8a peptide at 30 nmol/kg; 600 µl volume over 6 min) 30 min after MCAO. Unless indicated, values are mean ± SD. * P < 0.05 when compared to the vehicle control group. b Representative images of TTC-stained coronal brain slices. c Percentage increase cerebral oedema as compared to contralateral hemisphere. d Neurological grading scores (0 = no deficit, 5 = major deficit). Lines on graph indicate range and median for neurological scores
In addition to the animals treated with R12W8a at a dose of 30 nmol/kg, two animals were treated at a dose of 300 nmol/kg and one animal at a dose of 100 nmol/kg. These animals displayed a reduction in blood pressure commencing 1 min into the 6-min intravenous peptide infusion, a reduction that continued to gradually decrease to 30–50 mmHg by several minutes after the completion of the infusion, after which time animals became cyanotic. Ten to 15 min after the completion of the peptide infusion, blood pressure levels and cyanotic features in the animals did not improve and therefore the animals were euthanased. The blood pressure and cyanotic adverse effects were not observed for R12W8a at a dose of 30 nmol/kg.
Behavioural Outcomes and Weight Loss Measurements
Protamine study: compared to the vehicle treatment group, no significant differences were observed with protamine in the neurological, rota-rod and adhesive tape tests (Fig. 6 d–h) or in weight loss (data not shown).
R12W8a study: only a neurological assessment was undertaken in the study and compared to the vehicle treatment group, no significant differences were detected for R12W8a and R18 (Fig. 7 d). Moreover, there were no significant differences in weight loss between the any of the treatment groups (data not shown).
Discussion
The present study extends our previous findings regarding the neuroprotective effects of poly-arginine and arginine-rich peptides (Meloni et al. , , ; Milani et al. , , ). In doing so, the results for the first time demonstrate the neuroprotective action of arginine-rich protamine peptides following in vitro neuronal excitotoxicity or in vivo following permanent MCAO. These findings are hardly surprising given the arginine content and positive charge of arginine-rich protamine peptides, and given our previous studies highlighting the critical importance of arginine residues and peptide positive charge for neuroprotection. Interestingly, and consistent with the features associated with arginine-rich peptides, the LMWP peptide has been previously used as a cell-penetrating peptide (He et al. ). In addition, due to the side effects associated with protamine, including anaphylactic reactions and systemic and pulmonary hypotension, LMWP along with the poly-arginine R15 peptide has been evaluated as safer heparin reversal agents (Byun et al. ; Li et al. ).
Also of interest is a study demonstrating that mice fed a nucleoprotamine diet for 1 week prior to transient forebrain ischaemia displayed significantly reduced CA1 hippocampal neuronal injury, compared to mice fed similar diets not containing protamine (Matsunaga et al. ). However, the neuroprotective mechanism associated with the nucleoprotamine diet was attributed to increased cerebral blood flow during forebrain ischaemia. It was postulated that the nucleoprotamine diet increased levels of circulating arginine available for vascular endothelial cells to generate nitric oxide, through endothelial nitric oxide synthase. Whether this neuroprotective mechanism applies to intravenously administered protamine and poly-arginine peptides is presently unknown. Nevertheless, as previously demonstrated for arginine-rich peptides, we were able to confirm that protamine reduces excitotoxic neuronal intracellular calcium levels. Interestingly, protamine can inhibit endoplasmic reticulum ryanodine receptor activity (Koulen and Ehrlich ; Diaz-Sylvester and Copello ), and the release of calcium from this organelle through ryanodine channels is known to contribute to neuronal excitotoxicity (Ruiz et al. ). As the positive charge of protamine was attributable to its inhibitory action on the ryanodine receptor, it is likely that other cationic arginine-rich peptides will have a similar effect on the receptor.
The current study also demonstrated that the cyclic poly-arginine peptide, R12-c, is neuroprotective, a finding that suggests that structural conformations associated with linear peptides (e.g. α-helix, β-sheets, β-turns) are not critical for neuroprotection. These findings also indicate that a more generic mechanism may be involved in eliciting neuroprotection, particularly one that is dependent on electrostatic interactions of an arginine-rich peptide with target molecules, such as negatively charged plasma membrane structures such a heparan sulphate proteoglycans, phospholipid head groups or receptors and anionic domains of proteins. With respect to interactions with the plasma membrane, we have proposed that the ability of arginine-rich peptides to reduce excitotoxic neuronal intracellular calcium levels involves a process whereby the peptides decrease the levels of cell surface ion channels and receptors, possibly by endocytosis (Meloni et al. ). For example, we have shown that R12 and TAT-NR2B9c can reduce neuronal cell surface expression of the NR2B NMDA receptor subunit protein (McDougall et al. 2016). This mechanism of action is in line with the confirmed ability of arginine-rich peptides to reduce the activity of other calcium ion channels and receptors (Tu et al. . Brittain et al. ; Brustovetsky et al. ; Meloni et al. , ; Moutal et al. ; Ferrer-Montiel et al. ), and the fact that neuroprotective efficacy correlates with peptide endocytic or cell membrane transversing properties (Mitchell et al. ; Bechara et al. , ; Jobin et al. ; Rydberg et al. ; Walrant et al. ). In addition, the arginine-rich cell-penetrating peptides TAT, penetratin and R9 induce the internalisation of EGFR and TNFR in HeLa cells (Fotin-Mleczek et al. ). Since a critical step involved in peptide endocytosis is an electrostatic interaction with negatively charged plasma membrane moieties, this could explain why cyclic poly-arginine peptides retain neuroprotective properties. Cyclic arginine-rich peptides are also known to retain cell-penetrating properties (Oh et al. ; Traboulsi et al. ; Qian et al. ).
In an attempt to identify what are the most effective arginine-rich peptides compared to R18, we demonstrated that the R22 peptide was less effective, while tryptophan–arginine-containing peptides were more effective. The improvement in neuroprotective efficacy with arginine-rich peptides containing the aromatic hydrophobic amino acid, tryptophan, is not surprising. Tryptophan residues increase the endocytic uptake of arginine-rich cell-penetrating peptides (Bechara et al. , ; Jobin et al. ; Rydberg et al. ; Walrant et al. ), and we have previously demonstrated that peptide neuroprotective efficacy correlates with peptide endocytic properties (Meloni et al. , ). In addition, tryptophan residues are reported to improve the neuroprotective actions of arginine-containing 6-mer peptides (Ferrer-Montiel et al. ). Our results also indicate that the two other aromatic hydrophobic amino acids, phenylalanine and tyrosine, are able to enhance neuroprotective efficacy. Hydrophobic amino acids such as tryptophan are believed to improve cell-penetrating peptide endocytosis/uptake by enhancing penetration into the plasma membrane lipid bilayer following electrostatic interaction of the peptide with the cell surface. Based on these present results as well as data from previous studies, it appears that along with positively charged lysine, the presence of tryptophan, phenylalanine, tyrosine and cysteine residues can improve the neuroprotective efficacy of arginine-containing peptides (Marshall et al. ; Meloni et al. , , ). Interestingly, these findings may also explain why the peptide, penetratin (RQIKIWFQNRRMKWKK), which only contains 3 arginine residues, but has 4 lysine, 2 tryptophan and 1 phenylalanine, displays such a high level of neuroprotection following glutamic acid excitotoxicity (Meloni et al. ).
While the R12W8a peptide was highly neuroprotective in vitro, it caused severe hypotension and cyanotic side effects when administered intravenously at relatively low doses of 100 and 300 nmol/kg. The hypotensive and cyanotic effects of arginine-rich peptides, particularly protamine, are well documented (Starbuck et al. ; Horrow ; DeLucia et al. ), but are usually associated with high dosages and rapid bolus infusion. The hypotensive effects of protamine are not fully understood, but are believed to be associated with vasodilation, possibly due to the stimulation of endovascular nitric oxide production (Raikar et al. ; Pevni et al. ). In the case of R12W8a, it appears its side effects are linked with its increased neuroprotective potency. Based on the potential of the R12W8a and protamine to antagonise plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum ion channel receptor levels/function, it is possible that the vasodilatory effects induced by these peptides are the result of altered calcium levels in vascular smooth muscle cells and as a consequence, failure of the cells to contract. In addition, it is possible that the cyanosis is caused by peptide electrostatic interactions with the lung surfactant phospholipid molecule, phosphatidylglycerol (-1 net charge), leading to increase surface tension of fluids within alveoli, collapse of alveoli and the reduced transfer of gases between the blood and alveolar air.
Importantly, while both protamine, R18 and R12W8a were shown to reduce infarct volume and/or cerebral oedema following permanent MCAO stroke, no significant improvements in functional parameters were observed, a finding which most likely reflects the high variability associated with behavioural outcomes after stroke, the short 24-hour study end-point, and stroke severity. As a consequence, additional studies are required to examine long-term histological and functional end points, as well as the assessment of arginine-rich and other peptides in less severe models of stroke and in stroke models using aged animals, female animals and larger mammalian species.
Conclusions
The results from this and previous studies (Meloni et al. ; Marshall et al. ; Meloni et al. , ; Milani et al. , , ) further validate the neuroprotective properties of poly-arginine and arginine-rich peptides and support their recognition as a new class of neuroprotective agent with enormous potential as a treatment for stroke and other acute and chronic neurological disorders. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that while peptide neuroprotective potency could be increased considerably by the addition of tryptophan and other aromatic hydrophobic amino acid residues (i.e. phenylalanine and tyrosine), increased peptide potency was associated with toxicity when administered intravenously. As a consequence, if more potent arginine-rich peptides are to be developed, a CNS route of delivery (e.g. nasal or intracerebral artery) that avoids potential systemic side effects may need to be developed.