Highlights
NOS3 was identified as a direct and functional target of miR-195 and miR-582 Endogenous miR-195 and miR-582 suppressed NOS3 expression at both gene and protein levels in endothelial cells Further in vivo evidence of miR-195 and miR-582 inhibiting the expression of NOS3 will necessitate animal studies
Introduction
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is one of the common complications of orthopedic surgery. It usually occurs at the deep vein of leg (such as the calf vein, femoral vein, and popliteal vein) or the deep vein of pelvis after total knee arthroplasty (TKA) and total hip arthroplasty (THA). The incidence of DVT that received no thromboprophylaxis was approximately 40–60% [ ], and pulmonary embolism (PE) can lead to severe mortality and death. On the other hand, with the routine use of thromboprophylaxis, fatal PTE is rare, although symptomatic DVT continues to be reported in 1.3–10% of patients within 3 months after THA and TKA [ ]. According to the report from American Heart Association, approximately 2,000,000 people suffered from DVT per year and 10% of these died from PE, in the United States alone [ ]. DVT had been proven to be a complex genetic disease, and previous studies had demonstrated that several genes were related to the pathogenesis of DVT [ , ], but the common molecular mechanisms of DVT remain to be elucidated.
microRNAs (miRNAs) are 19–24 nucleotides long evolutionarily conserved small noncoding RNAs that mediate the post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression by complementary base pairing with specific 3′ untranslated region sequences [ ]. It is believed that miRNAs primarily affect the stability of mRNA and/or the initiation and progression of protein translation, but broader regulatory roles have been suggested [ ]. Though the biological function of miRNA is yet to be fully understood, it has been shown that the tissue levels of specific miRNAs correlate with the pathological development of several different cancers [ , ]. Recent studies demonstrate that miRNAs are present in normal human blood and are comparatively insensitive to RNA degradation [ , ]. In our previous study, we identified three serum miRNAs (miR-195, miR-532 and miR-582) were significantly up-regulated in DVT patients, ROC curve analysis revealed a strong relationship between these miRNAs and DVT after orthopedic surgery, suggesting that the panel of these three serum miRNAs might be a novel circulating biomarker for the diagnosis of DVT [ ]. However, the specific role and molecular mechanism of these miRNAs in endothelial cells remains unknown. Therefore, this study aims to reveal the possible function of these miRNAs in endothelial cells and their potential involvement in DVT.
In view of the important role of endothelial nitric oxide (NO) in the development of thrombosis, we focused on the relationship between these miRNAs and nitric oxide synthase 3 (NOS3). NOS3 locates at chromosome 7q36, and it encodes endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), which can generate NO in endothelial cells. Endothelial NO regulates several physiological processes such as the adhesion and aggregation of platelets, thus affecting propensity or resistance to thrombosis [ , , , , , , , , , ]. And it can also modulate vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation in response to vascular injury [ , , , , ]. A relative deficiency in the amount of bioavailable vascular NO results in endothelial dysfunction, resulting in the development of thrombotic diseases [ , , , , , , , , , ]. Therefore, we hypothesized that miR-195 and miR-582 might play an important role in the endothelial homeostasis by targeting NOS3 post-transcriptionally in endothelial cells. The current study might provide insights for the novel targets in the therapeutic approach to thrombotic diseases.
Materials and methods
Cell culture and reagents
MVEC cell lines were cultured in DMEM medium (Invitrogen, CA, U.S.A.), supplemented with 10% FBS (Invitrogen, CA, U.S.A.). Cell cultures were maintained at 37 °C under 5% CO2.
Cell transfection
miR-195, miR-532 and miR-582 mimic, inhibitor, or control miRNAs (RiboBio Co., China) were transfected into MVEC cells at a concentration of 50 nM for 48 h using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen, CA, U.S.A.) following the manufacturer’s instructions, respectively. The sequences used were: 5′-UAGCAGCACAGAAAUAUUGGC-3′ (miR-195 oligonucleotide); 5′-CAUGCCUUGAGUGUAGGACCGU-3′ (miR-532 oligonucleotide); 5′-UUACAGUUGUUCAACCAGUUACU-3′ (miR-582 oligonucleotide); 5′-UUUGUACUACACAAAAGUACUG-3′ (NC oligonucleotide).
Real-time quantitative PCR
The relative expressions of NOS3 were examined by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR). Total RNA was extracted from MVEC cells using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, CA, U.S.A.). Apoly-Atail was added to the extracted total RNA, which was then reverse transcribed into cDNA using the qScript™ microRNA cDNA Synthesis Kit from Quanta Biosciences (Beverly, MA, U.S.A.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RT-qPCR was conducted using the TaqMan microRNA assays kit (Invitrogen, CA, U.S.A.) according the manufacturer’s instructions. All reactions were performed in triplicate. 18srRNA served as an internal control. The relative expressions of miRNAs were calculated using the comparative CT method ( \({2^{ - \Delta \Delta {{\text{C}}_{\text{t}}}}}\) ).
Western blotting analysis
Total protein in cells from each groups were extracted by lysis buffer. Protein concentrations were measured by Bradford assay. Samples were diluted to 1:1 with Laemmli buffer, then desaturated by boiling for 5 min. Equal amount protein of each sample was loaded into SDS/PAGE (10% gel) followed by transfer to PVDF membrane. The membrane was blocked by 5% BSA at room temperature for 1 h and incubated with primary antibodies at 4 °C for overnight. After washing, the membrane was incubated for 30 min with the secondary antibody (horseradish peroxidase conjugated). After washing, immunoreactive bands were visualized with an ECL kit (Pierce, TX, USA). Quantitative analysis of immunoblotted bands was performed by ImageJ software.
Nitric oxide measurement
The transient and volatile nature of NO makes it unsuitable for most convenient detection methods, however, two stable breakdown products, nitrate (NO 3 − ) and nitrite (NO 2 − ) can be easily detected by photometric means. In this experimental, Griess method was adopted to detect NO, which is based on the chemical diazotization reaction, which uses sulfanilamide and N-1-napthylethylenediamine dihydrochloride (NED) under acidic (phosphoric acid) conditions [ ].
50 µl culture solutions of each well were collected and put into the counterpart well of another plate. Then NO production in cells was measured by Griess method and NO assay kit (Beyotime Biotechnology Co., Jiangsu, China). The data were analyzed with statistical program for social sciences.
Luciferase reporter assay
The wild-type or mutant 3′-UTR sequences of NOS3 were synthesized and subcloned into a PsiCheck2 vector. Cells were co-transfected with 100 ng plasmids containing wild-type or mutant 3′-UTR of NOS3 with 50 nM miR-195, miR-532 and miR-582 mimic, inhibitor or control miRNAs for 48 h according to manufacturer’s instructions using Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Invitrogen, CA, USA). After transfection, luciferase activities were measured using the Luciferase Dual-Reporter Kit (Promega, WI, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Experiments were performed in triplicate.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using Prism 5.0 software. All data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (STD); Student’s t test was used to compare the difference between two groups and P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
miR-195 and miR-582 inhibited NOS3 expression
To investigate whether miR-195, miR-532 and miR-582 negatively regulate NOS3 mRNA expression, miR-195, miR-532 and miR-582 mimic was transfected into MVEC cells for 24 h, NOS3 mRNA levels were then calculated. We found the mRNA levels of NOS3 were significantly reduced upon miR-195 and miR-582 overexpression, no significant change was observed in the miR-532 transfected group (Fig. 1 ). To test whether inhibition of endogenous miR-195, miR-532 and miR-582 could promote the NOS3 mRNA expression, we transfected miR-195, miR-532, miR-582 inhibitor and control miRNAs into MVEC cells. Our data showed that inhibition of endogenous miR-195 and miR-582 promoted NOS3 mRNA expression (Fig. 1 ).
Fig. 1 Effect of miR-195 and miR-582 on NOS3 mRNA expression. The mRNA expression levels of NOS3 in MVEC cells 48 h after tranfection were measured by real-time quantitative PCR, 18srRNA served as an internal control. The results are the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. ** P < 0.01, * P < 0.05 compared to control miRNA group
Western blotting results showed that transfection of miR-195 and miR-582 mimics led to a significant reduction of eNOS protein (Fig. 2 ), and transfection of miR-195 and miR-582 inhibitor increased eNOS protein levels compared to control-transfected cells. However, transfection of miR-532 showed no significant effect in regulating expression of eNOS protein.
Fig. 2 Effect of miR-195 and miR-582 on eNOS protein expression. MVECs were transfected with miRNAs mimic, inhibitor or control miRNA 48 h after transfection, the eNOS protein were analyzed by Western blotting. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford Protein Assay Kit. Proteins were run on 10% SDS polyacrylamide gels and electrotransferred to PVDF membrane. The bands were probed with anti-eNOS at 1:500 dilutions. GAPDH was used as an internal control. Up-regulation of miR-195 and miR-582 led to a significant reduction of eNOS protein, and inhibition of endogenous miR-195 and miR-582 increased eNOS protein levels
miR-195 and miR-582 suppressed the release of NO
To test whether miR-195, miR-532 and miR-582 suppress the release of NO, miR-195, miR-532 and miR-582 mimic were transfected into MVEC cells, as we expected, overexpression of miR-195 and miR-582 significantly suppressed the release of NO (Fig. 3 ). Secondly, we tested whether inhibition of endogenous miR-195, miR-532 and miR-582 promoted the release of NO, miR-195, miR-532 and miR-582 inhibitor and control miRNAs were transfected into MVEC cells. Consistently, inhibition of miR-195 and miR-582 promoted the release of NO (Fig. 3 ). Taken together, we demonstrated that miR-195 and miR-582 might act as a NO suppressor in endothelial cells.
Fig. 3 Influence of miR-195 and miR-582 on NO production in MVECs. NO production in MVEC cells was measured by Griess method and NO assay kit 48 h post-transfection of miRNAs mimic, inhibitor or control miRNA. Overexpression of miR-195 and miR-582 significantly suppressed the release of NO, and inhibition of miR-195 and miR-582 promoted NO production. ** P < 0.01, * P < 0.05 compared to control miRNA group or blank group
miR-195 and miR-582 post-transcriptionally down-regulated NOS3 expression by targeting the 3′ untranslated region of NOS3
To further detect the molecular mechanisms for these three miRNAs-modulated NO releases, the potential targets of these three miRNAs were investigated. To determine whether NOS3 is a direct target of miR-195, miR-532 or miR-582, we performed a luciferase reporter analysis by co-transfecting with miR-195, miR-532 and miR-582 mimic, inhibitor and control miRNA with a vector containing reporter-luciferase fused with either the wild-type 3′-UTR sequence or a sequence with a mutation in the predicted binding site of the 3′-UTR of NOS3 mRNA.
Compared to the blank or control group, the luciferase activity of the reporter in miR-195 and miR-582 mimic groups showed significant decrease (all P < 0.01, Fig. 4 ), indicating that co-transfection of miR-195 and miR-582 could decrease the luciferase activity of the reporter containing the wild-type 3′-UTR of NOS3. Whereas, compared to the blank or control inhibitor groups, the luciferase activity of the reporter in miR-195 and miR-582 inhibitor groups was significantly increased (all P < 0.05, Fig. 4 ), indicating that endogenous miR-195 and miR-582 could suppress the expression of NOS3 in endothelial cells. Meanwhile, we did not detect decreased luciferase activity of the reporter fused with the mutant 3′-UTR of NOS3 in all groups (all P > 0.05, Fig. 4 ). These results indicated that miR-195 and miR-582 could down-regulate the NO release by targeting the 3′-UTR of NOS3.
Fig. 4 Luciferase reporter assay showing miR-195 and miR-582 post-transcriptionally regulated NOS3 expression by targeting the 3′-UTR of NOS3. Luciferase reporter assay were performed at 48 h post-transfection using 293T cells co-transfected with full length NOS3 3′-UTR luciferase reporter gene plasmid DNA and either miRNA mimic, miRNA inhibitor or control miRNA. For each sample, firefly luciferase activity was normalized to Renilla luciferase activity, and data was expressed relative to each cell line co-transfected with reporter plasmid DNA and control miRNA or blank. ** P < 0.01, * P < 0.05 compared to control miRNA group or blank group
Conversely, co-transfection of miR-532 showed no impact on the luciferase activity of the reporter containing the wild-type or the mutant 3′-UTR of NOS3 in all groups, confirming that 3′-UTR of NOS3 is not the target of miR-532.
Discussion
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) which includes deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE) is a notorious disease related with severe mortality, cardiovascular disability and impaired quality of life. Our previous study identified three significantly up-regulated serum miRNAs were in DVT patients and ROC curve analysis revealed strong relationship between these miRNAs and DVT after orthopedic surgery [ ]. Considering the function of miRNAs, their deregulation expectedly contributes to substantial cell physiological and pathological processes and is ultimately involved in pathogenesis of many different human diseases. However, the specific role and molecular mechanism of these miRNAs in DVT endothelial cells remains unknown. The vessel wall and its inner lining of the endothelium are critical to the maintenance of a patent vasculature. After endothelial disruption, collagen (first line of endothelial defense) and intravascular tissue factor (second line of endothelial defense) are exposed to blood flow, starting the formation of a thrombus. Hence, we further investigated the possible function of these miRNAs in endothelial cells.
In this report, we showed that mRNA levels of NOS3 were significantly reduced upon miR-195 and miR-582 overexpression, no significant change was observed in the miR-532 transfected group. And inhibition of miR-195 and miR-582 in endothelial cells could promote NOS3 mRNA expression, suggesting that endogenous miR-195 and miR-582 suppressed the expression of NOS3. Western blotting results showed that overexpression of miR-195 and miR-582 led to a significant down-regulation of eNOS protein, whereas, transfection of miR-532 did not significantly down-regulate expression of eNOS protein. Moreover, luciferase reporter assay indicated that NOS3 was identified as a direct and functional target of miR-195 and miR-582 via binding to the 3′-UTR of NOS3. And NO measurement demonstrated that overexpression of miR-195 and miR-582 significantly suppressed the release of NO, which indicated that miR-195 andmiR-582 might act as a NO suppressor in endothelial cells. Given the above, our study suggested that miR-195 and miR-582 regulated NO release by targeting the 3′-UTR of NOS3, which played an important role in the endothelial homeostasis. And it might be a novel potential therapeutic approach for thrombotic diseases.
Our study has some limitations. Our current data suggest that miR-195 and miR-582 in vitro regulate nitric oxide release by targeting the 3′-UTR of NOS3. What remains unclear is that how these miRNAs would bind to NOS3 in endothelial cells in vivo. It could be either tissue or organ dependent. This mechanism would impact the design of using the dynamic flow test to examine the influence of these miRNAs.
Currently, there is no standard experiment to examine the influence of these miRNAs on DVT and platelets using the dynamic flow test in vitro, and there are still controversies about the effectiveness of animal models [ , ]. Previously described murine vein thrombosis models either use complete stasis via ligation [ , , , ] or flow reduction achieved with a non-occlusive stenotic ligature [ , , , ]. Both models require dissection of the vena cava for ligature placement, the dissection may induce a physiologic response in the vein wall, contributing to long-term changes independent of thrombosis. The stasis model also lacks analogy to clinical DVT for which immediate and complete obstruction of flow in the major veins is not a typical clinical scenario. Another problem with complete ligation is that it obviates the possibility of thrombolytic restoration of normal flow. The stenotic ligature model has a small thrombotic induction stimulus that is subsequently affected by reduced flow [ ]. However, the reduced flow caused by permanent ligature placement around the vena cava does not permit the possibility of a return to full vessel diameter.
Therefore, a certain more reliable DVT animal model needs to be designed and the dynamic flow test would be implemented to examine whether these miRNAs take part in the pathology or severity of DVT.
miRNAs are proven to be the key roles in the posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression. As a component of miRNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), miRNAs initiate mRNA decay or thus reduce protein output. The base-pairing interactions between nucleotides 2–8 of the miRNA and complementary nucleotides in the 3′-UTR of mRNA are responsible for the miRNA specificity [ ]. Up to now, only four miRNAs that directly affect NOS3 expression have been identified which include miR-24 [ ], miR-155 [ ], miR-214 [ ], and miR-765 [ ].
Direct binding of miR-24 to NOS3 mRNA was confirmed and resulted in lowering eNOS protein levels in normoxia [ ]. Although independent studies reported miR-24 induction during hypoxia in human neuroblastoma cells [ ], the expression profile of this miRNA during hypoxia in human endothelial cells requires further study. Recently, it was also proposed that XBP1-related down-regulation of some miRNAs including miR-24, miR-125 and miR-214 might result in NOS3 mRNA stabilization [ ].
In human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), the NOS3 expression increased when down-regulating of miR-214 (in normoxia) and miR-214 binding at the 3′-UTR of NOS3 was proven [ ]. miR-155 was also reported directly binding to NOS3 3′-UTR and reduced eNOS levels in human endothelial cells [ ].
miR-765, which is an abundant species in HUVEC, binds to NOS3 mRNA at 3′-UTR that is stabilized in normoxia by hnRNP [ ]. During hypoxia, hnRNP dissociates from NOS3 mRNA sensitizing this transcript to miR-765-dependent degradation [ ].
Another study found an intronic “27-nt miRNA” derived from the 27-bp repeats in intron 4 of NOS3 gene [ ]. “27-nt miRNA” overexpression indirectly down-regulated NOS3 mRNA and protein expression, and decreased the NOS3 transcriptional efficiency [ ]. However, this “27-nt miRNA” expression was not confirmed in human cells nor the specific promoter sequence for this potential miRNA was not identified. Hence, the further studies are required to evaluate the biological function of this miRNA candidate.
Considering the recent interest in the development of miRNA-based therapies for human diseases, it is tempting to hypothesize that miRNAs might offer a novel therapeutic approach for thrombotic diseases in regulating endothelial NO bioavailability. Although we can regulate the cellular miRNA levels and inhibitors, the multiple target genes of miRNAs remain a main defect of such treatments. Because a single miRNA can regulate plenty of mRNAs, the change of miRNA expression will have a wide range of consequences for cell metabolism. Our results demonstrated that miR-195 and miR-582 could target NOS3 in endothelium, which was significantly overexpressed in patients with DVT after joint replacement. Hence, our results provide a novel target for modulating the eNOS activity which might be a hint for treating and preventing the development of DVT after the joint replacement. And illuminating how these miRNAs govern the balance between increasing NOS3 expression and decreasing eNOS activity is important for the development of further therapeutic approaches for vascular diseases.
In summary, we reported up-regulation of miR-195 and miR-582 can lead to suppression of NOS3 expression in endothelium by binding to the 3′-UTR of NOS3 mRNA. And our study demonstrated that miR-195 and miR-582 caused endothelium dysfunction and provided molecular mechanisms on miR-195 and miR-582 regulating vascular homeostasis.