Introduction
Acute brain injuries such as stroke and physical trauma are common diseases that cause death and disability worldwide. Activated microglia are believed to be the central player in the above diseases, and indeed, they are implicated in practically all kinds of neurological diseases and disorders.
Microglia, the innate immune cells of the central nervous system (CNS), play a pivotal role in both physiological and pathological conditions. They have both beneficial and detrimental functions in the nervous system. It is well documented that microglia can phagocytose the cellular debris (Neher et al. ; Ling and Wong ; Thomas ) and invading pathogens, release neurotrophic factors that regulate the microenvironment (Dheen et al. ; Czeh et al. ), but in protracted injury activated microglia release several cytotoxic substances and proinflammatory cytokines that may aggravate the injury. There is ample experimental evidence indicating that the neuroinflammation mediated by microglial activation has detrimental consequences in the developing and mature brain. Activated microglia exacerbate disease conditions and impede tissue recovery by excessive production of inflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen intermediates. Therefore, it is not surprising that current therapeutic strategies tend to focus on attenuating microglia-mediated neuroinflammation. In this connection, many agents have been identified and shown to suppress microglia activation. Thus, the active ingredients from natural products with anti-inflammation and neuroprotective effects for CNS diseases have been explored in many studies. In the search for a potential drug that might help reduce microglia-mediated neuroinflammation, there has been increasing interest on scutellarin (4,5,6-trihydroxyflavone-7-glucuronide), a Chinese herbal compound reported to possess antioxidant and anti-apoptotic properties (Liu et al. ; Zhang et al. ). In this review, we discuss the role of activated microglia in cerebral ischemia especially in stroke, and the use of scutellarin to inhibit the inflammatory response mediated by microglia. To this end, the possible molecular mechanism and signaling pathways involved are discussed.
Activation and Roles of Microglia in Cerebral Ischemia
Being the resident immune cells in the CNS, microglia are responsible for the first line of immune defense in the CNS. They continuously survey the healthy brain. To execute this task, microglial cells assume a ramified phenotype characterized by a small flattened cell body bearing a variable number of branching processes or ramifications over nonoverlapping territories, thus covering the entire CNS parenchyma. They represent a relatively steady population in the adult CNS (Kaur et al. ) and are distributed in all regions of the CNS including the optic nerve and retina, responsible for immune surveillance.
In response to brain injury, microglia undergo progressive morphological transformation and functional changes that complete microglia activation, thus transforming into “activated microglia” or “reactive microglia.” Activated microglial cells change from ramified microglia into an amoeboidic phenotype with retracted and stout processes and a hypertrophic cell body. Chronic activation of microglia is thought to contribute to neuronal damage via the release of excessive proinflammatory cytokines and/or cytotoxic factors, such as nitric oxide (NO), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Jin et al. ; Neumann et al. ). Besides, glutamate released from chronically activated microglia could contribute to delayed neuronal death. Treatment with the glutaminase inhibitor decreased glutamate release from activated microglia and rescued neuronal death in a dose-dependent manner (Takeuchi et al. ).
Ischemic stroke constitutes more than 80 % of all strokes and are characterized by the occlusion of a blood vessel due to a thrombus or embolus (Candelario-Jalil ; Durukan and Tatlisumak ). Deficiency of blood supply to the brain rapidly leads to the development of an ischemic infarct accompanied by necrosis of neurons, glial reaction in the affected area, blood–brain barrier (BBB) disruption, and cerebral edema. After a cerebral ischemic stroke, two main regions of damage may be defined based on the remaining blood supply, i.e., the core and penumbra. The core is the brain area where the blood supply is almost completely depleted. In the penumbra surrounding the core, collateral blood supply from surrounding arteries ensures to some extent a flow of blood (del Zoppo et al. ; Northington et al. ; Stone et al. ). Therefore, it is believed that the affected neurons in the penumbra may be rescued through proper strategy.
Robust microglia reaction is observed in the ischemic brain that is acute in onset. With time, the microglia which normally exist as ramified form in the sham showed reduced numbers of processes, had significantly shorter processes giving the cells an amoeboidic phenotype notably in the ischemic core (Fig. 1 ), and increased CD11b expression that mediates phagocytosis (Morrison and Filosa ). In the penumbra area, microglia also undergo alterations and functional changes. After transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) in mice, microglia in the penumbral zone retract their processes and appear amoeboidic and increase CD11b expression, notably those abutting the infarct border (Morrison and Filosa ; Wiart et al. ). Fig. 1 Immunofluorescence labeling showing lectin-labeled ramified microglia ( green ) in sham ( a1 ) are activated at 3d after MCAO ( a2 ). Note the microglia in the ischemic region in the latter appear amoeboidic. Scutellarin suppresses TNF-α immunofluorescence ( red ) in lectin-labeled activated microglia (S+M, c2 , c3 ) compared with those in MCAO rats at 3d without the drug treatment (M, b2 , b3 ). Scutellarin treatment also attenuates NICD expression ( red ) in lectin-labeled microglia (S+M, e2 , e3 ) compared with cells in MCAO rats (M, d2 , d3 ). DAPI— blue . Scale bars in a1 – e3 : 50 μm
It has been reported that activated microglia could have dual functions in the ischemic damaged brains. During cerebral ischemia and reperfusion injury, the ramified microglial cells transform into activated form rapidly in the acute phase (minutes–hours), peaking at 48–72 h lasting up to 16 weeks after ischemia (Denes et al. ; Lalancette-Hebert et al. ; Ekdahl et al. ). The activated microglia can perform different functions, which include scavenging of cellular debris, and release of neurotrophic factors and anti-inflammatory mediators [IL-10, transforming growth factor-β, IL-4, IL-13, insulin-like growth factor-1, etc.] (Ponomarev et al. ), resulting in enhanced expression of genes associated with inflammation resolution, scavenging, and homeostasis (Liu et al. ; Shin et al. ; Zhou et al. ). Coupled with this, the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and associated inflammation was attenuated. Against this, however, the activated microglial cells could also release a plethora of pro-inflammatory mediators, including TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, ROS, and NO, which would stimulate and aggravate the inflammatory response. Among the noxious pro-inflammatory mediators, TNF-α and IL-1β are most well documented (Hossmann ; Wang et al. , ; Lai and Todd ).
TNF-α exists in soluble and membrane-bound form (McCoy and Tansey ). Activated microglia are the major producer of soluble TNF-α within the first 6 h after cerebral ischemia (Gregersen et al. ; Lambertsen et al. ; Pettigrew et al. ). TNF-α can enhance glutamate excitotoxicity by inhibiting its uptake (Sriram and O’Callaghan ; Brabers and Nottet ) and increase neuronal vulnerability by promoting intraneuronal calcium signaling in vitro (Park et al. ). TNF-α induces apoptosis of endothelial cells and contributes to vasogenic edema and, due to the BBB breakdown, infiltration of circulatory inflammatory cells (Christov et al. ). More importantly, TNF-α activates the nuclear factor κ-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) pathway that is involved in signaling cell death (apoptosis). It has been reported that inhibition of TNF-α using antibodies reduces infarct volume after a 2-h MCAO (Hosomi et al. ). Interestingly, other studies suggest that TNF-α can also be neuroprotective by acting on TNF receptor 1 (McCoy and Tansey ; Lambertsen et al. ). It also controls the downregulation of extracellular calcium in astrocytes, thereby reducing damage (Sriram and O’Callaghan ). There is, however, no consensus on the effect of TNF-α after ischemic stroke.
Activated microglia contribute to the larger part of the early production of IL-1β (Utagawa et al. ). IL-1β is an endogenous pyrogen which is linked to an exacerbation of neuronal loss (Simi et al. ). In the CNS, IL-1β stimulates its own production and expression of other pro-inflammatory mediators such as cytokines and adhesion molecules. IL-1β contributes to the further activation and proliferation of microglia and astrocytes. It also stimulates an influx of calcium into neurons, which increases their vulnerability to ischemia. Activated microglia are also the main cellular source for IL-6 (Amantea et al. ; Legos et al. ) which contributes to an exacerbation of the inflammatory response. IL-6 can enhance excitotoxicity via its enhancement of the Ca 2+ currents (Spooren et al. ). The upregulation of IL-6 may act on the vascular endothelium to increase harmful mediators and mediate inflammatory cascades, leading to the aggravation of cerebral ischemic damage (Huang et al. ). Along with the above, activated microglia produce NO by upregulating the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) in ischemic stroke (Regenhardt et al. ; Zhou et al. ). The cytotoxicity of NO is thought to be due primarily to its reactive metabolite, peroxynitrite, which is formed by reaction with superoxide (Beckman and Koppenol ). Thus, pharmacological inhibition of iNOS with aminoguanidine reduces infarct volume in mice (Iadecola et al. ).
Effects of Scutellarin on Microglial Activation
Neuroinflammation mediated by microglia plays a vital role in brain diseases (Dheen et al. ). Effective agents are available for not only blocking microglial activation that drives the inflammatory responses, but also targeting the relevant signal pathways linking to these events. Studies have already shown that scutellarin has beneficial effects on inhibiting neuroinflammatory response in which microglia are implicated.
Scutellarin is the major active component extracted from Erigeron breviscapus (Vant.) Hand-Mazz (Zhang et al. ). It has been reported that scutellarin is minimally toxic or nontoxic in rodents. LD50 value of scutellarin could not be detected. Oral ingestion (100 or 500 mg/kg) continuously up to 30 days did not result in death or significant changes in biochemical examination (Li et al. ). The study also demonstrated that scutellarin is unlikely to cause any clinically significant drug–drug interactions in humans when co-administered with substrates of six cytochrome P450 enzymes and P-glycoprotein, which are regarded as the most frequent and clinically important pharmacokinetic causes among the various possible factors between drugs interactions (Han et al. ). Therefore, scutellarin is safe to be a potential agent. Indeed, this herbal medicine has been widely used in China for treatment of ischemic cerebrovascular diseases.
It has been reported that scutellarin plays a protective role in multiple pathological conditions. It exhibits neuroprotective effects against hypoxic–ischemic-induced cerebral injury through augmentation of antioxidant defense capacity (Guo et al. , ). In type II diabetes-induced testicular disorder, administration of scutellarin significantly inhibited hyperglycemia-induced cell apoptosis and morphologic impairments in the rat testis (Long et al. ). Scutellarin has anti-angiogenic functions in human retinal endothelial cells, showing as inhibition of cell proliferation, migration, and neovascularization which are hallmark characteristics of diabetic retinopathy (Wang et al. ). It also could reduce the atherogenic properties of dietary cholesterol in rats (Li et al. ). Scutellarin can improve endothelium dysfunction of coronary artery against myocardial ischemia reperfusion injury (Li et al. ). It has been found to significantly suppress the hypertrophic growth of neonatal cardiac myocytes exposed to phenylephrine via inhibiting the Ca 2+ -mediated calcineurin and CaMKII pathways (Pan et al. ). There is also evidence that scutellarin exhibits anticancer activity. Scutellarin promoted the apoptosis of cobalt chloride-mediated human prostate cancer cell line PC12 (Wang et al. , ). It inhibits the growth and invasion of human tongue squamous carcinoma through inhibiting cell proliferation, inducing apoptosis, and regulating expression of matrix metalloproteinase 2 and −9, and integrin αvβ6. Moreover, scutellarin regulated the expression of collagen fibers in the tumor microenvironment, thereby inhibiting cell invasion and metastasis (Li et al. , ). Scutellarin was able to inhibit the proliferation and induce the apoptosis of HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (Xu and Zhang ). Scutellarin may be a new potential anti-lymphoma candidate because it diminished the proliferation of B-lymphoma Namalwa cells and inhibited lymphoma growth in Namalwa cell-xenotransplanted mice (Feng et al. ). In addition, scutellarin sensitized 5-fluorouracil-induced apoptosis of colon cancer cells (Chan et al. ).
The neuroprotective effects of scutellarin have recently been explored. This can be attributed to its antioxidant (Hong and Liu ; Liu et al. ) and anti-apoptotic (Zhang et al. ) properties. It has been reported that scutellarin could improve neuronal injury and had protective effect in rat cerebral ischemia related to its antioxidant property (Tang et al. ). Scutellarin effectively inhibited increase in NO production in early stages of neuron damage induced by hydrogen peroxide (Liu et al. ). Additionally, scutellarin has been reported to attenuate microglia-mediated inflammatory properties (Wang et al. ). It can inhibit lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced production of proinflammatory mediators such as NO, TNF-α, IL-1β, and ROS in rat primary microglia or BV-2 mouse microglial cell line (Wang et al. ). In agreement with this, we have shown that scutellarin could suppress the expression of TNF-α (Fig. 1 ), IL-1β, iNOS and ROS in activated microglia in rats subjected to MCAO and in LPS-induced BV-2 microglia. Very strikingly, it decreased the number of activated microglia and the infarct volume in MCAO rat (Yuan et al. ). The neuroprotective function of scutellarin was further evidenced by the fact that it enhanced the expression of nerve growth factor, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, and glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor in astrocytes under hypoxia/reoxygenation condition (Chai et al. ). It can improve neurological deficit and enhanced neuronal maturation in cerebral ischemia rat (Li et al. , ).
We have reported recently that microglial migration was significantly inhibited by scutellarin with a corresponding reduction in the expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in the activated microglia of MCAO rats and BV-2 microglial cells. Scutellarin was found to increase the ability of adhesion in microglia. Electron microscopy extended that scutellarin promoted the formation of flattened and microspike projections. Bundles of microtubules and microfilaments in parallel arrays were distributed in the cell body and in broad and slender cytoplasmic processes after scutellarin treatment. It is suggested that scutellarin has effects on the reorganization and stabilization of cytoskeletal dynamics in activated microglia (Yuan et al. ).
Scutellarin could effectively inhibit the inflammatory response induced by activated microglia, but the mechanism via which scutellarin could exert its effects on microglial activation has remained dubious. Scutellarin was also reported to reduce the expression of NF-κB p65 (Chen et al. ; Wang et al. ), a transcription factor known to be one of the most important regulators of proinflammatory gene expression such as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, iNOS, and cyclooxygenase-2 (D’Acquisto et al. ). As expected, we also found that scutellarin can inhibit the expression of NF-κB in activated BV-2 microglia and activated microglia in MCAO rats (Yuan et al. ).
In addition, scutellarin’s hydrolyzed form, scutellarein, is relatively easily absorbed into the blood and can metabolite into methylated, sulfated, or glucuronidated forms (Huang et al. ). It has been reported that scutellarein attenuated neuronal cell damage, reduced cerebral water content, and regulated the expression of glutamic acid in cerebral ischemia–reperfusion rats (Tang et al. ). Study has shown that metabolic changes after ischemic injury returned to near-normal levels after scutellarein intervention, identifying its heightened protective effects compared to scutellarin (Tang et al. ). 6- O -Methylscutellarein, which is one of the major in vivo metabolites, has also been reported to be responsible for the therapeutic effects of scutellarin (Zhang et al. ).
Scutellarin also can suppress activated microglia-mediated neuroinflammation in some neurodegenerative diseases. It has been shown that scutellarin inhibited the aggregation of β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) in vitro, and prevented the cell death mediated by Aβ when applied to cultured neuronal cells (Zhu et al. ). Scutellarin protected against Aβ induced learning and memory deficit, ameliorated reduction of superoxide dismutase, and upregulation of expression of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 in rats (Guo et al. ; Guo et al. , ). Accumulation of deposits of Aβ in the form of amyloid plaques in the brain may be the primary event in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Kowalska ). The results therefore suggest that scutellarin may have therapeutic effects against AD. Delayed astrocytic reaction is one of the hallmark features in cerebral ischemia. Astrocyte activation and glial scar formation (Anderson et al. ; Komitova et al. ) are crucial for tissue repair. Robust microglia activation invariably precedes astrocyte reaction at 3 days, which becomes apparent at 7–14 days after MCAO (Yuan et al. , ; Fang et al. ). A pertinent question arose from this would be whether scutellarin would also affect the reactive astrocytes in MCAO. To this end, scutellarin increases the expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and nestin along with that of proinflammatory mediators in reactive astrocytes in ischemic injury. Remarkably, as opposed to BV-2 cells, TNC1 astrocytes in vitro remained relatively unreactive to direct scutellarin application. Unexpectedly, scutellarin acts to promote astrogliosis as manifested by enhanced protein expression of GFAP, TNF-α, IL-1β, and iNOS through intermediary activated microglia; in other words, a functional “cross-talk” exists between the two glial cell types (Fang et al. ). The exact mechanism on how scutellarin acts on microglia-mediated astroglions, however, remains to be elucidated.
Scutellarin Suppresses Microglia Activation Through Notch Signaling Pathway
The Notch signaling pathway is one of the most conserved pathways with high versatility in terms of its function. In the CNS, Notch signaling pathway is prominent among the pathways known to regulate neural development. There is strong evidence indicating that Notch signaling not only influences the developmental processes in postnatal life but is also implicated in pathogenesis of CNS disorders. Recent studies have shown the possibility that the Notch signaling pathway may be involved in neuroinflammatory diseases by modulating the function of microglia. It has been reported that aberrant Notch signaling induced by cerebral ischemia aggravates brain damage as well as the functional outcomes (Arumugam et al. ). Brain damage and post-ischemic inflammation were significantly attenuated in Notch antisense mice and in normal mice treated with γ-secretase inhibitors that block the proteolytic cleavage and activation of Notch (Wei et al. ).
We have demonstrated the involvement of Notch in microglial activation that may contribute to the neuropathological process. In experimentally induced focal cerebral ischemia in adult mice, it was established that Notch signaling modulates the microglia innate responses (Stidworthy et al. ). Notch was upregulated in activated microglia in cerebral ischemia and Notch-1 antisense mice exhibited significantly lower numbers of activated microglia and reduced proinflammatory cytokine expression in the ipsilateral ischemic cortices compared to nontransgenic mice (Yao et al. ). We first reported that Notch-1 signaling was activated in primary microglia and BV-2 cells after hypoxia. The expression of Notch-1, Notch intracellular domain (NICD), recombining binding protein suppressor of hairless (RBP-JK), and transcription factor hairy and enhancer of split-1 (Hes-1) was increased after hypoxia (Yao et al. ). We also identified upregulated expression of Notch-1, NICD, and Hes-1 in rats subjected to MCAO and in LPS-induced BV-2 cells (Yuan et al. ) (Fig. 1 ). Functional studies of Notch found that blocking Notch-1 suppressed protein expression of IL-1β, TNF-α, macrophage colony stimulating factor, and iNOS in BV-2 cells. The expression of Hes-1, the main downstream target gene of Notch, was found to be increased in microglia upon LPS induction; however, in cells pretreated with N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-l-alany1]-S-phenyglycine t-butyl ester (DAPT, a γ-secretase inhibitor) followed by LPS stimulation, Hes-1 expression level along with TNF-α and IL-1β was suppressed (Cao et al. ). Most interestingly, hypoxia-induced upregulation of NF-κB immunoexpression in microglia was prevented when the rats were given DAPT pretreatment underscoring the interrelationship between Notch signaling and NF-κB pathways (Yao et al. ). This is consistent with an earlier study which reported that Notch and NF-κB pathways function synergistically in regulating several aspects of cellular functioning (Ang and Tergaonkar ). We have extended this by demonstrating that the Notch pathway is upstream of NF-κB and regulates activated microglia (Cao et al. ; Yao et al. ).
Scutellarin markedly attenuated the expression of Notch-1, NICD, RBP-JK, and Hes-1 both in activated microglia in vivo and in vitro. In the first-mentioned in the MCAO model in the adult rat, ischemia-induced upregulated expression of the various downstream elements of Notch was decreased with scutellarin treatment (Fig. 1 ). (Yuan et al. ). These results establish that scutellarin targets the Notch pathway, which lies upstream of NF-κB (Schwarzer et al. ). In addition, studies have shown that scutellarin is capable of attenuating the expression of not only those proinflammatory molecules whose expression depends on the activation of NF-κB, but also those via transcription factor signal transducer and activator of transcription 1α transcription factor (Wang et al. ). Besides activated microglia,we also found that scutellarin increased the expression of Notch-1, NICD and Hes-1 in reactive astrocytes in MCAO rats as well as in TNC1 astrocytes in vitro, but the effect appears to be microglia dependent (Fang et al. ). Notwithstanding, it is unequivocal from our experimental studies that scutellarin can promote astrogliosis that is involved in tissue repair or scar formation.
The neuroprotective effect of scutellarin was associated with inhibition of the apoptosis-inducing factor pathway (Zhang et al. ). Scutellarin treatment reversed brain nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide depletion and reduced DNA fragmentation. It also inhibited poly (ADP-ribose)-polymerase over activation and apoptosis-inducing factor translocation from the mitochondria to the nucleus following cerebral ischemic and reperfusion. Study also showed that scutellarin significantly lowered the blood pressure, attenuated the number of activated microglia and macrophages, and reduced the expression of Toll-like receptor 4 which has been shown to be linked to the development and maintenance of hypertension in the brain of hypertensive rats (Chen et al. ). Voltage-dependent Na + channels regulate the influx of Na + into neuronal cells. Abnormal activation of Na + channels contributes to the damage or death of neurons. Clinical trial results have demonstrated that Na + channel blockers might be effective in reducing neuronal damage caused by ischemic stroke and head trauma (Taylor and Meldrum ). It has been reported that scutellarin is capable of inhibiting Na + current in neurons, which could provide a novel pharmacological basis for the anti-ischemic injury (Zhang et al. ). There may be more factors involved in the protective function of scutellarin, but this needs to be further investigated.
Conclusion
Accumulating evidence indicates that microglia-mediated neuroinflammation contributes to various brain pathologies. Therefore, suppression of microglial activation is considered an effective therapeutic strategy to alleviate neuroinflammation, be it acute or chronic. In the search for potential agents that might help to reduce microglia-mediated neuroinflammation, there has been increasing interest on herbal extracts which have a competitive edge for being safe, inexpensive, and readily available. However, the majority of herbal extracts have not been characterized; indeed, much of the work is at the preliminary stages. The mechanism via which they act on suppression of microglial activation has not been fully clarified. It also remains to be ascertained whether the therapeutic effects as shown by the experimental settings may be applied to humans and in clinic. Nonetheless, attempts have now been made with experimental evidence strongly supporting the multiple and beneficial effects of scutellarin on microglia-mediated neuroinflammtion. Remarkably, we have shown that scutellarin not only decreases microglia-mediated neuroinflammation, but also amplifies astrogliosis that is crucial to tissue reorganization and repair in cerebral ischemia. There is strong evidence that the Notch signaling may be involved in this process. It remains uncertain whether the mechanism here discussed is common to other natural products; hence, unraveling the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms of scutellarin would be desirable.