Introduction
The functional role of biogenic polyamines (PAs) such as spermine (Spm) and spermidine (Spd) is of increasing interest since they play a central role in a variety of intracellular processes. PA homeostasis is required for cell growth, differentiation and transformation (Vergani et al. ; Rea et al. ; Cervelli et al. , ). Spermine oxidase (SMO) is an inducible FAD-containing enzyme highly expressed in the brain and playing a key role in regulating the levels of Spm: it selectively oxidizes Spm to produce H 2 O 2 , Spd and 3-aminopropanal (3-AP) (Cervelli et al. , ; Bellelli et al. ; Polticelli et al. ). Activation of PA catabolism has been implicated in the pathogenesis of brain ischemic injury, and inhibition of PA oxidases or sequestration of reactive aldehydes was found neuroprotective in the ischemic penumbra (Dogan et al. ; Huang and Huang ; Ivanova et al. , ; Li et al. ; Wood et al. ; see also Park and Igarashi ) and in cellular model of HIV-associated dementia (Capone et al. ). However, the clinical relevance of PA metabolism activation is still to be completely established. Recently, a transgenic mouse model JoSMOrec , conditionally overexpressing SMO in the neocortex neurons (named Dach-SMO mouse in the text), provided novel evidence of the complex network of functions carried out by Spm and SMO in mammalian brain (Cervelli et al. ). In particular, transgenic mice overexpressing SMO showed increased vulnerability to excitotoxic brain injury and epileptic seizures induced by kainic acid (KA) injection (Cervelli et al. ).
Transgenic mice overexpressing SMO in the neocortex showed higher neuronal production of H 2 O 2 , a strong oxidizer possibly leading to an unbalance of radical homeostasis. The possible oxidative stress associated with SMO overexpression might explain the increased KA excitotoxicity that is recognized to involve oxidative stress-related mechanisms (see Zhang and Zhu ). In fact, the central nervous system (CNS) is rich in unsaturated fatty acids and thus extremely susceptible to oxidants such as H 2 O 2 , and the reactive oxygen species (ROS) in general, that trigger processes of lipid peroxidation, ultimately leading to the neuronal death characteristic of various neurological disorders (see Popa-Wagner et al. ). Defense against ROS includes specific antioxidant enzymes as well as non-enzymatic antioxidants such as reduced glutathione and metallothioneins (MTs), a class of low molecular weight proteins playing neuroprotective effects by acting as defense against heavy metals and oxidative stress (Hidalgo et al. ).
Furthermore, since endogenous Spm has been demonstrated to be a strong modulator of ionotropic glutamate receptors (GluRs, AMPA type and NMDA type) (Williams ), altered Spm levels in Dach-SMO mice due to SMO overexpression (Cervelli et al. ) could affect the responses mediated by GluRs activation. Excessive activation of GluRs by excitatory amino acids is indeed the initial step of the excitotoxic pathway (Lipton and Rosenberg ). It is conceivable that also altered glutamatergic mechanisms could be involved in the increased vulnerability to a KA-induced neuronal death in Dach-SMO mice. In fact, secondary glutamate (Glu) release is central to KA excitotoxicity in brain (see Domin et al. ). Both Glu and GluRs are involved in a bidirectional crosstalk between neurons and astrocyte processes, specialized zones expressing machinery for Glu uptake and release (Araque et al. ; Gallo and Ghiani ; Fellin and Carmignoto ). Moreover, astrocytes are known to proliferate and be activated as a response to KA excitotoxicity, thus actively participating in neuron protection or derangement (Zhang and Zhu ).
The work was aimed at investigating the mechanisms by which SMO overexpression leads to increased susceptibility to KA excitotoxicity. To this end, we assessed the presence of KA-sensitive GluRs that might induce release of Glu from nerve terminals or astrocyte processes freshly isolated from the cerebral cortex of Dach-SMO and control mice. Furthermore, we evaluated if nerve terminals and astrocyte processes isolated from the cerebral cortex of Dach-SMO mice could reflect the astrocyte proliferation (gliosis) and neuron loss previously described in this mouse model (Cervelli et al. ). To better understand the increased seizure susceptibility in Dach-SMO mice, and a possible role for astrocytes in the increased seizure susceptibility, we used an in vitro model of epileptic-like activity in combined cortico-hippocampal slices, recorded with a multi-electrode array (MEA) device (Berretta et al. ). In parallel, we analyzed the oxidative status of the cerebral cortex of both Dach-SMO and control mice by evaluating a range of antioxidant systems that include enzymatic scavengers, such as superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase, and non-enzymatic factors such as MTs.
Altogether, better understanding of these mechanisms might shed light on the common pathways involved in excitotoxic neuron injury.
Materials and Methods
Animals
Male mice conditionally overexpressing SMO in the brain neocortex (JoSMOrec mice referred as Dach-SMO in this work) (Cervelli et al. ) and their control syngenic littermates (control in the text) were housed at constant temperature (22 ± 1 °C) and relative humidity (50 %) under a regular light–dark schedule (light 7 a.m.–7 p.m.). Food and water were freely available. Experimental procedures and animal care complied with the European Communities Parliament and Council Directive of September 22, 2010 (2010/63/EU), and were approved by the Italian Ministry of Health (protocol number 29823-6 of December 09, 2010) in accordance with Decreto Ministeriale 116/1992. All experiments were performed on independent groups of mice. All efforts were made to minimize the number of animals used and their suffering.
Immunohistochemical Analysis
Transgenic Dach-SMO and control mice were deeply anaesthetized (50 mg per kg body weight, Zoletil; 10 mg per kg body weight, Rompun) and transcardially perfused with saline followed by fixative [4 % paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB), pH 7.4]. Brains were removed from the skull, sagittally cut along the midline and then post-fixed in the same fixative overnight at room temperature. Following equilibration in 30 % sucrose in PB, 14-μm sections were cut in the sagittal plane with the freezing microtome Microm HM-450 and immersed in 0.1 M PB (pH 7.4). Immunohistochemical staining was performed on free-floating brain sections. Sections were incubated with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) containing 5 % (w/v) nonfat dry milk, 0.2 % Triton X for 1 h at 4 °C and then incubated for 48 h at 4 °C with either of the following antibodies, diluted in PBS containing 2.5 % (w/v) nonfat dry milk: 1:500 GFAP (glial fibrillary acidic protein; DakoCytomation) and 1:500 NeuN (Neuronal Nuclei; Chemicon). Brain slices were then incubated for 1 h at room temperature with biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG or goat anti-mouse IgG (Vector), diluted 1:200 in PBS containing 1 % normal goat serum (Vector). Immuno-complexes were revealed by means of an avidin biotin system (Vectastain Elite ABC kit, Vector), using 3,3′-diamino-benzidine (DAB substrate kit for Peroxidase, Vector), as the chromogen. Finally, the sections were mounted onto slides and sealed. Sections were observed under an Olympus BX 51 microscope, equipped with a Leica DFC 420 camera; electronic images were captured by a Leica Application Suite system and composed in an Adobe Photoshop CS2 format.
Determination of Antioxidant Enzyme Activities
For brain cortex determination of antioxidant enzyme activities, aliquots of about 40 mg of cortex from each mouse were homogenized in 10 vol (w/v) of ice-cold lysis buffer (potassium phosphate buffer 50 mM, pH 7.8, containing 1X protease inhibitor cocktail, PMSF 8 mM, Na 3 VO4 8 mM, DTT 8 mM) using a Polytron homogenizer (Kinematica A.G., Luzern, Swiss). After a first centrifugation at 700× g (5 min, 4 °C), the supernatant was further centrifuged at 10,000× g (15 min, 4 °C) and the resulting supernatant used for determination of enzyme specific activities (Lanza et al. ). SOD activity was measured as the inhibition of the reduction rate of cytochrome c by the superoxide radical (Saggu et al. ). Aliquots of the samples diluted in 50 mM PBS (pH 7.8) were incubated with 50 µM hypoxanthine and 10 µM cytochrome c, and the reaction was initiated by adding 1.8 mU/ml of xanthine oxidase. Changes in absorbance at 550 nm were followed at 25 °C. SOD specific activity was expressed as milliunits of enzyme per min per milligram of sample protein. Catalase activity was evaluated following the consumption of hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) at 240 nm at 25 °C (Aebi ). To initiate the reaction, aliquots of samples suitably diluted in 50 mM PBS (pH 7.8) were added with H 2 O 2 (30 mM final concentration). Catalase specific activity was expressed as micromoles of decomposed H 2 O 2 per min per milligram of sample protein. Protein content was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay using bovine serum albumin as a standard (Wiechelman et al. ).
RNA Isolation and Quantification of Gene Expression
Cerebral cortex samples (around 0.1 mg each) were rapidly removed from brain mice in ice-cold medium, then quickly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until use. Total RNA was isolated from the cortex using the Trizol reagent, and then first-strand cDNA was synthesized from 1 μg of RNA in a Master-cycler apparatus (Eppendorf, Milano, Italy), as previously described (Uccelli et al. ). The expression levels of MT genes were quantified in 96-well optical reaction by using a Chromo4TM System PCR apparatus (Bio-Rad, Milano, Italy). PCRs were performed in quadruplicate using iTaq-SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad) and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as housekeeping gene using the thermal protocol previously described (Lanza et al. ). The melting curve of the PCR products (55–94 °C) was also recorded to check the reaction specificity. The expression levels of MTs mRNA of each experimental group of mice were normalized to GAPDH and represented as relative to the control mice (normalized fold change). Sequence and characteristics of all primers pairs used in the study are listed in Table 1 . Table 1 Primers used in q-PCR experiments Gene Accession number Forward primer (5′–3′) Reverse primer (5′–3′) T m (°C) MT - 1 NM_013602.3 CTGCTCCACCGGCGG GCCCTGGGCACATTTGG 60 MT - 2 NM_013602 TCCTGTGCCACAGATGGATC GTCCGAAGCCTCTTTGCAGA 60 MT - 3 NM_013603.2 GGAGGAACCAAGCTACGGC ACATAGGCTGTGTGGGAGGG 60 GAPDH NM_013603 GACCCCTTCATTGACCTCAAC CGCTCCTGGAAGATGGTGATGGG 60 Names and accession numbers of the target genes ( MT - 1 , MT - 2 , MT - 3 , GAPDH ) are listed together with the sequences of the specific primer pairs and the sizes of the amplification product
Electrophysiological Experiments from Combined Cortico-Hippocampal Slices
Control and Dach-SMO mice were anaesthetized with halothane inhalation and killed by decapitation. The brain was removed from the skull, and horizontal slices containing the hippocampus and cortex were cut (350 µm) in ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF), according to the method described by Jones and Heinemann ( ). ACSF composition was the following (in mM): NaCl 124; KCl 3.0; MgCl 2 1.0; CaCl 2 2.0; NaH 2 PO 4 1.25; NaHCO 3 26; glucose 10; saturated with 95 % O 2 , 5 % CO 2 (pH 7.4). Individual slices were laid down over an 8 × 8 array of planar microelectrodes, each 50 × 50 µm in size, with an interpolar distance of 300 µm (MED-P5305; Alpha MED Sciences, Japan), and kept submerged in ACSF (5 ml/min; 34 °C) with a nylon mesh glued to a platinum ring (see Berretta et al. ). Voltage signals were acquired using the MED64 System (Alpha MED Sciences, Japan), filtered (0.1–1 Hz) and digitized at 20 kHz. Each slice was challenged with KA 1 µM in the perfusing medium (5–7 min) and then left to recover for at least 30 min, before a second challenge with KA 3 µM. The presence of regular spontaneous epileptic-like field potential events, detected from visually identified recording electrodes of the 8 × 8 array, was taken as an index of KA-induced seizures in the corresponding region of the slice (Berretta et al. ). In some experiments, the slices were preincubated in fluoroacetic acid (FAC, 1 mM) for at least 2 h and then placed in the recording chamber to be challenged with KA, in the continuous presence of FAC 1 mM.
Preparation of Purified Cerebrocortical Nerve Terminals (Synaptosomes) and Astrocyte Processes (Gliosomes)
Purified synaptosomes and gliosomes were prepared from the cerebral cortex according to Nakamura et al. ( ) with minor modifications as previously reported (Stigliani et al. , Marcoli et al. ; Alloisio et al. ). Briefly, the tissue was homogenized in 10 vol of 0.32 M sucrose, buffered at pH 7.4 with Tris–HCl, using a glass-Teflon tissue grinder (clearance 0.25 mm); the homogenate was centrifuged (5 min, 1000× g at 4 °C) to remove nuclei and debris. The supernatant was gently stratified on a discontinuous Percoll gradient (2, 6, 10 and 20 % v/v in Tris-buffered sucrose) and centrifuged at 33,500× g for 5 min; the layers between 2 and 6 % Percoll (gliosomal fraction) and between 10 and 20 % Percoll (synaptosomal fraction) were collected, washed by centrifugation and resuspended in physiological HEPES medium with the following composition (mM): NaCl 135; KCl 2.4; MgSO 4 1.2; KH 2 PO 4 1.2; CaCl 2 1.2; NaHCO 3 5; HEPES 10 with glucose 10; pH 7.4. In some experiments, an aliquot of the supernatant was collected before stratification on the Percoll gradient to perform Western blot analysis.
Western Blot
Western blot analysis was performed on the pellet obtained by centrifuging (20 min, 12,000× g at 4 °C) an aliquot of the supernatant collected before stratification on the discontinuous Percoll gradient (total crude preparation, containing both synaptosomes and gliosomes), in order to evaluate relative abundance of GFAP-containing particles (originating from astrocyte processes) and of synaptophysin-containing particles (originating from nerve terminals) in the cerebral cortex of control and Dach-SMO mice. Proteins (1 μg/μl) were denatured in Laemmli buffer and then subjected to a 10 % SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 200 V for 50 min (25 μg/lane; Mini Protean TGX Gel, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA), followed by electroblotting (100 V for 50 min) on polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Immobilon-P PVDF; Millipore Corporation). Immunodetection was performed using rabbit anti-synaptophysin (1:500; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), mouse anti-GFAP (1:1000; Sigma-Aldrich), rabbit anti-GluA1 (1:1000; Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and rabbit anti-phospho-GluA1Ser831 (1:1000; Merck Millipore). Primary antibodies were detected by using horseradish peroxidase-linked anti-mouse, or anti-rabbit (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, USA) secondary antibodies, incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The specific bands were detected by means of an enhanced chemiluminescence system (Pierce). The membranes were stripped using Re-blot plus solution (Millipore Corporation) and re-probed with mouse anti-β-actin (1:1000; Sigma-Aldrich). Developed films were analyzed under non-saturating conditions with an image densitometer and Quantity One software (Bio-Rad Laboratories Hercules, CA, USA). Protein determinations were carried out using bovine serum albumin as standard according to Bradford ( ).
Immunofluorescent Confocal Microscopy
Synaptosomes or gliosomes [15–20 µg; protein determinations carried out using bovine serum albumin as standard according to Bradford ( )] were fixed with 2 % paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.05 % Triton X-100 (5 min) and incubated 60 min with primary antibodies diluted in PBS containing 3 % albumin. The following antibodies were used: rabbit anti-synaptophysin (1:500; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), mouse or rabbit anti-GFAP (1:1000; Sigma-Aldrich), mouse anti-oligodendrocyte (RIP; 1:10,000; Millipore Corporation) and mouse anti-integrin-αM (clone OX-42; 1:25; Millipore Corporation). After washing with PBS, the preparations were incubated (60 min) with Alexa Fluor 488, 568 or 633 secondary antibodies conjugates (1:1000; Life Technologies Corporation, Carlsbad, CA, USA) in PBS containing 0.5 % albumin. Images were collected by confocal microscopy using a three-channel TCS SP2 laser scanning confocal microscope (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany). Sequential acquisition was performed to avoid crosstalk between color signal. The purity of each fraction was assessed by analyzing 5–7 fields from at least two different preparations. Gliosomes and synaptosomes were classified as immunopositive particles when with resolution higher than three voxels in a RGB 255 color scale, using ImageJ 1.43 software (Wayne Rasband, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). Only voxels with intensities above the threshold were considered. Data collected are expressed as percentage ± SEM of the total number of particles present in each fraction (i.e., synaptophysin-positive particles plus GFAP-positive particles in synaptosomal fraction).
Superfusion Experiments
Investigation on Glu release was carried out by pre-labeling the nerve terminals (synaptosomes) or the astrocyte processes (gliosomes) with the stable Glu analogue [ 3 H] d -aspartate. Radioactive d -aspartate is commonly used in release and uptake experiments to mimic Glu in neurones and astrocytes: exocytotic release of both previously taken up [ 3 H] d -aspartate and endogenously synthesized Glu from either cerebrocortical synaptosomes or gliosomes was comparable in terms of Ca 2+ - and transporter dependence (Stigliani et al. ; Marcoli et al. ), suggesting that the tracer reflects the behavior of the endogenous transmitter.
Synaptosomes or gliosomes were incubated (15 min at 37 °C) with [ 3 H] d -aspartate (0.03 μM; Amersham Radiochemical Centre, Buckinghamshire, UK), transferred in parallel superfusion chambers at 37 °C and superfused (0.5 ml/min) with standard HEPES medium (Marcoli et al. ; Alloisio et al. ; Cervetto et al. ). Briefly, after 33-min superfusion, superfusate fractions were collected in 3-min samples (from B 1 to B 7 ); at 38 min of superfusion synaptosomes or gliosomes were exposed (12 min) to KA or AMPA. The effect of cyclothiazide, concanavalin A or antagonists was evaluated by adding the compounds 8 min before the agonist. In each experiment, at least one chamber was used as a control for each condition and was superfused with standard medium or with medium appropriately modified. At the end of superfusion, the radioactivity in synaptosomes or gliosomes and superfusate samples was determined by liquid scintillation counting.
Data Analysis and Statistical Procedures
Immunohistochemical Analyses
Cell counting in each field (number of cells positive for GFAP or NeuN/0.24 mm 2 ) after immunohistochemical analyses was performed on mouse cortex slices ( n = 6) from six independent individuals for each groups; data are presented as mean ± SEM. Data significance was assessed by one-way ANOVA test and post hoc Bonferroni’s test.
Enzymatic Activities
Data on enzymatic activities are mean ± SEM of two independent measurements for each sample. Statistical analysis was performed by using Mann–Whitney rank sum test (INSTAT software, GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA 92130, USA).
Real-Time q-PCR
Data on real-time q-PCR are mean ± SEM of two independent RNA extractions from animal cortex performed in quadruplicate. Statistical analysis was performed by using unpaired t test (INSTAT software, GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA 92130, USA).
Electrophysiology Experiments
In electrophysiology experiments, the relative proportion of slices, from each animal, responding with regular epileptic-like activity to the KA challenge was included to obtain an overall measure of seizure susceptibility. The values obtained for every experimental group were then compared with the t test for unpaired data.
Western Blot Analyses
Data significance was assessed by the one-way ANOVA and post hoc Bonferroni test.
Superfusion Experiments
The efflux of radioactivity in each fraction was expressed as a percentage of the total radioactivity present at the onset of the fraction considered (fractional release). The mean tritium fractional release in B 1 and B 2 fractions was taken as the 100 % control value for each chamber; tritium efflux in B n fractions was evaluated as the percent variation of tritium fractional release with respect to the corresponding control value. The drug-evoked [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux was measured by subtracting the area under the curves of percent variations of tritium fractional release in appropriate control chambers from the area under the curve of the percent variations in drug-treated chambers. Mean ± SEM of the numbers of experiments ( n ) are indicated throughout. Significance of the difference was analyzed by the Mann–Whitney test.
In all tests, probability of p ≤ 0.05 was taken as limit for statistical significance.
Compounds
All chemicals, unless otherwise indicated, were of analytical grade and were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Corp. (Milano, Italy). [ 3 H] d -aspartate was from Amersham Radiochemical Centre (Buckinghamshire, UK); α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate (AMPA), KA, 6-chloro-3,4-dihydro-3-(5-norbornen-2-yl)-2H-1,2,4-benzothiazidiazine-7-sulfonamide-1,1-dioxide (cyclothiazide), 1-(4-aminophenyl)-4-methyl-7,8-methylenedioxy-5H-(3N-methylcarbamate)-2,3-benzodiazepine (GYKI 52466) and 1-naphthylacetyl spermine trihydrochloride (NASPM) were from Tocris Cookson (Bristol, UK); concanavalin A was from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA); FAC was from Sigma-Aldrich Corp. (Milan, Italy). When possible, drugs were dissolved in distilled water or in physiological medium. Concanavalin A was dissolved in buffer Hepes 10 mM and CaCl 2 100 μM and then diluted 1:300. Stock solutions of cyclothiazide were prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide and diluted at least 1:1000 in physiological medium; stock GYKI 52466 solutions were freshly prepared in HCl 0.1 N and diluted 1:670; dimethyl sulfoxide diluted 1:1000 or HCl 0.1 N diluted 1:670 had no effect on [ 3 H] d -aspartate release.
Results
Changes in Cytoarchitecture of Dach-SMO Cortex
The cytoarchitecture of Dach-SMO mouse neocortex was compared to its control counterpart, by analyzing the immunohistochemical distribution of specific neural cell markers. Sagittal brain sections from the Dach-SMO neocortex showed a higher GFAP immunoreactivity in terms of both intensity and number of positive cells (26 %), compared with control one (Fig. 1 a, b). In these samples, astrocytes not only are increased in number, but also show morphological features including hypertrophy and wide ramification, typical of reactive astrogliosis. Using NeuN antibodies, we could observe a significant decrease (17 %) in the number of positive cells in Dach-SMO with respect to control mice (Fig. 1 c, d), indicating a loss of neurons in transgenic mice. Fig. 1 Expression of neuron and glial markers in Dach-SMO and control mice: immunohistochemistry and Western blot. Immunohistochemical analysis of neocortex from 12-month-old Dach-SMO and control mice ( a – d ). Sagittal brain slices were stained with antibodies directed against GFAP ( a ) and NeuN ( c ) and then analyzed. Cell counting is expressed as number of positive cells per 0.24 mm 2 area, GFAP ( b ) and NeuN ( d ). The p values were measured with the one-way ANOVA test and post hoc Bonferroni test (* p < 0.05). Expression of neuron and glial markers in crude preparation of nerve terminals and astrocyte processes from control and Dach-SMO mice ( e ). Western blot analysis of the cerebral cortex from Dach-SMO and control mice using antibodies against GFAP and synaptophysin. One representative out of three experiments is shown. The mean values from n = 3 experiments normalized for controls ( f ). The p values were measured with one-way ANOVA test and post hoc Bonferroni’s test (* p < 0.05)
Astrogliosis in Dach-SMO Cortex
The relative abundance of nerve terminals and astrocyte processes in the cerebral cortex of Dach-SMO as compared to control mice was evaluated by Western blot analysis on the supernatant obtained after homogenization of the cerebral cortex (containing both the nerve terminals and the astrocyte processes). We observed a reduction in the neuronal marker synaptophysin (−39.25 ± 2.72 %, n = 3, p < 0.05) and an increase in the astrocyte marker GFAP (+67.75 ± 15.93 %, n = 3, p < 0.05) in Dach-SMO as compared to control (Fig. 1 e). Taken together, these data indicate that the SMO overexpression in the mouse brain leads to a marked astrogliosis, confirming the immunohistochemical findings.
Increased Antioxidant Defense in Dach-SMO Cortex
As a marker of oxidative stress, the specific activity of the two antioxidant enzymes catalase and SOD was evaluated in the cortex of both Dach-SMO and control mice (Fig. 2 ). In the cortex, the mean SOD activity (Fig. 2 ) was significantly higher in Dach-SMO mice group (0.054 ± 0.004 mU/mg protein) than in control group (0.032 ± 0.006 mU/mg protein) with an increase of +67 % ( p < 0.05). Also catalase activity was increased in Dach-SMO mice group (0.709 ± 0.02 mmol H 2 O 2 /min/mg protein) with respect to control group (0.385 ± 0.03 mmol H 2 O 2 /min/mg protein) with an increase of about +84 % ( p < 0.05). Fig. 2 Antioxidant enzyme activities in Dach-SMO and control mice. Specific activities of catalase ( a ) (mmoles of decomposed H 2 O 2 per min per mg protein) and SOD ( b ) (mU of enzyme per mg protein) were quantified by spectrophotometric assays in cortex lysates from both control and Dach-SMO mice. Data represent the mean ± SEM of experiments performed in duplicate on at least five animals per group. Differences between the two groups (control vs Dach-SMO) were assessed using Mann–Whitney rank sum test and denoted by symbols on bars (* p < 0.05)
The basal expression of the main MT isoforms in the cortex of control mice was assessed by q-PCR. The amplification curves recorded for the three MTs showed differences in Δ C t values over two cycles between MT-3 and MT-1 and two cycles between MT-1 and MT-2 (Fig. 3 a). This observation points at the following relative abundance of MT mRNA in the cortex of control mice: MT-3 > MT-1 > MT-2. The mRNA expression of the two non-neuronal MT isoforms, MT-1 and MT-2, was up-regulated in Dach-SMO mice with respect to control (Fig. 3 b) of about 3.5-fold ( p < 0.01) for both of them. The cortex of Dach-SMO mice showed also an up-regulation of MT-3, the neuronal-specific isoform, with respect to controls (about 3.2-fold increase compared with controls; p < 0.01). Fig. 3 Expression of MT isoforms in cortex from Dach-SMO and control mice. a Relative abundance of the MT isoforms in the cortex of control and Dach-SMO mice was quantified by using q-PCR. Amplification curves for MT-1, MT-2 and MT-3 in a representative experiment are reported with the threshold used for calculation. A crossing point at approximately 18 cycles (for MT-3), 20 cycles (for MT-1) and 21.6 cycles (for MT-2) was individuated. x -axis: amplification cycle number. y -axis: (relative fluorescence units) normalized fluorescence signal. b Expression of the three MT isoforms in the cortex from control and Dach-SMO mice was quantified by q-PCR. Relative expression of each MT isoform was calculated using GAPDH mRNA as a reference. Expression values are given as fold induction with respect to controls (mean ± SEM). Data represent the mean ± SEM of experiments performed in quadruplicate on at least five animals per group. Differences were assessed using t test and denoted by symbols on bars (** p < 0.01)
KA-Induced Epileptic-Like Activity in Brain Slices of Dach-SMO Mice
Combined cortico-hippocampal slices were exposed to KA (5–7 min) at increasing concentrations (1 and 3 µM, with at least 30 min recovery). In control mice, we never observed the occurrence of epileptic-like events in either the hippocampal network or cortex during KA 1 µM perfusion (zero out of eight slices, from six mice). Conversely, when the same slices were exposed to 3 µM KA, sharp (80–150 ms) spontaneous waves of the field potential appeared in the neocortical region beyond the rhinal sulcus, regularly occurring with an incidence of 1–2 Hz (six out of eight slices, from six mice; Fig. 4 a). We repeated the same experiments in slices from Dach-SMO mice, and we observed that KA 3 µM induced neocortical epileptic-like events in a similar manner (nine out ten slices, from nine mice). However, differently from control mice, spontaneous neocortical epileptic-like events could also be induced by 1 µM KA, although less pronounced (seven out of ten slices, from nine mice; Fig. 4 b). This lower threshold to induction of seizures by KA confirms previous results in vivo, showing an increased seizure susceptibility of Dach-SMO mice injected with KA (Cervelli et al. ). Fig. 4 Kainate-evoked epileptic-like activity. Multi-electrode array recordings from a combined cortico-hippocampal slice of a control ( A1 ) and a Dach-SMO ( B1 ) mouse, placed over 64 planar electrodes, detectable in transparency through the slice. The black star marks the position of the rhinal sulcus which separates entorhinal from neocortical area. The red dot indicates the position of the electrode whose voltage signal appears in A3 and B3 and in the red area in A2 and B2 . A2 and B2 are simultaneous recordings from each one of the 64 electrodes under KA 1 and 3 µM. The red area highlights the voltage traces expanded in A3 and B3 , detected by the corresponding electrode in A1 and B1 , respectively. The histograms in C express the proportion (mean ± SEM) of slices recorded from each animal (control mice, black column ; Dach-SMO mice, red column ), which responded with repetitive epileptic-like events in the neocortex when exposed to KA 1 µM ( C1 ) and 3 µM ( C2 ), in the absence or in the presence of FAC 1 mM. The relative proportion of slices from Dach-SMO mice with neocortical spontaneous seizures in KA 1 µM was significantly smaller than in control mice (* p < 0.05, t test) (Color figure online)
FAC is a toxic agent causing inhibition of the Krebs cycle. Since it is preferably uptaken by glial cells, it is used to inhibit astrocyte function through block of their metabolism (Fonnum et al. ; Pascual et al. ). With the aim to reveal an involvement of astrocytes in the lowered threshold to neocortical epileptic-like events of the Dach-SMO mice, we preincubated the slices in FAC (1 mM) for 2–3 h, before being challenged with KA, in the continuous presence of FAC. FAC-treated slices of control mice were still insensitive to KA 1 µM (zero out of nine slices, from three mice), while neocortical epileptic-like events appeared when the same slices were exposed to KA 3 µM (six out of nine slices, from three mice), in a similar manner to what observed on slices without FAC. Similarly, the neocortical region of FAC-treated slices from Dach-SMO mice was still sensitive to epileptic-like events under KA 3 µM (seven out of eight slices, three mice); however, under 1 µM KA the proportion of KA-responsive slices was significantly smaller compared with control (two out of eight slices, from three mice; p < 0.05, t test; Fig. 4 c), indicating a role of astrocytes in the lowered threshold to KA neocortical seizures of the Dach-SMO mice.
Synaptosomes are a Purified Preparation of Nerve Terminals and Gliosomes of Astrocyte Processes
In order to assess purity of synaptosome and gliosome preparations immunofluorescent analyses were performed (Fig. 5 ). Nerve terminals were labeled with anti-synaptophysin antibody, a marker for nerve terminals and proved negative for GFAP, integrin-αM and RIP, which are markers for astrocytes, microglia and oligodendrocytes, respectively. Astrocytic processes were labeled with anti-GFAP antibody, a marker for astrocytes, and proved negative for synaptophysin, integrin-αM and RIP. The confocal images (Fig. 5 ) clearly indicate negligible contamination of cerebrocortical synaptosomes by astrocyte processes and of cerebrocortical gliosomes by nerve terminals, microglia or oligodendrocytes either in Dach-SMO or in control mice. Fig. 5 Nerve terminals and astrocyte processes from Dach-SMO and control mouse cerebral cortex. Negligible contamination of nerve terminals by non-neuronal fractions and of astrocyte processes by non-astrocytic fractions, in control and Dach-SMO mice. Immunofluorescence for the neuronal marker synaptophysin ( a , d , g , k ), GFAP ( b , j , m , p ), the oligodendrocyte marker RIP ( e , n ) or the microglia marker integrin-αM ( h , q ), showing negligible contamination of purified nerve terminals ( a – i ) and astrocyte processes ( j – r ) in both control and Dach-SMO mice. Bars indicate percentage of positive particles (% ± SEM of five non-overlapping fields from two different preparations): synaptophysin ( c , f , i , solid bar ) and GFAP, RIP or integrin-αM ( c , f or i , respectively; empty bar ) in synaptosomal preparation, and GFAP ( l , o , r , solid bar ) and synaptophysin, RIP or integrin-αM ( l , o , r , respectively; empty bar ) in gliosomal preparation
Furthermore, we must notice that no Glu release in response to KA or AMPA appeared in purified astrocyte process preparation from control mice, while KA (or AMPA) activated AMPA-releasing receptors on purified nerve terminals from the control mice. The finding confirmed immunocytochemical evidence that the astrocyte process preparation is not contaminated by nerve terminals.
KA-Evoked [3H]d-Aspartate Release from Synaptosomes in Dach-SMO Mice
The fractional basal [ 3 H] d -aspartate outflow in the first two fractions collected from cerebrocortical purified synaptosomes amounted to 0.40 ± 0.05 %/min (mean ± SEM, n = 5) in Dach-SMO and to 0.43 ± 0.05 %/min (mean ± SEM, n = 11) in control mice, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6 , KA (30–300 μM) increased the [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux from synaptosomes prepared from both Dach-SMO and control mice in a concentration-dependent manner. The presence of 30 μM GYKI 52466, a selective AMPA receptor antagonist (Paternain et al. ; Wilding and Huettner ), almost completely abolished the [ 3 H] d -aspartate releasing effects of KA (100 μM) from synaptosomes from both Dach-SMO and control mice (Fig. 6 ). AMPA (100 μM) mimicked the KA effect and increased [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux; the selective AMPA receptor antagonist GYKI 52466 (30 μM) inhibited the response to AMPA (Fig. 6 ). Addition of GYKI 52466 at the concentration used did not affect basal [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux (data not shown). Fig. 6 Kainate activation of presynaptic autoreceptors. Antagonism of the KA-evoked [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux and of the AMPA-evoked [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux by GYKI 52466 in synaptosomes prepared from both control ( black bars ) or Dach-SMO ( gray bars ) mice. Bars represent % increase of [ 3 H] d -aspartate in the presence of the drugs at the concentrations indicated. Kainate or AMPA was added for 12 min during superfusion; the antagonist GYKI 52466 was added 8 min before the agonist. Other experimental details as in “ Materials and Methods ” section. Data are mean ± SEM of 3–6 experiments performed in triplicate. * p < 0.05 (Mann–Whitney test) when compared to the effect of the agonist alone
Collectively the findings indicate the presence of functional AMPA receptors that can be activated by KA, on glutamate-releasing nerve terminals obtained from both Dach-SMO and control mice.
KA-Evoked [3H]d-Aspartate Release from Gliosomes in Dach-SMO Mice
The fractional basal [ 3 H] d -aspartate outflow in the first two fractions collected from superfused cerebrocortical purified gliosomes amounted to 1.11 ± 0.18 %/min (mean ± SEM, n = 12) and to 1.03 ± 0.12 %/min (mean ± SEM, n = 12) in Dach-SMO and control mice, respectively.
Kainate was ineffective on [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux from gliosomes prepared from control mice. Neither cyclothiazide (10 μM), which selectively inhibits desensitization of native or recombinant AMPA receptors with little or no effect on KA receptors, nor concanavalin A (3 μM), that prevents desensitization of native and recombinant KA receptors with minimal effects at native AMPA receptors (Partin et al. ; Wong and Mayer ), could unmask a response to KA (Fig. 7 ). Analogously, AMPA (100 μM) was ineffective on [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux from gliosomes prepared from control mice; cyclothiazide (10 μM) could not unmask a response to AMPA (Fig. 8 ). Fig. 7 Kainate activation of AMPA receptors: stimulation of Glu release from Dach-SMO mouse astrocyte processes. Ineffectiveness of KA in gliosomes from control mouse ( black bars ) and release-stimulating effect of KA in gliosomes from Dach-SMO mouse ( gray bars ). Bars represent % variation of [ 3 H] d -aspartate in the presence of the drugs at the concentrations indicated. Kainate was added for 12 min during superfusion; cyclothiazide, concanavalin A or GYKI 52466 was added 8 min before the agonist. Other experimental details as in “ Materials and Methods ” section. Data are mean ± SEM ( bars ) values of 3–8 experiments performed in triplicate. * p < 0.05 (Mann–Whitney test) when compared to the effect of KA alone; # p < 0.05 when compared to the effect of KA plus cyclothiazide. Inset Western blot analysis of phosphorylated GluA1 subunit in gliosomes from Dach-SMO cerebral cortex. A representative blot of immunoreactivity of total-GluA1 and phospho-GluA1-Ser831. Actin was used as load control. The quantification of total levels of GluA1 and phospho-GluA1-Ser831 was determined by computer-assisted densitometry. The values are presented as mean ± SEM from three independent experiments. * p < 0.05 ( t test) when compared to control Fig. 8 AMPA stimulation of Glu release from Dach-SMO mouse astrocyte processes. Ineffectiveness of AMPA in gliosomes from control mouse ( black bars ) and release-stimulating effect of AMPA in gliosomes from Dach-SMO mice ( gray bars ). Bars represent % variation of [ 3 H] d -aspartate in the presence of the drugs at the concentrations indicated. AMPA was added for 12 min during superfusion; cyclothiazide, GYKI 52466 or NASPM was added 8 min before the agonist. Other experimental details as in “ Materials and Methods ” section. Data are mean ± SEM ( bars ) values of 3–4 experiments performed in triplicate. * p < 0.05 (Mann–Whitney test) when compared to the effect of AMPA alone
Conversely, KA (30–300 μM) increased [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux from gliosomes prepared from Dach-SMO in a concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 7 ). The KA (100 μM)-evoked [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux from gliosomes was abolished in the presence of the selective AMPA receptor antagonist GYKI 52466 (30 μM; Fig. 7 ). On the other hand, the inhibitor of AMPA receptor desensitization cyclothiazide (10 μM) increased the response to KA; and this effect was antagonized by the AMPA receptor antagonist GYKI 52466 (30 μM) (Fig. 7 ). Preventing desensitization of KA receptors with concanavalin A (3 μM) in the presence of the AMPA receptor antagonist GYKI 52466 (30 μM; see Cervetto et al. ) did not unmask a KA receptor-dependent response to KA (Fig. 7 ). AMPA (100 μM) increased [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux in gliosomes prepared from Dach-SMO; the response to AMPA was increased in the presence of cyclothiazide (10 μM). The AMPA (100 μM)-evoked [ 3 H] d -aspartate release was abolished by GYKI 52466 (30 μM; Fig. 8 ). The compound NASPM, a selective antagonist of the GluA2-lacking Ca 2+ -permeable AMPA receptors (Tsubokawa et al. ; Koike et al. ; Nilsen and England ), reduced the AMPA-evoked [ 3 H] d -aspartate release (Fig. 8 ). Addition of cyclothiazide, concanavalin A, GYKI 52466 or NASPM at the concentrations used did not affect basal [ 3 H] d -aspartate efflux from gliosomes (data not shown).
Collectively the findings indicate that KA activates AMPA receptors on astrocyte processes obtained from Dach-SMO mice, but not from control mice.
Phosphorylation of the AMPA Receptor GluA1 Subunit in Dach-SMO Gliosomes
The evaluation of the GluA1 subunit and the GluA1Ser831 phosphorylation level of AMPA receptors in the gliosomes prepared from the neocortex of Dach-SMO and control mice was analyzed by Western blot. The amount of GluA1 subunit showed a significant increase ( p < 0.03) being 48.2 % higher in Dach-SMO mice as compared to control animals (Fig. 7 , inset). The GluA1Ser831 phosphorylation parallels the increase of GluA1 subunit (35.5 % increase; p < 0.04; Fig. 7 , inset).
The data indicate that SMO overexpression in the mouse brain leads to an increase of phosphorylated GluA1 subunit in the AMPA in Dach-SMO gliosomes.
Discussion
With regard to the mechanisms sustaining the increased vulnerability to kainate excitotoxicity, in the cerebral cortex of SMO-overexpressing mice we found: (1) reactive astrocytosis and neuron loss as shown by overexpression of GFAP and reduction of synaptophysin and NeuN immunoreactivity in astrocyte processes, nerve terminals and brain slices; (2) stimulation of antioxidant systems in both neurons and astrocytes, as a sign of oxidative stress condition; (3) increased susceptibility to KA-evoked cortical epileptogenic activity, dependent on astrocyte function; (4) stimulation of a Glu-releasing response to KA in astrocyte processes, and no modification of the Glu-releasing response to KA in the nerve terminals.
We now address the implications of these findings.
Reactive Astrocytosis in Dach-SMO Mice
Reactive astrocytosis occurs in response to CNS injury or disease. Although recent studies point toward roles for reactive astrocytes in restricting inflammation and protecting neurons after CNS injury, both harmful and beneficial activities have been attributed to reactive astrocytes (Sofroniew ; Sofroniew and Vinters ; Wang and Bordey ). In fact, astrocytes may serve as integrators that recognize and respond to environmental signals and generate neuromodulatory responses (Parpura et al. ): in particular, role of astrocytes in Glu excitotoxic damage spreading during ischemia is related to both restriction of uptake and active release of Glu (Rossi et al. ). The present immunohistochemical results are consistent with reactive astrocytosis in the cerebral cortex of Dach-SMO mice (see also Cervelli et al. ) and are in accordance with the increase in GFAP-containing astrocyte processes and reduction in the synaptophysin-containing neuron terminals in the cortex of Dach-SMO mice. Also, we found neuron loss, consistent with the pronounced brain damage, and with the higher number of neurons exhibiting cytoplasmic condensation and nuclear basophilia in the neocortex of Dach-SMO mice, in response to in vivo KA treatment (Cervelli et al. ). The neuron morphological features (see Cervelli et al. ) recalled a poorly understood degenerative state, found also in models of different pathological conditions, such as Huntington’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease (Iannicola et al. ; Mastroberardino et al. ; Yang et al. ). The neuron loss measured is likely reflecting the occurrence of chronic excitotoxic and oxidative insult during the life of SMO-overexpressing mice and might contribute to increased vulnerability to excitotoxicity. In fact, oxidative stress and derangement of glutamatergic transmission in neuron–glial networks might lead to an imbalance between neuroprotective and neuro-aggressive conditions, reducing the neuron defense reserve and contributing to increased vulnerability to excitotoxic damage.
Stimulation of Antioxidant Systems in Dach-SMO Mice
There is growing evidence supporting the hypothesis that oxidative stress plays a role in different neurological disorders (Vergani et al. ; Popa-Wagner et al. ). Oxygen-free radicals are constantly produced in CNS in both physiological and pathological conditions. Majority of ROS are superoxide radical and H 2 O 2 that are degraded by SOD and catalase, respectively. In our study, both SOD and catalase activities were stimulated in cortex from Dach-SMO mice with respect to controls. These results clearly indicate an increased production of ROS as a consequence of SMO overexpression in brain cortex. Protection from ROS is also played by MTs acting as non-enzymatic scavengers. Large evidence indicated that in the CNS MTs are up-regulated in animal models of multiple sclerosis (Lanza et al. ), of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Gong and Elliott ; Uccelli et al. ) and of Parkinson’s disease (Ebadi et al. ). In the CNS, three MT isoforms are present and show distinct patterns of expression. MT-1 and MT-2 play neuroprotective action as defense against heavy metals and oxidative stress (Hidalgo et al. ). They are largely expressed in astrocytes, but almost absent in oligodendrocytes and neurons. MT-3 is abundant in neurons, and it seems to act in neuronal Zn 2+ homeostasis, mainly in specific brain regions such as the hippocampus (Aschner ). Here, we showed that expression of both the non-neuronal MT isoforms, MT-1 and MT-2, and of the neuronal isoform MT-3 was markedly increased in the cortex from Dach-SMO mice with respect to controls. The direct relationship between SMO overexpression and increased levels of all MT isoforms may be an attempt to protect brain from the oxidative unbalance caused by the increased levels of H 2 O 2 and other oxidant species. It is noteworthy that MT-1/MT-2s act as a unique antioxidant system being expressed coordinately. MTs may also act as anti-inflammatory molecules that reduce activation and cerebral recruitment of monocytes/macrophages and T cells, and counteract the activation of microglia (Penkowa ); interestingly, an increased number of microglial cells were reported in the cortex of the Dach-SMO mice (Cervelli et al. ). Taken together, our data confirm that the unbalance of PA catabolism in the cerebral cortex of Dach-SMO mice results in an oxidative stress condition in both neurons and astrocytes. The generation of Spm oxidation products, such as H 2 O 2 and 3-AP, which spontaneously converts in acrolein, leads to an increased oxidative stress that could contribute to the vulnerability to KA. In line with that, substantial evidence indicates that the oxidative stress generated during KA excitotoxicity can contribute to neuronal death (Zhang and Zhu ; Cervelli et al. ).
It should be considered that SMO-overexpressing adult mice are in a chronic condition as far as activation of Spm metabolism (and consequent H 2 O 2 production and oxidative stress) is concerned. It can be surmised that in such a condition, chronic activation of defense mechanisms serves to maintain a balance between oxidants and antioxidants. Therefore, even a small oxidative insult could be critical and the antioxidant system can be overwhelmed producing a shift toward oxidants, which can result in accumulated cell damage in time (see Birben et al. ; Poljsak et al. ). On the contrary, during acute generation of the Spm oxidation products H 2 O 2 and 3-AP during cerebral ischemia (or during acute H 2 O 2 or 3-AP in vitro treatment), the amount of the agent would need to be high to cause cytotoxicity (Ivanova et al. ; Wood et al. ). As a matter of fact, chronic activation of PA metabolism might better be related to chronic pathological conditions involving oxidative mechanism activation, as compared to acute oxidative insults.
Astrocyte Functioning is Required for Higher Susceptibility to KA-Evoked Cortical Epileptogenic Activity in Dach-SMO Mice
In the in vitro model, we could confirm the increased susceptibility to KA-evoked seizure that was observed in KA-treated mice (Cervelli et al. ). A spontaneous activity at low KA concentration appearing only in slices from Dach-SMO mice is in fact consistent with lower seizure threshold and increased sensitivity to KA injury observed in KA-injected Dach-SMO mice (Cervelli et al. ). Notably, this higher sensitivity to KA-induced seizures was greatly reduced following inhibition of the astrocyte metabolism using the FAC compound (Fonnum et al. ), indicating the involvement of astrocytes in the increased susceptibility to KA-evoked seizures in the Dach-SMO mice. Astrocyte inhibition tended to reduce epileptic-like events also in control mice, at higher KA dose, although the effect was not statistically significant, suggesting that astrocytes might participate to KA-evoked seizures also in control conditions. These findings are consistent with activated glia and secretion of pro-inflammatory molecules taking part in the KA-induced neuroinflammatory response and neurodegeneration (Zhang and Zhu ). If astrocyte role is detrimental in the KA-evoked seizures, increased vulnerability well fits with reactive astrocytosis in the cerebral cortex (see “ Immunohistochemical ” and “ Western Blot ” analyses sections) and with the activity of GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors on the reactive astrocyte processes from Dach-SMO mice. This astrocytosis could contribute to an excessive Glu release and a dysregulation of Glu synaptic dynamics. Interestingly, glia was also shown to exacerbate AMPA excitotoxicity in cultured mouse neocortical neurons (Dugan et al. ), and we here show that activation of AMPA receptors was mediating the effects of KA in preparation from mice neocortex.
On the other hand, a contribution of inwardly rectifying Kir and Na + channels to the increased susceptibility to KA-evoked epileptogenic activity cannot be excluded. In fact, it has been demonstrated that Spm can also affect inwardly rectifying Kir and Na + channels (Stanfield and Sutcliffe ; Fleidervish et al. ). Furthermore, depletion of endogenous PAs was shown to affect inactivation of Na + channel and lead to proepileptic behavior, increasing spontaneous spiking and hypersynchronous discharge in neocortex slices (see Fleidervish et al. ).
Notably, in the Dach-SMO mice after KA treatment the PAs content is altered, as consequential of the PA catabolism activation; in particular, a decrease in the Spm/Spd ratio was observed that could be responsible for higher sensitivity of Dach-SMO mice to KA treatment (Cervelli et al. ). In fact, it is well demonstrated that intracellular PAs can cause rectification of AMPA and KA receptors, as well as of inwardly rectifying Kir and Na + channels, acting as internal cell blockers. It is conceivable that the increase of Spd level competes for Spm binding to AMPA and KA receptors, enhancing the KA effect on both receptors and channels (Williams ; Stanfield and Sutcliffe ; Fleidervish et al. ).
Astrocyte Processes Express Glu-Releasing AMPA Receptors and Release Glu in Response to KA in Dach-SMO Mice
The KA ability to affect the release of the transmitter Glu was studied in purified astrocyte processes (gliosomes) and nerve terminals (synaptosomes) originating from astrocytes and neurons, respectively, that have matured in situ in the cerebral cortex of Dach-SMO and control mice and therefore mirror the features of the cerebrocortical astrocytes and neurons in these animals. Notably, monitoring Glu release from a superfused synaptosomal or gliosomal monolayer in our experimental conditions allows exposure of “nude” receptors: only the targets on Glu-releasing nerve terminals or astrocyte processes are acted upon, allowing pharmacological characterization of the release-regulating receptors (Marcoli et al. ; Alloisio et al. ).
KA, which functions as an agonist at both AMPA and KA receptors (see Boulter et al. ; Bleakman and Lodge ; Lerma et al. ), evoked the release of the neurotransmitter Glu by activating AMPA autoreceptors on the nerve terminals from Dach-SMO or control mice. In astrocyte processes from control mice, no Glu release in response to KA appeared; neither cyclothiazide nor concanavalin A unmasked a response to KA, indicating that neither AMPA nor KA receptors were functional. Conversely, a Glu-releasing response to KA emerged in astrocyte processes from Dach-SMO mice. The response appeared due to AMPA receptor activation; ineffectiveness of KA in the presence of concanavalin A and GYKI 52466 (to unmask any KA receptor-mediated response; see Cervetto et al. ) indicated that KA receptors were not involved. Consistent with the appearance of an AMPA receptor-mediated Glu-releasing response, the expression of GluA1 subunit and the phosphorylation at serine 831 (Ser 831) site of the subunit were increased in astrocyte processes from Dach-SMO mice. Indeed, it is known that phosphorylation of GluA1Ser831 subunit site increases conductance of the AMPA receptors, increasing the strength of synaptic transmission in long-term potentiation and neuron excitability (Song and Huganir ; Rakhade et al. ). Remarkably, ROS-dependent increase of GluA1Ser831 and cell membrane localization of the AMPA receptors were reported (Lee et al. ); this is in line with the increased expression of GluA1 (and of GluA1Ser831) subunit in astrocyte processes of Dach-SMO mice, which suffer a chronic oxidative stress with an increase in ROS production (Cervelli et al. ). Sensitivity of the Glu-releasing AMPA receptors to NSPAM, selective inhibitor of GluA2-lacking Ca 2+ -permeable AMPA receptors, was consistent with the involvement of GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors in the response to KA. Interestingly, AMPA receptor plasticity has frequently been reported in the CNS injury response, involving mainly the expression of the GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors, permeable to Ca 2+ and Zn 2+ (Kwak and Weiss ). The up-regulation of the GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors is likely crucial contributor to the neurodegeneration attributable to AMPA/KA receptors (see Kwak and Weiss ; Weiss ). Also, it is to be noted that intracellular PAs specifically inhibit the GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors ( Bowie and Mayer ; Kamboj et al. ; Koh et al. ); we can hypothesize that PA imbalance would affect the functional receptor expression.
Astrocytes are known to proliferate and be activated during KA excitotoxicity (Zhang and Zhu ), and astrocyte processes have important functional consequences in the control of synaptic plasticity and activity (Theodosis et al. ; Bernardinelli et al. ). We can therefore hypothesize that expression of AMPA receptors on the processes of reactive astrocytes may take part in the sequence of events leading to excitotoxicity, by amplifying the Glu-releasing response to a noxious stimulus (KA). In fact, the expression of functional AMPA receptors that can evoke Glu release from the astrocyte processes in Dach-SMO mice might be responsible for an increased secondary Glu-releasing response to KA, involving reactive astrocytes. This could lead to an amplification of Glu release response and excitotoxic mechanism cascade initiated by KA (see also Domin et al. ). Furthermore, Ca 2+ influx through Ca 2+ -permeable GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors may also result in mitochondrial Ca 2+ overload and consequent production of oxygen radicals (Carriedo et al. ), thus further contributing to oxidative stress. Notably, inhibiting Glu-releasing receptors was proven beneficial in an animal model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (see Cervetto et al. ), a neurodegenerative disease with excitotoxic and oxidative stress mechanism activation.
Conclusions
In the present study, we found that SMO overexpression in the cerebral cortex of mice is associated with an increased number of astrocytes and a loss of neurons. This is a clear sign of reactive astrogliosis that is confirmed by the relative abundance of astrocyte processes with respect to nerve terminals recovered from the cerebral cortex of SMO-overexpressing mice. Moreover, SMO overexpression in the cerebral cortex of mice is associated with an increased activity/expression of both enzymatic (SOD and catalase) and non-enzymatic (MTs) antioxidants in the brain cortex. This clearly indicates that the unbalance in PA catabolism leads to a general stimulation of the cellular antioxidant systems involving both neurons and astrocytes. At last, we confirmed by an in vitro approach our previous in vivo results showing increased seizure susceptibility of Dach-SMO mice injected with KA with respect to controls; astrocytes appear involved in the lowered threshold to KA-evoked cortical epileptogenic activity. Notably, findings on purified nerve terminals and astrocyte processes indicate that KA activates a Glu-releasing response (via activation of AMPA receptors) in astrocyte processes obtained from Dach-SMO mice, but not in those from control mice. Summarizing, we found the following relevant effects associated with SMO overexpression in mice cerebral cortex: increased vulnerability to KA excitotoxicity; increased astrocyte-dependent susceptibility to KA-evoked epileptogenic activity; appearance of a Glu-releasing response to KA in astrocyte processes; and increased oxidative stress in neurons and astrocytes.
Taken together, our data suggest that as a consequence of SMO overexpression, reactive astrocyte activation, with astrocyte processes expressing functional Ca 2+ -permeable AMPA receptors, might contribute to a secondary cascade of Glu release that could increase the brain vulnerability to KA excitotoxicity, worsened by the increased ROS production. This genetic mouse model would help to shed light on the role of astrocytes in increasing vulnerability to excitotoxicity in the neurodegenerative disease pathological mechanisms. Indeed, our findings (in a mouse model of chronic PA catabolism activation) are consistent with activated PA catabolism being implicated in the pathogenesis of brain damage in acute conditions such as the cerebral ischemia, in which excitotoxic mechanism and oxidative damage synergistically participate (Dogan et al. ; Huang and Huang ; Ivanova et al. , ; Wood et al. ; Li et al. ; Park and Igarashi ). Thus, evidence on SMO-overexpressing mice might be relevant for a better understanding of the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative/neuroinflammatory clinical conditions involving excitotoxic and oxidative damage. Noteworthy, Spm appears to be involved in anti-inflammatory function, by inhibiting the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines (Zhang et al. ). Although the mechanism responsible for reactive astrocytosis and regulation of functional Ca 2+ -permeable AMPA receptors due to SMO overexpression in neurons cannot be explained from our findings, we can assume that imbalance of neuronal PAs might alter the complex network of neuron–glial communication and activate a pro-inflammatory state, suggesting that endogenous PAs play roles in maintaining intercellular neuron–astrocytes signaling. In fact, our model indicates that chronic activation of PA catabolism can change vulnerability to excitotoxic/oxidative insult by a potentially self-sustaining Glu cascade through AMPA receptors on reactive astrocytes.