Highlights
This study describes a symptomatic case of congenital dysfibrinogenemia with multiple cerebral infarctions in China Mutation defect in the fibrinogen Aα Argl6Cys impede the ability of thrombin to release fibrinopeptide A and impair polymerization, as well as delayed clot degradation The impaired fibrinolysis and fibrinogen disulfide-linked albumin complexes likely account for the thrombotic disease observed in this patient
Introduction
Fibrinogen is a symmetrical plasma glycoprotein that circulates at a concentration of 2–4 mg/ml and plays an important role in blood coagulation and platelet aggregation [ ]. Fibrinogen is predominantly synthesized in the liver. Its three-dimensional structure has been confirmed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), which additionally showed a two-fold axis of symmetry perpendicular to the long axis [ ]. Each half-molecule consists of two sets of three different polypeptide chains(Aα, Bβ, and γ chains) that are encoded by three separate genes (FGA, FGB and FGG) located on chromosome 4 (q28–31) [ ]. Fibrinogen is converted to fibrin when thrombin cleaves fibrinopeptide and creates fibrin monomers, which can spontaneously polymerize to form a clot. The fibrin clot is cross-linked by activated factor XIII (FXIIIa) [ ]. Fibrin serves as a cofactor in plasminogen activation by tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA), which cleaves plasminogen to generate the enzyme plasmin and initiate fibrinolysis [ ]. During fibrinolysis, plasmin degrades the fibrin network by cleaving specific peptide bonds in all three chains. In addition, active plasmin binds to the newly exposed lysine residues during fibrin degradation and enhances the rate of fibrinolysis [ ].
Dysfibrinogenemia is characterized by the biosynthesis of a structurally abnormal fibrinogen molecule that results in altered functional properties and is commonly associated with bleeding and thrombophilia [ ]. Several mechanisms have been postulated to result in a thrombotic phenotype [ ]. Theoretically, the proposed mechanisms underlying thrombophilia are either an increased clot formation or an impaired clot dissolution (fibrinolysis) [ ]. Thrombophilia-associated dysfibrinogenemia has been associated with an impaired release of fibrinopeptides, defects in fibrin polymerization [ ], abnormal interactions with platelets, a defective assembly of the fibrinolytic system, defective fibrinolysis, and defective calcium binding [ ]. The molecular abnormalities in dysfibrinogenemia associated with a thrombotic tendency are located either on the C terminal portion of the Aα chain or the N-terminal portion of the Bβ chain [ ]. Several abnormal fibrinogens have been clearly shown to predispose patients to thrombosis [ ]. For example, Fibrinogen Paris V (fibrinogen Aα Arg554Cys) has properties that could facilitate thrombus formation, including poor plasminogen binding, an impaired fibrin-dependent tissue plasminogen activator activation, and an increased tendency to self-associate [ ]. Approximately 30% of reported cases with an Aα R16C mutation in humans are associated with haemorrhage, and 15% of the reported cases are associated with thrombosis [ ].
This report describes the structural defects in an abnormal fibrinogen with an Aα 16Arg → Cys substitution that was associated with multiple cerebral infarctions. Various strategies have been proposed for the identification of this mutation in abnormal fibrinogens with an impaired release of fibrinopeptide A (FpA) and delayed polymerization [ , , , ]. Here, we found that this abnormal fibrinogen was linked with albumin in disulfide-linked fibrinogen–albumin complexes and showed fibrinolytic resistance. These results provide a potential explanation for thrombosis.
Materials and methods
This study was approved by the Ethics Review Board of Guangxi Medicine University. After informed consent had been obtained from the patients, blood samples were collected for biochemical and genetic analyses. All experiments were carried out in accordance with the approved guidelines.
Coagulation studies
Venous blood was collected in a 1:100 volume in 40% sodium citrate at a pH of 7.4. The plasma was separated by centrifugation at 3000× g at 4 °C for 15 min. Coagulation measurements, including prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), thrombin time (TT), fibrinogen (Clauss method and ELISA), d-dimer (D-D) assay and clotting factors (VII, VIII, IX, XI, and XII), were performed using an ACL TOP 700 coagulation analyser (Instrumentation Laboratory, Milan, Italy).
Preparation of fibrinogen
Fibrinogen was prepared according to a previously described method [ ]. In brief, the plasma was separated by centrifugation at 3000× g for 15 min and diluted with an equal volume of 0.09 M sodium citrate. The protein was precipitated by adding saturated (NH4)2SO4 (pH 5.5) to achieve 25% saturation at room temperature. After 70 min, we obtained the protein by centrifugation at 4 °C. The precipitate was washed three times with 1 M (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 , each time in a volume approximately equal to twice the original plasma volume. Then, the precipitate was dissolved in 0.005 M sodium citrate. This precipitate was washed once with 1 M ammonium sulfate and redissolved in 0.005 M sodium citrate. The solute protein was stored at − 80 °C until further use.
Western blot (WB) analysis
A WB was conducted according to a procedure described by Bin et al. [ ]. In brief, fibrinogen was electrophoresed on gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes for 70 min at 100 mA. Blocking was carried out by adding 5% skimmed milk in Tris buffered saline with Tween (TBST) for 2 h at room temperature. The membrane was incubated with anti-fibrinogen alpha chain at 1/2000 and anti-albumin at a 1/1000 dilution (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) overnight, and then washed three times with a TBST buffer and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG at a 1:5000 dilution (Shenggong, Shanghai, China). The immunoreactive bands were detected using a Tanon 5200 multi chemiluminescence detection systems (Tianneng, Shanghai, China).
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI–TOF MS)
MALDI–TOF MS was performed on an AB SCIEX TOF/TOF™ 4800 PLUS System (AB SCIEX, USA). In-gel digestion was performed according to a method described by Yan et al. [ ]. The purified fibrinogen was processed with a sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel (SDS-PAGE) under reducing conditions and was stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R-250. The target protein was excised from the gel and placed into a 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube. The particles were washed twice, decolourized, washed again with water and NH 4 HCO 3 with oscillation, dehydrated using acetonitrile (ACN), and then vacuum drained. Digestion was subsequently performed by incubating the sample with endoproteinase Glu-C in 40 mM NH 4 HCO 3 and 10% ACN overnight at 37 °C. We added 20 µl of the matrix solution [50% ACN in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (1:2)] to the particles and incubated the resulting solution with oscillation for 20 min. The liquid was aspirated into a new microcentrifuge tube. This procedure was repeated three times. The liquid was dried with a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 1 µl of the matrix solution. A 1 µl sample was placed on a stainless-steel probe plate and allowed to dry at room temperature. The spectra of the fibrinogen peptides were analysed in the positive reflector mode in a range from 500 to 4000 Da.
DNA sequencing
Genomic DNA was extracted from fresh blood samples using a blood genomic DNA kit (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). The purified genomic DNA was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using specific primers comprising all exons of the FGA, FGB, and FGG genes. The amplifications were performed in a 50 µl reaction volume on an Applied Biosystems 9700 thermocycler (Applied Biosystems, NY, USA). The PCR products were sequenced with an ABI 3730XL sequencer (Applied Biosystems, NY, USA). After the causative proband mutation was identified, the proband’s family members were genotyped for the mutation.
Fibrin polymerization curve measurement
Fibrin polymerization was evaluated turbidimetrically. Based on our previous study [ ], the plasma fibrinogen level was adjusted to 0.5 g/l with a 50 mM TRIS, 0.1 M NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl 2 buffer (pH 7.4). Then, 90 µl of a diluent of fibrinogen (0.5 g/l) were incubated with bovine thrombin (0.1 NIH U/ml, final concentration) at room temperature. The time-dependent increase in the optical density induced by clot formation was continuously measured using an ELISA reader Ceres 900 (Bio-tek Instruments, Winooski, VT, U.S.) at 350 nm at 20 s time intervals during the first 12 and 1 min time intervals during the remaining 8 min. The following two parameters were observed and compared: lag period and maximum slope of turbidity.
Fibrinogen clottability
Purified fibrinogen was clotted in a mixture of 90 µl plasma, 10 µl 100 mM EDTA, and 25 µl 100 U/ml bovine thrombin. After a 60-min incubation at 37 °C, the clots were washed with 50 mmol/l TRIS buffer (pH 7.4) five times and dissolved in 300 g/l urea. The fibrinogen concentration in the urea was measured at 280 nm.
Kinetic measurement of the release of fibrinopeptides
The reactions were performed in a final volume of 225 µl according to a method described by Tanaka et al [ ]. Briefly, fibrinogen (0.22 mg/ml final concentration) was added to 0.12 M NaCl, 1 mM CaCl 2 and 20 MN-[2-hydroxyethyl] piperazine- N ′-[2-ethanesulfonic acid] (HEPES) at a pH of 7.4. The release of fibrinopeptides was measured as a function of time as follows: aliquots of the mixture were incubated with human thrombin (0.02 NIH U/ml, final activity) at room temperature for 0, 1, 3, 5, 10, 20, 30, and 60 min. The reaction was stopped at disparate time intervals via an incubation at 100 °C for 5 min. Then, the protein was centrifuged at 17,000 rpm at 4 °C for 30 min. The concentration of the released fibrinopeptides present in the supernatants was determined using a FpA and fibrinopeptide B (FpB) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (R&D, Nasdaq, USA). Fibrinopeptide release curves were constructed by plotting the percentage released at the designated time point, and we assumed that the total fibrinopeptide release from normal fibrinogen was 100%.
Fibrinolysis
A clot lysis assay was performed with a mixture of the two-chain t-PA and plasminogen as previously described [ ]. Briefly, fibrin clots were simultaneously formed and lysed by combining fibrinogen (0.5 mg/ml), plasminogen (0.12 U/ml), thrombin (0.5 NIH U/ml), t-PA (0.1 µg/ml), CaCl 2 (8 mM), NaCl (0.12 M) and HEPES (20 mM, pH 7.4) at room temperature. The total reaction volume was 200 µl. The turbidity of the solution (absorbance at 350 nm) was monitored on a Microplate Reader (Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) at 20 s intervals for 1 h at room temperature.
SEM
Samples for the SEM were prepared as previously described [ ]. Briefly, fibrin clots were induced to form directly in a microwell plate by adding 1 µl human thrombin (3 NIH U/ml final concentration) to 33 µl plasma from either the patient or a healthy donor, and the clotting mixture was incubated at room temperature for 2 h. The clots were washed three times with 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.4), fixed with 3% glutaraldehyde overnight at 4 °C, stained with 1.0% osmium tetroxide, and then dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol solutions (30, 50, 70, 80, 90, and 100% concentrations), followed by immersion in hexamethyldisilazane three times. The clots were dried, mounted on aluminium stubs and sputter-coated with 10 nm gold. The fibrin clots were observed under a VEGA3 LMU scanning electron microscope (Tescan, Brno, Czech Republic).
Statistics
All reactions were performed in duplicate. A Student’s t-test was used to detect differences between the results. Data are expressed as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). A difference was regarded as significant when the P value was 0.05 or less.
Results
Patient and coagulation tests
The proposita (I-2) was hospitalized because the left side of her body unexplainably lacked power. By analysing the routine coagulation tests, we found that the proband’s fibrinogen level indicated by the Clauss method was very low (0.46 g/l). Paradoxically, normal fibrinogen antigen levels were detected by ELISA (4.01 g/l). She had a particularly prolonged TT (24.8 s), which helped identify the dysfibrinogenemia. The prolonged TT and low fibrinogen levels detected using the Clauss method were also observed in her son (I-4). The A skull CT scan showed multiple cerebral infarctions in the left occipital lobe, right parietal lobe, and bilateral basal ganglia. No extraordinary bleeding was observed during her glaucoma surgery. The liver functions and platelet counts of all participants were normal. The results of the coagulation tests are shown in Table 1 .
Table 1 Coagulation screening results of participants from dysfibrinogenemia family Clotting time (s) D-dimer (µg/l) Fibrinogen (g/l) PT APTT Thrombin time Reptilase time Clauss ELISA I-1 11.3 35.8 11.3 16 60 4.21 3.56 I-2 13.2 33.5 24.8 57 2030 0.46 4.01 I-3 14.1 36.8 12.3 16 24 3.68 3.84 I-4 12.1 37.5 19.5 42 260 0.62 3.38 I-5 13.8 32.3 13.1 19 16 3.93 4.10 Normal range 9–15 23–40 9–15 14–25 0–450 2–5 2–5
WB analysis
The immunoblot analysis of purified fibrinogen demonstrated that some of the abnormal molecules were linked to albumin by disulfide bonds (Fig. 1 ).
Fig. 1 Immunoblot analysis of plasmin digests in a normal control (1), the proband (2) and her son (3). Samples were analysed under nonreducing conditions on 10% gels, blotted onto nitrocellulose and developed with a monoclonal antibody that reacts with either human fibrinogen Aα chain ( a ) or antihuman albumin ( b )
Mass spectrometry analysis
MALDI–TOF MS was used to investigate the expression of the abnormal chain containing the variant peptide. The resulting spectra of the fibrinogen in the release database was determined using MALDI–TOF biotyping software. The MALDI–TOF MS showed a normal peak with amass of 1082.23 Da (GGGVRGPRVVE) and an abnormal peptide with a mass of 1029.18 Da (GGGVCGPRVVE), corresponding to a variant Aα chain. The spectral peaks are shown in Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2 MALDI–TOF MS spectra of peptides of fibrinogen from the proband ( a ) and her son ( b ) corresponding to sequence Aα 12–22. Peaks of normal (1082.23 Da) and abnormal (1029.18 Da) peptides are shown
DNA sequencing analysis
The fibrinogen gene sequencing revealed missense mutations that corresponded to the abnormal MS peaks identified in the patients (Fig. 2 ). A mutation analysis revealed a heterozygous C → T replacement at nucleotide 6232 of the fibrinogen FGA gene that was responsible for the Arg → Cys substitution at position 16 of the Aα chain (Fig. 3 ). The genetic result was consistent with the laboratory test results of the patients.
Fig. 3 DNA sequencing of exon 2 of FGA. a, b A heterozygous point mutation C → T was found in the fibrinogen Aα gene in the patients, changing the triplet CGT (Arg) to TAT (Cys). c Sequence of a healthy control
Fibrin polymerization curve measurement
The curve of the proband showed a prolong lag phase and a slower rate of increase than that of the normal controls. In addition, the maximum turbidity of the clot formed by the proband’s fibrinogen (0.195) was less than the maximum value achieved with normal fibrinogen (0.63), shown in Fig. 4 . Our datas were consistent with numerous studies.
Fig. 4 Thrombin-induced fibrin polymerization curves. Plasma samples from the patient and healthy controls were incubated with 0.1 NIH U/ml thrombin (final concentration), and the optical density was measured every 20 s at 350 nm. OD optical density
Fibrinogen clottability
The clottability of the proband’s fibrinogen was 32%. The clottability of the healthy controls was 96%.
Kinetic measurement of the release of fibrinopeptides
The kinetics of the fibrinopeptide release, as indicated by a radioimmunoassay, showed that the rate and amount of FpA released from the patient were less than those in the normal controls. The FpB release was slightly delayed, but the amount was comparable to normal fibrinogen (Fig. 5 ).
Fig. 5 Kinetic measurement of thrombin-induced fibrinopeptide release from the proband fibrinogen and a normal control fibrinogen. The time dependent change in turbidity was assessed at 350 nm
Fibrinolysis
The lysis curves from the experiments using purified fibrinogen are shown in Fig. 6 . Based on the curves, we measured the lag period [the time until maximum absorbance (as 100%) decreased to 98%], the Lmax (the maximum lysis rate), and the 50% lysis time, which is the period until maximum absorbance (as 100%) decreases to 50%. Regarding the clot lysis initiated with the t-PA/plasminogen mixture, clots generated from the proband’s purified fibrinogen at a physiological concentration polymerized more slowly at 500 s and were digested by the t-PA-activated plasmin at a significantly slower rate than clots generated from normal fibrinogen. The most noticeable delay occurred during the lag period. The 50% lysis time of the proband’s clots required 1350 s compared with 920 s for the healthy control (Fig. 6 ).
Fig. 6 Fibrinolysis curves. Fibrin polymerization, followed by fibrin lysis, was measured by absorbance at 350 nm. The process can be divided into the following three stages: fibrin polymerization, plateau region and fibrin lysis. From top to bottom: filled diamond—control, open diamond—proband
SEM
To clarify the differences in the ultrastructures of the fibrin clots between the heathy controls and the abnormal fibrinogen, we observed the fibrin clots under a scanning electron microscope. Figure 7 shows that the clots of the proband consisted of thin fibres with many branch points and very small pore sizes. The fibrin fibres were less organized than the control fibres and had an additional visible mass. The fibre diameters were significantly smaller in the patient’s clot (364 ± 23 nm) than in the normal control clot (221 ± 30 nm; Student’s t-test, P < 0.001). Compared to those of the normal controls, several small-branched fibres with twisted ends were observed (Fig. 7 ).
Fig. 7 Scanning electron micrographs of plasma fibrin clots from the proband and a healthy control. Fibrin clots were formed in 33 µl plasma by the addition of 1 µl thrombin (2 NIH U/ml, final concentration) for 2 h, followed by washing and drying. SEM images of a healthy control ( a ) and the proband ( b )
Discussion
In this study, we identified a Chinese family with dysfibrinogenemia in which the proband had obvious symptoms of thrombosis tendencies. An Aα chain Arg16Cys substitution was identified to cause a mutation. This mutation prevents thrombin cleavage of the scissile Aα R16–G17 bond, thus impairing FpA release and delaying polymerization. We found that abnormal fibrinogens circulate as disulfide-linked complexes with albumin and delayed clot lysis, which may result in thrombosis.
Heterozygous dysfibrinogenemia was described in 2 members of the same family (the proposita and her son). The proposita described in this study suffered from multiple cerebral infarctions. Interestingly, her son, who had the same mutation, had no symptom of thrombosis. This mutation has been reported with a broad range of clinical manifestations, including major bleeding and thrombosis [ ]. However, according to the data compiled in http://www.geht.org/databaseang/fibrinogen/ , most patients with hotspot mutations are asymptomatic (73%) [ ]. A recent study reporting age and sex-adjusted Cox analyses from a cohort study of 101 patients revealed that mutations of FGA p.Arg35 (i.e., Arg35His or Arg35Cys) were not significantly associated with the risk of thrombotic events [hazard ratio (HR) 0.8; 95% CI 0.3–2.4] or the risk of major bleeding (HR 0.8; 95% CI 0.1–4.1) [ ]. In addition, among patients with thrombosis, the prevalence of dysfibrinogenemia is rather low [ ]. In a study of 2376 patients with DVT, the prevalence of dysfibrinogenemia was 0.08% [ ]. Zhou et al. studied the clinical features and molecular basis in 102 Chinese patients with congenital dysfibrinogenemia and indicated that thrombosis rarely occurred in Chinese patients [ ]. Therefore, it is very meaningful to study a symptomatic case to provide valuable insight into the relationship between dysfibrinogenemia and thrombosis.
DNA sequencing analyses of PCR amplifications is a simple and efficient method for identifying fibrinogen gene mutations [ ]. The mutation analysis revealed a heterozygous C → T replacement at nucleotide 6232 of the fibrinogen FGA gene, which was revealed to be responsible for the Arg → Cys substitution at position 16 of the Aα chain.
MALDI–TOF MS is a very useful technique that can provide full mass spectra with a very high accuracy and allows for the retrospective identification and structural characterization of the protein [ ]. Using MALDI–TOF MS, the expression of an abnormal chain with a mutation in Aα-chain Arg16Cys was revealed. The resulting spectra showed a normal peak with amass of 1082.23 Da (GGGVRGPRVVE) and an abnormal peptide with a mass of 1029.18 Da (GGGVCGPRVVE), which corresponded to the variant Aα chain.
The conversion of fibrinogen to a fibrin clot occurs during the cleavage of fibrinogen at AαR16/G17 and Bβ R44/G45, which results in the release of FpA and FpB, respectively [ ]. AαR16 (Arg35) is the P1 residue of fibrinogen, is engaged in the expected ion pair with Asp189 in the S1 pocket of thrombin via its side chain, and has an H-bond interaction with the carbonyl oxygen of Ser214 through its nitrogen atom [ ]. The substitution of this Arg with Cys will result in a drastic or complete loss of clotting activity. Our data showed that FpA released from the patient was less than that released by the normal controls, while the FpB release was slightly delayed compared to normal fibrinogen.
The removal of FpA exposed a polymerization site that initiates polymerization by docking to a constitutive complementary-binding pocket located in the D domain of a neighbouring molecule [ ]. The binding of the D domain of one molecule to the central E domain of an adjacent fibrin monomer provides a two molecule-thick strand or protofibril [ ]. Numerous studies have indicated that FpA release is essential for the induction of clot formation [ , , , ]. Consistent with impeding the ability of thrombin to release FpA, the rate of fibrin monomer polymerization was diminished, and the final clot turbidity was also decreased. Our data are supported by the results of Fibrinogen Metz and fibrinogen Nový Jičín [ ]. Interestingly, homozygous Aα R16C fibrinogen can undergo gelation to form clots under certain conditions despite the lack of FpA release. It is speculated that FpB release alone can drive polymerization and clot formation under certain conditions [ ].
The cleavage of FpA is important for fibrin polymerization and plays a critical role in determining the clot structure and function [ ]. The Aα R16C mutation leads to defective clot formation [ ]. The reason underlying the defective clot formation is that thrombin is unable to cleave FpA due to the mutant cysteine, resulting in diminished fibrin polymerization and delayed clot formation [ , , , , ]. Doolittle proposed that the abnormal fibrinopeptide cleavage and its effects on clot formation may be sufficient to explain the delayed clot formation observed with the mutation, because the lack of fibrinopeptide cleavage fails to expose new amino-terminal sequences that are critical for polymerization [ ].
Clots are degraded by plasmin-catalysed lysis in the fibrin matrix [ ]. Our data show that the proband’s fibrinolysis was dramatically decreased compared to that of the controls. Delays in clot lysis have also been observed in other cases, such as fibrinogen Guarenas (Aα 467 Glu → stop) [ ], Naples (Bβ 68 Ala → Thr) [ ], Ijmuiden (Bβ 14 Arg → Cys) [ ], and Nijmegen (Bβ44 Arg → Cys) [ , ]. There are several possible explanations for the delay in clot lysis with plasminogen. One obvious possibility is a slower rate of plasminogen activation. Alternatively, it is possible that altered plasmin binding may affect clot lysis. To test this hypothesis, Flood and his colleagues monitored clot lysis with trypsin and demonstrated that a fibrin clot of Fibrinogen Hershey III with a heterozygous Aα R16C mutation was more resistant to fibrinolysis than a clot formed from wild-type fibrinogen, which was due to changes in the clots susceptibility to proteolysis [ ].
The rates of fibrinopeptide cleavage, protofibril elongation and lateral aggregation largely determine the architecture of the fibrin clot [ ]. Therefore, the incorporation of fibrin molecules containing uncleaved FpA alters the clot ultrastructure [ ]. Based on the SEM results, clots from abnormal fibrinogen were dramatically different than the control clots. It was immediately apparent that the proposita’s clots consisted of thin fibres with very short distances between the branch points. The fibrin fibres consisted of many messy branched fibres with twisted ends and very small pore sizes compared with those in the healthy controls. We speculated that this may explain the barbed ends observed in the fibrin strands [ ]. Partially cleaved fibrin heterodimers containing one cleaved FpA and one uncleaved Aα R16C chain act as ‘chain terminators’ because they lack one of the two A knobs that are normally exposed by thrombin cleavage. The incorporation of such heterodimers could cause an abrupt end to the fibrin protofibril elongation [ ].
Fibrin clots containing thin fibres have been shown to dissolve at a slower rate than those with thick fibres, even though the thin fibres were cleaved at a faster rate than the thick fibres. The slower rate is due to the higher number of total fibres in clots consisting thin fibres [ ]. In addition, the fibrin fibre size has been shown to affect the lysis rate since fibrinolytic rates generally decrease with decreasing fibre sizes [ ]. These findings may be sufficient to explain the fibrinolytic resistance observed in the heterodimeric Aα R16C fibrin [ ].
The prolonged presence of an abnormal clot and decreased fibrinolysis maybe implicated as possible causes of thrombosis in the proband. Another possible explanation for the thrombotic phenotype in dysfibrinogenemia is the disulfide-linked albumin complexes. We found that some of the abnormal fibrinogen circulates as disulfide-linked complexes with albumin. This complex is consistent with heterodimer (A′αBβγ–AαBβγ) of Aα R16C. Heterozygous fibrinogens Osaka I [ ] has been reported as AαCys16, which participates in an intramolecular disulfide bond between two abnormal Aα chains. Therefore the disulfide bonds presumably formed between the neo-cysteine that was introduced by the mutation and the free sulfhydryl group that is present in albumin [ ]. Consequently, the conformation of the molecule may change drastically. Previous characterization of variant fibrinogens associated with thrombophilia demonstrated the presence of fibrinogen–albumin complexes. Fibrinogen Chapel Hill III (Aα R554C) [ ], fibrinogens Ijmuiden (Bβ 14 Arg → Cys) and Nijmegen (Bβ44 Arg → Cys) [ ] were associated with the thrombotic phenotype. However, the mechanism of the fibrinogen disulfide-linked albumin complexes in the thrombotic phenotype is unclear and requires more experiments for its confirmation.
Congenital dysfibrinogenemia is a potential risk factor for thrombosis [ ]. There are two mechanisms that may account for the increased risk of thrombosis in congenital dysfibrinogenemia [ ]. First, there is defective binding of thrombin to abnormal fibrinogen, which leads to elevated levels of circulating thrombin. Second, there is decreased fibrinolysis due to the impaired binding of plasminogen or t-PA to abnormal fibrinogen [ ]. Fibrin clots that have a high fibre density and an increased resistance to fibrinolysis have been consistently associated with a risk for thrombosis [ ]. Thus, we conclude that the impaired fibrinolysis and fibrinogen disulfide-linked albumin complexes likely account for the thrombotic disease observed in this patient.