Introduction
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is the most common neurological disorder encompassing a broad range of short- and long-term physical, cognitive, and emotional impairments that only partially depend on the severity of the injury (McAllister ; Slemmer et al. ). We have previously reported that a noninvasive, closed-head mild TBI in mice induced behavioral and biochemical changes in the brain (Rubovitch et al. , ; Tweedie et al. ).
mTBI induced elevations in the levels of various pro-apoptotic proteins and caused a gradual increase in TUNEL-positive and silver-impregnated neuronal number with increased impact force in different brain regions (Tweedie et al. ).
One of the leading mechanisms toward apoptosis is ER stress. The ER (endoplasmic reticulum) is an important cell organelle that is responsible for the correct folding and sorting of proteins (Boyce and Yuan ). Disturbed ER functions induce expression of chaperones, attenuate protein translation, and activate ER-associated degradation (Boyce and Yuan ). This may be induced due to post-traumatic release of large quantities of glutamate, ionic cellular derangement, and mitochondrial calcium overloading. Hence, an oxidative stress occurs which operates the UPR (unfolded protein response). Prolonged ER stress can trigger cell death (Hetz and Soto ) by activating the pro-apoptotic activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6) and the inositol-requiring enzyme-1 (IRE1). TBI can induce a chain of events leading to ER stress and neuronal cell death (Begum et al. ).
ER stress can activate another pathway which is considered the translation control arm: PRK (RNA-dependent protein kinase)-like ER protein kinase (PERK) (Hetz ; Ron and Walter ). PERK phosphorylates the α-subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor-2 (eIF2α) at Ser51. This phosphorylation inhibits the guanine nucleotide exchange factor eIF2B, a complex that recycles eIF2 to its active GTP-bound form. Lower levels of active eIF2 result in lower levels of translation initiation, globally reducing the load of newly synthesized proteins, many of which are destined to enter the already stressed cells (Harding et al. ). This is considered a pivotal step in the control of translation initiation. Phosphorylated eIF2α regulates ATF4 (activated transcription factor-4). Both ATF6 and ATF4 can induce elevated expression of the transcription factor CHOP (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein) expression (Gow and Wrabetz ). Studying the involvement of the ER stress system in mTBI-induced events, we have found that mTBI activated the UPR since it elevated the expression of ATF6 (Rubovitch et al. ). We have also reported that IGF-1 administration to mice prevented mTBI-induced cognitive deficits while significantly elevating the expression of CHOP in the cortices. However, IGF-1 did not change ATF6 or grp78 levels (Rubovitch et al. ). These intriguing results implied that IGF-1 exerted its neuroprotection via the eIF2α/ATF4 arm of the unfolded protein response. The main goals of the present study were to reveal whether eIF2α is affected by mTBI and whether it is a potential target for neuroprotection. In order to do so we used salubrinal, which is a selective phosphatase inhibitor of phospho-eIF2α.
Materials and Methods
Mice
Male ICR mice weighing 25–30 g (about 6 weeks old) were kept five per cage under a constant 12-h light/dark cycle at room temperature (23 °C). Food (Purina rodent chow) and water were available ad libitum. Each mouse was used for one experiment and for only one point of time. The Ethics Committee of the Sackler Faculty of Medicine approved the experimental protocol (M-11-055), in compliance with the guidelines for animal experimentation of the National Institute of Health (DHEW publication 85-23, revised, 1995). The minimum possible number of animals was used, and all efforts were made to minimize their suffering.
Brain Injury
Experimental mTBI was induced using the concussive head trauma device described previously (Zohar et al. ). Briefly, mice were slightly anesthetized by inhalation of vaporized isoflurane (0.5 ml in a closed glass chamber). Immediately, when the mouse remained on his back, he was placed under a device consisting of a metal tube (inner diameter 13 mm), placed vertically over his head. The animal was then held in a way that the impact on the skull (closed scalp) was anterio-laterally, close to the right ear. A sponge immobilization board was employed allowing small head movements during the injury, analogous to those that occur during closed-head injury in car accidents. The injury was induced by dropping a metal weight (30 g) from 80 cm height down the metal tube, striking the skull. Immediately, after the injury, the mice were placed back in their cages for recovery. Injured mice did not exhibit any apnea after the injury. The effect of the injury was studied at multiple days following the trauma using different groups of mice at each time point (at least 10 mice per group).
Drug Administration
Salubrinal (EMD Chemicals, Inc, USA) (1 mg/kg, first solubilized in DMSO to 100 mg/kg and then in saline to the final concentration) was injected (ip) 1 and again 24 h post-injury (Boyce and Yuan ; Colla et al. ). Control mice received a vehicle injection at the same time points (1 % DMSO in saline).
These paradigms (dose and administration time) were chosen according to relevant studies (Cai et al. ; Zhu et al. ). The 24 h post-injury injection was added to ensure sufficient drug penetration to the brain (mTBI was previously found to induce a transient rupture of the BBB around 24 h post-injury) (Guan et al. ).
For the behavioral tests, we use separated groups at each time point (7 and 30 days post-injury).
The Novel Object Recognition Test
An object recognition test was used to evaluate recognition memory (Messier ). This task is based on the tendency of rodents to discriminate between a familiar object and a new object. The open field was a 59 × 59 cm arena, surrounded by 20 cm black plexiglass walls. The floor of the arena was also black and divided into 36 identical squares by white gridlines. Each mouse was placed in an empty arena for 5-min habituation. After 24 h, the mice were placed for 5 min into the arena with two identical objects, A and B (e.g., bottles), positioned 40 cm from each other and 10 cm from the walls. On the next day (day 3), the mice were placed once again for 5 min into the arena with object A (the same as on the second day) and object C (a new object; e.g., a coffee can). The arena and the objects were cleaned with 70 % ethanol between each trial. Exploration of an object was defined as rearing on the object or sniffing it at a distance of less than 2 cm and/or touching it with the nose. Discrimination of recognition novelty was assessed by a preference index (Dix and Aggleton ): (time exploring the new object–time exploring the old object)/(total time exploring an object). Mice that spent less than 10 % of the total time (30 s) near the objects were excluded from the analysis.
Y-Maze Test
Spatial memory was assessed by using the Y-maze which was first described by Dellu et al. ( ) and then subsequently validated as a task-requiring hippocampal function and spatial memory (Conrad et al. ). The Y-maze was constructed of black Plexiglas with three identical arms (30 × 8 × 15 cm). Overt cues were attached inside of the Y-maze. The test included two trials separated by a 2-min interval. The first trial was 5 min with only two arms open (the start arm and the arm called “the old” arm), and the third arm was blocked by a door (the novel arm). The mouse was put in the start arm in the part most distant from the other two arms. After the first (familiarization) run, the mouse was put back into the cage for 2 min. The second run lasted 2 min, and all three arms were open. Time spent in each of the arms was measured. Between each run and between each mouse, the maze was cleaned with 70 % ethanol. The new arm preference index was calculated as follows: (time in the new arm–time in the old arm)/(time in the new arm + time in the old arm).
Western Blots
Whole brains were removed at 1, 24, 72 h, and 1 week post-mTBI. The whole cortex and hippocampus samples (right and left, separately) were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and homogenized with T-PER tissue protein extraction reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL), with appropriate protease inhibitors (Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail; Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were run on 10 % Bis–Tris gels (Bio-Rad) and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Blots were blocked for 1 h with Tris-buffered saline containing 0.01 % Tween-20 and 5 % BSA or powdered milk. Membranes were incubated with primary antibodies against phospho-eIF2 α (diluted 1:1,000, overnight at 4 °C, Cell Signaling Technology; Danvers, MA, USA) or CHOP (diluted 1:500, 2 h at r.t; Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Santa Cruz, CA) and then incubated with secondary horseradish peroxidase-linked antibodies (Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA) at room temperature for 1 h. Bands were recognized by enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce Rockford, IL) and exposed to an X-ray film. Protein band intensities were quantified by using the TINA software. Uniform loading was verified by stripping and re-probing with antibodies against tubulin (1:1,000; Santa Cruz Biotechnologies,). Stripping was done after washing the membrane five times with TBST and then incubated with stripping buffer (0.76 g Tris base, 2 g SDS and 700 μl β-mercaptoethanol in 100 ml DDH 2 O) for 30 min at 50 °C (with slight agitation). Then, the membrane was washed five times for 5 min each in TBST.
Immunohistochemistry for Mice Brain Slices
Seventy-two hours or 1 week post-TBI (for phospho-eIF2-α or NeuN, respectively) mice ( n = 4–6 for each group) were anesthetized with ketamine and perfused transcardially with PBS and then with 4 % paraformaldehyde (PFA) in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. Their brains were removed, fixed overnight in 4 % PFA in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, and then placed in 30 % sucrose for 48 h. Frozen coronal Sects. (30 µm) were then cut on a sliding microtome and collected serially. The free-floating sections were first blocked by incubation with 0.1 % Triton X-100 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBST) and 10 % normal horse serum for 1 h at 25 °C. The primary antibodies (mouse anti-NeuN, Millipore; MAB377, diluted 1 in 50 in incubation buffer, and rabbit anti-phospho-eIF2-α, 1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) were then dissolved in PBST and 2 % normal horse serum, and incubated with the sections for 48 h at 4 °C. Control slices were stained by omitting primary antibodies. After been rinsed in PBST, the sections were incubated for 1 h at 25 °C with DyLight™594-conjugated AffinityPure Donkey Anti-Rabbit IgG and DyLight™488-conjugated AffinityPure Donkey Anti-mouse IgG (1: 300; Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME, USA). After rinses in PBST, free-floating sections were mounted on dry gelatin-coated slides, and fluorescence was visualized using a Zeiss LSM 510 confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany). Excitation light was provided by the 488 nm line of argon lasers for the DyLight-488 fluorophore and the 543 nm line of HeNe lasers for the DyLight-594 fluorophore. Analysis of NeuN-stained neurons was done using the spots analysis, and the quantification of peIF2α was done with the surface intensity analysis, both with the Imaris software (Bitplane AG, Zurich, Switzerland).
To assess for early changes, neuronal cell viability at 72 h post-mTBI sections was stained for NeuN, a marker of mature neurons (Mullen et al. ) and Fluoro-Jade B (FJB), a marker of degenerating neurons. After incubation with the primary antibody for NeuN, the sections were washed and incubated with a Cy3-labeled anti-mouse secondary antibody (Jackson; 715-165-150, diluted 1 in 300 incubation buffer). The probed sections were mounted onto 2 % gelatin-coated slides and stained with FJB (Millipore; AG310) as described by Schmued and Hopkins (Schmued and Hopkins ). In light of the diffuse, rather than local, cellular dysfunction and loss that has been described to occur across both cerebral hemispheres in our mTBI model (Tashlykov et al. , ), both the ipsi- and contra-lateral cortices were analyzed and pooled together to attain stricter statistical analysis. The means of five mouse brains per treatment were used to assess the FJB/NeuN ratios for each treatment group. The slides were observed using a Zeiss Axiovert 200 fluorescence microscope (Zeiss).
Overall, we had 2–4 sections (different bregmas) from each brain. Images were taken from three fields at the enthirhinal/perirhinal cortex (together 6–12 field images were taken). The number of cells from each brain was determined as the mean counting of all the fields that were taken.
Data Analysis
All results are given as mean ± SEM, and data were analyzed using one-way ANOVA; statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. p values of post hoc tests were adjusted using the Fisher LSD test, and a nominal significance level of 0.05 was used.
Results
The Effect of mTBI on eIF2α Phosphorylation in the Brain
mTBI was previously found to activate the apoptotic arm of the UPR by activating ATF6 (Rubovitch et al. ). In order to examine the effect of mTBI on the translation regulation arm of the UPR, we tested eIF2α phosphorylation. For this purpose, mice were subjected to mTBI and brains were removed after 1, 24, 72 h, and 7 days. Cortices and hippocampi extracts prepared from brain tissues were subjected to western blot analyses. Results indicated that mTBI induced a significant reduction in eIF2α phosphorylation in the ipsilateral cortex 72 h post-mTBI compared to control (0.68 ± 0.06 and 1 ± 0.07, respectively, n = 7–29; p < 0.001), (Fig. 1 ). Hippocampi western blot analysis failed to show a similar reduction in the phosphorylation of eIF2α (data not shown). Fig. 1 Effect of mTBI on the phosphorylation of the translational/adaptive ER stress marker eIF2α. Cortex and hippocampus protein extracts (ipsi-lateral injured hemisphere; separate samples) prepared from sham or mTBI animals at the indicated time points were subjected to gel electrophoresis, followed by immunoblot analysis using antibodies raised against phospho-eIF2α. The level of activation (phosphorylation) was evaluated by densitometry analysis. One-way ANOVA revealed a significant reduction of phospho-eIF2α at 72 h following mTBI in the cortex: [ F (4,71) = 4.323; p = 0.003]; LSD post hoc test), but not in the hippocampus
The Effect of a Direct Activation of eIF2α by Salubrinal on the Cognitive Performance in mTBI Mice
Since we have found that mTBI reduced the phosphorylation level of eIF2-α, the next set of experiments was aimed at directly targeting this pathway in mTBI mice. We inhibited the dephosphorylation of eIF2α by salubrinal, the specific inhibitor of eIF2α phosphatase enzymes (IP injection at a dose of 1 mg/kg immediately after the injury and 24 h later). As expected, mTBI reduced the preference index in the novel object recognition test 7 days post-injury from (0.33 ± 0.05 to 0.06 ± 0.07; * p < 0.05). Salubrinal administration to mTBI mice abolished this decline in the preference index (0.3 ± 0.07; # p < 0.05; n = 9–14; Fig. 2 a). This protective effect on visual/recognition memory was found even 30 days post-injury and treatment: 0.3 ± 0.07 in salubrinal-treated mTBI mice compared to non-treated injured mice (0.08 ± 0.05; # p < 0.001; n = 15–23; Fig. 2 b). Similarly, salubrinal prevented the spatial memory deficits after mTBI as was tested by the Y-maze. 7 days post-mTBI the preference index was significantly damaged in mTBI mice compared with control (0.52 ± 0.04 and 0.31 ± 0.05, respectively, *** p < 0.001, this impairment was significantly inhibited by salubrinal (0.51 ± 0.06; # p < 0.05; n = 12–32; Fig. 2 c). Salubrinal maintained its protective effect even 30 days post-injury: 0.4 ± 0.05 in control mice compared to 0.19 ± 0.05 in mTBI mice; * p < 0.05. Salubrinal prevented this reduction to 0.39 ± 0.08; # p < 0.05 ( n = 17–24; Fig. 2 d). Fig. 2 Neuroprotective effect of salubrinal on the cognitive performance of mTBI mice. The behavioral tests were performed 7 or 30 days post-TBI (separate groups). a The recognition memory was assessed using the novel object recognition test (OR) by calculating the relative time that the mice spent near a novel object compared to an old, familiar one (“preference index”, see “ Materials and methods ”). The significant decrease in preference index in mTBI mice was significantly prevented by the administration of salubrinal (1 mg/kg; IP), both 7 and 30 days post-injury. One-way ANOVA revealed significant effect of group: at 7 days—[ F (3,36) = 3.645; p = 0.022] and at 30 days—[ F (3,76) = 5.278; p = 0.002];(LSD post hoc test). b The spatial memory was assessed in the Y-maze by calculating the relative time that the mice spent in a novel arm compared to an old, familiar arm (“preference index”, see “ Materials and methods ”). The significant decrease in preference index in mTBI mice was significantly prevented by the administration of salubrinal. One-way ANOVA revealed significant effect of group: at 7 days—[ F (3,78) = 6.217; p = 0.001] and at 30 days—[ F (3,81) = 2.744; p = 0.048] (LSD post hoc test)
The Effect of Salubrinal on Neuronal Survival in mTBI Mice
The first step of the survival assays focused on measuring the level of degenerating neurons in the perirhinal and entorhinal cortex. We doubled stained brain sections with Fluoro-Jade-B for degenerating neurons and with anti-NeuN antibodies for mature neurons (green and red, respectively, Fig. 3 ). We visualized three fields (0.03 mm 2 ) in each section. mTBI significantly elevated the number of FJB stained neurons when compared with control mice, and salubrinal administration completely prevented this elevation (15.1 ± 3.6, 37.4 ± 4.2 and 16 ± 1.61, respectively, n = 5; ** p < 0.01). In the lower panel of Fig. 4 , we show the NeuN-stained neurons (red) of the same visualized fields. Fig. 3 Effect of salubrinal on the number of degenerating neurons in mTBI mice. Representative images of Fluoro-Jade B (FJB) ( green , upper panel) and NeuN ( red , lower panel)-positive neurons in the cortex 72 h after mTBI. Bar graph quantification of neuronal degeneration in the enthorhinal cortex as the number of cells positively stained with FJB (degenerating neurons). ** p < 0.01; LSD post hoc [ F (2,12) = 14.134, p = 0.0007). Values are mean ± SEM, of n = 5 mouse brains (Color figure online) Fig. 4 Effect of salubrinal on neuronal survival in mTBI mice. Adult neuronal DNA was assessed by immunofluorescent staining with anti-NeuN. A significant reduction in the number of NeuN staining was found 1 week post-mTBI in the enthorhinal cortex. Salubrinal significantly prevented this decline as was found in One-way ANOVA [ F (3,50) = 0.643; NS = 0.591]; (LSD post hoc test)
In order to assess the effect of mTBI and salubrinal treatment on the number of mature neurons 1 week post-injury, we stained brain slices with antibodies that were raised against NeuN, a marker for mature neuronal DNA (Fig. 4 ). We counted NeuN-stained neurons in a number of defined fields in the perirhinal and entorhinal cortex. As can be seen in Fig. 4 , mTBI significantly reduced the average number of neurons in the visualized cortical fields: 169.8 ± 10.02 (mTBI) and 205.3 ± 12.9 (control) NeuN-stained cells per 0.1 mm 2 ; * p < 0.05. Salubrinal significantly prevented this reduction in neurons (217.12 ± 5.91; ## p < 0.01; n = 6–8).
The Mechanism That Underlies the Protective Effect of Salubrinal
This experiment was aimed at confirming the immediate conventional target of salubrinal: the phosphorylation state of eIF2α. Indeed, western blot analysis of the cortices revealed that salubrinal administration to mTBI mice significantly prevented the decline in phosphorylated eIF2α 72 h post-injury (Fig. 5 ): 0.68 ± 0.06 (mTBI) compared to salubrinal-treated mTBI mice (0.88 ± 0.08; # p < 0.05; n = 5–27; Fig. 5 ). Fig. 5 Effect of salubrinal on the phosphorylation of eIF2α in the cortices of mTBI mice. Western blot analysis revealed that salubrinal administration to mTBI mice maintained the control levels of phospho-eIF2α and significantly prevented the reduction 72 h post-mTBI; One-way ANOVA [ F (4,71) = 4.323; p = 0.003]; (LSD post hoc test)
In order to evaluate the effect of salubrinal in the hippocampi of mTBI mice, we stained brain slices with antibodies raised against p-eIF2α and looked at the hippocampi. Quantifying the immunofluorescence intensity by the Immaris software revealed that mTBI reduced p-eIF2α intensity in the ipsilateral hippocampus, but this reduction did not reach significance. Salubrinal treatment elevated eIF2α phosphorylation dramatically: control 0.62 ± 0.25; mTBI 0.29 ± 0.05 and 6.75 ± 0.01 for salubrinal-treated mTBI mice ( p < 0.05; n = 5–8; Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Effect of salubrinal on the phosphorylation of eIF2α in the hippocampi of mTBI mice. phospho-eIF2α expression was assessed by immunofluorescent staining with anti-p-eIF2α ( red , the brains were removed 72 h post-mTBI). The blue stain is DAPI. The images and analysis were processed with the Imaris software. While mTBI did not cause a significant reduction in the phospho-eIF2α staining, salubrinal significantly elevated phospho- eIF2α staining. One-way ANOVA [ F (2,13) = 4.031; p = 0.043]; (LSD post hoc test) (Color figure online)
The next set of experiments was aimed at elucidating the effect of salubrinal administration on the expression and activation of the molecules downstream to eIF2α. Phosphorylated eIF2α is known to activate ATF4. Western blot analysis revealed that ATF-4 levels were not significantly reduced after mTBI, and that salubrinal administration did not alter ATF4 expression (Fig. 7 a, b). However, phosphorylated ATF4 (corrected to tubulin) levels declined significantly in mTBI cortices compared with control (0.75 ± 0.06 and 1.02 ± 0.04, respectively, * p < 0.05; Fig. 7 a, c, d). Salubrinal administration significantly prevented this reduction: 1.03 ± 0.04; # p < 0.05. Even when pATF-4 was corrected to total ATF4, salubrinal had a significant effect on pATF-4 levels in mTBI compared with non-treated mTBI mice (1.19 ± 0.12 and 0.799 ± 0.07, respectively, # p < 0.07) Fig. 7 d. Fig. 7 Effect of salubrinal on the activation of ATF4 in the brains of mTBI mice. While total ATF4 expression was not altered by mTBI (72 h post-injury), or by salubrinal ( a , b ), the phosphorylated ATF4 was significantly reduced by mTBI ( c ). Salubrinal significantly prevented this decline (p-ATF4 corrected to tubulin; One-way ANOVA): [ F (3,16) = 5.515; p = 0.009]; (LSD post hoc test). The same significant effect of salubrinal in mTBI mice was found when p-ATF4 was corrected to total ATF4 ( d ) [ F (3,16) = 2.642; NS = 0.083]; (One-way ANOVA LSD post hoc test)
Since phospho-eIF2α/ATF4 pathway can activate CHOP, and since we have previously reported that IGF-1 administration to mTBI mice significantly elevated the expression of CHOP (Rubovitch et al. ), we examined the effect of Salubrinal on CHOP levels in the cortices of mTBI mice. Unlike IGF-1, salubrinal did not elevate CHOP expression in mTBI mice compare to non-treated mice (Fig. 8 ). Fig. 8 Effect of salubrinal on the activation of CHOP in the brains of mTBI mice. Western blot analysis and one-way ANOVA revealed that neither mTBI nor salubrinal had any significant effect on the expression of CHOP in the mice brains 72 h post-injury
Discussion
The goal of the present study was to find a new potential target for pharmacological treatment following mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) in mice. We aimed to do so by seeking to understand the mechanisms that underlie the destructive pathways in the brains of mTBI-affected mice. Here, we report that by treating the injured mice with the phosphatase inhibitor salubrinal, we managed to prevent the short- and long-term cognitive deficits in mTBI mice. In addition, salubrinal prevented the loss of neurons in the cortices of the injured mice. As expected, western blot analysis revealed that salubrinal exerted its neuroprotective effects by maintaining the levels of eIF2α phosphorylation after mTBI and that the mechanism that underlies this protection involves the phosphorylation, but not the expression of total ATF4.
We have previously reported that our model of mTBI induced ER stress and activated ATF6 (Rubovitch et al. ). In addition, IGF-1 treatment exerted at least part of neuroprotection via the phosphorylation of eIF2α (data not shown) and CHOP (Rubovitch et al. ). In the present study, we have focused on the eIF2α pathway because this pathway is essential for adaptation to ER stress, elevating the ER folding capacity and translational recovery (Ron and Walter ). eIF2α is phosphorylated by the ER stress sensor PERK (PKR-like ER kinase). PERK is an ER-resident type I transmembrane protein whose N-terminal lumenal domain is sensitive to the upstream ER stress signal and whose C-terminal cytoplasmic domain directly phosphorylates eIF2α (Harding et al. , ; Ron ). The phosphorylation of eIF2α has been previously proven to provide powerful protection against oxidative stress and apoptosis (Tan et al. ). It was also found that hibernation, one of the most stress resistant states known in mammalian physiology, is associated with marked eIF2α phosphorylation and suppression of translation initiation (Frerichs et al. ). In addition, impaired eIF2α, either by knockout or mutation, had severe and devastating consequences (for review see Ron ). Indeed, our basic results show that mTBI significantly reduced eIF2α phosphorylation in the cortex, and this is in agreement with our hypothesis that part of mTBI-induced damage is mediated through the inhibition of the translational arm of the ISR. Hence, we aimed to target eIF2α phosphorylation in order to find a potential therapeutic strategy. We used salubrinal, a small molecule known to inhibit GADD34, the phosphatase responsible for the dephosphorylation of p-eIF2a, preventing the ER stress (Frerichs et al. ; Nakka et al. ). Salubrinal was previously found to be neuroprotective in animal models of ALS, cerebral ischemia/reperfusion and even in cell cultures (Huang et al. ; Saxena et al. ; Vaccaro et al. ), but the exact mechanism by which it exerts its neuroprotection is still elusive.
Our cognitive experiments (Fig. 2 ) show that salubrinal prevented the cognitive deficits to both visual and spatial memories after mTBI. Two injections in the first 24 h after injury prevented the cognitive damage even 30 days post-injury. These results are in agreement with the knowledge that the activation of the PERK/eIF2a in the first hour’s post-stress will prevent cell death and thus the following deficits (Ron ). The fact that a similar protective effect was found in both spatial and recognition memories may suggest that salubrinal acts directly both in the cortex and hippocampus. The western blot analysis of the hippocampi did not reveal a similar reduction of eIF2a phosphorylation as in the cortices of mTBI compared with control mice (data not shown); hence, we continued our study on cortices. The quantification of phospho-eIF2a immunofluorescence staining in the hippocampus area revealed that mTBI caused only a minor, nonsignificant reduction of the fluorescence intensity. Nevertheless, salubrinal administration to mTBI mice not only significantly prevented this effect, but dramatically elevated phospho-eIF2a immunofluorescence staining even compared with the control samples (Fig. 6 ). The finding that mTBI caused damage to spatial memory performance, as seen in the Y-maze test, should not be in contradiction to the fact that we did not find a significant reduction in phospho-eIF2a expression in the hippocampus. Although the hippocampus is generally linked with spatial learning, it is also known to be involved in long-term memory and less involved the short-term memory (Larocque et al. ; Nee and Jonides ). Our Y-maze test protocol represents a short-term memory rather than a long-term one (see the methods section). One should remember that the fact that mTBI did not affect the phospho-eIF2a expression in the hippocampus does not mean that no other pathological alterations were exerted by mTBI in the hippocampus.
One of the goals of the present study was to show the involvement of the translational/adaptive arm of the UPR in the destructive mechanisms after mTBI and to test the effect of salubrinal treatment on this pathway. Indeed, immunofluorescent staining of brain slices with Fluoro-Jade-B anti-NeuN antibodies (markers for degenerating neurons and mature neuronal DNA, respectively) showed a significant elevation in degenerating neurons in the cortices of the injured mice 72 h post-injury. Salubrinal treatment prevented this elevation (Fig. 3 ). In addition, 1 week post-injury, we tested the number of mature neurons stained with anti-NeuN. This was done in order to eliminate neurons in the degeneration and stain only the surviving neurons. The fact that mTBI induced a significant decline in neurons number in our mTBI model is in agreement with other studies in our laboratory regarding mTBI-induced general or apoptotic neuron loss in the brain (Rachmany et al. ; Tashlykov et al. ; Tweedie et al. ). The effect of salubrinal on neuronal degeneration and survival (Figs. 3 , 4 ) confirmed that it exerted its neuroprotective effect on cognition by preventing neuronal cell loss.
Salubrinal has been known to work directly on the phosphorylation of eIF2α. In other studies, it was either injected directly to the brain (Gao et al. ; Methippara et al. ), inserted subcutaneously by miniosmotic pumps (Zhu et al. ) or injected intraperitoneal (Sokka et al. ). Since our model is a minimal (!) TBI and we tried to avoid additional brain damage, we injected salubrinal ip. The fact that we found a significantly higher phosphorylation state of eIF2α in the cortices of mTBI mice compared to the injured brains (no treatment) confirmed that it did penetrate the BBB and its immediate target was, as expected, the eIF2α phosphatase. To conclude, salubrinal treatment prevented the mTBI-induced reduction in phospho- eIF2α in the cortex and elevated it in the hippocampus. In addition, it prevented the elevation in degenerating neurons and maintained the surviving neurons in the cortices of injured mice. These results may suggest that salubrinal exerted its neuroprotection via the above mechanism.
The immediate known target of eIF2α is activating transcription factor-4 (ATF4), which was also found to participate in adaptation and survival mechanisms following ER stress (for review see Ron ). We found that neither mTBI nor the administration of salubrinal to the injured mice changed the total expression of ATF4 in the cortices. Nevertheless, mTBI significantly reduced the phosphorylated ATF4 and salubrinal prevented this decline (Fig. 7 ). Although most reports indicate that eIF2α phosphorylation induced a translational effect and elevated the total expression of ATF4 (Baird and Wek ), numerous studies show that it activated ATF4 in a post-translational manner and elevated the phosphorylated fraction of ATF4 (Li et al. ; Myers et al. ).
Previously, we suggested IGF1 as a neuroprotective drug. IGF-1 is known to modulate cell fate, to inhibit cell death, and to promote cell survival and proliferation (Aleman and Torres-Aleman ). Thus, it was previously suggested as a neuroprotective agent and was found by us and by others to reduce cognitive and biochemical brain damage in several models (Rubovitch et al. , ; Saatman et al. ). Its classic mechanism of action involves the PI3K/Akt pathways (Cantley ; Chang et al. ). Nevertheless, since the IGF-1 pathway was previously linked to the ER stress in several organisms in other models (Cohen et al. ; Guan et al. ; Tang ), we tested the effect of IGF-1 administration on the ER stress proteins in mTBI mice and found that CHOP was significantly elevated (Rubovitch et al. ). Although CHOP is known to be induced by the activation of the pro-apoptotic arm of the ER stress (ATF6 and IRE1), additional evidence links it to the anti-apoptotic pathway of the ER stress and to neuroprotection (Chen et al. ; Gow and Wrabetz ; Nashine et al. ). We have previously reported that the neuroprotective effect of IGF-1 administration to mTBI mice involved the activation of CHOP (Rubovitch et al. ). Salubrinal, on the other hand, had no effect on CHOP expression in mTBI mice (Fig. 8 ), suggesting a different mechanism of action. Selective and specific molecules like salubrinal can be potential candidates for pharmacological therapy in brain injury. Along with the growing number of reports regarding the neuroprotectivity of salubrinal in various models of pathological brain conditions including Alzheimer disease (Huang et al. ), there were also some studies that found salubrinal exacerbated amyloidogenesis and memory impairment in AD models (O’Connor et al. ; Segev et al. ). Thus, this specific molecule and other similar candidates should be further examined and indicated for specific conditions. Nevertheless, this does not contradict our suggestion to consider the eIF2α/ATF4 pathway as a potential target for pharmacologic intervention in traumatic brain injury.