Introduction
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is a late-onset neuromuscular disorder characterized by progressive ptosis, dysphagia, and proximal muscle weakness, with unique nuclear filament inclusions in skeletal muscle fibers as its pathological hallmark (Tome and Fardeau ). The underlying cause is the abnormal (GCN) expansion or, more rarely, point mutations leading to a lengthening of the tract in exon 1 of the polyadenylate-binding protein nuclear 1 gene ( PABPN1 ) on chromosome 14q11 (Brais et al. ; Robinson et al. ). The normal allele is (GCG) 6 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 encoding 10 alanines (Ala10) (Brais et al. ). PABPN1 variants were first described as pure (GCG) expansions of the normal (GCG) 6 stretch (Brais et al. ). Subsequently, additional (GCA) interspersions within (GCG) expansions were reported in various populations (Muller et al. ; Nakamoto et al. ). Now, (GCN) 12–17 has been widely accepted as the autosomal dominant form (Brais ). The extremely uncommon autosomal recessive form of OPMD has been shown to result from the homozygosity of (GCN) 11 expansion, which was referred to as (GCG) 7 previously (Brais et al. ). This (GCN) 11 polymorphism, with a prevalence of 1–2 % in North America, Europe, and Japan, is also considered as a phenotype modifier (Brais ; Brais et al. ).
OPMD has a worldwide distribution, particularly prevalent in the French Canadian population (1:1,000) and in Bukhara Jews living in Israel (1:600) (Brais ). The clusters of OPMD cases identified in various populations recently make it possible to explore the phenotype–genotype correlation. However, OPMD appears to be sparse among East Asians, with most families being reported in Japan (Uyama et al. , ; Nagashima et al. ; Nakamoto et al. ). Thus far, only rare cases have been reported in mainland China (You et al. ; Ye et al. ). Taiwan, sharing a similar genetic background, has a higher prevalence rate (Kuo et al. ; Huang et al. ). Additionally, at least 3 Chinese immigrants, originally from southern China, have been reported to have OPMD (Lim et al. ; Goh et al. ; Ruegg et al. ). Therefore, it has been suspected that OPMD is being under-diagnosed in mainland China. Here, we report the clinical and genetic characteristics of 34 OPMD patients from 13 unrelated families in northern China.
Materials and Methods
All 34 subjects from 13 unrelated families were recruited through the Neurology department of Qilu Hospital of Shandong University and Peking University First Hospital. All probands and some of their relatives were analyzed for (GCN) expansion in exon 1 of the PABPN1 gene by Kingmed Diagnostics, Guangzhou, according to standard protocol (Jiahui et al. ), and each of them carried an expanded (GCN) repeat.
Nerve conduction studies (NCS) and needle electromyography (EMG) were performed in 10 of 13 probands. Repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) test was performed in 8 probands. Muscle biopsy was carried out in probands from each family under local anesthesia. Muscle specimens for histological examination were frozen in isopentane that was precooled in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. Serial frozen Sects. (8 μm) were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H & E), modified Gomori trichrome, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide tetrazolium dehydrogenase, succinate dehydrogenase, cytochrome c oxidase, oil red O, periodic acid Schiff, and adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase; pH 4.3, 4.6, and 10.8). Muscle specimens from 4 probands were prepared for electron microscopy. These specimens were fixed in ice-cold glutaraldehyde and osmium tetroxide successively. After rapid dehydration in graded series of acetone, tissue blocks were embedded in Epon. Thin sections (1 μm) of the embedded blocks were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined by transmission electron microscopy.
Results
Genetic Analysis
Genetic analysis of 13 unrelated families revealed pure (GCG) expansions of the PABPN1 gene in 10 families; specifically, we saw (GCG) 8 in 1 family, (GCG) 9 in 6 families, (GCG) 10 in 2 families, and (GCG) 11 in 1 family. We detected (GCA) triplet interspersions in 3 families. The (GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCG) 3 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 allele was found in 2 families. In another family shown in Fig. 1 (family 1), the proband was a compound heterozygote with (GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 /(GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCG) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 . Her elder sister had one normal allele and the mutated allele of (GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCG) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 . Her younger brother, who carried the (GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 allele, was asymptomatic and was not included in subsequent phenotypic summary. All genotypes were summarized in Table 1 . Fig. 1 a The pedigree of family 1. b The genotypes of members in family 1 were (GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 /(GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCG) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 in the proband II2, (GCN) 10 /(GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCG) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 in II1 and (GCN) 10 /(GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 in II3. The lowest one was a normal control with (GCN) 10 /(GCN) 10 Table 1 Genotypes of PABPN1 in the analyzed population Genotype Total alanine codons/(GCN) No. of families Normal sequence (GCG) 6 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 10 Pure (GCG) expansion (GCG) 8 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 12 1 (GCG) 9 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 13 6 (GCG) 10 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 14 2 (GCG) 11 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 15 1 Expansion with (GCA) interspersion (GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 11 1 a (GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCG) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 12 1 a (GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCG) 3 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 14 2 a This family includes one compound heterozygote with (GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 /(GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCG) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1
Clinical Presentations
Out of 34 cases in our cohort, 19 were male and 15 were female. The mean age at onset was 47.2 ± 11.2 years (range 27–67 years). The mean disease duration was 15.5 ± 12.6 years (range 1–53 years) at the time of the last examination.
Dysphagia was the most common initial symptom (18/34), with the mean age at the onset of 44.8 ± 10.7 years. Ptosis was the initial symptom in 9 out of 34 cases, with the mean age at the onset of 57.8 ± 7.7 years. Two patient presented with both symptoms at onset. Additionally, two had dysarthria, two had both dysphagia and dysarthria, and one had limb muscle weakness initially. There was a significant difference between the age at onset in the dysphagia group and that in the ptosis group as studied by Mann–Whitney U test ( p = 0.0036).
During the course of the disease, 30 of 34 cases suffered from dysphagia, mainly presenting as prolonged meal time. None of our patients needed nasogastric tube feedings. Twenty-seven of 34 cases had ptosis as the disease progressed, with visual impairment caused by the ptosis being the main complaint in our cohort. One patient underwent levator resection, but ptosis recurred 2 years after the surgery. Ophthalmoplegia was present in 18 out of 34 cases, with the involvement of superior rectus being the most common. Markedly limited eye movement in all directions was present in only one patient. Fourteen patients had predominantly proximal limb weakness, and 9 of them had mild distal muscle involvement along with the disease’s progression. All these cases were ambulatory at the last visit. Sixteen patients aged between 54 and 79 years, with the mean disease duration of 10.8 ± 9.4 years (range 1–29 years), had no limb muscle weakness. Four patients had no limb muscle weakness until they died of unrelated causes, at the age of 68–71.
Four families with more than 3 patients (family 2, 3, 4, and 5) showed intrafamilial homogeneity to a great extent on initial symptom and occurrence of limb muscle weakness (Online Resource 1). As for patient IV6 from family 3 and patient III1 and III2 from family 5, the absence of limb muscle weakness may be due to the early stage they were in (Online Resource 1). In family 1, the proband with (GCN) 11 /(GCN) 12 had dysphagia and subsequently ptosis at the age of 53, then developed lower limb weakness at the age of 54, whereas her sister with (GCN) 10 /(GCN) 12 presented with dysphagia at the age of 57, which was the only symptom until the last examination (Online Resource 1).
Other Investigations
Serum creatine kinase levels that were measured in 21 cases ranged from normal values to 3.7-fold of the upper normal limit. Electrophysiological studies were performed in 10 probands (Online Resource 2). Only 1 patient showed mildly decreased conduction velocity in NCS, with normal latency, compound muscle action potential, and sensory nerve action potential. Needle EMG revealed a normal pattern in 4 cases, myogenic changes in 4 cases, neurogenic changes in 1 case, and a myogenic/neurogenic mix pattern in 1 case. RNS tests in 8 of the cases were normal. Muscle biopsies performed in 13 probands at different disease stages revealed myopathic changes with rimmed vacuoles. The mean frequency of rimmed vacuoles was 1.7 %. By electron microscopy, intranuclear inclusions formed by tubular filaments were found in 3 of 4 probands (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Tubulofilamentous inclusions in the nucleus marked with arrow (lead citrate and uranyl acetate staining, ×20,000)
Discussion
Analysis of the PABPN1 gene in our cohort revealed 7 different expansion types, with (GCG) 6 (GCA) 1 (GCA) 3 (GCG) 1 being first described here. Although cryptic (GCN) 11 has been widely referred to as the polymorphic allele, to the best of our knowledge, no (GCA) insertion has been reported before. The genetic heterogeneity implies multiple founders in Chinese population. Similar situation has been depicted in UK and German populations (Robinson et al. ; Muller et al. ). The genotypes with (GCA) interspersions, found in 3 families, further support the theory that unequal crossing over is the causative molecular mechanism leading to OPMD.
Phenotypically, dysphagia was the most common initial symptom in our cohort, while ptosis was the most common initial symptom in the previous large-scale studies (Mirabella et al. ; Hill et al. ; Tondo et al. ). A possible reason for this observation is the eyelid anatomical variation in different ethnic groups. Asian eyelids have a distinctive appearance with a narrower palpebral fissure, a lower or absent lid crease, and a greater fullness in upper lids, compared with that of the Caucasians (Liu and Hsu ; Kim and Bhatki ). Such features in Asians may make ptosis less obvious, giving rise to the unawareness of an insidious onset of ptosis. However, further support based on large-scale studies in Asian groups is needed. Additionally, the low education level of our patients may also contribute to the unawareness. A simple stochastic incident due to the small sample is still possible. OPMD could not be excluded simply by the absence of ptosis, since Hill et al. also reported 23 % of patients presented with dysphagia initially (Hill et al. ). Another interesting finding in our cohort is that the patients in the dysphagia group had a much earlier onset compared with those in the ptosis group, which is in accordance with the finding in the Spanish population (Tondo et al. ). As for the correlation between severity of the disease and the length of the repeats, no conclusion could be drawn based on our patients. However, intrafamilial homogeneity was noticed, which further suggests that other genetic background apart from the already known genotype could modulate the age at onset and the presentation of some symptoms.
Brais et al. first speculated that the (GCN) 11 polymorphism might have disease-modifying effects, in that a compound heterozygote with (GCN) 11 /(GCN) 13 displayed a more severe disease phenotype than a sibling with (GCN) 10 /(GCN) 13 (Brais et al. ). Subsequently, Hill et al. described a compound heterozygote sibling pair with (GCN) 11 /(GCN) 12 who had a much earlier onset than unrelated subjects with (GCN) 10 /(GCN) 12 (Hill et al. ). Such situations are in line with what we observed in our family 5 (Online Resource 1). However, such compound heterozygotes in the Italian population did not appear to have a more severe phenotype or an earlier onset (Mirabella et al. ). Further data are required to clarify the role of (GCN) 11 polymorphism in modifying the phenotype.
In conclusion, our data confirm the spectrum of genotypes reported in OPMD and support the theory of unequal crossing over. The heterogeneous genetic basis of OPMD implies that there is no single founder effect in Chinese population. Our data also lend support to the point that (GCN) 11 polymorphism may have a disease-modifying effect. Finally, phenotypic intrafamilial homogeneity observed in our series suggests that other genetic factors may contribute to the modification of the phenotype.