Introduction
Mitochondria are intriguing cellular organelles that exhibit numerous structural and functional specificities. They are responsible for producing the majority of the cell energy (Heller et al. ) while playing key roles in the regulation of cellular homeostasis (Rieusset ) and apoptosis (Gustafsson and Gottlieb ). There is growing evidence that mitochondrial function is impaired in hyperglycemia and insulin resistance (Rieusset ; Joseph et al. ). The relationship between mitochondrial deficiency and diabetes is supported by the findings of a decrease in mitochondrial density (Morino et al. ) added to an enhanced reactive oxygen species (ROS) production in high glucose conditions (Maechler et al. ). Several types of potassium channels expressed at the plasma membrane have been documented to also be present in the inner mitochondrial membrane, these include the ATP-sensitive potassium channel (mitoK ATP ), the intermediate and small conductance Ca 2+ -regulated potassium channels, voltage-gated potassium channels, twin-pore potassium channel and the BK Ca channel (mitoBK Ca ) (Szabo et al. ; Szabo and Zoratti ). Potassium channels in mitochondria have been proposed to regulate mitochondrial membrane potential, respiration and matrix volume (Bednarczyk ; Cardoso et al. ). We have shown in previous works the presence in control animals of two mitoBK Ca channels, a ChTx- and ATP-insensitive–IbTx-sensitive mitoBK Ca channel (Fahanik-Babaei et al. ) and ChTx- and ATP-sensitive mitoBK Ca channel (Fahanik-Babaei et al. ). Because mitochondrial potassium channels have been involved in several mitochondrial functions including cytoprotection, apoptosis and calcium homeostasis, and since reports indicated mitochondrial dysfunction in diabetes conditions, we hypothesized that gating behaviors of ChTx- and ATP-insensitive–IbTx-sensitive mitoBK Ca channel might be altered in diabetes. In support of this proposal is the observation in coronary smooth muscle cells of an altered Ca 2+ -dependent gating in BK Ca channel from type 2 diabetic rats, an effect due in part to a decrease in the BK Ca channel β1 subunit expression (Lu et al. ). Single-channel recordings of BK channels expressed in HEK293 cells have also shown that BK channels in cells cultured in high glucose conditions present a 60 % decrease in open probability in low Ca 2+ compared to control. These results were interpreted in terms of a redox control of the BK channel activity (Lu et al. ). As BK Ca channel kinetics, voltage and apparent Ca 2+ sensitivity are regulated by β subunits (β1, β2, β3 and β4) the expression of which is tissue specific (Shruti et al. ), it follows that modulation of BK Ca channel activity in pathological conditions could be consequent to a modification in the interaction patterns between the pore forming α subunit and the associated β subunit (McGahon et al. ), and/or to direct alteration through redox processes of the channel structure.
A study was thus undertaken in which we investigated potential changes in brain mitoBK Ca channel activities and/or modification in mitoBK Ca α and β subunits expression under diabetic conditions. Our results indicate that the channel gating and permeation properties are affected in channels from mitochondrial membranes prepared from diabetic rats compared to control, an effect potentially linked to a modification of the mitoBK Ca α and β4 subunits expression levels and/or an increase in ROS production.
Materials and Methods
Materials
HEPES ( N -2-hydroxyethylpiperazine- N ′-2-ethanesulfonic acid), sodium bicarbonate, d -manitol, sucrose, digitonin, potassium chloride, Trizma–HCl, bovine serum albumin (BSA), nagarase, potassium chloride, EGTA, iberiotoxin (IbTx), charybdotoxin (ChTx), ATP, glibenclamide and 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) were purchased from Sigma (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and n -decane was obtained from Merck (Merck KGaa, Dermstadt, Germany). Salts and all solvents were of analytical grade.
Solutions
Solutions for mitochondrial isolation were as follows: MSE solution (225 mM manitol, 75 mM sucrose, 1 mM EGTA, 5 mM HEPES, 1 mg/ml BSA, pH 7.4); MSE-nagarse solution (0.05 % nagarse in MSE solution); MSE-digitonin solution (0.02 % digitonin in MSE solution).
Animals
Male Wister rats (180–210 g) were housed in a controlled environment (temperature 22 ± 2 °C, humidity 50 ± 10 % and 12:12-h light/dark cycle) and were acclimatized for a week before use in experiments. Rats had free access to food and water ad libitum. Animal maintenance and treatment were in accordance with the Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (National Institute of Health Publication No. 80–23, revised 1996), as approved by the Research and Ethics Committee of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences (194/-90/3/18; 2011).
Induction of Diabetes
To induce diabetes, we used a single intraperitoneal injection of 45 mg/kg streptozotocin (STZ) dissolved in 0.1 M citrate buffer (pH 4.5). Seven and 14 days after the injection, type 2 diabetes was confirmed with fasting serum glucose levels above 200 mg/dl and increased serum insulin concentrations (Islam and Choi ).
Mitochondria Isolation
Brain mitochondria were isolated from diabetic rats according to the protocol described by Rosenthal et al. ( ) with a small modification. Rat was anesthetized by ether, and brain was immediately removed and homogenized in 10 ml ice-cold MSE-nagarse solution at 600 U/s using Potter homogenizer. Twenty milliliters of ice-cold MSE solution was then added (step 1) and centrifuged at 2,000× g at 4 °C. After 4-min centrifugation, supernatant was centrifuged at 12,000× g for 9 min at 4 °C (Beckman model J-21B, USA). Following dissolving the pellet in 10 ml of ice-cold MSE and digitonin, solution was manually homogenized for 10 min to obtain a homogenates (step 2). The suspension was then centrifuged at 12,000× g at 4 °C for 11 min, and the pellet was dissolved in 300 μl MSE solution (35 mg protein/ml) (step 3). To extract mitochondrial inner membrane as previously mentioned (Da Cruz et al. ), we suspended mitochondria in H 2 O at a concentration of 5 mg/ml, stirred for 20 min on ice and homogenized with a glass homogenizer, followed by twice centrifugation at 12,000× g for 5 min. The pellet (mitoplasts) was then treated with Na 2 CO 3 0.1 M, pH 11.5 at a final concentration of 0.5 mg/ml for 20 min on ice and centrifuged at 100,000× g for 30 min. Finally, mitochondrial inner membrane vesicles were stored in 20 μl aliquots in MSE solution, pH 7.4 at −80 °C until use (step 4). Vesicles prepared from brain mitochondria obtained from nontreated animals were taken as controls.
l-α-Phosphatidylcholine Extraction
l -α-Phosphatidylcholine ( l -α-lecithin) was extracted from fresh egg yolk according to the protocol described by Singleton et al. ( ).
Electrophysiological Studies
To perform the experiments, we used planar lipid bilayer technique. Bilayer lipid membranes were formed in a 200-μm diameter hole drilled in a Derlin cup (Warner instrument Corporation, Hamden, CT, USA), which separated two chambers ( cis / trans ). In conditions where right-side-out vesicles are added to the cis chamber, the cis side should in fact correspond to the cytoplasmic side (Ashley ). The chambers contained 200/50 mM KCl ( cis/trans ) solutions and contaminant levels of Ca 2+ (≈1 μM; ICP-AES technique, Varian 735, Australia) in both sides. The pH on cis and trans faces was adjusted to 7.4 with Trizma–HEPES. Planar phospholipid bilayers were painted using a suspension of l -α-lecithin in n -decane at a concentration of 25 mg/ml. Formation and thinning of the bilayers were monitored electrically by capacitance measurements and optical observations. Typical capacitance values ranged from 200 to 300 pF. Single-channel currents were measured with a BC-525D amplifier (Warner Instrument, USA). The cis chamber was voltage-clamped relative to the trans chamber, which was grounded. Electrical connections were made by Ag/AgCl electrodes and agar salt bridges (3 M KCl). All recordings were filtered at 1 kHz using a 4-pole Bessel filter, digitized at a sampling rate of 10 kHz and stored for off-line analysis by pClamp10 (Axon Instruments Inc., USA). Unitary channel conductance was calculated from the current–voltage ( I – V ) relationship. The channel open probability ( P o ) was calculated using the standard event detection algorithms in Pclamp10, on segments of continuous recordings lasting 50 s.
Western Blotting
Mitochondrial inner membrane vesicles were electrophoresed in sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by transfer to nitrocellulose membrane and probed with specific antibodies. To confirm the purity of mitochondrial preparation, we used markers of mitochondria (Cox1, SC-58347, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), cytoskeleton (Actin, SC-1615, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), endoplasmic reticulum (Calnexin, SC-11397, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and Golgi (58KGolgi protein, AB-6284, Abcam, Cambridge, UK). Expressions of BK Ca channel α and β4 subunits in the rat brain mitochondria were determined by antibody directed against BK Ca channel α (rabbit polyclonal antibody, AB-104467, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and β4 subunits (KCNMB4, goat polyclonal antibody, SC-161767, Santa Cruz, CA, USA). As a positive control for the specificity of primary antibody, CoxIV (rabbit polyclonal, AB-16056, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) was applied. Primary antibodies were detected using horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (goat anti-rabbit IgG, AP-7181, rabbit anti-goat IgG, AP-8039, goat anti-mouse IgG, AP-8036, Razi, Tehran, Iran). Immunoreactive polypeptides were detected by chemiluminescence using enhanced ECL reagents (Amersham Bioscience, USA) and subsequent autoradiography. Quantification of results was performed by film densitometric scan using Image J after background subtraction.
Statistical Analysis
Following protein densitometry, mean ± SE (standard error) of multiple samples was calculated and compared with the control values using unpaired t test. Differences were considered statistically at values with P < 0.05.
Results
Serum Glucose and Insulin Concentrations
Hyperglycemia occurred within 7 weeks after the injection of STZ. The mean ± SE fasting serum glucose level was 113 ± 7 before the injection, compared to 303 ± 12 and 326 ± 12 mg/dl 7 and 14 days after the injection of STZ, respectively. The respective values for fasting insulin concentrations were 0.65 ± 0.07, 0.87 ± 0.1 and 0.92 ± 0.09 µg/l under these conditions. These results confirmed the validity of our type 2 diabetic rat model.
Biophysical Properties of Brain Mitochondrial Inner Membrane Potassium Channels Under Diabetic Conditions
Figure 1 a presents examples of single-channel recordings measured in asymmetrical KCl concentrations (200 mM cis /50 mM trans ) obtained from mitochondrial membranes from diabetic rats. Clearly, channel activity was voltage dependent with decreased channel opening separated by longer silent periods at increasingly negative potential values. Brief openings to a subconductance level were observed on a few occasions in control conditions, a behavior not seen in channels obtained from diabetic rat mitochondrial membranes (Fig. 1 b). The channel current–voltage ( I – V ) curve was linear with no evidence of inward rectification at potentials between +40 and −40 mV (Fig. 1 c). The reversal potential was estimated to a value close to −30 mV as expected for a cationic selective channel. Importantly, our results indicate a reduction in unitary conductance of approximately 78 % with a value of 46 ± 2 pS ( n = 6) for channels obtained from diabetic rat membrane preparations compared to 211 ± 8 for the nondiabetic control (Fig. 1 c). In addition, the results presented in Fig. 1 d show a reduction in the channel open probability P o with values ranging from ~0.2 at −40 mV to ~0.4 at +40 mV ( n = 6) in channels from diabetic rat preparations, compared to 0.5 ± 0.03 at −40 mV and 0.9 ± 0.01( n = 5) at +40 mV for the control channels (Fahanik-Babaei et al. , ). Curve fitting the observed P o voltage dependence to a Boltzmann equation led to a voltage for half maximal activation of 26.36 ± 1 mV ( n = 6) for the diabetic model compared to 11.4 ± 1.1 ( n = 5) for the control rats with an equivalent gating charge z of 2.642 ± 0.22 and 4.7 ± 0.9, respectively. These results confirmed that channels coming from diabetic rat brain preparations present an overall 2–2.5 decrease in P o relative to nondiabetic brain preparations. Fig. 1 Conductance and gating properties of a BK channel incorporated from STZ-treated rat mitochondria preparations. a Single-channel recordings in 200/50 mM KCl ( cis/trans ) conditions after fusion of mitochondrial inner membrane vesicles from diabetic rat brains to planar lipid bilayer at potentials ranging from −40 to +30 mV. b Single-channel recordings illustrating the differences in current jump amplitude and open probability between mitoBK channels obtained from a control and a diabetic rat membrane preparation. The recordings were carried at +30 mV. The arrow indicates the closed-state current level. c Differences in single-channel current voltage relationships between diabetic and control rats. Data points are mean ± SE, obtained from six experiments. d Variations as a function of voltage of the channel open probability ( P o ) for STZ and control rats. Data fitted to a Boltzmann distribution: \(P_{\text{o}} = V_{ \hbox{min} } + (V_{ \hbox{max} } - V_{ \hbox{min} } )/( 1 + {\text{e}}^{{Z_{\text{d}} F(V - V_{\text{mid}} )RT}} )\) , with V mid : 26.36 ± 1 and 11.4 ± 1.1 mV; Z d : 2.642 ± 0.22 and 4.7 ± 0.9 for STZ-treated rats and control groups, respectively. Each point represents the average P o as a function of voltages from six different experiments. Control groups ( dashed lines ) were previously published (Fahanik-Babaei et al. )
Pharmacological Properties of the Potassium Channel
We have reported in previous works two different types of brain mitoBK Ca channels, namely an ATP-insensitive mitoBK Ca channel blocked by IbTx but not ChTx (Fahanik-Babaei et al. ) and an ATP-sensitive mitoBK Ca channel blocked by IbTx and ChTx (Fahanik-Babaei et al. ). Experiments were thus performed to determine the nature of the mitoBK Ca channels observed from diabetic brain rat preparations. As seen in Fig. 2 a, the addition of 100 nM of IbTx in the cis chamber resulted in an inhibition of the channel activities at +30 and −10 mV ( n = 3). In contrast, the addition of 300 nM ChTx to cis compartment did not alter neither the channel conducting nor the channel gating behavior at +30 mV and −40 mV (Fig. 2 b, n = 3). To further characterize this channel, we tested the effect of ATP on the channel behavior. The results in Fig. 3 demonstrate that the addition of ATP (2.5 mM) on the cis side of reconstituted potassium channel did not affect the channel amplitude and P o at negative or positive voltages ( n = 3). Fig. 2 The effect of IbTx and ChTx on mitoBK Ca channel activity. Single-channel recordings obtained in 200/50 mM KCl ( cis/trans) conditions for mitoBK Ca channels reconstituted from diabetic rat brain preparations after the cis addition of IbTx (100 nM) at +30 and −10 mV ( n = 3) and b ChTx (300 nM) at +30 and −40 mV ( n = 3). Arrows indicate the closed-state current levels Fig. 3 The effect on mitoBK Ca activity of ATP at different voltages. Recording conditions as described in Fig. 2 . The addition of ATP (2.5 mM) to the cis side has no effect on the unitary current amplitude nor on the channel open probability +20 and −10 mV ( n = 3). Arrows indicate the closed-state current levels
Altogether these results indicate that the channel obtained from diabetic rat brain preparations corresponds to an ATP-, ChTx-insensitive–IbTx-sensitive mitoBK Ca channel.
Characterization of Mitochondrial Fractions
To confirm the mitochondrial origin of the membrane preparation we used for channel incorporation, the expression of specific markers for cytoskeleton (actin, 45 kDa), endoplasmic reticulum (calnexin, 90 kDa), Golgi matrix (58 K Golgi, 58 kDa) and mitochondrial inner membrane (cox1, 39 kDa) was assayed by Western blotting. The observations presented in Fig. 4 confirmed that the mitochondrial fraction we used did not include specific proteins coming from other subcellular compartments. Fig. 4 Characterization of the cell fraction used for channel reconstitution: Western blotting of diabetic rat brain membrane preparations. Membranes were probed with organelle-specific antibodies. Plasma membrane marker: actin (C-11); 45 kDa; cytoskeletal marker: calnexin, 90 kDa, Golgi marker: 58 K Golgi protein and mitochondrial membrane marker: Cox1 (1D6), 39 kDa. Purification steps (homogenization procedures in steps 1 and 2; mitochondria extraction in step 3; and inner mitochondrial membrane extraction in step 4) are described in details in “ Materials and Methods ” section
Immunodetection of BK Channel α and β4 Subunits Expressions
One possible mechanism susceptible to account for the differences seen in permeation and gating properties between mitoBK Ca channels from normal and diabetic rats concerns the expressions of BK Ca -forming subunits, which may be modified under pathological situations. There is already evidence that the β4 subunit in brain upregulates BK Ca channels by left shifting its activation curve in high Ca 2+ conditions (Weiger et al. ). Experiments were thus undertaken to determine whether there were changes in the BK Ca channel β4 and α subunits expression between control and diabetic rats. The immunoblots presented in Fig. 5 a, c indicate in this regard that protein expression of inner mitochondrial BK Ca channel β4 (~30 kDa) and α subunits is decreased by approximately 26 and 30 % in membrane preparation from diabetic rats relative to control, respectively. These results are summarized in the densitometry bar plots shown in Fig. 5 b, d. Our results thus indicate a different pattern of β4 and BK Ca α subunits expression between membrane preparations from rat brain in diabetes compared to nondiabetes conditions. Fig. 5 Representative immunoblots of the BK Ca channel β4 and α subunits in rat brain. a Western blots of BK Ca channel β4 subunit (30 kDa) expressed in diabetic and control rat mitochondrial inner membrane preparations. CoxIV (~17 kDa) was used, as a positive control for the specificity of primary antibody ( n = 4). b Bar graph illustrating the change in β4 expression between control and diabetic rat brain membrane preparations. c Western blot of the BK Ca channel α subunit (130 kDa) expressed in the mitochondrial inner membrane of control and STZ rat brain preparations. CoxIV (~17 kDa) was used, as a positive control for the specificity of primary antibody ( n = 4). d Bar graph illustrating the changes in α subunit expression between the two membrane preparations. *Significance at P < 0.05 using t test for unpaired data
Discussion
The present findings demonstrate that the activity of the brain mitoBK Ca channel is decreased in diabetic rats, with a reduced conductance plus altered voltage-dependent gating properties, including a decreased P o and prolonged closed dwell times. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that the expression pattern of brain mitoBK Ca α and β4 subunits is modified in our rat diabetic model. A modification in α and β4 subunits expression could contribute to the observed changes in mitoBK Ca gating properties while being partly responsible for mitochondrial impairment.
BK Ca channels have been found in the mitochondrial inner membranes of cardiomyocytes (Xu et al. ), human glioma cell line LN229 (Siemen et al. ) and brain (Piwonska et al. ; Skalska et al. ). In cardiac cells for instance, mitoBK Ca channels have been involved in cytoprotection (Stowe et al. ), and pharmacological preconditioning using the BK Ca channel opener NS1619 was found to protect the heart against infarction (Piwonska et al. ). We have already identified in mitochondrial membrane preparations from rat brains a 211 pS mitoBK Ca channel inhibited by IbTx but insensitive to ChTx and ATP (Fahanik-Babaei et al. ). In the current study, we showed that addition of IbTx but not ChTx or ATP to the cis side caused a strong inhibition of the reconstituted K + channel derived from brain mitochondrial membrane, thus confirming that the channel incorporated from diabetic rat brain derived vesicles correspond to the ChTx- and ATP-insensitive–IbTx-sensitive mitoBK Ca identified previously. More importantly, our results point toward important differences in both conductance and gating properties between the channels obtained from diabetic rat membrane relative to control.
The single mitoBK Ca channel data presented here provide for the first time direct evidence for a decrease in channel open probability and unitary conductance for channels obtained from diabetic rat brains compared to nondiabetic controls. We showed in this work that the channels from diabetic rat brain gate preferentially to a subconductance level corresponding to approximately 25 % of the full conductance level measured for the control channel. Such behavior was rarely seen in membrane preparations from nondiabetic rats and could be indicative of a partial block mechanism or a modification of the pore structure consequent to a change in the channel structure coming from high glucose exposure (Fahanik-Babaei et al. ).
Our results also demonstrate a 2.5-fold reduction in the mitoBK Ca channel open probability in diabetic relative to normal rats. A decrease in open probability has already been reported for the plasma membrane coronary BK Ca channel in STZ-treated rats, an effect proposed to be linked to a downregulation (fourfold) of the channel β1 expression (Wang et al. ). Similarly, BK Ca currents were decreased in smooth muscle cells from insulin-resistant rats compared to a control group, an effect accompanied by a lower expression (twofold) of the channel β1 but not α subunits (Li et al. ). Because β1 was documented to significantly increase BK Ca channel sensitivity to Ca 2+ , it was argued that the observed decrease in BK Ca currents in STZ-treated or insulin-resistant rats likely resulted from a lower β1 expression level leading to a reduced Ca 2+ sensitivity (Li et al. ). Notably, β2 and β4 subunits have been reported to be expressed in neurons, with β4 documented to confer properties of the so-called type II BK channel isotypes, characterized by slow gating kinetics and resistance to iberiotoxin and charybdotoxin blockade (Meera et al. ; Weiger et al. ; Wang et al. ).
There is evidence, including our current work, that BK Ca and β4 subunits are both present in the inner membrane of neuronal mitochondria, thus suggesting a modulation of mitoBK Ca channel activity through β4 interactions (Douglas et al. ; Skalska et al. ). The effect of β4 on the plasma BK Ca channel voltage dependence was found to be complex with a right shift in the voltage for half activation ( V 1/2 ) at low Ca 2+ (<18 μm) and a left shift of V 1/2 at higher Ca 2+ levels (Weiger et al. ). If the presence of β4 causes a left shift in the channel voltage dependence in high Ca 2+ , decreasing β4 expression under these conditions could translate into a right shit in voltage dependence as we observed in STZ-treated rat membrane preparations (Latorre et al. ). Our results thus appear to be compatible with a high Ca 2+ β4 modulation model where a deregulation of the β4 subunit in diabetic rats would lead to a right shift in V 1/2 and a decrease in Ca 2+ sensitivity as observed experimentally. Our data do not provide information on the actual concentration of β4 and α subunits at the mitochondrial membrane. However, in conditions where the density of β4 subunits limits the formation of β4–α complexes (much more α than β4), a decrease in β4 expression is likely to have a major impact on the density of β4–α complexes formed and thus on the properties of the BK Ca channel present at the mitochondrial membrane. A downregulation of β4 expression cannot yet capture all the properties attributed BK Ca α/β4 interactions. For instance, the presence of β4 has been reported to result in brain BK Ca channels insensitive to IbTx (Weiger et al. ), a result not supported by the findings presented in Fig. 2 . BK Ca single-channel recordings obtained in granule cells from β4 knockout mice have confirmed that β4 is indeed essential for IbTx insensitivity (Brenner et al. ). We cannot currently rule out the possibility that the interactions between mitoBK Ca and β4 differ compared to BK Ca channels at the plasma membrane, so that the presence of β4 does not affect the channel sensitivity to IbTx. In fact, interactions between BK Ca α/β4 subunits may involve other protein constituents not present when channels are incorporated in a lipid bilayer. We also observed twofold decreases in the equivalent gating charge z in diabetic rats compare with control group. Such behavior cannot be accounted for by a simple downregulation in β4 expression as the presence of β4 was found to slightly decrease and not increase gating charges at high Ca 2+ concentrations (Weiger et al. ). This observation could reflect a mechanism, whereby the voltage sensor movement in mitoBK Ca is limited in diabetic rats compared with control groups, such that the number of voltage sensing positions is reduced and/or each residue makes a smaller contribution to gating charge.
Finally, there is a possibility that the interactions between the mitoBK Ca channel voltage sensor and Ca 2+ binding domains is altered under diabetic conditions. In this regard, Qian et al. ( ) have reported that intrasubunit cooperation is more effective than intersubunit interactions in mediating hSlo channel Ca 2+ sensitivity. Moreover, Lu et al. ( ) have demonstrated that Slo channel Ca 2+ -dependent activation was reduced in diabetic rats, an effect they attributed to impaired intrasubunit Ca 2+ cooperative binding. This mechanism could contribute to the effects we observed in mitoK Ca . In fact, modified intrasubunit/intersubunit interactions in diabetic rat mitoBK Ca channel would be compatible with previous data showing enhanced ROS production in high glucose conditions. Single-channel recordings of BK channels expressed in HEK293 cells have already showed that channels from cells cultured in high glucose conditions present a 60 % decrease in P o in low Ca 2+ compared to control with no significant impact on the P o voltage dependence (Lu et al. ). This effect could be mimicked by exogenous H 2 O 2 application and was absent in cells transfected with the BK C911A mutant. As C911 is close to the channel Ca 2+ bowl, oxidation of this residue is likely to affect the channel Ca 2+ sensitivity resulting in a decrease P o at low Ca 2+ . It is possible that similar mechanisms prevail in our case suggesting that part of the effects we saw on the brain mitoBK Ca could be consequent to an increased production of ROS and redox regulation of the channels.
Altered gating properties of mitoBK Ca are expected to impact on the overall mitochondrial function in diabetic conditions. Opening of BK Ca in isolated brain mitochondria was shown to inhibit ROS production by the respiratory chain complex I, and this effect was seen as beneficial for neuronal survival (Kulawiak et al. ). It follows that a decrease in mitoKCa-based K + conductance will likely promote the production of free radicals at the mitochondrial level. In addition, opening of mitoK ATP channel was reported to increase flavoprotein oxidation in mitochondria (Kohro et al. ; Zaugg et al. ). These observations would thus be compatible with a model where impaired mitoBK Ca activity would result in an overall decrease in mitochondrial activity.
In conclusion, we found that the open probability and conductance of the brain mitoBK Ca channels were decreased in early-stage diabetic rats. In parallel, we also observed a downregulation of the mitoBK Ca β4 and α subunits expression in rats treated with STZ. A lower expression level of β4 added to an increased production in ROS in diabetic conditions could account for the abnormalities in channel gating properties we observed. Our results may provide insight into the mechanisms that underlie diabetic mitoBK Ca channel dysfunction, and may lead to improved treatments for disease.