Introduction
Brain dysfunction is a common but widely neglected accompaniment of the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) during the early phase of systemic infection, called sepsis-associated encephalopathy (SAE) (Wilson and Young ). SAE is present in up to 70 % of patients with severe septic illness and causes increased morbidity and mortality (Eidelman et al. ; Jacob et al. ). Blood–brain barrier (BBB) breakdown represents an early key step of SAE pathogenesis starting with macromolecule passage via transendothelial channels of brain microvessels. Subsequently, significant deterioration of brain endothelial tight-junctions allows invasion of blood-born immunocompetent cells and corresponding proinflammatory reinforcement (Nag et al. ). Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) have been described as key mediators of the matrix-degrading processes in the basal lamina of brain endothelial cells leading to the opening of the BBB and subsequent neuroinflammatory tissue damage (Candelario-Jalil et al. ).
Whereas the role of endothelial cells in inflammatory deterioration of BBB is well characterized (Banks and Erickson ), the impact of other cellular components including pericytes, astrocytes and microglial cells is till now poorly understood. Microglial cells as the brain’s resident immune cells are prone to react early on signals of systemic inflammatory responses induced by infection. Ligation of microglial toll-like receptors (TLR) by pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) leads to a multistage activation process that converts the microglia into an activated proinflammatory state (Kettenmann et al. ; Lehnardt ). These sentinel cells for early neuroinflammatory response are able to release specifically MMP-3 after proinflammatory stimulation leading to BBB opening by cleavage activation of executing MMPs, like MMP-9 (Gurney et al. ). However, specific intracellular mechanisms of stimulus-dependent MMP upregulation in microglia are currently largely unknown.
Recently, we described the phosphoinositide 3-kinase species γ (PI3Kγ) as a major mediator of LPS-induced microglia activation and phagocytosis (Schmidt et al. ). PI3Kγ was originally characterized as a mediator of G protein-coupled receptor agonists, endowed with the enzymatic activity to produce phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate thereby and to subsequently stimulate AKT activity (Murga et al. ; Stephens et al. ; Stoyanov et al. ). Investigation of PI3Kγ-deficient mice revealed a pronounced depression of the immunogenic reactions of peripheral leukocytes indicating a major regulatory function of this signaling protein in the immune system (Hirsch et al. ). Unexpectedly, our subsequent investigations in heart revealed an intimate interplay of the PI3Kγ with the cAMP-signaling pathway. A first study characterized PI3Kγ as a stimulator of cAMP phosphodiesterase activity (Patrucco et al. ). More recent work explored the physiological relevance of cAMP/PKA-dependent suppression of PI3Kγ lipid kinase activity in heart (Perino et al. ). On the basis of these data, we asked for a possible interplay of cAMP/PKA signaling and PI3Kγ/AKT signaling in the brain.
The present study was conducted to assess the role of PI3Kγ in BBB dysfunction elicited by LPS-induced systemic inflammation in mice. Our data reveal PI3Kγ-dependent control of MMP production by microglia as an important element of LPS-induced BBB opening in mice. Surprisingly, PI3Kγ lipid kinase activity does not play a role in this process but rather PI3Kγ mediated regulation of cAMP.
Experimental Procedures
Animals, Verification of LPS-Induced SIRS in Mice Mutants
PI3Kγ-knockout (PI3Kγ −/− ) (Hirsch et al. ) and PI3Kγ kinase-dead (PI3Kγ KD/KD ) mice (Patrucco et al. ) were on the C57BL/6J background for more than 10 generations. Consequently, age-matched C57BL/6 mice were used as controls. The animals were maintained with 12-h light and dark cycles with free access to food and water. Experiments were approved by the committee of the Thuringian State Government on Animal Research. Mice received lipopolysaccharides (LPS, 10 mg/kg from Escherichia coli serotype 055:B5, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA, Lot #032M4082V) as a single intraperitoneal injection and another group received phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) vehicle as control. Additionally, 500 µl of saline was injected subcutaneously to prevent dehydration. Single intraperitoneal LPS injection (10 mg/kg) provoked a (sub)lethal systemic inflammatory response (mortality rate 87–100 %, n = 7–15 per group) with fast decline of the scored clinical status within the first 12 h after administration, quantified as described (Gonnert et al. ). The mice were killed 24 h after LPS administration, and their brains were obtained according to the following processing procedures.
Evaluation of BBB Permeability by Evan’s Blue Leakage
BBB disruption was analyzed by measurement of Evans blue (EB) extravasation into brain tissue as described (Comim et al. ). In brief, EB (4 ml/kg of a 2 % solution in PBS) was injected through the tail vein 1 h prior killing. Deeply anaesthetized animals were transcardially perfused with ice-cold PBS (40 ml) either 4 or 24 h after LPS administration. The brains were removed after blood removal, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. One hemisphere was homogenized in trichloroacetic acid (50 %) and centrifuged (10,000 rpm, 20 min, 4 °C). Supernatant was diluted in three volumes of ethanol. EB was quantified by fluorescence measurement (Tecan Infinite F200, excitation 620 nm, emission 670 nm) and compared to a standard curve. EB concentrations are presented as μg of EB per g of brain tissue.
Histology and Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Twenty-four hours after LPS administration, mice were deeply anesthetized and perfused with 4 % paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffer after rinsing with PBS by cardiac puncture via the left ventricle. Brains were removed immediately after fixation, post-fixated in 4 % paraformaldehyde at 4 °C for 1 day, embedded in paraffin and cut into 6-μm-thick sections. For immunohistochemistry, each deparaffinized, slide-mounted tissue section was incubated, after blockade of non-specific binding sites and antigen retrieval (microwave, 750 W, 11 min, 0.01 mol/l citrate buffer, pH 6), with the desired primary antibody in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at 4 °C overnight, followed with the associated secondary antibody at 4 °C for 1 h, and visualized by fluorescence imaging. Control sections were incubated with goat serum in absence of the primary antibody. The following primary antibodies were used: goat polyclonal anti-Iba-1 (1:250) antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) for Iba1 staining and rabbit polyclonal anti-MMP-9 (1:50) antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, USA) for MMP-9 and anti-myeloperoxidase (MPO, dianova, Hamburg, Germany) for neutrophils staining. For visualization, the secondary fluorescent goat anti-mouse isotype-specific antibodies Alexa Fluor ® 488 and Alexa Fluor ® 568 (Molecular Probes, Inc., Eugene, USA) were used.
Cell Culture
Primary microglial cells were isolated from neonatal mouse cerebral cortex of C57BL/6J wild-type (wt), PI3Kγ-knockout (PI3Kγ −/− ) and PI3Kγ-kinase-dead-knockin (PI3Kγ KD/KD ) mice. Microglial cells were cultured at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 in DMEM with high glucose supplemented with 10 % FCS, 1 % penicillin/streptomycin and 1 % amphotericin B. Co-cultures of microglial cells and astrocytes were incubated for 14 days at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 . Adherent microglial cells were separated from co-cultures by addition of PBS/EDTA and careful shaking.
Real-Time qPCR
Total RNA was extracted from microglial cells using the RNeasy Mini kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). RNA was treated with RNase-free DNase I (Fermentas, St. Leon Rot, Germany). After determining RNA concentration with a Nanodrop ND-1000 (Peqlab, Erlangen, Germany) photospectrometer, 0.5 µg of RNA was used for cDNA preparation by First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentas, St. Leon Rot, Germany). Real-time qPCR was performed using Maxima SYBR Green/Rox (Fermentas, St. Leon Rot, Germany) and appropriate primers (Table 1 ). Quantified mRNA was correlated with a normalization factor derived from β-actin, GAPDH and Hrpt1. Table 1 Primers designed for real-time PCR Gene Forward primer Reverse primer References MMP-2 TGGCAGTGCAATACCTGAAC CCGTACTTGCCATCCTTCTC (Nagyoszi et al. ) MMP-3 GTACCAACCTATTCCTGGTTGC CCAGAGAGTTAGATTTGGTGGG (Woo et al. ) MMP-9 ACCACTAAAGGTCGCTCGGATGGTT AGTACTGCTTGCCCAGGAAGACGAA (Setz et al. ) MMP-13 GGGCTCTGAATGGTTATGACATTC AGCGCTCAGTCTCTTCACCTCTT (Guo et al. ) MMP-14 AGGAGACAGAGGTGATCATCATTG GTCCCATGGCGTCTGAAGA (Guo et al. )
Gel Zymography
Cells were seeded in 6-well plates and incubated at 37 °C (5 % CO 2 ). Following adherence, cells were starved overnight and treated with LPS (100 ng/ml) for the indicated times. Supernatants were collected and centrifuged (500 g, 5 min, 4 °C). Thereafter 500 µl of supernatant were concentrated using a 30 kDa Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL centrifugal filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The whole concentrate was mixed with 5× non-reducing protein sample buffer (1.5 M Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, 2 % SDS, 50 % glycerol, 0.1 mg/ml bromophenol blue) and loaded to a 8 % polyacrylamide gel containing 0.6 g/l gelatin. Samples were separated at 15 mA constant current, the gels were washed in Triton X-100 (2× 30 min), and in water (30 min) and then incubated in TAB buffer (100 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.8, 30 mM CaCl 2 , 0.01 % NaN 3 ) for 20 h. Thereafter the gels were stained with 0.25 % coomassie blue G250 in de-/stain buffer (25 % methanol, 7 % acetic acid) (del Zoppo et al. ).
Stained gels were scanned and analyzed by quantitative densitometry using FUJIFILM Multi Gauge Ver.3.0 software (Fuji Photo Film Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). For statistical analysis, values were normalized to the corresponding unstimulated wild-type sample.
SDS-PAGE and Western Blotting
Protein expression and phosphorylation was analyzed by Western blotting of cell lysates. Cells were seeded in 6-well plates and incubated at 37 °C (5 % CO 2 ). Following adherence, cells were incubated overnight in DMEM without FCS and treated with agonists and/or inhibitors for indicated time points. Thereafter cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % (v/v) NP-40, 0.5 % (v/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.1 % (w/v) SDS, 100 mg/ml Pefa-Block, 1 µg/ml pepstatin, 100 µM sodium vanadate and 1 µg/ml leupeptin. After centrifugation (13,500 g, 20 min, 4 °C), supernatants were mixed with 5× loading buffer (5 % SDS, 33 % glycerol, 25 % β-mercaptoethanol, 0.1 mg/ml bromophenol blue) and heated to 95 °C for 5 min. Protein samples were separated on a 10 % polyacrylamide gel and transferred to a polyvinylidenfluorid membrane. After blocking with BSA, proteins were detected with the indicated antibodies followed by incubation with appropriate secondary antibodies, coupled to horseradish peroxidase and by enhanced chemiluminescence reaction and detection using a LAS4000 (Fuji Photo Film Co., Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) camera.
cAMP Assay
Microglial cells were seeded in 96-well clear-bottom plates and stimulated with LPS. cAMP was measured using the cAMP GloAssayKit (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) following the manufacturer’s protocol.
Statistical Analysis
Data are reported as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Comparisons between groups were made with one-way or two-way analysis of variance, if appropriate. If normality test failed, Kruskal–Wallis one-way analysis of variance on ranks was used. Post hoc comparisons were made with the Holm–Sidak test or the Dunn’s method was used, if appropriate. Differences were considered significant when p < 0.05.
Results
PI3Kγ-Deficient Mice Display Aggravated BBB Leakage After LPS Induces SIRS
To investigate the role of PI3Kγ in LPS-induced BBB deterioration, we used PI3Kγ-deficient mice (PI3Kγ −/− ) and mice carrying a targeted mutation in the PI3Kγ gene causing loss of lipid kinase activity (PI3Kγ KD/KD ). As shown in our previous studies, both genotypes allows assigning the phenotype of the mouse model to either PI3Kγ lipid kinase activity (Stoyanov et al. ) or kinase-independent “scaffold” reactions of the protein like the negative control of cellular cAMP level via stimulation of phosphodiesterases (Patrucco et al. ; Perino et al. ).
Figure 1 reveals a strongly enhanced BBB leakage in PI3Kγ-knockout mice (PI3Kγ −/− ) in comparison with wild-type mice 24 h after LPS treatment, whereas an early BBB opening (4 h after treatment) was similar in both genotypes (Fig. 1 Suppl.). In order to verify the causal impact of specific PI3Kγ signaling reactions on this phenotype, we also studied the response of lipid kinase-dead mutant mice PI3Kγ KD/KD . LPS-induced BBB disturbance in PI3Kγ KD/KD mice was similar as in wild-type mice, and clearly lower than in PI3Kγ −/− mice. These observations indicated that the loss of the scaffold protein activity of PI3Kγ exhibited aggravating effects on disturbed BBB integrity in the development of SIRS-induced SAE. Fig. 1 Enhanced Evans blue (EB) extravasation into brain tissue of PI3Kγ-deficient (PI3Kγ −/− ) mice 24 h after intraperitoneal LPS (10 mg/kg) administration ( open columns ) in comparison with wild-type (Wt) and kinase-dead (PI3Kγ KD/KD ) mice. Values are means + SEM, n = 16–17 per group; * # p < 0.05, *significant differences to control ( black columns , values obtained after PBS administration), # significant differences versus Wt, respectively
To further explore the in vivo findings of aggravated BBB leakage in PI3Kγ-deficient mice, we sought for a cellular basis and potential molecular mediators of the destructive processes involved in the discovered PI3Kγ-dependent BBB disturbance following LPS administration. We considered the contribution of resident microglial cells or invaded neutrophils to the LPS-induced BBB deterioration. IHC evaluation of brain slices revealed a distinct immunoreactivity for MMP-9 in Iba-1 positive cells (a marker of microglial cells), which suggests expression of this proteinase in perivascular microglial cells (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Detectable cells colabeling for Iba1 (a marker of microglial cells in red , left panel ) and MMP-9 ( middle panel , in green ) in brain slices derived from untreated mice (ctrl) and 24 h after LPS administration (LPS) were mainly perivascular located ( right panel , merged pictures, bar 50 µm) (Color figure online)
Next, we checked for leukocyte invasion after LPS challenge and found a rather small amount of invaded polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN), but a significant increase compared with control conditions (Table 1 Suppl.). Importantly, however, PI3Kγ −/− mice exhibited a reduced amount of PMN invasion after 24-h LPS stimulation as compared to wild-type and PI3Kγ KD/KD mice, making the contribution of PMN to the increased BBB leakage in PI3Kγ −/− mice unlikely and favoring a relevant role of activated microglial cells.
Together, these data disclose a time-dependent enhancement of LPS-induced BBB disturbance in PI3Kγ-deficient mice. Comparative investigations of PI3Kγ −/− and PI3Kγ KD/KD mice clearly indicate lipid kinase independence of this phenotype and suggest the known PI3Kγ scaffold function and potentially concomitant effects on cAMP signaling as a major cause for increased BBB opening in PI3Kγ deficiency. IHC analysis implies MMP production by perivascular microglial cells as a possible cause of the progressive BBB breakdown after LPS challenge. Hence, enhancement of LPS-induced BBB disturbance in PI3Kγ-deficient mice may be caused by cAMP-dependent MMP production of microglia.
PI3Kγ Mediates Microglial MMP Production and Release
On the basis of these in vivo data, further investigations were focused on regulatory functions of PI3Kγ in microglial cells. As shown in Fig. 2 Suppl., challenge with LPS induced a marked increase of PI3Kγ expression in primary microglial cells, consistent with an involvement in the control of inflammatory reactions of these immune cells. Next, we asked for the role of PI3Kγ in microglial MMP expression. As shown in Fig. 3 , LPS stimulation induced an enhanced expression of MMP-2, 9 and 13 mRNA in microglial cells derived from PI3Kγ-deficient mice, whereas there was no effect on MMP-3 and MMP-14 mRNA expression. Furthermore, there was no significantly increased mRNA expression of any of the analyzed MMPs after LPS stimulation in microglial cells derived from PI3Kγ KD/KD mice (Fig. 3 ). Therefore, comparison of the LPS-induced MMP mRNA expression in microglia from wild-type, PI3Kγ −/− and PI3Kγ KD/KD mice revealed lipid kinase independency of the PI3Kγ-dependent effects. Fig. 3 Increase of LPS-induced mRNA expression of MMP-2, MMP-9, and MMP-13 in microglia of PI3Kγ −/− mice, whereas MMP-3 and MMP-14 mRNA expression remains unaltered. Cells were seeded in 6-well plates, starved overnight and stimulated with LPS (100 ng/ml) for 3 h. After RNA extraction, cDNA was produced and used for real-time qPCR. Quantified mRNA was correlated to normalization factor. Values are mean + SEM, n = 4–7. * p < 0.05 significant difference versus wt (one-way ANOVA followed by Holm–Sidak test for post hoc multiple comparisons or one-way ANOVA on ranks followed by Dunn’s test for post hoc multiple comparisons, as appropriate)
Considering that MMP-9 is attributed to be the major inducible metalloproteinase, which acts on multiple substrates in the extracellular matrix of the abluminal BBB (Yang and Rosenberg ), we decided to focus the further investigations of PI3Kγ-dependent effects on MMP-9. First, we determined the MMP-9 content in microglial cells after LPS stimulation and found enhanced MMP production in PI3Kγ-deficient microglia compared to wild-type microglia (Fig. 4 a). Considering MMP synthesis as inactive zymogens, we determined the activity of microglial MMP-9 release into the supernatant by gelatin zymography. As shown in Fig. 4 b, enhanced MMP-9 secretion with the highest activity in supernatants derived from microglia of PI3Kγ-deficient mice was found under resting conditions. Wild-type and PI3Kγ KD/KD microglia exhibited low levels of liberated MMP activity indicating PI3Kγ scaffold function and related effects on cAMP signaling as the main cause of the effects observed. LPS stimulation caused a marked enhancement of MMP-9 secretion in the three mouse strains under consideration, which was more pronounced in supernatants derived from microglial cells of PI3Kγ-deficient mice. Fig. 4 a Enhanced LPS-induced synthesis of MMP-9 in primary microglial cells derived from PI3Kγ −/ mice. Cells were seeded in 6-well plates, starved overnight and used unstimulated (us) or stimulated with LPS (100 ng/ml). The MMP-9 protein content of lysed microglial cells derived from wild-type (wt, black columns ), knockout (KO, open columns ) and PI3Kγ-kinase-dead-knockin (KD, hatched columns ) mice were analyzed with a MMP-9-specific antibody. Western blot analyses were performed before and after 24-h LPS stimulation. Values are mean + SEM, n = 3–8. # * p < 0.05, # significant difference between the unstimulated (us) and LPS-stimulated state (two-way ANOVA, treatment effect), *significant difference between wt and KO (one-way ANOVA followed by Holm–Sidak test for post hoc multiple comparisons). b Extracellular MMP-9 activity of primary microglial cells derived from wild-type (wt, black columns ), knockout (KO, open columns ) and PI3Kγ-kinase-dead-knockin (KD, hatched columns ) mice was analyzed by zymography of cell culture supernatants. Cells were seeded in 6-well plates, starved overnight and used as well (us) or stimulated with LPS (100 ng/ml) for 24 h. 500 µl of cell culture supernatant was concentrated (30 kDa size exclusion) and used for gelantin zymography. Values are mean + SEM, n = 17. # * $ p < 0.05, # significant difference between the unstimulated (us) and LPS-stimulated state (two-way ANOVA, followed by Holm–Sidak test for post hoc multiple comparisons), *significant difference between wt and KO, $ significant difference between KO and KD (one-way ANOVA followed by Holm–Sidak test for post hoc multiple comparisons)
Together, these data disclose PI3Kγ as a negative mediator of the LPS-induced effects on MMP-9 regulation in primary microglia.
PI3Kγ Controls MMP-9 by Suppression of Intracellular cAMP Level
Our recent reports identified control of cAMP signaling as a prominent lipid kinase-independent activity of PI3Kγ in the heart (Patrucco et al. ; Perino et al. ). In cardiomyocytes, PI3Kγ stimulates cAMP phosphodiesterase activity via direct interaction with PDE3B and PDE4, leading to increased cAMP level and increase of heart contraction in PI3Kγ-deficient mice (Kerfant et al. ; Perino et al. ). On the basis of these data, we asked for similar signaling reactions of PI3Kγ in microglia. As shown in Fig. 5 , PI3Kγ-deficient microglia exhibited strongly increased cAMP in comparison with wild-type microglia or cells expressing PI3Kγ KD/KD . This effect could be shown before and after LPS treatment. We consequently looked for the role of PI3Kγ-dependent cAMP signaling on MMP-9 expression. To assess the role of cAMP-signaling mediators in the control of MMP-9 expression, a pharmacological approach was used. Treatment of primary microglial cells with H89, an inhibitor of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA), potently inhibited induction of MMP-9 production by LPS in cells of all genotypes (Fig. 6 ). On the contrary, stimulation with forskolin (an activator of adenylate cyclases) promoted MMP-9 secretion. Differences between genotypes were no longer seen in the latter setting, presumably because the MMP-9 induction becomes saturated. The same was observed for treatment of the cells with cilostamide or IBMX, both inhibitors of cAMP phosphodiesterases, which led to pronounced stimulation of MMP-9 activity. Together, these data further support the control of PI3Kγ-dependent expression of MMP-9 via regulation of cAMP levels. Fig. 5 Increased cAMP levels in primary microglial cells derived from knockout (PI3Kγ −/− , open columns ) mice compared to those from wild-type ( black columns ) and PI3Kγ-kinase-dead-knockin (PI3Kγ KD/KD , hatched columns ) mice. Cells were seeded in 6-well plates, starved overnight and stimulated with LPS for 2 h. cAMP levels were evaluated using Promega cAMP GloAssayKit. Values are mean + SEM, n = 4. # * p < 0.05, # significant difference between unstimulated (us) and LPS-stimulated microglial cells derived from the respective mouse strain (two-way ANOVA, treatment effect), *significant difference between wt and KO within the respective treatment group (one-way ANOVA followed by Holm–Sidak test for post hoc multiple comparisons) Fig. 6 cAMP signaling regulates LPS-stimulated MMP-9 secretion in primary microglial cells. Extracellular MMP-9 activity was analyzed by gel zymography of cell culture supernatants from primary microglial cells derived from wild-type ( black columns ), knockout (PI3Kγ −/− , open columns ) and PI3Kγ-kinase-dead-knockin (PI3Kγ KD/KD , hatched columns ) mice. Microglia were seeded in 12-well plates, starved overnight and activated by LPS (100 ng/ml; 24 h). Thereafter cells were treated with H89 (10 µM, PKA inhibitor), IBMX (500 µM, competitive non-selective phosphodiesterase inhibitor), cilostamide (Cilo, 10 µM, PDE3B inhibitor), or forskolin (Forsk, 10 µM, activator of adenylate cyclase), and compared to LPS stimulation. The cell culture supernatants were concentrated (30 kDa size exclusion) and used for zymography. MMP-9 secretion induced by LPS is abrogated by protein kinase A inhibition (by H89, 10 µM). Activation of adenyl cyclase with forskolin (10 µM), or PDE inhibition (by IBMX, 500 µM, a competitive non-selective phosphodiesterase inhibitor or cilostamide, Cilo, 10 µM, specific PDE3B inhibitor) strongly enhance the LPS-induced MMP-9 release in primary microglial cells. Values are mean + SEM, n = 6–7. * p < 0.05, *significant difference between PI3Kγ −/− and wild type as well as PI3Kγ KD/KD , $ significant differences compared to LPS stimulation, & significant differences compared to forskolin stimulation. (two-way ANOVA, treatment effect, followed by Holm–Sidak test for post hoc multiple comparisons)
Discussion
Our comparative investigation of plasma protein extravasation after LPS-induced systemic inflammation exhibited a time-dependent progression of BBB disturbance in PI3Kγ-deficient mice. In contrast, wild-type mice or mice harboring a lipid kinase-dead version of PI3Kγ revealed regressive tendency. The time course of plasma protein extravasation suggests that the genotype-related differences in BBB breakdown may be related to brain intraparenchymal processes occurring in response to systemic inflammation and concomitant brain tissue MMP upregulation. Immunohistochemical verification clearly shows the MMP-9 expression by perivascular Iba-1-positive microglial cells, which may play a crucial role for maintained BBB deterioration. Previous studies pointed out that activated microglia express MMP-3 together with other inducible MMPs including MMP-9 (Kacimi et al. ; Nuttall et al. ). However, an increase in MMP-14 expression after LPS stimulation was not observed, which corresponds with a recent report showing that upregulation of MMP-14 occurred in late stages of neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases but not in the acute period after stroke or brain trauma (Langenfurth et al. ).
Microglial cells are prone to trigger neuroinflammatory activation during systemic inflammation because of their sensitivity to blood borne PAMPs and proinflammatory cytokines (Lehnardt ). Stimulation of a wide variety of receptors including toll-like receptors induces a complex, multistage activation process of microglia immediately after pathogen entry into the brain tissue. TLR-mediated inflammatory reactions of microglia typically include LPS-driven upregulation of MMP (Candelario-Jalil et al. ; Rosenberg et al. ). According to our data, upregulation of MMP goes along with LPS-induced expression of PI3Kγ (Fig. 2 Suppl.). Thus, PI3Kγ-dependent control of MMP expression may be conceivable. Mechanistically, candidate signaling reactions initiating PI3Kγ effects on MMP expression are the AKT and the cAMP-signaling pathways.
Recent data from murine macrophage and microglia cell lines (RAW 264.7 and BV2) have shown that upregulation of LPS-mediated MMP-9 gene expression exhibits AKT—as well as cAMP—dependence (Lee et al. ). Our results suggest AKT-independent effects on LPS induced MMP-9 and MMP-13 upregulation in primary murine microglial cells. This can be concluded from similar LPS effects on MMP expression in microglial cells derived from wild-type mice and those containing PI3Kγ with lipid kinase inactive mutation. Wild-type and PI3Kγ KD/KD microglia differ regarding their ability to generate the PI3K lipid kinase product PTdIns 3,4,5P3 and subsequent stimulation of AKT, but they share similar stimulatory effects on cAMP-dependent phosphodiesterases (Patrucco et al. ; Perino et al. ). Abolishment of the PDE-dependent inhibitory effects of PI3Kγ on cAMP signaling in PI3Kγ-deficient mice may provoke increasing cAMP level, concomitant MMP production and subsequent impairment of BBB as observed in the present study. A cAMP-dependent upregulation of MMP expression and activity by PI3Kγ deficiency was also verified in cardiomyocytes in response to biomechanical stress (Guo et al. ).
Our results are in accordance with our previous data revealing that loss of PI3Kγ results in block of microglial phagocytosis via cAMP-dependent activation of protein kinase A (Schmidt et al. ). Herein, we showed for the first time a control of immune-cell function by regulatory effects of PI3Kγ on cAMP signaling. Hence, PI3Kγ may affect specific functions of the immune system either by lipid kinase activity or by lipid kinase-independent effects on cAMP signaling.
Conclusion
Our data disclose the signaling protein PI3Kγ as a key mediator of LPS-induced microglial MMP-9 production and subsequent BBB deterioration in the course of SIRS-associated SAE. In contrast to recent reports on regulatory functions of PI3Kγ in microglia-mediated inflammatory responses after brain ischemia or neurodegeneration (Jin et al. ; Passos et al. ), our data suggest a lipid kinase-independent stimulation of PDE activity by PI3Kγ as a crucial mediator, which controls LPS-induced MMP expression and activation. These results confirm and expand recent data on regulatory effects of PI3Kγ on cAMP signaling in the immune system.