Introduction
Blast injuries have become an increasing problem in recent military conflicts (Iraq and Afghanistan) and in terrorist incidents (Madrid, London, Mumbai) (Wolf et al. ). Blast-induced traumatic brain injury (TBI) has risen to prominence and represents a specific form of primary brain injury, with sufficiently different physical attributes (and possibly biological consequences) to be classified separately (Risdall and Menon ). The precise mechanisms underlying blast injury to the brain remain speculative. Blast injuries are divided into primary, secondary and tertiary injuries, based on the physical mechanism of damage (Mellor ; Zuckerman ). Primary blast injury is due to the blast shock wave and is pathognomonic of explosive injuries, whilst secondary and tertiary injuries (due, respectively, to fragments and translational forces) are common to other forms of trauma.
The pathophysiological mechanisms associated with blast-induced TBI can be divided into those arising from the primary neurological injury (caused at the time of the physical insult) and those from secondary neurological injury; caused either by host cellular responses (such as excitotoxicity, oxidant injury and inflammation) or physiological insults (such as ischaemia, hypoxaemia, hypo- or hypercapnia, intracranial hypertension and hypo- or hyperglycaemia). Neuronal, axonal and glial injuries have been described (Bauman et al. ; Cernak et al. ) and both necrotic and apoptotic cell pathways have been implicated in neuronal loss (Cernak et al. ; Kato et al. ).
There is increasing interest in the role of blast in initiating inflammatory responses, which may be linked to the pathological processes seen clinically. Inflammatory processes are known to accompany many brain pathologies (Skaper ) and may contribute to alterations in the permeability of the blood brain barrier (Shlosberg et al. ). Post-traumatic inflammatory responses include increased cytokine expression (Hutchinson et al. ; Helmy et al. ), microglial activation (Hailer ), local invasion of circulating immune cells (Gentleman et al. ), autoimmunization to neural epitopes (Cox et al. ; Schwartz et al. ) and astrocytic activation and proliferation (Schultzberg et al. ). Although this phase of damage has been the focus of much clinical and basic science research, the role of blast in initiating these changes is not completely understood.
Cytokines act as the autocrine and paracrine mediators of the inflammatory response to injury (Helmy et al. ). They are a diverse group of small proteins, synthesised by a wide variety of cell types and increased levels act as markers of inflammation. Increased levels have been identified in cortical homogenates from rats following controlled cortical impact injury (Dalgard et al. ) and by microdialysis in humans following traumatic brain injury (Helmy et al. ).
The aim of this study was to determine whether exposure to a blast wave (shock wave and dynamic overpressure), in the absence of impact from fragments or debris, leads to the expression of inflammatory markers in brain tissue in terminally anaesthetised rats. Furthermore, we undertook these studies at an early time point after blast injury, since we wished to identify whether these changes could be demonstrated at a stage when there was no histological evidence of injury, since inflammatory upregulation in the presence of such injury might be a secondary response, rather than a primary pathogenic mechanism amenable to specific treatment. We also wished to disentangle the direct primary cranial effects of blast from those that were secondary to activation of systemic host responses, and hence, we used a blast injury that was restricted to the cranium.
Materials and Methods
Surgical Techniques
The study was ethically reviewed and conducted in accordance with the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986. 28 male Wistar rats (Porton strain) of median body weight 244 g [238–274 g inter-quartile range] were utilised. The animals were sexually mature young adults (7–8 weeks old) and of comparable size to animals used in previous studies by this group (Guy et al. ). Surgical anaesthesia was induced with 5 % isoflurane (Merial Animal Health Ltd., Harlow, UK) in 100 % oxygen and maintained with 2 % isoflurane in 100 % oxygen. A 2.5-Fr catheter (Vygon, Écouen, France) was inserted via the ventral tail artery into the abdominal aorta to allow continuous monitoring of blood pressure using a strain gauge manometer (SensoNor 840, SensoNor a.s., Norway,), and the data captured continuously using a computerised data acquisition system (MacLab 16/sp, AD Instruments, UK) and associated software (Chart version 4.2.3, AD Instruments, UK). Prior to insertion, the line was heparinised with Hepsal (10 iU/ml heparin in 0.9 % saline). Where possible, percutaneous venous cannulation of the lateral tail vein was also performed using a luer lock 24G Vasofix Cato ¾ cannula (Braun, Melsungen, Germany). A temperature probe (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA) was inserted rectally and temperature monitored continuously. Animals were placed on a warming mattress (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA)) set to maintain a body temperature of 39.0 °C (range 38.0–40.0 °C). A pulse oximeter (Starr Life Sciences, Oakmont, PA) was also attached to the hind paw. On completion of surgery, animals were allowed to stabilise for 30 min whilst breathing 1.8–2 % isoflurane in air delivered via a nose cone. An arterial blood gas sample was collected at the end of this period.
Blast Wave Generator
A bench-top blast wave generator was used to generate the blast wave in this experimental series. This has previously been described (Guy et al. ; Jaffin et al. ). Briefly, compressed air at a pressure of approximately 100 kPa is directed by a solenoid to a 0.55-mm-thick aluminium bursting disc mounted in a nozzle (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Schematic diagram (© Crown copyright 2013) of bench-top blast wave generator
Upon rupture of the disk a blast wave (comprising a shock wave and dynamic overpressure or “blast wind”) is generated, which leaves the device through a 20-mm (internal diameter) nozzle (Fig. 2 ). The magnitude of the blast wave delivered to the target is regulated by changing the distance between the nozzle and the target below. A minimum of three test shots, at the selected distance (1.5 cm standoff), were monitored before each in vivo blast delivery using a piezoelectric pressure transducer (Meclec, Shoeburyness, UK) embedded in the surface of a surrogate “plastic rat”. The signal was amplified using a Meclec M124 amplifier recorded on a Nicolet 4094B digital oscilloscope (Nicolet Instrument Corp., Madison, WI) and analysed using FAMOS version 5.0 Rev8 software (IMC Meβsysteme, Berlin, Germany). Fig. 2 Schlieren image of blast wave emerging from nozzle of bench-top blast wave generator
Animals were placed in the right lateral position under the blast apparatus, with the blast nozzle 1.5 cm above the lateral canthus of the left eye. This delivered a peak overpressure of 885 kPa (coefficient of variability 11.3 %), with a rise time of 4.7 μs and represents a significant, but survivable, exposure when directed at the cranium.
Experimental Protocol
The rats were randomly allocated into two groups: animals in group 1 ( n = 14) were subject to a single blast exposure as described above, on completion of the 30 min monitoring period, animals in group 2 ( n = 14) were handled identically, but subjected to a sham (no) blast and acted as the control group. All animals were maintained under anaesthesia for 8 h, and 200 μl samples for arterial blood gas analysis were taken anaerobically before and at 15 and 30 min and 1, 2, 4, 6 and 8 h after the blast or sham blast exposure. Arterial blood gas samples were analysed immediately to determine arterial oxygen and carbon dioxide tensions (PaO 2 and PaCO 2 respectively), pH and arterial base excess (ABE) and haematocrit (Gem Premier 3500 Blood Gas Analyser, Instrumentation Laboratories, Warrington, UK). At the 8-h time point, the animals were killed with an overdose of pentobarbital sodium 20 % w/v (Pharmasol Ltd. Andover, UK) and the brains extracted for either immunocytochemistry or histological analysis.
The brains of 18 animals (9 blast exposed and 9 controls) were immediately frozen in liquid isopentane on dry ice (Scouten ), wrapped in aluminium foil, stored at −80 °C and subsequently cryo-sectioned for histological analysis. All brain sections were coronal and stained in duplicate either with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or used for fluorescent immunostaining (see below) for VCAM.
The H&E stained brain sections were sampled from three areas of the ipsilateral cortex, Bregma 1–0 incorporating the Caudate Putamen, Bregma −3 to −4 through the hippocampus and Bregma −5.5 to −6.5 (Fig. 3 ). They were examined for evidence of any inflammatory cell infiltrate, haemorrhage or peri-vascular oedema and for evidence of any inflammatory cells adhering to vascular endothelium, as this can be an early indicator of vascular endothelial activation. Fig. 3 Diagrammatic sagittal section showing bregma ranges from which coronal sections were taken for histochemical staining and their relationship to the larger distinct brain structures including cortex (Cor), Caudate Putamen (CP), Hippocampus (Hip), Brain stem (BS) and Cerebellum (Cer). A Bregma range 1–0, B Bregma −3 to −4 and C Bregma −5.5 to −6.5
Fluorescent Immunostaining
Remaining frozen sections from the same regions of the ipsilateral cortex were removed from the freezer and allowed to dry for 30 min at room temperature. They were fixed in acetone cooled to −20 °C for 5 min and dried again at room temperature. Sections were rehydrated and permeabilised in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) with Triton-X and Tween 20 for 10 min and blocked with bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 5 min before overnight incubation with the primary antibody or 5 % BSA (for non-specific binding). The following primary antibodies were used: Rabbit polyclonal anti-VCAM 1:100 (NBP2-20847 Novus Biologicals, Cambridge, UK) Rabbit polyclonal anti-Marberg (In house, Porton Down) (isotype). Sections were subsequently washed with PBS, blocked with 5 % BSA and incubated for 1 h with the secondary label [Alexa 594 donkey anti-rabbit 1:250 (A-21207, Invitrogen, Paisley, UK)] followed by a 10-min incubation with Hoechst [Hoechst 33258 (nucleic acid stain for dsDNA) 1:100,000 (Biotium, Hayward, CA)].
All stained sections were examined with a Zeiss Axioplan microscope (Göttingen, Germany) and images obtained with an AxioCam MRc5 camera and AxioVision version 4.3 software (Zeiss, Göttingen, Germany).
The brains of the remaining 10 animals (5 blast and 5 controls) were divided and tissue samples either immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored, wrapped in aluminium foil, at −80 °C for immunocytochemical analysis or placed in RNAlater solution (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) incubated at 4 °C and subsequently stored at −80 °C for qRT-PCR analysis. The portions for RNA analysis were distal, but adjacent, to those for protein analysis.
Cytometric Bead Array
Approximately 50 µg of ipsilateral cortex was homogenised in 250 µl of lysis buffer (Tris–HCl 50 mM, NaCl 150 mM, NP-40 1 %, EDTA 2 mM, sodium vanadate 2 mM, sodium fluoride 50 mM, aprotinin 10 µg/ml, leupeptin 20 µg/ml) with 1.4-mm ceramic spheres and lysing matric D (MP, Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA) for 1 min at 30 Hz, and then chilled on ice for 1 min. Bead beating was repeated for a total of two homogenisation steps. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 15 min, and the sample supernatant stored at −80 °C until analysis.
Samples were diluted 1:4 in homogenisation buffer containing 0.5 % bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). These samples were subsequently analysed using 9-plex Rat Bio-plex Pro Assay (IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ, Epo, MIP-1α, TNF-α, VEGF, Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA) and 3-plex Rat Procarta Cytokine Assay (ICAM, MCP-1, sVCAM-1, Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) according to the manufactures instructions. These were chosen to include the standard inflammatory proteins involved after trauma, VEGF as a downstream protein produced following HIF-1α activation, MIP-1α and MCP-1 as early inflammatory chemokines and the endothelial integrins ICAM and sVCAM for their role in the early recruitment of leucocytes. Standards for the bio-plex pro assays were reconstituted in lysis buffer containing 0.5 % BSA, whereas Procarta standards were reconstituted in Procarta standard lysis buffer. Samples were analysed on the Bioplex 200 system (Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA), and cytokine measurements in cell lysate supernatants were normalised to total protein concentrations as determined by Micro-BCA protein assay kit (Pierce ® Thermo Scientific, Rockford IL).
qRT-PCR Analysis
Cortical sections (circa 0.5 cm 3 ) stored in 1 ml RNAlater were dissected and homogenised using a TissueRupter (Qiagen, Germany). Total RNA was extracted from approximately 100 mg of cortex using RNAeasy Lipid Tissue Mini Kits (Qiagen, Germany) according to manufactures instructions. Total RNA was quantified using a nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford IL) and adjusted to 125 ng/µl in RNase free H 2 O. The quality of total RNA was assessed using the 2100 Bioanalyser system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA); all samples had a ribosomal integrity numbers (RIN) above 7.0. The expression of 87 different genes was measured using custom-made 96-well RT 2 Profiler PCR Array (Qiagen, Germany). These consisted of a standard inflammatory PCR array with the addition of integrins Pecam1, Icam1, Vcam1 and Epo. Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase 1 (Hprt1) and lactate dehydrogenase A (Ldha) were used as housekeeping genes. Assays were performed according to manufacturers instructions. In brief, 100 ng of high-quality total RNA was reverse transcribed using RT 2 First Strand Kit (Qiagen, Germany). Following reverse transcription, cDNA was amplified with RT 2 SYBR Green qPCR Mastermix and read using an ABI 7000 cycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Data were analysed using RT 2 Profiler™ PCR array data analysis software using ΔΔC t -based fold-change calculations. Five housekeeping genes were analysed used geNorm software, and the two most stable (Hprt1 and Ldha) were selected. These genes differed by no more than 0.12 cycles between controls and test samples. Differential expression was considered relevant when the P value was <0.05 and the change in expression was greater than a twofold increase or decrease.
Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as mean ± SEM unless indicated otherwise. Levels of inflammatory mediators were normalised to total protein levels. As the n value for each of these data sets was only five, the data could not be tested for normality, so groups were compared using a Mann–Whitney U test and the risk of a type II error accepted. Cardiovascular, blood gas and chemistry data were compared using two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measures over time. Single time-point analyses were made using a Student’s t test, unless indicated otherwise. Binary data were assessed using a Fisher’s exact test. In all cases, a significance level of P ≤ 0.05 (two tailed) was used.
Results
Baseline (pre-blast) values are shown in Table 1 . There were no statistically significant differences between blast and control groups in any of the parameters recorded. Table 1 Baseline (pre-blast) values for mean arterial blood pressure (MAP); heart rate (HR); arterial oxygen tension (PaO 2 ); arterial carbon dioxide tension (PaCO 2 ); arterial pH (Art pH); arterial base excess (ABE); arterial haematocrit (Hct) and body temperature Blast ( n = 14) Control ( n = 14) P Body weight (g)* 248 [242–265] 239 [234–274] 0.1581 MAP (mmHg) 82.2 ± 2.5 84.5 ± 2.3 0.5086 HR (b/min) 411 ± 8 403 ± 8 0.4528 PaO 2 (kPa) 14.9 ± 0.6 14.2 ± 0.6 0.4459 PaCO 2 (kPa) 6.7 ± 0.1 6.5 ± 0.2 0.3468 Arterial pH* 7.38 [7.36–7.40] 7.41 [7.38–7.43] 0.0642 ABE (mM) 4.1 ± 0.7 5.1 ± 0.5 0.278 Hct (%) 36.4 ± 0.6 36.2 ± 0.5 0.8372 Body temp (°C) 38.0 ± 0.1 38.3 ± 0.1 0.1224 P , unpaired t test or * Mann–Whitney U test blast versus control. Data are mean ± SEM for normally distributed data or median [interquartile range] for non-normal data
Physiological Effects of Blast Exposure
Exposure to a single blast wave, centred on the lateral canthus of the left eye, caused little cardiovascular disturbance. In six animals, there was a transient fall in mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) (range 8–31 mmHg, e.g. Fig. 4 ) following blast exposure. In the remaining eight blast-exposed animals, there was minimal cardiovascular disturbance. Fig. 4 Cardiovascular response to a single exposure to a blast wave (indicated by the arrow) focused on the lateral aspect of the head in terminally anaesthetised rats showing the depressor response typical of 6/14 animals
Overall, blast exposure did not cause a significant change in mean arterial blood pressure (fall in MAP of 7.6 ± 5.0 mmHg immediately after blast from a pre-blast baseline of 82.2 ± 2.5 mmHg P = 0.1536, paired t test), and there was no significant difference in the change in blood pressure between the two groups (increase in MAP of 0.9 ± 1.6 mmHg immediately after sham exposure from a baseline value of 84.5 ± 2.3 mmHg) following blast/sham blast exposure ( P = 0.1288). Similarly, blast exposure had no significant effect on heart rate (HR) (fall in HR of 50 ± 32 b min −1 from a pre-blast baseline of 411 ± 8 b min −1 in the blast group versus a rise of 1 ± 2 b min −1 from 403 ± 8 b min −1 after sham blast). Serial measurements of MAP between 15 and 480 min after blast exposure revealed no significant difference in MAP or HR between blast and sham blast groups ( P = 0.4411, Fig. 5 ). However, there was a difference between groups in the heart rate response ( P = 0.0063), which post hoc analysis revealed to be due to an elevation in heart rate to 414 ± 6 b min −1 15 min after blast exposure in the blast group compared with a rate of 385 ± 8 b min −1 at the same time point after sham blast (Fig. 5 ). This difference is unlikely to be of physiological significance. Fig. 5 Effects of blast exposure (Blast) or control exposure (Sham) on mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) and heart rate (HR) in terminally anaesthetised rats. Blast (or control) exposure was at time 0 h. Data are mean ± SEM
Blast exposure had little physiological effect on the other parameters. There were no significant differences between blast and control groups for any of PaO 2 , PaCO 2 , haematocrit ( P = 0.6523, 0.1721, 0.3922, respectively, Fig. 6 ) or body temperature ( P = 0.0991, data not shown). There was an overall statistically significant difference in arterial base excess between blast and sham blast groups ( P = 0.0097, Fig. 6 ), although since both groups were clearly above zero base excess throughout, the difference is unlikely to be of any physiological significance. Fig. 6 Effects of blast exposure (Blast) or control exposure (Sham) on arterial oxygen tension (PaO 2 ), carbon dioxide tension (PaCO 2 ) arterial base excess (ABE) and haematocrit (Hct) in two groups of terminally anaesthetised rats. Blast (or control) exposure was at time 0 h. Data are mean ± SEM
There was a significant decline in arterial haematocrit over the course of the study ( P < 0.0001), which was probably due to the volume of blood sampled and the saline used to maintain cannula patency. This decline did not differ between blast and control groups.
Histology
Histological examination of the cryo-sections showed no evidence of haemorrhage, perivascular cuffing or infiltration of inflammatory cells 8 h after blast exposure. Sections of ipsilateral cortical grey matter from fore, mid and hindbrain equating to the Bregma levels in Fig. 3 are shown in Fig. 7 . Each image is centred on a microvessel within the tissue. Fig. 7 Haematoxylin and eosin stained cryosections (×400 magnification) of ipsilateral cortical grey matter (nominal 15µ thickness) from fore ( A ), mid ( B ) and hindbrain ( C ) regions of two animals ( i blast exposed, ii control exposure). Microvessel is shown in the centre of each section indicated by arrows . The vessel in Cii is in longitudinal section, and the other vessels are tangentially sectioned
Fluorescent immunostaining revealed VCAM confined to the vascular endothelium (not shown). Non-specific and isotype incubated sections showed expected nuclear binding only. However, the thickness of the cryo-sections was such that it was not possible to quantify any difference in VCAM expression between blast-exposed groups and control groups.
Protein Levels
Endothelial integrins, ICAM and sVCAM, were significantly elevated ( P = 0.016 and P = 0.008, respectively) in the brain tissue of the blast-exposed group compared with controls (Fig. 8 ). Fig. 8 Endothelial integrins levels in blast-exposed and control animals. Data are mean and 95 % CI. Lower limit of detection is indicated by the dotted line
The expression of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL10 was not affected by blast exposure ( P = 0.950), but erythropoietin (Epo) and the pro-inflammatory cytokine MCP-1α were significantly elevated ( P = 0.008 in both cases, Fig. 9 ). Fig. 9 Epo and MCP-1α levels in blast-exposed and control animals. Data are mean and 95 % CI. Lower limit of detection is indicated by the dotted line
MIP-1α, another pro-inflammatory cytokine was also detectable, but at levels below those permitting accurate quantification. However, the extrapolated results showed a trend suggestive of higher values in the blast-exposed group. MIP-1α was detected in all five blast-exposed animals with a mean value of 3.20 pg/mg, whilst it was only detected in two out of five controls with a mean value of 0.92 pg/mg.
qRT-PCR
The contribution of 87 inflammatory genes was examined by qRT-PCR. Six genes were found to exhibit a biologically significant increase in expression in the blast-exposed animals, whilst no genes showed a biologically significant fall in expression (Fig. 10 ). Fig. 10 Change in gene expression (mRNA levels) in brain tissue of blast-exposed animals compared to those given sham blast. Data expressed as fold difference for each individual gene, and the statistical significance of the difference. Biologically significant changes are represented by a change of at least twofold and P < 0.05
Three of these genes result in increased mRNA levels for chemokines that are responsible for monocyte recruitment, including MCP-1, corroborating the evidence of increased protein expression of MCP-1 in the brain tissue of blast-exposed animals. A further two genes expressed are responsible for chemokines influencing T cell chemotaxis, and the final gene influences the complement system (Table 2 ). Table 2 Details of the six genes which displayed a biologically significant increase in activity in blast-injured animals compared to sham blast controls (at least twofold increase in mRNA levels and P < 0.05 for the change) Gene Transcribed protein Function Fold increase C3 Complement component 3 Complement, anaphylatoxin, chemotaxis 2.52 CCL12 MCP5 Chemokine, monocyte recruitment 6.44 CCL2 MCP1 Chemokine, monocyte recruitment 3.82 CCL7 MCP3 Chemokine, monocyte recruitment 3.09 CXCL11 I-PAC Chemokine, T cell recruitment 3.18 CCL22 MDC Chemokine, T cell recruitment 2.86
Discussion
This study finds that a primary blast exposure, focused on the cranium, results in increases both of endothelial integrins (ICAM and sVCAM) and inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in the cerebral tissue of blast-exposed rats. These increases are supported by changes in gene expression. Brain injury, from whatever cause, is usually accompanied by pathological neuro-inflammation, and blast brain injury is no exception (Goldstein et al. ; Dalle Lucca et al. ). Our data provide important mechanistic clues regarding the drivers of such inflammation.
Primary blast injury arises from the transmitted forces of the shock wave associated with the blast, which couples into the body and can cause direct tissue damage. This happens most commonly at air–tissue interfaces (lungs, gastrointestinal tract and auditory systems), but other body systems are also affected (Wolf et al. ). Blast wind can also cause injury, usually tertiary blast injury, by translational forces. Collectively, the shock wave and blast wind (i.e. the blast wave) have the potential to damage the brain by several mechanisms, including compression of the thorax generating a vascular surge to the brain (Courtney and Courtney ; Cernak et al. ), bulk acceleration of the head, transmission of loads through orifices in the skull or deformation of the skull (Moss et al. ).
Propagation of blast waves is complex, and comparing data from different models is challenging (Cernak et al. ). Blast shock tubes, in particular, generate complex patterns of pressure wave propagation (Risling et al. ). Many require the whole animal to be exposed, and responses are affected by the orientation of the animal in the apparatus. If particular anatomical areas are to be targeted, the animal may have to be partially protected and the animal may also have to be physically restrained to reduce motion artifacts. Our bench-top blast wave generator generates a Friedländer-type blast wave, which is not fully analogous to a free field blast or a shock tube exposure and results in an animal model that is inevitably reductionist (Jaffin et al. ). However, what is delivered is a reproducible blast wave of short range and duration that can be directed at a specific, limited anatomical area, without the need for additional protection. It produces minimal motion artifact, which reduces complications from collateral injuries. The level of blast directed at the cranium in this series of experiments is significant and, if directed at the thorax in this model, would result in severe blast lung, fulminant pulmonary oedema and death. Using this apparatus, a lesser blast exposure (greater standoff distance between the blast nozzle and target) when directed at the thorax, results in the classical triad of vagally mediated bradycardia, hypotension and apnoea, together with the pathological changes of blast lung in terminally anaesthetised rats of similar size to those used in the present study (Ohnishi et al. ; Sawdon et al. ).
Cernak has repeatedly expressed the complexity of the generation of blast-induced neurotrauma (Cernak ; Cernak et al. , ; Cernak and Noble-Haeusslein ) citing a combination of local, systemic and cerebral responses. Whole body blast exposure in rabbits, resulting in mild-to-moderate blast lung injury produced oedema and metabolic disturbance in the brain within 30 min of exposure, without evidence of haemorrhage or contusional damage. This response could be mitigated, in part, by pulmonary de-afferentation, suggesting that these very acute effects were due to pulmonary parasympathetic excitation following pulmonary hyperinflation, rather than a direct effect of blast on the cerebral tissue (Cernak ). Subsequent experiments using rigid body or head protection in mice subjected to mild whole-body blast exposure, showed that head protection alone failed to prevent inflammation in the brain or reduce neurological deficits at 30 days. Torso protection was successful in preventing the blast-induced functional and morphological impairments in this mild blast model (Cernak ), again suggesting a cerebral response to systemic causes rather than primary brain injury.
In our model, a severe isolated cranial blast exposure, without significant systemic disturbance, was able to initiate an inflammatory response. One component of cerebral inflammation is the influx of neutrophils and monocytes. Neutrophils can be toxic to vulnerable neurons (Neumann et al. ), and they have been shown to exacerbate cerebral oedema and brain tissue damage in rodent models of TBI (Semple et al. ). Monocytes also have a detrimental effect on neuronal survival and functional recovery after injury (Chen et al. ). Whilst recruitment of leucocytes is well demonstrated in a variety of brain injury settings, such demonstration has often been accompanied by histological evidence of tissue injury (Chen et al. ; Semple et al. ; Dimitrijevic et al. ). Consequently, it is not clear whether these cellular inflammatory responses are simply secondary to established tissue injury, or a primary pathogenic mechanism in their own right. Support for a significant pathogenic role of these processes in other forms of TBI come from studies in models where inhibition of these processes result in improved outcome (Raza et al. ; Wang et al. ; Knoblach et al. ), but such data are, as yet, unavailable in blast TBI. Further, we have little information that would inform the choice of anti-inflammatory therapies in this setting.
One way to address these issues is to examine the processes involved in such inflammatory cell recruitment at early time points after injury. The influx of these inflammatory cells is driven by endothelial activation, which promotes leucocyte–endothelial interaction, and by the expression of leucocyte chemoattractant proteins or chemokines. Given this context, it is interesting that the critical changes in protein levels and gene expression that we demonstrate, at a point when there is no evidence of tissue injury, involve precisely these biological processes involved in neutrophil and monocyte attraction, suggesting that they have a primary pathogenic role in tissue injury. Of equal relevance is the elevation of Epo, which may represent a neuroprotective response to the cerebral insult.
Erythropoietin
Epo is a glycoprotein belonging to the type I cytokine superfamily (Lin et al. ). In addition to its role as the hormone regulating erythropoiesis, numerous experimental studies have suggested that it is an endogenous mediator of neuroprotection after insult to the central nervous system (Ponce et al. ). Endogenous Epo is expressed in both neurons and astrocytes and binds to extracellular transmembrane Epo receptors causing homodimerization and subsequent Janus-tyrosine-kinase-2 (JAK-2) phosphorylation. This in turn activates phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase, induces the activation of nuclear factor, NF-kβ, and stimulates homodimerization of the transcription factor, signal transducers and activators of transcription-5 (Sola et al. ). NF-kβ pathway activation enhances the expression of cellular inhibitors of apoptosis and anti-apoptotic genes (Chong et al. ; Siren et al. ; Ponce et al. ). Epo also modulates cerebral inflammatory and immune responses via the JAK-2 and NF-kβ pathways (Digicaylioglu and Lipton ; Yamamoto and Gaynor ) through both B lymphocyte control and T lymphocyte proliferation.
Since Epo is too large to cross the blood–brain barrier, the presence of elevated levels seen in this study, in the absence of histopathological changes, suggests endogenous release in response to cranial blast exposure.
Endothelial Activation
Much of the neuroinflammatory response is orchestrated by endothelial activation. Cellular adhesion molecules are cell surface structures mediating cell–cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions. ICAM-1 is a ligand for the membrane-bound integrin receptors on leucocytes (Lee and Benveniste ) and plays an important role in endothelial–leucocyte cell interaction and leucocyte extravascation (Sligh et al. ). In vivo, ICAM-1 is detected only on the endothelial cells of the microvasculature in normal brain (Lee and Benveniste ). VCAM-1 similarly interacts with antigens on the surface of mononuclear leucocytes and facilitates leucocyte extravascation. Usually, VCAM-1 cannot be detected in normal brain (Lee and Benveniste ). Models of traumatic blunt brain injury show upregulation of ICAM-1 in response to TBI (Isaksson et al. ). Soluble ICAM (sICAM) is cleaved from endothelial cells and can be detected in serum. Human studies have shown that sICAM levels in serum are significantly related to neurological outcome (McKeating et al. ). In animal, models of ischaemic brain injury antagonists of ICAM-1 reduce the ischaemic damage seen (Feuerstein et al. ). In a prospective study of severe TBI in a civilian population, both soluble VCAM (sVCAM) and sICAM were found to be elevated in blood samples taken on admission (Rhind et al. ). Endothelial activation and expression of adhesion molecules are requisite elements in the recruitment of neutrophils following TBI (Carlos et al. ) and in brain endothelial tissue culture, activation of cell adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 correlates with increased neutrophil transendothelial migration (Leow-Dyke et al. ).
Neutrophil Chemoattractants
Inflammatory cells are recruited into tissues by a wide variety of chemokines and cytokines. The complement system has a critical role in neutrophil recruitment, and C3 and C5 knockout mice show significant attenuation of neutrophil recruitment after brain injury (Sewell et al. ; Camous et al. ). In addition to mediating chemotaxis of mononuclear cells, the chemokine family, including MIP-1, has been implicated in the recruitment of neutrophils. Antibody blockade of ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 attenuated this response in vitro (Reichel et al. ). The chemokine group, including CXCL11, is generally not detectable in most non-lymphoid tissues under physiological conditions, but is strongly induced by cytokines during inflammatory responses and appears upregulated in many pathological conditions of the central nervous system (Muller et al. ).
Monocyte Chemoattractants
Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) was the first human chemokine to be characterised (Semple et al. ). It activates and attracts cells of the monocyte lineage and in normal brain is predominantly produced by astrocytes and resident microglia. In addition to its chemoattractant properties, it may have direct effects on the permeability of the blood–brain barrier (Stamatovic et al. ) rendering it more porous and facilitating the transendothelial migration of blood-borne leucocytes into the brain. MCP-1 is also increased acutely in several models of TBI including penetrating trauma (Glabinski et al. ) and diffuse axonal injury (Babcock et al. ; Rancan et al. ) and parallels observed increases in sICAM.
From the current studies, we have demonstrated a statistically significant increase in MCP-1 and a trend increase in MIP-1α in cerebral tissue following a primary blast exposure focussed on the cranium, which is supported by changes in gene expression. Importantly, these chemokines are responsible for the recruitment of monocytic cells into damaged tissue. Our data suggests that the chemokine signals produced within cerebral tissue following primary blast injury are predominately involved in the recruitment of monocytic cells. The importance of monocytic chemokine production after TBI has previously been shown in fluid percussion and cortical impact models (Dalgard et al. ; Szmydynger-Chodobska et al. ; Mukherjee et al. ). In these models of brain injury, protein expression of MCP-1 was observed at both 4- and 24-h post-injury (Dalgard et al. ). Significant increases in the expression MCP-1 mRNA were also observed 6 h after injury in a cortical impact model (Szmydynger-Chodobska et al. ).
Both Szmydynger-Chodobska and Mukherjee (Mukherjee et al. ; Szmydynger-Chodobska et al. ) demonstrated that MCP-1, and not neutrophil chemokines such as GRO/KC, was the predominant chemokine produced in neuronal tissue following injury. MCP-1 levels were also shown to be significantly elevated in the CSF of patients for up to 10 days after severe TBI (Semple et al. ). Our data indicates that MCP-1 is significantly increased following primary blast wave injury to the head suggesting that the predominant recruitment signals for leucocytes to damaged brain tissue in cerebral blast injury are monocytic rather than neutrophilic.
The endothelial integrins, ICAM and sVCAM, were significantly elevated in the cerebral tissue of blast-exposed rats. Increased expression of these adhesion molecules indicates vascular endothelial activation, which may contribute to opening of the blood–brain barrier and the subsequent genesis of cerebral oedema. These adhesion molecules also play a key role in the attachment (margination) of leucocytes prior to leucocyte diapedesis into cerebral tissue.
We have shown that a significant, isolated blast to the brain without major systemic disturbance is, in itself, capable of eliciting both a neuroprotective and a cerebral inflammatory response, within 8 h of exposure. Whilst these effects alone are unlikely to be responsible for the totality of the response of the brain to severe blast injury, they suggest a mechanism that may be priming the cerebral inflammatory response and rendering the cerebral tissue more susceptible to the deleterious effects of systemic inflammatory reactions. Data were measured at a single time point when there was no histological evidence of tissue damage, and further studies will be required to elucidate, in detail, the origin and progress of this cerebral inflammatory response and to understand the temporal profile of interactions between the pro- and anti-inflammatory mechanisms.