Highlights
Fixed-Dose 4-Factor Prothrombin Complex Concentrate is an emerging treatment strategy for the reversal of Vitamin K antagonists. A fixed-dose strategy has many proposed advantages and is supported by the current literature. The available literature, however, is highly heterogeneous with respect to methodology and outcomes used to classify successful reversal. Future studies with robust methodologies are needed to determine the efficacy and safety of this strategy.
Introduction
The first commercially available 4-Factor Prothrombin Complex Concentrate (4F-PCC) was approved for vitamin K antagonist (VKA) reversal in the United States in April of 2013. In less than 5 years 4F-PCC has emerged as a standard of care for patients with life-threatening major bleeds, as recommended by at least one new guideline, due to their ability to rapidly and effectively achieve hemostasis [ ]. Despite the expansion in the use of 4F-PCC optimal strategies for dosing and administration of this agent remain unclear. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved dosing algorithm for 4F-PCC is based on a patient’s pretreatment International Normalized Ratio (INR) and body weight [ ]. However, recently there has been a large increase in the number of publications exploring fixed-dose 4F-PCC regimens, with doses lower than suggested by the package insert.
In December 2017, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) Expert Consensus Decision Pathway on Management of Bleeding in Patients on Oral Anticoagulants included two low dose 4F-PCC options for urgent reversal of VKA [ ]. The inclusion of a fixed-dose 4F-PCC strategy in these pathways suggests that it should be routinely considered in clinical decision making. However, a paucity of clinical data exists demonstrating the efficacy and safety of this strategy. This narrative review will address the potential advantages and shortcomings with clinical use of fixed-dose 4F-PCC, as well as limitations of the available literature.
Methods
A literature search was performed through MEDLINE, and English language articles related to fixed dose 4F-PCC in human subjects were identified from inception until January 2018. Search terms included “fixed-dose four factor prothrombin complex concentrate”, ‘fixed-dose PCC’’, and “4F-PCC”. Relevant papers were retrieved and assessed, and their associated bibliographies were evaluated for citations that may have been missed through the initial electronic search strategy. Articles describing unrelated prothrombin complex concentrates, such as activated prothrombin complex concentrate or 3 factor prothrombin complex concentrate, were not included. All relevant articles identified by the search were added to Table 1 . This is not a systematic review, and therefore the benefits of such an approach cannot be applied.
Table 1 Studies evaluating fixed-dose 4-factor prothrombin complex concentrates Author PCC brand Study design Patient population Comparator group(s) N, fixed-dose arm PCC dose, fixed regimen Rationale for fixed-dose regimen Clinical outcome INR outcome Yasaka [ ] PPSB-HT Nichiyaku Cohort study Major hemorrhagic complications during warfarin therapy PCC alone PCC and vitamin K vitamin K alone 11, PCC and vitamin K 2, PCC alone 500 IU Negative clinical experience with standardized dosing, unspecified Hematoma size, neurological symptoms INR decrease—no goal defined Yasaka [ ] PPSB-HT Nichiyaku Case Reports Case 1: Massive Subcutaneous hemorrhage Case 2 Emergent INR Reversal PCC with vitamin K 2, PCC and vitamin K 500 IU Unspecified None INR decrease, no goal defined Yasaka [ ] PPSB-HT Nichiyaku Cohort study Major hemorrhagic complications or invasive procedure during warfarin therapy None 42 200, 500, 1000, 1500 IU Follow up to previous study None INR < 1.5 van Aart [ ] Cofact Open label, prospective randomized controlled trial Receiving oral VKA therapy with INR > 2.2 with bleeding or other indication for urgent therapy reversal Individualized dosing regimen 47 500 IU Lack of clinical necessity for complete VKA reversal None INR < 2.1 for minor interventions, INR < 1.5 for major interventions Junagade [ ] Beriplex Retrospective chart review Major hemorrhagic complications during warfarin therapy None 21 500, 1000, 1500 IU Cost, risk of thrombosis None INR < 2.0 Khorsand [ ] Cofact Retrospective cohort study Major non-intracranial hemorrhagic complications during warfarin therapy or emergent invasive procedure Individualized dosing regimen 35 1040 or 530 IU Based off van Aart trial and other hospital experiences Hemostasis or invasive procedure without a bleeding complication INR < 2.0, 1.8, or 1.5 Khorsand [ ] Cofact Retrospective cohort study Major non-intracranial hemorrhagic complications during warfarin therapy Individualized dosing regimen 101 1040 IU Follow-up to previous pilot study Achievement of hemostasis INR < 2.0 Wozniak [ ] Octaplex Retrospective chart review Major hemorrhagic complications during warfarin therapy None 150 1000 IU (500–2500 IU) Evaluation of National Advisory Committee on Blood and Blood Products (Canada) protocol, 2008 Cessation or prevention of bleeding INR < 1.5 Varga [ ] Octaplex Retrospective chart review Major hemorrhagic complications during warfarin therapy None 122 1000 IU (additional doses administered but not described) Evaluation of National Advisory Committee on Blood and Blood Products (Canada) protocol, 2008 Control of bleeding on a graded scale INR < 1.5, 1.6–2.0, 2.1–3.0, and 3.1–5.0 Hirri [ ] Octaplex Retrospective chart review Emergent or urgent warfarin reversal for any indication None 67 1000, 1500, or 2000 IU Results of Wozniak study and internal, unpublished patient case audits None INR ≤ 1.5 Klein [ ] Kcentra Retrospective chart review Emergent oral anticoagulant reversal for any indication None 39 1500 IU Results of Varga study, with dose increase to account for larger patient body weight and more aggressive dosing in the setting of a level I trauma center None INR < 2.0, ≤ 1.5 Abdoellakhan [ ] Cofact Retrospective cohort study Intracranial hemorrhage during warfarin therapy Individualized dosing regimen 28 1000 IU, followed by 500 IU based on INR Follow up to Khorsand 2012 study Modified Rankin Scale (mRS) at discharge INR ≤ 1.5 Astrup [ ] Kcentra Retrospective chart review Emergent or urgent warfarin reversal for any indication None 37 1500 IU Streamline administration of agent at the facility None INR ≤ 1.5
Results
Benefits of fixed-dose 4F-PCC
Dosing strategies of 4F-PCC to maximize efficacy and minimize adverse events have been summarized previously [ , ]. It has been suggested that higher doses of 4F-PCC may carry increased thrombotic risk. However, in the randomized clinical trial which gained FDA approval for 4F-PCC, thromboembolic events occurred in only 3.9% of patients and did not differ from the comparator group [ ]. As one systematic review of PCC dosing strategies demonstrated that having any predefined protocol lends itself to positive outcomes, and the rate of thromboembolic events remains low, the benefits to the fixed-dose strategy must be found elsewhere [ ].
The first benefit of this dosing strategy is an improved time to drug administration in patient populations where time is critical to outcomes. An observational study in 2006 documented that time to initiation of VKA reversal was highly predictive of INR normalization, whereby every 30 min of delay in the first dose of FFP was associated with a 20% decrease in the odds of INR reversal at 24 h [ ]. Following the manufacturer’s labeling for 4F-PCC, a patient could receive between 5 and 10 vials of 500 IU product; these may be administered individually or pooled into a single empty container [ ]. A fixed-dose strategy allows for bedside admixture and therefore the potential to begin administration more rapidly. In fact, a recent study noted a statistically significant decrease in medication order to medication administration times following the implementation of a fixed-dose protocol involving bedside admixture, decreasing from an average of 51 min to an average of 38 min [ ]. Therefore, a fixed dosing strategy, which removes barriers such as dosage calculation may hasten both INR reversal and achievement of hemostasis.
The second benefit of this dosing strategy is a decreased cost of pharmaceutical goods. Financial evaluations of the variable dosing strategy have placed the median cost of 4F-PCC between $2817–4213 (range $1581–$6394) per patient [ ]. Klein et al. noted their fixed-dose strategy had an associated cost of $2264 ($2118–$2988) per patient; extrapolating the cost difference had patients received the manufacturer’s recommended dose, a potential savings of $40,273 could have been realized over the course of the investigation [ ]. Astrup and colleagues found a $982 per patient difference in favor of their fixed-dose strategy, which amounted to $36,365 over the 8-month study period [ ]. Utilization of such a strategy may decrease the cost per successful reversal and represents an opportunity for cost containment within health systems.
Select experiences with fixed dose 4F-PCC
One of the earliest reports of fixed-dose 4F-PCC regimen was described by Yasaka and colleagues, who sought to describe both the efficacy and safety of 4F-PCC with, without, or only with vitamin K in 17 patients with hemorrhagic complications secondary to warfarin therapy [ ]. Utilizing PPSB-HT Nichiyaku® (Nihon Pharmaceuticals), the group originally planned to investigate outcomes with 25 or 50 IU/kg regimens. However, the authors state, “in the first patient, the efficacy of PCC in correcting INR was greater than expected;” additional details regarding this patient and the related outcomes were not provided. This single outcome led to a protocol change, instead administering a fixed dose, 500 or 1000 IU once time, followed by additional dosing if the INR had not been corrected. A subsequent dose-finding study completed by this same group of authors determined that 500 IU was the optimal dose for correcting an INR less than 5.0; larger doses should be considered for an INR of 5.0 or greater [ ].
The dose-finding study by Yasaka et al. served as the single fixed-dose reference in support of the 2008 utilization recommendations for the 4F-PCC product Octaplex® (Octapharma Canada) put forth by The National Advisory Committee on Blood and Blood Products. Secondary to a stated lack of efficacy and safety data, along with inventory control measures the Committee recommended a dose of 1000 IU with vitamin K administration [ ].
However, The Advisory Committee updated their recommendations in 2011 following an audit of facilities of heaviest use of the Octaplex® product [ ]. Of the fourteen institutions surveyed, ten responded; of those ten, only two reported following the recommended fixed dosing regimen. Noting that 50% of patients from those two facilities responded to the fixed dose and a continued concern for thrombotic complications, the Committee adjusted its recommendation to a tiered fixed-dose regimen based in INR [ ]. Another update was provided in 2014, maintaining the 2011 regimen, while also providing a second recommendation for fixed dosing based on weight and INR [ ].
Retrospective reviews of the 2008 National Advisory Committee recommended regimen and other European experiences, serve as the foundations of fixed-dose protocols in the United States (Table 1 ). Most recently, Klein and colleagues, whose facility adopted a 1500 IU fixed dose protocol with the addition of 4F-PCC to their hospital’s formulary, evaluated the efficacy of this in 39 patients on chronic oral anticoagulation [ ]. Patients presented with an INR between 2.5 and 4.0, and 36 of these patients successfully had their INR decreased to less than 2.0. Mirroring this protocol, Astrup evaluated its efficacy in 37 patients with INR values between 1.17 to greater than 16 who were in need of emergent reversal of an oral anticoagulant [ ]. In their efficacy analysis, they note an INR value of 2.0 or less in all included patients. These small, successful reports provide encouragement to other facilities to adopt similar dosing protocols.
Knowledge gaps
Important questions remain about the clinical use of fixed dose 4F-PCC (Table 2 ). A recent international survey demonstrated that only a minority of health systems have implemented an emergent warfarin reversal protocol based on fixed-dose 4F-PCC, with noted interfacility variability, suggesting a hesitancy to adopt this dosing strategy [ ]. The current body of literature consists largely of retrospective studies which are at high risk of biases inherent to that design. The findings of these studies are significantly complicated by heterogeneity in patient population, bleed type, intervention utilized, administration of other blood products, severity of illness of the patient population, and delays in time to therapy.
Table 2 Limitations and areas of uncertainty of current fixed-dose 4F-PCC literature 1. Heterogeneity of patient populations, doses and products administered to patients 2. Current literature is largely comprised of retrospective analyses 3. Inconsistency of safety endpoint evaluations 4. Nonstandard definitions of successful anticoagulation reversal 5. An as of yet undiscerned relationship between delivery of 4F-PCC and patient outcomes
Doses are highly variable in the available literature, with reported doses ranging from 200 to 1500 IU. In a clinical trial utilizing a fixed-dose regimen, patients receiving a 500 IU dose of 4F-PCC were less likely than to reach INR reversal than patients who were dosing using a variable dosing regimen [ ]. Hence, while 500 IU represents a likely under-dosing for patients, the dose which optimizes efficacy, safety, and cost is not known. More recent retrospective studies have evaluated doses ranging from 1000 to 1500 IU, which appear likely to successfully reverse patients to INR < 1.5 [ , ]. Abdoellakhan et al. utilized a fixed dose 1000 IU followed by an additional 500 IU dose which was based on INR reversal [ ]. Dosing algorithms utilizing an initial fixed dose followed by additional doses based on clinical response may develop which allow for rapid administration while containing pharmaceutical costs, however data on these strategies are limited at this time.
There is noteworthy heterogeneity in the 4F-PCC products used in previous studies. Much of the early literature examining fixed dose regimens was performed using Cofact® (Sanquin/CAF, The Netherlands) or PPSB-HT Nichiyaku® (Nihon Pharmaceuticals, Japan) whereas more recent studies have examined Beriplex®/KCentra® (CSL Behring) (Table 3 ). No studies, of which these authors are aware, have directly compared 4F-PCC products. Consequently, the clinical relevance of differences in coagulation factors or anticoagulant proteins between products is not known.
Table 3 4-Factor Prothrombin Complex Concentrate Products Product Availability Coagulation factors (IU/ml) Anticoagulant proteins II VII IX X Protein C Protein S Antithrombin Heparin (IU/ml) Beriplex P/N, Condiex, or Kcentra (CSL Behring, Germany) Europe, Canada, United States 20–48 10–25 20–31 22–60 15–45 12–38 0.2–1.5 0.4–2.0 Cofact/PPSB SD (Sanquin/CAF, The Netherlands) Europe ≥ 15 ≥ 5 ≥ 20 ≥ 15 N/A N/A N/A N/A Octaplex (Octapharma, Austria) Europe, Canada, Germany 14–38 9–24 25 18–30 13–31 12–32 N/A 5–12.5 PPSB-HT Nichiyaku (Nihon Pharmaceuticals, Japan) Japan 20 20 20 20 15 N/A N/A N/A
Safety—specifically the risk of VTE—is regarded as a critical factor in the adoption of fixed-dose regimens. With traditional dosing, the incidence of VTE varies in the literature, from 1.8 to 13.8% [ , , ]. Fixed-dose regimens describe a zero to 4.9% incidence of VTE. However, there are inconsistencies in analysis of these VTE events in regard to time to said event, the presence of other risk factors, and comparison to a traditional dosing regimen. Those studies that included a comparator group were likely underpowered to detect thromboembolic safety outcomes.
The available literature differs in efficacy endpoints studied and there is controversy regarding what the most optimal clinical endpoint should be. Wozniak and colleagues defined reversal as INR < 1.5, while Klein and colleagues define reversal as INR < 2 [ , ]. Differences in the definition of successful reversal cloud a clearer risk–benefit analysis, as reversal to an INR of 2 may carry risk associated with continuance of bleeding. Conversely, reversal to an INR < 1.5 may carry greater risk for thromboembolic events. While INR serves as a surrogate for bleed risk it has been argued that direct measurements of hemostasis or neurologic outcomes may be more clinically important. Retrospective studies are not well suited to measure these outcomes as time to hemostasis is not routinely recorded in the patient chart.
The relationship between the speed in which 4F-PCC is delivered, attainment of goal INR values, and the impact on patient outcomes has not yet been discerned. Both the time to administration and time to completion of infusion may be shortened with fixed doses secondary to improved operational efficiencies. The manufacturer’s maximum recommended rate of 4F-PCC administration in the United States is 8.4 ml/min. Therefore, fixed-doses of 1000 and 1500 IU could be delivered in 4.7 and 7.1 min, respectively. Previous studies comparing fixed-doses to variable doses may be at risk of residual confounding due to the differences in time to administration between regimens.
The ACC Expert Consensus Decision Pathway on Management of Bleeding in Patients on Oral Anticoagulants provides two dosing options for fixed-dose 4F-PCC: 1000 units for a major bleed and 1500 units for intracranial hemorrhage [ ]. Notably, this recommendation is made only within a figure outlining a treatment pathway, stated without citations or discussion within the body of the document. The clinician is left to infer which evidence was used in support of this recommendation, with little guidance on risks, benefits, and limitations.
Future directions and conclusion
Fixed-dose 4F-PCC is a promising intervention modality, with the potential to rapidly restore hemostasis while minimizing the risk of adverse events and optimizing available resources. Before fixed-dose 4F-PCC can be recommended for routine practice, however, additional work is needed. Future studies must be comparative in nature; as interest in the fixed-dose regimen gains in popularity and acceptance, institutions utilizing this practice should have an ample comparator group from which to draw from. Outcomes should include more robust and meaningful measurements of clinical success, rather than just attainment of laboratory targets. Thrombotic events should be characterized by a temporal, rather than a dichotomous, relationship to PCC administration. Utilization of additional blood products should be documented and included for comparison, especially for cost-effectiveness comparisons [ ].
The use of fixed-dose 4F-PCC is supported by observational evidence and case reports. As there is little consistent practice in the area of fixed-dose regimens, further studies addressing the limitations of previous literature are warranted. A clinical trial designed to compare fixed-dose and variable-dose PCC may provide insight to many of the outstanding gaps in current clinical practice [ ]. Hopefully, findings from this study will lead to recommendations for the use of fixed-dose 4F-PCC which optimizes efficacy, safety and cost.