Introduction
Cognitive impairment is a well-known complication that has been related to chronic kidney disease (CKD) in recent years (Ruebner et al. ). The exact mechanism of cognitive impairment induced by CKD is still not fully understood. However, it is assumed that it results from the oxidative stress parameters, allowing spatial memory dysfunction and directly affecting the brain (Haruyama et al. ). In addition, previous studies have indicated a high risk for cognitive impairment in patients with CKD and those undergoing oxidative stress and inflammation (Chillon et al. ; Kurella Tamura et al. ; Tsuruya ). Cognitive impairment was also found to be associated with increased morbidity and mortality in people with CKD (Drew and Weiner ). Furthermore, a previous report revealed that overexpression of reactive oxygen species (ROSs) in the hippocampus has a major role in decreasing learning and memory in rats (Nicolle et al. ). The primary cause of brain’s oxidative stress can result in extreme formation of uremic toxins and consequently cognitive impairment. However, there are slight progress in efforts that have been investigated to abrogate cognitive impairment induced by CKD and highlighting the need for new and more specific anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory targets. Recent evidence suggests that hydrogen sulfide (H2S) a novel gaseous signaling molecule similarly to nitric oxide (NO) and carbon monoxide (CO) can represent an innovative treatment to slow the progression of cognitive impairment (Liu et al. ; Mard et al. ). Recently, NO has been implicated in the physiology and pathophysiology of pleiotropic signaling pathways. Changes in the NO synthases persuade CKD progression and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) deficit involved in the pathogenesis of renal failure (Baylis ). However, the potential role of NOS enzymes in beneficial effects of H2S in cognitive impairment remains to be established. In addition, enhanced inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) activity (Ca2 + -independent) may reduce eNOS activity (Ca2 + /CaM-dependent) and by this phenomenon result in renal vasoconstriction, reductions in CrCL and uremia eventually lead to cognitive deficiency (Gabbai ; Lv et al. ; Wu et al. ). H 2 S donors exhibit broad beneficial effects in renal diseases. For example, an H 2 S donor, sodium hydrosulfide (NaHS), was employed and exerted protective effects likely through increasing of glomerular filtration rate, anti-inflammatory, anti-apoptotic, and anti-oxidative responses (Cao and Bian ).
The present work aimed to study the impact of NaHS as a H2S donor on spatial memory in Morris water maze (MWM) in CKD induced animals. In the present study, we investigated the potential role of NO, using the non-specific NOS inhibitor, L-NAME (NG-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester), and the specific iNOS inhibitor, AMG, by functional evaluations of kidneys in different groups. In this regard, systemic inflammatory responses, hippocampus oxidative stress markers, and spatial memory were assessed.
Methods
Experimental design
All experiments were conducted in accordance with policies and procedures described in the guide for the care and use of laboratory animals of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee (AEC) at Tehran University of Medical Sciences (TUMS). Male Wistar rats, weighing 200–250 g, were housed under standard conditions (12 h light-dark cycle; 20–22 °C) with free access to water and a conventional rat diet. Animals were randomly assigned to control ( n = 10) and CKD ( n = 40) subjects. CKD was induced as described previously (Li et al. ). To study whether treatment with L-nitro-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME), an inhibitor of NO biosynthesis, attenuates CDK-induced brain dysfunction, rats were treated with L-NAME. Moreover, to study whether treatment with aminoguanidine (AMG or Pimagedine), an anti-glycating agent, as well as diamine oxidase and NO synthase inhibitor attenuates CDK-induced brain dysfunction, rats were treated with AMG. All the CKD rats were housed for four weeks to establish the 5/6Nx model and then, were equally randomized to CKD group, NaHS (30 micromol/l twice daily), NaHS with L–NAME (15 mg/kg), and NaHS with AMG (0.1 g/kg) in drinking water for 8 weeks. In the sham group, all of the surgical procedures were applied with the exception of no manipulation of the kidneys. Systolic blood pressure was measured between 13:00 and 16:00 h by the tail-cuff method connected to a pulse transducer device (MLT125/R; AD Instruments, Castle Hill, NSW, Australia). The transducer was connected to a PowerLab/4SP data-acquisition system (Chart, version 5; AD Instruments). Five measurements taken for each rat and subsequently averaged. After 12 weeks, the animals weighed and placed in metabolic cages for a 24-h urine collection and then, anesthetized for obtaining blood samples from the inferior vena cava.
Behavioral assessment
The MWM task was evaluated in a water tank. At the beginning, rats received a block of four trials during five daily sessions. During the first four days, the platform, located in the center of the southwest quadrant, was submerged 1.5 cm below the surface of the water and therefore hidden, for testing spatial learning. The platform position remained stable over 4 days and acquisition of this task was assessed. On day 5, the platform was elevated above water level, covered with a piece of aluminum foil and placed in the center of the southeast quadrant. This assessed motivation and sensorimotor coordination towards a visible platform. A trial was terminated as soon as the animal had climbed onto the escape platform or when 90 s (s) had elapsed. A rat was allowed to stay on the platform for 20 s. Next, it was taken from the platform and the next trial was started. Rats that did not find the platform during 90 s were situated on the platform by the trier and were allowed to remain there for 20 s. After performance of the 4th trial, rats were gently dried with a towel, kept warm for an hour and returned to their home cage. The path of each rat on each trial was automatically recorded by a computerized system and then analyzed by computing several parameters, e.g., latency to find the platform (the time to reach the hidden platform), traveled distance (the length of swim path) and percentage of quadrant entries as well as the swim speed. All tests were performed between 09:00 and 13:00 h.
Biochemical analysis
Urine samples were collected at the end of the experiment and the total volume was recorded. In conjunction with serum creatinine concentration and urine volume, urinary creatinine concentration was measured by with Jaffe reaction (Parsazmon Kit, Iran) using an autoanalyzer (Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan) to calculate creatinine clearance (CrCl). Standard formula was C = U * V/P, where U is the marker concentration in urine, V is volume of urine, and P is the marker concentration in plasma. Urine total protein (TP) was determined by colorimetric methods (Hitachi 704 auto-analyzer, Japan).
Analysis of oxidative stress markers
Lipid peroxidation assay
Malondialdehyde (MDA) levels were measured in hippocampus tissue samples using the thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) method (Baeeri et al. ). Malondialdehyde reacts with thiobarbituric acid (TBA) and results in the formation of a pink pigment that has maximum absorption at 532 nm. The values were expressed as μmol/100 mg tissue.
Superoxide Dismutase activity assay
Hippocampus tissue superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity was assessed by the spectrophotometric method (Baeeri et al. ). Oxidation of Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) is linked to the availability of superoxide anions in the medium. The activity was defined as U/g tissue.
Catalase activity assay
Hippocampus tissue catalase (CAT) activity was determined and the decomposition of H2O2 was measured using a spectrophotometer at 240 nm (Baeeri et al. ). Activity is expressed as a K rate constant of the first-order reaction per g tissue.
Glutathione levels assay
Hippocampus tissue Glutathione (GSH) content was determined according to the modified method (Shokrzadeh et al. ). In this method, the continuous reduction of 5, 5′-dithiobis 2-nitrobenzoic acid as a chromogen was measured at 412 nm. The value for each sample was extracted from the standard curve and is expressed in μmol/g tissue.
Analysis of gene expression
At 12th week of 5/6Nx induction, animals were euthanized by intra-peritoneal (i.p.) injection of a mixture of xylazine (10 mg/Kg) and ketamine (50 mg/Kg) and thereafter brains were dissected (Askari et al. ). The total RNA was isolated from frozen tissue homogenates using an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany). The purity and concentration of the extracted RNA were determined by Nanodrop 1000 (Thermo- Scientific, USA). The cDNA was transcribed from one microgram of the total RNA using a PrimeScript™ 1st strand cDNA synthesis kit (Takara, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The primer pairs used in this study are indicated in Table 1 . Expression among groups was calculated using comparative ΔΔCt method (Mard et al. ; Sanadgol et al. ). Table 1 Primer sequences used for quantitative RT–PCR Gene Name Direction Sequence 5′ to 3’ TNF-α Forward TACTGAACTTCGGGGTGATTGGTCC Reverse CAGCCTTGTCCCTTGAAGAGAACC IL-1β Forward TGATGTTCCCATTAGACAGC Reverse GAGGTGCTGATGTACCAGTT iNOS Forward AGCGGCTCCATGACTCTCAG Reverse GGAACAACACTCCCTTGCGG eNOS Forward CTCGAGCGGTGGACACAAG Reverse CACAGAAAGTTTCACAGGCAGC HPRT-1 Forward CTCATGGACTGATTATGGACAGGAC Reverse GCAGGTCAGCAAAGAACTTATAGCC
Analysis of protein expression
Immunoblotting was performed as described previously (Sanadgol et al. ; Mehrabi et al. ). In brief, after kidney removal, tissue micro dissected on ice, snap frozen and stored at −80 °C until further use. Tissues were homogenized with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), centrifuged and protein levels were estimated according to bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay method (Sigma-Aldrich). Equal amount of total protein (25 μg) was resolved on SDS-PAGE gels (8–10%) and transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes via electrophoretic transfer system (Bio-Rad, Munchen, Germany). The membranes were blocked and incubated with specific mouse monoclonal primary antibodies against iNOS/NOS2 and eNOS/NOS3 (Santa Cruz, USA) at 4 °C overnight (1:200). The membranes were thoroughly washed with PBS plus 0.05% Tween-20 (PBS-T), and incubated with respective goat anti- mouse IgG HRP secondary antibodies (Santa Cruz, USA) at 4 °C for 4 h (1:1000). The blots were exposed to 3 3′-diaminobenzidine and H 2 O 2 as substrate solution for detection of target antigens. After staining, bands intensity was quantified using ImageJ ( http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/ ) software after background subtraction and band density normalization.
Statistical analysis
The data were expressed as mean ± standard error of mean. Statistical differences between the groups were evaluated by one-way ANOVA with subsequent application of the Tukey test for post hoc analysis.
Results
Kidney functional recovery promoted by NaHS
As shown in Fig. 1 a, CrCl was significantly decreased after 12 weeks in the 5/6Nx group in comparison with the sham group ( P < 0.01). Moreover, proteinuria, was significantly increased in 5/6Nx group after 12 weeks’ post-surgery in comparison with the sham group (Fig. 1 b, P < 0.01). We observed a significant increasing in CrCl ( P < 0.001) after 8 weeks’ treatment with NaHS in comparison with 5/6Nx group ( P < 0.05). In addition, proteinuria was reduced in NaHS group in comparison with 5/6Nx subjects (P < 0.001). In NaHS group animals that treated with L-NAME there were statistical increase on CrCl ( P < 0.05) and decrease on proteinuria (P < 0.05) in comparison with NaHS group (Fig. 1 a, b). We suggest that the protective effect of NaHS on renal function could supported by L-NAME co-treatment. In NaHS group animals that co-treated with AMG there were no significant changes on both CrCl and proteinuria in comparison with NaHS group (Fig. 1 a, b). Fig. 1 Effect of different interventions on biochemical markers related with kidney function including creatinine clearance (CrCl, a and proteinuria ( b ). Data represent mean ± SEM ( n = 8); ** p < 0.01 vs. sham group, # p < 0.05 and ## p < 0.01 vs. 5/6Nx group, + p < 0.05 vs. NaHS group. 5/6Nx: CKD group, NaHS: CKD rats were treated with NaHS, L-NAME: NaHS group were co-treated with L-NAME, AMG: NaHS group were co-treated with aminoguanidine (AMG)
Spatial memory and learning improved by NaHS
Results from the MWM training trials are summarized in Table 2 and Fig. 2 . After four days training in this task (each day consisted of one block, and each block included four trials), rats learned to find the invisible platform. This was showed by a significant reduction in escape latency and traveled distance compared to those of the one day trained animals (Table 2 ). Animals in 5/6Nx group revealed a significantly longer escape latency and travel distance compared to sham group (Fig. 2 a, P < 0.05). However, the administration of NaHS (30 micromol/l twice daily) significantly improved spatial memory and learning during trials by decreasing escape latency and travel distance in comparison with 5/6Nx group (Fig. 2 a, b,P < 0.05). Significant increasing in escape latency and travel distance were observed in NaHS+L-NAME groups in comparison with NaHS group (Fig. 2 ). NaHS+AMG group showed a non-significant changes in escape latency and travel distance compared to NaHS group (Fig. 2 , P < 0.05). A comparison of swimming speeds revealed that there no significant difference between swimming speeds of different groups (Fig. 2 ). The animals in sham group showed a significant decrease in time spent in target quadrant compared to 5/6Nx animals (Fig. 2 , P < 0.05). However, the animals in NaHS and NaHS+AMG revealed significant reduction in time spent in target quadrant compared to 5/6Nx group (Fig. 2 , P < 0.05). NaHS+L-NAME significantly increased time spent in the target quadrant in comparison with NaHS group (Fig. 2 , P < 0.05). Table 2 Effects of 1th day and 4th day training on spatial memory of different experimental groups Treatments Groups Escape Latency (sec) Traveled Distance (cm) Swimming Speed (cm/s) Day 1 Day 4 Day 1 Day 4 Day 1 Day 4 Sham 15.25 ± 2.71 7.86 ± 0.89* 447.72 ± 72.24 245.01 ± 30.80* 32.44 ± 1.23 29.87 ± 1.08 5/6 Nx 19.47 ± 2.85 7.93 ± 1.07* 573.13 ± 84.2 244.74 ± 27.39* 30.39 ± 1.04 31.79 ± 1.28 NaHS 19.73 ± 2.94 10.80 ± 2.16* 599.87 ± 88.80 285.73 ± 41.25* 32.45 ± 1.32 33.93 ± 1.29 L-NAME 18.92 ± 2.13 12.33 ± 1.89* 833.50 ± 62.89 296.33 ± 30.34* 31.26 ± 1.02 30.05 ± 1.21 AMG 26.40 ± 3.48 19.52 ± 2.46* 919.9 ± 121.44 632.82 ± 72.72* 34.56 ± 1.29 37.08 ± 1.05 Results show that all animals learned to find the hidden platform during the training days. Values are presented as means±SEM for at least 10 animals per group, stars indicates p < 0.05. Fig. 2 Effect of different interventions on water maze task. Escape latency ( a ), travel distance ( b ), swimming speeds ( c ) and time spent in target quadrant ( d ). Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 8); * p < 0.05 vs. sham group, # p < 0.05 vs. 5/6Nx group, + p < 0.05 vs. NaHS group. 5/6Nx: CKD group, NaHS: CKD rats were treated with NaHS, L-NAME: NaHS group were co-treated with L-NAME, AMG: NaHS group were co-treated with aminoguanidine (AMG)
Oxidative stress moderated by NaHS
In order to evaluate the extent of oxidative stress resulting from free radical-induced damage following CKD, lipid peroxidation and antioxidant enzymes levels were assessed in the rat hippocampus. Analysis showed that there are significant increases in hippocampal MDA levels in 5/6Nx group compared to sham group (Fig. 3 , P < 0.01). However, administration of NaHS and NaHS with AMG significantly reduced the 5/6Nx-induced elevation of hippocampal MDA levels (Fig. 3 , P < 0.01). Data analysis showed that NaHS+LNAME significantly increased MDA levels in comparison with NaHS group (Fig. 3 , P < 0.05). Results also revealed that SOD, CAT activities and GSH levels reduced markedly in 5/6Nx group compared to the sham group (Fig. 3 , P < 0.05). The change of SOD, CAT activities and GSH levels were antagonized markedly after administration NaHS and NaHS+AMG in comparison with 5/6Nx group ( P < 0.01). There were significant decreasing in the SOD, CAT activity and GSH levels in NaHS+L-NAME group in comparison with 5/6Nx group (Fig. 3 , P < 0.01). Fig. 3 Effect of different interventions on oxidative stress markers. MDA ( a ), SOD ( b ), CAT ( c ) and GSH (D). Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 8); ** p < 0.01 vs. sham group, ## p < 0.01 vs. 5/6Nx group, + p < 0.05 and ++ p < 0.01 vs. NaHS group. 5/6Nx: CKD group, NaHS: CKD rats were treated with NaHS, L-NAME: NaHS group were co-treated with L-NAME, AMG: NaHS group were co-treated with aminoguanidine (AMG)
Inflammatory respounse Aleviated by NaHS
As indicated on Fig. 4 our results showed a significant increase in both TNF-α and IL-1β gene expression in 5/6Nx group in comparison with sham group (Fig. 4 a, b, P < 0.01). On the contrary TNF-α and IL-1β genes down regulated in NaHS group and NaHS+AMG in comparison with 5/6NX group (Fig. 4 a, b, P < 0.01). In NaHS group animals that treated with L-NAME there were no statistical change on TNF-α and IL-1β genes in comparison with NaHS group (Fig. 4 a, b). Fig. 4 Effect of different interventions on inflammation markers and nitric oxide synthase gene expressions. TNF-α ( a ), IL-1β ( b ) eNOS ( c ) and iNOS ( d ). Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 8); ** p < 0.01 vs. sham group, ## p < 0.01 vs. 5/6Nx group, + p < 0.05 and ++ p < 0.01 vs. NaHS group. 5/6Nx: CKD group, NaHS: CKD rats were treated with NaHS, L-NAME: NaHS group were co-treated with L-NAME, AMG: NaHS group were co-treated with aminoguanidine (AMG)
NO gene and Protein expression analysis
Figure 4 reveals the changes in mRNA expression of eNOS and iNOS genes in the hippocampus 12 weeks’ post-surgery. Our results showed an insignificant change in mRNA expression of eNOS and significant increasing in iNOS mRNA expression in 5/6NX group compared to the sham group (Fig. 4 c, d, P < 0.01). eNOS gene significantly up regulated in NaHS group in comparison with 5/6NX group (Fig. 4 c, P < 0.01). In addition, eNOS expression were significantly decreased in both NaHS+L-NAME and NaHS+AMG treated animals when compared to NaHS group (Fig. 4 c, P < 0.01). We also observed a significant decreasing in iNOS mRNA expression when 5/6NX group treated with all interventions including NaHS, NaHS+L-NAME and NaHS+AMG (Fig. 4 d, P < 0.01). Figure 5 reveals the changes in protein expression of eNOS and iNOS and confirmed previous mRNA expression data. As predicted in correspond with gene expression data, amount of eNOS protein expression dramatically increased only with NaSH treatment and not with other interventions in comparison with 5/6NX group (Fig. 5 a, P < 0.01). On the other hand, significant increasing of iNOS protein expression in 5/6NX group lessened via all interventions including NaHS, NaHS+L-NAME and NaHS+AMG (Fig. 5 b, P < 0.01). Fig. 5 Effect of different interventions on nitric oxide synthase protein expressions. eNOS ( a ) and iNOS ( b ). Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 8); * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 vs. sham group, ## p < 0.01 vs. 5/6Nx group, + p < 0.05 and ++ p < 0.01 vs. NaHS group. 5/6Nx: CKD group, NaHS: CKD rats were treated with NaHS, L-NAME: NaHS group were co-treated with L-NAME, AMG: NaHS group were co-treated with aminoguanidine (AMG)
Discussion
In this study, we evaluated the effects of H2S on recovery of CKD-induced spatial learning deficits in a rat model, via monitoring of imported mediators such as oxidative and inflammatory markers with implication on the participation of NO in this process. We observed that H2S treatment reduces neuroinflammation (IL-1β, TNF-α), prevents lipid peroxidation and finally decreases oxidative stress (SOD, CAT, GSH) markers in CKD group. This data is in agreement with previous studies in diseases showing that H2S reduces inflammation and oxidative stress in both chronic unpredictable mild stress and lipopolysaccharide-induced cognitive impairment conditions (Gong et al. ; Hu et al. ). As kidneys and brain are strongly interconnected, afferent impulses from the brain regulate GFR, blood pressure, and affect renal sodium handling. Renin-angiotensin axis interlinks the damaged kidney and brain dysfunctions by afferent and efferent sympathetic nerves (Gironacci et al. ). So, although inflammation is observed systemically in experimental models of CKD such as hypertensive (Tanada et al. ) and nephrectomy (Wei et al. ) models, it has been indicated that acute kidney injury leads to oxidative stress in the brain, especially in the hippocampus and in the frontal cortex (Kovalcikova et al. ).
Furthermore, our results demonstrated that H2S-mediated anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative stress effects could also restores spatial learning and memory in CKD group. This suggests that treatment with H2S supplementation could be a new therapeutic approach to improve cognitive and motor dysfunction induced by CKD. On the other hand, administration of L-NAME in combination with NaHS significantly impaired the ability of rats to locate the hidden platform. Since none of the treatments changed the swimming speeds and latencies to find the visible platform, the observed effects are unlikely to be associated with changes in locomotion or sensorimotor coordination and could be attributed to spatial performance. Inefficient performance in the MWM is showed a deficit in the hippocampus. The tracking system measures the gradually lessen escapes latency across trials, and variables such as path length, swimming speed, directionality in relation to platform location, and so on (D'Hooge and De Deyn ). Surprisingly, Ito and colleagues have been shown that the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score was positively correlated with the patients’ estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and proteinuria based on a multivariate analysis (Ito et al. ). In our study, 5/6Nx increased proteinuria and reduced CrCl in animals; as well as, significantly induced memory loss, implicating the success of model establishment. Our results, indicated that presence of memory deficits in L-NAME group is likely results from the extensive accumulation of ROSs and inflammatory cytokines, which contributes to its molecular signaling (Wu et al. ). In our study, the positive effects of H2S on memory and cognitive function in the NaHS and NaHS+AMG group were likely due to blocking redox and iNOS signaling. Studies have shown that 5/6Nx causes oxidative stress in the brain and enhances the formation of ROSs (Wu et al. ). Many experiments have advised the application of antioxidant supplementation and iNOS inhibitors to decrease oxidative stress levels, inflammatory response and slow down or prevent the improvement of disease-associated complications (Atef et al. ; Haghi-Aminjan et al. ; Haghi-Aminjan et al. ). H2S high antioxidant capacity is attributed to its potential for scavenging ROS, by activating gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase (γ-GCS) and cysteine transportation, glutathione production and suppresses oxidative stress in mitochondria and other free radicals, which are produced from different cellular reactions and lead to oxidative stress (Kimura et al. ; Shefa et al. ). It has been shown that TNFα and IL-1β are critical for neuroinflammation induced memory impairment (Gonzalez et al. ) and in the present study, animals were undergoing of 5/6Nx, showed significant changes in tissue levels of TNFα and IL-1β may be linked to cognitive impairment-induced by CKD. Thus, oxidative stress and inflammation has been shown to play a pivotal role in cognitive deficit (Godinho et al. ). Previous studies have implied that oxidative stress and inflammation induces neural damage in brain areas considered in the etiology of memory dysfunction (Askari et al. ; Tian et al. ; Tu et al. ). NOS inhibition was found to impair spatial learning in MWM (Koylu et al. ; Mutlu et al. ) in previous studies and our findings are consistent with them. These results indicate a role of NO in regulating the recovery of CKD-induced spatial learning deficits; potentially reveal the underlying mechanism by which NaHS ameliorates CKD-induced brain dysfunction. In addition, the neuroprotective effect of H2S against CKD may be due to the iNOS inhibition characteristic of this agent by inhibiting inflammatory cytokines. The induction of iNOS expression favors the increased synthesis of NO, which is associated with inflammatory responses. These enhancements in NO levels may accelerate detrimental levels of oxidant peroxynitrite production, which may react with tyrosine residues resulting in nitrotyrosine formation (Lanzetti et al. ). To clarify the role of NO and its potential to react with superoxide anion to synthesis peroxynitrite during the progression of memory deficit induced by CKD, rats were coadministered with AMG, a selective inhibitor of iNOS. AMG was proposed in 1992 as one of the first selective iNOS inhibitors. AMG is fifty times more effective in inhibiting the enzymatic activity of iNOS than eNOS and nNOS isoforms (Farhad et al. ).
In this current study, we showed that AMG might improve spatial memory maintenances considerably in rats. It is valuable to reveal that the animals that received H2S also showed improvement in spatial memory. There are number of possible reasons why H2S and inhibition of iNOS by AMG may ameliorate spatial memory, as follows. Potential mechanisms of NO-induced spatial memory dysfunction include up-regulation of glutamate receptors for NMDA, lack of oxygen and energy, mitochondrial disorders, and cell death. Moreover, NO produced by iNOS contributes to the generation of peroxynitrite, a potent and harmful free radical factor which commences oxidative and nitrosative pathways in neurons (Najafi et al. ).
Consistent with this, our results indicated the possibility that inhibition of iNOS by AMG protects negative effect of NO on memory. It has been shown that iNOS enhances cognitive deficits and depression in diabetic mice through upregulating the NO signaling (Zhou et al. ).
Synaptic plasticity induction is a key mechanism of learning and memory (Wang and Peng ). H2S affects synaptic plasticity through the expression of N-Methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit 2A, which plays a pivotal role in synaptic plasticity. H2S also improved the long-term depression (LTD) (Liu et al. ).
In summary, our data confirmed that hydrogen sulfide, could improve spatial memory in MWM model; also we showed that NO could interact with the H2S signaling pathway through subtype manner and protect the neurons against CKD induced memory loss. Finally, we speculate that the observed memory deterioration caused by L-NAME administration, might be due to the extensive accumulation of ROS, inflammatory cytokines and reduction of long-term potentiation on hippocampal slices (Wu et al. ). These findings for the first time, introduces H2S as a good candidate to improve the spatial memory by the modulatory role of NO system. These data suggest the presence of an interaction between H2S and NO in the hippocampus on spatial memory formation; provide a potential explanation of the mechanism, and a direction of drug development. However, the precise mechanism of drug-like H 2 S donors remains largely elusive and requires further investigation.