Introduction
Epilepsy affects 1–2% of population, approximately 50 million people worldwide. The treatment of epilepsy is extremely challenging. More than 30% of epilepsy patients are refractory to treatments with current antiepileptic drugs (AED). Besides, many patients experience adverse effects that may compromise treatment adherence. Even in individuals who finally obtain seizure control, it is usually achieved through “trial and error” approach for to find appropriate AED, dose or combination of AEDs. Development of the vast majority of current AED was based on a prevailing „dogma “ that epilepsy is primarily a channelopathy (Greenberg and Subaran ) and relied on established animal models (e.g., pentylenetetrazol, electroshock or kindling) reflecting mostly acute stages of seizures and ictogenesis and not the chronic nature of epilepsy and epileptogenesis (Bialer and White ). Failure of current AED to affect epileptogenesis is exemplified by 47 clinical trials of AED administration after an epileptogenic trigger event that could not prevent the development of epilepsy (Avanzini et al. ). Moreover, despite the introduction of more than 15 new antiepileptic drugs (AED) since 1990, efficacy and tolerability of AED treatment has not substantially improved, therefore, conceptually novel strategies for the development of AED are highly required (Löscher and Schmidt ).
Both traditional and genomic heritability studies unequivocally show the importance of genetic factors in epilepsy (Peljto et al. ; Speed et al. ). Genetic factors play a role in more than half of all epilepsies (Pal et al. ). Recent genetic revolution due to advancements in genomic testing technologies evolves into fundamental scientific achievements and changing paradigms in clinical practice, including precision medicine approaches (EpiPM Consortium, ). Knowledge on genetic architecture of epilepsy and on functions of implicated genes may provide major insights into the pathomechanisms of epilepsy and epileptogenesis and finally pave the ways to the identification of better treatments. Besides, this knowledge may aid in proper selection of methods and algorithms for epilepsy genetic testing. Currently, genetic architecture of epilepsy, including its monogenic forms, is largely unknown.
Epilepsy may be a symptom of many monogenic diseases, including genetic malformation syndromes, neurodevelopmental disorders and inborn errors of metabolism (IEM). The latter group of disorders is of special relevance due to available precision medicine approaches in many IEM (Pearl ) and sophisticated traditional diagnostics. Although IEM are considered as an infrequent cause of epilepsy (Dulac et al. ; Rahman et al. ), it is estimated that there are more than 200 IEM encompassing seizures or epilepsy, however, the true number is unknown (Rahman et al. ). The aim of this study was to perform a comprehensive analysis of genetic architecture of IEM involving epilepsy or seizures and to evaluate diagnostic approaches of these diseases.
Methods
Construction of the primary human epilepsy- or seizures-associated gene list
For the generation of primary epilepsy- or seizures-associated human gene list, OMIM database was searched with the keywords „epilepsy “and „seizures“. Afterwards, Pubmed database was searched with different combinations of keywords „epilepsy“, „seizures“, „genetics“, „gene “and inclusion of publications of the last 5 years (from 2012.01.01 to 2016.12.31). Only genes associated with monogenic human disorders involving epilepsy or seizures were selected (inclusion criteria) while genes associated with epilepsy through association or model animal studies were excluded (exclusion criteria). Finally, a database of human monogenic diseases involving epilepsy and seizures was comprised ( http://kimg.eu/en/tools/epigene-database/ ).
Construction of a list of IEM involving epilepsy or seizures
Gene function of every gene was identified according to Gene Ontology database terms ( http://geneontology.org ) and genes associated with IEM were selected from the primary list. IEM was defined as a monogenic disease due to mutations in a gene involved in human metabolism and belonging to one of IEM groups according to Society for the Study of Inborn Errors of Metabolism (SSIEM) classification (Zschocke ). Data on phenotype and metabolic/ histological diagnostics was extracted from Pubmed/MEDLINE and OMIM databases.
Results
Extensive search of OMIM and Pubmed/MEDLINE databases gave a primary list of 880 human genes associated with monogenic diseases involving epilepsy or seizures. Of these, 373 genes (42% of all genes) are involved in human metabolism and can be associated with one of IEM groups according to SSIEM classification (Zschocke ) ( Supplementary table ). The most numerous group of these IEM comprise disorders of energy metabolism (115 IEM, 31% of all seizure- or epilepsy-associated IEM), there are 56 disorders of amino acid and peptide metabolism, 54 congenital disorders of glycosylation, 45 lysosomal disorders and smaller numbers of other IEM groups (Fig. 1 ; Supplementary table ). The vast majority, 87% of these IEM (324/373 diseases) are autosomal recessive, 6% (23/373) – mitochondrial (due to defects in mtDNA), 4% (16/373) – X-linked, 3% (10/373) – autosomal dominant. Fig. 1 Number of IEM involving epilepsy or seizures. Note: classification of IEM according to Zschocke ( ) SSIEM Classification of Inborn Errors of Metabolism. In: Blau N, Duran M, Gibson MK, Dionisi-Vici C (eds.) Physician’s Guide to the Diagnosis, Treatment, and Follow-Up of Inherited Metabolic Diseases. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 817–831
Presentation of these IEM is very diverse and encompass a vast range of epilepsy and seizure types. Besides, majority of IEM may present with a range of possible phenotypes. In nearly all of these diseases, seizures are accompanied by other clinical features, mostly neurodevelopmental disorders (psychomotor retardation, intellectual disability, learning disabilities, autism). Unfortunately, characteristics of seizure semiology, electroencephalography (EEG) or head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can only seldom guide differential diagnostics (Dulac et al. ; Longo et al. ; Pearl ; Kölker et al. ) (Ibrahim et al, ). Seizures can be the main and the first symptom (e.g. in pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy) or a late presentation (e.g. in some of lysosomal storage diseases). Refractory seizures is a usual feature of 33 IEM, mostly neurotransmitter (e.g., GABA-transaminase deficiency, glycine encephalopathy), vitamin/cofactor (e.g., classic pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy, a recently described disorder due to PROSC gene mutation (Darin et al. ), biotinidase deficiency, folate deficiency syndromes, molybdenum cofactor deficiency), energy metabolism defects (e.g. mitochondrial diseases due to mutations in C10orf2, AARS, CARS2, COQ9, FARS2, GFM1, PDSS2, QARS, RMND1 ), congenital disorders of glycosylation (e.g., CDG due to defects in ALG1, ALG13, DPM2, NGLY1 ), and some lysosomal storage disorders (e.g., ceroid lipofuscinoses). Forty one IEM, mostly defects of intermediary metabolism (e.g., urea cycle defects, classic organic acidurias, fatty acid oxidation defects) and disorders of carbohydrate metabolism (e.g., fructose-1,6-biphosphatase def., glycogen storage disease type 0, hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemias), may present with symptomatic seizures during metabolic crises or as a sequelae of brain damage due to crises.
Of major importance, a considerable number of IEM (26%, 97/373, marked in bold in Supplementary table ) have established specific treatments, therefore timely diagnosis comes as an obligation providing a way to precision medicine and ensuring better prognosis (Pearl ). In many of these diseases (e.g., pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy, folate deficiency syndromes, GLUT1 deficiency, phenylketonuria, porphyria) specific treatments may considerably change prognosis of patients with marked improvement or even absence of symptoms provided treatments are instituted timely. In other cases, specific treatments are effective in a proportion of patients only (e.g., benzoate treatment in mild glycine encephalopathy) or only partially improve clinical symptoms (e.g., ketogenic diet in severe pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency). Some of IEM have specific treatments carrying high-risks (e.g., hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in adrenoleukodystrophy or Krabbe disease). Finally, we have also included some recently described IEM with potential treatments where current data are insufficient to judge about treatment efficacy (e.g., 3-methylglutaconic aciduria due to mutation in AUH gene where leucine restriction was proposed) (Wortmann et al. ).
Next, we have investigated diagnostic possibilities of these IEM ( Supplementary table ; Fig. 2 ). Abnormalities in routine laboratory tests (e.g., acid-base status, plasma electrolytes, glucose, ammonia, ketone bodies, etc.) may be found in 215 of these IEM. Metabolic tests (more than 20 different tests; Supplementary table ) of urine and/or plasma samples can be informative in 188 diseases, at least 23 IEM have characteristic metabolites in CSF. Only conventional metabolic tests in urine, plasma or CSF were included while those performed in research setting only were not included. Histological investigations are important in the diagnostics of 99 IEM (e.g., mitochondrial and lysosomal diseases). Various combinations of different tests are frequently used (Fig. 2 ) and molecular genetic testing is usually applied for the confirmation of diagnosis and/or for genetic counseling purposes. No metabolic/histological abnormalities can be detected by using conventional testing methods in 37 of these IEM (10% of all identified IEM) ( Supplementary table ). Fig. 2 Diagnostic possibilities of 373 inborn errors of metabolism involving epilepsy or seizures. Venn diagram depicting diagnostic possibilities of 373 inborn errors of metabolism involving epilepsy or seizures
Discussion
Although metabolic epilepsies comprised the major scientific interest of many outstanding experts and their seminal works gave us deep knowledge in the field (Dulac et al. ; Pearl ), current scope of IEM involving epilepsy or seizures was largely unknown. After extensive literature and database survey, we have comprised a contemporary gamut of 373 IEM involving epilepsy or seizures ( Supplementary table ). Extensive phenotypic diversity is inherent to these diseases. Because of mostly non-specific and overlapping clinical phenotypes, these IEM are frequently indistinguishable from each other and from other genetic diseases based on clinical grounds. Besides, 86 of 373 of these IEM (23%) are ultra-rare, described just in several patients or families and many novel diseases were published just recently. Therefore, phenotype-driven diagnostics of these IEM may be cumbersome.
Traditional diagnostics of IEM involves a range of metabolic tests and is performed in specialized laboratories. Urine and/or plasma specimen are mostly used, however, in some IEM characteristic metabolites can mainly or only be investigated in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Histological and/or biochemical investigations of biopsies (e.g., skin, conjunctiva or muscle) can aid in the diagnostics of certain other IEM. Selection of these tests is usually based on a diagnostic hypothesis and requires specialized knowledge in IEM. Consequently, diagnostics of IEM is sophisticated, time-consuming, sometimes invasive and requires a high degree of specialization, experience and investments into the diagnostic laboratory equipment and human resources. Despite considerable efforts to reach the diagnosis, diagnostic yields of these multiple tests are usually low (Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al. ; Syvertsen et al. ) and the whole endeavour frequently evolves into a long „diagnostic odyssey “ arduous for both patients and physicians. Moreover, existing guidelines ( www.epilepsydiagnosis.org ) and published algorithms and recommendations for testing in metabolic epilepsies (Pearl ; Hove and Lohr ; Mastrangelo et al. ) are not consistent and do not cover the whole range of IEM involving epilepsy or seizures.
Molecular genetic tests are usually performed for the confirmation of IEM diagnosis and/or genetic counseling purposes (Dulac et al. ; Pearl ). Recent revolution in genetic testing and emergence of NGS technologies resulted in changing paradigms of clinical practice. Comprehensiveness of NGS methods is of special importance in diseases with considerable genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity and non-specificity of symptoms. Therefore, NGS testing might be considered as a primary and the most comprehensive screening test for IEM presenting with epilepsy or seizures. Indeed, previously unsuspected IEM were frequently diagnosed in patients with epilepsy through NGS studies (Lemke et al. ; Della Mina et al. ; Soden et al. ) and, vice versa, other genetic diseases were diagnosed in patients with suspected IEM (Wortmann et al. ). Non-invasiveness is a further advantage of NGS tests. Gene panels are extensively used for the diagnostics of certain groups of IEM (e.g., mitochondrial diseases and congenital disorders of glycosylation) (Chambers et al. ; Jones et al. ; Wortmann et al. ). On the other hand, genes for metabolic diseases are frequently included into the gene panels for epilepsy testing. However, these gene panels vary considerably in IEM gene composition and comprehensiveness (Chambers et al. ; Lemke et al. ), therefore, whole exome sequencing may also play a role.
Although we could not find any published direct comparisons of clinical utility and cost-effectiveness of NGS vs. metabolic testing in IEM, several studies of patient cohorts that usually have metabolic testing (e.g., infants with severe neurodevelopmental disorders) evaluated traditional testing (including metabolic testing) vs. whole exome sequencing (WES). In a study by Soden et al. ( ), before WES or whole-genome sequencing (WGS), patients had an average of 13,3 prior tests for the cost of $19,100 per family (seizures were observed in 39 of 100 patients in this study) (Soden et al. ). The average costs of the entire traditional diagnostic trajectory were $16,409 per patient, substantially higher than the $3972 trio-WES cost, in 17 children with intellectual disability investigated by Monroe GR et al. ( ). A prospective comparison of cost-effectiveness of clinical WES vs. usual testing showed even more cost savings: in a cohort of 40 infants with neurodevelopmental disorders, standard traditional testing had an average cost per diagnosis of US$21,099 compared to US$3937 for singleton WES. Use of WES early in the diagnostic pathway resulted in more than three times bigger diagnostic yield, while the price of testing was three times smaller (Stark et al. ). Finally, a comparable diagnostic pathway in patients with developmental delay/intellectual disability, many of whom had epilepsy, was described by J. López-Pisón et al. ( ). 686 cases (69% of all cases, 686/995) in whom etiological diagnosis was not established had 8 tests each on average, including 2887 biochemistry tests, 1582 metabolic tests, 516 karyotyping/ subtelomeric deletion tests and 525 single-gene testing.
Comprehensive one-step NGS diagnostics may provide efficient and cost-effective ways to shorten “diagnostic odyssey” in IEM presenting with epilepsy or seizures. It is of special importance in diseases with specific treatments that comprise a substantial proportion of all identified IEM (26%, 97/373). Many of these diseases present with acute symptoms and rapid diagnostics in this setting may give the only opportunity for timely treatment. As it was recently shown, NGS diagnostics may sometimes be comparably time-efficient and give very high diagnostic yield rates. In a study by Soden et al. ( ), accelerated WGS has been performed in 15 acutely ill patients in 50 h (7 of them presented with seizures) with a remarkable diagnostic rate of 73%, while turnaround times of WES (applied mostly for out-patients) were on average 16 days. 20% of all diagnosed patients (9 patients of 45 diagnosed) were diagnosed with IEM (Soden et al. ). Apart from specific treatments, exact diagnosis is also essential in guiding patient management and long-term follow-up, social care planning, enabling genetic counseling and prenatal/preimplantation diagnostics in families, inclusion into clinical trials, connections to other patients and families through patient organizations and, finally, eliciting psychological relieve for the families due to resolved diagnostic uncertainty.
One of the main challenges of NGS methods is a high rate of variants of unknown clinical significance (VUS) creating a considerable additional workload for professionals and giving additional risks of psychological distress for families. In case IEM are diagnosed through the application of NGS, metabolic tests can be of high value as a second-tier test for VUS pathogenicity assessment. Besides, like any other diagnostic test, NGS have some limitations. Current diagnostic yields of WES in unselected patients with epilepsy are up to 40% (Helbig et al. ), hence, metabolic testing may still be of value in cases with a suspicion of IEM and negative NGS testing results. Sensitivity of NGS testing in patients with epilepsy or seizures may vary dependent on a clinical situation (i.e., specificity of a phenotype and the proportion of known genetic etiology in a given phenotype) and a method used (i.e., gene panels with an almost 100% gene coverage may have better sensitivity in specific phenotypes with a large proportion of known genetic etiology while comprehensive, however covering only about 90–95% of genes WES may have better sensitivity in non-specific, overlapping phenotypes). Finally, specificity of NGS testing is dependent on the rigorousness of NGS variant interpretation/ analysis/ reporting process.
In this work, we show that IEM constitute a considerable proportion (42%, 373/880 genes) of all identified monogenic diseases associated with epilepsy or seizures with the most numerous group comprising disorders of energy metabolism (31%, 115/373 IEM). These IEM may be highly significant as possible models for research into ictogenesis and epileptogenesis. Indeed, anoxic, hypoglycemic or symptomatic seizures in many intermediary metabolism defects point to the importance of metabolic disturbances in ictogenesis. Although important questions regarding causality of brain hypometabolism and epileptogenesis may arise, i.e., whether energy crisis is itself an initiating and driving factor for epileptogenesis, or whether it is simply a consequence of neuron hyperactivity, results of studies in model organisms show that chronic hypometabolism and, specifically, reduced glucose utilization (typically observed in epileptic patients also), can readily initiate epileptogenesis by itself (Samokhina et al. ). Besides, findings of secondary mitochondrial dysfunction were described in multiple forms of both rare and common epileptic disorders (Zsurka and Kunz ; Khurana et al. ).
In conclusion, IEM involving epilepsy or seizures comprise a numerous group of heterogenous disorders. As traditional phenotype-driven diagnostics of these IEM involve multiple specialized tests and can be invasive, time-consuming and ineffective, NGS methods may provide timely and cost-effective ways to diagnose these diseases. Our generated extensive list of 373 epilepsy- or seizures-associated IEM genes may be of value in both development of gene panels and as a tool for WES variants’ filtration. Besides, these IEM may provide valuable models for studies of ictogenesis and epileptogenesis that may potentially pave the ways for identification of novel treatments for epilepsy.