Introduction
Different studies have suggested a possible relationship between the reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the development of hypertension (Dhalla et al. ). Evidence shows that inflammation has been related experimentally and clinically to cardiovascular diseases (Pearson et al. ). Hypertension is considered a chronic inflammatory state and pro-inflammatory cytokines have been involved in the progression of hypertension (Jia et al. ). The key point of inflammation seems to be the generation of ROS due to immune system cells (dendritic cells, macrophages or lymphocytes), interleukins and other inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α) (Gilmont et al. ; Mittal et al. ).
During physical exercise, sympathetic activity increases and has a predominant action on different organs in relation to parasympathetic nervous system (Patel and Zwibel ). The increase in sympathetic activity also elicits renin release by the kidneys and consequently increases plasma angiotensin II levels (Ikeda et al. ). In spite of that, it is known that in both hypertensive humans and animal models, physical exercise improve the systolic and diastolic arterial pressure (Krieger et al. ).
Different studies have suggested the importance of ROS in the generation of hypertension and their relationship to substances very known for being involved in the cardiovascular homeostasis as angiotensin II (Dhalla et al. ). Kishi and Hirooka ( ) have shown that the oxidative stress evoked by activation of AT-1 receptors and NADPH oxidase in medullary areas involved in autonomic control is involved in the increase of sympathetic nerve activity in hypertension. Inflammatory cytokines activate vascular production of ROS, specifically superoxides, through the activation of NAPH oxidase. The last one has different subunits, nevertheless, all of them lead to the formation of superoxides, although not in an equivalent manner (Abo et al. ).
Neuroglobin (Ngb) and cytoglobin (Ctb) are members of the vertebrate globin family and the Ngb is mainly expressed in neurons of the central and peripheral nervous systems as well as some endocrine tissues (Burmester and Hankeln ). Those globins seem to be helpful for the oxygen transport in brain neurons and protect these cells against the oxidative damage evoked by ROS (Burmester and Hankeln ). The Ngb is concentrated in the mitochondria-containing areas of neurons, and its distribution is correlated with oxygen consumption rates, although there are quantitative differences among distinct neuron populations (Burmester and Hankeln ). Ctb is thought to be a method of cell protection under conditions of hypoxia that is mediated by hypoxia-inducible transcription factor-1 (HIF-1). It has been proposed that Ctb acts to detoxify ROS especially in the event of reoxygenation after hypoxia and up-regulated by hydrogen peroxide treatment in a neuroblastoma cell line (Fordel et al. ; Li et al. ).
During exercise, oxygen consumption by cells, sympathetic nerve activity and blood pressure increase, but the post -exercise effects includes reduction in resting arterial pressure (AP) and heart rate (HR) in hypertensive humans and animals (Krieger et al. ).
Earlier studies have demonstrated that the swimming exercise can induce an initial increase in HR and AP, but after 75 min in the water, both the HR and the AP decrease to lower baseline values in comparison to control animals (Sturek et al. ). In addition, rats with attached loads equal to 2% of their body weight showed the greater cardiovascular changes and were more acidotic and hypercapnic at the end of the swimming exercise (Sturek et al. ). It has been also suggested that the swimming can be more important on sympathetic nervous system activation than the treadmill running (Baptista et al. ). Neto et al. ( ) have demonstrated the effectiveness of the swimming exercise for 9 wks on the cardiovascular system in SHR. Exercised SHR showed resting bradycardia, lower blood pressure, higher baroreceptor-mediated reflex tachycardia or bradycardia compared to the sedentary group (Neto et al. ).
During the swimming, mitochondria may generate various harmful ROS. Nevertheless, it is unknown if Ngb and Ctb could protect the cells against ROS production during swimming. Proteins that either enhance O 2 supply or depress ROS induced injuries could enhance cell viability under ischemic stress as in neurons, which are particularly sensitive to hypoxia-related stress.
The central cardiovascular regulation is controlled by medullary areas as the Nucleus Tractus Solitarius (NTS) and Rostral Ventrolateral Medulla (RVLM). The commissural (c)NTS is the first relay in the central nervous system for the afferents arising from arterial baro- and chemoreceptors, an also ergoreceptors (Ciriello et al. ; Potts et al. ). The neurons in the cNTS tonically provide excitation to RVLM neurons in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) (Sato et al. ). The RVLM contains the presympathetic neurons, which project to the intermediolateral cell column in the spinal cord, and controls the sympathetic outflow (Guyenet ). Muscle afferents are much activated by exercise and their information arises to the cNTS (Potts et al. ). Previous reports have shown that swimming exercise can evoke changes in medullary areas as the cNTS and RVLM, and decrease excitatory responses dependent on sympathetic activation and selectively change regional blood flow regulation (Mueller and Hasser ; Mueller ; Ogihara et al. ). These findings suggested that the exercise training can modulate the neurons in the central nervous system in addition to the peripheral effects.
Exercise reduces sympathetic activity, arterial pressure and heart rate in hypertensive humans and rats, nevertheless, increases free radicals that cause oxidative stress. Inflammation has been implicated in the generation of ROS and progression of hypertension. In view of those previous reports showing controversial effects of the exercise and considering the fact that sympathetic activity is driven by medullary areas, we hypothesized that swimming exercise changes the gene expression of proteins involved in inflammation and oxidative stress in the cNTS and RVLM, which control the sympathetic output in SHR.
Methods
Animals
Adult male SHR and Wistar rats (250–300 g, 14–16 weeks-old at the beginning of the experiment, N = 12 of each strain) were obtained from the central animal facility of the Faculdade de Medicina do ABC (FMABC). Rats were housed in groups of 3 in plastic cages in an air-conditioned room (20–24 °C) with a 12:12-h light-dark cycle, and had free access to standard chow pellets and water. All procedures were performed in accordance with the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the FMABC (protocol number 005/2014).
Exercise
Swimming pools were plastic cylinders with a diameter of 30 cm, 60 cm high, filled to a height of 50 cm with lukewarm water (30-34 o C), one for each rat. Rats were subjected to moderate swimming exercise. Daily swimming sessions were carried out for 6 weeks, 5 days/week, always between 10:00 A.M. and 12:00 P.M. The duration of the sessions gradually increased during the first days (1st day: 10 min, 2nd day: 15 min, 3rd and 4th day: 30 min, subsequent days: 1 h). After the first week, exercise intensity was increased by placement of a small extra load (2% of the body weight) around the chest of the rat during swimming. This load was used previously by Sturek et al. ( ) and this approach of exercise has been previously described elsewhere (Ogihara et al. , ). During the exercise period, the age-matched sedentary control group was exposed to similar noise and handling, but maintained in the individual empty swimming pools.
Measurement of tail cuff blood pressure and heart rate in awake rats
The tail pressure (TP) of the SHR was determined at the beginning of experiment and at the end of 6 wk. of swimming to ensure that all the SHR used were actually hypertensive and also to evaluate the effects of exercise. The same procedure was also carried out in the normotensive Wistar rats.
The TP was measured in rats which were whole body heated in a chamber at 30° C for 15 min and afterwards restrained with a cuff attached to the rat tail. The cuff was inflated until blood flow was occluded, and then released until the first pulse of arterial flow could be detected by a transducer (MLT 1010, AD Instruments). The signal was amplified and recorded in a data acquisition system (Power Lab System 4SP, AD Instruments, Melbourne, Australia). Rats were gently handled and allowed to acclimate to this procedure for 2 days before the measurements were performed. Systolic pressure values were averaged from at least three consecutive recordings obtained from each rat.
The ECG was recorded from transcutaneous electrodes, implanted on the rat’s back the day before the experiment under brief (30 s) halothane anesthesia. The electrodes were placed in separate implantations carried out before and after exercise and sedentary conditions. Recordings lasted 30 min, and started when the rat had settled down. ECG signals were amplified (ETH-250, CB Sciences, Dover, NH) and recorded on a data acquisition system (Power Lab System 4SP). Heart rate was derived from the ECG with Chart 5.5 software (AD Instruments), using stretches of the recording during which behavioral activity was low.
Experimental protocol
At the beginning of the experiment and at the end of 6 wks of exercise, the TP and HR-derived from ECG of the SHR and Wistar were measured. The Wistar rats were used as normotensive control group. One day after the last exercise bout, exercised and also sedentary rats were deeply anesthetized with 3% halothane in 100% O 2 . The animals were transcardially infused with 50 mL of saline and the brain stem was removed and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The brain stem was sliced using a rodent brain slicer (Insight Ltda) and a 1-mm-thich section was obtained from 0.5 mm rostral to 0.5 mm caudal to the calamus scriptorius in order to perform punches of the cNTS, using a blunt-end 20-gauge stainless steel piece of hypodermic tubing (Insight Ltda). The brain stem was also sliced in a 1-mm-thich section from 1.6 mm rostral to 2.6 mm rostral to the calamus scriptorius in order to accomplish punches of the RVLM (Fig. 1 ). The anatomical landmarks of the cNTS and RVLM were identified according to the atlas of Paxinos and Watson ( ). The cNTS and RVLM were collected by punches of 1.0 mm (i.d.) to cover the anatomical boundaries of these areas. Fig. 1 Schematic draft depicting the brain stem slices at different levels from bregma where the micropunchs (black dots) were carried out for obtaining the cNTS (left) and RVLM (right) samples in accordance with the atlas of Paxinos and Watson ( ) 23 . Abbreviations: XII– hypoglossal nucleus, NA- nucleus ambiguous, LPGi- lateral paragigantocellular nucleus
RNA isolation and real time PCR
The samples of the medullary areas were quickly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in a freezer at −80° C. Total RNA was isolated from the rat brain tissue (cNTS and RVLM), using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to Invitrogen RNA extraction protocol and RNA concentrations determined by spectrophotometer readings at absorbance 260 and 280 nm (NanoDrop®). Total RNA was ~10 μg/sample dissolved in 20 μl of DEPC water that allow us to perform only two reverse transcriptase reactions with 5 μg each. First-strand cDNAs were synthesized using the MML-V reverse transcriptase (Promega, Madison, Wisc). Real Time PCR was performed using the SYBER Green Real Time PCR assay (Applied Biosystem, USA) and run on an ABI PRISM 7700 Sequence Detector (ABI Applied Biosystems). The sequences of primers manufactured by ThermoFischer Scientific (Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil) were: Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2): Sense: 5′- GATGACGAGCGACTGTTCCA- 3′ Anti-sense: 5′- TGGTAACCGCTCAGGTGTTG- 3’ Cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1): Sense: 5′- AGCACATTCGGTGGTGATGT- 3′ Anti-sense: 5′- GGGTAATCTGGCACACGGAA- 3’ Interleukin-6 (IL-6): Sense: 5′- AGAGACTTCCAGCCAGTTGC- 3′ Anti-sense: 5′- AGTCTCCTCTCCGGACTTGT- 3’ Interleukin-10 (IL-10): Sense: 5′- TTGAACCACCCGGCATCTAC- 3′ Anti-sense: 5′- CCAAGGAGTTGCTCCCGTTA- 3′ AT-1 receptor: Sense: 5′- AGTCCTGTTCCACCCGATCA -3′ Anti-sense: 5′- TCCAGACAAAATGCCAGCCA- 3’ Cyclophilin A (Housekeeping gene): Sense: 5’-GGATTCATGTGCCAGGGTGG-3′ Anti-sense: 5’-CACATGCTTGCCATCCAGCC-3’ Neuroglobin (Ngb ) Sense: 5’-CCTGCTGCCTCTCTTCCAGTAC-3′ Anti-sense: 5’-CCTCCAGTGAAGACAGGTCCTC-3’ Cytoglobin (Ctb): Sense: 5’-TCTGGAGGTGATCGCCGAGGAAT-3′ Anti-sense: 5′-CTTCTGCCCAAAGTGCTGCCAG-3′
Cycling conditions were as follows: 10 min at 95 °C followed by 45 cycles of 20 s at 95 °C, 20 s at 58 °C, and 20 s at 72 °C. Analysis used Sequence Detection Software 1.9 (SDS). Gene expression was determined by Ct, and all values were expressed using cyclophilin A mRNA as an internal control (Livak and Schmittgen ).
Data analysis
Results are mean ± SE. Data were submitted to two-way ANOVA followed by Student Newman-Keuls posttest for comparisons among groups The same statistical test was also used for comparisons of TP and HR-derived from ECG before and after 6 wks of exercise in conscious SHR and WKY rats. Significance level was set at p < .05.
Results
Effects of swimming exercise on resting cardiovascular parameters
The swimming exercise (SW) for 6 wks reduced resting HR-derived from ECG and TP in SHR (323 ± 9 bpm and 206 ± 10 mmHg, N = 6) compared to the values at the beginning of the experiments (363 ± 7 bpm and 227 ± 10 mmHg), but did not change HR and TP in sedentary (SED) SHR (398 ± 8 bpm and 192 ± 6 mmHg after 6 wks vs. 386 ± 8 bpm and 223 ± 8 mmHg at the beginning of the experiments, N = 6). Wistar rats submitted to SW (N = 6) decreased HR (306 ± 3 bpm after 6 wks vs. 327 ± 10 bpm at the beginning of the experiments), but not TP (127 ± 6 after 6 wks vs. 124 ± 4 mmHg at the beginning of the experiments). No changes were observed in SED-Wistar rats (N = 6) before (112 ± 2 mmHg and 359 ± 1 bpm) and after 6 wks of SW in Wistar rats (116 ± 2 mmHg and 362 ± 1 bpm) (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Tracings showing tail pressure (TP, mmHg), pulse in the tail artery (V) and HR (bpm) derived from ECG before and after 6 wks of sedentary (SED) condition or swimming exercise (SW) in A) SHR and B) Wistar (W) rats. Arrows show the pulse considered for determination of the systolic pressure. C) Tail pressure (mmHg) at the beginning of the experiments and after 6 wks of sedentary (SED) condition or swimming exercise (SW) in SHR and Wistar rats. D) Heart rate (bpm) derived from ECG at the beginning of the experiments and after 6 wks of sedentary (SED) condition or swimming exercise (SW) in SHR and Wistar rats. * p < 0.05 vs. beginning (before 6 wks of exercise or sedentary condition)
Gene expression in the cNTS neurons
The Ngb gene expression in cNTS neurons was increased either in SHR submitted to SW (1.2 ± 0.001 vs. 0.51 ± 0.014 Ngb/cyclophilin in SED) or in Wistar rats submitted to SW (1.35 ± 0.015 vs. 1 ± 0.012 Ngb/cyclophilin in SED) (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and AT-1 receptor gene expression in the cNTS (left panels) and RVLM (right panels) neurons in SHR and Wistar rats that were maintained sedentary (SED) or submitted to swimming (SW) exercise. * p < 0.05 vs. SED rats, + p < 0.05 vs. Wistar rats
The Ctb gene expression was also increased in cNTS neurons of the SW group in SHR (2.25 ± 0.008 vs. 0.9 ± 0.021 Ctb/cyclophilin in SED) and in Wistar rats (1.9 ± 0.013 vs. 1.05 ± 0.017 in sedentary). In addition, the Ctb gene expression was enhanced in cNTS in SHR submitted to SW compared to Wistar rats (Fig. 3 ).
The COX-2 gene expression in cNTS was increased in SHR submitted to SW (1.32 ± 0.12 vs. 1.01 ± 0.05 COX-2/cyclophilin in sedentary), but no differences were observed in Wistar rats submitted to SW and SED (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 Interleukin-6 (IL-6) and interleukin-10 (IL-10) gene expression in the cNTS (left panels) and RVLM (right panels) neurons in SHR and Wistar rats that were maintained sedentary (SED) or submitted to swimming (SW) exercise. * p < 0.05 vs. SED rats, + p < 0.05 vs. Wistar rats
The COX-1 gene expression in cNTS was increased in SHR submitted to SW (1.36 ± 0.08 vs. 1.02 ± 0.08 COX-1/cyclophilin in sedentary), and no differences were observed in Wistar rats (Fig. 3 ).
The IL-6 and IL-10 gene expressions were not different in cNTS in SW- and SED-SHR or Wistar groups (Figs. 4 and 5 ). Fig. 5 Neuroglobin (Ngb) and cytoglobin (Ctb) and gene expression in the cNTS (left panels) and RVLM (right panels) neurons in SHR and Wistar rats that were maintained sedentary (SED) or submitted to swimming (SW) exercise. * p < 0.05 vs. SED rats, + p < 0.05 vs. Wistar rats
The AT-1 receptor gene expression in cNTS neurons was decreased in SW-SHR (0.69 ± 0.05 vs. 1.03 ± 0.08 AT-1/cyclophilin in SED), and no differences were found in Wistar rats submitted to SW and SED (Fig. 5 ).
Gene expression in the RVLM neurons
In contrast to cNTS neurons, no difference was observed in the Ngb gene expression in RVLM in SHR and Wistar rats either SED or submitted to SW (Fig. 3 ).
On the other hand, the Ctb gene expression was increased in SHR submitted to SW (2.28 ± 0.02 vs. 1.03 ± 0.012 Ctb/cyclophilin SED) and in Wistar rats submitted to SW (1.68 ± 0.04 vs. 1.02 ± 0.015 Ctb/cyclophilin in SED). Further, the Ctb gene expression was enhanced in RVLM in SHR submitted to SW compared to Wistar rats (Fig. 3 ).
The COX-2 gene expression in RVLM was increased in SHR submitted to SW (1.27 ± 0.08 vs. 1.01 ± 0.06 COX-2/cyclophilin in SED) and no significant differences were observed in Wistar rats submitted to SW and SED. The gene expression of COX-2 in RVLM was higher in SHR submitted to SW compared to Wistar rats (Fig. 4 ).
The COX-1 gene expression was not different in RVLM in SW- and SED-SHR or Wistar groups (Fig. 3 ).
The IL-6 gene expression in RVLM was reduced in SW-SHR (0.14 ± 0.1 vs. 1.02 ± 0.05 vs IL-6/cyclophilin in SED) and even lower compared to Wistar rats (Fig. 4 ). On the other hand, IL-10 gene expression in RVLM was increased in SHR submitted to SW (1.24 ± 0.10 vs. 0.98 ± 0.05 IL-10/cyclophilin in SED), whereas no differences were observed in Wistar rats submitted to SW or SED (Fig. 5 ).
The AT-1 receptor gene expression in RVLM was reduced in SW-SHR (0.65 ± 0.04 vs. 1.02 ± 0.08 vs. AT-1/cyclophilin in SED), and no differences were observed in Wistar rats submitted to SW or SED. Further, the AT-1 receptor gene expression was lower both in cNTS and RVLM in SHR submitted to SW in comparison to Wistar rats (Fig. 5 ).
Discussion
This study showed that the swimming exercise affected the gene expression of proteins involved in inflammation and oxidative stress in SHR. The effectiveness of the exercise in this study was confirmed by the reduction in the resting HR, which is consistent with previous reports (Véras-Silva et al. ). The tail pressure was also reduced in exercised SHR, which suggests that this approach of exercise was not stressful to the animals, as the cardiovascular parameters have improved in the animals.
Previous studies have shown that systemic inflammation evoked by LPS activates microglia in RVLM to induce COX-2 dependent neuroinflammation, increasing superoxide production, which in turn mediates neurogenic hypertension (Wu et al. ). In the present study, our data showed that COX-2 gene expression was increased in SHR submitted to exercise either in cNTS or in RVLM compared to sedentary SHR, whereas COX-1 gene expression was increased only in cNTS in exercised SHR in comparison to sedentary SHR, but not in Wistar rats. In addition, the COX-2 gene expression was even higher in RVLM of exercised SHR. In contrast, we observed a decrease in AT-1 receptor gene expression in cNTS and RVLM neurons in exercised SHR in comparison to sedentary SHR and no changes in Wistar rats. These responses observed in AT-1 receptor gene expression in SHR likely happened in order to avoid an additional formation of ROS as COX-2 gene expression has increased in exercised SHR due to the higher blood pressure levels during exercise. Although the COX-1 is a constitutively expressed enzyme, is also expressed in microglia during recovery of hypoxic-ischemic injury (Graham and Hickey ). Earlier studies have shown that COX-1 also has a role in mediating brain inflammatory response (Calvello et al. ). Evidence suggests that upon inflammatory stimuli, COX-1 in microglia is responsible for the primary inflammatory response and induces the production of prostaglandins, mainly PGE 2 (Choi et al. ; Calvello et al. ). Upon induction, COX-2 is responsible for a later and secondary response, except in conditions in which the neurons are directly challenged as during excitotoxicity and ischemia (Choi et al. ; Calvello et al. ). In the latter case, the primary response is mediated by COX-2, and microglia derived COX-1 follows as a secondary response upon perpetuating stimuli. In the first circumstances, selective COX-1 catalytic activity inhibition may result beneficial. In the current study, COX-1 gene expression has increased in cNTS but not in the RVLM, whilst the COX-2 gene expression was increased in both medullary areas in exercised SHR, underpinning the existence of neuroinflammation.
In the current study, the gene expression of proteins used as markers of oxidative stress, particularly the neuroglobin and cytoglobin have increased in medullay areas of SHR and Wistar rats submitted to swimming for 6 wks compared to sedentary animals. The neuroglobin gene expression has increased in cNTS in both SHR and Wistar rats submitted to exercise, nevertheless, the increase was smaller in SHR in comparison to Wistar rats. The cytoglobin gene expression increased in cNTS and RVLM neurons in swimming exercised SHR and Wistar rats in comparison to sedentary animals, but were more expressed in SHR than Wistar rats. Evidence has suggested that the neuroglobin and cytoglobin can play an antioxidant effect in neurons, likely scavenging reactive oxygen species (Fordel et al. ). During the exercise, the oxygen consumption by cells is enhanced, and consequently increases the generation of ROS (Davies et al. ). The blood flow redistribution among tissues induced by exercise can induce ROS production by enhanced mitochondrial respiration (Davies et al. ). Thereby, it is possible that the increased neuroglobin and cytoglobin gene expression is required to detoxify the ROS, protecting the cells against them or minimizing the oxidative cell damage. Nevertheless, we have not quantified the reactive oxygen species, which is a limitation of this study.
Studies in mice have shown a moderate to intense transcript neuroglobin expression in the parabrachial complex, locus coeruleus, periaqueductal gray area as well as cNTS. Indeed, it has been suggested the expression of neuroglobin may be limited to areas important for adaptive responses (Mammen et al. ). The cNTS is a subnucleus of the NTS involved in several functions and shows a convergence of different information arising from peripheral afferents. The afferent information from muscle ergoreceptors arise to the intermediate NTS, which in turn synapse with neurons in the cNTS (Potts et al. ). In rats submitted to exercise, muscle ergoreceptors are likely much activated and could constantly modulate the cNTS neurons. The cNTS efferent neurons arborize in the RVLM (Koshiya and Guyenet ), which can lead to increased activation of synapses, including the ones dependent on AT-1 receptor activation, as they are distributed along the medulla (Allen ; Bourassa et al. ), and consequently in neurons of the cNTS and RVLM. Thereby, we believe that the continuous activation of those synapses mediated by angiotensin II during swimming exercise can induce gene expression adaptations in order to avoid neuronal damage due to excessive ROS formation dependent on AT-1 receptor activation.
Evidence underpinning the mechanistic pathways between oxidative stress and inflammation are still lacking (Wadley et al. ). In the present study, we observed that AT-1 receptor, cytoglobin, neuroglobin, COX- 1, COX-2 an IL-6 gene expression were upregulated in the medullary areas of sedentary SHR, whilst IL-10 gene expression was downregulated. The SHRs present increased sympathetic nerve activity and neurons in the cNTS tonically provide excitation to RVLM neurons in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) (Sato et al. ). Previous studies have shown that oxidative stress in the RVLM produced by the angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) elicits sympathetic activation (Kishi and Hirooka ). In addition, upregulation of the central AT1R is involved in the pathophysiology of hypertension (Dupont and Brouwers ). Neuroinflammation enhances sympathetic drive and plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of hypertension (Wu et al. ). Further, sympathetic activity and hypertensive responses are associated with the levels of cytokines and oxidative markers in the RVLM (Winklewski et al. ). Angiotensin II increases production of reactive oxygen species and mRNA for pro-inflammatory cytokines as interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) whilst simultaneously decrease expression of IL-10 mRNA in the RVLM (Shi et al. ; Kang et al. , ). Oxidative stress resulting from inflammation in the RVLM is downstream to microglial activation through a COX-2-dependent mechanism. Winklewski et al. ( ) have also shown that COX-2 augments the expression of the proinflammatory cytokines in the RVLM.
In the current study, swimming was capable for downregulating the IL-6 gene expression in RVLM and upregulating the IL-10 gene expression in this medullary area compared to sedentary SHR, but not in Wistar rats. These findings are suggestive that swimming exercise decrease pro-inflammatory cytokines production in RVLM, nevertheless, it is not possible to clearly state that IL-6 was produced by microglial cells because previous studies have shown that astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and neurons can also express IL-6 (Erta et al. ). The IL-10 is an anti-inflammatory cytokine and immune innate cells of the central nervous system, particularly microglia produce IL-10 downstream of pattern recognition receptors activation. Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2, 3, 4 and 9 stimulation in those cells induce the production of IL-10 (Ledeboer et al. ; Werry et al. ). Microglia counteract damage driven by excessive inflammation via continuous survey of the surrounding tissue environment, and responding to any disturbance in neuronal homeostasis (Lobo-Silva et al. ). According to the detected insult and alterations in the microenvironment, a spectrum of activated microglia can be found, with two extremes in the spectrum known as M1 and M2. The M2 phenotype is anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective and has been implicated in the resolution of the inflammation, phagocytosis and tissue repair (Lobo-Silva et al. ). Activation of purinergic receptors by ATP, glutamate and prostaglandin E2 have also been shown as examples of molecules that can enhance IL-10 expression and secretion (Werry et al. ; Seo et al. ). Despite brain inflammation seems to be necessary and beneficial when directed to ameliorate the effects of toxic materials produced in the brain parenchyma, inflammatory reactions must be well-regulated and self-contained to ensure protective effects (Saavedra ). When regulatory mechanisms fail and inflammation is unchecked as in hypertension, an unrestrained formation of inflammatory mediators and oxidative radicals take place, which in turn affect mitochondrial function and overall cell metabolism, leading to neuronal damage. In turn, cellular injury exacerbates the situation by promoting additional inflammatory cascades further increasing cellular toxicity (Saavedra ). In our study, swimming exercise in SHR has counteracted the neuroinflammation in medullary areas, likely downregulating the AT-1 receptor gene expression, and consequently decreasing IL-6 and increasing IL-10 gene expressions.
Studies have shown that rats submitted to swimming exercise were acidotic and hypercapnic after 75 min in the water, and rats with additional 2% load showed the greatest changes (Sturek et al. ). These findings suggest rats can be hypoxic at least close to 75 min of the swimming. Fordel et al. ( ) have demonstrated the cytoglobin is up-regulated upon hypoxia in all tissues. The mechanism of induction of cytoglobin is regulated by the HIF-1, a posttranscriptionally regulated transcription factor controlling several hypoxia-inducible genes. In the current study, cytoglobin gene expression in the cNTS and RVLM was increased either in SHR or Wistar rats submitted to swimming, which suggests that rats can became hypoxic at some point of the swimming exercise and likely the induction of cytoglobin could also be increased due to the hypoxic stimulus. Neuroglobin gene expression is less influenced by hypoxia (Fordel et al. ). Our findings showed that in the RVLM, the neuroglobin gene expression in swimming rats was not different from sedentary in SHR and Wistar rats. It has been suggested the RVLM contains oxygen-sensitive neurons (Mazza et al. ), thereby only cytoglobin gene expression was increased in this medullary area.
Swimming exercise is considered as low intensity when the animals are without overload (Rodrigues et al. ; Chinkin ), whereas 2 and 8% or higher of body weight load are considered as moderate and high intensity, respectively (Chinkin ; Gobatto et al. ; Oh et al. ). No previous study has shown the effects of different intensities of swimming exercise on neuroinflammation in the medulla oblongata. On the other hand, oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory processes have been deemed to be mutually dependent, and different studies have suggested that oxidative stress is a direct stimulus for inflammation and vice versa (Kim et al. ; Wadley et al. ). Previous reports have demonstrated that swimming exercise without load produces no difference in catalase, copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (Cu/ZnSOD), manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), NADPH subunit p22phox in the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM) compared to sedentary rats (Sousa et al. ). Thereby, the gene expression of enzymes involved in the antioxidant defense against reactive oxygen species (ROS) in RVLM is similar in rats submitted to 4 weeks of low intensity swimming exercise and sedentary ones. Nevertheless, in our study, rats that underwent the moderate approach of exercise showed up-regulation in the cytoglobin and neuroglobin gene expression in the medullary areas investigated. Those globins have been implicated in the enhancement of neuronal viability by decreasing oxidative stress (Hodges et al. ; Antao et al. ; Oleksiewicz et al. ; Xie and Yang ). Up to now, no previous study has described the effects of high intensity swimming exercise on ROS production in medullary areas. However, it is known that strenuous physical exercise can induce oxidative stress (Gambelunghe et al. ). Plasma gluthatione levels, which plays an antioxidant action, increases in rats submitted to intensive physical exercise in rota-rod treadmill, and the profile is closely related to exercise intensity (Gambelunghe et al. ). Indeed, we cannot exclude the possibility that a putative enhancement in ROS production in medullary areas could be observed in high intensity swimming exercised rats. Accordingly, it is likely that the neuroinflammation should be related to the oxidative stress level, i.e., as much as high the intensity of exercise higher could be the inflammation.
The interactions between oxidative stress and inflammation during and after exercise have been frequently researched, particularly linking muscle metabolism and muscle damage (Peake et al. ). Exercise in humans is known to stimulate an outflow of inflammatory mediators and free radicals in the cells of the active muscle bed (Bailey et al. ) and, despite antioxidant supplementation attenuate the exercise-induced muscle damage (suppressing the increased oxidative stress and inflammation), it blocks the mitochondrial biogenesis and endurance capacity which are essential to induce adaptations (Gomez-Cabrera et al. ). Those evidences support the links between oxidative stress and inflammation peripherally, which may justify the increased traffic of immune cells to the central nervous system through the blood-brain barrier in both, animals and humans (Engelhardt et al. ).
In conclusion, in the current study the swimming exercise induced adaptive responses in cNTS and RVLM changing the gene expression for reducing the inflammation and ROS formation, which is increased particularly in SHR, and consequently decrease the oxidative stress, improving the cardiovascular parameters in hypertensive rats.