Introduction
Male hypogonadism may occur at various stages of postnatal life in human males, with variable pathogenesis and untoward effects on sexual function, mood, stature and cognition (i.e., learning, reasoning and memory). The relationship between low circulating testosterone and cognitive function is not fully unraveled and is therefore still receiving intense attention. Androgen receptors (AR) are distributed in various regions of the brain, including the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, dentate gyrus and basal ganglia, which are critical to learning and memory. Aside from the nuclear androgen receptors, extra-genomic membrane receptors have been discovered in neurons, and have been reported to mediate the rapid effects of androgens on dendritic spine plasticity and neuronal survival, among other functions (Jacome et al. ; Vicencio et al. ).
This review examines some literature on the neuroanatomical and cognitive characteristics of hypogonadal subjects, such as young individuals with Klinefelter syndrome or aging individuals who have undergone bilateral orchiectomy (surgical removal of both testicles), with a view to giving an account of the gross, cellular and molecular brain changes that underlie some untoward cognitive and behavioural modalities in these male subpopulations.
Neural aromatase expression and the aromatization of testosterone in the mammalian brain
In male mammals, the predominant sex steroids are the androgens, especially testosterone, which is released by the Leydig cells of the male gonads. In addition to this, the adrenal glands also contribute some androgens to the circulation. Androgens, especially testosterone are convertible to oestrogens, mainly 17β oestradiol, by the process of aromatization, and in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme aromatase. The latter is a member of the cytochrome P450 superfamily of enzymes (Anthoni et al. ). In the peripheral tissues, aromatase is expressed in the adipocytes (Cleland et al. ), where the bulk of testosterone is aromatized to oestrogens. Centrally, aromatase expression varies in different brain regions and species. The human cyp19 gene that encodes P450 aromatase is expressed in the cerebral cortex and has four different variants of exon 1 (Yague et al. ); while cellular distribution of the human aromatase gene product, as studied by immunohistochemistry, was localized largely to the excitatory pyramidal neurons in the temporal cortex. This suggests that the pyramidal cell subpopulation is steroidogenic (Yague et al. ), and that central oestrogen biosynthesis is essential for cerebral function. Indeed, under physiological conditions in mammals, aromatase expression is largely reported in the neuronal but not glial cell subpopulations (Azcoitia et al. ; Azcoitia et al. ). Studies in non-human primates specifically showed aromatase localization to pyramidal neurons in the CA1, CA2 and CA3 fields of the hippocampus, the granule cells of the dentate gyrus, and to a lesser extent, the subpopulations of interneurons that co-express parvalbumin, calretinin and calbindin (Yague et al. ).
Although the detailed regional distribution of the aromatase gene transcript and protein product has not been exhaustively documented in humans, the enzyme is nonetheless expressed in several areas of the brain, as reviewed by Azcoitia et al. ( ), including the hippocampus, cerebellum, neocortex, basal forebrain regions, thalamus and brainstem. In each of these regions, neuronal expression predominates, while only small subpopulations of glial cells express the enzyme (Celotti et al. ; Azcoitia et al. ). Meanwhile, following injury, aromatase is expressed in reactive astrocytes to increase local oestrogen production at the injury site, suggesting a neuroprotective role for the oestrogens (Azcoitia et al. ; Azcoitia et al. ). In addition, brain aromatization of androgens to oestrogens also promotes neural development (Beyer ), neurogenesis and synaptogenesis (Fester et al. ; Li et al. ) (Figs. 1 and 2 ), and cell survival following injury (Garcia-Segura ; Li et al. ). Fig. 1 Brain androgens promote neurogenesis and neuronal survival directly or after aromatization to oestrogens [Source: Randy ( )] Fig. 2 Androgens and oestrogens promote hippocampal synaptic plasticity and synaptogenesis [Source: Trivino-Paredes et al. ( )]
However, this does not imply that the androgens, acting via androgen receptors, etc., do not have direct oestrogen-independent effects on neuronal functions. In vitro studies by Nguyen et al. ( ) showed that testosterone and dihydrotestosterone are neuroprotective and act by activating MAPK/ERK signaling in cultured hippocampal neurons. Using a similar model, Pike ( ) demonstrated the direct effects of testosterone on neuronal survival; in the presence of testosterone, exposure of cultured hippocampal neurons to β-amyloid resulted in reduced neurotoxicity.
Brain expression of the androgen and oestrogen receptors in relation to cognitive and behavioural functions
Classically, androgen receptors (AR) belong to the nuclear family of receptors and mediate gene transcription in relation to reproductive function in such organs as the testis, prostate, and seminal vesicles, etc. (Tveter ; Mainwaring and Irving ). In the brain, however, genomic and non-genomic androgen receptors are expressed in neurons for functions related to learning, memory, and neuronal survival (Li et al. ). In situ hybridization study by Simerly et al. ( ) in rats localized mRNA for AR to neurons in the cornu ammonis of the hippocampus, subiculum and cerebral cortex. This further supports a role for androgen receptors, their agonists and ligands in modulating higher cerebral functions, including hippocampal-dependent spatial memory. In addition, immunohistochemical studies have localized AR protein to the hippocampus, cerebral cortex, diencephalon and amygdala, and such expression is seen in neuronal and glial cells alike (Kerr et al. ; Patchev et al. ). For example, the hippocampal CA1 field, which is critical for spatial memory formation, has robust AR expression specifically in its pyramidal neurons (McAbee and DonCarlos ; Sar et al. ). In these neurons, classical genomic mode of androgen signaling does occur, leading to gene transcription. Meanwhile, additional mode of androgen signaling has been reported in these neurons. Recent findings suggest that androgen-mediated effects on hippocampal neuronal synaptic plasticity, growth and survival also occur much more rapidly by means of membrane androgen receptors (Li et al. ). Such extra-nuclear androgen receptor acts through non-genomic mechanisms via its interaction with G protein and kinases (Wang et al. ) to modulate Ca 2+ flux through neurons, thereby inducing downstream messengers that promote neuronal growth and survival (Vicencio et al. ). Specifically, the G protein coupled receptor (GPCR) of relevance to extra-nuclear androgen signaling include G protein-coupled receptor family C group 6 member A (GPRC6A) and the zinc transporter member 9 (ZIP9) (Wang et al. ).
In males, following peripheral aromatization of testosterone in adipose tissue, evidence exists for the uptake of oestradiol into the brain extracellular compartment after crossing the blood brain barrier (van den Berg et al. ). Apart from peripheral origins of central oestrogens, in situ synthesis of oestradiol in brain cells does occur, as suggested by numerous studies that reported and confirmed the expression of aromatase in the presynaptic terminals of neurons (Srivastava et al. ) and in the glial cells (Azcoitia et al. ). These suggest the presence of oestrogen receptors in brain cells. In this respect, studies in humans demonstrated the presence of active nuclear oestrogen receptor beta (ERβ) in neuronal cells (Mott and Pak ). These nuclear receptors act via the PAK/ERK1/2 dependent mechanism to rapidly increase spine density (Fig. 2 ) and enhance PSD 95 accumulation in postsynaptic cells (Srivastava et al. ). There is also empirical data suggesting that the brain has higher expression of ERβ compared to ERα (Kim and Casadesus ). Comparative studies of ERα and ERβ in rats by Shughrue et al. ( ) showed exclusive expression of ERα in the hypothalamic ventromedial nucleus, while ERβ is exclusively expressed in several hypothalamic nuclei including tuberal, paraventricular, supraoptic and suprachiasmatic nuclei, as well as regions such as olfactory bulb, zona incerta and cerebellar Purkinje cells. For cognition-related regions, ERα expression is also anatomically-restricted than ERβ expression (Shughrue et al. ). ERα protein is expressed predominantly in neurons of the CA1 and CA3 fields of the hippocampus, as well as the granule cells of the dentate gyrus – brain regions that are critical to memory formation and consolidation. Similarly, ERβ expression is localized to the hippocampal CA1, CA2 and CA3 fields and the dentate gyrus (Shughrue and Merchenthaler ). In addition to the presence of the expression of the genomic ERα and ERβ receptors in neurons, rapid neural effects of oestrogens on synaptic plasticity are as well mediated via the extra-nuclear GPR30 receptor, a PGCR that is expressed in the neocortex, corpus striatum and hippocampus (Funakoshi et al. ; Tang et al. ; Prossnitz et al. ). This suggests a role for this receptor in memory and learning.
Cognitive correlates in Klinefelter syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome (KS) remains a relatively common sex chromosome trisomy (47XXY), occurring in 1:600 men (Bojesen et al. ), many of which are undiagnosed in early life owing to the late clinical presentation. According to Bojesen et al. ( ), up to 90% of cases are undiagnosed in childhood, and up to 75% in adulthood. Adult KS males are hypogonadal (Host et al. ), with seminiferous tubule hyalinization, hyperplasia of the interstitial cells of Leydig, fibrosis, small testicular volume and absence of sperm cells (Aksglaede and Juul ).
A number of studies has documented the cognitive, metabolic and behavioural changes in KS. Boone et al. ( ) studied the neuropsychological profiles of adults with 47XXY karyotype (KS), aged 16–61 years and reported significantly low scores in language skills, verbal and non-verbal executive abilities, and motor dexterity, compared with the controls. Studies of the underlying structural brain changes in such adult KS subjects, as reported by Itti et al. ( ), showed that supernumerary chromosome favours structural changes in cortical and subcortical regions associated with language and motor processing. Specifically, the use of double-spin-echo brain MRI showed lateral reduction in cerebellar hemispheres and significant enlargement in ventricular volumes in KS subjects. The increases in ventricular volume was inversely associated with cognitive functions in relation to language skills and learning abilities (Itti et al. ). Moreover, compared with controls, KS subjects have significant reductions in the volume of the left temporal lobe – a region of the dominant cerebral hemisphere that is important for language comprehension in right-handed individuals. Other related findings showed executive dysfunction in KS subjects (Kompus et al. ), suggesting structural and functional changes in the prefrontal cortical circuitry.
In this regard, laboratory studies in male rats that examined the association between neuronal androgen receptor expression, dopaminergic signaling and the prefrontal cortical function showed that androgen modulates prefrontal dopaminergic effects in relation to cognitive function. This is done partly via rich expression of androgen receptors on prefrontal neurons that project to the mesencephalic ventral tegmental area (Aubele and Kritzer ), such that the activity of the dopaminergic neurons arising from the ventral tegmental area (and projecting to the prefrontal cortex) could be modulated directly by androgen signaling. Thus, deficit in executive function and learning outcomes in KS could partially be explained by this association.
In the adolescent population, morphometric studies by Giedd et al. ( ) in subjects with KS showed that language difficulty in this group is related to grey matter reduction in the temporal gyrus, cingulate gyrus, insula and hippocampus. In the younger (pre-pubescent) males, the high possibility of not diagnosing KS readily in this age group until after pubescence may explain the relative paucity of data on the neuroanatomical correlates of KS in childhood. Meanwhile, recent cognitive and behavioural studies of two KS boys (aged 7 and 10 years) by Messina et al. ( ) showed low scores in tests of general intelligence (learning abilities) and behavioural profile, including level of maturity and self-esteem. Therefore, campaign strategy that promotes the identification of boys with KS at earlier ages would ensure clinical interventions that would improve these cognitive and behavioural profiles (Simm and Zacharin ; Messina et al. ), as well as advance our understanding of specific neuro-anatomical profile in this group. In this regard, laboratory studies in rodents may be helpful. Mice with the XXY karyotype have been generated (Liu et al. ; Lue et al. ). Such mice possess diminuted testicles, elevated plasma FSH with reduced plasma testosterone; while immunohistochemical profiling of androgen receptors in these (XXY) mice showed diminished expression in Sertoli cells but not in Leydig cells (Lue et al. ). These changes in the gonads of XXY mice were correlated with adverse learning outcomes as assessed by the Pavlovian appetite approach procedure that measured stimulus-reward learning (Lue et al. ). Furthermore, other studies provide evidence supporting the preference of the XXY mice for male rather than female partners, suggesting homosexuality behaviour in this model as opposed to heterosexual inclination in normal 46XY mice (Liu et al. ).
Neuroanatomical and cognitive features in Kallman syndrome
Secondary (hypogonadotrophic) hypogonadism could either be congenital or acquired. The occurrence of congenital hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism (HH) in conjunction with hyposmia or anosmia are key findings in Kallman syndrome. The latter could arise from mutation in the KAL1 gene that codes for the protein anosmin 1, and this is the X-linked form of the syndrome. Mutation in KAL2 that encodes fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) is associated with the autosomal dominant form of Kallman syndrome (Hardelin ; Cadman et al. ). Epidemiological studies in a Finnish population showed higher incidence of the syndrome in males (1:30,000) than females (1:125,000) (Laitinen et al. ). This male preponderance is the case in other populations as well (Nand et al. ), although the rationale for this is poorly understood.
One key anatomical event that is impaired in Kallman syndrome is the deficient migration of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) cells into the developing hypothalamus (Cariboni and Maggi ). This results in low circulating GnRH that predisposes to failure of puberty development and impaired formation of secondary sexual characteristics; in addition to the dysmorphogenesis (hypoplasia or aplasia) of the olfactory system and rhinencephalon that underlies anosmia and hyposmia (Manara et al. ; Knorr et al. ). During foetal brain development, neuronal migration is a critical and keenly controlled event that requires such factors as motogens, chemoattractants, chemorepellants and stop signals (Fig. 3 ). In Kallman syndrome, mutation in KAL1 and KAL2 genes suggests some roles for the proteins anosmin 1 and FGFR1 in the migration of neurons from the nasal placode via the nasal cavity, ethmoidal cribriform plates, and basal forebrain, en route to the arcuate and anterior nuclei of the hypothalamus that are the definitive sources of GnRH (Lettieri et al. ). Anosmin 1 and FGFR1 may also be critical to the migration of cells and neurons from the nasal placode and lateral ganglionic eminence of the subpallium into the olfactory bulb. Fig. 3 Several signalling factors are required for successful migration of neurons into the olfactory bulb and hypothalamus; defective migration results in Kallman syndrome [Source: wordpress.com ]
Apart from these proteins (anosmin 1 and FGFR1), additional factors are required for the successful migration and localization of neurons to the olfactory bulb and hypothalamus. These may include the different semaphorins and their receptors (neuropilin) (Lettieri et al. ). For example, Cariboni et al. ( ) reported mutation in SEMA3E in two men with Kallman syndrome with inherited GnRH deficiency. Moreover, because higher percentages of subjects with Kallman syndrome are of the sporadic type (Cariboni and Maggi ), a role for epigenetic and environmental factors in its pathogenesis is suggested. Impairment of neuronal migration from the subpallium to the neocortex following exposure to an environmental neurotoxin (methylazoxymethanol) in pregnant ferrets had been previously reported by our team (Poluch and Juliano ; Djankpa et al. ; Poluch et al. ).
Phenotypically, neurological dysfunction of varying severities had been observed in patients with Kallman syndrome. Mirror movement of the hand occurs in a subset (up to 85%) of patients with the X-linked form of the disease (Krams et al. ). The anatomical basis of the neural mechanism that mediates this involuntary movement of the opposite hand that mimics the voluntary movement of its counterpart is not fully understood. However, recent data from MRI studies, PET analysis and electrophysiological evaluation suggests bilateral hypertrophy of the medullary pyramids (Krams et al. ) and abnormal activation of the primary motor cortex (Krams et al. ); variable alterations in the normal thickness of the different parts of the frontal lobe that are associated with motor functions (Manara et al. ), and complete absence of medullary pyramidal fibres decussation (Vale et al. ) as opposed to the normal anatomical decussation of the majority of these fibers in normal subjects (Kertesz and Geschwind ). Mental handicap and schizophrenia have also been observed in Kallman syndrome (Vagenakis et al. ; Obaydi et al. ). Although the aetiopathogenesis is undefined, this may not be unconnected with impaired prenatal neuronal migration. Markedly reduced density of the parvalbumin-positive GABAergic interneurons had previously been reported in schizophrenics, and is due to failure of migration of this neuronal subpopulation from their sites of origin in the subpallium into the developing cerebral cortex (Danos et al. ; Wang et al. ). In addition, such relatively rare association between Kallman syndrome, cerebellar ataxia and focal dystonia had also recently been reported in some cases of Kallman syndrome (Hernando-Quintana et al. ), although the causative factor remains elusive.
Anatomical basis of cognitive and behavioural perturbations in Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Hypogonadism in conjunction with cognitive and behavioural deficit are among the pathognomonic signature of Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS). The latter is an example of ciliopathy inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern and is typically characterized by retinal dystrophy, kidney dysfunction, central obesity, post-axial polydactyly; as well as mental retardation, hypogenitalism and hypogonadism (Forsythe and Beales ). Mutation in up to sixteen BBS genes are responsible for BBS (Fig. 4 ). Most BBS mutations involve BBS1 and BBS10, accounting for 23.2 and 20%, respectively, of the cases (Waters and Beales ). In sub-Saharan Africa, the syndrome has been previously reported in certain Nigerian families although a region-wide survey is not available (Okoronkwo ; Iwuala et al. ). The world-wide prevalence rate for BBS is 1:140,000 to 1:160,000 (Singh et al. ). However, in some Arabian population and Newfoundland, the incidence is higher owing to consanguineous marriages (Forsythe and Beales ; Farag and Teebi , ). Fig. 4 Mutations in several BBS genes account for Bardet-Biedl syndrome [Source: Zaghloul and Katsanis ( )]
Neurological involvement in BBS range from cognitive impairment, motor deficit, olfactory dysfunction and socio-behavioural perturbations indicating anatomical anomalies in different areas of the brain. Such anomalies would have embryological basis, and do point to the active role of cilia and ciliary signaling in neuronal migration during neonatal and postnatal neurogenesis (Fig. 5 ) , and given that most BBS genes are localized to basal bodies (Rooryck et al. ). In human, MRI investigations of ten patients (aged 14–28 years) with BBS showed white matter volume loss in the right inferior longitudinal fasciculus, gray matter volume loss in the anterior temporal lobes and orbito-frontal cortex, and reduced hippocampal volume (Baker et al. ). Bennouna-Greene et al. ( ) also performed MRI investigation in 34 BBS patients, and reported dysmorphic hippocampus in 42.31% of these patients. These MRI findings, coupled with the expression of BBS proteins in the human hippocampus and other brain regions in normal subjects, suggest a critical role for BBS genes and cilia-mediated signaling in hippocampal morphogenesis and hippocampal-dependent processes (Pan et al. ). With respect to the latter, immunohistochemical and immunoblotting studies in mouse models of BBS and ciliopathy with deletion of BBS4 gene further showed that impaired learning and memory seen in BBS could be associated with pathological alterations in hippocampal primary neuronal cilia (Agassandian et al. ). Fig. 5 BBS genes are critical to neuronal migration and localization in the cortical plate [Source: Guo et al. ( )]
Developmentally, cerebellar anomalies in BBS have been reported, including hypoplasia of the vermis and cerebellar atrophy (Aksoy et al. ; Baskin et al. ). Braun et al. ( , ) also reported structural aberration suggestive of olfactory dysfunction following MRI analysis of BBS patients. Such dysmorphogenesis of brain regions in BBS further underscores the import of BBS genes on neuronal migration during foetal brain development. BBS genes are also involved in the differentiation and development of the hypophysis cerebri. MRI investigation of the pituitary glands in 11 patients with BBS showed hypophyseal anomalies in 63% of the subjects, including hypoplastic hypophysis (Guran et al. ). Such anomalies correlated with perturbed hormonal profile that is suggestive of hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism in a subset of BBS patients.
Morphologic and molecular aberrations in relation to cognitive impairments in Prader-Willi syndrome
Deletion of some genes of paternal origin on chromosome 15 (15q11 – q13) accounts for up to 70% of all cases of Prader-Willi syndrome ( PWS) (Ledbetter et al. ). The remaining cases are non-deletion in type and arise from either maternal uniparental disomy (25%) or imprinting center defects (Buiting ). PWS is characterized by endocrine, mental, behavioural and developmental defects that manifests as hypotonia, psychiatric illness, hyperphagia and obesity; as well as hypogonadism and cognitive dysfunction with characteristic dysmorphic facial appearance (Cassidy ) (Fig. 6 ). The association of cognitive, psychiatric and developmental deficits with PWS indicates underlying neurodevelopmental disturbances, the incidence of which is in the range of 1:15,000 to 1:20,000 live birth (Soni et al. ). Fig. 6 Speculative diagram illustrating possible interconnected and interactive mechanisms leading to Prader-Willi syndrome [Source: Bittel and Butler, ]
The anatomical and biochemical underpinnings of the cognitive and behavioural defects in PWS have been actively investigated. Biochemical analysis of the serum and plasma in PWS patients for circulating BDNF showed lower levels of this neurotrophic factor that suggests reduced CNS production (Han et al. ). Such reduced central production of BDNF may partly explain cognitive (learning and memory) dysfunction in PWS. The severity of cognitive disturbance in PWS is genotype-dependent and is reportedly worse in the non-deletion subset in a French population of PWS patients as assessed by the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, WAIS-III (Copet et al. ). In adults, MRI studies of the brain of PWS patients showed reduced grey matter volume specifically in regions that subserve motor, cognitive, behavioural, autonomic and language functions, as well as diminished white matter volume in the brainstem, cerebellum, and temporal and frontal regions (Honea et al. ; Ogura et al. ). Similar studies of the brain during childhood in PWS subjects reported smaller surface area of cerebral cortex especially in the subset with deletion of the long arm of chromosome 15 (Lukoshe et al. ; Lukoshe et al. ). This finding reflects a diminished cortical complexity in such children, and partly explains the impaired intelligence quotient (IQ) as assessed by verbal performances, block design, and picture arrangement using the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence-Revised and the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised (Lukoshe et al. ).
During corticogenesis, inhibitory and excitatory neurons have multiple origins and do migrate over variable distances before localizing eventually in specific cortical layers. Impaired migration may partly underlie neurodevelopmental disorders as exemplified in PWS. Aside from the genetic underpinning of the latter, gestational exposure to some environmental toxicants could also be responsible, as is the case with several neuropsychiatric illnesses (Akinola et al. ).
In terms of the relative density of specific neuronal population, immunohistochemical study of the brain of a patient with PWS at autopsy indicated significantly reduced population of cholinergic neurons in the brainstem pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus (Hayashi et al. ). The latter nucleus has robust connections with the basal ganglia and cerebellum, and plays active roles in the mediation of motor and cognitive functions (Mori et al. ), both of which are deficient in PWS, and may partly explain the associated learning and motor impairment in this syndrome.
PWS is also characterized by psychiatric disorders that include obsessive-compulsive disorder, skin-pricking behaviour and tantrum (Rice and Einfeld ). The aetiologic basis of this behavioural perturbations remain to be fully elucidated but may include impaired GABA signaling. Using voxel proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy, Rice et al. ( ) measured GABA levels in the parieto-occipital regions of 15 subjects with PWS and reported significantly low concentrations of this inhibitory transmitter; and that GABA levels had an inverse association with psychiatric behaviour. Diminished GABA signaling in PWS could arise from reduced population of inhibitory interneurons in the cerebral cortex. Failure of GABAergic neurons to complete successful migration to the cortical plate has been reported to partly explain some neurodevelopmental phenomena as schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, and epileptogenic events, etc. (Chu and Anderson ; Sultan et al. ). In this regard, recent immunohistochemical and immunoblotting studies in our lab showed accelerated and over-expression of the potassium chloride co-transporter 2 (KCC2) in inhibitory neurons in a ferret model of moderate lissencephaly (Djankpa et al. ; Akinola et al. ). KCC2 serves as a stop signal during neuronal migration and its expression switches GABA from its excitatory function in immature migrating neurons to inhibitory function in mature neurons (Bortone and Polleux ). Therefore, its early, accelerated expression would imply that several inhibitory interneurons would not complete their migration and integration into their definitive cortical layers, leading to diminished cortical interneuron population that may partly explain the association of neuropsychiatric illness with such developmental disorders as PWS.
Although the relationship between neuronal androgen receptor (AR) distribution and cognitive function in PWS subjects is unclear, recent studies that examine AR gene in non-syndromic obese and PWS subjects showed how AR CAG repeat lengths modulate body stature and fertility in these subjects, and suggest that impaired AR signaling has a role in the aetiology of obesity and infertility in PWS (Butler and Manzardo ). Whether such genetic modification of the AR gene influences cognitive development in these subjects is however unclear.
Cognitive and behavioural changes in the orchiectomized males
Orchiectomy is indicated in males for varying conditions that include testicular cancer (that constitute 1–1.5% of male neoplasm and 5% of urological malignancy) (Cappuccio et al. ); prostate cancer, as well as trauma. Circulating testosterone levels in the bilaterally orchiectomized males remain significantly low, leading to changes in sexual, physical, social and cognitive functions (Amidi et al. ). Moreover, in healthy males with intact gonads, blood testosterone levels drop gradually as age advances owing to Leydig cells aging, etc. (Beattie et al. ; Harman et al. ; Feldman et al. ). The incidence of hypogonadism increases from around 20% in men aged 60–69 years to up to 50% in elderly men aged 80 years and beyond (Harman et al. ). Moreover, since the circulating oestradiol levels in males are largely derived from the aromatization of gonadal testosterone, diminished free testosterone would imply diminished free oestradiol (Ferrini and Barrett-Connor ).
Studies that probed the relationship between hypogonadism and cognitive (learning and memory) function in the orchiectomized human males appear to report conflicting findings. This is also true for findings related to the benefits of testosterone supplementation in such males, possibly as a result of differences in study design, among other factors. Recent review (Giagulli et al. ) updated the evidence in support of the association between male hypogonadism and cognitive dysfunction at the post-pubertal or pre-pubertal stage. In a study involving 106 men (aged 56.7 ± 12.6 years) with hypogonadism (total testosterone <3.3 ng/ml), Jung and Shin ( ) reported depressive mood and cognitive impairment (assessed using the Korean Mini-Mental State Examination, K-MMSE) that improved after a period of testosterone replacement. This supports the notion that a cohort of adult males with testosterone deficiency syndrome does present with cognitive (mental) impairment that responds positively to testosterone therapy. Such is also true for younger males with hypogonadism. Findings by Lasaite et al. ( ) in these young hypogonadal males (aged 29.1 ± 10.5 years) indicated severe impairment of cognitive functions such as executive function, scanning ability, attention and psychomotor speed (assessed by the Trail Making Test and Digit Span Test of Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale). Two-years testosterone replacement therapy led to improved cognitive ability (Lasaite et al. ), and further supports some benefit of testosterone replacement in the affected male subpopulation.
Related studies in healthy older men showed a strong or mild association between sex hormone and executive frontal-lobe function (Wahjoepramono et al. ; Resnick et al. ; Matousek and Sherwin ). As age advances, serum levels of gonadotrophins (LH and FSH) and sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) gradually increase in males, with concomitant decreases in the circulating free testosterone. This association is seen in men with Alzheimer’s disease as reported by Hogervorst et al. ( ) in the Oxford Project to Investigate Memory and Ageing (OPTIMA). In addition, lower serum testosterone levels have also been reported in a subpopulation of male Alzheimer’s disease patients with APOEε4 allele compared with those without the allele (Hogervorst et al. ). This implies that, like old age and the presence of APOEε4 allele, low serum testosterone is a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease, and could exacerbate dementia in men (Hogervorst et al. ). Although a randomized controlled study by Emmelot-Vonk et al. ( ) failed to show any benefits of 6-months testosterone supplementation on cognitive functions in elderly males (aged 60–80 years, with low normal serum testosterone), it is nonetheless unequivocal that testosterone levels gradually diminish with advancing age and are very low or undetectable in the bilaterally orchiectomized individuals, with potential or real adverse effects on some cognitive processes.
Furthermore, apart from electing bilateral orchiectomy, a large subset of men with prostate malignancy choose androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). This is a treatment that suppresses plasma androgens with the use of antiandrogens in combination with long-acting GnRH agonists (Ayub and Levell ; Labrie et al. ). Although this approach has high success rates, one of its reported drawbacks is in relation to the effects of such endocrine manipulation on cerebral (cognitive) function in the affected males. A review by Nelson et al. ( ) appraised the effects of ADT on certain cognitive domains in men with prostate cancer; 47–69% of such men were deficient in at least one cognitive function, especially in visuospatial abilities or executive function. Moreover, a study of cognitive outcomes in 20 non-metastatic prostate cancer patients treated with ADT (using leuprolide and flutamide) for 9 months showed that these patients had significant decline in such cognitive domains as spatial reasoning, working memory and spatial abilities during the treatment period compared with healthy non-cancer controls (Cherrier et al. ). In the same vein, Salminen et al. ( ) reported that diminished serum testosterone arising from ADT was associated with impaired working memory and visuomotor ability at 12 months of treatment compared with baseline.
Another clinical approach to pharmacological castration for prostate cancer is the use of monotherapy, with variable degrees of efficacy, but not without some reported effects on cognitive performances. Green et al. ( ) found that men on such monotherapeutic treatment showed impairment of memory, attention and executive functions after 6 months of treatment with either GnRH analogues (leuprorelin or goserelin) or steroidal antiandrogen (cyproterone acetate). Altogether, these findings show that treatment with antiandrogens and/or GnRH analogues in men with prostate cancer has variable effects on cognitive functions, especially working memory and visuomotor functions.
Meanwhile, details of the anatomical and molecular mechanisms by which serum testosterone deficiency arising from surgical or chemical castration could compromise cognitive function are not fully elucidated. However, investigations in laboratory animals have offered some explanations. At the subcellular and molecular levels, studies in aging rats with 75–80% reduction in plasma testosterone levels suggested a role for optimal testosterone level in the maintenance of dendritic arbors and spine density. Administration of testosterone or dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS) to such aging rats improved cognitive performance (spatial learning memory assessed by the Morris water maze) by partially restoring spine loss in the hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons and primary somatosensory cortical neurons (Chen et al. ). Such increase in spinogenesis by 20–40% occurred at 30 min and 2 h post-injection, suggesting that these beneficial effects of testosterone on spinogenesis occur rapidly via the membrane androgen receptors rather than the nuclear receptor. Moreover, electron microscopic stereological studies in rodents also indicated that exposure to hormone-disrupting agents such as bisphenol A in male rats interferes with the synaptogenic effects of testosterone supplementation on asymmetric spine formation in castrated male rats (Leranth et al. ). This suggests that testosterone mediates its beneficial effects on cognition and behaviour in males partly by promoting the formation of asymmetrical spine synapses (Leranth et al. ) consequent upon androgen receptor binding. Meanwhile, recent studies suggested that some effects of testosterone supplementation on cognition in orchiectomized rats may not be androgen receptor-mediated but N-methyl D-aspartate receptor-dependent (Locklear et al. ).
From the metabolic point of view, testosterone supplementation improves cognitive function by improving peripheral insulin sensitivity and decreasing central mitochondrial production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), with reversal of cognitive dysfunction in the orchiectomized lean but not obese rats (Pintana et al. ). This suggests that central insulin resistance could adversely impact cognitive function, as reviewed elsewhere (Akinola ). Moreover, additional evidence from experimental studies in orchiectomized mice have underscored the role of the steroid receptor co-activator 1 (SRC-1) in mediating the central effects of the androgens. Orchiectomized mice had reduced expression of SRC-1, as revealed by nickel-intensified immunohistochemistry in several brain regions, including the hippocampus (Bian et al. , ).
Androgens also play a vital role in maintaining certain neuronal populations in specific brain regions, and this effect is species-specific. Immunohistochemical study of cholinergic neurons by Nakamura et al. ( ) showed that at 28-days post-gonadectomy in adult male rats, the population of choline acetyltransferase-positive (ChAT+) neurons in regions such as anterior cingulate cortex, posterior parietal cortex and the medial septum was reduced significantly, while testosterone supplementation prevented the reduction. Moreover, in these orchiectomized rats, significant reduction in hippocampal ChAT immunoreactive fibre pixel density was observed, suggesting that testosterone impacts memory and behaviour by modulating the density and activity of cholinergic neurons. Given that the loss of cholinergic neuronal subpopulation is a known occurrence in Alzheimer’s dementia, these laboratory findings further support the hypothesis that testosterone deficiency may play some role in the pathogenesis and/or progression of neurodegenerative disease. In addition, evidence from studies in animals support a relationship between circulating androgens and neurotropin signaling. Testosterone partly mediates its modulatory effects on hippocampal-dependent cognitive processes and behaviour by modulating BDNF/TrKB signaling, as was recently reviewed elsewhere (Atwi et al. ).
Conclusion
Increasing empirical evidence now exists to support the significant physiological role of sex steroids on cognitive function. Findings from several human and animal studies point to the strong association between low circulating sex hormone levels and impaired neurocognitive process in males. Male hypogonadism, either primary or secondary in form, is variably correlated with perturbed behavioural, learning and cognitive outcomes at different stages of postnatal development, the detailed mechanisms of which is not fully understood. This therefore points to the need for renewed basic and clinical investigation into the cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie the association between low sex hormone levels and cognitive dysfunction, with a view to better understanding the relationship between these entities, as well as the potential benefits of hormone replacement therapy on cognitive and behavioural outcomes in the young and adult hypogonadal male populations.