Introduction
Sleep and depression
Approximately 14–16% of postpartum women are estimated to experience symptoms of depression, which significantly disturbs the course of the postpartum period and the formation of the mother-child bond (Gaynes et al. ; Clout and Brown ). Recently, more and more attention has been directed toward the role of sleep and circadian rhythm in the pathogenesis of postpartum depression (Bei et al. ; Bhati and Richards ; Lawson et al. ). The necessity to adjust to the erratic sleep pattern of a newborn contributes to sleep deprivation in the mother (Kryger et al. ). Reduced sleep quality seems likely to increase the risk of postpartum depression; however, there have been few studies on the topic (Kempler et al. ). A study by Dørheim et al. demonstrated that a poor sleep quality was associated with a higher risk of depression (Dørheim et al. ). According to Okun et al. reduced sleep quality during late pregnancy was associated with an increased risk of a recurrence of depression in women with a history of this condition (Okun et al. ; Okun et al. ).
Estradiol and sleep
One of the factors considered in the aetiology of both depression and sleep disorders occurring in the postpartum period are hormonal changes (Mehta et al. , Brummelte and Galea , Osborne et al. ). The levels of the hormone estradiol gradually increase during pregnancy and then rapidly drop after childbirth. (Torpy ).
Most of the recent studies evaluating a correlation between estradiol levels and sleep quality involve perimenopausal women. A favorable effect of estradiol on women’s sleep quality has been demonstrated (de Zambotti et al. ; Polo-Kantola et al. ; Ensrud et al. ), however, no studies have been conducted in postpartum women (Ross et al. ).
Restless leg syndrome
Affecting approximately 10–34% of pregnant women, restless leg syndrome (RLS) is one of the most common sleep disturbances during pregnancy (Gupta et al. ). Most women who reported RLS symptoms during pregnancy had no past history of RLS (Manconi et al. ).
RLS symptoms were shown to increase in severity as the pregnancy progressed and be most pronounced in the third trimester (Picchietti et al. ). RLS makes falling asleep difficult and is associated with lower sleep quality; it may also lead to poorer functioning during the day and increase the risk of mood disturbances and anxiety disorders (Becker ). In most cases, RLS symptoms subside after childbirth, however, in some women they persist into the postpartum period (Manconi et al. ).
The purpose of this study was to assess a possible correlation between insomnia on one hand and depression symptoms and estradiol levels on the other in postpartum women.
Methods
The study population consisted of women who gave birth at the First Faculty and Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology of Medical University of Warsaw in the period 2013–2016. Exclusion criteria were age under 18 years and unstable somatic condition.
All women included in the study had given their written informed consent.
The study had been approved by the Institutional Review Board of Medical University of Warsaw (109/A/2013).
The women’s mental status was assessed in the period 24–48 h after childbirth with the following psychometric tools: Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) – with the cut-off score for depression set at 12 points or higher; Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) – with the cut-off score for depression set at 11 points or higher.
The women’s sleep disturbances were assessed with: Athens Insomnia Scale (AIS) – with the cut-off score for insomnia set at 8 points or higher (the value validated for the Polish population (Fornal-Pawłowska et al. )).
Serum estradiol levels were measured. Fasting blood samples were collected from the basilica vein into 7.5-mL vacuum test tubes (VACUTEST) in the 24–48-h period following childbirth. The blood was drawn at 6:00–6:30 AM. ELISA was used to evaluate the estradiol level.
The statistical analysis used descriptive statistics such as mean values and standard deviations for normal distributions and medians and ranges for other distributions. The Shapiro-Wilk test was used to verify the hypothesis about the normal distribution of the analyzed quantitative variables. If the distribution of a feature was normal, the hypothesis of equality of means for groups was tested by T-test, otherwise Wilcoxon test (Wilcoxon Rank_Sum test) was used for the comparison of groups for features showing deviations from the normal distribution. The relationship between qualitative variables was tested in a contingency table system using the Chi-square test or the Fisher exact test for small numbers in the cells of the table.
Logistic regression models GLM (Generalized Linear Models) were used in the multivariate analysis to assess the relationship between postpartum insomnia and the analyzed risk factors. The selection of the optimal model was based on the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) statistics.
The significance level was set at P < 0.05.
Statistical calculations were conducted with SAS v.14.1.
Results
Univariate analysis
A total of 84 women, aged between 19 and 41 years (mean age 30.9 ± 13.4), were included in the study.
The Athens Insomnia Scale scores, assessed 24–48 h after delivery, showed: insomnia in 26 women whose mean age was 31.04 ± 4.83 (1); no symptoms of insomnia in 58 women whose mean age was 31.04 ± 3.99 (0).
The study showed no relationship between the age of the women giving birth and the incidence of insomnia.
Demographic characteristics, such as age, marital status, education, living in a single-person household or living with others, source of income, or the type of profession had no effect on the incidence of insomnia. The exact demographic characteristics have been presented in Table 1 . Table 1 Demographic characteristics of women in the study group N Women with insomnia P Marital status NS single 15 6 (40%) married 64 19 (29.7%) divorced 5 1 (20%) Household conditions NS living with the family 75 21 (28%) alone/with other people 9 5 (55.6%) Education NS primary/vocational 4 1 (25%) secondary 9 2 (22.2%) incomplete higher 6 4 (66.7%) complete higher 65 19 (29.2%) Source of income NS employed 78 24 (30.8%) unemployed 6 2 (33.3%) NS non-significant
The study showed no association between the incidence of postpartum insomnia and marital status, education, source of income, or living alone or with the family.
Childbirth-associated factors, such as gravidity and parity, type of delivery (Cesarean section or vaginal), breastfeeding after delivery were not related to the incidence of postpartum insomnia.
Three (3.6% out of 84) women gave birth prematurely, all children of study participants were born healthy – these aspects were not analyzed in this paper.
In the 24–48-h period after delivery, 13 women (15.4%) scored ≥11 points in Beck Depression Inventory (15.5%). Patients with postpartum insomnia had higher rates of BDI-diagnosed depression (7 out of 26 patients; 26.9%) than those with no postpartum insomnia (6 out of 58 patients; 10.3%); however, this difference was not statistically significant ( P = 0.099).
Ten patients (11.9%) scored ≥12 points in the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale. The rates of postpartum depression were similar ( P = 0.944) in patients with postpartum insomnia (3 out of 26; 11.5%) and in patients without postpartum insomnia (7 out of 58; 12.1%).
Table 2 presents the specific depression scores of patients who developed postpartum insomnia (1) and of those who did not (0). Table 2 Depression scale scores of women who developed (1) and who did not develop (0) postpartum insomnia Parameter AIS > =8 N Median Minimum Maximum P BDI 0 58 2.00 0.00 17.00 P = 0.002* 1 26 4.50 0.00 24.00 EPDS 0 58 4.00 0.00 14.00 P = 0.048* 1 26 7.00 0.00 18.00 *statistically significant
Women who developed postpartum insomnia scored significantly higher in Beck Depression Inventory ( P = 0.002) and Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale ( P = 0.048).
History data on insomnia during pregnancy were obtained from 61 women – 31 women (51%) reported insomnia during pregnancy, 30 women (49%) denied sleep disturbances.
Out of the women who developed postpartum insomnia ( n = 21), 17 (81%) had a history of insomnia during pregnancy. Out of the women with no postpartum insomnia ( n = 40), 14 (35%) had a history of insomnia during pregnancy. A significantly greater proportion of women who met the postpartum insomnia criteria reported insomnia during pregnancy ( P = 0.001).
History findings on depression from 69 women revealed no history of depression in 63 women (91%) and a past history positive for depression in 6 women (9%).
Out of the 20 women who developed postpartum insomnia, 5 women (25%) reported depression in the past. Out of 49 women with no postpartum insomnia, only 1 woman (2%) had suffered from depression in the past.
Significantly more women who met the criteria for postpartum insomnia had suffered from depression in the past ( P = 0.007).
RLS history data from 61 women: 10 women (16.4%) reported restless leg syndrome during pregnancy, and 51 women (83.6%) had no history of RLS during pregnancy.
Four (19.1%) of the 21 patients who reported postpartum insomnia also reported RLS during their pregnancy. Six (15%) of the 40 patients with no postpartum insomnia reported RLS during pregnancy.
No significant correlation was observed between developing RLS during pregnancy and postpartum insomnia ( P = 0.725).
Nineteen (33.3%) of the 57 patients who reported no postpartum RLS reported postpartum insomnia. Two (50%) of the 4 women who reported postpartum RLS also reported postpartum insomnia. Two (9.5%) of the 21 patients who developed postpartum insomnia reported postpartum RLS. Two (5%) of the 40 patients with no postpartum insomnia developed postpartum RLS.
The study showed no significant differences in the incidence of postpartum insomnia in women with and without postpartum RLS ( P = 0.602).
The data on estradiol levels within the first 24–48 h after childbirth were assessed in 41 women. The median estradiol level in women without insomnia was 252 pg/mL in comparison with 237 pg/mL in women with insomnia.
No significant differences in estradiol levels were observed between women with and without postpartum insomnia ( P = 0.989) (Table 3 ). Table 3 Estradiol levels in women with and without insomnia Variable AIS > =8 N Median Minimum Maximum P Estradiol [pg/mL] 0 27 252.00 55.47 4274.00 P = 0.989 1 14 237.00 102.00 43,620.00 Table 4 Odds ratio (OR) values and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) for factors in the optimal model Factor OR 95% CI P Insomnia during pregnancy 7.58 1.28 45.45 0.026* History of depression 11.63 0.74 200.00 0.080 BDI score (increase by 1) 1.18 0.98 1.43 0.086
Multivariate analysis
On the basis of multivariate analysis an optimal model was developed to describe the risk of postpartum insomnia. The model was based on three factors - insomnia during pregnancy, history of depression, and an increase in Beck Depression Inventory score (Table 4 ).
The risk of postpartum insomnia is 7.6 times higher in women with gestational history of insomnia.
The risk of postpartum insomnia is 11.6 times higher in women with a history of depression.
An increase in Beck Depression Inventory score by 1 point increases the risk of postpartum insomnia 1.2-fold.
Figures 1 , 2 , and 3 present the effect of the above factors on the probability of postpartum insomnia. Fig. 1 The probability of postpartum insomnia in women with and without insomnia during pregnancy Fig. 2 The probability of postpartum insomnia in women with no history of depression and in those who have been treated for depression Fig. 3 The probability of postpartum insomnia with respect to BDI scores
Discussion
According to the October 2005 survey conducted by TNS OBOP (Public Opinion Research Center) nearly a half of Polish women experiences various sleep problems daily or almost daily: 29% of this group wake in the middle of the night and cannot fall asleep again, 27% report difficulty falling asleep, 21% wake up too early, and 24% get up in the morning not feeling rested despite sufficient number of sleep hours (Skalski ).
There is a relationship between depression and sleep disturbances, with reports of their common etiology and pathogenesis [hyperactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis] (Rao et al. ). The hyperactivity of HPA axis is a well-known neuroendocrine abnormality in depression. Depressed patients suffer more often from adrenal cortical hyperplasia compared to healthy controls (Rubin et al. ) and they have altered response to dexamethasone test (American Psychiatric Association ). The HPA axis is also an important factor in sleep regulation (Buckley and Schatzberg ). A recent large population-based study revealed that short sleep duration and increased sleep disturbances were independently associated with a flatter diurnal slope in cortisol secretion (Kumari et al. ). Our study revealed insomnia in one third of parturients. The patients, who developed postpartum insomnia, scored significantly higher in depression scales, which is consistent with the current knowledge base.
A multivariate analysis revealed the following factors to have the greatest effect on the development of postpartum insomnia: past history of insomnia, past history of depression and an increase in BDI score. These findings support the existence of a relationship between depression and sleep disturbances, which indicates that both conditions have common etiology and pathogenesis (hyperactivity of the HPA axis).
RLS is believed to be one of the most common causes of insomnia in pregnant women (Skalski ). Our study showed no significant relationship between a history of RLS during pregnancy and developing postpartum insomnia; moreover, it showed no significant differences in the rates of postpartum insomnia in women with and without postpartum RLS. The exact etiology of RLS is unknown, with genetic predisposition, low serum iron and ferritin levels, as well as low vitamin D levels and calcium metabolism disturbances considered as the main factors in the pathogenesis (Gupta et al. ). Another factor that may provoke RLS is high estradiol levels. One study demonstrated that women with RLS during pregnancy had higher estradiol levels when compared with a control group of pregnant women without RLS (Dzaja et al. ). However, not all studies support this theory. Hübner et al. observed no differences in estradiol levels between women with and without RLS (Hübner et al. ).
A number of women complain of insomnia associated with sex hormone fluctuations during the luteal phase, during pregnancy, after delivery, and during menopause (Mong and Cusmano ; Joffe et al. ). Estrogens lengthen the REM phase of sleep, lengthen total duration of sleep, act as agonists of the serotonin system, inhibit MAO activity – which likely has an antidepressant effect (Burdick et al. ; Cusmano et al. ; Lokuge et al. ; Gundlah et al. ).
Higher estradiol levels have been shown to be associated with a better sleep quality in premenopausal women. Nevertheless, no correlation was demonstrated between estradiol levels and sleep disturbances in postmenopausal women (de Zambotti et al. ). Moreover, estrogen replacement therapy was shown to improve sleep quality, facilitate falling asleep, and reduce the number of nocturnal awakenings (Polo-Kantola et al. ). One study by Ensrud et al. demonstrated low-dose estradiol or therapeutic-dose venlafaxine to decrease insomnia and improve subjective sleep quality in a group of perimenopausal and postmenopausal women (Ensrud et al. ). Furthermore, higher estradiol levels and improved sleep quality were shown to precede an improvement in the mental condition of perimenopausal women suffering from depression (Joffe et al. ).
Our study demonstrated no relationship between estradiol levels during the early postpartum period and developing postpartum insomnia. Estradiol level results in the study population were considerably diverse, which is consistent with the current knowledge base (Okun et al. ; Brummelte and Galea ).
The data evaluated in this study indicate no effect of demographic factors (age, education, profession, source of income, household conditions) on the risk of postpartum insomnia.
Conclusions
A univariate analysis revealed that women who met the criteria of insomnia after delivery were significantly more likely to report insomnia during pregnancy ( P = 0.001) and were more likely to have suffered from depression in the past ( P = 0.007).
Women who developed postpartum insomnia had significantly higher BDI ( P = 0.002) and EPDS ( P = 0.048) scores.
Our study demonstrated no significant association between RLS during pregnancy and postpartum insomnia ( P = 0.725). The groups of women with and without postpartum RLS showed no significant differences in the incidence of postpartum insomnia ( P = 0.602).
There were no significant differences in estradiol levels between women with and without postpartum insomnia ( P = 0.989).
The study showed no relationship between developing postpartum insomnia and such factors as the marital status, education, source of income, living alone vs. with family, or peripartum factors.
Based on multivariate analysis the following factors were demonstrated to have the greatest effect on developing postpartum insomnia: history of insomnia during pregnancy; history of depression; and an increase in BDI score.
A study with a larger sample size is needed to confirm these findings.