Introduction
Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are convenient alternatives to vitamin K antagonists (VKAs). They have been shown to be as effective and safe as VKAs in both phase III trials and practice-based post-marketing studies [ , , , , , ]. Health care providers (HCPs) increasingly prescribe DOACs for their clinical effectiveness, safety, and ease of use. Four DOACs—dabigatran, rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban—have been approved by Health Canada for the treatment and secondary prevention of venous thromboembolism and prevention of systemic embolization and stroke in patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation.
We previously examined, via a 12-item survey, the practical use and dosing of DOACs among 93 consecutive patients who were recruited prospectively at a large tertiary care hospital in Hamilton, Canada [ ]. We found that there was large variability in how DOACs were dosed and how patients administered and stored DOACs [ ]. In addition, to assess HCPs’ knowledge around the indications and practical use of DOACs, we performed a cross-sectional survey of 52 HCPs at this hospital [ ]. Although HCPs expressed comfort with the use of DOACs, their understanding of the oral anticoagulant use and dosing was poor [ ]. Limited by a small sample size, we could not compare DOAC knowledge between different HCP professions. Therefore, to further explore HCPs’ understanding of oral anticoagulant indications, dosing, administration, and storage on a larger scale, we performed a national cross-sectional survey. Furthermore, we aimed to encompass HCP groups that were not part of our previous study, including nurse practitioners (NPs) and pharmacists. These professionals are at the front line in counseling and teaching patients about oral anticoagulants.
Methods
Study population
An electronic survey was distributed to 9646 HCPs across Canada from June to August 2017, with 18 questions on oral anticoagulant indications, administration, and storage. The questions and their corresponding correct answers are listed in Appendix 1 in Supplementary Material. Physicians receiving the survey included 492 members of the Canadian Hematology Society (which consists of hematologists, thrombosis medicine specialists, and residents and fellows in Hematology training programs across Canada), as well as 1600 members of the Canadian Society of Internal Medicine (which consists of internists and family physicians). The survey was also sent to 1154 NPs and registered nurses (RNs) from the Nurse Practitioners’ Association of Ontario, and 6400 pharmacists from the Ontario Pharmacists Association.
Questionnaire
The McMaster LimeSurvey online software was utilized to create and administer the electronic questionnaire and to collect the data ( https://www.limesurvey.org/ ). Potential participants received an email with a link to the survey and an introduction and the objectives of the survey. Two reminder emails were sent, and no participation incentives were offered. The 18 questions were divided into five categories: (1) demographics; (2) indications; (3) dose adjustments based on age and renal function; (4) practical use of oral anticoagulants including administration, storage, and reversal; and (5) issues addressed by HCPs when they counsel patients and the frequency at which oral anticoagulants are prescribed.
Ethics approval for this study was obtained from the Hamilton Integrated Research Ethics Board. Participation in the survey was completely voluntary and completion of the survey was interpreted as consent to participate in the study. The answers were kept confidential and anonymous, and no identifying data were collected outside of the information in the demographics section, which included profession, number of years in practice, and work setting (outpatient vs. inpatient).
Statistics
Descriptive statistics (proportions) were calculated for each item on the survey. Analyses were performed using the LimeSurvey online software. Chi square tests were used to compare proportions across 3 HCP groups (physicians, NPs, and pharmacists).
Results
Study population characteristics
A total of 193 responses were received, however, 2 surveys were excluded from the analysis as all responses to the 18 questions were left blank. The remaining 191 responses were analyzed as follows: 100 (52.4%) from NPs; 42 (22%) from pharmacists; 27 (14.2%) from Hematologists; 5 (2.6%) from Thrombosis Medicine specialists; 4 (2.1%) from internists; 9 (4.7%) from residents and fellows in Hematology training programs across Canada; and 2 each (1%) from family physicians and RNs. The overall response rate was 2%. The median and mean duration of practice were 8 and 12 years, respectively (range 0–44 years). The majority of respondents (158 of 189; 83.6%) worked in the outpatient setting. Two of the respondents did not respond to this question.
HCPs’ understanding of oral anticoagulant indications and practical use
51 (26.7%) of the respondents correctly identified that warfarin and 4 DOACs (apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban, and rivaroxaban) all have Health Canada approved indications for treatment and secondary prevention of VTE, as well as for stroke prevention in patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation. However, there were no significant differences in correct responses between the physician (9 of 47; 19.1%) compared with pharmacist (15 of 42, 35.7%; p = 0.097), and NP (26 of 100, 26%; p = 0.41) groups in correctly identifying all of the approved indications for oral anticoagulants. There was also no significant difference in correct responses between the pharmacist and NP groups (p = 0.31). The proportion of respondents in each physician speciality that correctly identified all indications for oral anticoagulants were: 3 of 9 residents or fellows (33.3%), 1 of 4 internists (25%), 1 of 5 Thrombosis Medicine specialists (20%), 4 of 27 Hematologists (14.8%), and none of the family physicians. There were no statistical differences in correct responses among different specialties and between residents and fellows compared with staff physicians (p = 0.344).
101 (52.9%) of the respondents correctly identified that DOACs are not approved for treatment of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), cerebral sinus venous thrombosis (CVST), or mechanical prosthetic valves. Forty-two of the respondents (22%) cited one or more of the above indications incorrectly. 33 of 42 (17.3%) incorrectly cited mechanical prosthetic valves as an indication for DOACs (see Table 1 ). The proportions of NPs (31 of 100, 31%) and pharmacists (8 of 42, 19%) that selected incorrect DOAC indications were significantly higher than the corresponding proportion of physicians (2 of 47, 4.25%) (p < 0.001 and p = 0.027, respectively).
Table 1 Proportion of HCPs choosing an incorrect DOAC indication Indication Proportion (N;%) CVST alone 5 (11.9) CVST and mechanical aortic and mitral valve prosthesis 7 (16.7) CVST and mechanical aortic valve prosthesis 1 (2.4) Mechanical aortic and mitral valve prosthesis 16 (38%) Mechanical aortic valve prosthesis alone 2 (4.8) Mechanical mitral valve prosthesis alone 4 (9.5) HIT alone 4 (9.5) HIT and mechanical aortic and mitral valve prosthesis 2 (4.8) CVST and HIT and mechanical aortic and mitral valve prosthesis 1 (2.4) CVST cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, HIT heparin induced thrombocytopenia, N number
Half of the respondents (53%) knew that dabigatran should not be crushed, and only 85 (44.5%) knew that it should not be exposed to moisture [ ]. Ninety-four of the respondents (49%) knew that higher dose rivaroxaban (≥ 15 mg) should be taken with food [ ]. While 104 (54.5%) correctly adjusted the dose of apixaban based on age, only 85 (44.5%) did the same for dabigatran. The recommended age adjustment for dabigatran is to use a lower dose of dabigatran (110 mg twice daily) in patients age ≥ 80 years old or age ≥ 75 years old with ≥ 1 risk factor for bleeding [ ]. 72, 71, 66.5, and 41% correctly adjusted rivaroxaban, apixaban, dabigatran, and edoxaban, respectively, for renal function.
HCPs’ understanding of oral anticoagulant reversal
Of the 191 respondents, 118 (61.8%) and 109 (57%) correctly specified that warfarin and dabigatran have a Health Canada approved reversal agent. However, only 93 (48%), 49 (25.6%), 41 (21.5%), and 36 (18.9%) correctly identified that prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) can reverse the anticoagulant effects of warfarin, rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban, respectively. Further, 67 (35%) incorrectly specified that dabigatran’s anticoagulant effects can be reversed using PCC [ ].
HCPs’ counseling and prescribing frequency
58.6% of respondents felt comfortable or very comfortable prescribing oral anticoagulants and the remaining 41.4% felt uncomfortable or very uncomfortable. Factors that contributed to HCPs feeling uncomfortable about oral anticoagulants are listed in Fig. 1 . Lack of knowledge about the appropriate indications was the most frequent factor, cited by 50 (26%) of the participants. Twenty-three of the respondents indicated other reasons for feeling uncomfortable about prescribing or dispensing oral anticoagulants, including it not being in their scope of practice (12 of 23, 52%), a general lack of familiarity or knowledge about DOACs (7 of 23, 30.4%), or preference to refer to more specialized services such as Thrombosis Medicine (4 of 23, 17.4%).
Fig. 1 Factors that contributed to HCPs feeling uncomfortable about using oral anticoagulants. Other: not in their scope of practice (12 of 23, 52%), lack of familiarity or knowledge about DOACs (7 of 23, 30.4%), referral to other services such as Thrombosis Medicine specialists (4 of 23, 17.4%). Does not apply: respondent was not uncomfortable using oral anticoagulants
When counselling patients, 182 (95.3%) discussed the indication, 180 (94.2%) discussed bleeding side effects, and 158 (82.7%) discussed when/how to take the drug. Only 115 (60.2%) discussed adherence and administration strategies. The full list of parameters that HCPs counsel patients about are demonstrated in Fig. 2 . HCPs’ frequency of prescribing or dispensing oral anticoagulants is in Table 2 . 75% of HCPs who felt uncomfortable or very uncomfortable prescribing oral anticoagulants prescribed them infrequently (< 5 times per month or never).
Fig. 2 What parameters do HCPs counsel patients about when prescribing or dispensing oral anticoagulants?
Table 2 How often do HCPs prescribe or dispense oral anticoagulants per month? Prescribing or dispensing frequency/month Proportion (N;%) a < 5 times 68 (35.8) 5–10 times 27 (14.2) 10–20 times 24 (12.6) More than 20 times 38 (20%) Never 33 (17.4) N number a One response was excluded for selecting two answers
Discussion
This electronic survey of Canadian HCPs shows that there is a pressing need for educational programs to improve HCP’s understanding of oral anticoagulants, particularly in correctly identifying approved indications and appropriately counseling patients on adherence and administration. There also appear to be concerning knowledge gaps around the appropriate and inappropriate use of DOACs; for example, its use in patients with mechanical valves. It is vital that any HCP prescribing or dispensing DOACs understands that off-label use may lead to significant patient harm in the form of thrombosis or bleeding.
Only 26.7% of respondents correctly identified all the approved indications for warfarin and 4 DOACs. This result is consistent with the findings from our previously reported study, which found that only 10% of respondents correctly identified the approved indications for available DOACs [ ]. The knowledge gaps about DOAC administration and storage were, however, more profound in our previously published study [ ]. This difference is likely related to different sample populations and sizes (a single center vs. a national study) as well as the higher proportion of trainees in the previous study compared with our current study (49 vs. 4.7%, respectively).
Forty-two of the respondents selected one or more incorrect indications for using DOACs including HIT, CVST, or mechanical prosthetic valves. Use of DOACs in patients for these unapproved indications might result in serious complications of thrombosis or bleeding. This was illustrated in the RE-ALIGN study, which showed that use of dabigatran in patients with mechanical valves resulted in increased risk of thromboembolic complications and bleeding [ ]. The proportion of both NPs and pharmacists that cited these incorrect indications were significantly higher compared with physicians. These differences might be explained by the fact that majority of the physician group was comprised of Hematologists and Thrombosis Medicine specialists with expertise in this area of medicine. The physician group’s knowledge about DOAC indications might have been more in line with NPs and pharmacists if there was broader representation from different physician specialties.
Although previous studies have reported a similar suboptimal understanding of oral anticoagulants among HCPs, these studies mainly focused on warfarin and not DOACs [ , , , ]. A cross-sectional study, using a 30-question survey, examined the knowledge of 160 HCPs (40 each of physicians, pharmacists, nurses, and dieticians) about dietary and drug interactions with warfarin [ ]. The authors found that there is a need for further training to improve HCP’s knowledge base with warfarin-related drug and dietary interactions [ ]. Two cross-sectional studies, one from Europe [ ] and the other from Australia and New Zealand [ ], examined cardiovascular nurses’ knowledge about the practical use of warfarin; they reported that there was insufficient understanding about warfarin anticoagulation [ , ]. Lastly, a recent single-center cross-sectional study distributed a 30-item questionnaire to a broad range of specialties including surgeons, cardiologists, general internists, neurologists, and physical and rehabilitation medicine specialists [ ]. Unlike in our study, this questionnaire focused on practice patterns and not knowledge base regarding indications, administration, and storage of oral anticoagulants. The authors concluded that there was a significant knowledge deficit among clinicians and that there should be more emphasis on educational programs to improve patient safety [ ].
Our cross-sectional study has limitations. First, our response rate was low, despite sending two electronic reminders. The low response rate may be related to the practice patterns of the targeted groups. For example, of the 492 members of the Canadian Hematology Society, many focus on malignant hematology; there may be a smaller number of Hematologists who routinely prescribe oral anticoagulants. The low participation rate introduces the potential for selection bias. For example, the understanding of oral anticoagulants among responders may have been different from that of non-responders. Furthermore, it is possible that the responders could have looked up the correct answer while completing the electronic survey, which would imply even greater knowledge gaps. Second, our study does not predict errors in prescribing among HCPs. It is possible that many of the HCPs utilize prescribing resources and decision-making tools prior to prescribing oral anticoagulants, thereby preventing medication prescribing errors. The actual error rate might be different from each HCP’s perceived error rate. Future studies are needed to inquire about actual differences in oral anticoagulant prescribing error rates among HCPs. Nonetheless, to our knowledge, our study is the largest to date that examines HCPs’ knowledge base about the practical use of warfarin and 4 DOACs amongst various professional groups.
Conclusions
The results of our cross-sectional study demonstrate that there are concerning knowledge gaps about oral anticoagulants among Canadian HCPs, particularly around approved indications, administration, and storage. Future studies should focus on knowledge translation to improve HCPs’ knowledge base (for example, about drug interactions of oral anticoagulants), empower patients, and optimize oral anticoagulants’ safety and efficacy.