Introduction
Exposure of the earth to toxic materials, including heavy metals is a noteworthy issue in this century. Although a few metals, including manganese, zinc, iron, and cobalt are necessary for enzymatic actions, other elements such as cadmium, arsenic, and mercury have no natural functions and are potentially hazardous to living organisms. These materials can pass through soil–plant–animal–human cycles (Demİr et al. ). Cadmium (Cd) has been reported to be one among hazardous substances, along with arsenic and lead (Demir et al. ). The increasing evidence of the deposition of Cd in the soils via airborne Cd particles is of concern. Although, Cd is generally ubiquitous metal in the soil, many agricultural products contain moderately high Cd levels (Mohammed et al. ). Food and cigarette smoking are an important source of Cd exposure to the overall public (Klaassen et al. ). The additional principal sources of exposure are inhalation of aerosolized Cd and the Cd -nickel battery industry, electroplating, and paint colors (Satarug et al. ). Acute Cd exposure causes pneumonic edema, renal damage, hepatitis, testicular damage, and lethality while chronic exposure to Cd produces toxicity to kidney and immune system (Klaassen et al. ) and neurotoxicity (Zheng et al. ). Magnifying evidence has revealed that Cd is a probable crucial factor of neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD) (Jiang et al. ). Cerebral cortical neurons have been known as targets of Cd-induced apoptosis (Yuan et al. ). Cadmium has also been determined to be a human carcinogen that induces tumors of different tissues (Waalkes ). At the molecular aspect, Cd exposure leads to genomic instability, affects DNA repair components, the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the induction of apoptosis, which are associated with Cd-induced neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity (Rana and Verma ). However, the exact mechanisms for this toxicity are still unknown. To protect against Cd-induced toxicity, various possible neuro- and nephro-protective mechanisms have been investigated. However, the understanding of these mechanisms is for the most part incomplete, and additional approaches are needed. Oxidative stress is a state of overwhelming of ROS and/or perturbations of the antioxidant mediated pathways (Azab et al. ). Because of its capacity to remove ROS, antioxidants might be consumed in the prophylaxis and therapeutic of Cd-poisoning alternating to binding agents (Ercal and Penugonda ). Selenium (Se) is an element that is important to mammalian well-being. This metal, as selenocysteine, has a capacity to serve as a redox site in various selenoproteins (Copeland ), having enzymatic activities that are essential for homoeostasis, for example, glutathione peroxidase (GPx) (Miyamoto et al. ), PHGPx (Imai and Nakagawa ) and thioredoxin reductase (TR) (Becker et al. ). The ability of Se to function in the Se-containing catalysts in vivo relies on its chemical nature (Ortuno et al. ). The action of nitrogenous compounds in the redox environment can control the agglomeration of the natural Se molecules to form essential Se nanoparticles (Se-NPs). Various sizes of Se-NPs can be provided by varying the quantities of BSA. For the most part, higher concentrations of BSA stabilize smaller sizes of Se-NPs molecules (Zhang et al. ). The sizes of the nanoparticles play a critical role in biochemical action of them. In general, smaller nanoparticles are more dynamic than larger nanoparticles (Oberdörster et al. ). The effects of the sizes of the Se-NPs on their protective impacts have been investigated in a few systems, including their roles in cancer prevention (Imai and Nakagawa ; Miyamoto et al. ). However, additional methods should have been used to clarify these results. To our knowledge, the role of Se-NPs in the protection from the Cd-induced biochemical, molecular and histopathological alterations in the kidney and brain of rats has not yet been examined. Consequently, the main focus of this study was to investigate the potential protective impact of Se-NPs by assessing various serum kidney and brain damage biomarkers—creatinine, uric acid, urea, creatine phosphokinase (CPK), the creatine phosphokinase isoenzyme BB (CPK-BB) activity, malondialdehyde (MDA), brain and serum acetylcholinesterase (AchE), catalase (CAT), and superoxide dismutase (SOD) activities, reduced glutathione (GSH), the percent of DNA fragmentation, the tissue Cd, Se, iron (Fe) and copper (Cu) levels, the gene and protein expression of SOD, CAT, B-cell lymphoma2 (Bcl-2), Bcl-2-associated X (Bax) and cell-protective enzymes—in Cd-intoxicated rats. A histopathological examination of the kidney and brains was performed to evaluate the neuro- and nephro-protective impacts.
Materials and methods
Chemicals
Cadmium chloride (CdCl 2 ) was obtained from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA). A CdCl 2 .4H 2 O solution was produced by dissolving CdCl 2 in ordinary saline at a concentration of 5 mg CdCl 2 /ml saline. The nuclear spectrophotometry standards for Cd, Se, Fe, and Cu were purchased from Ricca Chemical Company (Fenton, Mo). GSH, thiobarbituric acid (TBA), agarose, ethidium bromide, chloroform, and isopropanol were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). TRIzol reagent was provided by Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). QuantiFast SYBR Green PCR Master Mix unit was provided by QIAGEN (Hilden, Germany). The other reagents were of analytical, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), or the best accessible pharmaceutical grades.
Se-NPs synthesis
About 0.2 g of Na 2 SeO 3 was mixed in 10 mL of distilled water stand in a 100-mL beaker. About 0.1 g of BSA was mixed in 10 mL of Tris (pH: 11.0) buffer under vortex and Na 2 SeO 3 was poured at 121 °C for 20 min (Kalishwaralal et al. ).
Purification of Se-NPs
The Se-NPs carrying BSA mixture was centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 8 min followed by discarding the supernatant. The BSA-containing Se-NPs were rinsed and re-poured in distilled water and next centrifugation was performed at 15,000 rpm for 8 min. The aforementioned step was repeated two times at 37 °C (Kalishwaralal et al. ).
Characterization of Se-NPs
Transmission electron microscope (TEM) used in characterization of Se-NPs. TEM were performed on JEOL JEM-2100 high resolution TEM at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV (Kalishwaralal et al. ).
Animals
Adult male albino rats weighing 110–130 g were utilized as a test system. The rats were housed in enclosures and were maintained with food and water free access. The rats were observed for 7 days for acclimation. They were housed at temperature of (22 ± 1 °C) and humidity (55 ± 5%) under a 12-h dark/light cycle.
Acute toxicity study
A group of 48 normal male rats weighing 110–130 g was used to assess the acute subcutaneous hazard of the Se-NPs as described in a previous study (Barker-Treasure et al. ). The rats were separated into six subgroups ( n = 8 for every subgroup). The subgroups were treated with various doses (0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 mg/kg body weight s.c.) of Se-NPs. The animals were observed for 24 h to record the indications of toxicity and death rates.
Experimental design
Sixty male rats were separated into 4 groups, with15 rats in each. The rats in Group I received normal saline and were used as the controls. The rats in Group II were given CdCl 2 (5 mg/kg BW, orally) (El-Demerdash et al. ). The rats in Groups III and VI were subcutaneously infused with Se-NPs with respective diameters of 3–5 nm and 10–20 nm (0.5 mg/kg BW, individually) (Peng et al. ) one hour prior to the administration of CdCl 2 . Each of the agents was administered twice each week for 8 sequential weeks.
Ethics statement
All experiments were conducted in consistent with Animal Research: Reporting In Vivo Experiments guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals (Kilkenny et al. ) and were approved by Animal Care Review Committee of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Damanhour University, Damanhour, Egypt (Ethical Issue No: VM032/2015). The animals received humane care according to the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” of the United State National Academy of Sciences, and all efforts were made to minimize their suffering.
Sample collection and preparation of tissues
Blood sampling
By the lasting of the study (8 weeks after the first treatment) and 24 h after the last CdCl 2 dose, the rats were anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine (7.5–10 mg/kg, 1 mg/kg, i.p.). Blood was obtained via an incision in the heart and collected into a clean 2 ml test tube. The blood samples were allowed to coagulate at 37 °C and followed by centrifugation at 1800×g for 10 min. The clearly non-hemolyzed supernatant sera were collected and stored at −20 °C until use for the biochemical analysis.
Tissues samples
The rats were sacrificed, the tissues were rapidly extracted from each animal, and the connective tissue was removed. The kidney and brain were weighed, and each organ was separated into 2 parts. The first section was held in 10 % formalin for microscopical examination. The second part was washed with 0.9% ice-cold saline, blotted with a piece of filter paper and perfused with sodium phosphate-buffered saline (100 mM Na 2 HPO 4 /NaH 2 PO 4 ; pH = 7.4) in ice-cold medium that contained 0.1 mM ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA) to remove any red cells, platelets and clots. A piece of 0.5 g sample of the kidney and brain was homogenized in 10 ml ice-cold phosphate buffer saline (PBS; 100 mM, pH 7.4), and the homogenates were centrifuged at 600×g for 10 min to remove the cell debris. The supernatants were centrifuged at 10,000×g for 30 min, and the pellets were discarded. The resultant supernatants were transferred into Eppendorf tubes and stored at −80 °C in deep freezer until use for the various biochemical, molecular, and genetic tests.
Biochemical assays
The serum concentrations of uric acid, urea, creatinine, GSH, MDA, and activity of SOD and CAT were determined spectrophotometrically consistent to the suppliers’ recommendations using the provided standards (Vitro Scient Co., Germany). Kits for the analysis of cholinesterase activity were acquired from BioVision Inc. (Milpitas, CA, USA). The % DNA breakage was assessed in the tissues as stated by Jafari and Rabbani ( ) using colorimetrical quantitation after reacting with diphenylamine (DPA).
Gene expression of brain Bcl-2, Bax and antioxidant enzymes using real-time PCR
The total RNA was extracted from the kidney and brain using the TRIzol technique consistent to the supplier (Alshabanah et al. ). The quantity and quality of the RNA were evaluated utilizing UV spectrophotometry. The isolated RNA had a 260/280 absorbance ratio of >1.9. The production of the first-strand cDNA and subsequent PCR steps were performed using standard techniques (Alshabanah et al. ). We utilized β-actin as a housekeeping gene. The primers used are listed in Table 1 . Table 1 Nucleotide sequences of the primers used in RT-PCR Gene symbol GenBank accession no. Primer (5′ → 3′) Bcl-2 NM_016993.1 F: CCCCAGAAGAAACTGAACC R: GCATCTCCTTGTCTACGC Bax NM_017059.2 F: GTTGCCCTCTTCTACTTTGC R: ATGGTCACTGTCTGCCATG SOD NM_017050.1 F: AGGATTAACTGAAGGCGAGCAT R: TCTACAGTTAGCAGGCCAGCAG CAT NM_012520.2 F: ACACTTTGACAGAGAGCGGA R: TTTCACTGCAAACCCACGAG β-actin* NM_031144.3 F: AGCCATGTACGTAGCCATCC R: CTCTCAGCTGTGGTGGTGAA *Housekeeping gene
Western blot analysis
SOD, CAT, Bax and Bcl-2 protein expression were examined using Western blot analysis. The protein extracts from the kidney and brain tissues were prepared using a lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 0.5% Triton X-100, and 20% glycerol). The extracts were then subjected to centrifugation (15,000 g, 15 min at 4 °C). The supernatant fractions were assayed for protein concentration using a Bradford reagent (Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA) and were used for the Western blot analyses of SOD, CAT, Bax and Bcl-2, and β-actin (Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA, USA). Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated IgG (Zymed, South San Francisco, CA, USA) was used as a secondary antibody.
Tissue trace minerals
Samples of 200 mg of the tissues were placed in 10-ml microwave digestion vessels. An aliquot of 2 ml nitric acid was added to each vessel. The firmly capped vessels were set in a hot air heater, and the temperature was increased over a 15 min period to 200 °C and held at this temperature for 10 min. After cooling to room temperature, the resulting suspension was combined with an additional 2 ml of purified water. The mixture was then transferred to a 10-ml metal-free conical polypropylene tube and stored at 4 °C until investigation. A VARIAN spectroAA-20 plus GTA-96 flameless graphite heater AAS was utilized to measure the Se, Cd, Fe and Cu contents of the tissues. The processed samples were diluted in nitric acid with values are within the range of the standards.
Histopathology
Samples of the brain and kidneys were collected, fixed in 10% formalin for twenty four hour and prepared for light microscopy. The tissue samples were inserted in wax of paraffin utilizing a conventional technique and stained with hematoxylin and eosin for histopathological examination.
Statistical analysis
The results are illustrated as the means ± SE. The data analysis was performed utilizing SPSS version 22.0 for Windows (IBM, Chicago, IL). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to determine the statistically significant differences among groups. Values of p ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Results
The acute toxicity tests revealed no adverse behavioral and biochemical changes (Suppl. Table 1 ), toxic side effects, or mortality in the rats at doses up to 5 mg/kg (LD50 > 5 mg/kg). Based on these results, the Se-NPs were reported to be safe in rats.
The results shown in Tables 2 and 3 demonstrated statistically significant increases compared with the controls ( P < 0.05) in the serum urea, uric acid and creatinine concentrations (approximately 165, 275 and 428%, respectively) and CPK and CPK-BB activities (approximately 144 and 149%, respectively) as well as large decreases ( P < 0.05) in the serum and brain acetylcholinesterase activities (approximately 44 and 67%, respectively) in the Cd-treated groups. The administration of the Se-NPs restored these values toward those of the controls. Table 2 Effects of CdCl 2 and co-treatment with Se-NPs on serum urea, uric acid and creatinine of rats Group Urea (mg/dl) Uric acid mg/dl) Creatinine mg/dl) Control 47.59 ± 3.87d 4.54 ± 0.76c 0.79 ± 0.08d CdCl 2 78.48 ± 5.76a 11.54 ± 2.65a 3.10 ± 0.09a CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (3–5) 59.65 ± 3.76c 8.13 ± 1.98b 1.70 ± 0.03c CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (10–20) 67.54 ± 5.37b 7.85 ± 1.19b 2.38 ± 0.04b Means within the same column carrying different letters are significantly different ( P < 0.05) Table 3 Effects of CdCl 2 and co-treatment with Se-NPs on serum AChE, brain AChE, serum CPK and CPK-BB of rats Group Serum ChE (U/l) Brain AChE (U/mg protein) CPK (U/l) CPK-BB (U/l) LDH (U/l) Control 87.65 ± 4.45a 3.44 ± 0.08a 665.76 ± 12.65c 289.54 ± 13.65c 467.87 ± 23.87c CdCl 2 49.23 ± 3.18c 1.09 ± 0.02c 986.54 ± 23.76a 432.76 ± 19.73a 1276.38 ± 33.67a CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (3–5) 66.87 ± 4.19b 2.77 ± 0.01b 686.23 ± 18.98c 267.65 ± 17.65c 865.64 ± 25.87b CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (10–20) 70.00 ± 4.56b 3.21 ± 0.07a 779.43 ± 16.65b 348.87 ± 13.87b 872.62 ± 29.89b Means within the same column carrying different letters are significantly different ( P < 0.05)
The results illustrated that the GSH concentrations and SOD and CAT activities in the brain tissues of Group II rats were significantly decreased ( P < 0.05) (approximately 52, 56, 48%, respectively) compared to the controls. Similarly, these parameters were also reduced in the kidney tissues (64, 55, and 63%, respectively) compared with the controls. On the contrary, the GSH, SOD and CAT values in the brains and kidneys of the rats in Groups III and VI were significantly increased ( P < 0.05) from those of Group II (Tables 4 and 5 ); however, although increased, the enzyme activities in SeNPs + CdCl 2 -treated rats did not reach the control animals. Also, there were no significant differences between Group III and Group VI. The results shown in Table 5 revealed that there were large ( P < 0.05) increases in the MDA levels in the kidney and brain tissues of the group treated with Cd alone compared to the rats of Group I (approximately 201 and 183%, respectively). Unexpectedly, the Se-NPs significantly ( P < 0.05) decreased the MDA levels in these organs compared to Group II. Table 4 Effects of CdCl 2 and co-treatment with Se-NPs on catalase and SOD activity in the brain and kidney of rats Group Catalase activity (Units/mg protein) SOD activity (Units/mg protein) Brain Kidney Brain Kidney Control 11.54 ± 2.65a 8.34 ± 1.56a 23.43 ± 2.87a 19.36 ± 3.47a CdCl 2 5.12 ± 1.32d 3.54 ± 0.78c 12.76 ± 2.19c 7.36 ± 1.76d CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (3–5) 9.34 ± 1.76b 6.54 ± 0.68b 16.72 ± 2.89b 13.46 ± 3.76b CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (10–20) 7.65 ± 1.87c 6.47 ± 0.37b 17.57 ± 2.11b 10.37 ± 1.67c Means within the same column carrying different letters are significantly different ( P < 0.05) Table 5 Effects of CdCl 2 and co-treatment with Se-NPs on GSH and lipid peroxidation in the brain and kidney of rats Group GSH (mmol/mg protein) Lipid peroxidation (nmol/g wet tissue) Brain Kidney Brain Kidney Control 39.62 ± 4.83a 47.67 ± 5.68a 65.32 ± 8.23c 81.57 ± 9.42c CdCl 2 19.65 ± 3.82c 21.76 ± 4.67c 131.28 ± 9.74a 149.65 ± 7.69a CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (3–5) 37.68 ± 2.98a 32.47 ± 3.87b 89.39 ± 7.93b 79.57 ± 8.28c CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (10–20) 29.98 ± 3.19b 31.48 ± 4.76b 91.65 ± 9.17b 108.59 ± 7.90b Means within the same column carrying different letters are significantly different ( P < 0.05)
The impacts of CdCl 2 on the gene expression levels of the cancer-preventative biomarkers CAT, SOD, Bcl-2, and Bax in the brains and kidneys were evaluated using q-RT PCR. Figures 1 and 2 demonstrate the impact of CdCl 2 on the mRNA levels of CAT, SOD, Bcl-2 and Bax in the kidney and brain tissues. The CdCl 2 -treated rats demonstrated a very strong ( P < 0.05) upregulation of Bax and downregulation of Bcl-2. Unexpectedly, the Se-NP co-treatment downregulated the gene expression of Bax compared with that in the control and CdCl 2 -treated groups, whereas this treatment significantly ( P < 0.05) upregulated the cell-protective proteins and Bcl-2; however, these expression levels did reach the control group (Figs. 1 and 2 ). The changes in the mRNA levels of the tested targets clearly showed that the alterations in the activities of CAT and SOD occurred at the translational level. As present in Table 4 and Figs. 1 and 2 , the changes in the activities of the antioxidant enzymes and the relative expression of their genes are commonly in a positive correlation. Fig. 1 Effect of Se-NPs and CdCl2 on the mRNA level of Bcl-2, Bax, SOD and CAT in brain tissue of rats. The mRNA levels were quantified with β-actin as an internal control. The data presented as means ± S.E. Columns with different letters are significantly different ( P < 0.05) Fig. 2 Effect of Se-NPs and CdCl2 on the mRNA level of Bcl-2, Bax, SOD and CAT in kidney tissue of rats. The mRNA levels were quantified with β-actin as an internal control. The data presented as means ± S.E. Columns with different letters are significantly different ( P < 0.05)
As shown in Figs. 3 and 4 , the western blot results revealed a statistical increase in the protein expression levels of Bax and significant decrease of Bcl-2, SOD and CAT in the CdCl 2 group in relation to the placebo group ( P < 0.05). Compared to rats treated with CdCl 2 alone, the administration of Se-NPs markedly decreased the protein expression of Bax and obviously increased the protein expression of Bcl-2, SOD and CAT; however, these expression levels did reach the control group (Figs. 3 and 4 ). As shown in Figs. 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 , the changes in the relative expression of genes and proteins are commonly in a positive correlation, which indicate that regulation occur at both transcriptional and translational level. Fig. 3 Effect of Se-NPs and CdCl2 on the protein expression level of Bcl-2, Bax, SOD and CAT in brain tissue of rats by Western blot analysis. The protein levels were quantified with β-actin as an internal control. The data presented as means ± S.E. Columns with different letters are significantly different ( P < 0.05) Fig. 4 Effect of Se-NPs and CdCl2 on the protein expression level of Bcl-2, Bax, SOD and CAT in kidney tissue of rats by Western blot analysis. The protein levels were quantified with β-actin as an internal control. The data presented as means ± S.E. Columns with different letters are significantly different ( P < 0.05)
Furthermore, the results shown in Table 6 confirmed the data of the colorimetric assays of lipid peroxidation, antioxidant status, and corroborated the changed levels of the gene transcripts. The kidney and brain samples of CdCl 2 -intoxicated rats demonstrated a statistical ( P < 0.05) augmentation in the percent of DNA fragmentation (approximately 236 and 237%, respectively). Treatment with the 3–5 nm Se-NPs reduced the breakageof the DNA in the kidney and brain tissues to approximately 34 and 44%, respectively. The 10–20 nm Se-NPs had similar effects (31 and 24%, respectively). There were no noteworthy differences between the two distinct sizes of Se-NPs. Table 6 Effects of CdCl 2 and co-treatment with Se-NPs on DNA fragmentation %, Fe and Cu level in the brain and kidney of rats Group DNA fragmentation % Fe (μg/g wet tissue) Cu ((μg /g wet tissue) Brain Kidney Brain Kidney Brain Kidney Control 25.6 ± 3.7c 35.1 ± 4.2d 49.22 ± 5.43b 139.26 ± 6.87b 6.28 ± 1.37b 71.39 ± 5.38c CdCl 2 59.3 ± 2.8a 83.5 ± 5.1a 63.76 ± 4.76a 278.43 ± 9.16a 9.18 ± 1.47a 99.76 ± 7.65a CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (3–5) 39.4 ± 2.4b 47.7 ± 5.8c 28.45_ ±3.87c 142.23 ± 7.43b 3.91 ± 1.33c 57.18 ± 8.87d CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (10–20) 41.1 ± 5.9b 63.8 ± 6.8b 51.37 ± 4.54b 141.13 ± 8.65b 5.98 ± 1.47b 83.54 ± 7.89b Means within the same column carrying different letters are significantly different ( P < 0.05)
Compared to the placebo animals, the kidney and brain concentrations of Fe and Cu were significantly higher ( P < 0.05; Table 6 ) in the CdCl 2 -treated. However, the tissue levels of Cu and Fe in Se-NPs + CdCl 2 -treated rats were significantly decreased ( P < 0.05) compared to those that received CdCl 2 alone (Table 6 ).
The kidney and brain concentrations of Cd were significantly higher ( P < 0.05; Table 7 ) in the CdCl 2 -treated group. However, the tissue levels of Cd in Se-NPs + CdCl 2 -treated rats were significantly decreased ( P < 0.05) compared to those that received CdCl 2 alone (Table 6 ); however, although decreased, the Cd levels in SeNPs + CdCl 2 -treated rats did not reach the placebo animals. Table 7 Effects of CdCl 2 and co-treatment with Se-NPs on Se and Cd level in the brain and kidney of rats Group Se (μg/g wet tissue) Cd ((μg /g wet tissue) Brain Kidney Brain Kidney Control 0.12 ± 0.02c 0.38 ± 0.02b 0.13 ± 0.01c 0.16 ± 0.01d CdCl 2 0.19 ± 0.01c 0.19 ± 0.01c 0.96 ± 0.02a 1.27 ± 0.32a CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (3–5) 0.97 ± 0.03a 2.27 ± 0.16a 0.51 ± 0.01b 0.43 ± 0.03c CdCl 2 + Se-NPs (10–20) 0.68 ± 0.01b 2.09 ± 0.16a 0.53 ± 0.02b 0.79 ± 0.05b Means within the same column carrying different letters are significantly different ( P < 0.05)
Histopathological alterations in the kidney and brain
The current study stated that, supplementation of Cd caused microscopical alterations in the brain, including discrete blockage sites in the veins of the cerebral outer layer. The neurons experienced both destructive and apoptotic changes. The destructive alterations were indicated by shrinkage and intense staining of the neurons in both of the areas examined (Fig. 5 ). Cadmium exposure also caused extreme damage to the glomeruli with huge congestion of the veins. Obvious dilatation of Bauman’s capsule and glomerular epithelium damage were observed (Fig. 6 ). Se-NP treatment prevented the Cd -initiated degenerative changes in the kidney and brain tissues (Figs. 5 and 6 ). Fig. 5 Histopathological effect of Se-NPs on CdCl2-induced brain damage in rats. Control group; ( a ) Showing normal neurons (N) with no inflammatory cells infiltration. CdCl2 group; ( b and c ) Showing sever shrunken pyknotic and darkly stained neurons with multiple vaculations (P). Congestion in the blood vessels and capillaries ( arrow ) of cerebral cortex. Degenerative changes of the neurons manifested by shrinkage and deeply stained neurons (S). CdCl2-Se-NPs group; ( d ) appears like normal. (H&E X100) Fig. 6 Histopathological effect of Se-NPs on CdCl2-induced renal damage in rats. Control group; ( a ) showing renal capsule, normal glomeruli (GL), Bowman’s capsule (BC), proximal (P) and distal (D). CdCl2 group; ( b and c ) showing congestion in renal vein (BV) and cytoplasmic vaculation of the renal tubular cells, Edematous spaces (Es) and fragmented glomeruli (arrowhead). CdCl2-Se-NPs group; ( d ) showing normal glomeruli (GL), capsular space (CP) and normal proximal (P) convoluted tubules. (H&E X100)
Discussion
Cadmium is among the most dangerous ecological toxins. It causes change in oxidative status and share in the progression of adverse neurological outcomes due to its long persistence in a certain tissues (Bagchi et al. ). One mechanism of the Cd-initiated toxicity involves the generation of free radicals which modify mitochondrial activity and the genome (Patrick ). Along these lines, a few investigators have hypothesized that antioxidant agents are one of the required components of a potent method to ameliorate Cd toxicity (El-Demerdash et al. ). The present study focused on the potential prophylactic impact of Se-NPs on the neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity produced by CdCl 2 . In the current study, the levels of creatinine, uric acid and urea were all increased after Cd exposure compared to the placebo group. These results show the adverse effects of CdCl 2 on kidney function. The additional evidence provided by the increased MDA levels and upregulation of the gene expression of the pro-apoptotic Bax as well as the decreases in the activity and downregulation of antioxidant enzymes gene expression in the renal tissue support this concept. Hence, the renal injuries caused by CdCl 2 might be the result of the oxidative stress induced by free radical generation. This stress is known to affect various cellular components, including lipids, and thus produces lipid peroxidation (Sadek ; Sadek and Saleh ; Sadek ; Sadek ; Sadek et al. ). These outcomes are predictable and point towards a role for ROS in the CdCl 2 -induced toxicity (Novelli et al. ). Furthermore, urea is the principal acute renal marker and its level was augmented if the renal injury was experienced. In addition, creatinine is the best reliable renal marker and increases only when a major portion of the renal capacity is lost (Borges et al. ). The changes in the urea and creatinine levels indicated extreme damage of the kidneys by CdCl 2 . The decreases in the serum acetylcholinesterase activity, are consistent with evidence provided by El-Demerdash and Elagamy ( ) and El-Demerdash et al. ( ). Inactivation of AchE enzyme due to the alkylation of its functional centers by toxic metals has been proposed by Shaw and Panigrahi ( ). On the contrary, Cd inhibits the release of acetylcholine, probably by interfering with calcium metabolism (Desi et al. ). However, the roles of metals in the control of acetylcholinesterase are not clear. The increased serum levels of CPK and CPK-BB in the CdCl 2 -intoxicated rats paralleled the brain damage. These increases could be associated with the reactions of the free radicals with the cell membranes, which caused cellular damage and consequently leakage of the intracellular components. Our finding proposed that brain is more susceptible to the toxic effect of Cd, as revealed by Halliwell ( ) who stated that nervous system cells are vulnerable to oxidative damage caused by free radicals for a number of reasons. These include high centent of readily oxidizable substrate, especially membrane lipid polyunsaturated fatty acid, low level of protective antioxidant enzymes, high ratio of membrane surface area to cytoplasmic volume, and extended axonal morphology prove to peripheral injury.
The depletion of antioxidant agents is considered to be a basic event in Cd -initiated nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity. In the current experiment, the activities and gene expression of SOD and CAT were diminished in the rats that were administered Cd. SOD and CAT provide stable protection against ROS. Our outcomes incompletely concur with those of Erejuwa et al. ( ) who reported that the SOD activity was elevated whereas the CAT activity was decreased in rodent renal homogenates. In consistent with the present data, Renugadevi and Prabu ( ) reported a decreased activity of SOD and CAT initiated by oxidative stress in rats. SOD changes the superoxide anion (O 2 − ) to hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) (Akyol et al. ), which delivered to H 2 O and O 2 by GPx or CAT (Dringen ). Consequently, it could be proposed that the observed decrease in the SOD activity after CdCl 2 exposure might be a mechanism for the protection of the brain and kidney cells against the increased levels of superoxide anions under the conditions of oxidative stress. The study of Huang et al. ( ) proposed that, Cd attenuates CuZnSOD activity by substituting zinc, accelerating outputs of free radicals, and subsequently protein fragmentation, and/or induced Metallothionein which chelates Zn ions required for stability and so exhausts Zn, and so modulates enzyme folding and changes its activity. Since hydrogen peroxide is a product of superoxide dismutation and at the same time the substrate of CAT, it is obvious that the two enzymes act in collaboration. CAT catalyzes the transformation of H 2 O 2 to H 2 O and molecular oxygen (Dringen ), the decreased activity of CAT might occur as a result of H 2 O 2 over production as a consequence of Cd exposure. Our outcome does, however, conflict with recent reviews by Mourad and Noor ( ), who reported that there were increases in the CAT and SOD activities in rats that had been administered aspartame. The decreased antioxidant enzymes activity in kidney and brain tissues caused by CdCl 2 appears to be a consequent of not only oxidative damage but also to changed enzyme conformation, action, and expression (Szymonik-Lesiuk et al. ). Consistent with the CdCl 2 -induced alterations in antioxidant enzyme activity and expression, Manubolu et al. ( ) reported that altered patterns of enzyme activity during oxidative stress are due to a shift in gene expression. The effects of Cd are characterized by the exhaustion of non-enzymatic antioxidant compounds, including GSH (Sk and Bhattacharya ). Consistent with the previous investigation by Koyuturk et al. ( ), the content of GSH was greatly diminished in the kidney and brain tissues of the Cd -treated group compared with the level in the control group. This reduction in the GSH content potentially due to its utilization in the protective action against free radical-induced lipid peroxidation (Koyuturk et al. ). Additionally, SH might be exhausted in heavy metals detoxification (Thévenod ). Moreover, it has been proposed that the decreases in the GSH concentrations following Cd exposure may hinder the hydrolysis of LPO, which could promote the accumulation of Cd (Ramakrishnan et al. ). Contradictory to the present results, Kamiyama et al. ( ) reported increases in the GSH concentrations in the hepatic and renal tissues following the Cd infusion, which could be considered to be a defensive response. Moreover, Rana and Verma ( ) reported that GSH is an essential cell-protective agent that chelates Cd through its free sulfhydryl moiety, thereby modifying Cd transport and discharge. In the current study, MDA (a biomarker of lipid peroxidation), was elevated in the kidney and brain tissues of the rats that were treated with Cd compared with that in the control group. These observations suggested an increase in oxidative stress (Kanter et al. ). It seems that, Cd exchange Fe and Cu in diverse proteins, hence augmenting the quantity of unbound Fe and Cu ions which then contribute in oxidative stress via Fenton reactions (Casalino et al. ). These outcomes were supported by Ramakrishnan et al. ( ), who revealed that LPO is an promptly and subtle outcome of Cd exposure. Furthermore, Kawamoto et al. ( ) reported that Cd is thought to promote LPO, and this has frequently been considered the primary driver of its adverse impact on membrane function. This process is also consistent with the observation that CdCl 2 frequently creates free radicals, which interact with O 2 to produce ROS, including OH − , O 2 − , and H 2 O 2 that subsequently promote DNA damage. This process causes the mitochondrial membranes to lose their integrity and become distinctly hyperpermeable with increased pore opening activity (Masubuchi et al. ), matrix swelling, and external membrane lysis that potentiates the extract of apoptosis-initiating components and endonuclease G from the mitochondria. The discharged endonucleases translocate to the nuclei and cause the fragmentation of the DNA (Bajt et al. ). MDA and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenol products bind to DNA, which creates strand breakage and contortion (Eder et al. ). This process is consistent with the present discoveries and may be an important mechanism associated with the increased levels of DNA break in the Cd -treated groups. In the current study, oral administration 5 mg/kg of Cd twice per week for 8 weeks caused massive damage to the kidneys, as revealed by the increased concentrations of serum creatinine, uric acid and urea and the presence of severe damage to the glomeruli with extreme congestion of the kidney vessels. These results were consistent with those of Damek-Poprawa and Sawicka-Kapusta ( ), who found deterioration of some glomerular vessels, proximal tubular deterioration and vacuolation in cytoplasm of the DCT. Preceding experiments had shown that Cd is among the most lethal of the toxic metals to mammals; 69% of the Cd is absorbed, generally by the PCT of the kidney, and accumulates primarily in the kidney cortex, where it promotes proximal tubular injury (Kowalczyk et al. ). These discoveries are consistent with the present experiment. The renotoxicity of Cd has been broadly considered in various exploratory models (YAMAUCHI et al. ). Renal injury is believed to be caused by Cd-metallothionein which is originally produced in the liver, released into the circulation, taken up by the renal proximal tubular epithelial cells, and degraded to liberate toxic Cd ions (Kaplan et al. ). Administration of Cd induced microscopical alterations in the brain that included distinctive changes in the neurons in the inspected regions (cerebral cortex) with discrete blockage in the veins of the cerebral cortex. The neurons underwent either apoptotic or injuries alterations. The degenerative changes were shown by shrinkage neurons in examined regions. These observations are consistent with exploratory studies in the brain of newly born rodents supplemented with Cd overdose. These studies showed widespread edema and cytolytic neuroglial cells (Méndez-Armenta et al. ). These observations indicated that Cd has unmistakable neurotoxic impacts in adult and infant organisms. In mature rats, Cd overdose cause damage to the trigeminal spinal ganglia. In contrast, in infant rats, Cd overdose induce extreme hemorrhagic injuries in the cerebellum (Wong et al. ). Moreover, Cd is a profoundly toxic metal; specifically, it causes neuropathological and neurochemical alterations in the brain that cause irritability and hyperactivity (Zheng et al. ). The microscopical changes of the brain may be associated with the high vulnerability of rats to Cd toxicity, and these effects are considered to be key indicators of the neuro-toxic impact of Cd that results from the induction of oxidative stress. This interpretation was supported by Ramakrishnan et al. ( ), who stated that oxidative disturbance is a crucial factor that share in the fundamental alterations and lead to neurodegeneration. Supplementation of Se-NPs substantially reduced the impact of the Cd-induced damage to the kidney tissues, as confirmed by the diminished levels of creatinine, uric acid and urea. The co-administration of Se-NPs and CdCl 2 to the rats restored the modified levels of serum and brain AchE, CPK and CPK-BB to approximately those of the placebo group. The decreased activities of these enzymes in Se-NPs groups in the current experiment were probably associated with their antioxidant properties, which protect the cell membranes from oxidative stress-induced injury (Schubert et al. ). Unfortunately, we were not able to determine the impact of Se-NPs on the heavy metal-induced neurotoxicity to compare with our outcomes. These outcomes concerning the capacity of Se-NPs to ameliorate the adverse impact of CdCl 2 on the brain tissues are novel. Natural Se-NPs has received considerable attention on the basis of its high bioavailability, low toxicity and cancer-preventative activity. Treatment with Se-NPs in the current study completely restored the kidney and brain tissue levels of the antioxidant enzymes (CAT and SOD) as well as MDA and GSH compared with the Cd -treated rats. These results may show the value of Se-NPs as a valuable source of antioxidant agents that can ameliorate the Cd-initiated neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity. Increased levels of CAT, SOD, and GSH and diminished MDA concentrations are indicators of enhanced oxidative resistance of animal tissues (Celi ). There are three possible mechanisms for the prophylactic impacts of Se-NPs against oxidative stress (Schubert et al. ). Firstly, Se-NPs perhaps act as direct anticancer; inhibit ROS production by preventing a stage in apoptosis. Our subsequent observations of decreased Bax and increased Bcl-2 gene expression support this model. Secondary, these particles caused a sub-threshold level of ROS production that rapidly boosts the antioxidant apparatus preceding the glutamate-induced apoptosis is completed. Our observations of increases in the SOD and CAT activities and gene expression levels support this suspicion. A comparable studies of Sadek et al. ( ); Sadek et al. ( ) reported that lycopene and lipoic acid upregulate antioxidant enzymes gene transcript in monosodium glutamate induced neurotoxicity and CCl 4 induced liver fibrosis respectively. The last explanation is a sort of pre-requesting that initiated by the exposing the cells to ROS lowering material (Becker et al. ).
The brain and renal expression profiles of genes encoding antioxidant enzymes were investigated to provide insight into the mechanisms governing their activities. Herein, Se-NPs attenuate CdCl 2 -induced downregulation of antioxidant enzymes. Supplementation with exogenous antioxidants during periods of increased oxidative stress appears to increase activity of the antioxidant mediated-pathways by stimulating synthesis of antioxidant enzymes (Ng et al. ). Hence, in this study supplementation with Se-NPs appeared to boost antioxidant enzyme activities by upregulating gene expression.
The ability of Se-NPs to attenuate CdCl 2 -induced-DNA fragmentation affirmed the enzyme activities and gene expression findings, indicating that the Se-NPs are able to further the neuro- and nephrotoxicity directly by removing ROS.
It is generally understood that oxidative stress induces cell death through apoptosis that is regulated by certain functional genes, among them Bcl-2 and Bax proteins. The balance between Bcl-2 (anti-apoptosis) and Bax (pro-apoptotic) proteins determine tissue homeostasis. Bcl-2 is an essential mitochondrial membrane protein that antagonizes apoptosis and protects the cells (Jang and Surh ). Bcl-2 diminishes the effects of ROS by sequestering cytochrome c or preventing its release to the cytosol (Shimizu et al. ). The increased gene expression of Bcl-2 was associated with increases in cellular GSH levels (Amstad et al. ). Unexpectedly, by modulating the mitochondrial membrane channels, Bax and Bak promoted the release of apoptogenic proteins, for example, cytochrome c. By activating Bax gene expression, p53 (a primary tumor silencer protein) skews the Bax-to-Bcl-2 ratio and promotes apoptosis (Hemann and Lowe ). The present results revealed that CdCl 2 upregulated the level of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax and downregulated the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 in the kidney and brain. This outcome proves that CdCl 2 causes neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity by promoting apoptosis. Cd causes apoptosis via activation of MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein kinases) and mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) signaling and/or Ca 2+ -mitochondria-caspase pathway signaling pathways, respectively (Chen et al. ; Yuan et al. ). These interpretations confirm the observation that inhibitors of these pathways may be used for prophylaxis of Cd-induced PD, AD, and other neurodegenerative disorders (Chen et al. ). However, the gene expression of Bax was diminished and the Bcl-2 gene expression was enhanced upon co-administration of Se-NPs with CdCl 2 . The noteworthy upregulation of the Bcl-2 gene expression and downregulation of Bax gene expression in the CdCl 2 -intoxicated rats that were treated with Se-NPs compared to the rats treated with CdCl 2 alone improved the anti-apoptotic and antioxidant impact of Bcl-2 in the rodent kidney and brain. This result confirms that the neuro- and nephro-protective effects of Se-NPs involve the upregulation of Bcl-2 and downregulation of Bax in CdCl 2 -induced neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity. A comparable study of Sadek et al. ( ) reported that lycopene upregulate antiapoptotic proteins gene transcript in monosodium glutamate induced neurotoxicity. To evaluate the detailed mechanisms underlying the prophylactic impact of Se-NPs, we measured the protein expression of SOD, CAT, Bax and Bcl-2. In the current work, the data of the Western blot analysis show that CdCl 2 treatment enhances Bax protein expression and decrease SOD, CAT and Bcl-2. However, Se-NPs with two different size treatment decreases Bax and increase SOD, CAT and Bcl-2 protein expression. These results give an indication that the regulation of these parameters occur at both transcriptional and translational level. Demelash et al. ( ) reported that, Se-NPs have a protective role in caspase-3-dependent apoptosis induced by H 2 O 2 in cultured primary pig thyrocytes. Se-NPs also, attenuate oxidative stress induced apoptosis through modulation of p38 MAPK and nuclear factor kappaB (NF-κB) signaling pathways (Kim et al. ). In addition, Se-NPs repress hydrogen peroxide-induced cell apoptosis through inhibition of ASK1/JNK and activation of PI3-K/Akt pathways, and differentially modulate the MAPK pathways and suppress the JNK/SAPK signaling pathway by hindering JNK/SAPK via a thiol redox mechanism (Yu et al. ). Histopathological examination supported the biochemical results that showed that supplementation with Se-NPs ameliorated the Cd-promoted degenerative alterations in the kidney and brain tissues, which suggested that these effects might be associated with the capacity of Se-NPs to alleviate cell oxidative stress. The histopathology seemed more normal compared to the Cd -treated group. These protective effects make Se-NPs a promising intervention for pathologies that involve neuro- and nephron-degeneration. Subchronic Cd toxicity caused alterations in the Fe and Cu in the analyzed tissues. Initially, the Cd-exposed groups demonstrated increased levels of Fe in the kidney and brain tissues. Fe influences the uptake system of Cu; similarly, Cu affects the uptake of Fe (Collins et al. ). Both effects are progressively involved in kidney and brain diseases. These effects involve not only increases in the exposure to metals but also a breakdown in the homeostatic processes that compartmentalize and sequester metals (Das et al. ). It seems that, Cd replace Fe and Cu in diverse proteins, thus increasing the amount of free Fe and Cu ions (Casalino et al. ). A comparable study of Sadek ( ) reported that chromium induces testicular toxicity by increasing the Fe and Cu contents of the testicles. In the current experiment, the Fe and Cu levels in the kidney and brain tissues of the Se-NPs + Cd-treated rats decreased significantly compared to Cd treated group. On this basis, the chemoprotective activity of Se-NPs against Cd-induced neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity could be achieved by a system that associated with mineral hemostasis, chelator–metal particle interactions or restriction of the levels of redox-dynamic metals, for example, Fe and Cu. In the current study, Cd content of the kidney tissue was also examined. Pretreatment with Se-NPs decreased Cd levels in the kidney and brain (Lazarus et al. ). A conjugation mechanism beyond Cd-Se reaction has not yet been completely disclosed, nevertheless it perhaps consists of mitigating antioxidant effect of Se and the production of a Cd-Se complex, that changes the presence of Cd in the tissues (Lazarus et al. ). The reduction of renal and brain Cd accumulation by Se-NPs was probably responsible in apart on the prevention of Cd-induced injury to the kidney and brain.
Conclusion
Our results suggest that, the neuro- and nephroprotective effect of Se-NPs is likely due to the prevention of LPO, boosting of endogenous antioxidant enzymes, and regulation of genes encoding antioxidant and apoptosis pathways, thereby inhibiting DNA damage. This effect appears to be mediated by metal ion chelation which led to normal kidney and brain functions. Surprisingly, the molecular impacts of Se-NPs occur at both transcriptional and translational level. Taken together, Se-NPs could potentially included as an additive to Cd-based industries to control Cd-induced brain and renal injury.