Introduction
The uncontrolled neuroinflammation plays a key role in early-onset and progression of neurodegenerative diseases (Baron et al. ; Milanski et al. ), which is related to a process similar to peripheral insulin resistance, and associated with obesity (Gupta et al. ). Thus, the demand for drugs that minimize the harmful effects of obesity in the central nervous system (CNS), like the restoration of brain insulin sensitivity become increasingly significant (Athauda and Foltynie ; Park et al. ).
Obese individuals have elevated levels of serum saturated fatty acids, mainly palmitate (Sabin et al. ). The increase of palmitate concentration is observed in the brain of mice fed a high-fat (HF) diet (Rodriguez-Navas et al. ). Although the fatty acids are essential in the constitution of cell membranes and used as cellular messengers in areas of the nervous system, changes in its concentration may lead to neuroinflammation (Gupta et al. ; Stranahan ).
The saturated fatty acids such as palmitate recapitulate the effect of a diet-induced obesity leading to increased IKKβ (inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa -B kinase subunit beta ), IκBα (nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cells inhibitor, alpha ), and NFκB (factor nuclear kappa B) to cause inflammation and insulin resistance in the hypothalamus (Posey et al. ). Besides, the palmitate infusion in the amygdala also leads to effects of a HF diet on the insulin signaling (Oh et al. ). The HF diet impaired the hippocampal-dependent learning and memory altering the synaptic transmission (Cano et al. ; Valladolid-Acebes et al. ). In a recent in vivo and in vivo study, the HF diet and palmitate modulate the plasticity processes such as a hippocampal long-term potentiation implicating in neurological disorders including Alzheimer’s disease (Contreras et al. ).
The effects caused by palmitate seem to be associated with the toll-like receptor (TLR) 4. The TLR4 is a member of the interleukin-1 receptor superfamily that recognize lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and is related to the activation of the innate immune response (Milanski et al. ; Shi et al. ). However, the molecular mechanism responsible for fatty acid stimulation of TLR4 remains unknown.
Also, the chronic intracerebroventricular administration (ICV) of palmitate, induces signaling in the CNS to the phenotype of HF-fed animals, with impaired insulin tolerance. It also suggests that higher palmitate doses may cause leptin resistance and weight gain in the long term, as seen under diet-induced obesity conditions (Kleinridders et al. ).
The glucagon-like peptide (GLP) 1 agonists, mainly liraglutide, have neuroprotective effects. Unlike the endogenous GLP1, which has a short half-life, the liraglutide (97% sequence homology to endogenous GLP1) is resistant to degradation by dipeptidyl peptidase 4 and has a longer half-life. The US Food and Drug Administration approved the liraglutide for type 2 diabetes and obesity treatment because the GLP1 analogs are known for its effects on glucose homeostasis and its anorexigenic effect (Barreto-Vianna et al. ; Christou et al. ). A series of studies demonstrated a neuroprotective effect of liraglutide in animal models of neurodegenerative diseases (Liu et al. ; McClean and Holscher ; McClean et al. ) and through several neuroimaging exams, such as computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging in humans with neurodegenerative diseases (Femminella and Edison ).
However, the neuroprotective action of liraglutide in a model of palmitate-induced neuroinflammation, even being interesting and potentially opening new perspectives, is not available in the literature. The current study was undertaken to analyze in hippocampus the possible neuroprotective effects of subcutaneous administration of liraglutide in a model of ICV infusion of palmitate.
Methods and material
Animals and experimental design
The procedures followed current guidelines for animal experimentation (NIH Publication No.85–23, revised 2011), and the experimental protocols were approved by the animal ethics committee of the State University of Rio de Janeiro (Protocol 030/2014).
Male C57BL/6 mice were maintained under controlled conditions in the NexGen system (Allentown Inc., PA, USA, 12 h/12 h dark/light cycle). At three months of age, the animals were individually housed, with free access to food and water, the standard diet followed the American Institute of Nutrition standards for rodents (AIN 93) (Reeves et al. ). The body mass (BM) of the animals was measured weekly.
The animals were initially randomly distributed into two groups ( n = 40 each group), and received an intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion of artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) or palmitate (#5710–3, Cayman Chemical Company, MI, USA) (Fig. 1 ): a) Control (C): ICV aCSF; b) Palmitate (P): ICV palmitate. Fig. 1 Experimental design for palmitate-induced inflammation and liraglutide treatment in mice. We did the first surgery on day 1 to implantation of intracerebroventricular (ICV) cannula coupled to the osmotic pump for IVC infusion of aCSF (groups C/C and C/L) or palmitate (groups P/C and P/L). The continuous ICV infusion was done from day 1 to day 28. On day 14, the second surgery was achieved implanting the osmotic pump to the subcutaneous infusion: saline in the groups C/C and P/C, or liraglutide in the groups C/L and P/L. The continuous subcutaneous infusion was done from day 14 to day 28. On day 28, the animals were euthanized. Groups: C/C: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous saline; C/L: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous liraglutide; P/C: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous saline; P/L: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous liraglutide
Two weeks after ICV surgery, the animals were redistributed into four groups ( n = 20 each group). The two first groups were divided into two new groups, treated with subcutaneous (SC) infusion of saline or liraglutide (Novo Nordisk, Bagsvaerd, Denmark) (by an osmotic pump, as described) and were maintained for an additional two weeks until euthanasia (Fig. 1 ): c) C/C: ICV aCSF / SC saline; d) C/L: ICV aCSF / SC liraglutide; e) P/C: ICV palmitate / SC saline; f) P/L: ICV palmitate / SC liraglutide.
Surgical procedures
The animals were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal mixture of ketamine (90 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg), and placed in a stereotactic device (Insight, Brazil, SP). A sterile cannula (Alzet Brain Infusion, Kit 3) was implanted into the left lateral brain ventricle, according to stereotaxic coordinates (AP: −0,22 mm; ML: +1 mm; DV: −2,5 mm from Bregma) (Paxinos and Franklin ). The cannula was attached to the skull with cyanoacrylate adhesive and connected by a vinyl catheter tube to a subcutaneous Alzet osmotic pump (Alzet Corporations, Palo Alto, CA, model 1004). The secretion rate of 0.11 μl/h prefilled was maintained according to manufacturer’s guidelines, with either aCSF (250 μM) or palmitate (500 μM).
We used a palmitate dose (500 μM) to evoke a signaling in the CNS similar to the phenotype of the animals fed a HF diet, impairing insulin tolerance without changes in the fat mass and food intake over a two-week period (Kleinridders et al. ). However, Kleinridders and collaborators have suggested that weight gain might be induced in the long term. Thus, we choose to extend the palmitate infusion to four weeks.
Because of the insolubility of palmitate in polar solvents, we added cyclodextrin (hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin, #297560250, Acros Organics, Belgium) in aCSF solution. The palmitate in the crystalline solid formulation was diluted in aCSF with 40% m/v of the cyclodextrin to obtain the 500 μM of palmitate solution. Cyclodextrin in the same concentration was also added to the aCSF solution used in the C/C and C/L groups (since cyclodextrin is an appropriate vehicle for the central delivery of fatty acids), and the solubilized palmitate was filtered through a 0.22 μm filter before use. The osmotic pumps for SC delivery were filled with saline (vehicle) or liraglutide (200 μg/kg; Novo Nordisk, Bagsvaerd, Denmark) to a delivery rate of 0.11 μl/h according to manufacturer’s guidelines (Alzet Corporations, Palo Alto, CA, model 1004). The peripheral administration of liraglutide crosses the blood-brain barrier and has potential to act on the CNS (Hunter and Holscher ; McClean and Holscher ).
In humans, liraglutide is administered once daily in doses up to 3 mg/day. To investigate the neuroprotective effects of liraglutide on neuroinflammation induced by palmitate, we used a dose extrapolation between humans and mice (Nair and Jacob ). Thus, in the current study, we used a dose of liraglutide equivalent to the maximum recommended for humans.
For the SC implantation of the osmotic pumps, the animals were anesthetized with isoflurane (Insight, Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil) and the implants were placed next to the ICV connected pump, in the dorsal region of the animals. The wounds were cleaned and treated with antibiotic ointment (Neomycin sulfate + Bacitracin) for 3 to 5 days.
Immunofluorescence and confocal laser microscopy
For immunofluorescence ( n = 5/group), animals were deeply anesthetized and perfused transcardially with 0.9% saline solution and then with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA, 0.1 M phosphate buffer, PBS, pH 7.4). The isolated brains were rapidly immersed in a 4% PFA solution (4 h at 4 °C) and then cryoprotected with sucrose 30% in PBS (overnight at 4 °C). The brains were frozen (Optimal Cutting Temperature medium, Tissue-Tek, Sakura Finetek Europe, The Netherlands) and sectioned in a cryostat at a nominal thickness of 20 μm containing the hippocampus. The sections were treated with 0.3% PBS-Triton solution and blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin for one hour and immunolabelled with the primary antibodies overnight in single or double labeling, to confirm the cellular co-localization: a) Ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule (IBA) 1 (#19741, Wako Chemicals, VA, 1:600), b) Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II (NB100–65541, Novus Biologicals, USA, CO, 1:50), c) Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, C9269, Sigma-Aldrich, USA, MO, 1:200), d) Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha (sc-1350, Santa Cruz, USA, TX, 1:50).
Also, sections were exposed to an appropriate secondary antibody and then counterstained with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI; Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO). The slides were mounted in ProLong Gold Antifade (Invitrogen, Molecular Probes, Carlsbad, CA). Control procedures were performed with the omission of primary antibodies and with the inclusion of the secondary antibody. Fluorescence images were obtained with the confocal laser microscope Model C2 (Nikon Inc., Tokyo) and the quantifications of immunoreactivity were evaluated using the Image J software (1.50i, 64bit, http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/ ). We defined the hippocampal region of interest and measured the confocal channel corresponding to the protein labeled. The results were presented as a percentage of the C/C group.
Microglia activation was assessed by immunofluorescence with IBA1 and subsequently confirmed by an enhanced expression of the activation marker MHC2, which is expressed by activated but not resting microglia.
Density and morphology of microglia
IBA1 is a microglia-specific calcium-binding protein. The CA1 and the dentate gyrus (DG) sub-regions of the hippocampus were analyzed over a frame of known area (A T ). The numerical density per area (N A ) of immunoreactive cells was estimated by counting the number of marked cells (N) in four slides per animal ( n = 5 animals/group): N A = N / A T (Mandarim-de-Lacerda et al. ). We used the IBA1 immunofluorescent staining to analyze the morphology of microglia in the hippocampus, and the parameters were analyzed for at least 15 cells per slide (four slides per animal, n = 5/group).
The maximum intensity of IBA1 positive channel in confocal microscopy was enhanced to visualize the most microglia processes, followed by noise de-speckling to eliminate the single-pixel background fluorescence (Morrison and Filosa ). The image was binarized, skeletonized and the resulting image was analyzed using the ImageJ plugin AnalyzeSkeleton (written by Ignacio Arganda-Carreras, http://imagej.net/AnalyzeSkeleton ). Also, the circularity and Feret’s diameter (maximum caliper diameter) were estimated. Circularity was calculated as the product 4π (area/perimeter 2 ) (Zanier et al. ). All regions of each hippocampal subfield were included in the analyses (e.g. for DG, the molecular layer, granule cell layer, and the hilum were counted).
Real-time PCR
Total RNA was extracted from hippocampus using Trizol (Invitrogen, CA, USA). The RNA concentration was determined using Nanovue spectroscopy (GE Life Sciences), and 1 μg of RNA was treated with DNAse I (Invitrogen). Synthesis of the first strand cDNA was performed using Oligo (dT) primers for mRNA and Superscript III reverse transcriptase (both from Invitrogen). Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) used a StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR system cycler (Applied Biosystems) and the SYBR Green mix (Invitrogen). Primers were designed using the Primer3 online software (for TNF-alpha, FW: TCAGCCGATTTGCTATCTCA/ RV: TGGAAGACTCCTCCCAGGTA; for IL6, FW: AGTTGCCTTCTTGGGAGTGA/RV: ACAGGTCTGTTGGGAGTGGT). Beta -actin was used as the endogenous control to normalize the expression of the selected genes. The efficiency of qPCR for the target gene and endogenous control were approximately equal and were calculated through a cDNA dilution series. After a pre-denaturation and polymerase activation program (4 min at 95 °C), 44 cycles were performed, each consisting of 95 °C for 10 s and 60 °C for 15 s, followed by a melting curve program (60 to 95 °C with a heating rate of 0.1 °C/s). Negative controls consisted of wells in which cDNA was substituted for deionized water. The relative expression ratio of mRNA was calculated by the 2-ΔΔCt equation where -ΔCT represents the difference between the number of cycles (CT) of the target genes and the endogenous control.
Statistical analysis
We tested the data for normality and homogeneity of variances and then the differences were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by the post hoc test of Holm-Sidak. Values are presented as the mean and standard deviation (SD). A P -value <0.05 was considered statistically significant (Prism version 6.0c for Mac, GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA).
Results
Body mass
When the study started, the animals were not different in their BM. After four weeks of the experiment, the BM of the P/C group (32.1 ± 2.5 g) was higher than the BM of the C/C group (28.5 ± 2.7 g, P = 0.0054) and C/L group (29.2 ± 2.9 g, P = 0.0276). There was no difference in the BM between the C/C and C/L groups, neither comparing the P/L group (30.5 ± 2.7 g) with the other groups.
Microglia density and astrocyte immunoreactivity
The numerical density of the microglia was calculated from the slides labeled with the anti-IBA1 antibody, which is a molecule involved in the signaling pathways of calcium, accurate to identify the microglia. From the analysis of these slides, we verified that the animals of the group that received an ICV infusion of palmitate (P/C group) showed the numerical density of microglia higher than the control animals (group C/C) (DG +247%, CA1 + 338%, P < 0.0001).
The astrocyte density was performed from slides labeled with the anti-GFAP antibody, specific for astrocyte visualization. Due to the morphological characteristics of the astrocytes, the quantification of these cells was carried out by immunoreactivity. We observed that the animals from the P/C group showed an increase in this parameter in both the DG and CA1 regions of hippocampus compared to the animals from the C/C group (DG +1455%, CA1 + 4392%, P < 0.0001). These results indicate that ICV infusion of palmitate stimulates microgliosis and astrocytosis in these animals (Figs. 2 , 3 and 4 ). Fig. 2 Liraglutide decreases the palmitate-induced microgliosis and astrogliosis in the dentate gyrus and CA1 areas of the hippocampus. a Immunoreactivity of IBA1, b Immunoreactivity of GFAP, c Immunoreactivity of MHC2. Values are in relation to the control group (C/C) ( n = 5–7). Significant differences are indicated ( P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA and post hoc test of Holm-Sidak): [a] ≠ C/C, [b] ≠ C/L, [c] ≠ P/C. Groups: C/C: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous saline; C/L: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous liraglutide; P/C: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous saline; P/L: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous liraglutide Fig. 3 The microglial distribution and morphology were altered by liraglutide treatment in the palmitate-induced inflammation in the dentate gyrus and CA1 areas of the hippocampus. a The density of microglia (cells/mm 2 ), b The circularity of microglia (4π*area/perimeter 2 ), c Feret’s diameter of microglia (μm). Values are the mean ± SD ( n = 5–7). Significant differences are indicated ( P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA and post hoc test of Holm-Sidak): [a] ≠ C/C, [b] ≠ C/L, [c] ≠ P/C. Groups: C/C: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous saline; C/L: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous liraglutide; P/C: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous saline; P/L: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous liraglutide Fig. 4 Liraglutide decreases the palmitate-induced microglia activation and neuroinflammation. a Representative confocal images of dentate gyrus stained with anti-IBA1 ( red ), anti-MHC2 ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ), scale bars : 50 μm (up) and images of the microglia in greater magnification showing their colocalization with the MHC2, indicating that they are activated ( down ). b Representative confocal images of CA1 stained with anti-IBA1 ( green ), anti-TNF alpha ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ), scale bars : 100 μm. c Representative confocal images of CA1 stained with anti-GFAP ( red ), anti-TNF alpha ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ), scale bars : 100 μm. Values are in relation to the control group (C/C) ± SD ( n = 5–7). Significant differences are indicated ( P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA and post hoc test of Holm-Sidak): [a] ≠ C/C, [b] ≠ C/L, [c] ≠ P/C. Groups: C/C: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous saline; C/L: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous liraglutide; P/C: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous saline; P/L: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous liraglutide
The C/L animals (receiving subcutaneous liraglutide treatment but not ICV palmitate infusion) also had a greater numerical density of microglia than the C/C group (DG +153%, CA1 + 129%, P < 0.001) (Figs. 3 and 4 ). However, the immunoreactivity of the astrocytes did not change significantly.
Microglial morphology
We were also interested in the morphological changes in microglia after palmitate ICV infusion and after liraglutide treatment. The morphology was assessed from the skeletonized microglia labeled with the anti-IBA1 antibody. The representative images of the immunolabeled microglia and the same cells after skeletonization are shown in Fig. 5 . Fig. 5 The microglial morphology was altered by liraglutide treatment in the palmitate-induced inflammation in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. a Representative images of microglia cells immunolabeled with IBA1 ( up ) and the same cells after skeletonized ( down ). The maximum intensity of IBA1 positive channel in confocal microscopy was converted to binary images before the skeleton analysis. b Number of junctions of microglia. c Number of processes of microglia. Values are the mean ± SD ( n = 5–7). Significant differences are indicated ( P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA and post hoc test of Holm-Sidak): [a] ≠ C/C, [b] ≠ C/L, [c] ≠ P/C. Groups: C/C: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous saline; C/L: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous liraglutide; P/C: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous saline; P/L: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous liraglutide
The ICV palmitate administration (P/C group), compared to the C/C group, led to a massive increase in the number of activated microglia associated with a morphological modification in the regions CA1 and DG. The changes consisted of a large cell body poorly ramified, as shown by the number of junctions (DG –55%, CA1–32%, P < 0.0001), and the number of processes (DG –53%, CA1–41%, P < 0.0001) (Fig. 5 ). However, in the palmitate-infused plus liraglutide mice (P/L group), compared to the palmitate-infused plus vehicle mice (P/C group), we observed a diminished number of MHC-II-positive cells (DG –1452%, CA1–4362%, P < 0.0001) (Figs. 2 and 4 ).
Also, the P/C group, compared to the other groups, showed an elevated circularity ratio (DG 0,201, CA1 0,152) (C/C = DG 0.116, CA1 0.076, P < 0.0001; C/L = DG 0.055, CA1 0.074, P < 0.0001; P/L = DG 0.080, CA1 0.075, P < 0.0001) (Fig. 3 ).
The subcutaneous infusion of liraglutide, as observed in the C/L group in relation to the C/C group, increased the microglia complexity, demonstrated by the enlarged Feret’s diameter (DG +72%, CA1 + 108%, P < 0.0001), the greater number of junctions in DG (+66%, P < 0.0001), and greater number of processes (DG +66%, P < 0.0001; CA1 + 42%, P = 0.0422) (Figs. 3 and 5 ).
In the P/C group, the hippocampal microglia exhibit features of M1 activation. However, in the animals treated with liraglutide, microglia has formed long filopodia by ramification of formerly ameboid cells, features consistent with the M2 activation (Figs. 4 and 5 ).
Inflammatory profile
We measured the inflammatory profile with immunofluorescence and PCR. Figure 4 shows representative immunofluorescence double labeled with MHC2 and IBA1 images, as well as microglia and astrocytes colocalized with the proinflammatory cytokine TNF alpha . The high immunoreactivity of MHC2, as well as the secretion of TNF alpha by the microglia and by the astrocytes, indicate the activation of the inflammatory phenotype of these cells.
In the P/C group compared to the C/C group, we observed an enhanced transcription of pro-inflammatory genes: TNF alpha (+190%, P = 0.01), and IL6 (+91%, P = 0.01). The liraglutide treatment was able to decrease the transcription of TNF alpha (−40%, P = 0.03) in the P/L group compared to the P/C group, indicating an anti-inflammatory action (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Liraglutide decreases the palmitate-induced neuroinflammation markers in the dentate gyrus and CA1 areas of the hippocampus. a Immunoreactivity of TNF alpha , b mRNA levels of pro-inflammatory markers TNF alpha and IL6. Values are in relation to the control group (C/C) ± SD ( n = 5–7). Significant differences are indicated ( P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA and post hoc test of Holm-Sidak): [a] ≠ C/C, [b] ≠ C/L, [c] ≠ P/C. Groups: C/C: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous saline; C/L: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous liraglutide; P/C: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous saline; P/L: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous liraglutide
Correspondingly, in the P/C group compared to the C/C group, we observed an increased TNF alpha immunoreactivity in DG (+1500%, P = 0.03), and in CA1 (+40%, P = 0.03), corroborating with the PCR results. Furthermore, the liraglutide suppressed the palmitate-induced increase of the TNF alpha immunoreactivity, as seen by the comparison between P/L and P/C groups (−1400% in DG, P < 0.0001; −180% in CA1, P = 0.02) (Figs. 4 and 6 ).
Discussion
We observed that ICV infusion of palmitate induces activation of microglia and astrocytes in the hippocampus. The palmitate infusion altered the microglia into an ameboid shape, with a decreased branch number and junctions, and increased the MHC2 expression (a protein expressed on the membrane of activated microglia), with a consequent enhancement of the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF alpha and IL6 (protein and mRNA levels). Liraglutide, even with the continued palmitate infusion, decreased the activation of astrocytes and microglia. Although liraglutide has increased the density of microglia, its phenotype was consistent with a neuroprotective profile, with more branches and larger Feret’s diameter. The circularity ratio provides information about the ameboid shape and varies from 0 (linear polygon) to 1 (perfect circular object), and the Feret’s diameter is expected to decrease in activated microglia because of the shorter branches (Zanier et al. ), as shown in P/C group. These data show that palmitate ICV infusion led to a microglia activation with inflammation profile, while the liraglutide administration has neuroprotective effects in this model, by decreasing the activation of astrocytes and microglia, so decreasing neuroinflammation.
The consumption of polyunsaturated fatty acids, particularly omega-3, is considered to be neuroprotective (Michael-Titus and Priestley ; Zhang et al. ). However, studies have shown that saturated fatty acid consumption increases the palmitate concentrations in serum and brain (Rodriguez-Navas et al. ; Sabin et al. ). Indeed, the exposure to a HF diet is associated with hippocampal microglia activation and impairment of the hippocampal plasticity (Hao et al. ). Besides that, the HF diet consumption is one of the leading causes of type 2 diabetes, which leads to deleterious effects on brain function, causing accumulation of amylin in the brain, consequently, may develop neurological deficits, like decreased exploratory activity and impaired vestibulomotor activity (Srodulski et al. ). Unlike the unsaturated fatty acids, the saturated fatty acids, such as palmitate, act as ligands for TLR4 (Lee et al. ), which are mainly expressed in the CNS microglia (Lehnardt et al. ). In a previous study, we have found an activated inflammatory response in the hypothalamus due to the oral administration of a saturated fatty acid diet (Barreto-Vianna et al. ). Others have shown CNS inflammation, associated with a cognitive deficit caused by an oral palmitate-rich diet (Pistell et al. ). The intravenous infusion of saturated fatty acids upregulates the genes accountable for drives the ceramide biosynthesis in the hypothalamus, an event associated with the proinflammatory kinase IKKβ activity (Holland et al. ).
We demonstrated that ICV infusion of palmitate led to hippocampal inflammation, which is significant because of saturated fatty acids are present in a HF diet and are, probably, the main responsible for the harmful effects related to an increased predisposition to disorders in the CNS. Other studies have shown that palmitate and diet-induced obesity induce inflammation, leptin and insulin resistance in the hypothalamus, which is the area involved in energy metabolism mediated by TLR4 (Barreto-Vianna et al. ; Kleinridders et al. ; Milanski et al. ).
The increase in plasmatic levels of free fatty acids is associated with CNS dysfunction (Kanoski and Davidson ; Santiago and Potashkin ), and with an increase in brain fatty acid uptake (Karmi et al. ). In mice with genetic obesity (ob/ob) (Erion et al. ), and in diet-induced obesity (Hao et al. ), obesity promoted activated microgliosis in the hippocampus with an increase in IL1b (a pro-inflammatory cytokine), and loss of hippocampal synaptic proteins. Similarly, the present study demonstrated the potential of palmitate infusion inducing significant microgliosis and astrogliosis in the hippocampus of mice. Chronic microglial activation accompanied by toxic effects (such as an increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines) are typical of chronic neuroinflammation induced by external factors such as x-ray irradiation (Parthsarathy and Holscher ) and of neurodegenerative diseases (Lull and Block ; McClean et al. ).
Reactive astrocytes may produce pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF alpha and IL6), which are the primary effectors of the neuroinflammatory signals (Allan and Rothwell ; Liu and Chan ). Also, astrocyte culture supplemented with palmitate may increase the secretion of TNF alpha , thus indicating that the astrocyte responds directly to palmitate with the growth in pro-inflammatory cytokines (Liu et al. ).
However, the astrogliosis may be an indirect effect of palmitate. Astrogliosis was verified in vitro by the activation of astrocytes by lipopolysaccharides (LPS, also an agonist of the TLR4), in the presence of microglia (Holm et al. ). Therefore, we can say that palmitate can indirectly induce activation of astrocytes via pro-inflammatory factors released by microglia, like TNF alpha and IL6, which becomes active and contributes to the release of more pro-inflammatory factors. Because of the brain is highly responsive to inflammatory mediators, relatively high levels of inflammatory cytokines (TNF alpha and IL6) may interrupt pathways involved in the hippocampal functions (Sahin et al. ). Thus, the elevation of the cytokines in the brain may have a significant role in the development of neurological complications of obesity (Letra et al. ; Proctor et al. ).
In the current study, microglia and astrocytes were activated by ICV palmitate infusion, as indicated by the structural changes and increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines. This fact is relevant because we know that the initiation and progression of neurodegenerative diseases are associated with a reactive astrogliosis and microgliosis and, therefore, chronic inflammation (Bruck et al. ). Microglia and astrocytes exhibit GLP1 receptors (Iwai et al. ). Also, liraglutide diminished the secretion of IL6 and IL1b in astrocyte culture challenged with LPS (Iwai et al. ), and the sustained expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF alpha is associated with neurodegeneration (Leal et al. ). The morphology of microglia, as well as gene and protein expression profiles, demonstrated a direct effect of liraglutide on the microglial phenotype. Liraglutide stimulated the formation of filopodia and caused ramification of microglia cells in the palmitate activation, and even in the absence of palmitate. Moreover, pro-inflammatory secretions were partially blocked in palmitate-activated microglia upon co-treatment with liraglutide. The neuroprotective effects of liraglutide by decreasing the activation of microglia and astrocytes were also observed in chronic neuroinflammation induced by irradiation (Parthsarathy and Holscher ).
Probably the greater numerical density associated with the complex morphology of microglia found in liraglutide-treated animals strongly suggest a neuroprotection caused by this drug. Moreover, Hou et al. ( ) showed that GLP1(9–36), a product of GLP1 degradation by the DPP4 (dipeptidyl peptidase 4) enzyme, could act together with GLP1 inhibiting inflammation. It is not a prerequisite for neuroprotection that an activated profile of microglia is present. The ramified microglia not only act as sentinel cells but is crucial and has an active role in protecting neurons against excitotoxicity (Vinet et al. ).
On a diet-induced obesity mouse model, we have shown that liraglutide activates the central anorectic pathway, improving metabolism (peripheral and central resistance to insulin and leptin), and reducing reactive microgliosis in the hypothalamus (Barreto-Vianna et al. ). In the present study, shorter period of liraglutide administration was not enough to reduce the BM in this model. However, dependent and independent of the BM changes, liraglutide can enhance the metabolism (Bays et al. ). Therefore, the improvement of the data related to neuroinflammation seen in the present study may be linked to the peripheral performance of liraglutide along with its direct action in the CNS. Although we did not evaluate the presence of liraglutide in the liquor, others have demonstrated that liraglutide cross through the blood-brain barrier, and has the potential to act directly on the central nervous system (Hunter and Holscher ; Secher et al. ).
It would be significant in a future investigation the blockade of the GLP1 receptor signal pathway and observes the response of the anti-inflammatory effects of the GLP 1 agonist.
Conclusion
We summarized our interpretation of the findings of the current study in Fig. 7 . The study provides experimental evidence for the efficient use of liraglutide as a neuroprotective therapeutic agent against palmitate-induced inflammation, which has been described as one of the primary causes of different diseases of the CNS. The palmitate-induced inflammation is characterized by a reactive microgliosis and astrogliosis and increased protein and gene expressions of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Liraglutide treatment diminished all the effects in the hippocampus due to the central infusion of palmitate (Figs. 8 and 9 ). Fig. 7 Summary of the effects of ICV infusion of palmitate and treatment with liraglutide. The ICV palmitate injection triggered an inflammatory response with extensive astrogliosis and microgliosis and increased expression of inflammatory cytokines. The palmitate led to a massive increase in the number of activated microglia associated with a morphological modification in the CA1 and DG regions. In palmitate-infused animals, liraglutide could reduce the number of MHC2-positive cells, indicating a decrease in the microglia activation, increase the complexity of microglia and lessen the secretion of inflammatory cytokines Fig 8 Liraglutide decreases the palmitate-induced neuroinflammation markers in the dentate gyrus and CA1 areas of the hippocampus. ( a ) Immunoreactivity of TNF-alpha, ( b ) mRNA levels of proinflammatory markers TNF-alpha and IL-6. Values are in relation to the control group (C/C) ± SD (n = 5 - 7). Significant differences are indicated (P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA and post hoc test of Holm-Sidak): ( a ) ≠ C/C, ( b ) ≠ C/L, ( c ) ≠ P/C. Groups: C/C: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous saline; C/L: ICV aCSF + subcutaneous liraglutide; P/C: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous saline; P/L: ICV palmitate + subcutaneous liraglutide Fig. 9 Summary of the effects of ICV infusion of palmitate and treatment with liraglutide. The ICV palmitate infusion triggered an inflammatory response with extensive astrogliosis and microgliosis and increased expression of inflammatory cytokines. The palmitate led to a huge increase in the number of activated microglia associated with a morphological modification in the CA1 and DG regions. In palmitateinfused animals, liraglutide could reduce the number of MHC-II-positive cells, indicating a decrease in the microglia activation, increase the complexity of microglia and lessen the secretion of inflammatory cytokines