Introduction
Oxidative stress occurs in the body during physiological tasks, such as phagocytosis and mitochondrial functions. If not controlled by antioxidants, oxidative stress can induce tissue damage (Berr et al. ). It has been demonstrated that local and systemic inflammation responses, as well as neurodegenerative diseases, are associated with reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS are scavenged by enzymatic antioxidants, such as glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), and catalase (Nazıroğlu ) and non-enzymatic antioxidants, such as reduced glutathione (GSH), vitamin A, and vitamin E (Nazıroğlu ). Selenium is well-established as an essential trace mineral playing a critical role in many biological processes (Nazıroğlu and Yürekli ). In fact, selenium is known primarily for its antioxidant activity as a component of glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), and in therapeutic settings, for its anti-inflammatory properties (Berr et al. ). Researchers have also obtained positive clinical responses for neurodegenerative diseases with selenium therapy, providing substantial evidence for the important role of ROS in the pathological processes of Alzheimer’s disease (AD)-induced dementia (Berr et al. ; Rita Cardoso et al. ).
AD is characterized by the accumulation of amyloid β protein and abnormal tau protein filaments in the form of neurofibrillary tangles (Sezgin and Dincer ). It is well-known that decreased acetyl choline was observed in AD patients’ brain and this decrease is a critical neurotransmitter producing dementia (Giraldo et al. ; Koç et al. ). In addition to decreased acetyl choline concentrations, increased inflammation, apoptosis, and oxidative stress are implicated in the etiology of age-related neurodegenerative disorders, including dementia and AD (Jung et al. ). Additional reports have indicated that lipid peroxidation and antioxidants, such as GSH, GSH-Px, and vitamin E, can act as biomarkers for dementia’s neuronal oxidative stress (Jang et al. ; Hancianu et al. ; Giraldo et al. ). In addition to the chemical properties of the antioxidant role, their mechanisms of memory-enhancing action may predominantly involve a combination of anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and neuroprotective roles in signal transduction pathways (Rossi et al. ). Because dementia is highly related to apoptosis, amyloid β protein toxicity, inflammation, and intracellular oxidative stress, simultaneous investigation of anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities is a worthwhile approach in the development of promising anti-dementia agents.
Scopolamine (SCOP)-induced dementia is perhaps the most widely-used model not requiring complex surgical procedures (Neha Sodhi et al. ). SCOP is a muscarinic cholinergic receptor antagonist, leading to cholinergic dysfunction and impaired cognition in rats. Recently, reports have indicated that memory impairment induced by SCOP in rats is associated with increased brain (Hancianu et al. ) oxidative stress levels. Therefore, this study used rats with SCOP-induced memory deficits as an animal model for screening potential anti-dementia antioxidant drugs (Hancianu et al. ).
Thus, the present study aimed to investigate whether or not selenium has protective effects on the SCOP-induced dementia, and blood oxidative damage in aged rats. Following behavioral testing, the rats were given one final treatment of selenium. We then assessed the brain tissue, plasma, and erythrocytes in terms of antioxidant, cytokine, and apoptosis levels resulting from the treatments. We will discuss the obtained results with the intention of explaining selenium’s mechanism of action on SCOP-induced memory impairment in brain, and blood injury.
Materials and methods
Animals and study groups
The study used 32 (18–24 months) old female Wistar albino rats weighing 320 ± 30 g were obtained from the Animal Research Laboratory at Suleyman Demirel University (SDU). The animals were kept at the laboratory and were allowed to feed ad libitum on a commercially available rat chow. The study plan was approved by the Local Experimental Animal Ethical Committee of Suleyman Demirel University (SDU) (Protocol number: 20.04.2015–02). The animals were also maintained and used according to the Animal Welfare Act and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory. The rats received radial arm-maze task education for 14 days before starting, and their working memory (WME) and reference memory errors (RME) were recorded as described in a previous study (Balaban et al. ).
The aged rats were equally divided into four groups ( n = 8) as follows: The control group had no memory impairment and was not supplemented. They received 0.9 % w / v saline via intraperitonel injection (IP) for 14 days. In the dementia group, dementia was induced in the rats by IP injection of SCOP (Scopolamine hydrobromide , Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) (1 mg/kg and 21 days) (Chen et al. , ). The scopolamine hydrobromide was dissolved in an isotonic saline solution (0.9 % NaCl). In the selenium group, the rats received IP 1.5 mg/kg/ over one-day intervals (Kahya et al. ; Kahya et al. ; Balaban et al. ). Stock selenium was freshly dissolved in 0.9 % w / v saline and 1000 times diluted to its final concentration (1.5 mg/kg). A total of seven doses were given to the animals in the groups within 14 days. In the dementia + selenium group, rats were administrated with IP selenium (same as the selenium group) after dementia induction (same as the dementia group).
12 h after the last selenium dose administration, all rats were decapitated in accordance with SDU experimental animal legislation. The blood and brain (temporal lobe) samples were isolated as described in a previous study (Kahya et al. ). At the end of the experiments, half of the tissue and blood samples were washed with phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) and immediately used for lipid peroxidation, GSH-Px, and GSH analyses. The remaining tissue and plasma samples were then frozen at −33 °C. Western blot, antioxidant vitamin, and cytokine analyses were performed within one month.
Radial arm-maze task
As previously reported (Balaban et al. ), spatial memory testing was carried out using a radial arm-maze task. The rats were individually tested for spatial memory during 21-day training while WME and RME were recorded. The animals were kept in the test device for a maximum of ten minutes.
Blood collection and preparation of erythrocyte and tissue homogenate samples
Rats were anesthetized with ether inhalation before sacrifice of each rat and removal of blood samples. The blood (4–6 ml) was taken from the heart, using a sterile injector, anticoagulant coated tubes protected against light. Blood samples were separated into plasma and erythrocytes by centrifugation at 1500× g for 10 min at +4 °C. The erythrocytes samples were washed three times in cold isotonic saline (0.9 %, v / w ), then hemolyzed with a nine-fold volume of phosphate buffer (50 mM, pH 7.4).
The brain was also taken as follows; the temporal lobe was dissected out after the brain was split in the mid-sagittal plane (Bütün et al. ) and it was stored in a deep freeze (−33 °C). After weighing, half of the brain samples was placed on ice, cut into small pieces using scissors, and homogenized (2 min at 5000 rpm) in 5 volumes (1:5, w / v ) of ice-cold Tris-HCl buffer (50 mM, pH 7.4), by a ultrasonic homogenization (SONOPULS HD 2070, Bandelin Electronic, Berlin, Germany). The homogenate was used for determination of lipid peroxidation and antioxidant levels.
Lipid peroxidation determinations
Lipid peroxidation levels in the hemolyzed erythrocytes, and brain homogenate were measured with the thiobarbituric-acid reaction by the method of Placer et al. ( ) as described in a previous study (Senol et al. ). The values of lipid peroxidation in the erythrocytes, and brain samples were expressed as μmol/g protein.
Reduced glutathione (GSH), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) and protein assays
The GSH content of the erythrocytes, and brain homogenate was measured at 412 nm using the method of Sedlak and Lindsay ( ). GSH-Px activities of erythrocytes were measured spectrophotometrically at 37 °C and 412 nm according to method of the Lawrence and Burk method ( ). The decrease enzyme activity in absorbance at 412 nm against blank was measured spectrophotometrically. GSH-Px activity and GSH level in the erythrocyte and brain were expressed as IU/g protein and μmol/g protein, respectively. The protein contents in the brain and erythrocyte were measured by method of Lowry et al. ( ) with bovine serum albumin as the standard.
β-carotene, vitamins a and vitamin E analyses in brain and plasma
Vitamins A (retinol) and E (α-tocopherol) were determined in the brain cortex samples by a modification of the method described by Desai ( ) and Suzuki and Katoh ( ) as described in a previous study (Senol et al. ). Spectrofluorimetric determination of vitamin A used excitation and emission wavelengths of 330 and 480 nm, respectively (Multimode microplate reader, Infinite® 200 PRO series, Männedorf Switzerland). The equivalent wavelengths for α-tocopherol detection were 292 and 330 nm. Calibration was performed using standard solutions of all-trans retinol and α-tocopherol in hexane.
The levels of β-carotene in brain samples were determined according to the method of Suzuki and Katoh ( ). Two milliliters of hexane were mixed with brain samples. The value of β- carotene in hexane was measured at 453 nm in a spectrophotometer.
Cytokine determinations in plasma
Plasma TNF-α, interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-4 levels were measured using a commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), following the manufacturer’s instructions (DRG Inc., Marburg, Germany) as described in previous studies (Senol et al. ). TNF-α and IL-1β levels were expressed as nanogram (ng) per milliliter although IL-4 results are expressed as picogram (pg) per milliliter.
Western blot analyses in the brain
All Western Blot analyses in the brain were performed using standard procedures (Pecze et al. ; Balaban et al. ). Western blotting was performed using standard procedures. To detect β-actin, poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase (PARP), active caspase −3 and procaspase −9 protein expressions, the brain samples were homogenized in lysis buffer; the supernatant was removed and conserved after centrifuge at 16,000 g, 20 min. The total protein content in the brain samples were spectrophotometrically assessed at 595 nm by using Bradford reagent. Obtained bands were visualized using ECL Western HRP Substrate (Millipore Luminate Forte, USA), and visualition was achieved through Syngene G:Box Gel Imagination System (UK) and normalized against β-actin protein. The data are presented as relative density (fold-increase) over the pretreatment level (experimental/control).
Statistical analysis
The results are presented as means ± standard deviation (SD). The SPSS Statistical program (17.0, SPSS Inc. Chicago, Illinois, USA) was used for the statistical treatment of the data. To determine the effect of treatment, data were analyzed using oneway ANOVA repeated measures. P -values of less than 0.05 were regarded as significant. Significant values were assessed with LSD test.
Results
Lipid peroxidation results in erythrocyte and brain
Lipid peroxidation level as malondialdehyde (MDA) acts as a biomarker of oxidative stress (Placer et al. ). Research reports that brain aging in patients with dementia accelerates lipid peroxidation and protein nitration and induces extensive formation of ROS (Berr et al. ). We evaluated the inhibitory activities against oxidative stress and the scavenging activities of selenium in the erythrocytes (Table 1 ) and brain (Table 2 ) of rats with SCOP-induced memory impairment. The results showed that lipid peroxidation levels in the brain and erythrocyte samples in the SCOP group were significantly (p˂0.05) higher than the control. Hence, oxidative stress levels in the blood and brain were increased in rats by dementia induction. However, selenium administration decreased the lipid peroxidation levels of the rats’ brain, and erythrocytes. The lipid peroxidation levels in the brain (p˂ 0.05), plasma (p˂0.05), and erythrocytes in the selenium and SCOP + selenium groups were significantly (p˂0.05) lower than in the SCOP group. Table 1 The effects of SCOP and selenium (Se) on erythrocyte lipid peroxidation (LP), reduced glutathione (GSH) levels, glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) activity and plasma antioxidant vitamin concentrations in aged rats (mean ± SD) Parameters Control ( n = 8) SCOP (n = 8) Se (n = 8) SCOP + Se (n = 8) Erythrocytes LP (μmol/g protein) 24.50 ± 2.41 29.30 ± 2.18 a 25.90 ± 1.96 b 25.90 ± 1.97 b Erythrocytes GSH (μmol/g protein) 16.78 ± 1.57 14.94 ± 0.52 a 17.19 ± 0.97 c 17.18 ± 1.00 c Erythrocytes GSH-Px (IU/g protein) 41.11 ± 3.44 36.17 ± 3.90 a 45.63 ± 3.61 d 40.07 ± 1.74 c,e Plasma vitamin A (μmol/l) 2.29 ± 0.16 2.12 ± 0.18 2.51 ± 0.25 c 2.56 ± 0.22 c Plasma vitamin E (μmol/l) 10.40 ± 0.75 10.40 ± 0.84 11.80 ± 0.54 a,b 12.10 ± 1.29 a,b a p < 0.05 versus control b p < 0.05 c p < 0.01 d p < 0.001 versus SCOP group e p < 0.01 versus Se group Table 2 The effects of SCOP and selenium (Se) on lipid peroxidation, reduced glutathione (GSH) levels, glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) activity and antioxidant vitamin concentrations in brain of aged rats (mean ± SD) Parameters Control ( n = 8) SCOP (n = 8) Se (n = 8) SCOP + Se ( n = 8) Lipid peroxidation (μmol/g protein) 17.20 ± 1.12 21.80 ± 1.00 b 18.23 ± 0.96 e 18.16 ± 1.16 d GSH (μmol/g protein) 13.04 ± 0.53 10.09 ± 0.42 b 13.03 ± 0.48 e 13.25 ± 0.45 e GSH-Px (IU/g protein) 26.30 ± 2.70 14.82 ± 2.52 b 28.35 ± 3.62 e 24.52 ± 2.82 e,f Vitamin A (μmol/g tissue) 1.89 ± 0.37 1.87 ± 0.16 1.90 ± 0.24 1.94 ± 0.11 β-carotene (μmol/g tissue) 1.16 ± 0.09 1.14 ± 0.11 1.07 ± 0.09 1.16 ± 0.12 Vitamin E (μmol/g tissue) 8.27 ± 0.83 8.04 ± 0.53 a 8.59 ± 0.72 a,c 8.19 ± 0.58 c,f a p < 0.05 b p < 0.001 versus control c p < 0.05 d p < 0.01 e p < 0.001 versus SCOP group f p < 0.01 versus Se group
Glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) activity and reduced glutathione (GSH) level results in erythrocyte and brain
Tables 1 and 2 present the mean GSH-Px activities and GSH results for the four groups in terms of the erythrocytes and brain, respectively. The results showed that the brain and erythrocyte GSH-Px activities (p˂0.05 and p˂0.001) and GSH (p˂0.05) levels were significantly lower in the SCOP group compared to the control group. However, GSH and GSH-Px values were significantly ( p < 0.05 and p˂0.001) increased in the selenium and SCOP + selenium groups by the selenium treatments.
Antioxidant vitamin concentration results in plasma and brain
Tables 1 and 2 also provide the mean vitamin A and vitamin E concentrations in the four groups’ plasma, and brain. The plasma vitamin A and E concentrations did not decrease in the SCOP group, but selenium treatments increased these concentrations (p˂ 0.05). The brain vitamin E concentration significantly decreased in the SCOP group, but increased with selenium (p˂0.001) and SCOP + selenium (p˂0.05) treatments. Brain and plasma vitamin E concentrations were higher in the selenium group than in the control (p˂0.05) and SCOP + selenium groups (p˂0.01).
Cytokine results in plasma
Figures 1 , 2 , and 3 show the mean IL-1β, IL-4, and TNF-α levels in the plasma of the four groups. Mean IL-1β levels as ng/ml in the control, SCOP, Se, and SCOP + Se groups were 62, 78, 53, and 52, respectively. Mean TNF-α levels as ng/ml in the four groups were 54, 64, 54, and 52, respectively. Mean IL-4 levels as pg/ml in the four groups were 32, 38, 30, and 30, respectively. The IL-1β (p˂ 0.001), IL-4 (p˂ 0.05), and TNF-α (p˂ 0.05) levels significantly increased in the plasma of rats with SCOP-induced dementia although these levels decreased with selenium and SCOP + selenium treatment (p˂ 0.05 and p˂ 0.001). IL-1β was also found slightly lower in the Se and SCOP + Se groups than in control. Fig. 1 The effects of selenium (Se) on plasma IL-1β levels in rats with SCOP-induced dementia (mean ± SD and n = 8). a p < 0.001 versus control. b p < 0.001 versus SCOP group Fig. 2 The effects of selenium (Se) on plasma IL-4 levels in rats with SCOP-induced dementia (mean ± SD and n = 8). a p < 0.001 versus control. b p < 0.05 versus SCOP group Fig. 3 The effects of selenium (Se) on plasma TNF-α levels in rats with SCOP-induced dementia (mean ± SD and n = 8). a p < 0.05 versus control. b p < 0.05 versus SCOP group
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), active caspase-3 and procaspase-9 expression results in brain
Caspase-9 activity is important in the mitochondrial apoptotic cascade, and caspase-3 activity plays an important role in executioner caspase-activated pathways (Uğuz et al. ; Espino et al. ). The procaspases are further processed to active caspase-3 and caspase-9 (Li et al. ). Therefore, apoptotic pathways increase procaspase activity while decreasing active caspase activity. We assayed active caspase-3 and procaspase-9 expressions as indicators of apoptosis in the brain (Fig. 4 ) of the aged rats. The active caspase-3 expression levels were high in SCOP group although procaspase −9 expression levels in the brain were low in the SCOP group ( p < 0.05). However, active caspase-3 expression levels were significantly (p < 0.05) lower in the Se ( p < 0.001) and SCOP + Se (p < 0.05) groups than in the SCOP group only whereas procaspase −9 expression levels in the brain were higher in the Se (p < 0.001) and SCOP + Se ( p < 0.05) groups than in the SCOP group only. Fig. 4 The effects of selenium (Se) on procaspase 9 and active caspase 3 activities in brain of rats with SCOP-induced dementia (mean ± SD and n = 8). a p < 0.05 versus control. b p < 0.05 and c p < 0.001 versus SCOP group. d p < 0.05 versus SCOP + Se group
PARP is a significant indicator and signals DNA damage to repair mechanisms. It is activated in response to single-strand DNA breaks and subsequently attaches to regions of injured DNA (Nazıroğlu ). Figure 5 indicate PARP expressions in the brain. The PARP expression in the brain was significantly ( p < 0.05) higher in the SCOP group than in the control group. However, the PARP expression in the tissues were significantly lower in the Se ( p < 0.001) and SCOP + Se (p < 0.05) groups than in the SCOP-only group. Fig. 5 The effects of selenium (Se) on PARP activity in brain of rats with SCOP-induced dementia (mean ± SD and n = 8). a p < 0.05 versus control. b p < 0.05 and c p < 0.001 versus SCOP group. d p < 0.05 versus SCOP + Se group
Discussion
We found that induction of dementia increased lipid peroxidation levels, active caspase-3, and PARP activities in the brain, and erythrocyte as well as TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-4 levels in plasma. However, induction of dementia decreased brain, and erythrocyte GSH-Px activity and GSH level as well as brain vitamin E concentration and procaspase 9 expression. Therefore, SCOP-induced dementia in the aged animals was characterized by increased oxidative stress and apoptosis along with decreased antioxidant and cytokine levels. Selenium administration decreased lipid peroxidation, IL-1β, IL-4 levels, and PARP and active caspase-9 expressions although GSH, GSH-Px, vitamin A, and vitamin E levels increased. We have thus shown that selenium-based treatments modulated the balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in both rats and ringdoves by down-regulating the levels of apoptosis, pro-inflammatory (IL-1β and IL-4) cytokine while up-regulating oxidants levels. To the best of our knowledge, the current study is the first to compare selenium with particular reference to its effects on apoptosis, cytokine production, and antioxidant redox systems in experimental dementia (SCOP)-induced oxidative injury in aged rats.
Reports have indicated that SCOP-impaired memory in mice was associated with increased lipid peroxidation and reduced GSH levels and GSH-Px activity (Xiao et al. ). This condition might further promote apoptosis programming (Hou et al. ; Chen et al. , ), decrease cell proliferation, and influence dendrite loss in newborn neurons (Chen et al. , ). Because oxidative stress has been implicated in the pathophysiology of dementia and SCOP has been reported to elevate blood oxidative stress and apoptosis in rat brain, SCOP-induced memory impairment in experimental animals can be used as a valid model to screen drugs with potential therapeutic benefits for dementia (Jung et al. ; Xiao et al. ). Increased brain β-amyloid protein deposition is directly related to oxidative stress (Sezgin and Dincer ; Rita Cardoso et al. ), and the results of recent reports have also indicated improved cognition through decreased in brain β-amyloid protein deposition as mediated by an antioxidant effect (Rita Cardoso et al. ). Conversely, Harrison et al. ( ) reported that there were changes in MDA and GSH levels in the serum, and brain of SCOP-treated mice. In the current study, we observed decreased lipid peroxidation levels in the brain, and erythrocytes of experimental dementia-induced rats through selenium treatment. This study also provides evidence that selenium, as a co-factor of GSH-Px, is most able to protect the brain and erythrocyte against ROS production by dementia-induced oxidative toxicity. Treatment with selenium regulated the levels of lipid peroxidation in the brain, blood, and erythrocyte of rats with dementia, suggesting that selenium plays an essential biochemical function, retarding the oxidative processes and apoptosis while serving as a potential antioxidant (Nazıroğlu ; Berr et al. ; Nazıroğlu and Yürekli ). As a consequence, selenium supplementation may enhance the antioxidant capacity of patients with AD and dementia or prevent dementia-induced oxidative injury either directly through its antioxidant action or indirectly through binding to the cell membrane (Berr et al. ; Rita Cardoso et al. ).
Vitamin E has proven important fat soluble antioxidant, regenerating blood and tissue antioxidant levels through redox cycling while increasing intracellular GSH concentration (Bütün et al. ). Thus, vitamin E plays an important role in protein thiol group protection against oxidation. The GSH system effectively maintains the redox balance and is also important in the independent scavenging of hydroperoxides (Berr et al. ). The reduction of GSH levels in dementia could also be attributed to the decreased activity of GSH-Px (Rita Cardoso et al. ). It is well-known also that selenium is a strong antioxidant trace element, acting synergistically with vitamin E and glutathione (Nazıroğlu and Yürekli ) while stimulating antioxidant enzymes, including GSH-Px (Nazıroğlu ; Berr et al. ). In the current study, brain vitamin E concentration, as well as brain, and erythrocyte GSH level and GSH-Px activity decreased in dementia-induced aged rats although their values increased through selenium treatment. This study therefore supports the idea that dementia-induced oxidative stress can be reduced through selenium treatment. Similarly, Tsai et al. ( ) reported that SCOP administration decreased vitamin E, GSH, and GSH-Px in the hippocampus of rats. Eidi et al. ( ) reported a modulator role of vitamin E supplementation through cholinergic systems on SCOP-induced memory retention in rats.
Accumulating evidence suggests that cognitive deficits are associated with increased neuroinflammation and microglial activation (Jang et al. ). A high level of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-α, IL-4, and IL-1α, exist in the brain of dementia (Mitsuhashi et al. ). The generation of ROS and the activation of the NADPH oxidase redox system induced by memory impairment plays a central role in the pathogenesis of brain injury in elderly subjects (Parajuli et al. ), and these radicals stimulate the production of cytokines (Jung et al. ; Parajuli et al. ). Reports show that IL-1α, IL-4, and TNF-α levels contribute to brain-cell failure through dementia-induced microglia activation and oxidative stress (Kang et al. ; Park et al. ). To our knowledge, there is no report on the effects of selenium and melatonin in plasma IL-1α, IL-4, and TNF-α levels in dementia-induced experimental animals. In the current study, a SCOP-induced increase of plasma IL-1α, IL-4, and TNF-α levels was decreased through modulation of the antioxidant redox system with selenium treatment.
In conclusion, we used an experimental animal model to demonstrate that selenium administration can prevent brain neurodegeneration as well as blood oxidative toxicity from SCOP damage. In addition, the mechanisms underlying the neuroprotective properties of selenium include the antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anti-apoptosis. Therefore, there is widespread interest in the use of selenium because antioxidant administration can reduce lipid peroxidation levels in the brain, and erythrocyte of rats with dementia by virtue of their inherent antioxidant properties. In consequence, selenium treatment may have a beneficial effect in managing dementia and AD as well as their complications.