Introduction
The Ninth International Symposium of Thrombosis and Anticoagulation was held in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, on October 15, 2016; this congress offered its attendees the rare opportunity to network with internationally recognized experts while hearing about cutting-edge clinical research and discussing its implications for clinical practice. The scientific program was developed for practicing clinicians in multiple specialties and was endorsed by two major clinical research institutes—the Brazilian Clinical Research Institute and the Duke Clinical Research Institute of the Duke University School of Medicine. It was also supported by the Brazilian Societies of Internal Medicine and Cardiology, the Cooperative Latin American Group on Hemostasis and Thrombosis, and the Anticoagulation Forum from the United States. The chairmen of the meeting were Dr. Renato D. Lopes from the Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke University School of Medicine, in Durham, North Carolina, USA, and Dr. David Garcia from the University of Washington Medical Center, University of Washington School of Medicine, in Seattle, Washington, USA. We are confident that readers of this summary of the proceedings will agree that the symposium met its main goal: to educate, motivate, and inspire internists, cardiologists, hematologists, and other physicians to thoughtfully apply the best available evidence to the care of their patients with (or at risk for) thrombotic disease.
An overview of antithrombotic agents in 2016
Over the past decades, several antithrombotic drugs have been developed and approved for clinical use in various settings. Targeting different steps in the coagulation cascade, the non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants (NOACs) were shown to be at least as effective and as safe as vitamin K antagonists (VKAs) for stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation (AF) (Fig. 1 ). Additionally, several trials compared these new agents with parenteral anticoagulation for treatment of venous thromboembolism, which led to their approval for this clinical condition. More potent P2Y12 inhibitors were developed and are now standard of care for the treatment of acute coronary syndromes (ACS). However, the challenge of balancing the risk of thromboembolic events and the risk of bleeding remains. Thus, the decision-making should be individualized and take into consideration patient characteristics and preferences.
Fig. 1 Relative effects of non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants versus warfarin on stroke/systemic embolism and major bleeding. SE systemic embolism, RR risk ratio
Several clinical trials are ongoing with the aim of filling gaps in the literature regarding antithrombotic therapy. In the ACS setting, the Patient-Centric Trial Assessing Benefits and Long-term Effectiveness (ADAPTABLE) is a pragmatic trial that will compare two different daily doses of aspirin for patients with a high risk for ischemic events. The Study to Compare the Safety of Rivaroxaban versus Acetylsalicylic Acid in Addition to Either Clopidogrel or Ticagrelor Therapy in Participants With Acute Coronary Syndrome (GEMINI ACS 1) trial tested rivaroxaban against aspirin in addition to a P2Y12 inhibitor in patients with recent ACS. It was shown that the rates of ischemic events and clinically significant bleeding were similar between treatment groups. The trial was underpowered for efficacy outcomes. Interestingly, the rates of stent thrombosis were similar between the aspirin and non-aspirin groups. The Ticagrelor With Aspirin or Alone in High-Risk Patients After Coronary Intervention (TWILIGHT) study will compare ticagrelor alone with the combination of ticagrelor plus aspirin for patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with a drug-eluting stent. The Global Leaders trial will include 16,000 patients undergoing PCI with bivalirudin and BioMatrix drug-eluting stents. This study will test the strategy of using ticagrelor plus aspirin for a month followed by ticagrelor only versus standard dual antiplatelet therapy for 12 months followed by aspirin monotherapy. There are three ongoing trials testing different antithrombotic strategies with NOACs for patients with AF undergoing PCI with stenting: the Evaluation of Dual Therapy With Dabigatran versus Triple Therapy With Warfarin in Patients With AF That Undergo a PCI With Stenting (RE-DUAL PCI) trial; the 2 × 2 factorial design Apixaban versus Warfarin in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation and ACS and/or PCI (AUGUSTUS) trial, which is also comparing in a randomized fashion the use of aspirin or placebo in this setting; and the Edoxaban Treatment versus Vitamin K Antagonist in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation Undergoing Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (ENTRUST-AF-PCI) trial. In the next 2 years, these three studies together with the results from the PIONEER study will help to inform physicians on how to best treat this challenging group of patients with AF and coronary artery disease (Fig. 2 ).
Fig. 2 Antithrombotic therapy for patients with atrial fibrillation and concomitant percutaneous coronary intervention. DAPT dual antiplatelet therapy, OAC oral anticoagulation
Thrombolysis in patients using NOACs: when and how?
AF is an independent risk factor for ischemic stroke severity, recurrence, and mortality. It has been shown that individuals with AF not treated with anticoagulants have a 2.1-fold increase in risk for recurrent stroke and a 2.4-fold increase in risk for recurrent severe stroke. For decades, VKAs have been routinely used to prevent cardio-embolic stroke. NOACs appear to be as effective and at least as safe as warfarin. Due to the easy handling and the favorable risk/benefit profile compared with warfarin [reduced risk of intracranial hemorrhage (ICH), fewer food and drug interactions than warfarin], it is conceivable that the number of patients treated with NOACs will increase over time. For this reason, physicians are faced with new challenges, especially in emergency situations.
Despite the best medical treatment with VKAs or NOACs, an average of 1.11–3.24% of patients with AF will have an ischemic stroke annually. Furthermore, patients on anticoagulation can present with stroke for reasons other than AF. Many of these patients will be evaluated at emergency departments for eligibility for acute recanalization therapies. Thrombolytic treatment with recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rt-PA) within a 4.5-h time window after symptom onset is an established therapy for selected patients with an acute ischemic stroke. For patients with an ischemic stroke despite use of VKAs, there is evidence indicating that the use of intravenous thrombolysis (IVT) or intra-arterial treatment (IAT) can be safe under certain conditions. However, it remains uncertain how patients presenting with acute ischemic stroke while treated with NOACs should be managed.
According to current guidelines, thrombolytic therapy with rt-PA is not recommended in patients on anticoagulation (such as those with an international normalized ratio [INR] >1.7 if on VKA therapy) and cannot be given within 24–48 h after the last administration of NOAC (corresponding to 2–4 plasma half-lives depending on renal function), due to the risk of bleeding. However, this recommendation is arbitrary and has yet to be tested. If NOACs were administered within the last 24–48 h and appropriate coagulation tests are not available or are abnormal, mechanical recanalization may be considered. Few case reports on the use of IVT in patients taking dabigatran, rivaroxaban, or apixaban have demonstrated favorable clinical outcomes. Conversely, one patient with ischemic stroke while on dabigatran treatment had a fatal ICH associated with IVT. Shahjouei et al. published a case series of patients who received rt-PA while treated with NOACs and a systematic review of similar published case reports [ ]. In this study, the authors suggest that weighing stroke severity and hemorrhage risk might help justify treatment with IVT in the absence of coagulopathy. Recently, in a multicenter cohort pilot study, Seiffge et al. demonstrated that the use of IVT or IAT in selected patients with acute ischemic stroke on treatment with NOACs was not associated with a higher risk of subsequent ICH, in comparison with treatment with VKAs or without anticoagulation therapy [ ].
A retrospective study in 22 stroke centers in Germany reported the use of idarucizumab, a monoclonal antibody antidote for dabigatran, before thrombolysis in patients with acute ischemic stroke [ ]. This antidote was also used in patients with ICH to prevent hematoma growth. Among patients with ischemic stroke treated with rt-PA post-idarucizumab (n = 19), 79% showed improvement of 5 points in the National Institutes of Health stroke score. Among those with ICH (n = 12), an increase in hematoma size was seen in only two patients after the administration of idarucizumab, and the improvement of the stroke score for these patients was 5.5 points. Despite the small number of patients and nature of the study, these are interesting findings that might help to inform physicians in clinical practice. Further research is needed to fill this gap in the literature, and some questions remain, such as how should coagulation test results with different drugs types and doses be interpreted? And when is it safer to start IVT/IAT treatment? In the future, perhaps it will be possible to use a pharmaco-invasive strategy, with IVT followed by a mechanical revascularization procedure.
Deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis for surgical and clinical patients: where do we stand in 2016?
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a highly prevalent disease, with 70% of these events occurring either in the hospital or within 3 months of hospitalization and/or surgery. Despite evidence showing the efficacy, safety, and cost-effectiveness of several strategies for VTE prophylaxis, these approaches are systematically and globally underutilized. During the hospitalization period, only about half of eligible patients receive adequate thrombo-prophylaxis, and less than 10% continue to receive it after they leave the hospital.
Part of the problem can be attributed to a poor risk assessment for thrombotic and bleeding complications. It is time to move from a group-specific to an individualized, patient-centered approach to risk stratification, which should be done using a structured and validated risk assessment model such as Padua, IMPROVE (Table 1 ), and Caprini scores. These models may be combined with a biomarker such as the D-dimer, which has been shown to correlate well with the risk of venous thrombosis when measured at the patient’s arrival at the hospital.
Table 1 Variables included in risk scores for venous thromboembolism Score Variables Points Padua* Active cancer 3 Previous venous thromboembolism 3 Reduced mobility 2 Known thromboembolic condition 1 Recent trauma and/or surgery (<1 month) 1 Age ≥ 70 years 1 Heart failure or respiratory failure 1 Acute myocardial infarction or stroke 1 Acute infection and/or rheumatologic disorder 1 Body mass index >30 kg/m 2 1 Ongoing hormonal therapy 1 IMPROVE Previous thromboembolism 3 Known thromboembolic condition 2 Current lower limb paralysis 2 Current cancer 2 Immobilized for at least 7 days 1 Stay in the intensive care unit or coronary care unit 1 Age ≥ 60 years 1 *High risk ≥4 points
Several studies have shown the benefits of extending pharmacologic prophylaxis for 4–6 weeks in patients undergoing major orthopedic surgeries or major abdominal/pelvic surgeries for cancer [ ]. Nonetheless, for the large and heterogeneous group of hospitalized medical patients, a net clinical benefit has not yet been demonstrated. Most of the studies showed a reduction in thromboembolic events with the extended prophylaxis strategy but at a cost of significantly increasing the risk of major bleeding [ ].
Finally, effective implementation of a VTE prophylaxis program would allow for all eligible patients to receive adequate prophylaxis when needed. Some quality improvement initiatives that have been shown to increase the rates of compliance are (1) clinical audit and feedback, (2) promotion of patient engagement, and (3) utilization of the electronic medical record as a support tool for decision making.
Together, these approaches—individualized assessment of the thrombotic and bleeding risks, the extension of prophylaxis to the outpatient setting in selected high-risk patients, and effective implementation of a VTE prevention program—are opportunities for improvement.
The Acute Medically Ill VTE (Venous Thromboembolism) Prevention with Extended Duration Betrixaban (APEX) trial explored the efficacy and safety of betrixaban, an oral, direct factor Xa inhibitor, for thromboprophylaxis in acutely ill medical patients [ ]. A total of 7513 patients with acute illnesses and risk factors for thromboembolism were included and randomized to receive either enoxaparin or betrixaban. Sequential analysis was performed in three cohorts: cohort 1 included patients with an elevated d-dimer level; cohort 2 included patients aged ≥75 years or with an elevated d-dimer level; and cohort 3 included the overall population. In the primary and prespecified analysis (cohort 1), no difference between groups regarding rates of thromboembolic events was observed (6.9% in the betrixaban groups versus 8.5% in the enoxaparin group; RR 0.81, 95% CI 0.65–1.00, p = 0.054). However, when looking at cohorts 2 and 3, the rates of embolic events were lower with betrixaban compared with enoxaparin (5.6 vs. 7.1% in cohort 2, and 5.3 vs. 7.0% in cohort 3, for betrixaban versus enoxaparin, respectively). Additionally, major bleeding rates were similar between groups. Based on these results, betrixaban was recently approved for clinical use for prophylaxis of thromboembolism in this population and is currently the only NOAC approved for this indication.
NOACs for stroke prevention: once or twice daily?
In recent years, NOACs have been increasingly used for stroke prevention in patients with AF, primarily because of their greater convenience compared with VKAs, as NOACs do not require routine laboratory monitoring unlike VKAs. Dabigatran and apixaban are given in two fixed doses daily, while rivaroxaban and edoxaban are given in one fixed dose daily. Deciding the most appropriate drug for each patient should take these dose strategies into consideration. In the Rivaroxaban Once Daily Oral Direct Factor Xa Inhibition Compared with Vitamin K Antagonism for Prevention of Stroke and Embolism Trial in Atrial Fibrillation (ROCKET-AF) and Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke and Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation (ARISTOTLE) trials, dose reduction regimens were established according to patient characteristics such as renal function, body weight, and use of concomitant drugs that might interfere with NOAC metabolism. A previous meta-analysis based on indirect comparisons of these phase 3 clinical trials suggested that a twice-daily strategy with an NOAC has a better risk/benefit profile for stroke prevention [ ]. Importantly, we have information from over 71,000 patients included in four major AF trials demonstrating that both regimens work for stroke prevention.
Patients with AF and stable INR: should we switch them over to NOACs?
Anticoagulation therapy reduces the risk of thromboembolic events in patients with AF. VKAs have been used for decades in patients with AF for stroke prevention, but several challenges are associated with its use, including food and drug interactions, the need for regular INR monitoring, and frequent dose adjustments. A meta-analysis with more than 20,000 warfarin-treated patients found that the average time in therapeutic range was only 55% [ ]. NOACs have been compared with VKAs in large randomized trials and have been shown to be safe and efficacious, leading to the question of whether all patients receiving VKAs should have their treatment switched to NOACs.
Several secondary analyses of the main clinical trials that tested NOACs against VKAs have shown that NOACs were associated with consistent efficacy and safety benefits, regardless of quality of INR control [ , , ]. NOACs are at least as safe as warfarin regarding the risk of bleeding, and the fatality rates after major bleeding are lower with NOACs than with warfarin (Table 2 ). Perhaps most importantly, when compared with warfarin, NOACs have lower rates of ICH, a serious complication of anticoagulation. A significant portion of ICH events occur when INR is within therapeutic range, which means that even well-treated patients are at risk for ICH.
Table 2 Case fatality rates after major bleeding: warfarin versus non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants Trial/paper Warfarin Non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant ROCKET AF 386/55 (14%) 395/27 (7%) Dabigatran systematic review 407/53* (13%) 627/57* (9.1%) ARISTOTLE 462/55 (12%) 327/34 (10%) ENGAGE AF 524/59 (11.3%) 418/32 (7.7%) Dresden NOAC Registry N/A 5.1% Shown are major bleeds/fatal bleeds (%) *Estimated from the manuscript
In some situations, VKAs currently should still be preferred: for patients with end-stage renal disease, those with mechanical valves or severe mitral stenosis, those who require triple therapy, and those who cannot afford the cost of NOACs. There are ongoing trials with NOACs in some of these clinical settings, and it is very likely that NOACs will become the preferred agent in some of these settings. Patients who are stable on VKAs are of lower priority for switching to an NOAC; however, it is important to remember the significantly lower risk of ICH with NOACs compared with warfarin. Strategies for switching vary depending on the NOAC, and INR measures should be checked before making this transition.
Measuring the effect of NOACs: do the traditional tests work?
During the past several years, NOACs such as dabigatran (a direct thrombin inhibitor), rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban (factor Xa inhibitors) have been increasingly used to prevent stroke in patients with AF or to prevent/treat VTE. One of the key differences between NOACs and VKAs such as warfarin is that NOACs do not require routine anticoagulation monitoring or dose adjustment.
Although routine monitoring of NOAC side effects is not required, there are scenarios in which a clinician may need to determine the degree to which the hemostatic system is impaired by an NOAC. Examples include a patient for whom the risks of urgent versus delayed surgery are being considered, or a patient who presents with acute thrombosis despite reporting adherence to the NOAC regimen as prescribed. In such cases, there are laboratory assays that may help. For example, depending on the reagent-instrument combination used, a normal partial thromboplastin time may indicate that no clinically relevant dabigatran effect is present. Similarly, a normal prothrombin time can be (but is not always) helpful in excluding the presence of rivaroxaban (and possibly edoxaban) effect. Because not all reagents are sufficiently sensitive to prolong the clotting times at clinically important concentrations, clinicians should check with their local laboratory before creating clinical decision algorithms that use prothrombin time or partial thromboplastin time results. Both the prothrombin time and the partial thromboplastin time are especially unreliable in their ability to reflect the presence of apixaban. The most accurate measures of anticoagulant effect are the dilute thrombin time (for dabigatran) and the calibrated anti-Xa activity assay (for factor Xa inhibitors); however, many hospitals do not perform these assays with sufficiently fast turnaround time.
Peri-procedural anticoagulation in 2016: what do we know and what must we learn?
Perioperative anticoagulation management for patients who are receiving anticoagulant therapy has been challenging, especially for patients with AF. Approximately 10% of patients with AF need temporary interruption of anticoagulation every year for an elective surgery or procedure. Perioperative anticoagulation may be inconvenient, since coagulation must be partially or fully functioning to avoid excessive bleeding during the surgical procedure. The paradox between the risk of bleeding and the risk of thromboembolic events has to be faced for patient safety. Findings of recent clinical trials and guideline recommendations have helped to inform best practices for perioperative anticoagulant management in patients with AF and provide an algorithmic management approach to this issue [ , ].
First, it is necessary to understand the mechanism of action of various oral anticoagulants, as well as their pharmacokinetics, to determine the best period of time for drug interruption, whether there is need for bridging with heparin, and how to proceed with drug resumption after the procedure. Another important step is to classify patients according to their risk of embolic events, as either high risk (mechanical valve prosthesis or previous embolic event; CHADS 2 risk score 5 or 6), moderate risk (CHADS 2 risk score 3 or 4), or low risk (CHADS 2 risk score ≤ 2). It is also important to classify the risk of bleeding depending on the type of procedure.
For the best strategy to be applied in the perioperative setting, one may follow these steps: Step 1 Assess bleeding risks—determine whether the anticoagulant needs to be stopped for a proposed procedure/surgery, and decide on the duration of preoperative interruption of antithrombotic agent. Step 2 Define thrombotic risks—that is, the risk of a thromboembolic event due to perioperative interruption of anticoagulation. Step 3 Consider bridging therapy—particularly for patients on warfarin (patients at high risk of thromboembolic events during the perioperative interruption of anticoagulation should be considered for bridging therapy).
It is uncertain whether bridging anticoagulation is the right approach for patients with AF who need an interruption in warfarin treatment for an elective operation or invasive procedures. In the Bridging Anticoagulation in Patients who Require Temporary Interruption of Warfarin Therapy for an Elective Invasive Procedure or Surgery (BRIDGE) trial, it was found that a strategy of forgoing bridging anticoagulation was non-inferior to perioperative bridging with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) for the prevention of arterial thromboembolism in patients with AF who required temporary interruption of warfarin treatment for an elective operation or invasive procedure [ ]. The strategy of forgoing bridging treatment was also associated with a lower risk of major bleeding. Patients with intermediate risk of embolic events did not seem to benefit from the use of the bridging strategy in the perioperative period.
Less is known about the perioperative management of patients with AF who are receiving NOACs. Most guidelines suggest stopping NOACs 1 day before a low-bleeding-risk surgery or procedure and 2–4 days before a high-bleeding-risk surgery or procedure. In a multicenter registry, patients taking uninterrupted rivaroxaban during radiofrequency ablation were matched with patients on continued anticoagulation with warfarin [ ]. No differences were observed in the rates of major or minor bleeding. Another study compared apixaban with warfarin in patients who underwent radiofrequency ablation without treatment discontinuation, and the post-procedure bleeding rates were not different [ ]. There has been controversy regarding the management of oral anticoagulants for pacemaker implantation, as the results with continued treatment with warfarin were better than the oral anticoagulant interruption strategy using bridging with heparin.
Finally, the decision of anticoagulation management for patients who are undergoing invasive procedures or surgeries should involve a multidisciplinary team (cardiologist, surgeon, nurse, and anesthetist) to stratify patients based on their risk of embolism versus their risk of bleeding, in light of the surgical technique to be employed.
Primary and secondary prevention of venous thrombosis in cancer patients
Patients with active cancer (i.e., those receiving chemotherapy) are at significantly increased risk of VTE. This rather strong association is almost certainly multi-causal, with all three elements of Virchow’s triad potentially contributing: stasis (immobility due to fatigue or surgery), endothelial injury (central venous catheters and the direct effects of many cytotoxic agents), and hypercoagulability (increased levels of various procoagulants that are either produced by the neoplastic cells or by the immune response directed against them).
Primary prevention of VTE in cancer patients is effective, but clinicians and patients have not routinely adopted outpatient prophylaxis because until a reliable way of identifying those patients at very high risk for VTE can be established, the number needed to treat (to avoid one symptomatic thrombotic event) will remain high.
LMWH monotherapy remains the standard of care (at least for the first 6 months of treatment) in patients with cancer-associated VTE. This is unfortunate because once- or twice-daily injection of a medication for 6 or more months is both costly and burdensome. Although there were some patients with cancer in the VTE trials that compared NOACs such as rivaroxaban or dabigatran to warfarin, their numbers were small, and the subgroup analyses of these patients do not permit us to draw conclusions about how the safety and efficacy of NOACs would compare to LMWH in this setting [ ].
Cohort studies have reported favorable results with rivaroxaban and other NOACs but have been limited by the lack of a comparator. There are several ongoing, prospective studies of NOACs for cancer-associated VTE. At least one is a prospective randomized controlled trial (edoxaban versus dalteparin) that could publish results in late 2017 or early 2018 [ ]. In the meantime, patients with cancer-associated VTE should be advised to use LMWH for at least the first 6 months of treatment, unless they are enrolled in a clinical study.
AF after cardiac surgery: how to manage?
AF is the most common complication after cardiac surgery. It occurs in 20–40% of patients in the early postoperative period following surgical coronary revascularization, 30–50% after cardiac valve surgery, and 40–60% undergoing both procedures. Several risk factors for postoperative AF have been identified. Agents such as beta-blockers, sotalol, and amiodarone have proven efficacious in preventing postoperative AF, but its incidence remains high.
The optimal management of this arrhythmia has not been determined yet. Among patients who have no history of AF, up to 80% of new cases convert to sinus rhythm in the first 24 h. The development of AF after cardiac surgery may or may not lead to symptoms. In some cases, it leads to a change in the patient’s hemodynamic status; in these cases, there is a clear indication to apply a direct-current synchronized cardioversion. In hemodynamically stable patients, initial management should include correction of predisposing factors such as electrolyte abnormalities, hypoxemia, pain management, and withdrawal of stimulating factors such as intravenous vasoactive agents. There are two general approaches to managing postoperative AF: heart rate control and rhythm control (via use of antiarrhythmic drugs, direct-current cardioversion, or both). For patients who do not spontaneously revert to sinus rhythm within a few hours, rate control and rhythm control appear to be comparable strategies. The choice between the two strategies should take into account patient and physician preferences. Advantages of a rate-control strategy include the absence of side effects from drug therapy; disadvantages include a slower resolution of AF, thereby leading to a potentially greater need for anticoagulation.
For patients with multiple episodes of AF or one episode that lasts more than 24–48 h, if stroke risk is present and bleeding risks are considered acceptable, it is recommended to initiate oral anticoagulant therapy with warfarin. NOAC use has not been established for patients with postoperative AF. Anticoagulation should continue for at least 4–6 weeks after return to sinus rhythm. Long-term anticoagulation should be considered based on the etiology of AF and risk of stroke, and for patients who remain in AF or who have paroxysmal AF.
Antithrombotic therapy in patients with mechanical and biological valve prosthesis: where we stand in 2016 and future perspectives
Thromboembolism and anticoagulant-related bleeding are the most common life-threatening complications in patients with prosthetic cardiac valves. Patients with mechanical heart valves are at an increased risk of stroke and require continuous anticoagulation. The annual risk of thromboembolic events in patients with mechanical heart valves is 1–2 versus 0.7% in patients with bioprosthetic valves, even with antithrombotic therapy. Artificial valves in the mitral position are generally more thrombogenic than those in the aortic position.
According to current guidelines for the management of AF, in patients with mechanical heart valves, VKA therapy is indicated for the prevention of embolic events, with a goal of maintaining an INR of at least 3.0 (±0.5), and NOACs are not recommended in this setting. The addition of aspirin (75–100 mg per day) to VKA therapy should be strongly considered unless there is a contraindication to its use (i.e., bleeding or aspirin intolerance). This combination is particularly appropriate in patients who have had an embolus while on VKA therapy with therapeutic INR, those with known vascular disease, and those who are known to be hypercoagulable.
Bioprosthetic valves are considered to be less thrombogenic than mechanical heart valves. Additionally, bovine pericardial valves appear to be less susceptible to valve thrombosis than porcine valves. It has been historically accepted that long-term anticoagulation is not needed in patients with bioprosthetic valves and no additional risk factors. However, because of an increased risk of thromboembolic events during the first 3 months after valve implantation, anticoagulation with warfarin is often used, especially when the valve is in the mitral position. NOACs appear to deliver the same protection, but to date, little evidence is available on the use of NOACs in patients with bioprosthetic heart valves, since the ARISTOTLE and Effective Anticoagulation with Factor Xa Next Generation in Atrial Fibrillation–Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 48 (ENGAGE AF–TIMI 48) trials were the only ones that included these patients [ , ]. A recent analysis of the ENGAGE AF–TIMI 48 trial that included 191 patients with bioprosthetic valves suggested that edoxaban is safe and effective in these patients [ ]. Rates of embolic events were similar between edoxaban- and warfarin-treated patients. The occurrence of major bleeding was less frequent in patients using low-dose edoxaban than in those using warfarin. In ARISTOTLE, event rates were also similar among patients in the apixaban group and in the warfarin group, although numbers were small. In summary, in patients with bioprosthetic valves where oral anticoagulation therapy is being used for AF, for example, and not for the valve, NOACs seem to be a viable option. On the other hand, if oral anticoagulation is being used for the valve, for example, in the first 3 months after valve implantation, then warfarin is the preferred agent.
Management of bleeding in patients on antithrombotic therapy: where do we stand with reversal agents for NOACs?
Antithrombotic therapy is associated with a higher risk of bleeding. In AF patients, the main challenge is that the same patients who have the highest risk of bleeding have the most to gain from oral anticoagulation, as observed by the overlap in the variables of the CHA 2 DS 2 VASc and HAS-BLED scores. NOACs have been shown to be at least as safe as warfarin, with the important advantage of reducing the risk of ICH significantly.
Until recently, reversal agents for NOACs were not available for clinical use, and this made health care providers worried about the management of bleeding with these new agents.
One of the most favorable characteristics of NOACs is their relatively short half-life. Thus, it is vital to check with the patient when the last dose was taken, to estimate the drug effect. Renal function should also be measured in this assessment. Although it is common to use different strategies to reverse the effect of VKAs, such as vitamin K and fresh frozen plasma, there is no treatment or management for bleeding that has been shown to improve clinical outcomes.
For the management of bleeding events while using NOACs, 4-factor prothrombin complex concentrate (50 units/kg) may be considered for rivaroxaban or apixaban-treated patients, while activated prothrombin complex concentrate (80 units/kg) may be considered for dabigatran-treated patients. Specific reversal agents for NOACs are being developed and approved. Idarucizumab was the first reversal agent approved by the FDA. It consists of a monoclonal antibody fragment that binds dabigatran with higher affinity than that observed with thrombin. This agent was shown to reverse the anticoagulation effect of dabigatran in patients with serious bleeding, and in those who required an invasive procedure. Andexanet alfa, a factor Xa antidote, was shown to reduce anti-factor Xa activity in patients with major bleeding while on treatment with factor Xa inhibitors, and is expected to be approved for clinical use in 2017. Thus, the availability of these reversal agents might have a role in the management of selected bleeding events, particularly for the more severe events in which a few hours may make a difference in patients survival.
Subclinical AF: how much AF is enough to deserve to be treated?
Given that clinical AF causes embolic events and anticoagulation prevents these events, it is logical to wonder whether we should anticoagulate patients with subclinical AF to prevent a first cardio-embolic event. Subclinical AF or subclinical atrial arrhythmias are those events that are usually short in duration and only detected by implantable devices such as pacemakers or implantable cardioverter-defibrillators. Since the risk of stroke in patients with subclinical AF is lower than in patients with clinical AF, there is uncertainty about the role of anticoagulation therapy in this setting, especially for episodes lasting more than 6 min and less than 24 h.
The Asymptomatic Atrial Fibrillation and Stroke Evaluation in Pacemaker Patients and the Atrial Fibrillation Reduction Atrial Pacing Trial (ASSERT) demonstrated that patients with atrial arrhythmias incidentally detected by pacemakers are at greater risk for cardio-embolic events. This association remained after adjustment for CHADS 2 score. It is possible for subclinical AF to be just a marker of an unhealthy cardiovascular system or a greater burden of risk factors for atherothrombotic stroke. There is uncertainty about the risk/benefit ratio of oral anticoagulation for stroke prevention in patients with subclinical AF. However, large randomized clinical trials are ongoing to address this issue. The Apixaban for the Reduction of Thrombo-Embolism in Patients With Device-Detected Sub-Clinical Atrial Fibrillation (ARTESiA) trial is investigating the use of apixaban versus low-dose aspirin for patients with high risk for stroke with subclinical AF. Patients with at least one episode of device-detected subclinical AF lasting at least 6 min and less than 24 h will be included. The Non-vitamin K Antagonist Oral Anticoagulants in Patients With Atrial High Rate Episodes (NOAH) trial is comparing edoxaban to aspirin or placebo in patients with atrial high rate episodes and at least two additional risk factors for stroke. There is not enough evidence available to support the routine use of anticoagulation therapy for patients with subclinical AF. The results of these two ongoing studies will provide answers to these important questions and will likely impact the treatment of subclinical AF in the near future, by determining the efficacy and safety of using anticoagulation therapy for these patients.
Left atrial appendage closure device versus anticoagulants for patients with AF
Ischemic stroke is the most worrisome and dangerous complication for AF patients. Cardio-embolic ischemic strokes may lead to worse outcomes than atherosclerotic strokes because circulation is interrupted abruptly. In atherosclerosis, the gradual reduction in vessel lumen allows time for development of collateral vessels that warrant tissue blood supply distally to the occlusion. Preliminary studies have shown that 90% of thrombi in AF are formed in the left atrial appendage [ ]. The left atrial appendage plays an important role in modulating the autonomic nervous system, pooling blood during exercise and under stress volume situations, and regulating volemia by secreting atrial natriuretic peptide.
Anticoagulation with VKAs has been an important instrument in preventing cardio-embolic ischemic strokes in AF patients. However, hemorrhagic complications related to difficulties in managing the correct drug dose have limited VKAs’ more widespread use. The concept of left atrial appendage occlusion is based on the theory that as the structure is closed, thrombi formation would be prevented with no increase in hemorrhagic risk. In this regard, the Watchman (Boston Scientific) has been tested in multiple randomized clinical trials, which have demonstrated high rates of adverse events related to the device implantation. These rates tend to be reduced proportionally as operator experience increases. Despite some guidelines suggesting use of left appendage occlusion in patients at high risk of bleeding for whom oral anticoagulation therapy is contraindicated, this population has not been adequately represented in clinical trials. Notwithstanding, study protocols for the Watchman device used oral anticoagulation for 45 days, followed by aspirin and clopidogrel for 6 months, and then followed by aspirin indefinitely.
Because all patients receiving left atrial appendage closure will need lifelong use of aspirin, and considering that the Apixaban versus Acetylsalicylic Acid to Prevent Stroke in Atrial Fibrillation Patients Who Have Failed or Are Unsuitable for Vitamin K Antagonist Treatment (AVERROES) trial showed that apixaban was superior to aspirin in preventing ischemic stroke with similar rates of hemorrhagic complications, the implantation of left atrial appendage occluders is highly questionable. Stopping aspirin after left atrial appendage occlusion with a device has not been tested in a large-scale trial and is not advisable. Before this strategy could be considered safe, the appropriate time for stopping aspirin would need to be clarified. Clinical trials comparing other left atrial appendage devices versus oral anticoagulation are lacking, including comparisons with NOACs. At the moment, we do not have data comparing the occlusion of the left appendage with NOACs. So, it may be wiser to understand that the closure of the left atrial appendage is an additional tool that can be used in specific scenarios such as in patients with very high risk of thromboembolic events with a recent massive ICH for whom the use of oral anticoagulation is absolutely contraindicated.
Will there be a role for warfarin in the future? How to optimize current VKA use in clinical practice
VKAs have been in use for almost 60 years and have saved many patients around the world who needed oral anticoagulation therapy for diverse indications. On the other hand, these drugs are difficult to manage due to food and drug interactions, need for frequent monitoring with INR measures, and risk of hemorrhage when not correctly used. NOACs, on the other hand, have fixed doses, no need for dose monitoring, few drug interactions, and a safer profile (fewer total bleeding complications and, more importantly, less risk of ICH), which leads to an easier and safer management of anticoagulation therapy. The NOACs dosing according to renal function is presented in Table 3 . The future of VKAs is now a matter of debate. The recently published European Guidelines for AF management, for example, included for the first time a recommendation for NOACs to be the first choice for anticoagulation for AF over VKA.
Table 3 Non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant dosing based on renal function Drug Dose Dabigatran CrCl > 30 mL/min: 150 mg PO BID CrCl 15–30 mL/min: 75 mg PO BID CrCl < 15 mL/min: not recommended Rivaroxaban CrCl > 50 mL/min: 20 mg PO once daily CrCl 15–50 mL/min: 15 mg PO once daily CrCl < 15 mL/min: not recommended Apixaban 5 mg PO BID Dose adjusted to 2.5 mg PO BID for patients aged ≥80 years, weight ≤60 kg, or serum creatinine ≥1.5 mg/dL Hemodialysis 5 mg PO BID with dose adjusted to 2.5 mg BID for patients aged ≥80 years or weight ≤60 kg Edoxaban Both doses (30 mg and 60 mg) halved if CrCl 30–50 mL/min, body weight ≤60 kg or taking concomitant verapamil, quinidine or dronedarone Patients with CrCl < 30 mL/min were excluded from the ENGAGE AF–TIMI 48 trial CrCl creatinine clearance, ENGAGE AF–TIMI 48 Effective Anticoagulation with Factor Xa Next Generation in Atrial Fibrillation–Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 48
Since their approval, NOACs have gained popularity, and recent data from international AF registries have shown that NOACs are already the most utilized anticoagulants (almost 60% of anticoagulated patients with AF). On the other hand, around 40% percent of patients on anticoagulation are still on VKAs, so one can argue that there is still a place for VKAs. But why are physicians preferring a VKA over an NOAC? Recent data from GARFIELD-AF (Global Anticoagulant Registry in the FIELD-Atrial Fibrillation) reveal that the predictors of VKA use are hospital and emergency room prescription rather than anticoagulation clinics, primary care physician versus cardiologist prescription, permanent versus new AF, concomitant antiplatelet therapy, kidney disease or a previous systemic embolism, and cirrhosis. Thus, most of the reasons for choice of VKA are not specifically a contra-indication for NOACs. In trials comparing NOACs versus VKAs, either in AF or VTE, the most common exclusion criteria were severe renal dysfunction (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min for most NOACs, except for apixaban, which was <25 mL/min), presence of mechanical heart valves, moderate/severe mitral stenosis (rheumatic valve disease), patients with other specific indications for anticoagulation therapy (i.e., ventricle thrombus), and pregnancy [ , , , ]. In VTE trials, patients with some high-risk inherited coagulopathies such as antiphospholipid syndrome were underrepresented [ ]. Putting this in perspective, patients today who fall into one of these categories should have treatment initiated with VKAs rather than NOACs.
NOACs have been evaluated for new indications in ongoing clinical trials. In regard to patients with mechanical heart valves, the Randomized, Phase II Study to Evaluate the Safety and Pharmacokinetics of Oral Dabigatran Etexilate in Patients after Heart Valve Replacement (RE-ALIGN) was stopped early due to more events in dabigatran arm, but trials with rivaroxaban are ongoing. For moderate/severe rheumatic mitral stenosis, the Investigation of Rheumatic AF Treatment Using Vitamin K Antagonists, Rivaroxaban or Aspirin Studies (INVICTUS) trial was just launched. In antiphospholipid syndrome, specific trials with NOACs are also ongoing. Finally, in severe renal disease, as apixaban has almost 80% of hepatic elimination, there are already initial pharmacokynetics data with apixaban in patients on hemodialysis showing reductions in AUC inf and C max of 14 and 13%, respectively. The Renal Hemodialysis Patients Allocated Apixaban versus Warfarin in Atrial Fibrillation (RENAL-AF) trial is ongoing and will test apixaban 5 mg twice daily versus warfarin in patients with AF, end-stage renal disease treated with hemodialysis, and CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc score ≥2.