Introduction
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is one of the most commonly occurring chronic diseases with recent estimates suggesting 366 million people currently affected (Rhee ). DM is often associated with psychological complications such as depression, which have severe impact on morbidity and mortality (Islam et al. ). A literature review has shown that about 42 % of patients with diabetes have elevated levels of depression symptoms (Gemeay et al. ). In addition, recent clinical studies have shown the prevalence of depression in diabetic patients is much higher than the normal population (Zhang et al. , , ), supporting the notion that there exists a strong link between diabetes and depression disorder. Coexisting depression in people with diabetes causes significantly decreased adherence to treatment, poor metabolic control, higher complication rates, decreased quality of life, increased healthcare use and cost, increased disability and lost productivity, and increased risk of death (Egede and Ellis ). Depression in patients with diabetes is associated with less frequent blood glucose monitoring and suboptimal glycemic control (Gemeay et al. ), which further worse the diabetic condition.
Streptozotocin- (STZ-) evoked diabetes is among the most widely used preclinical models. Previous reports have shown that STZ-induced diabetes results in depression-like behavior in various preclinical testing paradigms (Castillo-Gómez et al. ). STZ-induced diabetes has demonstrated significantly prolonged immobility time in tail suspension and forced swimming tests which are both the important behavioral tests with strong predictive validity (Anjaneyulu et al. ; Kamei et al. ).
Increasing evidence suggests that brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), as one of the neurotrophin families of growth factors with an important impact on the survival and synaptic of neurons in the adult central nervous system (CNS), may play important roles in the pathogenesis of diabetes as well as depression, and contribute to the association of diabetes and depression (Alzoubi et al. ; Caletti et al. ; El-Marasy et al. ; Lenart et al. ; Wang and He ; Wang et al. ; Zhou et al. ). On the one hand, both animal and clinical experiments showed that BDNF has important influence on the pathobiology of diabetes, because BDNF modulates the secretion and actions of insulin, leptin, ghrelin, various neurotransmitters and peptides, and pro-inflammatory cytokines related to energy homeostasis (Rao et al. ). On the other hand, a strong association between BDNF and depression has been demonstrated in both clinical and animal studies. For instance, animal experiments have showed that BDNF decrease was associated with depressive states, and clinical investigations revealed that BDNF levels in depressed patients were lower than those in normal controls and supplementary BDNF was able to reverse depressive status (Haghighi et al. ; Li et al. ). BDNF may play an important role in the pathogenesis of depression and, therefore, might participate in the therapeutic actions of antidepressants (Kerman ).
Geniposide (GP), an iridoid glycoside isolated from the Chinese herb Gardenia jasminoides (Zhizi), possesses diverse bioactivities including neuroprotection in the MPTP mouse model of Parkinson’s disease by enhancing growth factor signaling and the reduction of apoptosis (Chen et al. ), ameliorating cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury in rats by the enhancement of BDNF and inhibition of caspase-3 (Zhang et al. ; ), ameliorating learning memory deficits, reducing tau phosphorylation and decreasing apoptosis via GSK3β pathway in streptozotocin-induced alzheimer rat model (Gao et al. ), attenuating insulin-deficiency-induced acceleration of β-amyloidosis in an APP/PS1 transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease via enhancing insulin signaling (Zhang et al. , , ), protecting human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y cell line) against formaldehyde stress through modulating the expression of Bcl-2, P53, caspase 3 and caspase 9, and by increasing the activity of intracellular superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase (Sun et al. ), antagonizing oxidative stress probably involving phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase (PI3K)- and nuclear factor-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)-mediated upregulation of the antioxidative enzyme heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) (Yin et al. ), antidepressant-like effect on chronic unpredictable mild stress-induced depressive rats by regulating the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis (Cai et al. ) and anti-diabetic effect (Yao et al. ), etc. However, as for its antidepressant-like effect on diabetes, there is no experimental report until now. Furthermore, whether its mechanism is associated with BDNF has not been known.
The present study was designed to assess the antidepressant-like effect of GP on STZ-evoked diabetic mice and the mechanism involved in BDNF by means of behavioral and pharmacological procedures.
Materials and methods
Experimental animals
Male Kunming (KM) male mice (18–22 g) were purchased from Experimental Animal Center of Henan Province (Zhengzhou, Henan Province, China). Animals were given rodent laboratory chow and water ad libitum, and maintained under controlled conditions with a temperature of 22 ± 1 °C, relative humidity 60 ± 10 % and a 12/12 h light/dark cycle (lights on at 7:00 a.m.). All the procedures were in strict accordance with the P.R. China legislation on the use and care of laboratory animals and with the guidelines established by Institute for Experimental Animals of Henan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine and were approved by the university committee for animal experiments.
Reagents
Geniposide (GP) was provided from Shanghai Jinsui Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China) with the purity more than 98 % as assayed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Fluoxetine hydrochloride (FH) was purchased from Changzhou Siyao Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd. (Changzhou, Jiangsu Province, China). Metformin hydrochloride (MH) was purchased from Shanghai Xinyi Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Streptozotocin (STZ), purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, Missouri, USA), was dissolved in sodium citrate buffer (0.1 mol/L, pH 4.2) immediately before its administration. Mouse corticosterone (CORT) and BDNF enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) kits (R&D system) were purchased from R&D Systems China Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China).
Diabetes induction
Experimental diabetes was induced following an overnight fast by a single intraperitoneal ( ip ) injection of STZ at the dose of 60 mg/kg freshly dissolved in sodium citrate buffer (0.1 M, pH 4.2). Hyperglycemia was confirmed 72 h after STZ administration by a portable Freestyle glucometer (Jiangsu Yuyue Medical Equipment & Supply Co. Ltd., Danyang, Jiangsu Province, China) in a blood sample obtained by tail prick and confirmed again at ending of the behavioral tests (ElBatsh ). Animals with fasting blood glucose levels ≥11.1 mmol/L (equal to 200 mg/dL) were maintained in the study (ElBatsh ).
Experimental procedure
Diabetic mice were randomly selected to receive daily doses of 50 or 100 mg/kg of GP, positive drug FHMH (10 mg/kg of FH combined with 100 mg/kg of MH) or vehicle 0.5 % sodium carboxyl methyl cellulose (CMC-Na) (0.2 mL/10 g) ( n = 10 mice per group) orally for 21 consecutive days by intragastrical administration ( ig ) (Cai et al. ). Non-diabetic control mice (CTR) ( n = 40) received vehicle on the day of diabetes induction and were subsequently allocated to receive 0.5 % CMC-Na, or the same doses of GP or FHMH as the STZ mice, following the same protocol as before. At 1 h after the last administration, the animals were submitted to the open field test (OFT), followed by forced swimming test (FST). Thirty minutes after the FST and immediately after the last determination of glycemia, blood samples were collected by eyeball removal exsanguinations and centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 15 min to obtain serum for detections of corticosterone (CORT). Thereafter, the animals were euthanized by decapitation and the brain rapidly removed and placed on ice. The whole hippocampuses in each hemisphere were dissected, weighed and kept frozen until the analysis of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) level, and the mRNA expression of BDNF and its cognate receptor tropomyosin-related kinase B ( TrkB ).
Assay for Forced Swimming Test (FST)
Independent groups of mice were submitted to the FST as described by Porsolt et al. ( ) with minor modifications. The test was conducted in 2 sessions. First, in the pre-test session, mice were individually placed into glass cylinders (height, 25 cm; diameter, 10 cm) containing water (10 cm deep; 22 ± 1 °C) for 15 min. Twenty-four hours later, animals were submitted to a 5 min session of the FST. During this session, total time of immobility (the minimum movement required to keep the head above water) and the latency to the first immobility episode were recorded with a stopwatch (Castagné et al. ). After each session (pre-test and test session), the animals were removed and allowed to dry in a separate cage before being returned to their home cages.
Assay for Open Field Test (OFT)
Locomotor activity was observed by the open field test (OFT) through a modified method (Porsolt et al. ). Briefly, the locomotor activity of the mice was measured using a box (40 × 60 × 50 cm) with the floor divided into 12 identical squares illuminated with light from the ceiling. Mice were placed in the central square, and horizontal locomotion (number of crossed squares) and the number of rears (posture sustained with hind-paws on the floor) were recorded for 3 min. The open field arena was cleaned following each trial.
Serum CORT and hippocampus BDNF levels determination
Serum CORT and hippocampus BDNF levels were determined by commercially enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) kits (R&D Systems China Co. Ltd., China) according to the manufacturer’s protocols.
Fluorescent Quantitative Reverse Transcription-PCR (FQ-RT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted from hippocampus using Trizol reagent following the manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse transcription (RT) was performed using a cDNA synthesis kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The house-keeping gene glyceraldehydes-3-phosphate dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) was used as an internal control. Sequences of the PCR primers were as follows: BDNF Forward 5′-CAGGGGCATAGACAAAAG-3′, Reverse 5′-CTTCCCCTTTTAATGGTC-3′ (153 bp product), TrkB Forward 5′-TTTCCGCCACCTTGACTTG-3′, Reverse 5′-ACAGGAACACGTGAACGGATT-3′ (61 bp product), and GAPDH Forward 5′-CAAGGTCATCCATGACAACTTTG-3′, Reverse 5′-GGGCCATCCACAGTCTTCTG-3′ (90 bp product). FQ-RT-PCR was performed using Hot Start Fluorescent PCR Core Reagent Kits (SYBR Green I) on a real-time PCR instrument (ABI StepOnePlus, Applied Biosystems). PCR thermal cycling parameters were as follows: the denaturing step at 94 °C for 4 min, followed by 40 cycles annealing step at 94 °C 30 s, 60 °C 30 s, and 72 °C 30 s. All amplifications and detections were carried out in a MicroAmp optical 96-well reaction plate with optical adhesive covers. Relative expression of mRNA (%) =2 -ΔCT(1– 2 ) × 100 %, where CT represents threshold cycle, ΔCT1 = CT ( BDNF ) -CT ( GAPDH ) , and ΔCT2 = CT ( TrkB ) -CT ( GAPDH ).
Statistical analysis
All experimental data were expressed as mean ± standard error of mean (SEM). Significant differences among experimental groups were compared by one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) followed by Least Significant Difference (LSD) ( P < 0.05) using the Statistics Package for Social Science (SPSS) program Version 13.0.
Results
Effect of geniposide on fasting blood glucose
Figure 1a shows significant differences in fasting blood glucose between the vehicle (VEH) controls and the STZ-mice. Elevated fasting blood glucose level was observed in the STZ-mice by comparison with VEH control mice. Treatment with GP (50 or 100 mg/kg) and FHMH only significantly decreased blood glucose in the STZ-mice ( P < 0.05, P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively). Fig. 1 Effects of geniposide (GP) on fasting blood glucose and immobility time in the forced swimming test (FST) in STZ-evoked mice. Data are presented as mean ± SEM ( n = 10). Significant differences compared with vehicle (VEH) control were designated as # P < 0.05 and ## P < 0.01, and with streptozotocin (STZ) control as * P < 0.05 and ** P < 0.01
Effect of geniposide on the immobility time in FST
Our results demonstrated that diabetic mice had significantly higher immobility duration by comparison with the VEH control ( P < 0.01), and GP attenuated this depressive-like behavior in the STZ-mice at doses of 50 and 100 mg/kg ( P < 0.05 and P < 0.01). This effect was comparable with that of the positive control FHMH [the classical antidepressant FH (10 mg/kg, oral) combined with the hypoglycemic MH (100 mg/kg, oral)] (Fig. 1b ).
Effect of geniposide on locomotor activity in OFT
To exclude the possibility that GP induces changes to locomotory behaviour, we investigated the effects of GP on locomotor activity. Mice treated with GP (50 or 100 mg/kg) and the positive control FHMH (10 mg/kg of FH combined with 100 mg/kg of MH) for 21 days showed no effect on the number of crossed squares or rearing frequency in either the VEH controls or the STZ-mice ( P > 0.05; Fig. 2 ), indicating that the antidepressant-like effects of GP are not attributable to a stimulatory effect on locomotory function. Fig. 2 Effects of geniposide on locomotor activity in open field test in STZ-evoked mice. Data are presented as mean ± SEM ( n = 10)
Effect of geniposide on serum corticosterone level
Figure 3 shows significant differences in serum CORT levels between the VEH controls and the STZ-mice. Elevated serum CORT level was observed in the STZ-mice by comparison with the VEH control mice. GP (50 or 100 mg/kg) did not change serum CORT level in either the VEH controls or the STZ-mice ( P > 0.05; Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Effects of geniposide on serum corticosterone (CORT) levels in STZ-evoked diabetic mice. Data are presented as mean ± SEM ( n = 10). Significant differences compared with vehicle (VEH) control were designated as # P < 0.05 and ## P < 0.01, and with streptozotocin (STZ) control as * P < 0.05
Effect of geniposide on hippocampal BDNF level
Hippocampal BDNF activity in the STZ-mice at the time of sacrifice were significantly decreased (10.2 ± 1.9 pg/mg protein) compared with the non-diabetic VEH control (22.3 ± 4.1 pg/mg protein; P < 0.01). GP (50 and 100 mg/kg) administration significantly elevated hippocampal BDNF levels to 20.5 ± 3.8 pg/mg protein and 25.4 ± 4.7 pg/mg protein in STZ-mice, respectively (both P < 0.01). Moreover, treatment with FHMH also increased BDNF level to 24.2 ± 4.6 pg/mg protein in STZ-mice ( P < 0.01) (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 Effects of geniposide on hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels in STZ-evoked diabetic mice. Data are presented as mean ± SEM ( n = 10). Significant differences compared with vehicle (VEH) control were designated as # P < 0.05 and ## P < 0.01, and with streptozotocin (STZ) control as ** P < 0.01
Effect of geniposide on hippocampal BDNF and TrkB mRNA expression
The mRNA expression of BDNF and its cognate receptor TrkB in the hippocampus were assessed to explore whether BDNF and TrkB participates in anti-depressive mechanisms of GP. As shown in Fig. 5 , the mRNA expression of BDNF and TrkB in STZ-mice was significantly downregulated in compared with the non-diabetic VEH controls (both P < 0.01). Administration of GP at the doses of 50 and 100 mg/kg significantly upregulated the hippocampal mRNA expression of BDNF and TrkB in STZ-mice ( BDNF P < 0.05, P < 0.01; TrkB P < 0.05, P < 0.01). Moreover, treatment with FHMH also enhanced BDNF and TrkB mRNA expression in STZ-mice (both P < 0.05) (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 5 Effects of geniposide on hippocampal mRNA expression of BDNF and TrkB in STZ-evoked diabetic mice. Data are presented as mean ± SEM ( n = 10). Significant differences compared with vehicle (VEH) control were designated as # P < 0.05 and ## P < 0.01, and with streptozotocin (STZ) control as * P < 0.05 and ** P < 0.01
Discussion
In Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), herb compounds decoction containing G. jasminoides fruits (GJ) have been widely used for the treatment of diabetes mellitus and depression in East Asian countries for hundred years. Diabetes and depression are common co-morbid conditions, and patients with diabetes have also elevated levels of depression symptoms. Hence, it seems advantageous to use GP, an active ingredient from GJ, for treatment of diabetes patients complicated with depression. However, there is still a lack of evidence.
Indeed, in the previous report, Xue et al. ( ) have found that acute administration of ethanol extract of Yueju pill (YJP), a herb compounds containing GJ, rapidly attenuated depressive-like symptoms in learned helpless paradigm, and the antidepressant-like effects were sustained for at least 24 h in tail suspension test of ICR mice. Additionally, YJP, like ketamine, an antidepressant by blocking NMDA receptors for glutamate, rapidly increased the expression of BDNF in the hippocampus of mice. YJP rapidly reduced the phosphorylation of eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF2), leading to de suppression of BDNF synthesis (Xue et al. ; Zhang et al. , , ). However, until now, the bioactive compounds of YJP in antidepressant-like effects are not known. Our study confirms that GP can be one of the main bioactive compounds of GJ even or YJP in antidepressant-like effects in diabetic mice. In fact, that YJP has antidepressant-like effects provided our study for experimental bases and backgrounds instead of inhibiting our innovation. Furthermore, our study mainly observed antidepressant-like effects of GP in diabetic pathological conditions, while other reported studies mainly did in normal physiological conditions. Considering that Chinese medicine is usually used on patients instead of normal people in clinic, thus our designed study has more innovation than except for different animal model.
This study has provided the relatively complementary evidence. As stated in the article, GP at the doses of 50 and 100 mg/kg by ig not only can decrease blood glucose levels, but also alleviate depression-like behavior in STZ-evoked diabetic mice. To the author’s knowledge, this is the first study to address the anti-depressant effects of GP in STZ-evoked diabetic mice.
STZ-evoked diabetes is a well-established animal model of type 1 diabetes that results in marked hyperglycaemia, probably through the destruction of pancreatic β cells and lack of insulin secretion (Ho et al. ). In the present study, GP attenuated STZ-evoked hyperglycaemia in a manner similar to that of FHMH. This finding is in accordance with the previous studies of Liu et al. ( ) and Wu et al. ( ), and suggests that the anti-depressant effect of GP may be, in part, due to its attenuation of hyperglycaemia in diabetic mice.
STZ-evoked diabetic mice demonstrated elevated immobility duration in the FST by comparison with the normal mice. This finding is in line with previous studies by Anjaneyulu et al. ( ); ElBatsh ( ); El-Marasy et al. ( ) and Gupta et al. ( ), and indicates the development of depressive-like behavior resulting from diabetes. In the present study, GP effectively reversed STZ-evoked prolongation of immobility duration in the FST. This effect was similar to that produced by the standard anti-depressant drug FH combined with anti-diabetic drug MH, and suggests the anti-depressant effect of GP in diabetic mice. This finding is in accordance with a previous study by Cai et al. ( ), who imparted anti-depressant-like effect of GP in a rat FST.
To exclude the possibility that the antidepressant-like effects of GP are attributable to stimulatory effects on locomotory function, we assessed GP-induced spontaneous activity in the OFT. GP-treated mice exhibited no alterations in spontaneous activity in the OFT, suggesting that the decreases in immobility in the FST were not caused by motor stimulation but rather by increases in active movements, such as struggling and swimming.
The effect of GP on locomotory activity was not in agreement with Cai et al. ( ), who reported that GP (25, 50 and 100 mg/kg) improved spontaneous locomotor activity in the OFT of rats undergoing chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS). The discrepancy of the data may depend on the differences between species and (or) the experimental procedures used.
Diabetes and depression are common co-morbid conditions. As previously mentioned, depression complicated with diabetes severely harms human health and life, as evidenced by causing significantly decreased adherence to treatment, poor metabolic control, higher complication rates, decreased quality of life, increased healthcare use and cost, increased disability and lost productivity, and increased risk of death (Egede and Ellis ). However, until now, the mechanism on depression complicated with diabetes is not quite clear.
In recent years, increasing evidence indicates that BDNF may play important roles in the pathogenesis of diabetes as well as depression, and contribute to the association of diabetes and depression (Alzoubi et al. ; Caletti et al. ; El-Marasy et al. ; Lenart et al. ; Wang and He ; Wang et al. ; Zhou et al. ). Therefore, the present study further evaluated the anti-depressant mechanisms of GP involved in BDNF on STZ-evoked diabetic mice.
STZ-evoked diabetic mice demonstrated decreased BDNF levels in hippocampus by comparison with the normal mice. This finding is consistent with a previous study by Pachauri et al. ( ). In the present study, GP effectively reversed STZ-evoked decreases in BDNF levels, and up-regulated the mRNA expression of BDNF and its cognate receptor TrkB in hippocampus of diabetic mice. In fact, the BDNF-enhanced effects of G. jasminoides (GJ) or GP had been reported in previous studies. For one example, 95 % ethanol extract of GJ produced rapid antidepressant activity from 2 h after a single oral administration at the dosage of 0.8 g/kg in the TST, and the underlying mechanism was associated with up-regulation of BDNF expression in the hippocampus of mice (Zhang et al. , , ). Besides, genipin, an important bioactive compound from GJ, was demonstrated to possess antidepressant-like effects with a CUMS-induced depression model in rats, and the possible mechanism, at least in one part, resulted from monoaminergic neurotransmitter system and the potential dysfunctional regulation of the post-receptor signaling pathway, which particularly affected the levels of BDNF as well as 5-hydroxytryptamine 1 A receptor (5-HT1A)R and 5-HT(2 A)R in hippocampus (Wang et al. ). In addition, the BDNF-enhanced effect of GP had been reported in a previous study by Zhang et al. ( ), who reported that GP and baicalin produced a synergy effect on the enhancement of BDNF mRNA expression in hippocampus of rats undergoing focal cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury. These results suggest that GP partially elicits antidepressant effects by the enhancement of BDNF expression. However, the present study is limited as lack of other potentially mediated parameters observed particularly involved in the monoaminergic neurotransmitter system as above mentioned.
In addition, considering the recent report (Cai et al. ) on antidepressant-like mechanism of GP probably involved in its regulation of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, we measured serum biomarker corticosterone (CORT), an index of hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis hyperactivation. In this study, STZ-evoked mice demonstrated elevated levels of serum CORT in accordance with a previous study by Revsin et al. ( ). GP did not change serum CORT level in either the VEH controls or the STZ-mice, at least from one part, indicating that the antidepressant effect of GP in diabetic mice may be not associated with HPA axis. This finding is not in agreement with a previous study by Cai et al. ( ), who reported the antidepressant-like effect of GP on CUMS-induced depressive rats by regulating the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis. This discrepancy of the data may depend on the differences between species and (or) the experimental procedures used.
Moreover, other authors also verified that the ethanolic or methanolic extract of GJ could slightly inhibit monoamine oxidase A and B (MAO-A/B) and dopamine β-Hydroxylase (DBH) activities in vitro assays, and the action of the extract can been verified by oral administration of rats (Kim et al. ). Further research also showed that iridoids compounds, geniposide and genipin, are considered as major MAO-B inhibitors because it was showed significantly selective MAO-B inhibition (Qu et al. ). However, until now, it is not known whether GP can produce anti-depressant activity in STZ-induced diabetic model by inhibiting MAO-A/B and DBH activities, which is likely to be as a next direction to our further research.
Besides, other researches indicated that glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) could improve depression (Anderberg et al. ) and GP was GLP-1 receptor angonist (Yin et al. ). As a receptor agonist of GLP-1R, which is a newer drug class to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), GP shows clear effects in inhibiting pathological processes underlying Alzheimer’s disease (AD), such as promoting neurite outgrowth (Liu et al. ). Besides, GP increases insulin secretion through GLP-1 receptors in rat INS-1 insulinoma cells (Guo et al. ). Therefore, we speculate that GLP-1 maybe plays a critical role in antidepressant-like effects of GP in T2DM complicated with depression. The present study did not design experiment to observe the mechanism of GP from the perspective of GLP-1 receptor in antidepressant activity on STZ-induced diabetic animal model, which is likely to be as another next direction to our further research.
Although GP can be hydrolyzed into genipin by β-D-glucosidases in the intestine (Akao et al. ), previous studies had still indicated that both GP and genipin exerted antidepressant-like (Cai et al. ; Peng et al. ; Tian et al. ) and hypoglycemic (Wu et al. ; Zhang et al. ; ) effects, suggesting that the prototype substance and its metabolite can both be likely to participate in such actions. As for the specific and exact participation between GP and its metabolite genipin, it needs further study. We have supplemented the exploration according to the reviewer.
In conclusion, the present study indicates that GP produces antidepressant-like effect in STZ-evoked diabetic mice, and the underlying mechanism, at least in one part, may be involved in the up-regulation of BDNF expression in hippocampus, for the first time.