Introduction
Left ventricular thrombus (LVT) can complicate the management of patients following acute myocardial infarction (AMI) or with LV dysfunction due to the risk of tissue ischemia from embolism. The risk of LVT in the setting of percutaneous coronary intervention has been reported to range from 5 to 15%, occurring most frequently within the first 3 months post AMI [ , , ]. Patients are also considered to be at high risk for LVT formation if they have a reduced ejection fraction (< 40%) or anteroapical akinesis/dyskinesis [ ]. Additionally, a prothrombotic state, as assessed by biomarkers such as soluble tissue factor, d-dimer, anticardiolipin antibody levels, may also contribute to LVT formation [ ].
Due to the high morbidity associated with acute ischemic stroke, current guidelines recommend anticoagulation therapy with a vitamin K antagonist (VKA) for at least 3 months in addition to antiplatelet agents in those at high risk for LVT formation after AMI [ , , ]. However, alternative and newer oral therapies are not discussed if VKA therapy is not ideal: abnormal liver function, concurrent use of cytochrome P450 inhibitors, history of labile international normalized ratio’s (INR), and patients with poor follow up to warfarin clinics. Nor do they consider the numerous drug–food interactions, delayed therapeutic onset requiring bridging with heparinoid products, and varied effectiveness dependent upon time in therapeutic INR range [ ].
The oral factor Xa inhibitors (FXAI) rivaroxaban and apixaban have a rapid onset of action, impact biomarkers like D-dimer, do not require routine monitoring, and are associated with lower bleeding rates than VKA [ , ]. All of these properties make them attractive alternative agents in the treatment of LVT. When used in another setting in which cardioembolism plays a role, namely for stroke prevention in the setting of nonvalvular atrial fibrillation (NVAF), rivaroxaban is noninferior to VKA in the prevention of ischemic stroke and significantly reduces fatal bleeding due to a reduction in the annual rate of hemorrhagic stroke [ , ]. In patients with NVAF, apixaban has been associated with a greater reduction in rates of stroke, systemic embolism, and comparable rates of gastrointestinal bleeding (GIB) compared to VKA [ ]. Additionally, the use of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) have been shown to be a potential option in the prevention and treatment of left atrial appendage (LAA) thrombi [ , ].
Given the improved pharmacokinetic profile of FXAI, current use in the prevention of thromboembolic events in NVAF, and use in the treatment of LAA thrombus it is possible FXAI may be useful in the management of LVT. In this single institutional study, we evaluate LVT resolution and bleeding in subjects who were not candidates for VKA therapy and were instead treated with rivaroxaban or apixaban.
Methods
Following Institutional Review Board approval, a single-center, retrospective chart review was conducted at a 945-bed tertiary care academic medical center. Patients were identified for inclusion through the University HealthSystem Consortium database if they had been initiated on rivaroxaban or apixaban between January 1, 2014 and December 1, 2015. Hospitalized patients were eligible for study inclusion if treated with rivaroxaban or apixaban for more than 1 day for echocardiogram (ECHO) or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed LVT. Patients were excluded if rivaroxaban or apixaban was received without documented imaging of LVT. Prisoners, pregnant women, and patients < 18 years of age were also excluded.
The primary objective was to analyze the effectiveness of rivaroxaban or apixaban on the resolution of LVT as measured by cardiac imaging at 3 months. Resolution of LVT was categorized as either resolved or not based on documentation of complete thrombus resolution at repeat imaging. The principal safety variables were major and clinically-relevant nonmajor bleeding. Bleeding was assessed with three validated scores: Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) bleeding, Global Use of Strategies to Open Occluded Coronary Arteries (GUSTO) bleeding, and Bleeding Academic Research Consortium (BARC) bleeding criteria [ ].
Patient characteristics collected via chart review included age, gender, height, weight, body mass index (BMI), and creatinine clearance. Non-normally distributed data is presented as median (25–75% interquartile range). Additionally, the presence of the following comorbid conditions were noted: malignancy (identified by current chemotherapy treatment without documentation of remission), diabetes, chronic kidney disease, congestive heart failure, hypertension, myocardial infarction, peripheral vascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, NVAF, chronic kidney disease, cerebrovascular accident or transient ischemic attack, and systemic embolism.
Results
During the 2-year study period, ten patients with LVT were treated with rivaroxaban (n = 7) and apixaban (n = 3). Patients characteristics were as follows: 70% male, age 67 (IQR 43–73), BMI 28.9 kg/m 2 (IQR 23.8–33.8). Concomitant antiplatelet agents, suspected cause of LVT, dosing regimen, and outcomes are listed in Table 1 . The suspected cause of LVT formation was non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (50%), ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (20%), non-ischemic cardiomyopathy (10%), atrial fibrillation (10%), and active malignancy (10%). A majority of patients (70%) received concomitant antiplatelet therapy of which 43% received either aspirin or clopidogrel alone, and 57% received dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and clopidogrel.
Table 1 Demographics, concomitant therapy, rivaroxaban or apixaban dosing, and outcome Patient Age (years) Gender Body mass index (kg/m 2 ) Creatinine clearance a Antiplatelet therapy b Comorbidities Suspected cause of LVT DOAC dosing Outcome Rivaroxaban 1 44 Female 34.2 129 Aspirin COPD, DM, HTN NSTEMI, immobilization 15 mg BID Resolved/bleeding event 2 69 Male 33.6 40 Aspirin, clopidogrel CVA, DM, HTN, MI STEMI 20 mg daily Lost to follow up 3 76 Male 27.9 68 Aspirin, clopidogrel HTN NSTEMI, active malignancy 15 mg BID for 7 days, 20 mg daily Unresolved 4 70 Male 25.6 72 Aspirin, clopidogrel TIA NSTEMI 15 mg BID for 14 days, 20 mg daily Resolved 5 65 Female 23.6 46 None HTN Active malignancy 20 mg daily Resolved 6 72 Male 30.2 99 Aspirin AF, COPD, DM, HTN, PVD AF/akinesis 20 mg daily Resolved 7 39 Male 23.9 50 None CHF NICM 20 mg daily Unresolved Apixaban 8 64 Female 29.9 76 None AF, CVA, HTN NSTEMI 5 mg BID Lost to follow up 9 82 Male 23.4 38 Clopidogrel AF, CHF, CKD NSTEMI 5 mg BID Lost to follow up 10 39 Male 35.2 168 Aspirin, clopidogrel HTN STEMI 5 mg BID Resolved HTN hypertension, DM diabetes mellitus, COPD chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, CHF congestive heart failure, VTE venous thromboembolism, CKD chronic kidney disease, MI myocardial infarction, NSTEMI non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, STEMI ST-elevation myocardial infarction, BID twice daily a Calculated using Cockroft–Gault equation (mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) b Aspirin dose 81 mg
Resolution of LVT at 3 months occurred in two patients on rivaroxaban: patient #1 (15 mg twice daily) and #6 (20 mg daily). Figure 1 depicts resolution of thrombus (2 × 1.6 cm) after 38 days of rivaroxaban therapy in patient #6. Outside of the 3 month window two additional patients in the rivaroxaban group (#4, 5) and one in the apixaban group (#10) had complete resolution of the LVT with a median time to follow up of 407 days (IQR 310–407). In those with initial and follow-up imaging, 83% of patients had complete resolution of thrombus upon repeat imaging (Table 2 ).
Fig. 1 Apical 4-chamber view echocardiogram of patient #6. a shows the initial left ventricular thrombus (2 × 1.6 cm) and b reveals complete thrombus resolution at 38 days on rivaroxaban 20 mg daily
Table 2 Description of left ventricular thrombus resolution Patient Initial ECHO Follow-up ECHO Days after initial ECHO Percent resolution EF (%) Thrombus (cm) EF (%) Thrombus (cm) Rivaroxaban 1 18 4.4 × 2.3 45 None 20 100 2 17 Layered apical mural thrombus Lost to follow up Unknown 3 30 1.0 × 1.0 30 1.0 × 1.0 118 0 4 50–55 Small apical thrombus > 55 None 436 100 5 30–40 3.0 × 1.0 40–50 None 310 100 6 40 2.0 × 1.6 40 None 38 100 7 a Unable to obtain < 20 1.09 × 1.37 58–88 b Unknown Apixaban 8 52.1 Not quantifiable Lost to follow up Unknown 9 < 20 1.3 × 1.0 Lost to follow up Unknown 10 35 1.0 × 1.0 > 55 None 407 100 EF ejection fraction a Unable to obtain previous records of ECHO performed 3 months prior to admission but was initiated on rivaroxaban b Days to follow up based on ECHO being performed on the first or last day of the month that rivaroxaban would have been initiated at outside facility
One patient (#1) had a bleeding event and was receiving rivaroxaban 15 mg twice daily with concomitant aspirin. Rivaroxaban was subsequently discontinued due to concern for pulmonary hemorrhage that was classified as minimal (TIMI), mild (GUSTO), or a type 2 (BARC). None of the patients on apixaban had a bleeding event.
Discussion
Guidelines recommend the use of warfarin in treatment of LVT, however, for certain patients alternative agents may be useful [ , ]. DOACs inhibit either thrombin (dabigatran) or factor Xa (rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban) and offer more favorable pharmacokinetic profiles. To assess the efficacy and safety of these agents, Ruff et al. performed a meta-analysis of the four phase 3, randomized trials that compared DOACs to warfarin for stroke prevention in patients with atrial fibrillation. In terms of safety the pooled analysis revealed a nearly 50% reduction in risk of intracerebral hemorrhage, but a 25% greater GIB risk [ ]. The potential advantages associated with the use of DOACs, until recently, have been often negated by the lack of effective reversal agents. This may soon be a point of contention based on recent and future reversal agents to come: idarucizumab for dabigatran, andexanet alfa for apixaban and rivaroxaban, and PER977 for edoxaban [ , , ].
In those with an initial and follow up ECHO we observed complete resolution of LVT in 83% of patients. This is comparable to a previous study which found the rate of LVT resolution to be 86.6, 81.4, and 81.4% at 4, 6, and 12 months respectively with warfarin [ ]. In our entire cohort only one patient experienced a bleeding event, but was receiving concomitant antiplatelet therapy which can increase bleeding risk [ ]. The RE-LY trial compared dabigatran versus warfarin in patients with NVAF and the risk of major bleeding was increased in both groups receiving concomitant antiplatelet therapy [ ]. After five days of rivaroxaban patient #1 was transitioned to warfarin with a heparin drip due to concern of pulmonary hemorrhage. Future research may help decipher which patients are appropriate for use of DOACs in addition to other antiplatelets for LVT treatment. Currently there are three ongoing trials evaluating the use of triple therapy with rivaroxaban in patients with atrial fibrillation; RT-AF (trial ID: NCT02334254), GEMINI-ACS (trial ID: NCT02293395), and AUGUSTUS (trial ID: NCT02415400). PIONEER AF-PCI found that in patients with NVAF who underwent PCI, a rivaroxaban based strategy with DAPT for varied durations resulted in a lower frequency of clinically significant bleeding [ ].
Several limitations should be taken into consideration in addition to limitations associated with a retrospective chart review at a single center. Only two patients met our initial criteria who had initial and follow up imaging to evaluate thrombus resolution within 3 months. There were varied dosing strategies used within the rivaroxaban group and it is difficult to determine which dosing strategy is most appropriate for treatment of LVT. However, current literature is limited to case reports and a single abstract that reported resolution of LVT with the use of DOACs [ , , , ]. While bleeding events did not occur or were not mentioned in previous case reports, we observed one incidence of bleeding in our entire cohort. This event was confounded by their history and hospital course given a computed tomography of the chest revealed improved bilateral multifocal areas of airspace consolidation consistent with improving infection or possible hemorrhage upon initiation of rivaroxaban. There was no incidence of intracerebral hemorrhage in the entire cohort that was not lost to follow up.
To our knowledge this is the largest case series that evaluates the efficacy and safety of apixaban or rivaroxaban in the treatment of LVT. Literature is growing in support of using DOACs primarily in the prevention and treatment of LAA thrombus [ , ]. The findings in these studies are encouraging and further support several case reports describing the use of apixaban in the treatment of left atrial appendage (LAA) thrombus [ , , , ]. Interestingly one case reported resolution of a LAA thrombus, that was found to be refractory to both warfarin and dabigatran, after 5 months of therapy with apixaban 5 mg twice daily [ ]. Wyrembak et al. also found that the single patient out of 420 noted to have LAA thrombus on TEE prior to catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation was also receiving dabigatran [ ]. Currently there is one trial which may provide insight into the efficacy and safety of treating patients with LVT comparing apixaban to warfarin (trial ID: NCT02982590).
Conclusion
In those who are deemed not to be a candidate for warfarin therapy the use of rivaroxaban or apixaban may be considered as an alternative therapy in the treatment of LVT. However, the use of these agents for the treatment of intracardiac thrombus is considered off label at this time. Prior to initiating therapy concurrent medications should be evaluated for drug–drug interactions. Furthermore, patients should be closely monitored as an outpatient with repeat imaging performed within 3 months to evaluate resolution of the thrombus and need for continuation of therapy. Further research is necessary to assess the efficacy and safety of FXAI to treat LVT.