Introduction
Theileria (so-called piroplasm) is an apicomplexan parasite of ruminants that causes economic loss and high mortality in livestock at tropical and subtropical Africa, temperate regions of Asia, Australia, and Europe (Mehlhorn et al. ). Theileria species are tick-transmitted and obligate intracellular parasites, which develop in the lymphocytes and red blood cells of their vertebrate hosts (Shaw ). Theileria ovis that causes benign theileriosis of small ruminants may be a very high prevalent Theileria in endemic areas of its geographical distribution (Kaufmann ; Taylor et al. ). The ticks of genus Hyalomma and Rhipicephalus bursa are claimed to be the main vectors (de la Fuente et al. ). Theileria hirci is a synonym of T. ovis (Mehlhorn et al. ). Anaplasma spp. are intracellular bacterial agents that infect wild and domestic ungulates with primary vectors which are ticks. The most important species are A. marginale , A. ovis , and A. centrale (Piesman and Gage ). Anaplasma ovis invades erythrocytes and causes sheep anaplasmosis (anemia) that occurs in tropical and subtropical regions throughout the world (Allison and Meinkoth ; Ganta ). In addition to sheep, A. ovis is pathogenic for goats and some wild ruminants (Harvey ). Under some circumstances, A. ovis can cause clinical anaplasmosis in sheep and goats (Carter and Wise ). In the old world, A. ovis is transmitted by R. bursa and most likely other species of ticks (Friedhoff cited in de la Fuente et al. ). Unculturable and hemotrophic wall-less organisms formerly classified in the order Rickettsiales (Fam. Anaplasmataceae) were recently assigned to the Mycoplasma (= Eperythrozoon ) genus according to phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA gene and electron microscopy (Songer and Post ). Mycoplasma species were found on the surface of erythrocytes and near thrombocytes (Kaufmann ). However, the mode of Mycoplasma transmission is unknown, but there is evidence that flies, lice, and mosquitoes may serve as mechanical vectors (Nicholas et al. ). Two most common Mycoplasma species namely, Mycoplasma ovis (parasites of sheep/goat) and M. wenyonii (parasites of cattle) probably may transmitted by various species of ticks (Neimark ). The distribution of mycoplasmosis due to Mycoplasma species of ruminants coincides with the distribution of their hosts so that the organisms can be assumed to be present within appropriate hosts throughout the world (Kreier et al. ). Anaplasma , Theileria , and Mycoplasma all are serious erythrotrophic pathogens of mammalian hosts, causing veterinary and economic impact, morbidity, and mortality (Robertson and Teske ). Iran is one of the countries with high livestock populations; more than 65% (40 million) of the available domestic animal units are sheep (SCI ). Ovine anaplasmosis, ovine theileriosis, and ovine mycoplasmosis are endemic infectious diseases of sheep in Iran (Hashemi-Fesharki ). We aimed to molecularly detect Anaplasma , Theileria , and Mycoplasma organisms of sheep hosts in Lorestan province, western Iran, using PCR and Sanger sequencing. Lorestan province is a center of animal husbandry, and ranching is ranked sixth in terms of sheep rearing at the country (SCI ). So this region can be the temperate endemic area of ovine tick-borne diseases. In the present study, sheep blood samples were examined only by molecular method and blood smears were not prepared for microscopic examination since red blood cells were to be lysed during the process of samples.
Materials and methods
Sample collection
Samplings were done on sheep population living in the villages of Aleshtar and Khorramabad counties, Lorestan province, located in western Iran (Fig. 1 and Table 1 ). The samples were collected during the tick activity season, March to April 2018, from jugular vein of 35 sheep units. Blood samples were collected into sterile tubes with anticoagulant (EDTA). Fig. 1 Map of study area and blood sampling sites (numbers 1–4 according to Table 1 ) in Lorestan province Table 1 Data of sheep blood samples and results of molecular assay in Lorestan province County Locality (village) GPS coordinates (NE) No. of collected samples No. of PCR positive Sequencing Aleshtar Zangivand 33° 52′ 37.86″ 48° 2′ 22.84″ 20 Negative Theileria ovis (18S rRNA) Anaplasma ovis ( msp4 ) Shineh 33° 47′ 24.27″ 47° 55′ 56.09″ Anaplasma (1) Nomads 33° 49′7.33″ 47° 58′ 40.53″ Anaplasma (4) Theileria (1) Khorramabad Sangtrashan 33° 13′ 52.04″ 48° 33′ 37.61″ 15 Anaplasma (4) Mycoplasma sp. (16S rRNA) Nojian waterfall 33° 13′ 40.74″ 48° 34′ 17.39″ Anaplasma (4), Theileria (2), Mycoplasma (1) Kamalvand 33° 29′ 20.29″ 48° 24′ 43.02″ Negative
DNA extraction and PCR
DNA of blood samples was extracted using CTAB according to Doyle and Doyle ( ) with minor modification. Primer pair BabfII (3′-GCTACCACATCYAAGGAAGGC-5′) and BabrII (3′-CGTCTTCGATCCCCTAACTTTCG-5′) was used to amplify 18S rRNA gene of Babesia and/or Theileria . A fragment of major surface proteins 4 ( msp4 ) of Anaplasma was amplified by primers designed by us including F msp4 (5′-GTYARRGGCTAYGRCAAGAG-3′) and R msp4 (5′-AGTRAACTGGTAGCTWATYCCA-3′), and a fragment of 16S rRNA Mycoplasma was amplified by primers Fmyco16S (5′-TATGTCCTATTAGGTAGTTGGCG-3′) and Rmyco16S (5′-CACCACTTGTTCAGGTCC-3′). PCR reactions for all genes were carried out in a thermocycler (Corbett®, Australia) based on a touchdown temperature profile by 3 min at 94 °C, 11X (45 s at 94 °C, 50 s at 60 °C, and 60 s at 72 °C), followed by 24X (45 s at 94 °C, 50 s at 50 °C, 60 s at 72 °C, and 3 min at 72 °C). PCR for each 25 μl, final volume reaction was performed using 12.5 μl RedMaster PCR 2X (Sinaclon®, Iran), 1 μl from each primer (10 pM), 4 μl gDNA template (100 ng/μl), and 6.5 μl D.D. water. The PCR products were visualized with 1% agarose gel electrophoresis, and the desired bands were purified using the GF-1 Gel DNA Recovery Kit (Vivantis®, Malaysia). Finally, the purified PCR products were submitted to Faza-Biotech® Inc. (Iran) for sequencing.
Phylogenetic analysis
Sequences were manually checked using FinchTV® software ( www.geospiza.com ) to correct any sources of error or ambiguities if present. Homologies with the available sequence data in GenBank were checked using BLAST analysis. Finally, sequences were submitted to GenBank, and accession numbers were assigned. The sequences were aligned using SeaView4 software (Gouy et al. ), and the genetic distances among the sequences were calculated using the maximum composite likelihood (MCL) model in the MEGA7 software (Kumar et al. ). To construct phylogenetic trees, the aligned sequences of each gene were analyzed using BEAST® software (version 2.5.1) (Bouckaert et al. ) based on the Bayesian inference (BI) method. This method employs Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms for Bayesian phylogenetic inference. For this purpose 21, 14, and 16 taxa (including sequences of the present study as well as the comparable GenBank data sequences as in- and out-groups) were used to construct Theileria , Anaplasma , and Mycoplasma phylogenetic trees, respectively. The constructed clades of phylogenetic trees were reorganized based on two criteria, including posterior probability greater than 99% support value and the reasonable genetic distance differences within and between the clade members. Taxa Babesia ovis (KY867435), Anaplasma marginale (L01987), Ureaplasma cati (NR_115604), Mycoplasma canis (MH169225), and Mycoplasma bovis (LT578453) were examined as out-group in 18S rRNA, msp4 , and 16S rRNA phylogenetic trees.
Results
By PCR, 13, 3, and one samples were to be infected by Anaplasma , Theileria , and Mycoplasma species (Table 1 ). One sample from each positive target PCR was sequenced, successfully and submitted to GenBank under the accession numbers MK246189 ( Theileria ovis ), MK252270 ( Anaplasma ovis ), and MH393561 ( Mycoplasma sp.). Phylogenetic tree of 18S rRNA, msp4 , and 16S rRNA target genes were constructed by BEAST software and Bayesian inference (Fig. 2 ). BLAST analysis shows 98–99% identity between a sequence of this study with T. ovis of Algeria, China, Northwest Iran, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, and Turkey submitted to GenBank. And we found 99% sequence identity between a sequence of this study with A. ovis sequences submitted from China, Iran (Tehran province), Mongolia, Portugal, Sudan, Tunisia, and Turkey. Finally, a sequence of Mycoplasma (this study) shows 99% genetic similarity with Mycoplasma ovis and M. wenyonii , so 16S rRNA gene fragment cannot specifically determine our Mycoplasma of infected sheep blood samples. Fig. 2 Phylogenetic trees generated based on 18S rRNA (A), msp4 (B), and 16S rRNA (C) sequence data of Theileria , Anaplasma , and Mycoplasma sequence data constructed using Bayesian inference (BI) method with 1,000 replicates. Sequence data were compared with GenBank database taxa based on query cover and identity parameters. The main clade of the tree is separated in the right side of the figure. Taxa as species name following GenBank accession number are given in the parenthesis; taxa of this study indicated as bold. Nodes are indicated with posterior probability values and branch length is proportional to evolutionary changes. Babesia ovis (KY867435), Anaplasma marginale (L01987), Ureaplasma cati (NR_115604), Mycoplasma bovis (LT578453), and Mycoplasma canis (MH169225) are indicated as out-groups in different phylogenetic trees
Discussion
The present study was designed to determine the infection of sheep blood with hemoparasitic agents (microbial and parasitic) in Lorestan province located in western Iran. We found three pathogenic agents including Theileria , Anaplasma , and Mycoplasma in two areas of Lorestan province according to specific PCR primers which are designed for the first time. This study was performed for the first time by PCR and sequencing techniques in Lorestan province. In this study, Theileria ovis , Anaplasma ovis , and Mycoplasma species were detected after Sanger sequencing and BLAST analysis of 18S rRNA, msp4 , and 16S rRNA target gene fragments. Various ovine theilerial agents such as T. annulata was reported from different parts of Iran among them T. ovis can be a widespread and most prevalent species (Heidarpour Bami et al. ; Tabaei et al. ; Telmadarraiy et al. ; Zaeemi et al. ). During the tick activity season, blood samples infected with Theileria agents were collected from healthy sheep, indicating the benign nature of this parasite for native animals. Thus, with utility of our PCR protocol presented in this paper, the actual incidence of the disease can be determined even with healthy sheep hosts. Without using the blood smear under the microscopical examination, PCR and sequencing can easily determine the exact species by BLAST analysis. In this study, A. ovis was detected in sheep blood simultaneously with T. ovis infection. Yousefi et al. ( ) reported both sheep and goat as the reservoirs of A. ovis and A. marginale . No genetic difference (100% similarity) was found among the various isolates of A. ovis from western Iran (Yousefi ). In the present work, a Mycoplasma agent is reported for the first time in Iran. There is only one unpublished report of M. ovis isolated from horse blood in Fars province (under the accession number MH615809 submitted in GenBank). Specific accuracy and inexpensive measures for identifying tick-borne agents in domestic livestock should be implemented. Timely diagnosis of tick-borne agents can be an important factor in controlling of subsequent diseases. Further molecular studies are needed to determine the specific Mycoplasma agent of sheep hosts in the Lorestan province. Based on genetic distance and phylogenetic tree of Theileria ovis , Anaplasma ovis , and Mycoplasma species, we can conclude that these agents are not genetically different from various isolates reported elsewhere.