Introduction
Enzootic pneumonia (EP) is one of the economic diseases of pigs having ubiquitous distribution. It is more important in an area where intensive pig production is carried out. Airborne transmission of EP up to the distance of 9.2 km from the source has been reported (Otake et al. ). The loss is mainly due to chronic dry cough and poor feed conversion ratio in affected animals (Straw et al. ). New born piglets are considered resistant to incoming infection for the first few weeks of their life due to passive immunity proffered by dam (Lam and Switzer ); however, EP is reported to begin very early in the farm and transmitting horizontally or vertically (Sibila et al. ). It takes approximately 15–38 days for the animal body to respond infection serologically (Neto et al. ; Giacomini et al. ) and these respiratory diseases such as EP and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) cause severe reduction in production performance as well as welfare of the animal (Fablet et al. ). Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae (Mh) infection not only causes chronic bronchopneumonia but also plays a prime role in aggravating consequences of PRRSV diseases (Thacker et al. ) predisposing to other secondary bacterial infections and suppressing pulmonary immunity simultaneously (Thacker and Minion ). Lack of secondary bacterial infections follows the subclinical form of the disease with chronic non-productive cough and decreased weight gain as a result of decreased feed conversion efficiency (Sibila et al. ) but when co-infected with other pathogens more pronounced clinical signs (i.e., fever, dyspnea, and sometimes death) may be observed (Maes et al. ). Mh is minimally pathogenic in its entirety but it moderates to exacerbate the condition jointly with other bacteria and viruses evoking more severe clinical manifestations (Thacker ). Clinical symptoms are mainly as a result of pathogenic potential of Mh and bodily defense mechanisms occurring in the lungs (Maes et al. ). In addition, cholesterol plays a role in enhancing Mh-induced cell deaths by upregulating its division and attachment to porcine alveolar macrophages (Liu et al. ). Associations between clinical manifestations of the disease and type of production system employed have been well established with the implication of effects of farm environment in the host body immunity (Sibila et al. ).
Transmission of Mh from sows to their young ones is a key source of persistent infection within the herd (Sibila et al. ). Besides direct transmission, possibility of indirect transmission through shed surfaces also increases the risk of this disease particularly, in the case of Nepal where majority of sheds do not meet the biosafety criteria. The evidences of Mh survival on dusty, propylene copolymer surface at low temperature setting supports this idea (Browne et al. ). In addition, some herd-specific factors such as number of replacing gilts annually, farrowing pens in a compartment, and the interval between the entry of new piglets into the previously emptied shed have a role in increasing the disease risk (Nathues et al. , ). In Nepal, swine farming is primarily based on one-site system which increases risk of Mh infection because mixed age animals share the same shed.
Pig farming is at its developing phase in the country and 5% of total pig population lies in the far western region (DoAH ). One potential reason of underdeveloped pig farming could be religious and cultural issue where consumption of pork is not allowed according to Hindu religious philosophy. This is a reason that limits pig farming to certain communities and caste systems of Nepal who consider pork. The other possible factor could be that several diseases are on the rise mainly, swine fever, reproductive disorders along with enzootic and induced pneumonia, etc. which renders industry into economic loss. On the other hand, high mortality of young ones and poor performance of adult animals are major challenges to bear in mind before considering pig farming as a commercial enterprise in Nepal. Though respiratory problems like chronic dry cough, fever, and pneumonia are very common in pigs of Nepal, literature remains silent about its prevalence in Far Western region. Thus, current study aims to document prevalence and associated risk factors of Mh infection in pig of Kailali and Kanchanpur Districts of Nepal which will be useful for the control and prevention of EP and pave the way for future studies.
Materials and methods
This cross-sectional study was carried out in between April and July of 2016.
Study area
The geographical location of Kailali District is 28° 41′ 0″ N, 80° 52′ 0″ E and Kanchanpur District is 28° 50′ 0″ N, 80° 20′ 0″ E. Both districts lie at the base of Mahabharata range where predominant area has been occupied by the forest and agricultural land. Human settlement is more densely focused alongside the East-West highway but most of the animal husbandries are located in rural areas. According to the annual epidemiological bulletin 2015 out of total 1,190,138 pigs throughout the Nation, approximately 56,076 pigs are located in this region (DoAH ).
Questionnaire survey
The information about herds, management systems, and environmental conditions of farms were gathered using standardized questionnaire survey. Farm owners of corresponding animals were selected for this purpose.
Study design
A cross-sectional study design was used with purposive sampling in the disease prone areas of Kailali and Kanchanpur Districts. Sampling areas were picked up according to the availability of farms as per the information supplied by District Livestock Services Office (DLSO) Kailali and DLSO Kanchanpur. Because of unavailability of complete list of animals within each village, animals were selected randomly for blood collection and blood was collected by researchers themselves.
Sample size calculation
The total pig population of Kailali and Kanchanpur Districts as stated in statistical year book, 2012, were 32,871 and 12,815 respectively. Sample size was calculated according to Daniel’s formula (Daniel ) which was further supported by Naing et al. (Naing et al. ). Since this study being the first study to determine the sero-prevalence of EP in this research site, 50% prevalence was considered for the maximization of number of samples. $$ n=\frac{Z^2P\left(1-P\right)}{d^2}=96\ \left(\mathrm{Daniel}\ 1999\right) $$ where, n sample size Z 95% level of confidence in Z statistics ( Z = 1.96) P expected level of prevalence (i.e., P = 0.5) d precision ( d = 0.1)
The calculated sample size was 96; however, researchers have managed to take 184 samples to optimize the power of the test.
Serum analysis
The serum was isolated by using centrifuge at 1200 rpm. Commercial ID screen® competitive ELISA detecting anti Mh antibodies present in the pig serum or plasma was used in this study. The specificity of the test is claimed due to its highly specific monoclonal antibodies targeting the conserved epitope of P65 protein of Mh and not cross reacting with the other mycoplasma species’ antigen, i.e., Mycoplasma flocculare , Mycoplasma hyorinis , or Mycoplasma hyosynoviae .
Briefly, wells of the 96-well plate were already coated with Mh antigen where serum samples being tested and controls (i.e., positive control and negative control) were kept. Wells A1, B1 were used for positive control, wells C1, D1 for negative control, and the remaining wells were used for the samples. In presence of anti-Mh antibodies, antigen-antibody complexes are formed occupying the epitopes. The remaining P65 protein epitopes were neutralized by adding anti-P65-peroxidase (HRP) that forms antigen-conjugate-HRP complex. Substrate was added after washing the excess amount of conjugate. It was the quantity of anti-Mh-antibody present in the serum that determined the color. Samples with anti-Mh-antibodies produced no color while blue color was produced in samples without antibody that gradually turned into yellow upon addition of stop solution. Finally, the microplate was read at 450 nm and resulting optical density (OD) was recorded. The test was assumed valid when OD of negative control was found greater than 0.7 and the ratio of OD values of positive control to the negative control was found less than 0.3. Samples with S/N% ≤ 50% were considered positive. The competition percentage was calculated as: $$ \frac{S}{N}\%=\frac{\mathrm{OD}\ \mathrm{samples}}{\mathrm{OD}\ \mathrm{negative}\ \mathrm{control}} \times 100 $$
Data analysis
Data entry, management, and analysis were done using Microsoft Excel 2010. The EP-associated risk factors were assessed by chi-square ( χ 2 ) analysis using commercial software PHStat2 version 2.5 and Fisher’s exact test at 5% level of significance. Odds ratio and confidence interval (CI) were calculated using software open epi-tool ( http://epitools.ausvet.com.au ).
Results
The overall sero-prevalence of EP as a result of this study was found to be 22.83% (42/184). Higher prevalence was observed in improved breeds of pigs, i.e., 27.46% (39/142) than in local breeds, i.e., 7.14% (3/42) and it was statistically significantly different (* P < 0.05) [Table 1 ]. Of the 184 animals tested, 26.67% (32/120) females and 15.63% (10/64) males were found positive. Although higher percentage of females were found positive, it was statistically insignificant (* P > 0.05). Based on age groups, lowest prevalence was recorded in group 0–6 months, i.e., 6.82% (3/44) and highest in group > 24 months, i.e., 60% (3/5) which was statistically significantly different (* P < 0.05) [Table 1 ]. In addition, this study considered health and nutrition status of animal such as history of abortion and growth rate to determine their association with occurrence of EP. Higher prevalence of EP was noted in animals with a history of abortion, i.e., 57.14% (16/28) than without history of abortion and odds of finding this disease in an animal with history of abortion was recorded very high, i.e., 6.66 (95% CI 2.825–15.73) [Table 2 ]. Likewise, poorly growing animals were found with higher prevalence of EP, i.e., 39% (29/74) than those at good growth rate [Table 3 ]. Table 1 Animal associated risk factors for prevalence of Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae infection Parameters Total Positive Negative Prevalence % Chi-square ( P value) OR Breed Local 42 3 39 7.14% 0.005841 0.2032 (0.05934–0.6955) Improved 142 39 103 27.46% Age (in months) 0 to 6 months 44 3 41 6.82% 0.00294 N/A 7 to 12 months 84 18 66 21.43% 13 to 18 months 33 12 21 36.36% 19 to 24 months 18 6 12 33.33% 25 to 30 months 3 1 2 33.33% 31 to 36 months 2 2 0 100.00% Sex Male 64 10 54 15.63% 0.09902 0.5189 (0.2361–1.14) Female 120 32 88 26.67% Table 2 Farm associated risk factors for prevalence of Mycoplasma hypopneumoniae infection Parameters Total Positive Negative Prevalence (%) Chi-square ( P value) OR Production system All-in all-out 18 2 16 11.11% 0.00005826 Continuous 125 40 85 32.00% N/A Household 41 0 41 0.00% Housing Modern 112 37 75 33.04% 0.0002095 Free range 27 2 25 7.41% N/A Semi-conventional 45 3 42 6.67% Partition Solid 11 2 9 18.18% 0.00003779 Semisolid 103 36 67 34.95% No partition 70 4 66 5.71% Table 3 Prevalence of Mycoplasma hypopneumoniae in pigs with/without previous history of abortion Abortion Positive Negative % positive Chi-square OR Yes 16 12 57.14% 0.000002618 No 26 130 16.67% 6.667 (2.825–15.73)
Farm management practices, type of production system (i.e., all-in all-out, continuous, households, etc.), housing and partition, and their potential association with EP occurrence were also assessed simultaneously. Higher prevalence was observed in continuous production system, i.e., 32.00% followed by all-in-all-out system, i.e., 11.11%, the difference was statistically significant (* P < 0.05). Out of three types of housing system found in the research site, the highest prevalence of EP was found in modern housing, i.e., 33.04%, while the remaining two, the free range and semi-conventional, were at similar range, i.e., 7.41% and 6.67% respectively. The difference in prevalence of EP in between modern housing and other two systems was statistically significantly different (* P < 0.05) [Table 4 ]. Table 4 Prevalence of Mycoplasma hypopneumoniae in pigs with good vs poor growth rate Growth rate Positive Negative % prevalence Chi-square OR Good 13 97 11.82% 0.00001441 Poor 29 45 39.19% 0.208 (0.09887–0.4374)
Discussion
Enzootic pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae is one of the most important diseases of porcine worldwide. EP infection causes huge economic loss in commercial pig farming mainly by reducing daily weight gain and feed conversion ratio by 17% and 14% respectively (Straw et al. ). Current study reveals 22.83% of the overall sero-prevalence of Mh in the pig population of two districts of far western site of Nepal. The result of this study is in accordance with the results of several previous studies. The overall sero-prevalence of Mh in adjoining area Tibet was reported to be 20.48% (Qiu et al. ). Likewise, approximately 20% sero-prevalence of Mh was reported in Spanish pig population (Sibila et al. ). Furthermore, the result of current study lies within the range (2–45%) reported for the commercial suckling pigs of Thailand (Boonsoongnern et al. ), prevalence range (5.7–57%) in a subset of general pig population of Ukraine (Lysenko et al. ), and prevalence range (2.9–79.1%) reported in a subset of Japanese pig population (Yagihashi et al. ). However, the result of the present study is slightly less than the average worldwide prevalence range 30–80% (He et al. ; Prokeš et al. ) and above the average prevalence of Mh (10.7%) in pigs of nine different European countries (Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Poland, Hungary, Italy, Spain, and The Netherlands) (Villarreal et al. ). In contrast, this prevalence proportion is significantly less than the results of studies done in pig population of subtropical southern China showing 45.7% average prevalence (He et al. ), Tibet 58.86% average prevalence (Zhang et al. ), eastern Slovakia 42.1% prevalence (Prokeš et al. ), north west Germany 65% prevalence (Grosse Beilage et al. ), and Sweden 90% prevalence (Mattsson et al. ). The higher prevalence could be due to more intensive farming system and ecological differences. Intensive farming system is more likely to bring direct contact between infected and susceptible pigs while less trend of commercialization and less intensive porcine industry provide lesser intermingling of herds which could have contributed to the lower sero-prevalence of Mh in pigs of Nepal.
Prevalence proportion was significantly higher (* P < 0.05) among improved breeds of pigs compared to the local breeds. The higher prevalence of Mh in improved breeds of pigs than in local breeds of pigs is potentially due to more acclimatization of local breeds to their native environment. Changing patterns of temperature, feed, humidity, animal density, ventilation, animal mixing, and other activities ultimately put animals under stress. Any stress on animals plays a crucial role in Mh infection (Leon et al. ). In addition, susceptibility of infection varies according to the breeds where inflammatory response to Mh infection is clearly linked with immune status, signaling pathway, and steroid metabolism (Xiao-min et al. ). Most of the commercial farms prefer improved breeds of pigs to the local breeds of pigs in the research site. The higher stocking rate combined with poor bio-security and poor nutritional and other management problems leads to immune-suppression and increased risk of Mh infection could be the other possible reason.
Although statistically insignificant, sero-prevalence was more among females than among the males. This finding is in accordance with the result of a study done in Tibetan pig population reporting no significant difference in Mh sero-prevalence among males and females (Zhang et al. ). On the flip side, higher sero-prevalence of Mh in bores than in sows (He et al. ) indicates that there is no any association between the Mh infection and sex of an animal where both males and females are equally likely getting infection.
Swines of age group 13–18 months were 7.8125 times more susceptible to Mh infection than their counterparts [Table 1 ].This finding is further supported by the report of increased prevalence of Mh in grower, finisher, and sows more than 4 months of age (Yagihashi et al. ; Leon et al. ). The higher prevalence in this age group is mainly due to a reduced level of primary antibodies against the Mh at the beginning of finishing age (Leon et al. ; Brockmeier et al. ) and as the maternal antibody level wanes, the number of serologically positive animals will be on rise gradually (Sibila et al. ). The lowest sero-prevalence observed in 0–6-month age group potentially due to elevated level of maternal antibody that later dwindles as the animal ages. Thus, the result of current study contradicts to a previous study showing Mh infection beginning very early life of animals at notable percentage (Fablet et al. ).
In this study, a notably higher level of risk of Mh infection in sows with history of abortion was observed. As the causes of abortion in pigs can be broadly categorized into two different types, infectious and non-infectious causes, in either case there is obvious connection with host body immune status. Good growth rate is an indicator of well-nourished animal while poor growth rate may be due to nutritional deficiencies. Deficiencies of any origin leading to immunosuppression render animals with increased susceptibility of infectious diseases.
Continuous production system was recorded with highest sero-prevalence compared to all-in all-out system (AIAO) and household farming. One potential reason of higher prevalence of Mh in continuous production system could be due to procurement of sub-clinically infected animals from outside the herd. Also, the population density of pig in the research site is not so high to pose threat of airborne transmission and sows and/or gilts with less parity might be serving as a source of infection due to low level of antibody in their body resulting into more excretion of Mh. Additionally, mixing or housing close to animals of different ages in finisher shed of continuous system further helps to transmit the causative agent of EP (Maes et al. ). In continuous production system, the number of animals infected with Mh increases with the age while in AIAO this number decreases as the age goes up (Sibila et al. ). Opposite to continuous production system, in all-in all-out system, all animals are grown and marketed at once, and new animals are not introduced unless a single animal from previous batch remains unsold. AIAO system results in breakage of pathogen transmission cycle occurring between older and younger pigs; therefore, AIAO method is suggested to reduce the prevalence of EP (Sibila et al. ) which corroborates the less prevalence of EP in pigs raised under AIAO system in this study.
Similar to the finding of this study, a previous study also suggested the possibility of housing playing an important role in EP transmission (Nathues et al. ) while association of age of the building with the sero-prevalence of Mh still remains unclear. The highest prevalence of Mh among pigs raised under modern housing could be due to higher stocking density relative to the shed size as well as problematic feed and water supply as stated by former scholars (Nathues et al. ). Semisolid partitioning, i.e., wires gauze fencing, bamboo fiber, or perforated wall, allows easy movement of droplets across the different animals’ groups leading to wider spread of infection within the shed. On the other hand, solid wall completely blocks the air movement across the pen, but the common ceiling space above may have played a role in this disease transmission to some extent. For this reason, simply it can be assumed that the solid partition showing less prevalence of Mh than semisolid partition is formidable. Unlike solid partition, no partition allows free movement of animals as in the case of free ranging system which increases the probability of this disease transmission. In no partition/or free ranging system, unless the density remains too high, it will not increase the prevalence proportion of Mh in animals which are less likely to come in close contact.
EP is a multifactorial disease. Optimization of management system, housing, balanced feed and water supply, less stressful climatic conditions, and medications or vaccination against the Mh could only minimize the loss. EP remains more problematic in intensive pig farming area but the above factors cannot be underestimated in sparsely populated area as well.