Introduction
The lesser guitarfish Zapteryx brevirostris (Müller and Henle 1841) is widely distributed in coastal waters of the South Atlantic, from Rio de Janeiro (≈ 23° S, Brazil), south of Province of Buenos Aires (≈ 41° S, Argentina) (Castello ; Menni and Stehmann ). In both countries Z. brevirostris is caught in trawling fisheries, which has led to a reduction in its incidence in these areas (Barbini et al. ). Due to its low fecundity, the Z. brevirostris is classified as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) (Barbini et al. ).
Periods of food deprivation are common in nature for many animals, but few species can withstand prolonged hunger without affecting homeostasis (McCue ). When animals are under food restriction, their body reserves play energetic functions for the normal functioning of the body (Fuglei et al. ). Thus, behavioral and physiological strategies are used to compensate for the animal's energy shortage during periods without food (Pottinger et al. ). During periods of fasting, stored energy mobilizations are commanded by the endocrine system (Ashouri et al. ).
In elasmobranch fish, the liver is the main storage site for triglycerides and, in some species, 80% of its weight may represent lipids. This reserve is the main source of energy during fasting periods and, in some cases, it assists in buoyancy (Grant et al. ). In teleost fish there is an expressive reduction of the lipid and glycogen reserves when they are submitted to different periods of fasting (Blasco et al. ; Ostaszewska et al. ). In the case of Z. brevirostris , there are no data on the morphological alterations in relation to the reduction of food resources and subsequent refeeding.
Thus, the objective of the present study was to quantify fat storage in hepatocytes and the presence of melano-macrophages in the hepatic parenchyma of lesser guitarfish Z. brevirostris submitted to different restriction and refeeding periods.
Material and Methods
Animals
Twenty one lesser guitarfish Z. brevirostris (486.56 ± 112.52 g and 44.48 ± 3.34 cm total length) were collected as a companion fauna of the shrimp trawl fishery in Ubatuba (23° 26′ 2″ S, 45° 4′ 15″ W), São Paulo state. The animals were taken and acclimatized at the Marine Fisheries Laboratory of the São Paulo State Fisheries Institute, in Ubatuba, and released in fiberglass tanks (2500 L).
All institutional and national guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals were followed: Committee of Ethics in Animal Experimentation of the São Paulo State Fisheries Institute - CEEAIP # 12/2016 and license of the Brazilian Institute of Environment and Renewable Natural Resources, IBAMA # 49980-3/2016.
Life support system
Three groups of males and females were divided and kept in circular fiberglass tanks with a capacity of 2500 L each, with a water depth of 93 cm, without sediment and with individual filtration system. Each filter set was composed of a plastic sump reservoir (100 L) with skimmer and mechanical bag filter to retain particles from 100 μm. Submersible pumps with flow rates of 4000 L h -1 were used, with complete recycling of the water every 45 minutes. The density of each tank was seven animals or approximately 1.16 kg m -3 . For adaptation, the animals stayed 60 days with daily feeding of frigate tuna ( Auxis thazard ) in cubes and 30% of Atlantic seabob shrimp ( Xiphopenaeus kroyeri ) without head ad libitum . The photoperiod used was 12/12h (light/dark). The temperature (26 ± 2 °C) was measured using the mercury thermometer and the salinity (30 ± 2 ‰) was measured daily through a manual refractometer (RETK-68 saline refractometer, Tekcoplus Ltd, Hong Kong) and weekly measurements of dissolved oxygen (7 ± 1 g L -1 ) were carried out using a Hanna HI 9829 (HI 9829 Hanna Multiparameter, Hanna® Instruments, USA) multiparameter meter, total ammonia (0.1 ± 0.1 mg L -1 ) and pH (8.3 ± 0.3) with Red Sea® colorimetric kits.
Experimental Design and Treatments
The trial lasted 76 days (December/2015 to February/2016) and started when all animals were acclimated and consuming the food provided. The guitarfish were divided into three groups ( n = 7): animals fed every day (control group); animals with one week of restriction and two of refeeding (W1 group) and animals with two weeks of restriction and two of refeeding (W2 group). A combination of 70% of frigate tuna ( Auxis thazard ) in cubes and 30% of Atlantic seabob shrimp ( Xiphopenaeus kroyeri ) at the amount of 3% of the biomass of the tank was supplied once a day in the morning. Food leftovers and feces were siphoned out 5 minutes after each feeding time.
Histology
On the last day of the trial, the animals were euthanized with deepening of the anesthetic plane using eugenol (168 mg.L -1 ) diluted in ethanol at 1:5 ratio for the collection of material for histopathology (Takatsuka et al. ).
For histopathological analyzes, distal portions of the three liver lobes were collected and fixed in 10% formalin (pH 7.2). After 24 hours, the tissues were dehydrated in increasing concentrations of ethanol (50%, 70%, 80%, 90 and 100%) for paraffin embedding. Six serial cuts of 4-5 μm thick were stained with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS). The slides were analyzed for structural and cellular changes captured with a digital camera (Leica DFC 295, Germany) coupled under a microscope (Leica-DM 2500, Germany) in a 40X objective. The photomicrographs were analyzed by the LAS V.3.8 image capture and analysis program (Leica, Germany). Three photomicrographs per slide were randomly selected using a randomization table (Gundersen ). In each image the number, area and diameter of melano-macrophages and number of hepatocytes with lipid deposition and the area occupied by the hepatic intracellular lipids globules were determined, obtaining the results converted into μm and μm 2 . To perform the analyzes, the software Image-Pro Plus® v. 4.5.0.29, drawing a horizontal (maximum) diameter and perpendicular line at an angle of 90° (square test-area).
Design and Statistical Analysis
Due to limited space and resource, each animal was considered as an experimental unit, resulting in seven replicates per treatment. The data were tested for normality and homoscedasticity, and when necessary the data were transformed to meet the prerequisites, once parametric analyzes were performed. The groups were compared by analysis of variance (ANOVA), and the Tukey test was used as a post-test to compare the means, with a significance level of 5%.
Results
This study investigated the stereological quantification of fat storage in hepatocytes and melano-macrophages in liver parenchyma of lesser guitarfish Zapteryx brevirostris submitted to different restriction and refeeding periods.
Histopathological evaluation of the liver of Z. brevirostris
Control group showed liver with apparently healthy hepatocytes, a nucleus with two to four nucleoli, and in the cytoplasm a single drop of lipid (macrovesicular steatosis) and glycogen granules (Fig. 1A ). In the hepatic parenchyma, melano-macrophages were randomly distributed and filled with brownish orange content (melanin and lipofuscin) grouped or not in melano-macrophage centers. Fig 1. In figure 1A , the lesser guitarfish Zapteryx brevirostris liver of the control group present hepatocytes accumulating large droplets of lipids in cytoplasm (vacuolar degeneration). Throughout the liver parenchyma cellular debris are phagocytosed by melano-macrophages of a wide range of sizes (arrows). In figure 1B the liver parenchyma of W1 group has hepatocytes with partially consumed lipid deposits, and “moth-eaten” cytoplasmic pattern (hydropic degeneration). Few hepatocytes are seen undergoing apoptosis (arrowheads). In figure 1C the liver parenchyma of group W2 showed marked alterations, with the presence of large numbers of melano-macrophages and hepatocytes undergoing apoptosis (arrowheads). Bar - 20 μm.
On the other hand, the stingrays with one week of fasting intercourse with two weeks of feeding (W1 group) showed hepatocytes with megalocytosis - high nucleus / cytoplasm ratio with two nucleoli evident in the nucleus, reduction of lipid content, and cytoplasm with hydropic degeneration. The hepatocyte shape also changed from slightly oval to cuboidal. Hepatocytes also underwent to apoptosis with intensely PAS positive stained cytoplasm (Fig. 1B ). Melano-macrophages were seen forming melano-macrophage centers in liver parenchyma.
However, stingrays that suffered the longest fasting (W2 group) had more intense consequences, with areas of coagulative necrosis and piecemeal necrosis, hepatocytes with marked megalocytosis, increased numbers of hepatocytes in apoptosis (Fig. 1C ), and large melano-macrophage centers throughout the liver parenchyma.
Number of Hepatocytes with lipid deposition and Occupied Area by hepatic intracellular lipid globules
The number of hepatocytes with lipid deposition (Fig. 2A ) did not differ statistically ( P = 0.861) among the groups. Fig. 2. In graphic A the number of hepatocytes with lipid deposition demonstrates similar features among groups of lesser guitarfish Zapteryx brevirostris submitted to different feeding cycles. However, the reductions of the area occupied by hepatic intracellular lipids globules seen in graphic B demonstrate the lipid droplet consumption in starvation periods. Different letters show significant differences ( P <0.05) among the experimental groups. Legend: Control group with daily feeding animals (Control), animals submitted to seven days of food deprivation and fourteen days of feed (W1) and animals submitted to fourteen days of food deprivation and fourteen days of feed (W2).
However, the area occupied by the liver lipid deposition (Fig. 2B ) showed a statistically significant difference ( P <0.001) among the groups. In comparison, the lipid deposition area of ​​the control group (507.09 ± 536.06 μm 2 ) was higher than the treatments W1 (340.39 ± 351.39 μm 2 ) and W2 (306.22 ± 282.96 μm 2 ), with the latter two treatments not differing from each other.
Number, Diameter and Area occupied by Melano-macrophage
The number of melano-macrophages (Fig. 3A ) did not differ statistically ( P = 0.856) among the evaluated treatments. Fig. 3. In graphic 3A, melano-macrophage counting did not change in lesser guitarfish Zapteryx brevirostris liver parenchyma among groups. But the diameter (graphic 3B) and the area (graphic 3C) occupied by melano-macrophages have increased in lesser guitarfish liver parenchyma submitted to different feeding cycles. Different letters show significant differences among the experimental groups. Legend: lesser guitarfish with daily feeding (Control), animals submitted to seven days of food deprivation and fourteen days of feed (W1) and animals submitted to fourteen days of food deprivation and fourteen days of feed (W2).
However, the diameter of melano-macrophages (Fig. 3B ) presented a statistical difference ( P <0.001) among the groups. In relation to the treatments, the diameter of melano-macrophages of the Control group was smaller than the treatments W1 and W2, which did not differ between them.
The area occupied by melano-macrophages (Fig. 3C ) presented a statistical difference (P <0.001) among the evaluated treatments. Melano-macrophages of the Control group occupied the smaller area when compared to the W1 and W2 treatments, which did not show any difference between them.
Discussion
The present work evaluated the morphological alterations in liver of lesser guitarfish Zapteryx brevirostris submitted to different periods of restriction and refeeding.
Hepatic glycogen and lipids are the energy reserves used by the fasting animal organism, which saves protein reserves for scarce periods in food (Navarro and Gutiérrez ). We observed lipid liver catabolism in lesser guitarfish Z. brevirostris submitted to fasting for one or two weeks, saving glycogen. Squalus acanthias sharks in different periods of fasting use muscle alanine and lactate in gluconeogenesis. The glucose synthesized maintains muscle glucose reserves, which undergo anaerobic glycolysis to provide energy for various activities such as predation, flight or if a rapid swimming is needed (Leech et al. ; de Roos et al. ). The biochemical and physiological changes during fasting can be configured in three phases in fish: I) a short transient phase, (II) a long phase of stable conservation status of protein, mainly with the oxidation of fat as primary energy source and (III), a shift to the mobilization of proteins as the main source of energy (Bar ). From the histological and stereological evaluation, we can locate the stingrays of this work in phase II by the consumption of lipid energy reserves of the liver.
Hepatic steatosis with presence of inflammatory infiltrate, balooning hepatocytes and necrosis can be understood as steatohepatitis. It has several origins, e.g. malnutrition and starvation (Angulo ). In the case of fasting, hepatocyte injury results from the peroxidation of unsaturated fatty acids, which, together with the lower levels of antioxidant components, may render cell structures more susceptible to free radical attack (Vendemiale et al. ). Free radicals in the cytoplasm cause fragility of cell membranes, attracting inflammatory cells into the liver parenchyma (Alfadda and Sallam ). In this way, melano-macrophages were present in the liver of the lesser guitarfish, cells containing melanin in the cytoplasm (Agius and Agbede ) - antioxidant protein, besides being described as metabolic deposits for damaged cell debris (Agius and Roberts ).
Melano-macrophages were detected in the lesser guitarfish liver parenchyma at values ​​similar to those reported in Raja clavata rays (Agius ), and their numbers increased with the increase of the restriction period applied. Similar behavior was reported in livers of Scyliorhinus canicula sharks submitted to short and long periods of fasting (Agius and Roberts ; Agius ). The increase in the diameter and the area occupied by the melano-macrophages in the liver parenchyma in the different fasted groups is a clue to the phagocytic action of melano-macrophages in the liver of Z. brevirostris . This fact was also reported by Herraez and Zapata ( ) who found similar behavior in splenic and renal melano-macrophages of Carassius auratus immunized with fetal bovine serum.
In order to evaluate the effects of environmental pollution on the elasmobranchs of continental waters (de Moraes et al. ) and histopathological evaluations of species of diseased marine elasmobranchs (Garner ) more morphological descriptions of fish livers are needed (Shiojiri et al. ).
Conclusion
The lesser guitarfish Z. brevirostris showed to be a captive species resilient to different cycles of fasting and refeeding. The results obtained will be the basis for the improvement of feeding protocols, ensuring welfare and general health of animals held in captivity. These data provide the basis for future experiments, such as long-term transport and its possible consequences for this species.