Introduction
Canine mammary carcinoma (CMC) is the most diagnosed tumor in female dogs and shares several characteristics with human breast cancer and is a good model for comparative breast cancer studies (Khanna et al. Khanna et al. ; Munson Munson and Moresco ; Queiroga et al. ). Finding an appropriate model for human breast cancer has been always a challenge for scientist. Pet animal like dogs are exposed to the same insulting agents causing cancer as human beings and their tumors are spontaneous and naturally occurring as well.
Interleukin-15 (IL-15) basically regulates immune responses such as activation of immune cells particularly natural killer (NK) cell (Bancroft ; Fehniger and Caligiuri ; Meazza et al. ; Trinchieri ). IL-15 also activates Janus kinase (JAK/STAT) pathway, src -related tyrosine kinases, MAPK pathway, and Bcl-2 induction (Ihle et al. ; Miyazaki et al. ), all of which are involved in mechanisms that contribute to cancer development (Dhillon et al. ; Sen and Johnson ; Thomas et al. ).
Hyper-expression of IL-15-transgenic mice in vivo has led to development of some types of cancer. This chronic increased expression of IL-15 induces JAK1/3 and STAT3/5 signaling pathways which eventually cause neoplastic transformation. Upon activation of STAT3 pathway, the expression of Myc increases. This will result in Aurora kinase A and B overexpression which leads to chromosome instability and mir-29b downregulation which results in silencing of oncosuppressor genes (Mishra et al. ).
There are evidences suggesting that IL-15 could be involved in tumorigenesis. In human breast cancer tissues, IL-15 protein has been found to be decreased (Sanders et al. ). Likewise, an immunohistochemical study has demonstrated that IL-15 mRNA levels are decreased in lung cancer in man and is correlated with higher tumor stages (Faisal Adhami et al. ; Sanders et al. ). In opposite, increased levels of IL-15 mRNA and protein have been observed in some human solid tumors including osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, melanoma, small cell lung cancer, renal cell carcinoma, glioblastoma, neuroblastoma, gastric cancer, melanoma cell lines, and mesothelioma (Barzegar et al. ; Kuniyasu et al. ; Lollini et al. ; Meazza et al. ; Trinder et al. ).
Targeted drug therapy against IL-15 has been tested in different hematopoietic and solid cancers including breast cancer, leukemia, renal cancer, melanoma, lymphoma, lung cancer, brain cancers, squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, and bladder tumors with beneficial results (Rautela and Huntington ; Steinway and Loughran ). The mentioned data has made IL-15 a promising target for anticancer therapy which is still under many investigations.
Bcl-2 belongs to the family of Bcl-2 proteins (Gross et al. ). It is an anti-apoptotic oncoprotein that blocks apoptosis (Cory et al. ; Tsujimoto et al. ). Inhibition of apoptosis is a strategy which is used by many of tumor cells to survive (O’Brien and Kirby O'Brien and Kirby ). There are several studies pointing out dysregulation of apoptosis pathways in canine mammary tumors in which Bcl-2 levels have been found to be increased or unaltered (Kumaraguruparan et al. ; Shokoohi et al. ; Shoorei et al. ; Yang et al. ).
It has been shown that IL-15 induces anti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl-2 family of proteins; one of our goals in the present study is to determine any possible relationships between IL-15 and Bcl-2 protein expression in canine mammary carcinoma (Mishra et al. ; Shenoy et al. ).
Cytokines could be considered as potential targets for anticancer therapy in canine mammary carcinoma in future; it has been reported that transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-β1) and interleukin-17 are overexpressed in canine mammary carcinoma and are of prognostic significance (Rezaee et al. ; Rezaee et al. ). Likewise, there are other articles showing that interleukin-1, interleukin-6, and interleukin-8 are in association with some malignancy indices (Kim et al. ; Zuccari et al. ). To date, there is no data available regarding IL-15 roles in canine mammary carcinoma and this article is investigating IL-15 expression in this tumor for the first time.
This study examined IL-15 expression in canine mammary carcinoma by immunohistochemistry and its possible associations with histologic grades, Bcl-2 expression, tumor recurrence, and overall survival.
Materials and methods
Ethical approval
The conducted research is not related to animals use. No ethical approval was obtained because this study did not involve laboratory animals and only involved non-invasive procedures.
Thirty female dogs—whose mammary tumors had been removed by surgery—were included in this study. Fixation of the tissues carried on using 10% formalin, after routine processing and staining with H&E stains. “World Health Organization histological classification of the canine and feline mammary tumors” was used for classification of the slides (Misdorp ).
Positive controls for IL-15 and Bcl-2 were mouse kidney and tonsil lymph node respectively.
We used a previously developed method for histologic grading of the canine mammary carcinomas for each slide and finally grade them as I, II, and III (Misdorp ).
Immunohistochemistry
Tissues were dewaxed in warm xylene and were rehydrated in graded alcohols 100%, 95%, 80%, and 70%. We put the specimens in water bath in 95 °C for 20 min using Tris-EDTA buffer (pH 9) to retrieve possibly masked antigens. 0.3% H 2 O 2 diluted in PBS was added to the slides to neutralize endogenous peroxidase enzyme.
To reduce unspecific binding, the slides were incubated with 1.5% normal goat serum in PBS for 1 h. Antibodies against IL-15 (Ab109082, Abcam) and Bcl-2 (SC-492, SantaCruz Biotechnology) were added to the slides at proper dilutions suggested by the manufacturer and were incubated overnight at 4 °C.
The method avidin-biotin complex (ABC) was used for immunostaining; biotinylated secondary antibody was added to the slides at 1:200 dilution for 30 min. Then, avidin and biotinylated horse radish peroxidase (HRP) were added and incubated for 30 min and DAB was used as chromogen. Counterstaining with Harris hematoxylin and dehydration were the final steps.
Interpretation of IHC results
Scoring was performed by two authors (MR, MM) according to a previously described method. The “distribution” of positive cells per slide was obtained by calculating mean percentage of positive-stained cell in 10 HPFs as 0 = 0%, 1 = 1–5%, 2 = 6–20%, 3 = 21–50%, or 4 = > 50% of cells. Additionally, the “intensity” of the observed signals was graded as 0 = negative, 1 = weak, 2 = moderate, 3 = strong, and 4 = intense. Final scores were obtained by multiplying the “distribution score” and the “intensity score”, ranging from 0 to 16. The examined slides were finally categorized into 4 groups as follows: negative (0), weak (1–3), moderate (4–7), and strong expression (8–16).
Statistical analysis
We performed statistical analysis by SPSS using chi-square test and p < 0.05 was considered as significant.
Results
Thirty tumor samples were classified as anaplastic carcinoma (5/30, 16.66%), carcinosarcoma (8/30, 26.66%), solid carcinoma (7/30, 23.33%), mixed-type carcinoma (5/30, 16.66%), and complex-type carcinoma (5/30, 16.66%). Ten samples were grade III (33.33%), 15 were grade II (50%), and 5 were grade I (16.66%).
Bcl-2 cytoplasmic immunolabeling was observed in neoplastic cells in different levels. Twelve cases (40%) showed strong immunoreactivity (Fig. 1 ), 8 cases (26.66%) moderate immunoreactivity, and 10 cases (33.33%) weak. Fig. 1 Anaplastic carcinoma, strong expression of Bcl-2 in hyper-cellular cancerous epithelial parts (arrows), mammary gland tumor, Dog. 200 ×. IHC for Bcl-2
In healthy mammary glands, IL-15 cytoplasmic and nuclear staining was absent (Fig. 2 ). Increased cytoplasmic IL-15 expression was observed in most of CMCs in comparison to normal tissues. IL-15 was expressed in all of the examined cases in different extends. Fig. 2 Healthy mammary gland tumor, absent expression of IL-15, Mammary gland tumor, Dog. 200 ×. IHC for IL-15
Fourteen (46.66%) of tumors samples show strong immunoreactivity, 7 cases (23.33.%) showed moderate reactions while 9 cases showed weak immunoreactivity (30%) for IL-15. Those cases with grades II and III had stronger immune-labelling for IL-15 than tumors with grade I. There was a significant relationship between higher IL-15 expression and higher histological grade ( p < 0.05). Additionally, IL-15 expression was increased significantly in CMCs compared to normal tissues ( p < 0.05). Statistical analyses showed that there is a significant correlation between high immunohistochemical expression of IL-15 protein with high Bcl-2 expression ( p < 0.05) and shorter overall survival ( p < 0.05), but not with tumor recurrence ( p > 0.05) (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Anaplastic carcinoma, strong expression of IL-15 in the cytoplasm (arrows), nuclei of the epithelial cells (arrowhead) mammary gland tumor, Dog. 400 ×. IHC for IL-15
Fourteen (46.66%) dogs were still alive after 1 year, and 16 (53.33%) dogs had died due to mammary cancer and recurrence of tumors was observed in 12 cases. The results are summarized in detail in Table 1 . Table 1 Details about IL-15 expression, Bcl-2 expression, histologic grades, overall survival, and recurrence in the samples used in this study No. Type Grade IL-15 expression level Bcl-2 expression level Recurrence Survival 1 Anaplastic carcinoma 3 Strong Strong No No 2 Complex type carcinoma 1 Strong Moderate No No 3 Solid carcinoma 3 Weak Weak No Yes 4 Solid carcinoma 2 Strong Strong No Yes 5 Solid carcinoma 2 Weak Weak No Yes 6 Solid carcinoma 2 Moderate Weak No No 7 Carcinosarcoma 3 Strong Strong No No 8 Mixed-type carcinoma 2 Weak Weak No Yes 9 Carcinosarcoma 2 Weak Weak No Yes 10 Carcinosarcoma 2 Moderate Moderate No No 11 Complex type carcinoma 1 Strong Strong No Yes 12 Solid Carcinoma 3 Strong Weak Yes Yes 13 Complex type carcinoma 1 Weak Weak No No 14 Solid carcinoma 3 Strong Strong Yes Yes 15 Mixed-type carcinoma 2 Weak Strong No Yes 16 Carcinosarcoma 2 Moderate Moderate No No 17 Solid carcinoma 3 Strong Moderate No No 18 Mixed-type carcinoma 2 Moderate Strong No No 19 Complex type carcinoma 2 Strong Strong No No 20 Carcinosarcoma 2 Moderate Weak Yes No 21 Carcnosarcoma 3 Strong Strong No No 22 Complex type carcinoma 1 Weak Weak Yes Yes 23 Mixed-type carcinoma 2 Weak Weak No Yes 24 Anaplastic carcinoma 3 Strong Strong No No 25 Anaplastic carcinoma 2 Strong Moderate No No 26 Anaplastic carcinoma 3 Strong Strong Yes No 27 Anaplastic carcinoma 3 Strong Strong No No 28 Carcinosarcoma 2 Moderate Moderate No Yes 29 Carcinosarcoma 1 Weak Moderate No Yes 30 Mixed-type carcinoma 2 Moderate Moderate No Yes
Discussion
This study is designed to evaluate IL-15 expression in CMC and its possible relationships with histologic grades, Bcl-2 expression, tumor recurrence, and survival. It is not yet clear whether IL-15 can promote cancer or is an inhibitory factor for tumor formation; there are several studies supporting both ideas which are briefly discussed below.
In the present study, IL-15 higher protein expression is in association with higher histologic grades and shorter overall survival. Finding reliable markers to predict canine mammary tumor prognosis is important and is a common interest among veterinary pathologists and oncologists. Among different potential markers, cytokines are considered interesting subjects and there are increasing interests to evaluate cytokines’ roles in oncogenesis.
Furthermore, we found that IL-15 protein expression is significantly increased in CMCs in comparison to normal mammary tissues. In contrast to our findings, there are some studies showing that IL-15 protein expression is decreased in breast cancer tissues; IL-15 mRNA levels are also reduced in human lung cancer which is in correlation with higher tumor stages (Faisal Adhami et al. ; Sanders et al. ). IL-15 transcripts and protein levels have been observed in some human solid tumors including osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, melanoma, small cell lung cancer, renal cell carcinoma, glioblastoma, neuroblastoma, melanoma cell lines, and mesothelioma (Barzegar et al. ; Lollini et al. ; Meazza et al. ; Trinder et al. ). Additionally, human colon cancer cells express IL-15 that is responsible for progression of tumor and angiogenesis (Kuniyasu et al. ).
IL-15 has been used to treat different cancers including human breast cancer (Rautela and Huntington ). Furthermore, IL-15 has inhibitory effects on metastasis rate in breast cancer (Gillgrass et al. ).
The importance of Bcl-2 expression in this study is its relationships with IL-15 expression and finding a clue for possible role of IL-15 in apoptosis induction in CMC. In the present study, we found a significant relationship between IL-15 and Bcl-2 expression ( p < 0.05). One of many biologic roles of IL-15 is induction of anti-apoptotic factors such as Bcl-2. IL-15 is able to support cell expansion and maintenance in different ways: one way is inducing JAK/STAT and Ras/MAPK signaling pathways which lead to proliferation. Besides, IL-15 prevents cell death by inducing anti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl-2 as well as inhibiting pro-apoptotic proteins like Bim and Puma (Adunyah et al. ; Huntington et al. ; Johnston et al. ; Miyazaki et al. ; Miyazaki et al. ; Steelman et al. ).
IL-15-mediated inhibition of apoptosis has been observed in different neoplasms including multiple myeloma, lymphoma, and leukemia in which presence of an autocrine loop of IL-15 production by malignant cells is suggested (Dobbeling et al. ; Hodge et al. ; Tinhofer et al. ). Our data may suggest that production of IL-15 by CMC cells can activate Bcl-2 and results in evasion of apoptosis, but more studies are needed.
Here, we observed IL-15 overexpression in CMC samples compared to normal mammary tissues. IL-5 higher expression was seen mainly in samples with higher histologic grades of malignancy and this association was statistically significant. Besides, there is a significant relationship between increased expression of Bcl-2 and IL-15. This could shed light to possible roles of IL-15 in CMC progression. As discussed above, IL-15 may activate some subcellular signaling pathways such as JAK/STAT and subsequently help cancer cell continue growing. Possible activation of Bcl-2 by IL-15 autocrine loop is also another mechanism which is also possible in CMC. These hypotheses are needed to be further tested to become facts. For example, we can use CMC cell culture to see whether IL-15 induction leads to Bcl-2 higher expression and higher growth rate or not.
The present article indicates that IL-15 expression is significantly correlated with higher histologic grades, Bcl-2 expression, and shorter overall survival. Repeating similar studies to ours with more samples and evaluating IL-15 mRNA level can lead to better clarification of IL-15 roles in CMC. To better understand the exact role of IL-15 in CMC, more studies are required.