Introduction
Hepatic cell dysfunction is a main marker of many hepatocellular disorders which develop as a consequence of various pathological conditions. Oxidative stress is one cause of hepatic cell dysfunction (Li et al. ). This undesirable condition develops when free radical generation increases above normal physiologic levels or when anti-oxidative elements of cells are hampered and so lose their intrinsic protective potency against various forms of free radical injury (Yaribeygi et al. ). Free radical generation is a normal physiological outcome of aerobic metabolism, occurring during aerobic respiration, and commonly results in two different classes of free radicals: reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) (Halliwell and Gutteridge ). In the normal physiologic state, these reactive species are no threat to cells because the antioxidative defense system of the cells is able to neutralize them. However, in specific pathological conditions, such as chronic hyperglycemia, this intrinsic defense system is weakened and cannot exert its protective effects against the damage induced by free radicals (Halliwell and Gutteridge ). Moreover, during hyperglycemia, the amount of reactive species generated is augmented and so overwhelms the antioxidative capacity of the cell (Yaribeygi et al. ). These two factors, augmentation of free radicals and overwhelming of the capacity of the antioxidative system, are jointly responsible for the resultant oxidative damage (Yaribeygi et al. ).
Oxidative stress is central to the pathophysiology of many chronic and debilitating disorders (Yaribeygi et al. ). Furthermore, studies have shown that many forms of hepatic disorders, including liver fibrosis, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, chronic hepatitis, nonalcoholic steato-hepatitis, and hepatocellular carcinoma, are related to an overabundance of free radicals which promote oxidative stress (Gentric et al. ; Li et al. ; Xiao et al. ). Both the enzymatic (e.g., superoxide dismutase, SOD and catalase, CAT) and the non-enzymatic (e.g., glutathione, GLT) elements of the hepatic antioxidant defense system are affected by oxidative attack (Li et al. ). In addition, numerous cell subtypes resident in the liver, parenchymal, hepatic stellate, Kupffer, and endothelial cells for example are very sensitive to oxidative damage (Cichoż-Lach and Michalak ).
Oxidative stress can stimulate Kupffer cells to release the TNF-α cytokine which, in turn, triggers inflammatory responses and apoptotic processes resulting in hepatic cell death (Cichoż-Lach and Michalak ; Sakaguchi et al. ). Moreover, proliferation of stellate cells (as a primary marker of hepatic cell damage) can be induced by lipid peroxidation consequent upon oxidative stress (Li et al. ; Sakaguchi et al. ). Hyperglycemia-induced oxidative stress can cause DNA damage, mitochondrial dysfunction, lipid peroxidation, inflammatory responses, protein adducts, and stellate cell activation, which all are involved in hepatocellular malfunction (Li et al. ). Therefore, maintaining the redox homeostasis in hepatocellular tissues is a subject of intense interest (Li et al. ; Reyes-Gordillo et al. ).
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR-α) is a class of nuclear receptors which act mainly as transcription factors in many important molecular pathways such as energy consumption and lipid metabolism (Derosa et al. ; Kawada et al. ; Sahebkar et al. ; Simental-Mendía et al. ). Different forms of PPAR-α agonist can exert some antioxidative effects and offer protection to tissue against oxidative damage (Ibarra-Lara et al. ; Yaribeygi et al. ). This class of receptors shows higher expression in tissues where oxidative capacity is higher, such as liver and kidney, and thus these receptors are important to the molecular pathways of these tissues (Yaribeygi et al. ).
In our current study, the possible protective effects of the PPAR-α agonist fenofibrate against hyperglycemia-induced oxidative stress in hepatic cells were evaluated.
Methods
Animals
Male Wistar rats (180–220 g) were purchased from Pasteur institute (Tehran-Iran) and housed in standard animal cages (two rats per cage) under standard conditions of temperature (22 ± 2 °C) and humidity (55 ± 5%) and a standard light cycle (12 h light/ 12 h dark). The rats accessed water and standard rodent chow ad libitum. NIH guidelines for the ethical treatment of experimental animals were followed. Animals were assigned to four groups randomly: normal control (C), normal-treated (CF), diabetic (D), and diabetic-treated (DF) ( n = 6 per group).
Diabetes induction
Streptozotocin (STZ) (Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in cold saline and injected into the tail veins of rats (40 mg/kg) for diabetes induction. To confirm diabetes, 72 h post-STZ injection, blood was drawn from the tail vein of each animal to assess the blood glucose level using a standard glucometer (Bionime, Swiss). If blood glucose was determined to be greater than 350 mg/dl, the animal was deemed diabetic and then randomly distributed into one of the diabetic groups (treated and non-treated).
Treatment
The PPAR-α agonist fenofibrate (Osvah Pharmaceutical Company, Tehran, Iran) was dissolved in a 0.05% suspension of carboxy methyl cellulose (CMC). The two treatment groups (control and diabetic) received fenofibrate (80 mg/kg) daily for 56 days by intragastric gavage.
Sampling and preparation
1. Blood sampling: on day 56, after sacrificing, blood samples were collected directly from the heart and assayed for blood glucose. The blood was immediately centrifuged (3500 rpm, 15 min), and then the serum glucose level was measured with available kits (Pars-Azmoon, Iran). 2. Tissue sampling: after sacrificing on the day 56, the hepatic tissue samples obtained were stored (− 80 °C) for later analysis. 3. Tissue preparation: after weighing, hepatic samples (500 mg) were homogenized with phosphate buffer (0.1 mol, pH = 7.4) on ice using an electric homogenizer, the samples were centrifuged (20 min at 4 °C and 4200 rpm), and the supernatants obtained as the cytosolic hepatocellular extract. These supernatants were stored (− 80 °C) for further biochemical evaluations.
Evaluation of antioxidant defense system potency
1. SOD enzyme: SOD enzyme activity was examined using the method introduced by Winterbourn (Winterbourn et al. ). This method relies on the activity of SOD enzyme, and its inhibition of the reduction of nitro-blue tetrazolium by anion superoxide. Potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.8, 0.067 M) was added to 0.1 M EDTA containing 0.3 mM sodium cyanide, 1.5 mM nitro-blue tetrazolium and 0.1 ml of sample. To each sample, 0.12 mM riboflavin was then added to stimulate the reaction, followed by 10-min incubation time. Finally, optical absorbance of the samples was documented at 560 nm in 5 min on a standard spectrophotometer. The enzyme amount needed for 50% inhibition was set as 1 U and sample results expressed as units per milliliter. 2. CAT enzyme: CAT enzyme activity was assessed by the Aebi method (Aebi ). A mixture of 0.85 ml potassium phosphate buffer (50 mM, pH = 7.0) and 0.1 ml homogenate was incubated for about 12 min at room temperature (22–24 °C). The reaction was stimulated by addition of 0.05 ml peroxide hydrogen (30 mM prepared in potassium phosphate buffer 50 mM, pH = 7.0), and then the drop of optical absorbance was recorded for 3 min at 240 nm. Enzyme activity is expressed as units per milliliter. 3. GLT content: GLT content of hepatic samples was determined with the method developed by Tietz (Tietze ). The protein content of hepatic extracts was precipitated by sulfosalicylic acid 5% addition and then removed by centrifugation (2500 g in 12 min). GLT content in supernatant was evaluated using these steps: 100 μl of protein-free supernatant, 800 μl of 0.3 mM Na2HPO4, and 100 μl of 0.04% 5-5′-dithiobis [2-nitrobenzoic acid] in 0.1% sodium citrate were all mixed. The 5-5′-dithiobis [2-nitrobenzoic acid] absorbance was recorded at 412 nm for 5 min. A standard curve for GLT was performed, and the sensitivity of measurement was determined to be between 1 and 100 μM. The level of GLT content was expressed as nanomoles per milliliter. 4. Nitrate content: The nitrate content of hepatic extracts, as a main marker of reactive nitrogen species (RNS), was assessed by the Griess colorimetric method (Granger et al. ). The steps are as follows: Deproteinization of 0.1 ml of stored liver extract was accomplished by addition of 0.2 ml zinc sulfate solution followed by centrifugation (4000 rpm at 4 °C for 20 min) to allow separation of the supernatant. A 0.05 ml sulfanilamide (0.01%) and 0.05 ml N-[1-naphthyl] ethylenediamin di-hydrochloride (NED, 0.01%) were incubated (37 °C for 30 min) in the dark. Absorbance of the mixture was assessed at 540 nm wavelength. The nitrite concentration was estimated using a standard curve and nitrate content expressed as microgram per milligram protein. 5. MDA content: The content of MDA, as a main marker of oxidative damage, was estimated using the Satoh method (Satoh et al. ). The steps were as follows: 0.5 ml of homogenated tissue was added to 1.5 ml of 10% trichloroacetic acid and incubated (RT for 12 min). Addition of 1.5 ml supernatant and 2 ml thiobarbituric acid (0.67%) was then performed, and the entire mixture was placed in a boiling water bath in sealed tubes for about 30 min. Samples were cooled to RT (20 min). Next, 1.25 ml N-butanol was added, samples were vortexed and centrifuged (5 min at 2000 g ). The optical absorbance of the resulting supernatant was measured at 532 nm on a standard spectrophotometer. The MDA content was estimated using 1,1,3,3-tetraethoxypropane and expressed as nanomoles per milliliter.
Statistical analysis
Normal distribution of data was assessed by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Data were analyzed using ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer post hoc tests. p < 0.05 was considered significant. The results are expressed as the mean ± SEM.
Results
Blood glucose changes
Figure 1 shows the average serum glucose in milligrams per deciliter for each experimental group at the conclusion of the study. STZ significantly increased blood glucose ( p < 0.001). Fenofibrate did not affect the blood glucose in nondiabetic rats but caused a reduction in the diabetic-treated group ( p = 0.04). Fig. 1 Blood glucose (mg/dL) at the conclusion of the study (8 weeks treatment) in normal control (C), control + fenofibrate (CF), diabetic (D), and diabetic + fenofibrate (DF) groups. All values are presented as mean ± SEM. *( p < 0.001) significant differences compared with control group (N). #( p = 0.04) significant differences compared with control group (D)
SOD enzyme activity
Figure 2 shows SOD enzyme activity as unit per milliliter at the conclusion of the study. Mean SOD enzyme activity in nondiabetic rats was 0.72 ± 0.07 U/mL. Diabetes decreased SOD enzyme activity to 0.25 ± 0.035 U/mL ( p < 0.001). Fenofibrate did not alter SOD enzyme activity in nondiabetic rats yet caused a significant increase in diabetic animals to 0.48 ± 0.055 U/mL ( p = 0.001). Fig. 2 SOD enzyme activity as unit per milliliter at the conclusion of the study in normal control (C), control + fenofibrate (CF), diabetic (D), and diabetic + fenofibrate (DF) groups. All values are presented as mean ± SEM. **( p < 0.001) and *( p = 0.004) significant differences with control group (N). #( p = 0.002) significant differences with diabetic group (D)
CAT enzyme activity
Figure 3 shows CAT enzyme activity (U/mL) at the conclusion of the study. The measured value in the normal control (NC) group was 27.84 ± 2.44 U/mL. Diabetes markedly reduced CAT enzyme activity to 14.47 ± 3.78 U/mL ( p = 0.006). Fenofibrate increased the activity of CAT enzyme to 40.16 ± 5.34 U/mL in nondiabetic rats (CF) ( p = 0.011) compared to nondiabetic control (C) animals and also significantly increased CAT enzyme activity to 28.44 ± 6.28 U/mL in diabetic animals (DF) compared with diabetic-non-treated rats (D) ( p = 0.003). Fig. 3 Catalase activity (U/mL) at the conclusion of the study in normal control (C), normal + fenofibrate (CF), diabetic (D), and diabetic + fenofibrate (DF) groups. All values are presented as mean ± SEM. *( p = 0.001) and **( p = 0.01) significant differences with control group (C). #( p = 0.001) significant differences than to diabetic group (D)
GLT content
Figure 4 shows GLT content (nMol/mL) in each group at the conclusion of the study. Mean GLT content in nondiabetic animals was 247 ± 42 nMol/mL. Fenofibrate increased it significantly to 355 ± 35 nMol/mL in normal-treated rats ( p = 0.002) compared with normal control animals and in diabetic rats ( p = 0.034) compared to the diabetic-non-treated group. Diabetes did not change this value when compared with the normal control animals. Fig. 4 Glutathione content (nMol/mL) at the conclusion of the study in normal (C), normal + fenofibrate (CF), diabetic (D), and diabetic + fenofibrate (DF) groups. All values are presented as mean ± SEM. *( p = 0.002) significant differences compared with control group (C). #( p = 0.034) significant differences than to diabetic group (D)
MDA content
Figure 5 displays the MDA content (nMol/mL) for each group. The mean value of MDA content in normal rats was 2.19 ± 0.40 nMol/mL. Diabetes markedly increased it to 4.24 ± 0.5 nMol/mL ( p = 0.000). Fenofibrate did not alter the level in normal animals but caused a decrease in the diabetic group to 2.19 ± 0.31 nMol/mL ( p = 0.036). Fig. 5 MDA content in nanomoles per milliliter at the conclusion of the study in normal control (C), normal + fenofibrate (CF), diabetic (D), and diabetic + fenofibrate (DF) animals. All values are presented as mean ± SEM. *( p = 0.000) significant differences compared with control group (C). #( p = 0.036) significant differences than to diabetic group (D)
Nitrate content
Figure 6 shows nitrate content in nanomoles per milliliter at the conclusion of the study for each group. The mean nitrate content value in the normal group was 18.58 ± 2.15 nMol/mL. Diabetes significantly increased it to 33.65 ± 3.54 nMol/mL ( p = 0.001). Fenofibrate did not change this value in non-diabetic animals but decreased it in diabetic animals to 23.51 ± 2.5 nMol/mL ( p = 0.035). Fig. 6 Nitrate content in nanomoles per milliliter at the conclusion of the study in normal control (C), normal + fenofibrate (CF), diabetic (D), and diabetic + fenofibrate (DF) animals. All values are presented as mean ± SEM. *( p = 0.001) significant differences compared with control group (C). #( p = 0.035) significant differences than to diabetic group (D)
Discussion
Oxidative stress plays a pivotal role in the pathophysiology of many chronic conditions, including hepatocellular disorders (Cichoż-Lach and Michalak ; Yaribeygi et al. ). In the current study, we demonstrated that uncontrolled hyperglycemia enhanced free radical generation (nitrate content) and debilitated the antioxidative elements (SOD and CAT enzymes), both contributing to the oxidative damage of the hepatic cells (as measured by MDA content). Also, we here show that inducing PPAR-α activity improves both enzymatic and non-enzymatic components of antioxidative element potency (SOD and CAT enzyme activity and GLT content) and so prevent oxidative damage (MDA content) in hepatic cells.
It is well documented that uncontrolled diabetes induces oxidative stress by weakening the antioxidative elements and augmenting free radical generation (Rochette et al. ; Tangvarasittichai ). Kakkar et al. demonstrated that STZ-induced hyperglycemia increases oxidative stress in both liver and pancreatic tissues (Kakkar et al. ). In addition, Sindhu et al. demonstrated that diabetes dysregulates the antioxidative defense system by lowering Cu/Zn SOD and CAT enzyme activity (Sindhu et al. ). These findings are confirmed in our study, and additionally, we observed that hyperglycemia mitigated SOD and CAT enzyme activity and increased nitrate and MDA content, markers of oxidative damage. While we did not examine the mRNA/protein expression level, it has been suggested that diabetes can directly down-regulate SOD and CAT enzyme expression (Asmat et al. ).
Diabetes-induced oxidative stress is involved in hepatocellular dysfunction (Li et al. ; Reyes-Gordillo et al. ). Consequently, improving the redox state is a primary goal in hepatic disorders (Reyes-Gordillo et al. ). For this reason, we induced PPAR-α activity using fenofibrate. It is known that PPAR-α agonists have pleiotropic actions (Derosa et al. ; Sahebkar et al. , Sahebkar et al. , Sahebkar et al. ; Sahebkar and Watts ) including antioxidant properties and have been shown to readjust the redox state in different experimental models (Hou et al. ; Sahebkar et al. ; Walker et al. ; Yaribeygi et al. ). Hou and coworkers in 2010 showed that the PPAR-α agonist fenofibrate can prevent renal injury in a hypertensive animal model by improving oxidative stress (Hou et al. ). Chung et al. in 2011 demonstrated that fenofibrate ameliorates oxidative damage in renal cells through FoxO3a (Forkhead box O) and PGC-1α (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1α) signaling pathways (Chung et al. ). Recently, we demonstrated that the PPAR-α agonist fenofibrate improves oxidative damage of pancreatic cells in hyperglycemia-induced oxidative stress (Yaribeygi et al. ).
In the current study, fenofibrate increased both SOD and CAT enzyme activity and GLT content and so potentiated the antioxidative defense system. Furthermore, fenofibrate decreased nitrate content and MDA production and so prevented oxidative damage in hepatic cells. It has been reported that PPAR-α agonists can directly induce antioxidative element expression (Wang et al. ). Wang et al. in 2010 demonstrated that fenofibrate increased both mRNA levels of three isoforms of SOD and their activity in brain microvasculature of ischemic animals (Wang et al. ). Moreover, Gureev and colleagues in 2016 found that fenofibrate markedly enhanced hepatic gene expression of SOD and CAT enzymes (Gureev et al. ). We therefore suggest that the PPAR-α agonist fenofibrate-induced antioxidative system potentiation may be stimulated by a direct effect on gene expression.
In conclusion, we here demonstrate that hyperglycemia induces oxidative damage in hepatic cells via suppression of the potency of antioxidative elements and by increasing free radical generation. Also, we show that treatment with the PPAR-α agonist fenofibrate potentiates the antioxidative system in hepatic cells and reduces free radical generation, thereby preventing oxidative damage in diabetic animals. Future studies are warranted to confirm the antioxidant effects of fenofibrate in patients with hepatic disorders accompanied by oxidative stress and diabetes. Finally, the effects of emerging selective PPAR modulators (Sahebkar et al. ; Sahebkar and Watts ) on redox state deserve investigation.