Introduction
The purpose of collection of clinical pathology data in toxicologic animal studies is fundamentally different from the clinical situation when dealing with a sick cat or dog and trying to understand what is wrong with the animal. Rather, in toxicologic clinical pathology, the main question is whether there are treatment-related changes between treated groups and the control group, and whether these are dose-dependent and even adverse? In spite of the fact that clinical pathology nowadays represents an integral part of toxicology studies, potential pitfalls may often not be anticipated or sufficiently prevented since study personnel may not be aware of potential sources of errors and artifacts. The collection of clinical pathology data requires not only careful planning, including the scheduling of blood sampling time points, recommended volumes, and variables, but also a professional and competent laboratory to perform analysis, and necessary assay validation studies, and quality controls and assurance. Specifically, for a careful design of the study plan, it is often recommended that a specialized toxicologic veterinary clinical pathologist is involved, as all aspects of the preanalytic phase may influence the validity and scientific meaning of the collected data (Vap et al. ; Gunn-Christie et al. ). For instance, excessive blood sampling can cause artifacts in hematology results, particularly in smaller animals, as they may become anemic towards the end of a 4-week study, and the physiologic regenerative response may result in skewed hematology data (e.g., increased MCV, increased reticulocyte counts, and changes in myeloid:erythroid (M:E) ratio in the bone marrow). Also, the use of anesthetics for blood sampling can affect clinical pathology results (Bennett et al. ), while stress before and during blood sampling can cause certain artifacts in the hematology profile. Furthermore, variation in practices such as transport and storage of samples may add to enhanced data variation within and between groups affecting the statistical power and so should be avoided. It is recommended to adhere to highly standardized procedures, executed by highly trained and experienced technical personnel.
As in clinical analytic diagnostics, in TCP, the adequate measurement of all variables and analytes (Tomlinson et al. ) requires proper laboratory management practices, including method validation and the regular (e.g., daily, monthly) quality control of all applied testing methods and instruments (Flatland et al. ; Camus et al. ) When using similar instruments across studies, the comparability of the performance in precision and accuracy has to be tested and documented. As for other study phases, the personnel performing the analytic portion for preclinical studies should have adequate training on all the instruments they operate, as well as the interpretation of instrument flags and their follow up (e.g., in hematology by evaluating blood smears, or the trouble shooting of coagulation tests by understanding the coagulation cascade, including the intrinsic, the extrinsic, and the common phases) (Tomlinson et al. ). This also includes knowledge and understanding of species-specific peculiarities, for instance the normal morphology of red and white blood cells in dogs, rats, mini pigs, monkeys, and also mice. For more detail, consulting a standard veterinary hematology text book is recommended (Weiss and Wardrop ) .
Of course, the final assessment, interpretation, and reporting of all measured variables must always include consideration and recognition of potential artifacts or laboratory errors, and necessitates the profound understanding of the physiologic, pharmacologic, and pathologic context of test item-related changes of toxicologic significance in each particular laboratory animal species (Tomlinson et al. ; Ramaiah et al. ). In summary, a high degree of standardization, as reflected by carefully updated standard operating procedures (SOPs), helps minimize artifacts and variability, including the avoidance of interference by hemolysis caused during technically inadequate blood sampling, and lipemia in non-fasted animals. This fosters efficient and scientifically meaningful data interpretation.
Any clinical pathology test, assay kit, or instrument must be validated and assessed for acceptable quality performance in toxicology studies by regular standard procedures. This includes validation studies performed on all newly acquired laboratory equipment and on instruments that have been moved or undergone maintenance procedures, and the assessment of interchangeability of results generated by similar types of instruments, either in the same laboratory or in a companion laboratory. A number of articles and recommendations have been published in recent years, providing detailed information concerning minimal standards (Flatland et al. ). A minimal database should include studies on accuracy and precision, as well as linearity under dilution and spiking experiments to assess potential matrix (i.e., blood properties in a particular species) and interference effects (i.e., hemolysis, lipemia, and icterus). An important component of validation efforts is leftover specimens that are not needed as backup material in archived studies. The use of such specimens for validation studies must be mentioned in respective study protocols, as such data will not fall under a particular study objective. The use of such precious leftover samples requires efficient and reliable freezer management.
In addition, daily calibration and quality control procedures should be standard with any automated or manual testing procedure in toxicology (Camus et al. ). The participation in shared assays, usually on a monthly basis, with external quality control materials is highly recommended (Camus et al. ).
Finally, the validation of computer transfer and archiving processes is a requirement in the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidance (FDA ). Such validation studies essentially verify the correct real time, data transfer from an automated analyzer to the laboratory informatics system (LIMS), tabulation, statistical analysis, final archiving, and potential disaster scenarios that must be validated and documented procedures. Archived data, by definition, may not be altered in any way; however if modifications do occur, they have to be traceable and well documented.
Hematology
As in clinical diagnostics, changes in the qualitative/morphologic and quantitative changes of all blood cells and also the coagulation status provide information on the normal/physiologic status of the red blood cell mass and the leukogram, including the maturation process (e.g., polychromasia in red blood cells) or potential pathologic changes (such as signs of toxicity or activation (e.g., in neutrophils, lymphoblasts, and large unclassified cells)), and the presence of other morphologic changes (e.g., intracytoplasmic vacuoles in phospholipidosis) may hint at specific compound-related effects.
As in clinical hematology, the red blood cell mass is characterized by the hematocrit or packed cell volume (PCV), the red blood cell count, and the hemoglobin concentration. In contrast to clinical hematology, the term “anemia” is avoided in TCP and one rather refers to a reduced red blood cell mass as a functional unit providing information on the total oxygen carrying capacity of peripheral blood with or without regenerative indicators such as an increased reticulocyte count, an increased mean corpuscular volume, and an enlarged red cell distribution width, together suggesting a solid/healthy erythropoietic response from the bone marrow.
As in clinical veterinary medicine, white blood cells or leukocytes are responsible for antigen-specific (lymphocytes) and non-specific defense against infectious pathogens (granulocytes, monocytes). The numbers, migration, and actual physiology of different leukocytes in blood and tissues are regulated by cytokines and complex immunoregulatory and endocrine networks. Such networks can be modulated by compounds such as biologics but also adrenocortical signals (stress) and can result in treatment-related or non-specific changes in leukocyte numbers in the absence of infectious pathogens. As such treatment-related effects may not be apparent in the histopathologic analysis, the clinical pathology data can be essential in the recognition of such treatment-related effects.
While all three types of granulocytes (i.e., neutrophil, eosinophil, and basophil) characterized by lobulated or convoluted to segmented nuclei, with a moderate amount of cytoplasm which contains different types of granules which do not stain (neutrophil), or take on a pink (eosinophil) or purple to blue (basophil) color after staining with standard Romanowsky-type stains, have been described in laboratory species, the predominant granulocyte is the neutrophil, while the eosinophil can be relevant in particular immunological settings such as allergic reactions and parasitic infections (particularly in non-human primates). The basophil is in general of no relevance in toxicology clinical pathology, but may parallel changes in eosinophil numbers. Like erythrocytes, the granulocytes originate in the bone marrow, where they undergo a maturation process. In times of increased need, such as under the influence of certain cytokines, severe inflammation, or other mediators, a left shift, characterized by the premature release of band neutrophils, can be seen. More details on species-specific morphologic characteristics of red and white blood cells can be found in standard textbooks (Weiss and Wardrop ).
Lymphocytes are produced in the bone marrow but also originate in the thymus in growing animals, and lymph nodes or other secondary lymphoid tissue in the body, and continue migrating through the entire body during life. Lymphocytes generally appear as round cells with a small rim of basophilic cytoplasm and usually round nuclei without visible nucleoli. They are slightly smaller than granulocytes, but larger than red blood cells. Lymphocyte numbers can be decreased under the influence of an adrenocortical stress reaction, which is usually accompanied by decreased size and weight of immunologic organs (Everds et al. ).
Nowadays, lymphocytes from most species can be further classified based on immunophenotyping according to the clusters of differentiation (CD) system. The most commonly used antibodies label CD4 (T helper) or CD8 (T suppressor and T cytotoxic) surface antigens. Special immunology texts should be consulted for further information on the CD system, the types of lymphocytes, and immunophenotyping (Abbas and Lichtman ; Rütgen et al. ).
Monocytes represent a smaller but equally important type of leukocyte. Monocytes originate in the bone marrow and are related to the myeloid cell lineage. Monocyte counts often increase together with neutrophil or lymphocyte counts and together may be an indication of an inflammatory response.
If the reason for a significant reduction in red blood cell mass is either not evident by in-life observations (hemorrhage) or documented by excessive blood sampling for analytic purposes, coagulation profiles should be checked for a potential explanation for increased bleeding and blood loss, e.g., into the gastrointestinal tract.
As in clinical medicine, the standard coagulation profile includes the prothrombin time (PT), the activated thromboplastin time (APTT), and the concentration of fibrinogen. Coagulation testing in toxicologic clinical pathology can sometimes be challenging in smaller species as the required minimal blood volumes of blood mixed with the correct amount of sodium citrate (nine parts sodium citrate and one part blood) may be hard to collect from smaller animals. As many coagulation factors are synthesized in the liver, deficient coagulation should always raise a concern about treatment-related hepatic dysfunction. In addition, the setting of automated coagulation analyzers may require adjustments depending on species, as for instance, dogs have much shorter PT times than rats. It is advisable to carefully validate commercial analyzers and after reagent changes, a method comparison study should be performed to identify potential biases (Flatland et al. ).
The assessment of coagulation includes also a quantification of platelets or thrombocytes, usually by analyzer. However, certain species (mice, minipigs) are prone to platelet clumping which will result in artifactual thrombocytopenia or pseudothrombocytopenia that must always be verified by blood smear evaluation (Tomlinson et al. ). Real thrombocytopenia can be due to either increased loss (e.g., by increased consumption such as blood loss) or reduced production in the bone marrow.
Bone marrow
Under some circumstances and if hematology changes may not be sufficiently explained by the available information, a bone marrow examination may be warranted, as all blood cells in mature animals are produced in the bone marrow, located in the marrow cavity of trabecular bone. Cytologic myelogram or bone marrow smear examination by an expert is a resource-intensive exercise in toxicologic clinical pathology, requiring substantial amounts of time and commitment. Therefore, although collection of bone marrow smears at necropsy is a recommended standard practice in preclinical studies, the actual myelogram should only be performed according to relatively stringent indications (Reagan et al. ).
Bone marrow examination should be performed in studies with clear treatment-related changes in hematology variables if the following apply: if treatment-related changes in hematology variables cannot be explained by circumstances such as chronic inflammation or disease, excessive blood sampling or hemorrhage, changes in body weight, body weight gain, food consumption, and/or related stress. in cases where there are unquestionable treatment-related quantitative and/or morphologic changes in all three cell lines, namely erythroid, myeloid, and thromboid cells. if the test item is known to specifically affect hematopoiesis in any way.
Importantly, a meaningful bone marrow evaluation is only possible if smears are prepared immediately after the death of the animal by experienced staff. Marrow smears with more than 30% smudged cells in a high-power field due to advanced autolysis should not be used for analysis. A compilation of comon not test-item related hematologic changes is listed in Table 2 .
Blood chemistry
While in clinical diagnostics chemical analysis is usually performed on serum collected after the clotting process of plain blood, in TCP, some standard practices may include plasma analysis from blood collected in lithium heparin. The advantage of such practice is that blood can be centrifuged immediately after collection without waiting for clotting. The disadvantage is that all methods need to be validated with lithium heparin plasma and not serum, as the results may differ. This also includes specific reference intervals for lithium heparin plasma analytes.
As in clinical diagnostics, the analytes of interest include enzyme activities, concentrations of components of protein, carbohydrate and fat metabolism, and electrolytes and minerals. For more detailed information, consulting a standard veterinary clinical chemistry textbook is recommended (Kaneko et al. ).
The most commonly assessed enzyme activities include, as in clinical diagnostics, markers for hepatic integrity (ALT, AST in all species, and SDH and GLDH in pigs) and hepatobiliary function (ALP in all species, γ-glutamyl transferase in rodents) (Tomlinson et al. ), as well as creatine kinase (CK) as a marker for striated muscle integrity, including both skeletal and cardiac muscle. Cardiac muscle evaluation has recently been complemented by measuring troponin I levels.
In general, it is assumed that significantly increased enzyme activities are equivalent with increased cellular release, usually due to a loss of cell integrity. However, as the average half-life of different isoenzymes has not been determined in all species, it has to be considered that in case of an assumed half-life of 60 h, acute massive liver necrosis after a single treatment may be accompanied by normal ALT activities by day 7 of a study (Ennulat et al. ).
The concentration of glucose as the main energy source of common laboratory species, being either directly absorbed from the intestine or synthesized in the liver, is regulated by a complex endocrine network. Marked increases or decreases in blood sugar (hyper- or hypoglycemia) may turn into life-threatening conditions in clinical medicine and in toxicology studies, which can be seen in dogs and monkeys with test item-related endocrine disorders such as subnormal function of the cortex of the adrenal gland (hypoadrenocorticism) or diabetes mellitus, respectively. A sudden onset of hypoglycemia may be accompanied by an increase of ketone bodies in the urine and a decrease in blood pH (metabolic acidosis). In addition, increased excretion of glucose in urine (diabetes mellitus) can be accompanied by dehydration and a tendency to urinary tract infections. Moderate hyperglycemia is typically seen in rats with a stress reaction (Everds et al. ). Therefore, massive changes in glucose concentration should always be interpreted within the context of other information indicating significant caloric restriction (fasting or inadequate feeding schedules), urinalysis, and signs of stress.
Proteins represent the building blocks of all body tissues. As in clinical diagnostics, protein metabolism is usually assessed by measurement of total protein concentration and its main component albumin, while globulins represent the calculated difference after deduction of the concentration of albumin from the total protein. The albumin -to -globulin (A:G) ratio can hint at an imbalance between the main measured protein components that may require an advanced analysis of globulin fractions by electrophoresis.
Decreased protein concentrations involving both albumin and globulins usually suggest compromised uptake (e.g., with lower food consumption) or increased gastrointestinal loss (e.g., diarrhea) as in clinical diagnostics. Decreased albumin levels could, in combination with other analytes, suggest an acute-phase reaction (e.g. in combination with increased fibrinogen), hepatic dysfunction (in the presence of prolonged coagulation times or histologic evidence of reduced functional liver mass), or renal loss in the presence of abnormal urinary values, such as dilute urine or histologic evidence of renal pathology. Increased globulin concentrations can be indicative of an acute-phase response or an immunologic reaction. Importantly, the former usually may not be evident in any other tissues, whereas the latter would be expected to be accompanied by enlarged lymphoid organs or obvious signs of inflammation and/or infection (seen histologically). For more details about immunoglobulin metabolism, a standard immunology text should be consulted (Abbas and Lichtman ).
Physiologic protein degradation results in urea, which is synthesized in the liver and cleared by the kidneys. A test item-related decrease of urea may suggest liver dysfunction, while increased urea can be caused by non-specific dehydration, e.g., in connection with reduced food intake in rodents, and hemoconcentration, e.g., also following massive diarrhea, in which case it is accompanied by increased erythroid mass variables and albumin concentration. However, increased urea and creatinine concentrations can also be markers for a renal dysfunction once dehydration and hemoconcentration have been carefully ruled out, among other things, in the presence of dilute/unconcentrated urine (lower specific gravity).
Lipids represent an important storable source of energy and are a component of membrane structures in the body. The main variables measured in preclinical studies for assessment of lipid metabolism are concentrations of cholesterol and triglycerides.
Lipids can be absorbed directly from the intestinal tract and metabolism mostly takes place in the liver under the influence of the endocrine network. As in clinical diagnostics, changes in lipid concentrations (triglycerides, cholesterol) therefore may indicate decreased food intake or alteration of hepatic function. Careful definition of the fasting or non-fasting status of animals prior to blood sampling is important for interpretation of changes in lipid concentration in peripheral blood, before a specific significance is assigned to lipid changes.
As in clinical diagnostics, the rate of hemoglobin synthesis is an important marker of erythropoiesis, while bilirubin and its conjugated and unconjugated forms as degradation products of hemoglobin are either markers for hepatobiliary function (because they are conjugated and excreted by the liver) or hemolysis, which would be characterized either by typical changes in hematology (reduced red cell mass) or by liver-specific variables (increased ALP, GGT).
As in clinical diagnostics, electrolyte concentrations can be sensitive indicators of overall hydration balance and renal function and include sodium, potassium, and chloride. In contrast, minerals such as calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium are only present in a small proportion in the blood, when compared to total body concentration and are not as representative of total body balance.
Potassium is an intracellular electrolyte and massive cell destruction (as in hemolysis or acute muscle necrosis) can result in transiently increased potassium concentrations in peripheral blood, but with normal renal function. Changes in the sodium-to-potassium ratio can be seen in adrenocortical hypofunction, while overall lower sodium and chloride concentrations are typical in animals with treatment-related, protracted vomiting and diarrhea and/or with profuse salivation. Usually in TCP, such effects would be identified by in-life observations that require careful consideration before assigning toxic relevance.
As in clinical diagnostics, calcium and phosphorus are important components of bone metabolism, and concentrations in blood may vary with the age of the animal, requiring age-specific reference intervals. The majority of calcium is bound to albumin. Phosphorus may be lower in cases of reduced food intake. While calcium and phosphorus may also change in cases of renal dysfunction, this would not be an isolated observation, but rather associated with increased urea and creatinine concentrations or histologic evidence of renal pathology. Again, before assigning toxic relevance to changes in calcium and phosphorus per se, other information such as concentrations of albumin, urea, and creatinine needs to be examined and ultimately put into context with the histology results. Recommended standard profiles in hematology and clinical chemistry have been published elsewhere (Tomlinson et al. ).
As in clinical diagnostics, urinalysis is part of the standard clinical pathology database in toxicologic studies (Tomlinson et al. ). The urine variables include physical variables such as volume, color, pH, and specific gravity, providing preliminary information on renal function and the hydration status of an animal, and a semiquantitative evaluation of physiologic and pathologic components such as the presence of red and white blood cells, protein, glucose, bilirubin, and ketone bodies in the urine. In addition to the physiochemical analysis, a microscopic evaluation of urinary sediment for confirmation of cellular or crystalloid particles can be appropriate in some studies (Tomlinson et al. ). A “state of the art” urinalysis is always indicated in cases of suspected renal dysfunction and pathology, although the final diagnosis will usually be provided by typical histologic lesions that are needed for a definitive interpretation of clinical pathology data, including some biomarkers.
Urine collection in preclinical studies is usually done using metabolic cages, where voided urine drips down through the cage floor into a collection pan over an extended time period of several hours. As a recent study has shown, contamination with food or feces can result in a considerable number of false positive blood results in such urine samples from dogs and monkeys (Aulbach et al. ). Therefore, it is recommended that urine collection procedures be optimized to avoid misleading results falsely implying potentially serious test article-related changes in the urinalysis.
A non-specific, acute-phase reaction is often observed in preclinical studies for reasons which are not always clear. An acute-phase reaction is characterized by changes in acute-phase proteins, a group of proteins expressed and secreted mostly in the liver after an inflammatory stimulus. Albumin is a negative acute-phase protein and hence will decrease (Cray et al. ). An acute-phase response can be initiated by many different etiologies, including trauma, infection, and a number of test items, particularly biologicals. Importantly, an acute-phase reaction may not be evident by any other noticeable changes in study variables (including the absence of histologic changes), except assays measuring acute-phase proteins, including increased concentrations of fibrinogen that often may be the only early hint in a standard TCP profile, together with lower albumin concentrations, of the presence of an acute-phase response.
Serum concentrations of acute-phase proteins are usually measured with immunologic assays that may or may not be species specific. In most cases, careful assay validation of such kits is recommended, particularly if the assay is not species specific. Also, as the changes in acute-phase proteins may be very dynamic over time, it is recommended to always include pretreatment samples in the evaluation and to measure the acute-phase proteins that have been found to undergo significant changes in a particular species (see Table 1 ) (Ennulat et al. ). Table 1 Acute-phase proteins showing measurable changes in different laboratory animal species (Christensen et al. ; Honjo et al. ; Heegaard et al. ) Species C-reactive protein Serum amyloid A α1-Acid glycoprotein α2-Macroglobulin Haptoglobin Fibrinogen Albumin* Dog x x x x x↓ Rat x x x x x↓ Mouse x x x Monkey x x x x x↓ Pig x x x x↓ *Albumin is a negative acute-phase protein; its serum concentration tends to be lower during an acute-phase reaction
Biomarkers
Biomarkers have become popular in the last decade, largely because of the expectation that they would allow the identification of organ-specific, treatment-related, adverse effects earlier in a study and at lower treatment doses, than traditional clinical pathology variables. However, the increased sensitivity of such biomarkers often comes with a decrease in specificity; therefore thorough method and assay validation are required in order to generate scientifically meaningful results. Unless very carefully and well-designed studies including phenotypic anchoring of particular markers are performed, caution is advised on the incorporation of insufficiently characterized and unvalidated biomarkers in preclinical studies (Burkhardt et al. ). While some biomarkers may have value in studies for preclinical research and development, the validity of biomarkers for incorporation into regulatory studies should be determined based on the most current scientific literature. Recently, the FDA has stated that the renal biomarkers (KIM-1, albumin, total protein, β2-microglobulin, cystatin C, clusterin, and trefoil factor-3) are considered acceptable biomarkers for the detection of acute drug-induced nephrotoxicity in rats in conjunction with traditional clinical chemistry markers and histopathology in toxicology studies (Blank et al. ).
The following minimal requirements should be fulfilled before a particular biomarker assay is included in the TCP database, i.e., minimal data based on analytic validation including precision, accuracy, linearity under dilution, and matrix effect testing for each species investigated and documented.
Changes in biomarkers should be strictly related to pretreatment reference data compiled from the same animals treated in the study. A control group should always be included as an additional normal reference group. Ideally, sensitivity and specificity of a given biomarker should be assessed and potential thresholds for toxicologic relevance should be determined based on receiver operator curves (ROC) (Burkhardt et al. ).
Biomarkers can be valuable in a case-by-case approach and particularly in early research and development studies. In studies performed under Good Laboratory Practice guidance, all generated data must be reported; thus, the biomarkers measured should be more or less established as diagnostic indicators; otherwise, final interpretation of marginal test item-related change will be difficult.
Microsampling
Microsampling is currently being discussed in many environments, mainly with the idea of reducing blood volumes necessary for analysis and thus the number of animals needed in a particular study, especially with mice and rats but also dogs and monkeys. Although a few available studies may suggest that simple sample dilution yields acceptable results, other studies report inaccurate and imprecise results by such an approach (Zamfir et al. ). It is highly recommended to perform regular validation studies including a minimal database for accuracy, precision, linear dilution effects, and determination of proportional and constant bias in comparison to standard methods to assure equivalency of microsampling to established standard methods (Zamfir et al. ).
Reference intervals
As in clinical diagnostics reference intervals (RI) should be determined from a group of healthy or normal reference individuals (Friedrichs et al. ). Reference intervals can be valuable, especially when assessing clinical pathology data from individual animals (e.g., also unscheduled terminations), during the pretreatment phase, or in situations where treatment-related changes appear equivocal. Reference intervals are also mandatory in target animal safety-type studies. However, RI are only valid if they are regularly updated and compiled using specimens taken from healthy animals, either from the control group or from all animals during the pretreatment phase. The reference animal population should be the same in terms of species, strain, origin (vendor), sex, and age group as the treated animals, as well as all preanalytic and analytic procedures and methods (Geffre et al. ). Age-specific RI are required in most species.
Data analysis and reporting
Clinical pathology data analysis appears very straightforward, since the numerical data can easily be analyzed for statistically significant differences between control and treated groups. However, practice and experience teach us that in many instances, a “weight-of-evidence” approach is needed and very often, a thorough check of histopathology findings and establishing a context that includes in-life observations (body weight gain, food consumption, menstruation in monkeys, treatment-related vomiting or diarrhea, or compromised hemostasis after blood sampling) and toxicokinetics may be required for a solid TCP data interpretation, especially with suspected organ-specific chemistry changes. In non-rodent species such as dogs, monkeys, and pigs, inter-animal variation can be considerable, affecting the findings of statistically relevant differences when just comparing means of treated groups with the control group. Therefore, it is critical to go to the effort of comparing the treatment data in each individual animal to its own pretreatment data (Tomlinson et al. ; Hall and Everds ). Finally, the basic questions in TCP data assessment are whether there are any real changes (i.e., that are not due to artifacts or errors) and whether these changes are treatment related, i.e., supported by similar types and magnitudes of dose-related changes in males and females? Also, are these changes reversible (e.g., in studies with recovery group of animals)?
A final assessment of toxicologic relevance and actual adversity generally requires confirmation by histopathologic examination (e.g., confirmation of hepatic necrosis) and thorough examination of in-life observations and also toxicokinetic information. In addition, changes in food consumption and body weight or body weight gain provide important information on the overall wellbeing of animals in studies (Jensen and Kjelgaard-Hansen ). Even though treatment-related changes in food consumption and body weight gain may not be specific, such data can provide useful information for the interpretation of changes in different metabolites and also hematology values. For instance, decreased food consumption can result in a stress response and in dehydration, particularly in rats, followed by respective changes in the hemogram and chemistry profile of affected animals. Typically, subchronic, stress-related changes include higher total white blood cell counts, due to higher neutrophils, and lower lymphocyte and eosinophil numbers. In addition, and particularly in dogs, ALP activity can be induced due to increased cortisol levels. In dehydration, the hematocrit is higher which is also termed hemoconcentration. It can potentially mask a mild loss of red blood cell mass. In addition, higher concentrations of albumin are usually due to dehydration. In hematology, dehydration and hemoconcentration can mask a mild loss of protein and albumin. Finally, a protracted decrease in food consumption can result in no specific and non-adverse changes in the hematology profile, although the overall picture indicates toxic effects of a particular treatment (Ramaiah et al. ).
Organ weights can also provide valuable information for the interpretation of clinical pathology results (Sellers et al. ). Overall reduced body and organ weights in treated animals must be correlated with food uptake, as they can indicate a massive lack of nutrient intake, which can also be reflected in lower concentrations of total protein and albumin in serum or plasma.
If body weight is lost due to diarrhea, changes in electrolyte concentrations and overall dehydration and hemoconcentration can also be expected. In rats, glucose concentration and ALP activity may be increased, whereas in vomiting dogs chloride concentration may be lower and bicarbonate concentration higher (metabolic alkalosis). Other changes such as generalized lower weights of lymphoid organs such as lymph nodes, thymus, and spleen, combined with increased weights of adrenal glands, support an interpretation of a stress response (Everds et al. ).
Finally, increased liver weights can be suggestive of treatment-related hypertrophy and induction of liver enzymes (Ennulat et al. ). Other changes in organ weights (e.g., heart, brain, and kidneys) call for a thorough histopathologic examination, although increased enzyme activities such as CK and troponin I concentrations can assist in assessments of myocardial integrity, and urea and creatinine concentrations in combination with urinalysis provide valuable information on renal function. Increased spleen weight in mice usually indicates increased hematopoietic activity.
Although it seems quite self-explanatory when thinking about the pathophysiologic significance of treatment-related changes in TCP variables to integrate all other disciplines such as in-life observations, histopathologic changes, and toxicokinetics, it is common that study directors or clinical pathologists are required to report clinical pathology data long before other study results are available. While a preliminary assessment of clinical pathology data is often possible and can also be considered legitimate to some degree, the final report should never be issued before all study-relevant data are completely available (Tomlinson et al. ). In particular, results of histopathology but also in-life observations and the outcome of toxicokinetics must be available, especially if TCP variables are included in the determination of treatment levels of no adverse effect (NOAEL) or no effect (NOEL) (Ramaiah et al. ).
Often, companies require a particular report format. It is appropriate to start out with a general statement about whether treatment-related effects were observed or not, and to point out some of the major findings. A more detailed narrative listing of the observed changes should follow in the form of system-related profiles (e.g., variables concerning liver function and integrity, or renal function and integrity) or metabolic categories (e.g., glucose metabolism) to provide a pathophysiologic framework for the best understanding of the mechanisms of potential treatment-related effects. Finally, all findings should be considered in terms of biologic and physiologic significance (Tomlinson et al. ; Ramaiah et al. ).
Clearly, specific information on the pharmaceutical actions of the test item in question item, e.g., whether it is a biological or a small molecule and potential specific information on pharmaceutical targets, can be very helpful when interpreting white blood cell data (e.g., with immunmodulating test items) or equivocal liver profiles (e.g., with molecules affecting the hepatobiliary system).
The following are some examples for typical clinical pathology profile changes in toxicologic clinical pathology (Tables 2 and 3 ). Table 2 Common non-specific change patterns in toxicologic clinical pathology Variable Decreased red blood cell mass due to chronic disease Decreased red blood cell mass due to blood loss or hemolysis Stress reaction Inflammatory response Hematocrit ↓ ↓ ↔ ↓ Hemoglobin concentration ↓ ↓ ↔ ↓ Red blood cell count ↓ ↓ ↔ ↓ MCV ↔ ↑ ↔ ↔ MCH ↔ ↔ ↔ ↔ MCHC ↔ ↔/↓ ↔ ↔ Reticulocyte count ↔/↓ ↑ ↔ ↔/↓ Red cell distribution Width ↔ ↑ ↔ ↔ Total white blood cell count ↔/↑ ↔ ↑ ↑ Neutrophils ↔/↑ ↔ ↑ ↑ Lymphocytes ↔ ↔ ↓ (↑ peracutely) ↑ Monocytes ↔ ↔ ↔ ↑ Eosinophils ↔ ↔ ↓ ↔ Basophils ↔ ↔ ↓ ↔/↑ LUC ↔ ↔ ↔ ↑ Clin chemistry ↑ Acute-phase proteins ↓ Albumin ↓ Calcium ↔/↑ Globulins ↓ Albumin ↓Calcium ↔/↓ Globulins ↑ Glucose ↑ ALP (dog) ↓ Albumin ↑ Globulins Anatomic pathology – Presence of hemorrhage ↓ Size/weight Lymph nodes, thymus, spleen ↑ Reticuloendothe lial System (RES) ↑ indicates increase, ↔ indicates no change, ↓ indicates decrease Table 3 Common patterns in chemistry profiles in toxicologic clinical pathology Analyte Dehydration/hemoconcentration Renal dysfunction Hepatic/hepatobiliary dysfunction Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) ↔ ↔ ↑ Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ↔ ↔ ↑ Sorbitol dehydrogenase (minipigs) (SDH) ↔ ↔ ↑ Glutamate dehydrogenase (minipigs) (GLDH) ↔ ↔ ↑ Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) ↔ ↔ ↑ γ-Glutamyl transferase (non-rodents) (GGT) ↔ ↔ ↑ Total bilirubin ↔ ↔ ↑ Glucose ↔ ↔ ↔ Urea ↑ ↑ ↓ Creatinine ↑ ↑ ↔ Triglycerides ↔ ↔/↓ Total cholesterol ↔ ↑ ↔/↑ Total protein ↑ ↓ ↔/↓ Albumin ↑ ↓ ↓ Albumin:globulin ratio ↔/↑ ↔/↓ ↓ Sodium ↔/↑ ↓ ↔ Potassium ↔/↑ ↑ ↔ Chloride ↔/↑ ↔/↓ ↔ Total calcium ↔ ↔/↓ ↔ Phosphorus ↔ ↔/↑ ↔ Hematology ↑ RBC, HGB, HCT ↓ RBC, HGB, HCT Coagulation – – ↑ PT, APTT Urinalysis ↑ SG ↔/↓ SG Bilirubin ↑ indicates increase, ↔ indicates no change, ↓ indicates decrease
Reduced red blood cell mass due to chronic disease is a very frequently encountered and is a reversible, treatment-related hematologic change in toxicologic studies. It is typically a mild to moderate (up to 10 or 15%) loss of red blood cell mass without an adequate regenerative reticulocyte response. The most likely mechanism is an inhibition of hemoglobin synthesis in immature red blood cells due to the sequestration of iron. This mechanism has been well investigated in clinical medicine in animals and people and seems to be quite common in preclinical studies, although the exact reason for this change is unknown. One important factor is the production of hepcidin in the liver, often elicited by IL-6 and other inflammatory mediators (Grimes and Fry ). It can sometimes be helpful to correlate the C-reactive protein, serum amyloid A, or α1-acid glycoprotein concentrations, depending on the species, indicating whether the animal is suffering from chronic inflammation. Importantly, such low-level inflammatory changes may not be picked up by any other means such as histology.
Likewise, stress reactions in the animals are quite common in preclinical studies. A typical subacute or chronic stress response is characterized by increased numbers of total leukocytes, usually due to increased counts of neutrophils and possibly monocytes, lower counts of lymphocytes and possibly eosinophils, and higher concentrations of glucose (particularly in rats), and higher activity of ALP (particularly in dogs) (Everds et al. ).
Reduced red blood cell mass may also develop due to excessive blood sampling and it can reach up to − 20% by the end of a 4-week study. This can also be considered an animal welfare issue and should therefore be avoided. In monkeys, excessive blood sampling can even cause animal death, especially in menstruating females. For the calculation of acceptable blood volumes for sampling, a simple formula assuming that total blood volume is about 10% of the body weight can be used, and roughly not more than 10% of the total blood volume should be removed at any one time (Diehl et al. ). An important issue in study animals undergoing excessive blood sampling is the normal physiologic response, namely the strong stimulation of erythropoiesis in bone marrow and a resulting reticulocytosis in peripheral blood. Even when blood volumes are respected, the blood sampling regimen may trigger a completely normal compensatory erythroid response from the bone marrow. A compensatory erythropoietic response can easily obscure real treatment-related effects in bone marrow analysis. Therefore, particularly with test items affecting hematopoiesis, oversampling should be avoided.
An artifact is a study-related effect that is a change in clinical pathology data not related to the test item, but rather due to circumstantial, procedural, or accidental influences. It can include any of the following: hemolysis (at blood sampling), lipemia (accidental feeding immediately prior to blood sampling), coagulation (at blood sampling), use of incorrect tubes (e.g., K-EDTA), and blood contamination (urine). Clearly, almost all of these artifacts can be prevented by highly standardized practices and executed by properly trained personnel.
Clinical pathology is a well-established discipline in preclinical toxicologic pathology. Although data generation and assessment appear relatively straightforward based on the mostly numerical quantitative changes and a high standard in commercially available, automated equipment, it also includes qualitative/morphological data evaluation that require specialized training. Many considerations affect the data interpretation and determination of actual treatment-related changes as most instruments were developed for human and not animal use, and species-specific differences can be considerable, requiring a solid veterinary medical background. Therefore, it is essential that all individuals active in all aspects of TCP data generation are properly trained and familiar with best practice.