Introduction
Platelets play a pivotal role in the development of atherothrombotic events [ ]. Recent reports of the association between platelet hyper-reactivity and adverse cardiac events in patients with acute coronary syndromes (ACS) have reinforced this central role [ ]. Therefore, dual-antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and a platelet P2Y12 receptor inhibitor is recommended as the standard of care in the management of patients with ACS and those undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) [ ]. Platelet populations are heterogeneous in terms of age, size, reactivity, and susceptibility to anti-platelet therapies [ ]. Reticulated platelets (RPs) are immature platelets with high dense granules content, a residual amount of megakaryocyte-derived of messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), and increased mean volume compared with older circulating platelets [ ]. The name reticulated platelets stems from the patterns of distribution of messenger ribonucleic acid that produces a reticulated pattern after staining with thiazole orange (TO) [ ].
RPs are presumed to be pro-thrombotic and hyperactive compared to mature platelets [ ]. Furthermore, a higher proportion of RPs has been associated with attenuated response to anti-platelet medications, including aspirin, clopidogrel and prasugrel [ , , , ]. The proportion of circulating RPs is increased in situations of enhanced platelet turnover, including ACS and acute cerebrovascular disease [ ]. Two recent studies have shown that the level of RPs is an independent predictor of major adverse cardiovascular events, including cardiovascular death, in patients with ACS or patients undergoing PCI [ ].
The mechanism underlying the association between circulating RPs and attenuated response to anti-platelet drugs, as well as their association with adverse clinical outcome is not clear. Investigation of the surface antigenic properties of this unique platelet population is essential for understanding their role in enhancing the risk of thrombotic events. The purpose of our study was to characterize and compare the surface antigens of reticulated and mature platelets in the resting and provoked state.
Methods
Study population
The present study included 10 healthy subjects with no past medical history and not currently taking any medications and 10 patients with diabetes mellitus not taking any anti-platelet treatment.
Study protocol
Whole blood sample was taken from each participant in the study, after signing an informed consent form and according to IRB approval. For each subject, we determined the following: (1) reticulated platelet (RPs) levels—by using a flow cytometry assay with thiazole orange (TO) staining and CD42b reagent. (2) Expression of variety of cell surface markers, by using flow cytometry analysis with double staining. The first stain was used to identify RPs, and the second stain to identify specific platelet activation markers: P-selectin expression and Annexin V.
Platelets analysis
Platelets were tested at rest and after activation. For activation 5 µl of blood samples was incubated with 10 µl ADP (10 µM) for 10 min. To avoid aggregation, 20 µl of epitifibatide/integrilin compound (for final concentration of 24 µM) was added to the tubes.
Flow cytometry analysis for platelets, reticulated platelets (RPs) and expression of platelets activation markers (P-selectin and Annexin V)
Platelets and RPs were analyzed by flow cytometry (FACS Calibur, Becton Dickinson, town country) using Thrombocytest TM plus kit (Glycotope Biothechnology), a reagent kit for FACS analysis of all platelets and reticulated platelets according to manufacturer’s instructions [ ].
The different markers were measured directly using flow cytometry Assay. Briefly: 10 μl of whole blood (in EDTA coated tubes) was incubated for 10 min with 10 μl CD42 (PE- conjugated, BioLegeng, USA), monoclonal antibody for platelets, together with 10 μl of one of the tested platelets markers - P-selectin (PE-CY5 conjugated, BioLegeng, USA) or Annexin V (PE-CY5 conjugated, SouthernBiotech, USA).
After incubation time, 1 ml of TO (Sigma, USA) reagent staining reticulated cells, was added to each tube and the tube were incubated for another 30 min. Isotype-identical antibodies were used as controls. After incubation, cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and analyzed by flow cytometry. Each analysis included 100,000 platelets in the platelet gate.
The proportion of RPs and mPLTs was assessed by double staining with TO (FL1—488 nm) and CD42b (FL2—PE 560 nm). CD42b was used to stain the whole platelet population, as seen by FL2. TO was used for staining nuclear acid content, as seen by FL1. RPs are represented by the cells positive for the both staining (FL1 and FL2). Mature platelets are the cells that were positive only for FL2. The expression of the surface antigens was assessed by triple-staining with the specific reagent, P-selectin or Annexin V (FL4—PE-CY5 633 nm), TO for RPs (FL1) and CD42b for mature platelets (FL2). An example of the flow cytometry analysis in one of the patients is depicted in Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1 Flow cytometry analysis of reticulated platelets and mature platelets. Staining for CD42b identifies the total platelet population and staining for both TO and CD42b identifies RPs ( a ). Further analysis performed for expression of surface antigens by the different platelet populations. Double staining for TO and CD62 was performed to identify expression of P-selectin in RPs ( b ) and double staining for CD42b and CD62 to identify expression of P-selectin in mPLTs ( c ). mPLTs mature platelets, RPs reticulated platelets; TO thiazole orange, FL1 stainig for TO, FL2 staining for CD42b, FL4 staining for each reagent, P-selectin or PAC-1
Statistical analysis
Continuous variables were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Continuous variables were compared by t test or ANOVA for normally distributed values; otherwise the Mann–Whitney U test was used. A correlation analysis was done using the Pearson’s correlation coefficient for normally distributed continuous variables and the Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient test for non-normally distributed continuous variables. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 22.0 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, Illinois, USA).
Results
Ten healthy volunteers (mean age = 38 ± 3.7, % Female = 50%) and 10 patients with diabetes mellitus (mean age = 62.1 ± 11.9, % women = 50%) were recruited for the study. Baseline characteristics of the two groups are presented in Table 1 . Two blood samples were drawn from each patient and the proportion of mature platelets and RPs, as well as the expression of various antigens were tested. Following incubation with the different reagents, the samples were analyzed using flow cytometry (example Fig. 1 ).
Table 1 Baseline characteristics Healthy control Patients with diabetes mellitus P value n = 10 n = 10 Age (mean ± SD) 38.3 ± 3.7 62.1 ± 11.9 0.0002 Female n, (%) 5 (50) 5 (50) 1 Diabetes mellitus n, (%) 0 (0) 10 (100) 0.0001 Hypertension n, (%) 0 (0) 7 (70) 0.003 Hyperlipidemia n, (%) 0 (0) 8 (80) 0.0007 Smoking current n, (%) 0 (0) 2 (20) 0.47 PVD n, (%) 0 (0) 3 (30) 0.21 IHD n, (%) 0 (0) 3 (30) 0.21 s/p CVA n, (%) 0 (0) 2 (20) 0.47 COPD n, (%) 0 (0) 2 (20) 0.47 CHF n, (%) 0 (0) 2 (20) 0.47 PVD peripheral vascular disease, IHD ischemic heart disease, CVA cerebrovascular accident, COPD chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, CHF congestive heart failure
The proportions of the mature and reticulated platelets
The proportion of RPs and mature platelets was calculated before and after activation with ADP. The activation process did not change significantly the proportion of RPs (before activation: 26.72 ± 0.45%, after activation: 27.72 ± 0.52%; P = 0.5) and mature platelets (before activation: 73.28 ± 0.45%, after activation: 72.28 ± 0.52%; P = 0.5) (Fig. 2 ).
Fig. 2 The proportion of reticulated platelets and mature platelets at rest and after activation. Activation with ADP did not cause a significant change in the proportion of RPs and mPLTs in whole blood. mPLTs mature platelets, RPs reticulated platelets
Expression of surface antigens in mature platelets and RPs in healthy subjects
Expression of P-selectin and Annexin V in mature platelets and RPs was assessed by double-staining flow cytometry in healthy subjects. The expression of P-selectin at resting state was not significantly different, in mature platelets compared with RPs (10.7 ± 12.6 vs. 6.8 ± 4.8%, respectively, P = 0.34). After activation, the expression of P-selectin by RPs was increased by 4- fold from 6.8 ± 4.8 to 29.8 ± 22.5% (P = 0.04), while the expression of P-selectin by the mature platelets increased numerically but not significantly, from 10.7 ± 12.6 to 19.3 ± 18.2% (P = 0.09) (Fig. 3 a).
Fig. 3 P-selectin expression by reticulated platelets and mature platelets in healthy subjects ( a ) and patients with diabetes ( b ). Increase in P-selection expression after activation was more pronounced in RPs than in mPLTs. mPLTs mature platelets, RPs reticulated platelets
The proportion of cells expressing the Annexin V antigen at resting state was lower in mature platelets compared with the RPs (4.96 ± 0.24 vs. 12.8 ± 0.64%, P = 0.003). After activation, the proportion of RPs expressing Annexin V increased 1.5- fold from 12.8 ± 0.64 to 19.5 ± 1.12% (P = 0.045), while the expression by the mature platelets did not change significantly (Fig. 3 b).
The expression of surface antigens by RPs and mature platelets in patients with diabetes
The proportion of the RPs (from total blood cells) among patients with diabetes was similar to that observed in healthy subjects (1.2 ± 0.5 and 1.2 ± 0.5% in the diabetic and healthy groups, respectively).
Similar to the healthy subjects, in patients with diabetes the proportion of cells expressing the P-selectin antigen at resting state was not significantly different between mature platelets and RPs (7.2 ± 4.1, vs. 5.9 ± 2.9%, respectively, P = 0.74). After activation, the proportion of RPs expressing P-selectin antigen increased significantly by twofold from 5.9 ± 2.9 to 11.6 ± 2.1% (P = 0.05), while the expression of P-selectin by the mature platelets did not change significantly (7.2 ± 4.1 to 11.3 ± 6.6%, P = 0.33, Fig. 4 a).
Fig. 4 Annexin V expression by reticulated platelets and mature platelets in healthy subjects ( a ) and patients with diabetes ( b ). Increase in Annexin V expression after activation was more pronounced in RPs than in mPLTs. mPLTs mature platelets, RPs reticulated platelets
Similar to healthy subjects, in patients with diabetes the proportion of cells expressing the Annexin V antigen at resting state was lower on mature platelets compared with the RPs (3.17 ± 0.68 vs. 5.38 ± 0.15%, P = 0.05).
After activation, the proportion of RPs expressing the Annexin V antigen increased by 2.2-fold from 9.23 ± 1.52 to 20.0 ± 0.58% (P = 0.045), while the expression by the mature platelets did not change significantly (Fig. 4 b).
Discussion
Several studies have highlighted the association between the proportion of RPs in the circulation and attenuated response to anti-platelet drugs, as well as adverse clinical outcome [ , ]. The mechanism of such an association is not clear. One of the assumptions is that the higher cardiovascular risk conferred by an increased proportion of RPs is mainly due to increased platelet turnover and reactivity [ , , ]. The present study examined the surface antigenic characteristics of immature RPs compared to mature platelets, using dual staining flow cytometry, in order to reveal mechanisms contributing to enhanced thrombotic risk.
The main findings of the study are: (1) the proportion of mature platelets and RPs in the circulation does not change significantly following activation, (2) following activation with ADP, RPs have a significantly higher capacity to increase the expression level of activation markers, compared to mature platelets. These findings were consistent both in healthy subjects and patients with diabetes. The second finding is in line with several recent reports [ ]. This observation demonstrates the higher potential of immature platelets to increase the expression of P-selectin and Annexin V following activation, possibly through ongoing protein synthesis by the residual mRNA in these platelets [ ]. This finding also suggests enhanced pro-thrombotic potential of RPs. Stratz et al. [ ] recently published a supplementary analysis to a sub-study of the ExelsiorLOAD trial with 6 healthy patients. Similar to our study, they found a stronger response of RPs to stimulation with ADP by expressing more surface P-selectin and PAC-1 compared with non-RPs. Moreover, Bernlochner et al. [ ] have shown that RPs expressed higher P-selectin levels upon ADP stimulation when compared with non-RPs in prasugrel or ticagrelor-treated patients following ACS. They also found that in RPs, P-selectin expression after ADP stimulation was significantly less affected by prasugrel when compared to ticagrelor. It may indicate that ticagrelor is a more effective platelet inhibitor in patients with higher proportion of RPs and high platelet turnover, possibly because of its twice daily dosing and its reversible receptor binding.
Studies of recent years have shown that anucleated platelets, lack of genomic DNA, are able to synthesize proteins using a pool of mRNAs [ , ]. RPs has high dense granules content, a residual amount of mRNA [ ]. Thus, RPs may have a higher potential to synthesize pro-thrombotic proteins from residual mRNA. The translation of mRNA in blood platelets is regulated by miRNA molecules. It has been shown that miRNAs regulate the biological response of platelets: change of their shape and secretion of granules content [ , ]. Recent studies explored the possibility of using platelets miRNAs as predictive biomarkers of thrombotic events episodes [ , ]. The detection of specific changes in platelet miRNA expression profiles associated with hyperactivity of platelets may have important implications in the prevention of embolic incidents.
Our current findings offer mechanistic insights into recent clinical observations concerning the importance of RPs in the pathophysiology of ACS. The levels of RPs in patients with coronary artery disease were found to be of prognostic importance, predicting subsequent adverse cardiovascular events [ , ]. In addition, the proportion of RPs in the circulation has been associated with attenuated response to several antiplatelet drugs [ , , , ]. Our study suggests that RPs differ from mature platelets, mainly in their enhanced potential for activation and expression of pro-thrombotic surface markers following stimulation. This difference may be pivotal in clinical ACS scenarios, and in the risk of patients with relatively high levels of circulating RPs do develop thrombotic complications.
Our study has several limitations as follow: (1) we had small sized groups (only 10 patients in each), (2) we had to use the GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor eptifibatide in order to avoid platelet clumping and aggregation during the experiments. It might have affected the expression of platelet activation markers. However, these conditions were the same for the reticulated and non-reticulated platelets.
In conclusion , our study highlights the differences in the surface marker expression between reticulated and mature platelets following their activation. The unique biologic profile of immature RPs may explain their growing clinical importance as markers of platelet reactivity and thrombotic events.