Introduction
Over 180 million people through world are chronically infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV), a hepatotropic and lymphotropic virus. Following HCV infection, 20–30% of infected individuals eliminate the virus without any therapy, while 70–80% of them become persistently infected (Karoney and Siika ).
In 2015, hepatitis C virus (HCV) still affects a great proportion of the Egyptian population. In the 1–59 year age group, 12.4% of male persons were positive for HCV antibodies while 8.1% of female persons were positive for HCV antibodies (Kandeel et al. ).
HCV infection mostly leads to chronic hepatitis and is a major cause for liver cirrhosis and its complication like hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Hematological complications such as type II mixed cryoglobulinemia (type II MC) or B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL) may be found in cases infected with HCV (Lee et al. ).
In Egypt, NHL has the highest incidence among hematopoietic cancers (HCs) (11.7 per 100,000). NHL incidence pattern is similar to that observed for HCC because of the possible link to hepatitis C virus for both cancers (Ibrahim et al. ).
Molecular genetic abnormalities have been seen to represent the main mechanism in the pathogenesis of B-NHL (Morton et al. ). Genomic analysis has greatly affects the diagnosis and clinical management of patients affected by diverse forms of hematologic malignancies (Taylor et al. ).
Human fibronectin (FN) is encoded by a 75-kb gene that is located on chromosome 2q34. Polymorphisms of the fibronectin gene are as follows: HindIII, HaeIII, TaqI, and MspI (Zeng et al. ).
Plasma FN is synthesized in the liver by hepatocytes and present in a soluble form in blood plasma at a concentration of 300 mg/ml. Major producers of cellular fibronectin are fibroblasts and endothelial cells, but many other cell types, including some epithelial cells, synthesize fibronectin at lower levels (Roderburg et al. ).
FN had been showen to be a risk of B-NHL development as engagement of B1 integren with FN decrease the induction of apoptotic proteins caspase-3 and caspase-7. In addition, integrin activation increases the expression of antiapoptotic proteins in lymphoid malignancy (Naci et al. ) .
On other hand pFn has a high affinity for monoclonal IgM with RF activity that present in type II MC. pFn also may bind to the Clq component of complement present in many cryoglobulin preparations. So, pFn is a an integral component of type II MC (Toschi et al. ).
In the current study, we investigate the possible link between two FN polymorphisms (called MspI and HaeIII) and the development of lymphoma in HCV-positive patients with MCns compared to healthy age- and sex-matched individuals. This study was conducted on patients selected from those admitted to the tropical department in Theodore Bilharz Research Institute and in Medical Oncology Department Kasr Al Ainy hospital.
Materials and methods
Patients
One hundred subjects were enrolled in this work. Selected patients were classified into three groups: 50 B-NHL patients, 25 HCV-positive patients with MCsn, and 25 healthy age- and sex-matched individuals served as a control group. Informed consents were obtained from the study subjects according to the declaration of Helsinki.
All patients under study were subjected to the following investigations for selection and grouping of patients; complete history taking, complete clinical examination, abdominal and pelvis ultrasonography and CT, routine hemogram using the automatic hematology analyzer Coulter, blood smears were spread and stained for determination of differential leucocytic count, kidney function tests, liver function tests, detection of HCV antibodies by ELIZA, and confirmed by RT-PCR. In addition, peripheral venous blood was received at 37 °C in a plane tube for cryoglobulins assessment by cold precipitation (4 °C for 72–96 h) (Motyckova and Murali ). Histopathological examinations, immunophenotyping, and bone marrow examination (aspirate/biopsy) were done for lymphoma patients only for classification and staging.
Genotyping
Peripheral venous blood was collected into 5% EDTA, and DNA was extracted by the QIAamp DNA Mini Kits; Blood Mini kit (Catalog No. 51104) following manufacturer’s instructions.
HaeIII and MspI FN gene polymorphisms were assayed. The HaeIII polymorphic site was amplified with primers F1 (5′-AGCTCTATTCCACCTTACAACACCG-3′) and F2 (5′-CTCCCAGGAGACTGTGAGCAC-3′) and following cycle condition: 94 °C for 1 min, 56 °C for 1 min, 72 °C for 1 min (35 cycles). The MspI polymorphic site was amplified with primers F3 (5′-GCCTGGTACAGAATATGTAGTG-3′) and F4 (5′-TGCCATTAAGAGCAACGATGC-3′) and following cycle condition: 94 °C for 1 min, 56 °C for 1 min, 72 °C for 1 min (35 cycles). Then, final extension at 72 °C for 10 min. Digestion of the amplified product by specific restriction enzyme were done at 37 °C for 2 h.
Detection of the digested PCR products was run onto 1.5% agarose gel containing 0.1% ethidium bromide.
Fibronectin plasma levels analysis by ELISA
To find the possible functional implication of the two FN polymorphic sites (MspI and HaeIII), 2 ml in a sterile disposable vacuum tube containing Na citrate anticoagulant, FN plasma levels were assessed by ELISA on freshly defrosted plasma samples stored at − 80 °C following the manufacturer’s instructions (R&D Systems, Inc., USA, cat. no. DFBN10). The optical density of each well was determined within 30 min, using a microplate reader set to 450 nm.
Statistical methods
Data were statistically described in terms of mean ± standard deviation (± SD), median and range, or frequencies (number of cases) and percentages when appropriate. Odds ratio (OR) and its 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) were calculated for homo/hetero between the different groups. Allelic frequency was also calculated for the different alleles within different groups. Comparison of numerical variables between the study groups was done using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test with post hoc multiple two-group comparisons when data were normally distributed and Kruskal-Wallis test with post hoc multiple two-group comparisons in not-normal data. For comparing categorical data, chi-square ( χ 2 ) test was performed. Exact test was used instead when the expected frequency is less than 5. P values less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical calculations were done using computer program SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Science; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) release 15 for Microsoft Windows (2006).
Results
MspI genotyping
In the current study, we did not find any significant difference between all patients’ groups and controls regarding MspI genotypes ( P = 0.697) (Figs. 1 and 2 ). Fig. 1 Comparative results of MspI genotypes between groups. Abbreviations are same as in text Fig. 2 Results of MspI genotyping by PCR-RFLP on gel electrophoresis. MW 50–2000 ladder size marker. Lanes 6, 7, 8, 10, and 11 showing 1360 and 270 bp bands: DD genotype. Lanes 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 showing 1630, 1360, and 270 bp bands: DC genotype. Lane 9 showing only 1630 bp band: CC genotype
HaeIII genotyping
Statistical analysis in our study revealed that HaeIII-AB genotype was significantly higher in B-NHL patients compared to HCV positive patients with MCsn ( P = 0.007) and compared to controls ( P = 0.002) (Figs. 3 and 4 ). Fig. 3 Comparative results of HeaIII genotyping between groups. Abbreviations are same as in text Fig. 4 Results of HaeIII genotyping by PCR-RFLP on gel electrophoresis. MW 50–2000 ladder size marker. Lanes 7 and 10 showing 750 and 650 bp bands: BB genotype. Lanes 1, 2, 3, 6, and 9 showing 1400, 750, and 650 bp bands: AB genotype. Lanes 4, 5, and 8 showing only 1400 bp band: AA genotype
Allele A was significantly higher in all B-NHL when compared with both HCV positive patients with MCsn ( P = 0.010) and controls ( P = 0.005) (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 5 Comparative results of A Allele between groups. Abbreviations are same as in text
Fibronectin plasma level
As regards plasma fibronectin level, no statistically significant difference was noticed between patients ‘groups and each other’s ( P = 1.000) (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Results of plasma FN. Abbreviations are same as in text
Discussion
The hepatitis C virus is transmitted by many ways; the most common ways of infection are through unsafe injection practices, inadequate sterilization of medical instruments, and the transfusion of infected blood and blood products (Page et al. ).
About 15–25 % of people exposed to HCV virus infection develop an acute disease, which spontaneously clears from the body within 6 months. The remaining 75% can develop different complications including chronic HCV infection, cirrhosis and liver failure as well as possible development of hepatocellular carcinoma (Irshad et al. ).
Hematological complications such as type II mixed cryoglobulinemia or B-cell NHL can be seen in many cases infected with HCV. This association between HCV and NHL has been reported by several studies (Goldman et al. ; Peveling-Oberhag et al. ; Youssef et al. ).
Africa has the greatest WHO estimated regional HCV prevalence (5.3%). Egypt has the highest incidence (17.5%) of HCV in the world (Karoney and Siika ) .
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs) are highly related diseases, each involving the malignant transformation of lymphoid cells, but with different morphologic, immunophenotypic, genetic, and clinical features (Morton et al. ).
In Egypt, NHL represented 11.7% of all diagnosed cancer cases in the National Cancer Institute (NCI)-Cairo University during the period 2008–2011 (Ibrahim et al. ) .
Genetic study of NHL will probably represent an important new approach not only for diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy monitoring of NHL patients, but also may be used in molecular targeted chemotherapeutic protocols capable of complete eradication of malignant clone (Li et al. ).
FN is an extracellular matrix (ECM) non-collagen adhesive protein that plays a important role in intercellular adhesion. The plasma form of FN (pFn) is produced by hepatocytes but cellular fibronectin (cFn) is secreted mainly by fibroblasts and endothelial cells (Attallah et al. ) .
FN has been shown to be a risk of NHL development as engagement of α4β1 integren with FN could prevent apoptosis and promote proliferation of B lymphocyte through increased levels of the antiapoptotic proteins XIAP and survivin while the levels of apoptotic proteins caspase-3 and caspase-7 are decreased (Astier et al. ).
FN plays an important role in liver diseases; as cFn produced by sinusoidal endothelial cells during liver injury carry the alternatively spliced EIIIA domain. This domain has been involved in cell adhesion and pro-inflammatory cytokine production occurs in liver disease. EIIIA domain also upregulate the production of matrix metalloproteinase (MMPs) and transforming growth factor β (TGF-β1) which are implicated in ECM remodeling events during liver fibrosis (Aziz-Seible et al. ).
In the current study, we did not find any significant difference between NHL group and control group regarding MspI genotying. Similar results previously reported by Fabris et al. ( ) who also found no significant difference in MspI genotyping between NHL group and control group (Fabris et al. ).
We also did not find any significant difference between NHL group and HCV positive with MCsn group regarding MspI genotying. But Fabris et al. ( ) noticed that MspI-DD genotype is significantly higher in NHL group compared to MCsn group which we could not prove in our study (Fabris et al. ).
As regards HaeIII FN gene polymorphisms, the statistical data obtained from the present work revealed that HaeIII-AB genotype was significantly higher in NHL group compared to control group and conferred an almost fivefold increased NHL risk (OR = 5.523, 95% CI = 1.785–17.091); this was in accordance with Fabris et al. ( ) who found that HaeIII-AB genotype was significantly higher in NHL patients in comparison to control group (Fabris et al. ).
Our study also revealed that HaeIII-AB genotype was significantly higher in NHL group compared to HCV positive with MCsn group and conferred an almost fourfold increased NHL risk (OR = 4.373, 95% CI = 1.491–12.826). However Fabris et al. ( ) found that HaeIII-AA was significantly higher in NHL group compared to MCsn group (Fabris et al. ).
The main difference between our results and Fabris et al. ( ) results regards FN gene polymorphisms appeared when we compared NHL group to MCsn group. This may be attributed to selection of patients enrolled in the two studies; in the current work the MCsn patients were all HCV positive while Fabris et al. ( ) study included MCsn patients regardless of being HCV positive or not (Fabris et al. ).
In our work data obtained revealed that HaeIII-A allele was significantly higher in NHL group compared to control group and conferred threefold increased risk of NHL development (OR = 3.165, 95% CI = 1.388–7.218). This was in agreement with that obtained by Fabris et al. ( ) who reported that HaeIII-A allele frequency was significantly higher in NHL patients compared to control group (Fabris et al. ).
We also found that HaeIII-A allele frequency was significantly higher in NHL group compared to HCV positive with MCsn group and conferred almost threefold increased NHL risk (OR = 2.779, 95% CI = 1.249–6.182). Fabris et al. ( ) also reported that HaeIII-A allele frequency was significantly higher in NHL patients compared to MCsn group (Fabris et al. ).
As regards, FN plasma levels we did not detect any statistical significant differences between all groups. Although Fabris et al. ( ) found that plasma FN levels was significantly higher in MCsn group. This discrepancy may be explained by that commercially available ELISA kits for measurement of FN cannot distinguish the different FN isoforms and may be attributed to selection of patients (Fabris et al. ).
In an trial to clarify the possible function of FN in NHL, many researches has been performed on FN gene in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) by Brandt et al. ( ), and Rimsza et al. ( ) and Lossos et al. ( ) they found that measurement of FN gene expression may be used to predict survival in DLBCL (Brandt et al. ; Lossos et al. ; Rimsza et al. ).
Other studies focused on FN role in liver diseases as Mosa et al. ( ), who found that serum fibronectin was elevated in Egyptian patients with combined HCV and Schistosomiasis (Mosa et al. ). While Moriya et al. ( ) studied role of FN in acute liver injury (Moriya et al. ).
Aziz-Seible et al. ( ) reported a remarkable increase in levels of cFn in chronic liver disease. In addition, immunohistochemical and RT-PCR analyses in their work also found elevated amounts of cFn and its mRNA in the tissue of diseased livers (Aziz-Seible et al. ).
On the other hand, many studies were performed on FN gene polymorphisms in different malignancies; Siemianowicz et al. ( ) studied FN gene polymorphisms in patients with lung cancer (Siemianowicz et al. ). Viana et al. ( ) has studied the expression of FN gene in colorectal cancer patients (Viana et al. ).
Conclusion
In conclusion, our study provides further evidence for the role of HaeIII-AB FN gene polymorphism as a risk factor for NHL development in sub-population of Egyptian HCV-positive patients with MCns. This work should be extended on a large numbers of patients to throw more light on the FN gene polymorphism and chronic HCV infection in NHL patients.
We also found that HaeIII-A allele has been significantly increased in overall NHL patients. But better understanding of the functional consequences of FN gene polymorphism would provide a base for future studies of this gene in the pathogenesis of NHL particularly among those suffering from HCV infection.
Furthermore, we did not find any association between plasma FN level and NHL development in HCV-positive patients with MCns so further studies on cellular FN and histopathological analysis of FN in lymphoma cells will help more in understanding role of FN in pathogenesis and progression of NHL in HCV positive patients with MCsn.