Introduction
The genus Camelus comprises two species: Camelus dromedaries (one-humped camel) and the Camelus bactrianus (two-humped camel). The general classification of these species has been described previously (Skidmore ; Wilson ). The Dromedary camels occupy arid regions of the Middle East through Northern Indian and the arid regions of central Australia and Africa, especially the Sahara desert, with most of them being owned by pastoralists (Ribadu ; Nowak ). In Nigeria, camels are commonly found in the Northern frontiers of the country, usually herded along with cattle, sheep, goats, and donkeys (Mshelia et al. ).
The camel has distinguished itself as a very important animal in the desert regions by its ability to provide milk and meat, and transport in harsh, dry conditions. It is globally estimated that there are 24,246.291 million one-humped camels in the world (FAO ), 80% of which are in Africa with the highest population in Somalia (7 million) and Sudan (4.25 million). Although the camels are far outnumbered by most domestic animals in Nigeria, their morphological, behavioral, and physiological adaptations to the arid and semi-arid environments of Northern Nigeria may play more important role in the economy of the country than is generally recognized (FDLPCS ; Chafe et al. ).
The she-came l matures at 3–4 years of age but reaches her full reproductive capacity at age 6 years (Khanvilka et al. ). Her estrous cycle differs from those of the angulates and basically consists of proestrus (growing follicles), estrus (mature follicles), and diestrus (follicular atresia if mating has not occurred) (Al-Eknah et al. ). In the absence of mating, there is only a succession of follicular waves with high variable rhythm (Tibary and Anouassi ). Because the camel is an induced ovulator (Marie and Anouassi ) with ovulation occurring after mating (Ayoub et al. ; Skidmore ; Ghazi ), they have a very slow rise in peripheral serum progesterone concentration after ovulation and a short luteal phase of only 9–10 days in the mated non-pregnant animal (Skidmore et al. ) with low serum progesterone concentration in unmated females (Skidmore et al. ). Thus, the serum progesterone level depends on the reproductive status and age of the she-camel (Kamoun and Jemmali ).
Alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) is one of the cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells, which is composed of three major protein families that form filamentous structures running throughout the cell (Ramaekers and Bosman ). Actin occurs in two forms and are important not only for mitosis, cell growth, and changes in cell shape, but also for regulation of protein secretion (Rao and Cohen ) and in the dynamic morphological and functional changes taking place in the endometrium (Christensen et al. ). Generally, the alpha-smooth muscle actin is regarded as a marker of terminal smooth muscle differentiation (Skalli et al. ) and have recently been shown to play a direct role in myofibroblast contractile activity through its end terminal domain (Chaponnier and Gabbiani ), mainly located in the cytoplasm ornucleus (Disanza et al. ). Actin is also a major component of both the contractile and cytoskeletal domains of smooth muscle cells (Small ).
Studies have shown that steroid hormones are involved in the regulation of alpha-smooth muscle actin in specific cell types and that this cytoskeletal protein is important in cellular differentiation and proteins synthesis (Christensen et al. ; Fazleabas et al. ; Kranenetal. 1993). To date, there is little that is known about the cellular changes that occur in the genitalia of the camelids. This study therefore describes the alpha smooth muscle actin localization in the utero-vagina of the one-humped camel.
Materials and methods
Geo-climate of the study area
This study was carried out in Maiduguri, in Northeastern Nigeria. This city is situated at an elevation of 354 m above sea level, located between latitudes 11° and 14° N and longitudes 10° and 14° E within the conventional Sahel zone (BMLS ). The temperature ranges from 13 to 40 °C for most parts of the year, with two distinct seasons, the rainy season with a mean annual rainfall of 647 mm (from July to October) and a prolonged dry season for the rest of the year (Hess et al. ; LCRI ).
Animals and sample collection
The camels sampled were amongst those presented to the Maiduguri municipal abattoir for slaughter. These animals come from the northern frontiers of Borno State in Nigeria, as well as trade animals brought from the neighboring Chad and Niger republics. A total of 86 blood samples and intact genitalia were collected from the one-humped female camel from May to September 2015. The blood samples were collected before slaughter through jugular venopuncture and transferred into cleans sterile vacutainer tubes, while the corresponding genitalia were collected immediately after slaughter and placed into clean polyethene bags. These samples were then transported immediately to the Department of Veterinary Anatomy Postgraduate Research Laboratory, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Maiduguri, for processing. Once in the laboratory, the ovarian structures were evaluated and recorded; the uterus was also examined for pregnancy. These genitalia and their corresponding blood samples were then separated and included in the study. Further to that, 2–3 mm of the uterine and vaginal tissue samples were cut and fixed Bouins solution for 72 h, while serum was harvested by centrifugation at 2000–3000 rpm for 10 min and stored at − 20 °C.
Serum progesterone (P4) assay
This assay was carried out using the Camel Progesterone (PROG) ELISA Kit (MyBioScience, USA). This kit uses the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) based on the biotin double antibody sandwich technology to assay the camel progesterone. The assay was carried out according to the manufacturer’s instruction.
Alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) localization
Tissue processing
The fixed tissues were rinsed in running tap water and placed in a tissue processing/embedding cassette II (Shadon Duplex, processor, Thermo Scientific, UK). This was then gradually dehydrated through ascending grades of alcohol (70, 80, and 90%, and finally three changes of absolute alcohol). This was later cleared in three (3) changes of xylene and impregnated in two changes of molten paraffin wax for 2 h each, and then embedded in paraffin wax. Finally, the tissues were removed from the machine and embedded in paraffin wax using the embedding center (LEICA, EG1160, Austria).
The paraffin-embedded tissues were then cut into sections of 5 μm thick and mounted on to histoslides according to Drury et al. ( ).
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry was performed using a mouse monoclonal primary antibody against α-smooth muscleactin (Clone1A4, MO851, DAKO, Hamburg, Germany). Antigen localization was achieved using the DakoLSAB+Kit and peroxidase (LSAB+Kit, HRP) technique according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Five (5 μm) sections of the paraffin-embedded tissues were deparaffinized in xylene in descending grades of alcohol, rehydrated, and rinsed in phosphate-buffered solution (PBS) at a pH of 7.4 (3 × 5 min). For antigen retrieval, a glass container filled with citrate buffer was placed into a water bath set at 95 °C. The retrieval solution was allowed to attain a temperature of 65 °C before the slides were introduced into the buffer. The temperature was then raised to 95 °C and maintained there for 20 min. Thereafter, the sections were removed and allowed to cool at room temperature for 15 min. The immunohistochemical staining was performed according to Abd-Elmaksoud et al. ( ). The endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by soaking the sections in 3% v / v hydrogen peroxide/distilled water for 20 min at room temperature and washed under running tap water for an additional 10 min. The slides were equilibrated in PBS pH 7.4 (2 × 5 min). The biotinylation and blocking reagents were prepared routinely according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Calculated quantities of a diluent were mixed with concentrated antibody and biotinylation reagents in a test tube and incubated for 15 min. Calculated quantity of a blocking reagent was added to the test tube and incubated for 5 min. The heated slides were then removed and transferred into a wash buffer and incubated for 5 min. Excess wash buffer on the slides was removed to keep the reagent within prescribed area. The slides were then arranged on a tissue holder, and sufficient peroxidase block was applied to cover each slide. The slides were then incubated for 5 min, after which they were gently rinsed with wash buffer for 5 min and placed in a fresh citrate buffer. After this, the slides were then wiped to remove excess buffer, and sufficient biotinylated primary antibody was applied unto the slides to cover the specimen and incubated for 15 min. The slides were then gently washed with buffer and placed in a buffer bath. The slides were then wiped off again as above, and sufficient streptavidin-peroxidase was applied to cover the specimen and incubated for 15 min, after which the slides were rinsed gently and washed again as before. Diaminobenzidine (DAB) + substrate chromogen was prepared by mixing 1 ml of buffer (20 μl) and a drop of DAB.
This was then applied immediately to the tissues and incubated for 5 min, after which they were then rinsed gently with distilled water. Thereafter, the tissue sections were counterstained in Mayer’s hematoxylin, dehydrated, mounted with DPX (Sigma, Munich, Germany), and cover slipped. Negative controls were performed by omitting the primary antibody according to Abd-Elmaksoud et al. ( ). All incubation procedures were performed in a humidified chamber. The tissue sections were observed on a light microscope (N-180M, Seeuco Electronics Technology, China) connected to a personal computer. For each tissue, five to six fields were examined for the follicular and luteal phases before photomicrographs of the sections were taken.
Evaluation of immunohistochemical slides
Stained immunohistochemical slides were evaluated using IHC profiler with the ImageJ software. Stained sections were opened with the ImageJ software and stained areas were selected, and the threshold was adjusted in order to precisely select the positively stained areas. The percentage of high positive, positive, low positive, and negative was calculated, and final scores determined for each sections (Varghese et al. ).
Statistical analysis
The serum progesterone profiles were expressed as mean ± SD. The differences between them mean values obtained during the follicular and luteal phases were determined by ANOVA using the GraphPad statistical software (GraphPad Instat ) with level of comparison considered significant at p < 0.05.
Results
Serum progesterone (P4) assay
The result of the progesterone assay is presented in Table 1 . The mean serum progesterone level during the follicular phase was 0.89 ± 0.16 and 1.61 ± 0.81 ng/ml during the luteal phase. This was used to categorize the camels into follicular and luteal phases. The animals with serum progesterone level < 1 ng/ml were considered to be in the follicular phase, while those with values > 1 ng/ml were considered to be in the luteal phase. Table 1 Mean serum progesterone (P4) concentrations during the follicular and luteal phases in the non-gravid one-humped camel ( Camelus dromedarius ) in Maiduguri, Nigeria Reproductive phases Number of animals P4 conc. (ng/ml) Mean ± SD Range Follicular phase 51 0.89 ± 0.16 a 0.6–1.0 Luteal phase 35 1.61 ± 0.81 b 1.1–2.5 7 Values with different lowercase letters are statistically significant ( p < 0.05)
Alpha-SMA localization
The results of the α-SMA localization in the utero-vagina are represented in the figures. During the follicular phase, α-SMA was observed to be localized only in the smooth muscle cells of the tunica muscularis of the uterus and vagina and the tunica muscularis of the uterine and vaginal blood vessel. The intensity of the α-SMA reactions was more in the tunica muscularis of both uterine and vaginal blood vessels than the tunica adventitia (Figs. 1 and 2 ). Fig. 1 Photomicrographs of a transverse section of the Camels ( Camelus dromedarius ) uterus. During the follicular phase showing a epithelial layer, b uterine gland (IHCX100), c blood vessel, and d tunica muscularis (IHC × 400). Note the characteristic alpha-SMA localization in the muscular layer of the blood vessels and the tunica muscularis (white arrows) compared to the epithelium and uterine gland (black arrow) Fig. 2 Photomicrographs of a transverse section of the camels ( Camelus dromedarius ) uterus during the luteal phase showing a epithelial layer, b uterine gland (IHC × 100), c blood vessel, and d tunica muscularis (IHC × 400). Note the characteristic alpha-SMA localization in the muscular layer of the blood vessels and tunica muscularis (white arrows) compared to the epithelium and uterine gland (black arrow)
During the luteal phase, α-SMA was also observed to be localized in the tunica muscularis of both uterus and vagina as observed during the follicular phase. Similarly, α-SMA reactions were also observed in the tunica muscularis of the blood vessels of both the uterus and vagina (Figs. 3 and 4 ). However, it was generally observed that there was mild α-SMA localization within the epithelial lining of the vagina and the uterine glands during both the follicular and luteal phases. Fig. 3 Photomicrographs of the Camel ( Camelus dromedarius ) vagina during follicular phase showing a epithelial layer, b lamina propria (IHC × 100), c blood vessel, and d tunica muscularis (IHC × 400). Note the characteristic alpha SMA localization in the muscular layers of the blood vessels and tunica muscularis (white arrows) compared to the epithelial layer (black arrow) Fig. 4 Photomicrographs of the camel ( Camelus dromedarius ) vagina during luteal phase showing a epithelial layer, b lamina propria (IHC × 100), c blood vessels, and d tunica muscularis (IHC × 400). Note the characteristic alpha SMA localization in the muscular layer of the blood vessels and tunica muscularis (white arrows) compared to the epithelial layer (black arrow)
Evaluation of stained slide sections with IHC profiler on firmed positive and high positive scores for α-SMA stained areas in the tunica muscularis, vaginal lamina propria, uterine endometrium, and mucosa (Figs. 5 , 6 , 7 , and 8 ). There were no differences ( p > 0.05) in the distribution of high positive, low positive, and negative percentages in both uterine and vaginal sections. However, there was differences ( p < 0.05) in positive scores between uterine follicular phase (UFP) and vaginal luteal phase (VLP); uterine luteal phase (ULP) and VLP; and vaginal follicular phase (VFP) and VLP (Fig. 9 ). Fig. 5 Photomicrographs of uterine follicular phase analyzed with ImageJ software using IHC profiler plug in. Highlighted areas are positively stained areas around blood vessels and in the endometrium Fig. 6 Photomicrographs of uterine luteal phase analyzed with ImageJ software using IHC profiler plug in. Highlighted areas are positively stained areas around blood vessels and in the endometrium Fig. 7 Photomicrographs of vaginal follicular phase analyzed with ImageJ software using IHC profiler plug in. Highlighted areas are positively stained areas around blood vessels and in the lamina propria Fig. 8 Photomicrographs of vaginal luteal phase analyzed with ImageJ software using IHC profiler plug in. Highlighted areas are positively stained areas around blood vessels and in the lamina propria Fig. 9 Bar graphs showing high positive (HP), positive (P), low positive (LP), and negative (N) percentage contributions in different uterine and vaginal follicular and luteal phase stained sections
Discussion
Steroid hormones are important regulators of anatomical and physiological changes in the female genitalia with progesterone playing a major role by exerting its effects on the growth and differentiation of ovarian structures (Abd-Elnaeim and Al-Kheraije ). In camelids, a corpus luteum (CL) that has a short life span starts developing in non-pregnant animals following ovulation induced by mating (Skidmore et al. ; Ghazi ). The CL increases in size until day 8 and then begins to regress by day 10, disappearing completely by days 13–14 after ovulation in non-fertile mating (Skidmore et al. ). The progesterone (P4) production also follows the life pattern of the CL. Thus, by days 4–5, serum progesterone concentration becomes detectable, reaching its peak level of 2–5 ng/ml by day 8 before returning to its baseline level by days 10–11. However, in pregnant camelids, the CL is morphologically detectable and has a long life span, with serum progesterone output (serum P4 > 1 ng/ml) throughout the gestation period (Nagy et al. ). Therefore, the determination of serum progesterone concentration has a significant value in their productive management of camelids.
The mean serum P4 value for camels in this study was observed to be higher in the luteal phase than for those in the follicular phase. This finding is comparable to the observations made in previous reports in non-gravid cyclical camelids (Homeida et al. ; Skidmore et al. ; Ayoub et al. ; Nagy et al. ; Ali et al. ; Kamoun and Jemmali ). Having identified the animals in the follicular and luteal phases, the alpha-SMA localization in their uterine and vaginal tissues was compared. The result showed positive demonstration of α-SMA localization in both the smooth muscle cells of the uterus and vagina during the different reproductive phases. For example, during the follicular phase, α-SMA localization was found to be localized in the tunica muscularis of the uterus and vagina, but there was no evidence of α-SMA localization within the epithelial linings in both organs. This finding is consistent with Christensen et al. ( ), who reported marked localization of α-SMA in the smooth muscle cells of the myometrium and blood vessels in the baboon, with the epithelial cells of the endometrium devoid of α-SMA localization during different reproductive stages. During the luteal phase in the present study, similar pattern of expression of α-SMA was observed in the tunica muscularis of the utero-vagina as reported during the follicular phase. It was generally observed that there were no α-SMA reactions within the epithelial linings of both organs and the uterine glands during both reproductive phases. These findings agree with a previous report (Shynlova et al. ) in pregnant rats. The localization of α-SMA signal in the myometrium could be responsible for the generation of the contractile force required by the uterus for the expulsion of the fetus during parturition (Shynlova et al. ). This is because α-SMA had previously been shown to play direct roles in myofibroblast contractile activity (Chaponnier and Gabbiani ). This is also true in many other organ system such as the vascular, respiratory, gastro-intestinal, and genito-urinary systems, which function via the contractile ability of the smooth muscles, since actin is a major component of the contractile and cytoskeletal domains of smooth muscle cells (Small ; Disanza et al. ). Transient expression of α-SMA has been associated with changes in cell shapes that preceded the induction of a fully differentiated decidual pregnancy in the baboon (Fazleabas et al. ), suggesting the association of α-SMA with the initial transformation of stromal fibroblast to a decidual cell (Christensen et al. ). In one recent study in male camels, Abd-Elmaksoud et al. ( ) reported α-SMA localization in the smooth muscle cells of the prostrate capsule and blood vessels, as well as the fibromuscular stroma surrounding the acini, but there was no evidence of alpha-SMA signals within the epithelium lining the secretory units of the prostrate.
Some studies have shown evidences suggesting the involvement of steroid hormones in the regulation of α-SMA in specific cell types (Fazleabas et al. ; Christensen et al. ). In a study involving rats, changes in the actin- cytoskeleton or in their binding proteins have been shown to be important for the cellular differentiation of the granulose cells (Kranen et al. ). Also recently, P4 was shown to influence the uterus by inducing the differentiation and proliferation of glandular and stromal cells (Abd-Elnaeim and Al-Kheraije ), but the specific role of P4 in the regulation of α-SMA localization in the utero-vagina has not been determined in the present study. The expression of P4 receptor-site in the camelids uterine tissue has also not been fully understood. These will be an interesting area of future studies in this specie.
Conclusion
To conclude, immunohistochemical staining of the utero-vagina has revealed that the pattern of α-SMA localization in the tunica muscularis and smooth muscles of the blood vessels during both the follicular and luteal phases are similar in the camels. However, there was no evidence of α-SMA reactions observed within the epithelial linings of both organs and the uterine glands during both reproductive phases. These findings possibly highlight the role of α-SMA in the contractile structures of the utero-vagina in camelids. However, the specific role of P4 in the regulation of α-SMA localization and the expression of P4 receptor-site in the utero-vagina has not been determined in the present study. Certainly, these will elucidate on our understanding of the regulatory role of secretory P4 in the expression of α-SMA in these organs in camels.