Introduction
In spite of all the evolutions in medicine, tuberculosis (TB) continues to be a terrifying contagious disease. The causative bacteria of TB is Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC), which involves M. tuberculosis and six other less common members: M. bovis , M. africanum , M. microti , M. canettii , M. caprae , and M. pinnipedii (Tang et al. and Ana et al. ). In addition, the rise of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) is considered as a thorny problem that has greatly hindered the efforts of TB control. According to WHO report in 2015, the total number of new MDR-TB cases was 480,000 with additional 100,000 rifampicin (RIF)-resistant cases detected (WHO ).
Shortening the detection time for MDR-TB diagnosis is of absolute necessity for taking very rapid decisions as regard starting an appropriate treatment with the second-line therapy to improve treatment outcome and preventing its transmission which leads to decrease mortality (Jahan et al. ). The reference method for the identification of TB and MDR-TB which is the classical drug susceptibility testing (DST) takes many weeks (Pandey et al. ). On the other hand, GeneXpert Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB)/RIF has dramatically shortened this period from weeks to only 2 h (Guenaoui et al. ).
Resistance to anti-TB drugs includes monoresistance, MDR-TB, and extensive drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB). Monoresistant-TB means unresponsiveness to one of first-line anti-TB drugs, MDR-TB means TB that does not respond to isoniazid (INH) and RIF, whereas XDR-TB means MDR-TB plus resistance to one of three second-line injectable drugs (amikacin, capreomycin, or kanamycin) and any fluoroquinolone (Nicola et al. ).
Specific gene mutations in MTB DNA are the etiology of drug-resistant TB (Abdelaal et al. ). Rifampicin inhibits transcription and elongation of RNA by combining to the β-subunit of RNA polymerase, encoded by the RNA polymerase gene (rpoB) (Steingart et al. ).
The rpoB gene represents an ideal target for the detection of both TB and the RIF resistance because most of the gene mutations responsible for RIF resistant are located inside its core region; meanwhile, susceptible isolates often have the same wild-type nucleotide sequence. As most of RIF are accompanied with INH resistance, so, RIF resistance is a good foreteller of MDR-TB (Lawn and Nicol ).
The aim of this study is to assess the use of GeneXpert assay for accelerating the diagnosis of MDR-TB in comparison to phenotypic DST by MGIT960 as the reference method.
Materials and methods
This study was carried out on 81confirmed pulmonary TB cases by both MGIT960 and GeneXpert MTB/RIF. All studied TB patients were new cases. Sputum samples were collected from King Khalid Hospital, Hail, KSA, between January 2015 to April 2017. Processing of all positive samples was done for the detection of MDR-TB by both classical phenotypic DST method on MGIT960 and genotypic method using GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay.
Phenotypic DST by MGIT960
Drug susceptibility testing for streptomycin (SM), INH, RIF, and ethambutol (EMB) was done using the MGIT 960 SIRE kit. To all lyophilized drug vials, 4 ml of sterile distilled water was added resulting in a final drug concentration of 1.0 μg/ml for SM and RIF, 0.1 μg/ml for INH, and 5.0 μg/ml for EMB. Then, 0.8 ml of MGIT SIRE Supplement, 0.1 ml of the antibiotic stock solution, and 0.5 ml of the positive broth culture were aseptically pipetted into each MGIT SIRE tube. For every positive sample, a growth control (GC) tube was included with the addition of MGIT supplement and diluted broth culture by distilled water in a ratio of 1:100 (no drug is added). All tubes were mixed well, loaded into BACTEC MGIT 960 instrument, and continuously observed for increased fluorescence (Ahmad et al. ). When the growth unit (GU) value of the GC tube was ≥ 400, the GU value of the drug tube was determined. The test result was reported as sensitive if the GU value of the drug tube was < 100 and resistant if the GU value of the drug tube was ≥ 100 (Springer et al. ).
Genotypic detection of RIF resistance by GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay
The GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) is a rapid and automated nucleic-acid amplification test using nested real-time PCR for the identification of both MTBC and RIF resistance at the same time. The amplification of the core region of rpoB gene that contains 81 base pairs is mediated by specific primers. The five detecting probes are designed to cover the entire core region to distinguish between the normal sequence and mutations that are responsible for RIF resistance (Fig. 1 ). The test is carried out on a disposable plastic cartridge in which sample processing and PCR were done because it contains all required reagents needed for all steps of PCR (Jahan et al. ). Fig. 1 The target of MTB assay is the 81-bp core region of rpoB gene
GeneXpert testing using version 4 cartridges was performed on sputum samples. First, the Xpert assay sample reagent (containing NaOH and isopropanol) was added in the ratio 1:3 for decontaminated sample and 1:2 for unprocessed sputum samples to liquefy it and kill the MTB. Then, the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 15 min and mixed twice using a vortex. Finally, Xpert assay cartridge is loaded into the instrument for PCR testing after pipetting of 2 ml of mixture into it. The results were interpreted by the measurement of fluorescent signals (Pandey et al. ).
In rifampicin-sensitive TB, the probe binds to its complementary part resulting in fluorescent signals, while in rifampicin resistance, the probe fails to combine with its matched part (Steingart et al. ). If the cycle threshold (CT) difference between the first and the last probes was > 3.5 cycles, RIF resistance is detected; meanwhile, if this difference < 3.5 cycles, RIF sensitive is reported (Lawn and Nicol ).
Statistical analysis
The evaluation of GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay as regard sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values were calculated. The statistical variance between two methods at 95% confidence interval was determined by using chi-square. Statistically significant difference was considered if P value was < 0.05. All analysis was performed using the SPSS software, version 16.
Results
Diagnosis of MDR-TB by both classical first-line DST method on MGIT960 and GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay was done for all 81 positive TB cases enrolled in the present study.
As shown in Table 1 , DST results of 81 positive TB cases by MGIT960 revealed that resistance to INH (6/81, 7.4%) and RIF (5/81, 6.2%) was more common than resistance to EMB (4/81, 4.9%) and SM (3/81, 3.7%). Table 1 DST results of all studied TB cases by MGIT960 First-line anti-tuberculous drugs Sensitive Resistant No. % No. % Rifampicin 76 93.8 5 6.2 Isoniazid 75 92.6 6 7.4 Ethambutol 77 95.1 4 4.9 Streptomycin 78 96.3 3 3.7
In Table 2 and Fig. 2 , among studied TB cases, one RIF monoresistance (1.2%), two INH monoresistance (2.4%), and four (4.9%) MDR-TB (resistance to both RIF and INH) were found. A significant statistical difference was found between RIF monoresistance and MDR-TB ( P value < 0.01). Table 2 Resistant patterns among studied TB cases (81) by DST on MGIT960 Resistance pattern Number Percent P value Monoresistance < 0.01 Resistance to RIF alone 1/81 1.2 Resistance to INH alone 2/81 2.4 MDR-TB Resistance to RIF and INH 4/81 4.9 Fig. 2 RIF monoresistance and MDR-TB among all RIF resistance cases
GeneXpert identified six RIF-resistant cases, of which five cases were proven to be resistant to RIF by phenotypic DST using MGIT960. Furthermore, out of these confirmed RIF-resistant cases, four cases were also resistant to INH, i.e., MDR-TB cases. Only one case was RIF resistant by GeneXpert, whereas MGIT960 identified it as sensitive to RIF. The discrepancy between GeneXpert MTB/RIF and classical DST for the identification of RIF resistance is not significant ( P > 0.05) (Table 3 ). Table 3 Genotypic detection of RIF resistance and MDR-TB by GeneXpert MTB/RIF versus gold standard phenotypic DST by MGIT960 Methods Rifampicin resistant Rifampicin sensitive MDR-TB P value DST by MGIT960 5 76 4 > 0.05 GeneXpert MTB/RIF 6 75
GeneXpert MTB/RIF detects both MTB and RIF resistance in 2 h compared to 23 ± 5 days by MGIT960. According to DST by MGIT960 as the reference method, GeneXpert MTB/RIF successively detected all five RIF-resistant cases identified by phenotypic DST on MGIT (no false-negative cases). So, both sensitivity and NPV of GeneXpert were 100%. On the other hand, out of 76 RIF-sensitive cases, 75 were detected by GeneXpert (one false positive), so, specificity and PPV of GeneXpert were 98.7 and 83.3%, respectively (Table 4 ). Table 4 Turnaround time (TAT) and performance of GeneXpert MTB/RIF in the diagnosis of MDR-TB compared to gold standard DST by MGIT960 Methods TAT of RIF resistance detection GeneXpert assay 2 h MGIT960 DST 23 ± 5 days Performance of GeneXpert MTB/RIF: Sensitivity 100% (5/5) Specificity 98.7% (75/76) NPV 100% (75/75) PPV 83.3% (5/6)
Discussion
Nowadays, the rise of MDR-TB represents a big problem facing clinician because of the long period needed to diagnose it (Pandey et al. ). So, quick diagnosis of MDR-TB is of absolute necessity for starting an appropriate treatment with second-line therapy to improve treatment outcome and preventing transmission of drug-resistant tuberculosis (Jahan et al. ).
Therefore, the present study was designed to assess the use of GeneXpert assay for accelerating the detection of MDR-TB in comparison to phenotypic DST by MGIT960 as the reference method. Detection of MDR-TB by both classical DST method using MGIT960 and genotypic method using GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay was performed on all 81 positive TB cases.
In this study, DST results of positive TB cases by MGIT960 (Table 1 ) revealed that resistance to INH (6/81, 7.4%) and RIF (5/81, 6.2%) was more common than resistance to EMB (4/81, 4.9%) and SM (3/81, 3.7%).
The same results were reported by Espasa et al. ( ), Green et al. ( ), and Abdelaal et al. ( ). This higher resistance among INH and RIF may be due to bad compliance and the abuse of these drugs for treatment of other diseases. In other studies conducted by Mdivani et al. ( ) and Aziz et al. ( ), INH and SM were found to be more prevalent than RIF and EMB. Also, a literature review was carried out by Areeshi et al. ( )) on 11,393 TB isolates from the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) revealed that most of the isolates were resistant to INH, followed by SM, RIF, EMB, and pyrazinamide. This discordance might be related to variations in the sample number and geographical distribution.
In the present study, among five RIF-resistant cases, monoresistance was only detected in one case (1.2%), while the remaining four cases (4.9%) were associated with resistance to INH (Table 2 and Fig. 2 ). Similarly, many studies found that RIF monoresistance was low as demonstrated by Jahan et al. ( ), Lawson et al. ( ), and Ocheretina et al. ( ) that were 1.47, 4.1, and 2.6%, respectively. Moreover, Saeed et al. ( ) and Guenaoui et al. ( ) reported that all detected RIF-resistant cases by GeneXpert MTB/RIF were phenotypically proven to be MDR strains, i.e., no RIF monoresistance.
The incidence rate of MDR-TB in our study was 4.9% which is in accordance with Areeshi et al. ( ) who reported in a literature review conducted in GCC that MDR-TB was more common in United Arab Emirates (9.2%) than Kuwait (5.9%) and Saudi Arabia (4.3%). Also, Elhassan et al. found that the incidence of MDR-TB in Al-Madinah Al-Monawarah, Saudi Arabia, was 4%.
On the contrary, a higher rate of MDR-TB was found by Jing et al. ( )) (China), Jahan et al. ( ) (Bangladesh), Nakwon et al. ( ) (Korea), and Lawson et al. ( )) (Nigeria) that was 14, 20.59, 11, and 7.5%, respectively. Also, Saeed et al. (Pakistan) reported that 134 (16%) out of 840 GeneXpert-positive samples for MTB showed RIF resistance and all of them were MDR-TB (no RIF monoresistance). A very high prevalence of MDR-TB (86.9 and 58.4%) compared to our study was reported in Haiti and South Africa by Ocheretina et al. ( ) and Green et al. ( ), respectively. This is different from what was reported by Montoro et al. ( ) in Cuba during 1999–2000 where the prevalence of MDR-TB was very low (0.5%). These discrepancies could be due to the difference in sample size, geographical variations, directly observed therapy, short course (DOTS) application, and the efficacy of TB-control programs (Jahan et al. ; Green et al. and Abdelaal et al. ).
In our study, a significant statistical difference was found between resistance to RIF only (1.2%) and resistance to RIF associated with INH (4.9%). Similar results were found by Saeed et al. ( ), Guenaoui et al. ( ), and Nawar et al. ( ). Consequently, Nakwon et al. ( ) stated that monoresistance to RIF is very low and most of RIF-resistant cases were accompanied with INH resistance, so it can be used as a good foreteller for MDR-TB.
By comparing GeneXpert with DST on MGIT as a reference method for detection of RIF resistance (Table 3 ), both identified five RIF-resistant cases, of which four cases were resistant also to INH by phenotypic DST using MGIT960. Moreover, only one case was RIF resistant by GeneXpert, whereas MGIT960 identified it as sensitive to RIF. The variance between GeneXpert MTB/RIF and classical DST is not significant ( P > 0.05). Similarly, excellent agreements between the GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay and conventional DST for detection of RIF resistance were reported by Tang et al. ( ), Jing et al. ( ), Lombardi et al. ( ), and Jahan et al. .
Genotypic/phenotypic disagreements were detected by Tang et al. ( ) and Zetola et al. ( ) who found one false-positive case, while Saeed et al. ( ) found seven false-positive cases (resistant to rifampin by the GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay, but was rifampin sensitive by using the MGIT SIRE kit). This could be due to the possibility of the presence of mixed TB infection by RIF-sensitive and RIF-resistant strains and the GeneXpert only detect the predominant strain as stated by Zetola et al. ( ). On the contrary, Pandey et al. ( ) and Jahan et al. ( ) found one false-negative case (resistant to RIF by conventional DST method, but genotypically sensitive to RIF by GeneXpert). This might be due to the presence of mutations in other sites rather than the studied one.
Genotypic assay by GeneXpert MTB/RIF is superior to DST by MGIT960 in the MDR-TB diagnosis, owing to its ability to detect both MTB and RIF resistance in 2 h compared to 23 ± 5 days by MGIT960 (Table 4 ). This decrease in detection time of MDR-TB is reflected on starting appropriate treatment rapidly and preventing its spread.
On the same way, Pandey et al. ( ) and Saeed et al. ( ) demonstrated that GeneXpert has a very short turnaround time (TAT) (< 2 h), while it takes an average of 10 weeks for identification of MDR-TB by conventional DST.
In the current study, the performance of GeneXpert assay for detection of RIF resistance was evaluated by comparison with phenotypic DST on MGIT960 as a reference method. GeneXpert correctly detected 5 of 5 RIF-resistant cases (100% sensitivity) and 75of 76 RIF-sensitive cases (98.7% specificity). Negative and positive predictive values of GeneXpert were 100 and 83.3%, respectively.
Nearly the same results were found by Pandey et al. who reported 98.6, 100, 100, and 93.8% for sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay respectively. Furthermore, Guenaoui et al. demonstrated that all values were 100%.
In agreement with our results, different studies carried out in different countries revealed a sensitivity and specificity ranging from 94 to 100% (Saeed et al. ; Pandey et al. ; Tang et al. ; Narute et al. ; Zetola et al. ; and Helb et al. ). Also, in a multicenter evaluation study conducted by Boehme et al. ( ) in Peru, Azerbaijan, South Africa, and India on 1730 patients with suspected resistant pulmonary TB, the GeneXpert MTB/RIF sensitivity was 97.6% and specificity was 98.1%.
On the other side, a lower sensitivity was reported by Jing et al. ( ) and Nakwon et al. ( ) that was 77.2 and 57.1%, respectively. This is may be due to the presence of larger false-negative cases compared to our results due to mixed infection by RIF-sensitive and RIF-resistant strains.
Conclusion
It was concluded that the results of GeneXpert MTB/RIF and the standard phenotypic DST on MGIT960 for detection of RIF resistance were nearly the same regarding the sensitivity and specificity. Moreover, GeneXpert MTB/RIF was superior to DST on MGIT960 owing to its ability to dramatically shorten TAT of MDR-TB diagnosis from weeks to only 2 h with fewer biohazard risks. The detection of RIF resistance serves as a good foreteller for MDR-TB as most of RIF resistance is accompanied with isoniazid resistance.