Introduction
Saponins are group of natural products with primary occurrence in foliage, roots, and petals of numerous plants plus several sea animals (Hostettmann and Marston ). They are secondary metabolites that have been demonstrated as most important biological compounds showing several pharmacological, physiological, and immunological actions in biological systems. Such biological properties like anti carcinogenic, hypocholesterolemic, heamolytic (Francis et al. ), immunostimulatory, antiviral, and hepatoprotective (Wang et al. ) have drawn considerable clinical and pharmacological interest in further extensive researches in this substance (Abid Ali Khan et al. ).
Sweetness and bitterness are some of the diverse properties characterized by saponins (Hostettmann and Marston ; Grenby ; Kitagawa ), frothing, and emulsifying properties (Heng et al. ), medicinal as well as pharmacological potentials (Price et al. ) molluscicidal properties, plus insecticidal, antimicrobial, together with strong haemolytic properties(Attele et al. ). Saponins known with diverse uses in beverages and confectionery, in addition to cosmetics (Sparg et al. ) and pharmaceutical inventions (Uematsu et al. ). Saponins are a prospective pharmaceutical precursor and have been employed in the synthesis hormone (Hardman ).
Recent investigations have shown that saponins may be accountable, partially for the antidiabetic activity attributed to medicinal plants. For example, 19-epoxy-3β, 25-dihydroxycucurbita-6,23(E)-diene, and 3β, 7β, 25-trihydroxycucurbita-5, cucurbitane triterpenoids 5β, 23(E)-dien-19-al obtained from M. charantia -reduced hyperglyceamia in diabetic mice (Harinantenaina et al. ), at the same time as a saponin from M. charantia was also identified to reduce high blood glucose and activity of rats gastrointestinal disaccharidase (Oishi et al. ).
Diabetes mellitus is recognized by the World Health Organization as a tremendously increasing global epidemic with more than 285 million people around the world afflicted in 2010, and it has been projected that this number will rise to 439 million by 2030, if no sustainable approach is adopted (Shaw et al. ). It leads to loss of equilibrium in the level of blood glucose with impairment of fat, protein, and carbohydrate metabolisms due to deficiencies in insulin secretion, insulin action, or both (Rajiv Gandhi and Sasikumar ). These shortcomings result in postprandial hyperglycemia and attendant diabetic problems like hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and diabetic neuropathy (Bailey and Day ).
One sensible remedial effort for the treatment of diabetes is by controlling the rise in blood sugar after meal. This is achieved by retarding the activities of α-amylase and α-glucosidase, the enzyme involved in the breakdown of carbohydrates present in the alimentary canal (Shim et al. ). Inhibitors of these enzymes retard carbohydrate digestion, thus, extending the rate of digestion, leading to decrease in the pace of absorption of sugar glucose, and thereby slowing the post meal plasma glucose increase (Rhabasa-Lhoret and Chiasson ). There still exist a lot of challenges in the management of diabetes. Drugs treatment options hampered by their pharmacokinetic activities, resultant failure rates, and related problems (Vishwakarma et al. ). There is, therefore, the need for probing for the other agents vital to overcoming diabetic-associated problems. Effort towards identifying for substitute drugs (Syamsudin ). Although, Yakubu et al. ( ) have lent support to the antidiabetic activity of water extract of Cochlospermum planchonii root in rats, there is paucity of information on its mechanism of hypoglycemic action. Consequent upon this and coupled with the ongoing search for succor in phytotherapy in the treatment of diabetes, the current study examined the free radical scavenging and inhibitory potentials of saponin extract from C. planchonii root (CPS) on the main enzymes linked to type 2 diabetes.
Materials and methods
Chemicals and reagents
Acetone, chloroform, ethanol, methanol, and petroleum ether are products of LASEC, South Africa. Ascorbic acid, sylimarin, acarbose, 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), para-nitrophenyl–glucopyranoside (PNPG) α-amylase, and α-glucosidase were manufactured by Sigma–Adrich Co., USA, while J. T. Baker Inc., Phillipsburg, USA, produced potatoes; starch soluble. The remaining reagents were of analytical status and prepared in glass-distilled water.
Plant materials
The root of Cochlospermum plamchonii (Cochlospermaceae) Hook. Ef. x Planch was obtained in November 2014, at Obanisuwa village along Egbejila Road, Ilorin, Kwara State, Nigeria. It was validated at the Forestry Research Institute of Nigeria (FRIN), Ibadan, Nigeria. A sample with number F.H.I 99093 was kept at the herbarium of the institute. The roots were rinsed with water, shredded, and air-dried to constant weight. The dried roots were, thereafter, ground using an electric blender and kept refrigerated (− 4 °C) in an air-tight container prior to use.
Preparation of total saponin
The extraction of saponin was done as described by Makkar et al. ( ). A portion (20 g) of the pulverized root sample was defatted by suspension in hexane and stirred for 24 h using magnetic stirrer. Whatman No. 1 filter paper was used to filter the resultant solution. The residue was subsequently dried overnight in an oven (45 °C) to completely remove the hexane content. The dried-defatted sample was awashed in 100 mL of 50% v /v methanol (MeOH) and thoroughly mixed for 12 h with an orbital shaker stirrer at ambient temperature, and afterwards centrifuged at 3000 g for 10 min and the supernatant was collected. The process was done twice. Supernatants from both processes were added together and filtered (Whatman No. 1 filter paper). Methanol was evaporated from the solution in a water bath at 40 °C. Thereafter, the aqueous phase containing the total saponin was removed by pouring100 mL equal amount of n-butanol (two times) with a separating funnel. The total saponin was moved from an aqueous phase in this step, to the butanol layer and kept the butanol layer each time. Thereafter, the collected layers were pooled together, and the solvent was removed at 45 °C using water bath. Finally, the total saponin was kept in a flask and the solvent was evaporated. The dried out fraction of saponin (CPS) was kept at − 4 °C for the subsequent assays.
α-amylase inhibition assay
The procedure followed was the technique of Shu et al. ( ). In brief, 50 μL of the saponin sample (0.063–1 mg/mL) in 0.02 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.9, containing 0.006 M NaCl) was mixed with 25 μL of enzyme solution (0.5 mg/mL) and incubated at 25 ± 1 °C for 10 min. Following incubation, 50 μL of starch solution [0.5% ( w / v ), 0.02 M phosphate buffer, pH 6.9, and containing 0.006 M NaCl] was added and incubated for 10 min at 25 °C. Then the process was ended by adding 100 μL DNS reagent and immediately kept in steaming water in a water bath for 10 min. The absorbance of reaction mixture was taken at 540 nm using micro-plate reader (Model 680, BIO-RAD) after making it up with 10 mL distilled water. The same protocol was adopted for the control by substituting the extract with distilled water while the activity of the standard was tested by replacing the extract with acarbose (0.063–1.00 mg/mL). The percentage inhibition of α-amylase was calculated by the expression below. $$ \%\mathrm{Inhibition}=\frac{\mathrm{Abs}\ \mathrm{control}\hbox{--} \mathrm{Abs}\ \mathrm{extract}}{\mathrm{Abs}\ \mathrm{control}}\times 100 $$
The IC 50 which represent the concentrations of extract that lead to 50% inhibition of enzyme were calculated by graphical extrapolation.
Mode of α-amylase inhibition
The manner with which saponin inhibited the activity of α-amylase was determined by following the modified technique used Ali et al. ( ). Initially for about 10 min at 25 °C, in a set of tubes, incubation of 250 μL of (1.00 mg/mL) CPS and 250 μL of α-amylase solution was done. In a separate tube, α-amylase was pre-incubated with 250 μL of phosphate buffer (pH 6.9). Two hundred fifty microliters of starch solution in ascending concentrations (0.025–0.40 mg/mL) was added to both sets of reaction mixtures to initiate the reaction process. Then incubation of reaction mixture at 25 °C for 10 min, and afterward boiled for 5 min following 500 μL of DNS addition to end the reaction. The amount of reducing sugars freed was established spectrophotometrically with maltose standard curve and changed to reaction velocities. Lineweaver–Burk graph (1/ v versus 1/[ S ]) where [ S ] indicates substrate concentration and v represents reaction velocity was plotted to establish the mode of inhibition.
α-glucosidase inhibitory assay
The modified procedure described by McCue and Shetty ( ) was used to estimate the inhibitory effect of CPS on α-glucosidase’s activity. In brief, in a 96-well microplate, 50 μL of saponin at different concentrations (0.063–1.0 mg/mL) was incubated along with 50 μL α-glucosidase (1.0 U/mL) in phosphate buffer (0.1 M, pH 6.8) for 10 min at 37 °C. In addition of 50 μL of substrate, 5 mM, p -nitrophenyl-α-D glucopyranoside in a 0.1 M phosphate buffer at pH 6.8 was done to initiate the reaction. The readings of absorbance were taken at 405 nm by micro-plate reader (Model 680, BIO-RAD). Acarbose was taken as reference. The IC 50 was then evaluated from the concentration-dependence curve.
Mode of α-glucosidase inhibition
The manner with which saponin of inhibited α-glucosidase was assessed with the procedure explained by Ali et al. ( ). In brief, 50 μL of the (0.063–1.00 mg/mL) CPS was initially incubated with 100 μL of α-glucosidase for 10 min at 25 °C in a set of tubes. α-glucosidase was pre-incubated with 50 μL of phosphate buffer (pH 6.9) in another set of tubes. Fifty microliters of PNPG at ascending concentrations (0.025–0.40 mg/mL) was put into two sets of reaction mixtures to initiate the process. Thereafter, the mixture was incubated at 25 °C for 10 min and 500 μL of Na 2 CO 3 was added to end the reaction. The quantity of reducing sugars freed were estimated spectrophotometrically by a para-nitrophenol standard curve and changed to reaction velocities. A Lineweaver–Burk graph (1/ v versus 1/[ S ]) where [ S ] represents substrate concentration and v stands for reaction velocity was plotted to establish the type of inhibition.
DPPH radical scavenging ability
The saponin ability to scavenge DPPH radicals was tested by adapted technique of Saha et al. ( ). One hundred fifty microliters of 0.4 mmol/L methanolic solution containing DPPH radicals were added with different concentrations (0.063–1.00 mg/mL) of the saponin (150 μL). Thereafter, absorbance was read at 516 nm following incubation for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The DPPH free radical scavenging capacity of CPS was consequently calculated with respect to the control. DPPH free radical scavenging activity of silymarin and vitamin C (standard antioxidant) was also tested by substituting the extract with them (0.063–1.00 mg/mL).
Hydroxyl radical scavenging ability
The potential of the saponin extract to avert Fe 2+ /H 2 O 2 -induced breakdown of deoxyribose was done by the adapted procedure described by Oboh and Rocha ( ). In brief, the reaction mixture, 20 μL 20 mM deoxyribose, 80 μL 0.1 M phosphate buffer, 10 μL 20 mM hydrogen peroxide along with 10 μL 500 mM FeSO4, was mixed with 40 μL of CPS (0.063–1.00 mg/mL) and the quantity was adjusted to 200 μL by distilled water. The reaction mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 30 min, and then reaction was terminated by adding 50 μL of 2.8% TCA (trichloroacetic acid solution. Afterward, incubation of the reaction mixture was done for 20 min and the absorbance was taken at 532 nm in a microplate reader (Model 680, BIO-RAD). Hydroxyl radical mopping-up capacity of the extract was compared with standard antioxidant by swapping the extract with silymarin and vitamin C (0.063–1.00 mg/mL).
Results
The inhibitory effects of CPS on the activities of α-glucosidase and α-amylase are shown in Figs. 1 and 2 , respectively. Overall, CPS displayed higher inhibition than acarbose in both cases. This stronger inhibitory potency is well supported by the IC 50 values of 2.89 mg/mL (α-gucosidase) and 0.40 mg/mL (α-amylase) compared with 4.02 and 6.48 mg/mL for acarbose, respectively (Table 1 ). Fig. 1 α-glucosidase inhibitory effect of saponin extract of C. planchonii root (CPS) Fig. 2 α-amylase inhibitory effect of saponin extract of C. planchonii root (CPS) Table 1 Inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) of saponin extract of C. planchonii root (CPS) on α-amylase and α-glucosidase activities α-amylase α-glucosidase Acarbose CPS Acarbose CPS IC 50 (mg/mL) 4.33 0.40 6.72 2.89
The mode of inhibition of the enzymes is represented in Figs. 3 and 4 . Considering the kinetic data (Vmax and Km), the enzymes were uncompetitively inhibited. The values of Vmax and Km are reduced in both cases. The values for α-glucosidase were 0.0065 mM min −1 , 3.33 × 10 −6 mM while 0.0067 mM min −1 , 3.84 × 10 −6 mM were for α-amylase compared with control values (0.0096 mM min −1 , 2.08 × 10 −5 mM) and (0.0098 mM min −1 , 7.88 × 10 −6 mM), respectively. Fig. 3 Lineweaver Burk plot of the type of inhibition of CPS on α-amylase activity Fig. 4 Lineweaver Burk plot of the type of inhibition of CPS on α-glucosidase activity
The CPS free radical scavenging capacity is as represented in Figs. 5 and 6 . The extract displayed superior scavenging ability on both DPPH and hydroxyl radicals compared with silymarin and vitamin C. Considering the IC 50 values of 1.89 mg/mL along with 1.11 mg/mL for DPPH and OH, respectively; CPS exhibited very promising free radical scavenging potentials compared with the standards (Table 2 ). Fig. 5 DPPH scavenging effect of saponin extract of C. planchonii root (CPS) Fig. 6 Hydroxyl radical scavenging effect of saponin extract of C. planchonii root (CPS) Table 2 Inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) of saponin extract of C. planchonii root (CPS) on DPPH and hydroxyl radicals DPPH OH Vit. C Silymarin CPS Vit. C Silymarin CPS IC 50 (mg/mL) 18.34 8.11 1.89 22.69 2.61 1.11
Discussion
Modulation of post meal rise in blood glucose, which is the immediate metabolic irregularity that arises in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) (Kim et al. ) has been identified as a means of controlling hyperglycemia. Thus, an effective treatment option for type 2 diabetes is to restrain the activity of α-glucosidase and pancreatic α-amylase since they are responsible for the hydrolysis of dietary carbohydrate such as starch to glucose which is absorbed by the small intestine (Krentz and Bailey ). The restriction of their action in the alimentary canal of human is taken as a means by which the absorption of glucose decomposed from starch can be diminished (Hara and Honda ). Results from this study demonstrated the superior inhibitory potency of CPS on α-amylase and α-glucosidase compared to acarbose. Studies have not only found saponins to be probable α-amylase inhibitors (Ponnusamy et al. ; Sudha et al. ), but have also implicated them as therapeutically antidiabetic phytonutrients (Chen et al. ; Hamden et al. ). Additionally, saponin-rich extracts have been acclaimed to exhibit in vivo hypoglycemic activity potential either by pancreatic β cells discharge of insulin, delayed of glucose in the gut or improved glucose used by the body system (Li et al. ; Modak et al. ). Uddin et al. ( ) have also demonstrated the capability of saponin to influence the transport system situated at the brush-border of membrane. This study supports the report of Yakubu et al. ( ) on the activity of aqueous extract of Cochlospermum planchonii root as antidiabetic agent in rats and findings from this study provide the probable mechanism of the demonstrated activity.
The uncompetitive mode of inhibition exhibited by CPS on the two enzymes implied that the CPS attaches to ES complex only at points other than the catalytic site. The substrate attachment changes enzyme structure, causing inhibitor-binding site accessible and the inhibition cannot be upturned by substrate (Adugna et al. ).
Several reports revealed that diabetes mellitus is linked with elevated formation of reactive oxygen species and lowered antioxidants potentials. This resulted to oxidative injury to cell components like protein, lipids, and nucleic acids. In both type 1 and 2 diabetes, there is amplified oxidative stress (Nazirogjlu and Butterworth ). The antiradical activities of plants may act by averting the production of free radicals or reducing the transition metals (Amic et al. ).
DPPH is a nitrogen-free radical compound which is easily quenched by a free radical scavenger (Chew et al. ). It is typically used as a substrate to assess the antioxidative potentials of chemical agents. It stabilizes diamagnetic molecule either by accepting electron or hydrogen radical (Soares et al. ). CPS demonstrated a superior DPPH radical scavenging ability compared with silymarin and Vitamin C (Figs. 5 and 6 ) with the lowest IC 50 of 1.89 mg/mL. This implies that the CPS decolorizes DPPH and so possesses the ability to scavenge the DPPH radicals (Wettasinghe and Shahidi ). Hydroxyl radical is a very reactive free radical produced in the body and it is deemed to be highly destructive species in free radical pathology, being able to damage virtually all molecules present in living cells (Hochstein and Atallah ). Hydroxyl radical scavenging ability of an extract is directly associated with its antioxidant action (Babu et al. ). The CPS exhibited robust antioxidant potency as indicated by its IC 50 of 1.11 mg/mL (Table 2 ) compared with silymarin and Vitamin C. The results from this study are in conformity with the reports of Ashraf et al. in which saponin from tuber of C. borivilianum exhibited free radical scavenging potential and that of Alli-Smith and Adanlawo where saponin from Garcinia kola displayed a concentration-dependent hydroxyl radical inhibitory activity. Subsequent to these findings, it may be logically inferred that elicited antidiabetic potential by the extract in this study is due to its antioxidant properties.
This study demonstrated that saponin extract from C. planchonii root (CPS) possessed antioxidant potentials and antidiabetic effects possibly by the inhibition of the carbohydrate enzymes, α-amylase, and α-glucosidase. Thus, the study further corroborates the earlier reports and the traditional uses of the plant in tropical Africa. However, the lower IC 50 for the extract against α-amylase compared with acarbose is not a good indication for a desirable antidiabetic agent as this will potentiate several adverse effects consistent with the orthodox antidiabetic medications.