Introduction
Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVT) is a rare form of stroke accounting for 0.5 to 1% of all strokes, but in developing countries, it constitutes a substantial part of patients with young stroke [ , ]. Once considered to be associated with substantial morbidity and mortality recent studies show improving trends of the outcome. This may be due to improvements in the treatment, changing risk factor profile, and probably an improvement in imaging with the identification of less severe cases [ ]. The ISCVT study reported, age, male gender, mental status changes, coma, thrombosis of the deep cerebral venous system, intracranial hemorrhage, infection of the central nervous system, and malignancy as the poor prognostic factors [ ]. Many of the features are present in the deep cerebral venous system thrombosis (DCVT) patients, which constitutes about 10% of CVT patients.
Various guidelines have been published which advocate anticoagulation with either intravenous (IV) unfractionated heparin (UFH) or subcutaneous (SC) low molecular heparin (LMW) in the acute phase of CVT [ , ]. Compared to UFH, LMWH is preferred based on its reduced risk of major bleeding, twice daily dose and not requiring monitoring [ ]. In an international study exploring the variation in the treatment of CVT, 64% of physicians reported using UFH and 36% LMWH and 85% responders were neurologist actively treating CVT patients [ ]. In addition, in developing countries, the issues with LMWH is the cost, and availability of the drug. Intravenous UFH is useful in acute cases where rapid reversal of anticoagulation effect is required in a patient such as the need for decompressive surgery or for the lumbar puncture to reduce intracranial pressure. However, it requires frequent monitoring of the coagulation parameters and also restricts the patient mobility [ ].
Subcutaneous unfractionated heparin (SCUFH) has the advantage of being cost effective, not requiring rigorous monitoring, as well as preserving the patient mobility. Our institute was one of the earliest centers to report a randomized study of subcutaneous heparin in the treatment of CVT and demonstrated that it is effective with less frequent monitoring with activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) [ , ].
Based on these studies it is the policy at our institution to use SCUFH 5000 U 6th hourly for initiation of anticoagulation in a normal weight adult CVT patient, with subsequent overlapping with oral anticoagulant. There are no studies which have analyzed the role of this SCUFH regimen in patients with DCVT. We aim to describe the outcome of patients with DCVT treated with anticoagulation with SCUFH seen prospectively in our stroke unit and present the preliminary data.
Materials and methods
Study participants
The present study was a part of a prospective and retrospective study of 63 patients of DCVT admitted to the stroke unit of our tertiary care teaching university hospital from January 2008 to December 2013. Among them 37 patients were seen prospectively and are described in this study. The hospital ethical committee approved the study protocol and written informed consent was taken from patients or relatives (if the patient was in altered sensorium) after explaining the nature of the study. The inclusion criteria were: patients of 18 years or above of both sexes admitted to the stroke ward with a diagnosis of DCVT. The exclusion criteria were patients <18 years of age, CVT secondary to infection, trauma and neurosurgical procedures and refusal to provide the informed consent. The diagnosis was considered in patients with appropriate clinical profile and presence of direct signs of CVT in CT or MRI scans involving internal cerebral veins (ICV), vein of Galen (VoG), thalamostriate veins (TSV), the basal vein of Rosenthal (BVR) and straight sinus (SS) [ ]. Isolated DCVT is defined as thrombosis of ICV, TSV, VoG, BVR, and SS; an additional involvement of dural sinuses or cortical veins qualified for the combined sinus thrombosis. Patients were initially evaluated in the emergency section of the department of neurology by a neurologist and later admitted to the stroke ward, managed by stroke neurologists and residents. Patient’s demographic profile like age, gender, place of living (rural or urban) and socioeconomic status were noted. They were categorized into a low or high-income group based on their annual income as per our institute’s policy. A detailed clinical evaluation was performed noting the history, mode of onset and presentation, and clinical signs on examination. Mode of onset was based on the duration from onset to the presentation and is divided into three groups—acute (<48 h), subacute (48 h to 30 days) and chronic (duration more than 30 days) [ ]. Mode of presentation was categorized into three groups—encephalopathy (progressive decrease in sensorium), isolated intracranial hypertension (headache, visual blurring with or without lateral rectus palsy and without change in the level of sensorium and focal weakness) and focal presentation (aphasia, focal seizures, hemiparesis etc.) [ ]. Glasgow coma scale was used for the assessment of the level of consciousness. All patients underwent investigations for risk factor detection. These included hemogram, liver and renal function tests, serum homocysteine, serum VitB12 and autoimmune profile [serum rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antigen (ANA) and antiphospholipid antibody (APLA)]. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) by ELISA method was done after taking an informed consent. Anemia was defined as hemoglobin level <13 g/dl in men, 12 g/dl in non-pregnant women and 11 g/dl in pregnant women. Polycythemia was considered when the hemoglobin level is more than 17 g/dl for men and 15 g/dl in women and packed cell volume of >49 in males and >48 in females.
All patients underwent CT brain (plain and contrast) at admission unless contraindicated. Once they are stable and cooperative, MRI brain was done without anesthesia. The presence of direct signs (hyperdense sinus with filling defect on contrast on CT, absence of flow void and or thrombus in the sinus on MRI) and indirect signs (venous infarction, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and dural enhancement) was noted.
Procedure (treatment protocol)
After confirmation of the DCVT by imaging, patients underwent baseline platelet count, activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), prothrombin time (PT) and detailed history for any contraindications for starting heparin. Each patient was started on subcutaneous unfractionated heparin (SCUFH) 5000 U every 6 hourly for 10 days. On the 5th day, we measured Platelet counts to rule out thrombocytopenia. On 7th-day platelet count, aPTT, PT were done, and oral anticoagulation with Acenocoumarol was started overlapping with subcutaneous heparin therapy. Tab Acenocoumarol was given as 4 mg once a day on the first day, 3 mg on the second day and 2 mg once a day subsequent days. Heparin injections were continued until the 10th day and then stopped. Repeat PT was done on the 13th day and subsequent oral anticoagulation was adjusted to keep INR 1.5–2.0. Oral anticoagulation was continued for 3–6 months in cases with reversible risk factors like puerperium, anemia, hyperhomocysteinemia, and oral contraceptive intake. In patients, without any identifiable risk factor, it was given for 6 months to 1 year with monthly monitoring of prothrombin time to maintain INR of 1.5–2. Supportive care included measures to reduce the raised intracranial pressure with mannitol and glycerol, antiepileptics in patients with seizures, and correction of underlying risk factors like anemia, polycythemia and hyperhomocysteinemia. Complications during the hospital stay and surgical intervention if any, were recorded.
Measures of efficacy
The efficacy of treatment was assessed by improvement of symptoms and signs, the effect on survival and also functional outcome at 3 months. Functional outcome was assessed at 3 months using National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) [ ], modified Rankin score (mRS) [ , ], and Barthel index for the activity of daily living (BADL) [ , ]. In BADL, the total possible scores range from 0 to 20, with lower scores indicating increased disability. The outcome was dichotomized on the basis of mRS score into poor (>3) and good (MRS 0–2) [ ]. All patients were followed in the outpatient department of the Neurology Department by one of the authors and follow up symptoms, signs, and blood investigations were noted.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was done by calculating mean and standard deviation. The ordinal variables like functional outcome scales were expressed as median (minimum–maximum values). Continuous variables were compared using student’s t-test and categorical variables using Chi square or Fischer’s exact test. The significance was set at p-value <0.05. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 16.0.
Results
The present study comprised of 37 prospective patients of DCVT treated and followed up at our institute. Among them, 11 (29.7%) had Isolated DCVT, while 26 (70.3%) had combined deep and superficial venous sinus or vein involvement.
The demographic profile, risk factors, and clinical profile are summarized in the Table 1 . The majority of the patients were poor, from a rural background and there was a female preponderance. The duration of the symptoms was subacute followed by acute and 2/3rd of patients had focal symptoms and signs at presentation. Pure encephalopathy was seen in a quarter of patients. The clinical picture was characterized by headache, weakness, seizures and encephalopathy. Isolated intracranial hypertension was less common. The risk factors were multiple in a given patient and different in both genders. The majority were related to the physiological states and nutritional factors.
Table 1 Demographic and clinical features of deep cerebral venous sinus thrombosis patients at presentation (n = 37) Characters/features Values Socioeconomic status Low 25 (67.6%), high 12 (32.4%) Place of stay Rural 26 (70.3%), urban 11 (29.7%) Gender Male 13 (35%), female 24 (65%) Mean age 27.9 ± 9.7 years Risk factors Males (n = 13): polycythemia 7 (53.8%), anemia 3 (23.1%), hyperhomocysteinemia 7 (53.8%), low B12 4 (30.8%), alcoholism 6 (46.1%) Females (n = 24): puerperium 12 (50%), anemia 15 (62.5%), polycythemia 1 (4.2%), low Vit B12 7 (29.2%), hyperhomocysteinemia 11 (45.8%), OCP intake 3 (25% of non-pregnant), malignancy 1 (4.2%), HIV 1 (4.2%) Onset to day of presentation 10.2 ± 15.9 days Mode of onset Acute 4 (10.8%), subacute 33 (89.2%) Mode of presentation Focal deficit 23 (62.2%), encephalopathy 9 (24.3%), isolated intracranial hypertension 5 (13.5%) Symptoms at presentation Headache 37 (100%), altered sensorium 20 (54%), weakness 18 (51%), seizures 11 (30%), language disturbance 3 (13%) Signs at presentation GCS score 12.6 ± 2.96, papilledema 25 (65%), hemiparesis 18 (51%), hemi sensory deficit 1 (3%), ataxia 1 (3%) ICP intracranial pressure, GCS Glasgow coma scale, HIV human immunocompromised virus, OCP oral contraceptives
Imaging with CT brain was available in 33 (89.2%) patients and it was diagnostic in 30 (89%) (Fig. 1 ). All the patients underwent MRI brain and MRV, which was diagnostic in all (inclusion criteria). In addition, it had an advantage of defining the stage of thrombus, elucidating subtle parenchymal changes and detection additional sinus and cortical vein involvement (Table 2 ) (Fig. 2 ). Imaging with MRI and MRV showed a majority of patients having subacute thrombus, followed by acute and chronic stages. The VOG, SS and ICV were commonly involved and BVR being spared in 75% of patients. The deep ganglionic and thalamus were commonly affected parenchymal areas, followed by temporal lobe. Among the combined group Lateral sinus was commonly affected in all but one patient, and more on the right side. Hemorrhagic lesions were seen on MRI in 18 (48.6%) patients and they also received heparin.
Fig. 1 a CT brain plain showing bilateral thalamic hypodensities ( red arrow ), with hyperdense internal cerebral veins ( white arrow ) and straight sinus ( black arrow ). b Contrast CT brain showing a filling defect in the vein of Galen ( white arrow )
Table 2 Magnetic resonance imaging features in deep cerebral venous sinus thrombosis patients at presentation (n = 37) Characters/features Values Type of DCVT Isolated DCVT 11 (29.7%), combined 26 (70.3%) Stage of thrombus Acute 7 (18.9%), subacute 25 (67.6%) and chronic 5 (13.5%) Site of parenchymal involvement Thalamus 27 (73%), basal ganglia 21 (56.7%), temporal 9 (24.3%), occipital 4 (10.8%), parietal 3 (8.1%), frontal 1 (2.7%) Hemorrhagic infarct or lesions With CT brain 14 (37.8%) with MRI 18 (48.6%) Deep sinuses affected Vein of Galen 36 (97.3%), straight sinus 36 (97.3%), internal cerebral vein 29 (78%), basal vein of Rosenthal 9 (24.3%) Superficial sinuses affected in combined group(n = 26) Lateral sinus 25 (96.1%) (right 12, left 8, bilateral 5), superior sagittal sinus 14 (53.8%), cortical veins 9 (34.6%) CT computerized tomographic scan, DCVT deep cerebral venous thrombosis, MRI magnetic resonance imaging
Fig. 2 a MRI brain T1 axial—bilateral internal cerebral vein thrombosis, b T2 FLAIR axial—bilateral thalamus hyperintensities, c MR venogram—non-visualization of the deep venous system, d sequential weighted image—acute thrombosis of the straight sinus
Patients were managed with 10 days of SCUFH overlapping with oral Acenocoumarol on day seven onwards. In case the patient needed any surgery or a possibility of any surgical intervention was expected the SCUFH was continued and switching over to oral anticoagulation was delayed but making sure that at least 4 days of overlap is ensured. Heparin was given for a mean duration of 9.3 ± 1.3 days and the mean aPTT on day 7 was 49.3 ± 9.8 s (control value 32–39 s). Oral anticoagulation was started on day 7 and from day 11 onwards it was only continued. The mean PT INR value on day 13 was 1.5 ± 0.45. One patient had thrombocytopenia on day 5 and it improved after stopping heparin. None of the patients had reduced platelet count on 13th day after starting treatment. In the present study, patients received Acenocoumarol for 7.1 ± 5.9 months, with monitoring of PT and the international normalized ratio (INR) every month. The mean INR during the study period was 1.4 ± 0.49. Among the heparin-related complications, only one had thrombocytopenia. This patient had a low platelet count on the 5th day −75,000/mm 3 , which further worsened to 63,000 after 3 days, improved after stopping heparin and his counts at discharge were 1.25 lakhs/mm 3 . None of the patients had pulmonary embolism or major/minor bleeding manifestation. Infection (n = 6, 4 = pneumonia, 2 = urinary tract) and deep vein thrombosis (n = 4) involving calf veins were common complications noted during the hospitalization. One patient underwent external ventricular drainage as a temporary measure to relieve raised intracranial pressure.
All the patients improved, irrespective of their level of sensorium and type of DCVT. None of the patients died. The mean NIHSS score at presentation was 8.3 ± 6.8, (isolated DCVT 11.7 ± 5.5, combined DCVT 7.2 ± 6.9). At 3 months follow-up it was 0.2 ± 0.8 (isolated DCVT 0.1 ± 0.35 and combined DCVT 0.2 ± 0.9). The median NIHSS scores being 9 at presentation and 0 at 3 months. The median mRS score being 3 at presentation and 0 at 3 months. At 3 months, good functional outcome (mRS: 0–2) was observed in 94.6% (n = 35) compared to 32.43% (n = 12) at admission (Fig. 3 ). Two patients with poor functional outcome at 3 months had hemiparesis interfering with their activities of daily living. The median Barthel index scores was 8 at presentation and 20 at 3 months. The NIHSS (0 in 33 subjects) and Barthel index for the activity of daily living (BADL of 20 in 35 subjects) showed almost complete improvement (Table 3 ). The majority of patients had high mRS score at presentation with an isolated group having higher scores compared to combined group (p = 0.001) (Table 3 ), So were the scores of Barthel’s ADL (p = 0.001). But over 3 months both the groups (isolated and combined DCVT) improved clinically with slight difference maintained but it was not statistically significant groups (p = 0.22, 0.45). The following symptoms were noted during follow up—an episodic headache without features of raised pressure (n = 3, 8%), seizures (n = 4, 12%) and extrapyramidal symptoms in the form of hemidystonia (n = 2, 5%) with associated mild hemiparesis (n = 2, 5%).
Fig. 3 Outcome of patients with deep cerebral venous sinus thrombosis assessed through modified Rankin scale (mRS). The number in the boxes represent patient number in each category of mRS
Table 3 Functional outcome in patients with deep cerebral venous sinus thrombosis at 3 months of follow-up Sl No Parameters Isolated DCVT 11 (29.7%) Combined DCVT 26 (70.3%) Total (n = 37) (100%) 1 mRS Admission 4 (2–5) 3 (1–5) 3 (1–5) At 3 months 0 (0–3) 0 (0–3) 0 (0–3) 2 Barthel ADL Admission 2 (0–15) 11 (0–20) 8 (0–20) At 3 months 20 (12–20) 20 (8–20) 20 (8–20) 3 NIHSS Admission 11 (1–21) 9 (0–21) 9 (0–21) At 3 months 0 (0–4) 0 (0–4) 0 (0–4) Variables are expressed as median and range (minimum–maximum) mRS modified Rankin score, ADL activities of daily living, NIHSS National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale
Discussion
The present study is one of the largest studies of DCVT patient reported in the literature which described the outcome of patients with SCUFH. The study was conducted in a setting of a large volume of CVT patients, in a stroke unit with extensive evaluation and monitoring. Also, our center is involved in multiple studies describing the role of heparin in CVT [ , ]. The important outcome of the study is that all the patients of DCVT survived and the majority were asymptomatic at follow-up. There were minimal side effects and complications from treatment with SCUFH. The added advantages are the low cost of the drug with minimal monitoring of the aPTT, platelets, and PT.
The initial studies on the outcome of DCVT patients reported a poor prognosis and survival [ , ], but recent studies have come out with good prognosis and low or absent mortality [ , , ]. The possible reasons for our patient having good outcome are; care in the stroke unit set up, transient reversible risk factors which are easily treatable, early detection of cases by CT and MRI, majority of patients having acute and subacute thrombus responding to anticoagulation, patency of basal vein of Rosenthal in almost 75% of patients which forms a channel to drain the blood from deep venous system to anterior circulation through its connections with superior petrosal sinus [ ].
Heparin forms the mainstay in the treatment of patients with CVT and it is based on two randomized controlled trials which showed reduced mortality and improvement with heparin compared to placebo and a Cochrane meta-analysis of comprising of these two studies [ , , ]. The rationale of heparin therapy is to prevent thrombus propagation, promote its resolution and prevent deep vein thrombosis in lower limbs [ ]. After analyzing the available literature on anticoagulation in CVT, AHA/ASA guidelines state that in the case of CVT a new randomized study may not be possible, and anticoagulation either with intravenous UFH or subcutaneous LMWH can be given in the beginning, followed by oral anticoagulation. There are no guidelines for the duration of parenteral phase and no studies which have looked into the level of anticoagulation during acute and maintenance phase and only consensus agreements are available [ , ]. Our rationale of giving 10 days of heparin initially was to make sure that, we get a predictable action of anticoagulation during the acute phase and rapid reversal if surgery is required. The oral drug used Acenocoumarol which is a vitamin K antagonist usually takes several days to produce anticoagulation effects. It also inhibits anticoagulants, proteins C and S, which may cause a paradoxical hypercoagulable state initially [ , ].
Unfractionated heparin acts by forming a complex with antithrombin III which inhibits the activity of thrombin (factor II), factors Xa, IXa, XIa, and XIIa. The side effects of unfractionated heparin include increased the incidence of hemorrhage, immune-mediated thrombocytopenia and osteoporosis; less commonly it can cause hypersensitivity reactions, skin rash, and alopecia. Heparin is often used by intravenous route due to reduced bioavailability (<50%) by the subcutaneous route [ , ]. Low molecular weight heparin has higher inhibitory activity towards factor X compared to factor II. The major advantages of LMWH are its increased bioavailability (90–100%) after subcutaneous route and lower risk of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia [ , ]. Our patients received 20,000 U of heparin/day and as per the guidelines, intravenous UFH dose for a 50-kg adult will be (24,000–26,000 U). So our patients received almost 80% of the daily dose in 4 divided subcutaneous injections. This is associated with prolonged aPTT as demonstrated by 7th-day aPTT value, with lower side effects. From 7th day onwards majority of patients start off with oral anticoagulants which will help in maintaining the anticoagulation.
The efficacy of SCUFH in CVT treatment has been proved in the literature from a study from our institute, which is the only one of the 3 randomized studies available comparing heparin with placebo. The outcome assessment was not blinded. It randomized 57 women with puerperal CVT, confirmed by CT scan. Treatment was with subcutaneous heparin 5000 IU every 6 h, with aPTT of 1.5 times baseline for 30 days. Three patients in the control group either died or had residual paresis compared with none in the heparin group [ ]. The present observational study has included both men and women (puerperal and nonpuerperal) and more severe form of CVT and showed that the treatment is effective.
About 50% of our patients had hemorrhagic lesions in MRI, and in spite of this heparin has helped in their treatment and associated with good outcome and this is in line with major guidelines [ ]. Misra et al. have reported a randomized controlled trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of LMWH in 34 patients compared to UFH in 32 patients of CVT. They concluded that LMWH resulted in significantly lower hospital mortality in CVST compared to UFH [ ].
The disadvantage of LMWH is its cost which is around 150 US dollars for 10 days in our country. This is a major factor especially in developing countries where the majority of affected patients are from the lower socioeconomic group as shown in our demographic data. Intravenous UFH has a good bioavailability and rapid reversal of anticoagulation in 1–2 h if required, but needs frequent aPTT monitoring and also impairs patient mobility. Another major drawback of intravenous therapy is a requirement for hospitalization which is an issue in the developing countries with the scarcity of resources and ever increasing demand for the hospital beds, which made us to plan the regimen after reviewing the literature. These disadvantages can be circumvented with SCUFH. In the present study, we successfully managed patients with SCUFH. There was no major/minor bleeding episodes, pulmonary embolism or mortality in the present group. Four patients did have DVT in lower limbs during hospital stay which resolved with continual anticoagulation therapy. All patients except two made a significant improvement at follow-up. This is the first reported prospective study to evaluate the role of SCUFH in DCVT patients. The major advantages of SCUFH as used in the present study were low cost, safety profile and it preserves patient mobility thereby reducing the duration of hospital stay. These factors have an important bearing on overall patient care. This regimen can be utilized in care centers in rural areas with limited resources.
Our study had several limitations. This is not a randomized controlled trial and we did not compare the efficacy of SCUFH with intravenous UFH or subcutaneous LMWH. Hence conclusions about the superiority of one over another cannot be drawn from the present study. The patient population predominantly comprised of puerperal women and men and women with transient procoagulant states and treated in a stroke unit setup with neurologists with experience in treating CVT. We have not done a neuropsychological evaluation of these patients during follow-up.
Conclusion
Our preliminary data of SCUFH use in DCVT patients show therapy is effective, safer and economical requiring less intense monitoring in these patients. Our regimen of SCUFH followed by oral loading and maintenance by Acenocoumarol helps in recovery of patients with DCVT. Further studies (observational and cohort) in this aspect will help in standardizing the route, dose and duration of anticoagulation in the acute phase of CVT.