Introduction
Malaria, a disease caused by a parasitic protozoan belonging to the genus Plasmodium spp., is one of the common diseases in the tropical regions. Almost half of the world’s population is at risk of the disease. About 200 million people are already infected with the disease (Organization WH ). Malaria pathogenesis is dependent on the parasite growth, proliferation, and the potency of host immune responses (Reisinger et al. ). The malaria disease manifestations are mostly ague, sweating, and anemia and occasional cerebral symptoms, splenomegaly, and kidney problems may happen (Olsson and Johnston ). Animal models for studying malaria are useful because there are limitations on the nature and interpretation of in vitro studies, particularly with regard to the behavior of host immune cells and the use of animal models to understand the pathogenesis of disease .Moreover, these models have been used for pre-clinical testing of various drugs and vaccines (Sanni et al. ). Plasmodium berghei has specific morphology and red blood cell (RBC) tropisms are used as experimental models for human disease (Schofield and Grau ) Cinchona bark is the most commonly used natural medicine against malaria. Raw material for the production of quinine is extracted from the bark of this plant (Kyle and Shampe ). In recent years, many reports have been recorded about the development of drug resistance to some Plasmodium spp., especially in endemic areas (Pattanasin et al. ). Several medications are used to treat malaria, including chloroquine, pyrimethamine, and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine. Chloroquine has been used for decades as an effective medication and is low-cost and readily available. Nevertheless, the use of chloroquine has been limited due to the emergence of strains resistant to this drug (Neequaye et al. ; Peters ). However, chloroquine is still used as first line of treatment even in malaria-endemic countries. Today, the use of combinational therapy and artemisinin derivatives has created new hope for the fight against malaria and is the new challenge for chemotherapy (Harinasuta and Karbwang ; Hien ). Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine is one of the alternative drugs that can be used for chloroquine-resistant malaria. Today, a serious problem in terms of the fight against malaria-resistant cases is the use of a combination of drugs and their derivatives in the fight against drug-resistant P. falciparum (White ). The use of these medications is highly important in order to prevent the emergence of resistant strains in endemic areas (Nwanjo and Oze ). On the other hand, the overuse of drugs and high doses of malaria drugs can be toxic and harmful and tends to cause more side effects on patients (Izunya et al. ). Studies have shown that high doses of pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine can cause blood disorders, thrombocytopenia, high-dose drug-induced fever, and gastrointestinal disorders. Moreover, reactions to chloroquine include rashes, itching, convulsion, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, and graying of the hair (Deck et al. ; Kasilo et al. ). In other words, chloroquine exhibits antiprotease activity and increases trans-epithelial resistance in immature Sertoli cells. Researchers reported that toxicants that cause damage due to their irreversibility are those that kill or genetically alter spermatogonia or Sertoli cells (Chapin et al. ). Other studies have shown that the use of artesunate can cause necrotic changes, cellular hypertrophy, and intercellular vacuolations in murine model (Eweka and Adjene ). In a study, the toxicity of artesunate under certain conditions causes the suppression of spermatogenesis (Jewo et al. ). Our aim in this study is to examine the effects of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, pyrimethamine, and hydroxychloroquine sulfate on the liver, spleen, and kidneys of treated mice.
Materials and methods
Animal model
Forty-five adult Wistar mice weighing between 20 and 25 g were used for this experiment. They were maintained in the animal house of the Isfahan University of Medical Science, Isfahan, Iran. They were divided into five groups: A, B, C, D, and E of nine mice each. Groups A, B, and C were considered as the test groups and the groups D and E as the control ones.
Parasite
Plasmodium berghei NICD strain sensitive to chloroquine was obtained from the Department of Parasitology and Mycology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Science. The parasite was cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen and passaged several times in laboratory mice before the experiment.
Drug administration
Pyrimethamine, hydroxychloroquine sulfate, and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, purchased from Biogen Company (India), were used in this study. Each of the mice receiving the parasite was infected intraperitoneally by injecting of 10 6 Plasmodium berghei -infected RBCs.
The use of pyrimethamine, hydroxychloroquine sulfate, and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine was according to the recommendation of the World Health Organization (WHO) at a dose of 2 mg/kg body weight daily for 4 days. All the animals were weighed before the experiment. The drugs were administered intraperitoneally to the groups as follows: group A, 2 mg/kg body weight of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine daily for 4 days; group B, 2 mg/kg body weight of pyrimethamine daily for 4 days; group C, 2 mg/kg body weight of hydroxychloroquine sulfate daily for 4 days; group D, infected but not treated with drug and considered as positive control; and group E received 0.9% isotonic saline and considered as negative control. The mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation at day 28 post treatment and their liver, spleen, and kidneys were collected.
Histological study
The euthanized mice were dissected carefully and the organs liver, spleen, and kidneys were collected and fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin. After preparation, they were embedded in paraffin. Pathological changes were examined in these organs. For this aim, the paraffin-embedded organ samples were cut into 5-μm sections, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, mounted on glass slide, and then analyzed by light microscope (Hsiao et al. ). The photomicrographs of the stained sections were taken with the aid of the light microscope. The following scores were used to grade the degree of histopathological changes or lesions observed in the organs: not observed (−), very mild (+), mild (++), moderate (+++), and severe (++++).
Results
Under macroscopic examination, in all of the infected groups, an increase in the weight of the liver, spleen, and kidneys was observed as compared with the negative control (Table 1 ). Under microscopic examination of the liver, the highest rate of hyperplasia, hemosiderosis, necrosis, and inflammation was observed in the positive control and also the lowest rate of changes was related to the pyrimethamine group (Table 2 ). The histopathological changes of the spleen were varied in different groups so that the highest changes were observed in the pyrimethamine group (Table 3 ). In the kidneys, the highest observed changes were regarding to the positive control and the lowest ones were related to the hydroxychloroquine sulfate group (Table 4 ). The observed histopathological changes in the different organs of the groups have been presented in Figs. 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 . Table 1 Weight of different organs in the groups under study Studied groups Weight Liver (g) Spleen (mg) Kidney (mg) Positive control 2.5 250 226 Hydroxychloroquine sulfate 1.83 280 181 Pyrimethamine 2.24 260 220 Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine 1.8 170 240 Negative control 1.5 160 180 Table 2 Histopathological effects on the liver Kupffer cell hyperplasia Hemosiderosis Hepatic necrosis Periportal inflammation Hydroxychloroquine sulfate – – + + Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine – – – – Pyrimethamine – +++ + ++ Positive control +++ +++ +++ +++ Negative control – – – – Not observed ( − ), very mild (+), mild (++), moderate (+++), and severe (++++) Table 3 Histopathological effects on the spleen Megakaryocytic hyperplasia Hemosiderosis Lymphoid hypoplasia Hydroxychloroquine sulfate ++++ – – Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine ++ – – Pyrimethamine +++ +++ +++ Positive control ++ +++ +++ Negative control – – – Not observed (−), very mild (+), mild (++), moderate (+++), and severe (++++) Table 4 Histopathological effects on the kidney Tubular nephrosis Perivascular and interstitial lymphocytic infiltration Hydroxychloroquine sulfate – – Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine – ++ Pyrimethamine + + Positive control +++ +++ Negative control – – Not observed (−), very mild (+), mild (++), moderate (+++), and severe (++++) Fig. 1 The liver under ×40 magnification. a Positive control (infected but not treated with drug), showing moderate hepatic necrosis with Kupffer cell hyperplasia and hemosiderosis. b Hydroxychloroquine sulfate, showing very mild hepatic necrosis and periportal inflammation. c Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, showing no lesion. d Pyrimethamine, showing moderate hemosiderosis, mild periportal inflammation, and very mild hepatic necrosis Fig. 2 The spleen under ×40 magnification. a Positive control (infected but not treated with drug), showing mild megakaryocytic hyperplasia, moderate hemosiderosis, and moderate lymphoid hypoplasia. b Hydroxychloroquine sulfate, showing severe megakaryocytic hyperplasia. c Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, showing mild megakaryocytic hyperplasia. d Pyrimethamine, showing moderate megakaryocytic hyperplasia, hemosiderosis, and lymphoid hypoplasia Fig. 3 The kidney under ×40 magnification. a Positive control (infected but not treated with drug), showing moderate tubular nephrosis and perivascular and interstitial lymphocytic infiltration. b Hydroxychloroquine sulfate, showing no damage. c Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, showing mild perivascular and interstitial lymphocytic infiltration. d Pyrimethamine, showing very mild tubular nephrosis and perivascular interstitial lymphocytic infiltration Fig. 4 Control negative: a liver, b spleen, and c kidney. Under ×40 magnification
Discussion
Malaria is a disease that has not been eradicated yet and the best way to control it is the use of an appropriate treatment regimen. The widespread use of antimalarial drugs makes it necessary that the toxicity as well as damage to the tissue need to be examined (Sharma and Shukla ). This study was conducted to determine the toxicity of three drugs, sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, pyrimethamine, and hydroxychloroquine sulfate. Liver damages observed in the positive control group represent the proliferation of the parasites in the blood. At the malaria liver stage, hepatocytes are ruptured and merozoites are released into the blood. Kupffer cell hyperplasia was not observed in the treated groups in this study and it shows a significant difference with the positive control, and this indicates that the drug inhibits the proliferation of liver macrophages. After the rupture of red blood cells, hemoglobin splitting may be formed and results in hemosiderosis in the liver that has a direct relationship with anemia and cirrhosis of the liver (Satoskar et al. ). In this study, in the groups receiving sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine and hydroxychloroquine sulfate, hemosiderosis was not observed; and in the group receiving pyrimethamine, it was found to be moderate. Hepatic necrosis happens following the aforementioned events; in the groups treated with hydroxychloroquine sulfate and pyrimethamine, it was observed to be very mild; and in the sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine group, it was not detected. The most important malaria pigment is hemozoin that mostly exists outside the cytoplasm of hepatocytes and the color of which is usually black and brownish. On the other hand, hemosiderin pigment is an iron-containing pigment resulted from hemoglobin degradation. Hemosiderin can be observed in the liver, spleen, and bone followed by phagocytosis of red blood cells that turn brown in color and are distributed in the cytoplasm. Hemozoin is usually observed in the spleen. Hemosiderosis was not observed in the liver in the groups treated with hydroxychloroquine sulfate and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, probably because of the early clearance of the parasites from the blood (Kühnel and Kuhnel ; Shapiro ). Nevertheless, hepatic necrosis and periportal inflammation were observed in the hydroxychloroquine sulfate group as very mild. In the group treated with pyrimethamine, hemosiderosis was detected as moderate, and a very mild hepatic necrosis and periportal inflammation were observed due to lack of complete removal of the parasites during treatment by pyrimethamine (Fig. 2 ). Hemosiderosis was observed in the spleen in the positive control group. The spleen is an organ that places ruptured blood cells (dead) and is a place to store iron. In the group treated with hydroxychloroquine sulfate and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, no lymphoid hypoplasia and hemosiderosis were observed. However, in the group treated with pyrimethamine, they were observed as moderate grade that is due to the poor drug performance. In the group treated with hydroxychloroquine sulfate, megakaryocytic hyperplasia was observed as severe form that is the reason for this drug toxicity. This histological change was observed as mild in the positive control group (Kühnel and Kuhnel ; Soniran et al. ). In a study, a high dose of chloroquine showed megakaryocytic hyperplasia (Desai et al. ; Othman and Arowolo ). Hydroxychloroquine sulfate completely prevented tubular nephrosis and perivascular interstitial lymphoid infiltration, but in the group treated with pyrimethamine, they were observed as very mild. In the group treated with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, mild perivascular interstitial lymphoid infiltration was observed. In all organs evaluated in this study, except for the spleen, hydroxychloroquine sulfate and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine performance was good as compared to pyrimethamine. In attention to the results of the present study, it can be concluded that the right recipes and detailed monitoring by physician when prescribing these medications are necessary, especially for people who take a long time taking these drugs, because these drugs may cause severe adverse effects.