Introduction
Brucella , an intracellular and Gram-negative bacteria, is responsible for an important and public health-threatening disease in humans and animals, worldwide (Dubray ). Brucella lipopolysaccharide (LPS) leads to long-term immunological reactions in vaccinated and suffering animals (Baldi et al. ; De Bagüés et al. ; Raybould ; Watarai et al. ). Also in serologic tests, LPS of bacterial cell membrane has been mainly used to identify particular antibodies. Therefore, differentiation between infection and immunization in human and animals, according to LPS, is arduous in serological tests (Corbel ; Delpino et al. ; Morgan et al. ; Ruiz-Mesa et al. ); also in these techniques, there are cross-reactions with some bacteria which cause false-positive results (Christopher et al. ; Eskra et al. ; Lindler et al. ; Smirnova et al. ).
An OMP (outer membrane protein), non-LPS antigen in Brucella , can be considered for production of vaccine and diagnostic kits (Cloeckaert et al. ; Cloeckaert et al. ; de Bagüés et al. ; de Wergifosse et al. ; Ficht et al. ; Gupta et al. ). There are at least 75 OMPs in the outer membrane layer (Sowa et al. ) including the major OMPs [group 2 (porin, 34 to 40 kDa) and group 3 (25 to 30 kDa)] (Dubray and Bezard ; Verstreate et al. ), Braun’s lipoprotein covalently bound to peptidoglycan (PG) (Gomez-Miguel and Moriyon ; Gomez-Miguel et al. ), and the minor OMPs [group 1 (88 to 94 kDa)].
Brucellar OMPs potentially can agitate the immune system and cause protection (Cassataro et al. ; Cloeckaert et al. ). Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against groups 1, 2, and 3 of the OMPs have been previously produced by Cloeckaert et al. ( ). Also, they produced mAbs to minor surface-exposed OMPs with molecular masses (MMs) of 10, 16, 19, and 31 to 34 kDa (the latter is a main OMP in B. melitensis strains) (Cloeckaert et al. ). Physico-chemical and functional analyses recently confirmed that OMP10, OMP16, and OMP19 are surface-exposed lipoproteins (Tibor et al. ); these lipoproteins are existent in the Brucella genus including all species and biotypes.
According to the published scientific data, OMP16 is an immunoreactive proteinous particle (Giambartolomei et al. ; Gomez et al. ; Ibañez et al. ; Pasquevich et al. ; Pasquevich et al. ; Sambrook and Russell ; Tabynov et al. ). In previous reports, IP administration of OMP16 with a systemic adjuvant or oral administration with a mucosal adjuvant resulted in protection against virulent B. abortus (Pasquevich et al. ). Also, this antigen activates monocytes and produces proinflammatory cytokines (Gomez et al. ). So, this project was aimed to express the B. abortus OMP16 for production of a polyclonal antibody for diagnosis of the Brucella genus by immunofluorescence assay (IFA).
Materials and methods
Cloning, expression, and verification tests
OMP16 gene was synthesized based on its sequence in the B. abortus genome (Accession number: AAA59360.1) (Genray, China) and cloned into pET-28a expression vector. This vector provided the suitable condition for production of a protein including six histidyl residues at the amino end. The cloned plasmid was transmitted into a competent cell ( E. coli DE3 or BL21) by heat shock (42 °C during 90 s) (Sambrook and Russell ).
The transformant bacterium was chosen from LB (Luria Bertani) agar medium with kanamycin (30 μg/ml). The bacteria were transmitted into 10-ml broth (LB) containing 50 mg/ml kanamycin and placed in a 37 °C and 200 rpm shaker incubator, overnight. Then, 1 ml of medium was added to fresh LB broth (100 ml) to obtain appropriate opacity (OD 600nm = 0.06) during 37 °C incubation; then, IPTG (isopropyl-β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside) was used (final concentration = 1 mM) and incubation was performed at 25 °C overnight with shaking. The transformant was centrifuged (5000× g , 10 min) and the supernatant was removed. Then, resuspension of pellet was done in a lysis buffer [imidazole (10 mM), Nacl (300 mM), NaH 2 PO 4 (50 mM), pH = 8.0] with a volume equals five pellets. The lysate was placed in a refrigerator (4 °C, 30 min), then was also sonicated (10-s pulse on followed by 10-s pulse off, total time 4 min) and finally, centrifuged (5000× g , 30 min, 4 °C). The supernatant containing the recombinant protein was evaluated via SDS-PAGE (5% stacking and 15% resolving gels), western blot, and dot blot analyses. The recombinant OMP16 (rOMP16) was purified using chromatography (metal chelate affinity) by Ni–NTA column (Qiagen, Germany).
Immunization and antiserum collection
Finally, purification of the protein was accomplished with an affinity chromatography and subsequently used for immunization of rabbit. Purified rOMP16 protein with 0.5 mg/ml concentration was infused into the back legs of an Oryctolagus cuniculus (female, healthy New Zealand white rabbit) during three steps; protein and Freund’s adjuvant (complete) at the first step, protein and Freund’s adjuvant (incomplete) at the second step, and protein without adjuvant at the third step (intervals were 2 weeks).
Collection of blood samples from the rabbit was done before and 2 weeks after each injection. Blood samples were obtained from the marginal vein of the ear, kept at 4 °C (overnight), centrifuged at 3000× g for 10 min, and saved at − 20 °C.
Evaluation of serum titer and reactivity of antibody
To evaluate serum titer, two ELISA tests were designed; in the first ELISA, the reaction of serum during immunization against purified recombinant protein was tested. In the second ELISA test, serum was diluted from 1/100 until 1/100,000 to determine serum titer.
Also, sera were surveyed using ELISA to confirm reactivity of antibody to the rOMP16 as follows; 96-well polystyrene microplates (Nunc, Denmark) were covered by the rOMP16 (100 μl per well) in PBS (25 μg/ml) and refrigerated overnight at 4 °C. Washing the wells was accomplished at least three times using PBS and then 200 μl of blocking buffer containing PBS and bovine serum albumin (3% BSA) (Sigma, Germany) was shed into the wells (waiting for 2 h at 37 °C). After washing three times, diluted sera were added in the wells and the plates were placed in an incubator (1 h at 37 °C). A triple-washing stage was implemented with a washing buffer containing PBS and Tween-20 (0.1% v / v ) (PBST). Attaching of antibody to the recombinant antigen was visualized using 100 μl goat antirabbit polyclonal IgG, conjugated to peroxidase (Serotec, UK) and diluted in blocking buffer (15000-fold). After an incubation stage (1 h at 37 °C), the wells of the microplate were washed with PBST and filled with 100 μl of TMB substrate [1 ml TMB, 9 ml of citrate-phosphate buffer (pH = 5), and 3 μl of 30% H 2 0 2 ]. After waiting 15 min, the reaction was stopped by a solution containing 50 μl 1 M H 2 SO 4 and finally the result was analyzed at 450-nm wavelength (650 nm was the reference wavelength).
Conjugation of antibody to FITC and tracing of B. abortus in IF test
The antibody was purified using a mini purification column (Serotec, USA). Conjugation of the antibody to FITC was accomplished using standard protocols. Briefly, a stock containing 40 μl of antibody (100 μg/ml), 80 μl of borate buffer (0.1 M), and 4 μl of FITC (1 mg/ml) was provided and the stock was placed in an incubator (37 °C, 30 min). The conjugated antibodies were stored at 4 °C.
Approximately 500 μl of culture medium belonging to B. abortus (positive standard), Escherichia coli (negative standard), Salmonella spp. (negative standard), and Klebsiella spp. (negative standard) was centrifuged (4000× g , 10 min). Washing was conducted, three times, on resulting pellets using PBS; several series of bacterial suspensions were made from each pellet by 180 μl PBS and 20 μl conjugated antibody, and they were placed on a shaker at 25 °C, overnight. Finally, after washing three times with PBS, 10 μl of the samples was examined via a fluorescence microscope.
Results
Expressed and purified OMP16
After expression, non-purified and purified OMP16 proteins were analyzed and observed on the acrylamide gel by SDS-PAGE technique (Figs. 1 and 2 ). Also in blotting, 6× His-tag section of the expressed OMP16 protein was determined using commercial antibody against His-tag on nitrocellulose membrane (Figs. 3 and 4 ). Fig. 1 SDS-PAGE analysis of total cell lysate of E. coli producing the OMP16 protein. Lane 1: OMP16; lane M: protein prestained Fig. 2 SDS-PAGE analysis of purified recombinant Brucella OMP16 protein. M: protein prestained ladder. Protein detection Fig. 3 Dot blot analysis of expressed His-tagged OMP16 protein using commercial anti-His-tag peroxidase-conjugated antibody. Lane 1: OMP16. Lane 2: negative control Fig. 4 Western blot analysis of expressed His-tagged OMP16 protein using commercial anti His-tag peroxidase-conjugated
Produced polyclonal antibody
After immunization of the rabbits, a specific anti-OMP16 polyclonal antibody was produced. During immunization, titer of the antibody had an increasing process (Fig. 5 ) and a strong reaction was observed after the last stage of immunization (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 5 The production of polyclonal antibody procedure against recombinant outer membrane protein 16 kDa of B. abortus during immunization of rabbit by ELISA Fig. 6 Determination of titer of polyclonal antibody by ELISA
Observation of Brucella via fluorescence microscope
Anti-OMP16 polyclonal antibody conjugated to FITC properly was able to identify B. abortus while negative standards were not observed (Fig. 7 ). Fig. 7 Recognition of Brucella with fluorescence microscope. a B. abortus ; b negative controls
Discussion
In our research, 16-kDa OMP of Brucella spp., as non-LPS and potential immunogenic-protective antigens, was expressed in the form of a fusion protein containing 6× His-tag. The produced OMP reacted positively using an antibody designed to detect His-tag in a blotting assay. Immunization of the rabbit by rOMP16 led to the polyclonal antibody in a high titer. This antibody could be considered for experimental biology, biomedical researches, development of brucellar vaccine, and improvement of diagnostic tests.
Some other investigators previously have produced specific antibodies to several types of OMPs; monoclonal antibodies to seven OMPs have been produced by Cloeckaert et al. ( ); he produced the related antibodies through immunization of mice by B. melitensis or B. abortus bacterial cells, SDS-I (insoluble sodium dodecyl sulfate), or cell wall of the bacteria. Detected OMPs in the above-mentioned study were major proteins including 25–27-kDa and 36–38-kDa porins and minor proteins including 89-, 31–34-, 19-, 16.5-, and 10-kDa molecular weights (Cloeckaert et al. ).
Production of monoclonal antibody against 36–38-kDa and 25–27-kDa OMPs of B. abortus S99 and rOMP31 of caprine Brucella was already performed (Farshad et al. ; Zheng et al. ). Also, some previous studies immunized the rabbits via inoculation of attenuated B. melitensis (Ghasemi et al. ); sera of the rabbits contained antibodies against rOMP31. In a research, antibodies against B. ovis OMPs were produced in rams (Riezu-Boj et al. ). Also, production and activities of immunoglobulins in BALB/c mice have been studied after immunization with Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SoD1) and OMP2b porin of B. abortus (Sung et al. ). The study of anti-OMP (89 kDa) antibody in cattle has been performed, too (Limet et al. ). In a study, making of antibodies to OMPs belonging to three B. abortus strains including RB51, S19, and an isolate (biotype 1) from the field have been confirmed in buffaloes (Munir et al. ).
In conclusion, Brucella OMPs are capable of irritating the immune system and subsequently antibody production. Thus, employment of these antibodies can be useful for the improvement of vaccine candidates and diagnostic tests of brucellosis. The produced antibody against rOMP16 protein had a high titer and was properly able to identify B. abortus in IF test which indicates the potential application of this antibody for laboratory tests to diagnose the Brucella spp.