Introduction
The giant anteater ( Myrmecophaga tridactyla ), which is native to Central and South America, is currently classified as a vulnerable species, according to the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Studies of the physiological and hematological parameters of this animal in its native regions are scanty (Rojano Bolaño et al. ), making it difficult to interpret laboratory exams (Sanches et al. ).
Knowledge of reference values is extremely helpful for veterinarians in their daily tasks, as well as for wildlife conservation and reintroduction programs (Sanches et al. ; Rojano Bolaño et al. ). However, extrinsic and intrinsic factors may influence such parameters (Birgel Junior et al. ) within a single population (Di Nucci et al. ).
Zoos, which in the past served mostly to exhibit captive animals, are now institutions established primarily to save endangered species. Although animals in zoos do not live in their natural habitat, concern focuses on enriching the environment by seeking to achieve similarity between their in situ and ex situ ecosystems. In addition to conservation, zoos enable the development of numerous studies, providing relevant information on the nutritional, anatomical, and physiological aspects of the species kept in them (Fioravanti ).
In view of the above, the purpose of this survey was to ascertain similarities and differences between the hematological profiles of giant anteaters originating from different Brazilian biomes and kept at different zoos in the country.
Material and methods
For this survey, several hematological studies of this species living in captivity in Brazilian zoos were chosen. Some of the existing studies were not included in this survey because they lacked complete hematological information (Machado et al. ) or because they involved a very small number of animals (Miranda et al. ). This limited the number of studies included in our survey to just three that could be compared, because they contained all the elements of a complete blood count (CBC) and involved a satisfactory number of giant anteaters as well as similar methodologies. Two of the studies were carried out in the state of São Paulo (Satake ; Sanches et al. ) and one was conducted in the Federal District (Oliveira ), representing the Atlantic Forest and Cerrado biomes, respectively.
All the hematological variables were subjected to statistical analysis by means of an appropriate test for paired data ( t test). The averages of the hematological variables were compared, and only those presenting p < 0.05 (Table 1 ) were considered different. Table 1 Mean values of hematological variables found in studies involving captive giant anteaters ( Myrmecophaga tridactyla ) conducted in Brazil, statistically compared by means of a paired t test Hematologic parameters Unit of measurement Oliveira (Brazilian Cerrado) Sanches et al. (São Paulo, Brazil) Satake (São Paulo, Brazil) RBCs ×10 6 /μL 2.07 ± 0.40a 2.36 ± 0.14a 2.46 ± 0.13a Hematocrit % 38.08 ± 5.93a 37.7 ± 1.06a 38.2 ± 1.12a Hemoglobin g/dL 11.33 ± 2.15a 11.8 ± 0.52a 12.46 ± 0.43b MCV fL 186.52 ± 21.72a 165.12 ± 8.71b 165.63 ± 29.36b MCHC g/dL 29.68 ± 2.56a 31.26 ± 0.96b 32.83 ± 2.14b MCH pcg 55.08 ± 5.94a 51.07 ± 2.27b 50.6 ± 3.31b WBC /μL 8142 ± 2441a 11,870 ± 2880b 8690 ± 570a Bastonet neutrophils % 0 0 0.04 Neutrophils % 71.50 ± 10.34a 72.62 ± 3.67a 68.62 Lymphocytes % 18.50 ± 8.25a 18.77 ± 3.17a 17.12 Eosinophils % 6.67 ± 4.70a 6.92 ± 1.67a 9.36 Basophils % 0a 0 a 0.16 Monocytes % 3.33 ± 2.57a 1.69 ± 0.04b 4.68 Platelets /μL 123,458 ± 31,362a – 168,320 ± 8770b TPP g/dL 6.23 ± 0.49a 8.10 ± 0.15b – Different letters in the same row indicate a statistically significant difference, considering p < 0.05
Results and discussion
The statistical results of the comparison between the published studies revealed significant differences between most of the hematological variables, underscoring the importance of local reference values. Such information is very helpful in the clinical evaluation of animals, in the determination of their health status or disease, and in the diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment efficiency (Kjelgaaerd-Hansen and Jensen ; Madureira et al. ). Therefore, the greater the similarity between animals used for determining reference values and their target group, the less likely it is for laboratory results to be misinterpreted.
Various factors are responsible for these discrepancies, including living habits (Pires et al. ), nutrition (Baeta ), climate, management (Birgel Junior et al. ), the types of enclosures in which these animals are kept in captivity, and the drugs they are treated with (Picioli et al. ). All these factors interfere in laboratory exams, but in different ways and intensities. However, some aspects can be standardized to minimize the divergent effects on blood variables.
Notwithstanding attempts to reduce these interferences, certain conditions cannot be controlled and should therefore be weighed in the interpretation of lab exams (de Miranda et al. ). Nutrition affects hematological data, since a large part of the nutrients used in the formation of blood cells come from the diet (Birgel Junior et al. ). With regard to this point, each institution uses a specific type of diet, with its own concentrations of proteins, minerals, and vitamins. This information is not always available, making it difficult to correlate the data (Gonzáles et al ; Oliveira ; Malafaia et al. ).
Another important factor that also alters laboratory results is climate, which cannot be controlled. Given its vast territory, Brazil contains six distinct biomes, each of which has not only its typical vegetation but also its specific climatic characteristics (Aleixo et al. ). The giant anteaters involved in the studies analyzed here came from two different biomes, Atlantic Forest and Cerrado, and the findings confirmed that animals accustomed to different climatic conditions have different physiological parameters. This was evidenced by the differences observed in all the cell groups that make up the CBC.
Divergences in the erythrogram involved mainly the hematometric parameters, which are essential for the morphological classification of anemia (Menezes et al. ). In such cases, diagnosis and treatment can be substantially impaired. Despite their similar methodology, such discrepancies may be the result of many factors, from the type of food consumed (Baeta ) to the season of the year when the samples were collected (Birgel Junior et al. ). The animals belonging to the same biomes (Atlantic Forest) were found to present similar variables, albeit different from those found in the Cerrado. This finding discovered in our study underscores the importance of local reference values, since animals of the same species in the same country showed variations in their hematological parameters.
Significant changes were revealed by the leukogram, especially in the total leukocyte count. However, notwithstanding this discrepancy, the cellular predominance in all the studies was similar, reinforcing the physiological standard of healthy adult giant anteaters. It is known that the total WBC count can be influenced by a number of factors, from the stress generated by handling during sampling (de Miranda et al. ) to the effects of drugs used to restrain these animals (Picioli et al. ). In these cases, a resource that can be implemented is to standardize techniques and methodologies for the production of reference values of this species.
Unlike what was observed in the red series, the environment in which these animals were living did not affect their total leukocyte count, since differences were found among animals from the same ecosystem. Unfortunately, some studies provide only incomplete information, making statistical analysis difficult. In this case, the absence of data on the standard deviation of the different types of leukocytes in one study made it impossible to compare them with the other studies. However, a tendency was found in the proportion of cell groups, which were similar in all the studies. Thus, the studies analyzed here, we observed an average of four neutrophils for each lymphocyte in the leukograms of giant anteaters.
As for the total platelet count, one of the more recent studies involving giant anteaters in the state of São Paulo does not include this information (Sanches et al. ). However, a comparison of the other two studies (one of the Atlantic Forest and the other of the Cerrado) revealed relevant differences. Since this cell group is highly unstable, these variations may be the result of different factors ranging from stress, which causes the release of adrenaline and consequent splenic contraction, increasing the number of platelets in the bloodstream (Bakovic et al. ), to an inadequate venipuncture technique (Hlavac ). However, some of these interfering factors can be controlled or reduced, for example, by standardizing blood sampling methods, contributing to more reliable and quasi-real results.
A tool widely used by zoos around the world is information supplied by the International Species Information System (ISIS), which acts as a database of a variety of parameters of numerous captive wild species. However, as several studies involving giant anteaters (Di Nucci et al. ) and other species (May Junior ; Gondim ) have found, comparisons of the data available in the ISIS database, which are used as reference values, regardless of where these animals are located, reveal significant differences in most of the hematological variables.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the aforementioned existence of such differences points to the need for regional reference ranges for hematological parameters to be established, since multiple factors influence these variables. As we found in our survey, healthy animals from different biomes in the same country may exhibit different hematological standards. Given that one of the goals of zoos is to promote research, thereby adding to the body of knowledge about species in captivity (Fioravanti ), it would be ideal for each institution to establish its own reference values. Although the number of animals of a given species in a zoo is not ideal for determining such information, periodic laboratory tests of these animals may provide the zoo with its own reference values.