Introduction
The black-tailed prairie dog ( Cynomys ludovicianus ) is one of five species of prairie dogs, a keystone species in the grasslands of western North America, and is kept in zoological collections, research facilities, and also as privately-owned pets (Funk ; Hoogland et al. ; Keckler et al. ). This herbivorous, burrowing animal is a member of the order Rodentia and the family Sciuridae (Hoogland et al. ). Although several studies have previously described hematologic and physiologic parameters in the black-tailed prairie dog, none have reported amylase or lipase concentrations in this species (Pfeiffer et al. ; Harlow and Buskirk ; Broughton ; Harlow ; Tell ; Keckler et al. ; Gardhouse et al. ; Higbie et al. ; Wyre and Eshar ; Matthews and Eshar ).
Amylase is a digestive enzyme secreted by the exocrine pancreas, liver, and small intestine for the hydrolysis of complex carbohydrates and is excreted or inactivated by the kidneys (Latimer and Prasse ; Stockham and Scott ). Like people and pigs, some rodent species, such as mice and rats, also secrete a salivary amylase isoenzyme (Stockham and Scott ; Hersey-Benner ). In mice, most of the measured serum amylase is secreted by the salivary gland because pancreatic amylase is rapidly cleared through the urine (Zhou and Hansson ). Amylase is often evaluated in conjunction with lipase, an enzyme secreted by both the exocrine pancreas and the gastric mucosa for the hydrolysis of triglycerides, to evaluate pancreatic health (Latimer and Prasse ). Production of these enzymes is induced by the appearance of carbohydrate and lipid digestive by-products, for amylase and lipase, respectively, in the blood (Kramer ). Pancreatic enzymes and zymogens are stored in acinar cells of the pancreas and blood concentrations can be increased during pancreatic cellular injury (Latimer and Prasse ). Amylase found in the blood during health is likely produced outside the pancreas, but severe increases in blood concentrations can be sensitive markers of pancreatic injury (Moridani and Bromberg ). In people, amylase can have salivary and pancreatic isoenzymes and total amylase measurements are less specific for pancreatic disease when compared to the pancreatic-specific isoenzyme-testing assay that inhibits the salivary isoenzyme (Moridani and Bromberg ).
Hematological examination is of considerable value in the clinical evaluation of any species (Jenkins ). Interpretation of test results, however, can be speculative because reference values for specific physiological analytes are unavailable for many species (Keckler et al. ). Knowledge of normal plasma enzyme parameters is important when evaluating pancreatic health (Kaneko et al. ). Low concentrations of plasma or serum amylase or lipase in individuals compared to that of their counterparts may indicate pancreatic insufficiency (Hersey-Benner ; Manley ). Increased concentrations of plasma or serum amylase and lipase are important diagnostic markers in identification of acute pancreatitis and exocrine pancreatic injury (Kramer ; Usborne et al. ). In one study evaluating biomarkers of exocrine pancreatic injury in Sprague-Dawley laboratory rats ( Rattus norvegicus ), amylase and lipase concentrations were found to be reflective of the severity of pancreatic histopathological changes characterized by edema, inflammation, and necrosis; further, the increased lipase values were more representative of the magnitude of histopathological changes than the increased amylase values (Usborne et al. ). These enzymatic values spiked acutely after pancreatic insult but declined over a 48–72-h monitoring period (Usborne et al. ). These findings further validate the importance of these diagnostic markers for detection of acute pancreatitis.
Both amylase and lipase may show mild to moderate serum concentration increases during renal insufficiency and lipase may also be increased in gastric or intestinal injury and inflammation, including obstruction and peritonitis (Latimer and Prasse ; Kramer ). Although gastrointestinal, renal, and pancreatic diseases are not yet commonly reported in black-tailed prairie dogs, the quality of medicine for these animals is evolving and our knowledge of their diseases can expand with the aid of better diagnostic markers.
The purpose of this prospective study was to determine the plasma amylase and lipase concentrations in clinically healthy captive black-tailed prairie dogs.
Materials and methods
Animals
Black-tailed prairie dogs ( C. ludovicianus ) from two zoological collections (Kansas, USA) were admitted for an overall health examination. All animal care procedures conformed to guidelines established by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Kansas State University (KSU) (IACUC, Approval no. 3311 & 3729).
Anesthesia and experimental protocols
Each prairie dog was chamber-induced using 5% isoflurane gas (IsoFlo; Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, IL USA) at 3 L/min oxygen. Following induction, each prairie dog was maintained under general anesthesia using a small face mask and non-rebreathing circuit using 2–3% isoflurane delivered via oxygen at 2 L/min. The animals were allowed to breathe spontaneously. Body temperature was monitored rectally using a handheld digital thermometer and maintained using a warm water blanket (HotDog Patient Warming System WC0x, Eden Prairie, MN, USA) and heating packs. Vital signs were monitored using a stethoscope and a pulse oximeter (Nellcor Handheld Pulse Oximeter N20PA, Covidien, Dublin, Ireland).
Handling and examination of animals
Following induction of anesthesia, each animal was weighed and a complete physical examination was performed. Complete blood count (CBC), plasma biochemistry profile, and venous blood gas analysis were performed and all animals were deemed healthy.
Blood sample collection and analysis
Once each prairie dog was induced and on a stable plane of anesthesia, approximately 0.5 mL of venous blood was drawn using a 1-mL syringe (Kendall Monoject 1-mL syringe; Tyco Healthcare Group, Mansfield, MA, USA) with a 25-gauge needle (Hypodermic needle; Exelint, Los Angeles, CA, USA). The collected blood sample was placed in lithium heparin tubes (Capiject 500 uL; Terumo Medical Corporation, Elkton, MD, USA). The blood tubes were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min and the plasma was removed for immediate analysis. The amylase and lipase enzymatic colorimetric assays were used to obtain a quantitative measurement of plasma enzyme concentrations by an automatic wet biochemistry analyzer (Cobas c 501, Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN, USA).
Data analysis
Data analysis was performed according to the guidelines published by the American Society for Veterinary Clinical Pathology (ASVCP) (Friedrichs et al. ). Reference Value Advisor, a Microsoft Excel Software program, was used for statistical analysis. Due to a study sample size of <120 animals, which is the recommended sample size to determine reference intervals, a robust analysis (parametric) was performed (Geffre et al. ). Reference intervals were determined, along with mean, median, minimum, and maximum plasma concentrations.
Results
A total of 26 black-tailed prairie dogs including 5 females and 21 males of varying weights and ages were examined in this study. The minimum and maximum weight range in grams was 488 and 1200, respectively (mean = 753.9, median = 703). The minimum and maximum age range in months was 6 and 54, respectively (mean = 16.2, median = 6).
The mean and median plasma amylase concentrations were 323.2 and 341 IU/L, respectively. The minimum and maximum measured concentrations were 152 and 481 IU/L, respectively. The determined reference interval was 111.3–499.1 IU/L for the prairie dogs in this study. Figure 1 depicts the distribution of the plasma amylase enzymatic concentration among the individuals in this study. Fig. 1 The box plot represents the measured plasma amylase for captive black-tailed prairie dogs ( C. ludovicianus ) in this study. The reference interval of 111.3–499.1 IU/L was generated with the robust method and a Box-Cox transformation. The mean plasma amylase concentration was 323.2 IU/L
The mean and median plasma lipase concentrations were both 49.5 IU/L. The minimum and maximum measured concentrations were 27 and 80 IU/L, respectively. The determined reference interval was 25.7–78.4 IU/L for the prairie dogs in this study. Figure 2 depicts the distribution of the plasma lipase enzymatic concentration among the individuals in this study. Fig. 2 The box plot represents the measured plasma lipase for captive black-tailed prairie dogs ( C. ludovicianus ) in this study. The reference interval of 25.7–78.4 IU/L was generated with the robust method and a Box-Cox transformation. The mean plasma lipase concentration was 49.5 IU/L. There was one outlier in this data, with a plasma lipase concentration of 80 IU/L
Due to the relatively small sample size, meaningful comparisons between gender, weight, and age subgroups were not plausible and therefore are not reported in this study.
Discussion
This is the first report of plasma amylase and lipase concentration measurements in captive black-tailed prairie dogs ( C. ludovicianus ). This novel data can promote better physiological understanding and medical management of this species.
The quantitative plasma amylase and lipase values reported in this study were generated from immediate analysis of the collected sample to avoid any storage artifacts. However, a study evaluating the effects of storage and time on biochemical parameters showed that common biochemical analytes in laboratory rat serum are stable under refrigeration for 7 days and recommended that prolonged sample storage should occur at −70 °C (Cray et al. ).
In this study, amylase and lipase enzymatic colorimetric assays were used to obtain a quantitative measurement of plasma enzyme concentrations. This testing methodology was chosen in this study as the KSU clinical pathology laboratory uses the Cobas c 501 (Roche Diagnostics) biochemistry analyzer, a large chemistry analyzer that is frequently used by reference laboratories. Amylase activity can be measured in three ways: a chromogenic assay (the test principle of the Cobas c 501 analyzer, in which a spectrophotometrical measurement of dyes is released from synthetic starches when the substrate is hydrolyzed) (Wu ), an amyloclastic assay (in which a dye binds to the available starch—less dye correlates with a higher concentration of amylase activity), or a saccharogenic assay (amylase catalyzes the degradation of starch to produce sugar which is then measured). Titrimetric procedures have historically been used to measure plasma or serum lipase activity, although dry film, turbidimetric, and colorimetric methods have become more readily available (Mackenzie et al. ). Due to the differences in the methodologies, laboratories and scientific reports are required to specify which method was used to generate the given results, and the results obtained from different methodologies cannot be reliably compared (Harr ; Steiner ). It has been reported that assays which measure amylase and lipase activities have limited specificity for exocrine pancreas due to the different tissues that secrete these enzymes, and the sensitivity of serum amylase or lipase activity for diagnosis of pancreatitis is poor (Steiner ). Therefore, caution is recommended when using pancreatic biochemical data for diagnostic purposes, especially in species where reference intervals are preliminarily being established.
There are very few reports that describe plasma or serum amylase and lipase concentrations in other rodent species (Fox et al. ; Wesche ; Suckow et al. ). Because the testing methodology in these reports were either not stated or ran with a different testing methodology than the one used in this study, caution is indicated when comparing the enzymes’ results from these prairie dogs to those reported for other rodent species. However, one study comparing hematological and serum biochemistry values in black-footed tree-rats ( Mesembriomys gouldii ) and greater stick-nest rats ( Leporillus conditor ) reported a relative consistency between individuals despite the use of different anatomical collection sites and utilizing two separate analyzing systems throughout the study (Tulk et al. ).
Amylase reference intervals have been reported in laboratory rats ( R. norvegicus ) (128–313 IU/L or 91.5 IU/L), hamsters ( Mesocricetus auratus ) (160–210 IU/L or 154–196 IU/L), guinea pigs ( Cavia porcellus ) (995–1239 IU/L), and mice ( Mus musculus ) (2500–3200 IU/L) (Zhou and Hansson ; Cray et al. ; Wesche ; Washington and Van Hoosier ). Plasma amylase reference intervals have been reported in juvenile (409.6–1947.9 IU/L) and adult (481.4–1263.5 IU/L) degus ( Octodon degus ) (Jekl et al. ). A mean amylase concentration of 1996.9 IU/L with a 90% confidence interval range of 780.7–3213.1 IU/L was reported in healthy, captive black-footed tree-rats (Tulk et al. ). Within this sample population of black-footed tree-rats, gender comparison revealed some variation among mean serum amylase values: male (1037 IU/L) and female (2476.8 IU/L) (Tulk et al. ). A gender comparison in C57BL/6 mice revealed similar amylase intervals: male (1827–2645 IU/L) and female (1554–2184 IU/L) (Schnell et al. ). A species and gender comparison between laboratory rats and mice revealed similar intervals across species while males of both species had higher amylase values compared to females: Wistar rats—male (1416–3161 IU/L) and female (1132–2260 IU/L); C57/BL6 mice—male (1541–3044 IU/L) and female (1197–2722 IU/L) (Boehm et al. ). The interval of amylase in prairie dogs in this study (111.3–499.1 IU/L) is similar to rabbits ( Oryctolagus cuniculus ) (200–500 IU/L), which is also a hindgut fiber-fermenter species (Washington and Van Hoosier ). Interestingly, the degu, a hindgut fermenter with a diet high in fiber, has amylase concentrations that are not comparable to either those of the prairie dog or the rabbit. The reported differences between species can be due to reasons which include species specificity, different analyzers or assays used, or the consumed diet. It has been suggested that amylase can be increased by the presence of carbohydrates in the diet, which may explain the variability between species digesting differing diets (Kaneko et al. ).
Lipase reference intervals have been reported in clinically healthy juvenile (16.8–112 IU/L) and adult (3–39.5 IU/L) degus, European hamsters ( Cricetus cricetus ) (0–1 CCU, Cherry-Crandall units [0–278 IU/L]), and guinea pigs (0–152 IU/L) (Wesche ; Jekl et al. ; Fenyk-Melody ). A mean serum lipase concentration of 110 mU/mL (110 IU/L) has been reported in Syrian, or golden, hamsters ( M. auratus ) (Jansen et al. ). Mean lipase concentrations have also been reported in three laboratory mice strains: C57BL/6J—male (901 IU/L) and female (1177 IU/L), 129SV/EV—male (991 IU/L) and female (1090 IU/L), and C3H/HeJ—male (969 IU/L) and female (1057 IU/L) (Mazzaccara et al. ). Interestingly, the lipase values are similar across all three strains, and notably the females have higher serum lipase concentrations when compared to those of males. Reference intervals published for guinea pigs (0–152 IU/L) and juvenile degus (16.8–112 IU/L) are similar to the interval found in this population of prairie dogs (25.7–78.4 IU/L) (Wesche ; Jekl et al. ). Similar to the effects of carbohydrates on serum amylase concentrations, serum lipase concentrations may vary with dietary fat (Kaneko et al. ). Golden hamsters fed a high cholesterol diet had enhanced total lipase activity compared to those fed a normal rodent chow (Jansen et al. ). This finding contraindicated their earlier discovery in rats, which had lower hepatic lipase activity following a cholesterol-enriched diet. It is possible that the relatively lower plasma concentration observed in prairie dogs in this study is related to the limited amounts of dietary fat consumed. Restricted dietary fat may reduce the need for pancreatic lipase in black-tailed prairie dogs and other primarily herbivorous rodents.
A limitation of this study is the relatively small number of tested animals, which precluded meaningful comparisons between gender, weight, and age subgroups. However, it is not uncommon to encounter similar sample numbers when studying zoo-kept animals. The number of animals ( n = 26) in this study falls within the current guidelines for reference interval generation (Cray ). Future studies should also compare data between males and females as there is limited published information evaluating how gender and age affect biochemical data in rodent species. In three studies, male mice had higher serum amylase concentrations compared to those of females (Schnell et al. ; Zhou and Hansson ; Boehm et al. ). However, females reportedly had higher serum lipase concentrations compared to those of males (Mazzaccara et al. ). Amylase concentrations in male mice also increased with age between 6 and 20 weeks (Zhou and Hansson ). Another study noted most biochemical analytes differed according to age in three mouse strains; therefore, they recommend using age-specific reference intervals for evaluation of individual animals whenever possible (Mazzaccara et al. ).
It is also possible that despite thorough clinical evaluation, some animals in this study had subclinical pancreatic, intestinal, or renal disease affecting some of the findings in this study. Future studies looking at blood amylase and lipase concentrations should include animals with known pancreatic, intestinal, and renal diseases in order to assess the behavior of these enzymes during these disease conditions. This study evaluated only zoo-kept animals and future studies should also encompass animals originating from other sources such as research facilities, wild populations, and privately-owned, as diet, along with environmental factors, is likely to play a role in affecting plasma enzymatic concentrations.
To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first report of plasma amylase and lipase concentrations for the black-tailed prairie dog. The new data reported in this study can be used, with the necessary cautions, in the research and clinical assessment of this rodent species.