Introduction
Scavenging birds are exposed to a wide range of food substances and these food substances are often contaminated by microorganisms. Consequently, the gastrointestinal tracts of birds require appropriate adaptation to enhance the digestion of the different food substances and protect the host from invading organisms (Strobel and Mowat ; Burks et al. ). The African pied crow ( Corvus albus ), which has a wide distribution in Africa, are voracious eaters that cohabit with man and compete for food, feeding on plant, such as seeds, roots, fruits, palm oil, nuts, potato, and rice (Del Hoyo et al. ), animals such as small invertebrates, small reptiles, small mammals, young birds, and eggs, and household wastes (Pomeroy ). These feed substances and the feeding habit of the African pied crow could influence the distribution and structural diversities of glands in the gut.
Furthermore, the digestive tracts of birds are lined by glands which are largely found in the submucosa. Previous investigations revealed subepithelial mucous glands in the tongue and oropharynx of owls and hawks (Gardner ), domestic chicken (Gargiulo et al. ), white-tailed eagle (Jackowiak and Godynicki ), ostrich (Guimaraes et al. ), emu (Crole and Soley ), goose (Jackowiak et al. ), muscovy duck, and guinea fowl (Igwebuike and Anagor ); esophageal glands in mallard, spot-billed duck, Ural owl, and Hodgson’s hawk-eagle (Shiina et al. ); mucous neck cells in the stomach (Suganuma et al. ); submucosal serous glands in the stomach and intestine of chicken (Aitken ); dispersed goblet cells in the duodenum, jejunum, and the ileum of chicken (Uni et al. ); and submucosal glands in the ceca (Pierce and Long ), which upon stimulation, discharge their contents, including enzymes, mucus, and serous fluid into the gut lumen for digestive, absorptive, protective, and homeostatic activities (Uni et al. ).
Although it is common knowledge that glands are associated with the digestive tracts of mammals and avian species, information on the distribution and morphological characteristics of glands in the gut of many birds have receivedscant ﻿attention﻿. Therefore, investigation of the distribution and histomorphology of the glands in the gut of the African pied crow ( C. albus ) may provide information on its feeding habit and could further X-ray the morphological significance of such glands in digestion and disease control.
Materials and methods
Histological and histochemical techniques
Following euthanasia, segments of the root of the tongue, oropharynx, proximal and distal esophagus, proventriculus, ventriculus, ventriculoduodenal junction, proximal and distal duodenum, proximal and distal jejunum, proximal and distal ileum, cecum, colorectum, cloaca, and bursa of Fabricius were obtained for histological and histochemical evaluations. They were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin. Fixed samples were then dehydrated by immersion in increasing concentrations of ethanol, cleared in three changes of xylene, embedded in paraffin wax, and mounted on wooden blocks for sectioning with a rotary microtome. Five–micrometer-thick sections were obtained and stained with hematoxylin and eosin, periodic acid Schiff (PAS), and toluidine blue stains for light microscopy. Further histological techniques were as described by Udoumoh et al. ( ), and histochemical techniques were as described by Uni et al. ( ) and Sheehan and Hrapchak ( ). Photomicrographs were captured using a Moticam digital camera (Motic China Group Co., Ltd., Xiamen, China).
Results
Distribution of glands in the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) of the African pied crow
In the gastrointestinal tract of the African pied crow ( C. albus ), glands were distributed in the oropharynx, tongue, esophagus, proventriculus, ventriculus, duodenum, jejunum, ileum, colorectum, ceca, and cloaca (Figs. 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , and 6 ). In the oropharynx, tongue, and proximal and distal esophagus, glands were present in the subepithelial regions and in the lamina propria mucosae while glands of the proventriculus and ventriculus were observed in the lamina propria mucosae and in the submucosa (Figs. 1 , 2 , 3 ). Moreover, the small intestine, colorectum, and ceca contained glands of Lieberkhün in the lamina propria mucosae and submucosae with goblet cells in the crypts and in the epithelium of the villi. Fig. 1 A compound tubular gland of the tongue of an African pied crow ( C. albus ) showing mucous secretory tubules ( S ) and a central collecting duct ( Dt ). Note the stratified squamous epithelium ( E ). H&E stain. ×100 Fig. 2 Photomicrograph of the secretory tubules ( S ) and collecting duct ( D ) of the proventriculus of an African pied crow ( C. albus ) showing cells with rounded nuclei ( black arrow ) and flattened basally displaced nuclei ( white arrow ). H&E stain. ×400 Fig. 3 Light micrograph of the gizzard of an African pied crow ( C. albus ) showing the secretory acini of ventricular glands ( A ) with cells having rounded nuclei ( arrows ). H&E stain. ×400 Fig. 4 Photomicrograph of the proximal jejunum of an African pied crow ( C. albus ) showing the villous epithelium ( E ), goblet cells ( black arrows ), glands of Lieberkhün ( G ), and tunica muscularis ( M ). H&E stain. ×100 Fig. 5 Light micrograph of the esophagus ( a ), proventriculus ( b ), ventriculus ( c ), and cloaca ( d ) showing magenta areas indicating PAS-positive reaction ( asterisks ). PAS stain. ×40 Fig. 6 Photomicrograph of the distal ileum showing magenta-stained areas ( black and white asterisks ) on staining with toluidine blue ( a ) and PAS ( b ). ×100
Histomorphological characteristics of glands in the GIT of the African pied crow
In the oropharynx, esophagus, and cloaca of the African pied crow, simple tubular and simple branched tubular glands were observed. The secretory cells of these glands were characterized by flattened basally displaced nuclei. The tongue of the African pied crow exhibited both simple and compound tubular glands. These glands contained secretory cells that equally demonstrated flattened basally displaced nuclei and foamy cytoplasm. The compound tubular gland of the tongue had a central collecting tubule that was lined by a stratified squamous epithelium (Fig. 1 ).
The glands of the proventriculus of the African pied crow were of simple tubular and compound tubular types (Fig. 2 ). The simple tubular glands had secretory tubules which were lined by simple columnar cells. The compound tubular glands were composed of many secretory tubules and each secretory tubule was separated from each other by a layer of connective tissue. Secretions of the tubules were evacuated through the collecting tubules which united to form the central collecting ducts. The secretory tubules were lined by cuboidal cells with rounded nuclei while the collecting ducts were lined by columnar cells with basally displaced flattened nuclei. The simple tubular glands of the ventriculus were characterized by the presence of simple cuboidal to low columnar cells and these cells demonstrated rounded nuclei (Fig. 3 ).
All segments of the small intestine of the African pied crow were characterized by the presence of goblet cells in the epithelium and glands of Lieberkühn in the lamina propria mucosa and submucosa. The crypt extended the whole length of the tunica submucosa while goblet cells which lined the villous epithelium and the crypt epithelia increased in number from the duodenum to the distal ileum. Towards the villi, the crypts were lined by simple columnar epithelium and these epithelial cells possessed rounded nuclei. Distal to the villi, towards the tunica muscularis, the crypt epithelia varied from simple columnar to pseudostratified columnar types (Fig. 4 ).
Histochemical properties of the glands in the GIT
Following histochemical evaluation, the glands of the oropharynx, tongue, esophagus, and the cloaca were stained magenta, a PAS-positive reaction following staining with PAS stain. Whereas the compound tubular glands of the proventriculus of the African pied crow exhibited PAS-negative reaction, the collecting tubules and the collecting duct demonstrated PAS-positive reaction (Fig. 5 ). Furthermore, the cuticle and the secretory tubules of the ventriculus, the villous epithelium and crypts of the small intestine and the colorectum, and glands of the ceca stained positive on PAS stain. Staining of the small intestine with toluidine blue stain revealed the magenta-stained goblet cells in the villous epithelium and the crypts (Fig. 6 ).
Discussion
The glands of the gastrointestinal tracts of animals are very essential in the modulation of digestive activities and in the defense of the organism against pathogenic invasions. This is more so in scavenging birds where their feeding habit exposes them to a wide range of pathogens and contaminated food substances. In the present study, the African pied crow exhibited glands throughout the entire length of its gastrointestinal tract suggesting them to be major components of the gut of the African pied crow. The glands ranged from simple tubular, simple branched tubular, compound tubular, and glands of Lierberkhün to goblet cell types. These observations are comparable to reports of previous authors in other avian species (Shiina et al. ; Gargiulo et al. ; Zhu , ; Rana et al. ).
In this study, the oropharynx, tongue, and esophagus of the African pied crow exhibited secretory acini with typical mucous cells. The secretions of these mucous glands may play critical roles in deglutition and could act as first-line chemical barriers to food-borne and dust-carrying pathogens. The mucous gland which predominated in this species corresponds to that reported in the glands of the oral cavity of humans and mice, where their glands were shown to be predominantly mucous types (Tucker and Miletich ). In the white-tailed eagle, the secretory units of the glands of the tongue similarly contained mucous secretory cells (Jackowiak and Godynicki ). On PAS evaluation, the magenta areas of the oropharynx, tongue, and esophagus demonstrate the presence of neutral mucin.
The presence of simple tubular and compound tubular glands in the proventriculus of the African pied crow as reported in this study is similar to that reported in the guinea fowl (Senthamil Selvan et al. ), red jungle fowl (Kadhim et al. ), coot bird (Batah et al. ), duck and pigeon (Hassan and Moussa ), and the black-tailed crake (Zhu ). Whereas the simple tubular glands of the proventriculus of the African pied crow were solely mucous type, the compound tubular glands exhibited both serous and mucous histological features. Their secretory tubules demonstrated serous cells and may release serous secretions into the collecting tubules and ducts, while the secretory ducts based on their histological and histochemical characteristics may contribute mucous secretions. Since the proventriculus of the African pied crow could serve as mucous and serous glands, mucin, hydrochloric acid, and pepsinogen may be produced as reported in the other species of birds (Aitken ; Arai et al. ) and mammals (Zhu , ). The secretory tubules of the proventricular glands showed PAS-negative reaction which suggests the absence of neutral mucin, while the collecting ducts showed PAS-positive reaction suggesting the production of neutral mucin. The secretory epithelium of the glands of the ventriculus contained cuboidal to low columnar cells with rounded nuclei. Their histological features point to the role of the gastric glands in the production of serous secretions. The horny cuticle or keratinoid which lined the epithelial surface of the ventriculus may have been produced as serous substances before it became hardened by the secretions of the proventriculus. This is most probably responsible for the PAS-positive reaction of the glands on PAS evaluation. Our observation is in contrast with the report of Aitken ( ) who reported that the distal portion of the secretory tubules of the glands of the ventriculus of chicken contained serous cells while the proximal aspect showed mucous cells. The present observations demonstrate that the gastric glands of the ventriculus may be involved in the production of horny cuticle which appeared as neutral mucin on PAS evaluation. While the mucous secretions of the proventriculus could protect the epithelial surface of the stomach of the African pied crow from the corrosive effect of the acidic gastric secretions, the cuticle of the ventriculus could offer mechanical protection and aid the grinding of food particles (Oliveira et al. ).
Furthermore, in the present study, the small and large intestines of the African pied crow contained goblet cells within the mucosal epithelium and the crypt gland epithelia. Apart from the role of producing mucin, goblet cells have been incriminated in persistence of maternal IgA in the gut, in a mechanism that is yet to be unraveled (Bar-Shira et al. ). In this study, the goblet cells in the small intestine of the African pied crow increased in number from the proximal part of the small intestine to the distal part and account for the PAS-positive reactions observed in the small intestine on histochemical examination. Toluidine blue staining also demonstrated the locations of these goblet cells. Unlike of the chicken where shallow crypts of Lierberkhün were described (Bacha and Bacha ), the crypt glands of the African pied crow small intestine extended deep through the thickness of the submucosa and contained epithelia which varied from simple columnar epithelium near the villi to pseudostratified columnar epithelium deep down the submucosa. Although goblet cells which lined the lumen prompted PAS-positive reaction, cells of the crypts had characteristic features of serous-secreting cells demonstrating that crypts of Lieberkhün could secrete digestive enzymes (Bezuidenhout and Van Aswegen ).
The vast distribution of mucous glands in the gut of the African pied crow may be a response to its harsh environment because mucin contains specific molecular structures that could regulate the microenvironment near the mucosal cell surfaces. They relay information from the external environment to the epithelial cells via cellular signaling through membrane-bound mucins (Moniaux et al. ; Hollingsworth and Swanson ). According to Bansil and Turner ( ), the physical state of mucous, changes in the concentration of secreted mucin, and the strong dependence of its physicochemical properties on environmental factors, such as ionic strength and pH, highlight the important roles of mucin in many diseases. In the gut of the African pied crow, acid mucin which is less glycosylated (Wesley et al. ) could be present. However, these were not evaluated and the neutral mucin, a highly glycosylated species (Wesley et al. ) which we expressed by positive reaction to PAS stain, further indicates the physiologic adaptation of the gut of the African pied crow to its wide range of food substances and microbial organisms.
In conclusion, the result of this study is a first-line detailed information on the glandular composition of the gut of the African pied crow and their histochemical properties. Thus, the data presented in this study represent morphofunctional modifications of the gut of the crow that may be related to their feeding habit, exposure to a wide range of microorganisms, and species adaptations which could guide the management of this wild species for its myriad purposes.