Introduction
Interleukin-17 (IL-17) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that is primarily produced by Th-17 lymphocytes: however, its production is not restricted to Th-17 lymphocytes (Chabaud et al. ; Fossiez et al. ; Jovanovic et al. ; Teunissen et al. ; Yao et al. , ). IL-17 induces the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase) and nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) (Attur et al. ; Shalom-Barak et al. ). IL-17 have different biological functions such as inducing the production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)–1, as well as tumour necrosis factor α (TNF-α), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and stromelysin (Aarvak et al. ; Fossiez et al. ; Jovanovic et al. ; Yao et al. , ).
The roles of IL-17 have been described in some human neoplasms including gastric, lung, colorectal and hepatic carcinomas (Chen et al. ; Chen et al. , ; Liao et al. ; Wagsater et al. ). This cytokine is believed to have both pro-tumour and anti-tumour activities, the pro-tumour activities include the induction of neutrophilia, angiogenesis, production of anti-apoptotic factors, and activation of matrix metalloproteinase-2 and −9 (Hemdan ; Martin et al. ). By contrast, its anti-tumour activities consist of expressing of MHC antigens on tumour cells and producing interferon gamma (IFN-γ) to kill cancer cells (Hemdan ; Murugaiyan and Saha ).
IL-17 can induce angiogenesis by stimulating the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production, which has been observed in human colorectal carcinoma, lung cancer, and some cancer cell lines (Chen et al. , ; Liu et al. ; Numasaki et al. ). Cervical, colorectal and lung cancer are other types of cancers in which IL-17 roles are described (Chen et al. , ; Tartour et al. ; Wagsater et al. ), but it can also promote metastasis in human hepatocellular carcinoma (Li et al. ).
This study aimed to evaluate the immunohistochemical expression of IL-17 protein in canine mammary tumours (CMTs) and its relationships with histologic grading, recurrence of tumour and overall post-surgical survival after 2 years.
Materials and methods
Forty female dogs which had undergone mastectomy were included in this study. Tissue specimens were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, processed, stained with H&E stains and examined under light microscope. The examined slides were classified according to the WHO published data regarding canine and feline mammary tumours histological classification (Misdorp et al. ).
The subjects diagnosed as mammary carcinoma were selected for a 2-year post surgery follow-up. Recurrence of mammary tumours were assessed by clinical examinations and the animals that died because of non-tumour related issues ( n = 4) were excluded from the study. Thirty-six dogs with mammary carcinomas were selected as the study population until the end of the follow-up period. Normal canine lymph nodes and mammary gland tissues were used as positive and negative controls for immunohistochemistry, respectively.
Histologic grading was done according to the grading system published by Misdorp and coworkers, which assess the degree of tubule formation, nuclear pleomorphism and the mitotic figures in tumour cells, and final grades were reported as grade I, II and III (Misdorp et al. ).
Immunohistochemistry
After routine processing, wax-embedded tissues were sectioned at 4 μm and were dewaxed in warm xylene three times, 10 min each. They were rehydrated in graded alcohols 100, 95, 80 and 70%, 5 min each. Antigen retrieval was carried out in a water bath in 95 °C for 20 min using tris-EDTA buffer (PH 9). 0.3% H 2 O 2 diluted in PBS was added to the slides and incubated 10 min in order to quench endogenous peroxidase activity and washed twice in PBS, 5 min each.
The slides were incubated for 1 h with 1.5% normal goat serum in PBS to reduce unspecific binding followed by 5 min washing in PBS. Rabbit anti interleukin-17 antibody (Abcam, ab79056) was added to the slides at 1:200 dilution and followed by overnight incubation at 4 °C. Staining procedure was continued using the commercial rabbit ABC Staining System (Immunocruz rabbit ABC Staining System, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. sc-2018), and biotinylated secondary antibody (goat anti-rabbit) was added to slides in 1:200 dilution based on the manufacturer’s suggestion for 30 min and was washed by PBS. The next step was a 30-min incubation with avidin and biotinylated horse radish peroxidase (HRP). Peroxidase reaction was visualized by using 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) and stopped with deionized water. Finally, the slides were counterstained using haematoxylin Harris and dehydrated using 95 and 100% ethanol and xylene, respectively.
Semi-quantitative scoring of immunohistochemistry
Semi-quantitative scoring of reactions produced by DAB—which are representative of IL-17 protein expression—was performed by two of authors (ARM, MR) according to the method described before (Sottnik and Thamm ). Ten high-power fields (HPFs) were randomly scored for the presence of IL-17 positive cells, and the mean percentage of positive cells in each slide were reported as (0 = 0%), (1 = 1–5%), (2 = 6–20%), (3 = 21–50%) or (4 ≥ 50%). Furthermore, the intensity of the positive signals were also graded as follows: 0= negative, 1= weak signal, 2= moderate signal, 3= strong signal and 4= intense signal. Intensity of slides was scored in comparison to staining intensity of positive control tissue. Final immunoreactivity yield by multiplying percentages of positive cells and intensity of the reactions, ranging from 0 to 16 and was categorized as: negative (0), weak (1 to 3), moderate (4 to7), and strong expression (8 to 16).
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed by chi-square test using SPSS version 16 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) and statistical significance was based on a 5% (0.05) significance level.
Results
Histopathology
Thirty-six tumour samples which are included in this study were classified as anaplastic carcinoma (10/36, 27.77%) (Fig. 1 ), mixed-type carcinoma (10/36, 27.77%) (Fig. 2 ), solid carcinoma (5/36, 13.88%) (Fig. 3 ), carcinosarcoma (5/36, 13.88%) (Fig. 4 ), complex-type carcinoma (6/35, 17.14%). Seventeen tumours were grade III (47.22%), 12 were grade II (33.33%) and seven samples were grade I (19.44%). Fig. 1 Anaplastic carcinoma, neoplastic cells show severe anisocytosis and anisokaryosis with infiltration of neoplastic cells to lymphatic vessels, Mammary gland tumour, dog. ×400. Haematoxylin and eosin Fig. 2 Mixed-type carcinoma, the epithelial part is malignant along with a benign mesenchymal part, mammary gland tumour, dog. ×200. Haematoxylin and eosin Fig. 3 Solid carcinoma, neoplastic cells are arranged in solid sheets and cords, mammary gland tumour, dog. ×200. Haematoxylin and eosin Fig. 4 Carcinosarcoma, both epithelial and mesenchymal parts are malignant, mammary gland tumour, dog. ×200. Haematoxylin and eosin
IL-17 is strongly expressed in canine mammary tumours
Out of 36 samples, 23 (63.88%) showed strong immunoreactivity for IL-17 antibody while 13 samples (36.11%) were scored moderate.
We did not observe IL-17 expression in the cytoplasm and nucleus in healthy mammary glands, while IL-17 increased cytoplasmic expression was detected in most of canine mammary tumours. Neoplastic cells of anaplastic carcinomas showed strong cytoplasmic immunolabelling for IL-17 (Fig. 5 ), adding that nuclear staining was not detected. Fig. 5 Anaplastic carcinoma, cytoplasmic strong expression of IL-17 in malignant cells in the epithelium of mammary ducts, mammary gland tumour, dog. ×400. IHC for IL-17
In carcinosarcomas, both malignant epithelial and mesenchymal parts were positive for IL-17 expression (Fig. 6 ). Neoplastic cells of solid carcinoma were arranged in solid sheets and cords with strong expression of IL-17 protein. Fig. 6 Carcinosarcoma, strong expression of IL-17 in malignant cells, mammary gland tumour, dog. ×400. IHC for IL-17
At the end of follow-up period, 25 (69.44%) dogs were alive, and 11 (30.55%) died from mammary carcinoma. Furthermore, recurrence of tumours was observed in eight cases.
Statistical analysis
IL-17 expression was increased significantly in CMTs compared to normal canine mammary tissues ( p < 0.05). Among pathologic criteria evaluated in this study, IL-17 strong expression was in significant relationships with high histologic grade ( p < 0.05).
Discussion
The results of the present study revealed that IL-17 protein levels are significantly increased in CMTs, and this finding is in agreement with some data in human gastric adenocarcinoma, colorectal cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma (Chen et al. ; Liao et al. ; Wagsater et al. ). There was a significant relationship between IL-17 increased expression and high histologic grades in CMTs, which suggests that IL-17 may have a role in CMT carcinogenesis, but further studies are needed to confirm this idea. In human breast cancer, increased numbers of IL-17 producing cells were found to be correlated with high histologic grades, shorter disease-free survival rate, and poor prognosis (Chen et al. ; Cochaud et al. ). Additionally, treating breast cancer cell lines by IL-17 leads to invasiveness, chemoresistance and proliferation (Cochaud et al. ; Zhu et al. ).
The prognostic importance of IL-17 is shown in some human cancers such as lung cancer (Chen et al. , ; Zhang et al. ), gastric cancer (Chen et al. ; Zhuang et al. ), hepatic cancers (Gu et al. ; Liao et al. ), colorectal carcinoma (Liu et al. ), esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (Lv et al. ; Wang et al. ), glioblastoma (Cui et al. ) and ovarian cancer (Lan et al. ). Different roles of IL-17 in cancers and other diseases such as inflammatory and autoimmune diseases suggest that it could be an interesting therapeutic target (Hall et al. ; Kirkham et al. ; Nwe et al. ; Zhao et al. ).
In conclusion, the present study shows that IL-17 protein expression is significantly increased in CMTs compared to normal tissues and is associated with high histologic grades. IL-17 may be involved in canine mammary tumours; however, more investigations are required. To our knowledge, this is the first study regarding IL-7 expression in CMTs. To better understand the exact role of IL-17 in CMTs, further studies are needed.