Introduction
Deep pectoral muscles’ myopathy is a focal necrosis and assimilator of small pectoral muscle which is also known as green muscle disease or Oregon disease (Grunder ). Etiologically, the disease is similar to human March syndrome in which, due to blockage of blood vessels, the front leg muscles are necrotized and turned brown (Wight et al. ). At first, the Oregon disease was observed in old turkeys in the USA (Dickinson et al. ). Later, it was exclusively observed in broiler chickens specially selected to produce bigger breast muscle (Richardson et al. ; Bilgili and Hess ; Siller ). The microbial culture of involved muscles to the disease has not indicated any sign of bacterial or viral infections (Harper et al. ). Neither enriched diet with vitamin E, selenium, and methionine (Jordan and Pattison ; Wight et al. ), nor difference in diet type could reduce the occurrence of the disease (Grunder ). Generally, deep pectoral muscle myopathy, also known as the compartment syndrome, is an ischemic necrosis, which happens during bird physiological activities like winging; the pectoral muscle cannot find enough volume increase due to tight facial around the muscle and sternum (Jordan and Pattison ). As a result, when bird begins to flap, the size of the pectoral muscle increases while it does not have enough space for extension; then the muscle is compressed and ischemic necrosis of deep pectoral muscle occurs due to perfusion and blockage of blood vessels (Siller ; Harper et al. ). Necrotic muscle, at first, has diffused hemorrhagic points and after a while, it turns dark green and remains deep light green to the final stages (Bilgili and Hess ). It does not jeopardize public health of such birds, and usually no symptoms are observed in live birds. It is only not market friendly and is an undesirable trait for the customer. While involved parts of the carcass should be removed, its remaining is safe for consumption (Jordan and Pattison ). The early lesions show edema, hyperemia, and hemorrhage in deep pectoral muscles which can affect one or both sides. Lesion is only limited to the involved parts. In the early lesions, the muscle shows signs of swelling, and sometimes is accompanied by hemorrhage. After a while, the middle part of the deep pectoral muscle turns green starting from its edges (Fig. 1 ). Then, the whole deep muscle becomes green (Fig. 2 ). In older cases, its color develops to yellowish green which is brittle, and the lesion is surrounded by a capsule of connective tissue. In some cases, this muscle part feels hard and rigid (Fig. 3 ). Histology shows many regions of muscle fibers’ necrosis, and sometimes Zenker’s necrosis accompanied by inflammatory cells such as macrophages. In older lesions, muscle tissue has been replaced with fibrin and fat tissue. The pectoral muscle comprises about 20 % of the carcass’s weight, which has to be removed in case of the disease. Therefore, it can economically be a debatable issue. The study was aimed at investigating occurrence of deep pectoral muscles’ myopathy in west of Iran, and offering some reasonable management practices to control damages to involved flocks. Fig. 1 Early stage and starting green lesion Fig. 2 Stage of forming green color in the muscle Fig. 3 Final stage of lesion and formation of fibrous layer and being yellow
Materials and methods
This was a descriptive cross-sectional study, and carried out in 1 year (from the beginning of April 2013 to end of March 2014). In the study, a number of condemned cases and causes of their record were examined from Sanandaj industrial slaughterhouse, west of Iran. Examining broiler chicken at post slaughter stage and out of carcasses with apparent evidence, some autopsy of the disease lesions were removed and excluded for recordings. The breed of broiler chickens was RAS. Ages of slaughtered flocks were between 50 to 60 days.
As focus of the study was on green muscle disease, suspected carcasses which showed green color necrosis while opening surface pectoral muscle were separated. The swab samples were collected randomly from the tissues in sterile conditions and were cultured on blood agar medium to investigate presence of microbial agents in the suspected tissues.
Study on two involved flocks with different slaughter age
In order to survey occurrence of the disease in detail, two flocks were considered cross-sectionally with different slaughter age and weight. Then, the following factors were examined: gender, slaughter age, type of involvement (whether unilateral or bilateral), and stage of lesion development. The data were statistically processed by a chi-square test comparing the factors. The differences were significant at P < 0.05.
Management practices to control the disease
Since physical inactivity in susceptible birds underlies poor development of blood vessels deep in muscle tissue and leads to necrosis and lesions, it is recommended that in these flocks with occurrence of the disease in previous rearing periods, the workers should walk slowly among the flock after the day 30 of rearing. Therefore, the chickens were gently forced to be active several times daily aimed at forming better blood vessels in their pectoral area. Post-mortem inspection was done after blood-out. Draining viscera and external surfaces of the carcass, internal cavity, and viscera were checked out to diagnose deep pectoral muscles’ myopathy.
Results
Examining slaughtered chickens during different seasons of 2013 revealed that of total slaughtered broiler chickens almost 29,255 carcasses (0.53 %) were recorded as condemned carcasses. By examination and with respect to the frequency of diseases, six reasons for the condemnations were identified (Table 1 ). Among condemned carcasses, the highest condemned cases were related to carcasses having septicemia which comprised 11,463 (0.20 % of total slaughter). The ascites and peritonitis cases were in the second rank which included 10,037 (0.18 %) carcasses of the total slaughtered chickens. The data showed that carcasses having septicemia and ascites/peritonitis were higher than others. The green muscle disease was 1850 (0.033 %) from condemned carcasses. Table 1 Frequency of condemned carcasses based on disease Number Frequency (%) Green muscle disease 1850 0.033 Septicemia 11,463 0.20 Cachexia 1634 0.02 Ascites 10,037 0.18 Respiratory diseases 2930 0.05 Other disease 674 0.01 Total condemned carcasses 29,255 0.53
As shown in Table 2 , there was a relationship between the months of rearing with green muscle disease occurrence. According to monthly frequency of the disease, August and January with 6.6 and 14.2 % indicated the lowest and highest rate of the disease, respectively. Table 2 Frequency of involved flocks to green muscle disease based on month Months Condemned carcasses Frequency (%) April 1 11.2 May 3 8.5 June 3 9.4 July 7 7.1 August 3 6.6 September 5 10.9 October 4 7.2 November 6 11.5 December 3 9.3 January 7 14.2 February 6 12.3 March 3 10.1
The data on the two involved flocks with different slaughter ages indicated a significant relationship between age and weight, and the disease occurrence ( P < 0.05) (Table 3 ). However, no relationship found between chicken’s ration and the disease. The managerial practice carried out among the folks showing high casualties and lesions previously, and significantly reduced the losses. Table 3 A comparison of two involved flocks with different slaughter age and weight The flocks Mean of weight Slaughter age (day) Involvement rate (%) Disease phase (%) Involved sides (%) Ration Male Female Male Female Acute Chronic Unilateral Bilateral Flock A 2.81 ± 0.10 2.66 ± 0.12 58 65 35 32.8 67.2 15 85 Adjusted formulated diet Flock B 2.37 ± 0.18 2.19 ± 0.06 51 68 32 82.5 17.5 18.8 81.2 Adjusted formulated diet
Discussion and conclusion
Every year around the world, broad and diverse researches are carried out related to causes of carcasses’ removal and losses resulted from it. Researchers found various ratios for carcasses’ removal out of the total slaughter, and their recorded causes in different countries were depending on weather conditions, management types, and the disease epidemiology (Radkowski et al. ). In the observation of Siller ( ) in Edinburgh, Scotland, catching percent of the disease was 19 % or more in the flocks. In study of Kijowski and Konstanczak ( ), the rate of green muscle disease was 0.06 % of total slaughtered carcasses. In the studies of Bianchi et al. (2006) in Italy, involvement rate to green muscle disease was estimated at 16.7 %. In the study of Bilgili and Hess ( ) in the USA, involvement rate in the flocks having green muscle disease was 19 %. During the studies of Dinev and Kanakov ( ) in Bulgaria, recorded carcasses total’s rate was 0.51 %. In our study, 0.33 % of slaughtered chickens had green muscle disease. Among involved flocks, 6.6 to 14.2 % of flocks had the disease. These differences were dependent to the slaughter weight and age, and most importantly, the management method. The disease is reported to be seen more among heavy weight poultry and those with higher slaughter age (Siller ; Grunder ; Crespo and Shivarprasad ; Bilgili and Hess ; Bianchi et al. ). Comparing flocks A and B in the present study showed when birds’ age increased and put on more weight, the disease’s percentage also amplified. According to the findings of Bilgili and Hess ( ), the disease outbreak was seen more in male than female birds. In our study, given that gain weight was better done in male, involvement of male in flock A equaled 65 % and in flock B reached 68 %. The findings were consistent with those of Bilgili and Hess ( ) in the respect that the females showed the symptoms 10 days later than the males, as well. This disease probably occurs due to increased muscle size during high activity of wings and when causing stress to the birds. When deep pectoral muscle does not have enough space, which is much needed due to increase size, and due to very high perfusion volume to the blood vessels, the area is blocked and ischemic necrosis is created (Bilgili and Hess ). Genetically, birds’ selection and rearing aimed at increasing pectoral meat size could be one important factor contributing to the disease (Crespo and Shivarprasad ; Bilgili and Hess ). Kijowski and Konstanczak ( ) studies on carcasses indicated that 67 % of lesions were bilateral. Autopsy revealed that 85 and 81.2 % of lesions on the flock A and B were bilateral; respectively. Macroscopic lesions are seen in two ways, in which the acute phase of hemorrhage, inflation is seen in one or both sides of the pectoral in deep muscles. In chronic lesions, hemorrhagic points are rare, and muscle color will go green limited by one capsule (Dinev and Kanakov ). In the flock A of conducted examination, chronic phase of the disease was more frequent. In other words, 67.2 % cases indicated the chronic and 32.8 % cases the acute phase. Meanwhile, in the flock B, 82.5 % of the involved carcasses showed acute phase with hemorrhage and 17.5 % showed the chronic phase. The difference could relate to lower slaughter age of the flock B. Outbreak of the disease in the flock could relate to mismanagement and gender. Females and males show involvement possibility after days 36 and 26, correspondingly (Dinev and Kanakov ). A reasonable management practice could control losses by prevention of the stress resulting from food, water, and light fluctuations.