Introduction
About 13 % of women and 10 % of men aged 60 years and older have symptomatic knee osteoarthritis (OA). Patients suffering from OA seek for various methods in order to lower the complications of the disease, for example for relieving pain and improving the function (Jordan et al. ). OA has multifactorial etiologies, which occurs due to interplay between systemic and local factors (Jordan et al. ). Actually, arthritis is one of the top 6 diseases for which complementary and alternative medicine is used (Lapane et al. ). This high popularity in applying complementary and alternative medicine can be due to its advantages such as widespread availability, no or fewer side effects, moderate efficacy, and low cost as compared with synthetic drugs (Edraki et al. ; De Silva et al. ; Ernst ). Although some studies reported therapeutic characteristics of some herbal remedies for OA, the overall evidence is weak (Cameron and Chrubasik ; Cameron and Chrubasik ). Among the herbal products, mango could be regarded as a potential natural remedy for OA due to its anti-inflammatory characteristics. Mangifera indica , usually known as mango, is a tropical fruit which belongs to the Anacardiaceae family. Mangifera fruit contains various components with therapeutic characteristics such as vitamins, polyphenols, terpenoids, steroids, fatty acids, and trace elements (Shah et al. ; Berardini et al. ; Rodríguez et al. ). Furthermore, various biological activities are demonstrated for its extract such as anti-neoplastic (Noratto et al. ; García-Rivera et al. ), analgesic (Ojewole ), antioxidant (Pourahmad et al. ; Ribeiro et al. ), anti-inflammatory (Mohan et al. ; Garrido et al. ), and immunomodulatory (Makare et al. ) properties. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the effect of mango as a complementary and alternative medicine on the prevention and treatment of OA of the knee regarding radiological and histopathological findings.
Methods
Experimental animals
Twenty male shorthaired England guinea pigs (750 ± 50 g), aged between 20 and 24 weeks and with no illness from the animal colony of Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, were used. The animals were maintained under controlled environment in the Institute’s animal house at 22 ± 2 °C, with 55 ± 5 % of atmosphere humidity and 12-h light-dark cycle. The experiments were performed in accordance with the regulations specified by the Institute’s Animal Ethics Committee and conformed to the national guidelines on the care and use of laboratory animals.
Collection and extraction of plant material
Fresh fruits of M . indica were harvested from Sistan o Baloochestan Province and cleaned and washed with water and re-washed with distilled water. And they were dried under shade in a clean, dust-free environment. The shade dried epicarp and mesocarp parts of the fruits were chopped in small pieces and then crushed into powder by a blender. The powder was macerated in hydroalcoholic solution (50 %) and stored in a percolator for 72 h. Then, the drops of the extraction were collected while hydroalcoholic solution (50 %) was added from the top of the separator funnel of the percolator. The extract was dried by a desiccator in 24 h, and a honey-like viscosity extract was obtained. The extract was then filtered by cellulose acetate membrane syringe filter (pore size 0.2 μm) and stored.
Osteoarthritis model
The guinea pigs were anesthetized with intramuscular administration of 20 mg/kg of ketamine (Alfasan, Woerden-Holand) and 2 mg/kg of xylazine (Alfasan, Woerden-Holand). Under aseptic conditions, anterior cruciate ligament transection (ACLT) was performed using a para-medial approach with the skin incision in the medial para-patellar area of the right knee. To achieve optimal visualization of the anterior cruciate ligament, the patella was displaced laterally and the knee was placed in full flexion; then, the ACL was transected. The joint capsule and subcutaneous tissue were closed using 4-0 polydioxanone suture (PDS*II, ETHICON, INC). The skin was closed using 2-0 silk surgical suture (SUPA, Iran). The right knee of the guinea pig underwent arthrotomy, but not transaction of the ACL. Following the surgery, guinea pigs were treated with the standard antibiotic (tetracycline, Zakaria laboratory Tabriz, Iran) and analgesic (flunixin, Razak laboratories, Tehran-Iran) and allowed to maintain in a normal cage for 10 weeks (Little and Smith ).
Study protocol
Twenty surgical prepared animal models were randomly assigned into four groups ( n = 5) and different treatments were applied: A) Control group: no treatment was applied. B) Prevention group: Mangifera extract was administered by gavage feeding from the first day after surgical preparation with a dose of 500 mg/Kg. C) Oral treatment: 10 weeks after surgical preparation, the extract with a dose of 500 mg/Kg was administered by gavage feeding for 8 weeks every day. D) Injection treatment: 10 weeks after surgical preparation, for 8 weeks, 0.1 cm 3 of the extract with a dose of 500 mg/Kg was injected into the knee joints for two times with a time interval of 4 weeks.
Repair assessment
Radiological examination
Knee joint X-ray images taken from anteroposterior and lateral views were at weeks 12, 16, and 20 after surgery. Radiographies were performed in the department of diagnostic radiology at the School of Veterinary Medicine, Shiraz University, using a standardized protocol. Radiography was performed by the same operator and the same equipment (Toshiba DC.12 m Japan, 42 kV, 250 mA, 32 ms, 80 cm film-focus distance). For anteroposterior view, guinea pigs were placed in dorsal recumbency with legs extended caudally. Lateral radiographs were done on semiflexed knee joints. Radiological osteoarthritis was assessed using a grading system which was provided by Boulocher et al. ( ). In this system, based on radiological features including narrowing of the joint space, presence of osteophytes, sclerosis of subchondral bone, and deformity of the bone ends, osteoarthritis was divided into five grades: 0 (none), 1 (doubtful), 2 (minimal), 3 (moderate), and 4 (severe). A blinded radiologist scored the radiographs.
Histopathological examination
After sacrificing, the joint surfaces were grossly examined. Distal femora and the proximal tibial plateau were removed and fixed in 10 % buffered formalin. The samples were decalcified and cut into four pieces. All pieces were embedded in paraffin. Serial sagittal sections were prepared and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (cellular architecture), Toluidine blue, and Safranin O (proteoglycan contents of matrix). Fourteen slices for distal femora and 14 slices for the proximal tibia plateau were evaluated. This observation was performed by a blinded pathologist. The severity of the articular cartilage lesions was graded, using a modified histological grading method provided by Yanai et al. ( ). This scoring system is based on the following repair indices: surface, matrix, cell distribution, cell population viability, subchondral bone, and cartilage mineralization (Table 1 ). A lower score indicates more severe damage. All morphometric parameters were recorded with Olympus DP12 Digital Camera system (Olympus Optical, Tokyo, Japan). Table 1 Osteoarthritis severity scoring system for histopathological and radiological assessment, which are obtained from indexes provided by Yanai et al. ( ) and Boulocher et al. ( ), respectively Histopathologic scoring system Radiologic scoring system Score Surface Matrix Cell distribution Cell population viability Subchondral bone Cartilage mineralization (calcified cartilage) Type I collagen staining of the matrix Type II collagen staining of the matrix – – – – – – – – Normal 4 Smooth/continuous Hyaline Columnar Predominantly viable Normal Normal Normal or nearly normal Normal or nearly normal Doubtful 3 – Mixture, hyaline/fibrocartilage Mixed/columnar-clusters – Increased remodeling – Slight Moderate Mild 2 – Fibrocartilage Clusters Partially viable Bone necrosis/granulation tissue – Moderate Slight Moderate 1 Irregularities discontinuous Fibrous tissue Individual cells/disorganized <10 % viable Detached/fracture/callus at base Abnormal/inappropriate location Abundant None Severe 0
Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as mean ± SEM, and statistical significance between experimental and control values was analyzed by Mann-Whitney U test and paired t test in SPSS, version 18 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). A P value <0.05 was considered as statistically significant.
The comparison of groups is shown in graphs 1 and 2. According to the graph, those columns which are marked with different alphabets are significantly different from each other.
Result
Radiological examination
The mean changes of the scores between weeks 10 to 14 and 14 to 18 were compared and confirmed by a radiologist (graph 1). The differences in scores between weeks of 10 and 14 were increased a little, and their enhancements were not significantly different among various treatment groups. However, during the second 4 weeks, from the weeks of 14 to 18, the enhancement of articular cartilage from radiological aspect was considerable.
According to Fig. 1 a, a triangular radio-opaque dense body was seen at the anterior aspect of the joint cavity. It is suggestive of the remaining loose body. Otherwise, the joint space is preserved which is associated with almost smooth borders of the subchondral bones. And this is suggestive of response to treatment. Fig. 1 a Enhancement (score differences) of osteoarthritis of the knee in the animal models after 4 and 8 weeks in each treatment group, obtained from an modified index provided by Boulocher et al. ( ). Comparison of the knee X-ray images after 8 weeks of treatment in the injection group ( b ) and control group ( c ). Columns which are marked with different alphabets are significantly different from each other
As it is revealed in Fig. 1 b, considerable narrowing of the joint space was seen; it was associated with subchondral irregularity. Also, sclerosis was seen which is suggestive of poor repair.
Histopathological examination
The histopathological findings of the femoral and tibial articular cartilage at 8 weeks after beginning of the treatment are demonstrated in graph 2 (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 a – h Histopathological score (mean) comparison of prevention, oral treatment, and injection of the Mangifera extract and control group on osteoarthritis of the knee in guinea pigs from a modified index provided by Yanai et al. ( ). Columns labeled with similar characters are significantly different
Although some of the femoral articular surface in group A and D healed and had regular surface, the mean scores were not significantly different among treatment groups.
The hyalinization of the femoral and tibial articular cartilage in the injection group was significantly better than that of the prevention and control groups, respectively. According to the graph, those columns labeled with similar characters were significantly different.
The cell distribution score of the femoral and tibial articular cartilage was not significantly different among different groups except the control group which was significantly lower than others. This means that columnar cells did not form as well as others.
The viable cell population of the femur in the injection group was significantly higher than others. On the other hand, the viable cell population of the tibia was significantly lower in the control group compared to others.
The subchondral bone in the injection group was remodeled more properly compared with prevention and oral treatment groups which revealed necrotic areas.
The score of the cartilage mineralization was significantly different among injection, oral treatment, and prevention group and control. All samples from the control group had abnormal mineralization under histopathological evaluation (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 In comparison with the control group ( a , b ), the defect in the injected group ( c , d ) was repaired with smooth and continuous auricular surface with columnar cell distribution. The surface in the control group had irregularity, and the cells were arranged in clusters (H&E ×100), (Toloiden blue ×100)
Overall, the pathologic findings revealed the better healing of both femoral and tibial surfaces in the treatment group.
Discussion
The current medications for OA are mostly symptom therapy, and it does not have a curative approach (Kang et al. ). Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and corticosteroids are the first choices in order to reduce joint inflammation and pain (Altman ; Argoff and Gloth ). However, the chronic consumption of these medications is limited by its side effects on the gastrointestinal system, such as nausea (Gargallo et al. ; O’Neil et al. ).
The main pathophysiology of OA is the progressive destruction of the cartilage which leads to joint dysfunction. The destruction of articular cartilage in OA is caused by two pathways: intrinsic pathway by which chondrocytes degrade the cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) and extrinsic pathway by which cells or tissues other than chondrocytes, such as inflamed synovium, pannus tissue, and infiltrated inflammatory cells, affect the ECM of cartilage via the synovial fluid (Alam et al. ).
Cyclooxygenase (COX) is an enzyme that is responsible for the formation of prostaglandins, which are involved in inflammatory processes in OA (Lee et al. ). One of the available polyphenols in the Mangifera fruit extract is amentoflavone (biflavone) (Khan et al. ; Roche and Pérez ). This has been identified as a COX inhibitor, as an inhibitor of microsomal lipid peroxidation, and as an inhibitor of degranulation and arachidonic acid production (Sakthivel and Guruvayoorappan ; Woo et al. ; Rathee et al. ).
One of the components which are increased in the joint synovial fluid of the patients with OA is reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS have an important role in pathogenesis of the knee OA (Reed et al. ). These molecules are produced improperly by abnormal metabolism of the chondrocytes. Nitric oxide (NO·) and superoxide anion as (two main ROS radicals of oxygen molecules) could be formed by chondrocytes. These two highly reactive radicals can form other radicals, such as peroxynitrite (ONOO − ) and hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ). It is demonstrated that mechanical pressure could induce the chondrocytes to form free radicals. Here, ROS exceeds the physiological buffering capacity and causes oxidative stress. The excessive formation of free radicals can impair proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and matrix components. They also serve as important intracellular signaling molecules that amplify the inflammatory response. Thus, it is suggested to use antioxidants as remedy in the prevention and treatment of knee OA (Rout et al. ).
Mangifera fruit contains many components with anti-free radical activity such as polyphenols and selenium. Mangiferin as the main polyphenol component of the Mangifera is reported for its antioxidant, immuno-stimulating, and antiviral properties. Thus, Mangifera can have a protective effect against oxidative stresses by neutralizing the high reactive free radicals. In spite of its advantages, mangifera products should be used warily because of its possible allergic reaction in some people (Sareen and Shah ).
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the effect of mangifera extract on animal model of OAK. It was found that the injection of Mangifera can enhance the regeneration of the articular cartilage compared with other forms of its prescription and control groups.
Also, toxicological investigations are needed to be performed. We tried to eliminate the bias of the estimator by recruiting only one radiologist and one pathologist for evaluation of the articular cartilages. Also, we tried to use standard scoring systems for radiological and histopathological assessments in order to make our subjective evaluation measurable. However, the results of our study could be influenced because of its subjective nature.
It seems that mangifera fruit can be regarded as an effective complementary and alternative treatment for OA of the knee.