Introduction
The term cardiocerebral ischemic attack (CCI) was first used in 2010 to describe a concomitant acute ischemic stroke (AIS) and acute myocardial infarction (AMI) [ ]. A previous 5-years series of 2281 consecutive AMI patients who were screened for concurrent AIS within 24 h reported the incidence of CCI as 0.52% [ ]. The incidence was higher (3.7%) in an older study [ ]. It may be as high as 12.7% among geriatric patients, especially if observed for 72 h of AIS [ ].
In CCI, the appropriate therapy is ambiguous, risky and largely dependent on the locations of arterial occlusions. Even in tertiary centers, equipped with advanced endovascular facilities, the ideal sequence and modalities of management remain unclear. For example, in cases with simultaneous AMI and AIS, the correct dose of intravenously administered tissue plasminogen activator (IV-tPA) is a matter of debate. Furthermore, endovascular treatment has its own problems. For instance, if the treatment decision is to initiate with primary percutaneous coronary intervention to salvage the myocardium, the consequently delayed management of the stroke may result in a permanent disability. Conversely, starting with the endovascular intervention for cerebral vascular occlusion may have devastating consequences if the patient becomes hypotensive or develops a serious arrhythmia. In CCI, the narrow therapeutic time-window, coupled with the complexity of management, puts immense pressure on the treating physician.
Part of the challenge also lies in the different pathogenesis of occlusion in the cerebral and cardiac vascular beds. Acute cerebral occlusions causing AIS are more heterogeneous in nature, comprising of embolic thrombi of arterial and cardiac origin in addition to in-situ atherosclerosis with supervening thrombosis. Whereas acute coronary occlusions are more often due to atherosclerotic plaques and the overlying thrombus [ , ]. Furthermore, Cerebral vessels are more fragile than the coronary arteries, thus more prone to complications from the mechanical energies exerted by various endovascular devices. Additionally, AIS patients are more prone to the hemorrhagic complications associated with fibrinolytic therapy as well as early initiation of antithrombotic agents.
We present the management approach in five illustrative cases of CCI.
Illustrative cases
Patient 1
A 45-year-old man, known to have hypertension and dyslipidemia, was admitted because of decreased effort tolerance for 2 months. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a left ventricular thrombus and reduced (30%) left ventricular ejection fraction (Fig. 1 a). His blood pressure was 84/60 mmHg. Low molecular weighted heparin and warfarin were started, but he developed chest pain on the same day. Electrocadiogram (ECG) revealed new T-wave inversion in lateral leads and Troponin-I was elevated (Fig. 1 b). This was followed by sudden onset of left hemiplegia with visual neglect. IV tPA could not be administered due to the anticoagulation and a decision was made to treat the heart vessels before the brain in view of the low EF and hypotension. Coronary angiogram showed a severe stenosis of proximal left anterior descending artery, for which a drug eluting stent was deployed (Fig. 1 c). The subsequent cerebral angiogram revealed a right internal carotid artery occlusion, which was recanalised with penumbra device (Fig. 1 d). The repeat computerized tomographic (CT) scan of the brain revealed a small right basal ganglia infarct with hemorrhagic conversion. He achieved a functional status of modified Rankin score 3-points at 3-month follow up (Table 1 ).
Fig. 1 a Echocardiogram showing left ventricular thrombus. b electrocardiogram showing T-wave inversion in the lateral leads. c coronary angiogram showing proximal left anterior descending stenosis pre-and-post percutaneous coronary intervention. d cerebral angiogram showing right internal carotid artery occlusion pre-and-post recanalization
Table 1 Summary of patients’ demographics, investigations and treatment modality Patient 1 Patient 2 Patient 3 Patient 4 Patient 5 Age in years 45 53 71 55 57 Gender Male Male Female Male Male ECG and Echocardiography findings T-wave inversions, EF 30%, LV thrombus ST-elevations in V2-V5. No echo performed ST-depression in inferior leads. EF 55%, LV thrombus T-wave inversions V4-V6. No echo performed T-wave inversions V4-V6. No echo performed NIHSS at onset 16 23 27 18 16 Cerebral occlusion Right ICA occlusion Left proximal MCA occlusion PCA occlusion Left proximal MCA occlusion Left proximal MCA Occlusion Modality of treatment PCI-stenting of pLAD followed by penumbra aspiration of ICA thrombus PCI-stenting of mLAD followed by embolectomy of MCA with solitare device Cerebral embolectomy with Solitare device followed by PCI with stenting of the mLAD and pLAD IV tPA started at 0.9 mg/Kg dose IV tPA started at 0.9 mg/Kg dose Reason for choice of txt modality Low ejection fraction and low BP-coronary intervention was performed first Refractory hypertension and on-site availability of cardiologist Cerebral embolectomy first because of NSTEMI. Severity of symptoms attributable to basilar occlusion Simultaneous treatment of both heart and brain with IV tPA Simultaneous treatment of both heart and brain with IV tPA mRS at 3-months 3 5 6 1 1 EF ejection fraction, LV left ventricle, ICA internal carotid artery, MCA middle cerebral artery, PCA posterior cerebral artery, pLAD proximal left anterior descending branch, mLAD mid- left anterior descending branch, Solitare device stentretriver device, mRS modified Rankin scale
Patient 2
A 53-year-old man, on regular medications for diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia, suddenly stopped his car, and could not walk or talk. Upon arrival to the hospital, he was noted to have right hemiplegia and global aphasia. Cardiac monitoring revealed a new onset fast atrial fibrillation. His blood pressure was 230/130 mmHg. The aphasia rendered him unable to describe any chest pain but his ECG showed ST-elevation in anterior leads while troponins were elevated. (Fig. 2 a) An urgent CT angiography showed an occlusion of the left middle cerebral artery (MCA). IV-tPA was not administered due to the refractory high blood pressure and to a lesser extent, the previously known occipital tricholemmal tumor.
Fig. 2 a Electrocardiogram showed ST elevation in leads V2–V5. b coronary angiogram showing mLAD occlusion. c cerebral angiography showing left middle cerebral artery M1 occlusion and post treatment recanalization. d non-contrast CT showing final left middle cerebral artery infarct
A decision was made to treat the heart first due to the refractory hypertension and the presence of interventional cardiologist on-site while the interventional neuro-radiologist was being activated. Coronary angiogram revealed a severe occlusion of left anterior descending artery, which required a bare metal stenting (Fig. 2 b). Subsequently, he underwent an endovascular embolectomy with a stentretreiver (Fig. 2 c). A repeat brain CT scan on the following day revealed a left MCA infarct (Fig. 2 d). At 3 months, he was wheelchair bound with expressive aphasia.
Patient 3
A 71-year-old female, with no previous cardiovascular risk factors, was brought to the emergency department with decreased level of consciousness, left hemiplegia and repeated vomiting, at 5 h since the onset of symptoms. Physical examination showed a drowsy patient with blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg and unequal pupils (left 5 mm, right 3 mm). Her Glasgow coma scale was 6-points. She was intubated for airway protection. CT-angiogram of the brain showed a thrombus in the right proximal posterior cerebral artery (Fig. 3 a). Her ECG showed ST depression in the inferior leads, serum troponins were elevated and the echocardiogram demonstrated a left ventricular thrombus. IV tPA was not initiated for AIS due to the late arrival. We elected to treat the brain first and she underwent an embolectomy with a solitaire stent retriever, (Fig. 3 b) which was followed by a coronary angiography. She underwent successful stenting for the severe stenosis of proximal and mid left anterior descending artery. (Fig. 3 c) Unfortunately, she suddenly developed pulseless electrical activity and could not be resuscitated.
Fig. 3 a CT-angiogram showing thrombus in the P1 segment. b cerebral angiogram showing vetebrobasilar system pre-and-post embolectomy. c coronary angiogram showing proximal and mid left anterior descending artery stenosis pre-and-post coronary intervention
Patients 4 and 5
These patients were similar in presentation. Both were middle aged male with no past medical history. They presented with right hemiplegia and aphasia due to left proximal MCA occlusions. Both patients’ ECGs showed ST depressions in lateral leads and troponins were raised. IV-tPA was started (AIS doses of 0.9 mg/Kg body-weight) that led to recanalization of the MCA on transcranial Doppler monitoring, with concurrent rapid clinical improvement. Subsequent Cardiac angiograms were unremarkable with ECG changes resolved by day-2. Both patients achieved excellent outcomes of mRS 1 at 3-month follow-up.
Discussion
Our case series demonstrates the complex and debatable issues associated with management of acute CCI. Management of both AIS and AMI is time-sensitive and preferential emergency management of any one of them often poses detrimental issues for the other.
CCI was first described as a simultaneous vascular thrombosis which could be further divided into synchronous (thrombosis of two vessels at the same time) or metachronous (thrombosis of one vessel precedes the other) events [ ]. In the case of metachronous presentation, it is obvious that immediate care will be directed without delay toward the initial event, according to standard practice guidelines (eg, percutaneous coronary intervention in a patient with an initial presentation of ST-elevation AMI). However, in cases of synchronous or nearly synchronous presentation, there are no clear recommendations for ideal management because of the rarity of this scenario.
Mechanism of CCI
Several mechanisms operate in the pathogenesis of CCI. First, a pre-existing hypokinetic segment of the myocardium can develop a thrombus that can simultaneously embolise to the cerebral and coronary arteries [ ]. In a similar fashion, a deep vein thrombosis can embolise paradoxically through the patent foramen ovale and occlude the coronary and cerebral arteries concurrently [ , ]. Atrial fibrillation is another known cause for multiple systemic embolization. However, CCI is uncommon because the coronary ostiums inside the sinuses of valsava protect the coronary arteries from the aortic stream [ , ].
Other less common causes include dissection of the ascending aorta involving the ostium and stretching into the carotid arteries [ , ]. In some patients, AMI can be the primary event, which results in hypotension and severe ischemic injury to the brain [ ]. Another interesting situation is the AIS involving the insular cortex, which is more commonly associated with arrhythmias and subsequently myocardial ischemia [ ].
Diagnostic approach to concurrent CCI
In view of the close pathophysiological links between AMI and AIS [ ], the current guidelines by the American Heart Association recommend cardiac monitoring for at least the first 24 h after AIS [ ]. Similarly the European Stroke Initiative suggests that every AIS patient should have an ECG and cardiac rhythm monitoring [ ]. However, routine measurement or monitoring of cardiac enzymes is not clearly advocated by any major management guideline for AIS.
Several factors might lead to delay in the diagnosis of AMI in some AIS patients due to aphasia and reduced pain perception [ ]. Moreover, some ECG changes are commonly seen in patients with AIS, making ECG interpretation challenging. However, it is important to note that ST-segment elevation occurs in only 6% of AIS patients, highlighting the importance of not dismissing this serious ECG finding [ ]. Similarly, it might be difficult to diagnose AIS in during the immediate post-intervention phase of AMI, especially in sedated patients [ ].
Treatment modalities
IV-tPA for simultaneous treatment of cardiac and cerebral occlusions
It is preferable to initiate a treatment modality that can benefit both AMI and AIS. IV-tPA remains the only thrombolytic agent that has been approved for use in both conditions. This approach worked satisfactorily in two patients in our series (case 4 and 5). IV-tPA is superior to placebo in ST-elevation AMI when used early after the symptom onset [ ]. However most guidelines state AMI within previous 3-months as a relative contraindication to IV-tPA [ , , ]. Nonetheless, IV-tPA was administered in AIS patients with AMI in the Safe Implementation of Thrombolysis in Stroke-Monitoring Study (SITS-MOST) registry [ ] and the Simplified Management of Acute Stroke study [ ] and showed comparable outcomes in patients with and without AMI.
A major roadblock is the different dosage and duration of administration of IV-tPA between coronary and cerebral occlusions. A higher dose is recommended for the use of IV-tPA in AMI as compared to AIS (for example, a 70-kg patient would require 100 mg tPA for AMI while only 63 mg for AIS!). There is no recommendation for the IV-tPA dose in CCI. Several trials for AIS have consistently shown increased risk of symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage if IV-tPA is used in a higher than the currently recommended dose [ , , , , ].
Development of myocardial rupture and hemopericardium are considered dreaded complications with IV-tPA [ ] and their incidence is reported to be 1–8% in various series of thrombolyzed AMI patients [ , , , ]. Nevertheless, it is rare and there have been only 4 published reports since the licensing of IV-tPA in 2006 [ , , , ]. Conversely, the recommended IV-tPA dose for AIS may be considered under-dosing for the coronary thrombi.
In the future, Tenecteplase may become the intravenous modality of choice for CCI as it has been recently shown to have better efficacy than IV-tPA, without any increased hemorrhagic complications, in both AIS and AMI [ ]. However, a unified dose for AMI and AIS might be difficult to reconcile. (Supplemental Material) Interestingly, even in the current tenecteplase AIS studies, “a clinical presentation suggestive of AMI or post-MI pericarditis” is listed as an exclusion criterion [ ].
Angioplasty and thrombectomy devices for AMI and AIS
An advantage of a combined endovascular approach is the ability to visualize occlusion of coronary as well as the cerebral vasculature to ensure a true CCI. Ischemia-like ECG changes and cardiac enzyme elevation due to neurologically mediated myocardial injury is often seen in AIS patients mimic an acute coronary syndrome [ ].
Another benefit of combined endovascular therapy is the effectiveness in proximal arterial occlusions of the brain. AIS caused by the proximal arterial occlusion may carry up to 55% risk of mortality when treated by IV-tPA. These occlusions can be effectively revascularized by endovascular therapy in up to 95% of patients [ , ]. Even in simultaneous tandem intracranial artery occlusions, recanalization may be achieved in 61% of patients, and with reduced mortality rate (13.6%) and favorable outcome.
One of the major differences between AMI and AIS lies in the intensity of adjuvant antithrombotic therapy after acute reperfusion strategy. Although antithrombotic therapy in acute MI is usually based on full-dose parenteral anticoagulation plus dual (or sometimes even triple) antiplatelet therapy, such multidrug strategy in AIS can be disastrous due to a high bleeding risk. None of the clinical trial for endovascular treatment of AIS tested the role of adjuvant antithrombotic therapies during or immediately after the procedure.
Combined approach
A feasible combined option is to administer the stroke dose of IV-tPA to treat the AIS (0.9 mg/kg) and then to proceed to percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty and stenting (PTCAS), if indicated, for the acute coronary event. After which a cerebral angiogram can be performed to determine if clot retrevial is needed. Pretreatment with IV-tPA does not decrease the coronary benefit of PTCAS [ , ]. Although, there is a risk of worsening of AIS due to delayed recanalization as well as PCI related new AIS, cardiac catheter interventions are performed quite fast and while IV-tPA is running. it is reasonable to allow IV-tPA to have a chance to act on the intracranial clot while the heart is treated by PCI. On the other hand, in patients with contraindications to IV-tPA, the treating physicians must decide which circulatory system to treat first. We propose a reasonable decision tree based on the currently available evidence (Supplemental Material).
With the benefit of hindsight, we can now see that patient 1 could have been treated for the ICA occlusion first, especially since he did not suffer from ST-elevation AMI. While for patient 2, treating the cardiac condition first might have contributed to the delay in reperfusion of the brain and caused worse outcome.
Conclusion
Cardiocerebral infarction is an uncommon and devastating clinical scenario. Further research in this field is logistically very difficult to perform due to its given rarity. We propose a reasonable treatment algorithm based on the current literature for an optimal management of this dreaded condition.