Introduction
The monoclonal antibody ipilimumab directed against the cytotoxic-T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) was the first approved immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI). After EU-approval in 2011, further developments led to the EU-approval of PD-1-antibodies in 2015 and of the combination ipilimumab plus nivolumab in 2016. Due to their higher efficacy, PD-1-antibodies or the combination of nivolumab plus ipilimumab replaced ipilimumab monotherapy in the front-line treatment of metastatic melanoma. However, all checkpoint inhibitors induce autoimmune side effects. Thus, the question remains how to treat patients with pre-existing autoimmune disease, since clinical studies regularly excluded these patients, and therefore, experience is limited.
Prevalence of autoimmune comorbidities is high and increases over time in patients with newly diagnosed metastatic melanoma. Among 12 028 US-patients with newly-diagnosed metastatic melanoma, the prevalence rate for autoimmune diseases increased 1.7-fold from 17.1% in 2004 to 28.3% in 2014 ( p < 0.001) [ ]. Patients with a non-metastasized melanoma had a lower prevalence rate of 11.7% in 2004 and 19.8% in 2014, in the general population the rate was 7.9% in 2004 and 9.2% in 2014. Female sex, bone- or gastrointestinal metastasis, and concurrent severe comorbidities were associated with higher risk of autoimmune disorders [ ].
Recent publications analyzed case series of patients with melanoma and pre-existing AD undergoing treatment with ipilimumab [ ] or PD-1- antibodies [ , ], but data are still scarce.
The typical toxicities of ipilimumab, the so-called irAEs, can manifest in any organ system [ ] but most frequently comprise autoimmune colitis, hepatitis, dermatitis, endocrinopathies (e.g., hypophysitis, hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism), neuropathies, and others [ ]. After the approval of ipilimumab, there was only a restrained use in patients with pre-existing AD due to concerns of exacerbating the underlying disorder or inducing severe irAEs.
Some case reports postulate that ipilimumab is safe in this patient collective [ , , ]. A recent publication from Johnson and co-workers [ ] reported on a series of 30 patients from Australia, Europe and the United States and analyzed the toxicity during ipilimumab treatment and the prevalence of treatment-related new autoimmune side effects in patients with pre-existing AD.
In our study, we retrospectively analyzed patients who were treated with ipilimumab and had various pre-existing AD. We collected clinical data from 41 patients treated at 14 German skin cancer centers, and characterized the safety (incidence and severity of irAEs and autoimmune exacerbations of their underlying disease) and response rates of ipilimumab in this setting.
Methods
Patients
Our study was a retrospective multicenter study initiated by the German Dermatologic Cooperative Oncology Group (DeCOG, committee “side effect management”). Ethics approval for the data collection was obtained from the Ethics committee of Hannover Medical School (vote number 1612). The inclusion criteria for eligible patients were the following: unresectable metastatic melanoma, therapy with ipilimumab, pre-existing autoimmune disorder.
Pre-existing AD included endocrine disorders (unspecified autoimmune thyroiditis, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis), rheumatoid disorders (rheumatoid arthritis/spondylitis ankylosans/ sarcoidosis/CREST-syndrome (Calcinosis cutis-Raynaud phenomenon-Esophageal Dysmotility-Sclerodactyly-Telangiectasia-syndrome), Churg-Strauss-syndrome), dermatologic diseases (psoriasis/lichen planus/ autoimmune urticaria), chronic inflammatory bowel diseases (Crohn’s disease/ulcerative colitis), and neurological diseases [multiple sclerosis, longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis (LETM)]. Rare conditions like pancreatitis were seen in one patient.
Data acquisition
The 14 skin cancer centers retrospectively searched their databases for eligible patients. We gained the data of interest by a standardized form including demographics (age, sex), melanoma characteristics (previous therapies, stage of disease according to the valid AJCC (American Joint Committee of Cancer) classification at that time [ ]), ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group) performance status, LDH level, details of the applied ipilimumab therapy (date of therapy start and best response according to RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors) 1.1 criteria [ ] and details on the autoimmune disease (type, onset, treatment, development during ipilimumab treatment). IrAEs were graded according to Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.03 [ ].
Results
Patients
Of 41 patients from 14 centers treated with ipilimumab (regular dose of 3 mg/kg every 3 weeks), 15 patients had autoimmune thyroiditis (unspecified autoimmune thyroiditis n = 10, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis n = 5), 11 had rheumatoid disorders (rheumatoid arthritis n = 6, spondylitis ankylosans n = 3, CREST-syndrome n = 1, Churg-Strauss-syndrome n = 1), 9 had dermatologic disorders (psoriasis n = 7, lichen planus n = 1, autoimmune-urticaria n = 2), 3 had inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease n = 1, ulcerative colitis n = 2), 2 had sarcoidosis, 2 had neurological disorders [multiple sclerosis, longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis (LETM)], 1 had pancreatitis. 3 out of 41 had two AD (thyroiditis plus spondylarthritis, lichen planus plus urticaria, psoriasis vulgaris plus spondylitis ankylosans) (Tables 1 , 2 ).
Table 1 Patients with exacerbation of pre-existing autoimmune disease Number Preexisting autoimmune disease Treatment before exacerbation/at time of first ipilimumab dose Number of ipilimumab doses Autoimmune exacerbation Treatment after exacerbation Immune-related adverse event Melanoma outcome (best objective response) 1 LETM (longitudinal extensive transverse myelitis), neuromyelitis optica-spectrum-disease Stable condition, no treatment 2 After two doses paraplegia with acute urinary retention treatment stop Systemic steroids, symptomatic treatment None Progressive disease 2 Ulcerative colitis Mesalazine 2 After two doses Colitis grade 3 Systemic steroids Stabilization after end of treatment with ipilimumab None Progressive disease 3 Rheumatoid arthritis At first leflunomide, then prednisone until start of ipilimumab 2 After the 1st dose Arthritis in finger, hand and shoulder joints Treatment continued until 2nd dose Prednisone pulse therapy, 60 mg baseline therapy with hydroxychloroquine 200 mg 0-0-1 and sulfasalazine 500 mg None Progressive disease 4 Seronegative rheumatoid arthritis Prednisone 5 mg 4 After first and more severely after second dose Increased morning stiffness Prednisone pulse therapy 20 mg, prednisone 5 mg Colitis grade 2 Progressive disease 5 Hashimoto’s thyroiditis None 2 After two doses Thyrotoxicosis beta-blocker, thiamazole Colitis grade 3 Systemic steroids Progressive disease 6 Autoimmune urticaria Antihistamines as needed 4 After one dose: increased urticaria Unknown Hypophysitis with partial and ongoing insufficiency, maculopapular exanthema grade 1 Treatment unknown Partial remission, no subsequent therapy 7 Rheumatoid arthritis 5 mg prednisone 3 After second dose Joint pain, myalgia after three infusions Increased joint treatment stop Increased steroid dose None Clinically progressive disease, patient died before re-staging 8 Rheumatoid arthritis Symptomatic treatment, pain management 2 After two doses, increase in symptoms Systemic steroids None Progressive disease 9 Unspecified thyroiditis Thyroxine substitution, 100 µg/d 4 After three doses, Thyroid-stimulating-hormone suppression Hyperthyroidism was treated with thiamazol 6 weeks and propranolol hydrochloride, followed by permanent substitution with l-thyroxine for hypothyroidism None Progressive disease after four doses, follow-up therapy with nivolumab, again exacerbation with thyreopathy 10 CREST-syndrome None 4 Exacerbation 7–8 months after end of therapy Increase in symptoms, whole-body pain Corticosteroids Colitis grade 3 hypophysitis grade 3 Mixed response, therapy ended due to colitis and suspected hypophysitis 11 Psoriasis vulgaris Urea-containing cream, calcipotriol/bethametasone cream 3 after three doses, slight worsening of psoriasis Mometasone cream, calcipotriol/bethametasone cream Psoriasis vulgaris did not recover after treatment stop Colitis grade 2–3 maculopapular exanthema grade 1 One time infliximab and steroids treatment ended due to colitis Partial response 12 Psoriasis vulgaris with arthritis Prednisone 5 mg 3x/week and topical calcipotriol 4 After second dose, discreet worsening of condition no joint paint Increase in arthritis 2 years after end of therapy Baseline therapy continued Maculopapular exanthema grade 1 Mixed response
Table 2 Patients without exacerbation of pre-existing autoimmune disease Number Preexisting autoimmune disease Treatment at time of first ipilimumab dose Number of ipilimumab doses Immune-related adverse event Melanoma outcome 1 Hashimotos’ thyroiditis None 4 None Progressive disease 2 Unspecified thyroiditis None 4 None Progressive disease 3 (1) psoriasis vulgaris (2) Spondylitis ankylosans Methotrexate, prednisone, etanercept 4 None Progressive disease 4 Ulcerative colitis None 4 None Progressive disease 5 (1) Seronegative spondylarthritis (2) Unspecified thyroiditis (1) No therapy (2) Thyroxine substitution 4 None Progressive disease 6 Rheumatoid arthritis Prednisolone, sulfasalazine, hydroxychloroquine, non–steroidal antiinflammatory drugs 4 None Progressive disease 7 Unspecified thyroiditis Thyroidectomy, thyroxine substitution 4 Vitiligo Mixed response 8 Sarcoidosis None 4 None Progressive disease 9 Hashimotos’ thyroiditis Thyroxine substitution 4 None Progressive disease 10 Hashimotos’ thyroiditis Thyroxine substitution 4 None Progressive disease 11 Hashimotos’ thyroiditis Thyroxine substitution 4 Pruritus, maculopapular exanthema grade 1—therapy unknown Progressive disease 12 Psoriasis vulgaris Topical therapy 4 None Progressive disease 13 Psoriasis vulgaris Topical therapy 4 None Complete remission 14 Psoriasis vulgaris Topical therapy 4 None Progressive disease 15 Churg-Strauss-syndrome Azathioprine (discontinued before start of treatment), prednisone 5 mg/d 3 Colitis grade 3 Systemic steroids Treatment discontinued due to colitis Mixed response 16 Crohn’s disease Mesalazine 3 Pruritus grade 3, maculopapular exanthema grade 2 Systemic steroids Progressive disease 17 Psoriasis vulgaris Topical therapy 4 None Progressive disease 18 Pancreatitis Systemic steroids 4 None Partial remission 19 Spondylitis ankylosans None 4 None Progressive disease 20 Unspecified thyroiditis Thyroxine substitution 4 None Progressive disease 21 Unspecified thyroiditis Thyroxine substitution 4 None Progressive disease 22 Unspecified thyroiditis None 4 Colitis grade 3 Systemic steroids Progressive disease 23 Unspecified thyroiditis Thyroxine substitution 4 colitis grade 2—symptomatic treatment: loperamide Progressive disease 24 Unspecified thyroiditis Thyroxine substitution 4 None Progressive disease 25 Multiple sclerosis None 4 None Progressive disease 26 Unspecified thyroiditis None 3 None Progressive disease 27 Seronegative rheumatoid arthritis Prednisone, 5 mg/day 4 None Progressive disease 28 Sarcoidosis None 3 None Progressive disease 29 (1) Lichen planus follicularis (2) Autoimmune urticaria (1) Topical steroids (2) Cetirizine 4 None Partial remission
The median age was 61 years (range 34–78 years) and 18 were male (43.9%) and 23 female (56.1%). The median time interval of diagnosis of AD and start of ipilimumab treatment was 9 years (range 4–59 months). At the time of ipilimumab initiation, 11 were actively receiving at least one systemic immunosuppressive therapy. The majority of patients (n = 8) received a low-dose prednisone therapy, 1 patient received methotrexate and etanercept and 3 patients mesalazine/sulfasalazine (Tables 1 , 2 ).
Evaluation of pre-existing autoimmune disorder
12 patients (29.2%, Table 1 ) experienced a worsening of their pre-existing AD. This flare occurred most frequently in patients with rheumatological disorders (5/9 patients with spondylitis ankylosans or rheumatoid arthritis, 55.5%), followed by neurological diseases (1/2 patients, 50%), inflammatory dermatological diseases (3/9 patients, 33%), chronic inflammatory bowel disease (1/3 patients, 33%) and thyroid dysfunction (2/15 patients, 13.3%).
5 out of 12 patients (41.6%) with exacerbation of their pre-existing autoimmune disease were treated with immunosuppressive drugs at initiation of ipilimumab in contrast to 6 out of 29 patients (20.6%) without exacerbation. 7 out of 12 patients (58.3%) with exacerbation did not complete 4 ipilimumab doses in total. In contrast, only 5 out of 29 patients (17.2%) without exacerbation did not complete 4 doses of ipilimumab.
Autoimmune thyroiditis
Autoimmune thyroiditis was the most common pre-existing AD. Due to the retrospective design of our study, is was difficult to ascertain the specific subgroup of autoimmunity. In ten patients, this was not clearly possible, therefore, the disease was designated “unspecified thyroiditis”, five patients had Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Two of these 15 patients developed a flare of the thyroiditis, resulting in hyperthyroidism. One female patient (Table 1 , number 9) had a pre-existing Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and received 100 µg/day l-thyroxine as substitution at initiation of ipilimumab therapy. After three ipilimumab doses, hyperthyroidism was observed and was treated with thiamazole and beta blockers for 6 weeks, followed by permanent substitution with l-thyroxine for hypothyroidism. The patient completed all four doses of ipilimumab. Interestingly, the patient was later treated with nivolumab and then developed a severe hypothyreosis that required intravenous high-dose l-thyroxine. The second patient (Table 1 , number 5) was male and had an unspecified autoimmune thyroiditis with a subclinical hyperthyreosis at the initiation of ipilimumab. After two ipilimumab doses, he developed a thyreotoxic crisis, stopped treatment with ipilimumab and was treated with beta blockers and thiamazole.
Neurological disorders
One of our patients (Table 1 , number 1) with a pre-existing neuromyelitis optica developed an aggravation of her disease, resulting in a longitudinal extensive myelitis (LETM) after two doses of ipilimumab with a paraplegia and acute urinary retention. This patient was treated with steroids and symptomatically (Table 1 , number 1); finally she had progressive melanoma disease. Another patient with a pre-existing multiple sclerosis with no concurrent treatment at the start of ipilimumab did not exacerbate but showed progressive disease (Table 2 , number 25).
Chronic inflammatory bowel disease
Autoimmune colitis is a hazardous and dangerous ipilimumab-induced side effect, and therefore, the three patients with inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis) were of particular clinical interest. One patient with Crohn’s disease (Table 2 , number 16) who was stable with mesalazine treatment did not show any worsening during ipilimumab treatment. This patient developed pruritus and exanthema that was controlled by systemic steroids. Unfortunately, he showed a progressive disease after four infusions of ipilimumab. Two patients suffered from ulcerative colitis for 15 years (Table 2 , number 4) and 29 years (Table 1 , number 2, mesalazine at baseline). The first patient (Table 2 , number 4) did not experience a flare but had progressive disease. The second patient (Table 1 , number 2) presented with a grade 3 colitis and also progressive disease. Of course, it is clinically not possible to differentiate between a flare of a pre-existing chronic inflammatory bowel disease and autoimmune colitis induced by ipilimumab. In this case, we do not have a histology available to evaluate the origin of the colitis.
Evaluation of additional irAE
Treatment-related irAEs were noted in 12 of the 41 patients (29.2%) (Tables 1 , 2 ). These included colitis ( n = 7), hypophysitis ( n = 1), exanthema ( n = 5), and vitiligo ( n = 1). The standard management with corticosteroids (dosage at 1 mg/kg followed by a slow taper over 4 weeks) was usually used in case of colitis. No patient died of irAEs or autoimmune exacerbations. Additional irAEs occurred in 6 of the 12 patients with flare of the preexisting autoimmunity (50%) and were also manageable according to established algorithms mostly with corticosteroids or with the addition of infliximab in one patient (Table 1 , number 11). There was a trend for a higher rate of additional irAEs in exacerbated patients. Only 6 out of 29 patients (20.6%) without an exacerbation of their underlying autoimmune disease developed an additional irAE compared to 6 out of 12 (50%, p = 0.06) of patients with exacerbation of their autoimmune disease. In 23 patients (56%), neither autoimmune flares nor irAEs were observed.
Efficacy
Concerning their advanced melanoma, five patients showed an objective response (12.1%). These patients had psoriasis ( n = 2), lichen planus follicularis, autoimmune urticaria or pancreatitis, respectively. The patients demonstrating a treatment benefit were mostly not treated with immunosuppressants, only one patient with pancreatitis (Table 2 , number 18) was treated with low-dose prednisone. No response was seen in the patient (spondylitis ankylosans) with more intense immune-suppressive medication (high-dose prednisone, methotrexate, etanercept; patient 3, Table 2 ). In direct comparison, patients undergoing immunosuppression had a similar response rate of 9% ( n = 1) compared to 13.3% without immunosuppression ( n = 4). Due to the low patient numbers, a final evaluation of this question is not possible and needs further analysis.
16.6% of the patients with a flare of their underlying disease had an objective response compared to 10.3% of the patient without flare.
Discussion
To date, our experience with patients with pre-existing AD and immuncheckpoint blockade is limited. So far, only few case series have been published for ipilimumab [ ] and later also for PD1-antibodies [ , , ].
In comparison to a previous case series from Johnson et al. consisting of 30 patients treated with ipilimumab and pre-existing AD [ ], our patient collective was similar in terms of age and gender. The flare rate was similar in the Johnson study with 27% exacerbations compared to 29.2% in our study. The spectrum of underlying diseases in the Johnson series comprised similar AD-like chronic inflammatory bowel diseases, dermatologic diseases, neurologic diseases and thyroid disorders. The rate of patients on immunosuppressive medication at the start of ipilimumab was 36% in contrast to 26.8% in our case series. In both groups, predominantly, a moderate immunosuppression/ modulation with steroids or hydroxychloroquine was used. Specific conditions seem to exacerbate more frequently. Although the number of patients is limited, our analysis showed that rheumatological disorders seem to exacerbate more frequently compared with inflammatory dermatological diseases, inflammatory bowel disease or thyroiditis. This was consistent with the series from Johnson (5/6, 88.3% of patients with rheumatological disorders exacerbated, 1/2, 50% with inflammatory bowel disease, 1/4, 25% with inflammatory dermatological diseases).
With regard to pre-existing autoimmune thyroiditis, this AD is often burnt out so this would not really be a relevant risk. In our series, it was not easy to differentiate retrospectively between the different types of thyroiditis, making a comparison of different subtypes of thyroiditis such as Hashimoto’s or Graves’disease difficult. The two patients in our series who flared developed hyperthyroidism managed with thyreostatic drugs and beta blockers.
Since autoimmune colitis is a common side effect of ICI treatment, preexisting chronic inflammatory bowel disease might predispose to an autoimmune colitis or a flare by an immuncheckpoint inhibitor. However, the flare rates (1/6 patients in Johnson 2016, 0/6 patients in Menzies 2016; 1/3 patients in our case series) are rather low. Interestingly, also an ipilimumab induced autoimmune colitis does not seem to exacerbate under subsequent PD1-antibody treatment frequently [ ]. Only 3–4% of all ipilimumab induced irAEs seem to flare during subsequent PD1-antibody treatment more frequently [ , ]. A clinically relevant question could be how to differentiate between a flare of a pre-existing AD and a typical ipilimumab induced side effect. One of our two patients who suffered from ulcerative colitis developed after two doses of ipilimumab a worsening of colitis symptoms. This colitis has been stable under mesalazine before the start of ipilimumab. Since colitis is a common irAE during ipilimumab treatment, in this particular case, it is difficult to differentiate between ipilimumab-triggered irAE or flare of pre-existing ulcerative colitis.
Although uncommon, neurological side effects entail a specific risk for long-term morbidity or mortality if not recognized early [ ]. In our series, the exacerbation of an underlying neuromyelitits optica spectrum disorder to a LETM with severe clinical symptoms deteriorated the quality of life of the patient markedly and this flare was not manageable easily by steroids. In the case series of Johnson 0/2 patients with multiple sclerosis flared. Severe neurological side effects are rarely occurring in about 1% of patients treated with ICI. Transient sensory and motor peripheral neuropathies are the relevant problems; rare cases of autonomic neuropathy, Guillain–Barré syndrome, and myasthenia gravis-type syndrome have been reported [ ]. The outcome of these rare side effects can be fatal for the patients, therefore, it is important to inform the patients about this specific side-effect profile, and patients with pre-existing inflammatory disorders should be treated with ICI very cautiously.
The spectrum of the newly developed irAEs (all grades) in 29.2% of patients was in an expected range (Tables 1 , 2 ). This compares nicely with a rate of 33% of grade 3–5 newly developed irAEs in the Johnson series. Only 20.6% of patients without an exacerbation of their underlying AD developed an additional irAE compared to 50% ( p = 0.06) of patients with exacerbation of their pre-existing AD. Why additional irAEs occurred more often in patients with flare of the pre-existing AD can only be speculated. One hypothesis is that these patients had a more intensely stimulated immune system.
23 of our patients (56%) had neither a worsening of their pre-existing AD nor additional irAEs. This data is similar to the case series from Johnson and co-authors (50%, [ ]), so in general, a patient with a pre-existing AD does not necessarily need to develop a flare or an additional irAE.
The current treatment schedule in our national guideline does not foresee the first-line use of ipilimumab monotherapy. Currently, our national guideline recommends a PD1-antibody monotherapy for a large patient cohort in the first-line situation. Alternatively, ipilimumab is used in combination with a PD1-antibody. Therefore, the question, if PD1-antibodies may also have a comparable risk of an exacerbation of a pre-existing AD, is very relevant. A patient series of 52 patients with AD undergoing anti PD1-therapy showed a flare of AD requiring immunosuppression in 20 (38%) patients, including 7 out of 13 with rheumatoid arthritis, 3 out of 3 with polymyalgia rheumatica, 2/2 with Sjogren’s syndrome, 2/2 with immune thrombocytopenic purpura and 3/8 with psoriasis [ ]. No patients with gastrointestinal ( n = 6) or neurological diseases ( n = 5) flared [ ]. 15 (29%) patients developed other irAEs. Another case series [ ] comprised a total of 41 patients that received either nivolumab ( n = 21) or pembrolizumab ( n = 20). 8 out of 19 (42.1%) patients with AD before PD-1 antibody had a flare of their pre-existing AD, that was usually controlled by steroids. 3/19 (15.8%) patients had other irAEs. In patients with ipilimumab-triggered irAEs, a flare was observed in 0/13 patients with colitis, 1/10 with hypophysitis, 2/3 with thyroiditis, and 0/1 with hepatitis, respectively. 5/24 patients suffered from irAE unrelated to the ipilimumab-triggered irAE.
We know already, that ipilimumab is the most responsible agent for some of the irAEs (colitis, hypophysitis) induced by ICI if used as a combinational partner. Thus, it will be very interesting to gain data for the combination in this patient cohort with pre-existing autoimmunity.
With regard to efficacy, the response rate of 12.1% in our partially immunosuppressed patient population was in an order of magnitude of clinical trials using ipilimumab 3 mg/kg body weight and slightly lower than in the Johnson series (20% response rate) [ ]. Thus, the Johnson series and our case series did show that the response rate in patients with pre-existing AD is not decreased. We know already that patients who were treated with steroids for irAEs or need to terminate ICI therapy due to side effects do not necessarily have a worse outcome [ ]. Since our study included mainly patients who were not heavily immunosuppressed, we cannot exclude a negative effect of a more intense immunosuppressive regimen or certain immunosuppressive drugs. The idea that an activation of the immune system that reveals as an autoimmune side effect or perhaps as a flare of a pre-existing AD may be also be in conjunction with a treatment benefit has often been raised in the past.
Some large studies showed a correlation between autoimmune side-effects and treatment outcome [ , , , ], with response rates of 26% in patients with irAEs induced by ipilimumab, compared to 2% in patients without these side effects [ ]. The severity of these side effects correlate with the treatment efficacy: 22% of patients with grade 1–2 adverse events demonstrated a response but 28% of patients who had grade 3–4 toxicity. Interestingly, also patients without these irAEs were able to demonstrate a treatment benefit [ ]. This has already been shown in a case series of rare ipilimumab-related side effects that were related to a response rate of 30.9% (21 of 69 patients) and a tumor control rate of 61.8% (42 of 69 patients) [ ].
A trial of 83 patients on pembrolizumab therapy demonstrated that the 35 patients with dermatologic side effects (rash, pruritus, hypopigmentation) had a significantly prolonged progression-free survival compared to patients that did not show these side effects [ ]. This should be interpreted cautiously because especially patients with a longer time on treatment are supposed to develop cutaneous side effects over time, resulting in a “lead time bias”.
In conclusion, we should discuss the pros and cons thoroughly with our patients to gain a real informed consent. Every single patient should be considered carefully in terms of his individual risk and alternative treatment options. Pre-existing autoimmunity is not an absolute contraindication for immune checkpoint blockade. We should take into account if the patient is currently under immunosuppression and discuss the individual expectations and treatment options. Depending from the type, severity and activity of pre-existing AD our recommendation may be different; as we know the differences between, e.g., colitis and rheumatoid disorders how likely an exacerbation may occur.