Introduction
Temporalis muscle flap is an excellent regional flap for head and reconstruction, which is hardly described in literature and rarely practised in oncological resections. Whether this flap is forgotten or forbidden—is an unanswered question. While use of this flap for orbital reconstruction and facial reanimation is familiar to most reconstructive surgeons, less attention has been paid to this highly versatile flap in oncological reconstructions. The muscle has a reliable vascularity, and is classified under Mathes—Nahai type III, with two dominant vascular pedicles—the deep and superficial temporal artery (middle temporal branch) [ ]. The flap can be used as a muscle flap, myofascial flap or rarely as composite flap with underlying bone following skull base and craniofacial resection where use of microvascular flap is not feasible owing to technical and cost constraints. The recipient and donor site morbidity associated with the flap are acceptable.
History of the Temporalis Flap
The temporalis muscle flap was first described by Lentz in 1895 who used it after resection of the condylar neck for temporomandibular joint ankylosis [ ]. Golovine used the flap to repair an orbital exenteration defect. Gilles used the temporalis muscle flap for an external cheek defect in 1920 [ ]. Subsequently, this flap has been described for the reconstruction of defects of the orbital region, the mastoid, maxilla, cranial base and oral cavity. In the oral cavity, the temporalis has been used specifically for reconstructing the palate, retromolar trigone defects [ ]. Following these, many cadaveric dissection studies have been reported, studying the vascular pattern of this flap.
Aims and Objectives
To evaluate the various malignancies for which, after oncological resections, the temporalis flap was used for reconstruction of post excisional defects, in our centre for oncology is the aim of this study.
Materials and Methods
The data from our master case sheets, operation records and cancer data book for the past 12 years (2005–2016) were studied and analysed in detail, to collect data on cases for which temporalis muscle flap was used for reconstruction of defects following resections of various head and neck malignancies. The following data was collected: the location of the tumour, the type of oncological resection that was performed, the area of the defect post resection, donor site morbidity after temporalis flap was harvested, the local flap survival and long-term outcome.
Operative Procedure
The patient is placed in supine position with head turned to the opposite side. The incision is made along the superior temporal line, extending below in front of the tragus (preauricular region). The preauricular incision must be kept close to the tragus (with in 1 cm) to avoid injury to the facial nerve trunk. The scalp flap is raised beyond the temporalis muscle boundaries [ ]. The glistening temporalis fascia is identified, and care is taken to preserve the superficial temporal vessels. The temporalis fascia is incised and dissection is carried out in sub periosteal plane. The dissection is carried down to expose the zygomatic arch, where care is taken to identify and preserve the facial nerve. The temporalis muscle is identified, and dissection is carried out in sub periosteal plane preserving the deep temporal arteries (anterior and posterior branches) [ ]. The muscle is divided at its origin and is rotated under zygomatic arch after its osteotomy and is brought down and sutured to the defect. The donor area is then closed primarily with a drain.
Review of Our Case Series
We have performed 12 cases of temporalis muscle flap so far. Our series included seven cases of maxillary tumours, of which, one is rhabdomyosarcoma of maxilla, one is muco epidermoid carcinoma, five cases are squamous cell carcinomas (one recurrent case), three cases of squamous cell carcinoma of upper alveolus, one case of recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of right ear, one case of basal cell carcinoma left temporozygomatic area with orbital involvement. The applications of this flap in our series were mainly to cover the defects following maxillectomy and alveolar resection. In two cases—total and extended maxillectomy, the muscle was used to cover mainly the orbital floor to prevent sagging of the eye ball. In one case of craniofacial resection, the temporalis muscle was used to cover the post resection-orbital defect by fashioning the muscle as a sling to support the orbital contents and was also used to cover bony defect which was reinforced with T plate and screws. Following lateral temporal bone resection in our series, the temporalis muscle was used to cover the defect of mastoid and auditory canal. Following orbital exenteration in one of our case series for basal cell carcinoma involving the orbit, the muscle was used to cover the orbital defect. All our patients, underwent routine osteotomy of the zygomatic bone to facilitate bringing the flap without undue tension there by achieving adequate length without vascular compromise.
Among the 12 cases of temporalis muscle flap reconstructions performed, seven cases are maxillary tumours, of which, one is rhabdomyosarcoma of maxilla, one is muco epidermoid carcinoma, five cases are squamous cell carcinomas (one recurrent case), three cases of squamous cell carcinoma of upper alveolus, one case of recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of right ear treated with lateral bone resection, one case of basal cell carcinoma left temporozygomatic region involving the left eye. Resections included subtotal maxillectomy (four cases), total maxillectomy (one case), extended maxillectomy (one case), craniofacial resection (one case), palatoalveolar resections in three cases, lateral temporal bone resection in one case, wide excision and left orbital exenteration (one case). Our flap survival rate was 100%. Morbidity in the form of temporal hollowing was present in nine cases (75%), mouth opening difficulty in five patients (41.6%), temporomandibular neuralgia in two patients (16.6%), facial nerve neuropraxia in three cases (25%), facial nerve palsy involving the zygomaticotemporal branch, following craniofacial resection, one patient (8.3%) and donor site minor wound infection in four patients (33.3%) which was managed conservatively. Open image in new window
Discussion
The aim of presenting this series on temporalis flap is to bring out the utility and application of this versatile flap, which can be safely and conveniently used in head and neck reconstructions after major oncological resections. A detailed review of literature, for this, yielded only few case reports and case series that are published so far. Hanasano et al. in their land mark paper published in Laryngoscope, 2001 [ , ] has retrospectively analysed 13 cases of temporalis muscle flap for reconstruction of palate, retromolar trigone defects, and they have concluded that temporalis muscle flap has better aesthetic outcome and is a reliable flap post oncological resections of the head and neck. However, this study has not made much detailed analysis of morbidity, complications and outcome.
The temporalis muscle is a fan shaped muscle which originates from the temporal fossa and the temporal lines and gets inserted into the coronoid process of the mandible. It is classified under Mathes and Nahai type III, based on two dominant vascular pedicles from deep temporal artery (a branch from internal maxillary artery)—anterior and posterior branches and the middle temporal artery (branch from superficial temporal artery) [ ]. The deep temporal vessels supply around 60% of the muscle, and remaining 40% is supplied by middle temporal artery, which can be sacrificed during flap harvesting without compromising the muscle viability [ , ]. The muscle is covered by temporal fascia which has superficial and deep layers, and the muscle lies deep to deep temporal fascia.
Temporalis muscle flap is a versatile flap, which can be used in reconstructions following maxillectomy [ ], palate alveolar resections [ ] and craniofacial resections. The major advantage of this flap is that it is less bulky, has reliable vascularity, with minimal donor site morbidity [ ]. Although microvascular flap has become the order of the day, temporalis muscle flap is an excellent alternative, in major head and neck resections where expertise and technical feasibility to microvascular flaps are not readily available. It has definite advantage over pectoralis major myocutaneous flap or deltopectoral flap which is more bulky and carries significant donor site morbidity as well as recipient site complications. Another advantage of this muscle is that, it has a tough facia which can be used as myofascial flap and as composite flap with the underlying temporal bone following major craniofacial resections. We have used the temporalis muscle flap for various reconstructions like alveolus, palate [ ], orbital floor, defect of mastoid and auditory canal and following craniofacial resection as myofascial flap. An important application of temporalis flap is in orbital reconstruction and filling of orbital cavity following orbital exenteration and resections involving the floor of orbit. We have used, the temporalis muscle to fill the orbital floor defect in a case of rhabdomyosarcoma of maxilla, another case of total maxillectomy where the muscle was used to reconstruct the orbital floor. In yet, another case (Table 1 ), we have used the temporalis muscle which was fashioned as a sling to support the orbital contents following craniofacial resection. This technique is a simple, effective and reliable method of supporting the orbital contents and prevents it from sagging, where micro vascular flap or prosthesis was not feasible due to huge soft tissue defects and techn ical issues (Table 2 ). Table 1 Case description S. no Malignancy (case) No of cases performed Procedure done Defect for which TM was used Average defect size Flap survival/morbidity 1 Squamous cell carcinoma of maxilla 4 Maxillectomy Palate, alveolus 7.54 cm (average of 5) Temporal hollowing—3, mouth opening difficulty—2, facial neuropraxia—1 2 Rhabdomyosarcoma of maxilla 1 Total maxillectomy Orbital defect 5 cm Temporal hollowing, minor wound infection 3 Mucoepidermoid carcinoma of maxilla 1 Total maxillectomy Orbital floor to support eye ball 5.6 cm Temporal hollowing, facial nerve neuropraxia, wound infection, mouth opening difficulty 4 Squamous cell carcinoma of upper alveolus 3 Partial maxillectomy Palatal defect 8.4 cm (average of 3) Temporal hollowing—1, wound infection—1, mouth opening, articulation difficulty—1 5 Recurrent squamous cell carcinoma right ear 1 Lateral temporal bone resection Defect over mastoid and auditory canal 12.96 cm Temporal hollowing, temporomandibular neuralgia, facial nerve neuropraxia (recovered in 3 months), minor wound infection 6 Basal cell carcinoma left temporozygomatic region extending to left orbit 1 Wide excision with left orbital exenteration Temporalis muscle used to fill orbital contents, and cover bone defect. 10.2 cm Temporal hollowing, mouth opening difficulty, TMJ neuralgia 7 Recurrent carcinoma maxilla 1 Craniofacial resection (middle cranial) Temporalis muscle fashioned as sling to support orbital contents The muscle was used as sling to support the orbital contents with bony defect reconstructed with T plate and screws reinforced with the muscle Facial nerve weakness involving the zygomaticotemporal branch, minor wound infection, temporal hollowing Table 2 Showing details of temporalis muscle flap reconstruction in this study Total no of patients who underwent temporalis flap reconstruction (2005–2016)—12 Mean age (in years)—40.2 (range 29–68) Average size of defect—8.78 cm (range 5.43–12.96 cm) Flap survival rate—100%
Yavuz et al., in their retrospective analysis on use of temporalis muscle flap for orbital reconstruction following oncological resections, have reported acceptable cosmetic and functional outcome with use of temporalis muscle to fill the orbital defects. They have also mentioned that use of this muscle did not make any difficulty with monitoring for recurrences.
All the three cases in our series had acceptable cosmesis and functional outcome in terms of preventing the orbital contents from sagging, diplopia and also in terms of cavity obliteration providing soft tissue cover.
The complications (Table 3 ) are acceptable. Nearly 75% had temporal hollowing, which was hidden in hairline. Mouth opening and articulation difficulty was seen in 41.6%, which was managed with physiotherapy and mouth opening exercises and dental advice. Facial nerve neuropraxia was seen in three patients (25%), as a consequence of resection rather than the result of flap harvest. All cases recovered in average time of 3.4 months. There was one case of facial nerve injury involving the zygomaticotemporal branch, following middle craniofacial resection. Our flap survival was 100%. Djae, Li et al., in their retrospective study on complications following temporalis muscle flap, in 39 cases, reported acceptable complications, 100% flap survival. They have reported, complications such as oroantral fistula (14.2%), flap hematoma (11.6%) which were not seen in our series. We have tried to elucidate all the possible complications and outcome in this study which are not reported in detail in other studies in literature. Our cosmetic outcome was in par with other reported studies which are reported till date, with acceptable morbidities. Table 3 Showing complications, morbidity Temporal hollowing—9 (75%) Mouth opening and articulation difficulties—5 (41.6%) Temporomandibular neuralgia—2 (16.6%) Minor wound infections—4 (33.3%) Facial nerve neuropraxia—(25%)—average time to recovery 3.4 months Facial nerve palsy (zygomaticotemporal branch) following craniofacial resection—1 (8.3%)
The contraindications to use of this flap are previous surgeries in scalp, trauma to scalp or previous radiation to the scalp area which jeopardizes the vascularity, gross temporal wasting.
Our aim of presenting this case series is that, temporalis muscle flap in oncological reconstructions is not widely reported, in currently available literature. It is a versatile flap which remains forgotten and underutilized in the armamentarium of an oncosurgeon. It is an excellent alternate option to free flap, as it readily available, easy to perform with very minimal morbidity.
Conclusion
Temporalis muscle flap is an excellent alternative to microvascular flap following various complex head and neck resections like post maxillectomy, orbital reconstructions. The flap is less bulky, provides adequate cover, has a reliable vascularity and easy to harvest with minimal donor site morbidity.