Introduction
Despite major advances in understanding the mechanisms of malignant carcinogenesis, breast cancer is still a leading cause of cancer-related death in women worldwide. In the past decades, genetically engineered mouse models have contributed significantly towards understanding breast cancer development and progression. These include amongst others the widely used MMTV-driven transgenic mouse models, such as MMTV-PyMT or MMTV-Neu, as well as conditional models based on the knockout of tumor-suppressor genes, such as Brca1 , p53, and Cdh1 [ ]. Recently, genetic lineage tracing approaches using conditional fluorescent reporters for the visualization of cell populations of interest have contributed towards our understanding of the origin of breast cancer [ , , ], breast cancer stem cells [ ], metastatic dissemination [ , ] and chemoresistance [ ].
Site-specific recombination systems such as Cre/ loxP and Flp/ Frt are powerful tools for the genetic manipulation of somatic cells in vivo . Briefly, these systems consist of a DNA recombinase and its unique short DNA target sequences. Cre recombinase of bacteriophage P1 recognizes and acts on 34 base pair loxP sites, while Flp recombinase of Saccharomyces cerevisiae specifically recombines 47 base pair Frt sites. Consequently, DNA sequences flanked by two loxP or Frt sites will be deleted upon Cre and Flp-mediated recombination, respectively, if the recognition sites are oriented in the same direction. In case the recognition sites are oriented in opposite directions, the flanked DNA sequence will be inverted. Although in murine models Cre has been initially found more efficient in catalyzing recombination than Flp, temperature-optimized version of Flp (Flpe) and mouse codon-optimized variants of Flpe (Flpo) are now almost as efficient as Cre [ , , ].
To date, conditional breast cancer mouse models and genetic lineage tracing approaches most commonly rely on the widely used Cre/ loxP system. In these models, Cre recombinase mediates excision of DNA to e.g. delete tumor suppressor genes or to remove a STOP cassette that prevents the expression of a fluorescent reporter or an activated oncogene. The choice of the promoter driving Cre expression is essential, as it determines the cell-lineage to be targeted in the mouse.
More recently, different site-specific recombination systems such as Cre/ loxP and/or Flp/ Frt or Dre/ Rox have been combined in order to generate increasingly sophisticated model systems which combine the activation or inactivation of specific genes in a temporal and spatial manner [ , , , , ]. Such dual recombinase-mediated approaches potentially allow to simultaneously target different cell-lineages, such as tumor and stromal cells or to modulate gene expression in the same cell-lineage in a sequential manner. The latter allows for the time-dependent introduction of mutations in tumor cells, for example by using inducible recombinases such as CreER T2 , or for the specific targeting of distinct tumor cell subpopulations in an individual tumor. Thus, the generation of novel Flp-driver lines and Frt -flanked alleles is required in order to establish “next-generation” dual recombinase-mediated mouse models for studying the tumor microenvironment, tumor progression and tumor heterogeneity in breast cancer. Here, we have generated a novel mouse line expressing a mouse codon-optimized Flp (Flpo) under the control of the MMTV promoter for the specific genetic manipulation of mammary gland epithelial cells and, in combination with adequate oncogene and/or tumor suppressor gene manipulations, in breast cancer cells.
Results and Discussion
In order to express the Flp recombinase in mammary gland epithelial cells, we placed the mouse codon-optimized Flp ( Flpo ) under the control of the MMTV promoter. Transgenic mice were generated by pronuclear microinjection. 17 founder animals were obtained, of which ten showed germline transmission.
To analyze Flpo activity in normal mammary gland epithelial cells, the founder lines were crossed with the RC::FrePe reporter strain [ , ] (Fig. 1 a). Briefly, this dual recombinase-responsive reporter allele encodes for mCherry and GFP whose expression can be controlled by Flp and Cre activity in a sequential manner. Since transcription of mCherry is prevented by a Frt -flanked STOP site, Flp-mediated recombination leads to mCherry expression. Upon fluorescence microscopy analysis of mCherry expression in mammary gland epithelial cells, two founder lines (9 and 11) with high Flpo activity were identified (Fig. 1 b and c). Further analysis revealed that in animals of line 9 Flpo activity was restricted to cytokeratin 8/18 (CK-8/18)-positive luminal mammary gland cells, while Flpo was found active in both luminal and cytokeratin 14 (CK-14)-positive myoepithelial cells in mice of line 11 (Fig. 1 b). Besides the mammary gland epithelium, also the pulmonary- and most notably the salivary gland epithelium are sites of MMTV promoter activity, which poses a risk of unwanted off-target effects. Interestingly, we did not detect any recombination in the lung and only very limited recombination in the salivary gland of line 9. However, we observed considerable Flpo activity in the lung and very strong activity in the salivary gland of line 11 (Fig. 1 c). Consistent with this, Flpo expression levels were overall higher in animals of line 11 with particularly strong expression in salivary glands. Although we did not observe Flpo-mediated recombination in pulmonary epithelium of line 9, Flpo expression was detected by quantitative RT-PCR and, thus, low Flpo activity in the lung cannot be fully excluded (Fig. 1 d). Fig. 1 Flpo activity in the mammary gland, lung and salivary gland . a Strategy for genetic lineage tracing of Flpo activity. Combination of MMTV-Flpo (left) and RC::FrePe (right) leads to stable mCherry expression in Flpo-expressing cells. b Co-staining of mammary glands with the luminal epithelial cell marker CK-8/18 (green) and myoepithelial cell marker CK-14 (grey). mCherry: magenta. Scale bar, 50μm. c Analysis of mCherry expression in mammary glands, lungs and salivary glands of adult female mice of MMTV-Flpo lines 9 and 11. mCherry: grey, DAPI: blue. Scale bar, 200μm. d Analysis of Flpo expression by quantitative RT-PCR in mammary glands (MG), lungs (Lu) and salivary glands (SG) of adult female mice of MMTV-Flpo lines 9 and 11. Mean and SEM of n = 5 mice are shown for mammary glands. Salivary gland and lung tissue of n = 5 mice were pooled prior to RNA extraction. Flpo expression levels were normalized to Gapdh. P value, 0.166; unpaired, two-tailed t-test
The MMTV-PyMT transgenic mouse model is one of the most widely used models of metastatic breast cancer [ ]. To generate mice developing tumors of the mammary glands, we crossed MMTV-Flpo/RC::FrePe double-transgenic mice with the MMTV-PyMT strain (Fig. 2 a). Primary tumors and lung metastasis of both Flpo founder lines showed strong mCherry expression (Fig. 2 b). Immunofluorescence staining for the stromal cell marker PDGFRβ and for the epithelial cell marker E-cadherin confirmed that Flpo activity of both mouse lines is specific to cancer cells. No leakiness of Flpo expression was observed in stromal cells (Fig. 2 c). Fig. 2 Flpo activity in breast cancer cells of MMTV-PyMT mice . a Strategy for genetic lineage tracing of Flpo activity in breast cancer cells of MMTV-PyMT transgenic mice. Combination of MMTV-Flpo (top), MMTV-PyMT (middle) and RC::FrePe (bottom) leads to stable mCherry expression in Flpo-expressing tumor cells. b Analysis of mCherry expression in primary tumors and lung metastasis of MMTV-Flpo mouse lines 9 and 11. mCherry: grey, DAPI: blue. Scale bar, 200μm. c Co-staining of primary tumors for the stromal cell marker PDGFRβ (green) and the epithelial cell marker E-cadherin (grey). mCherry: magenta, DAPI: blue. Scale bar, 50μm
Thus, both our MMTV-Flpo transgenic founder lines show high recombination efficiency in mammary gland epithelial cells and cancer cells in the MMTV-PyMT mouse model. However, Flpo activity of line 9 is spatially more restricted compared to line 11 and hence at lower risk for off-target effects. We therefore continued employing line 9 for further experimentation.
When breeding both male and female transgenic mice in strictly heterozygous matings we observed stable transgene transmission according to Mendelian inheritance. Follow-up analysis after at least four additional generations of breeding confirmed robust Flpo activity throughout the mammary glands (Fig. 3 a). Overall, approximately 64% of luminal mammary gland epithelial cells showed mCherry expression in later generation MMTV-Flpo/RC::FrePe mice. There was no significant difference in recombination efficiencies at second and sixth filial generations (65.20 ± 1.22% at F 2 ; 64.04 ± 4.38% at F 6 ). Similarly, approximately 67.45 ± 4.71%, of cancer cells in PyMT driven breast tumors showed mCherry expression (Fig. 3 b and c). Fig. 3 Efficiency and onset of Flpo activity in the MMTV-Flpo mouse line 9 . a Mammary glands of MMTV-Flpo + / RC::FrePe + adult (8-week-old) female mice (whole mounted tissue). mCherry: grey. Scale bar, 500μm. b Flpo recombination efficiency in mammary glands of 8-week-old mice at filial generations F 2 and F 6 . Means of n = 7 (F 2 ) and n = 6 (F 6 ) individual mice are shown. Five imaging fields (63× magnification) were analyzed per mouse. P value, 0.7902; unpaired, two-tailed t-test. c Flpo recombination efficiency in breast tumors of MMTV-PyMT + /MMTV-Flpo + / RC::FrePe + triple-transgenic mice . The mean of n = 6 individual mice are shown. Two tumor sections were analyzed per mouse. d Analysis of Flpo expression by quantitative RT-PCR in mammary glands of 2, 4 and 8-week-old female mice. Means of n = 5 (2 weeks), n = 4 (4 weeks) and n = 5 (8 weeks) mice are shown. Flpo expression levels were normalized to Gapdh. P values: 0.0018 (2 vs 4 weeks), 0.0068 (2 vs 8 weeks), 0.0620 (4 vs 8 weeks). e , f Mammary glands of MMTV-Flpo + / RC::FrePe + 2-week-old ( e ) and 4-week-old ( f ) female mice (whole mounted tissue). mCherry: grey. Scale bar, 500μm
In the various MMTV-driven transgenic strains generated in the past years, differences in the onset of transgene expression have been observed. We hence performed time course analysis to investigate the onset of Flpo expression in the mammary glands of MMTV-Flpo line 9. Flpo expression levels of four-week-old females were comparable to expression in eight-week-old females and low levels of Flpo expression could be detected already in two-week-old mice (Fig. 3 d). Consistent with this, we observed mCherry expression in mammary glands of two and four-week-old mice indicating Flpo is active in mammary glands of mice as young as two weeks old (Fig. 3 e and f).
In summary, we have generated and characterized a novel mouse line expressing Flpo under the control of the MMTV promoter. This line shows robust Flpo activity in luminal mammary gland epithelial cells. Since Flpo is already expressed in the developing mammary glands of prepubertal mice, the mouse line may also be useful for research focusing on pubertal mammary gland development. Furthermore, the mouse line may be crossed to strains harboring Frt -flanked tumor suppressor genes, such as p53 Frt/Frt or an activated version of oncogenes [ ] for the generation of novel conditional breast cancer mouse models. Importantly, our new mouse line offers new opportunities for genetic lineage tracing in breast cancer, particularly in the widely used MMTV-driven mouse models. For example, combination of MMTV-Flpo, RC::FrePe and a Cre driver line of choice may be readily used to visualize cancer cell subpopulations of interest, for example in MMTV-PyMT-driven tumors. With novel Frt -flanked conditional alleles and increasingly complex site-specific recombinase-responsive reporter alleles becoming available, our mouse line has the potential to become a versatile tool for genetic manipulation and lineage tracing in the murine mammary gland and in mammary gland cancer.
Materials and Methods
Animals
Mouse colonies were kept at the animal facility of the Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Switzerland. All animal experiments were carried out in accordance with the guidelines of the Swiss Federal Veterinary Office (SFVO) and the Cantonal Veterinary Office of Basel-Stadt (Licenses 1878, 1023G1). MMTV-PyMT (FVB/N) mice were a kind gift of N. Hynes (FMI, Basel, Switzerland). RC::FrePe mice (B6;129S6-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm8(CAG-mCherry,-EGFP)Dym/J) were a kind gift of S. Dymecki (Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts). The mice were crossed six to seven generations into the FVB/N background and then used for the experiments. All experiments were performed on female mice. For analysis of the mammary gland, mice were sacrificed at eight weeks, four weeks or two weeks of age. Tumor bearing mice were sacrificed before a tumor volume of 1500mm 3 was reached, usually at 12–13 weeks of age.
Construction of the Flp Expression Vector
The mouse codon-optimized Flp ( Flpo ) gene was placed under the control of the MMTV LTR promoter. The pPGKFlpobpA plasmid was a kind gift from Philippe Soriano (Addgene plasmid # 13793). The vector containing the MMTV-LTR and BGHpA was a kind gift from Kari Alitalo. The Flpo fragment was PCR amplified from the pPGKFlpobpA plasmid and inserted into the vector as an XhoI fragment.
Generation and Genotyping of Transgenic Mice
The MMTV-Flpo-BGHpA was released from the construct as a HindIII-NdeI fragment and purified using the QIAEX II Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The fragment was then microinjected into the pronuclei of FVB/N zygotes and the embryos were transferred into pseudopregnant CD1 females at the Center for Transgenic Models (University of Basel, Switzerland). Transgenic founders were identified by PCR using primers 5’-CCA AGG TGC TGG TGC GGC AGT TCG TG-3′ and 3`-GAT CTC CCA GAT GCT CTC GCC CTC GGA C-5 resulting in a 436 bp PCR product in transgenic mice. The established MMTV-Flpo line (FVB/N-Tg(MMTV-Flpo)9Gcr) was kept heterozygous and in a pure FVB/N background. Transgenic progeny was identified by PCR as described above or alternatively using primer pair 5′-TGA GCT TCG ACA TCG TGA AC-3′ and 3’-TCA GCA TCT TCT TGC TGT GG-3′ generating a 231 bp product.
Immunofluorescent Staining
Tissues were fixed in 4% PFA for two hours and incubated in 20% sucrose overnight at 4 °C. Tissues were then embedded in Tissue-Tek O.C.T compound (Sakura), snap-frozen and stored at −80 °C. 7 μm thick tissue sections were cut, dried for 30 min, rehydrated in PBS, permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 20 min and blocked with 5% normal goat serum (NGS; Sigma-Aldrich; G6767) in PBS for one hour. Next, sections were incubated with primary antibody overnight at 4 °C followed by 1 h incubation with secondary antibody at room temperature. All antibodies were diluted in 5% NGS in PBS. The following primary antibodies were used: guinea pig-anti-CK8/18 (Fitzgerald Industries; 20R-CP004; 1:50), rabbit-anti-CK14 (Thermo Scientific; RB-9020; 1:50), rat-anti-E-cadherin (clone ECCD-2; Invitrogen; 13–1900; 1:400), rabbit-anti-PDGFRβ (clone Y92; abcam; ab32570; 1:100). Secondary antibodies directed against the species of the primary antibody were coupled to Alexa 488 or Alexa 647 (Invitrogen; 1:400). Nuclei were stained with 4′,6-Diamidin-2-phenylindol (DAPI; Sigma-Aldrich; 1:5000) for 10 min at room temperature. The sections were mounted with Dako fluorescence mounting medium (Agilent). Images were acquired with a Leica DMI 4000 microscope and processed with ImageJ.
RNA Isolation and Quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNA was isolated using RNAeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). On column DNA digestion using RNAse-Free DNase Set (Qiagen) was performed. Prior to isolation, tissue of thoracic and abdominal mammary glands was pooled for every individual mouse. Salivary gland and lung tissue of five mice was pooled. cDNA was synthesized using ImProm-II Reverse Transcriptase (Promega). Quantitative RT-PCR was performed on a StepOnePlus machine (Applied Biosystems) using Power-Up SYBR green (Applied Biosystems). Flpo expression levels were normalized to Gapdh. Flpo -specific primers 5′-ccgagaagatcctgaacagc-3′ (forward) and 5′-ggtacagggtcttggtcttgg-3′ (reverse) and Gapdh -specific primers 5′- agcttgtcatcaacgggaag-3′ and 5′-tttgatgttagtggggtctcg-3′ were used.
Mammary Gland Whole Mounts
Isolated mammary glands were mounted on a glass-slide and imaged with a Leica DMI 4000 microscope.
Quantification of Recombination Efficiency
For quantification of Flpo-mediated recombination efficiency in the mammary gland, the total numbers of cytokeratin 8/18 positive (luminal) cells and the number of mCherry expressing cytokeratin 8/18 positive cells were counted. Five imaging fields each of mammary glands (63× magnification) from a total of 7 (F 2 ) and 6 (F 6 ) mice were analyzed. For quantification of the levels of recombined cells in PyMT tumors, sections of two different tumors per mouse were analyzed. The whole tumor section was imaged with a Zeiss Axio Imager Scanning Microscope (10× magnification). The mCherry-positive area and total tumor areas (DAPI positive area) were determined by global thresholding (Otsu algorithm) using ImageJ. Six mice (F 2 ) were analyzed.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software Inc.). Graphs display single measurement points and means or mean + SEM. Unpaired, two-tailed t-tests were performed.
Data Availability
All data and materials are freely available to the research community. The newly generated transgenic mouse line is available by a Material Transfer Agreement.