Introduction
Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer and the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in women worldwide [ ]. Over recent decades, the widespread use of mammography and improvements in treatment has significantly reduced mortality rates [ ]. Despite this, breast cancer pathogenesis is still only partially understood. Therefore, better understanding of the precise molecular mechanisms in breast carcinogenesis and disease progression will facilitate the identification of new therapeutic strategies for breast cancer patients.
Recent studies have identified Pax-5 as a key regulator of cancer progression. Pax-5 , or Paired Box Gene 5, is a transcription factor implicated in cell differentiation and tissue development [ , ]. Pax-5 has an important role in maintaining B-cell identity during B-cell lymphopoiesis and is found in the embryonic central nervous system and adult testis [ , , ]. Numerous studies have described the oncogenic role of Pax-5 in many types of lymphoma and leukemia [ ]. However, Pax-5 expression is also found in non-lymphoid cancers such as breast carcinomas where, in contrast to B-cell cancers, it inhibits cancer cell malignant features [ , , ]. Interestingly, Pax-5 inhibits breast cancer growth, migration, invasion, and also, modulates epithelial-mesenchymal/mesenchymal-epithelial (EMT/MET) transitioning [ , , , ]. In fact, Pax-5 reduces mesenchymal features while concomitantly promoting epithelial behavior and phenotypic markers [ , ].
NF-κB, another important cancer transcriptional regulator, plays a central role in inflammation, stress response, and can exert a variety of pro-tumorigenic functions (reviewed in [ ]). NF-κB is shown to contribute to cancer progression by controlling EMT and cellular processes, including the induction of cell growth and inhibition of apoptosis [ , , ]. In its inactive form, NF-κB is sequestered in the cytoplasm as a dimer by inhibitory molecules of the IκB family of proteins. Once IκB kinases (IKK) are activated in a signal-induced manner, IKK phosphorylates IκB, subsequently leading to its degradation, which allows for the nuclear translocation of NF-κB and activation of pro-survival target genes. The canonical NF-κB pathway is activated by a IKK complex consisting of IKKα, IKKβ, and a regulatory subunit IKKγ/NEMO [ ]. However, a non-canonical IKK pathway also exists which encompasses IKKε (IKBKE). IKKε activates NF-κB and has been found aberrantly expressed in 30% of breast carcinomas [ ]. IKKε acts as a breast cancer oncogene capable of inducing cell survival, growth, and chemoresistance [ , ] where its suppression results in cancer cell death [ ]. Recently, we have reported that Pax-5 expression inhibits NF-κB activity in breast cancer cells [ ]. In order to characterize the downstream effects of Pax-5 on NF-κB signaling, we turned our intention to microRNAs.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a group of single-stranded, non-coding RNAs approximately 22 nucleotides in length. In recent years, miRNAs have emerged as important regulators of gene expression in several aspects of cancer such as: tumor growth, development, metastasis, and drug resistance [ , ]. Abnormal expression profiles of miARNs have been found in both clinical tumor specimens and in cancer cell lines when compared to their respective controls [ ]. Furthermore, various studies have indicated that miRNAs play an important role in many cellular processes that are critical in the development and progression of cancers including cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, invasiveness, and motility (reviewed in [ , ]).
In the current study, we demonstrate that Pax-5 is a potent regulator of miRNA expression. Additionally, Pax-5 protein expression supresses the activation of the NF-κB signalling pathway through the up-regulation of miRNA-155 and consequential downstream targeting of IKKε. We also show that microRNA-155 is strongly induced during EMT and its overexpression in turn, reduces Pax-5 expression, suggesting an auto-regulatory feedback loop between Pax-5 and microRNA-155. Together, our results demonstrate a regulatory molecular link between Pax-5 and NF-κB, which furthers our understanding of the downstream effectors of breast cancer aggressivity.
Materials and Methods
Cell Culture, Reagents and Treatments
The MCF-7 (mammary ductal carcinoma, HTB-22) and MDA-MB-468 (mammary gland adenocarcinoma, HTB-132) breast cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD, USA). Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) supplemented with foetal bovine serum (FBS) and L-glutamine (2 mM). Cell culture media and reagents were obtained from ThermoFisher Scientific (Burlington, Canada) except for the FBS which was provided by PAA Laboratories (Etobicoke, Canada).
To induce transient epithelial to mesenchymal transitioning (EMT), 3 × 10 5 cells in 6 well plates were treated with 10 ng/mL of both transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) (MCF-7) [ ] or 50 ng/mL of Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) (MDA-MB-468) [ ] for 5 days.
Plasmids and Transfections
Transient transfections of Pax-5 were performed using the pcDNA3.1 plasmid expressing Pax-5 or empty vector pcDNA3.1 as a control [ ]. In brief, 5 × 10 5 cells suspended in appropriate growth medium were seeded in 6 well plates for 24 h. Thereafter, transfections were performed with 4 μg of Pax-5 /pcDNA3.1 or 4 μg of empty vector pcDNA3.1, using X-tremeGENE™ 9 DNA Transfection Reagent (Roche, Branford, CT, USA) according to instruction of the manufacturer’s protocol.
Gene silencing experiments were accomplished using either a siRNA pool against Pax-5 transcripts (ON-TARGET plus, Dharmacon, Lafayette, USA); miRNA inhibitors (anti-miR™ miRNA inhibitor, ThermoFisher); or miRNA mimics (Pre-miR™ miRNA precursor, ThermoFisher). Technically, 5×10 5 cells seeded into 6 well plates received either 50 nmol/L of siRNA- Pax-5 ; 36 nmol/L of anti-miR™ inhibitors; or, 36 nmol/L of Pre-miR™ miRNA precursor mixed with 5 μL of LipofectAMINE® 2000 (ThermoFisher) in addition to 1 ml of Gibco™ Opti-MEM® (ThermoFisher). Transfections were incubated for 4 h before washing and subsequent analysis. Control transfections included scrambled siRNA, scrambled non-targeting miRNA inhibitor (Anti-miR™ miRNA Inhibitor Negative control, ThermoFisher) or scrambled non-targeting miRNA mimic (Pre-miR™ miRNA Precursor Negative Control, ThermoFisher).
Co-transfections were performed according to manufacturer’s protocol. In brief, 5 × 10 5 cells were cultivated 24 h in 6 well plates. After incubation, 7.5 μl of TransIT-X2® Dynamic Delivery System (Mirus, Madison, USA) was mixed in 250 μl of Gibco™ Opti-MEM® (ThermoFisher) and 2.5 μg of Pax5/pcDNA3.1, pcDNA3.1 empty vector or NF-κB luciferase reporter vector was added, followed by the addition of 36 nmol/L of Anti-miR™ miRNA inhibitor, 50 nmol/L of siRNA- Pax-5 or their respective non-targeting controls; incubated at room temperature for 30 mins and then added dropwise to plates and incubated until ready for further assays.
Reverse Transcription and Quantitative PCR
Total RNA, with miRNA enrichment, was isolated from cells using mir Vana™ miRNA isolation kit (ThermoFisher). For mRNA analysis, reverse transcription was performed using oligo-dT and SuperScript® III reverse transcriptase (ThermoFisher) as previously described [ ]. Quantitative gene expression analysis was conducted using the SYBR® Green 2X FastMix for iQ (Quanta, Biosciences Inc., Beverly, USA). Each reaction was carried out with 2.5 μL of each forward and reverse primers (3 μM) and 2 μL of cDNA. For miRNA analysis, cDNA was generated from 5 ng of miRNA-enriched total RNA using TaqMan® microRNA Reverse Transcription Kit (ThermoFisher). qRT-PCR assays were then performed using miRNA-specific TaqMan® assays (ThermoFisher) on a Mastercycler® ep Realplex 2 Real Time PCR system (Eppendorf, Mississauga, Canada) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Comparative expression levels were calculated using the ΔΔCt method of Livak and Schmittgen, (2001) [ ], using the hypoxanthine ribosyltransferase (HPRT), or small nucleolar RNA 48 (RNU48) transcripts as a normalizing control, respectively.
Western Blot Analysis
Cells (10 6 ) were lysed in whole cell lysate buffer (0.125 M Tris pH 6.8, glycerol 0.2 g/mL, 4.0% SDS, 10 mg/mL PMSF, 5 μL of protease inhibitor cocktail set III (Calbiochem, Etobicoke, Canada) and 100 mM sodium orthovanadate (Sigma, Oakville, Canada)). Protein content was measured using the bicinchoninic acid protein assay (ThermoFisher) and loaded on to a 10% SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Proteins were then transferred onto a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane (Millipore, Etobicoke, Canada), blocked with 5% non-fat milk and probed with either anti- Pax-5 (New England Peptide, Gardner, USA); anti-IKKε (ab124766, Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom); anti-G3PDH (#2275-PC-100, Trevigen, Gaithersburg, Canada); or peroxydase-conjugated antibodies (ThermoFisher). Protein levels were then visualized by chemiluminescence according to the manufacturer’s protocol (SuperSignal West Dura, ThermoFisher).
Luciferase Reporter Gene Assay
Luciferase-based reporter gene assays were conducted as described previously [ ] using the ONE-Glo luciferase system (Promega, Madison, USA). Briefly, 24 h post-transfection, cells were seeded in 96-well plates (3 × 10 3 cells/well) and treated with 10 μM of IKKε/TBK1 inhibitor II (#506306, EMD Milllipore) or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solvent control and measured at 72 h post-transfection on a SpectraMax I3 microplate reader (Molecular Devices).
Next Generation Sequencing
RNA library construction and sequencing were conducted following Ion Torrent (ThermoFisher) protocols. Small RNAs were loaded on an Ion PI Chip v2 and sequenced with an Ion Proton Sequencer using the 260 flows parameter. Small RNA libraries were constructed from three technical replicates for each condition. Initial FASTQ files were gathered and adaptor sequences were trimmed. Sequencing data filtered by eliminating reads of <16 and of >60 nucleotides. Reads with bases showing Q scores of <20 were eliminated.
Results
Pax-5-Regulated miRNA Expression Profile Analysis
To establish a causal link between deregulated Pax-5 expression in breast cancer and deregulated miRNA expression profiles as well as downstream molecular pathways, we submitted MCF-7 breast cancer cells with recombinant Pax-5 overexpression to Ion Torrent™ Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) to generate miRNA expression profiles (Supplementary Table 1 ). Results from Pax-5 -overexpressing MCF-7 cells were compiled and compared to control cells transfected with the pcDNA3.1 empty vector to reveal relative normalized and upregulated miRNA counts superior to a value of 1 log 2 . A sample of 9 miRNAs were selected and plotted based on their effective relevance and quantity of RNA reads measured in MCF-7 breast cancer cells (Fig. 1 a). Notably, the most strongly induced miRNA was microRNA-155 with a log 2 relative normalized miRNA count of 1.91. From this list, we selected 4 miRNAs for direct qRT-PCR validation (Fig. 1 b) based on NGS quantification; and, the miRNA’s involvement (miRNA-135b, miRNA-155) [ , , , ] or suppression of cancer aggressivity (miRNA-155, miRNA-200b, miRNA-200c) [ , , , , , ]). In a Pax-5 transfected MCF-7 models, only miRNA-155 and -200b were replicable by qRT-PCR, with relative miRNA expressions of 1.58 and 2.34 respectively when compared to transfected control cells (empty vector). Together, these results show that the Pax-5 transcription factor is a potent inducer of miRNAs in breast cancer cells, including miRNA-155 and -200b which were selected for further analysis. Fig. 1 Pax-5 -induced miRNA expression profile in breast cancer. MCF-7 cells were submitted to Pax-5 overexpression by transiently transfecting a Pax-5 /pcDNA3.1 construct where control cells consisted of empty vector pcDNA3.1 transfection. The induced miRNA expression profile was studied 48 h post transfection by Ion Torrent™ next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology. a MiRNAs levels above 1 log 2 relative normalized counts Pax-5 over control empty vector were plotted and considered for further analyses. b MiRNAs of interest were then validated by qRT-PCR under the same conditions and normalized against small-nucleolar RNA 48 (RNU48). Data is represented as means ±SEM of biological and experimental triplicates. * indicates P ≤ 0.05 in two tailed unpaired t tests
Validation of a miRNA Overexpression Cell Model System
Knowing that miRNA-155 and -200b are important regulators of cancer progression and that they are induced following Pax-5 upregulation, we set out to study the downstream effects of these miRNAs in breast cancer processes. To validate the use of cell models harboring recombinant expression of either miRNA-155 or 200b, we made use of qRT-PCR following respective pre-miRNA transfections into MCF-7 cells. We observed that the transfection of pre-miRNA-155 is extremely effective when transiently transfected into MCF-7 cells 24 and 72 h post-transfection (Fig. 2 a). However, we were unable to attain any appreciable upregulation of miRNA-200b despite multiple attempts. Consequently, we chose to pursue our functional analyses with miRNA-155. Fig. 2 Validation of molecular miRNA overexpression system. MCF-7 cells were transiently transfected with selected miRNA mimics and incubated for 24 and 72 h. Using qRT-PCR, we evaluated and plotted a miRNA-155 and -200b transcript levels, normalized against RNU48, as well as b IKKɛ transcript levels, normalized against HPRT and c IKKɛ protein levels by Western blotting, using GAPDH as a protein loading control. Control samples include non-transfected (NT) cells as well as scramble non targeting miRNA mimic transfected cells (Scramble –ctrl). Relative pixel density ratios (IKKε/GAPDH) are also provided and compared to non-treated (NT) samples. Data is represented as means ±SEM of biological and experimental triplicates. * indicates P ≤ 0.05 in two tailed unpaired t tests
To ascertain the functional ability of recombinant miRNA-155 in transfected breast cancer cells, we evaluated the expression of a prominent and validated downstream miRNA-155 target, IKKε [ , ]. Using qRT-PCR on miRNA-155 transfected MCF-7 cells, we observed a significant decrease (approximately 50%) of IKKε transcripts when compared to transfected controls (Fig. 2 b). Similarly, we also observed a marked decrease in IKKε protein expression in these miRNA-155-transfected MCF-7 cells by Western blot when compared cells transfected with miRNA-scrambled control sequences (Fig. 2 c). Altogether, these results provide a confirmation that our model and molecular tools are able to regulate not only miRNA-155 levels within breast cancer cells, but also IKKɛ, a validated downstream target of this miRNA.
Pax-5 Regulates IKKɛ Expression via miRNA-155
Having validated that Pax-5 induces miRNA-155 overexpression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells and knowing that miRNA-155 directly regulates IKKε expression, we explored whether Pax-5 , by transition, could modulate IKKɛ; a potent activator of the pro-cancer NF-κB pathway. To study this, we transiently transfected MCF-7 cells with either Pax-5 ; or, the empty control vector and evaluated relative IKKɛ mRNA expression levels. Using qRT-PCR, we found that Pax-5 slightly reduces IKKɛ mRNA expression (Fig. 3 a). More importantly, we also witnessed a quasi-total ablation of IKKɛ protein expression by Western blot in MCF-7 cells under these same conditions (Fig. 3 b). On the other hand, by inhibiting Pax-5 expression in MCF-7 cells using siRNA transfections (Fig. 3 c), we observed a marked increase in IKKε protein levels when compared to control cells transfected with scrambled siRNA sequences (Fig. 3 d). Finally, we performed a rescue assay where MCF-7 were co-transfected with Pax-5 and anti-miRNA-155 and evaluated IKKɛ protein levels by Western Blot when compared to their respective controls (empty vector and scrambled-ctrl anti-miRNA). We observed that IKKɛ protein levels is markedly higher in Pax-5 transfected cells when co-transfected with anti-miRNA-155 than the negative control scramble anti-miRNA (Fig. 3 e). Altogether, these results show strong evidence that not only is Pax-5 capable of regulating IKKɛ, a potent activator of NF-κB; but also, that this molecular interaction is, at least partially, mediated via miRNA-155. Fig. 3 Pax-5 regulates IKKɛ expression via miRNA-155. MCF-7 cells were either transfected with Pax-5 or the control pcDNA3.1 vector and monitored by a qRT-PCR to evaluate IKKɛ transcript levels, normalized against HPRT, as well as by b Western Blotting to evaluate IKKɛ protein levels, using GAPDH as a protein loading control. c Silencing of Pax-5 protein expression was validated in cells transfected with a Pax-5 -targeting siRNA pool (si Pax-5 ) and compared to control cells receiving a non-targeting siRNA pool (siCtrl) 72 h post transfection. Thereafter, d IKKɛ protein expression was monitored by Western blot. Finally, e IKKɛ protein expression was evaluated in a rescue assay where MCF-7 cells were co-transfected with either Pax-5 or empty vector control pcDNA3.1 as well as either a miRNA-155 inhibitor (anti-miR-155), or a non-targeting scramble anti-miRNA (Scramble -ctrl miR) using Western Blot GAPDH as a protein loading control. Relative pixel density ratios (IKKε/GAPDH) are also provided and compared to non-treated (NT) samples. Data is represented as means ±SEM of biological and experimental triplicates
Pax-5 and miRNA-155 Regulate NF-κB Activity via IKKε
MiRNA-155 has been previously reported to regulate of NF-κB activity [ ]. We therefore set out to elucidate the potential implication of the Pax-5 /IKKε axis within this interaction in breast cancer. To do this, we first made use of an MCF-7 cell line stably expressing a luciferase-based NF-κB-reporter vector (NFκB-Luc) and transfected either miRNA-155; or, a control scrambled miRNA. We found an 80% reduction in NF-κB activity when cells expressed miRNA-155 in comparison to a scramble miRNA control (Fig. 4 a). Next, we set out to elucidate the upstream implication of Pax-5 within this interaction by monitoring MCF-7 NF-κB-luc cells transfected with an siRNA against Pax-5 (or siRNA scramble control) treated with an IKKɛ-specific inhibitor (or DMSO control). As expected, the silencing of Pax-5 expression in MCF-7 cells exhibited a 3-fold induction in NF-κB-dependent luciferase activity when compared to control cells transfected with scrambled siRNA (Fig. 4 b). However, this NF-κB activity was nearly completely lost upon the chemical inhibition of IKKε when compared to cells treated with the control solvent DMSO (Fig. 4 b). These results confirm that miRNA-155 modulates NF-κB activity in breast cancer cells. Additionally, to the best of our knowledge, we show for the first time that Pax-5 seems to suppress NF-κB activity partially via IKKɛ. Fig. 4 Pax-5 and miRNA-155 regulate NF-κB activity via IKKε. MCF-7 cells bearing a NF-κB-luciferase reporter vector were co-transfected with a either a pre-microRNA-155; or, a scramble control pre-miR (Scramble-ctrl) and monitored for luciferase activity 72 h post-transfection. b Luciferase reporter activity was evaluated in MCF-7 NF-κB-luc cells transfected with either an siRNA pool against Pax-5; or, a non-targeting siRNA control (siCtrl) followed by a IKKɛ inhibitor treatment (10 μM, IKKε inhibitor II, #506306, EMD Milllipore) or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solvent control. Data is represented as means ±SEM of biological and experimental triplicates. * indicates P ≤ 0.05 in two tailed unpaired t tests
MiRNA-155 is Regulated during EMT and Modulates Pax-5 Expression
Given that Pax-5 and NF-κB are intricately implicated in EMT/MET during breast cancer progression, we explored the potential implication of miRNA-155 within these processes. To do so, we transiently induced EMT in two breast cancer models (i.e. MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468) using various treatments with TNF-α/TGF-β or EGF respectively. EMT phenotypic features were confirmed using qRT-PCR on mesenchymal markers (i.e. E-cadherin, Zeb, Slug and Twist) as previously described [ ] (data not shown). We next analyzed miRNA-155 and Pax-5 expression levels by qRT-PCR in these cells and found that miRNA-155 is strongly upregulated, with a 3.7 and 2.35-fold increase in EMT–induced MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468 cell models respectively (Fig. 5 a). Surprisingly, we also observed a concomitant decrease in Pax-5 levels in both cell lines following the induction of EMT. Fig. 5 MiRNA-155 is upregulated during EMT and modulates Pax-5 expression . a EMT was chemically induced in either MCF-7 (10 ng/mL of both TGF-β and TNF-α) or MDA-MB-468 cells (50 ng/mL of EGF) for 5 days followed by qRT-PCR evaluation of miRNA-155 and Pax-5 transcript levels normalized against RNU48 and HPRT respectively. b Pax-5 mRNA and c protein levels were evaluated by qRT-PCR and Western blot respectively in MCF-7 cells transfected with either a mimic miRNA-155 (Pre-miR-155); or, a scrambled micro-RNA (Scramble-ctrl). Relative pixel density ratios (Pax-5/GAPDH) are also provided and compared to respective non-treated (NT) samples. Data is represented as means ±SEM of biological and experimental triplicates where * indicates P ≤ 0.05 in two tailed unpaired t tests
Given the popularity and involvement of miRNA-155 in miRNA/target regulatory feedback loops [ , , , ], we thus attempted to elucidate the possible regulation of the Pax-5 transcript by miRNA-155 which could explain a net increase of miRNA-155 and decrease of Pax-5 in breast cancer cells following EMT. Using qRT-PCR in MCF-7 transfected with miRNA-155, we observed a significant reduction (60%) in relative endogenous Pax-5 mRNA expression when compared to control cells (Fig. 5 b). These effects were also mirrored at the protein level where endogenous Pax-5 expression decreased over time in miRNA-155-transfected cells (Fig. 5 c). Altogether, these findings indicate that miRNA-155 is upregulated during breast cancer cell EMT and also suggest that miRNA-155 is involved in a negative feedback loop to effectively suppress Pax-5 expression.
Discussion
With extensive advances in molecular biology techniques in recent years, miRNAs have attracted increasing attention due to their deregulation in cancer and their central role in cellular processes such as cell proliferation, invasion, motility, and apoptosis (reviewed in [ , ]). A number of reports have shown that miRNAs can be regulated by transcription factors [ , ]. This suggests that miRNA deregulation may be a downstream effect of transcription factors involved in cancer processes. Accordingly, the Pax-5 transcription factor which confers a tumor suppressor role in breast carcinoma in contrast to its oncogenic effects in lymphoid-derived cancers, has never been studied for its role on miRNAs regulation in cancer.
In this study, we investigate the expression of Pax-5 -induced miRNAs in breast cancer by way of next-generation sequencing on the MCF-7 cell model. We found several miRNAs to be up-regulated in Pax-5 overexpressing cells in comparison to vector control cells. Interestingly, most of these Pax-5 -regulated miRNAs have been previously shown to confer anti-cancer properties which is in accordance with Pax-5 ’s anti-proliferative role in breast carcinoma [ , , ]. For example, miRNA-155, miRNA-184, miRNA-200c, and miRNA-200b have been reported to target pro-oncogenic genes such as FADD [ ], MMP-2/9 [ ], KRAS [ ], and IKBKB respectively [ ]. Two miRNAs of particular interest, miRNA-155 and -200b, are also notable regulators of EMT/MET, and were subsequently evaluated for Pax-5 regulation of EMT-MET processes [ , ]. Our technical model only successfully modulated miRNA-155 expression in breast cancer cells, thus miRNA-155 was selected for further analyses. Nevertheless, the Pax-5 -miRNA-200b axis remains of particular interest to be studied given its prominent role in cancer progression [ ].
To elucidate downstream targets of miRNA-155, we considered possible validated candidate genes such as: IKKε [ , ]. ΙΚΚε, a member of the IκB kinase (IKK) family, is a non-canonical IKK that activates NF-κB, contributing to cell transformation, and has been found aberrantly expressed in 30% of breast carcinoma [ , ]. MiRNA-155 was also shown to affect IKKε levels in lymphoblastoid cells [ ], Hodgkin lymphoma cells [ ], gastric cancer tissue-derived MSC-like cells [ ], and fibroblast-like synoviocytes [ ]. In our study, we determined that miRNA-155 supresses IKKε transcript and protein levels following miRNA-155 mimic transfection in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Interestingly, we also found a marked reduction of IKKε expression in Pax-5 -transfected cells, likely explained by Pax-5 ’s capacity to induce miRNA-155 expression. Conversely, suppression of Pax-5 expression by siRNA lead to increased IKKε expression. Importantly, we were able to partially revert this Pax-5 -mediated inhibition of IKKε by performing a rescue assay via miRNA-155 silencing indicating not only that Pax-5 is an effective regulator of IKKε; but also, that this interaction is likely mediated through miRNA-155 modulation.
We also observed that miRNA-155 inhibited the activity of the NF-κB reporter activity in MCF-7 cells. This result supports previous data where miRNA-155 reduces NF-κB activity levels as well as protein level of phospho-p65 in mesenchymal stem cells [ ]. Furthermore, these findings also corroborate our previous reports where Pax-5 represses NF-κB activity, thereby decreasing breast cancer aggressiveness [ ]. Intriguingly, we were able to partially revert this effect when cells were treated with IKKε inhibitor thus suggesting the regulation of a complex network for NF-κB regulation in cancer cells. Accordingly, previous studies have indicated that p65, a NF-κB subunit, regulates miRNA-155 expression by directly binding to its promoter in MV-4-11 cells [ ]. These findings suggest the presence of a potential feedback loop; adding to NF-κB’s already effective self-regulating system via IκBα and IκBɛ transcription following NF-κB transduction to the nucleus (reviewed in [ ]). It is also interesting to note that we have shown previously that Pax-5 reduces phosphorylated levels of IKKα and IKKβ, in addition to a decrease in total levels of IKKα [ ]. Altogether, Pax-5 has shown versatility as a potent inhibitor of the IKK family and NFκB activation through the suppression of both the conical (IKKα and IKKβ) [ ] and non-conical (IKKε) pathways. As a result, Pax-5 regulates epithelialisation not only through the induction of hallmark epithelial regulator E-cadherin [ ]; but also, through the concomitant suppression of pro-mesenchymal regulator NF-κB in breast cancer cells [ ].
Studies have demonstrated dichotomous roles for miRNA-155 either as an oncomiR; or, a tumor suppressor in cancer cells (reviewed in [ ]). Indeed, our present discoveries indicate that microRNA-155 down-regulates IKKε expression and function in breast cancer cells. Consistent with our observations, miRNA-155 has been previously shown to repress breast cancer malignancy by targeting ErbB2 [ ] as well as reduce proliferative and invasive capacities by targeting claudin-1 in ovarian cancer-initiating cells [ ]. Moreover, the loss of miRNA-155 in tumor cells in vivo increased myeloid derived suppressor cells, therefore leading to tumor growth [ ]. Given that an individual miRNA can target many genes involved in various cellular signalling pathways, it is not surprising that miRNAs may often have dichotomous roles in cancer development as the target genes themselves are present in a spatio-temporal manner. Consequently, we speculate that the role of miRNA-155 in breast cancer is time and context-dependant and the cumulative effect of this miRNA on multiples genes may dictate its tumor suppressive or oncogenic role. Accordingly, this is the case for miRNA-155 and its associated with the onset of EMT [ ]. Specifically, miRNA-155 has been shown to be up-regulated in EMT-induced Caski cervical cancer cells [ ]. These observations are in agreement with our results where higher expression levels of miRNA-155 were observed in EMT-induced breast cancer cells indicating that miRNA-155 induction during EMT may be dependent on the pathological context of the cellular milieu. Furthermore, from a mechanistic standpoint, we show that miRNA-155 successfully forms a feedback loop to repress the expression of endogenous Pax-5 in MCF-7 cells. These results could explain why we observe a net increase of miRNA-155 and decrease of Pax-5 in breast cancer cells following breast cancer EMT. It may be possible that Pax-5 induces miRNA-155 levels to a point where, in turn, would silence EMT inhibitor Pax-5 [ ], to enable phenotypic transitioning and mesenchymal gene expression. As a result, miRNA-155 would be exposed to a new profile of target genes to govern breast cancer processes (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Schematic representation of the Pax-5/miR-155 signaling axis in a breast cancer EMT-MET setting. The Pax-5 transcription is central to the signaling process where it shuttles (dotted arrow) to the nucleus to induce miR-155 possibly through the multiple Pax-5 binding motifs found on the miR-155 gene promoter. Pax-5 is a reported pro-epithelialisation factor and MET regulator [ , ] and thus suppresses breast cancer malignant features such as: proliferation, migration and invasion processes. Upon its induction, miR-155 targets IKKε which results in: the inhibition of NF-κB activity; the blockade of NF-κB nuclear translocation; the downregulation of NF-κB target genes; and finally, the suppression of mesenchymal-like features and malignant processes. Altogether, Pax-5 has shown to be a potent inhibitor of the pro-mesenchymal regulator NF-κB through the suppression of the conical (IKKα and IKKβ) [ ] and non-conical (IKKε) pathways. However, in the case where Pax-5 expression cannot be sustained, miR-155 can also inhibit Pax-5 protein expression possibly through an intermediate regulator SPI1. In the latter situation, we hypothesize that the cell would lose its pro-epithelial identity and gain mesenchymal-like features
Our observations of a possible Pax-5/miR-155 feedback loop is interesting. We thus attempted to elucidate the mechanistic pathway supporting mutual regulation of the miR-155/Pax-5 axis. First, we set out to understand how Pax-5 may induce miR-155 expression by analyzing potential binding motifs upon the miR-155 host gene (MIR155HG). Using the JASPAR search engine [ ], we identified a cluster of binding motifs for the Pax-5 transcription factor located between −3360 and -3566 bp upstream from the transcriptional start site of the MIR155HG gene. These findings suggest a possible direct regulation of Pax-5 upon the miR-155 promoter region. Conversely, we also sought to elucidate how miR-155 could regulate of Pax-5. Through the use of bioinformatics and micro-RNA software, we were unable to predict any potential binding sites for miR-155 upon the Pax-5 transcript. It is possible however that miR-155 could regulate an intermediate target which could in turn modulate Pax-5 expression. Accordingly, recent studies have identified SPI1 as a specific target of miR-155 [ ]. SPI1, a member of the E26 transformation-specific transcription factors (Ets), is involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, DNA damage, apoptosis and angiogenesis [ ]. More importantly, SPI1 has been shown to be deregulated in many cancer types and is associated to poor prognosis. A study by Lu, D. et al. in 2014 has shown in terminal B cell differentiation that miR-155 targets SPI1 which then silences Pax-5 expression, an essential step during plasmocyte maturation [ ].
In summary, our study has demonstrated that Pax-5 acts as a novel regulator of miRNA-155 and NF-κB signaling through the suppression of IKKε in breast cancer cells. Mechanistically, we found that microRNA-155 forms a regulatory feedback loop, reducing Pax-5 protein expression, and is up-regulated in EMT-induced breast cancer cells. Altogether, our results support a novel role by which Pax-5 suppresses breast cancer aggressiveness via regulation of miRNA-155 and IKKε.