Introduction
Human milk (HM) is a complex and dynamic biological fluid, which is adaptively altered throughout lactation to tailor to the individual and unique needs of a developing infant [ ]. HM enables nutrient transfer between mother and infant, with compositional regulation of the macro- and micro-nutrients influencing infant growth and development [ , ]. Much recent research has highlighted the complexity of HM, revealing the extent to which developmental needs of the growing infant is paired with HM composition, and the significant knowledge gaps that exist [ ]. In addition to nutritive components, HM also contains non-nutritive bioactive ingredients, including the glucocorticoid family of steroid hormones [ ]. Cortisol and cortisone are typically the predominant glucocorticoids found in the maternal circulation [ , ] and in HM [ ].
The actions of circulatory glucocorticoids are diverse, with a critical role in classic stress responsiveness [ ]. Beyond this role, glucocorticoids also mediate aspects of physiological adaptations required for mammary function, including contributing to mammary growth, secretory differentiation and activation, maintenance of lactation and milk ejection [ , , , ] in lactating women.
The functions of HM derived glucocorticoids are less well understood, although they may exert an influence in shaping the infants behaviour, physiology and metabolic programming [ , , ]. Higher milk cortisol levels have been associated with greater nervous and less confident behaviour in both human infants [ ] and rhesus macaques [ ]. In contrast data demonstrates beneficial actions of milk cortisol with higher levels being correlated with a higher score on the autonomic stability on the Neonatal Behavioural Assessment Scale [ ]. Further, in the rhesus macaque elevated milk cortisol at peak lactation (3–4 months lactation) is also positively associated with infant weight gain [ ]. More recently another study showed on cortisol in HM showed its role towards early metabolic programming, and suggested its importance in providing protection against obesity [ ]. Together, these findings suggest that milk glucocorticoids are bioactive signalling agents by which maternal physiology may modulate offspring growth and behavioural development. Despite the potential significance of HM glucocorticoids few studies have examined factors influencing their abundance. One key aspect contributing to the complexity of HM is the circadian variation in its composition [ ].
HM fat has exhibited significant 24 h variation, with total fat content varying at different times of the day. Kent et al. [ ] found higher lipid concentrations during the day and evening, compared to the milk expressed during early morning and night. However these changes could reflects higher degree of fullness of the breast, rather than circadian variations [ , , ]. Although many other components of milk including amino acids, melatonin and trace elements have shown temporal correlation with maternal rhythms [ , ]. A recent study has identified the presence of circadian regulation of glucocorticoids in HM. This study demonstrates the presence of peak concentrations of cortisol and cortisone around 0700 h, declining through the remainder of the day [ ]. The purpose of the current study is to further the analyse of concentrations of cortisol and cortisone over a 24 h period, in HM obtained from exclusively breastfeeding women. This study aimed to additionally identify whether glucocorticoids differed over the duration of a feed, with analysis in HM donated immediately before and after infant feeding, across both breasts. We hypothesised that the described circadian regulation of blood glucocorticoid hormones would be reflected in the levels measured in HM, with concentrations falling from pre- to post-feeding samples.
Methods
Study Design and Subjects
Mothers were recruited through the Western Australian branch of the Australian breastfeeding Association and through the Child and Adolescent Community Health Nurses of the Oceanic Region. Written informed consent was obtained from the participants. The study protocol was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of the University of Western Australia.
Milk Collection
All participating mothers were asked to collect the milk samples (1–2 ml) either by using manual expression or by using an electric breast pump into 5 ml polypropylene vials (Disposable Products Pty Ltd., Australia). Milk samples were taken immediately before (pre) and after (post) each breastfeeding session, from each breast at each feed over an entire 24 h period. All of the samples were initially stored in the mother’s home freezer, prior to transport to the laboratory where they were stored at -20 °C. Samples were shipped to Auckland (New Zealand) for subsequent glucocorticoid analysis on dry ice and were kept at -80 °C frozen until analysis.
Milk samples were divided into four intervals of six hours as described by Khan et al. [ ] and were classified as morning (0401–1000 h), afternoon (1001–1600 h), evening (1601–2200 h) and night (2201–0400 h). These time periods were used in subsequent statistical analysis.
Sample Preparation
Milk steroids were measured by using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. The internal standard consisted of 12 ng/ml cortisol d4, 60 mg/ml corticosterone d8, prepared in water. Preparation was initiated by adding 100 μl of internal standard to 100 μl HM. All milk samples were heated at 37 °C for 10 min and vortexed for 20 s before adding 100 μl of sample to glass tubes with internal standards. Steroids were then extracted using 1 ml ethyl acetate (Merck, Germany); the top organic layer was removed into a separate tube and then vacuum dried (Savant, SC250EX, Thermo Scientific, United States) for ~2 h. The dried residues were reconstituted with 80 μl of 50% methanol (Merck, Germany) /water and transferred to HPLC injector vials. All samples were run in duplicates and average values are reported.
Liquid Chromatography- Tandem Mass Spectroscopy
The HPLC Mass Spectrometer (MS) used a Surveyor MS pump and auto sampler followed by an Ion Max APCI source on a Finnigan TSQ Quantum Ultra AM triple quadrupole mass spectrometer, all controlled by Finnigan Xcaliber software (Thermo Electron Corporation, San Jose, CA.) The mobile phase was a methanol-water gradient starting at 50:50( v /v) (peaking at 80:20 before returning back to 50:50) at 500 μl/min. The chromatography was performed at 40 °C. The instrument was set up in selective reaction monitoring (SRM) mode with the following mass transitions: m/z 363.1 → 121 for cortisol, 361.1 → 163 for cortisone, 367.1 → 121 for cortisol d4 and 355.2 → 125.2 for corticosterone d8. Dissociation voltage was 24 V and the collision gas (Argon) was set at 1.2 mTorr for all steroids.
Steroid concentrations were calculated from a standard curve generated for each steroid relative to its internal standard (cortisol d4 for cortisol and corticosterone d8 for cortisone) from the injection of standards; cortisol 0.05–100 ng/ml, cortisone 0.025–50 ng/ml, diluted into stripped human plasma and extracted in the same way as the samples for each assay.
Statistical Analysis
Linear mixed models were used to investigate differences between glucocorticoid concentrations over the 24 h period with the inclusion of time of the day, and pre and post breastfeed as repeated measures fixed factors and infant gender as a non-repeated fixed factor and maternal BMI and parity as covariates. The 24 h difference between pre and post feed samples were investigated using Univariate analysis and its effect at each time point was tested using student T-test. The 24 h differences between right and left breast milk samples were also tested using a students paired T-test. Between group differences were assessed by using Sidak post hoc method. Pearson correlation was used to analyse the association between the calculated average value of cortisol and cortisone over the 24 h period. Univariate relationships between glucocorticoids and milk intake variables such as breastfed volume, frequency of breastfeeding were performed using linear regression. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistic 2 pg1.InK United States). All the data are reported in text and tables as mean ± (SD) and mean ± (SE) in figures. P values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Lattice plot was created using R software version 2.15.2 and GraphPad Prism version 7.0 was used to create all other graphs.
Results
Participant Characteristics
A total of 502 human milk samples from twenty-three mothers were measured and analysed for glucocorticoid concentrations. Table 1 shows the demographic characteristics of mother and infant. Mean cortisol and cortisone concentrations for the 24 h period were 1.63 (0.75) ng/ml and 3.42 (1.18) ng/ml, respectively, these are presented in Fig. 1 . Table 1 Subject and sample characteristics ( n = 23) Mother characteristics Age in years, mean (SD) 31 (8.14) BMI before pregnancy, mean (SD) 31 (3.92) Parity 1.3 (0.57) Marital status Married n (%) 22 (95.6) Unmarried n (%) 1 (4.3) Maternal BMI Normal weight n (%) 13 (56.5) Overweight n (%) 2 (8.7) Underweight n (%) 7 (30.4) Infant characteristics Male n (%) 18 (78.2) Female n (%) 5 (21.7) Breastmilk and feeding characteristics 24 h breast milk production of both breast (ml), mean (SD) 740 (274.75) Right breast milk production (ml) 389 (144.64) Left breast milk production (ml) 34 (154.57) Total feeds during 24 h period (range) 8–21 Fig. 1 HM glucocorticoids (cortisol and cortisone) over 24 h in individual mothers ( n = 23). Each box of the lattice plot indicates a single mother milk glucocorticoid profile with symbol (○) representing cortisol and (∆) representing cortisone. Each solid line indicates cortisol and dashed line cortisone. Time points are categorised as morning (0401-1000 h), afternoon (1001-1600 h), evening (1601-2200 h) and night (2201-0400 h)
Temporal Changes in HM Glucocorticoid Composition
HM glucocorticoid (cortisol and cortisone) concentration demonstrated a circadian response over the analysed period. Post-hoc analysis identified that 24 h averaged morning samples, cortisol was significantly higher than afternoon ( p < 0.001), evening ( p < 0.001) and night ( p = 0.001) samples. Furthermore, the evening cortisol level was significantly lower than afternoon ( p = 0.03) and night ( p = 0.02) (Fig. 2 a). Similarly, a significant difference was observed in the cortisone levels, with morning cortisone higher than afternoon ( p = 0.01), evening ( p < 0.001) and night ( p < 0.001), whereas evening was significantly lower than afternoon cortisone levels ( p = 0.001) (Fig. 2 b). Fig. 2 HM glucocorticoids Cortisol ( a ) and Cortisone ( b ) concentration throughout the period of 24 h at four different time points. Time points are categorised as morning (0401-1000 h), afternoon (1001–1600 h), evening (1601-2200 h) and night (2201-0400 h).* Represent significant difference from morning milk cortisol levels with remaining time points. # Represent significant difference from evening milk cortisol levels with remaining time points. Error bars represent SEM (standard error of means). Difference over time are expressed as * p < 0.01** p < 0.001, and # p < 0.01 ## p < 0.001
Effect of Breastfeeding on HM Glucocorticoid Composition
The 24 h HM cortisol and cortisone concentrations were not significantly different between pre and post feed samples (cortisol: p = 0.97; cortisone: p = 0.46). The cortisol and cortisone did not differ significantly between pre and post breastfeed samples at any time points, morning ( p = 0.61 and 0.26), afternoon ( p = 0.49 and 0.28), evening ( p = 0.50 and 0.92) and night ( p = 0.58 and 0.86). There was no significant correlation between the 24 h pre and post feed glucocorticoid levels and breastfeed volume (cortisol pre feed p = 0.88, cortisol post feed p = 0.94, cortisone pre feed p = 0. 83, cortisone post feed p = 0.86). Furthermore, each infant had 15 (3.29) breastfeeds during 24 h period, however no significant difference was found between the frequency of breastfeeding and glucocorticoid levels (cortisol p = 0.21 and cortisone p = 0.19).
The HM cortisol concentration did not differ significantly between male and female infants at any time-point, morning ( p = 0.12), afternoon ( p = 0.27), evening ( p = 0.70) and night ( p = 0.42). Similarly, the HM cortisone concentration did not differ significantly between male and female infants at morning ( p = 0.07), afternoon ( p = 0.10), evening ( p = 0.82) or night ( p = 0.61). Furthermore, no significant interaction effect was seen between pre and post breastfeed samples, infant gender, parity, maternal BMI and time of the day.
Between-Breast Difference on HM Glucocorticoid Composition
Overall the 24 h average concentration of HM glucocorticoid (cortisol and cortisone) for the left and right breast was not significantly different (cortisol: p = 0.37; cortisone: p = 0.15). The 24 h average cortisol concentration of milk from left breast was 1.73 (0.70) ng/ml and right was 2.0 (1.01) ng/ml (Fig. 3 a). The cortisone 24 h average concentration from the left breast was 3.83 (1.27) ng/ml and right breast 3.56 (1.35) ng/ml (Fig. 3 b). Fig. 3 Distribution of HM glucocorticoids (cortisol and cortisone) in left and right breast milk collected during the 24 h period. Data is expressed in Mean (SEM)
Relationships between HM Cortisol and Cortisone
The average HM cortisol concentration over 24 h was significantly lower than that of cortisone ( p < 0.001). A significant positive correlation was observed between cortisol and cortisone concentrations in HM ( r = 0.606, y = p < 0.0005) (Fig. 4 ). Furthermore, a moderate correlation between two hormones was observed in the afternoon ( r = 0.75, p < 0.001) and night ( r = 0.62, p < 0.01), whereas a weak correlation was found in the evening ( r = 0.46, p < 0.01) and morning ( r = 0.20, p = 0.34). Fig. 4 Residual scatter plot and fitted regression line for the HM cortisol versus HM cortisone concentration over the 24 h period (averaged data)
Discussion
Glucocorticoids are components of the complex non-nutritive hormonal fraction of HM. Currently there is limited data on the regulation of glucocorticoids in HM, and the circadian pattern of these hormones. Thus this study examined the glucocorticoid concentration of HM samples collected from a cohort of women who were exclusively breast feeding throughout the course of a single 24 h period. Both cortisol (1.60 ± 0.71 ng/ml) and cortisone (3.40 ± 1.18 ng/ml), were present in all analysed samples. The presence of these glucocorticoids, exhibited a pronounced 24 h pattern, characterized by the rapid increase in the cortisol and cortisone levels in the early morning hours followed by the gradual fall throughout the day. This mirrors the well described circadian pattern of glucocorticoids found in the maternal circulation and reported in lactating women [ ]. Further we found no impact of sampling before or after feeding or between breasts indicating time of sampling to be the most critical factor in investigating glucocorticoids in HM.
In humans nearly all bodily functions exhibit circadian rhythms and glucocorticoid displays one of the most distinct circadian rhythms. The circadian rhythm of glucocorticoid release is regulated by the endogenous biological clock, the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the anterior hypothalamus exerts control over the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis response and thus dictates the pulsatile release of cortisol [ ]. Typically plasma cortisol concentrations demonstrate circadian rhythms, with elevated levels in the early morning followed by a gradual decline to around midnight to complete the 24 h cycle, throughout the day [ , , , ]. This circadian pattern of secretion has been speculated to be an important contributant to the effective actions of glucocorticoids in immunity, growth and metabolism, although the precise mechanisms are not well understood [ , , ]. Our data demonstrates replication of this typical circadian pattern, with both cortisol and cortisone concentrations peaking in the early morning before progressively declining throughout the day to reach the lowest point in the evening. These findings are consistent with a recent study that examined the diurnal rhythm patterns of HM in 10 women, 4 weeks postpartum [ ]. In this study glucocorticoids levels were shown to peak at 0700 h when milk was collected 2 hourly for a complete 24 h, mirroring saliva analysis that was conducted at the same time [ ]. Thus the rhythmic behaviour of HM glucocorticoid concentrations found in the current study is likely to be reflective of the concentrations in the maternal circulation. This then reinforces the past observations that maternal physiological environment plays a critical role in dictating the hormonal composition of the human milk [ , ].
There is currently limited insight into how glucocorticoids are transferred from the maternal circulation to the synthesised HM. Animal studies have shown that cortisol can passively diffuse across the cell membrane and maintains a dynamic equilibrium between milk and plasma cortisol levels. In a study of dairy cows, milk cortisol levels were used a reliable indicator of stress response, because a rise in plasma cortisol was reflected in milk [ ]. However, in the current study, glucocorticoids were measured in the milk samples and not in maternal or infant plasma samples, so direct comparison between milk and plasma glucocorticoid concentration was not possible.
As HM composition is dynamic and constantly changing, it is therefore important to further investigate the milk glucocorticoids content with respect to timing of milk secretion (in this study measured in milk obtained before and after the infant fed) and the frequency of feeding. Many studies have reported the effect of breastfeeding on the milk composition by analysis of pre- and post-feed samples [ , , , ]. For instance, milk expressed prior to feed has a lower lipid content, when breast is full, compared to immediately after feed, when breast is empty [ , ]. Interestingly we found that milk removal from the breast by the breastfeeding infant had no influence on glucocorticoid profiles. This is in contrast to what might be expected with the positive effect of lactation in regulating the HPA axis response to both physical and psychological stressed state [ ]. Breastfeeding by the newborn infant tends to reduce plasma cortisol levels and increase both oxytocin and prolactin release [ , ]. Indeed, this is consistent with the calming effect of oxytocin released into the maternal circulation at milk eject which occurs multiple times throughout a breastfeed [ ]. Further, the results from the current study also demonstrate that milk glucocorticoid levels were independent of breastfeeding frequency and feed volume, indicating no difference between frequent and non-frequent breast feeder; despite the considerable variation among the frequency of breastfeeding between mother and infant dyad.
It is well established that milk output from each breasts may not be equal with output from one breast greater than other, however milk composition between breasts remains independent of the breast [ , ]. In this study, no differences in the glucocorticoid profiles of the milk were found between the left or right breast. These results are comparable to the evidence that the macro-nutrient composition of the milk including protein, lactose and leptin have also been shown not to differ between breasts [ , ]. Unlike macronutrient, HM volume is highly sensitive to maternal condition, and its hormonal composition is associated with maternal circulation [ , , ]. Hence, the sample collection techniques, sample timing and volume are the critical factors, which must be characterized pertaining to maternal health and its environment. However, lack of standardised sample collection technique reflects the variability in milk macronutrients, and thus it is challenging for researchers to collect a representative milk sample. Clearly, no single sampling technique could be ideal but our study may enable the selection of an appropriate time for collecting milk samples, for hormonal analysis in future lactation studies.
In humans, two iso-enzymes of 11-β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase catalyse the interconversion of biologically active cortisol into its inactive metabolite, cortisone. We found a moderate positive correlation between the 24 h cortisol and cortisone concentration ( r = 0.66), and found strong positive relationship at afternoon ( r = 0.75) and night ( r = 0.62). Many plasma and serum based studies have suggested closely correlated dynamics between the two hormones under normal physiological conditions, and any alteration in this equilibrium is usually associated with adrenal insufficiency or diseases [ , ]. Equilibrium between these hormones might be involved in the regulation of glucocorticoids levels in milk as well. Chen et al. [ ] identified maternal stress, long labour and primiparity, as the predictor of delayed onset of lactation. Cortisol a classical regulator of stress and is a permissive hormone which plays an important role in milk secretion and onset of lactation [ ]. However, it would be interesting to further identify, the role HM cortisol plays as a predictor of lack or/delayed onset of lactation in lactating mother with chronic stress or depression.
Recent research suggests that HM composition differs depending upon infant gender, and tends to favour greater nutritional investment for male offspring [ ]. Additionally, mothers of male offspring had higher cortisol in their milk compared to the mothers of female offspring [ ]. One limitation of the current sample cohort was that there were few female infants, thus it is not possible to report with any confidence on the presence of any potential gender differences in the glucocorticoids. However, previous studies have shown that infant sex has very little effect on the glucocorticoids levels in plasma and serum [ , ]. Secondly, the absence of maternal plasma samples collected at the time of breastfeeding makes it impossible to establish that the relationship in HM glucocorticoids correlates with maternal concentrations. As such, additional analysis is required, including the analysis of potentially important variables including parity, maternal social and environmental circumstances.
One key feature of the current study was the measurement of glucocorticoids in milk using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS). In our study, milk cortisol concentration ranged between 0.1–11 ng/ml and cortisone was between 1.7–14.0 ng/ml, which was either lower/ similar to previous reports for both milk (0–218 ng/ml) and plasma (50–230 ng/ml) [ ]. Variation between present and previous studies could be due to the differences in detection methodology, particularly the use of immunoassay analysis, which lacks specificity of analysis due to cross-reactivity with other related glucocorticoids [ , , , , ]. Compared to immunoassay, the method used in current study has both a simplified sample preparation workflow and the ability to quantify both cortisol and cortisone simultaneously [ , ].
This study was further strengthened by sample homogeneity, at the time of milk collection infants’ age were within the narrow range of 3.2 (1.2) months, which provides a critical measurement of the duration of maternal lactation, further affecting the milk composition. Therefore, the mothers recruited in the current study, produced a homogenous set of milk samples with minimal variation.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrates the fluctuating glucocorticoid profile of human milk samples throughout the day, closely align with the circadian rhythm of plasma cortisol that has been previously reported [ , ]. The milk glucocorticoids levels were highest during morning and lowest prior to sleep; however further studies are required to elucidate the mechanistic and functional consequences of the milk glucocorticoids on infant growth and development.