Introduction
Three-dimensional cell culture systems have been caught up with an increasing number of publications in the recent years [ ]. Therefore, and due to the growing interest in applying 3D cell culture models, a shift in cell culture paradigm towards three-dimensional may be expected in the coming years [ ]. For their extended use in future it is necessary to establish standardized and reproducible protocols for generation of multicellular tumor spheroids (MCTS, shortly termed as spheroids) of comparable size, structure and shape [ ]. Three-dimensional cell cultures display a variety of features, which are absent in cell monolayers, such as a complex network of cell-cell contacts and advanced extracellular matrix. They develop pH, oxygen, metabolic and proliferative gradients causing stratification in mature spheroids, which resemble avascular stages of solid tumors [ , , , ] and micrometastases [ ] mimicking the situation in vivo. The spheroid structure is driven by nutrient and signal gradients [ ] resulting in an outer zone of proliferating cells, followed by an inner hypoxic area with quiescent cells [ ], which encloses a necrotic core [ ]. Due to this in vivo-like composition, MCTS offer a great potential to study the molecular properties of tumors. However, despite this intrinsic potential for numerous applications, their advantages seem to be underestimated [ ] which may be due to limited technical information available in literature [ ]. Therefore, optimized and standardized protocols for spheroid formation are needed. Here, we tested 42 different experimental conditions for spheroid generation on the following breast cancer cell lines: MCF-7, a non-invasive, hormone positive and HER2 negative cell line [ ], SK-BR-3, a more invasive, hormone negative and HER2 positive cell line [ ], and the triple negative and invasive cell line MDA-MB-231 [ ].
In contrast to the frequently missing exact description of MCTS in literature [ ], we have applied a strict definition based on characteristics recognizable in light microscopy: three-dimensional growth, spherical shape, high compactness, concluded, smooth rim, and an even surface. We classified the formed structures in spheroids, multiple small spheroids, compact and loose aggregates, and single cell suspension (Table 1 ), based on the definition for spheroids as described in Vinci et al. [ ]. In the following section we outline specific methods, which we recommend for use in this assay. Table 1 Classification of structures formed under tested conditions. The formed structures were classified in spheroids, multiple small spheroids, compact aggregates, loose aggregates or singular cell suspension. Open image in new window
Material and Methods
Cell Culture
MCF-7 (ATCC® HTB-22TM) and SK-BR-3 (ATCC® HTB-30TM) breast cancer cells were cultured in DMEM high glucose, MDA-MB-231 (ATCC® HTB-26TM) breast cancer cells in RPMI 1640. Cells were trypsinized as soon as confluence was observed until passage 35 (MCF-7; MDA-MB-231) or 65 (SK-BR-3). All cell cultures were performed at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere with 5 % CO 2 and all media were supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum (for all reagents in this paper, see Table 2 ). Table 2 List of equipment and reagents used for generation and analysis of multicellular tumor spheroids Plastics and equipment Company Petri dishes 6 cm; 10 cm Greiner Bio-One, Frickenhausen, Germany NuclonTM Surface dishes 6 cm NuncTM, Roskilde, Denmark 96-well plates Cellstar® (see Table 2 ) Greiner Bio-One IKA KS 260 basic Laborgeräte München, Munich, Germany Cellstar® 48–well plates Greiner Bio-One Life-Imaging microscope with incubator Axio Observer Z1 Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany ZEN blue software Carl Zeiss MS2 Minishaker IKA® Laborgeräte München Heraeus Multifuge 1S Centrifuge ThermoScientific, Waltham, MA, USA microtome Microm Microm, Walldorf, Germany poly-L-lysine-coated glass slides Reagents Company DMEM with high/ low glucose Sigma, St. Louis, USA RPMI 1640 Sigma 10 % fetal calf serum Gibco, Paisley, UK 0.05 % trypsin-EDTA Gibco Ham’s F12 Sigma methocel Sigma growth-factor reduced Matrigel BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany 2 % poly-HEMA Polysciences, Eppelheim, Germany pooled plasma Institute for Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital Jena fibrinogen Stago, Asnières sur Seine, France Mayer’s hematoxylin and eosin Y solution Sigma DePex SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany hydrogen peroxide Sigma Vectastatin® Elite® ABC Kit Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, USA primary antibodies Ki-67 1:50 Dako, Hamburg, Germany cPARP 1:200 New England Biolabs, Beverly, USA MUC-1 1:5000 Dako AEC substrate BioGenex, San Ramon, USA Mowiol Carl Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany
Spheroid Generation
The efficacy of three different methods for spheroid generation has been compared (Fig. 1 , for protocols see Table 3 ): the hanging drop method (2.3.1.), liquid overlay technique (2.3.2.) and suspension culture (2.3.3.). Fig. 1 Overview of the tested spheroid generation protocols. Three principally different methods have been tested and compared for their suitability for generating spheroids from 3 breast cancer cell lines. Each method has been applied under varying conditions as displayed Table 3 Methods and simplified protocols for generation of breast cancer cell line multicellular tumor spheroids and their respective components. Recommended culture period for all is 3 days Hanging drop method Place up to 45 hanging drops under the lid of a Petri dish Drop volume 20 μl Cell number 400–10,000 cells/drop Additives 25 % methocel (with or w/o 1 % Matrigel) Media (used in this paper) RPMI 1640, DMEM high or low glucose (each 100 % or 50:50 mixed with Ham’s F12) Liquid overlay technique Use 96-well plates. Cellstar® V-shape coated or not with 2 % poly-HEMA Cellstar® Cell Suspension Cellstar® Cell-Repellent Surface Volume 100 μl/well Cell number 10,000 cells/well Additives 25 % methocel without or with 1 % or 3.5 % Matrigel Medium depending on cell line Suspension culture on non-coated plates Culture cells in Petri or Nunclon™ dishes under slight shaking (100 rpm, or not) Cell number and volume on a 6 cm diameter Petri dish 0.2 × 10 6 cells in 5 ml medium on a 10 cm diameter Petri dish 0.75 × 10 6 cells in 10 ml medium Additives none or 25 % methocel Medium depending on cell line
The Hanging Drop Method
For comparison of cell number influence on generation of spheroids, different numbers of cells (400–10,000) were seeded in hanging drops (20 μl) under the lids of cell culture plates for 3 days. Experimental approaches differed in the type of media and additives in hanging drops: DMEM high glucose (medium 1, labelled as “M1”), DMEM low glucose (Sigma; “M2”), RPMI 1640 (“M3”), a mixture of Ham’s F12 (Sigma) and DMEM high glucose (50 %/50 %; “M4”) or a mixture of Ham’s F12 and DMEM low glucose (50 %/50 %; “M5”). In addition, 25 % methocel or 25 % methocel plus 1 % growth-factor reduced Matrigel were added to the cell suspension for increasing viscosity. The methocel stock solution was prepared as described by Korff and Augustin [ ]. The process of thawing and pipetting of Matrigel was done as described by Ivascu et al. [ ].
Liquid Overlay Technique
Round bottom Cellstar® Cell-Repellent Surface, Cellstar® Cell Suspension and Cellstar® V-shape plates were used. Cellstar® Cell Suspension and Cellstar® V-shape 96–well plates were additionally coated with 2 % poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (poly-HEMA). A total suspension volume of 100 μl containing 10,000 cells, cell-specific medium and additives (25 % methocel, 25 % methocel plus 1 % Matrigel or 3.5 % Matrigel) was added to wells. Cells were cultivated for 3 days.
Suspension Culture on Non-Coated Plates
Cell suspensions were seeded at defined densities in their respective medium in different cell culture dishes to compare their suitability for the generation of MCTS: 6 cm Petri dishes (0.2 × 10 6 cells in 5 ml), 6 cm Nuclon™ Surface dishes (0.2 × 10 6 cells in 5 ml) or 10 cm Petri dishes (0.75 × 10 6 cells in 15 ml medium). The cells were incubated in pure medium or medium supplemented with 25 % methocel for 3 days and exposed or not to slightly shaking at 100 rpm.
Microscopical Analysis of Formed Structures
Eight mm of the narrow end of 200 μl pipette tips were cut for enlarging the aperture diameter to transfer the formed structures into 400 μl cell-specific medium in Cellstar® 48–well plates. Size and morphology of the formed structures were evaluated and recorded using a Life-Imaging microscope with incubator Axio Observer Z1. Pictures were taken with an AxioCam MRm Rev.3 camera using ZEN blue software (Table 4 ). Table 4 Immunohistochemistry protocol for 3D structures. Generated structures can be transferred from site of production to site of analysis by using 200 μl pipette tips after cutting eight mm of the narrow end for enlarging the aperture diameter Embedding of formed structures Transfer six of the formed spheroid-like structures in 200 μl pooled human plasma in a 0.5 ml tube. Wait until sedimentation of the structures, add 20 μl fibrinogen and vortex the sample carefully for 20 s. The sample needs 5 min for coagulation at room temperature. Fix the coagulated structure in 4 % formalin. Perform final paraffin embedding. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining Cut 4 μm sections from the paraffin blocks at a microtome. Float section onto poly-L-lysine-coated glass slides and wait until the sections are air-dried. Deparaffinize sections in xylene and rehydrate in a graded ethanol series. Perform HE staining according to routine protocols. Wash sections in distilled water, dehydrate in a graded ethanol series, clear in xylene and mount in DePex. Evaluate sections at an appropriate microscope. Immunostaining of formed structures After deparaffinization and rehydration in a graded ethanol series, block the endogenous peroxidase by hydrogen peroxide. Perform antigen retrieval by boiling in 0.1 M citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 16 min. Wash sections in PBS and incubate them for 20 min in blocking solution. Incubate sections with primary antibodies in a humid chamber at 4 °C overnight. Wash sections in PBS and incubate them with biotinylated secondary antibodies, expose to the avidin-peroxidase and develop with AEC substrate. Counterstain sections with Mayer’s haematoxylin and mount in Mowiol. Evaluate immunostained sections at an appropriate microscope.
Paraffin Embedding of Formed Structures and Cell Monolayers
Structures formed in hanging drops have been transferred into poly-HEMA coated 96-well plates and cultured conventionally. After 0 h, 6 h, or 48 h, they were placed into a 0.5 ml reaction tube filled with 200 μl pooled plasma from healthy anonymous blood donors. After sedimentation of the formed structures, 20 μl fibrinogen were added and the samples were vortexed for 20 s. After 5 min of coagulation at room temperature, samples were fixed in 4 % formalin. Cell suspensions from monolayers were centrifuged (25,200 x g, 10 min) using a Heraeus Multifuge 1S Centrifuge and the cell pellet was resuspended in 1 ml pooled plasma and treated like the formed structures. The final paraffin embedding was performed as described by Lupp et al. [ ].
Hematoxylin and Eosin (HE) Staining
From the paraffin blocks, 4 μm sections were cut using a microtome, floated onto poly-L-lysine-coated glass slides and air-dried. Subsequently, sections were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in a graded ethanol series. HE staining was performed according to routine protocols using Mayer’s hematoxylin and eosin Y solution [ ]. Thereafter, sections were washed in distilled water, dehydrated in a graded ethanol series, cleared in xylene and mounted in DePex. Sections were evaluated by use of an Axio Imager A1 microscope.
Immunostaining of Formed Structures
Sections of embedded structures and cellular monolayers were deparaffinized, rehydrated in a graded ethanol series and the endogenous peroxidase was blocked by hydrogen peroxide. Antigen retrieval was performed for the histochemical detection of all antigens by boiling in 0.1 M citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 16 min. After washing in PBS, sections were incubated for 20 min with blocking solution followed by incubation with primary antibodies against Ki-67, cPARP and MUC-1 in a humid chamber at 4 °C overnight. After washing in PBS, the specimens were incubated with biotinylated secondary antibodies, exposed to the avidin-peroxidase complex and developed with AEC substrate. Sections were counterstained with Mayer’s haematoxylin, mounted in Mowiol and evaluated at an Axio Imager A1 Microscope.
Evaluation and Nomenclature of Formed Cellular Structures
The formed structures have been classified by applying the following categories: “spheroids”, “multiple small spheroids”, “aggregates” (compact or loose) or “single cell suspensions” (Table 1 ). Each of a total of 42 individual methodological setups has been repeated at least 3 times in 6 replicates ( n = 18 up to n = 200 independent spheroid formation preparations). The most practicable setups leading to spheroids have been repeated routinely ( n > 1000) as they have been produced for further experiments which are not part of this paper.
Statistics
Aim was to identify the most frequent outcome of each setup. The respective structures have been categorized as being generated at a frequency of >90 %, >80 % or >70 %.
Results
Breast Cancer Spheroid Formation
None of the used cell lines formed spheroids in hanging drop cultures without addition of a viscosity raiser (data not shown). The addition of 25 % methocel led to regularly shaped MCF-7 spheroids in each drop independently of the culture media. MDA-MB-231 cells generated compact aggregates at higher cell numbers and SK-BR-3 cells formed exclusively loose aggregates independently of the culture media. By applying the liquid overlay technique or suspension cultures, only very specific setups allowed the formation of spheroids. SK-BR-3 cells did not form spheroids under the tested conditions, but compact aggregates being the best observed result. The only condition for spheroid generation in MDA-MB-231cells was the liquid overlay technique on a Cellstar Cell-Repellent Surface and 3.5 % Matrigel (microphotographs in Fig. 2 ; summarized results in Fig. 3 ). Fig. 2 Representative microphotographs of most frequently formed structures from breast cancer cell lines after 3 days culture under different conditions. MCF-7 and SK-BR-3 cells were cultured in DMEM high glucose medium, MDA-MB-231 in RPMI 1640. The generated structures have been classified as spheroids ( Aa , A b , Ad , B a , Bc , Bf ), multiple small spheroids ( B b , C a , C b ), compact aggregates ( Ac , Af , Bd , Bi , Cc , Cd ), loose aggregates ( Ae , Ag – l , Be , Bg ) or single cell suspension ( B h ). Each indicated setup has been repeated at least 18 times. For summary see Fig. 3 . Scale bars = 100 μm Fig. 3 Representative structures as mostly formed from breast cancer cell lines after 3 days culture under different conditions. Schematic summary of results from 42 different setups for spheroid generation in the breast cancer cell lines MCF-7, SK-BR-3 and MDA-MB-231. Representative photographs are shown and described in Fig. 2 . The symbols display the most frequently generated structure obtained by application of the respective setup. The triangles indicate the frequency of these structures. n varied between setups due to their different complexicity ( n = 18 to n > 1000)
Immunostaining
After 3 days of generation in hanging drops, MCF-7 spheroids showed a homogenous inner structure (Fig. 4 a-d). After additional 6 h of spheroid culture on plates, MCF-7 spheroids were morphologically altered. A minority of the spheroidal MCF-7 cells became apparently larger and had a pale cytoplasm (Fig. 4 e). The expression of MUC-1 was decreased, particularly in cells of the core (Fig. 3 a f). After 48 h culture on a plate, the spheroidal core disorganized while the spheroidal rim remained organized (Fig. 4 i) in comparison to younger MCF-7 spheroids (Fig. 4 a). Simultaneously, in the core MUC-1 expression increased (Fig. 4 j), Ki-67 decreased, and cells became cPARP-positive (Fig. 4 a k-l). In contrast to MCF-7 spheroids, after 3 days of culture in the hanging drops, MDA-MB-231 aggregates displayed lower cell density (Fig. 4 p), and consequently, did not differentiate into inner core and an outer proliferating zone (e.g., 48 h Fig. 4 r-s). In two dimensional cell cultures, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells expressed Ki-67 in nuclei, and were cPARP-negative. MCF-7, but not MDA-MB-231 cells were MUC-1-positive (Fig. 4 m-o; t-v). Fig. 4 HE and immunostaining of MCF-7 spheroids/ monolayers and MDA-MB-231 aggregates/ monolayers. The microphotographs show HE staining ( a , e , i , p ), immunlocalization of MUC-1 ( b , f , j , m , q , t ), Ki-67 ( c , g , k , n , r , u ) and cPARP ( d , h , l , o , s , v ) in MCF-7 spheroids ( a – l ), MCF-7 monolayers ( m – o ), MDA-MB-231 aggregates ( p – s ) and MDA-MB-231 monolayers ( t – v ). MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells were cultured 3 days in hanging drops with 25 % methocel, 10,000 cells/drop. Formed MCF-7 spheroids were analyzed immediately after formation (0 h; a - d ), or cultivated for further 6 h ( e – h ) or 48 h ( i – l ) in a conventional poly-HEMA coated 96 well plate. Immediately after formation, MCF-7 spheroids were compact ( a ). In some figures the spheroidal inner zone is exemplarily indicated by asterisks ( b , j ) or by dotted lines ( a , f , i ). Almost all cells expressed MUC-1 ( b ) and most nuclei were Ki-67 positive ( c ). In contrast, cPARP was only expressed in few cells ( d ). After 6 h, some larger MCF-7 cells with pale cytoplasm ( arrows ) appeared in the core and at the interface to the outer spheroidal rim ( e ). In the inner spheroidal cells MUC-1 expression was decreased ( f ). Most nuclei (in the spheroidal rim and core) were Ki-67 positive ( g ) and cells were cPARP negative ( h ). After 48 h, spheroids developed a disintegrated spheroidal core, whilst the outer rim was still organized ( i ). The expression of MUC-1 in the core was increased ( j ). Ki-67 positive nuclei were detectable in the outer rim but not in the disintegrated core ( k ). Almost all cells in the spheroid core were cPARP positive, but in the organized spheroidal rim cPARP negative ( l ). MUC-1 ( m ) and Ki-67 ( n ) were expressed constantly in MCF-7 monolayers which were cPARP-negative ( s ). MDA-MB-231 aggregates ( p – s ) were analyzed immediately after generation or after further 48 h culture in poly-HEMA coated 96 well plates. MUC-1 was expressed at different intensities in approximately half of the cells ( arrows ; q ). Several nuclei were Ki-67 positive ( arrows ; r ), and a few cells were cPARP positive ( s ). MDA-MB-231 monolayers were MUC-1 negative ( t ), Ki-67 positive ( u ) and cPARP negative ( v ). Scale bars = 50 μm
Discussion
The hanging drop spheroid generation protocol established in our study differs from previous protocols which used lower concentrations of methocel (0.24 %) and did not lead to spheroid formation [ ]. In general, hanging drops represent an attractive alternative for spheroid production, because they are easy to handle, inexpensive and useful for further experiments, e.g., in toxicity testing [ ]. The here presented method is optimized and standardized and might therefore help to overcome previously reported problems with inconsistent spheroid size, variable cell populations and high expenses [ ]. The liquid overlay technique established by Ivascu and Kubbies [ ] is rapidly gaining popularity. Recently, several spheroid generation protocols have been established based on this method [ , , , ]. Although the liquid overlay technique is considered to be an established method for the formation of spheroids, variations exist depending on the type of well plates. When using V-shaped [ ] or U-shaped [ ] wells, cells can be pelleted in the well cone by smooth centrifugation in contrast to F-shaped wells [ ]. Different non-adherent substrates such as agarose [ , , , ] and poly-HEMA [ ] prevent cell adhesion and change spheroid morphology. Further, some biotechnology companies offer 96-well plates with special non-adherent coatings as well. In order to compare the effects of different coatings on spheroid formation in breast cancer cell lines, we have used different types of 96-well plates. The best results were achieved by using the Cellstar ® Cell-Repellent Surface well plate enabling MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 spheroid formation (Fig. 2 B c,f).
In suspension cultures , MCF-7 cells generate spheroids which can be improved by continuous spinning [ ]. Although this method displays some advantages like easy application, low costs and the possibility of scale-up production, the most critical limitation is the variability in spheroid size and morphology [ ]. In our experiments suspension culture of MCF-7 cells in Petri dishes with or without methocel revealed formation of heterogeneous spheroids which complicates standardization for subsequent experiments (Fig. 2 C). Compactness of inner zone of MCF-7 spheroids was proven by HE- and immunostaining. MCF-7 spheroids generated during 3 days in hanging drops were compact and almost all cells were proliferating, whereas only few cells were apoptotic. Extended spheroid culture time of up to 5 days decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis. These spheroids presented typical characteristics of central necrotic regions. The increasing depletion of oxygen and nutritive substances in growing spheroids may cause an energy and ATP deficit and an accumulation of fatty acids in the cells, detectable as lipid droplets. The process may be followed by tissue disintegration and destruction in the inner region which leads to the characteristic stratified composition of spheroids and depends on size, culture time and cell type [ ]. Spheroids larger than 500 μm display the concentrically layered structure with a necrotic core surrounded by a viable layer of quiescent cells and an outer rim of proliferating cells within 3–5 days [ , , , ], while smaller spheroids of around 200 μm need more time (~8 days) to develop central, hypoxic core regions with necrotic areas [ , ].
Spheroid formation required the addition of methocel and/or Matrigel to the medium in all successful approaches. Without additives no cell line generated spheroids. Previously, it has been shown that Matrigel used as viscosity-increasing additive induces MDA-MB-231 and SK-BR-3 in a single cell suspension to form cell aggregates which do not fulfill our definition of spheroids as used in the present paper [ ]. In our hands, SK-BR-3 cells did not form spheroids under the tested conditions, but formed compact aggregates on Cellstar ® Cell-Repellent Surface well plates coated with 3.5 % Matrigel. Compared to previously published protocols we employed higher concentrations of Matrigel and methocel for the generation of spheroids [ , ]. Applying Matrigel and methocel in combination had no added impact on spheroid generation in breast cancer cell lines.
Conclusions
In the present study we have analyzed the influence of 42 different experimental approaches on the capability of inducing spheroids in three commonly used breast cancer cell lines. While MCF-7 cells easily formed spheroids under different conditions, only one single protocol yielded spheroids in MDA-MB-231 cells. SK-BR-3 cells did not form spheroids under the tested setups. The different spheroid formation capabilities of different cell lines stress the need for standardization of spheroid generation protocols for better comparability of international data and for avoiding of unnecessary spending of resources for their establishment at different laboratories. Based on our results we assume hanging drops as the most appropriate method for reproducible generation of spheroids with similar size, shape and structure. We show a comprehensive overview of the different outcomes of spheroid formation depending on the applied protocol and provide an easy-to-follow protocol as supplementary information.