Introduction
Breast cancer (BC) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer and is the second cause of cancer related mortality among females according to US cancer statistics in 2014 [ ]. In Australia, it is estimated that 15,600 females will be diagnosed with BC and 3,040 BC related deaths will occur in 2015 [ ]. A well established predictor of BC risk is percent mammographic density (PMD), with values greater than 75 % PMD conferring 4–6 fold higher risk of BC than those in the lower 10 % [ ]. Adjusted for age and body mass index, MD appears to be the second highest risk factor for BC after BRCA mutation. MD reflects the quantity of non-adipose tissue of the breast; namely epithelial and stromal tissues [ ] and histologically, the key difference is the significantly higher amounts of stroma in high MD regions [ , ]. Stroma consists of cells (fibroblasts, myofibroblast, inflammatory cells) and extracellular matrix (ECM). Despite extensive research, the molecular and pathobiological mechanisms underlying the association between BC predisposition and MD remain poorly understood. One mechanism that partially explains such association is that increased matrix stiffness through altered ECM composition, which is associated with increased MD [ , , ], could generate and maintain BC through altered mechano-transduction in mammary epithelial cells [ , ]. Therefore, altering MD through targeting its structural basis may be a reasonable approach for BC risk management. Several changes in the ECM are associated with initiation and progression of BC [ ].
Collagens- arguably the most prominent component of mammary ECM- have been found to correlate directly with PMD [ ] have been implicated in malignancy and BC progression as well [ , , , , , ], and have been studied as potential therapeutic targets. Some of these studies investigated targeting of collagen receptor DDR2, which is known to facilitate metastasis; however, DDR is not the only collagen receptor over-expressed in BC [ ]. Others studied the cleavage of the collagen VI fragment endotrophin which mediates epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT); however, further studies regarding the required proteases should be conducted [ ]. Collagens interact with many ECM proteins including proteoglycans (PGs) [ ].
PGs are a class of essential biological macromolecules in ECM that play a role in breast carcinogenesis [ , ]. Consequently, their expression levels were found to be different in malignant versus normal breast tissue as well as in high (HMD) versus low (LMD) MD tissue, where MD alteration is consistent with their water sequestering properties [ ]. Their pivotal role in BC and varying expression in relation to MD make them attractive manipulable targets. In fact, PGs seem appealing to be targeted for several reasons: (1) diversity and specificity of their roles in carcinogenesis allow multiple possibilities for potential pharmacological targeting [ , ], (2) ease of accessibility of some PGs i.e., cell surface PGs [ ], (3) promising results (halting primary tumor/ lung metastasis) have been achieved in BC xenograft implanted mice through systemic delivery of some PGs i.e., decorin [ ] and (4) pharmaceutical formulations that regulate expression of some PGs already exist [ ]. In this review, we aim to summarise changes in PG levels in BC and any potential correlations with MD. Such knowledge will help to develop and select appropriate PG modifying agents either to replace the deficient PG or to inhibit the excess PG as a therapeutic approach for women with BC, or as a preventive strategy in those with HMD.
Classification of Proteoglycans
PGs are composed of a protein core, covalently linked to differentially sulfated chains of repeating disaccharides called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). The latter subsequently include multiple subclasses; most importantly: heparan sulfate (HS), heparin, chondroitin sulfate (CS), dermatan sulfate (DS), keratan sulfate (KS) and the non-sulfated hyaluronic acid (HA) [ , ]. GAGs are a family of linear, highly anionic polysaccharides that are composed of repeating disaccharide subunits of an amino-sugar; D-glucosamine or N -acetyl-D-galactosamine, linked to D-galactose for KS, or a uronic acid, D-glucuronic acid or L-iduronic acid, for heparin/HS,DS,CS and HA [ , , ]. Recently, Iozzo et al. [ ] have classified PGs into four types, based on the cellular and subcellular location; namely intracellular PGs, cell surface PGs, pericellular and basement membrane PGs, and extracellular PGs (Fig. 1 ). Taking into account structural considerations, extracellular PGs can also be divided into three families; namely small leucine–rich proteoglycans (SLRP), modular PGs and cell-surface PGs [ ]. Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the proteoglycans in mammary ECM, their cellular locations, and their association with MD. PG associations with BC are indicated by color coding of the legend: Green designates reduced expression in BC, Red designates increased expression in BC, Blue designates no change / unknown expression in BC. Cellular structures abbreviated as follows: MEP myoepithelial cells, BM basement membrane, MF myofibroblast, BV blood vessels, F fibroblast, CF collagen fibre
Extracellular Proteoglycans
Small Leucine –Rich Proteoglycans (SLRPs)
Lumican, decorin and biglycan are the most extensively studied SLRPs in breast tissue ECM. They consist of a core protein of molecular weight of 38 kDa having 10 leucine rich repeats at its N-terminus, covalently linked to GAG moieties. The number and type of GAG chains determine the resulting PG [ , ].
Lumican
Lumican has been identified as the most abundant SLRP in normal and neoplastic breast tissue [ ]. Lumican is involved in the regulation of collagen I fibrillogenesis [ ], cell migration [ ], cell growth [ ], invasion [ ] and angiogenesis [ ]; activities that are intimately related to BC initiation and progression. Leygue et al. [ ] observed higher expression of lumican mRNA and protein in neoplastic breast tissue relative to normal breast tissue. Likewise, proteomic analysis of human infiltrating ductal BC showed increased lumican when compared to non-neoplastic breast tissue [ ]. On the other hand, Eshchenko et al. [ ] reported a 2-3 fold decrease in lumican expression in human BC tissue relative to the normal tissue. Leygue et al. [ ] reported that higher lumican expression in breast tumors was associated with higher grade and lower estrogen receptor (ER) levels; such factors are known to associate with worse prognosis. Conversely, a lower level of lumican expression in breast tumors was found by Troup et al [ ] to be associated with poorer outcome. In correlating tissue composition to MD in normal mammary tissues obtained during breast cancer excision, Alowami et al. [ ] found that those corresponding to HMD showed significantly higher levels of lumican protein than LMD. Such a correlation could be explained through modulatory effects of collagen fibrillogenesis by lumican, which consequently alters MD [ , ]. Being differentially expressed in HMD, lumican could be an attractive target for reducing the MD-associated BC risk.
Decorin
Decorin is known to modulate cell growth and proliferation through down-regulation of growth factors (TGFβ [ ] and VEGF [ ]) and growth factor receptors (EGFR and IGFR) [ ]. These actions are consistent with the immuno-histochemical (IHC) finding of reduced decorin expression in BC tissue when compared with normal breast tissue [ , ]. When administered systemically to mice bearing orthotopic mammary carcinoma xenografts, it suppressed tumor growth and metabolism, reduced levels of the erb B2 oncogene in the tumor and prevented metastatic spread [ ]. It was also reported that reduced decorin expression in invasive BC is correlated with rapid progression, higher recurrence and poor survival [ ], although Skandalis et al. [ ] showed increased decorin associated with in situ carcinomas with malignant-appearing microcalcifications. Reduced decorin expression was observed during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle [ ]. MD has been shown to increase from the follicular to the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle [ , ]; however these studies were relatively underpowered and the changes were small. Conversely, a higher IHC score for decorin was recorded in HMD tissue despite MD being a well recognized and strong risk factor for BC when compared with LMD [ , ]. Decorin modulation of growth factors and their receptors [ ] could be responsible for its probable contribution to the MD state, though unlikely to directly cause MD-associated BC risk. Thus, decorin appears associated with MD rather than BC risk, since reduced decorin is associated with BC in general.
Biglycan
Biglycan is present in almost every organ in the body, however it has been reported to be occasionally present at low levels in normal and neoplastic breast tissue, where its presence correlates with stromal collagen content [ , ]. This observation is consistent with its role in the regulation of collagen fibrillogenesis [ ]. Another important role of biglycan is its ability to act as a ligand for toll-like receptors 2 and 4 (TLR2 and TLR4), which are trans-membrane proteins involved in inflammatory and immune responses that were found to be highly correlated with BC aggressiveness through promotion of cancer cell adhesion and invasiveness [ , , ]. Pre-invasive breast lesions may demonstrate enhanced biglycan expression through TGFβ1 release to generate an invasive microenvironment [ ]. Biglycan down-regulation has been found in cells transformed with the erbB2 /Her2/neu oncogene, the over-expression of which has been correlated with increased MD [ , ]. Conversely, biglycan expression is increased during the transition from lactation to involution, a transition that is marked by decline of PMD in women [ , , , , ], although we have seen increased MD post involution in our murine biochamber model [ ]. A contradictory expectation of PMD rise could be made from Maller et al. [ ] who described increased collagen within mammary glands of parous mice (post involution), however the collagen was found to be less linearised which indicates a decrease in stiffness, which would be less cancer stimulating. The controversial correlations between biglycan expression and MD are obviously related to the multiplicity of its actions, which subsequently indicates that further assessment of biglycan in relation to MD is required.
Modular PGs
The unique structural feature of Modular PGs is the existence of the protein domain in a relatively elongated and highly glycosylated pattern [ ]. These are multi-domain PGs with their central domain carrying GAG side chains, the length of which determine the resulting PG. In addition, the central domain may be flanked by hyaluronan-binding and carbohydrate-binding (lectin-like) regions. According to the presence or absence of these regions, modular PGs are described as hyalectans or non hyaluronan-binding PGs respectively [ ].
Versican
Versican is a hyalectan modular extracellular PG, expressed in five isoforms, denoted V0-V4. Its core protein consists of three domains. The N-terminus domain (G1) contains one IgG fold followed by two consecutive protein modules, which interact with hyaluronan. The C-terminus domain (G3) contains a lectin-binding site, two epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeats and a complement regulatory region. Alternative splicing of the central G2 domain, which contains the GAG attachment sites, generates the different isoforms [ , ] with V3 lacking the G2 domain and thus is not a PG. Versican has been found to be increased in human tumors including BC where it localizes in the proliferating interstitial tissue as well as vascular and perivascular elastic tissue involved in carcinoma invasion [ , ]. In addition, it has been recently found to be highly expressed in BC progenitor cells [ ]. Versican G3 domain enhances BC growth and invasion through up-regulation of EGF signaling, and enhances cell motility through chemotactic mechanisms, thus promoting bone metastasis [ ]. Over-expression of versican in BC confers a higher resistance to certain chemotherapeutics and is associated with poor outcome and higher relapse rate in patients with node-negative BC [ , , ]. Versican accumulation in tumor stroma has been correlated with HMD [ , ]. This could be attributed to hygroscopic effect of the hyaluronan-containing versican macromolecule [ ], since areas of water accumulation would appear mammographically dense [ ]. The relation between water and MD could be explained on account of the higher water content in glandular tissue versus adipose tissue within the breast and the well known higher MD in the former tissue [ ]. Conversely, the effects of parity in reducing both MD and BC risk may be attributed at least partially to reducing the expression of versican through reduced Wnt signaling [ ]. Thus increased versican expression is associated with both MD and BC, making it a candidate target for reducing MD-associated BC risk.
Aggrecan
Aggrecan is a hyalectan modular extracellular PG with a tendency to “aggregate” into hydrophilic macromolecules, accounting for its role in the maintenance of a hydrated state of ECM [ , ]. Aggrecan is a primarily a cartilage-specific PG, making it an important marker of chondroid differentiation of neoplastic tissue; this explains the diffuse strong aggrecan immune-reactivity observed by Kusafuka et al. in matrix-producing BC, a rare histopathologic entity [ ]. Over-expression of the metalloproteinase ADAMTS-4 has, however, been implicated in BC invasiveness through the degradation of aggrecan substrate [ ]. However, aggrecan transcription was found to be unchanged in classic infiltrating ductal BC in comparison with normal breast tissue [ ]. To our knowledge, aggrecan expression in relation to MD has not been investigated. However, along the same lines as versican, it could also cause increased MD on account of its hygroscopic properties.
Perlecan
Perlecan, a pericellular PG, is distributed in the basement membrane of various mammalian tissues including breast tissue and the vascular system, where it plays an essential role in the assembly of the basal lamina [ , ]. The protein core of perlecan consists of five domains. Domain I is located at the N-terminus and contains three GAG attachment sites that are most frequently decorated with HS, but can be decorated with CS or KS or as a GAG free glycoprotein [ , ]. The HS chains in its N-terminus are involved in the control of vascular and tumor cell proliferation and by binding and presenting growth factors such as members of the FGF [ , ] and VEGF families to their receptors [ , ]. Domain V of perlecan is located at the C terminus and contains three folding modules with homology to the laminin globular chain (LG3 domain) and a GAG attachment site. Endorepellin is a recombinantly produced bioactive protein fragment of perlecan domain V containing the LG3 region that has been shown to either inhibit [ , , , , , , ] or promote [ , ] angiogenesis in an organ-specific and cell context-specific manner [ , ].
In invasive BC, insitu hybridization studies revealed significant expression of perlecan mRNA in tumor and stromal cells, despite the IHC finding of reduced perlecan in basement membrane fragments as reported by Nerlich et al. [ , ]. These opposing findings have been attributed to post-transcriptional modification or matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) up-regulation in BC [ ]. Contrary to the Nerlich report, Iozzo et al. observed abundant deposits of perlecan in BC stroma [ ]. Similarly, Jansson et al. reported an up-regulation of perlecan expression in the stroma of malignant breast tumors [ ]. Unexpectedly, comparative proteomic analysis revealed decreased endorepellin LG3 fragment in conditioned media of human malignant versus non-tumor breast cell line cultures. Subsequently, circulating levels of this perlecan fragment were found to be significantly lower in plasma from BC patients than control plasmas [ ]. The latter observation has been attributed to the probable modulation of soluble angiogenic factors by BC cellsto establish a microenvironment that favors their survival. Additionally, plasma perlecan concentration was significantly higher in ER-positive versus-negative BC [ ]. A recent transcriptomal comparative study showed that perlecan is overexpressed by fibroblasts cultured from HMD versus LMD tissues [ ]. As much less is known about perlecan in MD than in BC and in BC the results are complex, this PG definitely warrants further investigation in MD.
Cell Surface PGs
Syndecan
This family of HSPGs contains four members (syndecans1-4), each of which is encoded by distinct genes [ ]. They are expressed mainly on the surface of mammalian epithelial cells and bind the latter to the underlying ECM. The core protein of syndecans consists of three domains; ectodomain, transmembrane and intracellular domains. The ectodomain is decorated by GAG chains, which are the major functional component [ ]. They are known to modulate and regulate many cell behaviors mainly through acting as co-receptors for various growth factors [ ]. The ectodomains may be shed into the pericellular environment through the action of MMPs, converting the membrane bound receptors into soluble effectors in the ECM, thus down-regulating signal transduction [ ]. Syndecan-1 is over-expressed in BC, being detected in both cellular and stromal elements, in contrast to benign breast tumors in which there is no detectable stromal staining [ , ]. In addition, an epithelial to stromal redistribution of syndecan-1 has been observed in malignant versus normal breast tissue [ ]. Syndecan-1expression in BC is correlated with invasiveness, with more intense staining in invasive versus in-situ cancer, and within the infiltrating cancer areas [ ]. Its expression in BC was also found to be significantly correlated with higher tumor grade, larger size, lymph node positivity, absence of ER and higher Ki-67 index-all markers of poor prognosis [ ]. Syndecan-2 has also been recently shown through microarray analysis to be up-regulated in human BC cell lines [ ] and has been shown to promote the invasiveness of these cells [ ] and to suppress the anti-invasive function of syndecan-4 [ ]. Syndecan-3 has not been implicated in cancer conditions [ , ]. Controversial results were reported about syndecan-4 regarding its association with tumor grade and hormone receptor status [ , ] but it is generally known to behave as anti-migratory/ anti-invasive receptor in cancer cells [ ].
An IHC study revealed that syndecan-1 levels were significantly higher in both the epithelium and stroma of mammographically dense versus non-dense regions of histologically normal mammary tissue collected in a pair-wise manner during breast cancer surgery, and assessed radiographically immediately after excision. A strong correlation was seen between epithelial ER α and stromal syndecan-1 expression in dense tissue, but not in non-dense tissue. Enhanced angiogenesis and epithelial proliferation resulting from stromal syndican-1 accumulation could account for the associated higher MD [ ]. The study contradicts the reportedly lower syndican-1 expression during luteal versus follicular phases of menstrual cycle [ ]. Also, despite the reported significant correlation of syndecan-1expression and a higher Ki-67 index, an inverse correlation has been observed between PMD and Ki-76 index [ ]. Similarly, although syndican-1 expression was significantly correlated with an ER negative status of BC, the PMD was observed to be more strongly related to ER-positive rather than ER-negative BC [ ].
Depletion of syndecan-2 in human BC cells inhibits collagen degradation [ ]. This could influence MD as greater amounts of collagen have been found in HMD versus LMD tissues [ ]. Syndecan-4 expression was found through PCR analysis to be significantly higher in mammographically dense breasts of pre-menopausal women [ ].
Collectively, syndecans are important organizers of ECM [ ] which in turn affect MD [ , ]. Particularly strong evidence exists for a stromal syndecan-1 association with both BC and MD, whereas syndecan 4 appears to be discordant between MD and BC. More study of the syndecans in MD is needed.
Glypicans
The glypican family of HSPGs includes six members (GPC1 to GPC6), which are encoded by six independent genes. These cell-surface PGs are bound to the plasma membrane through a lipid moiety and hence can be shed into the EC environment by the action of Notum lipase [ , , ]. Their protein core, though unique, bears similarity in its ecto-domainto the cysteine-rich domain of Frizzled proteins, which may account, in part, for the regulatory role of GPCs to growth factors through modulation of Wnt, Hedgehog, FGFs and BMPs signaling [ , ]. Their structural and functional characteristics account for their role in modulating BC and consequently the expression levels of GPCs vary in BC. Expression of GPC-1 is increased in cancerous versus normal breast tissue, thus may be considered as a biomarker for BC progression [ ]. On the other hand, silencing of GPC-3 expression was detected in human BC. In addition, GPC-3 was reported to inhibit invasion and metastasis in mouse BC models, which suggests a role as a negative BC regulator [ , , ]. Expression of the remaining GPCs was not found to be significant in BC [ , ]. Although, to the best of our knowledge, no studies have directly investigated the correlation between GPCs expression and MD, we could expect changes in GPCs expression with changing MD on account of their growth factor modulatory effects. Such expectation may be supported by the fact that HSPGs in general are known to play an important role in branching morphogenesis of the breast; a developmental process that is known to be age dependent and hormonally controlled, and subsequently affects MD [ , ]. However, further research is needed to ascertain changes in the levels of individual GPCs in HMD versus LMD tissues.
Intracellular Proteoglycans
Serglycin constitutes the sole PG in this group and is composed of a core protein containing a unique repeating serine-glycine region where up to eight CS and HS/heparin can attach [ ]. It is found mainly in haemopoietic lineages and endothelial cells, with implications in intracytoplasmic granular storage, probably due to the electrostatic attraction between the anionic heparin containing moiety and basic residues within the proteases of secretory granules of mast cells [ ]. Serglycin may protect BC cells from complement attack, thereby supporting their survival and promoting metastasis [ , ]. In a recent IHC study, serglycin was demonstrated to be over-expressed in aggressive BC cell lines [ ]. To the best of our knowledge, no study has investigated the relationship between serglycin expression and MD. However, serglycin has recently been reported to be up-regulated in BC cells over expressing NEDD9 protein [ ], the expression of which was found to correlate positively with BC progression [ ]. A similar correlation has been established between MD and BC progression [ ] suggesting that serglycin may be up-regulated in HMD tissues. Direct assessment of serglycin in MD versus non-MD tissues needs to be undertaken.
Heparanase Regulation of HSPGs
The presence of HS side chains as the GAG moiety in the last four mentioned PGs has led them to be considered as a functionally distinct group, named HSPGs [ ]. Because of their important roles in the modulation of breast tumorigenesis and consequently the potential to develop anti-tumorigenic agents, a lot of interest has been generated about their regulating enzyme; heparanase. Heparanase is an endo-glucuronidase that cleaves HS chains, thus regulating their availability and modulating their effects [ ] Heparanase has been found to promote growth, angiogenesis, survival and metastasis of BC [ , ]. It was also found to enhance syndecan shedding [ ], which is known to stimulate cell proliferation and migration [ , ]. In addition, heparanase, acting together with syndecans, facilitates the production of exosomes, which are membrane vesicles containing signaling molecules that have been implicated in promoting tumor progression and may alter chemo-susceptibility [ , ]. Expectedly, heparanse was found to be up-regulated in BC with higher expression levels in more aggressive BC cell lineages [ , ]. To the best of our knowledge, no study has investigated heparanase levels in relation to MD. However, both heparanase over-expression and increased MD are induced by estrogen [ , ], suggesting that HMD tissues may indeed over-express heparanase.
Conclusion
The fact that PGs are among the players in breast carcinogenesis in addition to the observed changes of PG levels in HMD versus LMD (Table 1 ) call for further research to better identify and accurately measure their expression levels in correlation with different PMDs. This, subsequently, will enable us to better target PGs in subjects with BC or HMD with a therapeutic or preventive intent. In some cases (e.g., lumican, decorin, bigylcan), the PG has been differentially associated with MD status and other scenarios associated with BC risk. In considering PG as a chemo preventative target for reducing BC risk by modulating MD, we should focus on PGs that have parallel correlations with both. The reportedly lower decorin and syndican-1 expression in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, despite the confusing MD results, calls for further studies to better elucidate the changing MD in correlation with PG expression in both menstrual phases. This may enable us to better select the optimal timing for PG targeting for therapeutic or preventive purposes. Table 1 Summary of expression levels of different PGs in BC and in relation to MD Proteoglycan Expression level in BC Expression level in relation to MD SLRP • Lumican Controversial results Higher in HMD vs LMD tissues • Decorin a Reduced Higher in HMD vs LMD tissues • Biglycan Increased Controversial results Modular PGs • Versican Increased Increased in HMD tissues • Aggrecan Reduced No available data • Perlecan Controversial results Higher in HMD vs LMD tissues Cell surface PGs • Syndecans Syndecan-1 Increased Increased Syndecan-2 Increased Expected to correlate inversely to MD Syndecan-3 Not implicated in BC No available data Syndecan-4 Controversial results Higher in HMD vs LMD tissues • Glypican Glypican-1 Increased No available data-Not adequately investigated but expected to vary with MD Glypican-3 Reduced Other GPCs Not significant Intracellular PGs • Serglycin Increased Expected to correlate directly to MD Heparanase Increased Expected to correlate directly to MD a denotes discordance in PG levels in relation to BC and MD