Introduction
Cyclooxygenase (COX) is an enzyme which converts arachidonic acid (derived from membrane phospholipids) to cyclic endoperoxidases (prostaglandin G2 and prostaglandin H2), which are then converted to prostaglandins I2, D2 and E2 and thromboxane via their respective synthases [ , ]. The constitutively active form of COX (COX-1) is present in most human tissues, and has particular importance in maintaining the normal lining of the stomach and kidney and in platelet function whereas the inducible form of COX, termed COX-2, participates specifically in inflammation [ ]. Alternative splice variants of COX-1 have been identified (COX-3 and PCOX), as have variants of COX-2, which appear to determine the effect of analgesic/antipyretic drugs [ , ]. COX-1/COX-2 can dimerize however the biological function of these heterodimers is unclear [ ]. COX-2 plays an important role in CI-driven cancer, as reviewed by Harris and colleagues [ ], however how this is achieved is not fully understood.
This review focuses on how CI may influence the formation of tumors and cultivate their growth. We review the large number of studies supporting a role for COX-2 in CI, and then evaluate COX-2 expression in cancer, with a focus on breast cancer and on gestational breast cancer in particular. We assess the efficacy of the commonly used, general COX inhibitor aspirin on reducing breast cancer risk. Narrowing our focus on understanding cancer invasion, we consider COX-2 expression in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and review attempts to inhibit COX-2 in this process in mouse models and in human cancers. Finally, we describe a mechanism through which c-Myb may drive COX-2 expression within a growing, then hypoxic tumor, and how this may contribute to invasion featuring EMT.
Inflammatory States Promoting Tumor Initiation and Growth
Chronic irritation of epithelia and the subsequent activation of inflammatory pathways are intuitively linked to tumor growth. This is typified in Barrett’s esophagus leading to esophageal adenocarcinoma [ ], Helicobacter pylori -driven gastric ulcers leading to gastric cancer [ ] and chronic long-term ulcerative colitis leading to colon cancer [ ]. In breast cancer 1/2, early onset (BRCA1/2) associated breast cancers, tumor-associated CI may provide prognostic value [ ]. These chronic inflammatory states may provide a fertile ground for tumor growth, and as reviewed in [ ]: the persistent attraction of inflammatory cytokines (e.g., tumor necrosis factor-alpha [TNF-α], interleukin-6 [IL-6] and IL-8) to the site of irritation can occur through prolonged exposure of epithelial cells to reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, which are produced by cells exposed to inflammatory cytokines leading to DNA damage and tumorigenesis. Many other steps necessary for tumor formation and metastasis may be fostered in the inflammatory environment, such as the promotion of EMT by transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β), disruption of the epithelial barrier achieved by T helper cell cytokines interferon-gamma (IFN-γ), IL-10 and IL-17, cellular migration aided by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and the synthesis of new blood vessels to bring oxygen to the tumor, as enabled by vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression.
Upon formation of a solid tumor, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) infiltrate peri-tumoral tissues to induce immune tolerance and promote a permissive microenvironment for tumor growth, as reviewed in [ ]. How these cells are drawn to the tumor site is unclear, however MDSC provide cytokines IL-6, and IL-10, and interact with macrophages, regulatory T cells and natural killer cells to maintain immune tolerance [ , ]. Indeed, we have previously described a pro-tumorigenic role for inflammatory mast cells within the tumor microenvironment via IL-6 production [ ] and where mast cells have now been recognized to enhance MDSC activity [ ]. We define how c-Myb and COX-2 act to create an immune suppressive microenvironment in addition to a pro-inflammatory milieu in more detail later in this article.
Aspirin and Cancer Risk
Further validation of the CI-cancer link may be found in the widely reported pharmaceutical benefits of aspirin. Long term use of this anti-inflammatory drug has been reported to reduce the risk of developing cancers of various origins, as reviewed in [ ]. Of relevance to this review, a large number of meta-analyses suggest a relationship between aspirin use and reduced breast cancer risk irrespective of breast cancer subtype, including when estrogen receptor alpha (ER) status is taken into account [ , , ]. Although aspirin may reduce the risk of developing breast cancer, no significant correlation was found with pre-diagnostic aspirin use and survival after breast cancer diagnosis [ , ]. Aspirin efficacy may be affected by genomic variance within the COX-2 ( PTGS2) gene, as Brasky and colleagues discovered a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the COX-2 gene sequence that determined whether aspirin reduced the risk of developing breast cancer [ ]. These kinds of variations ascribed to the individual may contribute to unexpected outcomes of aspirin use.
Role of COX-2 in CI
As reviewed by Ricciotti and FitzGerald [ ], COX-2-synthesized prostaglandin E2 (PGE 2 ) acts on neurons in the peripheral and central nervous system to produce pain at sites of inflammation. Furthermore, PGE 2 acts upon blood vessels, causing them to dilate and become more permeable to allow the influx of inflammatory cells and their cytokine mediators to the site of tissue damage. PGE 2 acts synergistically with the angiogenic factor VEGF to promote the synthesis of new blood vessels that contribute to granulation tissue following injury [ ].
These COX-2 mediated effects on blood vessels meet the demands of a growing tumor. We have previously outlined that chronic inflammatory states are often connected with carcinogenesis, thus COX-2 activation may be a major causative link, as suggested by Greenhough and colleagues [ ]. These authors outlined how COX-2 expression contributes to the hallmarks of cancer proposed by Hanahan and Weinberg [ ] (Fig. 1 , adapted from [ ]). An additional hallmark suggested by Kroemer and colleagues [ ], evasion of the antitumor immune response , is caused by suppressing cytotoxic T cell activation via myeloid-derived suppressor cells. We address new developments in these hallmark areas, related to the action of COX-2, in this review. Fig. 1 COX-2 expression in cancer contributes to a least six hallmarks first defined by Hanahan and Weinberg [ ]. Text beside each hallmark defined in circles radiating from the central COX-2 text indicates the factors through which COX-2 achieves these outcomes. This review focuses on the effects of COX-2/PGE 2 on self-sufficiency in growth signals and tissue invasion and metastasis , in the context of normoxic and hypoxic breast cancer
COX-2 Expression in Cancer
COX-2 expression has been found to be associated with an increased risk of tumor recurrence, advanced cancer stage and/or poor overall survival in a large number of cancers such as ovarian cancer [ , ], osteosarcoma [ , ], pancreatic cancer [ ], gastric cancer [ , , ], classical Hodgkin’s lymphoma [ ], oral squamous cell cancer [ ], melanoma [ ], non-small cell lung cancer [ ] but not lung adenocarcinoma [ ], clear cell renal carcinoma [ ], cervical cancer [ ] and esophageal adenocarcinoma [ ]. The specific expression of COX-2 in breast and colon cancers is detailed later in this article.
In CI, IL-1β can induce VEGF through COX-2 and prostaglandin synthesis [ ], and COX-2 overexpression in MCF-7 human breast tumor cells upregulates VEGF [ ] [ ]. It follows therefore that in tumor types where analysis of COX-2 expression across tumor samples was not informative in terms of prognosis, its correlation with VEGF expression produced a statistically significant prognostic measure. Other informative COX-2-VEGF correlative relationships were found in cancer of the tongue, in which COX-2 and VEGF co-expression correlated with lymphangiogenesis and lymph node metastases [ ]; in oral squamous cell carcinoma where VEGF-C was associated with promoting peri-tumoral lymphangiogenesis [ ], in classical Hodgkin’s lymphoma where both factors correlated with angiogenesis and tumor progression [ ], and in esophageal adenocarcinoma, where COX-2 and VEGF were found to be independently associated with a poor prognosis [ ].
The predictive value of COX-2 in colorectal cancer (CRC) has been inconclusive. In CRC COX-2 was shown to be associated with a poor overall survival [ , , , ] and advanced CRC stage [ , ] however in another study no such correlation was found [ ]. As outlined in Fig. 1 , COX-2 induces chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 2 (CXCL-2) and VEGF to promote angiogenesis to facilitate tumor growth. Indeed, evidence for the existence of a COX-2-VEGF inductive partnership in CRC can be gained from studies examining the effect of COX-2-specific inhibitors, where COX-2 inhibition in CRC cell lines and tumors in vivo has been shown to directly reduce VEGF expression [ , , , ]. Taken together, these findings suggest that the COX-2-VEGF inductive axis contributes to tumor cell growth and metastasis via the pro-angiogenic and lymphangiogenic effects of VEGF, providing for both the oxygenation demands of the growing tumor and the means through which the tumor cells can metastasize.
COX-2 Expression in Breast Cancer
In several breast cancer studies examining COX-2 expression (mRNA and/or protein by immunohistochemistry), COX-2 was only expressed in tumor, not normal breast tissue, and overall its expression in tumors predicted a worse prognosis [ , , , , , , , , ]. COX-2 expression was used to predict whether tumors were likely to metastasize or, in the case of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), to recur. In a study of high-grade breast tumors, COX-2 expression was predictive for lymph node metastasis in tumors greater than 20 mm in size [ , ]. In DCIS, COX-2 expression was predictive for recurrence [ ]. These DCIS lesions were positive for COX-2, p16 and the proliferative marker Ki67, and in invasive cancers, the combination of these markers was significantly associated with relapse [ ]. In another study, COX-2 expression was suggested to be a molecular marker to predict progression of DCIS to invasive carcinoma of the breast [ ]. COX-2 in proliferative (Ki 67+) breast tumors was associated with an unfavorable prognosis but predicted a better outcome if expressed in breast tumors with a low proliferative index [ ]. Finally, in an analysis of studies on the expression of COX-2 in breast cancer from 18 independent laboratories [ ], it was found that COX-2 was overexpressed at all stages of breast cancer. In this collective analysis it was found that COX-2 was highly expressed in 44 % of atypical hyperplasia, 65 % of DCIS, 57 % of invasive cancer and 87 % of metastatic cancer.
COX-2 and the ER
No clear conclusion can be made from comparing the expression of COX-2 and the expression of ER, in breast tumors. In breast cancers of varying stage, COX-2 expression was shown to be inversely correlated with ER expression [ , , , ]. Similarly, stable transfection of ER in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells led to the repression of COX-2 and VEGF-C, in turn leading to a reduction in proliferation and migration of these cells [ ]. Despite these studies supporting an inverse relationship between ER and COX-2, no such correlation was found in other studies [ , ].
These COX-2/ER correlative analyses are influenced by the breast cancer stage, as ER expression is lost as they become more aggressive. It is thought that in ER positive cancers, COX-2 induces aromatase production leading to estrogen availability to drive cancer growth through the ER [ ]. In ER negative cancers, COX-2 may drive cancer growth via AKT pathway activation [ ]. Thus despite the differences in signaling pathways responsible for COX-2 expression, this expression appears to be a constant feature in breast cancer of increasing stage, and as mentioned earlier, a predictor of poor survival.
Contribution of COX-2 to Promotion of Breast Cancer in Post-partum Involution
Breast cancer diagnosed during pregnancy or in the first year postpartum is known as gestational breast cancer (GBC). Although these women tend to present at a later stage than non-GBC cases, stage-matched survival is similar [ ]. Contrastingly, for those diagnosed in the immediate post-partum period this does not appear to be the case, with a number of studies now showing a significantly worse survival compared with diagnosis during pregnancy, after pregnancies that end in other ways e.g., termination and miscarriage, or indeed with young age-matched women with a diagnosis of breast cancer unrelated to pregnancy [ , ].
These disparities suggest a connection between breast involution that occurs during weaning and poor patient outcomes in women with tumors that present at this time. Post-partum mammary gland involution has been described as a natural inflammatory process [ , ], and the genes that are expressed during this time may have potential relevance to breast cancer [ , ]. Involution involves an acute, reversible, phagocytic phase, which in mouse models is induced at 6–12 h post weaning. Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) is up-regulated at this time, and activates the transcription factor signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) [ ], an important factor governing the process of involution. In these mouse models, at around day 3 post weaning, Oncostatin M is also activated, which further activates Stat3 [ ] and heralds the irreversible phase characterized by inflammation of inflammatory cells such as macrophages [ ] and mast cells.
Involution promotes the growth and metastatic invasion of human breast cancer cells in mice, where an inflammatory, pro-tumorigenic environment may be one possible mechanism explaining the growth of these tumors [ ]. Our work has previously shown that the only identified pathological feature of GBC tumors in-vivo associated with poor outcome was minimal or no lymphocytosis [ , ].
The role of COX-2 in GBC is not fully understood. However, Lyons and colleagues delineated a pro-tumorigenic role for COX-2 in post-partum breast cancer [ ], building upon the observation that collagen I is upregulated in the post-partum involuting mammary gland [ ]. Breasts that contain more regions with a higher proportion of collagen, which appears dense on a mammogram (i.e., mammographic density / MD), have an increased risk for breast cancer, and part of this increased risk may be attributable to increased COX-2 [ ].
COX-2 is Associated with Breast Cancer Invasion via EMT
EMT is a means through which epithelial cancers can invade and metastasize (reviewed in [ , ]). EMT is characterized by degradation of inter-cellular adhesion, actin cytoskeleton re-arrangement, the acquisition of an elongated or stellate cellular shape, a switch from apical-basal to front-back polarity, degradation of the extracellular matrix enabling motility and evasion of pro-apoptotic immune signals. In terms of gene expression changes, EMT is typically characterized by E-cadherin repression enabled by up-regulation of one or more of the E-cadherin repressive factors (e.g., Snail1/2, Zeb1/2, Twist1/2). This further leads to the up-regulation of a spectrum of genes necessary for cellular invasion and metastasis, including N-cadherin, MMPs and vimentin (reviewed in [ , ]. Typically, induction of vimentin/repression of E-cadherin is considered a hallmark indicator of EMT.
COX-2 is induced in various pathways to facilitate invasion and metastasis, including EMT, as shown in Fig. 1 . Activation of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) in bladder cancer cells leads to COX-2/PGE2 pathway upregulation which in turn promotes migration and a full EMT [ ]. Similarly, the upregulation of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in hepatocellular carcinoma cells promoted an EMT via COX-2 and protein kinase B (AKT) [ ]. Finally, TGF-β induced EMT features COX-2 in benign but not malignant HaCaT keratinocytes [ ].
In cutaneous squamous cancers COX-2 expression positively correlated with the induction of EMT markers in comparison to normal skin, with tumoral COX-2 expression suggested to contribute to this association rather than COX-2 from stroma or macrophages [ ]. Somewhat converse to this finding, the overexpression of Snail1 in cell lines derived from the same cancer type induced an EMT that did not feature COX-2; indeed Snail1 repressed it [ ].
COX-2 appears to induce an EMT in breast cancer cell lines, promoting invasiveness. This was seen in MCF-7 cells, where COX-2 overexpression induced an EMT that was exacerbated by hypoxia [ ]. In mammary epithelial cells, COX-2 induced an EMT featuring anchorage-independent growth [ ]. In human breast cancers, COX-2 was found to induce membrane-type 1- MMP and its downstream effector MMP-2 [ ], factors important in EMT [ ], thus providing a rational mechanism through which COX-2 can promote breast cancer invasion.
The COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib (also called Celebrex), is the only COX-2 inhibitor approved for human use in the USA, and is additionally used in the treatment of osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, acute pain and as an adjunct to surgery in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients, as reviewed in [ ]. It has also been used in clinical trials in breast cancer, as pre-operative therapy or as a treatment regime in recurrent breast cancer, in these cases alone or in combination with Vinorelbine, Exemestane, Letrozole and Trastuzumab, with varied results (clinicaltrials.gov - a service of the U.S. National Institutes of Health). One particular clinical trial, which is ongoing, is focusing on the use of Celecoxib after breast cancer treatment (chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy) to reduce inflammation and therefore reduce the ability of new tumors to grow and survive (European Celecoxib Trial in Primary Breast Cancer [REACT], Imperial College London, Institute of Cancer Research, UK).
Indeed, EMT marker expression has been used to ascertain COX-2 inhibition treatment efficacy. Thus, Celecoxib was found to be effective in upregulating E-cadherin thus reversing the EMT in cell lines derived from head and neck squamous cancer, colon cancer, gastric cancer and breast cancer [ , , , ]. Another COX-2 inhibitor, Etodolac, had a similar effect in bladder cancer cell lines, where EMT reversal was also seen in vivo in xenografts of the human bladder cancer cell line T24 [ ]. Treatment of the colorectal cancer cell line HT29 with the novel COX-2 inhibitor Apricoxib has shown promise at least in vitro, reversing EMT [ ]. These authors show that forcing an EMT in this cell line, and in non-small cell lung cancer cells, sensitized the cells to Apricoxib, increasing the efficacy of the drug 50-fold, thus suggesting that EMT may increase dependence of these cells upon COX-2. The effect of Apricoxib in reversing EMT has also been demonstrated in human pancreatic cell lines [ ] and in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines [ ].
These studies offer insight into the likely role of the E-cadherin ( CDH1 ) tumor suppressor gene employed by cells expressing COX-2 in the induction of EMT. In bladder and breast cancer the E-cadherin gene is induced by COX-2 appears to be Snail1 [ , ], in non-small cell lung cancer COX-2 induced Snail1 and Zeb1 [ ], whereas in head and neck squamous cancer COX-2 induced Snail1, SIP1/Zeb2 as well as Twist1 [ ].
In contrast to the promising effects of COX-2 inhibition in these cancers in vitro, this is not always associated with a favorable outcome in patients. In non-small lung cancer cells, Celecoxib induced an EMT featuring Snail1, accounting for the observed effect of Celecoxib but in this instance leading to metastasis and chemoresistance [ ]. Therefore the inclusion of COX-2 inhibition in traditional pre-surgery or metastatic disease cancer treatment regimens should be considered with caution. This paradox may be related to the observations that there can be an induction of EMT following treatment with hormonal or chemotherapeutic agents [ ], or hypoxia [ ]. Nevertheless, COX-2 remains an attractive potential target for inhibition of cancers, as reviewed in [ ], and on the whole this approach is likely to show some efficacy in preventing cancer metastasis.
c-Myb in Chronic Inflammatory and Immune Suppressive Pathways Aiding Tumor Growth
As mentioned earlier, pro-inflammatory and immune suppressive settings favor the tumor, and these microenvironmental changes may occur in succession to facilitate tumor formation and growth. c-Myb is an oncoprotein and transcription factor that is required for normal hematopoietic stem cell development and growth. Analogous to the action of COX-2 (Fig. 1 ) c-Myb sustains proliferative signaling in various cancers including colon and breast, as we have reviewed [ ]. A range of studies suggest c-Myb target genes are involved in both CI and survival of immune-directed cytotoxicity, also reviewed [ ]. Inflammatory cytokines trigger tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) and nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB), which in turn can drive c-Myb to induce COX-2 transcription. We have previously defined COX-2 as a direct c-Myb target gene [ ], and c-Myb was essential in mediating a proliferative inflammatory response in an in vitro H 2 O 2 -based model of CI in cancer cells [ ]. We have outlined in Fig. 1 that COX-2 induces factors such as B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2), to enable resistance to cell death and thus evasion of cytotoxic immune signals. Similarly, we have demonstrated that two important proteins used by tumor cells to survive these cytotoxic immune responses, the molecular chaperone protein GRP78 reviewed in [ ] and BCL-2 reviewed in [ ], are regulated by c-Myb [ , ]. Exogenous delivery of c-Myb induced both BCL-2 and GRP78 expression in non-transformed mammary epithelial cells thereby facilitating survival and colony formation in vitro [ ].
c-Myb in Breast Cancer
In models of human and murine breast cancer, we have shown that c-Myb is an essential element in mammary tumorigenesis [ ]. In addition, we have defined a mechanism involving c-Myb through which estrogen activates mammary tumor growth. We have shown that estrogen drives c-Myb expression in ER positive tumors [ ] and that estrogen-activated ER induces c-Myb expression directly by promoting transcriptional elongation beyond the c-Myb intron 1 attenuation region [ ]. c-Myb has been shown to induce ER expression via a similar mechanism, by relieving a block in transcription to permit transcript elongation [ ]. Although c-Myb is expressed in some human breast cancers in the absence of the ER (in combination with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) positivity, [ ]) and 29 % of BRCA1-mutant breast cancers contain amplified MYB [ ], in two thirds of human breast cancers c-Myb expression is strongly associated with ER positivity where it is an indicator of a good prognosis [ ].
Interestingly, c-Myb is expressed most abundantly in breast tumors and in breast cancer cell lines that display expression profiles associated with a good prognosis; the luminal molecular phenotype [ ]. Metastatic tumor dormancy is a major challenge to the effective treatment of breast cancer [ , ]. A plausible explanation to the seeming paradox is that c-Myb is associated with a good prognosis yet appears to drive proliferative growth of ER positive breast cancer, is that in the clinical situation non-quiescent, actively cycling tumor cells are more amenable to treatment with cytotoxic drugs that target highly proliferating cancer cells.
Putative c-Myb-COX2 Pathway
Our work previously demonstrated that c-Myb induces COX-2 expression, acting on numerous moderate to high-affinity DNA binding sites in the COX-2 promoter [ ]. Given that we have previously shown c-Myb plays a central role in CRC [ , ], this work provided the first logical explanation for the over-expression of COX-2 in CRC.
Several lines of evidence suggest that c-Myb-COX-2 pathway of induction may occur in breast cancer. MYB is an E2F target gene [ ], and it was shown in the Davis study [ ] that the E2F1-COX-2 inductive relationship was dependent on E2F1 induction of c-Myb. Retinoblastoma gene (Rb) loss leading to E2F upregulation (Rb/E2F disruption) is commonplace in cancer, and in breast cancer in particular, where it has been shown to modulate the invasiveness of HER2+ breast cancer [ ]. As mentioned earlier, a role for collagen I in promoting COX-2 expression in gestational breast cancer has been defined [ ]. Collagen I ( COL1A2) is a target gene of c-Myb [ ], thus a c-Myb-Collagen I-COX-2 inductive pathway may serve as an alternative means through which c-Myb may indirectly govern the expression of COX-2 in breast cancer. Taken together, these findings lend support to the notion that the c-Myb-COX-2 inductive relationship may extend beyond colorectal cancer.
Interplay Between c-Myb/COX-2 Proliferative Pathways and Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-1 Alpha (HIF1α)/COX-2 Invasive Pathways in Breast Cancer
Several points of crossover appear to exist between c-Myb and COX-2 pro-proliferative pathways in breast cancer. In obese women, COX-2 mediates the activation of prostaglandin CYP19, which leads to increases in aromatase and estrogen levels [ ]. This in turn could potentiate activation of the estrogen-ER-Myb pathway defined earlier [ ]. In addition, COX-2 synthesized PGE 2 stimulates the activation of β-catenin, the driver of the canonical wingless (Wnt) pathway, leading to cell growth by the binding of β-catenin to transcription factor-4 (TCF-4) within the nucleus [ ]. In this context c-Myb also co-operates with activated β-catenin for the purpose of driving MYC expression in colorectal [ ] and potentially breast cancer. Such co-operation between c-Myb and activated β-catenin induces the intestinal stem cell gene leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein coupled receptor 5 (LGR5) and cellular growth in colorectal cancer [ ]. Combined these findings suggest a positive feedback signaling cascade (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 How COX-2 acts to drive growth and invasion of breast cancer. In early breast cancers in which oxygen is readily available, tumor cells receive proliferative signals via estrogen acting upon the ER. ER drives c-Myb expression which in turn may activate COX-2, which is known to make estrogen more readily available in the cell. This positive feedback loop promotes further growth, to the point where the tumor becomes hypoxic. Hypoxia induces HIF1-α, which represses ER, effectively ending the pro-growth effect of COX-2. HIF1-α induces COX-2 afresh, which along with HIF1-α induces Snail1 and ZEB1, facilitating invasion via EMT
When such a cascade as above is sustained and as the tumor grows, regions within the tumor become hypoxic, resulting in the induction of HIF1-α. HIF1-α induces and stabilizes Snail1 protein [ , ], which in turn induces zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (Zeb1) [ , ]. We have shown that Zeb1 transcriptionally represses c-Myb [ ] and in this study we also observed a down-regulation of c-Myb concomitant with an up-regulation of Zeb1 in MDA-468 cells exposed to hypoxia. In addition, HIF1-α has been shown to represses ER expression in human breast cancer cells [ ], thus the acquisition of hypoxia may effectively shut down the estrogen (E2)-ER-Myb-COX-2 proliferative cascade. HIF1-α successfully competes with TCF-4 for β-catenin [ ] thus shutting down this alternative pathway of tumor growth. Additionally, HIF1-α can induce COX-2 directly [ ] and thus may ‘take over’ from c-Myb. In the absence of the ER, COX-2 may continue to drive tumor growth via Akt pathway activation [ ]. Given that COX-2 is implicated in an EMT featuring Snail1 and Zeb1, as outlined earlier, COX-2 and HIF1-α may work synergistically to amplify Snail1 and Zeb1 induction, resulting in robust EMT facilitating motility and invasion, and metastasis (Fig. 2 ).
Conclusions and Future Perspectives
CI provides a “fertilizer” to nurture tumor growth, due in part to the effect of prostaglandins, whose synthesis is orchestrated by COX-2. Indeed, we have argued that COX-2 expression on the whole forecasts a poor outcome in a number of cancers, including breast cancer. Long term use of the NSAID aspirin, which inhibits COX-2, reduces breast cancer risk although this may not be solely due to COX-2 inhibition. An important mechanism through which COX-2 promotes tumor invasion and metastasis is through EMT, and we highlight a further level of regulation of COX-2 involving c-Myb. We show that COX-2 and c-Myb play central roles in breast cancer.
We further posit the existence of a c-Myb-COX-2 inductive pathway that may occur in breast cancers that have disrupted Rb/E2F regulation such that E2F1 may induce c-Myb and in turn COX-2, and we have illustrated that COX-2 expression may also be governed by a collagen type I-c-Myb pathway, with particular relevance to gestational breast cancer [ ]. Very recently we have shown that c-Myb is required for collagen type 1 production via TGF-beta, and skin integrity [ ]. Given that the appearance of highly collagenous breast tissue in a mammogram, termed MD, is a risk factor for breast cancer, we have an ongoing study into whether COX-2 is associated with MD in a paired cohort of low and high MD tissues from prophylactic mastectomies [ , ]. A study which investigated MD, COX-2 and c-Myb in post-partum breast cancer may be predictive for survival outcome. c-Myb and COX-2 may also be associated in a growth pathway in breast cancers which develop in normoxic conditions, and we suggest how this may be disrupted, leading to metastasis and invasion under hypoxic conditions. Taken together, this review will hopefully stimulate further investigation of COX-2 and c-Myb in breast cancer.