Background
Progesterone (P) is an ovarian hormone which signals through the progesterone receptor (PR) and is a critical regulator of normal breast development. Along with its synthetic analogues, P has for some time been implicated in the etiology and pathogenesis of breast cancer. For example, PR is required for mammary carcinogenesis in mice [ ], while in humans, removal of the ovaries reduces breast cancer risk by more than 50 %, implicating the ovarian hormones in breast tumorigenesis [ , ], and the evidence that P is a major driver of breast cancer risk has continued to significantly grow over the last decade (reviewed in [ ]). Through both the menstrual cycle and pregnancy, healthy women are frequently exposed to changes in their hormonal milieu, and this can have a profound influence on breast cancer risk. For example, early menarche or late menopause, or late age at first pregnancy is associated with an increase in breast cancer risk [ ]. In addition, the fact that exposure to exogenous hormones such as synthetic progestins in hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and oral contraception is associated with increased breast cancer risk and/or mortality [ , , , ], highlights the importance of understanding the molecular mechanisms of P signaling, both in the normal breast and in the development and progression of breast cancer.
PR is a member of a large family of ligand-activated nuclear transcription factors, and is expressed as two distinct isoforms, PRA and PRB. Despite the well-defined role of this signaling pathway in counteracting the proliferative effects of estrogen (E) in the endometrium [ , ], P is now recognised as a major proliferative hormone in both the mouse mammary gland and the normal human breast, and is required to promote the massive proliferation which occurs during early pregnancy. In the adult mouse mammary gland, P-mediated signals trigger the formation of lobuloalveolar structures and side branches from the mammary ducts during estrous cycles and early pregnancy [ , ]. However, the details of the proliferative action of P in the human breast, and the mechanisms by which they occur, remain less well defined.
The normal human breast is comprised of two major tissue compartments—the stroma and the epithelium, which is lined by a single layer of luminal epithelial cells associated with secretory activity, surrounded by a basal cell layer, consisting mostly of myoepithelial cells with contractile properties, as well as progenitor cells [ ]. The epithelium is thought to derive from stem cells, which self-renew and give rise to uncommitted bipotent progenitors, which differentiate to lineage-committed progenitors and eventually to mature luminal or basal/myoepithelial cells [ ]. However, as described in detail later in this review, much of the current understanding of these different cell types is derived from mouse models. Recent lineage tracing studies in mice have given rise to new concepts and ideas regarding the stem cell hierarchy, however for now these ideas are the subject of much debate. The balance between the luminal and myoepithelial cell types is important in maintaining mammary homeostasis, as maintenance of the myoepithelial component suppresses tumor formation [ ], the majority of breast cancers contain only luminal epithelial cells, and even basal-like tumors appear to originate from luminal-like progenitors [ , , ]. This is further illustrated by the fact that changes in the balance between luminal and myoepithelial cells correlate with increased proliferation, and are one of the earliest events in breast carcinogenesis [ ].
The cells of origin of breast cancer are unknown, but evidence increasingly suggests that stem and progenitor cells are targets for carcinogenic transformation [ , ]. Cancer stem cells (CSCs), are a rare population of cells within cancers with indefinite potential for self-renewal. While they do not initiate tumor formation, they have been postulated to drive the growth of the tumor mass [ ]. It has been suggested that CSCs may derive from normal progenitor counterparts, because the CD44+/CD24- markers [ ] which, with the aldehyde dehydrogenase enzyme (ALDH) [ ] currently define CSCs, have been used to isolate cells with progenitor activity from normal human breast epithelial cells [ ]. These observations highlight the fact that tight regulation of cell fate determination is critical for normal breast development, and that disrupted cell fate decisions are implicated in breast cancer. Because of this, much interest in recent years has been focussed on studying the individual cell subtypes, and their regulation, within the human breast.
The identification of specific cell surface markers which enrich cell subsets for different lineage characteristics has enabled the fractionation and isolation of distinct cell subtypes from human breast tissue. The markers for mature luminal cells (eg. MUC1, cytokeratin-18) and basal/myoepithelial cells (eg. p63, cytokeratin-14) are well-established, and a large array of markers have been reported to be associated with progenitor activity (eg. CD49f, SSEA-4, CD133, Thy1, CD44, cytokeratin-5) [ , , ]. However, while markers of a mammary stem cell-enriched population have been identified in the mouse [ , ], and breast stem/progenitor cell-enriched populations have been identified in the human [ ], the markers of a true human breast stem cell remain to be elucidated. In fact, much of the current understanding of the mammary epithelial hierarchy is derived from transplantation assays in immunodeficient mice, and more recently, from inducible lineage tracing studies in mice, in which a particular cell lineage is fluorescently labelled and then monitored in vivo, along with its progeny, over time. These experiments have unveiled new and unexpected levels of complexity, for example, the discovery of putative unipotent stem cells [ , ]. Cell fate mapping studies have suggested that unipotent stem cells, which have restricted capacity to differentiate into only either luminal or myoepithelial cell lineages, drive development in the postnatal mammary gland, rather than bipotent stem cells [ ]. In contrast, other studies have tracked bipotent stem cells in vivo [ ], and so the concept of unipotent stem cells is controversial. Furthermore, these cells have so far not been observed in the human breast, and so it remains unclear whether these distinct cell types exist in women. Thus, our current understanding of the stem cell hierarchy is based largely on mouse studies, is subject to repeated revision as new data from different model systems becomes available, and its applicability in the human requires significant exploration and validation.
The impact of P signaling on lineage specification has long been implied by the studies demonstrating the requirement for P in mammary gland development and function, including driving differentiation of the mammary gland [ ]. More recently, as will be discussed in this review, P has been shown to simulate stem/progenitor cells in both the mouse mammary gland and the human breast. This action mediated by P, along with its role in driving cell proliferation, is essential for the growth and development of structures in the breast that are critical for lactation. However, aberrant P signaling may promote uncontrolled proliferation within the progenitor cell compartment, in turn providing a larger pool of cells susceptible to oncogenic mutations and tumorigenesis.
Progesterone Stimulation of Progenitor Cells in the Normal Human Breast
It has been demonstrated that P regulates the stem cell compartment in the mouse mammary gland, via likely paracrine mechanisms involving the receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand (RANKL), and specifically during pregnancy as well as during the luteal diestrous phase of the reproductive cycle, when P levels are at their peak [ , , ]. The study by Joshi et al. (2010) also identified Wnt-4, a member of the Wnt family and one of the first paracrine mediators of P action to be identified in the mouse mammary gland [ ], to be a paracrine effector of this expansion of mammary stem cells [ ]. This is supported by a recent study which has suggested that it is actually Wnt-4, which plays the critical role in mammary stem cell activation and regulation [ ]. However, it should be noted that this study involved serial transplantation assays, which measures the maintenance and survival of the stem cell compartment, rather than its P-induced expansion during pregnancy. Another recent study has reported that the CXCL12-CXCR4 (chemokine-receptor) signaling axis is essential in P-mediated stimulation of progenitor cells, as inhibition of CXCR4 decreased mammary progenitor cell numbers in the mouse mammary gland [ ]. These studies illustrate the common finding that paracrine mechanisms in the mouse underlie P action on mammary progenitor cells.
Women are exposed to a transient increase in breast cancer risk when serum P levels are high, including during pregnancy and the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle [ , ], and so P-driven expansion of mammary stem cells observed in mice would provide a potential explanation to account for the window of increased susceptibility to transformation at these times. However, whether this mechanism is recapitulated in the human breast remains to be determined, owing largely to the lack of markers which define a human breast stem cell. Nevertheless, there is growing evidence that P does stimulate progenitor cells in the human breast. In a model where primary normal human breast tissue is cultured by embedding within a 3D matrix, in order to retain hormone responsiveness, P was shown to augment the progenitor-like compartment [ ]. This was demonstrated by a P-mediated increase in the proportion of cells that formed mammospheres in suspension (an assay which preferentially selects for progenitors able to survive in suspension culture [ ]), as well as the proportion of cells with stem-like ALDH activity [ ]. This was supported more recently by the demonstration that P enhanced secondary mammosphere formation and increased progenitor activity in primary normal human breast epithelial cells [ ]. Also using the 3D culture method of primary normal human breast epithelial cells, P stimulated the numbers of acini composed of both luminal and myoepithelial cells, concordant with P stimulating bipotent progenitor cells in the normal human breast [ ], as well as increasing the proportion of CD10+ cells [ ]. CD10 is a marker which is enriched in the bipotent progenitor cell compartment and can be co-expressed with putative stem cells markers, and CD10+ cells express both luminal and myoepithelial markers, and display enhanced colony forming ability with a high proportion of colonies displaying a bipotent progenitor phenotype [ , , , ]. In further support of CD10 being a downstream target of P signaling, RANKL stimulation of RANK-overexpressing non-transformed human breast epithelial cells also simulated the proportion of CD10+ cells [ ].
The mechanisms underlying the effect of P on progenitors in the human breast are less well defined than in the mouse, but increasing evidence suggests that P regulates RANKL in the human breast, which may be a mechanism to drive proliferation and potentially expand the stem/progenitor cell compartment. RANKL expression within breast tissue microstructures was shown to increase upon stimulation with the P agonist, R5020 [ ]; fluctuated with P levels during the menstrual cycle in the normal human breast [ ]; was highly correlated with serum P levels in breast tumor samples [ ]; and was induced with treatment with P or the synthetic progestin, medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) in primary 3D cultures of normal human breast tissue [ ]. However, the finding that RANKL is P-induced in human breast tissue cultured in 3D is not uniform [ , ], which may suggest that RANKL induction by P is dependent on the dose and timing of P administration in human breast tissue, highlighting the need for additional studies to define the role of P in RANKL induction, and the functional impact of RANKL expression in human breast. There is little evidence yet for the functional effect of P-induced RANKL in the human, although in human breast epithelial cells, RANK overexpression increased the expression of mammary stem cell markers and transcription factors, as well as inducing hallmarks of transformation, including migration and metastasis, in non-transformed human breast epithelial cells as well as in breast cancer cell lines deficient in BRCA1 [ ].
In addition to the paracrine signaling mediators such as RANKL and Wnt, it has more recently been shown that P can also expand the progenitor cell compartment via stimulation of growth hormone (GH) secretion [ ]. Specifically, in normal human breast epithelial cells, both P and MPA, activated GH signaling, and this stimulated proliferation of adjacent GH receptor-positive (GHR+) cells, which displayed functional properties of progenitor cells [ ]. The vast majority of GH+ cells, as well as GHR+ cells, did not express PR but were localised adjacent to PR+ cells, in primary human breast epithelial cells in culture, as well as in human breast tissue sections. The demonstration that P stimulation of mammosphere formation was mediated by GH supports the hypothesis that PR+ cells stimulate the proliferation of PR-/GHR+ mammary progenitor cells via secretion of GH acting in a paracrine manner [ ]. The Notch signaling pathway has also been associated with regulating breast stem and progenitor cells [ ], and members of this pathway are up-regulated by P in both normal human breast and in breast cancer cells. For example, progestins induce expression of Notch2 and the Notch1 ligand, Jagged1, in T47D breast cancer cells [ , ], and Notch ligands, delta-like 1 and 3 (DLL-1 and DLL-3), as well as the Notch receptor regulator, presenilin-2, were shown to be up-regulated by P stimulation in the normal human breast [ ]. Taken together, the data suggest that there are similarities between human breast and mouse mammary gland in paracrine mediation of hormone effects, although there is less information in human breast. Paracrine signaling through RANKL and Wnt appears to mediate the effects of P in the human as in the mouse, and in addition there is emerging evidence in human for a role for Notch and the growth hormone axes.
Reproductive events provide additional insight into the interplay and underlying mechanisms of P signaling on stem/progenitor cells. Molecular profiling studies comparing parous with nulliparous mouse mammary glands have recently revealed that early parity alters cell fate determination signaling pathways in a cell type-specific manner [ ]. The study by Meier-Abt et al. (2013) demonstrated that an early pregnancy modulated the Wnt:Notch signaling ratio through decreasing Wnt target genes and increasing Notch target genes, specifically in the mammary stem cell enriched subset. This was accompanied by a decreased proliferation potential and more differentiated phenotype within this specific cell subset [ ], suggesting that parity protects against breast cancer by reducing the proliferative capacity of mammary stem cells. It has also recently been shown that early pregnancy reduces the proportion of PR+ cells and subsequent paracrine mediators, leading to a reduction in the proportion of progenitor cells in the mouse mammary gland, potentially providing a mechanism for the protective effect of an early first pregnancy against breast cancer that occurs in the human [ , ]. In contrast to how P-driven expansion of mammary stem cells may account for increased susceptibility to malignant transformation, perhaps an early pregnancy provides protection by giving rise to a smaller pool of progenitor cells susceptible to oncogenic hits. Therefore, depending on the time of exposure to surging levels of P in pregnancy, P may either promote or provide protection from breast cancer, through the regulation of stem/progenitor cells.
Progesterone Stimulation of Breast Cancer Stem Cells
Perhaps as an extension of its role on progenitor cells in the normal breast, P also regulates progenitor-like cells in breast cancer. For example, in breast cancer cell line xenografts, treatment with P or the synthetic progestin, MPA, up-regulated the expression of the stem/progenitor marker cytokeratin-5 (CK5) in a subset of cells, by reprogramming a small subset of PR+CK5- cells into PR-CK5+ cells [ , ]. CK5+ tumor cells have been shown to be resistant to chemotherapy and endocrine therapy compared with CK5- cells, thus exposure of pre-existing tumors to P or progestins may later impede efficient treatment options [ ]. In addition to CK5, several groups have reported P-mediated stimulation of additional progenitor markers in human luminal breast cancer cell lines, including CD44, CD49f and ALDH [ , , , , ]. Furthermore, P and synthetic progestins (MPA and ORG2058) specifically stimulate the rare subset of tumorigenic CD44+/CD24- CSCs in human breast cancer cell lines, and this was mediated directly by PR [ ]. This was also observed following RANKL stimulation of RANK-overexpressing non-transformed human breast epithelial cells [ ], implicating RANKL as a downstream effector of P-mediated expansion of breast CSCs. Furthermore, the impact of parity (arguably due to the rising levels of circulating P) on overall gene expression was most pronounced on CD44+ progenitor cells [ ].
The evidence that P regulates progenitor-like cells in breast cancer prompted the hypothesis that progestins in certain HRT formulations may stimulate dormant pre-malignant stem cells, potentially explaining the increased breast cancer incidence in women taking HRT [ ]. Data from the Women’s Health Initiative and the Million Women Study showed that the inclusion of the synthetic progestin, MPA, in HRT formulations led to an increase in invasive breast cancer risk via promoting the growth of pre-existing lesions [ , ], whereas other synthetic progestins, and the natural hormone P itself, had less striking effects on breast cancer risk [ ]. Recent data from the Women’s Health Initiative clinical studies have also shown that women may be at different levels of breast cancer risk according to the length of time since cessation of progestin-containing HRT exposure, with the interesting observation that following an initial sharp decrease in risk in the early postintervention phase, a higher risk remained beyond this and during the late postintervention phase [ ]. Moreover, as previously reported, there was no increased risk observed in women taking estrogen-containing formulations, either during exposure, or at any time measured afterwards [ ]. In addition to the data derived from mouse models, this new data has led to the speculation that in the human breast, progestin-containing HRT may temporarily stimulate stem/progenitor cells numbers, while discontinuation of therapy may deplete or reduce the susceptibility of any hormone-dependent early cancer lesions that have arisen prior to, or during HRT administration [ ]. However there may remain some hormone resistant cells, and after this period, these clones may be expanded, accounting for the continue elevated risk that remains for several years having ceased HRT [ ].
The precise mechanisms behind the differential actions of natural P and synthetic progestins are not known, although may involve sustained activation of PR signaling pathways due to the pharmacokinetic properties of MPA and/or through MPA signaling via RANKL. Indeed, there is evidence that MPA regulates the RANK signaling axis. In the DMBA mammary tumorigenesis mouse model, MPA triggered a large induction of RANKL in the mouse mammary gland, and activation of RANK signaling promotes MPA-driven mammary tumorigenesis in mice [ ]. Conversely, knockout of RANK receptor in mouse mammary epithelial cells inhibited the development of MPA-driven mammary tumors [ ]. Analogous to the role for RANKL in mediating the P-driven expansion of the mammary stem cell compartment during pregnancy and luteal phase of the menstrual cycle [ , ], MPA was shown to stimulate mammary stem cells, and RANK signaling enhanced the self-renewal capacity of putative CSCs in the mouse mammary gland [ ]. One could therefore postulate that MPA, acting via RANKL, may promote breast tumorigenesis by disrupting cell fate determination and stimulating CSCs within pre-existing lesions.
P-mediated regulation of microRNAs, (miRNA; small non-coding regulatory RNA molecule), which are often expressed in a tightly cell-type specific manner, is a mechanism proposed to be important in cell- and tissue-specific gene regulation by PR [ ]. P-mediated regulation of a number of miRNAs has been shown to be important in cell fate determination in recent years. For example, P down-regulates miR-29 family members in breast cancer cells [ ], potentiating the P-mediated expansion of CK5+ and CD44+ cells, which in turn increased tumor-initiating capability [ ]. This process is likely to involve induction of KLF4, a transcription factor which is required for maintenance of breast CSCs [ ], and is regulated by both miR-29 and PR [ , ]. miR-141, a member of the miR-200 family which regulate epithelial-mesenchymal transition [ ], is also down-regulated by progestins [ ], and was shown to enhance the P-mediated expansion of CK5+ and CD44+ cells, and increase in mammosphere formation in luminal breast cancer cell lines [ ]. Thus, inappropriate exposure to P, or P analogues in HRT, may contribute to progenitor expansion or re-activate dormant CSCs via a number of different mechanisms, accelerating tumor formation.
PR Expression in Stem/Progenitor Cells
Although P can regulate the stem cell compartment in the murine mammary gland [ , ], mammary stem cells do not express PR, or the estrogen receptor (ER). This was first suggested in the mouse, following the isolation of cell populations with high expression of the cell surface markers integrin β1 (CD29) or integrin α6 (CD49f) to enrich for cells with mammary stem cell properties, where PR expression was virtually undetectable [ ], providing support for this regulation of stem cells occurring via paracrine mechanisms. However, depending on the method and markers used to enrich for mouse mammary stem cells, there has also been the suggestion of the existence of a subpopulation of cells with stem cell-like characteristics which do express steroid hormone receptors [ ]. Mammary stem cells have also been proposed to be those which retain their template DNA strands during mitosis, identified through the administration of 3 H-thymidine [ ]. These label-retaining epithelial cells (LRECs) comprised approximately 2 % of the murine mammary epithelium and were detected in both luminal and basal positions, and interestingly, 30–40 % of these LRECs also expressed PR [ ]. Similarly, 3 H-thymidine labelling of normal human breast tissue transplanted into mice also suggested that PR was expressed in a significant subset of these LRECs [ ]. Whether these are true human mammary stem cells which also express steroid hormone receptors remains to be definitively demonstrated. Thus differences between the particular stem cell assay used may yield conflicting results, highlighting the importance of interpreting such data with care.
Although the markers of human mammary stem cells are not well defined, the notion that PR can be expressed in mammary progenitor cells has gained considerable momentum over recent years. Using cell fractionation strategies to sort primary normal human breast epithelial cells into cell subsets enriched for different lineage characteristics, the detection of PR transcripts in the bipotent progenitor fraction of primary normal human breast epithelial cells was first reported by Raouf et al. [ ]. Using a selection of cell surface markers, the authors isolated the EpCAM+/CD49f hi /CD10+/THY1+/MUC1-/CD133- fraction from breast epithelial cells, which had been pre-cultured for 3 days on top of irradiated mouse fibroblasts in order to stimulate the growth of cells with progenitor-like properties. The authors then demonstrated that this subset was enriched for bipotent progenitor activity, as determined by colony forming cell assays, and contained high PR transcript levels [ ]. This was later supported in the model of human breast epithelial cells embedded in 3D culture, with the detection of high levels of PR transcripts in both the bipotent progenitor-enriched compartment, as well as in the basal-enriched EpCAM+CD49f+ cell sub-fraction of normal human breast [ ]. The EpCAM+CD49f+ fraction was also shown to express PR protein, as confirmed by flow cytometry [ ].
Dual immunofluorescent (IF) studies have also demonstrated the expression of PR protein in a small subset of basal cells, and have shown co-expression of PR with a number of basal markers, including smooth muscle actin (SMA), cytokeratin-14 (CK14), p63 and CD10 (Fig. 1 ) [ , , ]. It is intriguing that co-expression was observed with SMA, thought to be a marker of mature myoepithelial differentiation, and that this seemed to be PR isoform specific, with PRB, but not PRA, displaying co-expression [ ]. This is an important point as the study which demonstrated that PR was not present in mouse mammary stem cells only examined the expression of the PRA isoform [ ]. Similarly, it has been postulated that PRB in basal cells in the mouse mammary gland directly stimulates Rank within these basal cells, rather than (or in addition to) RANKL in luminal cells acting as a paracrine effector or P by binding to RANK on basal cells [ ]. Fig. 1 Co-expression of PR with basal markers. a Dual IF staining for PR ( red ) and CK14 ( green ) in uncultured normal breast epithelial cells. b Dual IF staining for PR ( red ) and CK14 ( green ) breast epithelial cells in 3D culture. c Dual IF staining for PR ( red ) and p63 ( green ) in breast epithelial cells in 3D culture. d Dual IF staining for PR ( red ) and CD10 ( green ) in sorted CD10+ breast epithelial cells. White arrows indicate PR expression in basal cells. Scale bars represent 25 μm. Images adapted from [ ] and [ ]
While CK14 is known to be a basal/myoepithelial marker, it has also been shown to be expressed in mammary stem cell-enriched subpopulations, in both the mouse mammary gland and human breast [ , , ]. Co-expression of PR and CK14 was observed in both uncultured primary human breast epithelial cells, as well as in breast epithelial cells grown in 3D culture [ ]. Moreover, expression of PR in a subset of CK14+ cells was observed only in sorted cells which had been enriched for those with bipotent progenitor characteristics, while there was complete segregation of PR and CK14 in the cell fraction which contained differentiated luminal and myoepithelial cells [ ]. Similarly, expression of PR has been observed in a small subset of cells expressing p63, a marker also associated with mammary stem/progenitor cell properties [ , , , ], and CD10, which is enriched in bipotent progenitor cells [ , , , ].
One recent study reported that the vast majority of ALDH+ cells isolated from primary normal human breast tissue with functional characteristics of stem/progenitor cells did not express any ER, however very low levels of ER were detected in a small minority of cells expressing the ALDH isoform, ALDH1A1, and suggested this to be a transient, rare cell population detectable in a subset of samples [ ]. Although the levels of PR were not reported in this study, it is interesting that low levels of PR expression have also been noted in CD10+ cells, relative to adjacent more intensely staining PR+ cells [ ]. These may represent transient hormone receptor-positive progenitor cell pools which are continuously and rapidly proliferating and differentiating into PR+ and PR- cells, responding to various stimuli such as microenvironment factors and hormone action.
Recent cell fractionation studies have also detected PR transcripts in EpCAM-CD10+ cells which were enriched for basal progenitor characteristics, and IF analysis revealed strong PR expression in basally located cells which also expressed the luminal marker, cytokeratin-8 (CK8), suggested to be putative progenitor cells [ ]. It is not possible to definitively determine whether these basal cells are in fact progenitor cells from these studies, however bipotent progenitor cells have previously been suggested to be basally positioned in the breast in vivo [ ], and have a gene signature enriched for basal cell type markers [ ], as well as being closely related to mature myoepithelial cells [ ]. Finally, in addition to the normal breast, low levels of PR transcripts have previously been observed in CD44+ cells in an invasive breast tumor sample [ ] and in the CD44 hi fraction of HCC1428 breast cancer cells [ ], while PR was expressed in many CD44+ cells in colony outgrowth experiments from T47D xenograft tumors [ ]. These data suggest that PR can be expressed in CD44+ progenitor cells in breast cancer. Thus, while there is little evidence of PR expression in the stem/progenitor compartment of the mouse mammary gland, there is building evidence that PR can be expressed in a subset of cells enriched for progenitor characteristics in the human breast.
An Autocrine Mechanism of Progesterone-Mediated Signaling in the Normal Breast?
In preparation for massive amounts of milk production during lactation, proliferation and expansion of the progenitor cell compartment is required during pregnancy, and P is likely to play a critical role in this process. Although based on mouse studies it is generally agreed that the majority of P signaling occurs via paracrine mechanisms, it is increasingly becoming accepted that, at least in a subset of cells where PR expression has been identified, there is evidence of P-mediated autocrine signaling. P has been reported to drive proliferation in two waves in the mouse mammary gland: prior to the large wave of proliferation being driven by a paracrine RANKL-dependent mechanism, proliferation can also occur within PR+ mammary epithelial cells, via an initial small burst which occurs rapidly, and transiently, within the first 24 h of P treatment, and is dependent on cyclin D1 [ ]. It has been postulated that this first small wave of proliferation occurs in a distinct population of PR+ cells, which have higher proliferation potential, and are potentially PR+ stem/progenitor cells [ ], whereas the majority of proliferation occurs via paracrine mechanisms for a more controlled and sustained proliferation in the longer term. It remains to be determined whether this mechanism also occurs in the human breast, however proliferation in a small subset of PR+ cells has been observed in primary human breast epithelial cells grown in 3D culture [ ]. Similarly, a rare subset of cells in normal human breast epithelium co-express PR and GH [ ], raising the possibility that P does indeed also drive proliferation in a minority of cells via autocrine mechanisms.
In the mouse mammary gland, P treatment selectively up-regulates specific targets in either basal cells or luminal cells [ , ], and so P action may potentially be cell-type dependent, and act via different mechanisms in progenitor cells compared with mature luminal cells. As discussed above, P stimulates progenitor cells in normal human breast epithelial cells grown in 3D culture, and PR is expressed in a subset of basal cells enriched for progenitor characteristics [ , , , ]. Therefore, one could postulate that a small number of PR+ progenitor cells within the breast lobule are able to directly respond, via cell-intrinsic mechanisms, to the proliferative signals of high circulating P levels to expand the epithelial compartment, during both the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, and during pregnancy in preparation for lactation. Although the potential of PR+ bipotent progenitor cells to proliferate in direct response to surges of P may be critical for normal breast function, transient increases in these cell numbers in response to the hormonal fluctuations during pregnancy and the menstrual cycle may account for the window of increased risk during these phases of development [ , ]. This window may be accentuated in those who take exogenous hormone formulations containing synthetic progestins, particularly in postmenopausal women. Thus it may be this small population of PR+ bipotent progenitor cells that are particularly susceptible to oncogenesis consequent to the increased proliferation provided by exogenous progestin use in HRT and the oral contraceptive pill.
Summary and Conclusions
Women are exposed to frequent fluctuations in levels of P during both the menstrual cycle and pregnancy, as well as when taking exogenous formulations, and can be at increased breast cancer risk during these times. The demonstration that P stimulates mammary stem cells in the mouse provided a possible explanation for this increased risk. Growing evidence supports the view that P expands progenitor cells in the normal human breast, as well as stimulating breast cancer stem cells, and these mechanisms may also contribute to increased breast cancer risk in the human. Recent studies have also demonstrated that PR can be expressed in progenitor cells, thus while it is well accepted that P signals to mature luminal cells predominantly through paracrine mechanisms, one cannot rule out that P acts on different cell types through different mechanisms, and that autocrine signaling may be an important mechanism for P-mediated effects on progenitor cells in the normal (and malignant) breast. Given the clear demonstration that PR is expressed in progenitor cells in human breast whereas there is little evidence for this in the mouse, this mechanism may be particularly relevant in the human breast. P-mediated stimulation of progenitor cells may provide a larger pool of progenitor cells which is particularly susceptible to breast tumorigenesis when P levels are high, or when exposed to synthetic P analogues in exogenous hormone formulations (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Schematic diagram depicting one possible scenario of the potential role of P signaling in breast tumorigenesis. In the normal breast, high levels of P during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle and during pregnancy act on both PR+ luminal cells and PR+ bipotent progenitor cells to stimulate proliferation and expand the epithelial compartment. This can occur via paracrine mechanisms (in luminal cells, which may signal to PR luminal cells or PR+/− cells in the basal layer; depicted by white round arrows ) as well as potentially autocrine mechanisms (in progenitor cells; depicted by black arrows ). These PR+ progenitor cells have the potential to give rise to additional progenitor cells, as well as differentiating into both luminal and myoepithelial cells ( white square arrows ). P-mediated stimulation of proliferation of progenitor cells, as well as from synthetic progestins in exogenous hormone formulations, also provides a larger pool susceptible to oncogenic mutation, and potentially tumor formation and metastasis
Progesterone is crucial in driving normal development and growing evidence points to a role in stimulating proliferation of stem/progenitor cells, as well as acting on mature luminal cells within the breast. The mechanisms by which P stimulates the expansion of distinct cell types within the epithelial hierarchy, at least in the human breast, remain poorly defined. It is therefore imperative that we now gain a detailed understanding of the precise mechanisms which drive P-induced mammary epithelial proliferation and tumorigenesis within different cell types. Therefore, although critical for the normal development and function of the breast, this effect of P on progenitor cells may underlie the capacity of P analogues in HRT to expand pre-existing lesions and increase breast cancer risk. Characterising these mechanisms may identify new potential indicators of breast cancer risk, prognosis and/or treatment options.