Introduction
Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women in the USA after skin cancer, according to the latest data provided by the US National Cancer Institute. It is estimated that there will be 232,670 new cases of breast cancer in women and 2,630 new cases in men in 2014, with an expected mortality of around 40,000 in females and 430 in males. In Europe, 89,300 breast cancer deaths are expected in women. The World Health Organization estimated that breast cancer represents 16 % of all female cancers, being the most frequent cancer among women worldwide and showing an especially marked increase in developing countries, where most cases are diagnosed in advanced stages [ ].
This information represents a warning to the entire scientific community on the need to intensify basic and clinical research into breast cancer. Further study of tumor cell biology in different types of breast cancer appears essential to obtain improved clinical response. Numerous factors have been implicated in the regulation of breast cancer stem cells, but information on the precise molecular and cellular mechanisms guiding their pathobiology remains inadequate [ , ]. Notably, it is becoming widely acknowledged in the scientific community that many tumor cells are susceptible to vesiculation [ ], being able to release extracellular vesicles that can travel via body fluids [ , , , ]. There are various types of vesicles, but this review focuses on exosomes because of their impact on cancer progression and their versatility; various authors have advocated their use as biomarkers for cancer disease, and they may also be useful for delivering antitumor drugs [ , ].
Exosomes are extracellular lipid vesicles that can be released by tumor cells and by several non-malignant cells, including reticulocytes, enterocytes, hematopoietic cells [ ], lymphocytes and dendritic cells [ , , ]. They have an endocytic origin, especially in late endosomes. Exosomes originate as small invaginations of endosomal membrane that eventually form intraluminal vesicles. When endosomes are filled with these vesicles, they are known as multivesicular bodies (MVBs). MVBs are intermediary endosomal compartments that direct cargo to lysosomal degradation, although it has been observed that they can fuse with the plasma membrane and release exosomes [ ] (Fig. 1 ). Many authors have argued that exosomes can form in specific regions of the plasma membrane that are rich in sphingolipids and cholesterol; however, we consider that these vesicular formations are more properly designated as ectosomes, because they derive directly from the plasma membrane and their origin is not endosomal [ ]. Hence, their biogenesis, nomenclature, and functions remain under debate [ , ]. Fig. 1 Multivesicular body (MVB) formation and exosomes released into the extracellular environment. Exosomes originate as small invaginations of the endosomal membrane. MVBss can direct their cargo for lysosomal degradation or release into the extracellular environment (modified from Ref. [ ]).
The interaction of exosomes with target cells may occur via several mechanisms, involving receptors, endocytosis, fusion with plasma membrane, or the release of their cargo [ , ]. They contain a broad range of bioactive material and are able to transport molecules such as proteins, lipids, DNA, mRNA, miRNA, mtDNA, ssDNA, and retrotransposons [ , , , ]. They play a key role during morphogenesis and organogenesis and have also been associated with wound-healing, myocardial repair, homeostatic processes, removal of cellular material, intercellular synapsis formation, and phenotypic reprogramming of cells [ , ]. Exosomes have been found in blood, urine, ascites, synovial fluid, malignant pleural effusions, bronchial lavage fluid, human semen, breast milk, pregnancy-associated serum, amniotic and ocular fluid, and human saliva [ ]. Although they are involved in normal physiological processes, they have recently been associated with disease processes. Because of the molecules they transport, there is no doubt that their main role is intercellular communication; hence, numerous tumor cells may use exosomes for the purpose of favoring tumor progression [ , ]. Tumor development takes place through a continuous dialogue between tumor and stromal cells that involves exosomes, which can induce changes in the stroma [ ]. Moreover, their content depends as much on the origin of the cell type as on the state of the cell, because these vesicles contain multiple epitopes from the original cells and can carry components that promote the neoplastic transformation of other cells [ , ].
Exosomes derived from tumor cells appear to be involved in various processes, including tumor invasion, angiogenesis, chemoresistance, immune evasion, and evasion of cell death [ ]. The increasing interest in exosomes is based on their ability to transport tumor factors. Recent studies have shed light on the roles of exosomes derived from breast tumor cells. These exosomes are able to induce certain neoplastic characteristics in fibroblasts [ ] and in mesenchymal stem cells derived from adipose tissue [ ] and may be able to increase proliferation, migration, and invasiveness in other breast cell types [ ]. Exosomes derived from breast tumor cells have been found to contain certain ligands of EGFR, HLA class I molecules, and numerous proteins with different functions, including integrins, metalloproteinases, and their inhibitors [ , ]. Our review aims to explore the impact of these small vesicles on the development of breast cancer and to provide data on the behavior, cargo, and characteristics of exosomes.
What are Exosomes Like?
Morphologically, exosomes are extracellular vesicles with a lipid bilayer that imitates the plasma membrane and contains an intravesicular lumen. Authors have variously described their size range as 30–100 [ ], 40–100 [ ], 50–100 nm [ ], and even up to 200 nm [ ]. Exosomes are further characterized by a shallow surface concavity reminiscent of that of red blood cells [ ], although this concavity may be an artifact.
Areas of the plasma membrane rich in sphingolipids and cholesterol are known as lipid rafts. They are usually thicker than the rest of the bilayer and can readily accommodate certain membrane proteins. A study by Staubach and colleagues in 2009 described the presence of lipid rafts and their protein composition in the membrane of exosomes derived from MCF-7 breast cancer line [ ], one of the cell lines most widely used to study the biology and treatment of breast cancer [ ]. The role of exosomes remains controversial. Thus, although associated with cell debris removal [ ] intercellular synapsis formation [ ], and controlled macromolecular assembly [ ], among other functions, they have recently been implicated in intercellular communication and cancer progression [ ].
The most frequent markers used to quantify and detect exosomes are tetraspanins CD63, CD9, and CD81 and heat-shock protein HSP70. CD81 located in exosomes was reported to enhance the metastatic potential of breast tumor cells through motility regulation [ ]. Tetraspanins are transmembrane proteins associated with the regulation of cell proliferation, motility, and development and with various cell signaling pathways, and they have also been implicated in cancer [ ]. They appear to be associated with the β1 integrin unit and other proteins involved in intercellular adhesion, extracellular matrix, and cell motility [ ].
In 2011, Rupp and colleagues found that exosomes isolated from the sera of breast cancer patients lacked the EpCAM expression observed in exosomes isolated from their pleural effusions, suggesting that the serum may contain proteolytic activity. The authors also postulated that the loss of EpCAM expression may be due to the release by circulating tumor cells (CTCs) of exosomes that have lost EpCAM expression due to epithelial-mesenchymal transition [ ]. EpCAM is an epithelial surface antigen (glycoprotein) found in epithelial intercellular junctions mediating homophilic calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion. EpCAM is frequently expressed in various solid tumors, including colon, gastric, prostate, ovarian, lung, and breast cancers. EpCAM expression is higher in metastatic breast cancer metastases than in the primary tumor [ ].
Isolation of Exosomes
Given the potential of exosomes as a key to improving our understanding of cancer, the question of their in vitro and in vivo isolation arises. In fact, the isolation of exosomes from culture medium and certain biofluids is a simple process based on successive centrifugations [ , , , ]. It is necessary to collect culture medium supernatants deprived of serum, because serum exosomes may contain unwanted exosomes that can interfere with the results. The supernatant is first centrifuged at 300 g for 10 min, and the supernatant is then centrifuged at 1200 g for 10 min to eliminate cells and cell debris; this cell-free supernatant is passed through filters of 0.45 and 0.2 μm to reduce contamination by large vesicles and then centrifuged at 100,000 g for 60 min at 4 °C, resuspending the resulting pellet in PBS. Additionally, the pellet can be further purified by centrifugation in sucrose/DSO gradient at 100,000 g for 60 min at 4 °C. The desired volume of the cushion layer formed is collected and sedimented at 100,000 g for 60 min. The pellet is washed twice with PBS, resuspended in PBS, and stored at −80 °C. It can also be stored with the corresponding culture medium.
Exosomes are isolated from patients by diluting the serum with PBS (1:2 ratio) and centrifuging at 2,000 g for 30 min, 12,000 g for 45 min, and 110,000 g for 2 h. The pellets are washed once with PBS and then centrifuged at 100,000 g for 1 h, followed by their resuspension in PBS [ , ]. Isolation of the exosomal fraction can be verified by electron microscopy, ELISA, western blotting, or flow cytometry, using CD63, CD9, CD81 and HSP70 as markers [ , , ].
A number of products are now available for isolating exosomes from serum, plasma or culture medium by precipitation, avoiding the need for multiple centrifugations [ , , ].
Cargo of Exosomes Derived from Breast Cancer Cells
Exosomes can carry various type of molecules, such as lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids [ ]. Contents of exosomes from different organisms, including humans, are listed in ExoCarta, an online database ( http://www.exocarta.org ). Molecular analysis of exosomes derived from MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines showed the presence of a large number of proteins with catalytic activity, cell adhesion proteins, proteins involved in molecular transport, and extracellular matrix proteins. Some proteins are common to both types of exosomes, while others are specific to MCF-7 or MDA-MB-231 exosomes. Exosomes from MCF-7 cells have a high content of linker DNA, binding proteins, and proteins with transport activity, whereas exosomes from MDA-MB-231 cells have a higher content of proteins related to extracellular matrix and catalytic activity, which may explain their more metastatic phenotype with respect to MCF-7 cells [ ].
The presence of miRNAs was recently detected in exosomes isolated from the plasma of breast cancer patients [ ]. The miRNAs are non-coding small RNAs that can regulate gene expression at the post transcriptional level and affect the transport and stability of messenger RNA. Although this field is relatively new in breast cancer, some authors have already observed that breast tumor cells can release exosomes loaded with miR-221/222, which may participate in resistance to tamoxifen, an estrogen receptor antagonist used against certain types of breast tumor [ ]. Other studies found that endothelial cells can secrete exosomes enriched with miR-214, which can promote endothelial cell migration and angiogenesis [ ]. AZ-P7a metastatic gastric cancer cells were reported to selectively secrete Let-7a miRNAs into the extracellular medium via exosomes in order to maintain their oncogenic and tumorigenic capacity and even to induce the transformation of target cells [ ]. The large amount of research on miRNAs has allowed the development of databases to organize this information and aid its understanding. Thus, the MiRandola database, which is available online ( http://atlas.dmi.unict.it/mirandola/index.html ), contains more than 2,132 entries for 581 miRNAs derived from 21 sample types, classified according to their extracellular form in four categories: miRNA-Ago2, miRNA-exosome, miRNA-HDL, and miRNA-circulating. According to this database miRNAs of mir-8, mir-205 and mir-21 families have been recorded in exosomes derived from pleural effusions of breast cancer.
A complete proteomic analysis of exosomes derived from the MDA-MB-231 cell line allowed the classification of eight groups of proteins differentially enriched in the vesicular component: cytoskeleton, apoptosis, anti-apoptosis, cell cycle, cell signaling, oxidative stress, focal adhesions, and mobility cell proteins [ ]. The proteomic profile differed between the exosomes and the whole cells, most widely in the presence of proteins related to apoptosis, cell signaling, and cytoskeleton [ ]. Another study demonstrated that exosomes isolated from cultures of MCF7 and 807-BC breast cancer cell lines carry tumor antigens expressed on the cell surface that are recruited into the intravesicular lumen, including: HER2; integrins β1, α3, and α5; HLA class I molecules; and metalloproteinases and their inhibitors [ , ]. Exosomes from MDA-MB-231 cells showed the presence of EGFR ligands such as HB-EGF and TGF-α, whose orientation in the exosomal membrane allows stimulation of the EGF receptor in target cells. AREG, an EGFR ligand, has greater stability than HB-EGF and TGF-α in the exosomal membrane and enhances cell invasion; it has been observed in exosomes derived from MDCK (kidney Canis familiaris) and HCA-7 (human colon adenocarcinoma) cell lines [ ].
The above studies demonstrate the role of exosomes in the mobilization and transfer of tumor cell factors (proteins related to cell survival, tumor growth, and metastasis) that may induce a neoplastic phenotype in normal breast cells and increase the malignancy of tumor cells. Exosomes may also be capable of modifying the tumor microenvironment by mediating cell-matrix interactions, altering the immune response and angiogenesis processes.
Oncogenic Transformation of Cells
Exposure of normal cells to tumor-derived exosomes, also called oncosomes [ ], may cause cells to acquire a tumor phenotype (Fig. 2 ). Hence, the tumor mass may depend not only on the clonal expansion of the tumor cells themselves but also on the oncosome-mediated transformation of stromal cells [ , ]. In fact, extracellular vesicles derived from MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and U87 glioblastoma cells proved capable of conferring a tumor phenotype to NIH3T3 fibroblasts and MCF-10A normal breast cells, characterized by increased survivability and ability to grow under anchorage-independent and low serum conditions. It was also found that tissue transglutaminase (tTG) can associate with the fibronectin (FN) on the membrane of exosomes and produce malignant transformation (Fig. 3a ), in part through the activation of FAK and ERK pathways [ ]. Fig. 2 Migration of exosomes. Exosomes can travel via body fluids to reach and alter other tissues. The expansion of a tumor may depend not only on clonal expansion but also on exosome release (modified from Ref. [ ]). Fig. 3 Exosomes induce oncogenic transformation and promote invasiveness. a Exosomes with FN and tTG can transform non-malignant cells, increasing their growth and survival (modified from Ref 28). b CD81 + exosomes can alter the Wnt and planar cell polarity pathways of breast cancer cells, leading to an increase in cell protrusions, motility, and invasiveness (modified from Ref. [ ]).
In 2013, O’Brien and colleagues demonstrated that exosomes released by HS578T invasive breast cancer cells significantly increased proliferation, motility, and invasion in three breast cancer cell lines (SK-BR-3, MDA-MB-231 and HCC1954) in comparison to exosomes from a less invasive parental HS578T line. They also observed higher serum exosome concentrations in triple-negative breast cancer patients than in patients without cancer. They reported that these exosomes can increase the invasiveness of SK-BR-3 cells and increase the angiogenic capacity of endothelial cells [ ].
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have the capacity to differentiate into a large number of cell types [ ] but they can also act as precursors of tumor stroma, in part through the generation of myofibroblasts that provide a favorable environment for tumor progression [ , ]. MSCs derived from adipose tissue (ADSCs) treated with exosomes derived from breast tumor cells (MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7) showed a phenotype of tumor-associated fibroblasts, characterized by an increased expression of α-SMA and the release of certain tumor factors such as SDF-1, VEGF, CCL5, and TGF. This process appears mainly attributable to activation of the SMAD2 pathway via type I and II TGF-β receptors. Exosomes derived from MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 lines can induce an increase in phosphorylated Smad2, and those from the MCF-7 cell line can also induce an increase in the phosphorylated form of ERK. These effects produce a phenotypic change in ADSCs, which acquire new physical (increased expression of α-SMA) and functional (release of SDF-1, VEGF, and TGF CCL5) characteristics of myofibroblasts related to tumor stroma [ ].
Cell senescence can promote carcinogenesis in the surrounding tissues through the secretion of specific factors that affect the cellular microenvironment, but it also acts as a barrier to cancer progression by inhibiting cell proliferation, decreasing cell motility, and preventing oncogenic transformation of the cells [ , ]. Cell senescence can be activated by telomere shortening. Telomerase is a necessary ribozyme for telomere elongation and is inactive in normal somatic cells but active in the majority of tumor cells and stem cells due to expression of the human telomerase reverse transcriptase gene hTERT. Although the mechanisms by which certain miRNAs can regulate this gene are poorly understood, it was recently reported that miR-138 potentially targets the hTERT gene, which is involved in the development of thyroid carcinoma [ ]. MiR-138 has also been linked to other tumor processes, including epithelial-mesenchymal transition, extracellular matrix remodeling, and immune evasion [ ]. There has been no report of miR-138 in exosomes derived from breast tumor cells, but further studies are required to clarify this issue. Telomerase was recently detected in exosomes from some pathogenic organisms, such as Leishmania , even when the parasite was subjected to stress [ ]. Research is warranted on the presence of telomerase in exosomes from patients diagnosed with cancer.
Exosomes as Elements of Bidirectional Communication
The tumor microenvironment has recently emerged as a critical contributor to the development of cancer. Fibroblasts and immune cells in this environment have been identified as active mediators of tumor progression [ ]. The tissue microenvironment is composed of the extracellular matrix, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), inflammatory cells from the immune system, and tumor-associated vessels [ ]. CAFS are able to secrete various tumor factors into the medium, including HGF and SDF1, which may participate in the neoplastic transformation of epithelial cells. They also interact with other stroma components, resulting in inflammatory processes and promoting angiogenesis. A dialogue between the tumor and stroma is required to remodel the tumor environment and allow cancer progression [ , , ].
Hypoxia in the tumor microenvironment can derive from an imbalance between the oxygen supply and consumption in tumor cells. The cellular response to hypoxia is mediated in part by hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), which is degraded in normoxic conditions. Hypoxia is an important feature of solid tumors and is implicated in tumor progression, angiogenesis, and metastasis [ ]. Interestingly, the release of exosomes by tumor cells may be stimulated under hypoxic conditions. It has been shown that hypoxia significantly increases the release of exosomes from three different breast cancer cell lines, MCF7, MDA-MB-231, and SK-BR-3, and that this response may be mediated by HIF [ ].
Fibroblasts can release exosomes that might be able to stimulate the migration and metastasis of breast tumor cells via a signaling pathway that involves Wnt11 and planar cell polarity. Mouse L-fibroblasts release vesicle-embedded factors that express CD81, lgsf8, Ptgfrn, CD63, CD81, and CD82 markers, which have a potent effect on the motility and migration of MDA-MB-231 cells. The co-inoculation of MDA-MB-231 and L-fibroblast cells in mouse mammary fat resulted in a robust tumor growth and increased signs of lung metastasis in comparison to the inoculation of each cell type alone [ ]. It was also reported that CAFs isolated from breast cancer patients can release CD81 + exosomes that are capable of increasing the motility of MDA-MB-231 cells via autocrine Wnt signaling [ ] (Fig. 3b ).
Exosome-Mediated Drug Resistance
Acquired resistance to chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and targeted therapies continues to be a major obstacle in cancer treatment. Recent studies suggested that exosomes may be involved in the resistance mechanisms [ , , , , ]. Chemotherapy is essential for the treatment of certain human malignant tumors, but tumor cells can often develop multidrug resistance (MDR), resulting in treatment failure. Several ABC transporters are involved in this type of resistance, including P-glycoprotein (P-gp / ABCB1), multiple drug resistance protein 1 (MDR1 / MRP1 / ABCC1), and resistant breast cancer protein (BCRP / ABCG2) [ ]. Interestingly, exosomes may be able to carry ABC proteins or chemotherapy drugs and their metabolites [ ]. In prostate cancer, docetaxel resistance was associated with increased exosome secretion and P-gp overexpression [ ], and the encapsulation and removal of different antitumor drugs via exosomes were related to the gene expression and chemosensitivity profiles of breast cancer cells in vitro [ ]. A study by Ifergan and colleagues reported the overexpression of ABC transporters in vesicular-type formations that arise between neighboring breast cancer cells in vitro , although these were not referred to as exosomes. The vesicles are located in certain areas of cell-cell binding and are able to capture mitoxantrone into the lumen, apparently mediated by the ABCG2 transporter [ , ].
Tumor exosomes carrying antigens that are targets for certain therapeutic antibodies may contribute to capture of the drugs and therefore to treatment failure. HER2 overexpression in breast tumors is a feature of aggressiveness, and 25 % of invasive breast tumors show HER2 amplification. In these cases, the treatment is usually based on Trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody that binds to the receptor and blocks its mitogenic signaling, proteolytic cleavage of the extracellular domain and tumor cell-induced angiogenesis. However, not all patients respond well to this drug, and there is some evidence that the release of HER2-overexpressing exosomes can counteract its therapeutic effects. Exosomes isolated from SK-BR-3 and BT-474 breast cancer lines overexpress HER2 receptors that can bind directly to the antibody (Fig. 4 ), as also observed in patient samples [ ]. Binding to Trastuzumab was lower with exosomes from the serum of HER2-positive breast cancer patients in an early stage of the disease than from the serum of those in a more advanced stage [ ]. The release pattern of HER2 + exosomes may reflect the stage of disease, and a greater release may increase drug sequestration. These data appear to demonstrate the interference of exosomes with the bioavailability of antibody-based drugs. Fig. 4 HER2 receptors present in exosomes. HER2 receptors can be internalized in the membrane of exosomes and subsequently released into extracelullar environment, reducing the bioavailability of Trastuzumab for cancer cells (modified from Ref. [ ])
Exosomes as Biomarkers for Breast Cancer Diagnosis
Various research groups have demonstrated the presence of RNA in exosomes isolated from the serum and plasma of cancer patients [ ]. The nucleic acids that are protected from RNAses by the vesicle membranes may be useful for the diagnosis of ovarian cancer, glioblastoma, and lung cancer, among other cancers [ , ]. However, the diagnostic significance of exosomes derived from breast cancer patients remains under investigation. Findings to date include significantly higher levels of miRNA, either free or in exosomes, in patients with newly diagnosed breast cancer than in healthy volunteers. A pilot study found miRNAs may offer advantages over mRNAs as biomarkers in some cancers due to the former’s short sequences and stability [ ].
Saliva is an easily accessible biofluid for the detection of tumor markers [ ], and vesicles derived from breast cancer cells are able to interact with salivary gland cells. The incubation of human submandibular gland (HSG) cells with exosomes derived from the breast cancer line MDA-MB-23 led to an increase in the RNA and protein content of HSG cells, and these breast exosomes altered the composition of exosomes released by the glandular cells [ ]. These effects may allow the development of novel strategies for the diagnosis of breast cancer.
Survivin is an anti-apoptotic protein expressed in prostate, pancreas, lung, ovary, and breast cancer cells, among others [ ]. Survivin levels are often elevated in the serum of breast cancer patients and derived exosomes. Survivin transcripts can undergo alternative splicing to generate variants such as survivin-2B, survivin-ΔEx3, survivin-3B, and survivin-2α [ ]. Analysis of sera from 40 breast cancer patients revealed a differential expression of survivin-2B with respect to other variants that depended on the degree of tumor aggressiveness. There appears to be expression of survivin-2B in primary tumors at early stage of development but low or no expression in high-grade and metastatic tumors. [ ]. Hence, survivin-2B may be useful as a biomarker for the early diagnosis of cancer.
Conclusion and Perspectives
New elements have emerged in the field of cancer biology over recent years. Numerous studies have demonstrated the role of CTCs, free nucleic acids, and small vesicles in cancer progression.
Metastasis is responsible for around 90 % of cancer-related mortality. During this process, the cells of the primary tumor can invade surrounding tissue and penetrate the lymphatic and blood system as CTCs. CTCS able to survive in the microenvironment of distant locations can develop a secondary tumor [ ]. For this reason, considerable research attention is currently directed at CTCs as markers of disease progression [ ]. With regard to the study of cell-free nucleic acids in plasma, it has prompted further research into the pathobiology of numerous diseases, including cancer. The genometastasis hypothesis proposes that metastasis may occur through the transfection of susceptible cells in distant target organs by oncogenes derived from the primary tumor as cell-free DNA present in plasma [ ].
The present review underlines the potential value of investigation into exosomes associated with breast cancer and raises questions about their potential role as protagonists of the disease. They may constitute a key piece of the metastasis puzzle. These small vesicles represent a new form of intercellular communication that is not fully understood. Because of the functionality of exosomes, tumors may use them to dialogue with and transform their neighboring cells in order to create a suitable environment for cancer progression. However, despite the negative effects of exosomes in cancer, it is worth highlighting their positive aspects, including their potential diagnostic and prognostic value and the possibility of using these natural liposomes to transport drugs to specific targets.
This review reports data on the diagnostic and prognostic usefulness of exosomes, including the presence of molecules that may serve as biomarkers, including mRNAs, miRNAs, oncogenes, and survivin in breast cancer, although further research is required. Clinical trial NCT01779583 carried out by Pazo-Cid and colleagues from Miguel Servet Hospital in Zaragoza (Spain), which is recruiting patients in 2014, aims to clarify the role of exosomes as prognostic and predictive biomarkers in advanced gastric cancer patients. Unfortunately, clinical trial NCT01344109 on the use of exosomes as diagnostic and prognostic markers in breast cancer patients receiving neoadjuvant therapy was withdrawn prior to enrolment. With regard to their potential therapeutic value, it should be considered that exosomes are lipid bilayer vesicles that can transport molecules and travel via different body fluids, even crossing the blood–brain barrier. It may therefore be feasible to use exosomes to transport drugs to specific targets. In fact, clinical trials are under way on the therapeutic utilization of exosomes against colon (NCT01294072) and head and neck cancers (NCT01668849) and on the administration of exosomes derived from dendritic cells as “vaccines” against lung cancer (NCT01159288). Are we witnessing a new form of vaccination?
Our review provides an update on the role of exosomes in breast cancer. They appear to be a double-edged sword. They have a pro-oncogenic role through their ability to transport tumor factors and transfer oncogenic characteristics, operating as small oncogenic “Trojan horses”. On the other hand, exosomes may represent key tools for the early detection of cancer, as prognostic and predictive biomarkers, and for the targeted delivery of therapeutic molecules. Further basic and clinical research is warranted on these important issues.