Introduction
Understanding the composition of milk has been a fundamental topic in lactation biology. The molecular basis of mammary gland function has been studied from an evolutionary perspective to understand the evolution of mammals and adaption of the lactation system to support the survival of the newborns by providing nutrients [ , ]. Milk is known as a well-balanced source of nutrition, providing essential carbohydrates, lipids and proteins to support the neonate. Milk is well established nutritional source that also comprises various bioactive components supporting early development of the neonate [ , , ] and also regulates mammary gland development and function [ , ]. Recent studies have recognized the biofunctional potential of milk in supporting the development of the newborn by delivering bioactives [ ]. Biologically active components within milk include growth factors, proteins, peptides, fatty acids, hormones and miRNA [ , ]. The presence of various sources of bioactivity in milk raises questions about their role in supporting neonatal growth and development. Studies on the role of milk in neonates have shown that factors in milk have a potential role in maturation of the immune system of the neonate [ ]. Milk is a source of different growth factors like epidermal growth factor, transforming growth factor, nerve growth factor, insulin, and insulin like growth factors supporting development [ ]. Growth factors and hormones have been observed to have a crucial role in regulating organ development like maturation of the intestinal epithelium for the preparation of solid food intake following birth [ ]. Traditionally, it was believed that the development of the gut was not influenced by factors in milk, but recent observations have shown that bioactive components in colostrum and milk can influence the development of the gastrointestinal tract [ ].
The secretion of milk is a defining feature of all mammalian species [ ]. The evolution of unique anatomical secretory mammary glands and development of the lactation process has seen the evolutionary success of mammals over million years [ , ]. The term mammalia comes from the latin word mamma (breast or mammary gland) coined by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 [ ]. A dependency on milk is key to the life history of all mammals and is evolutionarily ancient in origin [ ]. Pond (1984) summarized the process of lactation as a means by which lactating females can convert their nutrient reserves for milk production and offer substantial selective advantages to feed dependent young when food is unavailable, and is a universal feature of mammalian reproduction. Lactation provides the essential nutrients required by the smallest and most altricial neonate to the largest and most precocial offspring [ ] (Fig. 1 ). The ability to provide easily digestible, balanced nutritional components supported evolution of different developmental and reproductive strategies [ ]. In the ancestral history of mammalian evolution, milk has evolved not only for nutritional value but also the earliest mechanism through which mothers signal biochemically to their offspring by providing factors in milk that play a significant part in improving health of the young [ , , , , ]. Fig. 1 Developmental differences in newborn offspring of mammalian lineages. Monotreme and marsupial young begin life as altricial young, while most eutherian species are born comparatively well developed. a From left: echidna adult, hatchling emerging from egg and young b From left: tammar wallaby adult, newborn and pouch young c From left: human adult, fetus and newborn
Although the lactation cycle is a common feature of all mammals, the monotremes and marsupials have evolved a reproductive strategy that is very different from that of most eutherians. Eutherians have a long gestation relative to their lactation period, and the composition of milk doesn’t change substantially. This contrasts with reproduction and lactation in monotremes, such as platypus and echidna, and the marsupials, such as the tammar wallaby (Fig. 2 ). Deciphering the functions of milk and discovery of new functional components involved in the development of various organs requires smart, innovative and strategic approaches. One such approach is the use of comparative models with extreme adaptations to lactation such as the monotreme and marsupial whose young are born highly underdeveloped. When combined with technology platforms that include genomics, proteomics and bioinformatics these powerful models can be exploited to identify milk proteins (and potentially microRNA) with bioactivity and subsequent application as nutraceuticals and pharmaceuticals. Fig. 2 Schematic representation of differences in length of mammalian gestation and lactation between lineages. Monotreme and marsupials have a short gestation and young are highly altricial at birth. This is followed by a prolonged period of lactation. In contrast, eutherians evolved longer gestation periods to allow greater in utero development for the birth of a more highly developed young. The following lactation period is comparatively short
Evolutionary Diversity in Mammalian Lactation
Prototherian, metatherian and eutherian mammals differ principally in their strategy of reproduction such as gestation period, composition of milk and length of lactation period. Prototherian mammals comprise the extant species platypus ( Ornithorhynchus anatinus ) and 2 genera of echidnas, short-beaked echidna ( Tachyglossus aculeatus ) and the long-beaked echidna ( Zaglossus spp.), which are confined to Australia and New Guinea [ ]. Monotremes have a unique position in mammalian evolution with a highly specialized reproductive strategy which facilitates both egg-laying and lactation characterized by the secretion of complex milk [ ]. Monotremes lay eggs after a short gestation period and the egg is incubated in a burrow (platypus) or pouch (echidna), an immature young hatches from the egg, and therefore these highly altricial hatchlings depend entirely on milk secreted by the mother for development and immune protection [ ]. The mother has a long lactation period extending to 114–145 days in platypus [ ] and 160–210 days in echinda [ , ], depending on geographical location. In comparison, marsupials comprise over 300 diverse species distributed into two groups called Ameridelphia and Australidelphia. Marsupials survive mainly in Australia (~200 species, including tammar wallaby, possums, kangaroos and koalas). The Virginia opossum is the only extant species that can be found in North America but several other species are located in South America (including more than 65 species of opossums and shrew opossums) [ ]. All marsupials have a brief intrauterine life (for example 28 days in the tammar wallaby) supported by a short-lived, less developed placenta and give birth to an altricial young which relies on an elaborate and sophisticated lactation period for developmental cues [ , ]. The tammar wallaby is one of the most studied marsupials, and its lactation period is divided into three phases (phase 2A, phase 2B and phase 3) based on the composition of the milk, and growth and behavior of the young. Tammar young are born after 28 days of gestation and weigh approximately 440 milligrams [ ]. During the early phase of lactation (phase 2A), the young is permanently attached to the teat and the mother secretes dilute milk with a low concentration of protein and lipids but a high concentration of carbohydrates [ ]. In the tammar, the expression of phase specific proteins include early lactation protein (ELP), whey acid protein (WAP) and late lactation protein-A &B (LLPs) (Fig. 3 ) [ ]. During the first 100 days, the development of the neonate is similar to a late stage eutherian fetus. Therefore, the signalling factors involved in the development of the eutherian fetus may be delivered in the milk secreted by marsupials [ ]. Fig. 3 Lactation cycle of the tammar wallaby showing changes in milk composition during different phases of lactation (phase 2A, phase 2B and phase 3) and growth of the young. The expression of ELP (early lactation protein), WAP (whey acidic protein) and LLP (Late lactation protein) was observed only at specific phases. Modified from [ ]
In general, pouch young are born with immature organs due to their short gestation period and during early lactation, the organs within the pouch young develop according to the necessity for their survival. This includes developing organs such as lungs [ ], lymphoid tissues [ ], nervous system including brain and spinal cord [ , ] that all develop rapidly during this period of milk consumption. In mid-lactation the young remains in the pouch without being permanently attached to the teat and milk composition remains similar although changes in milk protein composition have been observed [ ]. At this stage, the eyes of the pouch young are opened, fur is visible and by end of phase 2B, the kidney is functional to produce concentrated urine and the thyroid gland is fully developed [ ]. By the end of lactation in phase 3, the pouch young begins feeding on vegetation but intermittently consumes milk from the mother until 300–350 days of age. In this phase, the milk becomes rich in protein and lipids with a reduction in the concentration of carbohydrates [ ].
The eutherian mammals are represented by almost 4700 extinct and extant genera [ ]. Eutherian mammals evolved with a deeply invasive placenta to support in utero development after which the mother gives birth to a well-developed offspring compared to monotremes and marsupials [ ]. Eutherian milk remains relatively unchanged throughout lactation apart from the initial colostrum [ ]. Thus, there are significant differences in reproductive strategies among three groups of mammals but the common feature that unites these divergent reproduction strategies is that all mammals secrete milk to supply nutrition and bioactive components to the newborn until they become independent at weaning [ ]. Oftedal (2002) proposed that mammary gland secretions first originated from glandular skin secretions in synapsids which laid parchment-shelled eggs which occurred well before the common ancestor of living mammals appeared on the earth [ , ]. The early amniotes (sauropsids and synapsids) in general laid ancestral parchment-shelled eggs; however, sauropsids evolved to develop calcified eggshells resistant to moisture loss when exposed to vapor pressure gradients [ ]. In contrast, synapsids did not evolve calcified eggshells but instead produced glandular skin secretions to prevent eggs from drying under ambient conditions during the course of incubation [ , ]. These glandular skin secretions are suggested to have evolved from the primary function of providing moisture and antimicrobials to parchment-shelled eggs to a new function associated with the supply of nutrients and other components like antimicrobials for the young [ ]. The egg-laying ability of synapsids was retained in early mammals which include the monotremes that lay parchment-shelled eggs and produce mammary gland secretions to provide nutrients for the young [ , ].
Identifying the Potential of Milk as a Source of Bioactives to Support Development of the Suckled Young
Bioactive Milk Peptides
Peptides derived from milk proteins constitute a major family of signalling molecules [ ]. Recent studies have revealed that different fractions of milk protein provide groups of specific peptides including, casein phosphopeptides, alpha lactorphins and beta lactorphins, antihypertensive peptides, casokinins, glycomacropeptide and opioid peptides [ , ]. These milk-derived peptides have nutraceutical, antimicrobial, antioxidative, antiviral and antihypertensive functions [ , , ] and are beneficial to the function of a variety of organs including the gastrointestinal, immune, cardiovascular and nervous systems [ ].
Milk proteins are broken down to fragments by the action of enzymes derived from secretions within the stomach and small intestine during digestion [ , , , ]. However, in the case of tammar pouch young the digestive system is very underdeveloped at the time of birth and only matures during mid-lactation phase2B (100–200 days) [ ]. As an alternative, tammar milk may contain enzymes that support digestion and recent studies have demonstrated that endogenous enzymatic activities including amylase, catalase, lactase, lactoperoxidase, lipase and phosphatase act on milk proteins to release bioactive peptides [ , ]. Hence, it is conceivable that tammar milk may include specific enzymes to hydrolyse milk proteins to produce bioactive peptides at specific times during the lactation cycle as an additional mechanism to support neonatal development. Interestingly, endogenous human milk peptides have been found to be greater in milk produced by mothers of preterm infants compared to term infants [ ]. Further studies are needed to focus on understanding tammar milk derived enzymes and the potential bioactive peptides derived from fragmentation.
Milk MiRNAs: Potential New Regulators of Newborn Development
Recent studies have shown milk also contains other components such as miRNAs [ , ] indicating that in addition to proteins and peptides, miRNA may be a new class of signalling molecules that contribute to the development of the neonate. Milk miRNAs may have a crucial role in development due to their key role in gene regulation [ ]. Together with proteins and peptides, the mammary gland also packages and secretes miRNAs [ ]. MicroRNAs are small untranslated RNAs involved in post-transcriptional modification of mRNAs, which in turn regulates protein levels [ ]. miRNAs play a crucial role in regulating a wide range of cellular functions, such as cell differentiation, proliferation and cell death [ , ]. Recent studies have shown that secretory miRNAs are found in body fluids including breast milk [ ], saliva [ ], plasma [ ] and urine [ ]. The presence of miRNAs in these body fluids suggests they can act as paracrine signals to regulate gene expression in adjacent cells/tissues by allowing cell to cell signalling and subsequently regulating cellular function. Discovery of miRNA in the milk of various species potentially has profound implications in understanding their role in neonate development and immune regulation. However, the precise mechanism of secretion and the physiological role of these miRNAs is not yet clear. Studies on the miRNA expression profiles of human breast milk have shown the presence of functional miRNAs, indicating that milk mediates the supply of maternal miRNA to infants, potentially further regulating the gene expression within infant tissues during lactation [ ]. The existence of exogenous miRNAs in the blood serum and other body fluids may suggest that miRNAs can travel throughout he circulation and play a significant role in other sites of the body [ , ]. Recent studies on transportation of milk miRNAs in different eutherian species have shown that miRNAs are packed into the exosomes and passed on to neonates along with other components [ , , ]. Comparative studies on milk miRNA from different eutherian species includes human [ ], porcine [ ] and goat [ ]. However, their functional role within the neonate has not been clearly defined but a potential immunological role in the newborn has been suggested [ ].
The miRNA knockout studies in both laboratory models, zebrafish and mouse have shown miRNAs are involved in many biological process, including organogenesis and morphogenesis during fetal development including liver [ , , ], brain [ , , ], kidney [ ] and retina [ , ] by regulating mRNA expression. The latest reports on expression profiles of miRNAs in the developing lung suggest a role in regulating lung development [ ]; for example miR-127 has been implicated in regulating terminal bud development [ ].
Work to date on milk miRNAs has identified their presence in milk but their functional role in neonatal development still needs to be comprehensively analyzed. The existence of miRNAs in milk supports the concept that milk miRNAs could represent new signalling agents in the molecular relationship between mother and child that has evolved in the mammal kingdom through lactation. The monotreme and marsupial are ideal models to investigate the role of milk miRNAs in neonatal development. Recently we showed that tammar milk contained a substantial amount of miRNAs involved in developmental processes (Table 1 ) along with other RNA molecules [ ]. These miRNAs were specifically transported in exosomes (Fig. 4a ), as shown in milk from eutherian species [ , , , ]. Exosomes (Fig. 4b, c ) and miRNA have also been identified in platypus and echidna milk (Enjapoori unpublished) suggesting these evolved early in the evolution of milk production. Further analysis of tammar exosomal miRNAs showed they were stable under harsh conditions, indicating that milk miRNAs may be successfully transported to the pouch young without degradation and may survive longer in the intestinal tract [ ] . Therefore, the presence of exosome-like vesicles in milk suggests that these secretory vesicles may provide protective packaging and transport of miRNA to signals the neonate. In addition, the immature intestinal epithelial lining of pouch young allows nonspecific uptake of large molecules from milk such as immunoglobulins for a major period of lactation [ , , ], a process which could facilitate transfer of exosomes across the gut. This indicates that tammar wallaby milk miRNAs are most likely transported into the pouch young blood circulation. The high levels of miRNA secreted in milk has allowed the identification of differentially expressed milk miRNAs during the wallaby lactation cycle and demonstrates the dynamics of milk miRNA profiles across the tammar wallaby lactation cycle [ ]. This analysis identified putative markers of mammary gland activity and functional candidate miRNAs which may assist growth and timed development of the young. This approach highlights the value of comparative quantitative transcriptomics to improve understanding of milk composition and, more importantly, has paved the way forward to address the true potential of milk miRNA functionality and the full impact of milk consumption on health and wellbeing. Table 1 Differentially expressed tammar milk miRNAs and their function during development miRNA Function Reference miR-148 Growth and development of normal tissues [ ] miR-184 Development of central nervous system and regulates the balance between neural stem cell proliferation and differentiation [ , , ] let-7b Neural stem cell differentiation and proliferation [ ] let-7 s Regulates the timing of terminal differentiation during embryogenesis [ , ] miR-122 Liver-specific and key role in liver development [ ] [ , ] miR-22 Neural system and erythroid development and maturation [ , ] miR-375 Highly expressed in hormone secreting organs (pancreas and pituitary gland) and regulates pancreas organogenesis [ , , ] miR-204 Lens and retinal development [ , ] miR-30 Kidney development by regulating Xenopus pronephros development [ ] Fig. 4 Exosomes in monotreme and marsupial milk. Exosomes (30–100 nm) were prepared from a tammar wallaby, b , platypus and c and short-beaked echidna milk by differential centrifugations and visualized by JEM 2100 transmission electron microscopy (JEOL) with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV
Bioactivity of Milk for Immune Defence; Evidence from the Monotreme and Marsupial
The best known antibacterial proteins family, the cathelicidins are secreted in milk as well as epithelial surfaces and in neutrophils and have been proposed to provide a first line of defence against infection by acting as natural antibiotics [ , ]. Tammar mammary cathelicidins are secreted abundantly in milk during early neonatal life (mid lactation) and weaning (involution) and display antibacterial activity against the common Staphylococcus aureus , Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Enterococcus faecalis and Salmonella enterica species [ ] . This correlated with stages of lactation associated with higher risks of infection in pouch young and mammary gland. Similarly, in the tammar, WFDC2 (WAP four-disulfide core domain 2) expression has been identified in the mammary gland during lactation [ ]. Tammar WFDC2 is comprised of two 4-DSC domains: domain III on the amino terminal end and domain II at the carboxyl terminal end. The domain II of the protein exhibited significant antibacterial activity against S. aureus, S. enterica and P. aeruginosa while no activity was seen against gut commensal E. faecalis [ ]. The timing of WFDC2 expression during pregnancy, early lactation and involution correlates with stages of the lactation cycle that have increased risk of infection in the mammary gland. Lactoferrin and lysozyme are other examples of milk bioactives present in milk. These proteins are capable of degrading gram negative and positive cell walls, respectively [ , , , ]. In newborn mammals, immature intestinal immune function and the intestinal epithelial lining may be susceptible to systemic infections. Secretion of antimicrobials and functional nutrients into mother’s milk is a potential strategy to reduce the young early-life infections, and protect the integrity of the epithelial monolayer.
Recently two novel milk proteins, AMP (antimicrobial protein) and MLP (monotreme lactation protein) have been identified only in both platypus and echinda milk [ ]. AMP and MLP are abundantly expressed in milk at similar levels to caseins [ , ]. Recombinant AMP protein was found to have significant bacteriostatic activity against Escherichia coli , S. enterica and S. aureus , and showed significant inhibition of growth of Staphylococcus epidermidis and P. aeruginosa [ ] . However, AMP showed no inhibition of growth of the bacterial species, E. faecalis demonstrating that AMP exhibited strain-specific antibacterial activity. Similarly, the study of recombinant MLP also showed significant antibacterial activity against two gram-positive bacterial species S. aureus and E. faecalis but had no effect on the third gram-positive species, S. epidermidis , nor the gram-negative E. coli 2348/69, P. aeruginosa , E. coli O157:H7 and S. enterica [ ]. Antimicrobial activity was observed but levels of activity varied between S. aureus and E. faecalis .
Both AMP and MLP protein sequence are highly conserved between the two monotreme species studied. However homologues have not been identified in other mammals suggesting that these proteins are specific to this lineage and therefore highly specialized in their role in monotreme lactation. Monotreme mammary glands are unique because they have no nipples. Milk produced by the monotreme emerges from a cluster of openings of mammary gland ducts (areola or milk patch) onto the female’s abdomen and the young suck up the milk directly from the abdominal surface [ , ]. It is therefore predicted that AMP and MLP may be necessary to facilitate nippleless delivery of milk which is more prone to bacterial exposure. A major rationale behind this hypothesis is that highly altricial hatchlings are immunologically naïve lacking differentiated lymphoid tissue and mature immune effector cells [ ]. It has been reported that monotreme do not possess CD4 T cell memory immune response and lymph nodes, which are characteristic of mammalian immunity [ ]. The hatchling without immunological tissues will have lower resistance to infection from a wide range of pathogenic organisms in the non-sterile environment of the burrow or pouch, and therefore may require high concentrations of proteins like AMP and MLP in the milk for anti-bacterial protection.
Mother-to-hatchling transfer of pathogens during milk ingestion as the young lick the abdominal fur on the milk patch is very problematic and may present one of the most significant challenges to the survival of the young. In marsupials such as the tammar wallaby this disadvantage appears to have been minimised by the development of a teat to which the altricial young permanently attaches for the first 100–125 days of lactation [ , , ]. Marsupial pouch secretions also contain antimicrobial proteins which provide immune protection to the immune deficient pouch young along with antimicrobial proteins in milk [ , , , , ]. Interestingly, some of the antibacterials are delivered in the milk only when the young is immunocompromised or when the mammary gland is particularly susceptible to infection. In eutherians, the developing young are protected by the sterile confines of the mother’s uterus and young are born at a more advanced stage of development. During intra-uterine development the immune system of the fetus becomes more developed (although not to full maturity) and a level of protection is provided postpartum via colostrum and milk bioactives [ ]. Therefore the evolution of a sophisticated delivery system of signalling molecules necessary for continued development of the young whilst maintaining the necessary protection against threats such as bacterial infection appear to have evolved differently in each of the mammalian lineages.
Eutherian Placenta vs Marsupial Milk: Delivery of Bioactives to Support Development of the Young
Factors responsible for development of the eutherian fetus are generally supplied through the placenta via the umbilical cord. In eutherians, the placenta mediates intrauterine fetal development and also plays a key role in fetal growth by supplying various bioactives [ , ]. During fetal development the placenta performs a wide range of physiological functions which are subsequently performed by the neonate after birth including respiration, endocrine and digestive processes [ , ]. Blood from the fetus enters the umbilical arteries of the umbilical cord and blood enters the placenta with the required amount of oxygen and nutrition [ ]. Recent studies have demonstrated that the placenta plays an integral role in programing both brain and lung development of the fetus [ , , , ].
In contrast the majority of marsupial young development occurs postnatally, the associated changes are comparable to the developmental changes in the fetus in eutherians [ ]. Hence, bioactives involved in regulating eutherian fetal development delivered to the fetus via the placenta are proposed to be delivered through milk by the marsupial mammary gland [ , , ]. Early attempts to understand the role of milk in development of tammar pouch young have shown that factors in milk have a potential role in maturation of the immune system of the neonate [ ]. Recent studies on understanding the changes in tammar milk protein secreted during lactation have revealed several factors that may involve maturation of internal organs [ , , ]. These include the growth hormone-like and growth factors like epidermal growth factor, transforming growth factor, nerve growth factor, insulin, and insulin-like growth factors which support development [ , , ]. Fostering experiments performed in tammars to understand regulatory effects of milk composition on the rate of pouch young development have demonstrated that transferring early pouch young to late lactating tammar mothers can accelerate the growth and development of pouch young [ , ]. This is presumably due to disruption of the timing of delivery of essential bioactives necessary for growth and development.
Milk Bioactives in Gut Development
Studies attempting to identify the role of milk factors in gut development of tammar pouch young have shown that every phase of milk has specific factors triggering phenotypic changes in the neonate stomach, where the late phase milk can drive stomach maturation following cross fostering of the early phase neonate to late phase lactating mother [ ]. Milk is a vital immune modulator aiding in regulation of the microbial flora of neonate’s gut [ ]. As previously discussed, studies of gene expression profiles of tammar wallaby milk protein genes have shown differential expression profiles of genes encoding antibacterial proteins WFDC2 [ ] and cathelicidin [ ]. Further analysis of the WFDC2 protein has shown specific antibacterial activity protecting the mammary gland of the mother, whilst avoiding the disruption of neonatal gut microbial flora [ ].
Growth factors and hormones have a crucial role in regulating organ development like maturation of neonate gut for preparation of food intake [ ]. Human preterm infants (30–37 weeks) can reduce the risk of necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), a result of a poorly developed gastrointestinal tract, by breast feeding [ , ]. Studies attempting to identify the role of milk factors in gut development in the marsupial tammar wallaby pouch young have shown that every phase of milk has specific factors that trigger phenotypic changes in the neonate stomach [ ]. The physiological delay in gut maturation is considered advantageous in mammals like marsupials, as their gastro-intestinal system is not mature until the late phase [ ]. This allows the pouch young to have the capacity to absorb macromolecules such as maternal immunoglobulins in milk from the gut and this capacity for enhanced absorption persists through a majority of pouch life [ ]. This significantly contrasts to gut closure observed in eutherians at a much earlier stage of development [ , , ]. The milk proteins and peptides transmitted from the gut lumen into the peripheral circulation may play a regulatory role in pouch young maturation in other organs.
Milk Bioactives in Lung Development
The lungs are a primary organ that undergoes considerable morphological change to perform adequate levels of respiration in the newborn. At birth, the respiratory system of the neonate must be mature enough to function with efficient gas exchange. Respiratory complications are frequently seen in premature infants and preterm death rates are high due to incomplete development of the respiratory system. Identifying the components responsible for lung development and accelerated maturation of the lung may provide new intervention therapies to reduce preterm deaths. During early development of the respiratory system in eutherians, several factors involved in regulating specific stages of lung development are signalled by factors secreted by the placenta which drive lung development for postnatal function. In contrast, marsupial young are born with immature lungs and the majority of lung development occurs postnatally and is dependent on factors provided in milk.
The process of lung development in all mammals is similar [ ], but differs in the perinatal and postnatal development period. In eutherians, the majority of lung morphogenesis occurs during gestation, where the placenta performs gaseous exchange between the fetus and the mother [ ], and during this period the lung develops completely to perform gaseous exchange after birth. In contrast, studies of lung development in several marsupial species including bandicoot ( Isoodon macrounus ) [ ], Julia Creek dunnart ( Sminthopsis douglasi ) [ ], tammar wallaby ( Macropus eugenii ) and gray short tailed opossum ( Monodelphis domestica ) [ ] have demonstrated that the lungs of marsupial newborns are still under the process of development and major developmental changes in the respiratory system occur during their early postnatal life [ ].
Newborn marsupials are similar in development to an early stage eutherian fetus and the immature lung is required to develop rapidly to become fully functional. Unlike eutherians, marsupials have the ability to allow the transmission of macromolecules across the gut wall due to their immature gut [ ] and therefore the milk proteins and peptides transmitted from the gut lumen into the peripheral circulation may play a regulatory role in lung maturation. For example, in marsupial species like the tammar wallaby and brushtail possum, the thyroid gland is non- functional until mid-lactation [ , ], but analysis of thyroid hormone levels in the neonate have shown the presence of T4 & T3 thyroid hormones [ ] and the presence of thyroid hormone in the milk throughout lactation [ ]. These findings suggest that the thyroid hormones in the neonate are acquired from the mother’s milk [ ]. This theory was later supported by observing the transmission of radiolabelled thyroxin from mother to neonate in brushtail possums ( Trichosurus vulpecular ) and bandicoots ( Isoodon macrourus ) during early lactation [ ].
Recently we performed the most detailed investigation of gray short tailed opossum and tammar wallaby lung development to date, to understand the morphological changes during the course of early postnatal life [ ]. These studies showed lungs in the newborns were immature, transiting from the late canalicular to saccular stage of development (Fig. 5 ). As the marsupial neonate developed the lung underwent morphological changes by forming sacs and gradually increased the respiratory surface area, simultaneously the volume of lung increased and by end of lactation the lungs were well developed and similar to that observed in a eutherian newborn [ , , ]. During early postnatal life the lungs comprised a handful of sacs and connected with primitive air ducts and were too immature to provide the required amount of oxygen for the young [ , , ]. However, studies undertaken to understand the respiratory mechanism of newborn tammar and dunnarts [ ] have demonstrated respiration occurs through the skin for a period of early postnatal life to meet oxygen demand. This unique mechanism diminishes gradually during early development as the neonate lungs mature to perform efficient respiration [ , ]. It appears that this mechanism was exclusively developed by these primitive mammals to survive during their early postnatal life and this mechanism has been lost during evolution of sophisticated respiration in mammals. This is also consistent with respiration through the skin in primitive animals like amphibians [ ]. Fig. 5 Lung development in the tammar wallaby. The majority of lung development in the tammar wallaby occurs postnatally and progresses through late canalicular to alveolar stages
Based on our observation the majority of tammar pouch young lung development is carried out during early lactation phase 2A. In order to test the role of tammar milk in lung development a study was performed using mouse embryonic lungs (E-12) cultured in media with tammar skim milk collected at key time points of lactation [ ]. Remarkably the embryonic lungs showed increased branching morphogenesis when incubated with milk collected at specific time points between approximately day 40 to 100 lactation (phase 2A) and reduced lung development when incubated in milk from day of 20 lactation (Fig. 6 ). This suggests that day 20 milk either lacks the necessary factors to stimulate lung development or includes inhibitors of this process at a time when respiration occurs through the skin and is an example of timed developmental cues delivered through milk. This concept of the timed presentation of milk bioactives to the young for lung development is consistent with the timed appearance of milk bioactives that regulate gut development in the young and protection of the young from infection [ , , , ]. A cross fostering experiment was performed whereby 25 day old wallaby pouch young were fostered onto a series of mothers at day 15–25 of lactation (Fig. 7 ) until the pouch young was 45 days old (Modepalli unpublished). Extraordinarily, the fostered young showed marked reduction in lung volume and lung development compared to the control group. Notably total body weight and head length was also reduced in fostered young when compared with controls. Fig. 6 Tammar milk accelerates lung development. a Mouse E12.5 embryonic lung cultures with tammar milk protein. b After 3 days (T72) lung development is accelerated when cultured in day 60 milk and abrogated when cultured in day 20 milk compared to other time points. c Number of terminal endbuds of differentiated lungs grown in day 20, day 60, and day 120 milk Fig. 7 Foster experiment. Pouch young of the foster group only receives milk from day 1–25 of lactation, while the control group receives milk from days 1–45 of lactation
Overall, these studies have demonstrated the importance of milk in marsupial postnatal development and showed that milk has evolved to support the development of immature pouch young, in addition to providing a source of nutrition.
Importance of These Models for Future Study to Improve the Health Outcomes of Preterm Neonates
Preterm neonates are highly vulnerable to death due to interruption of their normal fetal development. Human neonates born before 37 weeks of gestation are considered as preterm births [ , ] and are afflicted with various health issues including respiratory complication, limited central nervous system and also have decreased risk of survival [ , , , ]. Even though the initial survival outcomes are positive, the preterm baby may develop long term issues that include lifelong mental retardation, poor health, chronic diseases like hypertension, cardiovascular and diabetes [ ].
In all newborn eutherian mammals, the ability to survive in the external environment depends on the degree of maturity at birth. The rate of maturation and the period of gestation are inversely proportional. A better understanding of the process of fetal development and the molecular mechanism of organ maturation may provide new therapeutic approaches for reducing the number of preterm deaths. During fetal development in utero , factors involved in regulating specific morphological changes are signaled by placental secretions and amniotic fluid in readiness for postnatal function. In contrast, marsupial pouch young are born with immature organs due to their short gestation and during early lactation the pouch young organs necessary for survival, such as respiratory system [ ], lymphoid tissues [ ], nervous system including brain and spinal-cord [ , ] are rapidly developed and are entirely dependent on factors provided through milk [ , ]. Therefore, the marsupial and monotreme provide exceptional models to identify and understand the role of these milk factors in programming and stimulating fetal development.
Future studies are needed to investigate the gene expression profile in the tammar mammary gland during the lactation cycle and proteomics to identify those factors in milk regulating lung development. Identification of bioactives which progress or halt the development of lung may provide therapeutic modalities, or targets for therapeutic modalities, for the treatment of preterm babies at risk of respiratory failure. In addition, future studies understanding the importance of tammar milk in driving the maturation of other organs including gut, nervous system and kidney may provide significant evidence to support preterm neonatal maturation. The potential approaches to produce intervention therapy will not only assist in saving lives but may also shorten the duration of preterm infant hospitalization leading to substantially reduced costs for hospital-based health care.
Summary
Advances in next-generation sequencing transcriptomics and mass spectrometry proteome studies have enabled precise determination of the timing of mammary gland gene expression and protein production during the lactation cycle from diverse mammalian lineages. RNA profiling of both mammary gland tissue and mammary epithelial cells secreted in milk have been used to catalogue the complete lactome and mass spectrometry has been used to explore mammary secreted proteomes. The depth of proteogenomic analysis of milk from platypus, echidna, tammar wallaby, mouse, fur seal and human lactation have enabled the discovery of a number of novel milk protein-coding genes and proteins which are tailored to the particular needs of each mammalian lineage. The continuous change in the composition of milk in marsupials and monotremes presents an excellent opportunity to identify and investigate the role of milk derived factors in neonatal maturation. Further studies in understanding monotreme and marsupial milk may reveal those necessary signalling factors delivered through milk which are involved in regulating development of various organs of the young during lactation, such as lung and gut. These unique models may offer new opportunities for the identification of signalling molecules that are presented to the young at a time that correlates with prenatal presentation of signalling factors by the placenta and amniotic fluid for the development of a range of tissues during eutherian foetal development.