Adiposity and Breast Cancer Risk
Obesity, defined as having a body mass index equal or above 30, is affecting over 300 million adults worldwide [ ]. With a dramatic rise in the prevalence of obesity has come an increase in the rates of associated diseases, including heart disease and stroke, diabetes and a number of cancers, including that of the colon, endometrium and breast.
Obesity as a risk factor for breast cancer has been extensively examined in pre- and postmenopausal women. Studies in premenopausal women, have been more controversial with many studies demonstrating no association, and in some cases a protective effect [ , , , ] of obesity on breast cancer risk. Because obese women tend to have more frequent anovulatory menstrual cycles, this protective effect is believed to occur as a consequence of a decreased lifetime exposure to estrogens. Nevertheless, more recent studies have not only demonstrated a positive association between body mass index and premenopausal breast cancer risk [ ], but have found that tumor characteristics were different in these women. For example, obese premenopausal women tend to have a higher risk of triple negative breast cancers and their tumors display more vascular infiltration and metastasis to axillary lymph nodes compared to healthy weight women [ , ]. Another complicating factor in assessing whether adiposity influences breast cancer risk in premenopausal women comes from how the adipose tissue is distributed in these women. As body mass index is simply a measure of mass divided by height 2 , it does not account for central adiposity, known to be more detrimental to health than subcutaneous fat. To address this issue, the relationship between waist-to-hip ratio and breast cancer risk has also been assessed [ ]. It was found that for each 0.1 unit increase in waist-to-hip ratio, there was a 1.19 increase in relative risk of developing breast cancer prior to menopause. Additional studies are necessary to determine the exact risk of obesity in premenopausal women in order to be able to provide clear guidance to an increasingly obese population.
The relationship between obesity and breast cancer risk in postmenopausal women is less contentious with studies demonstrating a significant increase in relative risk of breast cancer with increasing body mass index [ , ]. Studies have also demonstrated that postmenopausal breast cancer risk is increased by the degree of weight gain during adult life prior to menopause [ , ]. Considering the prevalence of obesity in today’s society, it is estimated that obesity has contributed to the occurrence of approximately 50 % of all breast cancers in older women [ ]. Breast tumors in obese postmenopausal women are more likely to be hormone receptor positive [ ], larger and faster growing, and are more likely to involve axillary nodes [ , , ].
Menopause and Adiposity
The menopausal transition is accompanied by dramatic changes in both circulating and adipose-derived hormones. Where circulating estrogen levels were tightly regulated prior to menopause, the cessation of ovulation is accompanied by a substantial decrease in estrogens found in blood. Androgen levels, on the other hand, tend to remain constant, leading to a change in the ratio of both hormones. A number of studies have examined the relationship between circulating sex hormones and adiposity, and have demonstrated that an increased androgen-to-estrogen ratio leads to the accumulation of central adiposity and a decrease in subcutaneous fat mass around the hips and thighs [ ]. Moreover, body mass index is inversely associated with sex hormone binding globulin in postmenopausal women [ ]. Animal models have also been used to characterize the relationship between sex hormones and adiposity and largely support what is observed in humans. In the aromatase knockout mouse, where estrogen biosynthesis is eliminated and androgen levels are high, there is an increase in intra-abdominal fat accumulation and adipocyte volume compared to wild type littermate controls [ ], a phenotype that is reversed with estrogen replacement [ ]. A similar phenotype is also observed in estrogen receptor α knockout mice [ ]. Interestingly, the loss of ovarian steroids has also been associated with an increase in adipose tissue inflammation [ ], a phenomenon that is reversed in the presence of estrogens [ ]. In humans, the change in body fat distribution that occurs perimenopausally is also accompanied by a change in adipose-specific and systemic inflammation. Namely, changes in C-reactive protein, proinflammatory cytokines and nuclear factor-κB signaling. In postmenopausal women, a strong inverse relationship also exists between sex hormone binding globulin and C-reactive protein [ ].
Obesity and Breast Tissue Inflammation
The breast adipose is also susceptible to increased inflammation in obesity. The infiltration of macrophages in obese adipose, which in some cases make up 40 % of cells, is associated with an increase in the production of a number of inflammatory mediators, including prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα). Histologically, these macrophages are arranged around necrotic adipocytes and present as crown-like structures (CLS) (Fig. 1 ). Research has elegantly demonstrated that there is a clear relationship between the number of CLS of the breast and adiposity [ ]. CLS are positively associated with the expression of the rate-limiting step in prostaglandin synthesis, COX-2, along with breast PGE 2 and nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) levels [ , ]. Inflammation has been shown to play an important role in regulating adipocyte function by affecting the release of adipokines, including leptin, and preventing adipocyte differentiation [ ]. Reciprocally, leptin produced from obese adipocytes stimulates the maturation of macrophages thereby promoting a vicious cycle of inflammation and adipocyte dysfunction [ , ]. Elevated levels of inflammatory mediators in circulation have also been shown to impact cancer risk and patient outcome [ , , ]. Inflammatory factors, including PGE 2 , IL-1β, IL-6 and TNFα have been shown to play an important role in regulating the biosynthesis of estrogens within the breast, a key driver of breast cancer cell growth in postmenopausal women [ , ]. Fig. 1 Inflamed obese breast adipose stimulation of estrogen production and breast cancer cell growth. Infiltrating macrophages (blue) surround necrotic adipocytes (yellow) and leads to the release of inflammatory mediators including PGE 2 and TNFα. These factors then stimulate aromatase expression in adipose stromal cells via actions on promoters I.3, PII and PI.4. Transcription factors involved in this process are listed. The increased expression of aromatase leads to the increased biosynthesis of estradiol (E2) which stimulates breast cancer cell growth
Local Estrogen Production in Postmenopausal Breast Cancer
Estrogens are considered an endocrine hormone prior to menopause. They are secreted at high levels during the menstrual cycle, peaking prior to ovulation. However, with ovarian estrogen biosynthesis ceasing after menopause, estrogens are produced at low levels at extra-gonadal sites and tend to act in an autocrine and paracrine manner to maintain organ function. Nevertheless, the adipose is an important source of estrogens in postmenopausal women and the breast adipose is believed to be a major driver of breast cancer cell growth. The production of estrogens in the adipose has been shown to increase both as a function of aging and obesity [ , , ], and breast tissue estrogen levels are similar to what is observed in premenopausal women, despite being barely detectable in the circulation [ ]. The biosynthesis of estrogens from androgen precursors is dependent on the aromatase enzyme. Aromatase is encoded by the CYP19A1 gene which encompasses 123 kb and is composed of nine coding exons, II-X. The regulation of aromatase expression is mediated by the presence of tissue-specific promoters, which give rise to transcripts with unique 5’-untranslated regions [ , , ]. Aromatase has been shown, by immunohistochemistry, to be predominantly expressed in adipose stromal cells within mammographically dense areas of the breast [ ]. Considering the strong relationship between mammographic density and breast cancer risk, these findings would suggest that local aromatase expression is a key driver of breast cancer development. Consistent with this hypothesis, aromatase transcript, protein and activity have been shown to be highest in mastectomy tissue from the quadrant that contains the breast tumor [ , , , , , ]. The hypothesis that this elevated aromatase expression may lead to an increased risk of breast cancer is also supported by work in animal models whereby overexpression of aromatase in the mammary gland of ovariectomized mice leads to breast hyperplasia, a phenomenon that is reversible in the presence of the aromatase inhibitor letrozole [ ].
Inflammation as a Driver of Estrogen Biosynthesis
Inflammatory factors found in the circulation and produced locally in the breasts of obese women have been shown to stimulate the expression of aromatase and hence estrogen production in adipose stromal cells of the breast (Fig. 1 ). In normal breast tissue, aromatase expression is low, with half derived from the activation of promoter I.4 (PI.4), while the other half is derived from promoters I.3 and PII [ ]. Class I cytokines and glucocorticoids increase PI.4 activity, whereas adipokines, including leptin and adiponectin regulate the activity of PII. In obese and tumor-bearing breast tissue, the coordinately regulated activation of promoters I.3 and PII lead to a 3 to 4-fold increase in aromatase expression in the adipose stromal cells [ , ]. The effect of PGE 2 has been a major focus in this area as it is known to act on the breast-specific promoters, I.3/PII. PGE 2 acts via its cognate G-protein-coupled receptors, the E-prostanoid (EP) receptors. In breast adipose stromal cells, PGE 2 binds to and activates the EP 1 and EP 2 receptor subtypes, leading to the activation of protein kinase A (PKA) and protein kinase C (PKC) and the stimulation of aromatase expression [ , ]. The effects of PGE 2 can therefore be mimicked in vitro by using cAMP analogues, known to stimulate PKA, and phorbol ester, known to stimulate PKC. The signaling pathways downstream of PKA and PKC have been explored extensively to characterize the PGE 2 -mediated induction of aromatase. CREB (cAMP response element binding protein) is one of the first transcription factors proposed to be involved in the regulation of aromatase promoter I.3/II. This followed on from results demonstrating that dibutyryl cAMP had stimulatory effects on aromatase expression [ ] and the identification of cAMP response elements (CREs) within the proximal promoter of the aromatase gene [ ]. Three CREs have been shown to be involved in the regulation of aromatase promoters I.3/PII by CREB. The first, having a high sequence homology to a palindromic CRE, is located 211 base pairs upstream of the transcription start site [ ]. The second, located 292 base pairs upstream of the transcription start site, has been shown to be required for the cAMP-induced activity of aromatase PII in mouse 3 T3-L1 preadipocytes [ ]. The third is located 66 base pairs upstream of the transcription start site for promoter I.3 [ ]. EMSAs have confirmed the ability of these CREs to bind CREB in vitro .
The CREB-regulated transcription coactivators (CRTCs) are a family of CREB transcriptional coactivators that have recently been shown to be necessary for the PGE 2 -mediated induction of aromatase PII [ , ]. Reporter assays demonstrated that overexpression of CRTC1, CRTC2 and CRTC3 proteins lead to an increase in promoter II activity and this is further increased in the presence of forskolin and phorbol ester, to mimic PGE 2 . Moreover, CRTC proteins were found to interact with the promoter I.3/II region of the CYP19A1 gene using chromatin immunoprecipitation on isolated human breast adipose stromal cells, and this interaction was significantly increased in the presence of PGE 2 and PGE 2 mimetics. CRTC-mediated effects on PII were shown to be dependent on the CREs found in the PII region and CRTC2 and CRTC3 proteins were shown to be required for aromatase expression in these cells [ , ]. PGE 2 stimulated nuclear entry of CRTC proteins thereby providing a possible mechanism for the regulation of aromatase promoter activity by these proteins.
Another factor recently shown to activate aromatase promoter PII by binding to the proximal CRE in response to PGE 2 is hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) [ ]. This transcription factor is a key mediator of hypoxic responses in healthy and tumor-bearing tissue. Findings in adipose stromal cells, however, demonstrated that HIF1α could be stabilized by PGE 2 under normal oxygen tension, thereby expanding the role of this factor as an inflammation sensor as well as a hypoxia sensor. The hypoxia response element on PII is on the antisense strand within a region also containing the proximal CRE. Similar to CRTCs, HIF1α acts cooperatively with CREB to increase PII activity. The absolute requirement for HIF1α in PGE 2 -mediated aromatase induction was also highlighted by findings demonstrating that silencing of HIF1α was sufficient to abolish the effect of PGE 2 . In clinical samples, HIF1α and aromatase were co-localized in adipose stromal cells of tumor-bearing breast tissue. The transcription factors JunD, JunB and ATF-2 have also been shown to be necessary for the PGE 2 -mediated expression of promoter I.3/II-specific transcripts via actions on the proximal CRE [ , ].
The molecular link between PGE 2 and aromatase regulation via CREs lies with the signaling pathways involving LKB1 (liver kinase B1)/AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) [ ] and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/c-jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) [ , ]. AMPK and its upstream kinase LKB1 are known AMP/ADP sensors and are important for the maintenance of energy homeostasis in a number of tissues, including the liver, adipose and muscle [reviewed in 64]. The relationship between LKB1 and aromatase was first described in sex cord tumors of Peutz Jeghers Syndrome patients who have heterozygous germline mutations in the gene that encodes LKB1 [ , ]. Later studies demonstrated that LKB1 and aromatase are mutually exclusive in the breast tissue of these boys, suggesting an inverse relationship between both proteins [ ]. LKB1 directly phosphorylates and activates AMPK, which subsequently phosphorylates CRTC proteins and inhibits their nuclear entry. Thus, it is conceivable that LKB1 and AMPK may be inhibitory of aromatase via the inhibition of CRTCs and CREB activity. This hypothesis was confirmed when it was demonstrated that overexpressing LKB1 was sufficient to inhibit the nuclear translocation of CRTC2 and activation of aromatase promoter PII in the presence of forskolin and phorbol ester. It was also demonstrated that the AMPK activator AICAR had a similar inhibitory effect [ ]. PGE 2 mimetics were also found to decrease LKB1 expression and activity, leading to a decreased phosphorylation of AMPK and the increased nuclear translocation of CRTC2. This was also accompanied by an increase in phosphorylation of AMPK at an inhibitory site. Furthermore, PGE 2 was found to stimulate the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and JNK in adipose stromal cells within an hour of treatment [ ] and inhibition or silencing of p38 MAPK and JNK1 significantly reduced the PGE 2 -mediated expression and activity of aromatase. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that PGE 2 acts on multiple signaling pathways to increase the binding of transcription factors and coactivators to PII, and increase aromatase expression (Fig. 1 ).
The orphan nuclear receptor LRH-1 has also been shown to be necessary for the induction of aromatase by PGE 2 [ ]. LRH-1 was found to bind to aromatase promoter II at a nuclear receptor half site (AGGTCA) located 130 bp upstream of the transcription start site and silencing of LRH-1 significantly decreased the ability of forskolin and phorbol ester to increase aromatase expression in breast adipose stromal cells [ ].
Other inflammatory factors shown to stimulate aromatase within the breast are TNFα and IL-6. TNFα simulates the activity of promoter I.4 of the CYP19A1 gene and requires glucocorticoid receptor agonists, dexamethasone for example, in order to stimulate aromatase expression and activity [ , ]. The actions of TNFα at promoter I.4 requires the binding of c-fos and c-jun proteins to an imperfect AP-1 binding site found 500 base pairs upstream of the transcription start site within promoter I.4. Binding of the glucocorticoid receptor is also required for activation of promoter I.4. An additional mechanism for the TNFα-mediated regulation of promoter I.4 was recently revealed when it was demonstrated that induction of promoter I.4-specific transcripts by TNFα requires early growth response (Egr) factors in stromal cells [ ]. These factors were shown to require a short region of promoter I.4 proximal to the transcription start site, without directly binding to the promoter [ ]. Limited work has been undertaken with regards to the role of IL-6 in aromatase regulation. However, it was shown that IL-6, alone or with the soluble receptor IL-6sR, can stimulate aromatase activity in adipose stromal cells [ ].
The mounting evidence demonstrating that inflammation is a key driver of aromatase expression in the breast adipose therefore provides a mechanism for the relationship between obesity and breast cancer in older women.
Conclusions
With an increasingly obese population, we are at risk of seeing a dramatic increase in breast cancer cases as this population grows older. Inflammation and estrogens act hand-in-hand to stimulate the growth of cancer cells. Understanding this relationship will undoubtedly lead to the development of new therapeutics that target inflammation and estrogen biosynthesis/action to treat and possibly prevent obesity-related breast cancer.