Introduction
The mammary gland is an atypical mammalian exocrine organ whose main function is to produce large quantities of milk to feed newborns. To this end, fully differentiated mammary epithelial secretory cells (MESCs) finely orchestrate the uptake of molecules from the blood as well as the synthesis, transport and secretion of milk components depending on the nutritional requirements of neonates. Milk is a complex fluid containing proteins (mostly caseins), sugars (mainly lactose), lipids and minerals, as well as bioactive molecules such as immunoglobulins (IgA), growth factors and hormones. Milk components are secreted by distinct pathways that have already been reviewed [ , ]. Casein micelles are secreted by exocytosis of Golgi-derived secretory vesicles (SVs), while lipids are released as milk fat globules (MFGs) by budding of the apical plasma membrane (APM) of MESCs. SNARE (Soluble N-ethyl-maleimide sensitive factor (NSF) Attachment Protein (SNAP) Receptor) proteins, which have been studied extensively in the context of synaptic neurotransmitters release, have been recognized as the core machinery for membrane fusion in eukaryotic cells, and are involved in nearly all membrane fusion events. These proteins have recently been shown to be expressed in the mammary gland and are probably involved in casein exocytosis [ ]. The present review discusses the role of SNAREs during the secretion of milk products in light of what is known in other cell types. Other aspects, such as their role as extracellular morphogens and their potential involvement in breast cancer, will also be presented.
The SNARE Protein Family
Membrane fusion is one of the fundamental biological processes that govern intracellular trafficking and exchanges of material between organelles or the extracellular environment. Deciphering the underlying molecular mechanisms has led to SNARE proteins being considered as the minimal core machinery for membrane fusion [ , , ]. By engaging in multimeric complexes, SNAREs bridge together vesicular and target membranes, and then allowing specific and directed fusion between intracellular compartments [ , ]. SNAREs were first categorized as v- (vesicular-) and t- (target-) SNAREs depending on their residence in the “donor” or the “acceptor” membrane compartments, respectively [ , ]. The v-SNAREs mainly correspond to VAMPs (vesicle-associated membrane proteins) while t-SNAREs include syntaxins (Stx) and SNAPs (synaptosomal-associated proteins). To avoid ambiguity in the case of homotypic membrane fusion, a more recent classification has taken account of the presence of a conserved glutamine (Q) or arginine (R) in their SNARE motif to define them as Q- or R-SNAREs [ ]. This evolutionarily conserved protein family (from plants to mammals) is made up of 36 members in humans, classified into nine subfamilies. At present, the best characterized SNAREs are those involved in the regulated exocytosis of neurotransmitters from synaptic vesicles. In this case, secretion is driven by a SNARE complex including the R-SNARE VAMP2 (also known as synaptobrevin), the Qa-SNARE Stx1A and the Qbc-SNARE SNAP25, which are considered as canonical SNAREs. It is interesting to note that these proteins constitute natural targets for Clostridial neurotoxins (both botulinum and tetanus toxins), which specifically recognize and efficiently cleave and inactivate SNAREs, resulting in the inhibition of synaptic transmission [ ].
The Structure of SNAREs
As depicted in Fig. 1 , most Stx and VAMPs have a single C-terminal transmembrane domain (TMD) and an adjacent SNARE core motif (or H3 domain) [ , ]. The latter consists of homologous coiled-coil stretches of 60–70 amino acids which are involved in the reversible assembly of SNAREs into SNARE complexes [ ]. SNAPs contain two SNARE motifs connected by a linker sequence which undergoes palmitoyl modifications on four cysteine residues, enabling the anchoring of the SNAPs to the membranes. Substantial variations exist between SNAP members: some of them only contain one SNARE motif while others possess a variable N-terminal domain. As determined for VAMP2, the cytoplasmic domain of VAMPs may be unfolded in solution [ , ]. Some VAMPs also contain a conserved N-terminal domain with a profilin-like fold called the longin domain (LD) which is involved in regulating the formation of SNARE complexes and subcellular targeting [ ]. The cytoplasmic domain of Stx is partially folded [ , ] and some (such as Stx1A) have an additional, autonomously folded three-helix bundle N-terminal domain (Habc-domain) [ , ] which is connected to the SNARE motif via a flexible linker [ ]. This linker region may be involved in interactions with regulatory proteins (see below) [ ]. Importantly, many, but not all, Stx contain an additional region at the very N-terminus called the N peptide, which plays an essential role in membrane fusion [ , , ]. Fig. 1 Structure of SNARE proteins. The transmembrane domain (TMD, light blue ) of SNAREs is localized at their C-terminus. The central region contains the SNARE coiled-coil motif (Q or R, purple ). Syntaxins fall into three subfamilies (Qa-, Qb- and Qc-SNAREs) depending on the nature of their N-terminal domain. As shown here, Qa-SNAREs (for example neuronal Stx1A) have anti-parallel three-helix bundles (Habc domain, green ). SNAPs (synaptosome-associated proteins, Qbc-SNAREs) possess duplicated SNARE motifs (one Qb- and one Qc-SNARE motif) connected by a linker which is frequently palmitoylated ( zig-zag lines ) and anchors SNAPs to the membranes. Domain in brackets is variable among Q-SNAREs, domains in square brackets are missing from some subfamily members
Several experiments have shown that the progressive extension of the linker region between the TMD and the SNARE motif of Stx1A by the addition of flexible residues gradually reduces the fusion activity of liposomes in vitro. Surprisingly, similar experiments with VAMP2 did not affect its fusion activity so far [ ]. However, replacing the TMDs of the synaptic SNAREs with covalently attached lipid anchors leads to the complete inhibition of fusion in vitro [ ]. These data suggest that TMD may play an active role during fusion, possibly through direct conformational coupling between TMD and the core complex. Alternatively, TMDs may locally destabilize membranes so that they become prone to fusion while being kept in close apposition. In the same way, a stretch of 12 residues in the linker region and the N-terminal half of the TMD of Stx1A has been shown to be capable of penetrating the membrane-water interface [ , ] and tends to have an enhanced helical structure in the presence of charged lipids [ ]. Studies using synthetic peptides designed from both Stx1A and VAMP2 TMDs have inferred the structural flexibility of these regions [ ]. Nevertheless, it remains unclear whether structuring of the linker region occurs at formation of the SNARE complex and the extent to which TMDs may contribute to the fusion activity of SNAREs.
A major role in the modulation of SNARE function is provided by additional N-terminal domains of ∼ 120 residues, namely LD in R-SNAREs and Habc in Q-SNAREs, respectively. These domains can fold back onto the SNARE motif to bring them into a closed conformation, thus affecting the kinetics of the SNARE complex formation [ , ]. However, while many SNAREs harbor additional N-terminal domains, only some of them display auto-inhibitory closed conformations. In the case of Stx1A, its closed conformation is also maintained by SM (Sec1/Munc18-like) proteins (see below) and exocytosis only occurs after a conformational switch to an open configuration of Stx [ , ].
SNARE Complex Formation and Membrane Fusion
SNAREs have been shown to display specific subcellular locations within cell organelles. However, the study of SNAREs in various polarized cells has revealed that subtle variations exist depending on the cell type considered, particularly for Stx present at the plasma membrane (see below). Based on in vitro liposome fusion assays, it was first proposed that SNARE interactions might contribute to the targeting specificity of membrane trafficking [ , , , ]. Because the formation of a functional SNARE complex only strictly requires four different SNARE motifs (R, Qa, Qb and Qc), it is therefore possible to assemble non-cognate SNAREs in vitro, i.e. complexes that do not occur in vivo [ , ]. Indeed, some SNAREs can engage in different SNARE interactions in vivo [ , ]. However, SNARE specificity may be strengthened by the local lipid environment that may modulate the structure of the SNARE motifs, thus limiting non-cognate SNARE pairing [ , ]. Furthermore, the presence of certain SNAREs within lipid rafts appears to be cell type-dependent [ ]. Lipid rafts are membrane microdomains that are defined as small (10–200 nm), heterogeneous, highly dynamic, sterol- and sphingolipid-enriched domains [ ]. These microdomains segregate or exclude various proteins [ ], serve as platforms for cell signaling [ ] and are involved in the regulation of membrane protein trafficking, SV biogenesis and exocytosis [ , , ]. Furthermore, since SNARE machinery likely assembles unidirectionally [ ], correct targeting is critically dependent on other factors, including Rab GTPases, their effectors [ ] and other upstream regulatory proteins (see below). Taken together, these data suggest that the conjunction of both the lipid environment and the SNARE complex interacting proteins influences the stability, kinetics and/or spatio-temporal regulation of the fusion pore to finely regulate exocytosis.
Formation of the neuronal SNARE complex (Fig. 2 ) is a multistep process leading to the fusion of cognate membranes which is initiated by the opening of Stx and the binding of Munc18 (mammalian uncoordinated-18) to the syntaxin H abc N-terminal domain [ ]. This promotes a reversible interaction between the SNARE motifs of Stx1A, SNAP25 and VAMP2, and leads to docking of the synaptic vesicle at the release site (active zone) through a partially zippered complex. Another regulatory protein, complexin, then binds to the SNARE core which is thus primed for rapid activation by the Ca 2+ sensor synaptotagmin present on synaptic vesicles [ ]. Synaptotagmin promotes the dissociation of complexin from the SNARE complex. A highly stable ternary four-helix bundle SNARE complex is then formed by zippering that starts from the N-termini of SNAREs and is accompanied by major disorder to order transitions in their core domains [ , ]. Fig. 2 SNARE-dependent membrane fusion. ( 1 ) Syntaxin (Stx, Qa SNARE, green and purple ) and SNAP (synaptosome-associated protein, Qbc SNARE, purple ) are localized on the target plasma membrane. In neuronal synapses, when a secretory vesicle ( SV ) moves into the vicinity of the plasma membrane, the N-terminus (Habc, green domain) of Stx1A shifts from a closed to an open conformation which is conditioned by Munc18. Stx1A then interacts with SNAP25 (Qbc SNARE, purple ) and VAMP2 (R-SNARE, orange ), leading to ATP-dependent docking of the SV. The SNARE complex is primed by complexin ( Cpx ) and Munc18 for activation by synaptotagmin ( Syt ) and Ca 2+ . Following an influx of Ca 2+ influx, Syt dissociates the Cpx from the SNARE complex and reacts with both membrane phospholipids and SNAREs. ( 2 ) The trans -SNARE complex drives membranes mixing and opening of the fusion pore leading to release the SV content. ( 3 ) After fusion is completed, cis -SNARE complexes present at the plasma membrane are dissociated by the NSF (N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive Factor) ATPase and its cofactor αSNAP (soluble NSF attachment protein α) for further reuse. ( 4 ) VAMPs are redirected to SVs by endocytosis which also allows membrane retrieval (compensatory endocytosis)
The trans -SNARE complex (RQabc-SNARE complex, Fig. 2 ) thus consists of four parallel and tightly packed α-helices, with Stx1A, VAMP2 and SNAP25 contributing to one, one and two helices, respectively [ , ]. The core SNARE complex thereby contains 16 hydrophobic layers (numbered from −7 to + 8) of interacting amino acid side chains with a central conserved ionic layer (“0-layer”) which consists of one arginine and three glutamine residues contributed from each of the four α-helices [ ]. This complex tightly bridges the two opposing membranes, gradually brings them into close juxtaposition and leads to their fusion and the exocytosis of neurotransmitters [ ].
The high degree of homology between SNARE subfamiliy members suggests that the formation of all SNARE complexes may be similar to that of the synaptic complex [ , ]. For example, the structure of the endosomal SNARE core complex containing four different SNAREs (STx7 (Qa), Vti1b (Qb), Stx8 (Qc), and VAMP8 (R)) is very similar to that of the neuronal SNARE complex despite limited sequence similarity [ , ]. In this case, the two helices of SNAP25 belong to two independent proteins, Vti1b and Stx8, and may contribute to folding intermediates with different compositions.
The overall free energy necessary to overcome the repulsive forces between two membranes has been estimated to be as 50–100 k B T [ ] and this could be supplied by the formation of two or three SNARE complexes at the fusion site [ , ]. Nevertheless, how this energy leads to the merger of lipid bilayers remains unclear. Subsequent disassembly of the cis -SNARE complex requires ATP hydrolysis by NSF ATPase and its SNAP (soluble NSF attachment protein) cofactor [ ] allows the recycling of the individual SNAREs for another round of fusion.
SNAREs Regulatory Proteins
Multiple configurations, conformations and oligomeric states of SNAREs allow them to interact with their matching SNARE partners or accessory proteins, often in a mutually exclusive fashion to enable the spatio-temporal regulation of membrane fusion. Indeed, the kinetics of SNARE complex formation is also finely tuned by regulatory proteins which prevent or trigger further zippering. For example, the SNARE motif of Stx1 can bind more than forty proteins in vitro [ ]. Notably, the cytosolic SM proteins Munc18-1 and Munc13 have been shown to be obligatory factors for neurotransmitter release [ , ]. Munc18-1 interacts in a multimodal manner with Stx1 at distinct binding sites [ ]. Indeed, Munc18-1 complexes with the closed conformation of Stx1 [ ] but when bound to the N-terminus of Stx1, it stabilizes Stx1/SNAP25 heterodimers so as to facilitate SNARE complex formation with VAMP [ , ]. Munc13 interacts with the Stx1 N-terminal region to promote its conformational transition toward the opening of Stx1, but has also been shown to bind to SNARE complexes and to Stx1/SNAP25 heterodimers. In this way, SM proteins promote vesicle priming [ ].
Synaptotagmins (Syt) are a family of transmembrane proteins which act as Ca 2+ sensors [ ]. In the context of neurotransmitter secretion, Syt1, associated with the synaptic vesicle, binds and stabilizes membrane-anchored Stx1/SNAP25 heterodimers independently of Ca 2+ , thus mediating synaptic vesicle docking [ ]. Upon stimulation, Syt1 binds Ca 2+ through two C2 domains (C2A and C2B) and promotes fusion by simultaneously binding to both membranes and SNARE complexes [ , ]. Thus, Syt1 acts as a ‘clamp’ during vesicle docking and switches to act as a fusion ‘accelerator’ following Ca 2+ entry.
Complexins (Cpx) are a four members family of conserved soluble and highly charged proteins that bind to the assembled SNARE complex and are essential for synaptic Ca 2+ -evoked secretion [ ]. They are thought to act as ‘clamps’ to maintain the trans -SNARE complex in a highly fusogenic state until the entry of Ca 2+ [ ].
Moreover, molecular chaperones such as CSPα (cysteine string protein α), Hsc70 (heat shock cognate protein 70), SGT (small glutamine-rich protein) and synucleins also interact with the SNARE complex, probably to assist with the successive folding and refolding of synaptic SNAREs. In addition, these chaperones have been shown to be linked to neurodegenerative disorders [ ]. Interestingly, α-synuclein sequesters arachidonic acid (AA) in order to modulate exocytosis in neuronal cells [ ], which could also be important in the context of milk product secretion in MESCs (see below).
SNAREs in Polarized Epithelial Cells
As in neurons, the delivery of specific proteins and lipids to particular membrane locations contributes to establish and maintain the polarity of epithelial cells. Depending on their function, most epithelial cells display similarities and specificities for the vectorial secretion of various products at their apical side. Polarized targeting implies that the basolateral and apical plasma membranes (BLM and APM, respectively) have distinct identities and consequently particular fusion machineries [ , ]. Thus the correct localization of SNAREs is crucial to the fidelity of membrane trafficking in polarized epithelial cells [ , ]. Indeed, Stx located at the plasma membrane (Stx1-4) of epithelial cells display subtle variations depending on the cell type considered. For example, in MDCK (Madin-Darby Canine Kidney) cells, Stx3 and 4 are mutually exclusively localized to the APM and BLM, respectively [ ]. Stx3 is involved in apical recycling and in biosynthetic traffic from the trans -Golgi network (TGN) to the apical surface [ ]. Conversely, Stx4 contributes to TGN-to-basolateral trafficking [ ]. In addition, Stx2 and 11 also localize to the plasma membrane but in a non-polarized manner [ , ]. Moreover, the route via which some proteins reach the APM also differs among polarized cells and the epithelial sorting phenotype sometimes changes concomitantly with the establishment of polarity [ , ]. However, in vivo, the panel of SNAREs expressed in renal epithelial cells, as well as their subcellular localizations, differs somewhat from those observed in MDCK cells [ ]. Although general features such as constitutive and regulated secretion are thought to be shared by all exocrine cells [ ], the molecular mechanisms and SNAREs involved are not as well known as in neurons. Regulated exocytosis may be of crucial importance in exocrine glands since it allows the spatio-temporally release of products in response to specific physiological stimuli [ , ]. Indeed, this pathway is the major mechanism for protein secretion in pancreatic and salivary cells, whereas it seems minor in lactating MESCs [ ]. As for SNAREs, VAMP8 has been shown to be expressed in airway goblet cells, pancreatic, salivary, lacrimal, sweat, sebaceous, prostate and mammary glands, and it has been suggested to play a pivotal role in regulated exocytosis from exocrine cells [ ]. However, inactivation of the Vamp8 gene in the mouse did not affect regulated secretion in other non-neuronal tissues such as the endocrine pancreas [ ]. VAMPs being differentially expressed among tissues, it is plausible that the VAMP involved in exocytosis depends on the cell type considered. For example, in gastric parietal cells which secrete hydrochloric acid, exocytosis depends on Stx3, VAMP2 and SNAP25 in response to paracrine, endocrine, and neurocrine signals [ ]. In parotid acinar cells, VAMP2 has been shown to be involved in the release of amylase, and Stx4 and SNAP23 are possible candidates for the formation of the exocytic SNARE complex [ ]. In lacrimal acini, VAMP2 is associated with SVs that are recruited to the APM upon secretagogue stimulation. Stx3 colocalizes with VAMP2 at the APM in stimulated lacrimal acini and is therefore likely to form an apical SNARE complex with VAMP2 [ ]. Stx4 and SNAP23 are involved in the secretion of mucin by duodenal Brunner’s gland acini [ ]. In the exocrine pancreatic acinar cells secreting the digestive enzymes, both VAMP2 and VAMP8 [ , ] together with Stx3, 7, and 8, are found to be associated with zymogen granules (ZGs) while Stx2 and 4 are localized at the APM and the BLM, respectively. SNAP23 is found on both ZGs and the plasma membrane [ ]. Interestingly, interaction by these proteins may determine whether ZG exocytosis occurs at the APM (physiological secretion) or the BLM (pathological secretion in a mouse model of alcoholic pancreatitis). In addition to mediating the basolateral exocytosis of ZGs, VAMP8 has also been shown to be involved in their homotypic fusion which is required for exocytosis [ ]. In lactating MESCs, SNAP23, VAMP8 and Stx3, 6, 7 and/or 12 are probably involved in casein exocytosis [ , ] (see Fig. 3 ). However, their functional role, the SNARE complexes which form and their involvement in regulated or constitutive exocytosis remain to be demonstrated. Of note, SNAP23, Stx5 and VAMP4 have been found to be associated with CLDs and to mediate their fusion, then promoting their growth [ ] (see Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 SNAREs associated with different possible pathways for milk products secretion. Caseins are synthesized and transported along the secretory pathway of lactating MESCs where they assemble into a supramolecular structure called a casein micelle ( CM ). Casein-containing secretory vesicles ( SVs ) move to and fuse with the apical plasma membrane ( APM ) through exocytosis (pathway A ). Microlipid droplets ( MLDs ) emerge from the rough ER ( RER ) and are believed grow by fusing with each other and with larger cytoplasmic lipid droplets ( CLDs ) during their transport to the apex of the MESC. Together with Stx5 and VAMP4, SNAP23 has been suggested to be involved in CLDs growth [ ]. Since the release of CLDs by budding requires considerable quantities of membrane, one hypothesis is that, in addition to APM, SVs provide supplementary amounts of membrane. In line with this, CLD and CM secretion may be partly (pathway B ) or significantly (pathway C ) coupled. In this case, pathway B only involves heterotypic fusion between SVs and the APM, while pathway C also implies homotypic fusion between SVs ( dotted lines indicate SV membranes that have fused). Alternatively, CLDs may be secreted independently of SVs (pathway D ). The localization of SNAP23 ( asterisks ) as well as other SNAREs associated with milk products is indicated [ , ]. Basal plasmamembrane ( BPM ); milk fat globule ( MFG ); syntaxin ( Stx ); tight junction ( TJ ). Adapted from [ ]
The regulatory proteins associated with the SNARE complexes involved in exocytosis have only been partially characterized in exocrine cells. Munc18-2 and Munc18-3 were found to regulate secretion in gastric parietal [ ] and parotid acinar cells [ ], respectively. Munc 13–2 has been shown to prime mucin granule for exocytosis in the mouse airways [ ]. The Ca 2+ sensors Syt1 and Syt2 are localized to secretory granules of the exocrine parotid gland [ ] and in airway goblet cells [ ], respectively. Cpx2 regulates ZG exocytosis in pancreatic acini [ ] together with the chaperones CSPα and Hsc70 [ ]. Proteins involved in the docking and fusion of vesicles (rabphilin 3A, Sec8, Stx4, SNAP 25, rabaptin and Doc2) were found to be expressed in mammary epithelial cell lines [ ]. The various isoforms of Munc18 and Munc13, as well as Cpx1 and 3, were shown to be expressed in lactating MESCs [ ]. Furthermore, the mRNAs of certain Syt (at least Syt2, 3, 6, 8, 9 10 11, 13 and 15), Rab3A [ ] and 3C, and synucleins (α, β, γ) were also detected (our unpublished results). However, their role in the regulation of casein exocytosis requires to be further investigated.
Therefore, although the molecular mechanisms of exocytosis appear to be similar in exocrine acinar cells [ ], a combination of both the SNAREs involved and the regulatory proteins associated with the fusion complex is likely to be specific to each cell type. This suggests that expression and localization of the exocytic machinery is modulated in epithelial cells in order to achieve their particular secretory phenotypes.
SNAREs and Establishment of the Polarity in Epithelial Cells
Polarization is intimately linked to the secretory function of epithelial cells, and specialized intracellular trafficking routes are crucial to the asymmetric delivery of proteins and lipids that leads to the establishment and maintenance of polarity. Interestingly, some SNAREs have been shown to play a role in targeted trafficking [ , ] or even as morphogenic signals in various cell types [ ]. Indeed, Stx2 and/or 3 are mainly localized at the APM in polarized epithelial cells, such as Caco-2, MDCK and acinar cells [ , , ]. Strikingly, Stx2 was initially called epimorphin (EPM) because of its morphogenic properties. This membrane-anchored protein was first characterized as a stromal cell-surface molecule involved in embryonic epithelial morphogenesis [ ]. Depending upon the context of its presentation, EPM selectively directs branching or luminal morphogenesis and its overexpression promotes alveolar hyperplasia and mammary carcinoma [ ]. Later studies showed that EPM was widely expressed, conserved among species and belongs to the SNARE protein family [ , ]. A morphogenic role for EPM has been characterized in various epithelia such as the lung, intestine, skin, pancreas, kidney and mammary gland [ ] as well as in non-epithelial tissues such as the liver, endothelium, hair follicles and tooth formation, embryo outgrowth, cartilage condensation, bile duct formation, testicular development and spermatogenesis [ ]. Moreover, four isoforms of Stx2, including a soluble type, have been shown to have distinct subcellular localizations and functions in polarized cells [ , ]. Interestingly, in mouse MESCs, Stx2 is localized at the APM during late gestation but becomes intracellular at the onset of lactation [ ] and a truncated form of EPM resulting from a proteolytic cleavage has also been identified in mouse milk [ ]. Another SNARE family member, namely Stx4, was recently demonstrated to be involved in keratinocyte cornification when expressed extracellularly [ ]. SNAP23 and Stx2 were also found to be present at the surface of platelets [ ]. Particular mechanisms may therefore lead to the dual membrane topology of Stx2/EPM, leading to distinct functions for this protein, i.e. intracellular membrane fusion and extracellular morphogen, respectively [ ].
SNAREs and Milk Secretion
During lactation, the mammary gland shares some structural and secretory features but also displays notable differences with other exocrine glands [ ]. One major difference is that the secretory activity of most exocrine glands is chiefly under direct neuronal control [ , ], while the secretion of milk by MESCs mainly relies on hormonal signals released by the pituitary during suckling or milking. The lactogenic hormones prolactin (PRL) and oxytocin not only control the gene expression of milk proteins but also maintain tissue architecture and stimulate the intracellular trafficking of milk products in MESCs through secretagogue effects [ ] (see below). Another significant difference is that lactating MESCs secrete a complete nutritive fluid which also contains hormones and immunoglobulins that may directly result from their transcytosis from the blood to the lumen of mammary acini. Moreover, lipids are secreted by the budding of MFGs, the size of which can reach several micrometers in diameter, being enwrapped by the APM [ ]. Thus, the APM of lactating MESCs is subjected to substantial modifications, both in terms of turnover (exocytosis: input and budding: loss of membrane) and deformation (exocytosis: negative and budding: positive membrane curvatures, respectively) probably relying on the local phospholipid composition and compartmentalization. APM homeostasis may be maintained by specific regulatory mechanisms which probably differ in part from those described in other exocrine glands and synapses, such as compensatory endocytosis and membrane recycling [ ]. Major secretory routes in lactating MESCs have been reviewed earlier [ , , ]. Newly synthesized proteins are transported along the classical secretory pathway and casein micelles become closely packed as they are vectorially routed to the APM. Furthermore, as SVs also contain hormones such as PRL, growth factors, transferrin, albumin and immunoglobulins (which are in part endocytosed at the basal side of MESCs), the secretory and the transcytotic pathways may somehow be connected in lactating MESCs [ , , ]. Lipid droplets (CLDs) are thought to grow by accumulation of neutral lipids between the two leaflets of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane (Fig. 3 ). CLDs surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer derived from the ER membrane are then translocated to the APM [ ]. The observation that apical CLDs are often surrounded by numerous SVs has lead to the hypothesis that MFGs may be released upon the fusion of these SVs [ ]. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this process have not yet been fully deciphered. The docking and budding of CLDs at the APM are thought to result from the interaction of at least three proteins, namely butyrophilin, xanthine oxydase and adipophilin [ , , , ], but the kinetics and the mechanisms for MFGs release are not clearly established. During lactation, casein exocytosis appears to be both constitutive and regulated by intracellular Ca 2+ [ ]. Several studies have indicated that PRL may control the final trafficking steps and potentially the exocytosis of SVs. After binding to its receptor and endocytosis of the receptor-ligand complex at the BLM of MESCs, PRL has been shown to exert a secretagogue effect by activating a calcium-independent phospholipase A2 (PLA2) to transiently produce AA [ , ]. The secretagogue effect of PRL is linked to its endocytosis and intracellular transport, as well as to the composition of MESCs membranes [ ]. Interestingly, several studies have shown that AA directly interacts with some SNAREs in different neuroendocrine cell types, thus promoting the assembly of the SNARE complex which leads to exocytosis and membrane expansion [ , ]. As SNAREs were recently described in MESCs [ ], one promising hypothesis is that they may be the targets of AA produced in response to PRL, thus providing a link between endocytosis, signal transduction, the secretagogue effect and exocytosis in MESCs. This possibility is supported by the fact that α-synuclein (which modulates exocytosis by sequestering AA [ ]) is also expressed in lactating MESCs (our unpublished results, see above). Since regulated secretion primarily depends on Ca 2+ [ ], and PRL does not induce a significant Ca 2+ increase in MESCs [ , ], other unidentified signaling pathways may operate in MESCs in order to stimulate SVs exocytosis. Furthermore, because some SNAREs appear to be up-regulated during lactation [ ], one interesting point would be to determine whether their expression is regulated by PRL in MESCs, as it has been demonstrated in pancreatic β-cells [ ]. Nevertheless, SNAP23 and VAMP8 are good candidates to mediate casein exocytosis and their presence at the interface of the CLDs and SVs present in the apical region of lactating MESCs (see Fig. 3 ) suggests they could also be key point regulators for the coordination of milk product secretion [ ]. One possible scenario is that SNAREs mediate both constitutive and regulated secretion. In this case, SNAREs may concomitantly promote both homotypic (between SVs) and heterotypic (SVs with the APM) fusion, thus leading to the release of both caseins and MFGs without excessive APM loss, as previously suggested [ ]. Indeed, our recent data support this theory. SNAP23 and VAMP8 are present at the surface of secreted MFGs together with other apical proteins, suggesting that the membrane provided to the apical surface by SV exocytosis may partly be reused to enwrap budding MFGs (Honvo-Houéto et al., in preparation). In addition, in response to PRL, AA may be delivered locally by a PLA2, directly hydrolyzing phospholipids from the budding MFGs [ , ]. Further work is however required to completely decipher the molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways involved in milk secretion.
SNAREs and Breast Cancer
Metastatic tumor cells are highly motile and are considered as polarized since they secrete proteolytic enzymes at their leading edge (invadopodia) in order to degrade the extracellular matrix, thus allowing the spread of malignant cells from a primary site to distant organs [ ]. In migrating cells, the polarized exocytosis of cell adhesion receptor integrins and proteolytic enzymes depends on SNAREs. However, it has not so far been suggested that SNAREs may be tumor cell markers but some of these proteins may be linked to tumorigenesis. As previously mentioned, overexpression of EPM/Stx2 promotes alveolar hyperplasia and mammary carcinoma [ ]. Furthermore, the level of Stx7 expression was found to be inversely correlated to tumor stage meaning that its decreased expression might be associated with more aggressive melanoma [ ]. Stx17, which was initially described as being mostly expressed in steroidogenic cells [ ], is also present in mammary tissue, being merely cytoplasmic in MESCs, but present in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus of myoepithelial cells, with a very low level of expression in the stroma [ ]. Surprisingly, the cellular localization of Stx17 therefore appears to depend on the cell type considered and may be altered in malignant cells. Unfortunately, the localization of Stx17 has not so far been investigated in breast cancer cells. VAMP7 has been found to play a central role in the focal delivery of MT1-MMP (membrane type 1-matrix metalloproteinase) at the invadipodia, and also to contribute to invadopodia maturation during invasion in MDA-MB-231 breast adenocarcinoma cells [ ]. Interestingly, VAMP8 has been identified as one of the two genes specifically regulated by the HER2 oncogene, which has known functions in glucose metabolism and whose expression is frequently altered in human breast cancer cells. As VAMP8 plays a role in the internalization of glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4) [ ] in adipocytes, it is tempting to speculate that its oncogene-mediated down-regulation in mammary epithelial MCF10A-HER2 transformed cells may then favor the likelihood of GLUT4 localization at the plasma membrane versus its internal storage, thus contributing to the insulin-independent phenotype of these cells [ ]. By contrast, the expression of prenylated SNARE Ykt6 was found to be up-regulated in the mouse mammary epithelial cell line HC11 transformed with the colony-stimulating factor receptor [ ]. This receptor is abnormally expressed in breast cancer and its expression confers both in vitro invasive and in vivo tumorigenic properties when expressed in normal mammary cells [ ]. Ykt6 has also been found to be up-regulated in p53-mutated breast tumors, a phenotype associated with a low response rate to docetaxel [ ]. Thus, Ykt6 may be linked to both metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy in MESCs. In the same way as Ykt6, Stx18 is involved in membrane trafficking between the ER and Golgi. This SNARE has been found to enhance the growth of human breast cancer cells (MCF-7), when down-regulated, whereas its over-expression leads to the suppression of cell growth [ ]. These effects may depend on the ability of Stx18 to interact with proteins involved in the cell cycle [ ]. Finally, VAPB (VAMP-associated protein B), a SNARE-interacting protein also localized in the ER and the cis-Golgi [ ], has been shown to regulate the growth of mammary tumor cells (MCF10A-HER2) at least in part by modulating the Akt signaling pathway [ ]. VAPB is known to regulate multiple cellular functions [ ]. Its aberrant expression is associated with breast cancer and VAPB mRNA expression levels are negatively correlated with patient survival [ , ]. This tumor growth activity could in part be explained by the fact that VAPB is involved in vesicle trafficking and exocytosis and may therefore play a role in receptor localization and growth factor secretion [ ]. Moreover, as shown in Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster , VAPB can be cleaved and its secreted domain can act as a ligand for the Eph receptor [ ]. Thus, through the modulation of Eph receptor activity, which is commonly dysregulated in cancer [ , ], truncated VAPB may affect tumor growth and invasion. Therefore, the modulation of SNARE expression and/or their mislocalization may play a role in cancer progression.
Conclusion
Deciphering the molecular mechanisms that govern the transport and secretion of milk, as well as their physiological regulation in MESCs is an important issue to address due to the nutritional and economical value of milk. Furthermore, the cross-talk between endocytosis, transcytosis and the secretory pathway, as well as the release of MFGs through a unique budding process, means that MESCs are a model of choice for the study of traffic in polarized cells. As central players in membrane fusion, SNAREs may not only be involved in all the aspects of membrane trafficking during lactation but may also play a substantial role in establishing apical polarity in MESCs and in the switch of the mammary gland from a quiescent to a highly secreting organ. SNAREs are therefore obvious candidates to be crucial actors in the genetically, spatio-temporally and hormonally coordinated secretion of milk.