Leptin and the Leptin Receptor
Leptin, a 16 kDa protein is the product of the ob gene [ ]. The originally characterized mouse ob gene encodes a 167 amino acid (aa) protein with a 21 aa signal sequence that is cleaved to yield the 146 aa mature protein. The leptin gene is remarkably conserved across all species, e.g., human and mouse leptin DNA coding sequences share 93 % similarity and 84 % identity [ ]. The human leptin protein features a bundle of 4 helices (A-D) with an up-and-down antiparallel topology [ ].
In humans, leptin is produced mostly by the white adipose tissue, however, several other sources of the hormone have been reported, including the mammary gland [ , , , , ]. Serum leptin levels are directly proportional to body mass index (BMI) and are usually higher in women than in men [ ]. Leptin binds to the transmembrane receptor, ObR, a member of the class I of cytokine family receptors [ ]. In human tissues, at least four splicing variants of ObR with different COOH-terminal cytoplasmic domains have been described [ ]. The full-length isoform of ObR (ObR long form, ObRb) (1161 aa, Mw 130–190 kDa) contains the extracellular, transmembrane and intracellular domains, whereas the intracellular tail recruits and activates signaling substrates. ObRb is highly expressed in hypothalamic nuclei, but has also been found in many peripheral tissues. The short isoforms of ObR (Mw 96–109 kDa) are commonly expressed in all organs and have distinct tissue distribution and may induce limited signaling events [ , , , ].
Under physiological conditions, leptin crosses the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and binds to ObRb in the hypothalamus [ ]. Activation of ObRb in the arcuate nucleus stimulates anorectic neuropeptides, and suppresses the action of orexigenic peptides, resulting in maintenance of energy balance [ , ]. Development of leptin resistance, e.g., in obese individuals, impairs leptin CNS penetrance and causes peripheral hyperleptinemia. Circulating leptin levels in obese people often reach 100 ng/mL concentrations, and in morbidly obese individuals, levels exceeding 250 ng/mL have been reported [ ].
Thus, given widespread expression of ObR and the presence of circulating as well as locally produced ligand, the leptin signaling system has a remarkable potential to affect multiple organs and regulate diverse processes through endocrine, paracrine, and possibly autocrine loops. Indeed, in addition to its CNS function, leptin is known to modulate many different processes in the periphery, among others, hematopoietic, reproductive and immune response, wound healing, bone remodeling, and cognitive functions [ , , , , , , ].
Leptin interacts with ObR through three domains (I-III). Binding site I is located around leptin residue 40, the bivalent site II consists of a leptin domain around the N-terminus (aa 3–21) and another in the middle (aa 70–93), and site III is positioned at the leptin’s C terminus (aa 110–142) [ ] (Fig. 1 ). Binding of leptin to the extracellular domain of ObRb leads to the activation of broad array of intracellular signals [ , ]. Many of those have been implicated in carcinogenesis, such as those controlling cell growth and survival (extracellular-signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2, [ERK1/2], phosphoinositide-3-kinase/Akt kinase [PI-3K/Akt], mammalian target of rapamycin [mTOR], p38 kinase, cyclin D1), inflammatory response (nuclear factor-κB [NF-κB] and cyclooxygenase 2 [COX-2]), angiogenesis (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 [STAT3] factor, vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF], fibroblast growth factor [FGF], interleukin-1), and differentiation (Notch/Wnt, E-cadherin) [ , , , , , , , ]. Recently, leptin has been found to regulate adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), an energy- sensing enzyme in a tissue-specific manner. Leptin inhibits AMPK in the hypothalamus but increases its activity in several peripheral organs. In cancer cells, leptin can counteract metformin-induced AMPK phosphorylation but has minimal impact on basal AMPK activity [ , , ]. On a genetic level, ObRb stimulation can upregulate the expression of several genes involved in cell proliferation, including those encoding transcription factors, cell cycle-regulating proteins, anti-apoptotic regulators, and extracellular matrix proteins [ , , ]. Activation of ObRb engages at least two intracellular proteins that terminate receptor signaling—namely, suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 (SOCS3) and protein tyrosine phosphatase-1B (PTP1B) [ , , ]. In contrast to ObRb, the shorter isoforms of ObR can bind leptin, but have significantly limited signaling potential [ ]. Fig. 1 Targeting ObR and AdipoR in cancer. a . Leptin structure with ObR interaction sites I, IIa, IIb, and III indicated. ObR antagonist peptidomimetics developed by our laboratory are based on site III that is essential for leptin/ObR binding. Aca1, Allo-aca and D-Ser are specific inhibitors of ObR signaling acting at pM-nM concentrations in vitro and low mg/kg/day in rodent animal models. D-Ser is the third generation ObR antagonist featuring exclusively peripheral biodistribution in animals [ , , , , ]. b . Adiponectin monomer structure with different domains indicated. According to our structure-function analysis, the region aa 149–166 in the gAd domain is essential for AdipoR binding in vitro. ADP355, a peptidomimetic based on the binding domain, contains non-natural aa and other chemical modifications improving its stability and AdipoR interactions. The peptidomimetic is the first-in-class AdipoR agonist developed in our laboratory as a potential anti-cancer therapeutic [ ]
Leptin and Breast Cancer
The signaling and non-signaling isoforms of ObR have been detected in breast cancer cells, and leptin has been shown to induce a variety of responses, such as mitogenesis, survival, transformation, migration, invasion [ , , , , ]. The potential role of leptin in breast cancer has also been suggested by analysis of human cancer specimens. ObR appears to be frequently expressed in breast cancer tissues (~80 % of cases) and is overrepresented in cancerous breast epithelial cells vs. non-malignant mammary epithelium [ , , ]. In some studies, ObR overexpression has been reported to be associated with larger tumors and/or distant metastasis [ ]. Notably, high expression of ObR in breast tumors in conjunction with high systemic leptin levels is correlated with poor prognosis [ ]. In majority of published studies, ObR has not been associated with the estrogen receptor α/progesterone receptor [ER/PgR] or human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 [HER2] status [ , , , ]. Indeed, we recently demonstrated that ObR is detectable in most hormone-receptor negative breast cancer cases (~90 % triple-negative and ~70 % HER2-positive) [ , ].
Results from different animal models have suggested leptin involvement in mammary carcinogenesis. In obese mice, leptin deficiency suppresses MMTV-Wnt-1 mammary tumor growth and abrogates tumor initiating cell survival [ , ]. In animal xenograft models, leptin is required for the growth of both hormone-receptor positive as well as triple-negative tumors [ ]. Several reports have suggested that leptin can promote metastasis by stimulating tumor neovascularization and breast cancer invasiveness in experimental models [ , , , , ].
In addition to its direct action, leptin can transactivate different key breast cancer targets, including ERα, HER2, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R), VEGF and VEGF receptor 2, either through direct phosphorylation, transphosphorylation, increased stability, or increased transcription [ , , , , , , ]. Of note, leptin can also promote mammary carcinogenesis by bidirectional interactions with tumor microenvironment [ , ].
Leptin likely activates ObR in cancer tissues not only through endocrine mechanisms but also via paracrine/autocrine (intratumoral leptin) pathways. In fact, evaluation of breast tissues demonstrated frequent overexpression of leptin in epithelial cancer cells. Remarkably, leptin expression is almost invariably highly correlated with the presence of ObR [ , , , ]. On the mechanistic levels, we have demonstrated that leptin and ObR expression in breast cancer cells can be induced by obesity-related stimuli, such as hyperinsulinemia, high IGF-I levels, estrogens or hypoxia [ , , ].
Adiponectin and the Adiponectin Receptors
Adiponectin, a major fat tissue-derived cytokine, is a 244 amino acid protein, circulating at 0.5–30 μg/mL concentrations, usually in oligomeric complexes. While trimer is the basic form of circulating adiponectin, hexamers and multimers are also common. In addition, a globular fraction of adiponectin (gAd) generated by proteolytic cleavage of the monomer has been described. It has been suggested that high molecular weight multimers mediate peripheral adiponectin functions, while low molecular weight fractions may be transported to the brain and regulate several CNS processes [ , , , ]. In the experimental setting, the role of adiponectin is often addressed using gAd that appears to mimic the effects of full size protein [ , , ](Fig. 1 ).
Serum adiponectin levels are inversely correlated with BMI [ ]. In obese individuals, especially in those with high visceral fat content, adiponectin levels are low [ ]. Epidemiological and experimental data suggest that adiponectin is a protective cytokine exhibiting beneficial effects against insulin resistance and cardiovascular disease, and potentially in inflammatory conditions and cancer [ , , , , , , , ].
The adiponectin receptors, AdipoR1 and AdipoR2, are 7-channel membrane proteins containing an N-terminal intracellular portion and a C-terminal extracellular-transmembrane domain [ , ]. AdipoR1 is a high-affinity receptor for gAd and a lower affinity receptor for the full-size ligand [ ]. The evidence from many experimental systems suggests that the major intracellular pathway induced by adiponectin is the energy-sensing AMPK pathway [ , ], although some exceptions have been noted [ ]. In addition, adiponectin or gAd can modulate in a tissue context-dependent manner several other signaling effectors such as mTOR, Akt, ERK1/2 and p38 kinases, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α (PPARα) and stress-responsive c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), Wnt receptor, STAT3, NF-κB, and ceramide [ , , , , , , , , , , ]. Targeted disruption experiments suggested that AdipoR1 transmits signals mainly through AMPK-, while AdipoR2 through PPARα-related pathways [ ].
Adiponectin and Breast Cancer
In contrast with leptin, adiponectin appears to exert anti-neoplastic activity in breast cancer [ , ]. Clinical studies have suggested that hypoadiponectinemia is associated with a BMI-independent increase of postmenopausal breast cancer [ ] and a BMI-independent intraepithelial neoplasia or higher risk of second breast neoplastic events in premenopausal women [ ]. Furthermore, low systemic adiponectin levels are associated with more aggressive breast tumors and a higher frequency of lymph node metastasis [ ].
In vitro studies have demonstrated that several breast cancer cell lines, including triple-negative breast cancer cells, express AdipoR1/2 and are sensitive to adiponectin [ , , , , , , , , ]. Depending on the experimental model, cytostatic/apoptotic adiponectin activity can be associated with increased activation of AMPK, reduced ERK1/2 and mTOR signaling [ , ], inhibition of the Akt kinase and glycogen synthase kinase/β-catenin pathway [ ], and/or enhanced expression of Bax and p53 pro-apoptotic genes [ , ]. Adiponectin can also reduce cancer cell migration and invasion [ ]. In animal models, adiponectin suppresses the growth of breast cancer xenografts, and in some cases, inhibits tumor neoangiogenesis [ , ]. The effects of adiponectin on endothelial cell differentiation are conflicting, with proangiogenic [ , , ] and antiangiogenic [ ] properties reported.
The adiponectin receptors, AdipoR1 and AdipoR2, have been detected in breast cancer tissues, but not clearly associated with other biomarkers [ , , , , ]. AdipoR1 appears to play a key role in breast cancer, as adiponectin-dependent antiproliferative effects are abolished by siRNA knockdown of this receptor [ , ]. In agreement with this observation, adiponectin-sensitive MDA-MB-231 cells express AdipoR1 but lack AdipoR2 [ ].
Leptin-Adiponectin Crosstalk in Breast Cancer
Experimental data suggest that leptin and adiponectin exert opposite effects on key oncogenic pathways in breast cancer cells, and clinical studies have indicated that increased leptin:adiponectin ratios, rather then the levels of individual adipokines, are stronger predictors of breast cancer risk [ ]. The functional relationship between the two adipokines is also suggested by the observation that adiponectin can antagonize leptin activities in different breast cancer cell and animal models [ , , , ]. In this context, development of therapeutic strategies reducing clinical consequences of hyperleptinemia and mitigating hypoadiponectinemia in breast cancer patients has been strongly advocated [ , , , ].
Targeting the Leptin Signaling in Breast Cancer Models
The importance of leptin in human physiology and pathology prompted the development of innovative ObR-interacting compounds, such as leptin mutants, leptin fragments, and leptin or ObR antibodies, all reviewed in detail by us before [ ]. Below I discuss several of these reagents that have been shown to act as inhibitors of leptin signaling in cellular and animal models of breast cancer (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Therapeutic rebalancing of leptin and adiponectin signaling. Obesity is characterized by hyperleptinemia and hypoadiponectinemia. Excess leptin signaling might induce pro-neoplastic and inflammatory events, while deficient adiponectin signaling can be associated with metabolic abnormalities such as insulin resistance and cancer progression. Leptin receptor antagonist with specific peripheral activity and superior efficacy as well as other inhibitors of ObR signaling (e.g., JAK2/STAT3 inhibitors) could mitigate the effects of hyperleptinemia. On the other hand, specific peripheral adiponectin receptor agonist could remediate loss of adiponectin function. Other therapeutic interventions, such as drugs that specifically activate AMPK might also be useful in reactivating some adiponectin-like, energy-restricting signals
Leptin Peptidomimetics
The first class of leptin petidomimetics with antagonistic activity towards ObR and efficacy in mammary cancer models has been designed based on leptin sites II and I (Fig. 1 ) [ , , , ]. The leptin protein fragment containing site II (aa 70–95), LPA-2, binds ObR with high affinity and has been tested in mammary cancer and other models [ ]. In MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells, the pegylated version of LPA-2, PEG-LPrA2, was able to block leptin-induced VEGF and VEGFR2 expression [ ]. Furthermore, the injections of LPrA2 reduced the growth of human breast cancer xenografts as well as downregulated the expression of angiogenic (VEGF/VEGFR2, leptin/ObR, and IL-1 receptor type I) and mitogenic (proliferating cell nuclear antigen and cyclin D1) regulators. Interestingly, LPrA2 was much more effective in ER-positive MCF-7 cells than in ER-negative MDA-MB-231 cells, possibly due to higher ObR expression in the former model [ , ]. In the 4T1 mouse mammary carcinoma model, LPrA2 inhibited leptin-dependent activation of ERK1/2, Akt, STAT3, and SOCS3 and significantly delayed the development and slowed the growth of 4T1 tumors in syngeneic mice. In addition, LPrA2 decreased serum VEGF levels and VEGF/VEGF R2 expression in 4T1 tumors [ ]. In endothelial HUVEC cells, LPrA2 was able to suppress leptin-induced angiogenic differentiation [ ]. In the above experiments, leptin fragments were used at high nM-low μM concentrations in vitro and low mM doses in vivo, and were not tested for potential agonist activity in the absence of leptin.
Recently, in search for optimal ObR antagonists, we screened a library of leptin fragments to identify those that interact with ObR, block leptin effects in breast cancer cells at pM-nM concentrations and do not exhibit agonist activity in the absence of exogenous leptin. While several of our leptin site I and site II variants exhibited partial antagonist/agonist activity, specific peptides based on a shortened leptin site III featured the desired pharmacological characteristics (Fig. 1 ) [ , ]. The native site III fragments were further modified by incorporating non-natural amino acid residues to avoid exopeptidase cleavage in biological fluids and providing acceptable absorption and biodistribution properties without any additional leptin-unrelated modules attached.
Two of our lead ObR antagonist petidomimetics, Aca 1 (aa 121–129; modifications Nva123, Aca129) and Allo-aca (aa 121–129; modifications alloThr121, Nva123, Aca129) inhibit leptin-dependent growth and signaling in cancer cell lines, including MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells, without any effects on ObR-negative cells. Importantly, both antagonists inhibit leptin activity at high pM-low nM concentrations, with Allo-aca featuring superior efficacy and higher stability in biological fluids [ , , ].
In immunocompromized mice, Allo-aca significantly suppressed the growth of established MCF-7 orthotopic xenografts when administered either intraperitoneally or subcutaneously for 38 days at a dose as low as 0.1 mg/kg/day [ ]. In mice carrying MDA-MB-231 xenografts, Allo-aca injected subcutaneously significantly extended the average survival time from 15.4 days (untreated controls) to 24 and 28.1 days at 0.1 and 1 mg/kg/day doses, respectively. In parallel, conventional treatment with 1 mg/kg/day intraperitoneal cisplatin prolonged the average survival time of mice carrying MDA-MB-231 xenografts to 18.6 days only, while administration of 20 mg/kg/day oral Tamoxifen (negative control) had no significant survival effects relative to controls [ ]. Importantly, in normal mice, Allo-aca produced no signs of systemic toxicity up to the highest studied subcutaneous bolus dose of 50 mg/kg. However, both Aca 1 and Allo-aca modestly (2–10 %) increased body weight during prolonged administration, likely due to their ability to cross BBB and interfere with ObR in the brain [ , , , ].
To avoid potentially undesirable orexigenic effects of ObR antagonists, we redesigned Allo-aca to uncouple its central and peripheral activities. We generated several Allo-aca analogs and tested their biodistribution in vivo and anti-neoplastic activity in vitro in different cancer cells, including the MCF-7 model. The initial screening identified the peptidomimetic D-Ser (aa 121–129; modifications 121D-Ser, 123Nva, 128N-MeArg, 129beta-Ala) that distributed exclusively in the periphery of experimental animals [ , ]. Next detailed analysis demonstrated that D-Ser inhibits leptin-dependent-proliferation of MCF-7 cells in vitro at 1–100 nM concentration without exhibiting any partial agonistic activity in the absence of the exogenous ligand. Interestingly, D-Ser efficacy against leptin-driven cell growth and survival was evident not only in monolayer, but also in three-dimensional MCF-7 spheroid cultures. In both experimental settings, D-Ser antiproliferative action was associated with the inhibition of several leptin-induced pathways, including JAK/STAT3, MAPK/ERK1/2 and PI-3K/Akt, cyclin D1, and E-cadherin [ ]. D-Ser is the first leptin-based peptidomimetic featuring peripheral ObR antagonistic activity and superior efficacy. As such, the peptide has desired characteristics of a prototype for novel ObR targeting therapeutics, particularly for the management of obesity-related cancers.
Antibodies and siRNA to Block ObR
A limited number of studies incorporated the use of ObR blocking antibodies (Abs) or ObR siRNA for the validation of leptin responses in breast cancer cells. For instance, in MCF-7 cells, H-300 Ab against ObR blocked leptin-induced expression of tissue factor, a hallmark of cancer progression [ ]. Another study demonstrated that inhibition of ObR with blocking 9F8 Ab or ObR siRNA reduced leptin induction of ERK1/2 and STAT3 activation in MCF-7 cells [ ]. In non-breast cancer models, 9F8 Ab has been shown to act as a partial antagonist capable of inhibiting proliferation and downstream leptin signaling to STAT3 in vitro [ ]. Other polyclonal Abs (e.g., ObR12-A, Lep11) have been shown to block ObR and downstream signaling to STAT3 and p38 kinase, or neutralize leptin in various experimental systems in vitro [ , ]. These Abs, however, have not been systematically evaluated as potential drug candidates.
STAT3 Inhibitors
AG490 is a small molecule and a specific and potent inhibitor of JAK2, and therefore useful in blocking leptin/Jak2/STAT3 signaling. In breast cancer cells, the compound has been shown to inhibit several leptin-induced effects, such as STAT3 phosphorylation, proliferation [ , ] as well as HER2 transphosphorylation and HER2 stabilization [ , ]. Other experiments demonstrated that knockdown of STAT3 expression in breast cancer cells by siRNA blocked leptin-induced upregulation of survivin [ ], and transfection with the STAT3 dominant negative mutant inhibited leptin-dependent aromatase expression and activity [ ]. While Jak2/STAT3 inhibitors have been approved or are in clinical trials as therapeutics for other diseases, none of these compounds are currently being developed as breast cancer drugs ( www.clinicatrials.gov ).
Reactivation of Adiponectin Pathways in Breast Cancer Models
In case of adiponectin, specific therapeutics have been difficult to generate, partly due to unclear structure-function relationships of this cytokine and difficulties in converting the full size adiponectin protein into a viable drug. While adiponectin normally circulates in multimeric complexes, several experiments have demonstrated the efficacy of gAd monomers in activation of AdipoR1/2 in different cells, including breast cancer models. However, the results with gAd have been inconsistent in terms of required dosage, time of treatment and end outcomes, and gAd has not been converted into drug.
AdipoR Agonists
We set out to develop small adiponectin mimetics that would retain adiponectin activity and be suitable for future preclinical and clinical development as a cancer therapeutic. First, using a library of short peptides, we identified the minimal adiponectin region necessary for AdipoR binding. The minimal active site mapped as the 149–166 aa region in the adiponectin protein (Fig. 1 ). Three-dimensional modeling of the active site and functional screening of 330 peptide analogs covering this region allowed us to develop a peptidomimetic ADP 355 (H-DAsn-Ile-Pro-Nva-Leu-Tyr-DSer-Phe-Ala-DSer-NH 2 ) (Fig. 1 ) [ ]. The peptide features several non-natural aa that protect the compound from proteolysis and stabilize its structure. ADP 355 inhibits proliferation in AdipoR-positive breast cancer cell lines at 100 nM–10 μM concentrations and modulates several signaling pathways (AMPK, Akt, STAT3, ERK1/2) in a manner similar to gAd. siRNA knockdown experiments suggested that ADP 355 effects are mediated mostly through AdipoR1. Interestingly, the effects of ADP 355 (like gAd) on signaling pathways appear to be cell-specific. For example, in MCF-7 cells, the peptide increases AMPK and STAT3 phosphorylation and decreases ERK1/2 activation, but does not affect Akt. In MDA-MB-231 cells, ADP 355 inhibits ERK1/2 signaling, transiently increases STAT3 and Akt phosphorylation, but does not activate AMPK. In vivo, ADP 355 inhibits the growth of orthotopic MCF-7 xenografts by ~31 % at a 1 mg/kg/day intraperitoneal dose administered for 28 days. The peptide displays excellent stability in mouse blood or serum and has acceptable safety profile at 5–50 mg/kg bolus doses in normal CBA/J mice [ ].
AMPK Activators
As an alternative to adiponectin mimetics, different activators of AMPK have been evaluated as potential anti-neoplastic agents in breast cancer. The most frequently tested small molecule AICAR (5-aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide) has been shown to increase AMPK phosphorylation and activity and reduce the growth in different cell models at low mM concentrations. For example, AICAR restricts the growth of MCF-7, T47D and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells through either cytostatic mechanisms (T47D cells) or apoptotic effects (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells) [ ]. In another study, AICAR treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells reduced lipogenesis, decreased protein translation, and blocked DNA synthesis, which was accompanied by cell arrest and loss of invasiveness. In vivo, AICAR at 0.4 mg/g/day intraperitoneal doses attenuated the growth of MDA-MB-231 xenografts in nude mice [ ].
A different activator of AMPK, pomolic acid (PA), inhibited MCF-7 cell proliferation and induced sub-G(1) arrest, elevating the mRNA levels of the apoptotic genes p53 and p21. PA activated caspase-3, -9, and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. The anti-neoplastic potential of PA was accompanied by effects on de novo fatty acid synthesis. In addition, PA inhibited key enzymes involved in protein synthesis such as mTOR, 70 kDa ribosomal protein S6 kinase, and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1 [ ].
Metformin
Metformin, a biguanide derivative, is a first-line oral medication for type 2 diabetes mellitus. The best known effects of metformin include suppression of hepatic glucose production and reduction of insulin resistance in peripheral tissues [ ]. In addition the drug enhances peripheral glucose uptake and enhances fatty acid oxidation [ ].
AMPK is the major intracellular effector of metformin [ , , ]. Upregulation of AMPK inhibits several anabolic/mitogenic pathways activated by growth factors and nutrients, including PI-3K, mTOR, ERK1/2 [ ]. Further downstream, the consequences of AMPK stimulation may include inhibition of the cell cycle regulator cyclin D1, downregulation of critical transcriptional regulators such as hypoxia inducible factor 1α, NF-κB, and the c-myc protein, and depletion of other mitosis-related proteins [ ]. On a cellular level, in addition to insulin-sensitizing effects, the drug is known to inhibit cell growth, migration, invasion, and angiogenesis [ ]. The cellular and molecular activities of metformin, especially its energy-restrictive function, appear to partially mimic adiponectin signaling. The drug has demonstrated anti-cancer activities in different breast cancer models [ ], including HER2-overexpressing and triple-negative breast cancer [ , , ]. Interestingly, in HER2 models, metformin reduces HER2 expression via AMPK-independent inhibition of p70S6K1 activity [ ]. In vivo, the drug inhibits chemically induced carcinogenesis in different organs, including the mammary gland and suppresses the growth of breast cancer xenografts and mammary tumors in HER2 transgenic mice [ , , , , , ]. In the context of leptin-adiponectin crosstalk, we recently found that metformin can counteract mitogenic and motogenic leptin effects in cancer cells [ ].
Clinical trials suggested that metformin might reduce breast cancer risk or recurrence in type 2 diabetes patients [ , , , ]. Recent study involving triple-negative breast cancer diabetic patients found that use of metformin with adjuvant chemotherapy decreased the risk of developing distant metastases vs. non-metformin group, however, it did not improve survival in this population [ ]. The potential use of metformin for breast cancer treatment or prevention is currently addressed by several clinical trials [ ] (clinicaltrialas.gov).
PPARγ Agonists
PPARγ are ligand-activated transcription factors, members of the nuclear receptor superfamily. PPARγ can be activated by its natural ligand, the prostanoid 15-deoxy-prostaglandin J2, its synthetic ligands, such as the N-aryl tyrosine derivative as GW1929 as well as thiazolidinediones (TZDs), including troglitazone, rosiglitazone, pioglitazone and ciglitazone, a class of drugs used to improve lipid and glucose metabolism in type 2 diabetes [ ]. Rosiglitazone has profound effects on the fat tissue, stimulating adipocyte differentiation and generating more numerous, smaller adipocytes that are more insulin-sensitive, produce less fatty acids, TNF-α, and leptin, but more adiponectin [ ]. In vitro, treatment of breast cancer cells with rosiglitazone results in increased adiponectin expression and inhibition of migration and invasion. Rosiglitazone treatment also inhibits leptin signaling, leptin-induced growth of breast cancer cells and xenografts as well as decreases leptin gene transcription in MCF-7 cells [ , ]. However, our data suggested that effects of PPARγ agonists on breast cancer cells may be compound- and concentration-specific. For instance, treatment of MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells with submolar concentrations of ciglitazone and GW1929 elevated the expression of leptin and VEGF mRNA and protein, and increased cell viability and migration [ ], which prompts caution with PPARγ agonist use as cancer therapeutics. At present, rosiglitazone as an anti-diabetic therapeutic has severe restrictions due to its serious cardiovascular side effects, however early clinical trials evaluating this drug in combination with metformin in obese metastatic breast cancer patients are ongoing ( www.clinicaltrials.gov ).
Considerations for Leptin- and Adiponectin-Based Therapeutics
While targeting leptin signaling as well as reactivation of adiponectin signals could prove to be an innovative and attractive option in breast cancer treatment, laboratory and clinical studies identified several issues that these strategies will need to address. The most important consideration in modulating either leptin or adiponectin pathways is achieving target specificity as both these adipokines not only influence cancer tissues, but are implicated in a great spectrum of physiological processes in peripheral organs as well as in the CNS.
For instance, targeting ObR might produce undesirable increase in body weight when ObR inhibitory compounds cross BBB and interact with appetite controlling centers in the hypothalamus. Furthermore, as leptin is known to control several critical processes in the periphery (e.g., reproduction, would healing, cardiomyocyte health, bone remodeling, etc.), circulating ObR antagonists might induce a variety of undesirable or even detrimental effects. These potential problems could be mitigated by developing specific and highly efficacious peripheral ObR antagonists that could be administered at low doses. The initial ObR modifiers, especially leptin mutants, exhibited differential activities (i.e., antagonist or agonist) towards ObR, depending on cell or tissue context [ ]. Furthermore, some of the ObR inhibitors produced desired effects only at pharmacologically unacceptable high doses. Our leptin petidomimetics based on site III (especially D-Ser) act at high pM-low nM concentrations in cell cultures and low mg/kg/day doses in animals, thus have a potential to enter into further pre-clinical development [ ] (Fig. 1 ). In addition, the administration mode of ObR antagonists could be further improved by conjugating the compounds with cancer-specific chaperones. In this context, it is important to note that breast cancer tissues express higher levels of ObR than non-cancer epithelium, thus would constitute the preferential target for ObR antagonists.
However, even with specific and efficacious peripheral ObR antagonists at hand, more research is still necessary to define types and subtypes of tumors that would be most responsive to such treatments. While in vitro and animal data suggest that inhibition of leptin signaling might be more effective in hormone receptor-positive than in triple-negative breast cancer, development of other biomarkers for ObR drugs using human biopsy specimens is essential. For instance, our preliminary analysis of primary and metastatic breast cancer samples suggested that ObR and leptin are often co-expressed with different hypoxia markers (HIF1α and GLUT1), but not with ERα [ ]. Other potential biomarkers, including genomic and proteomic signatures coexpressed with the leptin system, especially in aggressive tumor subtypes, could help in developing novel combined therapeutic strategies.
The potential adiponectin replacement in cancer patients will face equally great number of clinical issues. First, it is still not clear what levels of adiponectin should be considered optimal, as there is a great variability in circulating adiponectin concentrations in healthy individuals [ ]. Next, if small peptides or monomers, like our ADP355 or gAd, are used in adiponectin replacement, one has to take into account that the compounds can cross BBB and induce undesirable side effects, especially weight gain [ ]. These problems can be potentially remedied by medicinal chemistry redesign, for instance, by modulating peptides to promote circularization or oligomerization, and reduce BBB transport. The next issue would be potential induction of side effects in peripheral organs associated by systemic administration of AdipoR agonists and chronic activation of adiponectin pathways. While in general adiponectin is considered a beneficial adipokine, there are reports of adiponectin acting as pro-inflammatory factor [ ]. These observations have not been uniformly confirmed in different relevant models, suggesting the variability of adiponectin responses in specific cells and/or tissues. Indeed, even our studies with ADP355 and gAd demonstrated differential responses in different breast cancer cells. All this suggests that adiponectin replacement should be carefully tailored to specific disease or condition. In the case of breast cancer, still little is known about cancer subtypes that would be sensitive to AdipoR agonists. Our preliminary analysis demonstrated AdipoR in different cancer subtypes, including triple-negative cases, but other biomarkers of adiponectin sensitivity have not been yet discovered.
The use of metformin or PPARγ agonists as indirect means to reactivate adiponectin expression or signaling has been debated over the past years, and clinical trials are still underway to evaluate these drugs as potential adjuvant treatment options in breast cancer.
In summary, the development of new ObR and AdipoR modifiers for any therapeutic intervention, including cancer treatment, should integrate the knowledge about the mechanisms of leptin and adiponectin action in physiology and pathology with rational medicinal chemistry design, rigorous preclinical testing, and innovative clinical trial design.