Introduction
Manual compression at the arteriotomy followed by bed rest has been the gold standard to achieve hemostasis after common femoral artery access. Manual compression can be uncomfortable, require increased nursing and monitoring requirements, and prevent early ambulation. For these reasons, arterial closure devices are often used to increase efficiency and decrease time on bed rest in adults.
Several devices have been shown to demonstrate rates of complications similar to manual compression and are commonly used [ , , ]. Most of these devices rely on bioabsorbable plugs, sutures or vascular clips to achieve hemostasis at the arteriotomy site. The Angio-Seal arterial closure device (Terumo, Somerset, NJ) utilizes an intra-arterial bioabsorbable anchor that is locked into place against the inside vessel wall. A collagen plug is compressed on the outer vessel wall to seal the arteriotomy. A suture holds the anchor and collagen plug close together to help form a secure seal and the suture is then cut at the skin.
The efficacy and safety of arterial closure devices have not been studied to the same degree in pediatric populations as they have been in adults, but the potential benefits of such devices have been theorized particularly because bed rest requirements can be especially challenging in pediatric patients. An original article published in 2013 from this institution suggested that the Angio-Seal closure device could be an efficacious method for achieving immediate femoral arterial access site hemostasis with only rare and minor complications in children [ ]. Since the publication of that article, several complications were encountered with the continued use of the Angio-Seal. This report updates the existing case series with further analysis on efficacy and complications when the Angio-Seal is used in children.
Materials and methods
Institutional Review Board approval was obtained for this retrospective review. An internal review of the radiology record database and medical records was performed to identify all children (age ≤18 years) who had placement of the 6-Fr Angio-Seal closure device after femoral arterial access between July 2011 and September 2017.
The closure device was used if at least one of the following criteria were met: patient with pre-procedural hypertension (>95th percentile for age), hypertension listed as the indication for the procedure, body mass index (BMI) >97th percentile for age, persistently elevated activated clotting time >180 s at the time of sheath removal, required anticoagulation during post-procedural bed rest, thrombocytopenia (platelet count <50,000 per ul), developmental delay or a seizure disorder.
Pre-procedure distal pulses were checked and documented. Before arterial access, the common femoral artery was identified by ultrasound (US) and documented to be at least 4 mm in diameter in all cases as prescribed by the device instructions [ ]. US was utilized to guide a single-wall micropuncture of the common femoral artery with eventual placement of a vascular sheath for the procedure. Upon completing the procedure and before sheath removal, a completion angiogram was performed to document CFA access and a patent femoral artery. The percutaneous access site was then re-sterilized with a chlorhexidine prep stick before device deployment and all children were given 25 mg/kg (maximum of 1 g) of cefazolin intravenously for antibiotic prophylaxis.
Following the manufacturer’s instructions, the device was deployed by removing the sheath over a wire. Subsequently, the Angio-Seal locator system was introduced into the artery and blood flow through the locator system was used to demonstrate proper position within the artery. The anchor of the device was then set and deployed by advancing the device into the locator system. The collagen plug was then compacted on the outer vessel while maintaining back tension to ensure the proper positioning of the anchor against the inner vessel wall. The suture was cut and 1–2 min of light manual compression was applied if there was any venous oozing. All Angio-Seal devices were deployed by fellowship-trained interventional radiologists with at least 4 years of experience.
A physical exam after deployment was completed on all cases to document hemostasis and distal pulses. A nursing reassessment was performed 2 and 4 h after the procedure to evaluate adequate hemostasis and distal pulses and to detect early complications.
Technical success was defined as hemostasis without the need for manual compression. All children were contacted 7–10 days post procedure to survey for delayed complications. All complications associated with placement of the Angio-Seal were recorded and characterized according to Society of Interventional Radiology criteria [ ]. Logistic regression analysis was used to evaluate the relationship between patient demographic, vessel size and indication for angiography, and the presence or absence of complications. A P -value <0.05 was considered significant.
Results
From June 2011 to September 2017, 48 arterial devices were deployed in 41 patients, which were unique from the previously studied cohort of 38 children. Five patients >18 years old at the time of deployment were excluded. Forty-three devices were deployed in 36 patients (mean age: 13.3 years of age, range: 4–18 years). Eighteen of the patients were female. Body mass index (BMI) and age-adjusted BMI percentile are listed in Table 1 . The immediate pre-procedural laboratory and blood pressure values are provided in Table 2 . Indications for the use of the arterial closure device are listed in Table 3 . Technical success was achieved in 100% of the Angio-Seal deployments (43/43) with hemostasis achieved after device deployment without the need for manual compression. Table 1 Patient demographics ( n =36) Mean±SD Range Age (years) 13.3±4.3 4–18 Female (%) 18 (50%) BMI 22.6±6.8 13.6–35.7 Age-adjusted BMI %ile 69.1±36.2 2.7–99 BMI body mass index, SD standard deviation Table 2 Pre-procedural laboratory and clinical parameters Mean±SD Range Hematocrit (%) 35.14±5.4 18–48 Platelet (/μL) 243.1±94.4 54–417 INR 1.1±0.14 0.9–1.6 PTT (s) 22.18±9.2 12.8–39 SBP (mmHg) 119.13±14.4 90–156 DBP (mmHg) 66.69±13.9 40–90 DBP diastolic blood pressure, INR international normalized ratio, PTT partial thromboplastin time, SBP systolic blood pressure, SD standard deviation Table 3 Number of children with primary clinical indication for arterial closure device utilization Clinical criterion Number of patients a Hypertension 17 Post-procedure anticoagulation 6 Obesity 8 Inability to cooperate 5 Thrombocytopenia 4 Elevated ACT 12 a Some patients met more than one indication for device utilization ACT activated clotting time
Mean common femoral artery diameter was 5.98 mm in short axis diameter (range: 4–9 mm). The procedural sheath size was 4-Fr in 18 cases (42%), 5-Fr in 21 cases (49%) and 6-Fr in 4 cases (9%). Before upsizing to 6-Fr to deploy the Angio-Seal closure device, all completion angiograms confirmed patency of the CFA.
Three major and 3 minor complications occurred in 43 cases (14%) (Table 4 ). In one patient, a small hematoma developed 1 day after the procedure with concern for infection 3–4 days later given overlying erythema. Oral antibiotics were prescribed with eventual resolution and no further intervention. Transient peripheral pulse loss was encountered in two cases. US after diminished pulses demonstrated patency of the external iliac artery and arteries distal to the common femoral artery. The common femoral artery was poorly evaluated due to reported gas artifact from the arterial access and the closure device. Thus, it was not clear if thrombus or spasm was present. As both of these patients were on anticoagulation, no additional intervention was performed aside from additional nursing monitoring. Table 4 Closure device complications with associated indications for use, age and vessel size Complication Indication Age (Years) Vessel size Minor 1 Hematoma Hypertension 13 No image saved 2 Transient pulse loss On anticoagulation 17 8×8 mm 3 Transient pulse loss On anticoagulation 12 5×6 mm Major 1 Pseudoaneurysm Hypertension 17 7×6 mm 2 Occlusive dissection Hypertension 17 7×6 mm 3 Occlusive thrombus Hypertension 4 5×5 mm
One of the major complications involved a delayed hematoma 18 h after device placement. This prompted US evaluation of the common femoral artery revealing a common femoral arterial pseudoaneurysm measuring up to 11×7 mm, which was subsequently treated with US-guided thrombin injection. In another case, an occlusive dissection of the common femoral artery was discovered 2 days after the procedure with worsening claudication symptoms. Initial US examination revealed thrombosis of the common femoral artery. The occlusive dissection was subsequently discovered intraoperatively and was repaired with thromboendarterectomy and patch angioplasty. In yet another case, a hematoma developed within 5 min of device placement. Hemostasis was subsequently achieved with additional manual compression. A physical exam while the patient was still in the angiography suite revealed diminished pulses and US confirmed acute occlusion of the common femoral artery secondary to thrombus. This required emergent thrombolysis performed via the contralateral femoral artery. Successful resolution of the thrombus was documented on subsequent US.
No correlation was seen between the rate of complication and the indication for the procedure. Additionally, a logistic regression showed no statistical significance for age ( P =0.78) or vessel diameter ( P =0.44).
Discussion
While arterial closure device efficacy and safety have not been extensively evaluated in pediatric patients, its use has been proposed to decrease morbidity and reduce nursing requirements after arterial access [ , ]. Prolonged bed rest can be burdensome or impossible in especially young patients and patients with developmental delay or seizure disorders. Additionally, patients with an increased risk of bleeding due to anticoagulation or thrombocytopenia may benefit from their use.
At our institution, the use of the Angio-Seal device was adopted to help facilitate hemostasis in the setting of an inability to be immobilized, obesity, hypertension and anticoagulation. Initial results were promising and have previously been described above with only a single minor complication of a hematoma [ ]. Continued use of the device over the next 6 years, however, demonstrated an increase in both major and minor complications at our institution.
The cause of the differing rates of complications between the two retrospective cohorts is not clearly known. The patient populations were similar in age, gender and weight and the indications for use and the procedures to deploy the Angio-Seal were largely unchanged. The operators who deployed the devices had adequate training and experience with the device. The most likely cause behind the discrepant rates of complications is likely due to the small size of both retrospective analyses. The initial study likely was insufficiently powered to identify rare yet serious complications [ ]. Combining the current series (June 2011 to September 2017) with the previously reported series (June 2009 to June 2011) gives a total of 81 devices deployed in 74 patients. Complications occurred in 9% of cases (7/81) with major complications occurring in 4% of cases (3/81). A conscious effort was made to replicate the previous study criteria to ensure a comparable analysis.
Angio-Seal has been studied in larger adult populations. Similar major complications, including femoral artery occlusion, have been described in adults [ ]. In the available literature, studies looking at vascular closure device use and possible associated increased (or decreased) rate of complication relative to manual compression are largely mixed [ ]. The adult data are in larger patient series and demonstrate lower rates of complications with a major complication rate of closer to 2–3% [ , ]. This discrepancy in adult studies and our pediatric population may be due in part to the larger sample sizes or differing physiology in pediatric vessels.
We speculate that increased vascular reactivity or spasm in children and young adults compared with adults may contribute to a higher rate of complications [ , ]. While iliofemoral arteriography before closure device use confirmed patency, vasospasm from subsequent instrumentation may explain the instances of transient pulse loss in the series. Deployment of the device requires removal of the sheath and placement of the 6-Fr device, which in our series often required upsizing from a 4- or 5-Fr sheath size. Reported rates of vasospasm after femoral artery puncture have been as high as 62% in pediatric populations [ ]. Upsizing the sheath for the 6-Fr device and manipulating the device footplate through the narrowed lumen of an artery in vasospasm may predispose the vessel to intimal injury and in situ thrombosis.
Another theoretical risk for increased complication is that smaller vessel sizes are at a greater risk for complication. It has been shown in other studies that smaller vessels correlate with increased rates of thrombosis and occlusions [ ]. During each case, a US image of the femoral artery was stored and demonstrates a diameter greater than 4 mm, in keeping with the device instructions. A logistical regression did not show any correlation with vessel size and risk for complication.
The Angio-Seal closure device employs a bioabsorbable anchor opposed against the inner lumen wall with a compacted collagen plug sealing against the outer vessel wall. This intraluminal anchor may decrease the vessel diameter or may cause dissection if the artery is in vasospasm, as theorized above. In the complication with dissection, the footplate at surgery was found to be lodged through the intima of the posterior vessel wall, causing a large circumferential intimal flap and occluding the lumen of the vessel. It may be that other closure devices without an intravascular component may carry reduced rates of complications and may be a better alternative for pediatric patients. For example, various devices are available that use extraluminal collagen plugs, sutures or metallic clips. A recent retrospective review from last year demonstrated that the MynxGrip (Cordis, Fremont, CA), which uses an extraluminal collagen plug, was used in 83 pediatric cases without any immediate or delayed complications [ ].
Several limitations to this study exist. The study is a retrospective review and the total number of cases remains small at 43 closure devices. Additionally, only a single closure device is evaluated and the results cannot be generalized to other closure devices, particularly those without an intraluminal component. No control group was used for this study so comparisons of complication rates between manual compression and the Angio-Seal device were not possible. It is possible the complication rate for manual compression is higher than those seen in this study. Based on the authors’ experience, however, this seems unlikely. Finally, inconsistent long-term follow-up of these children limits the detection of delayed complications. Long-term complications including claudication and limb-length discrepancies have previously been reported [ ]. Our retrospective study, however, did not have adequate follow-up to evaluate for these complications.
Conclusion
While use of an arterial closure device may present theoretical benefits of shorter immobility time and less nursing monitoring, the inability to control femoral access site bleeding in a child with manual compression alone is rare. Contrary to our institution’s previous report, a higher rate of complication may exist with the use of the Angio-Seal in the pediatric population and our updated series may represent a more balanced view of the risks associated with the device.