Introduction
With more than 40 pediatric radiology fellowship programs in the United States, the application process for fellowships can be tedious for applicants and programs alike as both sides strive to find the best fit [ , ]. While word of mouth and advice from mentors provide invaluable insight regarding fellowship opportunities, websites are a ubiquitous resource for gathering information. Although the applicant pool for pediatric radiology fellowships has not been studied specifically, diagnostic radiology residency applicants report that program websites are a top resource [ , ]. Websites, therefore, present a simple and actionable opportunity for facilitating fellow recruitment at a time when pediatric radiology is the only radiologic subspecialty to have a progressive decrease in applicants and fill rates since 2013 [ , ].
The pediatric radiology fellowship web page conveys practical information and provides an opportunity to impress upon visitors the program’s mission and core principles. Should there be a deficit in the information available, it is to the detriment of all parties. It is important to note that fellowship and residency websites are a valuable resource to applicants and an integral variable in applicants’ decision-making process in choosing which programs to apply to, interview with, and rank [ , ].
Several studies have assessed the quality of program websites of various specialties [ , , , , ], but there has not been an analysis of pediatric radiology fellowship websites. The goal of the current study is to assess the state of pediatric radiology fellowship program websites and identify potential areas for improvement, particularly with respect to maximizing recruitment and program–applicant fit.
Materials and methods
This study made use of publicly available websites of pediatric radiology fellowships listed in the Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) Accreditation Data System (ADS) for the 2017–2018 academic year. No human subjects were used in this study, and no institutions are individually identified by the results. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Two authors systematically reviewed all fellowship websites for structure and content between April 2018 and May 2018, with differences resolved cooperatively to ensure consistent and reliable data collection. We included in the study all ACGME-accredited programs with websites. We collected 17 criteria for fellowship website comprehensiveness based on criteria used in similar studies in other specialties [ , , , , ]. These included various topics, such as fellow training, incentives and application instructions/requirements; the complete list of criteria can be found in Table 1 . The criteria were binary and based on whether a website contained information on the specified content. Table 1 Percentage of pediatric radiology fellowship websites that contained publicly accessible information on the list of 17 variables Website criteria Websites with criterion ( n =41) Percentage Program director contact 36 87.8% Application instructions/requirements 32 78.0% Affiliated hospital information 31 75.6% Faculty listing 27 65.9% Rotation scheduling 20 48.8% Program coordinator contact 20 48.8% Research (past & opportunities) 20 48.8% Separate faculty for pediatric radiology 18 43.9% Didactic schedule 17 41.5% Salary & benefits 15 36.6% Number of positions available 15 36.6% Number of current fellows 11 26.8% Current fellows 10 24.4% Social life 9 22.0% Call responsibilities 6 14.6% Alumni information 6 14.6% Away rotations 2 4.9% Mean number/percentage of criteria met 7.2±2.9 42.3%
Each program was given a region specification, per the United States Census Bureau’s classification scheme: Midwest, Northeast, South and West. While we collected the number of positions offered per year and the number of fellows currently enrolled to assess website comprehensiveness, we obtained reliable numbers for each program from the ACGME ADS. We used these numbers to assign programs the classification of small (≤2 positions offered per year), medium (3–4 positions offered per year) or large (≥5 positions offered per year). We further classified programs with websites as having separate websites if the fellowship had its own uniform resource locator (URL), separate from that of the program’s radiology department, and if the fellowship’s URL contained its own sub-links.
We used Stata 15.1 (StataCorp, College Station, TX) for all data collection and analysis. Descriptive statistics were generated based on the 17 variables and various classification systems. Comparative analysis of website comprehensiveness was conducted by region, size and separate website classifications using the Kruskal-Wallis and unequal variance two-tailed t -test to correct for small sample size and normality and variance assumptions. P <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
We analyzed a total of 41 fellowship websites, and excluded 8.9% (4/45) of programs without websites. The region breakdown of programs was as follows: 19.5% (8/41) in the Midwest, 24.4% (10/41) in the Northeast, 34.1% (14/41) in the South and 22.0% (9/41) in the West. Regarding size, 58.5% (24/41) of programs were small, 29.3% (12/41) were medium and 12.2% (5/41) were large. Ten of the 41 programs (24.4%) were classified as having separate websites. A mean of 2.7±2.3 positions were offered per year, although a significantly lower mean of 1.4±2.3 fellows were enrolled in these programs ( P <0.001).
During data collection, most websites were noted to include at least three components: a program description with variable degrees of information, information for applicants in an additional section, and readily visible contact information of the program director or program coordinator. While generalized data were commonly present within the program description, the information often lacked sufficient detail to differentiate it from the dozens of other programs. Programs that provided the greatest number of accessible content items had either a program description with subheadings or additional sections for information such as rotations and research.
The 41 pediatric radiology fellowships evaluated met a mean of 42.3% of online criteria (7.2±2.9 of 17 criteria; Table 1 ). Some of the most common content found on websites included program director contact information (36/41, or 87.8%), application instructions and requirements (32/41, or 78.0%), and affiliated training hospital information (31/41, or 75.6%). The least prevalent criteria encountered were information regarding away rotations (2/41, or 4.9%), alumni (6/41, or 14.6%), call responsibilities (6/41, or 14.6%) and social life (9/41, or 22.0%). Websites that did provide information on alumni typically listed the previous 1–2 years of alumni along with their contact information. However, no reference to career trajectory or current disposition of alumni was available. Websites providing information on social life focused on recommended events in the program’s surrounding city. Fifteen of 41 (36.6%) fellowship programs specified the number of positions available for the upcoming application year, whereas only 11/41 (26.8%) specified the number of fellows at their respective programs currently.
Programs in the Northeast met significantly more criteria on their websites than those in other regions (mean 8.7 vs. 6.7 of 17; P =0.034; Table 2 ). Program size was not significantly associated with a difference in website comprehensiveness ( P =0.17), though large program websites met a mean 9.2 of 17 criteria versus 6.7 of 17 criteria for small program websites. Fellowship websites that were categorized as having websites separate from their main diagnostic radiology departments were associated with a significant increase in comprehensiveness factors (9.9 vs. 6.3 of 17, respectively; P <0.001). Table 2 Percentage and number of criteria met on pediatric radiology fellowship websites by region, size and separate website designation Mean percentage criteria met Mean number criteria met ± standard deviation Region Midwest 31.3% 5.6±3.6/17 Northeast 48.3% a 8.7±2.2/17 South 38.1% 6.9±2.9/17 West 41.4% 7.4±2.5/17 Size Small 37.0% 6.7±2.9/17 Medium 43.5% 7.4±2.0/17 Large 54.1% 9.2±4.1/17 Separate websites No 35.1% 6.3±2.7/17 Yes 55.0% b 9.9±1.6/17 P <0.05 was considered statistically significant a P =0.035 b P <0.001
Discussion
Pediatric radiology fellowship program websites have been reviewed and analyzed for comprehensiveness based on a variety of factors that are pertinent to applicants [ , , , ]. The goal of the study was to evaluate the level and nature of informational content on fellowship websites and to identify areas for improvement moving forward. We found that two-thirds of websites contained fewer than 50% (8.5/17) of the included criteria, and no website had more than 76% (13/17) of included criteria. Thus strengthening website information and content might present a low-risk, potentially high-yield opportunity for improved recruitment at a time when applications to and enrollment in pediatric radiology fellowships have steadily declined [ , ].
While the data available on most websites are utilitarian, the lack of information on the more distinct facets of each program does little to set apart individual programs and results in candidates lacking sufficient data to make an informed decision. There were notable deficiencies in online information related to social life, call responsibilities and alumni. Moreover, less than half of programs provided online material regarding their pediatric radiology faculty and their research.
A survey of applicants to diagnostic radiology residencies revealed current residents and websites to be the most important sources of information regarding a program [ ]. Given that applicants to pediatric radiology fellowships arise from this pool, it can be extrapolated that this statement holds true for them. When less than one-quarter (10/41, or 24.4%) of pediatric radiology websites contain current fellow listings, applicants are deprived of a very useful potential resource. Additional items cited as important for applicants include job placement of recent alumni (not provided by most websites evaluated), curriculum and rotation structure (provided by half of websites) and basic information such as size of program (provided by a third of websites) [ ]. Detailed application information was highly valued by applicants, and in contrast with other variables, the vast majority of programs evaluated did provide such information. Additional information cited as important for applicant knowledge, but not assessed by this study, included quality and types of imaging equipment.
Limitations of this study include potential subjectivity of identifying relevant and important criteria. To address this issue, we used variables analogous to those in previously published studies in other fields. Additionally, it is possible that if the data were collected by different individuals, varying results could have occurred. However, the likelihood that collection differences would alter the nature of the presented data is low, given the primarily descriptive nature of this investigation. Finally, it is feasible that some of the criteria are not relevant to a particular program and are thus not present online, such as away rotations (given pediatric radiology is a 1-year fellowship) and current fellows (should a program currently be empty). While exact comprehensiveness scores are not meant to be interpreted in absolutes, this study still provides a reliable source of what information is and is not accessible for prospective applicants on pediatric radiology fellowship websites.
Fellowship websites are an important tool for data gathering during the application phase, and they can be seen as an opportunity to attract the most qualified and fitting applicants. The future of diverse pediatric radiology fellowship training opportunities is increasingly influenced by the availability and transparency of fellowship program and training attributes online. An initial actionable step for improving the accessibility of pediatric radiology fellowship websites might be including all accredited programs’ website links on the Society for Pediatric Radiology (SPR) website. With a mean online comprehensiveness score of 42.3% (7.2/17) across all 41 included fellowships, it is likely that programs are not taking full advantage of their websites as a source of fellow recruitment. There is evidently room for improvement of the accessible online resources of pediatric radiology programs, particularly with regard to providing alumni information and job dispositions, listing current fellows whom applicants could contact regarding the program, and including realistic call and other work expectations of fellows.