Introduction
Paraneoplastic syndromes are defined as clinical syndromes that are not related to direct tumor invasion or compression but are secondary to tumor secretion of functional peptides and hormones or related to immune cross-reactivity with normal host tissue [ ]. In some instances they present before the primary malignancy or tumor recurrence is diagnosed. They often mimic subtypes of syndromes that occur in the absence of malignancy. Although multiple articles have described a wide range of paraneoplastic syndromes in adults, they are often considered rare in children. To our knowledge, most pediatric articles are limited to opsoclonus-myoclonus or myasthenia gravis. However, there are a number of more unusual ways in which paraneoplastic syndromes present in children [ , , , , ]. Paraneoplastic syndromes can be categorized into neurologic, endocrine and dermatologic/rheumatologic syndromes [ , ]. We present a systematic review of clinical and imaging manifestations of paraneoplastic syndromes in children. This review should aid radiologists and referring physicians in imaging optimization and early diagnosis.
Neurologic syndromes
Paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes frequently develop before the underlying cancer becomes clinically apparent. The diagnostic criteria for a definite or possible paraneoplastic neurologic syndrome, proposed by Graus et al. [ ], are summarized in Table 1 [ , , , , , ]. Most result from the production of tumor-directed antibodies (onconeural antibodies), which, as a result of antigenic similarity (immune cross-reactivity) with host nervous system tissues, attack components of the host nervous system [ , ]. They can involve any level of the nervous system including the central nervous system (e.g., opsoclonus-myoclonus, limbic, NMDA [anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate] and anti-Ma2 encephalitis), and the neuromuscular junction (e.g., myasthenia gravis). These are described in Table 2 [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. In those involving the central nervous system, this can result in signs of inflammation in the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) including oligoclonal bands, elevated white blood cell (WBC) count, protein and immunoglobulin G (IgG) levels [ , ]. Immunosuppressive therapies often have variable success rates but are the mainstay of treatment for paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes [ ]. Table 1 Diagnostic criteria for definite and possible paraneoplastic neurologic syndrome, ROHHAD and paraneoplastic pemphigus Neurologic a Definite paraneoplastic neurologic syndrome 1. Classic syndrome with cancer diagnosis within 5 years of neurologic disorder diagnosis 2. Resolution or significant improvement of non-classic syndrome after cancer treatment without concomitant immunotherapy (provided that the syndrome is not susceptible to spontaneous resolution) 3. Non-classic syndrome with onconeural antibodies and cancer that develops within 5 years of neurologic disorder diagnosis 4. Classic/non-classic neurologic syndrome with well characterized onconeural antibodies with or without cancer diagnosis Possible paraneoplastic neurologic syndrome 1. Classic syndrome without onconeural antibodies or cancer diagnosis but at high risk of having an underlying tumor (such as genetic/syndromic predisposition) 2. Classic/non-classic syndrome with partially characterized onconeural antibodies and no cancer. 3. Non-classic syndrome without onconeural antibodies but with cancer diagnosis within two years of neurologic disorder diagnosis Endocrine Features suggestive of ectopic hormone production in paraneoplastic endocrine syndromes 1. Endocrine or metabolic disturbance in the presence of an underlying tumor 2. Syndrome remission after successful tumor treatment 3. Return of the syndrome with tumor recurrence 4. Abnormally regulated elevated hormone levels 5. Significant gradient in hormone concentrations between the arterial afferent and venous efferent from the tumor 6. Extracts from the tumor show bio- and/or immune-reactive hormone 7. Relevant hormone mRNA is identified in tumor tissue 8. In vitro synthesis/secretion of relevant hormone by tumor cells Diagnostic criteria for ROHHAD Rapid weight gain and hypoventilation appearing after 1.5 years of age Child must also have hypothalamic dysfunction plus at least one of the following: Rapid-onset obesity (20–30 pounds over 6–12 months) Hyperprolactinemia Central hypothyroidism Electrolyte imbalances Failed growth hormone stimulation test Corticotrophin deficiency Altered onset of puberty Dermatologic/rheumatologic syndrome Diagnostic criteria for paraneoplastic pemphigus: diagnosis is made when all three major or two major and two minor criteria are met Major Polymorphic mucocutaneous eruptions Concurrent internal neoplasia Serum antibodies with specific immunoprecipitation pattern Minor Histologic evidence of acantholysis Direct immunofluorescence showing intercellular and basement membrane staining for IgG and C3 complement deposition Indirect immunofluorescence staining using rat bladder epithelium for serum autoantibodies ROHHAD rapid onset of obesity (RO), hypoventilation (H), hypothalamic dysfunction (H) and autonomic dysregulation (AD), IgG immunoglobulin G, mRNA messenger ribonucleic acid a Classic paraneoplastic syndromes were previously defined by Graus et al. [ ] as neurological syndromes that are often associated with cancer and consist of: encephalomyelitis, limbic encephalitis, subacute cerebellar degeneration, opsoclonus-myoclonus, subacute sensory neuronopathy, chronic gastrointestinal pseudo-obstruction, and Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome [ , , , , ] Table 2 Paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes Syndrome Presentation Mechanism Imaging findings Diagnostic workup Associated antibodies Associated cancers a Treatment options Central nervous system Opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome Involuntary arrhythmic and multidirectional saccades, myoclonic jerks in limbs and trunk, encephalopathy Unclear but could be due to auto-antibodies to cerebellar Purkinje cells resulting in disinhibition of fastigial nucleus of cerebellum Not applicable Syndrome diagnosis: Serum/CSF autoantibodies Screening: US or chest radiograph as initial screening tests CT/MRI of chest and abdomen are most accurate. MRI favored in evaluating extent of thoracic tumors. CT is otherwise recommended MIBG and urine catecholamines are less sensitive Most are antibody negative Anti-neuroleukin Anti-gliadin Anti-APC Anti-Zic2 Anti-Ri Neuroblastoma (~50%) Ganglioneuro-blastoma Corticosteroids Adrenocortico-tropic hormone IVIG Plasma exchange Cyclophos-phamide Rituximab Limbic encephalitis Mental status changes, hallucinations, memory loss, mood changes, sleep disturbance, seizures Auto-antibodies to intracellular and cell membrane antigens MRI: can be normal initially, bilateral T2 prolongation in the limbic system/ mesial temporal lobes, basal ganglia with or without patchy enhancement FDG PET: increased metabolism in temporal lobe(s) Syndrome diagnosis: Brain MRI, EEG, CSF, (pleocytosis and oligoclonal bands, serum/CSF autoantibodies) Screening: CT chest or FDG-PET/CT for thoracic region; pelvic US followed by CT/MRI for possible pelvic tumor in females; US testes for possible testicular tumor in males Tumor screening can be repeated at 3–6 months followed by screening every 6 months up to 4 years if suspicion for malignancy remains high Anti-CRMP5 Anti-amphihysin Anti-VGKC Anti-NMDA receptor Variety of tumors including: germ cell tumor (~20%), teratoma, thymoma, Hodgkin lymphoma Corticosteroids IVIG Plasma exchange Cyclophos-phamide Rituximab NMDA encephalitis Viral-like prodrome followed by psychiatric features (anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, psychosis), amnesia, seizures Movement disorder (facial dyskinesia), decreased level of consciousness, dysautonomia Anti-NMDA receptor antibodies (extracellular antigen) MRI: normal in most patients, unilateral or bilateral Anti-NMDA receptor Ovarian teratoma (9%) and carcinoma Corticosteroids IVIG Plasma exchange Cyclophos-phamide Rituximab Anti-Ma2 Isolated or combination of limbic, diencephalic and brainstem dysfunction, eye movement abnormalities Anti-Ma2 (intracellular antigen) antibodies react with neurons MRI: More commonly abnormal compared to limbic encephalitis Similar to limbic encephalitis with variable involvement of thalamus and brainstem Anti-Ma2 Almost always testicular and germ cell tumors Orchiectomy Corticosteroids IVIG Neuromuscular junction Myasthenia gravis Fatigable voluntary muscle weakness (limbs and ocular-bulbar), diaphragmatic weakness Auto-antibodies (anti-AchR or anti-MuSK) to extracellular post-synaptic membrane proteins resulting in morphologic and function alteration that interferes with neuromuscular transmission Not applicable Syndrome diagnosis: Serum/CSF autoantibodies, EMG Screening: CT chest MRI may be helpful for equivocal cases (differentiating thymomas from thymic hyperplasia) Anti-AchR (~85%) Anti-MuSK Thymoma (~15-20% in adults) Thymectomy Symptomatic treatment with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors Plasmapheresis & IVIG Immuno-suppressive therapies, e.g., cyclosporine, azathioprine, prednisone, cyclophos-phamide, tacrolimus, rituximab CSF cerebral spinal fluid, EEG electroencephalogram, EMG electromyography, FDG PET [F-18]2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography, IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin, MIBG metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy, NMDA anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate a The percentage of the syndrome that is related to a specific malignancy is provided when available [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]
Opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome
The most common neurologic paraneoplastic syndrome in children involving the central nervous system is opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome. Children who have any three of the four clinical features described by Matthay et al. [ ] are diagnosed with opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome: (1) opsoclonus, (2) ataxia or myoclonus, (3) behavioral changes or sleep disturbances and (4) diagnosis of neuroblastoma. Non-neoplastic causes include infection and toxic metabolic disorders. Although the exact pathogenesis remains unclear, various autoantibodies that bind to cerebellar Purkinje cells have been found in people with opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome related to neuroblastoma. These autoantibodies are thought to disinhibit the fastigial nucleus of the cerebellum [ ]. Symptoms can be treated with corticosteroids, adrenocorticotropic hormone and immune modulators/suppressants but can persist despite treatment and surgical resection of the underlying tumor [ , , ].
Opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome is most frequently associated with neuroblastomas (Fig. 1 ) and ganglioneuroblastomas [ , ]. Up to 50% of cases of opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome are related to neuroblastoma in children, while 2–3% of neuroblastoma patients present with opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome [ , ]. Neuroblastomas in people with opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome are generally associated with better prognosis because of smaller size at diagnosis and more favorable histology [ , ]. For this reason, they can be more difficult to detect and occasionally present as only a tiny speck of calcification. Brunklaus et al. [ ] in a study of 101 people with opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome suggested that although primary investigations such as abdominal ultrasound (US) and chest radiography might be useful, they lack sensitivity. CT and MRI of the chest and abdomen were the most accurate diagnostic exams for detecting an occult neuroblastoma (up to 43% detection rate). MRI is favored for thoracic tumors to evaluate for nodal, intra-spinal and chest wall involvement [ , ]. Otherwise, CT is favored in most circumstances because tumor calcifications can be more readily detected, which helps in tumor detection [ ]. Metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy (MIBG) and metabolic investigations such as urine catecholamines are less sensitive (approximately 24% detection rate) because of low metabolic activity of opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome-associated neuroblastoma relative to its non-opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome counterpart [ ]. Fig. 1 Opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome in a 13-month-old otherwise healthy twin girl. She developed constant fast eye movements, jerking of her extremities and inability to hold her head up. a, b Coronal ( a ) and axial ( b ) T2-W fat-saturated MR images of the abdomen show a right adrenal mass (*), compatible with neuroblastoma on histopathology. Her symptoms resolved after tumor resection
Limbic encephalitis, anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate encephalitis (NMDA) and anti-Ma2 encephalitis
Paraneoplastic and non-paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis have a similar clinical presentation with mental status change, hallucinations, short-term memory loss, mood changes and seizures [ , , ]. Gultekin et al. [ ] proposed a diagnostic criteria for paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis based on four features: (1) compatible clinical picture; (2) <4 years between development of neurological symptoms and tumor diagnosis; (3) exclusion of other neuro-oncological complications; and (4) at least one of the following: inflammatory changes in the CSF with negative cytology, electroencephalogram (EEG) showing epileptic activity in one or both temporal lobes, or MRI demonstrating temporal lobe abnormalities [ ]. Contrast-enhanced MRI is considered the most sensitive imaging modality for limbic encephalitis, but a normal MRI does not exclude its presence because many people have no imaging findings, especially early in the course of the disease [ , ]. MRI findings are usually bilateral with T2 prolongation in the limbic system/mesial temporal lobes, and frequently also in the basal ganglia (Fig. 2 ). These regions of involvement can also show patchy areas of enhancement [ ]. Limbic encephalitis is associated with a variety of tumors (up to 63% in adults), most commonly germ cell tumor, teratoma (Fig. 2 ), thymoma and Hodgkin lymphoma in children [ , , , , ]. Fig. 2 Suspected limbic encephalitis in a 16-year-old girl who presented with sudden onset of mental status change. Workup consisting of gadolinium-enhanced MRI and lumbar puncture was suggestive of limbic encephalitis. a–c Axial ( a ), coronal ( b ) and sagittal ( c ) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MR brain images show T2 prolongation in the bilateral mesial temporal lobes and hippocampi ( arrows ) . d, e Pelvic ultrasound ( d ) and CT ( e ) show a partially calcified predominantly hypoattenuating mass in the right adnexa (*). A separate right ovary was not visualized on either modality. The girl’s mental status changes/limbic encephalitis resolved after tumor resection. This was found to be a poorly differentiated immature ovarian teratoma
Anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate encephalitis (NMDA encephalitis) is caused by the presence of IgG autoantibodies against extracellular NMDA receptors. The syndrome most commonly affects young women and children [ ]. People present with viral-like prodrome followed by psychiatric features (anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, psychosis), amnesia and seizures. This is followed by movement disorders, most often facial dyskinesia, decreased level of consciousness and dysautonomia [ , , , ]. MRI findings include unilateral or bilateral limbic encephalitis; however up to 89% have been reported as normal [ , , ]. In one study, 9% of girls with NMDA encephalitis were found to have an ovarian teratoma [ ]. In adults, the syndrome has been seen with both ovarian teratoma and carcinoma [ , ]. Up to 50% of people respond to immunotherapies, often with full remission [ , ].
Anti-Ma2-associated encephalitis is thought to differ from classic paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis and presents with either isolated or combined limbic, diencephalic or brainstem dysfunction/encephalopathy. It is often associated with eye movement abnormalities, such as nystagmus [ , ]. The syndrome results from the production of anti-neuronal cell (anti-Ma2) antibodies, which are detected in the CSF or serum [ , , , ]. There is a strong association with testicular and germ cell tumors (Fig. 3 ). In a study by Dalmau et al. [ ], 89% of adults with anti-Ma2 encephalitis were found to have an underlying tumor, most of which were testicular germ cell tumors. In contrast to limbic encephalitis, MRI is commonly (approximately 74%) abnormal, with similar findings to limbic encephalitis including T2 prolongation in the medial temporal lobes and variable involvement of the thalamus and brainstem. These areas can show nodular enhancement, mimicking tumor or infection [ , ]. Fig. 3 Thymic germinoma in a 19-year-old man presenting with mental status change, increased fatigue, memory loss, confusion and SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion). a–c Axial T2-W fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR; a, b ) and post-contrast coronal fast spoiled gradient recalled acquisition in the steady state (FSPGR; c ) MR images demonstrate symmetrical T2 prolongation and enhancement of the optic pathway ( solid arrowheads ), hypothalamus, midbrain ( open arrowheads ), medial temporal lobes ( straight arrows ), basal ganglia and thalami (*), as well as the fornices ( curved arrows ). Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) was positive for anti-Ma2 antibodies, concerning for paraneoplastic encephalitis . d, e Sagittal ( d ) and axial ( e ) contrast-enhanced chest CT images show a cystic anterior mediastinal mass with peripheral enhancement ( arrows ). Scrotal ultrasound (not shown) was negative for testicular mass or neoplasm. The man subsequently underwent total thymectomy with histopathology compatible with a thymic germinoma. The man’s symptoms and MRI findings improved after tumor resection
Diagnostic workup for limbic, NMDA and anti-Ma2 encephalitis begins with brain MRI, CSF analysis and EEG. Up to 80% of these patients have CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis and 50–60% have oligoclonal bands [ , ]. If clinical symptoms, brain imaging, EEG and CSF are suggestive, tumor screening might be indicated, particularly when onconeural antibodies are detected [ ]. The European Federation of Neurological Societies recommends CT chest followed by [F-18] 2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET) if negative or FDG PET/CT for screening of the thoracic region [ ]. For possible pelvic tumors in females (such as ovarian teratoma), pelvic US followed by CT/MRI is recommended. US of the testes is recommended for screening of testicular tumors in males [ ]. If initial screening is negative and clinical suspicion for malignancy remains high, screening can be repeated at 3–6 months followed by routine screening every 6 months up to 4 years [ ]. Treatment includes corticosteroids, and immunotherapy such as intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG).
Myasthenia gravis
Myasthenia gravis is caused by the production of anti-acetylcholine receptor or anti-muscle-specific tyrosine-kinase antibodies [ , ]. Its clinical hallmark is fluctuating fatigability and weakness involving the ocular, bulbar and proximal limb skeletal muscles [ ]. Electromyography (EMG) shows decremental muscle response to low-frequency repetitive nerve stimulation [ , ]. Myasthenia gravis is most commonly attributable to thymic lymphoid hyperplasia (up to 65% of adults with myasthenia gravis) and thymic epithelial tumors, mostly thymomas (rarely thymic carcinomas), which often present as an anterior mediastinal mass on imaging (Fig. 4 ) [ ]. In adults, thymomas are found in approximately 15–20% of people with myasthenia gravis, while 25–40% of adults with thymoma develop myasthenia gravis [ , ]. Treatment includes thymectomy, symptomatic therapies such as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (pyridostigmine) and immunotherapies [ ]. Fig. 4 Myasthenia gravis in a 6-year-old boy who initially presented with persistent cough and abnormal breathing. a He was found to have a large mass (*) involving both the left and right hemithoraces, silhouetting the cardiac borders on anteroposterior chest radiograph. b Axial contrast-enhanced CT of the chest demonstrates a corresponding large anterior mediastinal mass (*), which was compatible with a thymoma on histopathology. The boy later developed generalized weakness related to juvenile generalized myasthenia gravis, with improved symptoms after thymectomy
Although chest radiography might show widening of the mediastinum in the presence of a thymoma, it has a minor diagnostic role in screening because of its low accuracy. CT chest is considered the first choice for screening [ , ]. Compared to MRI, CT has been shown to have a higher diagnostic accuracy because of its better spatial resolution and ease of scanning the whole chest [ ]. MRI might be helpful in equivocal cases for differentiating small thymomas from thymic hyperplasia because both appear as a focal anterior mediastinal soft-tissue mass on CT [ , ].
Endocrine syndromes
Paraneoplastic endocrine syndromes typically present after the underlying tumor has been diagnosed. They are caused by the production of hormones or functional peptides by the malignancy [ ]. Successful treatment of the underlying malignancy often leads to significant improvement of the syndrome [ , ]. Features suggestive of ectopic hormone production in paraneoplastic endocrine syndromes are summarized in Table 1 . In addition to the paraneoplastic syndromes associated with neuroendocrine tumors, other syndromes seen in the pediatric population include hypercalcemia, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), osteomalacia/rickets and ROHHAD (rapid onset of obesity [RO], hypoventilation [H], hypothalamic dysfunction [H] and autonomic dysregulation [AD]). These are outlined in Table 3 [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. Table 3 Endocrine paraneoplastic syndromes [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ] Syndrome Presentation Mechanism Laboratory findings Diagnostic workup Associated cancers Treatment options Related to neuroendocrine tumors Symptoms are related to over-production of the metabolically active substance that is normally secreted by the neuroendocrine cell Derived from cells with ability to store and secrete metabolically active substances and peptides Elevated tumor specific metabolically active substance/peptide Presence of chromogranin on immunohisto-chemistry Syndrome diagnosis: Serum markers Screening: patient-specific and dependent on tumor-specific substance/peptide Imaging include In111-octreotide, CT, MRI or PET/CT Wide range of tumors including pituitary, parathyroid, medullary thyroid, Merkel cell, carcinoid, pancreatic, pheochromo-cytoma Supportive tumor resection Hypercalcemia Altered mental status, muscle weakness, hypertonia, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, hypertension, bradycardia, renal failure Tumor production of PTHrP or less commonly vitamin D Hypercalcemia Low to normal PTH level Elevated PTHrP Syndrome diagnosis: serum chemistries including Ca, PTH, PTHrP, calcitriol Screening: patient specific and dependent on serum findings Mesoblastic nephroma Lymphoma Renal cell carcinoma Normal saline Loop diuretics Intravenous bisphosphonates Prednisone Calcitonin Mithramycin Gallium nitrate Hemodialysis SIADH Gait disturbances, headache, nausea, fatigue, muscle cramps, anorexia, confusion, lethargy, seizures, respiratory depression, coma Tumor production of antidiuretic hormone Euvolemic hyponatremia Hypo-osmolality of plasma Increased urine osmolality Normal renal function Syndrome diagnosis: serum and urine electrolytes/osmolality Screening: chest radiograph, CT or MRI head In absence of an obvious diagnosis, CT chest, abdomen or pelvis depending on clinical presentation Astrocytoma Medulloblastoma Choroid plexus papilloma Prolactinoma Neurofibroma Neuroblastoma Lymphoma Ewing sarcoma Ovarian teratoma Thymoma Fluid restriction Adequate salt and protein intake Hypertonic (3%) saline Demeclocycline Tolvaptan Conivaptan Osteomalacia/ rickets Diffuse bone pain, muscle weakness, pathological fractures, skeletal deformities, height loss Tumor production of fibroblast growth factor 23 results in decreased reabsorption of phosphates in proximal renal tubules and inhibition of 1-α-hydroxylase, reducing levels of 1-α, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 Hypophosphatemia Low serum 1, 25- dihydroxyvitamin D 3 Normal 25-hydroxyvitamin D 3 Normal or slightly low serum calcium Elevated ALP Syndrome diagnosis: serum and urine phosphate, other serum biochemistries including ALP, 1, 25- dihydroxyvitamin D 3 , serum fibroblast growth factor 23 Screening: skeletal survey by MRI or FDG PET/CT, In111-octreotide Phosphaturic mesenchymal tumor Phosphorus Calcitriol ROHHAD Rapid onset of obesity, hypoventilation, hypothalamic dysfunction, autonomic dysregulation Unknown but postulated to result from lymphocytic and histiocytic infiltration of the hypothalamus Variable but can present with hyponatremia and abnormal hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis hormone levels Syndrome diagnosis: serum biochemistries Screening: MRI brain to exclude other causes Ganglioneuroma & ganglioneuro-blastomas (up to 40% of ROHHAD) Variable improvement with immune-suppressive therapies: IVIG Cyclophos-phamide Rituximab ALP alkaline phosphatase, FDG [F-18]2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose, IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin, PET positron emission tomography, PTH parathyroid hormone, PTHrP parathyroid hormone-related protein, ROHHAD rapid onset of obesity (RO), hypoventilation (H), hypothalamic dysfunction (H) and autonomic dysregulation (AD), SIADH syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
Neuroendocrine tumors
Neuroendocrine tumors are derived from cells with the ability to synthesize, store and secrete metabolically active substances and peptides that are characteristic of the tissue of origin [ ]. Tumors regarded as neuroendocrine tumors tend to express the immunohistochemical markers chromogranin and synaptophysin [ ]. These arise from neuroendocrine cells found throughout the body including pituitary, lung, pancreas, thyroid, adrenal glands, skin, prostate, breast and gastrointestinal tract [ ]. The clinical manifestations of neuroendocrine tumors result from an abundance of the metabolically active substance that is normally secreted by the neuroendocrine cell that the tumor arises from. As a result, they are associated with a diverse range of symptoms depending on the substance/peptide secreted [ , ]. Because of their diversity, diagnostic workup is often patient-specific, dependent on clinical presentation and measurements of serum markers including the tumor-specific metabolically active substance/peptide and the presence of chromogranin (found in all neuroendocrine tumors) [ ]. Imaging is then tailored toward the specific neuroendocrine tumor in question [ , ].
Hypercalcemia
Malignancy-associated hypercalcemia most commonly results from tumor secretion of parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) with suppression of endogenous parathyroid hormone levels [ , ]. Symptoms of hypercalcemia include weakness, lethargy, altered mental status and hypertonia. Hypercalcemia can also lead to renal failure [ ]. Severity of symptoms depends on the rapidity of onset and the patient’s baseline neurologic and renal function rather than the calcium level. Although hypercalcemia-associated malignancy is rare in children, it has been reported to occur with mesoblastic nephroma, which is the most common neonatal renal tumor, comprising 50% of renal masses during the neonatal period (Fig. 5 ) [ , , ]. Additional associated cancers in older patients include lymphoma, small cell ovarian carcinoma, testicular malignancies and renal cell carcinoma [ , ]. Fig. 5 Mesoblastic nephroma in a 6-month-old otherwise healthy boy who was found to have a right-side abdominal mass at his 6-month well child visit. On further workup, the boy was also found to have elevated calcium and parathyroid hormone-related peptide levels (PTHrP), suppressed parathyroid hormone (PTH) and a normal vitamin D level. a–c Abdominal ultrasound ( a ) as well as axial ( b ) and coronal ( c ) contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen and pelvis show a heterogeneously enhancing large solid and cystic mass arising from the right kidney (*). Internal vascularity was noted within the solid components of the lesion on Doppler ( a ). His hypercalcemia, PTHrP and PTH normalized after tumor resection. Histopathology was compatible with a mesoblastic nephroma
Diagnostic workup begins with differentiation of primary hyperparathyroidism from malignancy-related hypercalcemia. Malignancy-associated hypercalcemia usually has higher calcium concentrations, patients are usually more symptomatic and the underlying malignancy is often clinically evident by the time patients present with hypercalcemia [ ]. Serum parathyroid hormone levels are also suppressed. Measurements of PTHrP and calcitriol might be helpful if the primary malignancy is unknown. Elevated PTHrP is associated with solid tumors, while elevated calcitriol is associated with lymphoproliferative disorders [ ]. Imaging workup is then tailored based on clinical presentation and serum findings. First-line treatment for persistent hypercalcemia is fluid repletion with normal saline and calciuresis [ , ].
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH)
Paraneoplastic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) is characterized by hypo-osmotic, euvolemic, hyponatremia secondary to tumor production of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). Children present with gait disturbances, muscle cramps, anorexia, confusion, lethargy, seizures, respiratory depression and coma [ , , ]. Persistent ADH secretion with continued water intake results in water conservation, suppression of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone pathway and enhanced renal salt wastage [ ]. SIADH has been reported to occur in various tumors including primary brain tumors (e.g., astrocytoma, medulloblastoma, choroid plexus papilloma, and prolactinoma) neuroblastoma, lymphoma (Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin), Ewing sarcoma, ovarian teratoma and thymoma [ , , ].
Initial imaging workup includes chest radiograph to evaluate for any underlying pulmonary disorders (such as pneumonia) as a cause of SIADH [ , ]. CT or MRI head might be helpful to evaluate for cerebral edema (such as narrowing of the ventricles) as a result of hyponatremia and the underlying brain tumor and to exclude other potential causes of mental status change [ , ]. In the absence of an obvious cause for SIADH, CT chest, abdomen or pelvis (depending on clinical presentation) might be helpful for screening [ ]. Although complete tumor eradication is the most effective treatment, fluid restriction is a potential short-term therapy [ ].
Osteomalacia/rickets
Tumor-induced osteomalacia/rickets is characterized by impaired bone mineralization. It is caused by the overproduction of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), a hormone normally produced by osteocytes that regulates phosphate and vitamin D metabolism [ ]. FGF23 leads to decreased reabsorption of phosphates in the proximal renal tubules, resulting in hypophosphatemia [ ]. It also inhibits 1-α-hydroxylase in the proximal renal tubules, reducing the levels of 1-α, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (active form of vitamin D) [ ]. Children present similar to those with the classic form of osteomalacia/rickets seen with vitamin D deficiency including bone pain, muscle weakness and bowing of the legs [ ]. Radiographic findings include decreased bone mineralization, growth plate widening and irregularity, metaphyseal flaring and fraying, bowing, fractures, looser zones (unmineralized osteoid), and rachitic rosaries in the chest [ ].
Most tumors responsible for tumor-induced osteomalacia/rickets are slow-growing mesenchymal tumors, which are now believed to arise from a single histopathological entity and are classified as phosphaturic mesenchymal tumors [ ]. Phosphaturic mesenchymal tumors are benign tumors that can originate from the soft-tissue or bone, typically at a single site (Fig. 6 ) [ , , , , ]. These tumors have a nonspecific MRI appearance. They are isointense relative to muscle on T1-W images and T2-hyperintense with heterogeneous or homogeneous enhancement [ ]. Less frequent tumors associated with tumor-induced osteomalacia/rickets include giant cell granuloma, hemangiopericytoma, fibrosarcoma and osteosarcoma [ , ]. Fig. 6 Phosphaturic mesenchymal tumor in an 11-year-old boy who first presented with bilateral knee pain while playing basketball. a Anteroposterior (AP) radiograph of the right tibia shows a sclerotic lesion with a wide zone of transition in the right tibial metadiaphysis (*), which was further evaluated by MRI. b–d Coronal proton-density ( b ), T2-W ( c ) and post-contrast T1-W fat-saturated ( d ) MR images demonstrate an eccentric rounded heterogeneous lesion (*) in the proximal right tibial metadiaphysis with enhancement in the areas of T2 hyperintensity corresponding to the lesion on the radiograph ( a ). The lesion results in cortical breakthrough laterally ( arrow ). This was found to be a phosphaturic mesenchymal tumor. Note the physeal widening and metaphyseal irregularity in the right distal femur, proximal tibia and fibula ( arrowheads ) . e–g Further radiographs of the same boy of both wrists ( e, f ) and pelvis ( g ) show similar physeal widening, metaphyseal irregularity and loss of the normal zone of provisional calcification as in the proximal tibia ( arrowheads ). h AP radiograph of the right proximal tibia/fibula 2 months after tumor resection shows improved physeal widening ( arrowheads )
Urine phosphate levels are typically inappropriately high despite the low serum phosphate levels, which might differentiate tumor-induced osteomalacia/rickets from classic rickets/osteomalacia related to nutritional deficiency [ ]. Imaging workup includes skeletal survey by MRI or FDG PET/CT [ , ]. Octreotide scanning might be useful in some children because mesenchymal tumors often express somatostatin receptors [ , ]. The mainstay treatment for tumor-induced osteomalacia/rickets is phosphorus and calcitriol. The syndrome can be cured with complete tumor resection [ ].
Rapid onset of obesity, hypoventilation, hypothalamic dysfunction and autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD)
Children with rapid onset of obesity, hypoventilation, hypothalamic dysfunction and autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD) usually present within the first 10 years of life. These children have normal development in the first 2–4 years but later develop hyperphagia, which leads to rapid weight gain (20–30 pounds over 6–12 months), decreased height velocity, followed by hypothalamic and autonomic dysfunction, resulting in electrolyte imbalances [ , , , ]. This is accompanied by behavioral changes and alveolar hypoventilation [ , ]. A proposed diagnostic criterion is summarized in Table 1 . Up to 40% of cases have been found to be associated with tumors of neural crest origin, particularly ganglioneuromas (Fig. 7 ) and ganglioneuroblastomas, but less commonly with neuroblastoma [ , , , ]. Imaging workup is patient-dependent but often includes MRI brain to exclude other causes of the child’s symptoms. However, brain MRI is often normal and no consistent MRI findings have been reported to be associated with ROHHAD [ , ]. Although the exact pathophysiology of this syndrome is unknown, some cases have shown response to immunomodulatory treatment and presence of inflammatory biomarkers in the cerebral spinal fluid such as oligoclonal bands [ , ]. It is postulated that ROHHAD results from lymphocytic and histiocytic infiltration of the hypothalamus. It is treated with immunosuppressive therapies [ ]. Fig. 7 ROHHAD syndrome (rapid-onset obesity, hypoventilation, hypothalamic dysfunction and autonomic dysregulation) in a 9-year-old girl. She presented with a constellation of symptoms including polyphagia, rapid weight gain, sleep difficulties, obsessive behavior, dehydration, enuresis, intermittent hypernatremia, temperature instability, hypoventilation, hyperinsulinemia and autonomic dysfunction leading to abnormal coloration of her extremities. a, b Whole-body tumor screening MRI shows an enhancing nodular left adrenal lesion ( arrow ) on coronal inversion recovery ( a ) and axial gadolinium-enhanced T1-W fat-saturated ( b ) images. The lesion did not demonstrate any metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) avidity (not shown). Her symptoms improved with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy and tumor resection. The lesion was found to be a ganglioneuroma
Dermatologic/rheumatologic syndromes
Dermatologic and rheumatologic paraneoplastic syndromes are defined by the of a dermatologic/rheumatologic disease in the setting of an underlying malignancy. Many are conditions that commonly occur in the absence of malignancy but are less responsive to therapy compared to their non-paraneoplastic counterparts [ ]. These syndromes often present before the underlying tumor is diagnosed and include hypertrophic osteoarthropathy and paraneoplastic pemphigus (Table 4 ) [ , , , , , , , , , , , ]. Table 4 Dermatologic and rheumatologic paraneoplastic syndromes [ , , , , , , , , , , , ] Syndrome Presentation Mechanism Imaging findings Diagnostic workup Associated cancers Treatment options Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy Digital clubbing, periostosis of tubular bones, synovial effusions, pain, swelling Exact mechanism unclear but could be diseased-organ-induced neural reflex via vagus nerve, leading to increased blood flow to extremities or release of hypoxia-induced cytokines and growth factors including platelet-derived growth factor, prostaglandin E2, and vascular endothelial growth factor Radiograph: soft-tissue swelling at distal fingers, periostosis along tubular bones Bone scan: symmetrical, linear, increased uptake along periosteum of long tubular bones (tram line) Syndrome diagnosis: radiograph, Tc99m-MDP (more sensitive) Screening: chest radiograph followed by chest CT Intrathoracic tumors (most common) Rhabdomyosarcoma NSAIDs Bisphosphonates e.g., zoledronic acid Octreotide Paraneoplastic pemphigus Severe, painful cutaneous and mucosal blisters and erosions Nearly all cases present with stomatitis Autoantibodies produced against epidermal proteins involved in cell adhesion such as anti-plakin and anti-desmoglein Skin biopsy Cross-sectional imaging of the chest, abdomen and pelvis for occult tumor Syndrome diagnosis: skin biopsy, serum Screening: CT or MRI chest Castleman disease (most frequent in children and adolescents) Non-Hodgkin lymphoma Thymoma Immuno-suppressive therapies, e.g., Corticosteroids Cyclophos-phamide Azathioprine Rituximab IVIG IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin, NSAIDS nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy is characterized by digital clubbing, periostosis of tubular bones, and synovial effusions [ ]. Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy can be separated into primary (pachydermoperiostosis) and secondary forms. Disseminated skin hypertrophy is characteristic of the primary form, while the secondary form is by far more common, comprising 95–97% of all cases of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. The secondary form has a high association with malignancy, most commonly pulmonary in origin such as pleuropulmonary blastoma (Fig. 8 ) [ , ]. The exact mechanism for hypertrophic osteoarthropathy remains unclear but is thought to be related to either of two models: (1) diseased-organ-induced neural reflex via the vagus nerve, leading to increased blood flow to the extremities or (2) the release of cytokines and growth factors including platelet-derived growth factor, prostaglandin E2, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) [ ]. Fig. 8 Pleuropulmonary blastoma in a 13-year-old girl who presented with chronic cough refractory to antibiotics, progressive chest pain, fatigue, low-grade fevers and weight loss. a, b Post-contrast coronal ( a ) and axial ( b ) T1-W fat-saturated MR images show a large heterogeneously enhancing left chest mass (*) with extension into the mediastinum and upper abdomen and associated mediastinal lymphadenopathy ( straight arrow ). A left pleural effusion is also present ( curved arrows ). c Anteroposterior radiograph of the left ankle obtained for ankle pain shows periosteal reaction in the distal tibia and fibula ( arrowheads ), likely representing hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. The left chest mass was a pleuropulmonary blastoma on histopathology
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy is often first seen on plain radiograph used to evaluate extremity pain [ ]. Periostosis along the shafts of tubular bones with sparing of the epiphyses early on is the imaging hallmark of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. There is usually symmetrical and widely distributed osseous involvement. Acro-osteolysis or less commonly tuftal overgrowth might also be seen [ ]. Bone scintigraphy with technetium 99m-methylene diphosphonate (99mTc) is more sensitive compared to radiography and allows for evaluation of the extent of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy [ ]. It presents with symmetrical linear radiotracer uptake along the periosteum of the diaphysis and metaphysis of tubular bones (tram line or double stripe sign) [ , ]. Imaging workup for children with hypertrophic osteoarthropathy of unknown source includes chest radiograph to evaluate for thoracic abnormality followed by chest CT, depending on clinical suspicion [ , ]. Pain related to hypertrophic osteoarthropathy usually responds well to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), but in cases where symptoms are insufficiently controlled, zoledronic acid has been successfully used through suppression of bone turnover and reduction of VEGF levels [ ].
Paraneoplastic pemphigus
Paraneoplastic pemphigus is an autoimmune blistering disease involving the skin and mucosal surfaces. Patients often present with painful stomatitis, which is seen in nearly all cases and is the symptom that is the least responsive to treatment [ ]. In addition, the paraneoplastic syndrome can lead to respiratory compromise such as bronchiolitis obliterans/constrictive bronchiolitis, secondary infections, and bleeding leading to high morbidity and mortality rates [ , ]. The most frequently used criteria for diagnosis (proposed by Camisa and Helm [ ]) include three major and three minor criteria (Table 1 ) [ ]. Paraneoplastic pemphigus is diagnosed when all three major or two major and two minor criteria are met [ ]. It is believed to be caused by autoantibodies produced against epidermal proteins involved in cell adhesion (such as anti-plakin and anti-desmoglein autoantibodies), which leads to the blistering [ , , , ]. Known malignancies associated with the paraneoplastic syndrome include non-Hodgkin lymphoma, thymoma and Castleman disease (Fig. 9 ), with Castleman disease being the most frequently associated tumor in children and adolescents [ , ]. Diagnosis is mainly dependent on identification of serum markers (autoantibodies to epithelium) and histology from skin biopsy [ ]. Imaging workup is often patient-specific but might include CT or MRI chest to evaluate for a possible thoracic abnormality [ ]. The syndrome is treated with immunosuppressive therapies such as corticosteroids and rituximab [ ]. Fig. 9 Paraneoplastic pemphigus in a 13-year-old girl who presented with ongoing stomatitis as well as oral and vaginal ulcers, which were treated with valacyclovir. She developed multiple large areas of full thickness skin desquamation, skin necrosis and bullae, abdominal pain, bloody emesis and fevers, which were initially thought to be related to a systemic herpetic infection. a–c Axial contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen and pelvis ( a ), as well as axial T2-W ( b ) and coronal T2-W fat-saturated ( c ) MR images of the pelvis show a conglomerate of enlarged right pelvic lymph nodes (*) with encasement of the right iliac and left internal iliac vessels ( b, c ). The lymph node conglomerate demonstrates relatively homogeneous enhancement on axial CT ( a ). Workup and histopathology were compatible with paraneoplastic pemphigus in the setting of pelvic Castleman disease
Conclusion
Paraneoplastic syndromes are remote effects of underlying malignancy, commonly a result of tumor secretion of functional peptides and hormones or the production of autoantibodies to normal host tissue [ , ]. They often mimic conditions that occur in the absence of malignancy. For this reason, and their wide range of presentations, they can be difficult to diagnose, which can delay treatment of both the underlying malignancy and the paraneoplastic syndrome. Investigation for the underlying cause often needs to be tailored to the child’s symptomatology and likelihood of associated malignancy [ ]. Familiarity with the range of paraneoplastic syndromes that can occur in children, including neurologic, endocrine and dermatologic/rheumatologic syndromes, can aid in early diagnosis, treatment and imaging optimization.