Introduction
Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis is the most common musculoskeletal infection in children [ , , ]. There has been an overall increasing incidence and virulence of hematogenous osteomyelitis in children. The disease is more often multifocal and has greater involvement of extraosseous structures, both of which impact the imaging approach to the disease [ ]. Diagnosing osteomyelitis can be challenging for clinicians, particularly in young children in whom symptoms and signs are nonspecific as the classic clinical presentation of fever, pain, swelling and decreased mobility is present in only a small percentage of patients [ ]. The yield of positive blood cultures is only 30–75%. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used to help delineate the location(s) of infection and guide drainages and biopsy procedures in an attempt to identify a causative pathogen [ ]. A delay in diagnosis can lead to infectious complications and increased morbidity in the developing skeleton [ , ].
With suspected osteomyelitis in young children, it has been advocated to image with an extended field of view (FOV) initially to screen for abnormalities in other locations that may be clinically occult and then to acquire smaller FOV imaging in any areas of marrow edema as well as the site of clinical concern [ , , , ]. The frequency of multifocality in the literature varies from 2% to 7% [ , ] to up to 22% [ , , ]. Older studies that rely more on bone scintigraphy report a higher rate of multifocality whereas more recent studies that focus on MRI report a lower but still important rate of multifocality. The exact frequency of multifocality of acute osteomyelitis and the usefulness of extended FOV imaging, particularly in young children, are still unclear.
At our institution, the MRI protocol in suspected osteomyelitis for children < 5 years of age includes extended FOV coronal fluid-sensitive sequences from neck to feet, regardless of the clinical site of concern. The purpose of this study is to determine if extended FOV MRI contributes important information in very young children with suspected osteomyelitis resulting in a change in clinical management and to evaluate the overall effect on scan time.
Materials and methods
Subjects
This retrospective study was approved by the institutional review board of our hospital with a waiver of consent and assent, and was performed in compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). We conducted a search of children < 5 years of age who were imaged for a clinical suspicion of acute osteomyelitis. MRI studies performed from January 2011 to September 2015 were queried using a search engine (Illuminate; Softek Illuminate, Overland Park, KS) and the term “osteomyelitis.” A total of 269 subjects were queried. Subjects with focused MRIs of the spine, neck, face, brain and MRI extremities where extended FOV imaging was not performed were excluded ( n =204). Patients with a fever of unknown origin and no localizing signs ( n =9), patients with known osteomyelitis ( n =4) being imaged for follow-up and patients with insufficient clinical history and follow-up data ( n =1) were also excluded. Fifty-one subjects met inclusion criteria.
Definition of reference standard
The electronic medical record was reviewed by a physician (J.D.) with 4 years of radiology research experience. For all subjects, fever and criteria for pediatric sepsis (temperature, white blood count, heart rate, respiratory rate) [ ], positive hemocultures before the date of imaging, and length in days of symptoms before the MRI were recorded. Osteomyelitis was diagnosed when there were 1) positive cultures from a pathological specimen (e.g., bone biopsy or fluid aspiration); or, in subjects in whom no cultures were available, 2) clinical and imaging findings consistent with osteomyelitis in the setting of positive blood cultures or elevated inflammatory markers. In subjects in whom diagnosis was different than osteomyelitis, the alternative diagnosis was also documented.
Imaging analysis and interpretation
Two radiologists, a board-certified pediatric radiologist with 7 years of experience in musculoskeletal imaging (N.A.C.) and a pediatric radiology fellow (A.J.L.), reviewed the studies in consensus blinded to all clinical information. Images were analyzed for one or more foci of osteomyelitis. Also, additional imaging findings suggesting a differential diagnosis that could be related to the patients’ signs and symptoms were documented. With the aim of evaluating the additional time required to perform extended FOV images, the number of imaging stations and acquisition times of the survey extended FOV images were recorded.
Image acquisition
All children included in the study underwent screening coronal fluid-sensitive short tau inversion recovery (STIR) imaging from neck to feet. Imaging was performed on Seimens scanners (Erlangen, Germany) at 3 T in 40 subjects and at 1.5 T in 11. Parameters for STIR imaging at 3 T were echo time (TE): 30–61 milliseconds (ms), repetition time (TR): 2,800–8,400 ms, and inversion time 220 ms. At 1.5 T, STIR imaging, parameters were TE: 36–43 ms, TR: 3,000–6,042 ms and inversion time: of 150 ms (Fig. 1 ). Subsequent multiplanar, multisequence imaging was performed (as necessary) focused to any abnormal sites depicted on survey imaging as well as the site of initial clinical concern as all images were reviewed in real time by the radiologist overseeing the examination. In 43/51 subjects (84.3%), post-contrast imaging of the infection site/sites was performed. Various matrix sizes and coils were used according to the size of the child and the anatomical segment evaluated. Appropriate coils were placed at the initiation of the study to facilitate imaging multiple stations. All scanners were equipped with sliding tables. Fig. 1 Coronal short tau inversion recovery (STIR) MR composed image of two imaging stations in a 7-month-old girl with reported right shoulder pain. The dotted line demarcates the separate imaging stations acquired to create the final composed image
Statistical analysis
Descriptive analysis of absolute distributions was performed using percentages, means and ranges.
Results
Fifty-one subjects met inclusion criteria. The mean patient age was 2.2 years (range: 21 days – 5.5 years) and 53% were boys. Osteomyelitis was the final diagnosis in 20/51 (39.2%) subjects and 18/20 (90%) subjects were < 3 years of age. Positive blood cultures were obtained in 8/20 subjects with osteomyelitis (40%). Cultures were positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (n=4), methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (n=2), Streptococcus pyogenes (n=1) and concomitant Klebsiella penumoniae and Salmonella in one subject with sickle cell disease. Fifty-nine percent of osteomyelitis was present in the lower extremities. Multifocal sites of osteomyelitis were seen in 2/20 (10%) of the patients ages 3 months and 18 months. Septic arthritis (diagnosed by positive joint fluid cultures) was present in 14/51 (27%) subjects with 4 patients having concomitant osteomyelitis and septic arthritis (Fig. 2 ). Extraosseous findings were present in 16/20 subjects (80%) with osteomyelitis . Myositis (50%) and subperiosteal abscess (35%) were the most common extraosseous findings. In 31/51 (60.8%) subjects, a diagnosis other than osteomyelitis was made. Reviewers’ findings were concordant with the initial radiology reports for all cases. No significant discrepancies were identified. Fig. 2 Distribution of osteomyelitis ( red circles ) and septic arthritis ( blue circles ) in patients. As expected, most cases of osteomyelitis (59%) occurred in the lower extremities. Two subjects presented with multifocal osteomyelitis, one with osteomyelitis of the foot and distal femur and one with osteomyelitis of the tibia and humerus
Overall, extended FOV imaging led to important additional information in 11/51 subjects (21.6%). There were 6/20 subjects (30%) with confirmed osteomyelitis in which important information was depicted on extended FOV imaging (Table 1 ). In 4/6 subjects (60%), the additional information resulted in a change in management. These findings included infection outside the area of concern ( n =2), depiction of venous thrombosis remote from the suspected site of osteomyelitis (Fig. 3 ) and identification of a distant abscess that was subsequently drained (Fig. 4 ). Subjects 3 and 4 were diagnosed with an additional site of infection; however, management did not change. In addition, there were 5 cases in the group of 31 subjects (16%) where important information was added with a final diagnosis other than osteomyelitis (Table 2 ), which changed management in all cases by contributing an alternative diagnosis. These cases included diffuse abnormal marrow infiltration in acute lymphoblastic leukemia ( n =1), multiple masses and additional biopsy targets in lymphoma ( n =1) (Fig. 5 ), bilateral and symmetrical diffuse metaphyseal abnormalities in scurvy ( n =2) (Fig. 6 ), and detected unsuspected healing fractures remote from the initial site of concern in a case of non-accidental trauma ( n =1) (Fig. 7 ). Table 1 Six subjects (6/20) had a final diagnosis of osteomyelitis determined based on extended field of view (FOV) imaging and/or significant information added on extended FOV that impacted management Subject Age (years) Presenting symptom Area of clinical concern Final diagnosis/findings Impact on management 1 1.3 Bilateral extremity weakness Both legs Lumbar vertebral osteomyelitis/discitis Diagnosis made solely based on extended FOV imaging 2 2.8 Right thigh pain Right upper leg Lumbar vertebral osteomyelitis/discitis Diagnosis made solely based on extended FOV imaging 3 1.5 Sickle cell disease, right arm pain Right arm Right humerus osteomyelitis and septic arthritis, left humerus osteomyelitis No change in management 4 2.8 Fever, decreased right arm motion Right arm Right scapular osteomyelitis, multiple liver abscesses/granulomas, gluteal myositis No change in management 5 2.5 Recurrent fevers, right hip pain, cervical adenopathy Neck, right hip Suppurative adenitis, venous thrombosis, pulmonary septic emboli, right radial osteomyelitis, right hip septic arthritis Anticoagulation initiated for deep venous thrombosis 6 0.3 Febrile, not using right arm Right arm Right humerus osteomyelitis, right arm soft-tissue abscess, right shoulder septic arthritis, deep venous thrombosis right leg, right thigh abscess Right thigh abscess was drained Fig. 3 Coronal short tau inversion recovery (STIR) images in a 2-year-old boy with recurrent fevers, cervical adenopathy and right hip swelling. a Abnormal signal in the left neck and internal jugular vein is due to suppurative adenitis and internal jugular vein thrombosis ( arrow ). b Right upper lobe pulmonary nodules, one of which appears cavitary, are due to septic emboli ( arrows ). c Metaphyseal signal abnormality in the distal right radius consistent with osteomyelitis ( arrow ) was discovered because of the extended field of view imaging. A right hip effusion related to septic arthritis was also present but not shown on these images Fig. 4 Coronal short tau inversion recovery (STIR) images acquired in a 4-month-old girl with fevers who was not using her right arm. a Increased marrow signal in the right proximal humeral metaphysis is consistent with osteomyelitis ( arrow ). b Soft-tissue abscess in the right axilla ( arrow ). c Soft-tissue abscess in the right thigh ( triangle ) required drainage and was discovered because of the extended field of view imaging Table 2 Five subjects (5/31) with clinically suspected osteomyelitis at the time of imaging had a final diagnosis other than osteomyelitis in which extended field of view (FOV) imaging added significant information in arriving at an alternative diagnosis. Diagnosis was confirmed clinically Subject Age (years) Presenting symptom Area of clinical concern Final diagnosis Imaging findings on extended FOV 1 4.9 Right foot cellulitis Right foot Acute lymphoblastic leukemia Diffuse marrow infiltration 2 4.6 Right knee pain Right knee Lymphoma Distal right femoral and proximal tibial masses, marrow abnormalities within the left hemipelvis, sacrum and left proximal humerus, paravertebral mass, bilateral renal masses 3 0.8 Right elbow swelling Right elbow Non-accidental trauma Acute right distal humeral fracture/physeal separation with healing fractures in the right tibia 4 4.5 Intermittent refusal to walk Pelvis Scurvy Diffuse metaphyseal abnormalities 5 4.1 Limp and decreased ambulation Right leg Scurvy Diffuse metaphyseal abnormalities Fig. 5 Coronal short tau inversion recovery (STIR) composed image of three imaging stations in a 4-year-old girl with reported right knee pain. Bone lesions were seen within the distal right femur and proximal right tibia ( circle ). Extended field of view imaging depicted a left chest paraspinal mass ( arrowheads ), bilateral renal masses ( arrow on left renal mass) and additional bone lesions within the left hemipelvis and sacrum ( dashed arrows ) Fig. 6 Coronal short tau inversion recovery (STIR) image ( a ) and T1-weighted image ( b ) in a 4-year-old boy with clinical suspicion of proximal femoral osteomyelitis. a Symmetrical increased signal intensity is shown within the bilateral proximal and distal femoral metaphyses and proximal tibial metaphyses ( arrows ). b The same areas show decreased signal intensity on T1-weighted images ( arrows ). This pattern of abnormal signal intensity was considered to be suggestive of vitamin C deficiency (scurvy). Vitamin levels demonstrated deficiencies of vitamins C and D Fig. 7 Imaging in a 10-month-old boy with clinical suspicion of osteomyelitis in the right elbow. a Sagittal short tau inversion recovery (STIR) image of the right tibia shows periosteal reaction along the diaphysis ( arrowheads ) with low intensity line consistent with a non-displaced fracture ( arrow ) with adjacent soft tissue edema. b Following the extended field of view MRI, a bone survey was performed which demonstrated the healing nondisplaced tibial diaphyseal fracture as well as a healing distal tibial metaphyseal buckethandle fracture ( arrow )
Extended FOV imaging was accomplished by adding a single coronal fluid-sensitive station in 1 child, 2 stations in 31 children, 3 stations in 16 children and 4 stations in 3 children. Survey imaging added a median total time of 6:51 min to the examination (Interquartile range [IQR]: 5:26–9:01 min; range: 2:29–20:54 min). Multiple survey series needed to be repeated for one patient because of motion despite the use of sedatives leading to an outlier scan time of 20:54 min.
Discussion
This retrospective analysis of young children with suspected osteomyelitis sought to determine whether extended FOV MRI added important clinical information. All children were imaged with coronal fluid-sensitive sequences from the neck to the feet regardless of the site of clinical concern. This added a median time of less than 7 min to the study time and changed management in approximately 20% of our study population.
The epidemiology of hematogenous osteomyelitis has changed during the past two decades; however, community-acquired Staphylococcus aureus is the most common pathological organism to cause osteomyelitis [ , , ]. Staphylococcus aureus is aggressive (secondary to specific proteolytic enzymes) and frequently associated with extraosseous manifestations including subperiosteal abscess, pyomyositis and deep venous thrombosis [ , ]. Many of the extraosseous findings require an intervention, such as drainage, debridement, filter placement or anticoagulation [ ]. In the last 15 years, there has been an important increase in the recognized cases of osteomyelitis caused by Kingella kingae in young children [ ], but this increase is believed to be mainly related to the improved accuracy of culture methods and the use of nucleotide amplification techniques [ ]. In our 8 patients with osteomyelitis and positive blood cultures, as expected, Staphylococcus aureus was the most common organism identified (75%). In 60% of patients with osteomyelitis, blood cultures were negative.
Rapid diagnosis and treatment are required to prevent infectious complications and permanent disability and deformity [ , ]. In young children, acute osteomyelitis may be multifocal (up to 22%) and the additional sites of involvement may be clinically silent [ , ]. In our study, 2/20 (10%) patients with osteomyelitis had multifocal involvement. For both patients with multifocal osteomyelitis, management was not impacted as the patients were treated for the suspected site and neither patient required surgical intervention (subjects 3 and 4). Acute osteomyelitis is frequently associated with extraosseous findings, many of which require a treatment intervention. A 2-year-old boy was found to have left internal jugular vein thrombophlebitis, pulmonary septic emboli and an occult osteomyelitis on extended FOV. He was treated with anticoagulation for the venous thrombosis. The frequency of extraosseous findings has been reported as high as 68% [ ]. In our group of 20 patients with osteomyelitis, 16 (80%) subjects had extraosseous findings . A majority of these required a treatment intervention.
Extended FOV MRI has been suggested as a method to screen for sites of additional osseous involvement, extraosseous involvement and alternative diagnoses [ , , ]. However, a recent study found that imaging the contralateral asymptomatic lower extremity (in addition to the symptomatic lower extremity) resulted in increased detection of osteomyelitis and extraosseous disease, although patient management was not altered [ ]. That study focused on the lower extremities, included all pediatric patients up to 18 years of age and did not stratify based on age. We focused our evaluation on very young patients who are often unable to verbalize symptoms and in whom clinical diagnosis is more challenging. Of the 51 patients included in our study, extended FOV imaging detected additional findings in 11 patients (21.6%) and 9 of these led to a change in management. In five of the patients diagnosed with osteomyelitis, the extended FOV imaging led to correctly making the diagnosis of osteomyelitis in three cases, diagnosing a remote soft-tissue abscess in one case, and detecting an additional biopsy site in one case.
When working up suspected osteomyelitis in young children, alternative diagnoses may be present [ , , , , , , , ]. In 16% of subjects (Table 2 ), extended FOV provided alternate diagnoses other than infection. A 4.9-year-old boy presented with foot swelling and fever (subject 1). The initial radiographs of the foot demonstrated normal bones. On the subsequent MRI, there was diffuse abnormal marrow infiltration, most pronounced in the metaphyses of the lower extremities that led to the diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Extended FOV imaging was also useful for the 4.6-year-old boy who presented with right knee pain. Radiographs demonstrated mild periosteal reaction and soft-tissue swelling along the lateral aspect of the distal femur, which supported the diagnosis of osteomyelitis. MRI demonstrated multiple masses involving multiple bones as well as both kidneys which proved to be lymphoma. The two subjects diagnosed with scurvy had normal radiographs. They both experienced fever and difficulty walking. On extended FOV MRI, the diagnosis became evident because of the symmetrical appearance of metaphyseal signal abnormalities that involved both lower extremities and the upper extremities. In the case of non-accidental trauma, the infant presented with fever and right elbow swelling. Radiographs demonstrated soft-tissue swelling and a joint effusion. No displaced fractures were present. Given the fever and soft-tissue swelling, the MRI was ordered to evaluate for osteomyelitis. On MRI, an acute elbow physeal fracture/separation was demonstrated. In addition, a healing non-displaced fracture of the right tibia was identified that was not suspected clinically. The additional findings depicted outside the region of clinical concern promptly led to a correct diagnosis and appropriate management in these patients.
Extended FOV imaging added a median total time of 6:51 min (IQR: 5:26–9:01 min) to the examination. Most patients required either two or three imaging stations to image the body from neck to toes with coronal STIR screening. None of the remote findings in our study required additional smaller FOV imaging. Importantly, there were also no incidental findings on the extended FOV imaging leading to unnecessary, further work-up. The additional images were acquired at no additional cost to the patient. The patient was billed according to the specific site of concern, as requested by the ordering physician.
We believe that after 5 years of age, children are more able to verbalize symptoms and point to the source of pain. The physical examination can predict more reliably the site of infection. There is also decreasing incidence of multifocality with age [ ]. These considerations, and the fact that larger children require more imaging time for coronal STIR whole-body imaging, made us decide to limit the protocol to children ages 5 and younger. It remains to be evaluated whether whole-body STIR adds value in older children and adolescents.
Limitations to the study include that there were only 51 patients, resulting in decreased power to assess for correlation with clinical outcome. There were patients with suspected osteomyelitis imaged during the time range of the study in whom extended FOV was not performed and these patients were not included in the study. An additional limitation is that patients who were imaged for indications other than infection and in whom osteomyelitis was diagnosed may not have underwent our extended FOV protocol and were not included in the study. Omitting these patients may serve as a potential source of referral bias. There is a degree of subjectivity involved in the process of determining whether the added information from extended FOV imaging is important. This was less of an issue with the cases of osteomyelitis where there was more certainty that the remote findings would not have been picked up without extended FOV imaging.
Taking into account the number of cases where extended FOV imaging added additional information and changed clinical management as well as the relative small effect it had on overall scan time, the authors believe this is worthwhile and remains an important tool in the radiologist’s armamentarium in working up suspected osteomyelitis in very young children. In addition, we postulate that acquiring the additional stations during one scan time may prevent subsequent MR imaging at a later time during the child’s illness that would warrant additional sedation and may require a second bolus of intravenous gadolinium contrast.
Conclusion
The addition of extended FOV MRI in children ≤5 years of age with suspected osteomyelitis adds important clinical information because occult, multifocal sites of infection or alternative, noninfectious pathologies may be present in this patient population. Since this is commonly outside the anatomical region of clinical concern, additional survey fluid-sensitive sequences allow for a complete, accurate and timely diagnosis.