Introduction
Focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia is a rare growth disturbance of the bone resulting in deformity. Focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia is most commonly reported in the proximal tibia, with fewer cases reported in the upper extremity. Focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia was first described by Bell et al. [ ] in 1985 as a deformity of the tibia with a “punched out” area of cortex and surrounding sclerosis at the insertion of the pes anserine tendons, resulting in tibial varus angulation [ ]. Since Bell’s article, multiple others have described focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia in the upper and lower extremities. In the ulna, the fibroligamentous tether can result in progressive deformity and dislocation of the radial head [ ]. This type of progressive ulnar focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia has been described as a distinct entity called ulnar focal cortical indentation by Kazuki et al. [ ]; however, it is more likely that ulnar focal cortical indentation is an ulnar variant of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia. The fibroligamentous tether is similar in appearance and function to the anomalous Vickers ligament seen in Madelung deformity. The imaging features of ulnar focal cortical indentation — unilateral angular deformity of the ulna with a radiolucent cortical defect and surrounding sclerosis, and progressive radial deformity — are diagnostic. We present four cases, three with surgical or pathological correlation, further elucidating ulnar focal cortical indentation as a distinct form of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia.
Materials and methods
We obtained approval from our institutional review board, which waived informed consent. This study complied with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). We identified four children referred by orthopedic surgery with imaging features compatible with ulnar focal cortical indentation treated at two of our institutions between 2007 and 2015. We retrospectively reviewed the clinical presentation, imaging features, treatment and surgical outcomes for each child. All children had pre- and postoperative radiographs.
Results
Table 1 summarizes results of four children with ulnar focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia. Table 1 Summary results of four children with ulnar focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia (FFCD) Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Age 22 months 48 months 32 months 48 months Gender Male Male Male Female Clinical history Bump on arm History of “resected ulnar FFCD” at an outside institution Progressive left forearm deformity Progressive right radial head dislocation and ulnar bowing Ulnar lesion location Ulnar metaphysis Ulnar metaphysis Ulnar diaphysis Ulnar metaphysis Radiographic description of lesion Hypoplastic distal ulna with an ulnar cortical defect and radial bow Hypoplastic ulna with a distal ulnar cortical defect and radial bowing Ulnar bowing and more proximal subtle ulnar cortical indentation Radial and ulnar bowing with varus curvature and ulnar hypoplasia, with a subtle distal ulnar indentation Radial head dislocation Yes Yes Yes No Pathology of resected tissue Focus of dense fibroligamentous tissue N/A N/A Focus of dense fibroligamentous tissue Initial management Conservative management Excision of ulnar tether at another institution Conservative management Conservative management Final treatment Corrective radial and ulnar osteotomy with resection of a fibroligamentous tether Corrective radial and ulnar osteotomy with bony synostosis and radial head excision Conservative management Closing ulnar wedge osteotomy and resection of fibroligamentous tether Follow-up Full range of motion 30° of forearm pronation from persistent radial head dislocation Forearm supination 50° and pronation 80° Full range of motion N/A not applicable
Case 1
A 22-month-old boy with no significant medical history presented for evaluation of the right upper extremity. The mother first noticed a bump on the forearm 6 months prior to the office visit. Radiographs showed ulnar hypoplasia with an increased radial bow and posterolateral dislocation of the radial head (Fig. 1 ). Observation and yearly follow-up was recommended. At the age of 7 the boy presented with pain and increasing deformity (Fig. 1 ), at which time radiographs demonstrated a dislocated radial head and short ulna. Physical examination demonstrated a radial head that could be subluxed with provocative maneuvers, and a shortened ulna. The boy underwent corrective radial and ulnar osteotomies with resection of a fibroligamentous tether that extended from the ulnar defect to the lunate and triquetrum (Fig. 1 ). Pathological examination of the resected soft tissue showed dense fibroligamentous tissue. The boy retained full range of motion without radial head dislocation following radial and ulnar osteotomies with plate and screw fixation (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Case 1, initial presentation radiographs of a 22-month-old boy with ulnar focal cortical indentation. a Anteroposterior radiograph of the left forearm at initial presentation demonstrates hypoplasia of the distal ulna with a large cortical defect (notch) in the distal ulna ( arrow ). b Lateral radiograph of the left forearm shows an increased radial bow, posterolateral dislocation of the radial head at the radiocapitellar joint and demonstrates large cortical defect in the distal ulna ( arrow ). c Preoperative photograph at age 7 shows radial head dislocation and forearm bowing. d Intraoperative photograph shows the fibroligamentous tether at the site of the ulnar defect, extending from the ulna to the lunate and triquetrum ( arrow ). e Oblique lateral radiograph demonstrates a healed osteotomy of the radius with plate-and-screw fixation, distal ulnar osteotomy and improved alignment, with no radial head dislocation
Case 2
A 4-year-old boy was brought to the office by his mother for a deformity of his left forearm. Two years prior, the boy had been diagnosed with “[focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia] of the left ulna treated with excision of the lesion” at an outside institution. No further surgical history was available. Since then, the mother had noticed progressive deformity of the forearm and a bump on the lateral aspect of the elbow. Upon physical exam, forearm range of motion demonstrated full supination and 20° of pronation; however there was frank dislocation of the radial head. Radiographs demonstrated a shortened ulna with a distal ulnar cortical defect and radial bowing with posterolateral radial head dislocation (Fig. 2 ). There was no radiographic evidence of a prior osteotomy. The boy underwent further surgical intervention at our institution with radial and ulna osteotomies and excision of the radial head. A fibroligamentous tether was not seen and was likely resected in the surgical procedure at the outside institution. Radiographs obtained 4 months postoperatively demonstrated complete union of the osteotomies and a “one bone” forearm with radius/ulna bony synostosis and improved alignment. Final follow-up showed full range of motion at the elbow and shoulder; however the forearm remained limited to 30° of pronation with persistent radial dislocation (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Case 2, a 48-month-old boy with ulnar focal cortical indentation. a Anteroposterior (AP) radiograph of the left forearm at initial presentation demonstrates a shortened ulna with a subtle distal ulnar cortical defect ( arrow ). b Lateral radiograph shows radial bowing and posterolateral radial head dislocation. c AP radiograph of the left forearm demonstrates complete union of the radial and ulnar osteotomies following “one-bone” forearm (radius/ulna bony synostosis) procedure. d Lateral radiograph shows resection of the radial head; however there is persistent radial dislocation
Case 3
A 32-month-old boy was brought to the clinic by his parents with complaints of a progressive left forearm deformity that began at 8 months of age. Physical examination revealed forearm pronation and supination; range of motion was 50° for both. Radiographs demonstrated a posterolaterally dislocated radial head and mild ulnar hypoplasia with a bowing deformity (Fig. 3 ). The ulna demonstrated cortical thickening in the diaphysis with a subtle proximal cortical indentation. At 1- and 2-year follow-ups the boy had no change in his physical examination or radiographs and was again instructed to follow up annually. At the latest follow-up, he continued to be pain-free and have full elbow flexion and extension despite his palpable radial head dislocation. Radiographs showed stable bowing of the ulna, mild ulnar hypoplasia with cortical indentation and radial head dislocation. Supination and pronation measured 50° and 80°, respectively. Given the lack of significant interval worsening, conservative management was elected. Fig. 3 Case 3, a 32-month-old boy with ulnar focal cortical indentation. a Anteroposterior radiograph shows diaphyseal ulnar cortical thickening with a subtle indentation, mild ulnar hypoplasia and posterolateral dislocation of the radial head ( arrow ). b Lateral radiograph shows diaphyseal ulnar cortical thickening with an ulnar bowing deformity ( arrow )
Case 4
A 4-year-old girl was brought to the clinic by her parents with a history of right radial head dislocation and ulnar bowing that began at birth and had been progressive since that time. Physical exam revealed varus deformity of her right upper extremity and mild decrease of pronation with active range of motion. Initial radiographs revealed radial and ulnar bowing with a varus type of curve and ulnar hypoplasia with a subtle distal ulnar indentation (Fig. 4 ). At this time annual follow-up was recommended. At the 2-year follow-up examination (age 6 years), an MRI report from an outside institution described a distal 12-mm T1- and T2-hypointense lesion near the cortical indentation suggesting fibrous tissue, with no change in the bowing of the radius or ulna (images not available). Follow-up radiographs at age 10 showed 45° bowing at the ulna and increased bow at the radius but no radial head dislocation. At this time given the progressive deformity, surgery with an ulnar closing wedge osteotomy and application of an ulnar fixator with removal of the ulnar fibroligamentous tether was elected. Intraoperative image showed the tether extending from the ulna to the carpus (lunate and triquetrum; Fig. 4 ), and pathology of the resected tether revealed fibroligamentous tissue. Follow-up clinical examination demonstrated full range of motion at the wrist and elbow. Radiographs showed forearm alignment was neutral with no residual ulnar angular deformity; however there was persistent mild radial bowing with no radial head dislocation (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 Case 4, a 4-year-old girl with ulnar focal cortical indentation. a Anteroposterior (AP) radiograph shows radial and ulnar bowing with varus curvature and ulnar hypoplasia with a distal ulnar indentation ( arrow ). b Lateral radiograph shows distal ulnar indentation ( arrow ) without evidence of radial head dislocation c Intraoperative photograph shows the fibroligamentous ulnar focal cortical indentation tether extending from the distal ulna to the carpus ( arrow ). d AP radiograph at age 11 shows a healed ulnar osteotomy and neutral forearm alignment without residual angular deformity. The radius remains mildly bowed but the radial head is not dislocated
Discussion
Bell et al. [ ] first described focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia of the medial tibia in 1985 as a mesenchymal area of the pes anserinus that failed to differentiate and persisted as fibrocartilage, thereby interfering with normal growth. Histologically the lesions of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia are diverse and can have fibrous elements with or without cartilage, ligamentous and tendon components. The literature to date has described more than 100 cases of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia in the upper and lower extremities [ , ]. In 1997, Lincoln and Birch [ ] were the first to describe focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia in a long bone of the upper extremity, the humerus. Others have described focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia of the phalanges, rib and vertebral body [ ]. In 2005, Kazuki et al. [ ] described three cases in the ulna, which they called ulnar focal cortical indentation. Radiographically those ulnar lesions appeared like other focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia cases with well-defined areas of cortical metaphyseal lucency and surrounding sclerosis; however Kazuki et al. [ ] reported extension to the epiphysis in one case, unlike reports of other cases of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia [ ]. Kazuki et al. [ ] also reported distinctive pathology in this case, with folds of tissue resembling periosteum but no fibrous tissue or fibrocartilage. The limited number of cases (one) showing atypical pathology for focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia raises some concern about its validity. Given the radiologic similarity of these lesions to focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia in other locations, it is likely that ulnar focal cortical indentation is a progressive form of ulnar focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia. Treatment of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia typically varies depending on patient age, deformity and clinical symptomatology, with observation or surgical intervention as the current treatment options. However, unlike focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia in other locations, ulnar focal cortical indentation is a progressive deformity often resulting in progressive radial head dislocation. Therefore early surgical intervention is often required [ ].
The clinical features of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia are different depending on the involved site. In the lower extremity, focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia typically presents at 12–24 months as the child begins to stand and walk. In the upper extremity, presentation can be delayed because of lack of symptoms [ , ]. Initial presentation typically occurs when parents notice a discrepancy in forearm length and forearm bowing in the absence of prior trauma. There is progressive deformity, with the ulna tether ultimately resulting in restricted ulna growth with progressive ulnar bowing and secondary progressive radial bowing or radial head dislocation. In the current literature, there is no known gender or laterality predilection [ ].
Ulnar focal cortical indentation has a classic appearance on radiographs and further imaging is usually not required for diagnosis. The radiographic features include a well-defined, obliquely oriented lucent defect in the distal ulnar cortex with sclerosis at the margins of the lesion. This cortical indentation usually involves the anteromedial distal ulna extending proximally in a posterolateral direction, resulting in a flame pattern like that seen in Madelung deformity. The fibroligamentous tether arising at the ulnar notch results in restricted ulnar growth and deformity, with secondary radial bowing and progressive posterolateral radial head dislocation leading to decreased range of motion, especially supination and pronation. Lack of additional osseous abnormalities helps confirm the diagnosis. While cross-sectional imaging is not typically necessary for diagnosis, MR findings can include low T1 and T2 signal corresponding to the fibroligamentous tether at the cortical lucency and peripheral low T1 and low T2 signal corresponding to areas of adjacent cortical sclerosis [ , ]. If the tether includes elements of cartilage as in other forms of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia, the T2 signal is likely to be more heterogeneous. CT shows a cortical defect with soft-tissue attenuation within the defect but no mass [ ]. Ultrasound findings include a hypoechoic lesion visible within the echogenic cortex similar to findings in a “gapping” fracture [ ]. There has been one reported case of florid periosteal reaction surrounding a tibial focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia; however this has not been described in upper-extremity focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia and might have been secondary to recent trauma or infection [ ].
The histopathology of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia has traditionally been described as a mesenchymal area of persistent fibrocartilage attached to the metaphysis, in contradistinction to the lesion in ulnar focal cortical indentation, which was described by Kazuki et al. [ ] as a periosteal-like tether extending from the bone marrow to the epiphysis. Regardless of the histology, the tether acts as an anchor restricting growth [ , , ]. Jouve et al. [ ] described this “fibrous periosteal inclusion” as having a similar effect as an epiphysiodesis [ ]. The tether extends from the superior margin of the pronator quadratus in the distal ulnarnotch to the lunate or triquetrum, similar to Vickers ligament described in Madelung deformity [ ]. Surgical notes and pathology from our cases (cases 1 and 4) confirm that the fibroligamentous tether does extend from the distal ulna to the lunate and triquetrum, across the ulnar physis, resulting in focally restricted ulnar growth (Fig. 5 ). The origin of the fibroligamentous tether on the ulna results in the cortical defect seen radiographically [ ]. In the focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia cases reported in the literature, the pathology has been a mixture of dense fibrous tissue, hyaline cartilage and fibrocartilage [ ]. The histopathology of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia is not uniform, and the presence of fibrocartilage, despite its name, is not an essential feature of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia [ , ]. Given the varying biopsy results, it has been proposed that there are at least two types of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia, one with cartilaginous metaplasia and the other without [ ]. Others have suggested that focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia undergoes evolutionary changes from initially highly cellular to paucicellular and more fibrotic [ , , ]. Kazuki et al. [ ] proposed that ulnar focal cortical indentation was a separate entity, citing their histopathology results lacked any fibrocartilage and more resembled periosteum. However given the variability in pathology of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia, it is more than likely that ulnar focal cortical indentation and other focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasias are on a pathological spectrum [ ]. Fig. 5 Fibroligamentous tether. a Anteroposterior illustration shows the typical fibroligamentous tether ( gray bands ) extending from the ulna notch ( star ) across the physis and inserting in the lunate or triquetrum. b Lateral illustration shows the fibroligamentous tether compressing the distal ulnar physis, restricting ulnar growth ( arrowhead ), with secondary progressive lateral and posterior radial head dislocation ( arrow )
Management of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia differs in the upper and lower extremities and is often based on patient age and degree of deformity. Spontaneous resolution of lesions in the lower extremity has been reported; this might be secondary to resorption, further differentiation into normal bone or even rupture of the fibrotic band [ , ]. Spontaneous resolution is reported much less frequently in the upper extremities for unclear reasons. Eren et al. [ ] reported significant limb-length discrepancy in the proximal humerus that underwent conservative management, and there is reported recurrence following osteotomy in the phalangeal lesions [ ]. In cases of ulnar focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia described by Nakura et al. [ ] in their literature review , 71% of cases needed surgical correction and 9 of 10 cases developed radial head subluxation or dislocation before the operation. Specifically, ulnar variant focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia (ulnar focal cortical indentation) is a progressive deformity leading to radial head dislocation, and we believe surgical intervention might be indicated at an earlier age than in other types of focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia [ ]. The cases presented here support this belief in that two of the four children (cases 1 and 2) required salvage procedures because of late presentation, delayed diagnosis and prolonged observation. Early surgical management is therefore important to long-term outcomes as it is intended to maximize ulnar growth and remodeling potential by untethering the ulna, allowing the radius to grow and stabilizing and preventing radial head dislocation as demonstrated in case 4. This girl underwent surgery prior to radial head dislocation and retained full range of motion. The types of surgery include one-bone forearm creation (radius/ulna bony synostosis), radial head resection, ulnar osteotomy with excision of the fibroligamentous band, and ulnar lengthening. Although there is limited data with regard to growth plate lengthening, this procedure has shown effectiveness in treating femoral focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia without the associated complications of osteotomies [ , ].
Given the prognosis for ulnar variant focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia, it is important to differentiate it from other forearm deformities. The differential diagnosis for ulnar longitudinal deficiencies includes congenital pseudoarthrosis of the ulna, fibromatosis, osteochondromatosis, fibrous dysplasia, post-traumatic deformity, and deformity secondary to tumor or tumor resection. Congenital pseudarthrosis of the ulna is rare and is commonly found in children with neurofibromatosis or a family history of the disease [ ]. Radiographs show progressive radial angulation and a tapered distal ulna with a radiolucent gap with corticated edges, but not the flame-shape notch seen in ulnar focal cortical indentation [ ]. Fibromatosis is a soft-tissue disease that rarely affects bone and is not common in children, although radiographically it can be similar to focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia, with muscle contractures that disrupt bone growth, or lesions that permeate bone directly resulting in a cortical defect [ ]. Osteochondromatosis involving the distal ulna can result in ulnar shortening relative to the radius. As the radius grows the soft tissues act as a restraint holding the distal ulna in place and limiting its longitudinal growth [ ]. Fibrous dysplasia is a lesion characterized by fibro-osseous replacement resulting in an expansile lucent lesion with a ground-glass-appearing internal matrix and can result in growth disturbance [ ]. The last three lesions, however, do not result in radial head dislocation, helping distinguish them from ulnar focal cortical indentation.
Conclusion
Focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia is a spectrum of lesions that as a group are diverse in location, histopathology and outcome. Ulnar focal cortical indentation is proposed to be a focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia variant within this pathological spectrum; however unlike focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia in other locations, ulnar focal cortical indentation can be progressive and early surgical intervention is important to prevent significant deformity and disability. Like the anomalous Vickers ligament seen in Madelung deformity, the primary lesion in ulnar focal cortical indentation acts as a tether across the ulnar physis resulting in restricted ulnar growth with progressive deformity and secondary radial head dislocation.