Introduction
Although many infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) have intracranial abnormalities including enlarged extraaxial spaces, intraventricular hemorrhage, ventriculomegaly, white matter injury, delayed sulcation and cerebral and cerebellar hemorrhage on postnatal brain MRI [ , , , ], little is known about fetal brain growth and injury in CDH. There is concern that brain volumes might be smaller in fetuses with CDH [ ]. Conditions affecting blood flow and perfusion of the brain such as specific patterns of congenital heart diseases can affect brain growth in utero [ , , ], and CDH might affect brain growth through a similar mechanism. It has been shown that fetuses with CDH have an average 30% reduction in left ventricular size and decreased left ventricular output, with decreased middle cerebral artery flow velocities [ , , ]. In addition, Vogel et al. [ ] identified significantly smaller tricuspid annulus dimensions and long-axis dimension of the right ventricle prenatally in CDH that improved after birth following CDH repair [ ]. The small right and left heart dimensions prenatally in CDH, hypothesized to be caused by compression of the heart by the hernia [ ], could potentially alter brain perfusion and resultant brain growth.
Infants with CDH are shown to be at risk for neurodevelopmental impairment in later life [ , ]. While postnatal brain injury could be a cause of the impaired neurodevelopment, it is unclear whether any in utero brain maturational deficits exist and to what extent these would affect future neurodevelopment. Understanding the pathophysiology and time course of fetal brain development can assist in better understanding the factors affecting adverse brain development in CDH and allow for better prognostication and counseling of these patients. Most studies assessing brain injury in CDH have focused on survivors. Infants with CDH who did not survive to discharge have not been studied. With the greater use of in utero fetoscopic procedures such as intratracheal balloon occlusion improving survival in fetuses with CDH and severe lung hypoplasia, it is important to understand potential brain growth and maturational changes in these infants. The purpose of our study, therefore, was to assess fetal brain growth in CDH and identify how brain growth is affected by severity of CDH in survivors and non-survivors. We hypothesized that infants with CDH who do not survive are more likely to have greater severity of CDH and therefore a greater potential for decreased brain perfusion and poor brain growth.
Materials and methods
Patient selection
After receiving approval from the institutional review board, we retrospectively identified fetuses with CDH who had fetal MRI from 2009 to 2014 at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center. We included fetuses with known outcome: survived to discharge or did not survive to discharge. We excluded fetuses who were lost to follow-up with unknown outcome, pregnancy terminations, and those with syndromic associations.
Image review
Fetal MRI was performed at a single center using a routine fetal MRI protocol on a 1.5-T MRI (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, or Philips Healthcare, Best, the Netherlands). Irrespective of the indication, the fetal MRI protocol includes T2-weighted images — single-shot fast spin-echo (SSFSE) and fast imaging employing steady-state acquisition (FIESTA), T1-W, gradient and diffusion-weighted brain imaging. T2-weighted brain imaging was performed in three planes — sagittal, axial and coronal, with a slice thickness of 4 mm and slice gap of 4 mm. No maternal sedation was used. Two fellowship trained pediatric neuroradiologists (R.R., with 1 year of experience, and B.K.-F., with greater than 15 years of experience), at separate time points and blinded to the outcome, reviewed different aspects of fetal MR imaging. Brain morphometry included fronto-occipital diameter, brain biparietal diameter, bone biparietal diameter, anteroposterior pons dimension, transverse cerebellar dimension, and anteroposterior (AP)-vermis and craniocaudal cerebellar vermis dimensions [ ] (Fig. 1 ). These data were recorded by a single observer (R.R.) in a manner previously published using the best T2-weighted image slices for midline sagittal, and non-oblique coronal and axial images [ ]. Fig. 1 Fetal brain measurements on single-shot fast spin-echo (SSFSE) MR images in a 36-weeks-gestation fetus a Sagittal plane demonstrates measurement of the fronto-occipital diameter. b , c Coronal plane at the level of the foramen of Monro shows measurements of the brain biparietal diameter b and bone biparietal diameter c . d Mid-sagittal plane image shows measurement of the anteroposterior pons diameter. e Coronal image at the greatest transverse cerebellar dimension shows measurement of the transverse cerebellar diameter. f Mid-sagittal plane image shows the anteroposterior and craniocaudal cerebellar vermian dimensions
Other findings recorded by a single observer (R.R.) on the fetal MRI were germinal matrix hemorrhage, diffusion restriction, ventriculomegaly and enlarged extraaxial spaces [ ]. Enlargement of the extraaxial spaces was determined when the distance between the inner margin of the calvarium and the frontal or parieto-occipital region was greater than values for gestational age (Fig. 2 ) [ , ]. Ventriculomegaly was diagnosed when the maximum width of the lateral ventricles at the level of the atrium measured greater than 10 mm [ ]. Presence of maturational delay (based on sulcation and brain parenchymal migration pattern on T2-weighted images), engorged dural venous sinuses, and parenchymal signal abnormality were recorded by a senior neuroradiologist (B.K.-F.) who had knowledge of the gestational age but not the outcome. Fig. 2 Enlarged extraaxial spaces. Axial ( a ) and parasagittal ( b ) single-shot fast spin-echo (SSFSE) T2-weighted MR images of the brain in a 34-week fetus with congenital diaphragmatic hernia demonstrate enlarged frontal ( arrow ) and parietal ( dashed arrow ) extraaxial spaces as described by Watanabe et al. [ ]
Lung volumes were generated prospectively at the time of imaging by dedicated image postprocessing technologists with fetal radiologist guidance using Vitrea software (Vital Images, Minnetonka, MN) for clinical purposes. Markers of CDH severity were the presence of intrathoracic liver, side of diaphragmatic hernia (right or left) and two measures of severity of lung hypoplasia: percentage predicted lung volume (PPLV) and observed-to-expected total lung volume (o/eTLV). These were calculated from previously published formulae:
Percentage predicted lung volume (PPLV) = total lung volume/predicted lung volume*100 as described by Barnewolt et al. [ ], where predicted lung volume = total thoracic volume – mediastinal volume.
Observed to expected lung volume (o/eTLV) = total lung volume/expected lung volume, where expected lung volume = 0.0033*(gestational age in weeks) 2.86 , based on the formula by Rypens et al. [ ].
Statistical analysis
We calculated the gestational-age-corrected z-scores for brain morphometric measurements using previously published normative data [ ]. Average z-scores were compared in survivors versus non-survivors using a two-sample t -test. We also assessed the 95% confidence intervals of the mean differences. We compared categorical variables using the Fisher exact test. We assessed the correlation between brain morphometric measurements and severity of CDH using Pearson correlation coefficient and linear regression models. We evaluated the association between survivors and z-scores using logistic regression. MR examinations performed at <28 weeks and >28 weeks were analyzed separately. We performed all analyses using SAS version 9.4. (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). P -values <.05 were considered statistically significant.
Results
Sixty-three fetuses with CDH had 109 fetal MRIs at 20.1–37.7 weeks of gestation. Thirty-six infants survived to hospital discharge (of these, 26 had 2 fetal MRIs) and 27 died before discharge (of these, 20 had 2 fetal MRIs). There was no significant difference in gestational age at time of imaging in those who survived and those who died (Table 1 ). Variables of severity of CDH are shown in Table 2 . There was a significantly greater proportion of right CDH among survivors. Presence of liver herniation was significantly greater in non-survivors. Both PPLV and o/eTLV were significantly lower in non-survivors at >28 weeks. Table 1 Distribution of gestational age at fetal MRI in survivors and non-survivors Survivors n (mean gestational age/range) Non-survivors n (mean gestational age/range) MRI <28 weeks 22 (23.6 w / 20.1 w – 27.9 w) 20 (24.45 w / 21 w – 27.4 w) MRI > 28 weeks 35 (33.2 w / 28 w – 37.7 w) 23 (33.7 w / 30.7 w – 35.1 w) w weeks Table 2 Findings of congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) severity among survivors and non-survivors Survivors Non-survivors P -value a Right CDH (total) 10 (36) 1 (27) 0.017 b Liver up (total) 19 (36) 24 (27) 0.0027 b Percentage predicted lung volume in mean (SD) <28 weeks 26.63 (10.16) 25.76 (14.38) 0.78 c >28 weeks 23.57 (10.17) 13.72 (6.32) <.0001 c Observed to expected total lung volume in mean (SD) <28 weeks 0.41 (0.15) 0.37 (0.17) 0.33 c >28 weeks 0.44 (0.15) 0.28 (0.09) <.0001 c SD standard deviation a P -values <.05 were considered statistically significant b Fisher exact test c t -test
Of the 27 fetuses with CDH who did not survive to discharge, 1 died in utero, 1 died in the neonatal period at an outside hospital (exact time not known), and the others died prior to discharge at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center. Of the 25 infants who died prior to discharge, the average survival period was 22.8 days (median 12, range 1–100 days). On chart review, the cause of death was related to the severe pulmonary hypoplasia and pulmonary hypertension caused by CDH in all cases.
Enlarged extraaxial spaces were the most common brain imaging finding in the entire group, identified in 57% of cases at >28 weeks and in 2% of cases at <28 weeks of gestation. This finding was seen in 60% of survivors and 53% of non-survivors ( P =.77). Venous sinus distention was the second most common finding, present in 23% of survivors and 35% of non-survivors ( P =.38) at >28 weeks. Venous sinus distention was only identified in 12% of fetal MRIs at <28 weeks of gestation. On fetal MRI at >28 weeks of gestation, enlarged extraaxial spaces coincided with venous sinus distention in 15 cases (42%); 14 (39%) had either enlarged extraaxial spaces or venous sinus distention, and 7 (19%) had neither enlarged extraaxial spaces nor venous sinus distention.
There was no evidence of delayed sulcation, abnormal parenchymal signal or intracranial hemorrhage in either survivors or non-survivors.
Assessing morphometric measurements, mean brain z-scores were within two standard deviations of the mean in survivors and non-survivors on the <28-week and >28-week fetal brain MRIs.
In fetuses with CDH with MRIs at both time points, <28 weeks and at >28 weeks of gestation, anteroposterior (AP) vermis z-score was significantly smaller in non-survivors (−1.91±1.74) compared to survivors (−0.73±1.5) only at >28 weeks of gestation ( P =.02; mean difference of 1.17 with 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.20–2.15; Fig. 3 ). The AP vermis z-score correlated with o/eTLV for the entire group ( r =0.25, P =.018; Fig. 4 ). Specifically, AP vermis z-score increased by 2.5 with one unit increase in o/eTLV. The transverse cerebellum z-score correlated weakly, but significantly, with the o/eTLV for the entire group (r=0.25, P =.021), more strongly at >28 weeks ( r =0.39, P =.009; Fig. 5 ). Specifically, transverse cerebellum z-score increased by 1.8 with one unit increase in o/eTLV. Logistic regression showed that AP vermis z-score was significantly associated with survivors and non-survivors, with an odds ratio (OR) of 0.71 (95% CI 0.51–0.99). The association was stronger at >28 weeks (OR=0.61 with 95% CI 0.39–0.96). There was no difference in the mean z-score values for morphometric measurements between survivors and non-survivors with respect to the fronto-occipital diameter, brain biparietal diameter, bone biparietal diameter, anteroposterior pons dimension and craniocaudal cerebellar vermian dimension (Table 3 ). Fig. 3 Box plots of z-scores of the anteroposterior (AP) vermian dimensions in fetuses with congenital diaphragmatic hernia who survived and those who did not survive, at >28-weeks fetal MRI Fig. 4 Scatter plot and regression lines of the z-scores of the anteroposterior (AP) vermian dimensions versus the observed-to-expected total lung volume (o/eTLV) in the entire cohort of fetuses with congenital diaphragmatic hernia Fig. 5 Scatter plot and regression lines of the z-scores of the transverse (TR) cerebellar diameter versus the observed-to-expected total lung volume (o/eTLV) in the entire cohort of fetuses with congenital diaphragmatic hernia Blue circle: <28 weeks; Red plus: >=28 weeks Table 3 Z-score values of brain morphometry in fetuses with congenital diaphragmatic hernia and had MRI at <28 weeks and > 28 weeks of gestation, in survivors and non-survivors Brain morphometry Gestational age Survivor z-scores mean + SD Non-survivor z-scores mean + SD t -test P -value Fronto-occipital diameter <28 weeks −0.03±1.66 0±1.55 0.95 > 28 weeks 0.01±1.30 −0.03±1.46 0.93 Brain biparietal diameter <28 weeks −0.99±1.69 −0.52±1.48 0.35 > 28 weeks −0.67±1.77 −0.20±1.40 0.33 Bone biparietal diameter <28 weeks −0.29±1.55 −0.15±1.00 0.73 > 28 weeks 0.09±1.56 0.02±1.33 0.88 Transverse cerebellar diameter <28 weeks 0.33±0.97 0.16±0.94 0.55 > 28 weeks 0.01±1.27 −0.15±1.17 0.66 Anteroposterior cerebellar vermis <28 weeks −0.61±1.07 −0.78±1.09 0.60 > 28 weeks −0.73±1.50 −1.91±1.74 0.02* Craniocaudal cerebellar vermis <28 weeks −0.05±0.92 −0.02±1.47 0.92 > 28 weeks −0.45±1.71 −0.23±1.69 0.67 Anteroposterior pons <28 weeks −0.87±1.44 −1.27±1.31 0.35 > 28 weeks −0.81±1.16 −0.89±1.08 0.82 SD standard deviation * P -value <.05 is significant
Discussion
In this study, we provide a detailed assessment of brain growth and injury in congenital diaphragmatic hernia in survivors and non-survivors. Enlarged extraaxial spaces in the third trimester was the most common finding irrespective of postnatal survival, and this finding was similar in distribution among survivors and non-survivors. Enlarged extraaxial spaces in the fetus are of unclear etiology but could be related to venous hypertension. Previous work in animals and infants on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has suggested a role of venous hypertension in the enlarged extraaxial spaces in CDH [ , , , , , ]. In a previous study, we discovered enlarged extraaxial spaces to be the most common intracranial finding in infants with CDH, especially when associated with ECMO [ ]. However we also identified that postnatal enlarged extraaxial spaces were associated with enlarged extraaxial spaces in utero in this population [ ], suggesting that it is not exclusively postnatal ECMO that plays a role in the extraaxial space enlargement in CDH. Enlarged extraaxial spaces are also present in fetuses with congenital heart disease, attributed to delayed maturation and altered cerebrospinal fluid dynamics [ ]. Studies showing decreased right and left heart measurements in fetuses with CDH raise the possibility of some degree of cardiac compression by the diaphragmatic hernia, which might be a cause of impaired central venous return and enlarged extraaxial spaces [ , , ]. Future research could further study this association of prenatal cardiac compression in CDH and impairment of central venous return.
In this study, we identified a weak but significant correlation of transverse-cerebellum measurement with o/eTLV. We are unclear of the clinical significance of this finding, and it is possible that this finding is stochastic. Few studies have explored cerebellar dimensions in the healthy fetus and those with underlying abnormalities. Prenatal ultrasound studies show that the transverse-cerebellum dimension is proportionate to gestational age and is unaffected by gender, or the presence of intrauterine growth retardation [ , , ]. Interestingly, another population that has shown decreased transverse-cerebellum dimension is the donor twin with twin–twin transfusion syndrome [ ]. In this group, the decreased cerebellar diameter persisted even after correcting for growth restriction.
In our study, we also found that the anteroposterior vermian dimensions were smaller in non-survivors compared to survivors in the third trimester and positively correlated with o/eTLV. Normally, the AP-vermis dimensions increase linearly with advancing gestational age [ ]. AP-vermis dimensions were found to be small also in the donor twins in twin–twin transfusion syndrome as compared to recipient twins and normal controls [ ]. While we might hypothesize that altered in utero blood flow could be a contributing factor for impaired vermian growth in these populations, this finding is not replicated in other systemic conditions affecting systemic blood flow. For example, a large study of 144 fetuses with congenital heart disease revealed only 3 infants with inferior vermian hypoplasia, but no other cerebellar abnormalities in the entire cohort [ ]. In our study cohort, we did not identify specific foliation abnormalities of the cerebellum or cerebellar vermis. We are unsure of the cause and clinical significance for the smaller AP-vermis dimensions in fetuses with CDH. A larger study with developmental follow-up might be necessary to fully understand the impact of these cerebellar changes on neurodevelopmental outcome.
Our previous study and other studies of brain imaging in infants with CDH have shown findings of intraventricular hemorrhage, ventriculomegaly, white matter injury, delayed sulcation and cerebral and cerebellar hemorrhage [ , , , , ]. However with this study we show normal morphometry of the cerebral hemispheres and lack of major parenchymal abnormalities up to the late third trimester, even in non-survivors (with more severe CDH). Brain injury in infants with CDH might therefore be related to birth or postnatal brain injury in the neonatal intensive care unit as well as during surgical repair of the CDH [ , , , , ]. This would imply that robust neuroprotective mechanisms could be employed in this period to decrease the severity of brain injury. In addition, with the promise of intrauterine treatment of lung hypoplasia for CDH (fetoscopic intratracheal balloon occlusion), it is valuable to know that even in presumed severe CDH, there is no increased proportion of brain injury.
Our study’s major limitations are the retrospective nature and small sample size. In the population of infants with CDH that died, we did not examine the autopsy report to assess for additional information for perinatal death. It is possible that other comorbid factors accounted for cerebellar growth disturbances in our population with CDH. We did not assess for intrauterine growth restriction; however in the absence of cerebral morphometric differences, isolated cerebellar morphometric differences suggest that this process is distinct from cerebral pathology. In addition, it is not clear whether these cerebellar deficiencies can lead to some of the developmental disabilities identified in children with a history of CDH [ , ]. Nevertheless the results of our study suggest that it is important to assess the cerebellum and extraaxial spaces in addition to other structures in fetuses with CDH on prenatal imaging.
Conclusion
Enlargement of the extraaxial spaces is the most common intracranial finding on fetal MRI in CDH in survivors and non-survivors. Severity of lung hypoplasia in CDH is associated with fetal cerebellar and vermian dimensions, especially in the third trimester. There are normal biometry of the supratentorial brain and lack of major brain parenchymal abnormalities on third-trimester fetal MRI in surviving and non-surviving children with CDH.