Introduction
The upper gastrointestinal (GI) series is routinely used in children to assess the esophagus, stomach and proximal small bowel [ ]. In the outpatient setting, it is often requested to diagnose structural abnormalities in children with abdominal pain, failure to thrive and vomiting [ , , , , , , , , ]. The upper GI series may also be obtained before gastrostomy tube placement, although recent reports advocate eliminating this practice since most studies are normal [ , , , ].
The incidence of anatomical abnormalities diagnosed on upper GI series in the non-emergent, outpatient setting is low [ , ]. In a study of 344 healthy infants ranging from 1 month to 1 year of age with chronic vomiting (defined as vomiting for more than 30 consecutive days), Simanovsky et al. [ ] found only a 0.6% incidence of an underlying anatomical abnormality. Despite this, upper GI series are still frequently requested in otherwise healthy children with abdominal pain, vomiting and failure to thrive. Aside from its low diagnostic yield, an upper GI series costs the health care system, may lead to the identification of incidental findings that prompt further potentially unnecessary diagnostic studies and exposes children to ionizing radiation [ , ]. While the effective dose of a upper GI series is low (0.33 to 0.79 mSv using a digital pulse fluoroscopy system), dose varies and may be considerably higher than expected as not all upper GI series are performed by dedicated pediatric radiologists, and not all fluoroscopic equipment is optimized for dose [ ]. This study sought to determine the incidence of a positive finding on upper GI series in children younger than 18 years old in the outpatient, non-emergent setting to identify clinical indications correlating with the highest diagnostic yield.
Materials and methods
This study was performed at three separate institutions. Institutional review board approval was obtained from each institution. Using the PowerScribe 360 Montage Search (Nuance Communications, Inc., Burlington, MA) and McKesson PACS (Change Healthcare, Nashville, TN), a list of all pediatric (up to age 18 years) outpatient upper GI series performed between October 2015 and October 2017 from each institution was compiled. The upper GI series results were compared with patient demographics obtained from each hospital’s electronic medical records. These included age and gender, clinical symptoms, duration of symptoms, indication for the study, medical comorbidities, prior surgeries and ordering physician specialty (general pediatrician versus pediatric gastroenterologist). Atopic conditions were specifically recorded due to the association with gastrointestinal conditions, such as eosinophilic esophagitis/gastroenteritis, milk protein allergy and reflux [ ].
Only examinations that included evaluation of the esophagus, stomach and duodenum were included in the study; all esophagrams were excluded. Subjects were also excluded from the study if they had a previous history of GI disease (including inflammatory bowel disease or Hirschsprung disease) or surgery, if the upper GI series was requested in preparation for gastrostomy tube placement, if there was insufficient patient history in the chart, or if the upper GI series was incomplete. Since positive gastric and duodenal findings accounted for only 16% of positive cases, subjects with upper GI series findings of the stomach and duodenum were grouped for the analysis.
At all institutions, examinations were performed by radiology residents (postgraduate year [PGY]-2 to PGY-5) under direct supervision by attending radiologists or by the attending radiologists alone. Pulse fluoroscopy with last screen capture was routinely used at all institutions at a rate of 3–4 frames per second. Full exposures were not typically obtained. Doses and fluoroscopy time for each case were not routinely recorded at any of the institutions and are therefore not reported. The results of each study were recorded based on the final radiologic report, which had been generated by a board-certified, subspecialty trained pediatric radiologist at the time of the upper GI series.
The protocol used for each upper GI series performed was institution specific. Patients were NPO (nil per os ) before the examination. At all institutions, the esophagus was evaluated with the patient in a lateral decubitus position; frontal views of the esophagus were also obtained at two of the three institutions. At all institutions, frontal supine and lateral decubitus projections of the stomach and duodenum were evaluated to document gastric emptying and to determine the location of the duodenal-jejunal junction. No institution recorded or had a preset volume of oral contrast to be administered, and the degree of gastric distension with oral contrast was variable. None of the institutions required specific maneuvers to elicit gastroesophageal reflux and none required a specific time frame to evaluate for reflux. At all institutions, esophageal dysmotility (defined as poor peristalsis or presence of tertiary contractions), pylorospasm and gastric emptying were determined by subjective evaluation.
The Mann-Whitney U and Kruskal-Wallis H tests were used to compare continuous variables and the Fisher exact test was used to compare categorical variables. Multinomial logistic regression models were built to assess confounding variables and relevant interactions, using backward stepwise regression to determine independent predictors for positive upper GI findings. Nonordinal categorical variables, such as research site, were added as dummy variables. Statistical analysis was performed using Stata version 12.1 (StataCorp., College Station, TX). A two-tailed P- value <0.05 was required for statistical significance.
Results
Of 1,267 patients who underwent upper GI series in the outpatient setting, 720 were included in the study. Of the excluded patients, 439 had a medical or surgical history of gastrointestinal disease, 46 underwent upper GI series before gastrostomy tube placement, 44 had an esophagram only, 14 had insufficient patient history in the chart, 3 had an incomplete upper GI series performed and 1 underwent 2 upper GI series.
Patient characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . Subjects ranged in age from 4 weeks to 18 years (median: 2 years), were 54% male, experienced symptom durations ranging from 1 to 313 weeks (median: 26 weeks) and 19% had underling atopic conditions. Fifty-three percent of the subjects undergoing upper GI series presented with a single symptom while 47% described more than one symptom. The most common indication for upper GI series was non-bilious vomiting ( n =444, 62%), reflux symptoms (spitting up, reflux of food into the mouth after meals, burning chest pain and acidic taste in the mouth) ( n =204, 28%) and abdominal pain ( n =143, 20%). Eighty-one percent of the studies were requested by pediatric gastroenterologists and the remainder by general pediatricians. Table 1 Patient demographics by upper gastrointestinal series findings Normal (605) GER (78) Esophageal findings (19) Gastric or duodenal findings (18) P- value Age in years median (IQR) 2 (0.7–9) a,b 0.9 (0.3–4) 11 (1.2–16) a 1.3 (0.6–7) b <0.001 c Male % ( n ) 53% (322) 59% (46) 47% (9) 44% (8) 0.61 d Atopy (eczema, asthma, allergies, etc) % ( n ) 20% (118) 14% (11) 16% (3) 22% (4) 0.67 d Term birth ( n =387) % ( n ) 79% (252) 80% (37) 82% (9) 64% (7) 0.63 d Length of symptoms in weeks ( n =347) median (IQR) 26 (9–52) 13 (9–36) 20 (10–41) 26 (13–48) 0.73 c GER gastroesophageal reflux, IQR interquartile range a P <0.001 vs. GER, Mann-Whitney U test b P <0.05 vs. esophageal findings, Mann-Whitney U test c Kruskal-Wallis H test d Fisher exact test
The majority of studies ( n =605, 84%) were normal. Of the 115 studies with positive findings, 78 (68%) demonstrated gastroesophageal reflux (GER) alone. The results of the remaining 37 positive studies are listed in Table 2 , and consisted predominantly of findings related to the esophagus (19). Only one patient (age 8 months) had malrotation (without midgut volvulus), which was confirmed at surgery. Table 2 Positive upper gastrointestinal series findings grouped by the location of finding Esophageal ( n =19) Gastric ( n =13) Duodenal ( n =5) Aberrant right subclavian artery (8) Delayed gastric emptying (8) Malrotation without volvulus (1) Esophageal dysmotility (3) Hiatus hernia (2) Duodenal web (1) Achalasia (2) Pylorospasm (1) Duodenum inversum type II (1) Congenital distal esophageal ring (2) Gastritis (1) Superior mesenteric artery syndrome (1) Esophageal diverticulum (1) Bezoar (1) Wandering duodenum with normal cecal location (1) Compression by adenopathy (1) Hypopharyngeal web (1) Cricopharyngeal achalasia (1)
Of the 444 subjects presenting with non-bilious vomiting, 374 had a normal upper GI (84%) and 50 demonstrated GER alone (11%). Twenty patients (5%) had other upper GI findings, including delayed gastric emptying (5), aberrant right subclavian artery (4), esophageal dysmotility (2), hiatus hernia (2) and achalasia (2). Of the 26 subjects presenting with a history of bilious vomiting (median age: 6.5 years), upper GI series showed pylorospasm in 1, while the remainder of the studies were normal. Bilious vomiting was absent in the single case of confirmed malrotation without midgut volvulus.
Patients with GER on the upper GI series were significantly younger than those with a normal upper GI series (median: 0.9 years vs. 2 years) ( P <0.001) and those with upper GI findings unrelated to GER (median: 3 years) ( P <0.001). When other patient characteristics, including gender and presence of atopic condition (eczema, asthma, allergies), were evaluated, there was no difference between those with a normal upper GI series and those with positive upper GI findings. There was no significant difference in the incidence of positive or normal upper GI series based on whether the ordering physician was a general pediatrician or pediatric gastroenterologist ( P =0.37). The duration of patient symptoms was readily available in only a subset of patients, but was not significantly different across groups ( P =0.73).
Symptoms of reflux were a strong predictor of GER on upper GI series (Tables 3 and 4 ); 17% of 162 subjects with reflux symptoms had GER confirmed on upper GI series, 79% had a normal upper GI series and 4% had a positive upper GI with other findings including delayed gastric emptying (3), aberrant right subclavian (1), malrotation without volvulus (1) and esophageal dysmotility (1). Adjusting for the other variables, reflux symptoms of GER increased the risk of finding GER on upper GI by 2.2 times. Table 3 Clinical symptoms leading to the upper gastrointestinal (GI) series by upper GI findings % ( n ) Normal (605) GER (78) Esophageal findings (19) Gastric or duodenal findings (18) P- value ‡ Reflux symptoms 27% (162) 45% (35) 16% (3) 22% (4) 0.006 Weight loss 5% (33) 6% (5) 11% (2) 11% (2) 0.33 Failure to thrive 12% (72) 12% (9) 0% (0) 17% (3) 0.36 Bilious vomiting 4% (24) 1% (1) 0% (0) 6% (1) 0.48 Non-bilious vomiting 62% (374) 64% (50) 42% (8) 67% (12) 0.34 Abdominal pain 22% (130) 14% (11) 0% (0) 11% (2) 0.03 Dysphagia and/or foreign body sensation 18% (106) 19% (15) 47% (9) 11% (2) 0.02 Choking sensation 7% (44) 8% (6) 5% (1) 6% (1) 0.98 ‡ Fisher exact test GER gastroesophageal reflux Italics indicates statistical significance Table 4 Multinomial logistic regression model assessing independent predictors of upper gastrointestinal series outcomes Multinomial logistic regression with normal upper gastrointestinal (GI) series as base outcome a GER Esophageal finding Gastric or duodenal findings Relative risk ratio P- value Relative risk ratio P- value Relative risk ratio P- value Reflux 2.2 0.005 0.7 0.68 0.7 0.64 Dysphagia and/or foreign body sensation 1.6 0.15 3.3 0.02 0.6 0.55 Age (years) 0.9 0.03 1.1 0.03 1.0 0.84 Male 1.2 0.46 0.7 0.41 0.6 0.36 a adjusted for study site GER gastroesophageal reflux Italics indicates statistical significance
Patients with dysphagia and/or foreign body sensation after eating were more likely to have an positive upper GI series due to an esophageal findings compared to other upper GI findings (47% upper GI series with esophageal findings, 18% with a normal, 19% with GER and 11% with stomach or duodenal findings; P =0.019). These patients were also generally older, with a median age of 7 years, and had a 3.3-times increased risk of having a positive upper GI series related to the esophagus, adjusting for other variables in the model.
Adjusting for other variables, for each year the patient’s age increased, the risk of finding GER on upper GI series decreased by 1.1 times and the risk of having an esophageal finding on upper GI series increased by 1.1 times. No variables were significant independent predictors of a gastric or duodenal finding on upper GI series. Although abdominal pain was significantly more prevalent in subjects with normal upper GI series in univariate analysis ( P =0.007), after adjusting for other findings in multivariable regression, it was not found to be independently associated with upper GI findings.
Discussion
The majority of positive upper GI series in our study were due to GER in younger children presenting with symptoms of reflux, in whom abnormalities predisposing to reflux were sought. The high incidence of GER is not unexpected, as 70–80% of infants exhibit GER during their first 2 months of life [ ]. In 95% of cases, however, GER has been reported to resolve without intervention by 1 year of age, prompting upper GI series in children with persistent GER symptoms who are older than 1 year [ ]. Based on our findings of a median patient age of 2 years for a normal upper GI series, upper GI series should be avoided in otherwise healthy children younger than age 2, even in those with uncomplicated reflux symptoms.
Both increasing age and specific symptoms of dysphagia/foreign body sensation improved the diagnostic yield of the upper GI series. When cases of GER were excluded from our study group, most positive upper GI series were due to findings related to the esophagus, and symptoms were referable to the esophagus (specifically dysphagia and foreign body sensation). Anatomical and physiological findings in the esophagus diagnosed on upper GI series included aberrant right subclavian artery congenital distal esophageal ring, dysmotility, achalasia, and extrinsic esophageal compression. Additionally, the age of these subjects (median age: 11 years) was significantly higher than those with normal upper GI series (median age: 2 years) or those with upper GI series showing GER (median age: 11 months).
Only one subject in our study was diagnosed with malrotation (without midgut volvulus). This 8-month-old boy presented with reflux symptoms and dysphagia. Of note, the clinical history of bilious emesis was not a significant predictor of a positive upper GI series in our study. Of the 26 patients with bilious vomiting, only 1 had a positive finding on upper GI series and none demonstrated malrotation. It is likely that the term “bilious” was used incorrectly in this group. Not only was the median age of 6.5 years higher than would be expected for the presentation of malrotation/midgut volvulus, but all upper GI series were scheduled as outpatient studies despite the clinical history of bilious vomiting and none was performed emergently. True bilious vomiting in an infant or child is an indication for a prompt and immediate upper GI series to evaluate for malrotation/midgut volvulus [ , ].
The strengths of this study include the inclusion of a large number of patients across multiple institutions. However, the lack of standardization of imaging protocols across the three centers and the variability in experience of the radiologists performing the examination may alter the sensitivity for certain findings. Additionally, the study is limited by the subjective method of evaluating gastric emptying and esophageal motility, the retrospective design of the study and the reliance on often terse clinical notes to derive patient symptoms and characteristics. A prospective study might clarify subtle differences in patient symptoms and clinical presentation. However, due to the relatively few positive upper GI findings, it is unclear how much this would change the overall results. Although the sites from which the patients were recruited were adjusted for in regression models, inherent referral differences among centers may have resulted in selection bias.
This study sought to identify positive findings on upper GI series and did not determine whether the findings were responsible for the patients’ symptoms. Some of the findings identified, including aberrant right subclavian artery, duodenum inversum and wandering duodenum, may be considered incidental and may not have been responsible for the patients’ symptoms. However, while it is true that the majority of children with aberrant right subclavian artery (60–80%) are asymptomatic, a small percentage of patients describe dysphagia (dysphagia lusoria) [ ]. Additionally, duodenum inversum and wandering duodenum, may result in vague symptoms including nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and weight loss [ ]. The absence of clinical follow-up in this study is a limitation and could serve as a focus for a future study [ , ].
Conclusion
In this study, the diagnostic yield of the upper GI series was very low in non-emergent cases without prior medical or surgical GI diagnoses. Most positive studies were due to GER and only a small percentage demonstrated other findings. While the effective dose of an upper GI series is low using digital pulse fluoroscopy system, efforts to improve the yield of such exams are warranted [ ]. Potentially unnecessary tests add costs to the medical system, may lead to further diagnostic tests, and may result in discomfort, anxiety and missed school for patients and missed work for parents [ , ]. Diagnostic yield may be increased in older children with dysphagia and/or foreign body sensation to look for esophageal findings. In such cases, an esophagram alone may be a consideration to further reduce radiation exposure. We recommend that routine upper GI series in children with symptoms of uncomplicated GER who are clinically well and have no significant GI history be delayed to 2 years of age.