Introduction
Fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is rapidly becoming an indispensable tool in the diagnosis and management of complex fetal anomalies. However, the unpredictability of fetal movement can present challenges in obtaining diagnostic images, primarily by increasing scan times due to the need for repeat acquisitions. Historically, options to reduce motion primarily included patient coaching and maternal or fetal sedation [ , ]. Although the use of modern ultrafast MRI sequences such as single-shot fast spin echo and ultrafast gradient echo have significantly reduced acquisition times [ ], fetal motion still remains a major limiting factor in obtaining diagnostic quality images.
Some fetal imaging centers require mothers to fast or at least avoid caffeine before fetal MRI studies in an effort to reduce fetal motion. These restrictions have presumably been suggested by studies detailing the stimulatory effects of caffeine and glucose in the body. However, there is no literature describing the efficacy of limiting such substances for fetal MRI exams. The objective of this study is to define associations between specific foods and beverages consumed the morning of a fetal MRI exam and the severity of fetal motion during the subsequent MRI. Determining if such associations exist may help define the utility of dietary restrictions before fetal MRI.
Materials and methods
Institutional review board approval was obtained for conducting a prospective survey of mothers undergoing fetal MRI studies. Upon arrival for their pre-MRI ultrasound (US) exam on the morning of a scheduled MRI, patients were given an open-ended questionnaire asking for details regarding their intake before arrival. Questions included “What did you eat for breakfast this morning?,” “Did you have any of the following beverages: Coffee, Soda, Juice?,” and “What time did you eat breakfast?” An open-ended questionnaire approach was used to encourage patients to more fully describe their meals and not limit their responses to preselected categories. Patients were not given any prior dietary instructions and were not informed that they would be given this survey until they arrived in the department. The questionnaire was collected by the US technologist and results were blinded from the technologist who would later conduct the MRI exam. After the MRI study, which immediately followed the US examination, the MRI technologist subjectively recorded a score for the exam based on a 3-point scale, in which: 1=much less motion than normal, 2=average fetal motion and 3=much more motion than average. Only MRI exams performed by our institution’s most senior MRI technologist, who had 9 years of fetal MRI experience at the start of the data collection period, were included in the study. The only requirement for exclusion was having an illegible or blank questionnaire form. Responses were included even if they did not specify the exact time that the meal took place.
A total of 228 patient encounters from September 2013 to May 2015 met the inclusion criteria. Preliminary data showed an average MRI exam time of approximately 38 min, with a range from 20 min to 67 min. Patients were all scanned on an Ingenia 1.5-T magnet (Philips Medical Systems, Best, Netherlands) using either body or cardiac coils. Patients were positioned in supine or left lateral decubitus positions depending on the mother’s preference. Although obtained sequences varied based on indication, a standard MR protocol included balanced steady-state free precession (bSSFP) localizers, single-shot fast spin echo (SSFSE) T2 and bSSFP large field of view sequences for the uterine environment, and SSFSE T2, bSSFP, and gradient-recalled echo T1 sequences for the fetus. Additional diffusion-weighted imaging, echo-planar imaging and dynamic sequences were obtained depending on the indication.
Questionnaire responses were sorted into the categories of beverages, foods, macronutrients and fasting state for the purpose of statistical analysis. Within these major categories, a total of 15 specific item categories were created. The “beverages” category consisted of milk, fruit juice, other sweetened beverages, coffee (not including decaffeinated coffee), soda (not including decaffeinated soda) and tea. The “foods” category consisted of eggs, cheese, meat, sweetened cereals and whole grain. The “macronutrients” category consisted of protein, carbohydrates and fat. Responses could then count toward multiple specific item categories at the authors’ discretion. For example, a response that included “sausage,” “biscuit” and “coffee” would count toward the items of coffee, meat, protein, carbohydrates and fat. One hundred ninety-one patients listed at least one food or drink item and were categorized into the “Had any food/drink” category to be compared against the 37 who indicated that they fasted.
For every item category, the means and standard deviations of the MR scores were calculated for the populations that, respectively, did and did not consume each particular item. In order to demonstrate similarity between these two groups, results were analyzed using a two-sided test for equivalence [ ] . In our test, statistical equivalence was claimed when the confidence interval of the difference in the mean MR scores between the two groups fell under the margin of 0.5. The null hypothesis was that the scores were not equivalent, with an alpha level of 0.05. A statistically significant difference would support the alternative hypothesis – that the MR scores between the two groups differed by less than 0.5 and could thus be considered equivalent. Due to the performance of multiple independent comparisons on a single data set, a Bonferroni correction was used to adjust the P values based on the number of comparisons made. To further analyze any nonequivalent results, a Wilcoxon rank sum test was performed to evaluate for the presence of a statistically significant difference, or superiority of one value over another. In this test, the null hypothesis was that there was no statistically significant difference, with an alpha level of 0.05.
The potentially confounding factors of meal timing and amniotic fluid volume were also investigated. The interval from mealtime to scan start time was first derived. Mealtime was obtained from the questionnaire (“What time did you have breakfast?”); scan start time was the time stamp of the earliest sequence, typically the bSSFP localizers, on the corresponding MRI exam. Of the 228 fetal MRI cases, 188 had accompanying mealtimes. Of the 40 cases without recorded mealtimes, 37 patients were fasting and 3 did not give a response to the survey question. A Kruskal-Wallis test was performed to determine if there was a statistically significant relationship between the mean meal-to-scan time and the MR score, with a null hypothesis that there was no relationship and a P -value of 0.05 considered significant. Studies without a mealtime response were not included in this portion of the analysis. Amniotic fluid index values, recorded as absolute numbers without correction for gestational age, were obtained from US reports accompanying the MRI. Of the 228 fetal MRI cases, 218 had accompanying quantitative amniotic fluid indices. The remaining 10 cases reported the amniotic fluid index as “normal” (without a numerical value) and thus were not included in the analysis. A Kruskal-Wallis test was performed to determine if there was a statistically significant relationship between the mean amniotic fluid index and the MR score, with a null hypothesis that there was no relationship and a p -value of 0.05 considered significant.
Results
Of the 15 item categories assessed, 11 comparisons were statistically significant for equivalence. Essentially, the results for each of these item categories suggested that the difference in mean MR score between the groups that did or did not consume the item in question was less than 0.5, thus rejecting the null hypothesis that consuming that item makes a difference in MR score (Table 1 ). For the four items in which the null hypothesis was not rejected (caffeinated soda, tea, sweetened cereals and whole grain), meaning a greater than 0.5 difference in MR score, equivalence between consumption and nonconsumption could not be established. Although deemed not equivalent, the Wilcoxon rank sum test did not show a statistically significant difference either. Being neither statistically equivalent nor statistically different, the consumption of these four items were thus determined to be inconclusive in regard to their impact on MR score. Table 1 Results of statistical analyses Category Specific item X Average MR score of patients who consumed X Average MR score of patients who did not consume X Equivalence study ( P -value) Superiority study* ( P -value) Beverages Milk 1.9±0.6 1.9±0.7 <0.05 – Fruit juice 2.0±0.8 1.9±0.7 <0.05 – Other sweetened 1.9±0.7 1.9±0.7 <0.05 – Coffee (caffeinated) 2.0±0.7 1.9±0.7 <0.05 – Soda (caffeinated) 1.9±0.7 1.9±0.7 1 0.16 Tea 1.6±0.7 1.9±0.7 1 0.29 Foods Eggs 1.8±0.8 1.9±0.7 <0.05 – Cheese 1.8±0.7 1.9±0.7 <0.05 – Meat 1.8±0.8 1.9±0.7 <0.05 – Sweetened cereals 1.9±0.7 1.9±0.7 0.06 0.98 Whole grains 2.0±0.7 1.9±0.7 0.08 0.32 Macronutrients Protein 1.9±0.7 1.9±0.7 <0.05 – Carbohydrates 1.8±0.8 1.9±0.7 <0.05 – Fat 1.8±0.7 1.9±0.7 <0.05 – Fasting/non-fasting Had any food/drink 1.8±0.8 1.9±0.7 <0.05 – *Only performed if not statistically significant for equivalence
Regarding the additional factors analyzed, average meal-to-scan time did not have a significant association with MR score (Table 2 ). Although higher mean amniotic fluid indices correlated with higher MR scores, as expected based on anecdotal evidence, the association was not statistically significant (Table 3 ). Table 2 Meal-to-scan time and MR score Variable Score 1: Less motion ( n =62) Score 2: Average motion ( n =88) Score 3: More motion ( n =38) P -value Meal-to-scan time (hours) 3.2 (±1) 3.2 (±1.1) 3.3 (±1) 0.57 Table 3 Amniotic fluid index and MR score Score 1: Less motion ( n =72) Score 2: Average motion ( n =105) Score 3: More motion ( n =41) P -value Amniotic fluid index (cm) 16.4 (±6.4) 16.9 (±12.5) 17.4 (±5.2) 0.39
Discussion
These results suggest that there is no significant difference in MR scores in patients consuming or not consuming 11 of 15 items. Of the remaining four food categories, there was no significant association with increased motion. In mothers who had breakfast, there was no significant effect of meal-to-scan time on motion. Amniotic fluid indices did correlate positively with motion, as expected from anecdotal experience and prior studies [ ], although the difference was not statistically significant.
An informal survey of members of the Society for Pediatric Radiology’s Fetal Imaging Committee revealed that there is no established standard practice regarding maternal dietary restrictions before fetal MRI (personal communication). While many centers do not place any dietary restrictions or give any recommendations to mothers before MRI, an almost equal number of centers do advise against or prohibit caffeine intake. A much smaller number of centers require mothers to fast. Such limitations seem to be based on anecdotal experience, though studies in fetal medicine have suggested that maternal caffeine intake can result in increased fetal heart rate variation and increased fetal arousal [ , ]. However, this study did not find a significant association between caffeine and fetal motion. Blood glucose levels were not directly evaluated on this study. Similarly, the association between increased maternal blood sugar levels and increased fetal activity has been described in the literature [ ]. Specifically, sweetened cereals and whole grains are foods with high glycemic indices and have been shown to cause postprandial increases in blood glucose [ ]. Again, neither high-sugar foods nor shorter meal-to-scan times, both of which would presumably increase blood glucose levels, were associated with increased fetal motion.
While these results would suggest that diet and meal timing do not play a meaningful role in fetal motion at the time of MRI, limitations of the study design may have prevented detection of any associations. In addition to the limitations of recall and nonresponse bias inherent in a survey study, the open-endedness of the questions required the authors to apply a subjective method in assigning responses into their respective categories, without knowing specific nutrition facts or ingredients of the self-reported foods and beverages. Additionally, self-reporting biases by mothers may have resulted in underreporting of some foods. Future studies may consider a randomized prospective study design with patients assigned to consume specific foods while avoiding others, to limit the potentially confounding effect of having multiple different item types in one meal.
MR score consistency is subjective. Technologist experience is highly variable among institutions, and there may even be day-to-day differences in assessing degree of motion from every individual technologist. However, because the technologist at the authors’ facility is given discretion in determining the need for reacquisition of motion-degraded images before radiologist review, the authors believe it is most appropriate that the technologist grade motion for purposes of the study. While having a radiologist act as an additional scorer of fetal motion was considered, this option was not pursued due to inconsistency in staffing, with three staff fetal MR radiologists rotating through the department at any given time. Given that the radiologist provides final approval for all images and is allowed to request repeat sequences as deemed necessary, this would introduce an additional layer of subjectivity to the scoring method. Objective markers of motion, such as duration of MR exam or total number of acquisitions, were considered for analysis but eliminated as too likely to be confounded by factors other than fetal motion. For example, the duration of an exam may be increased due to indication-specific protocol differences, limited patient cooperation and/or equipment delays. Similarly, the total number of acquisitions could also vary based on clinical indication or patient/technologist factors.
Another possible explanation for the results of this study is that there are factors other than diet, amniotic fluid index and timing that impact fetal motion. Perhaps individual maternal and fetal physiological factors have the greatest effect. Given that the goal of this study was to evaluate for associations on a broad scale, specific details regarding the patient population, such as gestational age, twin vs. singleton pregnancies, maternal conditions and medications, and underlying fetal conditions were not collected. Given that fetal MRI is nearly always performed for fetuses with known or suspected pathological conditions, future studies might attempt to control for the type of pathology being studied. Maternal factors, such as age, chronic or gestational maternal medical conditions, and external stressors, may also contribute to the degree of fetal motion. However, the analysis of such factors was beyond the scope of this study, which primarily aimed to identify, on a broad scale, the influence of diet on fetal motion.
Conclusion
For the purposes of reducing fetal motion, this study has found no evidence to support requiring mothers to fast or restrict their diets immediately before a fetal MRI study. Specifically, common anecdotally cited contributors to fetal motion (such as caffeine and high sugar foods such as sweetened soda, sweetened cereals and whole grains) did not show a significant association. Additionally, neither the timing of the meal nor the volume of amniotic fluid showed a statistically significant association with fetal motion, although higher amniotic fluid volumes did positively correlate with higher motion scores. Due to the confounding factors in measuring fetal motion and the inherent difficulty in quantitatively assessing the contents of a meal, further studies to investigate the effects of maternal diet using a prospective, randomized approach would be difficult but could uncover associations to guide future recommendations.