Introduction
The assessment of treatment response in the setting of cancer therapy is a mainstay of neuroimaging. Clinical decision-making in this setting is predominantly guided by the radiologic evaluation, preferentially MR imaging. Specifically, response and progression endpoints rely on MRI, which can be difficult to interpret with treatment-related changes and pseudoprogression/pseudoresponse.
Pseudoprogression was initially described in adult gliomas in 2007 as a radiologic phenomenon mimicking tumor progression, where treatment-related changes initially suggestive of disease progression on MR imaging resolve or stabilize over time [ , , ]. Radiologically, pseudoprogression demonstrates a transient increase in size of contrast enhancement, mimicking tumor growth. It is considered part of a continuum of treatment-related change that is histologically distinct from both true tumor progression and more delayed changes related to treatment such as radiation necrosis, specifically associated with the combination of chemotherapy and radiation [ , ]. This is a phenomenon that has been almost exclusively described in adults with glioma.
Pseudoresponse is a term used to describe radiologic improvement without true biological response or clinical improvement in survival. This phenomenon is thought to be secondary to the normalization effect of anti-angiogenic agents on the permeability of leaky endothelium. Clinical trials using bevacizumab in recurrent gliomas have demonstrated a high response rate (up to 63%) based on imaging but without improved survival [ , ]. Furthermore, in addition to the pseudoresponse phenomenon in patients on anti-angiogenic therapy, the evaluating radiologist must be aware of the tendency of anti-angiogenic agents to promote progression of non-enhancing disease by presumed selection of invasive tumor capable of co-opting existing blood vessels without the need for tumor angiogenesis [ , ] (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Pseudoresponse with progression of non-enhancing disease in a 16-year-old girl with a glioblastoma multiforme on anti-angiogenic therapy. a–c Axial diffusion-weighted MR image ( a ), apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map ( b ) and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MR image ( c ) demonstrate a heterogeneous hypercellular tumor in the right temporal lobe with restricted diffusion ( arrow ). d–f Axial diffusion-weighted image ( d ), ADC map ( e ) and FLAIR image ( f ) demonstrate a second focus of hypercellular infiltrative tumor ( arrow ) distal from the dominant mass in the right parietal lobe with restricted diffusion. There was no associated enhancement on post-contrast imaging (not shown)
In adults, 20–30% of patients undergoing concurrent chemoradiation therapy show size increase in an enhancing lesion within the first 3 months. In children, the rates of pseudoprogression are similar, with 21% reported incidence, and in children with diffuse midline glioma (formerly diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma) receiving radiation therapy and temozolomide or immunotherapy, the pseudoprogression rate is reported at 19–24% [ , , ]. Of note, patients who developed pseudoprogression have been described as having improved survival secondary to a favorable correlation with methylguanine methyltransferase promoter status [ ].
Treatment-related changes have been categorized based on timing after radiation therapy as seen in Table 1 . Pseudoprogression can be considered a pathological continuum between acute post-radiation-therapy changes and radiation necrosis with pseudoresponse described in cases where antiangiogenic therapy is administered. In this review we highlight the challenges of tumor response assessment and provide advanced imaging techniques used in neuroradiology to address and solve some of these challenges. Table 1 Timing of radiotherapy-induced MRI changes Time interval Imaging findings Acute (weeks) Increased T2-weighted/FLAIR hyperintensity secondary to increased edema Subacute (weeks to 3 months) Increased enhancement with our without increased T2-weighted/FLAIR hyperintensity Late (>3 months to years) New enhancing lesion representing a pseudo-mass secondary to radiation, no associated significant mass effect; MR spectroscopy shows overall decreased metabolites with large lipid/lactate peak FLAIR fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
Pseudoprogression versus true progression imaging analysis
Perfusion magnetic resonance imaging
Before reviewing the various imaging techniques used to assess progressive disease versus pseudoprogression, we discuss the physiological/histological differences between tumor- and treatment-related changes. Both treatment-related changes and progressive disease can look similar on conventional MRI sequences, demonstrating an enlarging, enhancing mass; however the underlying histology is distinct. Recurrent gliobastoma multiforme and other high-grade gliomas are characterized by vascular proliferation, whereas radiation necrosis results in decreased microvascular density and capillary perfusion secondary to endothelial and small-vessel injury [ ]. Additionally, recurrent/progressive tumor is further characterized by increased cellularity [ ]. Alternatively, pseudoprogression is not characterized by increased cellularity but rather results from a robust inflammatory response causing increased blood–brain barrier permeability, manifesting on MR imaging as increased contrast enhancement.
Advanced imaging techniques such as perfusion imaging can be used to differentiate treatment-related response from progressive disease, and these are summarized in Table 2 . The types of perfusion imaging include dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion and dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion as well as arterial spin labeling. Table 2 Summary of advanced imaging findings for progression and pseudoprogression Advanced imaging technique Progression Pseudoprogression Dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion Increased relative cerebral blood volume Unchanged relative cerebral blood volume Dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion Increased k trans and initial area under the curve Unchanged k trans and initial area under the curve Arterial spin labeling Increased cerebral blood flow Unchanged cerebral blood flow Diffusion-weighted imaging/apparent diffusion coefficient Decreased apparent diffusion coefficient Increased apparent diffusion coefficient Magnetic resonance spectroscopy Increased choline/creatine or choline/N-acetylaspartate Decreased overall metabolite concentrations, especially of choline and N-acetylaspartate
Dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion is a functional imaging technique used to assess tumor angiogenesis. Dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion is used to estimate vascular density with vascular volume and flow [ ] by exploiting the susceptibility-induced signal loss caused by paramagnetic contrast agents on T2-weighted images. Gadolinium-containing contrast agent is intravenously injected with rapid repeated imaging of the brain performed during the first pass. This leads to a series of images with the signal in each voxel representing intrinsic tissue T2 and T2* signal attenuated by susceptibility-induced signal loss proportional to the amount of contrast primarily in the microvasculature. A signal intensity-time curve is then generated, from which perfusion parameters including relative cerebral blood volume and flow can be calculated [ , ].
Relative cerebral blood volume is used to measure tissue vasculature under interrogation and provides information regarding vascular density. It is a technique often used clinically to monitor angiogenesis and response to treatment. Multiple studies of high-grade glial neoplasms have reported higher values of relative cerebral blood volume within contrast-enhanced regions of recurrent glioblastoma multiforme as compared to radiation necrosis [ , , ]. Although these studies predominantly focus on adults with glioblastoma multiforme, similar findings of elevated relative cerebral blood volume have been reported in children with progressive high-grade tumor, specifically pertaining to differences in permeability of the tissue as predicted by dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion in cases of angiogenesis and anti-angiogenic agents [ ]. Progressive disease in the setting of high-grade gliomas is dependent on the promotion of angiogenesis (angiogenic switch), which ultimately helps produce vessels that are leakier than normal vessels. Therefore techniques such as dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion can be used to track changes in permeability and vascular density of progressive tumor in the setting of anti-angiogenic treatment [ , , ]. Both pseudoprogression and radiation necrosis have similar findings on dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion, with lower relative cerebral blood volume as opposed to progressive tumor [ ] (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion pseudoprogression in a 19-year-old woman with anaplastic astrocytoma. a, b Axial T1-weighted post-contrast MR image with fat saturation before ( a ) and after ( b ) radiotherapy demonstrate appearances of enhancing nodule in the left occipital lobe with central necrosis after radiation therapy ( arrow ). c Axial T1-weighted post-contrast MR sequence with fat saturation demonstrates interval enlargement of the mass at follow-up ( arrow ). d, e Dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion map ( d ) and time curves ( e ) with regions of interest placed in the mass seen in ( c ) and in the contralateral normal white matter demonstrate no elevated relative cerebral blood volume in the enhancing nodule, consistent with pseudoprogression (relative cerebral blood volume=0.64). f Follow-up image demonstrates decreased conspicuity of the enhancing mass ( arrow )
Many studies have examined cutoff values for mean relative cerebral blood volume to differentiate pseudoprogression from progressive disease. Although these studies have demonstrated a trend among pseudoprogression patients to have lower relative cerebral blood volume as compared to patients with progressive disease, set cutoff values have not been determined [ ]. These values have varied considerably in the literature with varying sensitivity and specifity, suggesting that although the trend is helfpul to determine a standard cutoff value for relative cerebral blood volume, it is not reliable and additional sequences or modalities might be needed to decipher between pseudoprogression and progressive disease.
In addition to lack of standardized cutoff values, dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion poses other limitations. In children, there are technical issues with gadolinium-based perfusion methods. These techniques require power injection with large-bore intravenous access, which is difficult in children [ ]. Additionally, dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion technique is more sensitive to susceptibility effects, which can become problematic in people with hemorrhagic tumors or dental hardware, often more commonly seen in children. Taking these limitations into consideration, the sensitivity and specificity for differentiating pseudoprogression from tumor recurrence is estimated at 80–90% [ ], albeit this estimation mostly reflects findings in adults.
Dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion can be used to estimate vascular permeability by measuring contrast agent leakage through the blood–brain barrier. An intravenous contrast bolus is injected, and rapid repeated T1-W imaging is obtained. Regional increased signal occurs because of gadolinium concentration that ultimately depends on intravascular gadolinium and accumulation of gadolinium in the extravascular space. Dynamic contrast enhanced perfusion relies on pharmacokinetic modeling, which helps derive regional values that include k-trans (transfer constant), rate constant, fractional volume of extravascular–extracellular space, and fractional volume of the plasma space [ ].
Treatment response versus recurrent tumor evaluation with dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion relies on the vascular transfer constant, k-trans and the initial area under the curve. K-trans is dependent on blood flow and endothelial permeability, which helps predict the neoangiogenic nature of tumor microvasculature and vascular density. In recurrent tumor, both k-trans and the initial area under the curve are elevated as compared to treatment-related changes [ ]. Dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion is often used in the setting of anti-angiogenic therapy such as in people with high-grade gliomas receiving bevacizumab. In clinical trials of children with recurrent ependymomas and gliomas where dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion was used in the response assessment, k-trans demonstrated decreased permeability in children on anti-angiogenic therapy such as bevacizumab [ ]. With treatment response, there is presumed decrease in tumor neovasculature, reflected by decreased vascular permeability seen on dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion. Alternatively, if there is progressive disease, the permeability increases as a reflection of increased tumor neoangiogenesis and the k-trans is increased [ ]. The disadvantage of dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion technique over dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion is longer scan time. Additionally, as with all contrast-based perfusion techniques, large-bore intravenous access is required for power injection of the gadolinium contrast agent, a limitation that is a substantial problem in children [ ]. It is recommended that an 18- to 20-gauge intravenous needle be used to accommodate the high injection rate needed for the perfusion study [ ].
In addition to perfusion techniques that require an exogenous contrast agent such as dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion and dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion, arterial spin labeling offers an alternative perfusion technique that does not require an exogenous contrast agent. Arterial blood water is used as an endogenous tracer in arterial spin labeling to evaluate cerbral blood flow. This perfusion technique is particularly useful in the pediatric population because it does not require intravenous access, which is a major technical limitation with both dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion and dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion. There are three main categories of arterial spin-labeling pulse sequences: continuous arterial spin labeling, pseudocontinuous arterial spin labeling, and pulsed arterial spin labeling. Pseudocontinuous arterial spin labeling is at present the sequence of choice because of high labeling efficiency and ease of implementation for clinical scanners [ ]. Studies have demonstrated the utility of arterial spin labeling in differentiating high-grade from low-grade tumors [ , ], with higher-grade tumors demonstrating elevated cerebral blood flow (Fig. 3 ). Yeom et al. [ ] demonstrated that elevated cerebral blood flow was seen in high-grade pediatric brain tumors. Furthermore, Choi et al. [ ] explored the utility of arterial spin labeling in the assessment of treatment-related changes, with progressive tumor demonstrating elevated cerebral blood flow as compared to pseudoprogression/treatment-related change]. Arterial spin labeling can therefore serve as a useful tool to not only assess tumor grade at initial presentation, but also to follow patients after chemoradiation and determine treatment-related changes from true progressive disease, especially in the pediatric brain tumor population. Fig. 3 Arterial spin labeling of a high-grade tumor (glioblastoma multiforme) in a 16-year-old girl. a, b Axial diffusion-weighted image ( a ) and apparent diffusion coefficient map ( b ) demonstrate a hypercellular tumor with restricted diffusion ( arrows ). c Axial arterial spin-labeling map demonstrates increased cerebral blood flow within the tumor ( arrow )
Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is an MRI technique that maps the motion of water molecules in tissue. Theoretically water molecules are more restricted in their movement within cells and less restricted in extracellular space, and therefore the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) as measured by DWI reflects tumor cellularity. It is well known that ADC values are inversely correlative with tumor cellularity, with hypercellular high-grade tumor demonstrating lower ADC values [ , , ]. Researchers have examined the role of DWI in tumor assessment and response to treatment. Recurrent high-grade tumors have been shown to have decreased ADC values as compared to radiation necrosis [ , , , ] (Fig. 4 ). This is thought to be from cellular integrity degradation, inflammation and necrosis that are seen in the setting of treatment-related changes that ultimately increase diffusivity and ADC values (Fig. 5 ). Lee et al. [ ] compared people with true progressive disease to those with pseudoprogression and found higher signal intensity on DWI with lower ADC values of the truly progressive disease group, and either a rim of high signal intensity or no increased signal intensity on DWI of the pseudoprogression group on imaging performed within 2 months of chemoradiation. This is thought to be caused by hypercellularity of progressive tumor resulting in lower ADC values, as compared to pseudoprogression where there is inflammation that often results in higher ADC values [ , , , ]. Fig. 4 Diffusion-weighted imaging of progressive disease in a 7-year-old boy with anaplastic astrocytoma. a–d Axial diffusion-weighted MR image ( a ), apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map ( b ), fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image ( c ) and T1-weighted post-contrast MR image ( d ) demonstrate an infiltrative mass in the left thalamus with an enhancing hypercellular component ( arrow ). Of note, the ADC within the mass was 1.284 × 10 −3 mm 2 /s. e–h At follow-up, note enlargement of the hypercellular component ( arrow ) as seen on axial diffusion-weighted imaging ( e ) and ADC map ( f ), with corresponding increase in size and extent on FLAIR image ( g ) and post-contrast T1-weighted image ( h ), consistent with progressive disease. Of note, the ADC in the mass was 0.664 × 10 −3 mm 2 /s Fig. 5 Diffusion-weighted imaging of pseudoprogression in a 16-year-old girl with anaplastic astrocytoma. a–d Axial diffusion-weighted image ( a ), apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map ( b ), fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image ( c ) and T1-weighted post-contrast MR image ( d ) demonstrate a hypercellular nonenhancing expansile mass ( arrow ) of the brainstem. The ADC within the mass was 0.723 × 10 −3 mm 2 /s. Follow up axial DWI ( e ), ADC ( f ), T2/FLAIR ( g ) and T1 post contrast ( h ) sequences demonstrate increased diffusivity with increased T2/FLAIR and enhancement suggestive of pseudoprogression ( arrow ). Of note, apparent diffusion coefficient region of interest is 1.533 × 10 −3 mm 2 /s
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy is a widely available noninvasive imaging tool that provides information regarding the biochemistry and metabolism of tissue. Often obtained in conjunction with conventional MR imaging, MR spectroscopy can play an important diagnostic role in the multi-parametric MR imaging assessment of brain tumors. The methodology for acquiring 1 H MR spectroscopy includes single-voxel versus multi-voxel techniques. Single-voxel MR spectroscopy offers a good spectrum for a homogeneous lesion, with good quantification of the metabolites in a short time. Multi-voxel MR spectroscopy, also known as chemical shift imaging, includes multiple spectra in the same region, with less optimal spatial quantification from voxel bleeding but better spatial distribution. High-resolution multi-voxel MR spectroscopy chemical shift imaging is prefered over single-voxel in cases of tumor inhomogeneity as well as for the advantage of looking at not only the lesion, but the surrounding tissue [ ].
Hydrogen 1 ( 1 H) MR spectroscopy has often been used to provide a specific diagnosis for brain tumors in conjunction with conventional MRI. Information gained from MR spectroscopy has also been used to guide biopsies, predict histological aggressiveness/grade and assess response to treatment [ ]. The MR spectroscopy hallmark of brain tumors relative to normal tissue is increased choline and decreased N-acetylaspartate levels. In general, decrease in N-acetylaspartate and creatine levels with a simultaneous increase in choline, lactate and lipids corresponds to increase in histological grade. Very aggressive malignant tumors typically demonstrate high metabolic activity, which translates to depletion of energy stores resulting in decrease or absence of creatine, high levels of choline, high levels of lipids/lactate from necrosis and utilization of glycolytic pathways as well as lower levels of N-acetylaspartate.
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy is often used in combination with DWI as well as perfusion imaging as part of a multiparametric MRI approach to evaluate progression and treatment-related changes. For example, in the setting of increased enhancement, if there is no significant change in the metabolites, pseudoprogression is favored over true progression [ ] (Fig. 6 ). Furthermore, the increase in choline/creatine or choline/N-acetylaspartate ratios and decrease of N-acetylaspartate/creatine ratio in the treatment bed are highly suggestive of tumor recurrence/progressive disease rather than treatment-related change [ , ] (Fig. 7 ). Pediatric brain tumor metabolic profiles typically do not change significantly from diagnosis to first relapse and thus can aid in the confirmation of recurrent/progressive disease [ ]. Fig. 6 Magnetic resonance spectroscopy of pseudoprogression in a 14-year-old girl with a history of medulloblastoma treated 10 years prior. a–c Initial MRI at presentation. Axial T2-weighted MR image ( a ) and T1-W post-contrast MR image ( b ) demonstrate a mass ( arrow ) in the 4th ventricle. ( c ) MR spectroscopy confirmed an aggressive tumor profile with elevated choline, decreased creatine and N-acetylaspartate, and elevated lipids/lactate with a taurine peak that is seen in medulloblastomas. d–f MRI 10 years after end of therapy. Axial T2-weighted ( d ) and T1-weighted post-contrast ( e ) MR images demonstrate ill-defined hyperintensity and enhancement in the right brachium pontis ( arrow ). f MR spectroscopy is not consistent with a tumor profile, with significant residual N-acetylaspartate and no significant increase in choline or reduction in creatine. There are elevated lipids/lactate. g, h Six-week follow-up imaging. Axial T2-weighted ( g ) and T1-weighted post-contrast ( h ) MR images demonstrate significant decrease in T2-weighted hyperintense signal and enhancement ( arrows ), consistent with pseudoprogression/treatment-induced change Fig. 7 Magnetic resonance spectroscopy of true tumor progression in a 6-year-old boy with midline glioma H3K27M mutation (formerly known as diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma). a–c Initial tumor. Axial T2-weighted ( a ) and T1-weighted post-contrast ( b ) MR images demonstrate an infiltrative nonenhancing mass ( arrow ) in the pons. ( c ) MR spectroscopy demonstrated mildly decreased N-acetylaspartate and creatine, with mildly increased choline, suggestive of a low-grade glioma. d–f Follow-up imaging. Axial T2-weighted ( d ) and T1-weighted post-contrast ( e ) MR images demonstrate a new enhancing component ( arrow ) in the center of the tumor suggestive of progressive disease. MR spectroscopy demonstrated decreased N-acetylaspartate and creatine with increased choline and lipids/lactate as compared to the initial tumor, also suggestive of progressive disease. Pathology confirmed high-grade glioma within the enhancing component
Post-treatment changes can have characteristic metabolic profiles. Walecki et al. [ ] described elevation of the myoinositol-to-creatine ratio as one of the first indicators of post-radiation changes. Furthermore, studies have demonstrated that late radiation necrosis changes cause an overall decrease in all metabolites with the exception of lipids [ ]. Ultimately the assessment of treatment response and treatment-related changes depends on serial MR spectroscopy throughout the child’s treatment course. Alexander et al. [ ] reported an evolving metabolite pattern identified at week four of radiation therapy, with normalization of the choline-to-creatine and lactate-to-N-acetylaspartate ratios as markers for early treatment response [ ]. Quon et al. [ ] also endorsed serial MR spectroscopy for the evolution of post-treatment-related changes in people with high-grade glioma, demonstrating that changes in normalized choline levels at 2 months post radiation therapy are prognostic of overall survival. Specifically, they reported that people with greater than 40% reduction in normalized choline levels from 4 weeks to 2 months post radiation therapy had a worse overall survival than those without such a change [ ].
Multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging
Multiparametric MRI sequences have also been used to assess progressive disease versus treatment-related changes. Whereas perfusion techniques are used to assess tumor vascular density and diffusion technique is used to assess tumor cellularity, combining these two sequences can differentiate recurrent/progressive tumor from treatment-related changes. Prager et al. [ ] demonstrated increased specificity in deciphering progressive disease from pseudoprogression and radiation necrosis when both apparent diffusion coefficient and cerebral blood volume values were examined concurrently. Furthermore, Cha et al. [ ] also endorsed the utility of multiparametric MRI analysis of post-chemoradiation-therapy patients to determine true progression versus pseudoprogression, showing that the subtracted histogram mode using a multiparametric approach demonstrated higher sensitivity and specificity than the single parametric MR approach, with a sensitivity of 81.8% and a specificity of 100%. Additionally, a high mode of relative cerebral blood volume on the subtracted histogram was found to be the best predictor of true progression [ ]. Park et al. [ ] demonstrated similar findings with multi-parametric volume-weighted voxel-based clustering over single parametric methods to decipher true progressive disease from pseudoprogression. However, as stated in the discussion of perfusion imaging, most people in these referenced studies were adults, and there are limited data regarding the sensitivity and specificity of these techniques in children.
Emerging magnetic resonance imaging techniques
Additional MRI techniques on the horizon for the evaluation of pseudoprogression have also been recently described. Dual-contrast perfusion MRI in a single imaging session using ferumoxytol has been described in the evaluation of pediatric brain tumors. Ferumoxytol is an ultra-small superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle that remains intravascular at early time points and therefore has advantages over gadolinium-based contrast agents in identifying active tumor [ ]. This agent might be helpful in perfusion imaging to differentiate pseudoprogression from progressive disease.
An additional MRI-based technique known as applied parametric response mapping, formerly known as functional diffusion mapping, has also been described in the pediatric brain tumor population as a tool to differentiate progressive disease from pseudoprogression. Parametric response mapping is used to characterize temporal diffusion profiles with higher specificity for true tumor progression than mean ADC measurements or tumor volume measurements [ ]. This advantage is based on the concept that treatment-related changes cause heterogeneity of tissue with areas of edema and necrosis mixed with viable tumor. Parametric response mapping helps minimize the heterogeneity encountered to better detect true progressive disease [ ].
Radionuclide imaging
Alternative imaging techniques have been investigated for the evaluation of treatment response in neuro-oncology. Specifically, the role of nuclear medicine techniques for the evaluation of progression versus pseudoprogression in people with brain tumors is of interest recently, including positron emission tomography (PET)-based amino acid radiolabeled agents. As with the prior studies, most people in these reports are adults and there are limited data in children. Hatzoglou et al. [ ] found that fluorine-18-fludeoxyglucose PET/CT had similar predictive capabilities as compared to dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion in differentiating post-treatment changes from progressive tumor. Furthermore, pseudoprogression and radiation necrosis reportedly demonstrate decreased fludeoxyglucose avidity on PET/CT as compared to increased avidity in tumor [ ].
The use of amino acid tracers in nuclear medicine has also been described as a potentially helpful technique to differentiate treatment-related changes from progressive disease. Terakawa et al. [ ] reported that C 11 -methionine is better than fludeoxyglucose PET in differentiating radiation necrosis from tumor recurrence. Others have also reported the utility of amino acid tracers in differentiating between pseudoprogression and recurrent high-grade glial tumors, including L-tyrosine PET techniques [ ]. Additionally, 18F-DOPA PET has more recently shown an increased conspicuity of tumor compared with normal surrounding tissue [ ].
Pseudoresponse imaging analysis
T1 subtraction maps
Assessing progressive disease in the setting of antiangiogenic therapy is challenging because the identification of enhancing tumor burden is suboptimal because of the effect of the treatment. Antiangiogenic therapy targets vascular endothelial factor, normalizing the leaky blood vessels of the tumor, resulting in decreased conspicuity of enhancement on MR imaging (Fig. 8 ). This can happen within days after administration of antiangiogenic agents, with a significant decrease in enhancement detected in 25–60% of patients [ ]. This robust radiographic response, however, is related to the treatment effect and is not a true anti-tumor effect. Fig. 8 Pseudoresponse on antiangiogenic therapy in a 16-year-old boy with optic pathway glioma. a, b Axial T1-W post-contrast MR images before ( a ) and 2 months after ( b ) initiation of antiangiogenic therapy with bevacizumab demonstrate an enhancing mass ( arrows ) in the left temporal lobe with absence of enhancement at follow-up
Quantitative methods using voxel-to-voxel image subtraction of T1-weighted MR images can detect subtle residual enhancement that is not visualized on qualitative post-contrast images to identify true tumor extent in the setting of antiangiogenic therapy [ , ]. Ellingson et al. [ ] reported a significant improvement in the visualization of enhancing tumor volume using T1 subtraction maps with a correlation to progression-free survival as well as overall survival.
Magnetic resonance diffusion and perfusion
As stated, diffusion-weighted MR imaging is useful in identifying hypercellular tumor and true tumor progression. Therefore apparent diffusion coefficents and DWI are relatively unaffected by changes in permeability that can be seen with antiangiogenic therapy. Whole-tumor ADC histogram analysis is increasingly used for glioma analysis where there is known heterogeneity within the tumor. Studies have demonstrated a correlation with regions of lower ADC in an enhancing tumor with overall survival.
In addition to diffusion, perfusion imaging is often used in tumor assessment and can be helpful for antiangiogenic therapy response evaluation. Identification of early decrease in k-trans on dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion has been associated with improved progression-free and overall survival [ , ].
Radionuclide imaging
The use of radiolabeled amino acids has become more popular in brain tumor assessment. The most common PET tracer in oncology is 18 F-2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG). However in neuro-oncologic radiographic assessment, FDG poses limitations, the most noteworthy being the decreased signal-to-noise ratio for identifying brain tumors given the high rate of glucose metabolism of normal brain tissue [ ]. The two amino acids that have gained popularity recently for the evaluation of brain tumors are 18 F-labeled amino acid tracer and 18 F-labeled amino acid analogue. The increased uptake of these two agents in gliomas is believed to be secondary to increased transport via the amino acid transport system [ ]. Recent studies and case reports indicate that 18 F-labeled amino acid tracer and 18 F-labeled amino acid analogue PET are useful in detecting pseudoresponse and also have been used to predict favorable outcome in responders to bevacizumab [ , ].
Response assessment in immunotherapy
Challenges also arise in the setting of immunotherapy response assessment and there is very little literature in terms of imaging criteria, especially in children. Immunotherapy with checkpoint inhibitors, which have started becoming a critical component of clinical trials in the pediatric brain tumor population, conceptually harness the child’s immune system to attack the cancer cells, and therefore there is much more of an expected inflammatory response as compared to cytotoxic cancer therapy (Fig. 9 ). In 2015, the iRANO (Immunotherapy Response Assessment in Neuro-Oncology) working group developed a response criteria for patients receiving immunotherapy treatment for gliomas. The working group suggested that in people with early findings concerning for progressive disease (≥25% increase in size of enhancing tissue, development of new lesions, or substantial worsening T2/FLAIR signal abnormality extent) within the first 6 months of immunotherapy without neurologic deficits, the patient should be continued on the immunotherapy treatment. Follow-up imaging should be obtained up to 3 months after initial suspected radiographic progression [ ]. Fig. 9 Immunotherapy-related changes in a 14-year-old girl with anaplastic astrocytoma. a–c Axial T2-weighted MR image ( a ), fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image ( b ) and T1-weighted post-contrast image ( c ) demonstrate nonenhancing infiltrative tumor ( arrow ) in the optic tracts (subependymal nodule in the left lateral ventricle not shown). d–f Two-month follow-up after the initiation of immunotherapy with a checkpoint inhibitor. Axial T2-weighted image ( d ), FLAIR image ( e ) and T1-weighted post-contrast image ( f ) demonstrate increased signal hyperintensity and enhancement of all the known sites of disease ( arrows ), showing the expected inflammatory changes associated with immunotherapy without changes in the clinical exam
Limited studies have evaluated the imaging changes in immunotherapy. Vrabec et al. [ ] demonstrated changes in advanced imaging techniques in adults with glioblastoma multiforme receiving dendritic cell immuonotherapy. The group reported significant differences in maximum relative cerebral blood volume ratios and minimum ADC values in the enhancing tissue secondary to immune-therapy-mediated inflammation as compared to progressive tumor [ ]. Our understanding of these immune-related changes on conventional as well as advanced neuroimaging is improving as more clinical trials become available.
Conclusion
In this review, we have discussed the challenges of treatment response assessment in children with brain tumors, including extensive discussion on imaging findings of pseudoprogression and pseudoresponse in pediatric neuro-oncology imaging, with a focus on advanced imaging techniques. The limitations and advantages of techniques such as perfusion, diffusion imaging as well as MR spectroscopy have been presented to increase awareness of these techniques in everyday clinical practice of radiologists. We hope this review can guide radiologists in deciphering between post-treatment changes and progressive tumor in their everyday practice.