Introduction
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is a post-remission treatment option for various types of pediatric malignancies, such as hematologic malignancy, high-risk neuroblastoma and brain tumor [ , ]. The beginning of the process of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is to administer a preparative regimen to create marrow space and to eliminate malignant cells [ ]. Carmustine (bis-chlorethylnitrosourea, BCNU) and cyclophosphamide (CPM) are drugs in the preparative regimen and are highly pulmonary-toxic agents [ , , , ]. To our knowledge, only sporadic radiologic descriptions of pulmonary injuries associated with BCNU and CPM have been found in the literature [ , , ]. This pulmonary injury of pediatric hematologic transplantation recipients might demand early diagnosis for optimal treatment because the response to steroids in pulmonary injuries is known to be effective [ ]. Moreover, children suffer from the complications longer than adults.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate radiologic findings of pulmonary injury following BCNU- and CPM-based preparative regimens for autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation in children.
Materials and methods
Patients
Our institutional review board granted approval for this study and waived the requirement for written informed consent. The diagnostic process of pulmonary injury following BCNU- and CPM-based preparative regimens was as follows: First, we identified exposure to BCNU- and CPM-based preparative regimens. Second, we identified new developments of symptoms and radiologic abnormalities after children received BCNU- and CPM-based preparative regimens. Third, we excluded other lung diseases [ , , ]. Figure 1 shows a flow chart of the study population. A total of eight children were included in the study. The preparative regimens for autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation at our institution were BCVAC (BCNU, CPM, etoposide and cytosine arabinoside) for children with leukemia and BEC (BCNU, etoposide and CPM) for children with lymphoma. The total cumulative dose of BCNU used in the BCVAC regimen was 450 mg/m 2 , and in the BEC regimen it was 150 mg/m 2 , in accordance with the protocols of our institution. BCNU administration was initiated 8 days (D-8) prior to the day of stem cell reinfusion (D-0). The total cumulative dose of CPM used in the BCVAC regimen was 50 mg/kg, and in the BEC regimen it was 1,500 mg/m 2 /d for 4 days, in accordance with the protocols of our institution. CPM administration was initiated 2 days (D-2) in the BCVAC regimen and 5 days (D-5) in the BEC regimen prior to the day of stem cell reinfusion (D-0). All children received prophylactic methylprednisolone to prevent pulmonary toxicity for 15 days, from 9 days before (D-9) and through 5 days (D+5) after stem cell reinfusion [ ]. Fig. 1 Flow chart of children included in the study. BCNU bis-chlorethylnitrosourea (carmustine), CPM cyclophosphamide
Imaging
Two pediatric radiologists with 6 years (KYJ) and 29 years (KWS) of clinical experience, respectively, reviewed the serial chest radiograph and chest CT scans with consensus. Evaluation of chest radiographic findings was conducted as follows. Reviewers evaluated the presence or absence of ground-glass opacity, consolidation and septal thickening. They also evaluated the distribution of ground-glass opacity, consolidation and septal thickening for upper and lower zonal predominance and bilaterality. The predominance was defined as a tendency to affect the upper or lower zone more strongly. If there was no clear predominance in distribution, reviewers recorded it as “even.” Reviewers recorded the presence and bilaterality of pleural effusion. They also evaluated the initial CT scan for the presence or absence of ground-glass opacity, consolidation, septal thickening, nodules, cysts, coexisting cysts and nodules, mosaic attenuation pattern and crazy-paving pattern [ ]. These radiologic terms are based on the “Glossary of Terms for Thoracic Imaging,” released by the Fleischner Society [ ]. The analysis of spatial distribution of ground-glass opacity and consolidation followed upper/lower zonal predominance, central/peripheral predilection, anterior/posterior predilection and bilaterality. Zonal predominance was defined as “upper” if most of the affected areas were above the carina, and “lower” if most of the affected areas were below the carina in the craniocaudal direction. Central or peripheral predilection was defined as “central” if the primary affected areas were in the central two-thirds of the lung on a transverse plane, and “peripheral” if the primary affected areas were in the peripheral third of the lung. Anterior/posterior distribution was defined as “present” if the primarily affected areas followed the anterior/posterior distribution, and “absent” if there was a lack of anterior/posterior distribution. Septal thickening was categorized as bilateral and with upper/lower zonal predominance. Reviewers also evaluated the presence, bilaterality and amount of pleural effusion. The amount of pleural effusion was visually categorized into three degrees based on the anteroposterior quartile of the hemithorax: 0–25% was referred to as “small,” 25–50% was “moderate” and more than 50% was “large” [ ].
CT images were displayed with a 1-mm thickness of axial images in the lung window setting, and a 3- to 5-mm thickness of axial images in the mediastinal window setting. If available, coronal images of the 2- to 3-mm thickness were also reviewed.
Results
Patients
All developed symptoms of fever ( n =7), dyspnea ( n =3) or cough ( n =2). Their symptoms presented alone or in combination. Fever was the most common symptom that presented alone ( n =4). Symptoms developed after a mean of 29 days (range, 18–42 days) after D-0. Symptoms developed after a mean of 37 days (range, 26–50 days) after the day of BCNU infusion (D-8), a mean of 24 days (20 and 28 days) after the day of CPM infusion in the BCVAC regimen (D-2) and a mean of 36 days (25–47 days) after the day of CPM infusion in the BEC regimen (D-5). All children came to the emergency room or an outpatient clinic of our institution on the day of symptom development except patient 3, who came 1 day later. None of the eight children had shown abnormality on chest radiographs prior to developing symptoms. They had no evidence of infection, cardiogenic edema or recurrence of malignancy. Patient characteristics are detailed in Table 1 . Patients 1 and 8 received bronchoalveolar lavage, and their results revealed no eosinophilia, neutrophilia, presence of malignant cells or infection. Patient 8 had bronchoalveolar lavage lymphocytosis and a low CD4/CD8 ratio. Patients 1 and 6 had aspiration targeting pleural effusion, but there was no evidence of malignancy or infection. Patient 4 underwent a lung biopsy to reveal infectious organisms. The pathological examination presented inflammatory cell infiltration and interstitial collagen deposits, and there was no evidence of either fungal or viral infection. The remaining four children did not receive invasive workups, such as bronchoscopy or lung biopsy, to confirm idiopathic pneumonia syndrome. All eight children had no other explainable objective causes for radiologic abnormality and symptoms. Thus, they were clinically diagnosed with pulmonary injury following BCNU- and CPM-based preparative regimen. One of the children (patient 8) received methylprednisolone treatment for clinicoradiologic aggravation, which the remaining seven children did not. Table 1 Clinical features of patients, dose of carmustine and cyclophosphamide, and time to development of symptoms Case no. Age/Gender Primary malignancy Regimen Cumulative dose of drug Chief complaints Days between drug infusion and development of symptoms Carmustine Cyclophosphamide Carmustine Cyclophos-phamide 1 12/F Lymphoma BEC 150 mg/m 2 6,000 mg/m 2 Fever 34 31 2 17/F Lymphoma BEC 150 mg/m 2 6,000 mg/m 2 Fever 50 47 3 5/F Leukemia BCVAC 450 mg/m 2 50 mg/kg Dyspnea 34 28 4 6/M Lymphoma BEC 150 mg/m 2 6,000 mg/m 2 Fever 28 25 5 14/M Lymphoma BEC 150 mg/m 2 6,000 mg/m 2 Fever, cough, dyspnea 45 42 6 17/M Lymphoma BEC 150 mg/m 2 6,000 mg/m 2 Fever, dyspnea 48 45 7 4/M Lymphoma BEC 150 mg/m 2 6,000 mg/m 2 Fever, cough 27 25 8 12/M Leukemia BCVAC 450 mg/m 2 50 mg/kg Fever 26 20 BCVAC carmustine, cyclophosphamide, etoposide and cytosine arabinoside, BEC carmustine, etoposide and cyclophosphamide, F female, M male
Radiologic studies
The initial chest radiograph was taken on the day of the child’s first visit for symptoms, when infection was suspected. The chest CT scan was performed for further characterization of abnormalities visible on initial chest radiographs; the as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA) principle was adhered to for all patients. Four children underwent a chest CT scan on the day of symptom development; the remaining four children received a CT scan after a mean interval of 3.5 days (range, 1–5 days). The time between the initial chest radiograph and the initial CT was 1 day on average (range, 0–5 days). Serial chest radiographs were taken for follow-up, and the outcomes of pulmonary parenchymal abnormality and pleural effusion were evaluated. The follow-up chest CT scan was performed in cases of sustained or aggravated clinicoradiologic findings despite conventional antibiotic treatment. A total of 28 chest CT scans (24 non-contrast scans, 4 contrast scans) were performed and each child received an average of 3.5 CT scans (range, 2–6 scans) during the acute episode. The delayed follow-up CT was performed in all patients after resolution of chest radiographic abnormalities. Sequelae were recorded based on follow-up CT scans performed before March 2016. The mean survey time of CT follow-up performed before January 2018 was 731 days (range, 31–1,405 days).
Initial chest radiograph findings
Initial chest radiograph findings are presented in Table 2 . All eight children showed bilateral ground-glass opacities (100%) on the initial chest radiograph; five of the eight children showed even distribution, and three of the eight showed lower zonal predominance. No child showed accompanying consolidation. Seven of the eight children (88%) showed bilateral septal thickening; five of these seven showed lower zonal predominance (Fig. 2 ) and two of these seven showed even distribution. Pleural effusion (bilateral) was seen in one child (13%). Table 2 Radiographic findings at initial presentation Case No. Initial chest radiographic findings Ground-glass opacity Consolidation Zonal predominance Septal thickening Pleural effusion 1 Diffuse No Bilateral, lower zonal predominance Bilateral, lower zonal predominance No 2 Diffuse No Bilateral, lower zonal predominance No No 3 Diffuse No Bilateral, even distribution Bilateral, lower zonal predominance No 4 Diffuse No Bilateral, even distribution Bilateral, lower zonal predominance No 5 Diffuse No Bilateral, even distribution Bilateral, even distribution Bilateral 6 Diffuse No Bilateral, lower zonal predominance Bilateral, lower zonal predominance No 7 Diffuse No Bilateral, even distribution Bilateral, lower zonal predominance No 8 Diffuse No Bilateral, even distribution Bilateral, even distribution No Fig. 2 A 6-year-old boy with lymphoma (patient 4) and fever. He had carmustine- and cyclophosphamide-based preparative regimen for autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. a The initial posteroanterior chest radiograph shows subtle diffuse ground-glass opacity evenly distributed in both lungs and septal thickening with lower zonal predominance. No pleural effusion was noted. b The initial axial chest CT scan demonstrates diffuse and inhomogeneous ground-glass opacity in both lower lobes. Septal thickening ( arrows ) and bilateral pleural effusions are also noted. Despite antibacterial and antiviral treatment, clinicoradiologic findings had aggravated. c On the follow-up posteroanterior chest radiograph after 6 days, the extent of ground-glass opacity has increased and consolidation has developed in the right lower lung field. Bilateral pleural effusions are also noted. d On the follow-up axial chest CT scan, multifocal patchy consolidations ( arrows ) have developed. The boy had a wedge resection to determine the pathological process; it revealed inflammatory cell infiltration, interstitial collagen deposit, and no evidence of infectious organisms
Initial CT findings
Initial chest CT findings are presented in Table 3 . All eight children showed ground-glass opacities (100%) on the initial CT scan; four of the eight children had multifocal patchy ground-glass opacities (Fig. 3 ); four of the eight children had diffuse ground-glass opacities with inhomogeneous attenuation (Fig. 2 ); all ground-glass opacities were bilateral (Figs. 2 and 3 ). Accompanying consolidation was seen in seven children (88%); all consolidation was bilateral (Figs. 2 and 3 ). Seven of the eight children (88%) showed a lower zonal predominance of ground-glass opacities (Figs. 2 and 3 ), and one child (13%) showed even distribution. There was no central/peripheral predilection or anterior/posterior distribution. Septal thickening was observed in seven children (88%); all cases were bilateral. Five of these seven children showed lower zonal predominance (Figs. 2 and 3 ), and two showed even distribution. Pleural effusion was seen in six children (75%) on CT scans; five of these six cases were bilateral (Figs. 2 and 3 ) and the remaining one was unilateral. Pleural effusion was small in each hemithorax in all children. There were no nodules, cysts, coexisting cysts and nodules, mosaic attenuation patterns or crazy-paving patterns. Table 3 Computed tomography findings at initial presentation Case No. Ground-glass opacity Consolidation Zonal predominance Septal thickening Pleural effusion 1 Inhomogeneously diffuse Multifocal acinar or lobular Bilateral, lower zonal predominance Bilateral, even distribution Bilateral Small amount 2 Multifocal patchy Multifocal acinar or lobular Bilateral, lower zonal predominance No Unilateral Small amount 3 Inhomogeneously diffuse Multifocal acinar or lobular Bilateral, lower zonal predominance Bilateral, lower zonal predominance No 4 Inhomogeneously diffuse Multifocal acinar or lobular Bilateral, lower zonal predominance Bilateral, lower zonal predominance Bilateral Small amount 5 Inhomogeneously diffuse Multifocal acinar or lobular Bilateral, even distribution Bilateral, even distribution Bilateral Small amount 6 Multifocal patchy Multifocal acinar or lobular Bilateral, lower zonal predominance Bilateral, lower zonal predominance Bilateral Small amount 7 Multifocal patchy No Bilateral, lower zonal predominance Bilateral, lower zonal predominance No 8 Multifocal patchy Multifocal acinar or lobular Bilateral, lower zonal predominance Bilateral, lower zonal predominance Bilateral Small amount Fig. 3 A 12-year-old boy with leukemia (patient 8) and fever. He had carmustine- and cyclophosphamide-based preparative regimen for autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. a The initial axial CT scan reveals multifocal patchy ground-glass opacities ( arrows ) in both lungs with lower zonal predominance and bilateral pleural effusion. b On the follow-up axial CT scan after 2 days, the extent of ground-glass opacity has increased. Multifocal consolidations ( arrows ) and multiple septal thickenings are noted in both lungs. In addition, the amount of bilateral pleural effusion has increased. After this CT examination, the patient was managed with methylprednisolone after the diagnosis of pulmonary injury following BCNU and CPM-based preparative regime. c Minimal subpleural reticulations ( arrows ) are noted in both lower lobes on the follow-up axial CT scan after 3 months. Other findings have disappeared
Follow-up radiologic findings
Follow-up radiographic findings are presented in Table 4 . At follow-up, the time between the initial chest radiograph and follow-up chest radiograph showing resolution of pulmonary parenchymal abnormality was 15±11 days (range, 4–41 days). Radiologic aggravation was seen in six children at follow-up, which increased the extent of ground-glass opacities/consolidation ( n =6), or newly developed ( n =5) or increased ( n =1) pleural effusion (Figs. 2 and 3 ). In these six children, it took 8 days (range, 2–11 days) to improve and 21 days (range, 10–41 days) from the day of onset to resolve. In children who showed no further aggravation at follow-up ( n =2), it took 4 days (range, 2–6 days) to improve and 7 days (range, 4–7 days) to resolve. The fate of pleural effusion was parallel to that of pulmonary parenchymal abnormality. Seven of eight children (88%) who had not received steroid therapy had no sequelae on the last follow-up CT. Patient 8 was treated with methylprednisolone after the diagnosis of pulmonary injury following BCNU- and CPM-based preparative regimen. The child showed gradual improvement on clinicoradiologic findings and showed minimal subpleural reticulation at the first 3-month follow-up CT scan and on further follow-up CT scans at the site where consolidation was first observed (Fig. 3 ). This residual lesion was not detectable on the follow-up chest radiographs. Table 4 Follow-up of radiographic abnormalities and clinical-radiologic outcome Case No. Outcome by number of days after development of symptoms Steroid treatment Sequelae at follow-up computed tomography 1 Increasing severity to day 10, then improvement until complete resolution on day 13 - - 2 No change in severity to day 2, then improvement until complete resolution on day 4 - - 3 Increasing severity to day 2, then improvement until complete resolution on day 17 - - 4 Increasing severity to day 2, then improvement until complete resolution on day 41 - - 5 Increasing severity to day 2, then improvement until complete resolution on day 12 - - 6 Increasing severity to day 6, then improvement until complete resolution on day 30 - - 7 No change in severity to day 6, then improvement until complete resolution on day 10 - - 8 Increasing severity to day 2, then improvement until complete resolution on day 10 + +
Discussion
Pulmonary toxicity of BCNU and CPM, which are used for preparative regimens, can be one of the important causes of pulmonary injury after receiving hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. In this study, pulmonary complications after receiving a PBSCT without evidence of infection, cardiac or renal failure, or iatrogenic fluid overload was defined as pulmonary injury after stem cell transplantation. Because radiologic findings as well as clinical symptoms, such as fever, dyspnea, fatigue or cough, are nonspecific in a child with a pulmonary injury after stem cell transplantation [ , , , , ], recognizing and recalling pulmonary injury in these children who are susceptible to infection is challenging. Radiologically, to perceive pulmonary injury after receiving stem cell transplantation, correlation with clinico-laboratory findings and prescription history, and knowledge of previously reported radiologic findings are necessary [ ].
The dominant radiologic findings of the present study were bilateral, multifocal, patchy or inhomogeneously diffuse ground-glass opacities; multifocal consolidations; bilateral septal thickening; and bilateral pleural effusions. The histopathological findings of ground-glass opacities and the air-space consolidation of pulmonary injury after bone marrow transplantation are considered diffuse alveolar damage, which can be seen in cases of pulmonary toxicity following administration of BCNU [ , , ] and CPM [ ]. Septal thickening can accompany pulmonary injury following BCNU [ , ] and CPM [ , ] administration. The histopathological findings of septal thickening can be interstitial edema, lymphocytic infiltration, or early fibrosis after BCNU administration [ , , ], or interstitial edema or early fibrosis after CPM administration [ ].
Pulmonary injury following BCNU administration in adults showed lower zonal predominance in most patients [ ], which are in accord with the present study. Pulmonary injury after CPM administration is known to occur bilaterally at imaging study [ ]. Pleural effusion was uncommon in adults following administration of a BCNU-based preparative regimen for stem cell transplantation. A small amount of pleural effusion developed in 10% of adults and was explained by a recurrent tumor or overhydration [ ]. A single case of pleural effusion was reported in an adult after CPM administration and it was ascribed to myocardial injury [ ]. However pleural effusion was noted in the majority of cases in the present study (6/8, 75%), although our patients were all recurrence-free and had little chance to be overhydrated because they were outpatients. Consequently, the pathophysiology remains unexplained.
Although a small number of cases was evaluated in the present study, chest radiographic abnormality was instantly recognizable on chest radiographs, and CT was superior to radiography for characterizing or identifying the distribution of ground-glass opacities or consolidation in the differential diagnosis. Additionally, CT showed the presence and the amount of pleural effusion better than chest radiographs.
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia is reported to be induced by drugs, and this shows similar radiologic findings to those of the present study: extensive opacity in the air space, interlobular septal thickening and pleural effusion at chest radiography [ ]; diffuse interstitial infiltrates, patchy alveolar infiltrates or diffuse ground-glass infiltrates at CT [ ]. In acute episodes of eosinophilic pneumonia, eosinophils in the peripheral blood are rarely increased, but they are increased in broncho-alveolar lavage fluid [ ]. None of the children in the present study showed hypereosinophilia in peripheral blood and only two showed hypereosinophilia in broncho-alveolar lavage fluid.
For the differential diagnosis of oncologic patients showing symptoms and ground-glass opacities or consolidation on the chest radiograph in the early post-transplantation period, infections such as cytomegalovirus pneumonia or Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia are primary suspects because bone marrow transplantation recipients are susceptible to infections from compromised immunity [ , ]. In immunocompromised patients, viral pulmonary infections can manifest as patchy or diffuse interstitial opacity [ , ]. Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia is characterized by rapidly developing diffuse ground-glass opacities [ , , , ], which is contrary to the results of the present study. Pleural effusion [ , ] and interstitial septal thickening [ , , , , ] are uncommon in both viral pneumonia and Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia, though they were common in the present study. In addition to the infection, pulmonary edema is one of the common complications in the first month of the post-transplantation period [ ]. Radiologic findings of pulmonary edema have many similarities with those of pulmonary injury following BCNU- and CPM-based preparative regimens for stem cell transplant in children: diffuse ground-glass opacities, septal thickening and occasionally pleural effusion. However, fluid overload related to drug administration, transfusion, or cardiac or renal insufficiency are predisposing clinical factors for pulmonary edema in the early post-transplantation period [ , ]. Moreover, rapid radiologic change of pulmonary edema parallel to clinical improvement of these predisposing conditions is characteristic [ ]. Acute graft-versus-host disease occurs in the early posttransplant period and can also show similar features to those of patients in this study [ ]. However, because allogeneic transplantation should be a preceding condition of acute graft-versus-host disease, acute graft-versus-host disease was not a concern in this study, which included only children who underwent autologous transplantation. Pulmonary involvement of leukemia or lymphoma also needs differentiation here. Pulmonary involvement of leukemia presents as thickening of bronchovascular bundles and interlobular septae. Pulmonary involvement of lymphoma presents as single or multiple pulmonary nodules, reticular interstitial opacities or consolidation of variable extent. In addition, hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy usually accompanies these features in both leukemia and lymphoma [ , , , , ]. However, these findings were absent in children in this study.
In the present study, a single child showed minimal to mild subpleural reticulation in both posterior lower lungs on follow-up CT scans, and this was regarded as a sequela of pulmonary injury following BCNU- and CPM-based preparative regimens for stem cell transplant. The remaining seven children showed resolution of pulmonary lesions; their good prognosis may be ascribed to the prophylactic use of methylprednisolone to prevent pulmonary toxicity and the use of BCNU dose lower than the maximum tolerated dose. It is known that BCNU is a dose-dependent toxic agent [ ], whereas CPM is a dose-independent toxic agent to lungs [ ]. In addition, BCNU and CPM are known to be synergistical toxic agents to each other [ , ]. Further studies with a larger sample of patients who resolved and who had sequelae might be necessary to elucidate the prognostic factors in imaging studies.
Some limitations of the present study must be addressed. First, this was a retrospective study stemming from a small sample. Second, not all children underwent histological confirmation; histopathological confirmation of a diagnosis is rarely available because of the significant risk of invasive procedures in the early transplant period. Third, other drugs such as cytosine arabinoside might contribute to pulmonary toxicity. However, BCNU and CPM were considered the main contributing drugs to pulmonary injury given their established toxicity, particularly that of BCNU [ , , ].
Conclusion
Bilateral ground-glass opacities combined with or without consolidation, septal thickening and bilateral pleural effusion were common radiologic findings in pulmonary injuries following BCNU- and CPM-based preparative regimens. Although there was a lack of specific findings, the merging of radiologic, clinical and laboratory findings and medication history can lead to a diagnosis. This should be differentiated from pulmonary infection and edema, which are critical conditions frequently encountered in oncologic patients.