Introduction
Congenital lung lesions are a relatively frequent referral to our fetal center. To place this into context, in the year 2016, of the 1,207 new patient consults we received, 101 were for prenatal lung masses, whereas in the last 5 years, of 6,623 total new patient consults, 583 were for lung lesions. Of these, the more common pulmonary lesions are the bronchopulmonary foregut malformations. Their etiology is unknown, but it is thought to be caused by an obstruction/malformation sequence occurring in early gestation [ , ]. The timing, severity and level of obstruction are thought to result in the particular phenotype of the lesion, be it a congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM), a sequestration or a bronchial atresia, among others, noting that there is considerable overlap in their prenatal imaging presentation and appearance at histology. The prenatal ultrasound (US) and MR appearance of these congenital lung lesions has been extensively discussed in the imaging literature. If predominantly solid, they are usually echogenic at prenatal sonography and T2 hyperintense at fetal MR [ , , ].
Other rare congenital solid lung lesions have been described. These include congenital infantile fibrosarcoma; congenital peribronchial myofibroblastic tumor, or CPMT [ ]; and fetal lung interstitial tumor, or FLIT [ , ]. These tumors also tend to be T2 hyperintense at fetal MR imaging (noting that CPMT has been described as T2 iso- to hypointense with respect to surrounding normal lung).
In this study we evaluated the imaging findings and pathological characterization of the rare fetal solid lung lesions that contain T2-hypointense signal, lesions that usually present a diagnostic conundrum.
Materials and methods
The institutional review board of the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia approved this retrospective study. All cases had US and MR imaging done on the same day, following the protocol set by our fetal center. All MR imaging was obtained using a 1.5-T magnet (Siemens Medical Systems, Erlangen, Germany). Sequences evaluated included half-Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo spin echo, or HASTE (field of view [FOV] = 280–300, matrix = 256, repetition time/echo time [TR/TE] = 1,100/76 ms, number of excitations [NEX] = 1, flip angle = 180°); T2-weighted steady-state free procession, or TruFISP (FOV = 280–300, matrix = 256, TR/TE = 4.05/1.65 ms, NEX = 1, flip angle = 70°); T1-weighted fast low angle shot, or FLASH (FOV = 280–300, matrix = 256, TR/TE = 202/4.76 ms, NEX = 1, flip angle = 60°); and echoplanar imaging, or EPI (FOV = 280–300, matrix = 256, TR/TE = 5,290/50 ms, NEX = 1, flip angle 90°). All included cases had prenatal and postnatal care at our institution, including mass resection and subsequent pathological examination. Two pediatric radiologists for MR (T.V. and A.S., with 10 years and 8 years of experience, respectively) and one pediatric radiologist for US (E.R.O., with 7 years of experience) analyzed prenatal images; they were blinded to the other modality’s imaging findings. They evaluated imaging characteristics including overall appearance at US and MR; presence of cystic components, vascular connections, mediastinal shift and pleural effusions; and findings of hydrops. We defined hydrops as fluid (pleural or pericardial effusion, ascites or skin/scalp edema) in at least two fetal compartments. We calculated the MR lung volumes following established protocols [ ], with normative data from Rypens et al. [ ]. Briefly, we manually outlined the normal lung tissue visible on each section through the chest on each slice of a single sequence. We took the areas obtained from each slice, summed them separately for each lung field, and converted them to a volume by multiplying by the slice thickness. We calculated the ratio of observed versus expected (O/E) fetal lung volume by dividing the number obtained for the total lung volume (both right and left lungs) by that expected for gestational age from the reference tables as set by Rypens et al. We followed the same measuring protocol to estimate mass volume. We calculated a simple percentage to determine the proportion of mass volume compared to the total pulmonary volume as follows: volume of mass/(left lung + right lung + mass volume) × 100. By ultrasound, we calculated the congenital pulmonary airway malformation volume ratio (CVR) using the formula for a prolate ellipsoid divided by head circumference (CVR = width x height x length × 0.52/head circumference) [ ]. Two pediatric pathologists reviewed gross pathology images, reports, and hematoxylin and eosin slides. One of the pediatric radiologists (T.V.) and the two pathologists (J.P. and P.A.K.) jointly reviewed MR images and the pathological slides, correlating MR image findings to the appearance of the mass on visual gross inspection and under the microscope. We reviewed medical records to determine mode of delivery, clinical course and overall outcome.
Results
Study population
We identified eight cases of solid fetal lung lesions containing atypical T2-hypointense elements with respect to normal lung between 2007 and 2017. Of these, we excluded two cases secondary to intrauterine fetal demise at 24 weeks and 30 weeks of gestation with no available pathological evaluation of the fetal lung mass. Maternal age in the remaining six cases ranged from 19 years to 33 years, mean age 26. Average gestational age at our institution’s first imaging intake was 28 weeks, ranging from 27 weeks to 33 weeks. One case (case 1) was part of a monochorionic diamniotic twin gestation, with the other twin demonstrating intrauterine growth restriction but otherwise normal. Final pathology of the included six cases was five cases of CPAM (cases 1–5) and one of CPMT (case 6). All cases of CPAM were male fetuses whereas the fetus with CPMT was female.
Imaging findings
Magnetic resonance
All six cases demonstrated T2-hypointense/T1-hyperintense sections that tended to have a rosette-like configuration around small, irregular, cystic T2-hyperintense central areas of fluid-like signal (Fig. 1 ). The margins of the T2-hypointense areas were sometimes ill-defined (Figs. 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 and 6 ). In the periphery of the lesion and bordering the normal lung, more classic-appearing T2-hyperintense CPAM-like solid tissue was identified (Figs. 1 and 5 ). No bronchial elements (defined as small tubular T2-hyperintense structures reflective of obstructed bronchial channels) or bronchoceles were seen at MR. No additional cysts were encountered when excluding the central areas of T2 hyperintensity in these rosette-like structures. Fig. 1 Case 1, a 27-week fetus. a–c Sagittal ( a ) and axial ( b ) single-shot turbo spin-echo (SSTSE) and sagittal T1-weighted ( c ) MR images demonstrate the T2-hypointense/T1-hyperintense rosette-like structures ( long arrows ) with respect to lung. Note the more characteristic T2-hyperintense congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM)-like appearance in the periphery of the lesion ( short arrow in a and b ). d Ultrasound. At US the overall rosette pattern of the lesion is not as conspicuous as at MR, albeit it is still abnormal and sonographically heterogeneous, with the areas of hypoechogenicity ( arrows ) correlating with the abnormal T2-hypointense areas at MR (area between the calipers denotes the normal lung). e Gross pathological appearance of the lesion, a lobulated cluster, mirrors the T2-hypointense pattern seen at MR. The color difference of the lesion is likely from fixation artifact. f Histology section (hematoxylin and eosin, 0.5x) through the mass demonstrates decreased airspaces and markedly increased mesenchyme ( asterisks ) and cuboidal epithelium. Note slightly increased airspaces in the periphery of the lesion ( arrows ), as expected in more classic CPAM lesions. Final diagnosis: CPAM Fig. 2 Case 2, a 27-week fetus. a Sagittal single-shot turbo spin-echo MR image through the lesion demonstrates T2-hypointense elements ( arrows ), although less well-defined than in case 1. b At US a somewhat heterogeneous appearance of the mass is noted ( arrows ), with no specific correlation to the area of hypointensity seen at MR. c , d Gross pathological ( c ) and histological ( d , hematoxylin and eosin, 0.5x) images demonstrate a vaguely lobulated mass involving almost the entire lobe with more airspaces ( arrows ) than in case 1 but with immature lung parenchyma manifested as increased mesenchyme ( asterisks ) and cuboidal epithelium. The degree of T2 hypointensity correlated with the degree of immaturity, thus this lesion was comparatively more mature (less T2 hypointense) than case 1. Final diagnosis: congenital pulmonary airway malformation Fig. 3 Case 3, a 29-week fetus. a , b Coronal single-shot turbo spin-echo ( a ) and sagittal T1-weighted ( b ) MR images of the fetus demonstrate the area of interest in the lung ( arrows ), this time with a slightly more prominent cystic center. c At US, the lesion was predominantly echogenic ( arrows ). d , e Correlating gross pathological ( d ) and histological ( e , hematoxylin and eosin, 10x) images show a solid lesion with increased mesenchyme, columnar epithelium and reduced airspaces as well as a clusters of mucous cells ( asterisks in e ) and subnuclear vacuoles ( arrows in e ). Final diagnosis: congenital pulmonary airway malformation Fig. 4 Case 4, a 23-week fetus. a Coronal single-shot turbo spin-echo MR image demonstrates the large predominantly T2-hypointense lesion ( black arrows ), which displaces the hemidiaphragm and right kidney inferiorly. Trace ascites ( white arrow ) is noted. b , c Gross specimen ( b ) and high-power histological representation of the lesion ( c , hematoxylin and eosin, 10x). Although at pathology this lesion has a similarly lobulated appearance as case 1, it also demonstrates larger airspaces and reduced mesenchyme, consistent with a more mature congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM) lesion than in case 1. Note areas of mucous cells within the lesion ( arrows, c ). Final diagnosis: CPAM Fig. 5 Case 5, a 32-week fetus. a , b Sagittal ( a ) and axial ( b ) single-shot turbo spin-echo MR images of the fetus demonstrate large areas of rosette-like T2 hypointensity within the lesion ( arrows in a , large black arrows in b ). The axial image shows the mass crossing the midline and markedly displacing the heart ( H ) and aorta ( small white arrow , b ). Note how the periphery of the lesion demonstrates the expected pattern of T2 hyperintensity seen in more classic congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM)-type lesions ( large white arrows in b ). The contralateral contracted lung can be seen in the axial image as well ( small black arrow in b ). c Gross pathological specimen shows a mix of more solid areas at the bottom of the image as marked by the asterisks (in red, the color difference from fixation artifact), with areas demonstrating interspersed cysts within a more classic-appearing solid CPAM-type tissue ( arrows ). d Histology (hematoxylin and eosin, 0.5x) reveals a mix of more solid areas with increased mesenchyme ( arrows ), with solid areas interrupted by small airspaces and large dilated alveoli ( asterisks ), findings more typical of classic CPAM. Final diagnosis: CPAM Fig. 6 Case 6, a 33-week fetus. a Coronal single-shot turbo spin-echo MR image demonstrates vague areas of T2 hypointensity ( arrows ) more ill-defined than in the prior cases. b Correlating sonographic image shows the lesion to be of mixed echogenicity ( arrows ), more hypoechoic centrally. c Gross pathological exam shows a mix of cartilage ( asterisks ) and fibrous tissue ( arrows ) extending in irregular tongues into the residual lung parenchyma. d Histologically (hematoxylin and eosin, 0.5x), sheets of spindle cells ( arrows ) interspersed with plates of cartilage ( asterisks ) are present, extending in tongues into the peripheral alveoli, predominantly along the path of bronchovascular bundles or interlobular septa. Final diagnosis: congenital peribronchial myofibroblastic tumor
All lesions demonstrated significant mass effect manifested by severe mediastinal shift, complete displacement of the heart to the contralateral hemithorax with the cardiac wall partially abutting the ipsilateral chest wall, relative lateral displacement of the aorta (Fig. 5 ), and flattening or eversion of the normal curvature of the ipsilateral diaphragm (Table 1 ). Similarly, all lesions crossed the midline. Table 1 Prenatal imaging findings at first intake Case # GA at presentation at our institution (weeks) Displacement ipsilateral hemidiapragm Mediastinal shift Pleural effusion Pericardial effusion Ascites Scalp/skin edema Hydrops, first intake Poly-hydramnios MR O/E normal fetal lung (%) a Percentage mass in TLV by MR (%) b Lobar distribu-tion at MR Lobar distribution at US 1 27 Flattened Severe No Small Trace No Yes Yes 44 78 LLL LLL 2 27 Inverted Severe No No No No No Yes 32 85 LLL Can’t determine 3 29 Flattened Severe No Trace No No No Yes 31 88 RML c RLL c 4 23 Inverted Severe No Trace Trace Mild Yes Yes 26 91 LLL LLL 5 32 Inverted Severe No No Small Mild Yes Yes 30 86 RLL RLL 6 33 Inverted Severe Trace No No No No Yes 13 92 LLL Can’t determine GA gestational age, LLL left lower lobe, O/E observed vs. expected, RLL right lower lobe, RML right middle lobe, RUL right upper lobe, TLV total lung volume a Ratio of observed versus expected lung when evaluating only normal lung parenchyma (lesion excluded) b Percentage of lesion when adding volume of lesion and total normal lung (mass volume /mass volume + normal TLV) c Incorrect lobar determination by US and MR; at surgery the mass was described as RUL
A trace pleural effusion was only observed in one case, skin/scalp edema in two cases at the time of first intake (Table 1 ). Ascites was seen in 3/6, pericardial effusion was seen in 3/6. All six cases demonstrated polyhydramnios at first imaging intake. Overall there was mild hydrops in 3/6 cases at first intake (Table 2 ). Table 2 Prenatal course/interventions Case # Steroid courses CVR at presentation Peak CVR a Final CVR Hydrops at birth/fetal surgery Fetal surgery Lobar distribution at surgery 1 × 1 NA NA NA NA No LLL 2 × 2 3 2.8 3 No No LLL 3 × 4 2.9 2.9 2.9 No No RUL 4 × 3 2.7 2.5 2.6 Yes Fetal surgery at 25 wks GA LLL 5 × 2 3.8 3.1 3.3 Yes No RLL 6 Multiple courses at an outside institution 2.8 2.2 2.2 No No LLL CVR congenital pulmonary airway malformation volume ratio, GA gestational age, LLL left lower lobe, NA not available, RLL right lower lobe, RUL right upper lobe a Highest CVR obtained between first intake and surgical resection
Lobar determination was challenging to discern by imaging because the masses were in all cases fairly large, destroying and distorting normal lobar anatomy. When compared to the surgical reports, MR was correct in determining the lobe of origin in 5/6 cases (Table 1 ).
Regarding lung measurement by MR, the O/E of normal lung volume (excluding the pulmonary mass) was >25% in all cases of CPAM and <25% in the case of CPMT. The pulmonary masses were massive in most cases, occupying 78–92% of total (normal lung + lung lesion) pulmonary volume (average 86%, see Table 1 ).
Ultrasound
Sonographically, all lesions were heterogeneous with mixed hyperechoic and hypoechoic components, differing in appearance from the typical hyperechoic appearance of solid CPAMs. The rosette-like structures seen at MR were only identified as a discrete hypoechoic focus in one case. Scattered microcysts (<5 mm) were observed in two cases (cases 2 and 4), one of which (case 4) was also demonstrated to be a macrocyst (5 mm). A third case (case 6) demonstrated a single irregular septated cystic focus measuring up to 2.1 cm. Tubular anechoic structures resembling bronchial elements were present in three cases (cases 3, 4 and 5), which were located centrally and/or peripherally. All six lesions demonstrated pulmonary arterial supply and pulmonary venous drainage, and none was hypervascular. All lesions were relatively large, as indicated by the CVR (Table 2 ). When evaluating anatomical lobar location of the lesion, US was correct in 3/6 cases, incorrect in 1/6 and could not determine it in the remaining two cases because no normal lung could be identified in the ipsilateral hemithorax, thus excluding lobar identification.
Clinical course
All cases received maternal steroids (betamethasone) shortly after imaging at our center, with the exception of case 6, who was treated with multiple courses of betamethasone prior to reaching our institution. Information on CVR progression was available for five of the cases (Table 2 ). Overall the CVR did not vary significantly despite steroid use. At the time of birth or fetal surgery, hydrops was still present in two of these cases; a third case with hydrops at the time of presentation could not be assessed at birth given limited chart information.
Of the six cases, one underwent fetal surgery at 25 weeks of gestation secondary to increasing CVR (despite two rounds of steroids) and development of hydrops marked by progressive ascites as well as skin and scalp edema. The remaining cases were resected on the day of birth secondary to large mass size and neonatal respiratory distress.
All cases of CPAM-type lesions resulted in premature delivery (Table 3 ). In four cases this was secondary to premature rupture of membranes; in the remaining case, early delivery was due to placental abruption with subsequent fetal distress. Gestational age at delivery in these cases ranged from 30 weeks to 34 weeks of gestation (mean 33 weeks); four of these fetuses were born via cesarean section and one via vaginal delivery. The fetus with a CPMT (case 6) was delivered at 37 weeks of gestation via ex-utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) to lung lesion resection; this approach was used secondary to the very large mass and concern for adequately ventilating the neonate at birth (Table 3 ). Table 3 Peri- and postnatal course # GA at delivery (weeks) Age at mass resection Delivery method Cause of premature delivery Outcome 1 30 DOL 0 C-section to resection NA Alive 2 33 DOL 0 C-section to resection Non-reassuring fetal tracing, placental abruption Alive 3 30 DOL 0 NSVD PPROM Alive 4 34 Fetal surgery at 25 weeks’ GA C-section PPROM Alive 5 34 DOL 0 C-section to resection PPROM Alive 6 37 DOL 0 EXIT Large lung lesion, projected respiratory distress NND DOL day of life, EXIT ex utero intrapartum delivery, GA gestational age, NA not available, NND neonatal death, NSVD normal spontaneous vaginal delivery, PPROM preterm premature rupture of membranes
Postnatal follow-up
The five neonates with atypical CPAM survived, with follow-up ranging 3–6 years. Postnatal inpatient stay ranged 1–3 months. Body weight percentiles at most recent postnatal clinical visits were in the 5th percentile for all except for one, who was in the 10th percentile. Four of these five infants required gastrostomy placement for nutrition. The children are otherwise developmentally normal.
The neonate with CPMT died shortly after mass resection on the day of birth. Death was attributed to marked lung hypoplasia.
Pathology
The five cases of CPAM had overall similar findings. The lesions occupied the majority of the resected lobe with a vaguely multilobulated configuration. The cysts, when present, were overall small and scattered (Table 4 ). Unlike the typical CPAMs resected in infancy, each of these lesions showed markedly premature parenchymal development with increased mesenchymal tissue between the small airspaces. The airspaces were lined by cuboidal to columnar cells (in contrast to the expected flattened epithelium and minimal mesenchyme encountered in the more classic CPAM tissue), and in some cases, by subnuclear vacuoles. These features are both seen in very premature pulmonary/CPAM parenchyma, more consistent with a less mature (pseudoglandular or canalicular) stage of development than with 3rd-trimester tissue. In each case there was a suggestion of centripetal differentiation in the lobules (Fig. 1 ): as the lesion approached the pleural surface or the interlobular septa dividing it from normal lung, there was a thin rim of transitional tissue that in every case showed a relative decrease in mesenchymal tissue and increase in airspace suggesting more “mature” tissue at the periphery. Two of the cases had numerous foci of mucinous cells. Case 5 had a markedly variable morphology with some regions showing pronounced immature parenchyma mixed with sections of more typical CPAM morphology (Fig. 5 ). Interestingly, the degree of T2 hypointensity at MR imaging mirrored the degree of pulmonary maturation at histology, such that the more T2 hypointense the lesion was, the less mature it was at pathology (Figs. 1 and 4 ). Table 4 Pathology findings a Case# Cyst size on gross exam (cm) Fetal pathological classification a Type of cell lining alveolar spaces Mesenchyme Mucous cells Final pathology 1 <1 2 Columnar Loose mesenchyme – CPAM 2 <1 1 Cuboidal to low columnar, subnuclear vacuoles Prominent smooth muscle – CPAM 3 <1.5 1 Subnuclear vacuoles Prominent smooth muscle + CPAM 4 <1 1 Subnuclear vacuoles Smooth muscle, loose myxoid tissue + CPAM 5 <0.5 3 Columnar Mostly myxoid – CPAM 6 None NA No alveoli present Myofibroblasts and cartilage – CPMT CPAM congenital pulmonary airway malformation, CPMT pulmonary myofibroblastic tumor, NA not applicable a Described in Kreiger et al. [ ]
The lesion that was pathologically consistent with CPMT also involved the majority of the lobe and was composed of a mixture of large foci of irregular cartilage intermixed with sheets of relatively bland spindle (myofibroblast) cells (Fig. 6 ). At the periphery, the spindle cells extended in tongues along the bronchovascular bundles.
Discussion
A congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation, now preferentially called congenital pulmonary airway malformation, or CPAM, is a hamartomatous bronchopulmonary malformation characterized by an excessive proliferation and cystic dilatation of terminal respiratory bronchioles, often with intervening abnormally enlarged alveoli. It usually involves a lobe or part of a lobe, with multiple-lobe involvement rarely encountered [ ]. The mass communicates with the tracheobronchial tree and derives its arterial blood supply from the pulmonary circulation (rarely from the systemic blood supply). The classification of CPAM lesions was originally described by Stocker as types I–III based on a combination of cyst size at resection and on histological features of the specimens resected postnatally [ ]. Adzick and colleagues [ ] introduced a prenatal imaging classification based on sonographic cyst size (macrocystic or microcystic if cysts larger or smaller than 5 mm). A more extensive pathological description and subclassification of lesions resected during fetal development was subsequently reported [ ]. At prenatal imaging, CPAM lesions are echogenic masses of varying solid and cystic components; on fetal MR the lesions are predominantly T2 hyperintense. The less common CPMT is a solid pulmonary tumor of benign histology. Its prenatal MR imaging appearance has been recently described by Calvo-Garcia et al. [ ], who presented a single case and characterized it as predominantly T2 hypointense with respect to lung, with a thin T2-hypointense rim.
In this series of six cases we present the imaging and pathological features of unusual congenital lung lesions containing T2-hypointense signal on MR. These lesions do not have a unifying diagnosis: of the six cases, five were atypical CPAM and one was CPMT. Interestingly, no imaging features distinguished or separated the two diagnoses. None of the lesions decreased significantly in size after steroid administration. Clinically, all fetuses with CPAM lesions had preterm delivery and are all alive. The one fetus with CPMT was born at term via EXIT to resection but died almost immediately from pulmonary hypoplasia.
All of the lesions presented in this paper were large in size, as reflected by their CVR. The degree of pulmonary hypoplasia was also determined by the MR-calculated O/E total lung volume (TLV). Using this volumetric calculation, and when extrapolating for known O/E TLV values used for survival in the fetus with isolated left congenital diaphragmatic hernia (L-CDH) [ , , ], all CPAM lesions had total normal lung volume values in the less severe range for degree of hypoplasia, or a ratio of >25%. The only non-survivor of the cohort (the one with CPMT) had a degree of lung hypoplasia in the very severe group (O/E TLV <15). It should be noted, however, that this prediction in severity of lung hypoplasia has not been proved to extrapolate to the fetus with pulmonary masses and that, unlike the fetus with a primary lung mass, the pulmonary architecture and vasculature of the existing lung in the fetus with L-CDH is abnormal, factors that might contribute to their mortality and morbidity [ ].
As part of their prenatal care at our institution, and following the protocol for solid lung lesions, all six cases received prenatal betamethasone [ ]. Steroid administration, however, did not significantly affect mass size, as reflected by their essentially unchanged CVR (noting that for case 1, CVR progression was not available at chart review). All six masses were associated with polyhydramnios and a CVR much greater than 1.6, a reliable predictor of increased risk for hydrops [ ], with three of the six cases developing hydrops. All fetuses with CPAM were born prematurely, with immediate resection of the lung lesion, except for one case in which the fetus underwent successful prenatal mass resection at 25 weeks of gestation secondary to worsening hydrops, with eventual fetal delivery at 34 weeks. The CPMT was the only case of the six who went to term, with delivery by means of EXIT to resection.
As for possible explanations for the T2-hypointense appearance of these rosette-like structures seen on MR, there are a few distinctive histological and morphological solid tissue entities that result in shortening of T2 relaxation time, hence manifesting as low signal at T2 imaging. These include blood products, muscle and fibrous tissue, calcifications, certain paramagnetic substances (e.g., melanin) and high lesion cellularity. We hypothesize that in these pulmonary lesions the unusual T2 signal might be a result of high lesion cellularity (increased mesenchyme) and, in the case of CPMT, the presence of fibrous tissue. In this regard, and given the increased cellularity, it would be interesting to evaluate whether the lesions demonstrate restricted diffusion because this could be a potential differentiator between these two pathological diagnoses.
The most salient pathological feature in the CPAM-type masses is the marked histological developmental immaturity of the lesion tissue relative to that expected for gestational age, as if arrested at an earlier stage of development than expected, findings manifested mostly by the increased mesenchymal tissue and decreased airspaces. Interestingly, a similar rosette-type pattern of T2 hypointensity could be seen at gross inspection of the masses and at histological examination (Fig. 1 ); this MR pattern, however, was more difficult to discern on US. Among the histological differentiations between the CPAM lesion and the CPMT was the presence of cartilage in the latter.
Postnatally, all neonates with CPAM-type lesions survived, whereas the one with CPMT died shortly after birth. Of note, two excluded cases with similar imaging characteristics resulted in intrauterine demise, but their final pathological diagnosis is unknown because they were lost to follow-up.
Limitations to this study include its retrospective nature. Additionally, two cases that had this type of lesion were excluded secondary to intrauterine fetal demise. It is uncertain what the pathology of these presumably more aggressive lesions would have been.
Conclusion
We present six unusual prenatal lung lesions containing different degrees of T2-hypointense elements. These appear to correlate with increasing degrees of immaturity at histology and perhaps increased cellularity or fibrous content. The diagnosis of the lesions was not unified and consisted of five CPAM lesions and one CPMT. None of the lesions significantly changed in size after prenatal administration of steroids. All cases with CPAM lesions did well despite persistent polyhydramnios and premature birth (noting that two excluded cases died in utero). The single case of CPMT, however, resulted in neonatal demise shortly after birth secondary to pulmonary hypoplasia. It is important that fetal radiologists, obstetricians and fetal surgeons alike are aware of these lesions so that appropriate diagnosing and parental counseling can be reached.