Introduction
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is a potentially curative therapy for patients with hematological malignancies. However, it is generally understood that high-dose chemotherapy for remission induction can induce cardiac toxicity prior to HSCT. Cardiac functions are frequently evaluated by echocardiography, electrocardiography, and biomarkers such as brain natriuretic peptide (BNP). In particular, several studies have reported that left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) by echocardiography was implicated in the prognosis [ , , ]. Hence, the evaluation of cardiac functions before HSCT seems to be important. However, these evaluations were only performed at rest, and therefore did not assess the integrative function of cardiovascular system or cardiovascular reserve capacity, or accurately predict peak VO 2 [ ]. Thus, it is necessary to evaluate dynamic cardiac function. Previous studies demonstrated that exercise capacity before HSCT may be a prognostic factor [ , ], but the hemodynamics during exercise in patients before HSCT and relevance with exercise capacity have not been explained. The aim of present study was to evaluate cardiac output response to exercise in patients before HSCT and its relationship with exercise capacity.
Patients and methods
Twenty-nine of fifty patients who underwent allo-HSCT for hematological malignancies between February 2015 and December 2017 at Kanazawa University Hospital (Fig. 1 ), and 13 healthy controls matched for age and sex participated in this study. We excluded patients with poor condition (such as severe fatigue, nausea, or anorexia) if we judge that they can not complete the exercise test, pancytopenia (neutrophil count < 500/mm 3 , platelet count < 25,000/mm 3 , or hemoglobin < 7.0 g/dl), central nervous system disease, or musculoskeletal disorders. LVEF, measured by echocardiography before the conditioning regimen for HSCT, was 65.4 ± 7.0% in these 29 patients. Laboratory tests in the patients at the point of assessment showed the following results: creatinine, 0.7 ± 0.2 mg/dl; hemoglobin, 10.1 ± 1.9 g/dl. Erythroblasts were observed in only 4 cases. This study was conducted in compliance with the protocol which was reviewed by the Ethics Committee of the Kanazawa University Hospital. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants before participation in this study.
Fig. 1 Flow diagram for selection of participants
Exercise test and hemodynamic measurements
Subjects performed the 6-min walk test (6MWT) approximately one week before the conditioning regimen for HSCT as stated in the American Thoracic Society Guidelines [ ]. All participants were tested by trained physical therapists. During the 6MWT, hemodynamic responses were measured using a cardiography device (PhysioFlow Q-Link, Manatec Biomedical, France) by an impedance method. The PhysioFlow concept and the methodology were detailed at rest and during exercise in a recent study [ , ]. This device noninvasively measures the stroke volume (SV), the cardiac output (CO), and several hemodynamic parameters. There is no need to use multiple electrodes, measure parameters related to thorax morphology, and correct for blood resistivity. Additionally, this device has better reproducibility and reliability. Six electrodes were applied, 2 for an ECG measurement (V1/V6 position) and 4 electrodes at the supraclavicular fossa at the left base of the neck and the xiphoid area. After an initial calibration, which was conducted in a resting seated position, the subjects carried the device in shoulder bag during the 6MWT, as per prior studies [ , ]. Cardiac output (CO), stroke volume (SV), heart rate (HR), and cardiac index (CI) were recorded continuously and averaged every 10 s for data analysis.
Statistical analysis
We compared the distribution of gender using the Fisher’s exact test and evaluated continuous variables when appropriate by the unpaired t test. Additionally, we assessed the correlation between 6-min walk distance (6MD) and SV, CO, HR, and CI after the 6MWT in all subjects, and between LVEF and 6MD, SV, CO, HR, and CI at the end of 6MWT in all patients by the Pearson’s correlation coefficient. A value of P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were performed with EZR (Saitama Medical Center, Jichi Medical University, Saitama, Japan) [ ].
Results
Characteristics of participants are presented in Table 1 . All patients have not received physical therapy at the time of evaluation. Patients did not significantly differ from controls in gender, age, height, weight, or body mass index. The six-minute walk distance in patients did not significantly differ from that in controls. SV, CO, and CI were significantly lower in the patients compared with them in the controls both at rest and at the end of the 6MWT, whereas there was no significant difference in HR at rest or at the end of the 6MWT ( P = 0.39 and 0.10, respectively; Table 2 ). In all subjects, the 6MD was positively correlated with SV, CO, CI, and HR at the end of the 6MWT ( P < 0.001, 0.001, 0.001, and 0.001, r = 0.50, 0.63, 0.62, and 0.51, respectively). There was no correlation between LVEF and hemodynamic parameters (SV, CO, CI and HR at the end of the 6MWT) or 6MD ( P = 0.70, 0.94, 0.96, 0.49, and 0.86, r = − 0.09, − 0.02, 0.01, 0.17, and 0.04, respectively).
Table 1 Subject characteristics Patients ( n = 29) Controls ( n = 13) P value Gender (F/M) 11/18 5/8 1 Age (years) 44.6 ± 15.2 (19–67) 45.7 ± 15.6 (20–64) 0.82 Height (cm) 166.6 ± 6.8 165.6 ± 10.4 0.76 Weight (kg) 59.9 ± 10.4 60.2 ± 9.2 0.93 Body mass index (kg/m 2 ) 21.5 ± 3.8 21.9 ± 2.5 0.66 6MD (m) 532.3 ± 77.0 590.1 ± 95.1 0.07 Diagnosis (no.) AML 18 ALL 5 MDS 4 Lymphoma 2 Median total dose of ANT (mg/m 2 ) 158 (0–705) Values are expressed as mean ± standard deviation 6MD 6-minute walk distance, MDS myelodysplastic syndrome, ANT anthracyclines
Table 2 Cardiac hemodynamic response to exercise Patients Controls P value SV (ml) Rest 55.5 ± 15.2 74.9 ± 14.3 < 0.001 After the 6MWT 75.1 ± 22.3 103.2 ± 15.9 < 0.001 CO (l/min) Rest 4.9 ± 1.8 6.3 ± 1.4 0.01 After the 6MWT 10.7 ± 4.2 13.2 ± 3.6 0.04 CI (l/min/m 2 ) Rest 2.8 ± 0.8 3.8 ± 0.7 < 0.001 After the 6MWT 6.2 ± 2.2 7.9 ± 1.7 0.02 HR (beats/min) Rest 88.2 ± 15.0 84.7 ± 13.0 0.39 After the 6MWT 139.3 ± 20.6 125.4 ± 26.1 0.10 Values are expressed as mean ± standard deviation SV stroke volume, CO cardiac output, CI cardiac index, HR heart rate, 6MWT 6-min walk test
Discussion
We measured hemodynamic parameters during the 6MWT in patients before allo-HSCT and in healthy controls. In this study, the 6MD was similar between patients and controls. However, SV, CO and CI at the end of the 6MWT were lower in patients than in controls, and the peak HR in patients tended to be higher than in controls. This suggests that the lower SV during exercise was compensated for by increased HR in patients to conserve CO. Additionally, the impaired cardiac response during exercise may not affect the 6MWT used to assess submaximal exercise capacity.
There are two possibilities for the lower SV at rest and the end of the 6MWT in patients than in controls. First, chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity may cause cardiac dysfunction. Previous studies reported that toxicities of anthracyclines and cyclophosphamide in remission induction therapy increased in a dose-dependent manner. Sakata-Yanagimoto et al. [ ] reported that the total dose of anthracyclines could potently predict cardiac complications. Similarly, Sucak et al. [ ] reported that an increased total dose of anthracycline was one of the risk factors for cardiac toxicity. Several studies proposed that high-dose cyclophosphamide-containing chemotherapy regimens have been most frequently related to cardiac toxicity [ , ]. In this study, 18 of 20 patients were treated with anthracycline-based regimens, and only two patients were administered cyclophosphamide, but our results were supported by the previous reports in terms of cardiac dysfunction. However, the LVEF in patients was normal in this study, and evaluation of SV or CO using an impedance cardiography device seemed to be more sensitive to confirm cardiac dysfunction.
Second, patient inactivity due to cleanroom isolation, poor condition, or fatigue during remission reduction therapy may reduce physical function. Steinberg et al. [ ] proposed that daily activities of many patients significantly decreased even before HSCT owing to preceding chemotherapy, radiation therapy, surgical treatment, or other medical conditions. Morishita et al. [ ] found that grasping power, lower extremity muscle strength, and 6MD in patients before allo-HSCT were 21–23% lower than in healthy persons. Additionally, White et al. [ ] reported that grasping power and submaximal exercise tolerance are reduced before HSCT. In this study, no significant difference was noted in 6MD between patients and controls. This result may be because of the difference in evaluation of the distance walked from the above two studies. In the two studies, the predicted value for 6MD was calculated for each subjects using following variables: height, weight, and age, and they compared with actual measurements. In contrast, we evaluated 6MD with an absolute value, and compared with controls with matched age and sex, because Casanova et al. [ ] suggested there were geographic variations in 6MD in healthy subjects and we needed to be careful when using existing prediction expressions. As mentioned above, patients can suffer from reduced physical function, including the lower SV, because of inactivity before HSCT. However, exercise tolerance of the patients in this study was preserved. This result implies that this degree of the impaired cardiac output response may not affect the submaximal intensity exercise such as the 6MWT, or the lower SV may be compensated for by an increased heart rate.
This study demonstrated that 6MD was highly correlated with cardiac response. There are several reports on the relationship between exercise capacity and CO during exercise in heart failure patients. Fukuda et al. [ ] revealed that chronic heart failure patients with exercise intolerance had reduced attenuated CO during exercise and SV attained its peak levels before maximal exercise level. Other studies found that heart failure patients with preserved ejection fraction exhibited attenuated SV throughout exercise as compared with controls, and exercise capacity was significantly correlated with CO during exercise [ , , ]. Taken together, our findings suggested that patients developed a similar pathology of cardiac dysfunction, such as impaired augmentation in systolic function, before allo-HSCT, and cardiac response to exercise was a determinant of exercise capacity. However, there was no significant difference in the 6MD between the two groups. Therefore, we can not deny possibility that other factors, such as muscle endurance and local skeletal muscle oxygenation, affected the exercise tolerance. Further investigation is necessary to clarify this point.
This study has several limitations in the present study. First, this study included small number of subjects. Further studies with more patients are needed to analyze each disease separately. Second, we did not take into account differences in protocols of remission induction therapy or drug dosages. Therefore, the effects of medications on patients were not evaluated in the present study. Finally, we did not examine relevance of cardiac biomarkers such as BNP or cardiac troponin I (cTnI). BNP and cTnI values before conditioning were not sufficiently monitored in any patients. Cardinale et al. [ ] reported that cTnI can be a valuable biomarker of cardiotoxicity in patients after high-dose chemotherapy. Thus, further studies are needed to clarify the relationship between cardiac function during exercise and these biomarkers.
In conclusion, SV, CO, and CI in patients before allo-HSCT were significantly lower than in healthy controls, although all patients presented an EF value within the normal range. Our study suggests cardiac output response to exercise to be a determinant of exercise intolerance in patients before HSCT.