Introduction
The emergence of ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) dramatically improved the prognosis of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). The improved long-term survival of CML patients [ ] raised the issue of the adequate use of TKIs including their discontinuation. TKI discontinuation has, therefore, been examined in several clinical trials. In the initial Stop Imatinib (STIM) study, 41% of patients who stopped imatinib after more than 2 years of a deep molecular response (DMR), which was previously described as complete molecular response (CMR), remained in treatment-free remission (TFR) at 24 months after stopping imatinib [ ]. The Dasatinib Discontinue (DADI) trial demonstrated that approximately 50% of CML patients treated with dasatinib as second or subsequent line therapy and who sustained DMR for more than 1 year remained in TFR at 1 year after stopping dasatinib [ ]. Other clinical trials assessing TKI discontinuation showed similar results [ , , , , , ]. Several clinical studies are currently ongoing in Japan, such as the “stop imatinib or dasatinib study in CML patients in chronic phase (CP) maintaining DMR for more than 2 years” and “the prospective, multicenter Stop Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor trial of pediatric CML with sustained CMR (STKI-14)”. A retrospective study, i.e., a study performed not in a clinical trial setting but outside clinical trials, reported a 5 year TFR rate of 47% in patients who stopped imatinib for more than 6 months [ ]. There are limitations regarding stopping TKIs only in clinical trials because of a significant increase in the number of patients who can clear the criteria to stop TKIs. Some patients stop TKIs not only in clinical trials but also outside clinical trials following the recommendations of hematologists. Although many patients choose to discontinue TKIs, they often suffer from anxiety and depression.
Approximately 32% of cancer patients have clinically important mental health problems, and 18–20% of them suffer from clinically important mental disorders [ ]. In addition, some patients may feel severe anxiety related to TKI discontinuation. Patients may experience extreme fear of relapse related to the discontinuation of anticancer agents, and approximately 50% of patients are anxious about losing the therapeutic response [ ].
The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) is commonly used to assess patients’ mental status [ ]. The HADS consists of 14 items including a 7-item anxiety and a 7-item depression subscale. Considering the high comorbidity of anxiety and depression associated with cancer as well as the systematic exclusion of confounding physical symptoms, the scale seems especially appropriate for use in cancer patients [ , ].
In the present study, the HADS was used to analyse anxiety and depressive states in CML patients who stopped TKIs both in and outside clinical trials. In addition, we retrospectively investigated the TFR rates of patients who stopped TKIs outside clinical trials, i.e., in the real world.
Patients and methods
This retrospective study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Saga University Hospital. All data were treated anonymously, and private information of all patients was protected. Between April 2007 and March 2017, CML patients who stopped TKIs in Saga University Hospital after achieving enough duration of DMR were enrolled. Enough duration of DMR was defined as at least 2 years with imatinib and at least 1 year with second generation TKIs including dasatinib and nilotinib. Patients who were deemed physically incapable of completing the survey by a physician and those who provided defective responses were excluded from the study. In the present study, physicians who had qualified the hematology specialist for certification of the Japanese Society of Hematology, managed patients with CML. 32 CML patients who stopped TKIs were included in the study. Sex, age, type of TKI, dosing period, real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) data, and the Sokal score of 32 patients were obtained from medical records. Anxiety and depression were assessed using the HADS. The survey was performed at the initiation of TKI discontinuation and at 1, 6, 12, and 24 months after discontinuation in patients with sustained TFR. In patients who resumed TKIs after molecular relapse, the survey periods were the initiation of TKI discontinuation, at 1 month after discontinuation and at reintroduction of TKIs. All patients examined herein looked back on each period and answered. The content of the survey is shown in Table 1 . The primary endpoint of this study was the comparison of HADS scores at the initiation of TKI discontinuation between patients within and outside clinical trials. To expand this study, we also compared the HADS scores between patients with sustained TFR and those who resumed TKIs after molecular relapse. As a secondary endpoint, we investigated TFR rates in patients who stopped TKIs outside clinical trials. Table 1 HADS sheet I feel tense or ‘wound up’ I feel as if I am slowed down Most of the time 3 Nearly all the time 3 A lot of the time 2 Very often 2 From time to time (occ.) 1 Sometimes 1 Not at all 0 Not at all 0 I still enjoy the things I used to enjoy I get a sort of frightened feeling like ‘butterflies’ in the stomach Hardly at all 3 Very often 3 Only a little 2 Quite often 2 Not quite as much 1 Occasionally 1 Definitely as much 0 Not at all 0 I get a sort of frightened feeling as if something awful is about to happen I have lost interest in my appearance Very definitely and quite badly 3 Definitely 3 Yes, but not too badly 2 I don’t take as much care as I should 2 A little, but it doesn’t worry me 1 I may not take quite as much care 1 Not at all 0 I take just as much care 0 I can laugh and see the funny side of things: I feel restless as if I have to be on the move Not at all 3 Very much indeed 3 Definitely not so much now 2 Quite a lot 2 Not quite so much now 1 Not very much 1 As much as I always could 0 Not at all 0 Worrying thoughts go through my mind I look forward with enjoyment to things A great deal of the time 3 Hardly at all 3 A lot of the time 2 Definitely less than I used to 2 From time to time, but not often 1 Rather less than I used to 1 Only occasionally 0 As much as I ever did 0 I feel cheerful I get sudden feelings of panic Not at all 3 Very often indeed 3 Not often 2 Quite often 2 Sometimes 1 Not very often 1 Most of the time 0 Not at all 0 I can sit at ease and feel relaxed: I can enjoy a good book or radio/TV program: Not at all 3 Very seldom 3 Not often 2 Not often 2 Usually 1 Sometimes 1 Definitely 0 Often 0
DMR was defined as more than a 4 log reduction of BCR-ABL mRNA (MR4.0) determined by RQ-PCR (IS: international scale). Evaluation of patients who maintained TKI discontinuation and those who resumed TKIs after molecular relapse was performed according to the BCR-ABL mRNA level measured with the IS.
Statistical analysis
The paired t test was used to compare the HADS scores between patients with sustained TFR and those who resumed ABL TKIs after molecular relapse. The Mann–Whitney U test was used to compare the HADS scores at ABL TKI discontinuation in patients within and outside clinical trials. In addition, it was used to compare HADS scores according to age (≥ 65/ < 65), sex, and choice of TKI at the initiation of discontinuation and resumption of TKI. The proportion of patients in TFR was calculated by Kaplan–Meier analysis. Differences were considered significant at p ≤ 0.05.
Results
Table 2 shows the characteristics of patients. There were 32 patients, including 19 men and 13 women with a mean age of 53 years at CML onset. Eight patients were treated with imatinib, 20 with dasatinib, and five with nilotinib before TKI discontinuation. The average dosing period before discontinuation was 2267 days. The Sokal score was investigated in patients who could be evaluated according to each chart. Table 2 Patient characteristics Characteristics Value No. of patients 32 Male/female 19/13 Age of CML onset (years) 53.1 ± 14.2 Sokal score (n = 21) Low risk 10 Intermediate 9 High risk 2 Count of stop 33 ABL TKI at discontinuation Imatinib 8 Dasatinib 20 Nilotinib 5 Dosing period of ABL TKIs until discontinuation (days) 2267 ± 1176 Clinical trial (in/out) 17/16 Maintain discontinuation/resume 18/15
At initiation of TKI discontinuation, there was no difference in HADS scores according to age or choice of TKI; however, HADS scores were higher in men. The HADS scores at 6, 12, and 24 months after TKI discontinuation were significantly lower than those at the initiation of TKI discontinuation in patients with sustained TFR (at the initiation of discontinuation vs. at 6, 12, and 24 months after TKI discontinuation: 5.72 ± 6.16 vs. 2.75 ± 3.11; p = 0.001, 2.64 ± 2.84; p = 0.048 and 3.00 ± 3.02; p = 0.031; mean ± SD; Fig. 1 ). In patients who resumed TKIs after molecular relapse, the HADS scores at reintroduction of TKIs were significantly higher than at the initiation of discontinuation (at the initiation of discontinuation vs. at reintroduction of TKIs: 1.67 ± 2.26 vs. 8.47 ± 5.53; p = 0.0003). There was no difference in HADS scores at resumption of TKI with respect to age, sex, or choice of TKI. Fig. 1 Comparison of HADS scores over time. a Patients who sustained TFR. b Patients who resumed ABL TKIs after molecular relapse. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. The bar means standard error
The TFR rates at 6, 12, and 24 months after TKI discontinuation in patients who stopped TKIs outside a clinical trial were 62.5, 55.6, and 55.6%, respectively (Fig. 2 ). This was consistent with historical controls obtained from several clinical trials. Fig. 2 Kaplan–Meier estimates of treatment-free remission after ABL TKI discontinuation outside clinical trials. The TFR rates at 6, 12, and 24 months after TKI discontinuation in patients who stopped TKIs outside a clinical trial were 62.5, 55.6, and 55.6%, respectively
Although the HADS scores of patients who stopped TKIs outside clinical trials were higher than those of patients in clinical trials, the HADS scores at the initiation of TKI discontinuation did not differ significantly between patients in and outside clinical trials (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Comparison of the HADS scores within and outside clinical trials. The HADS scores at the initiation of TKI discontinuation did not differ significantly between patients in and outside clinical trials. The bar means standard error
Discussion
The present study is the first to investigate anxiety and depression using the HADS in CML patients who stopped TKI treatment. In patients who resumed TKIs after molecular relapse, the HADS scores at reintroduction of TKIs were significantly higher than those at the initiation of TKI discontinuation (Fig. 1 b). Drug expenses are considered one of the causes of anxiety and depression associated with relapse, because the cost of CML treatment is considerably high [ ]. Jiang et al. reported that 78% of patients who cover the costs of TKI treatment pay more than $4000 USD per year in China [ ]. In Japan, the medical care benefit system provides extra financial assistance according to the patient’s income if a patient must pay a high price; therefore, most CML patients treated with TKIs pay approximately $3600–$9600 USD per year [ ]. Discontinuing TKI means that this amount will disappear. On the other hand, because advances in CML treatments are associated with survival gains among older adults, CML treatments may provide reasonable value for money despite the high cost [ ]. Drug expenses remain a problem for both initial treatment and resumption of therapy. In the present study, we did not have detailed information about what concerned patients, such as drug expenses. To manage better patient quality of life (QOL), such information should be collected in future work.
The HADS scores at 6 months after TKI discontinuation were significantly lower than those at the initiation of TKI discontinuation in patients with sustained TFR. The duration of anxiety and depression may be related to the time to recurrence according to the previous clinical trials. In the STIM study, among patients who discontinued imatinib, 45% at 6 months, 43% at 12 months, and 41% at 24 months after stopping maintained DMR and did not experience molecular relapse [ ]. In the DADI trial, 49 and 48% of patients who stopped dasatinib experienced sustained TFR at 6 and 12 months, respectively, after dasatinib discontinuation [ ]. These data indicate that the results after 6 months are almost unchanged, and most of the failure of discontinuation occurs at more than 6 months. Therefore, patient anxiety and depression could be alleviated after 6 months of treatment. In our hospital, the physicians inform the patients when the risk of recurrence is high based on the results of clinical trials.
It might be necessary to take into account the involvement of the adverse effects of TKIs that lead to depression, because depression had been sometimes reported in the patients undergoing treatment with TKIs [ ]. In the present study, six patients declined the HADS score only 1 month after discontinuation. As time elapses after discontinuation, patient anxiety would be expected to diminish, but 1 month seems a little early. It is possible that this early decline might be due to the disappearance of the adverse effects of TKIs following TKI discontinuation.
The TFR rate in patients outside clinical trials (Fig. 2 ) was similar to that reported in clinical trials. In addition, there was no significant difference in the HADS scores at the initiation of TKI discontinuation between in and outside clinical trials (Fig. 3 ). These results suggested that, if the criteria for discontinuation were the same as those used in clinical trials, stopping TKIs may be acceptable outside clinical trials, i.e., when the risk of anxiety or depression is high. According to the guidelines of the Japanese society of Hematology (2013 version) [ ], TKIs should be stopped only in clinical trials. However, there is a mismatch between the number of patients who wish to stop TKIs and the number of people actually able to participate in clinical trials. Currently, the number of patients who can participate in clinical trials is too small. In addition, according to the latest NCCN [ ] and ESMO guidelines [ ], if safety can be guaranteed in each hospital and the patients meet the criteria for stopping TKIs, then patients should be allowed to stop TKIs outside clinical trials. Since the patients in the present study were considered to satisfy this condition, we stopped TKIs outside clinical studies.
The period of maintenance of DMR before TKI discontinuation is mentioned in the NCCN guidelines [ ]. In most STIM studies and other TKI discontinuation studies, a minimum of 2 years of DMR maintenance was the criterion for discontinuing treatment; however, the DADI trial used a shorter DMR period of more than 1 year [ ]. The decrease of the period by 1 year contributes to reducing medical costs and adverse effects. If ABL TKIs are routinely stopped in real clinical situations, then it will be necessary to define the DMR maintenance period.
In the present study, we used the HADS to evaluate anxiety and depression. The cut-off value was reported as 11 points overall [ ] and 17 points in end-stage cancer patients [ ]. The present results showed a lower value, which may indicate that the patient cohort had a relatively lower incidence of anxiety and depression. Although the HADS is considered the most thorough evaluation measure, it is limited by cut-off variability [ ]. There are many other evaluation scales. Aktas et al. reported that the M.D. Anderson Symptom Inventory was the best scale overall from a psychometric perspective [ ]. However, there are no reports evaluating anxiety and depression associated with discontinuation of therapeutic agents. A scale that is specific for this type of case needs to be developed in the future. In addition, the skill of each physician treating the patient might affect the results of HADS. In the present study, physicians who had qualified the hematology specialist for certification of the Japanese Society of Hematology, managed patients with CML. Thus, the physicians’ skill in managing patients with CML could be adequate. However, it will be necessary to establish a method to evaluate physician skill in managing patients’ QOL for more practical use of HADS at any hospital.
The physician and pharmacists also had to evaluate the patients’ ability to understand the biology of CML and what discontinuation of TKI treatment, based on dialogues with the patients, especially in cases where TKIs were stopped. When the patients were judged to have an inadequate understanding, the physician and pharmacists educated the patients. We often used patient education videos created by the staff at Saga University Hospital [ ]. Since the present study was conducted as a HADS retrospective survey, the physician could not provide further mental/psychological support for the patients with high HADS scores. We are considering the construction of a system that utilizes the results of HADS in real time.
The major limitation of this study was the relatively small number of patients. The inclusion of a greater number of subjects is necessary to draw definitive conclusions. In addition, the study was a retrospective survey, and it is necessary to improve the reliability by performing a prospective study.
In conclusion, the present study showed no significant differences in the occurrence of anxiety and depression between within and outside clinical trials. This suggests that it is acceptable to stop TKIs outside clinical trials by following the guidelines for TKI discontinuation, such as the NCCN guidelines, if an adequate monitoring system is available. However, preventing the occurrence of anxiety and depression is necessary for effective TKI discontinuation.