Introduction
Carcinosarcomas (CS) are uncommon malignant tumours defined as a subtype of sarcomatoid carcinoma, a monoclonal tumour with divergent lines of differentiation leading to admixture of carcinomatous (usually epithelioid) and sarcomatous mesenchymal elements (typically spindle cell, though sometimes a mixture of heterologous cell types). They are known to occur at a variety of anatomical locations and/or involve a variety of organ systems, including the uterus, ovary, renal tract, prostate, biliary tree, stomach, breast, lung, thyroid gland and liver. They are rare tumours, and ther is only a limited collection of natural history data and hindered initiation of prospective trials. Diagnostic and treatment decisions have therefore relied predominantly on small retrospective series, case reports and anecdotal experience.
The spectrum of morphology and immunophenotype is wide and varied, leading to sometimes arbitrary and inconsistent nosology within and between different specialist areas of practice, which is apt to cause confusion. Synonyms, such as malignant mesenchymoma, mixed mesodermal (Müllerian) tumour, metaplastic carcinoma, sarcomatoid carcinoma, Lane tumour and carcinoma with sarcomatoid stroma, amongst others, have historically found favour with different clinical groups. Furthermore, at least conceptually, distinction is drawn between CS and other biphasic or polyphasic malignancies, notably, mixed/combined/composite, hybrid and collision tumours and the phenomena of dedifferentiation and high-grade transformation. Differentiated tumours at specific sites showing a bimorphic cell population (e.g. salivary glands) and some higher-grade tumours of specific ontogenesis also characterised by potential biphasic or multiphasic differentiation (e.g. malignant melanoma, malignant mesothelioma and germ-cell tumours) are conventionally classified as clinicopathological entities separate from CS.
Pathologically, a mixed (combined or composite) tumour is one that contains fields of multiphasic differentiation, for example anaplastic small-cell lung cancer with non-small-cell elements, or adenocarcinoma with carcinoid tumour. Hybrid tumours are extremely rare and are defined as two different subtypes within one tumour, each of which conforms precisely to its paradigmatic diagnostic category (e.g. adenoid cystic carcinoma and mucoepidermoid carcinoma). So-called collision tumour refers to the juxtaposition of two distinct tumour types coincidentally occurring at the same anatomical site between tumours originating in the same organ and/or between metastases from other locations. Dedifferentiation and high-grade transformation describe the reversion over time of differentiated tumour cells to a less-specialised or more primitive form, as opposed to anaplastic malignancy, denoting undifferentiated or high-grade tumour ab initio (e.g. mesenchymal chondrosarcoma), such that there is evidence of low-grade tumour becoming higher grade with time and/or both elements intermingled at presentation, as is seen, for instance, in dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma.
CS should be considered a unique cancer subtype in which multiple cells within the tumour have undergone genetic and phenotypic transitions. Cells typically display diffuse mitotic activity with widespread atypical mitoses. Immunohistochemistry is generally essential to support an accurate diagnosis (Figs. 1 and 2 ), with the caveat that aberrant expression of epitopes and ambiguous immunophenotyping sometimes confound convenient classification and may be misleading [ ]. Fig. 1 Biphasic tumour growth, typical of that seen in a carcinosarcoma, type ordinaire . Note islands of pleomorphic epithelioid cells surrounded by sheets of atypical spindle cells, some forming short fascicles, with minimal intervening interstitium (haematoxylin and eosin, original magnification ×10) Fig. 2 Cytokeratin-positive, solid, cohesive groups of epithielioid cells ( brown ). Although background spindle cells are substantially negative, scattered and individually disposed sarcomatoid cells also express cytokeratin reactivity (cytokeratin immunoperoxidase, original magnification ×10)
At all locations, CS is an inherently aggressive tumour with a tendency for early metastasis and local recurrence. This review discusses its pathogenesis and describes its natural history, presentation and treatment at a variety of abdominal sites.
Pathogenesis of carcinosarcoma
Several well-documented theories have attempted to account for the dual presence of both epithelial and mesenchymal tissue that characterises CS. The collision theory proposes that both carcinomatous and sarcomatous elements arise independently from distinct cell lines. By contrast, the combination theory suggests that both elements derive from a single progenitor cell. The conversion theory hypothesises that neoplastic cells undergo an epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT), also termed epithelial plasticity, which promotes the development of neoplastic properties, including loss of cellular adhesion and angiogenesis [ , ].
Several studies have used molecular techniques, including loss of heterozygosity analysis and gene arrays, which have demonstrated shared mutations in both the carcinomatous and sarcomatous elements in the vast majority of CS, strongly suggesting a common origin [ , ]. These observations have essentially disproven the collision theory, except for in very rare instances where there has been genuine collision of two independent neoplasms at the same site, each harbouring differing mutations [ ].
The vast majority of CS are, however, of monoclonal origin, most frequently originating from an epithelial-like cell. The observation that adenocarcinoma of the prostate may recur following transurethral resection as prostatic CS lends observational support to the theory of conversion via epithelial–mesenchymal transition [ ]. Several studies have also demonstrated that as well as consisting of distinct epithelial and stromal elements, CS may also harbour transitional cells thst express biomarkers and structural properties of both epithelial and sarcomatoid cells [ ].
Interestingly, there is some evidence that the proportion of sarcomatoid to epithelial cells within a CS may correlate with prognosis. A clinicopathologic study of uterine CS demonstrated that sarcoma-predominant tumours had a shorter recurrence-free survival than tumours with an epithelial predominance [ ]. Similarly, Amant et al. demonstrated a tendency towards sarcomatous differentiation during disease progression [ ]. This increasing tendency to aggressive behaviour as tumours progress from a more epitheloid to a more sarcomatoid tumour is mirrored by a progression of neoplastic biomarkers [ ].
The molecular explanation for CS metastases remains unclear, but they may exhibit either sarcomatoid features alone [ , ], carcinomatous features alone [ ] or mixed histology [ ]. Although epidemiological and clinicopathological data demonstrate that CS is an aggressive tumour with a high rate of metastasis, the precise mechanism of disease dissemination and particular cell type driving distant metastasis in CS remains unknown.
The evolution of targeted gene and whole-exome sequencing is enabling increasing clarification of the precise mutations driving the development of CS. Specific molecular and genetic characteristics known to be essential for maintaining an epithelial phenotype have been shown to be mutated in CS. These data lend further support to the theory of conversion, which appears to occur through an epithelial–mesenchymal transition.
Uterine carcinosarcoma
Epidemiology and pathophysiology
Uterine CS (UCS) in an uncommon uterine malignancy with an incidence of 0.5–3.3 cases per 100,000 women that comprises 4.3% of all uterine corpus tumours. UCS was previously termed malignant mixed Müllerian tumour, or malignant mixed mesodermal tumour. It represents a high-grade endometrial malignancy, and despite its rarity, accounts for 15% of all deaths from uterine malignancy [ , ].
UCS were historically classified and treated as sarcomas, but it is clear that these tumours actually represent a distinct clinical and pathological entity. The carcinomatous element is usually the main component in UCS, as with CS at other sites. The sarcomatous element may consist of either homologous uterine-type tissue or heterologous tissue (frequently cartilage or bone) [ ]. Whilst there is some evidence that sarcoma-predominant tumours have a poorer prognosis, there is also data that demonstrate that epithelial grade and subtype also impact outcome [ , ]. It is also the epithelial component that most commonly metastasises and recurs [ , ]. UCS is therefore increasingly regarded as biologically akin to a dedifferentiated endometrial carcinoma rather than a sarcoma. However, it has many differences to classic endometroid endometrial cancer in terms of natural history, responsiveness to treatment and preponderance for recurrence.
Compared with patients with endometrial adenocarcinoma, those UCS are diagnosed later (median age 70 years) and are more commonly of African Caribbean descent [ ]. UCS is associated with distant metastases in 60% at presentation, with 50% of tumours recurring despite patients undergoing surgery and adjuvant therapy with curative intent. Endometriod endometrial cancer, by contrast, typically presents with low-grade early-stage disease. UCS is also significantly more aggressive than even high-grade endometrial carcinomas, with 5 year survival rates of 33–39% [ , ].
Risk factors for the development of UCS are similar to those for endometrial adenocarcinoma, in particular, prolonged oestrogen exposure, nulliparity, obesity and prolonged use of tamoxifen therapy. A history of pelvic radiotherapy is also a risk factor for UCS [ , ]. Similarly, presentation of UCS is very similar to that of endometrial adenocarcinoma. Evidence of distant metastatic UCS also correlates with elevated CA 125 levels [ ].
Treatment
The majority of patients with UCS present with advanced (stage 3 or 4) disease. An aggressive surgical strategy involving hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and lymphadenectomy, with cytoreduction of extrauterine disease, should be employed in fit women. Complete resection improves survival in stage 3 and 4 disease from 8.6 to 52.3 months ( p < 0.0001) [ , ]. Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection is essential for complete staging and also generates a survival advantage, whereas omentectomy is not necessary [ , ].
The role of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in UCS has not been investigated. However, several randomised trials support the use of adjuvant chemotherapy. Since all UCS is considered high grade, available data supports the use of adjuvant chemotherapy even in patients with early-stage disease [ , ]. In advanced disease, the evidence for adjuvant chemotherapy is compelling, although the precise regimen is still debated. Ifosfamide is the most effective single agent, with a response rate of up to 36% [ ]. The addition of paclitaxel demonstrated a clear survival advantage; however, the better-tolerated combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin is preferable in some instances [ ]. The two regimens were recently compared in a Gynaecology Oncology Group randomised controlled trial, although results are not yet available.
Adjuvant radiotherapy decreases cancer-specific mortality by 21% in stage 1–2 UCS, although this effect disappears in those who have undergone a lymphadenectomy [ ]. Its effect in more advanced disease is limited, since these patients typically succumb to distant metastases rather than local recurrence.
In summary, evidence supports a strategy of treating all early-stage UCS with adjuvant chemotherapy and either adjuvant pelvic radiotherapy (or possibly vaginal brachytherapy) in an attempt to limit systemic and local recurrence, respectively. In advanced disease, cytoreductive surgery should be coupled with systemic therapy, with radiotherapy considered only for palliation. [ ].
Ovarian carcinosarcoma
Epidemiology and pathophysiology
Ovarian CS (OCS) accounts for <1% of all malignant ovarian tumours and typically occurs in postmenopausal women [ ]. The epithelial component may be an adenocarcinoma (serous, epitheloid or undifferentiated) or, alternatively, a clear- or squamous-cell carcinoma [ ]. The mesenchymal component may be leiomyosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, endometrial stromal sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma or chondrosarcoma [ ]. The presence of neuroendocrine elements within the epithelial component has also been reported [ ].
OCS has a worse prognosis than ovarian carcinoma; 75% of women present with stage 3 or 4 disease, and 90% have extraovarian disease at presentation (stage 2–4) [ ]. Median survival is 4–27 months, with a reported overall 5-year survival of <10%, compared with 44% for all-type ovarian cancer [ , ].
Treatment
Radical surgical excision is the mainstay of treatment and is known to improve survival in patients with resectable disease [ ]. OCS responds less effectively to platinum-based chemotherapy than do epithelial ovarian cancers, although these agents are still used, typically in combination with paclitaxel, ifofosfamide or an anthracycline [ , ]. The role of radiotherapy is limited by the advanced stage of the disease at presentation and its predilection for distant metastasis.
Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma
Epidemiology and pathophysiology
Renal CS, also known as sarcomatoid renal-cell carcinoma, is a rare and highly aggressive malignant tumour of the kidney [ ]. To avoid inconsistency, the World Health Organisation classification of renal cancers recommends the term sarcomatoid renal-cell carcinoma (SRCC) to describe all biphasic malignant tumours consisting of sarcomatous and epithelial elements [ ].
CS have been described in all locations within the urinary tract, although case reports are rare. SRCC is typically a solitary tumour known to be particularly aggressive, with an early propensity to metastasis [ , ]. Reported 5-year survival is <10% in T3 tumors [ ]. SRCC most commonly occurs after the age of 60 years and is more prevalent in men. Presentation is typically with haematuria, palpable mass or lumbar or abdominal pain. However, these lesions can grow particularly large before a diagnosis is made. Spontaneous intraperitoneal rupture and life-threatening haemorrhage has also been described [ ].
The epithelial component of SRCC may be a urothelial carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, squamous-cell, or small-cell carcinoma [ ]. The mesenchymal component is most commonly leiomyosarcoma, although a wide variety of other sarcomatous tumours have been described, including liposarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, angiosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve-sheath tumour and Ewing’s sarcoma [ , ].
Treatment
The only potentially curative treatment is radical nephrectomy. There is no evidence to date to support the use of either adjuvant radiotherapy or chemotherapy [ ]. However, given the rarity of the condition and the absence of clinical trials, it is not uncommon for units to consider the use of adjuvant chemotherapy in fit patients with potentially responsive tumours.
Biliary carcinosarcoma
Epidemiology and pathophysiology
CS of the biliary tract is a rare but highly aggressive tumour with poor outcomes, even after attempted curative surgery. Biliary CS (BCS) accounts for <1% of all malignant biliary neoplasms, and there have been no prospective trials addressing its management. Okabyashi et al. performed an extensive literature review and collated data on 131 patients who had undergone resection for BCS between 1970 and 2012 [ ]. Of these, 24 (18%) cases involved the extrahepatic biliary tree, 59 (45%) the gallbladder and 48 (37%) the intrahepatic biliary tree. Presenting symptoms including weight loss, fatigue, jaundice and abdominal pain were reported, in keeping with those seen in adenocarcinoma of the biliary tract [ ]. However, intrahepatic BCS lesions tend to be larger at diagnosis than in adenocarcinoma and are also associated with hepatitis B infection in approximately 50% of patients [ ]. In their pooled analysis, Okabyashi et al. found that intrahepatic lesions consisted predominantly of a cholangiocarcinoma or hepatocellular carcinoma component, with their sarcomatous element generally being significantly smaller in size [ ].
Treatment
As with CS at other anatomical sites, BCS is increasingly thought of as a carcinoma that displays sarcomatoid differentiation and is treated as such. Establishing a preoperative diagnosis can be extremely difficult, and immunohistochemistry techniques are essential. Staging investigations should be performed as for a carcinoma.
Although BCS tend to present at a later stage than carcinomas of the biliary tract, their treatment is similar, with surgery being the only potentially curative treatment option. Adjuvant chemotherapy has not been shown to improve survival in BCS. Okabyashi et al. reviewed 131 cases of CS of the biliary tract and concluded that CS has a greater malignant potential and consequently a poorer prognosis than carcinoma [ ]. Postoperative prognosis was also worse with BCS due to a greater tendency to both local and distant recurrence. Where a preoperative diagnosis of BCS is made, surgeons should consider this tendency to disease recurrence when contemplating an aggressive surgical treatment plan with high associated morbidity, particularly in those of marginal fitness.
Conclusions
CS are rare, highly aggressive tumours consisting of both sarcomatous and carcinomatous elements. They are most commonly found within the abdominal cavity or retroperitoneum, particularly involving the uterus or ovary, but may affect almost any site. Immunohistochemistry techniques are essential for establishing an accurate diagnosis. Epidemiological and clinicopathological data demonstrate that CS share a propensity for rapid growth, local recurrence after surgery and early development of distant metastases. Their biological behaviour appears more akin to that of a dedifferentiated carcinoma than a sarcoma, and treatment strategies generally mirror this observation. However, it is unclear how the relative ratio of sarcomatous and carcinomatous tissue within a tumour and their differing histological subtypes impact its natural history and resistance to therapy. Similarly, little is known about the mechanisms that drive CS to metastasise and whether the two cell types act synergistically to promote metastasis.
It is hoped that centralisation of cancer services, coupled with increasing access to sophisticated molecular and genetic techniques, will enable initiation of multicentre trials to better define the aetiology of CS, clarify treatment decisions and potentially enable development of highly targeted therapies.