Introduction
Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy [ ]. High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) is responsible for more than 80% of ovarian cancer deaths. About 75% of patients with ovarian cancer are diagnosed with advanced disease, and metastases account for the majority of ovarian cancer mortality [ ]. Given the lack of feasible screening for ovarian cancer, there is a profound need for the development of effective therapy for advanced-stage HGSC. However, the exact mechanisms by which primary ovarian carcinoma progresses into metastatic cancer are not completely elucidated.
The differences in gene expressions between primary carcinoma and omental metastases help explain the increased aggressive behavior of the latter [ ]. Metastatic tumor cells in the omentum have a higher proliferative index as determined by their Ki-67 expression and increased resistance to apoptosis [ ]. A number of genes have been shown to be differentially expressed with at least a twofold increase in omental metastases compared to primary HGSC [ ].
NNMT is a cytosolic protein found to be upregulated and associated with poor prognosis in a variety of human malignancies including ovarian cancer cell lines [ , ] gastric [ ], colorectal [ ], pancreatic [ ], lung cancer [ ] and glioblastoma [ ]. NNMT is correlated with aggressive tumor behavior as defined by invasion and migration properties of tumor cells [ ]. It plays a role in epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) and sustenance of cancer stem cells, which have been implicated in invasive and metastatic tumor capability and cancer recurrence [ , ].
To our knowledge, the protein expression of NNMT in HGSC metastases in the omentum has not been described, previously. We assayed the expression of NNMT in primary HGSC and matched metastatic omental carcinoma and investigated the relationship between omental NNMT expression and relapse-free and disease-specific survival.
Materials and Methods
Patient Samples
A total of 90 tissue samples from 35 patients diagnosed with HGSC, 10 patients with benign ovarian tissues and 15 patients with benign omental tissues who were treated at a single institution between October 2009 and November 2018 were included in the study. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks of primary ovarian and matched synchronous metastatic omental HGSC of patients diagnosed with HGSC were collected. The tumors were considered to be primarily ovarian as tubal involvement was not observed. The patients were diagnosed with HGSC according to the World Health Organization (WHO) criteria [ ] and Federation International of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) [ ] stage III disease. The tissues were obtained as part of debulking surgery. Patients underwent debulking surgery with subsequent administration of platinum and taxane-based chemotherapy. Ten blocks of benign ovarian tissue and 15 blocks of benign omental tissue from patients who were operated for benign gynecological indications were included in the study. Patients with a previous diagnosis of malignancy were excluded from the study. The study was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee. Written informed consent was obtained from patients for the use of their tissues in a retrospective research study.
Age, histopathological information, including histomorphological diagnosis, and stage were retrieved from patient records. Relapse-free survival as the interval from the date of completion of primary therapy to the date of clinical or radiological evidence of metastatic disease (confirmed by biopsy) and disease-specific survival as the interval from the date of diagnosis to the time of death due to disease were calculated from follow-up records and National Death Registry, last checked on April 10, 2019.
Immunohistochemistry
The tissue blocks were sliced into 4-μm sections after which the sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated. Heat-induced antigen retrieval was performed with 10 mM of sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.0). Endogenous peroxidase was quenched with 3% hydrogen peroxide for 15 min. Monoclonal mouse antihuman antibody (dilution 1:400, Novus Biologicals, USA, NBP2-00,537) was applied to detect NNMT expression. Following the addition of the secondary antibody, diaminobenzidine was applied for 3 min for the chromogenic reaction. Hematoxylin–eosin stain was used for counterstaining.
Immunoreactivity in each slide was evaluated independently by two experienced blinded pathologists without the knowledge of the clinicopathological characteristics of the patients. The staining was scored based on the staining intensity multiplied by the percentage of positive cells obtained under 400 × microscope. The staining intensity was classified as follows: 0 (no staining), 1 (weak staining), 2 (moderate staining), 3 (strong staining) and 4 (very strong staining). The primary tumor and its adjacent stroma and the metastatic tumor and its adjacent stroma were analyzed for immunoreactivity. Four different scores were calculated; the primary tumor NNMT score, primary tumor’s adjacent stromal NNMT score, omental metastatic tumor NNMT score and metastatic tumor’s adjacent stromal NNMT score.
Statistical Analysis
Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare NNMT scores between matched primary and metastatic cancer as well as between stroma adjacent to primary tumor and stroma adjacent to metastatic tumor. Correlation of NNMT expression with age was obtained using Spearman’s rank-order correlation coefficient. The quantitative staining score data for NNMT expression were converted into dichotic data of high and low NNMT expression by cutoff and sensitivity values, calculated using ROC analyses. Kaplan–Meier analysis was used to investigate the potential association between low and high NNMT expression and survival outcomes, and the log-rank test was used to determine statistical significance. Variables with p value < 0.20 on univariate analyses were included in multivariate analysis (Cox proportional hazards model). p value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 24.0 statistical software package (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL).
Results
The mean age of 35 patients was 57.6 ± 12.1. All of the patients had omental involvement of HGSC.
Illustrative samples of immunohistochemical assessment are shown in Fig. 1 . NNMT immunoreactivity was detected in 19/35 (54.2%), 31/35 (88.6%), 31/35 (88.6%) and 35/35 (100%) in primary tumor, primary tumor’s adjacent stroma, metastatic tumor and metastatic tumor’s adjacent stroma, respectively. NNMT staining was mostly cytoplasmic, although nuclear reactivity was seen as well. NNMT immunoreactivity was not detected in stroma of benign ovarian tissue. The mean NNMT staining scores for each of the tissue types are given in Table 1 . NNMT expression score was significantly higher in omental metastatic tumor than in matched primary tumor ( p < 0.001). NNMT staining score was significantly higher in primary tumor’s adjacent stroma than in primary tumor ( p < 0.001). NNMT staining score was significantly higher in metastatic tumor’s adjacent stroma than in the metastatic tumor ( p < 0.001). NNMT staining score was significantly higher in metastatic tumor stroma than in matched primary tumor stroma ( p < 0.001). NNMT metastatic omental expression was significantly higher than benign omental NNMT expression (24.3 ± 13.1) ( p < 0.001). Fig. 1 Left: Primary HGSC showing differentially expressed NNMT in the tumor (low) and stroma (higher). Right. Metastatic HGSC in the omentum with higher expression of NNMT in stroma compared to tumor. Red arrow indicates tumor, and white arrow indicates stroma. Overall metastatic HGSC exhibited higher NNMT expression than primary HGSC Table 1 Comparison of NNMT expression between primary and metastatic tumor and stroma in HGSC N NNMT score p Primary tumor 35 26.6 ± 61.6 (0–360) < 0.001 Metastatic tumor 35 101.8 ± 97.0 (0–360) Stroma adjacent to primary tumor 35 97.7 ± 97.2 (0–360) < 0.001 Stroma adjacent to metastatic tumor 35 333.4 ± 69.7 (45–360) Primary tumor 35 26.6 ± 61.6 (0–360) < 0.001 Stroma adjacent to primary tumor 35 97.7 ± 97.2 (0–360) Metastatic tumor 35 101.8 ± 97.0 (0–360) < 0.001 Stroma adjacent to metastatic tumor 35 333.4 ± 69.7 (45–360) NNMT nicotinamide N -methyltransferase
For the omental tumor score, the cutoff for low and high NNMT expression was 45. The median disease-specific survival for patients with low and high NNMT expression was 56.1 months (95% CI 41.3–70.9) and 34.5 months (95% CI 32.5–36.5), respectively ( p = 0.01) (Table 2 , Fig. 2 ). The median relapse-free survival for patients with low and high NNMT expression was 34.0 months (95% CI 24.4–43.6) and 13.2 months (95% CI 7.1–19.2), respectively ( p = 0.008) (Table 2 , Fig. 2 ). Metastatic NNMT expression retained its prognostic significance on multivariate analyses ( p = 0.014) (Table 2 ). Table 2 Univariate and multivariate analyses of stage III HGSC by age and NNMT score Parameter Category No. of cases Univariate analysis Multivariate analysis of DSS DSS RFS Hazard ratio (95% CI) No. of events p No. of events p p Age < 60 22 9 0.10 17 0.84 1.2 (0.9–3.6) 0.30 > 60 13 9 7 NNMT score Low 14 6 0.011 7 0.008 6.5 (1.5–9.1) 0.014 High 21 12 17 The p -values in bold indicate statistical significance HGSC high-grade serous carcinoma, DSS disease-specific survival, RFS recurrence-free survival, NNMT score NNMT expression score in omental metastasis of HGSC Fig. 2 A: Disease-specific survival in patients with low and high metastatic tumor NNMT expression. p = 0.011 B: Relapse-free survival in patients with low and high metastatic tumor NNMT expression. p = 0.008
Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate a higher expression of the cytosolic protein and NNMT in metastatic omental tumor than its matched primary tumor in HGSC of the ovary and to correlate NNMT overexpression in metastatic tissue with decreased survival. The primary tumors were ovarian in these cases as at least 17% of HGSC can be seen without the involvement of the fallopian tubes [ ].
Even with advances in therapy, a significant decrease in mortality from ovarian cancer has not been observed in the past decades [ ]. Ovarian cancer remains a major cause of cancer-related mortality in women largely due to the lack of feasible screening, late onset of symptoms, the frequent presence of metastasis at diagnosis and a relapse rate of over 90% [ , , ].
NNMT is a metabolic protein increasingly implicated in cancer dissemination, treatment failure and tumor recurrence [ , ]. It is an enzyme involved in the methylation of nicotinamide ( N ), transferring a methyl group from S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) to produce S-adenosyl- l -homocysteine (SAH) and 1-methylnicotinamide (1MN). NNMT overexpression rather than mutation leads to epigenetic changes through hypomethylation of histones, which among other mechanisms alter activation of phosphorylated protein kinase B (AKT) and methylated protein phosphatase 2A, a proto-oncogene product and a tumor-suppressor protein, respectively [ , ].
This study showed that NNMT expression in metastatic omental tumor was significantly upregulated compared to matched primary tumor. By enabling tumor cells to survive under hypoglycemic conditions, NNMT may enhance cancer growth when cells outnumber their nutrient supplies [ ]. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) involves the transformation of epithelial cells into mesenchymal-like cells and plays a critical role in invasion and metastasis [ , ]. NNMT overexpression is thought to aid metastasis and has been linked to EMT of the tumor with loss of cellular adhesion proteins [ ]. NNMT is shown to promote EMT through upregulation of transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) [ , ].
In this study, the stromal components of both omental and primary HGSC displayed higher NNMT expression than their matched adjacent tumoral components with the highest NNMT expression observed in the stromal component of metastatic HGSC. These findings suggest that NNMT may be involved in desmoplastic tumor reaction, which is the increased growth of dense fibrous tissue surrounding the tumor. The desmoplastic or mesenchymal type of HGSC, classified based on molecular profiling of stromal fibroblasts, has been associated with the poorest survival [ ]. A number of growth factors including TGF- β1 have been shown to be differentially expressed between normal ovarian tissues and stroma adjacent to ovarian carcinoma [ , ]. Desmoplasia is associated with tumor progression and treatment resistance [ ]. A novel therapeutic method targeting desmoplasia in HGSC has been investigated with promising results [ ].
This study’s finding of the association of metastatic tumoral NNMT overexpression with decreased relapse-free survival and disease-specific survival is consistent with previous studies linking NNMT overexpression in primary tumor with poor survival in gastric [ ], pancreatic [ ] and hepatocellular carcinoma [ ]. NNMT has been consistently related to treatment resistance and recurrence [ , , ], which may be explained by its role in EMT and sustenance of cancer stem cells [ , , ]. Both EMT and cancer stem cells are closely linked together and are by now accepted to play a role in metastasis, resistance to treatment and tumor recurrence [ , , , ]. Specifically, the high rate of relapse in ovarian cancer has been attributed to cancer stem cells [ ]. Overexpression of NNMT reduces cellular methylation potential [ ], which may enhance the maintenance of stem cells [ ]. NNMT upregulation may be a specific trait of glioblastoma stem cells [ ] and was also detected in cancer stem cells from head and neck squamous cell carcinoma [ ].
The small sample size is obviously a shortcoming of the study, and the expression of NNMT can be studied further in different histological subtypes of ovarian cancer.
Metastatic HGSC demonstrates aggressive behavior and is responsible for the lethality of ovarian cancer. NNMT may promote cancer progression through desmoplasia, and NNMT overexpression in metastatic tissue appears to be associated with poor survival. NNMT overexpression may be related to p53 mutations and exploration of this potential relationship may reveal shared pathways, which may explain why aberrations of both proteins are associated with DNA methylation and aggressive tumor behavior. NNMT’s role in cancer progression can make it a critical target of HGSC therapy.