Introduction
There is a dramatic change in the prognosis of gestational trophoblastic diseases due to earlier diagnosis and precise measurement of serum human chorionic gonadotropin. Trophoblastic disease should be treated in a center with experienced physicians, and this helps to reduce the mortality [ ]. Gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD) is a group of disorders derived from a pregnancy. This term covers hydatidiform mole (including complete and partial moles), invasive mole, gestational choriocarcinoma and placental site trophoblastic tumor (PSTT) [ ]. The incidence of the disease is quoted to vary from 1 in 125 in Taiwan to 1 in 1500 in the USA [ , ]. Of the reported incidence in the Middle East in Yemen, it is 1 in 164 pregnancies, 1 in 318 in Iraq and 1 in 314 pregnancies in Iran [ , , ].
GTD is reported to be more common in Asia, and this may be due to hospital- and population-based data in addition to dietary and genetic influences. The risk factors include age < 16 and also advanced age [ ]. Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) is a term used to describe GTD requiring chemotherapy. GTN follows hydatidiform mole (60%), previous miscarriage/abortion (30%), normal pregnancy or ectopic gestation (10%). GTN most commonly follows hydatidiform mole as a persistently elevated hCG titer [ ]. About 9–20% women with complete mole develop GTN. If GTN is confined to uterus, it is called nonmetastatic trophoblastic neoplasia [ ]. Many first-trimester abortions are associated with triploidy and are in fact partial moles when examined histologically and confirmed by flow cytometry. Clinically, there is a high hCG titer, a variable amount of abnormal fetus present, and hydatidiform changes in the placenta [ ].
Ultrasound examination of the uterus in early pregnancy is very useful in making the diagnosis of complete or partial mole, but histological examination of the placenta is essential in making the diagnosis. Evacuation is the standard of care for complete and partial moles with a weekly follow-up of serum human chorionic gonadotropin (β hCG) [ ]. In the developed countries like the UK, there are national registry data with central pathology review [ ]. In developing countries, there is paucity of such data though a recent report from Oman of 65 cases over 9 years reported a prevalence of 1 in 386 births [ ].
Another report from South Korea reported an incidence of 130/100,000 pregnancies [ ]. This clinical study was carried out retrospectively over a 11-year period in a tertiary care hospital in Oman (belonging to ministry of health and different from the other study reported), and they were followed up for complications and fertility outcome. The study highlights the importance of complications following partial mole and the importance of follow-up of all women with GTD.
Materials
This was a retrospective descriptive study conducted at a tertiary center (Royal Hospital), from January 2007 to December 2017. All cases with a histopathological report of gestational trophoblastic disease were included. Information was collected from the hospital electronic system.
This study addressed the demographic characteristics, clinical presentation and physical signs. We also studied the management, treatment and follow-up including reproductive outcome. Descriptive statistics were used to describe the demographic characteristics, baseline clinical characteristics, histopathological and sonographic features. All analyses were performed with SPSS (21.0 version); groups were compared using comparison of independent sample t test and Chi-squared test, where indicated. Statistical significance for difference was defined as P < 0.05. Ethical approval was granted by the local committee.
Follow-up was clinical, biochemical with serum β hCG and radiological for suspected metastases and for plateauing beta hCG.
Results
Prevalence
The sample size was 236 during the 11-year period. The prevalence of GTD was 2.7/1000 births in our study. The demographic parameters are shown in Table 1 . The commonest blood group was “O” rhesus positive followed by A and B types. The commonest presenting symptom was vaginal bleeding (48%, Table 2 ). Though most women presented before 16-week, about 5% women presented between 18- and 20-week gestation. Table 3 describes various histological patterns/diagnoses. Typical sonographic appearance of snow storm was seen in 85% women with complete mole, and this was statistically a significant finding. The sonographic picture was suggestive of missed miscarriage in 29% women. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was necessary to confirm invasive mole in three women. Table 1 Demographic data Parameter Mean ± SD Age in years 35 ± 8 Gravida 5 ± 3.5 Parity 3 ± 2.9 Gestational age 10.57 ± 3.2 Table 2 Presenting symptoms Vaginal bleeding 47.5% Amenorrhea 33.9% Nausea and vomiting 4.2% Abdominal pain 4.2% Abdominal distension 2.1% Dizziness 0.4% Table 3 Histological diagnosis Histology Prevalence (%) Complete mole 36.8 Partial mole 61.0 Invasive mole 1.27 Choriocarcinoma 0.42 Placental site trophoblastic disease 0.42
Thyrotoxicosis, preeclampsia and anemia were rare (3.8%, 7.2% and 0.8%, respectively). Mean gestational age was 10.57 ± 3.2 weeks.
Treatment
Surgical evacuation was carried out in most of the women, and 3.8% women needed hysterectomy for the following indications: as an initial management as they completed their family in four women and five women who had persistent trophoblastic disease and refused chemotherapy.
Follow-Up
Serum beta hCG was negative in 67.2 ± 2.74 days in most women (63%). Persistent disease was noted in 29 women (12.3%) of which 5.5% progressed to GTN needing chemotherapy. Of the remaining women with persistent elevated beta hCG, four were lost to follow-up and the remaining had hysterectomy but no chemotherapy. Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) was noted in 17.8% of women with complete mole and 9.7% women with partial mole.
During follow-up, 5.5% women conceived and 25% missed their follow-up.
Chemotherapy
GTN was noted in 5.5% women requiring chemotherapy. Of the remaining, 75% needed single agent and the rest needed EMACO, multiple agent chemotherapy (Table 4 ). Metastases were reported in 4.7%, and most of them were to lungs. Metastasis was reported more with partial mole (9.4%) and in all women with invasive mole, compared to complete mole (2.9%). This was statistically significant with P value < 0.001. Table 4 Chemotherapy for GTN (neoplasia) Single agent (methotrexate) 9 Multiple agent EMACO 3 Refused chemobrain metastases 1
Reproductive Outcome After Treatment
Of the 236 women, 38% conceived after treatment of GTD and 67% had live births, 5% miscarried, 1% had molar pregnancy and 1% had ectopic pregnancy and others conceived more than once with miscarriage or live birth.
There was death of one woman who refused chemotherapy for persistent trophoblastic disease and presented 2 years later with brain metastases in advanced stage.
Discussion
The prevalence of the GTD in our study was much similar to that reported by Riyami et al. and Jagtap et al. from India, and that is not surprising as both reports are from a similar population geographically [ , ]. Histologically partial mole was more common than complete mole and this was almost similar to Riyami et al. [ ]. The incidence of complete hydatidiform mole is around one per 1000 pregnancies and three per 1000 for partial hydatidiform mole according to Seckl et al. [ ]. Subjecting all early trimester products of conception for histopathological study may be the reason for the higher prevalence of partial mole in our study.
Most complete and partial hydatidiform moles have distinctive morphological characteristics, although diagnostic criteria have changed because evacuation is carried out earlier in gestation due to earlier diagnosis by ultrasound. The histological pattern of early partial moles shows patchy villous hydrops with scattered abnormally shaped irregular villi, trophoblastic pseudo-inclusions and patchy trophoblast hyperplasia according to Sebire et al. [ ]. Morphological distinction of non-molar miscarriage from partial hydatidiform mole can be difficult, since villous dysmorphism can be present but without the characteristic trophoblast hyperplasia that is noted in partial mole. Immunostaining for P57 kip2 and ploidy analysis by in situ hybridization or flow cytometry can distinguish diploid from triploid conceptions, helping to diagnose partial mole [ ]. These techniques are not available in our institute, and this study may necessitate such analysis in future.
About 9–20% women with gestational trophoblastic disease develop neoplasia [ ]. The incidence of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia was 17.8% in women with complete mole and 9.7% in women with partial mole, slightly higher than quoted in the literature for partial mole. Feltmate et al. reported a 5.6% incidence of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia after partial mole in 2006 [ ]. Hancock et al. emphasized the importance of proper histological diagnosis of partial mole and the follow-up of partial mole [ ]. However, our prevalence was much higher and this may not be due to over diagnosis in histology as we also had higher metastatic disease in these women.
There was more metastatic disease in women with partial mole than complete mole surprisingly, almost three times more with complete mole. There are some case reports of metastasis in partial mole [ ]. A recent study by Xiao Li et al. reported 10% women with partial mole with lung metastasis and even observational treatment without chemotherapy [ ].
This brings into question of review of slides and strict criteria for diagnosis as carried out in the UK with a centralized approach.
The strength of our study is a good sample size but obviously has the limitation that it is retrospective and 25% missed the follow-up. The most important aspect of is that there were many patients with partial mole possibly due to all products of conception being sent for histological examination. Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia was present in almost 10% with partial mole. Metastatic disease also was high in women with partial molar pregnancy emphasizing the need for histological examination and follow-up of these women with miscarriage.