Introduction
Cervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer and the fourth most common cause for mortality among women in the developing world [ ]. It is estimated that worldwide there are 570,000 new cases and 311,000 deaths each year. In India, it is the second in incidence and mortality among female cancers [ ]. Early-stage cervical cancer is treated by radical hysterectomy that consists of removing the cervix, uterine body, parametrium, upper vagina and the pelvic lymph nodes. This radical operation is recommended for stages IA2, IB1 and in selected cases of stages IB2 and IIA. In young women, it preserves ovarian function, vaginal suppleness and enables pathological assessment for prognostic factors and tailor adjuvant treatment. Like any surgical procedure, there are chances for early and late complications.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the complications and survival outcomes after radical hysterectomy for early-stage cervical cancer by general gynaecologists (prior to subspecialisation) at a medical college hospital.
Methods
This was a retrospective chart review approved by the institutional review board. All 61 patients who underwent modified radical or radical hysterectomy for early-stage (IA to IIA) cervical cancer in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at a tertiary-level teaching hospital, between 2001 and 2010, were included. Patients were included if they had cervical cancer on cervical punch or cone biopsy, stage IA1 with lymphovascular involvement, stages IA2, IB1, IB2 and IIA without extracervical extension on imaging. Patients who received neoadjuvant treatments and were not fit for surgery or preferred radiation therapy as primary treatment were excluded. Clinical details were obtained from discharge summaries and medical records, both paper and electronic. All patients had complete blood count, renal function test, chest x-ray, ECG and ultrasound examination. CT or MRI scan was done only for large or poorly differentiated tumours. Patients with stage IA1 (with LVSI) and IA2 had type II radical hysterectomy, and those with IB and IIA had type III radical hysterectomy. In the initial years, retroperitoneal drains were used or the vaginal vault was left open and peritoneal closure done. All patients who were less than 45 years of age had ovaries transposed above the pelvic brim. Urinary catheters were usually removed at the time of suture removal on ninth or tenth post-operative day. If the residual urine was more than 150 cc, the catheter was re-inserted and removed after another 2 weeks when the majority had a normal residual urine. Patients who could not void after 3 weeks were then taught clean intermittent self-catheterisation. Patients with constipation were given stool softeners. In order to show the survival to be 90%, with a 95% confidence interval of 7.5%, the sample size needed was 64 at 3 years follow-up. Statistical analysis was done using SPSS (version 21.0). The Chi-square test of association was used for categorical variables. Overall survival and progression-free survival were estimated using Kaplan–Meier life table analysis. Survival outcomes in various subgroups were analysed using the log rank test.
Results
During the period 2001–2010, 2210 patients with cervical cancer were treated at our institution, mainly by radiation therapy. Most of the study patients were from Tamil Nadu (67%). The others were from Andhra Pradesh (5%), West Bengal (13%), rest of India (13%), and one was from Bangladesh. The mean age of the patients was 53 years (SD 10) with a range of 33–77 years. The mean age at marriage was 17 years (SD 3.5), and the mean BMI was 26 kg/m 2 (SD 3.7). The majority (70%) of women had three or more children. The majority (72%) of patients had stage IB1 disease. All patients were HIV seronegative. The baseline characteristics are given in Table 1 . The tumours were predominantly squamous cell (78%) with most being large-cell keratinising type. Most tumours (86%) showed moderate differentiation. Only 16% were over 4 cm in size. The mean number of nodes removed was 12 per patient. Table 1 Baseline characteristics of patients who had radical hysterectomy ( n = 61) Factor Number Percentage Parity 1–2 18 29.5 3–4 32 52.5 5 or more 11 18.0 ASA grade I 44 77.0 II 17 23.0 FIGO stage IA1 with LVSI 2 3.3 IA2 5 8.2 IB1 44 72.0 IB2 5 8.2 IIA 5 8.2 Histology Squamous cell 48 78.7 Adenocarcinoma 11 18.0 Others 2 3.3 Grade Well differentiated 2 3.3 Moderately differentiated 44 72.1 Poorly differentiated 5 8.2 Not specified 10 16.4
A third of patients had a blood transfusion; however, only four (6.6%) had a blood loss over 1.5 L. There were one bowel injury and three ureteric injuries that were repaired primarily. Injury to pelvic vessels occurred in three patients. The most common post-operative complication was urinary tract infection (29%) followed by voiding dysfunction (23%). Those who could not void at time of suture removal were recatheterised for another 2–3 weeks. Only two patients had persistent bladder and rectal dysfunction 4 weeks after surgery. Wound dehiscence, requiring re-suturing, occurred in 10% of patients. One patient developed a ureterovaginal fistula that was managed by ureteric DJ stenting. One patient developed venous thromboembolism and was managed with anticoagulants. One patient developed symptomatic lymphedema. One patient developed a lymphocyst that had to be drained. There were no perioperative deaths. Major complications are shown in Table 2 . Table 2 Treatment complications Complication Number Percentage Urinary tract infection 18 29.5 Voiding dysfunction 14 23.0 Wound dehiscence 6 9.8 Blood loss > 1.5L a 4 6.6 Ureteric injury b 3 4.9 Bowel injury 1 1.6 Rectal dysfunction 2 3.3 Thromboembolism 1 1.6 Lymphoedema 1 1.6 Lymphocyst 1 1.6 a Three patients had iliac vessel injury b Among the three ureteric injuries, one developed a fistula
High risk factors were present in 14 patients (23%) and intermediate risk factors in eight patients (13%). Margins were positive in 12 patients, LVSI in 15, deep stromal invasion in 24, nodal metastasis in nine and parametrial involvement in four patients. Adjuvant radiation therapy was given in 22 patients. The pathological risk factors are shown in Table 3 . All patients with any high risk factor or two or more intermediate risk factors were treated after surgery. Patients with just one intermediate risk factor or one positive pelvic node were not given radiation therapy. Adjuvant radiation was given in 22 patients, 19 of whom received both external beam radiation and brachytherapy. Chemotherapy was not given for even patients with high risk factors. Table 3 Pathological risk factors Risk factor Number Percentage Size > 4 cm 10 16.4 Deep stromal invasion 24 39.3 LVSI 15 24.6 Positive margins 12 19.7 Positive nodes 9 14.7 Positive parametrium 4 6.5 Intermediate risk 8 13.1 High risk 14 23.0
Among the 61 patients that underwent open radical hysterectomy, seven (11.5%) were lost to follow-up (< 90 days) and excluded from survival analysis. The mean length of follow-up was 74 months, and the median follow-up was 75 months (range 2–203). Recurrence was documented in ten out of 54 patients (18.5%). Two patients were low risk while eight had intermediate or high risk factors for recurrence. Two patients recurred only at the vault and were cured with radiation. Six patients had pelvic or peritoneal disease, one had pelvic recurrence treated and then a second recurrence with lung metastases and five of these patients succumbed to the disease (Table 4 ). One patient had nodal recurrence and one had disseminated disease, and both died of their disease. The recurrence-free survival (RFS) was 84% at 3 years, 79% at 5 years and 74% at 10 years. The mean RFS was 153 months as shown in Table 5 (95% CI 132–174 months). Recurrences were more common in those who had larger tumours and had high risk factors. Table 4 Details of recurrences Serial no. Stage Adjuvant therapy Site of recurrence Months to recurrence Therapy Status 1 IB2 No Peritoneum 12 Palliation Died at 1.5 years 2 IIA No Bowel 5 Palliation Died at 1 yr 3 IB2 No Neck nodes 13 Palliation Died at 2 years 4 IIA No Pelvis 36 EBRT (second recurrence) Lung 130 Palliation Died at 11 years 5 IB1 No Pelvis 45 Palliation Died at 4.5 years 6 IB1 No Vault 37 EBRT Alive at 11 years 7 IB1 EBRT Vault 57 VBT Alive at 17 years 8 IIA EBRT Pelvis 6 Chemo-RT Alive at 9.5 years 9 IIA EBRT Pelvis 2 Palliation Died at 8 months 10 IB1 EBRT Bone, brain 115 Palliation Died at 10 years Lung, nodes Table 5 Oncological outcomes Time period (years) Recurrence-free survival Overall survival RFS estimate (%) 95% CI OS estimate (%) 95% CI 3 84 73–95 89 80–98 5 79 66–92 84 73–95 10 74 59–89 79 64–93 RFS recurrence-free survival, OS overall survival, 95% CI 95% confidence interval
Death was documented in seven patients due to disease. Another patient also died but cause of death was not known. The overall survival was 89% at 3 years, 84% at 5 years and 79% at 10 years (Table 5 ). Recurrence ( p = 0) and death ( p = 0.002) were significantly more in patients with stages IB2 and IIA as compared to IA and IB1 as shown in Figs. 1 and 2 . However, numbers in each category were too small for meaningful analysis of prognostic factors such as histology or nodal disease. Fig. 1 Recurrence-free survival after radical hysterectomy for cervical cancer by stage Fig. 2 Overall survival after radical hysterectomy for cervical cancer by stage
Discussion
Cervical cancer is the most common cancer in sub-Saharan Africa and some parts of Asia [ ]. It is caused by oncogenic human papillomaviruses (HPV). Other causative co-factors are immunosuppression, HIV infection, high parity, smoking and poor nutrition [ ].
India has 453 million women at risk for cervical cancer. About 132,000 women develop cervical cancer, and 73,000 die from this disease every year [ ]. Although cervical cancer is the second most common cancer in India, there are no vaccine or screening programmes at a national level. Only about 3% of women aged 25–65 are screened for cervical neoplasia. The incidence is on the decline in most parts of the world and even in India; however, the absolute numbers of prevalent cases are still increasing due to population growth. Almost 90% of cases are detected at an advanced stage where surgical treatment is not possible. Access of patients to surgical oncologists, gynaecologic oncologists or radiation oncologists is poor. Hence, many cancer cases are suboptimally managed by those who are not properly trained or at facilities that are inadequately equipped.
Most medical colleges in the country do not have a department of gynaecologic oncology or surgical oncology. This report is from a tertiary-level medical college where all the operations were done by general gynaecologists. The volume of operable cervical cancer cases was only about six cases per year. In 2011, a separate department of gynaecologic oncology was created after faculty were trained and the number of cases of cancer cervix that were operated increased more than threefold. However, this report is from the preceding 10 years.
Staging of cervical cancer is still clinical although imaging and pathology may be incorporated in due course [ ]. Early cervical cancer (stage IIA or less) is preferably treated by surgery in patients who are fit. Most patients are young and surgery would enable preservation of ovarian function and suppleness of the vagina. Radiation therapy is equally effective but would lead to ovarian failure and often lead to vaginal stenosis. However, patients for surgery should be carefully chosen as large exophytic tumours (> 4 cm) and endocervical tumours with deep stromal invasion do poorly with surgery. Multimodal therapy could improve the prognosis but also carries a potential for more complications [ ]. It would be ideal if all patients could have pre-operative imaging such as MRI abdomen and pelvis or a PET/CT scan but most patients are poor and these imaging modalities are not cost-effective [ ]. In this report, the old FIGO 1995 clinical staging system was used and only patients with stages IA1 (lymphovascular invasion positive) to IIA were operated upon.
The main intra-operative complications are blood loss and visceral injury [ ]. Injuries to bladder, ureter, rectum, pelvic vessels and obturator nerve have been reported. These injuries have to be recognised and repaired immediately. The most common early post-operative complications are febrile morbidity due to chest or urinary tract infections and voiding dysfunction. Other complications include paralytic ileus, wound dehiscence, venous thromboembolism (VTE), ureterovaginal and vesicovaginal fistula and lymphocyst. The late complications are lymphoedema, sexual dysfunction and ureteric stricture. In this report, the complications are understandable but a little more than reported. Several surgeons, some of whom were in training, were involved. The only way to avoid all complications of surgery is not to operate. Complications can be decreased by surgical training and subspecialisation.
Post-operative adjuvant chemoradiation after radical hysterectomy is necessary for those with high risk factors: positive lymph nodes, parametrial disease and positive vaginal margins. Systemic chemotherapy has also been used in the presence of nodal disease [ ]. The use of adjuvant radiation therapy in those with intermediate risk factors (large tumours, deep stromal invasion and LVSI) is controversial. It has been suggested that adjuvant therapy can be tailored on clinicopathological factors [ ]. In this study, all patients with intermediate and high risk factors were treated with only radiation therapy. Since 2011, we are giving those with high risk factors chemoradiation. Young patients would benefit if ovaries are transposed out of the pelvis and brachytherapy is avoided [ ] after radical hysterectomy so that their ovarian and sexual functions are not compromised.
After completion of treatment, patients should be followed up every 3 months for the first 2 years, every 6 months for the next 3 years and then annually. Apart from clinical examination at every visit, cytology, HPV testing, chest x-ray and abdominal ultrasound should be done annually. If recurrence is suspected, biopsy and PET-CT scan should be ideally done.
In our study, only one case was done by laparoscopy. The recurrence-free survival and overall survival after endoscopic surgery were comparable to those of open surgery in most retrospective studies [ , ]. However, in the randomised controlled LACC trial, survival was better in the open group as compared to the minimally invasive surgery group [ ]. The 5-year recurrence-free and overall survivals are 92% and 95%, respectively [ ]. In early cervical cancer, 10-year recurrence-free survival is around 90% [ ]. In multivariate analysis, LVSI, deep stromal invasion and lymph nodal metastasis were independent risk factors for recurrence-free survival. For overall survival, nodal metastasis, LVSI and grade 3 differentiation were independent risk factors. The poor or grade 3 differentiation was especially important for adenocarcinomas/adenosquamous carcinomas.
The limitations of this study are that several patients (11.5%) were lost to follow-up, hence recurrence and survival rates. One could analyse these missing cases in a best-case (recurrence of 16.4%, mortality of 13.1%) or worst-case scenario (recurrence of 27.9%, mortality of 24.6%). Since it was a retrospective chart review, clinical information was often poorly documented. The operative injuries in this study were high as surgeons were still in their learning phase. However, the oncological outcomes were comparable to those in the literature [ , , ].
On the other hand, the strength is that our institution has a very good medical records department and there is long-term follow-up on several patients. Since 2003, electronic charts are being maintained. The department has now started a cancer database with a social worker to improve patient follow-up.
Patients with larger and more advanced stages have a worse prognosis. With proper selection of cases and good operative techniques, the survival rates could be improved with minimal complications. In patients with early-stage cervical cancer, radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy offer cure for the majority of patients with preservation of ovarian and vaginal functions.