Introduction
Operative laparoscopy has shown a revolutionary development in the last few decades. This is due to its various advantages over laparotomy, such as better cosmesis, decreased post-operative pain and faster recovery, shorter hospital stay and reduced overall cost of care. For these reasons, laparoscopy has become a choice surgery for various pathologies.
Minimally invasive surgery is becoming increasingly common in the surgical management of gynaecological malignancies. In gynaecological oncology, in the 1970s, laparoscopy was used only for a second-look assessment in ovarian cancer patients. Operative laparoscopy became feasible in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Significant progress has been made in the last two decades. Various studies have shown laparoscopic surgery to be safe and feasible in patients with endometrial, cervical and even early-stage ovarian cancer [ , ].
Laparoscopy has various benefits in cancer patients, including image magnification to visualize metastatic or recurrent disease and improved dissection in challenging areas, such as the paravesical and pararectal spaces. The pressure from pneumoperitoneum prevents bleeding from small vessels. Post-operative chemotherapy or radiation therapy can be initiated earlier, and radiation complications from bowel adhesions are minimized.
Laparoscopy has gained popularity equally amongst doctors and patients over the last few years, and these days there is a trend for laparoscopic surgeries. However, since the training in laparoscopy is prolonged and tedious, surgeons trained for advanced and difficult laparoscopic oncologic surgeries are handful. Also, in India, there are insufficient comprehensive cancer centres to cater to the large patient population. An estimated number of 600,000–700,000 deaths were caused by cancer in India in 2012 [ ]. Majority of the patients do not have access to specialized care and are likely to be managed by surgeons inadequately trained to diagnose and manage malignancies. Lack of oncology exposure, along with the inadequate laparoscopic training, leads to suboptimal management of such cases.
Thus, through this study, conducted in western India, we have tried to study the results of the use of laparoscopy for gynaecological malignancies outside of comprehensive cancer centres. Case records of such patients, referred to this state cancer centre for further management, were retrospectively analysed. They were evaluated for the completeness of the surgery, need for adjuvant therapies and their final outcome.
Materials and Methods
The present retrospective study was conducted in the Department of Gynecological Oncology in the Gujarat Cancer and Research Institute, Ahmedabad, from October 2015 to February 2018. All patients with gynaecological malignancies, referred to our institute after initial laparoscopic surgeries at other centres, were included in the study. A total of 38 patients were included for final analysis. Approval from the institutional review board was obtained. The duration between the primary surgery and the date of visit to our institute was noted. A period of more than one month was considered as delay. The operative notes were evaluated, and an attempt was made to contact the primary surgeon to obtain further information. The radiological investigations and pathological slides of the specimens obtained during the initial surgery were reviewed at our institute. Serum investigations including tumour markers (CA-125, CEA, CA-19.9, HE4, α-fetoprotein, β-HCG, LDH, inhibin B, anti-mullerian hormone and estradiol) were done as per the case.
After clinical assessment and requisite investigations, the cases were discussed in the tumour board. A decision for further management was made according to the merit of each case. The patient and the relatives were counselled and involved in the decision-making. Patients who were operated for malignant ovarian cysts or masses were either planned for complete surgery or referred to chemotherapy. The surgical procedure for restaging included peritoneal washing, careful exploration of the abdomen and pelvis, salpingo-oophorectomy, high-position ligation of the infundibulopelvic ligament, total hysterectomy, omentectomy, peritoneal biopsies, retroperitoneal lymph node dissection and port site excision. Senior gynaecological oncologists performed all the restaging operations. Adjuvant chemotherapy was administered based on the final histopathological examination report and clinical judgement of the gynaecological and medical oncologist.
Post-operative patients with carcinoma cervix were referred to radiation oncologist for curative/palliative radiotherapy. Patients operated for carcinoma of endometrium were planned for either a staging surgery or adjuvant radiotherapy.
Results
The present study included 38 patients referred to our institute for management after undergoing laparoscopic surgeries elsewhere. Ovarian malignancy was found in 27 patients, and 1, 4 and 6 patients had fallopian tube malignancy, cervical carcinoma and uterine malignancy, respectively. The patient characteristics are shown in Table 1 . The median age was 40.5 years (range 19–65 years). Most patients (68.32%) were pre-menopausal, and majority (44.74%) had a parity of ≥ 3. Table 1 Patient characteristics Parameter Ovarian and tubal pathology [ n = 28 (%)] Cervical cancer [ n = 4 (%)] Uterine pathology [ n = 6 (%)] Total [ n = 38 (%)] Age < 20 1 (3.57) 0 0 1 (2.63) 20–39 15 (53.57) 1 (25.0) 0 16 (42.11) 40–59 11 (39.29) 2 (50.0) 5 (83.33) 18 (47.37) ≥ 60 1 (3.57) 1 (25.0) 1 (16.67) 3 (7.89) Menopause No 21 (75.00) 3 (75.0) 2 (33.33) 26 (68.42) Yes 7 (25.00) 1 (25.0) 4 (66.67) 12 (31.58) Parity 0 11 (39.29) 0 0 11 (28.95) 1 2 (7.14) 0 0 2 (5.26) 2 4 (14.28) 1 (25.0) 3 (50.0) 8 (21.05) ≥ 3 11 (39.29) 3 (75.0) 3 (50.0) 17 (44.74) Symptom Infertility 5 (17.86) – – 5 (13.16) Irregular menstrual cycles 4 (14.29) – – 4 (10.53) Post-menopausal bleeding 2 (7.14) – 4 (66.67) 6 (15.79) Abdominal discomfort 3 (10.71) – – 3 (7.89) Pain in abdomen 14 (50.00) – 1 (16.67) 15 (39.47) Vaginal discharge – 1 (25.0) – 1 (2.63) AUB – 3 (75.0) 1 (16.67) 4 (10.53)
All the surgeries were done in private hospitals, except one, which was done in a teaching institute. Four surgeries were done by gynaecological oncologists and the rest by general gynaecologists. Complete operative notes were available in 6 patients, of whom 4 were operated by gynaecological oncologists. Delay in presentation was observed in 17 patients (44.74%). The median duration of delay was 5 months (range 1–84 months). Nine patients (23.68%) did not come back after their first consultation.
Ovarian and Tubal Malignancy
The patient characteristics are highlighted in Table 1 . The median age was 36 years (range 19–65 years). Most patients were nulliparous (39.28%) and pre-menopausal (75%). The most common presenting symptom was pain in abdomen (50%) followed by infertility (17.86%). Pre-operative imaging report was available in 20 patients and showed omental infiltration in 3, ascitis in 4 and pleural effusion in 1 patient. A solid ovarian mass was present in 10 patients and a complex adnexal cyst in 7 patients. The mass was bilateral in 3 patients. The average size of the lesion was 9 cm (range 3–20 cm). Malignancy was an incidental diagnosis in a patient undergoing diagnostic laparoscopy for infertility. No patient had undergone pre-treatment biopsy. One patient had received neo-adjuvant chemotherapy prior to laparoscopic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. One patient was referred after being administered incomplete chemotherapy post-surgery.
Pre-operative CA-125 was done in 8 patients (28.57%), of whom 6 had elevated values. However, only one patient had a value of more than 500 U/ml. A patient with choriocarcinoma of ovary was suspected to be a case of ectopic pregnancy and had serum β-HCG done. No other patient had any tumour markers done.
Table 2 shows the various primary surgeries offered to these patients. Complete laparoscopic staging surgery with pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy and omentectomy was done in only 2 cases, by gynaecological oncologists. One of these had pelvic peritonectomy done as well. Overall, omentum was assessed in 3 cases. Most patients (60.71%) had undergone either unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy or cystectomy. In 2 patients with infertility, ovarian drilling was also performed. Table 2 Primary laparoscopic surgery of ovarian/tubal masses done elsewhere ( n = 28) S. no. Type of primary surgery No. of patients (%) 1 Total hysterectomy + BSO 4 (14.29) 2 Total hysterectomy + USO 2 (7.14) 3 BSO 2 (7.14) 4 USO 8 (28.57) 5 Unilateral cystectomy 9 (32.14) 6 Bilateral cystectomy 1 (3.57) 7 Staging surgery 2 (7.14)
The histopathological characteristic of ovarian/tubal masses is evident from Table 3 . The most common histopathology in this subset of patients was adult granulosa cell tumour, followed by serous papillary adenocarcinoma. Although the capsular status could not be commented upon in 50% of the cases, it was intact and uninvolved in 25%. The tumour was ruptured in 28.57% and suspected to be ruptured in another 35.71%. Removal of the tumour was done by morcellation in one patient. Frozen section was utilized by a gynaecological oncologist in one case. Table 3 Histopathological characteristics of ovarian/tubal masses S. no. Parameter No. of patients Histopathology Ovarian ( n = 27) 1 Serous papillary adenocarcinoma 5 (18.52) 2 Mucinous cystadenocarcinoma 2 (7.41) 3 Endometrioid carcinoma 3 (11.11) 4 Borderline serous papillary tumour 2 (7.41) 5 Borderline mucinous neoplasm 1 (3.70) 6 Poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma 1 (3.70) 7 Adult granulosa cell tumour 9 (33.33) 8 Sertoli–leydig tumour 1 (3.70) 9 Immature teratoma 1 (3.70) 10 Choriocarcinoma 1 (3.70) 11 Malignant mixed germ cell tumour 1 (3.70) Fallopian tube ( n = 1) 1 Serous papillary adenocarcinoma 1 (100.0) Capsular status 1 Breached 4 (14.29) 2 Involved by tumour 3 (10.71) 3 Intact and uninvolved 7 (25.0) 4 Cannot be commented 14 (50.0) Rupture 1 Absent 2 (7.14) 2 Present 8 (28.57) 3 Suspected 10 (35.71) 4 Cannot be commented 8 (28.57) Size ( n = 26) 1 <10 16 (61.53) 2 10–19 9 (34.62) 3 ≥20 1 (3.85) Site 1 Right 15 (53.57) 2 Left 10 (35.71) 3 Bilateral 3 (10.71)
Correlation between the available histopathological report and the slide and material review at our institute was established in all, except 3 cases. (One case of adult granulosa cell tumour was reported as juvenile, one case of moderately differentiated endometrioid carcinoma was reported as borderline endometrioid carcinoma, and one case of adenocarcinoma of ovary was reported to be originating from the fallopian tube.) At our institute, immunohistochemistry was utilized in 4 cases. CA-125 was done for all cases and was found to be raised in 7, with a value more than 500 U/ml in one patient.
At presentation, 13 patients had residual disease on radiological imaging. Of these, 5 patients had only adnexal lesions, 1 patient had a lesion at the vault, 6 patients had multiple metastatic lesions in the abdominal cavity, and 1 patient had an isolated abdominal wall metastasis. Delay in presentation was noted in 8 of these patients.
Seven patients (25%) did not come for follow-up after the initial consultation. One patient with borderline mucinous neoplasm was kept on observation. Four patients were referred to adjuvant chemotherapy. Six patients, with extensive disease and/or unwillingness for immediate second surgery, underwent neo-adjuvant chemotherapy followed by debulking surgery. Ten patients underwent staging/completion surgery, the details of which are provided in Table 4 . Fertility-sparing surgery was done in 3 patients (with the diagnosis of sertoli–leydig cell tumour, granulosa cell tumour and borderline serous papillary tumour). Of the 21 patients who were managed at our institute, 3 were associated with disease at their last follow-up. Table 4 Summary of patients who underwent completion/staging surgery at our institute S. no. Histology Primary surgery Staging surgery Final stage 1 Serous papillary adenocarcinoma TLH + Left ovarian mass removal + RSO Bilateral IP ligament removal + infracolic omentectomy + bilateral PLND IC1 2 Sertoli–leydig cell tumour Meyer’s type 2 Ovarian drilling and removal of solid areas from right ovary Right SO + infracolic omentectomy + right PLND + peritoneal biopsies IA 3 Adult granulosa cell tumour Cystectomy TAH + left SO + infracolic omentectomy + peritoneal biopsies IC1 4 Adenocarcinoma poorly differentiated TLH + right ovarian mass removal Left SO + infracolic omentectomy + bilateral PLND IC1 5 Granulosa cell tumour Left oophorectomy Infracolic omentectomy + left PLND + lower PALND + excision of all port sites and peritoneal nodules IC1 6 Granulosa cell tumour Cystectomy TAH + BSO + infracolic omentectomy + removal of metastatic lesions IIIC 7 Borderline serous papillary tumour Cystectomy + partial oophorectomy Left SO + infracolic omentectomy + left PLND + port site biopsies + peritoneal biopsies IA 8 Borderline serous papillary tumour Right oophorectomy TAH + left SO + right salpingectomy + infracolic omentectomy + bilateral PLND + port site biopsies IA 9 Mucinous cystadenocarcinoma TLH + LSO + right salpingectomy Right adnexal mass removal + infracolic omentectomy + removal of multiple peritoneal deposits + appendicectomy IC1 10 Endometrioid carcinoma Bilateral cystectomy TAH + BSO + infracolic omentectomy + bilateral PLND + bladder peritoneal nodule biopsy + sigmoid deposit biopsy IC1
Cervical and Uterine Malignancies
Table 1 shows the characteristics of patients with cervical and uterine malignancies.
The median age of patients with carcinoma of cervix was 42 years (range 30–61 years). Only one patient with carcinoma cervix had pre-operative cervical assessment and biopsy and was clinically staged. She underwent laparoscopic radical hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and bilateral pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, by a gynaecological oncologist. The other patients had incomplete workup and had undergone total/subtotal hysterectomy. Their details and management at our institute are provided in Table 5 . Table 5 Summary of patients with cervical malignancy who underwent laparoscopic surgery elsewhere S. no. Age of patient Primary surgery HPE review at GCRI Delay Clinical examination Cervical involvement Management 1 61 Laparoscopic radical hysterectomy + BSO + bilateral pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection Moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma; bilateral pelvic lymph nodes involved; para-aortic nodes free; bilateral parametria show foci of tumour cells No No abnormality detected Full thickness Curative radiotherapy of 50 grey in 25 fractions with two CVC 2 40 Subtotal laparoscopic hysterectomy Moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma No Residual lesion of 6–7 cm size + multiple pelvic lymph nodes Full thickness Lost to follow-up 3 30 Total laparoscopic hysterectomy + BSO Moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma Yes (2 months) Vault induration 2/3rd cervical thickness Concurrent chemoradiation (50 grey in 25 fractions with two CVC) 4 44 Total laparoscopic hysterectomy + BSO Squamous cell carcinoma Yes (12 months) Residual/recurrent lesion of 8.5 × 8.5 cm size, port site metastasis, liver and omental metastasis, multiple pelvic lymph nodes – Palliative and basic supportive care
The median age of patients with uterine malignancy was 51 years (range 45–60 years). Five women had menstrual complaints of which four had post-menopausal bleeding. Only one of these had undergone an endometrial sampling. She was managed by a gynaecological oncologist and underwent a comprehensive laparoscopic staging surgery. The other patients had undergone incomplete surgeries. Table 6 provides the details of the patients and their management at our institute. Table 6 Summary of patients with uterine malignancy who underwent laparoscopic surgery elsewhere S. no. Age of patient Primary surgery HPE review at GCRI Delay Radiological imaging at GCRI Management 1 60 TLH Endometrioid adenocarcinoma; well differentiated; one-third myometrial invasion Yes (1 month) No abnormality detected Brachytherapy 2 55 TLH + BSO Endometrioid adenocarcinoma; well differentiated; more than half myometrial invasion No Gross hydronephrosis in left kidney Staging surgery (final stage IB G1) followed by external beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy. 3 46 TLH Endometrioid adenocarcinoma; moderately differentiated; full thickness myometrial invasion Yes (8 months) Bone metastasis; bilateral mild obstructive uropathy; multiply pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes Palliative radiotherapy 4 52 TLH + BSO + Peritoneal fluid cytology + omental sampling + bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection Endometrioid adenocarcinoma; moderately differentiated; more than half myometrial invasion; cytology negative No No abnormality detected External beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy 5 50 LAVH + BSO Endometrial stromal sarcoma; low grade; invades myometrium; mitosis 3–5/10 HPF No Multiple pelvic lymph nodes, largest 17 × 10 mm Patient lost to follow-up. 6 45 TLH + BSO Leiomyosarcoma; grade 1; brisk mitosis Yes (2 months) No abnormality detected Patient lost to follow-up.
Discussion
Surgery is the cornerstone in the management of gynaecological malignancies. It has the advantage of documenting the exact extent of the disease and removing as much of the visible tumour tissue as possible. Surgical staging guides further management and defines the need for adjuvant therapy. The traditionally performed midline vertical approach is being slowly replaced by laparoscopic approach. Since the experience with laparoscopy is limited and expertise to undertake laparoscopic omentectomy and para-aortic lymphadenectomy is universally lacking, incomplete surgery is common, which may compromise the outcome of cancer patients.
Laparoscope was first developed as a diagnostic tool in the 1960s. Gynaecological oncologists initially used the approach for prophylactic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy for high-risk women and for second-look evaluations for patients with a history of ovarian cancer [ ]. The first total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy with pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy was performed by Nezhat et al. [ ]. The benefits of minimal invasive surgery are many and include less blood loss, less wound-related problems, increased patients comfort, shorter hospital stay and earlier recovery. It correlates with a reduction in lymphatic complications after retroperitoneal staging [ , ]. In patients with ovarian masses desiring fertility sparing, laparoscopy has the advantage of less adhesion formation which may enhance fertility. Additionally, adjuvant therapy can be initiated early.
Nowadays, operative laparoscopy is the mainstay in the treatment of benign gynaecological conditions. However, its role in the management of malignant conditions is still evolving. In evaluating their initial 10-year experience with laparoscopy in gynaecological oncology, Chi and colleagues noted a low complication rate (2.5% grade 3–5) and a low conversion rate of 7% [ ].
Beside the expertise needed to perform radical surgeries, issues limiting the use of laparoscopy in malignant conditions include the inability to perform complete staging or debulking, risk of port site metastasis and tumour rupture and dissemination. Early case series have reported port site metastasis to be around 2.3% with an even higher incidence in patients with recurrent ovarian cancer or ascitis [ ]. A 12-year study of 1288 patients found port site metastasis rate of 0.97% [ ]. In our study, port site metastasis was noted in 4 patients (10.53%).
Laparoscopic tumour rupture rates have been reported from 10.5 to 41.8% [ , ]. A retrospective, multicentre study found tumour rupture to be an independent predictor of decreased disease-free survival [ ]. Other studies show that intra-operative rupture leads to up-staging of malignant cysts and the need for adjuvant chemotherapy [ ]. In our study, 64.28% of adnexal masses were found or suspected to have intra-operative rupture. Such high rates may be explained by the fact that most surgeries were done without the suspicion of malignancy by surgeons unaware of oncologic principles. Tumour dissemination may also occur due to inadvertent procedures such as ovarian drilling, tumour aspiration or morcellation.
Laparoscopic procedures are being most frequently offered to young women of reproductive age. The median age in our study was 40.5 years. Management of adnexal masses is one of the most commonly performed laparoscopic surgeries. Same is evident from our study, where 73.68% patients had undergone surgery for adnexal pathologies. Also, laparoscopy is now an integral part of workup of infertility. Five women, in our study, had the primary complaint of infertility. While evaluating such patients laparoscopically, surgery should be abandoned in case of suspicion of malignancy and further diagnostic workup should be done prior to planning definitive treatment.
Compared to benign masses, laparoscopic management of suspicious masses has been found to be associated with an increased risk of intra-operative and post-operative morbidities [ ]. Bellia et al. have found laparoscopic surgery adequate and feasible for the treatment of early-stage ovarian cancer [ ]. In advanced ovarian cancers, laparoscopic cytoreduction after neo-adjuvant chemotherapy has been found feasible and found to decrease morbidity and allow earlier initiation of chemotherapy in experienced centres only [ , ]. Also, there is a definite role of laparoscopy prior to laparotomy, in advanced ovarian cancers to decide whether optimal cytoreduction is possible with upfront surgery [ ]. In the present study, in patients with ovarian/fallopian tube malignancies, complete laparoscopic staging surgery with retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy and omentectomy was done in two cases. Both were performed by gynaecological oncologists. All the other patients had undergone incomplete surgeries. The operative notes were either missing or inadequate. The tumour was suspected to be ruptured in 64.28%. The tumour was removed by morcellation in one patient. The commonest final histopathology in this subset of patients was adult granulosa cell tumour. This may be because stromal tumours present a diagnostic dilemma and are often missed pre-operatively. The second commonest histopathology was serous papillary adenocarcinoma, which is in consonance with the general distribution of ovarian malignancy.
In our study, one patient each of carcinoma cervix and carcinoma endometrium had undergone complete surgery by gynaecological oncologists. The remaining cases had inadequate pre-operative evaluation, and the diagnosis was missed. Although laparoscopic surgery for early-stage cervical and endometrial cancer has been found safe [ ], it should be planned after complete diagnostic evaluation. Total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy has been shown to reduce operative blood loss, post-operative infectious morbidity and length of hospital stay [ ]. The outcome of minimal invasive radical hysterectomy has been found comparable to abdominal radical hysterectomy in terms of the mean number of lymph nodes obtained, nodal metastasis and positive margins [ ]. Intra-operative frozen section evaluation of lymph node biopsies should be utilized. Patients should be referred to comprehensive cancer centres if surgical expertise is unavailable with the primary surgeon.
The LAP2 study of 2616 women, randomized to either laparoscopy or laparotomy for endometrial cancer surgery, found laparoscopic surgery to be comparable to laparotomy in terms of recurrence and survival rates [ ]. Due to earlier ambulation and less wound-related complications, obese women with endometrial cancer are likely to benefit from laparoscopy [ ]. Likewise, it may be helpful to diabetic patients. However, in our study, of all patients with endometrial malignancy, one had undergone endometrial sampling followed by comprehensive staging surgery. The others had undergone inadvertent laparoscopic surgery.
Thus, in our study, we observed that most patients operated outside the cancer institute were not managed appropriately. Malignancy was not suspected even in obvious cases. Only 28.57% patients had undergone CA-125 pre-operatively. The risk of malignancy should be classified, utilizing tools such as RMI/ROMA or ADNEX model. A high index of suspicion for malignancy should be kept for young girls and post-menopausal women. Referral to high-output cancer centres should be done, and laparoscopy should be avoided. We also observed that none of the patients with post-menopausal bleeding had a trans-vaginal ultrasound for documenting the endometrial thickness. Endometrial sampling was done in only one patient. Except for one patient, gross cervical disease was missed in other cases of cervical cancer. Thus, it is imperative to be aware of the signs of malignancy. To avoid inadvertent procedures, one should decline surgery till the diagnostic workup is complete. The choice of laparotomy/laparoscopy depends on the expertise and experience of the surgeon. Although the increasing popularity of laparoscopy keeps the surgeon under pressure to perform surgeries laparoscopically, one should be aware of his or her limitations. Laparoscopy should better be avoided if the requisite skills are lacking. Since comprehensive cancer centres are handful in India, more surgeons need to be trained in oncosurgery as well as laparoscopy.
Lost to follow-up is another issue that needs to be addressed. In our study, 23.68% of patients did not come back after their first consultation. Therefore, importance of counselling by the primary surgeon, regarding the need for a repeat surgery or adjuvant therapy, cannot be understated. Delay in presentation after primary surgery was observed in 44.74% patients. The reasons cited were apprehension/fear of cancer, temporary symptomatic relief, the presumption that the surgery has removed the tumour completely and utilizing alternate forms of therapies.
Conclusion
Although laparoscopy is expanding its role in the management of gynaecological malignancies, inadvertent use is common. Thorough diagnostic workup is essential for optimal outcome. Laparoscopic surgeries for malignancies should be performed by well-trained gynaecological oncologists and be limited to high-output cancer centres.