Introduction
Cervical cancer is curable, if detected early and treated on time. There are various effective screening modalities available to diagnose preinvasive stages of cervical carcinoma. Despite this fact, cervical cancer is the leading cancer and leading cause of cancer mortality in Indian women accounting for 23.3% of all cancer deaths in women [ ].
Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection has a proven role in cervical cancer pathogenesis, and HPV vaccination is a proven helpful tool to reduce incidence of cervical cancer. Pap smear, visual inspection after acetic acid application (VIA) and visual inspection after Lugol’s iodine application (VILI) are simple and cost-effective screening tools available for cervical cancer screening. The annual incidence and prevalence of cervical cancer has decreased by 50–70% after introduction of population-based screening in developed countries [ ]. The proportion of women who undergo Pap smear testing ranges from 68 to 84% in developed countries as compared 2.6–6.9% of women in India [ , , , ].
Unlike developed countries, cervical cancer prevention programs have failed to meet their objectives in developing countries like India due to various financial and social problems. This study was conducted to access awareness of cervical cancer, its screening, HPV infection and its vaccination in women attending tertiary care hospital in north India.
Subjects and Methods
This was a cross-sectional study conducted in the department of obstetrics and gynaecology of VMMC and Safdarjung Hospital. A total of 500 women attending outpatient clinic over 3 months (November 2015–January 2016) were enrolled in a questionnaire-based survey. Known cases of cervical cancer and women who had undergone hysterectomy were excluded from the study. Pretesting of the questionnaire was done on 10 respondents, after which necessary changes were made, and the questionnaire was re-administered. Results were analyzed using SPSS statistical software, and p value of < 0.05 was considered as level of significance.
Results
The mean age of study population was 31.73 years. Majority of women in the study group lie in 21–35 years age group. Maximum women were educated till primary standard and were homemakers (Table 1 ). Table 1 Association of sociodemographic characteristics with awareness of cervical cancer screening Sociodemographic variable Total number Aware of screening N (%) Yes N (%) p value* Age 21–35 years 349 (69.8%) 192 (55%) 0.012 > 35 years 151 (30.2%) 101 (66.9%) Education status Uneducated 72 (14.4%) 18 (25%) 0.00001 Primary 286 (57.2%) 203 (83%) Secondary 91 (18.2%) 83 (91.2%) Graduate or more 51 (10.2%) 48 (94.1%) Occupation Employed 91 (18.2%) 61 (67.10%) 0.437 Housewife 409 (81.8%) 291 (71.15%) * Chi-square test
Majority of women (73%) were aware that cervical cancer is preventable, and 58.6% were aware of availability of screening tests for the same. Despite being aware of screening, only 3% women underwent screening for cervical cancer and majority had got screened only once, while none had regular screening (Table 2 ). Table 2 Awareness of carcinoma cervix and its screening in study population Variable Number Screened Frequency of screening n % Yes n (%) No n (%) Once > 1 but not regular Regular Aware of Ca cervix 365 73 – – – – – Aware of screening for Ca cervix 293 58.6 15 (3%) 485 (97%) 13 2 None
Source for this awareness was a visit to doctor (70% women) while friend, media and family members were sources for awareness in rest 30% of women. Only 3.2% women came to know about cervical cancer and its prevention from there family member (Table 3 ). Table 3 Source of awareness among study population Source Number Percentage Media 43 11.8 Friend 55 15 Doctor 255 70 Family 12 3.2
When asked about awareness of role of human papillomavirus (HPV) in cervical cancer, only 10 women (2%) were aware of this and 8 out of these 10 women were aware of availability of preventive vaccine for HPV. Although none of the study women were vaccinated with HPV vaccine, 99% had an inclination to get vaccinated if provided free of cost to them (Table 4 ). Table 4 Awareness of HPV infection and vaccination Variable Number ( n ) Percentage Aware of role of HPV infection 10 (500) 2 Aware of HPV vaccine 8 (10) 80 Vaccinated 0 (500) 0 Will get vaccinated if provided free of cost 495 (500) 99
Discussion
In the present study, interestingly, majority of women were aware of cancer cervix being a preventable disease and also knew that screening methods are available for the same. Similar study done in rural Kerala also found that 74.20% of their study population knew that cervical cancer could be detected by a screening test, but only 5.8% could name Pap smear as a screening modality for the same [ ]. High literacy rates and dissemination of information via media were the major sources for awareness, in their study. On the contrary, majority of women in our study had received only primary level of education and major source of information was ‘visit to a doctor.’ Study at a tertiary care center in Puducherry reported that less than half of the study population (i.e., 44.5%) knew about cervical cancer and only 18% knew about screening options for same [ ]. Similar results have been reported by another study conducted in Gujarat in staff nurses of a tertiary care hospital, where only 69% of staff nurses were aware of carcinoma cervix while 88% were aware of Pap test [ ]. All these studies from different geographical areas of India depict sociodemographic variation in the knowledge and awareness for prevention and control of cervical cancer.
Despite the high level of awareness among women regarding screening in the present study, only 6.9% of them actually got themselves screened. This screening percentage data are similar to percentage of women screened for carcinoma cervix in the rest of India [ , ]. These figures highlight the low percentage of cervical cancer screening in spite of National Cancer Control Programme introduced way back in 1975. Therefore, in the context of implementing a successful program it is essential to identify the reasons that prevent a woman from using the services.
The reasons for not getting screened in spite of a desire to do so, in our study, were mainly ‘no disease or symptoms,’ ‘no other family member or friend going for it’ and ‘husbands approval.’ Aswathy et al. [ ] reported knowledge factors, resource factor and psychological factors in 51.4, 15.5 and 10.2% women, respectively, as reasons for not getting screened. A study from Kolkata reported that most of the women did not appreciate the importance of preventive health check up in the absence of symptoms [ ]. Fear of discomfort and embarrassment have been reported as barriers for women in a study in Singapore [ ]. Screening is considered a preventive service which is not a priority for asymptomatic women who are struggling to cope with more acute day-to-day problems [ ]. The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) supports these findings that women fail to be screened due to insufficient resources, lack of knowledge, inability to access the healthcare delivery system, individual psychosocial and cultural contexts, fear or limited family support and community participation [ ].
We found that women more than 35 years of age were significantly more aware of screening for cervical cancer ( p value 0.012). This could be explained as probably these women approached a health facility for other types of reproductive needs when an opportunistic screening for cervical cancer was also offered. Similar positive correlation between age and awareness regarding screening was also reported in a study at Kerala [ ]. Working women were more aware of carcinoma cervix screening in comparison with homemakers, although this difference was not statistically significant ( p value 0.437). In our study, better education was found to have significant impact on awareness of carcinoma cervix screening ( p value 0.00001) which is consistent with other studies in Puducherry [ ] and China [ ]. Contrary to this observation, Aswathy et al. [ ] reported that higher levels of education did not seem to have an influence on awareness of carcinoma cervix.
It is now well established that almost all cases of carcinoma cervix harbor high-risk HPV infection. But unfortunately, awareness of HPV as a cause of cervical cancer is remote. In our study, 58.6% of women were aware of cervical cancer screening, and only 10/500 women (2%) were aware of the role of HPV in the same. Further among these 10 women, only 8 had any knowledge regarding HPV vaccination. HPV vaccine although available is still not being incorporated in universal immunization schedule in India considering several social, economic and ethical issues [ ]. As cost remains an important hindering factor for the use of vaccine and majority of women in our study belonged to low socioeconomic status, none of them was vaccinated. However, if provided free of cost, almost everyone was willing to get vaccinated, disproving any involvement of ‘social stigma’ regarding this. These data emphasize on need of spread of HPV vaccination in order to curb down cervical cancer incidence.
In conclusion, to curb carcinoma cervix prevalence in India, screening rates of women need to be improved. As there is marked sociodemographic variation in awareness regarding screening and prevention of cervical cancer, education level does seem to be a major factor for inclination and understanding the importance of screening. So, motivational programs involving community leaders and also the males in the family may prove to be beneficial to achieve these goals.
Measures Taken
After seeing these encouraging results regarding awareness of cancer cervix, our preventive oncology team took it as a challenge and displayed multiple boards (stating the need and various methods of screening) at various strategic sites in hospital, to further increase this figure. Also, continuous video display of screening methods and vaccination for cancer cervix.