Introduction
Globally, cervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer among women and the second most common type in the developing countries [ ]. The majority of the diagnosed cases and deaths occur in developing countries. The high burden of cervical cancer in developing countries reflects the absence of cervical cancer prevention programs as resources for screening and treatment are limited [ ]. There is no doubt that regular screening is the single most important public health strategy to reduce cervical cancer incidence and subsequent mortality [ ]. Cervical cancer is a good example for screening as it has a long natural history, a long preclinical phase, and a premalignant lesion, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). CIN is a premalignant lesion that may be diagnosed at one of the three stages: CIN1, CIN2, or CIN3. The last two lesions can progress to invasive cervical carcinoma if left untreated [ ].
Screening with use of Pap smear, liquid-based cytology, and screening for human papillomavirus using DNA testing resulted in the reduction in cervical cancer in developed countries [ , ]. However, these methods of screening are very difficult to implement in low-resource countries. Therefore, alternative preventive methods for cervical cancer in developing countries are needed.
Non-cytology tests include visual inspection with acetic acid (VIA), visual inspection with acetic acid and magnification (VIAM), and visual inspection with Lugol’s iodine (VILI). They provide immediate results and have been investigated extensively in low-resource settings as alternative screening methods to cervical intraepithelial neoplasia two or higher [ , ]. VIA test can be performed by a range of trained providers including physicians, nurses, and nurse-midwives, and has been shown to be safe, rapid, and efficacious [ ]. The disadvantages are low specificity compared to cytology, leading to unnecessary anxiety, over-diagnosis, and over-treatment. Moreover, false-negative VIA results may lead to delayed diagnosis and treatment. Furthermore, interpretation of test results is difficult in postmenopausal women with brittle, degenerating cervical epithelium, and unsatisfactory in women with partially visible squamocolumnar junction (SCJ), as the visibility of the transformation zone is critical for VIA accuracy [ ]. There is a large variation in the specificity of VIA test which indicates that several variables affect the test performance, including light source, observer training, criteria for test positivity, and the presence of coexisting infection, inflammation, and metaplasia [ ]. Since there is a need to improve the accuracy of VIA test, we conducted this cross-sectional study to compare the performance of our suggested “revised VIA” test to the traditional crude VIA test.
Materials and Methods
The study was conducted in the early cancer detection unit of Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mansoura University Hospitals, Egypt. Five hundred patients who attended the outpatient clinic were included in the study during the period from 01/06/2014 to 31/12/2015.
Type of the Study A cross-sectional study for the assessment of a screening test. Inclusion Criteria 1. Woman who visited early cancer detection unit for screening. 2. Patients complaining of postcoital and contact bleeding. 3. Patients complaining of recurrent abnormal vaginal discharge despite treatment for different types of vaginal infections. Exclusion Criteria 1. Pregnancy. 2. History of proved malignancy of the genital tract. 3. Active vaginal bleeding.
After taking consent from the patient, detailed history was taken including personal history: name, age, residence, occupation, marital status, age at first sexual intercourse, number of marriages, and presence of smoking. The patient complaint, menstrual, and obstetric histories were reported. Past history of genital warts, cervical ulcers, biopsy from cervix, cryotherapy, or LEEP procedure was recorded.
The materials needed for the revised VIA test were gynecological examination table, vaginal speculum, sponge forceps, cotton swabs, diluted vinegar solution (5%), Lugol’s iodine solution, and light source.
The Procedure
After the procedure of screening was explained to the patient, she was placed in lithotomy position, and then, Cusco’s speculum was inserted to visualize the cervix. The cervix was examined by naked eye in the presence of bright light source to detect position, size, shape, color, surface, and abnormal discharge.
Then, 5% of acetic acid solution was applied to cervix for 2 min using cotton swab to perform the visual inspection with acetic acid test (VIA) followed by naked eye examination of cervix to detect the test results. VIA was considered negative when only nabothian cyst is detected and no acetowhite lesion was observed. VIA test was considered positive if any acetowhite lesion is detected on cervix at the site of transformation zone. At the same time, revised VIA test was applied by observing the following five criteria in the lesion: diameter of lesion > 2 cm, persistence acetowhite > 2 min, well-demarcated edges, and extension of lesion to endocervical canal. After that, Lugol’s iodine solution was applied to the cervix, and again, the cervix was examined by naked eye and was considered positive if no mustard yellow iodine was observed in transformation zone. This was considered the fifth item of revised VIA test. When lesion had none of the above criteria, it was reported as acetowhite only. When the lesion shows at least three or more of the revised criteria, it was considered positive for the revised test.
Then, all patients with positive and negative VIA test were referred to colposcopy as a confirmatory procedure to differentiate between normally appearing cervices and cervices suspicious for CIN by acetowhite lesion, punctuation, mosaicism, abnormal vascularity, and bleeding on touch. Biopsy was taken from all suspicious cervices, fixed in formalin, and sent for histopathological examination.
Statistical Analysis
Data entry was done using Microsoft Excel 2010 software. At the end of the study, the data were organized to perform statistical analysis using SPSS (Statistical Package for Social Science) version 21. The normality of data was first tested with one-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. Qualitative data were described using number and percent. Association between categorical variables was tested using chi-squared test. Two-proportion z -test was used to determine whether the difference between two proportions is significant. Continuous variables were presented as mean ± SD (standard deviation) for parametric data. The difference was considered significant when p value is less than or equal 0.05. The performance of VIA test, crude VIA, revised VIA, and VILI test was assessed regarding sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), false-positive rate (FPR), false-negative rate (FNR), accuracy, and prevalence. The performance of crude VIA and revised VIA was then compared with each other.
Ethical Considerations
Oral and formal consent was taken from patients who participated in the study. The study was approved by the Institutional Research Board of Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University (IRB number: MS/586).
Results
Five hundred women were enrolled in the study. The mean age was 37 years (range 17–64 years). Table 1 shows patient’s socio-demographic characteristics of the studied women. Table 1 Patient’s socio-demographic characteristics Age distribution Study group n = 500 No. % < 20 2 0.4 20 − 288 57.6 40 − 203 40.6 > 60 7 1.4 Mean ± SD 37.04 ± 9.78 Residence Urban 219 43.8% Rural 281 56.2% Contraception No 75 15.0% COCs 192 38.4% IUDs 181 36.2% Others 52 10.4% Marital status Married 457 91.4% Divorced 28 5.6% Widow 15 3.0% Number of sexual partners One 463 92.6% More than one (after divorce or death of husband) 37 7.4% Parity Nulliparous 18 3.6% Less than 4 376 75.2% More than 4 (multiparous) 106 21.2% Presentation Screening 54 10.8% Persistent vaginal discharge 212 42.4% Postcoital bleeding 106 21.2% Others 128 25.6%
The flow chart of the study design is shown in Fig. 1 . The positive cases with crude VIA test were 236 of 500 screened women (47%). When we implemented the five criteria of revised VIA test on the positive cases at the same time, only 175 cases (35%) were positive. When the positive cases of VIA test were referred to perform colposcopy and cervical punch biopsy, only eleven cases were proven to be CIN. The prevalence of CIN in this cross-sectional study was 2.2%, CIN 1 represented 64%, and CIN 2 represented 36%. Fig. 1 Flow chart of the study
Tables 2 and 3 compare the performance of crude and revised VIA tests. There were no differences between crude VIA and revised VIA test as regards the sensitivity, negative predictive value, and false-positive rate. On the other hand, there were significant differences between both tests regarding specificity, false-positive rate, and accuracy ( p value = 0.03). There was insignificant difference between both tests regarding positive predictive value ( p value = 0.52). Table 2 Validity of the crude and revised VIA tests in screening of cervical precancerous changes VIA test Diagnostic test by colposcopy and biopsy Total Diseased (CIN) Not diseased Positive 11 225 236 Negative 0 264 264 Total 11 489 500 Revised VIA Positive 11 164 175 Negative 0 325 325 Total 11 489 500 Crude VIA test (%) Revised VIA test (%) p value Sensitivity 100 100 Specificity 55.62 66.46 0.03 Positive predictive value 4.82 6.28 0.52 Negative predictive value 100 100 False-positive rate (FPR) 44.38 33.53 0.03 False-negative rate (FNR) 0 0 Accuracy 56.6 67.0 0.03 Table 3 Level of agreement between crude VIA test and revised VIA test in screening of cervical precancerous changes Crude VIA test Revised VIA test Total Cohen’s kappa p value Positive Negative Positive 171 57 228 0.749 0.001 Negative 4 268 272 Total 175 325 500
There were 264 cases with negative VIA test (53%), and they were referred to colposcopy for confirmation. Two of them had suspicious colposcopic findings in the form of punctuations and abnormal vascularity; however, they were found to be chronic cervicitis after punch biopsy of the cervix.
Discussion
Cervical cancer remains the commonest and the most lethal gynecologic malignancy in the developing countries. In sub-Saharan Africa, age-standardized annual incidence and mortality rates for invasive cervical cancer are 56 and 41 per 100,000 women, respectively, which are the highest rates in the world [ ]. VIA test was used in the developing countries being simple, non-expensive, and easy to be performed; however, it has disadvantage of low specificity [ ].
Recently, the World Health Organization (WHO) provided recommendations for screen-and-treat programs for comprehensive cervical cancer prevention. In recommendation 4, the expert panel recommended a strategy of screen with VIA and treat with cryotherapy over a strategy of screen with cytology followed by colposcopy and treat with cryotherapy [ ]. Moreover, Shastri et al. [ ] concluded from their RCT that screening with VIA test reduced the incidence of invasive cancer in India.
In this study, we suggested a “revised VIA test” which simply implies commenting on five items after application of acetic acid on the cervix instead of considering acetowhite areas as positive in the crude VIA test. The five criteria were as follows: diameter of lesion > 2 cm, persistence acetowhite > 2 min, well-demarcated edges, extension of lesion to endocervical canal, and positive Lugol’s iodine test. All cases were referred to perform colposcopy for confirmation, and punch biopsy was performed for cases with abnormal colposcopic findings. The author selected these five criteria after performing a pilot study and reporting their accuracy and efficacy in screening [ ].
The prevalence of CIN in this cross-sectional study was 2.2% which is less than reported by Bhattacharyya et al. [ ] which was 6.3%. The difference may be due to different sample size and patient criteria. Data from Egyptian studies provide estimates on the prevalence of pre-invasive cervical lesions ranging from 1 to 8% [ , ].
In the current study, colposcopy was regarded as the reference investigation which was applied to all studied group, while biopsy was taken only if CIN was suspected by colposcopy or persistent symptoms despite normal colposcopy. Biopsy as a main confirmatory gold standard test was applied to all VIA positive cases and only 5% of VIA negative cases which were suspicion on colposcopic examination.
The positive cases with crude VIA test were 236 of 500 screened women (47%). Its sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), and accuracy were found to be: 100, 53.98, 4.66, 100, and 55%, respectively, which agreed with findings of other authors [ , ].
When the five criteria of the suggested “revised VIA” test were applied, only 175 cases (35%) were positive. The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), and accuracy became 100, 66.46, 6.28, 100, and 67%, respectively. This figure means that the revised test reduced the number of false-positive cases and therefore improved the specificity and accuracy. Furthermore, the revised VIA test is still simple, rapid, cheap, and with no reported complications.
The drawback of this study is that results may be biased because the reference investigation (biopsy) was restricted to test positive individuals and a sample of test negative persons. Such bias is known to inflate sensitivity estimates. This may be avoided if all individuals receive the reference investigation, irrespective of the test results. Second, there was no cutoff value for the results as we included all types of CIN including CIN 1 which may cause some statistical confusion.
Conclusion
The suggested “revised VIA” test improved the performance of the crude VIA test by reducing false-positive rate and improving its specificity. We recommend further studies with larger sample size to evaluate its performance in low-resource-setting countries.