Introduction
Endometrial carcinoma is the second most common gynecologic malignancy. The most common symptoms are abnormal uterine bleeding and vaginal discharge. Although staged surgically preoperative imaging can help plan treatment more meticulously, transvaginal sonography (TVS) is better than abdominal scans as it uses high-resolution transducers and bypasses the abdominal fat as adiposity is a common association with endometrial carcinoma. Myoinvasion and endocervical extension are not very difficult to identify with modern high-resolution transducers. Taking into account its wide availability, TV Scan can be advocated as the imaging modality of choice for screening for endometrial cancer. The preoperative ultrasound along with histopathology report can guide to tailor the surgery for endometrial carcinoma. Extent of involvement, i.e., myometrial invasion, endocervical extension, adnexal involvement , is an indirect evidence of extent and severity of disease and hence can be a guide to decide about referring patient to higher center for more aggressive surgery.
The study was conducted in the Department of Gynaecological Oncology, Acharya Harihar Regional Cancer Center (AHRCC), Cuttack, and Department of Radiodiagnosis, S.C.B. Medical College, Cuttack, from June 2011 to May 2015. This was a retrospective study which included 192 cases of histopathologically proven cases of endometrial malignancy (either preoperatively or postoperatively) who had undergone a prior transvaginal ultrasonographic examination. Patients who did not have a previous TVS examination and other causes of abnormal uterine bleeding were excluded from the study. All the clinical, imaging, operative and pathological data were collected in pre-designed data collection sheet.
TVS was done with 7.5 MHz convex transvaginal probe. Sagittal and coronal images were obtained in all patients. The double layer endometrial thickness is measured at its maximal thickness on a midline sagittal image of the uterus obtained by TVS.
The TVS data were analyzed with regard to endometrial thickness, echogenicity, contour (wherever available), presence of cystic areas, myometrial invasion, cervical extension and adnexal involvement. Thickened endometrium was defined as an endometrial thickness >5 mm in postmenopausal and >15 mm in premenopausal women, respectively.
The TVS findings and preoperative histopathological data were correlated with postoperative histopathological data. Endometrial thickness was correlated with histopathological types and grades.
The sensitivity of TVS in detection of myometrial and cervical invasion was also estimated.
Results
Age Distribution
The study included patients between the age of 25 and 80 years. Maximum number of patients was in the age group of 51–60 years which comprised 98 cases, i.e., 51%. The mean age was found to be 56.6 years (Table 1 ). Table 1 Age distribution of study group Age group (in years) No. of patients Percentage 25–40 08 04 41–50 30 16 51–60 98 51 61–70 46 24 71–80 09 05
Presenting Symptoms
One hundred and sixty-one patients presented with postmenopausal bleeding. This was the most common symptom which accounted for 84% of cases. Seventeen (8%) patients presented with menorrhagia, 11 (6%) patients with watery discharge per vaginum, 1 (0.5%) patient with dysmenorrhea and 1 (0.5%) patient with pain in lower abdomen. Two cases were diagnosed during routine infertility workup (Table 2 ). Table 2 Presenting symptoms in endometrial malignancy Symptoms No. of patients Percentage Postmenopausal bleeding 161 84 Menorrhagia 17 08 Watery discharge P/V 11 06 Dysmenorrhea 01 0.5 Others 02 1
TVS Findings
TVS findings were normal in 11 (6%) cases. One hundred and eighty-one (94%) cases demonstrated abnormal TVS findings. Well-defined/smooth endometrial thickening was seen in 59 (31%) cases, whereas ill-defined/irregular endometrial thickening was seen in 87 (45%) cases. Frank mass formation was noted in 27 (14%) cases. Cystic changes were seen in 48 (25%) cases. Five (3%) cases were diagnosed as endometrial polyp on TVS, whereas three (1%) cases were diagnosed as submucosal fibroid. The sensitivity of TVS in detecting endometrial pathology was 94.2% (Figs. 1 , 2 , 3 ). Fig. 1 Irregular endometrial thickening Fig. 2 Endometrial thickening with obliteration of subendometrial halo Fig. 3 Smooth endometrial thickening
Out of the 181 cases which demonstrated abnormal TVS findings, lesions were at least partially echogenic in 165 (91%) cases. In the remaining 16 (9%) cases, the lesions were characterized as isoechoic. Myometrial invasion could be identified in 68 cases and 46 cases had superficial myoinvasion, whereas 22 cases showed deep myoinvasion. Either one or both ovaries were involved in eight (4%) cases (Table 3 ). Table 3 TVS findings in endometrial malignancy TVS findings No. of patients Percentage Normal 11 06 Well-defined/smooth endometrial thickening 59 31 Ill-defined/irregular endometrial thickening 87 45 Frank mass formation 27 14 Endometrial polyp 05 03 Submucosal fibroid 03 01 Cystic changes 48 25 Myometrial invasion 68 35 Ovarian involvement 08 (U/L 06 cases B/L 02 cases) 04 Endocervical extension 14 07 Cervical stromal involvement 03 02
Post-op Histopathological Findings
1. Histopathological types: The commonest histological type was endometrioid type of adenocarcinoma which accounted for 153 (80%) cases. Other histological types included clear cell carcinoma—eight (4%) cases, papillary serous carcinoma—five (3%) cases, adenosquamous carcinoma—eight (4%) cases, adenocarcinoma with squamous differentiation—three (1%) cases, undifferentiated carcinoma—11 (6%) cases, sarcoma—one (0.5%) case and malignant mixed mullerian tumor—two (1%) cases. One (0.5%) case which was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma on preoperative study was diagnosed as atypical hyperplasia on post-op histopathological study (Table 4 ). Table 4 Post-op histopathological types Histopathological type No. of patients Percentage Endometrioid adenocarcinoma 153 80 Clear cell carcinoma 008 04 Papillary serous carcinoma 005 03 Adenosquamous carcinoma 008 04 Adenocarcinoma with squamous differentiation 003 01 Undifferentiated carcinoma 011 06 Sarcoma 001 0.5 Malignant mixed mullerian tumor 002 01 Atypical hyperplasia 001 0.5 2. Grades of endometrial malignancy: Forty-six (24%) cases had grade I malignancy, 104 (54%) grade II and 42 (22%) cases had grade III malignancy (Table 5 ). Table 5 Grades of endometrial malignancy Grades No. of patients (preoperative ) Percentage No. of patients (postoperative) Percentage I 54 28 46 24 G1–G2—7 G1–G3—2 II 101 53 104 54 G2–G3—3 G2–G1—1 III 37 19 41 22 G3–G1—1 3. Myometrial invasion: No myometrial invasion could be identified in 66 (34%) cases. Superficial myometrial invasion was present in 92 (48%) cases, whereas deep myometrial invasion was present in 34 (18%) cases (Table 6 ). In TVS, 12 cases having deep myoinvasion were reported as superficial myoinvasion on histopathology and five cases having superficial myoinvasion overestimated as deep myoinvasion. Out of 126 cases of myoinvasion, 58 cases of myometrial invasion were missed by TV scan. Of which 50 out of 92 were superficial myoinvasion and eight out of 34 cases were of deep myoinvasion (more than 50%) at postoperative histopathology. Hence, missing out deep myoinvasion by TV scan is not common when done by an expert sonologist though it may be subjective at times. Table 6 Myometrial invasion Myometrial invasion No. of patients Percentage Absent 66 34 Superficial 92 48 Deep 34 18 Correlation of morphological types of endometrial carcinoma by TVS with post-op histopathological types and grades of tumor 4. Others: Twenty (10%) cases demonstrated endocervical extension. Eight of the 20 cases showed cervical stromal invasion. Lymph nodes were involved in 33 (17%) cases. Either one or both ovaries were involved in eight (4%) cases.
Correlation of TVS Findings with Post-op Histopathological Study
On retrospective analysis, TVS was able to correctly suspect a diagnosis of endometrial pathology in 90% of cases when 5 and 15 mm was used as the upper limit of normal endometrial thickness in symptomatic postmenopausal and premenopausal women, respectively. In 59% of cases which had irregular/ill-defined endometrial thickening or frank mass formation, TVS was able to give a definite diagnosis of endometrial malignancy in 59% of cases (Table 7 a). Table 7 Correlation of post operative histopathology and grade of tumour with TVS features Morphological types Endometrioid Others a Normal (11) 9 (G1-6, G2-3) 2 Smooth endometrial thickening (59) 46 (G1-31, G2-12, G3-3) 13 Irregular endometrial thickening (87) 78 (G1-6, G2-65, G3-7) 9 Frank mass formation (27) 16 (G1-2, G2-8, G3-6) 11 Histopathological types G1 G2 G3 b Endometrioid 39 94 20 Others 7 10 21
Superficial myometrial invasion was present in 92 (48%) cases, whereas deep myometrial invasion was present in 34 (18%) cases in post-op histopathological study. In TVS, 68 cases found to be having myometrial invasion. The sensitivity of TVS in detecting myometrial invasion was found to be 53% (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 a Endometrial thickening with cystic changes. b Postoperative gross specimen
Twenty (10%) cases demonstrated endocervical extension and eight cases had stromal invasion on post-op histopathology, whereas in TVS only 14 cases found to have endocervical extension.
So the pickup rate of cervical involvement had a sensitivity rate of 70%.
Most (62%) of the endometrioid types are moderately differentiated, whereas other histological types (non-endometrioid) (55%) are poorly differentiated (Table 7 b).
Discussion
Endometrial carcinoma (EC) is the most common gynecologic malignancy in developed countries and the second most common gynecologic malignancy in developing countries [ ]. In India, the incidence is 4.3 per 100,000 women [ ]. 75–80% of endometrial carcinoma occurs in postmenopausal women. EC is more common during the 6th and 7th decades of life, with the mean age being 65 years [ ].
The most common symptoms are abnormal uterine bleeding and vaginal discharge. More than 80% of cases present with abnormal uterine bleeding both in menstruating or postmenopausal cases. USG remains the primary and most commonly available imaging modality to evaluate the endometrium, especially in patients with postmenopausal bleeding. The use of a higher-frequency transducer results in significantly improved spatial resolution and less of artifacts as compared to transabdominal scan. Myometrial invasion can be identified by the disruption of subendometrial halo and extension into myometrium. Studies have shown sensitivity rates of 77–100% and specificity of 65–93% in assessing the degree of myometrial invasion [ ]. Under staging is a issue when there is minimal myoinvasion, or the endometrium is distorted [ ]. Other cross-sectional imaging studies such as CT and MRI may be more helpful as a metastatic workup.
Mostly diagnosed after menopause, only 15% of cases diagnosed before the age of 50 years and only 5% before 40 years of age [ ]. This is almost akin to our study where 20% were below 50 years of age and the rest above 50.
Transvaginal sonography (TVS) is advocated as the imaging modality of choice for screening for endometrial cancer in all abnormal uterine bleeding in perimenopause and postmenopause. Definitive diagnosis of EC is generally made via endometrial biopsy or dilatation and curettage.
Type II ECs include the clear-cell, serous papillary subtypes and carcinosarcomas. Type II cancers are not associated with estrogen excess or in a background of atypical hyperplasia. They occur in older women with a high-grade malignancy and with a worse prognosis [ ]. USG pictures may be misleading in this type of endometrial carcinoma as the endometrium may not show thickening or mass formation (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 5 a Mass formation. b Postoperative gross specimen
Based on the degree of differentiation, endometrioid adenocarcinoma are subdivided into grade 1, well-differentiated; grade 2, moderately differentiated; and grade 3, poorly differentiated tumors. Poorly differentiated cancers usually show early myoinvasion which is picked up by good TVS.
Premenopausal endometrial thickness depends on the stage of the menstrual cycle, and thickness of >15 mm considered hyperplasia in the secretory phase. In postmenopausal women, thickness of >5 mm is considered abnormal [ ]. Sonographically thickened endometrium must be considered carcinoma until proven otherwise in postmenopausal women. The endometrium is measured at its maximal thickness on a midline sagittal scan of the uterus obtained by transvaginal US.
Timmermans et al. [ ] concluded that a 3-mm endometrial thickness cutoff on transvaginal ultrasonography reliably excludes endometrial cancer in postmenopausal bleeding. When thickness cutoff of 5 mm on TVS taken, resulted in a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 54% compared to 98 and 35%, respectively, if the cutoff was reduced to 3 mm.
Smith Bindman et al. [ ] studied the sensitivity and specificity of TVUS for detecting EC approach 96 and 61%, respectively, when an endometrial thickness threshold of 5 mm in postmenopausal women is used to define abnormal endometrial thickening.
The earliest finding is a thickened endometrium. Many studies have shown a spectrum of appearance from uniformly thickened echogenic endometrium in well-differentiated endometrioid adenocarcinoma to poorly defined irregular heterogeneous endometrium and heterogenous mass compressing myometrium in high-grade tumors. Our study also shows a large spectrum of ultrasound findings in the studied cases of proved endometrial carcinoma. Hence TVS is a very good tool to identify endometrial carcinoma though more aggressive disease may not have distinct ultrasonological characteristics to differentiate from more indolent cancers.
In most cases, endometrial echogenicity is either diffusely or partially more echogenic than the myometrium. Mostafa Atri et al. [ ] studied that tumors are hyperechoic relative to the myometrium in 76%, and isoechoic in 12% and both hypoechoic and hyperechoic regions in 12% of patients.
It may be associated with hydrometra or hematometra. The role of color and spectral Doppler study in diagnosis of endometrial carcinoma remains controversial. It may show low-resistance flow as compared to normal or benign endometrium.
Cystic endometrial changes though present in majority of benign diseases may also be seen in malignancy. The most common feature associated with tamoxifen is a thickened endometrium with multiple cystic foci. None of our patients in the present study showed such change. Sometimes endometrial cancers may appear like a broad-based polypoidal mass [ ]. In most cases, endometrial echogenicity is either diffusely or partially more echogenic than the myometrium. Mostafa Atri et al. studied that tumors are hypoecoic relative to the myometrium in 76%, and isoechoic in 12% and both hypoechoic and hyper echoic in 12% of patients.
Sonography may show myometrial invasion. An intact subendometrial halo usually indicates superficial invasion, and obliteration indicates deep invasion [ ]. On the contrary, US features cannot reliably differentiate between malignant and benign endometrial pathology when myometrial invasion is absent. Ascher et al. [ ] reported the sensitivity and specificity for TVS in determining the depth of myometrial invasion 69 and 70%, respectively. Our study shows a sensitivity of 53% in diagnosing myometrial invasion which is quite appreciable. Depth of myometrial invasion can be quite accurately made out by high-end ultrasound machines.
EC initially invades the myometrium and then the endocervix. Direct invasion and trans-serosal spread may involve parametrium, bladder and bowel. High-resolution transducers used by experienced ultrasonologists may be able to pick up lesions quite accurately.
Lymph node metastases may also be diagnosed by ultrasonography. The location of lymph nodes metastases reflects the part of the uterus involved. Lymphatic metastasis to common iliac, para-aortic and obturator lymph nodes is involved when tumor is located in the upper corpus and fundus of the uterus, whereas parametrial, paracervical and the obturator nodes are involved in tumor involving middle and lower third of the uterus [ ]. This knowledge of spread is essential to search for nodal enlargement/metastases at specific sites according to the tumor location in the endometrial cavity.
Prognostic indicators includes: the stage of disease at diagnosis, histological grade, depth of myometrial invasion, lymphovascular invasion and lymph node status [ ]. Grade 3 histological type and the presence of greater than 50% depth of myometrial invasion are associated with poor survival and a high prevalence of pelvic and para-aortic lymph node metastases [ ].
Transvaginal ultrasound imaging did not detect any abnormality in hardly 6% of cases, whereas in 94% of the patients the endometrium showed thickening, polyp formation, etc. This is a significant result to confirm that TVS can reliably pick up cases of EC and the details can correlate with grade and type of endometrial carcinoma.
Summary: TV scan is a good imaging modality for preoperative assessment of abnormal uterine bleeding to diagnose endometrial carcinoma. It can indicate high risk factors like deep myoinvasion and endocervical extension to decide upon the surgical treatment in situations where better modalities such as MRI are not available. However, more studies will confirm and validate the findings.