Introduction
Burst abdomen, also known as complete wound failure or dehiscence, has fortunately become a rarity due to the use of non-absorbable suture material for abdomen closure and improved understanding of postoperative care. However, it continues to be a frustrating problem for surgeons who perform large number of laparotomies through a vertical incision, because it is associated with high morbidity, mortality, and increase in treatment costs [ , , , ].
The incidence of burst abdomen as per western data is around 3%. It is much higher in India [ , , ]. Vertical incisions are more prone to burst than transverse incisions; males, elderly, obese, and debilitated patients are more likely to develop burst abdomen than females, young, thin, and patients with good nutritional status [ ]. The other predisposing factors are increase in intra-abdominal pressure postoperatively due to cough, vomiting, ascites, paralytic ileus, bladder distension, etc. Wound infection, hypoproteinemia, prolonged use of corticosteroids, history of having received antineoplastic agents, and uncontrolled diabetes are the other known risk factors for burst abdomen [ ]. Emergency laparotomies are more likely to develop burst abdomen as compared to elective laparotomies [ ].
Burst abdomen usually happens on day 6–8 of laparotomy, though cases have been reported anytime between day 5 and day 14. Appearance of serous discharge is usually the first sign of burst abdomen. The patient suddenly looks ill and complains of ‘something having given away.’
Burst abdomen is frequently encountered by a gynecological oncologist. Many patients are elderly, anemic with poor nutritional status. Carcinoma endometrium is associated with obesity and diabetes mellitus—both of which are known risk factors for burst abdomen. Many patients with ovarian carcinoma have ascites a known risk factor, and those who undergo neoadjuvant chemotherapy are also at risk since antineoplastic agents are associated with poor wound healing.
Purpose
To determine whether burst abdomen can be prevented in gynecological malignancies by layered closure of the abdomen and by the routine use of Ryle’s tube, abdominal and subcutaneous drains.
Methods
A total of 43 patients underwent surgery through a midline vertical incision over a period of 10 months between January 01, 2015 and October 31, 2015. All incisions were closed by mass closure technique using no. 1 loop polypropylene. No drains were used since hemostasis achieved was satisfactory and no bowel injury was encountered. Subcutaneous fat was approximated with interrupted sutures using no. 1–0 polyglactin 910 in patients who had a subcutaneous fat thickness of more than 2 cm. Skin was closed by mattress sutures using no. 1–0 nylon. All patients were started on oral sips once bowel sounds were heard. Ryle’s tube was inserted postoperatively only if the patient developed distention.
During the next 10 months, between November 01, 2015 and August 31, 2016, a total of 36 patients underwent surgery through a right paramedian incision. The abdominal closure was done by closing the peritoneum and rectus sheath separately. Peritoneum was closed using no. 1 polyglactin 910 with continuous sutures. Rectus sheath was closed with no. 1 loop polypropylene using continuous running sutures. An abdominal drain kit no. 32 was placed in all patients as a routine. A suction drain no. 16 was placed in the subcutaneous space as a routine. In very thin patients with little subcutaneous fat, a mini suction drain was placed. No sutures were taken on the subcutaneous fat even in morbidly obese patients. Skin was closed using staplers, with 3–4 intermittent deep mattress sutures taken with no. 1 silk (Fig. 1 ). Ryle’s tube was inserted in all patients during induction and was removed only after patients passed flatus. Oral sips were started only after the patient passed flatus. Suction drain was removed during check dressing done on day 5 of surgery, or when the drain output was negligible, whichever was later. The abdominal drain was removed when the drain output was <50 cc/day, or after patient passed stools, whichever was later. In those cases where the patient continued to have large amount of abdominal drain output, the drain was removed on day 8 irrespective of the discharge amount. All patients had passed stools by then. Fig. 1 Right paramedian incision extending above the level of umbilicus. Skin is closed using staplers with mattress sutures taken with no. 1 silk 3–4 cm apart
The indications for laparotomy, the numbers of obese and diabetic patients in both groups are mentioned in Tables 1 and 2 . Table 1 Number of cases done in each group with indication Indication for laparotomy Group 1 January 01, 2015 to October 31, 2015 Total 43 Group 2 November 01, 2015 to August 31, 2016 Total 36 Carcinoma ovary-staging laparotomy 9 7 Carcinoma ovary interval laparotomy following neoadjuvant chemotherapy 10 9 Recurrent carcinoma ovary 0 1 Benign ovarian tumor 8 6 Borderline ovarian tumor 4 1 Carcinoma endometrium 7 2 Carcinoma cervix 4 8 Uterine sarcoma 1 1 Fallopian tube carcinoma 0 1 Table 2 Breakup of number of diabetic and obese patients in both groups Risk factor for burst abdomen Group 1 January 01, 2015 to October 31, 2015 Total 43 Group 2 November 01, 2015 to August 31, 2016 Total 36 Diabetes mellitus 10 (23%) 4 (11%) Obesity (BMI > 30) 7 (16%) 7 (19%) Diabetes with obesity 6 (14%) 3 (8%)
Results
There were 3 cases of burst abdomen in the first group (6.9%). There were 4 full-length wound gapes and 3 partial wound gapes in the first group (16.2%).
In the second group, there was one case of burst abdomen (2.7%), one case of full-length wound gape (2.7%), one case of drain site infection (2.7%), and one case of stitch sinus (2.7%).
Discussion
Surgical site infection is a major cause of postoperative morbidity and a predisposing factor for burst abdomen [ ]. Despite frequent hand washing, scrubbing of the incision site with povidone–iodine scrub prior to painting and draping of abdomen during surgery, segregation of infected patients from the non-infected, meticulous attention to the dose of antibiotics in obese patients and in prolonged surgeries, aggressive correction of postoperative hypokalemia and hyponatremia (which are associated with paralytic ileus and vomiting, respectively), we were not able to reduce the incidence of wound gape and burst abdomen.
We encountered a total of 3 burst abdomens over a period of 10 months, out of which only one was in a 75-year-old obese diabetic lady. The other two were neither obese nor diabetic and were aged 45 and 55 years, respectively. None of these three patients had ascites or had received neoadjuvant chemotherapy. During the closure of burst abdomen in all the three cases, we noticed that the visceral organs were healthy with no signs of any injury or leak having been overlooked. However, there were two important observations. First, adhesions were forming between a loop of jejunum and the cut end of rectus muscle in one case. The rectus muscle was cut transversely to facilitate better exposure. The peritoneum had probably cut through, or there must have been a gap between the peritoneal bites where the bowel loops had come in contact with rectus muscle. Second, there was no reperitonization over the iliac vessels (which were exposed for performing pelvic node dissection), and the iliac vessels stood exposed. This indicates that reperitonization is not completed by day 8 of surgery.
Immediately after we encountered our third case of burst abdomen, we switched over to a right paramedian incision. The reason behind this step is that we had encountered a case of skin necrosis around the umbilicus with partial wound gape in the first group. Whenever the incision needs to be extended, one has to skirt around the umbilicus in case of a midline incision, whereas the incision can be extended upwards in a straight line in case of a paramedian incision. Infections around the umbilicus are cosmetically disfiguring and associated with extreme discomfort.
Secondly, we decided to close the peritoneum and rectus sheath separately. The reason behind this step was that should the sutures give away at any point, it would result in complete dehiscence in case of mass closure (Fig. 2 ); but if the rectus sheath and peritoneum are closed separately, there would be an intact peritoneum should the rectus sheath give way [ , , , , ]. Our own past experience with retention sutures has been associated with extreme postoperative pain and disfigurement of the abdominal skin. We deliberately chose not to apply retention sutures [ ]. Fig. 2 Upper diagram showing mass closure of the abdomen. Theoretically, the disadvantage is that a single suture is responsible for maintaining the integrity of the closure and should the closure give way at any point, it would result in complete dehiscence. The lower diagram showing layered closure of the abdomen. The theoretical advantage being that should the rectus sheath sutures break, the closure is still held by the peritoneal closure
In the first 10 months, we followed a practice of closing the subcutaneous space with no. 1–0 polyglactin 910 using interrupted sutures. After our experience with wound gapes and burst abdomen, we have now abandoned the practice. We directly close skin after rectus sheath closure, with a suction drain in subcutaneous space (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Healthy wound of a morbidly obese (BMI-45) lady who underwent staging laparotomy for carcinoma ovary on day 8 and after staple removal. She had diabetic nephropathy with serum creatinine—2.6 mg/dl. She had an output of 50 cc of clear serous fluid from the suction drain even on day 12 of laparotomy. She had fluid overload, hypokalemia followed by hyperkalemia in the postoperative period. Her sutures were removed in three stages, and her suction drain was removed on day 18. She was discharged with a healthy wound
For skin closure, we switched over from using mattress sutures using no. 1–0 nylon to staplers. Since we abandoned the practice of taking interrupted sutures on subcutaneous fat, we anchored the two margins of the incision with silk to prevent them sliding against each other (Fig. 1 ).
Thirdly, Ryle’s tube was inserted in all patients during induction and removed only after the patient passed flatus. Oral sips were started after removal of Ryle’s tube. All patients were still on semisolid diet on day 8 of laparotomy. The reason for this measure is that return of bowel activity is slow whenever there is extensive handling of the intestines, paraaortic node dissection, and prolonged surgery. Starting the patients on oral sips prematurely causes abdominal distention and results in stress on the wound. Passage of flatus is more reassuring than mere reappearance of bowel sounds. Inserting a Ryle’s tube helps in keeping the bowels decompressed; there is not much use in inserting Ryle’s tube after distention or paralytic ileus has developed, because the closure has already been exposed to stress. Despite evidence to contrary, we have found that routine placement of Ryle’s tube is useful [ ].
Lastly, we began placing drains in the abdomen and the subcutaneous spaces as a routine. This is, no doubt, a contentious issue with many authorities questioning the benefits.
The analysis of drain output is very revealing. Most patients had significant drain outputs from both subcutaneous and abdominal drain. In some patients, we noticed that there was an increase in the drain outputs from either or both drains after day 4. This is the reason why we kept the suction drain till check dressing or till the output was negligible, whichever was later. Patients with a thick layer of subcutaneous fat had higher drain outputs from suction drain. Even thin patients had measurable drain output from the suction drain. Only 3 patients (8.3%) had nil output throughout. The vascular supply to the subcutaneous tissue is limited, which makes it susceptible to infection [ ]. Keeping a suction drain in the subcutaneous space ensures that there is no fluid collection in the subcutaneous space and prevents seroma formation [ ]. We believe that collection of fluid above the rectus sheath can cause seepage of fluid through the rectus sheath and possible weakening of the sutures.
We were surprised to find that some patients had an abdominal drain output as high as 500 cc/day even after they had passed stools. Bile stained and feculent discharge from the drain indicates bowel injury. Passage of stools following surgery indicates that the bowels are intact, and is reassuring to the surgeon. Hence, we waited for patients to pass stools before removing the abdominal drain. The abdominal drain output in some patients was as high as 300 cc/day even on day 8. The total abdominal drain output over 8 days was as high as 2000 cc in some patients, and this had no correlation with suction drain output. One patient who had nil output from the suction drain had a total drain output of more than 1000 cc from the abdominal drain. A 16-year-old thin girl with poorly differentiated germ cell tumor of the ovary also had more than 1000 cc of drain output over 8 days. Some patients who underwent lymph node dissection, extensive adhesiolysis, interval surgery following neoadjuvant chemotherapy had profuse straw colored drain output from the abdominal drain, whereas some others had moderate drain output. Only those patients who had a benign ovarian tumor—diagnosis of which was confirmed on table by frozen section, with no adhesions—had low drain outputs.
Our reason for routinely placing an abdominal drain is that bowel being an air-containing organ floats whenever there is a significant collection of fluid in the abdominal cavity. And when bowel floats, it comes in contact with the overlying sutures, and there is pressure on the sutures to separate. By placing a drain, we are minimizing the contact between the bowels and the overlying sutures. We removed the abdominal drain when the abdominal drain output fell below 50 cc/day or on day 8, irrespective of the amount. Our reason for this is that all our burst abdomen cases happened on or before day 8. It is uncommon for burst to happen after day 8 if the sutures are absolutely healthy and the patient is feeling good.
By placing a drain in the abdomen and the subcutaneous space, we were also able to check the nature of the drain output from the two spaces. Sometimes the color and character of both the drain fluids were so similar, making us suspect if the closure had given way. In fact, a sudden increase in the drain output of the suction drain is a sign of impending burst.
Check dressing was done on day 5, and the wound was inspected at regular intervals of 3–4 days, or whenever the patients had fever or complaints of pain. One or two staples were removed from points of maximum tenderness to release any possible collection. Staple removal was done in two intervals on day 12 and day 14. Discharge when noted was gently expressed out, and the interval between staple removal was increased. Delayed staple removal had to be done in four patients, and one of them developed a stitch sinus which had to be resutured under local anesthesia.
The reason for this we believe is the use of silk for deep mattress sutures on skin. Silk is soft and requires fewer knots. Most surgeons use silk for fixing drains, and by default we used the same silk suture for taking deep mattress sutures on skin. Silk being antigenic and braided is known to cause wound discharge and stitch sinus [ ]. We have now switched over to no. 1–0 nylon for taking deep mattress sutures on skin.
By following the above techniques, we encountered only one case of burst abdomen in the second group. The patient was a 65-year-old obese (BMI-33) lady with ischemic heart disease and suffers from chronic cough. She underwent staging laparotomy for ovarian tumor; the frozen section confirmed the benign nature of the tumor. She had persistent postoperative cough, and she had burst abdomen on day 7.
We encountered one case of full-length wound gape. The patient was a 58-year-old lady who presented with worsening pain abdomen since 10 days. There was a tender mass felt in the pouch of Douglas. MRI showed a pelvic mass, and her total WBC count was 18000/cu mm. She was taken up for emergency laparotomy with a provisional diagnosis of pelvic abscess, or torsion of ovarian tumor. On table there was neither abscess nor torsion, but a friable purplish mass which turned out to be papillary serous cystadenocarcinoma of the ovary. The patient had an uneventful postoperative phase, but had full-length wound gape with rectus sheath necrosis at the upper end of the wound. The peritoneum was intact, and fortunately, there was no burst.
The main drawback of routinely placing drains in the abdomen and subcutaneous space and inserting a Ryle’s tube is greater patient discomfort [ ] and delayed ambulation. They have to carry both drains in hand and needed support to move about. For this reason, most patients had Foley’s catheter in situ till Ryle’s tube and one of the drains was removed. Patient’s attendants were also anxious seeing 5 tubes—Ryle’s tube, Foley’s catheter, epidural catheter, and one drain on either side of the abdomen, dangling out of the patient.
There are concerns that patients with drains placed for long periods lose a lot of protein and become hypoproteinemic. Serum proteins have to be monitored, and albumin infusions have to be given in hypoproteinemic patients. Also, drains are futile when they get blocked, when they become loose resulting in leakage around the drain site, and when infection develops at the drain site; all these conditions require immediate removal of the drain.
Obviously, there is an increase in costs. But considering the morbidity of burst abdomen, it appears to be worth it.
Conclusion
By routinely placing Ryle’s tube, abdominal and subcutaneous drain, and by suturing the peritoneum and rectus sheath separately, we were able to reduce the incidence of burst abdomen from 6.9 to 2.7% and the incidence of wound gape from 16.3 to 2.7%. However, the most important factor in prevention of burst abdomen is control of predisposing factors. We still had one patient who had burst abdomen because of uncontrolled cough.