Introduction
Vulvar cancer is an uncommon malignant disease that accounts for approximately 3–5 % of all gynecologic malignancies and 1 % of all carcinomas in women [ , ]. Most vulvar cancers occur in postmenopausal women in the seventh decade [ ]. Approximately 75 % are squamous cell carcinomas [ ]. In India, vulvar cancer most often occurs in elderly women (1–3 %) [ ].
Vulvar cancer is considered advanced on the basis of a T3 or a T4 primary tumor or the presence of bulky, positive groin nodes. Patients with T2 lesions that extensively involve the distal vagina, distal urethra, or anus are also considered with this group, since they are generally beyond curative resection with radical vulvectomy alone. In these cases of locally advanced vulvar cancer (LAVC), curative surgery to achieve negative margins is associated with considerable morbidity [ ].
The traditional therapeutic approach to vulvar cancer has been radical surgical excision of the primary tumor and inguino-femoral lymphadenectomy, followed by tailored adjuvant therapy. However, in certain locally advanced cases, tumor cannot be excised with clear resection margins without the need for a stoma (urinary or diverting colostomy). In addition, also in patients with huge, fixed, fungating groin nodes neo-adjuvant treatment may be indicated before surgery. Hence, treatment in these advanced cases needs to be modified, to avoid excessive surgical morbidity with an acceptable cure rate. Such locally advanced cases are uncommon and hence, Level 1 evidence to guide management is scarce [ ].
Nowadays, multi-modality approach, such as neo-adjuvant chemotherapy, radiotherapy or concurrent/sequential chemo-radiotherapy, has been studied as a means to decrease tumor burden and reduce the need for radical exenteration. It increases the operability and potentially reduces severe morbidities. A number of retrospective analyses have established the feasibility of this new therapeutic approach. Some evidence [ ] even suggests that such a tailored approach resulted in an improved 5-year disease-specific survival rate.
We undertook a single-institution-based retrospective study to analyze the effectiveness of neo-adjuvant treatment in such rare cases of LAVC. The present study aimed to evaluate tumor response, significant adverse effects and disease resectability after neo-adjuvant treatment in locally advanced vulvar cancer. The status of the patient with respect to recurrence and disease free survival was also noted.
Materials and Methods
The present study is a retrospective analysis approved by an institutional review board. Ten patients treated between January 2008 and December 2015 at the Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Gujarat Cancer and Research Institute, Ahmedabad, were assessed. All these patients had locally advanced vulvar cancer, involving midline structures, which would have necessitated radical exenterative surgeries for complete cure. In all these patients, primary surgery would involve permanent urinary diversion or colostomy to obtain negative margins. Thus, all patients received preoperative neo-adjuvant therapy.
All patients signed an informed consent. Also, all possible therapeutic options as well as the benefits and drawbacks of each of the procedures were fully explained to patients.
The treatment protocol was discussed with the radiation and medical oncologists before initiation of therapy in each case. The radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy was intended as a preoperative treatment in order to downstage the disease and hence spare the rectum and/or bladder, thus avoiding exenterative surgery and stomas. A wide discrepancy was observed in type and regime of neo-adjuvant therapy given in the study. Either neo-adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy or concurrent/sequential chemo-radiotherapy was used. Neo-adjuvant treatment regimens were found to be tailored according to clinical response assessed after each cycle of chemotherapy or after the completion of radiotherapy, as planned.
Response assessment was determined according to the response criteria in solid tumors (RECIST, version 1.0) [ ]. Local response was monitored via clinical evaluation with lesion measurements (Table 1 ). Subsequently, all patients underwent surgery (radical vulvectomy alone or radical vulvectomy with inguino-femoral lymphadenectomy). Surgery was planned 4–6 weeks after the completion of neo-adjuvant treatment. Eight out of ten patients were operated 5 weeks later. The remaining two patients reported late for surgery and hence were operated about 8 weeks after neo-adjuvant therapy. Postoperative treatment was given when deemed necessary. Patients were being followed up at 3-month interval, with clinical examination and sonography. The status of the patients at last follow-up was studied. Table 1 Clinical response parameter definition Parameter Definition Complete response (CR) Lesion completely disappeared Partial response (PR) Tumor decreased at least 30 % of its original size Progressive disease (PD) Lesion increased ≥20 % of its original size Stable disease (SD) Changes occurring between PR and PD
Results
Characteristics
Between January 2008 and December 2015, 10 patients with locally advanced vulvar cancer were given neo-adjuvant therapy. The patients’ median age was 59.5 years (range 40–72 years). Patients’ characteristics are shown in Table 2 . Seven women had clinical FIGO stage II disease and 3 had stage IVA tumor. Tumor grade was grade 1 in two cases, grade 2 in seven, and grade 3 in one case. Four patients had clinically suspicious inguinal nodes. Three were subjected to fine needle aspiration biopsy, but were negative for malignancy. One patient had a large, fixed, unilateral node. The node later fungated during the course of neo-adjuvant therapy. Six patients had urethral involvement. One of these patients had vaginal involvement of lower half as well. Four patients had disease involving the anal verge. All these cases could not have been managed with primary curative surgery, without compromising continence. Therefore, all these cases received neo-adjuvant therapy, aiming to shrink lesions that would have otherwise required pelvic exenteration. Table 2 Demographic characteristics Serial no. Age (in years) Stage Grade Indications of neo-adjuvant therapy 1 65 II 2 Anal involvement 2 60 II 2 Urethral involvement 3 45 II 3 Anal involvement 4 67 II 2 Urethral involvement 5 55 II 2 Anal involvement 6 72 II 2 Urethral involvement 7 59 IV A 1 Anal involvement 8 65 IV A 1 Urethral involvement + vaginal involvement in lower half 9 45 II 2 Urethral involvement 10 40 IV A 2 Urethral involvement + fixed inguinal lymph nodes
Neo-adjuvant Therapy
Level 1 evidence for type and dose of neo-adjuvant treatment in locally advanced vulvar cancer is sparse in the literature. In our study, also a wide variation in neo-adjuvant treatment plan was observed. Two out of ten patients were planned for radiotherapy alone. One of these was subsequently given chemotherapy, after inadequate response to radiotherapy. Three other patients received radiotherapy with concurrent chemotherapy. The remaining five patients were planned for chemotherapy alone. Three out of these five patients had optimal response and subsequently underwent surgery. Two patients had suboptimal response to chemotherapy and were radiated before surgery. The various neo-adjuvant treatment regimes, with drugs, doses, site, and number of cycles, have been shown in Tables 3 and 4 . Table 3 Neo-adjuvant treatment No. Plan of neo-adjuvant therapy Radiotherapy Chemotherapy Site Dose (Gy) Drug Dose Interval No. of cycles 1 RT Vulva + b/l groins 60 2 RT → CT Vulva only 30 Mtx + 5-FU Mtx: 50 mg 5-FU: 500 mg Weekly 4 3 RT + CT (concurrent) Vulva + b/l groins 60 Cisplatin 50 mg Weekly 5 4 RT + CT (concurrent) Vulva + b/l groins 60 Carboplatin 150 mg Weekly 5 5 RT + CT (concurrent) Vulva + b/l groins 45 Carboplatin 150 mg Weekly 4 Table 4 Neo-adjuvant treatment No. Plan of neo-adjuvant therapy Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Drug Dose Interval No. of cycles Site Dose (Gy) 6 CT Carboplatin + Paclitaxel C: 450 mg P: 260 mg 1 7 CT Carboplatin + Paclitaxel C: 350 mg P: 200 mg 3 weekly 3 8 CT Methotrexate 50 mg Weekly 4 9 CT → RT Carboplatin + Paclitaxel C: 450 mg P: 240 mg 3 weekly 3 Vulva only 30 10 CT → RT → CT Carboplatin + Paclitaxel C: 450 mg P: 260 mg 3 weekly 3 Vulva + b/l groins 30 Methotrexate + 5-FU M: 50 mg 5-FU: 500 mg Weekly 2
Evaluation After Neo-adjuvant Therapy, Surgery, and Pathological Response (Table 5)
All patients had clinical objective response to neo-adjuvant treatment (three had complete clinical response and seven had partial clinical response). Table 5 Results No. Clinical response to neo-adjuvant therapy Surgery Pathological response Resection margin Adjuvant therapy Recurrence DFS (mon) 1 PR RV + BGLND PR Adequate 9 2 CR RV + BGLND CR Adequate 81 3 PR RV PR Close Local, at 3 months 80 4 PR RV PR Adequate 12 5 PR RV PR Close LFU, 1 month after t/t – 6 PR RV + BGLND PR Adequate 79 7 CR RV + BGLND CR Adequate 13 8 PR RV + BGLND PR Close RT (60 Gy) 9 9 CR RV + BGLND PR Close RT (30 Gy) 6 10 PR RV + BGLND PR Close Distant (lungs), at 3 months Died after 6 months
Subsequently all patients underwent surgery. Out of ten patients, seven had radical vulvectomy with bilateral inguino-femoral lymphadenectomy. One of these patients had extensive disease on mons pubis with large fungating node in right inguinal region. A thigh perforator flap was used for primary closure in this case. The remaining three patients underwent only radical vulvectomy. These three patients had non-palpable inguinal nodes. They had already received groin irradiation which would have treated microscopic nodal disease, if present.
Two cases had complete pathological response (no residual tumor), while the remaining eight cases had partial pathologic response with residual tumor in the specimen. All patients had negative resection margins. Adequate resection margins (≥8 mm) were achieved in five cases and no further treatment was given. Five patients had negative but close margins (<8 mm). Of these, two patients received adjuvant radiotherapy.
Morbidity
Postoperative wound complications were acceptable. In one very thin patient, radical vulvectomy resulted in a very large defect which was left partially open. The wound healed well by secondary intention. A second patient had gross disease on mons pubis along with large fungating node in right inguinal region. After resection, a right antero-lateral thigh perforator flap was required to manage the defect. Postoperatively flap uptake was very good with no complications. A third patient had extensive local disease abutting the anal margin and extending to the left ischio-rectal fossa even after neo-adjuvant treatment. Radical vulvectomy was performed with adequate resection margin, also excising the disease from deep in the left ischio-rectal fossa. Primary closure was done. However, the patient had wound dehiscence on the seventh postoperative day and subsequently developed a small ano-vaginal fistula on the sixteenth postoperative day. A diverting colostomy was advised but the patient discharged herself against medical advice.
Recurrence and Follow-Up
One patient was lost to follow-up. Hence, nine cases were evaluable for follow-up and recurrence. Two out of nine patients had recurrence. One had local recurrence, 3 months after the completion of treatment. Wide local excision was done with free margins. She is free of disease since then (DFS—80 months). Another patient had systemic recurrence, to lungs and bone, 3 months after the completion of treatment. Palliative chemotherapy was given, but the patient died 6 months after recurrence. The remaining seven patients are alive without any evidence of disease. The median follow-up period was 10.5 months (range 6–81 months). All patients are on regular follow-up.
Discussion
Optimal management of locally advanced vulvar cancer is controversial and often a debated topic. Locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva has long been surgically treated with en bloc radical vulvectomy and bilateral inguino-femoral lymphadenectomy with partial resection of urethra, vagina, or anus, or by exenteration. These procedures carry risk of severe postsurgical complications and poor quality of life. Numerous studies have shown the feasibility of preoperative neo-adjuvant therapy followed by less extensive surgery in these locally advanced patients [ , , , , ].
Preoperative radiation therapy was developed in the 1980s by Boronow [ , ] and Hacker [ ], and results were encouraging, with avoidance of pelvic exenteration. Boronow’s experience indicates that radiotherapy is effective in achieving regression of locally advanced disease to the point that a more limited resection may be performed, hence preserving the function of adjacent organs and improving quality of life. Several subsequent studies have reported that complete pathologic response rates of 31–55 % can be achieved in these patients with radiation [ , , , , ].
Thomas et al. (1989), was the first to use chemo-radiation for patients with advanced vulvar cancer [ ]. In 2008, Beriwal et al. [ ], reported 18 patients having preoperative IMRT and chemotherapy for LAVC. The median dose of radiation was 46 Gy. Fourteen patients had surgery performed, with a pathologic complete response in nine patients (64 %) and a partial response in 5 (36 %).
In 2012, the GOG reported a phase II trial of radiation and concurrent weekly cisplatin (40 mg/m 2 ) for patients with LAVC. Of the 58 patients in the trial, 40 (69 %) completed total dose of 57.6 Gy of radiation and had at least five cycles of chemotherapy. Following completion of radiation, patients had a surgical resection of residual tumor or biopsy to confirm a complete clinical response. A complete clinical response was achieved in 37 of the 58 patients (64 %); of these 37 patients, 29 (78 %) also had a complete pathologic response confirmed by biopsy. However, 5 of these 29 had failed loco-regionally by the time of the data analysis. With a median follow-up of 24.8 months, 31 women (53.4 %) were alive without evidence of recurrence [ ]. A number of other small studies have evaluated the role of preoperative chemo-radiation in patients with LAVC.
In 2006, a study from Indianapolis, USA, reported the use of neo-adjuvant chemotherapy for patients whose vulvar cancer involved the anus and or urethra. Ten patients received cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), and three received cisplatin alone. Patients receiving cisplatin alone showed no measurable response, while all patients receiving cisplatin and 5-FU achieved at least partial response. With a median follow-up of 49 months (3–90 months) nine patients receiving cisplatin and 5-FU followed by surgery remained disease free, and a stoma was averted in all cases [ ].
A prospective, multicentre study of neo-adjuvant chemotherapy for LAVC was reported from Buenos Aires in 2012. Thirty-five were recruited to the study, and a variety of different chemotherapeutic regimes were used. Twenty-seven patients (77 %) underwent radical surgery, including two who required posterior exenteration for persistent rectal involvement. Twenty-four patients (68.6 %) were without evidence of disease, with a median follow-up of 49 months (range 4–155 months) [ ].
The present retrospective analysis evaluates the treatment efficacy of neo-adjuvant therapy in ten patients of LAVC, treated over a 8-year period. Being uncommon, studies on the management of LAVC are scarce. Therefore, a wide discrepancy was observed in type and regime of neo-adjuvant therapy given in the study.
Two out of ten patients were planned for neo-adjuvant radiotherapy alone. One patient received 60 Gy of radiation and had adequate response. She underwent surgery with partial pathological response in specimen and adequate resection margin. The other patient was subsequently given chemotherapy (methotrexate and 5-FU), after inadequate response to 30 Gy radiation. She had complete clinical response (no visible gross disease present) and following surgery a complete pathologic response was also seen in specimen. Hacker and colleagues, in their eight patients of advanced disease (who needed pelvic exenteration) were able to do conservative excision in 87.5 % with 50 % having a complete pathologic response after neo-adjuvant radiation [ ].
Another three patients out of ten received neo-adjuvant radiotherapy with concurrent chemotherapy. Radiotherapy was given in different doses (two received 60 Gy and one had 45 Gy) with concurrent platinum-based chemotherapy (cisplatin/carboplatin). Two of these three patients were evaluated after a preoperative radiation dose of 50 Gy. However, the anal margin in case no. 3 and the urethra in case no. 4 were still not free of disease. Hence, after discussion with the radiation oncologist, they were given an additional 10 Gy after which surgery was feasible. The third patient received a preoperative radiation dose of 45 Gy after which surgery was performed. All had partial clinical response. Only radical vulvectomy was done in these cases. Groin dissection was not done because groin nodes were not palpable and had already been irradiated. This would have sterilized any microscopic nodal disease if present. Furthermore, two treatment modalities to the clinically normal groin would increase morbidity. All these three patients had partial pathologic response with negative resection margin. However, two cases had close margins. Of these, one had local recurrence, subsequently underwent wide local excision and is free of disease since 80 months. Moore et al. [ ] and Montana et al. [ ] evaluated concurrent chemo-radiation and concluded that a combined treatment is feasible in patients with advanced vulvar cancer and reduces the need for more radical surgery including pelvic exenteration. In this regard, a review of the Cochrane database published in 2006 [ ] concluded that patients with inoperable vulvar cancer benefit from chemo-radiation if followed by surgery, as chemo-radiotherapy reduces the tumor size and thus improves the operability. Leiserowitz et al. [ ] omitted groin dissection after preoperative chemo-radiation with 5-FU, with or without cisplatin, in 23 patients. None of the patients failed in the groins, but they believed with a median radiation dose (36 Gy) to the groins, it is difficult to replicate the results.
The remaining five patients in our study were planned for neo-adjuvant chemotherapy alone. Four patients received carboplatin and paclitaxel. The number of cycles varied. In case number 6, a single cycle of carboplatin and paclitaxel was sufficient to downsize the disease abutting urethra before surgery could be performed. One patient received single agent methotrexate only. Of these, three patients could be operated after adequate response to chemotherapy. One of these three patients had complete clinical and pathological response with adequate resection margin. The other two had partial response, with one having close margin, for which adjuvant radiation was given (60 Gy). Two out of five patients (given neo-adjuvant chemotherapy) had suboptimal response to chemotherapy and were radiated before surgery. Both had partial pathological response with close margins. One of them received adjuvant radiation (30 Gy). The other patient had systemic recurrence, for which palliative chemotherapy was given but the patient died after 6 months of recurrence. In 1985, Bortolozzi et al. [ ] at the University of Milan and Strzinar et al. [ ] in former Yugoslavia were the first to publish encouraging results with polychemotherapy followed by surgery in advanced cancer of the vulva. Wagenaar et al. EORTC study [ ] underlined the role of bleomycin, methotrexate, and lomustina in locally advanced and recurrent disease and in the palliative care of these patients. A subsequent EORTC study [ ] using paclitaxel showed moderate response rates in local control of advanced disease. Francesco Raspagliesi et al. [ ] concluded that NACT with paclitaxel and cisplatin with or without ifosfamide followed by surgery could be considered as a therapeutic option for locally advanced vulvar cancer, based on the high response rate and manageable toxicity. The clinical response rate in the study was 80 %, whereas the pathological responses included one case with complete remission, two with persistent carcinoma in situ, and six invasive cancer cases with tumor shrinkage of more than 50 %. After a median follow-up period of 40 months (range 5–112 months), 55.5 % of patients remained alive with no evidence of disease, including two long-term survivors after recurrence at 5 and 9 years.
Overall, in the present study, all had good subjective response to neo-adjuvant therapy. Three out of ten patients had complete clinical response and rest had partial response. All underwent surgery, and primary stoma could be averted in all the cases. Complete pathological response was seen in two cases, while the rest had residual disease in the specimen. All patients had negative resection margins, with five having adequate resection margin. Two patients received adjuvant radiation due to close margin.
Conclusion
Advanced vulvar cancer is uncommon and presents as a therapeutic dilemma. Management should be individualized, and a multidisciplinary team approach is desirable. Although extensive radical surgery can be curative, it is associated with significant physical and psychological morbidity. More recently, the use of neo-adjuvant therapy has proven to be effective in treating locally advanced vulvar cancer patients for whom radical surgery would be too morbid. We need to acquire more experience with neo-adjuvant therapy.
Despite the impressive response and local control rates, inhomogeneity of the study populations and wide variations in the treatment schemes invalidate attempts to compare results with each other. A randomized trial comparing neo-adjuvant therapy with current standards of care would be useful to achieve a better understanding of this disease and its management. The results of prospective, multicentre clinical trials with larger number of patients are necessary to determine whether these results are reproducible. Definitely, neo-adjuvant therapy holds the promise of better outcomes for patients with locally advanced vulvar cancer.