Introduction
Klippel–Trenaunay syndrome (KTS) is characterized by capillary malformations, cutaneous vascular nevi, bony or soft tissue hypertrophy and abnormal deep or superficial veins. Varicose veins usually affect limbs but can also be present in abdominal or intrapelvic organs. The morbidity of this disease is related to vascular anomalies, which can end in venous insufficiency, thrombophlebitis, limb disparity and thromboembolic disease. The KTS occurs sporadically although it has sometimes appeared in more than one member of the same family. KTS incidence during pregnancy is unknown but it is extremely rare. Pregnancy can increase complications, mainly thromboembolic and hemorrhagic events [ ].
A multiple pregnancy with one fetus and a coexisting hydatidiform mole has an incidence of 1 in 22,000–100,000 pregnancies [ ], with most being complete hydatidiform moles (CHM) with a fetus; however, the reported prevalence for a partial mole with a coexisting fetus is 0.005–0.01 % of pregnancies [ ]. Very few twin pregnancies with a hydatidiform mole and a foetus continue to term as they often have spontaneous or induced terminations for maternal complications.
We present a case of a pregnant woman with KTS associated with complete hydatidiform mole and coexistent fetus that was detected early in pregnancy. This is the first case to report this association. This case deserves reporting because of rare association of these vascular anomalies. Also, we discuss the management dilemma with review of the literature.
Case Report
We reported a case of 27-year-old woman, G2P1, NVD, with a female living child about 5 years old. The patient suffered KTS since her childhood with affection of left leg. The patient had debulking surgery at 6 years old wearing permanent elastic compression sockets since then. There was no history of this disease in family. Menarche occurred at 12 years with regular menstrual cycles since then. No hypotension or loss of consciousness happened when changing the elastic compression or while standing up.
She was referred to our hospital at 14 weeks of gestation with the report of twin gestational sacs: one with a live fetus and the other was a complete hydatidiform mole. The patient did not receive any ovulation induction for this pregnancy. Her general and systemic examinations were unremarkable except for the KTS affecting left lower limb with disparity between limbs regarding size, hyperkeratosis from the previous surgery from the leg down and vascular malformation over the thigh (Fig. 1 ); the uterus was found to be at approximately 24 weeks of gestation. A transabdominal scan (TAS) at our hospital confirmed the findings of a live fetus with a normally appearing placenta in one sac and an adjacent mixed echoic mass with a honeycomb-like pattern, suggestive of a hydatidiform mole (Fig. 2 ). The fetus was situated over the cervical os, while the molar tissue was situated near the fundus. There was no bilateral theca lutein cysts on the scan. The beta human chorionic gonadotropin was very high, at 220,000 IU/L; however, her thyroid function tests were normal. Hemoglobin level was 12 g %. She was counseled regarding the risks involved in continuing the pregnancy, and as per her preference, the pregnancy was terminated. The patient was given oral misoprostol every 4 h for expulsion of the fetus as it was in the lower sac and measuring about 10 cm fetal size so, avoiding manipulation of the fetus with evacuation. Trophoblast embolization is a theoretical risk and its risk in this case is lower regarding the risk of fetal extraction. Heavy vaginal bleeding with ballooned cervix and severe pain occurred, so she was transferred to OR. Surgical evacuation under general anesthesia and endotracheal intubation was done where the cervix was dilated by Hegar’s dilator, evacuation by ovum forceps for the fetus in pieces then vacuum aspiration for the complete mole while oxytocin infusion was given (Fig. 3 ). Evacuation was done under ultrasound guidance to avoid fundal perforation especially on the thinned right side of the uterus (molar tissue site). During surgery, there were no complications and no problems in the post-abortive period regarding abnormal bleeding. Histopathological examination confirmed vesicular mole with a normal fetus. Serial beta HCG values were done and decreasing titer was noted. B-hCG reached normal levels at the end of 5 weeks, and she is now on post-molar surveillance for 1 year while on oral combined contraceptives. Fig. 1 Klippel–Trenaunay syndrome with venous malformations and hypertrophy of involved left lower limb; lymphedema managed by debulking surgery with hyperkeratosis in the foot and leg with vascular malformation in the thigh Fig. 2 Transabdominal ultrasound showing upper molar mass near the fundus beside a normal placenta and lower fetus Fig. 3 Normal fetus and placenta evacuated by extraction ( a ) and vacuum aspiration of the molar changes ( b )
Discussion
Klippel–Trenaunay syndrome is a congenital vascular disorder with a low frequency (<1:10.000) [ ]. In about 1 % of cases of KTS, a genetic pattern has been described, but the gene has not yet been identified [ ]. In some cases, KTS is associated with the presence of hemangiomas in the patient’s family. KTS is characterized by capillary malformations, cutaneous vascular nevi, bony or soft tissue hypertrophy and abnormal deep or superficial veins. At least two over three main symptoms (port-wine stains, varicosity and hypertrophy of soft tissues and bones) must be present for the diagnosis KTS [ ]. The first case was described by Maurice Klippel and Paul Trenaunay in 1900 [ ]. Later, Frederick Parkes Weber reported other cases with the same clinical findings associated with deep arteriorvenous fistula. Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome is a pure low flow condition, while Parkes Weber syndrome is characterized by significant arteriovenous fistulas. The etiology of the syndrome is unknown. Several theories have been proposed including abnormalities of the sympathic nerve system resulting in dilatation of the arteriovenous anastomosis or obstruction of the deep veins and persistence of fetal microscopic small arteriovenous anastomosis [ ].
KTS is extremely rare in pregnant women and nearly twenty cases have been described. It puts a pregnant woman at increased obstetric risk and can increase complications, mainly thromboembolic and hemorrhagic events. KTS is a high risk obstetric situation and we have to be aware of maternal and fetal complications [ ]. The normal physiologic changes in pregnancy, such as increased venous pressure, leg edema, venous stasis and cardiac output, exacerbate the problems of this syndrome and increase the risk of adverse events during pregnancy such as thromboembolism and hemorrhage [ ]. Coagulopathy is the most frequently reported complication during pregnancy in women with KTS, including deep venous thrombosis and other thromboembolic problems both during and after delivery. It is considered that the risk is 10 times higher than in the normal population. In spite of this, there are no prospective trials on the use of anticoagulants and during pregnancy in this syndrome [ ]. Different reports on prenatal diagnosis of KTS in fetuses have been published [ ]. The fetus should be checked for prenatal diagnosis of limb hypertrophy or multiloculated cystic lesions, which can be easily performed by color Doppler flow. Sometimes this syndrome has been related to intrauterine growth restriction [ ]. A gynecological examination should be made before choosing the best way of delivering in order to identify the presence of varicose veins in uterine cervix or vaginal wall, which could contraindicate vaginal delivery. Except for this, the delivery is chosen according to obstetric indications. Cesarean section can lead to further complications due to the existence of varicose uterine or abdominal wall veins that can be detected on ultrasound. Epidural anesthetic is the best option during labor. The presence of neuraxial vascular anomalies and coagulopathy can increase the risk of epidural hematoma [ ]. The management of these patients needs a multidisciplinary approach between gynecologist, anesthesiologist, hematologist and vascular surgeon.
Twin pregnancies with one normal fetus and a coexisting molar pregnancy (complete or partial) are fraught with complications for both the mother and the fetus. For the mother, in addition to hemorrhagic complications, there are increased risks of medical problems such as hyperemesis, preeclampsia, thyrotoxicosis and trophoblastic emboli. The risk of persistent trophoblastic disease (PTD) in twin molar pregnancy is more than in a single complete mole and is also increased in partial moles with a diploid fetus, compared to triploidy. Preeclampsia has been reported in 34 % of these pregnancies [ ].
There are case reports where patients required hysterotomies and hysterectomies for severe bleeding. The risks to the fetus when pregnancy continues in these cases include abortion, intrauterine fetal demise, preterm labor and fetal growth restrictions. Live births in these pregnancies vary from 16.56 % [ ]. Another rare problem that has been reported is the molar placenta previa developing placental abscesses. It has been observed that there is a tendency for these molar tissues to be in the lower segment of the uterus, closer to the os, thereby resulting in bleeding (on and off) [ ]. Hysterectomies have recently been reported for molar placenta previa–accreta and also for spontaneous fundal rupture of the uterus in the second trimester. The risk of persistent trophoblastic disease (PTD) in complete hydatiform mole (CHM) is said to be as high as 16.50 % [ ]. The risk of a partial mole developing PTD is 14–33 % [ ]. Stellar et al. noted a higher risk of developing PTD in cases with twin molar pregnancies with a coexistent fetus, when compared to singleton molar pregnancies. PTD not only is more common, but requires multiple cycles of combination chemotherapy [ ]. Another interesting observation made in some studies is that PTD was more often seen in those twin molar pregnancies with maternal complications such as preeclampsia and hyperemesis.
Prenatal diagnosis by amniocentesis has been advocated to rule out triploidy or any other genetic abnormalities, before advising the continuation of a pregnancy. Chorionic villi sampling for karyotype is not recommended, as it may vary from that of the fetus because of confined placental mosaicism. Most often, the triploid fetus coexisting with a partial mole tends to die, while a fetus with a complete mole tends to survive [ ].
It has been reported that very high β hCG and the presence of medical complications portend a poor outcome, and may serve as an indication for the termination of pregnancy because they are suggestive of aggressive trophoblastic growth [ ]. Fortunately, our patient did not develop any medical complications.
Regarding surgical evacuation for gestations less than 18 weeks, several osmotic dilators should be placed on the day before the procedure. Misoprostol is an attractive agent because it is inexpensive, stable at room temperature and easily applied either orally or vaginally. At 14–16 weeks’ gestation, buccal misoprostol (600 mcg) 2–4 h prior to D&E can provide dilatation and softening for vacuum aspiration with a 14 mm curette [ ]. If misoprostol is administered vaginally more than 4 h before the procedure, there is potential for unexpected delivery (greater than with osmotic dilators). D&E can be performed safely under local anesthesia (paracervical block) with intravenous conscious sedation and analgesia. The most important requirements for safe D&E are the specialty training, skill and experience of the surgeon [ ].
It is suggested that during forceps extraction the physician keep one hand on the fundus as a splint to reduce the risk of perforation. The procedure may also be performed under ultrasound guidance in an attempt to minimize the incidence of perforation. The fetal tissue should not be removed forcibly through the cervix, as bone spicules may lacerate the cervix. Crushing and rotating techniques lessen cervical trauma [ ]. After forceps extraction, the uterine cavity should be gently explored with a large curette to ensure complete evacuation. The products of conception need to be examined for completeness.
Zhang et al. [ ] from University of California, San Diego, reported partial molar pregnancy with dead fetus in utero at 26 weeks. Zahida et al. in Pakistan [ ] reported G4P1+2 lady with partial hydatidiform mole along with alive baby managed conservatively 18 weeks onwards and delivered successfully at term. Bruchim et al. [ ] reported a case of lady with partial mole at 41 weeks of gestation and another at 26 weeks with complete hydatidiform mole along with twin fetuses. Tamrakar et al. [ ] reported a case of preterm gestation along with partial hydatidiform mole and a live fetus. Such patients have risk of developing persistent gestational trophoblastic disease. Patient with molar pregnancy can develop choriocarcinoma and mortality has been reported by Seckl et al. [ ]. However, partial hydatidiform mole rarely requires chemotherapy. Several factors influence the outcome of the fetus in partial molar pregnancy most important being karyotype of the fetus. The problems in the management of molar pregnancy and a live fetus involve the risks of fetal abnormality, malignant trophoblastic change and severe maternal complications such as preeclampsia, thyrotoxicosis, heavy bleeding, pregnancy failure and preterm birth. Termination of pregnancy might be required due to these complications. Amniocentesis should be done for karyotyping. Prognosis of partial mole is usually better than the complete mole as only few cases of partial moles progress to persistent trophoblastic disease. However, the nature and the risks of diploid partial moles are not well established and they seem to be a distinct clinical entity [ ].
In the absence of gross fetal abnormalities on sonography, some authors recommend to continue the pregnancy as long as maternal complications are absent or controllable. Complete evaluation of the placental tissue is important even in cases with normal fetal outcome as focal molar changes which might be unsuspected during antenatal period, may affect the future obstetrical outcome [ ].
There could be an association between KTS and twin with molar pregnancy as both are vascular abnormalities that need to be investigated. Also, KTS could be investigated regarding it association with HEELP syndrome and pre-eclampsia. There are no reports before regarding these issues. This need further evaluation that is hindered by lower prevalence of both conditions.
Conclusions
Klippel–Trenaunay syndrome (KTS) is a rare syndrome of congenital vascular malformations. Pregnancies with a hydatidiform mole and a live fetus are extremely rare. This is the first case to report this association. When detected early in the pregnancy, the management approach is generally to offer termination in view of the anticipated complications. Nevertheless, it seems reasonable to opt for conservative management with the consent of the patient, after thorough counseling. However, one must be prepared for termination in the event of maternal complications such as severe preeclampsia or bleeding. The most important requirements for safe D&E are the specialty training, skill and experience of the surgeon. Induction of abortion is safe for VM with a fetus with low risk of theoretical trophoblastic embolization especially with low fetus over the cervix or advanced pregnancy with partial mole.