Introduction
With the start of specialized training in gynecologic oncology, gynecologic oncologists have become proficient in radical pelvic surgeries. Radical hysterectomy for cancer involving the cervix has been mired in controversies due to the complexity of the surgery, its associated morbidity, and the need for adjuvant radiation. Hockel et al. [ ], state that pelvic failure after radical hysterectomy, despite adjuvant radiation, is due to incomplete removal of the Müllerian compartment. They have shown that resection of the embryologically defined uterovaginal compartment, without adjuvant radiation, results in sustained high locoregional tumor control with low morbidity. By preserving the pelvic splanchnic nerve, the hypogastric nerve, and the bladder branch of the inferior hypogastric plexus, the morbidity after radical hysterectomy can be substantially reduced. The precise network of pelvic nerve plane has been described by Fujii et al. [ ].
The article is to encourage young gynecologic oncologists to attain an in-depth knowledge of the development of the female genital tract, during their training, and incorporate the principles of compartment resection and preservation of the pelvic nerves which can lead to significant improvements in the surgical management of cancer involving the cervix.
Methods
Single institutional descriptive study of Nerve sparing radical hysterectomy (NSRH) over a 6-month period (August 2014 to January 2015) at Amrita Institute of Medical Science. Electronic medical records including clinical records, radiological, pathological, and operative details were studied.
Inclusion Criteria
ECOG score—0 or 1 FIGO stage I B1–IIA cancer cervix Primary cancer endometrium involving the cervix Radiologically negative nodes in cancer cervix
Preoperative work-up included an MRI and investigations for anesthesia clearance.
Relevant Operative Steps
Patient is placed in low lithotomy using Allen stirrups. With a midline vertical incision the abdomino pelvic organs are examined. After a systematic pelvic lymphadenectomy (mid-common iliac to circumflex iliac vein), the next step was to identify and lateralize the hypogastric nerves and the proximal part of the pelvic plexus during the dissection of the uterosacral ligament and rectovaginal ligament. Next, we resected the vascular portion of the lateral parametrium, including the uterine artery and deep uterine veins. We then move on to resection of the vesicouterine ligament after identifying and preserving the main vesical branch of the inferior hypogastric plexus. The uterus is then removed with an appropriate length of vagina.
All patients had an indwelling foley catheter for 13 days. Postoperative assessment of bladder function was begun on postoperative day (POD) 10. Voiding trials were performed every 4 h and the post-void residual urine volume (PVR) was measured by catheterization. Intermittent catheterization was performed if PVR exceeded 50 mL. The primary endpoint for bladder function was the time to achieve a PVR less than 50 mL. Secondary end points of bladder function were measured by patient self-report of (a) the time to obtain a sensation of bladder fullness (b) the time to achieve satisfaction of micturition.
These were compared to those of the sensations before the surgery.
An immunohistochemistry positive for ER, negative for CEA, and p16, favored a diagnosis of primary endometrial carcinoma in relevant situations.
Adjuvant radiation depended on the presence of high-risk factors or a Delgado score of >120 in the presence of intermediate risk factors. Patients received a radiation dose of 45 Gy in 25 fractions with 2 insertions of vaginal brachytherapy of 700 cGy each.
The patients were followed-up for 6 months for possible complications.
Results
During the 6-month period from August 2014 to January 2015, six patients were eligible for NSRH. One was a case of stage II adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Four cases were cancer cervix FIGO IB1 with radiologically negative nodes. Two of these were biopsied as squamous-cell carcinoma and rest two were adenocarcinoma. In one case showing radiologic evidence of lesion in cervix with another solid lesion in one ovary and enlarged pelvic nodes, the cervical biopsy and FNAC of the ovarian mass were negative for malignancy while endometrial curettings were positive for adenocarcinoma. Due to the uncertainty in diagnosis, it was decided in the multidisciplinary tumor board to offer her neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT). In view of the partial response post three cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin and the presence of bulky pelvic nodes, she was offered surgery.
Table 1 shows the characteristics of the patients. Table 1 Characteristics of patients undergoing NSRH Characteristics Mean age (years) 56 (range 46–70) Mean operative time (h) 7 (range 6–9) Mean blood loss (mL) 966 (range 300–2000) Histology Primary cervix Squamous-cell carcinoma T1B1N0 2 Adenocarcinoma T1B2N0 1 T1B1N1 1 Primary endometrium Adenocarcinoma T2N0 1 ypT4BN1 1 Mean follow-up (months) 7 (range 6–11) Postoperative complications Constipation and voiding difficulty 1 Constipation 1 Pelvic lymphocele with subacute intestinal obstruction 1
None of the patients had any intraoperative visceral injuries or postoperative thromboembolism.
Five patients had sensation of bladder fullness and satisfaction of micturition by POD 14. Three patients had measured PVR of less than 50 mL by POD 14. Two patients required further intermittent self-catheterization for a week and achieved a PVR < 50 mL by POD 21. The patient post NACT had voiding difficulty and constipation during the postoperative period and required prolonged intermittent self-catheterization and conservative treatment for constipation.
The histopathology reports showed clear surgical margins and parametrium was not involved in all six cases. One patient had a GOG score of 120 (deep stromal invasion with lymph-vascular space invasion) and received small field radiotherapy (SmRT) while a patient with a single positive pelvic node had standard field radiotherapy (StRT) with weekly cisplatin. One patient had a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma cervix mixed with neuroendocrine carcinoma (large-cell type) and received concurrent chemoradiation with weekly cisplatin followed by four cycles of cisplatin and etoposide. The patient with stage II cancer endometrium was a 70-year-old lady with a well-differentiated carcinoma of 5 cm, involving more than 50 % of the myometrium with lymph-vascular space invasion and received adjuvant pelvic radiotherapy. The single patient subjected to neoadjuvant chemotherapy showed a primary adenocarcinoma of endometrium extending to cervix with neoplastic glands in the omentum, deposits in sigmoid colon and right paracolic gutter, and positive pelvic nodes (ypT4BN1). She received three more cycles of postoperative chemotherapy (paclitaxel + carboplatin) followed by StRT
During a mean follow-up of 7 months, the patient with neuroendocrine carcinoma developed constipation during adjuvant treatment. One patient required readmission due to the development of pelvic lymphocele with subacute intestinal obstruction. The patient with stage IV endometrial cancer was managed with self-catherization. All the bowel complications were managed conservatively. None of the patients developed lymphedema during the follow-up period
Discussion
Inspite of the growing body of literature on NSRH, studies are needed to identify the clinical situations in which this technique is applicable. This article highlights three clinical situations wherein NSRH played an important role in the management of these patients.
Delgado [ ] et al. have developed a prognostic risk scoring system (GOG score) to tailor adjuvant radiation in early cervical cancer (FIGO IB-IIA) with intermediate risk factors (deep stromal invasion, lymph-vascular space invasion, and bulky disease). This group of node-negative patients have a good survival rate of 85–90 % after radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy but a high rate of recurrences which are mostly in the pelvis. Standard field radiation in this setting has reported a benefit in terms of local disease control but at a cost of increased serious/severe toxicity without any survival advantage. In an effort to reduce the toxicity, centers have tailored the radiation fields (small field radiation—SmRT) to target the primary tumor bed and first-echelon lymph nodes, thereby minimizing the amount of small and large bowel irradiated as well as preserving the lymphatic drainage. Hacker et al. [ , ] reported only one recurrence in their study of 25 patients (GOG score > 120) treated with SmRT. No major morbidity was reported. Minor morbidity was recorded in four patients: lymphedema in three and mild rectal incontinence in one. Ohara et al. [ ] showed a 5-year pelvic control rate of 93 versus 90 % in the SmRT group ( n = 42, high-risk, node-negative stage I or II cervical cancer) and StRT group ( n = 42, patients with node-positive disease), respectively. They also reported decreased hematologic and gastrointestinal toxicity with SmRT. Yeo et al. [ ] have also confirmed the high pelvic control rates, and significantly less lower limb lymphedema in the small field group. Similarly in our center, patients with a GOG score of: <40 receive no adjuvant treatment, 40–120 are treated with SmRT and >120 with StRT.
Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinomas (LCNEC) of the cervix are a rare and aggressive type of cervical cancer. Due to the rarity of cervical LCNEC, no consensus has been reached on an optimal treatment plan, and current multimodal strategies that combine radical hysterectomy, chemotherapy, and radiation are mainly adapted from treatments used for neuroendocrine carcinomas of the lung. Embry et al. [ ] in their review of 62 cases showed that earlier stage ( p < 0.00001) and the addition of chemotherapy ( p = 0.04) were associated with improved survival. Both platinum agents ( p = 0.034) and the combination of platinum and etoposide ( p = 0.027), given pre- or postoperatively, were associated with improved survival. Among various chemotherapy options, the combination of cisplatin and etoposide is used most commonly and was used for our patient as well. The diagnosis of adenocarcinoma with neuroendocrine carcinoma (large-cell type) was made from the hysterectomy specimen. Punch biopsy of cervix showed adenocarcinoma with poorly differentiated areas. Hence the patient could receive the benefit of chemotherapy.
Radical hysterectomy and tailored adjuvant radiation may be the choice of treatment for primary endometrial cancer involving the cervix. Sartori et al. [ ] reported on 203 patients who underwent primary surgery for stage II endometrial cancer. Survival rates were 79 % in the simple hysterectomy group and 94 % in the radical hysterectomy group at 5 years, and 74 and 94 % at 10 years, respectively ( p = 0.05). Adjuvant radiation reduced locoregional recurrence, without any significant survival benefit. Similarly the SEER data [ ] of 555 patients undergoing simple hysterectomy and 377 patients undergoing radical hysterectomy showed better 5-year cumulative survival rate for patients who received radical hysterectomy (93 vs 84.4 %, p = 0.05). There was no significant survival difference for adjuvant radiation versus no radiation in either arms. These findings were confirmed in a multicenter study by Cohn et al. [ ] of 162 patients with surgical stage II endometrial cancer. An extrafascial hysterectomy was performed in 75 % of patients and a radical hysterectomy in 25 %. The 5-year disease-free survival was 94 % in patients undergoing radical hysterectomy vs 76 % in patients undergoing extrafascial hysterectomy ( p = 0.05). Adjuvant radiation did not improve survival. Hence diagnosed cases of stage II endometrial cancer may be offered radical hysterectomy as done in our case. In view of the intermediate risk factors of large size, LVSI and outer myometrial involvement it was decided to offer adjuvant radiation. Even for advanced disease, maximal cytoreduction should be the goal at the time of primary surgery. Bristow et al. [ ] in a large series of 65 patients of stage IVB have reported a median survival of 40.6 months in patients with no macroscopic residual disease while the survival was 34 months in patients with optimal cytoreduction (≤1 cm) and 11 months in the suboptimal group ( p = 0.0001). Higher performance status, age ≤58 years, and adjuvant chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy were also significantly associated with superior survival on univariate analysis. On multivariate analysis, residual disease ( p = 0.0001), performance status ( p = 0.043), and age ( p = 0.023) were independent predictors of survival. Similar results were reported by Van et al. [ ]. Our patient with stage IV B endometrial cancer was a 52-year-old lady with good performance score and a well-differentiated tumor. Hence it was decided to proceed with multimodal treatment including optimal cytoreduction.
An in-depth knowledge of the neuroanatomy of the pelvis is essential for the successful performance of a NSRH [ , , , , ]. Fujii et al. [ , ] extensively described the anatomical and technical details of NSRH with functional outcomes in 24 patients using a surgical loop (×2.5). They showed how to preserve the pelvic autonomic nerves by identifying and dividing the uterine branch from the inferior hypogastric plexus. Sakuragi et al. [ ] emphasizes on completing the posterior steps and then moving forward to tackle the anterior part of the dissection leading to complete lateralization of the ureters. We initially followed the order mentioned by Prof. Fujii [ ] but now complete the posterior dissection followed by dissection of the vascular part of the cardinal ligament, preserving the dissection of the vascular vesicouterine ligaments at the end. By this approach the operating time as well as the blood loss were minimized.
Bladder dysfunction is the most frequent postoperative complication and has been reported to be within the range of 5–76 % [ ]. A prospective study of 30 patients with early stage cervical cancer by Tseng et al. [ ] comparing a Tokyo method of NSRH versus conventional radical hysterectomy showed a significant reduction in the incidence of postoperative self-catheterization ( p < 0.01) and bladder dysfunction ( p < 0.006) after NSRH. In patients with stage IIb cervical cancer, who have parametrial invasion only on one side, normal urinary function can be maintained by preserving the autonomic nerves in the uninvaded side. Our study also shows the beneficial effects of NSRH on bladder functions—five patients had sensation of bladder fullness and satisfaction of micturition by POD 14 and all five attained a PVR of less than 50 mL by POD 21, only one patient required prolonged self-catherization.
Little information is available regarding anorectal dysfunction after radical hysterectomy [ , , ]. In a retrospective study [ ] following hysterectomy for both benign and malignant disease, it was reported that 42 % of patients complained of postoperative bowel dysfunction, predominantly severe straining. To avoid these adverse events, it is important to undertake adequate mobilization of the rectum while minimizing damage to the inferior hypogastric plexus. In our study one patient developed constipation post-surgery while the other two cases were during adjuvant treatment and responded to conservative measures.
The relevance of radical hysterectomy assumes greater importance in this era of minimal invasive oncologic surgeries. Magnification allows better identification of nerves and their preservation. Possover et al. [ ], in a prospective study of 261 patients, described a laparoscopic neuro-navigation (LANN) system to help preserve the parasympathetic pelvic nerves and to reduce postoperative morbidity. This method involves identifying the pathways of the splanchnic nerves after electrostimulation of separate splanchnic nerves. The rate of postoperative bladder dysfunction was less than 1 %.
The 5-year survival after radical hysterectomy for early stage cervical cancer is 88–97 %, more than 50 % of women are younger than 50 years of age. Thus despite the comparable efficacy of surgery and radiation and choice of single modality of treatment, radical hysterectomy is the preferred treatment option for the treatment of early stage cervical carcinoma in young women because of the possibility of preserving the ovaries and vaginal integrity. Hockel et al. [ ] have suggested that if the treatment of cervical carcinoma is tailored according to the embryological concepts of Total mesometrial resection (TMMR), postoperative adjuvant RT is unnecessary, even in the presence of high-risk factors. In their study of 212 patients (63 % had high-risk features), who underwent TMMR without adjuvant radiation, a recurrence-free and overall 5-year survival probabilities of 94 % (95 % CI 91–98) and 96 % (93–99), respectively was noted. Treatment-related grade 2 morbidity was detected in 20 (9 %) patients, the most common being vascular complications.
The limitation of our study is the small number of cases. However, we can confidently state that by understanding the neurovascular anatomy of the pelvis, NSRH for cancers involving the cervix results in good oncologic clearance with minimal morbidity. However, the surgical steps of this concept should be clearly identified and disseminated to gynecologic oncologists to ensure reproducible results. The uniform reporting of precise surgical steps is required for reproducible results and to compare the data between studies.