Introduction
Lipid-based formulations have been utilized to increase the solubility and oral absorption of poorly water-soluble drugs. An example of lipid-based delivery systems is the self-emulsifying drug delivery system (SEDDS); this system is an isotropic mixture of oil, surfactant, and co-solvent. These SEDDS formulations rapidly and spontaneously form oil in water (o/w) emulsions upon mild agitation in the aqueous media [ , ]. The SEDDS can enhance the solubilization capacity by causing the drug to be in supersaturated state. However, there is a possibility that the drug may precipitate out of the solution as SEDDS disperses in the gastrointestinal tract (GIT). This can happen as the potential of a supersaturated system is increased compared to the equilibrium condition. Hence, a supersaturated drug solution is thermodynamically unstable and has the tendency to return to the equilibrium state by drug precipitation. If, however, a supersaturated drug solution exists in a metastable state in the GIT for a time sufficient for absorption, the increased intraluminal drug concentration can result in an enhanced drug concentration across the intestinal wall. If the rate of precipitation is minimized and the stability of the induced supersaturated state is increased, the clinical benefit of the supersaturated SEDDS can be greatly enhanced by improving the bioavailability of the poorly water-soluble drugs [ , ].
It has been shown that digestion of SEDDS in vivo can significantly lower their solubilization and cause the drug to precipitate [ , , , ]. The effect of this precipitation depends upon the physical form of the drug in the precipitate. If the drug precipitates in a crystalline form, the rate of redissolution is slower which can lead to decreased bioavailability [ , , ]. Studies show that drug precipitation from in vitro dispersions can be correlated to lower absorption in vivo [ , , ]. Thus, studying the precipitation behavior of drugs upon dispersions and factors that contribute to it are highly desirable. Appropriate evaluation of supersaturation, precipitation, and possibly precipitation inhibition is therefore the key for the efficient development and optimization of the supersaturated drug delivery systems [ ].
Approaches to reduce the rate of precipitation from supersaturated solutions include the addition of polymers, surfactants, and cyclodextrins [ ]. It has been thought that the ability of polymers to maintain supersaturated state is the result of intermolecular interactions such as hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic, and ionic interactions between the drug and polymer [ , , ]. Some of these interactions have been studied in binary solid dispersion systems [ , ]. However, lipid-based delivery systems such as SEDDS comprise of various excipients in liquid form. These excipients can interact with each other and with the drug by various mechanisms and hence can be a complex system to interpret the involved interactions. The ability of SEDDS excipients to prevent or delay precipitation from the supersaturated solutions that are commonly formed in situ after dispersion of poorly water-soluble drug formulations is therefore complex and to this point, incompletely understood. Understanding of precipitation kinetics and precipitation inhibition is rather limited. Insight into the physicochemical characteristics that govern the interactions between drugs and excipients during nucleation and crystal growth would lead to a more focused selection and even prediction of effective precipitation inhibitors. More in vitro – in vivo correlations are required to assess in vitro supersaturation parameters relevant for in vivo absorption. Eventually, improved insight related to these issues will enable rational design of supersaturated systems (SEDDS) and the full exploration of this promising delivery strategy for poorly water-soluble drugs.
In our previous study [ ], several SEDDS consisting of Lauroglycol® as the oil phase, Transcutol® as the co-solvent, and either Labrasol® or vitamin E TPGS were formulated. Based on the particle size and solubilization power, an optimized SEDDS was selected for kinetic solubility study. It was found that TPGS SEDDS was able to maintain supersaturation levels for the tested drugs (indomethacin and probucol) whereas the drug candidates precipitated out from Labrasol® SEDDS dispersions. In this study, the drug-excipient interactions were investigated further with seven other drugs with different physicochemical properties. Raman spectroscopy is a useful tool in investigating in situ drug-excipient interactions in dilute solutions. With the help of Raman spectra, the changes in the molecular vibrations were studied which indicate the interactions responsible for the precipitation inhibition. Our second objective was to understand why TPGS was able to maintain the drugs in supersaturated state versus Labrasol® and if there was any relation between the physicochemical properties of the drugs to their extent and precipitation inhibition behavior from a complex system like SEDDS dispersions.
Materials and Methods
Materials
Glyburide, ≥ 99% HPLC, progesterone ≥ 99% HPLC, 17 α-hydrpxyprogesterone, and phenytoin USP were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO; lidocaine base USP, lorazepam USP, carbamazepine USP, and naproxen USP were purchased from Letco Medical, Blaine, MN; BHT Lot no. FH094 was purchased from Spectrum Quality Products Inc. NJ; Labrasol®, Lauroglycol® FCC, and Transcutol® HP were gifted by Gattefosse, Paramus, NJ; acetonitrile, HPLC grade, lot no. H10809, and methanol, HPLC grade, lot no. H09E36 from J.T. Baker, Mallinckrodt Baker Inc., Phillipsburg, NJ; glacial acetic acid, 99.7% ACS reagent, Aldrich Chemical Company Inc., Milwaukee, WI; hydrochloric acid, 10 N, ACS grade, lot no. SN0543 and sodium hydroxide, lot no. QX0299 were purchased from Spectrum Chemical Mfg. Corp. NJ; syringe filter nylon, 0.45 μm 25 mm and membrane filter, 0.45 μm 47 mm from Whatman Inc., Florham Park, NJ.
Methods
SEDDS Formulation
Lauroglycol® FCC was used as the oil, Transcutol® HP as the co-solvent, and either Labrasol® or vitamin E TPGS were used as the surfactant in the SEDDS formulations described in the previous study [ ]. In general, Transcutol® HP and either Labrasol® or vitamin E TPGS were heated in a vial. The drug(s) was then dissolved using frequent vortexing. Lauroglycol FCC® was then added followed by butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) as the antioxidant. Seven SEDDS formulations were generated using experimental design and based on preliminary experiments, two of them were selected for further studies.
Raman Spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy was used to study the molecular interactions between the drugs and the excipients. Raman RXN1 analyzer (Kaiser Optical Systems, Inc., Ann Arbor, MI, USA) equipped with a charge-coupled device camera and a diode laser operating at a wavelength of 785 nm was used. The spectra were recorded with a laser power of 400 mW and background Rayleigh scattering was removed by a holographic filter during spectra acquisition. One gram of SEDDS was added to 100 mL of dissolution medium, and the spectra of the precipitated or the dissolved drug in the emulsions were obtained in situ using the MR probe with short focus immersion optics especially designed for dispersions. The Raman data collected was exported to GRAM Al 8.0 data processing software. Wherever the peak shifts and change in intensities were not clear, GRAMS Al peak pick routine was used to identify the maximum peak height at the maximum peak position.
Results
Formulation
The optimum formulation is required to have good solubilization power as well as low droplet size. Two SEDDS formulations out of seven with good drug solubilization power and low droplet size were selected for Raman studies (Table 1 ). The SEDDS formulations are referred to as TPGS SEDDS and Labrasol® SEDDS in the Raman spectra wherever needed. The physicochemical properties of all the drugs studied are summarized in Table 2 . Table 1 Percent concentration ( w / w ) of the excipients in the optimized SEDDS formulation SEDDS Transcutol HP® (%) TPGS (%) Lauroglycol FCC® (%) TPGS SEDDS A 60 20 20 B 10 70 20 SEDDS Transcutol HP® (%) Labrasol® (%) Lauroglycol FCC® (%) Labrasol® SEDDS A 60 20 20 B 10 70 20 Both A and B SEDDS were tested and behaved similar upon dispersion and hence were termed as TPGS SEDDS and Labrasol SEDDS for Raman studies Table 2 Physicochemical properties and structures of the studied model drugs Open image in new window Solubility, MW, pKa and LogP values for all drugs taken from PubChem
Raman Spectroscopy
Analyzing the precipitates can be challenging as they tend to change their physical form upon washing and drying. Alternative methods to Raman such as IR spectroscopy, DSC, and UV were also used. These methods were found to have shortcomings (Supplemental Information_ 2 ) and hence, we decided on in situ Raman spectroscopic analysis. It can be a useful tool in investigating drug-excipient interactions in dilute solutions. Unlike IR, the water OH peak does not conflict or mask with high wavenumber peaks in the 3000–3400-cm −1 region. Using Raman spectra, the changes in the molecular vibrations could be studied which indicate the interactions responsible for the precipitation inhibition and thus, the best formulation could be selected. It was observed, for all drugs, that the spectra of the precipitated drugs from diluted SEDDS were different from the spectra of the non-precipitated formulations. Spectral changes at the functional group (carboxylic acid, amide and hydroxyl) regions were observed for all the tested compounds. The stretching vibrations of hydroxyl group are prominent in the 3000–3400-cm −1 region. However, due to pixel saturation in this region from all SEDDS formulations, no information was obtained from this region due to technical limitations. Therefore, the bending vibrations at that reciprocal centimeter for –OH group were studied instead of the stretching vibrations. The spectra were collected for a period of 2 h to capture the changes over time. The stability or the instability (precipitation) of the SEDDS dispersions was monitored.
In our previous findings [ ], we studied two drugs, indomethacin and probucol. The changes observed in the Raman spectra between precipitated and non-precipitated drug from the SEDDS dispersions indicated that hydrogen bonding took place between the drug and TPGS causing the drug to remain in solution, whereas the interaction with Labrasol® was weak leading to drug precipitation from the SEDDS dispersions. Due to this, indomethacin and probucol achieved higher supersaturation levels from TPGS SEDDS formulations than Labrasol® formulations ( see supplemental data ). In this study, we further investigate this phenomenon using other drugs with different physicochemical properties.
Glyburide
Formulations from which the drug precipitated showed the presence of 1714 and 1527 cm −1 peaks, whereas these peaks disappeared or the relative intensity reduced for formulations that did not precipitate. The decrease in intensity of 1714 cm −1 peak and the changes observed in the 1620–1565-cm −1 region implied that drug–surfactant interactions took place at the amide region [ ] and may be responsible for maintaining glyburide in solution (Fig. 1 , Table 3 ). Fig. 1 Raman spectra of glyburide from SEDDS dispersions. The peak corresponding to the carbonyl stretching (1714 cm −1 ) vibration of the amide group disappeared and changes were observed in the 1650–1550-cm −1 region for diluted TPGS A and TPGS B Table 3 Raman vibrational frequencies of the drug compounds studied with observed spectral changes Compound Raman vibrational frequencies Labrasol® TPGS Performance of drugs in SEDDS dispersions Progesterone 1696 cm −1 : ν C=O at C-20 1660 cm −1 : ν C=O at C-3 1616 cm −1 : ν C=O at C-3 No change No change Labrasol ® : precipitated TPGS: precipitated 17 α-hydroxyprogesterone 1003 cm −1 : ν C–O 1154 cm −1 : δ OH Peak intensity did not change (compared to a reference peak that does not change) Peak intensity reduced (compared to a reference peak that does not change) Labrasol ® : precipitated TPGS: did not precipitate Carbamazepine Form III Form I Ratio of peak intensity did not change Ratio of peak intensity changed Labrasol ® : precipitated TPGS: did not precipitate 1624 cm −1 1621 cm −1 ν C=N, amide II 1600 cm −1 1598 cm −1 δ N–H, amide II 1588 cm −1 (shoulder) – ν C=C, aromatic 1565 cm −1 1563 cm −1 ν C–N, amide III Lidocaine 1655 cm −1 : ν C=O 1541 cm −1 : δ N–H 1271 cm −1 : ν C–N, ternary amine 1249 cm −1 : ν C–N, ternary amine 1036 cm −1 : aromatic C=C No change 1662 cm −1 peak disappeared; shift and broadening of 1593 cm −1 peak Labrasol ® : precipitated TPGS: cloudy but did not precipitate Lorazepam 1690 cm −1 (weak): ν C=O (dimer), asym 1616 cm −1 : ν C=N (diazepam ring) 1604 cm −1 : ν C=O (dimer), sym 1589 cm −1 : ν C=C 1500 cm −1 (broad): δ NH 1616 cm −1 , 1604 cm −1 peaks disappeared; broad peak at 1606 cm −1 . Inconclusive Labrasol ® : precipitated TPGS: did not precipitate Phenytoin 1760 cm −1 : ν C=O 1598–1606 cm −1 : δ C–N–H No change No change Labrasol ® : precipitated TPGS: did not precipitate Glyburide Crystal form I Crystal form II No change Decrease in intensity of 1714 and 1527 cm −1 peaks. Changes observed in the 1620–1565-cm −1 region Labrasol ® : precipitated TPGS: did not precipitate 1714 cm −1 1727 cm −1 , 1714 cm −1 Urea/amide ν C=O 1615 cm −1 1620 cm −1 Amide ν C=O or amide ν N–H 1588 cm −1 1590 Amide ν C=O 1518 cm −1 1535 cm −1 Urea/amide δ N–H 1340 cm −1 , 1158 cm −1 1340 cm −1 , 1320 cm −1 , 1158 cm −1 Asymmetric ν SO 2
Progesterone
The next two drugs were selected to act as controls of each other. Progesterone and hydroxyprogesterone have the same structure except of a hydroxyl group on the latter. Since we hypothesized that the interaction was at the hydrogen donor site, we expected interaction to take place with hydroxyprogesterone and not with progesterone.
Progesterone is characterized by the presence of two carbonyl groups: the cyclic one in position 3 of ring A of the steroid system (Fig. 2 ) and a methyl-keto group present in position 20 of the other end of the molecule [ ]. No changes were observed in the Raman peak positions and intensities from any SEDDS (Fig. 3 ). The spectra of precipitated progesterone from diluted Labrasol® and diluted TPGS were similar to the spectrum of the original drug (Table 3 ). Hence, as expected, no interaction took place between progesterone and the surfactants which led to precipitation upon dilution of both SEDDS formulations. Fig. 2 Structure of progesterone with IUPAC ring lettering and numbering Fig. 3 Raman spectra of pure progesterone from SEDDS dispersions in the 1800–1550-cm −1 region. No spectral changes were observed from any formulation
17α-Hydroxyl Progesterone
Hydroxyprogesterone contains a hydrogen bond donor and thus should interact with TPGS and show spectral changes. The OH stretching band in the region 3625–3200 cm −1 is often the most prominent in a steroid spectrum [ ]. However, due to signal saturation from SEDDS in this region, we focused on the OH bending region. The OH bending signal for 17α-hydroxyl progesterone is found in the 1150-cm −1 region. Its exact position depends upon the state of association (hydrogen bonding) of the molecule. An unassociated hydroxyl group gives a sharp peak, whereas intermolecular hydrogen bonding gives a broader peak. As seen from the spectra (Fig. 4 ), peak broadening was detected for the 1153-cm −1 band from diluted TPGS indicating intermolecular hydrogen bonding between TPGS and the drug molecule (Table 3 ). Fig. 4 Raman spectra of pure hydroxyprogesterone and from SEDDS dispersions in the 1200–950-cm −1 region. Spectral changes were observed corresponding to the hydroxyl group for the diluted SEDDS formulation (dotted box region)
The C–O single bond stretching vibration in alcohols usually has medium intensity and lies in the fingerprint region (1060–1000 cm −1 ). The axial C–O bonds vibrate at the lower end of this frequency range while equatorial C–O bonds give peaks towards the higher end. 17α-hydroxyl progesterone thus shows the C–O band at around 1003 cm −1 . It has been shown that the neighboring hydroxyl and carbonyl groups of the same molecule may be hydrogen bonded to each other if the conformation is suitable. However, the expectation that the C-20 carbonyl group would be intramolecularly hydrogen bonded in 17α-hydroxyl groups is rare. Another possibility in certain cases is the formation of internal hemiacetals, which may effectively mask the presence of a carbonyl group. However, this is only a property of 18-hydroxyprogesterone [ ]. The peak intensity of the C–O stretching vibration was found to change for diluted TPGS formulations. The changes in the peak intensities were also confirmed using a reference peak as mentioned in the “ Methods ” section for Raman spectroscopy. The ratio of the intensity of the hydroxyl peak to that of the internal standard was measured. The ratios from all formulations were compared with each other. It was found that the ratio of the peak intensities from pure drug and from Labrasol® sample was similar, whereas the ratio differed for TPGS. Thus, from the changes in the δ OH and ν C–O region of hydroxyl progesterone from diluted TPGS, it was concluded that TPGS was able to maintain supersaturation due to hydrogen bonding at the hydroxyl of the drug compound.
Carbamazepine
Few other drug candidates were selected to confirm the hypothesis. As expected, carbamazepine precipitated from Labrasol® formulation but not from TPGS. Carbamazepine is a molecule with only one hydrogen bond donor, but it is known to exist as four anhydrous polymorphs and one dehydrate [ ]. The two principle polymorphs constitute an enantiotropic pair, form I and form III with form III being more stable than I at room temperature. Table 3 provides the Raman peak assignments for carbamazepine in the 1700–1500-cm −1 region of interest.
Few differences were observed in the peak positions and intensities from diluted TPGS formulation compared with pure drug sample. The ratio of the peak intensity at 1624 cm −1 to intensity at 1600 cm −1 (I 1624 /I 1600 ); the ratio of peak height at 1624 cm −1 and at 1556 cm −1 (I 1624 /I 1556 ) were recorded. The intensity ratios from diluted Labrasol® formulation were similar to the ratios from carbamazepine (Fig. 5 ). The carbamazepine peak ratios from diluted TPGS differed from the solid carbamazepine ratios thus indicating that carbamazepine was involved in an intermolecular interaction with TPGS. Fig. 5 Raman spectra of carbamazepine in the 1700–1500-cm −1 region. Spectral changes in the amide region were observed. * The ratio of peak intensities (I 1624 /I 1600 ) and (I 1624 /I 1556 ) for all formulations was measured to calculate any drop in peak intensity. (A change in ratio of peak intensity indicates an interaction at that region)
Lidocaine
In the case of drugs that are weak bases, a change in pH from the stomach to the intestine can cause the drug to precipitate out. Not many self-emulsifying drug delivery systems have been successful in maintaining supersaturation in the GIT for weakly basic drugs. Thus, it was important to evaluate the performance of our SEDDS systems for weak bases. Lidocaine and lorazepam were selected as the model weakly basic compounds; both are poorly water soluble with different pKa values. It was found that TPGS SEDDS was successful in maintaining the supersaturation of both compounds in acidic as well as alkaline media.
Lidocaine did not precipitate from TPGS formulations though the dispersion was cloudy in nature. Upon dilution of Labrasol® SEDDS, phase separation took place with large oil globules floating on top. More than 90% of the drug was contained in the oil phase. In order to understand this occurrence, Raman analysis was carried out and spectral changes in the vibrational modes of lidocaine were observed. The characteristic Raman vibrational frequencies for lidocaine in the 1000–1700-cm −1 region are given in Table 3 . This region can provide useful information on the vibrational modes of important functional groups of lidocaine [ ].
The peak at 1662 cm −1 corresponding to the carbonyl stretching vibration disappeared in the spectrum from diluted TPGS. Also, slight shift and broadening of the 1593 cm −1 peak was detected from diluted TPGS formulations (Fig. 6 ). These changes indicated the possibility of an interaction at the amide moiety which could be the reason for precipitation inhibition from TPGS SEDDS. The cloudiness of the lidocaine dispersions was an interesting observation and will be addressed in the “ Discussion ” section. Investigating the changes in the Raman spectra and in the visual observations together can help explain the role of TPGS in precipitation inhibition. Fig. 6 Raman spectra of lidocaine in the 1700–1550-cm −1 region. Spectral changes for the amide region were observed for diluted TPGS SEDDS
Lorazepam
Lorazepam is a control substance (class IV) and limited information is available regarding its polymorphic forms. It has been reported though that the crystal form can be modified by precipitating the drug from different solvents. The Raman frequencies reported in literature for lorazepam are given in Table 3 [ ].
Similar to other compounds, lorazepam precipitated from Labrasol® formulations. TPGS was able to maintain the drug in solution and avoid precipitation in both pH. However, unexpected results were obtained from Raman analysis of lorazepam from diluted SEDDS. Changes in the peak positions were observed for Labrasol® formulations instead of TPGS. The 1616 and 1604-cm −1 peaks disappeared and a new broadened peak appeared at 1606 cm −1 (Fig. 7 ). We attribute these changes to the presence of a new polymorphic form though further investigation is necessary to confirm this finding. Spectrum from diluted TPGS indicated only a slight change in the peak intensity but not the peak positions. Due to both, the very low concentration of the drug and the weak –OH bending region, further analysis deemed difficult. Thus, studies are needed to confirm the interaction that inhibited precipitation from TPGS SEDDS. Fig. 7 Raman spectra of lorazepam in the 1700–1550-cm −1 region
Phenytoin
Phenytoin is a very weak acid with a pKa value of around 8. The important Raman vibrational band assignments in the 1500–1800-cm −1 region are listed in the Table 3 [ ]. This region is characteristic of the carbonyl stretching and NH vibrations. No spectral changes were observed for any of the formulations which were in correlation to the visual observation (Fig. 8 ). Phenytoin precipitated out from Labrasol® as well as TPGS, and no interaction was expected between them. Fig. 8 Raman spectra of phenytoin in the 1800–1500-cm −1 region. No spectral changes were observed for any formulations
Discussion
In order to gain a better understanding of the reason for successful self-emulsifying drug delivery system formulation, various poorly water-soluble drugs exhibiting different physicochemical properties were selected. Glyburide and previously studied indomethacin are weak acids with moderate LogP (~ 3.0), whereas probucol is highly lipophilic with a LogP value of about 11. Lorazepam and lidocaine are weak bases. Carbamazepine, progesterone, and hydroxyprogesterone are non-ionic at physiological pH. Also, the pKa values of the selected drugs ranged from 4 to 13. Thus, a wide range of compounds with different physicochemical properties were tested even though not all are given as oral drugs.
Drug-Surfactant Interactions
The difference in the precipitation behavior from TPGS and Labrasol® SEDDS formulations can be explained by studying the drug-surfactant molecular interactions. All the drugs precipitated from Labrasol® dispersions. The TPGS SEDDS was able to maintain supersaturation for all drugs except progesterone and phenytoin. This phenomenon was studied using Raman spectroscopy, and the performance of all SEDDS dispersions are summarized in Tables 3 and 4 . Table 4 Relationship between the hydrogen bond donor strength of the drug functional groups and its precipitation tendency from TPGS-SEDDS dispersions (Todeschini and Consonni [ ]) Drugs Vibrational peaks’ shifts Functional group involved H-bond donor strength of functional groups Observation (diluted TPGS SEDDS) pH 1.2 pH 6.8 Interacting Probucol* Decrease in intensity of δ OH at 549 and 1164 cm −1 Phenolic OH Strong Clear Clear 17α-hydroxyl progesterone Decrease in intensity of ν C–O at 1003 cm −1 and δ OH at 1153 cm −1 OH Strong Clear Clear Carbamazepine Decrease in intensity of amide II and III regions at 1566, 1600, and 1624 cm −1 NH 2 –C=O Strong–medium Clear Clear Indomethacin* a–Disappearance of δ OH at 971 cm −1 COOH Very strong (though forms dimers) Precipitated Clear b–No change in the acid C=O 1680 cm −1 Glyburide Disappearance of 1714 cm −1 ; NH–C=O Medium Phase separation Clear Changes in the amide II region near 1500 cm −1 Lidocaine Broadening of 1593 cm −1 N–C=O Medium Phase separation Phase separation Disappearance of 1662 cm −1 Non-interacting, precipitation Progesterone No change – Precipitated Precipitated Phenytoin No change – Weak Precipitated Precipitated Hydrogen ability constants ( I H ) of 3–2.8 is considered very strong; 2.8–2.6 = strong, 2.6–2 = medium, and below 2 is weak (Todeschini and Consonni [ ]) *Refer to Raut et al. [ ] for more details
These changes suggested that all the tested drugs that did not precipitate, exhibited Raman shifts at the hydrogen bond donor site. All studied drugs except progesterone have hydrogen bond donor groups. From our results, it was found that, as expected, progesterone precipitated out from TPGS SEDDS due to lack of hydrogen bonding. Besides progesterone, phenytoin also precipitated out from TPGS SEDDS. Phenytoin contains two hydrogen bond donor NH groups and two hydrogen bond acceptor C=O groups. Their tendency to form strong intermolecular N–H---O hydrogen bonds with each other have been reported [ ]. This makes it a strong crystal structure difficult to disrupt. Alternatively, the nitrogen with lone pair of electrons can be involved in resonance stabilization. This causes a decrease in the electronegativity of nitrogen making phenytoin a weak H-bond donor. Thus, it is possible that any bond between phenytoin and TPGS was weak in nature and broke upon dilution with aqueous media.
Why TPGS and Not Labrasol?
In the previous study, the spectral changes for TPGS and Labrasol® were studied in order to study the surfactant site of action [ ]. Changes in the carbonyl region were seen in case of TPGS but not for Labrasol®. Since both surfactants contain PEG moiety, this change indicated that hydrogen bonding with the drug took place only at the carbonyl region of the TPGS succinate group. This hydrogen bonding with TPGS was strong which did not break upon dispersion preventing drug precipitation. However, the initial interaction with Labrasol® weakened upon dispersion causing the drug to precipitate out of the solution. The hydrogen bonding properties of TPGS make it a very powerful solubilizer and precipitation inhibitor for several drugs with different physicochemical properties. The hydrogen bonding property of TPGS plays such a strong role in inhibiting precipitation that it masks the effect of hydrophobicity.
Hydrogen Bonding Ability of Drugs with Vitamin E TPGS
Hydrogen bonding between all the compounds and TPGS was found to be the main factor that contributed to precipitation inhibition. The visual precipitation behavior of the studied drugs varied and is indicated in Table 3 . It was found that the hydrogen bonding ability of the drugs with TPGS could be correlated to the general hydrogen bonding ability of the functional groups [ ] of the drugs (Table 4 ). In order to draw a trend, these observations can be simplified into groups. Probucol and carbamazepine have strong hydrogen bond donors and did not precipitate out of TPGS dispersions. Hydroxyprogesterone also did not precipitate though it showed limited solubility in the SEDDS. This may be attributed to intermolecular bonding of some hydroxyprogesterone molecules with each other, thus not being available for bonding with TPGS. Indomethacin and naproxen contain carboxylic acid which is a very strong donor; however, COOH group is known to form dimers. Indomethacin and naproxen formed dimers due to which it did not interact with Labrasol®. This led to precipitation from diluted Labrasol® SEDDS. The dimers were disrupted due to hydrogen bond formation with TPGS. This led to achieving high levels of indomethacin supersaturation from TPGS formulations [ ].
Hydrogen ability constants ( I H ) of 3–2.8 is considered very strong; 2.8–2.6 = strong, 2.6–2 = medium, and below 2 is weak [ ]. The SEDDS dispersions of amide-containing drugs, glyburide, and lidocaine (moderate I H value), showed phase separation or cloudiness indicating that bonding with TPGS was also moderate. Lidocaine-TPGS formulations appeared cloudy indicating intermediate H-bonding with TPGS. Phase separation was observed from diluted glyburide SEDDS. It may be possible that there was steric hindrance at the amide of glyburide due to the neighboring aromatic rings which led to weaker hydrogen bonding with TPGS compared to lidocaine. This caused glyburide formulations to show phase separation but only cloudiness for lidocaine formulations. Lastly, compounds with no H-bonding ability did not interact with TPGS and thus precipitated out. Progesterone lacks a hydrogen donor, whereas phenytoin has extremely weak H-bonding capability as discussed earlier in the paper [ ].
This study provides an understanding that the performance of SEDDS can be predicted from the structure and physicochemical properties of the drugs and the surfactants. No such findings have been reported before. Typically, SEDDS have been formulated on a trial and error basis by screening many surfactants for the required drug molecule. We have pointed out that though hydrophobic interactions may be important for the initial alignment of the molecules, hydrogen bonding is the main factor responsible for precipitation inhibition. Vitamin E TPGS contains a succinate group that can act as a powerful hydrogen bond acceptor. TPGS thus can bind with molecules with hydrogen bond donor functional groups and inhibit precipitation of these compounds upon dilution from SEDDS. The performance of these compounds may be predicted from the general hydrogen bonding ability of their functional groups (though this needs further in-depth analysis). Though this was a simplified approach, we could establish a pattern to predict which drugs would or would not work with TPGS. Surfactants/excipients with powerful hydrogen bond acceptors should be used with drugs with strong hydrogen bond donors and vice versa. Hundred-fold increases in supersaturation can be obtained (as seen with probucol) by using the proposed method. To confirm our findings, we reviewed some of the available literature. For example, Gao et al. investigated the precipitation tendency of AMG 517 using various polymers such as HPMC and PVP [ ]. Similarly, Chen et al. studied indirubin precipitation from SEDDS containing polymers such as PVP, HPMC, and PEG [ ]. These polymers were selected and evaluated randomly. Looking at the structures of AMG 517 and indirubin and correlating it with the results of our study, we can predict that a polymer such as PVP (which has a hydrogen bond acceptor like TPGS) would be able to inhibit precipitation inhibition of indirubin but not of AMG 517. This is because indirubin contains a hydrogen bond donor group that can interact with PVP, whereas AMG 517 lacks a donor group. This prediction based on our findings correlated with the final conclusion of the two studies though in literature, these results were obtained only by formulating SEDDS with different polymers and evaluating each formulation on a case-by-case basis. Based on our findings, it may be likely that the performance of many drug compounds can be predicted from their physicochemical properties and the number of experiments can be minimized. This finding may also be extended to the interaction of drug molecules with other excipients. This can help make excipient selection for lipid-based drug delivery and other dynamic delivery systems more rational and faster process.
Conclusion
Lipid-based delivery systems are complex formulations that contain many excipients, and the performance of these systems depend on the interplay of all these excipients. Besides, these liquid systems can have varying degrees of interaction with water (GI fluids) upon dispersion. Due to these complications, very few studies are found that work on interpreting these mechanisms and typically lipid-based systems are developed case-by-case. In this study, we have attempted to correlate the physicochemical properties of the drugs to their ability to interact with surfactants which in turn affects their precipitation tendency upon dilution of SEDDS. We have shown that the performance of such complex lipid systems can be predicted by simple intermolecular interactions, and the right excipients can be selected based on their physicochemical properties and molecular structures. These findings can help formulators predict the most successful surfactants to be used in lipid-based systems and save time and efforts in screening of excipients. Future studies can help extend these findings to other drugs and excipients as well. This can help make the SEDDS development process a more systematic and rational one.