Introduction
Electrostatic charge generation which is popularly known as triboelectrification is a major cause of problems in the transport of granular materials in pharmaceutical industry. The processes handling powders are susceptible to jamming at the discharge of hoppers, dust explosions, and adhesion of powders to equipment surfaces. Physical changes in granular structures and their dispersion were believed to be one of the major reasons for the generation of static charge [ , ]. The major challenge in the area of electrostatic charges in powders is to capture such changes in physical behavior as a result of granular flow, friction between particles, and resultant magnitude of charge accumulation. This is essential because the electrostatic interactions will result in classical tribological problems interfering with the mixing behavior of granular systems [ ]. This phenomenon often leads to inconsistent optimization of physical properties [ ]. It was not clear whether the charge generated influenced the powder flow instantly or the accumulation of charge over a period of time resulted in the deterioration of the overall flowability of the powder. While the previous studies on charge generation of granular media provide valuable information, the quantification of online continuous electrostatic measurements during powder flow remain challenging. In order to address the role of electrostatic charge in mitigating powder flow, it is essential to quantify the electrostatic charge as it is generated during the powder flow.
Understanding the source of particle charge can help prevent major problems in granular rheology and powder mixing. Predictive techniques applicable to various sizes and shapes which were developed in the past showed that charge transfer was due to impact charging [ ]. When powders become charged due to mutual impact or contact, their physical nature can be manipulated by inducing voltage of opposite polarity [ ]. This can lead to change in adhesion force between particles when they come in contact during powder flow. It was popularly believed that electrostatic charges of granular materials were generated due to the potential difference during contact [ ]. In addition, the possible cause in variability in powder flow arises from the difficulty in identifying the source of electrostatic charge generation. This problem is even more complicated when the charge generates from multiple sources and combination of several factors involving geometry of particles, environmental conditions, and interactions between particles as well as with the wall of the mixing device. The source of tribocharge resulting from multiple factors makes the quantification even more complicated. In addition to the impact between particles and walls, the transfer of charge between particles themselves was also believed to be a possible reason for the variability in charge accumulation and dissipation in granular media [ , ].
During the course of tribocharging, mechanical attributes of particulate flow, including contact time, mode of contact and velocity of particles can result in variations in surface charging [ ]. Since the electrostatic charge accumulation is difficult to measure within the powder bed, surface net charge was believed to be the only possible way of measuring the triboelectrification in powders [ ]. However, the overall charge distribution and charge separation depending on size fractions also were found to predominantly influence the typical surface charge of dry powders [ , ]. More interestingly, particle impact velocity [ ] and the nature of mixing device and its length [ ] can also influence the overall charge distribution. Hence, the ability to understand the charging phenomenon and its relation to powder flow is vital to improve the quality of pharmaceutical blends thereby addressing the key issue of content uniformity in pharmaceutical manufacturing. An attempt is made in this work to quantify the electrostatic charge phenomena online during powder flow in a rotating cylinder and simultaneously investigate the role of cohesive and free flowing powders on triboelectrification as a function of shear rate of the cylinder and time.
Experimental: Materials and Methods
Materials
Four pharmaceutical blends listed in Table 1 were prepared by mixing in a v-blender at a shell speed of 15 rpm and intensifier bar speed of 500 rpm. Preblend consists of the 50–50 % mixture of microcrystalline cellulose (MCC–Avicel 102, particle size—90 μ), and fast flow lactose (Foremost Farms, particle size—90 μ). This preblend was mixed with 1 % hydrophobic magnesium stearate (MgSt) (Macron Chemicals) and 0.5 % colloidal silica [Cab-O-Sil (CS) delivered by Cabot Corporation, grade M5-P, glidant, particle size—0.2–0.3 μ] which has hydrophilic surface. Three blends B1, B2, and B3 (4 lbs. each) were prepared by varying the order of mixing of lubricant and glidant. All the blends were mixed for 30 min in the v-blender. In the first blend, both lubricant and glidant were added at the same time (B1). In the second blend, CS was added first and mixed for 15 min and then MgSt was added next and mixed for another 15 min. In the third blend, the order was reversed where MgSt was added and mixed for the first 15 min followed by CS for the next 15 min. For comparison of the lubricated blend with non-lubricated blend, a fourth blend was prepared consisting of only cellulose and lactose (preblend) with no lubricant or glidant. The purpose of preparing both lubricated and non-lubricated blends was to compare the ability of powders to generate electrostatic charge in the presence or absence of flowing agents or additives. Relative humidity (RH) recorded during sample preparation and also during experimental analysis was 40 %. Experiments were carried out immediately after preparing the powder samples at a room temperature of 70 °F. Table 1 Composition of blends used in the experimental investigation Blend Order of Mixing Composition B1 MgSt and CS (together) 49.25 % Microcrystalline cellulose (PH 102) + 49.25 % Fast Flow Lactose + 1 % Magnesium stearate + 0.5 % Cab-O-Sil B2 CS First and MgSt later 49.25 % Microcrystalline cellulose (PH 102) + 49.25 % Fast Flow Lactose + 1 % Magnesium stearate + 0.5 % Cab-O-Sil B3 MgSt First and CS later 49.25 % Microcrystalline cellulose (PH 102) + 49.25 % Fast Flow Lactose + 1 % Magnesium stearate + 0.5 % Cab-O-Sil B4 Only cellulose and lactose 50 % Microcrystalline cellulose (PH 102) + 50 % Fast Flow Lactose
Methods
Powder Flow Rheometer
Gravitational displacement rheometer (GDR) [ , , ] consisting of a platform and a rotating cylinder was used to capture the movement of center of gravity of powder blends (Fig. 1 ). The unit consists of an acrylic cylinder rotating at various rotational rates ranging from 5 to 30 rpm and the corresponding variations of force acting on the load cell was recorded from the movement of center of mass of the powder bed. Powder bed dilation was captured with a camera measuring the percentage change of powder bed (Fig. 1b, c ). The force acting on the load cell due to variations in the cohesion of powder as the powder flows was recorded for every blend using an automated computer interface (Fig. 2 ). The unit was discussed in detail in our previous works [ , , ] and will not be discussed here. Fig. 1 a Equipment with rotating drum and load cell assembly for measuring flow properties. b Powder at rest before starting the motor c Powder while dilation: measured as the percentage net change of the powder bed Fig. 2 Measurement of flow properties of powders. Load cell and bed expansion readings measured as flow index and dilation
Mechanical Modifications
In order to facilitate the electrostatic measurements and to run a wire through the cylinder, the end caps of the cylinder were drilled with perforations small enough to run a copper wire through them. The wire was run through the end caps as well as the powder bed. During the rotation of the cylinder, care was taken such that the powder has continuous contact with the wire. The wire was connected to an electrometer which is located external to the cylinder unit (Fig. 3 ). The first experiment was performed using a multimeter/resistor to record the voltage measurement. The purpose of this experiment was to initially confirm the preliminary voltage signals coming from the powder bed due to charge generation from the powder particles interaction during overall powder flow. In the second stage, all the powder blends which were initially prepared in the v-blender were tested using this assembly. In the third stage, the multimeter was replaced with an oscilloscope to capture the voltage readings with higher accuracy. A spiral wire was incorporated in the drum so that the contact was always established with the powder as it tumbles in the rotating cylinder. During the first set of experimental run, leakage of powder was observed due to the perforations made on the end caps of the cylinder. Therefore, o-rings were inserted at the perforations (with electrical tape) to prevent such leakages for the subsequent experimental runs. Care was taken such that the spiral wire does not get entangled during the powder flow or interferes with the surroundings of the cylinder assembly during charge measurement. Fig. 3 Schematic of electrostatic voltage measurement from the charges generated during the powder flow in a rotating cylinder
Results and Discussions
Voltage Spike Intensity Versus Voltage Spike Frequency
All the experiments including powder flow and electrostatics were conducted for a period of 30 min. The first set of experimental results listed in Fig. 4a showed that the frequency of voltage spikes increased with corresponding increase in the rotational speed of the cylinder. Although the intensity of the peak remained stable, an increase of frequency of voltage signal was observed. This phenomenon can be attributed to the larger number of particles and increase in the interaction between the particles of smaller size. It can be hypothesized that for a given volume, an increase in number of particles mutually interacting during powder flow, generated the multiple voltage signal output which was seen as the frequency of voltage signal. From the results, it was evident that the signal strength was small indicating that the charges accumulating and dissipating immediately where the charge density was low as seen from the weak signal of each peak generated. In addition, flow index measurements also showed that there was a variation in center of mass which potentially can be arising from packing variations. However, it is interesting to notice the wide spread of voltage output data arising from the powder flow phenomenon. Fig. 4 a Frequency of voltage spike variation with rotational rate of the cylinder. The number of voltage spikes increased with external shear in the form of speed of rotation of the cylinder. b Average spike intensity did not change with the rotational speed
The lower charge intensity arising from particle impact can be seen as a consequence of contact area of particles. Previous work by Watanabe et al. [ ] confirmed that the impact charge was a function of contact area. The results shown in Fig. 4a in our study are in agreement with Watanabe et al. [ ]. In our study, the particles in the formulation composed of different sizes and shapes as mentioned in the “ Materials ” section. Due to the variability in the particle sizes of components, the powder flow phenomenon observed was not smooth. A wide distribution of avalanches was also observed during the analysis of flow index, particularly for blends B8 and B12. This was evident through the wide distribution of voltage spike frequency for all powders.
Relation Between Rotational Speed and Electrostatics
The cylinder was operated at various rotational speeds ranging from 5 to 30 rpm. The speed was slowly increased from 5 rpm with a step increase of another 5 rpm until the rotational speed reached 30 rpm. Electrical voltage output was recorded for all the speeds as the cylinder was operating. In order to relate the electrostatic nature to flow behavior online, simultaneous flow index measurements were also recorded. It was interesting to notice that the voltage intensity did not change with the corresponding increase in rotational speed (Fig. 4b ). This indicated a strong dependence of electrostatic behavior which was intrinsic to the powder bed rather than the mechanical vibrations caused due to rotational speeds. This also confirmed that the influence of powder particle interactions were dominant over the particle wall interactions or external parameters such as speed of rotation. The results strongly indicated that material properties had a stronger influence on electrostatics than operating conditions.
Since triboelectricity is not quantitative, we tried to study the qualitative charging propensity of particles and their ability to contact charge by varying the compositions of formulations and the order of mixing in the formulations tested for both flow and electrostatics. From the results of low voltage spike intensity, it can be said that the charging propensity depended on the material contact. As the rotational speed was increased, the contact time between the particles decreased and the ability of particles to charge phenomenally decreased. Figure 5 showed that for every rotational speed, the voltage spike intensity did not change and remained stable even though the speed of rotation was altered. Interestingly, the voltage spike intensity increased slightly for all speeds when exposed for a prolonged period of roughly 12–16 min. The highest spike intensity was noticed after approximately 15 min for all speeds. However, there was a sharp drop in voltage intensity beyond that exposure time. The results showed that powder particles pick up electrostatic charge not immediately, but over a period of time of 15 min in the given environment. However, this static charge acquired did not last long by the particles as noticed by the drop in voltage after 15 min. The results proved that the electrostatic charges could not be retained by particles for longer time. The continuous interactions dissipated the charges. Such behavior can be attributed to the strength of the charges acquired by the particles. An attempt was made in this study to increase the frequency of contact charging by increasing the rotational rate of the cylinder. This did not increase the voltage intensity showing that mechanical forces extrinsic to the powder bed failed to increase the particle contact thereby reducing the time of particle contact. The trends shown in Fig. 5 were derived from the average values of tests repeated three times on each experimental run. Fig. 5 Variation of voltage spike intensity as a function of time for various rotational speeds. After a period of 12 – 16 min, the electrostatic charge slightly increased for all rotational speeds. The highest voltage intensity was observed at approximately 15 min for all speeds
Control Experiments at Low Speeds
In order to understand the electrostatic variations and acquisition ability of powders at lower rotational speeds, a separate set of experiments were run between 2 to 8 rpm. Three different conditions were used in this experimental run. The first study included a controlled experiment where the system was run without powder in order to see the charge acquisition phenomena. The second study was done using a free flowing powder [fast flo lactose, 90 μ, Foremost Farms)] and the third experiment was run using a very cohesive powder [micronized acetaminophen (acetyl-para-aminophenol—APAP), 15 μ, Mallinckrodt]. Figure 6 shows a comparison of all three sets of experiments and their variations of peak voltage intensity detected during the powder flow. It should be noted that all the three sets of experiments were run at 2, 4, 6 and 8 rpm respectively. The results show that the peak voltage intensity detected was minimum with the empty cylinder, proving that the contribution of mechanical factors was minimum in charge generation. In comparison, lactose powder exhibited higher voltage intensity. A comparison at 2 rpm between all runs showed that the cohesive powder (APAP) exhibited higher voltage peak intensity compared to lactose (Fig. 6a ). As the speed of rotation increased, the peak voltage intensity also increased only for free flowing lactose (Fig. 6b ), which can be attributed to the continuous interaction and friction between the free flowing particles. However, an opposite effect was observed in the case of cohesive APAP powder where the voltage peak intensity continuously dropped as the speed of rotation of the cylinder changed from 2 to 8 rpm (Fig. 6c ). This can be seen possibly due to sticking of the powder to walls of the cylinder and inability of powder particles to pick up electrostatic charge as the speed was increased. It was also observed that the powder particles of APAP not only stuck to the sides of the cylinder, but also formed individual granules or agglomerates which consequently flowed and decreased the electrostatic charge. In the cohesive powder, the initial rise in voltage peak intensity at 2 rpm and subsequent drop as the speed increased to 8 rpm can be attributed to (i) sticking of powder to the walls of the cylinder and (ii) formation of agglomerates. Fig. 6 Control experiment showing comparisons between empty cylinder, free flowing powder and cohesive APAP powder. Comparison of empty cylinder with a APAP and lactose at 2 rpm, b lactose alone at various speeds, c APAP at various speeds
Powder Flow Correlation to Online Continuous Measurement of Electrostatics
The higher frequency of voltage signals and absence of higher voltage intensity demonstrated that the particle interactions are quite discrete rather than continuous. We attempted to study the flow attributes of the charge generated due to discrete particle interactions. Among the blends tested for powder flow and electrostatics, the blend B12 exhibited the worse flow behavior. Interestingly, blends B1 and B4 exhibited similar flow behavior characterized by their flow index values of 38 and 40. However, B2 and B3 showed flow index values of 26 and 30 respectively. The differences in the flow index values are in agreement with our previous work [ ] which showed that the order of mixing was critical in altering the powder flow. Particularly, the blend with CS added first showed a lowest flow index value compared to the other blends. However, in the present work, the net influence of such parameters on the generation of electrostatic charge was assessed. During the experimental run, it was observed that the blends with higher flow index values exhibited wider electrostatic charge variations. Although the voltage charge spike frequency increased with increasing speed of rotation, voltage intensity did not change. However, the increase in voltage charge frequency had an influence on the powder flow. Although, a clear link between the voltages generated online could not be clearly linked to the cause of flow variability of powder, an indirect correlation was observed in the case of blends with improved powder flow with low voltage intensity. This will be the focus of our next study, in which we plan to further develop the methodology to directly link the voltage generation due to charge accumulation and its direct consequence of force acting on load cell. Due to the complexity involved in identifying and quantifying the instantly accumulating and dissipating electrostatic charges generated during the powder flow, we intend to investigate it as a separate work related to the cohesion of powder bed.
Relation of Electrostatics with Powder Flow in Formulations
Interestingly, multi-component formulations showed different results compared to pure component powders. In case of formulations, a correlation existed between flow index and spike frequency, but a weaker correlation was observed between spike intensity and flow index (Fig. 7 ). This showed that the net charge was low on the overall blend compared to the charge generated during the powder flow caused by the particle interactions. These trends again confirmed that the electrostatic charges were discrete. Therefore, accumulation and dissipation was found to be a continuous occurring phenomenon, also due to presence of lubricants and glidants. Our previous work [ ] had shown that the presence of nanocoated smears due to high shear mixing affect particle interactions and their flow properties. Although charge accumulation or dissipation is expected to alter the particle impact, no physical evidence was found to show the particle contact due to these charges. The particle, if tracked, can provide a useful insight into such particle contact dynamics due to electrostatics. However, the accumulated charge was found to affect various system flow regimes. Interestingly, the sliding behavior of powder particles was observed during the experimental run on lubricated powders at lower speeds of 5 and 10 rpm. However, as the speed was increased, the sliding decreased and the powder started to flow with periodic avalanches. Fig. 7 Influence of a voltage spike frequency and b intensity on flow index captured by load cell. A stronger correlation was established with the voltage spike frequency rather than voltage spike intensity
Dilation study performed on the blends provided an indirect insight into the contact area between the particles. The results on dilation study were similar to that of the results seen in the case of flow index. Again, a stronger influence of voltage spike frequency on dilation of powder bed can be seen from Fig. 8 . However, in comparison to flow index, the dilation property of powder seemed to be influenced by the electrostatics generated during the powder flow. Perhaps, the electrostatics generated was sufficient enough to dilate the bed as seen from the results of dilation correlation with voltage charge intensity and frequency. This accumulation could not influence the force acting on load cell thereby showing a weaker correlation of voltage intensity with flow index in comparison to powder dilation. Hence, based on the results obtained in Figs. 5 and 6 , dilation can be better correlated to online powder electrostatics than the load cell method. Reduction in powder density can also be seen as another possibility due to small magnitude of electrostatics generated and dissipated instantly during the powder flow. Results further showed that such behavior decreased as the lubricant was added to the preblend. Fig. 8 Variation of voltage spike frequency ( a ) and voltage spike intensity ( b ) with powder bed dilation. Again, a stronger correlation was seen in the case of voltage spike frequency with dilation
The reason for powder bed dilation was related to the bed expansion which reduced the particle contacts. A higher dilation seen in powders can be attributed to this phenomenon. A simultaneous analysis of dilation along with flow index and electrostatic charge measurements showed that the powder which generated higher frequency of voltage exhibited higher dilation of the powder bed. The dependence of electrostatic charge on the bed dilation can therefore be deduced indirectly. Such a live measurement technique visualizing the simultaneous voltage generation and powder flow had provided a new way of looking into particle dynamics affecting the overall powder flow and mixing. Similar to the flow index results, no relation existed between the voltage spike intensity with powder dilation as well.
Relation of Electrostatics with Powder Flow in Pure Component Powders
Pure component powders such as free flowing lactose and cohesive APAP were tested for their relation of charge accumulation to the powder flow. The electrical signal output of load cell generated by the force acting on the load cell by the flowing powder was compared with the electrical voltage detection at 8 rpm for a pure component powder (lactose). The results displayed in Fig. 9 showed that the variations of forces acting on load cell signal are correlating with the electrical signal output. The voltage intensity generated from an online powder flow measuring device showed a continuous trend of rise and fall of signal output which indicated a possible charge accumulation and dissipation at 8 rpm. It is likely that the accumulated charge increased the cohesion of powder particles and caused an increase in vertical forces on the load cell which can be seen from the electrical output of the load cell. Apart from resulting in various voltage peak intensities, these signals exhibited periodic rise and fall of voltage intensity which was similar to the load cell reading captured on GDR. This leads us to believe that the electrostatic agglomeration is one of the possible reasons for variations of load cell readings during continuous powder flow measurement. Fig. 9 Variations of electrostatics in powders generated during powder flow and its correlation with load cell reading of powder as a function of time
The free flowing pure component lactose powder showed a steady variation of voltage peak. When compared to a cohesive APAP powder, the variations of electrical signals were found to be stable. Although, the cohesive powder initially showed higher voltage intensity, the signal became weaker after 20 min indicating a state of consolidation that was attained as a function of time (Fig. 10 ). Considering the fall of voltage reading in cohesive powder, it is likely that the electrostatic charge in the early stage showed a stronger electrical signal whereas cohesion, stickiness of powder to the walls of cylinder, and formation of agglomerates showed a weaker signal in the latter stage. As APAP voltage signal declined over time till 10 min, voltage intensity readings remained relatively stable after reaching consolidated state between 10 and 20 min. Figure 10 illustrates the drop in voltage signal of APAP powder after the consolidation state was reached after 20 min. However, the initial higher peak intensity of APAP when compared to the latter part of experiment was derived by a combined effect of cohesion, agglomerates and sticking of powder to the walls of the cylinder. When monitoring the peak intensity of voltage output signal, the role of cohesion of powders in affecting electrostatics was noticeable. Fig. 10 Comparison of voltage peak intensity variation from the time the cylinder starts tumbling till the powder reaches a consolidated state in 20 min. The voltage intensity decreased for cohesive powder (APAP), but remained stable for free flowing lactose powder
Continuous Measurements Using an Oscilloscope
In order to capture the surface charge over a period of time continuously while monitoring the powder flow through flow index and dilation, the electrometer was replaced with an oscilloscope. The immediate observation was that the electrostatic interference was generated from lighting in the room where experiment was conducted and vibrations in the electric motor. An aluminum foil was used to cover the cables to reduce the noise from the motor. Lighting was switched off for every experiment to minimize the electrical disturbance. These two precautions significantly improved the signal strength on the oscilloscope. The goal of this study was to relate the variations of the charge distributions to the variations caused due to load cell variations.
Due to the immediate accumulation and dissipation of charge distributions, it was observed that there was a time lapse for the charge generation to show a considerable impact on force acting on the load cell. The common characteristic features of voltage spikes and spikes of load cell signal coming from variations of force acting on load cell by the movement of center of gravity could not be directly related. However, it can be argued that there was an indirect interference of charge distributions on the load cell reading. As for measurement and quantification, the charge distribution curves were very different from those of load cell readings. It should be worth noting here that charge voltage distribution curves were obtained only from the charge generation between the powder particles. In comparison, the force acting on the load cell can vary due to several factors such as humidity, moisture, particle size, particle shape, van der Waals forces of attractions, inter-particle interactions, wall effects of the vessel, etc. Due to these combined effects on force acting on load cell for the powder flow, only an indirect or partial correlation can be derived between charge effects and powder flow.
Conclusions
Electrostatic charge generation during the powder flow in multiple pharmaceutical formulations was studied by incorporating online simultaneous measuring methods. The net surface charge generated by the interaction of powder particles was captured by a multimeter and an oscilloscope. The periodic readings on the multimeter showed that the voltage frequency increased with the speed of rotation or shear rate of the cylinder, but the voltage spike intensity did not change for formulations. Higher frequency of voltage signals demonstrated discrete particle interactions thereby resulting in accumulation and dissipation of static charge as the powder tumbled in the rotating cylinder. The weak strength of voltage spike intensity confirmed a poor contact between powder particles, particularly in the blends mixed with flowing additives. Pure component powders exhibited different trends compared to formulations. Voltage peak intensity increased as a function of speed for free flowing powders, but decreased for cohesive powders. However, cohesive powders showed higher voltage peak intensity than free flowing powders. A stronger correlation existed between powder flow property (flow index and dilation) and spike frequency, whereas a weaker correlation was observed between spike intensity and powder flow in formulations containing additives. In pure component powders, both voltage peak intensity and flow properties were found to be correlated. Pure component powders generated sufficient charge in order to have a considerable immediate impact on force acting on the load cell. However, the overall flow was affected by the continuous charge accumulations, resulting into an indirect dependency of powder flow on electrostatic charge.