Introduction
Protein therapeutics in various stages of development (pre-clinical, clinical, commercial, etc.) constitutes a significant volume in the current pharmaceutical market [ , ]. Worldwide commercialization of a therapeutic drug product requires a minimum shelf life (e.g., 24 months), which in turn is dependent on successful development of a formulation that imparts the required product stability. Therefore, it is critical to conduct extensive development studies that enable evaluation of a wide experimental design space and ensure selection of a formulation with optimum physical and chemical stability profile for the product. Because formulation development studies involve simultaneous optimization of several components (e.g., pH, buffer species, ionic strength, and formulation excipients), study execution can have significant implications on material availability, project timelines, resources, etc., particularly during early development stages. While a number of physical and chemical attributes are monitored, aggregation is often utilized as one of the primary physical stability attributes to rank order formulations. Formation of higher molecular weight species due to protein aggregation can potentially lead to challenges associated with product stability, manufacturability, immunogenicity, and safety implications [ , , , , ]. Therefore, minimization of aggregation is often a key objective during protein formulation development studies. Several protein aggregation mechanisms have been proposed, including reversible association of monomers in their native state, irreversible association of partially or completely unfolded or misfolded monomers, aggregation of chemically modified monomers, and surface-induced partial unfolding that leads to aggregation [ , , , ]. The rate of aggregate formation is impacted by formulation components including pH, ionic strength, and excipients [ ]. A number of analytical methods are available to detect aggregates with varying degrees of sensitivity, throughput, and resolution. These methods range from highly sensitive and quantitative methods such as size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), mass spectroscopy, and analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) to the less sensitive, but high throughput, methods such as fluorescence spectroscopy, dynamic light scattering (DLS), and UV spectroscopy [ , , , ]. Given the complex nature of proteins and limited mechanism of detection for a given technique, it is essential to utilize multiple orthogonal techniques for aggregation analysis.
During the early stages of formulation development, limited information is available regarding the typical degradation pathways that a therapeutic protein candidate may undergo as a function of pH, ionic strength, buffer type, temperature, excipients, etc. Additionally, limited material availability can present to scouting a wide experimental design space. Therefore, incorporation of a high throughout physical stability screening method during the early product development stage offers unique advantages to minimize the sample, time, and resource requirements. Formulation conditions such as pH, buffer type, ionic strength, excipients, etc. can be incorporated into a well-designed high throughput (HT) screening study. Once the HT tool has been successfully used to establish the relative stability profiles for protein candidate in various compositions, development studies can then be extended with only selected lead formulations to be further evaluated using additional analytical methodologies. For a HT to be successfully implemented for a variety of development projects, the assay must be independent of protein attributes such as molecular weight, construct type, and mechanism of instability. It should also be independent of interference from formulation components such as pH, ionic strength, presence of excipients, etc. To support practical implementation, the assay must be easy to interpret and preferably amenable to automation.
Fluorescence-based assays have been routinely employed to detect conformational changes in proteins [ , , , , , ]. For example, an amino acid (such as tryptophan) within the protein primary sequence can be used as an intrinsic fluorophore [ ]. In the absence of an intrinsic fluorophore, proteins can be covalently linked to extrinsic fluorescence dyes for detecting protein-protein interactions and unfolding-refolding mechanisms [ ]. Additionally, extrinsic fluorescence dyes like Nile Red (NR), Thioflavin T (ThT), and 8-anilino-1-naphthalenesulfonic acid (ANS) can be utilized based upon their hydrophobic, non-covalent interaction with conformationally altered protein species or aggregates [ , , , , , , ].
In the current manuscript, the unique properties of these external dyes were successfully utilized in reported formulation development studies to (a) detect aggregates in liquid solution samples for enabling rank ordering of various formulations and (b) accurately detect low concentrations of non-ionic surfactants in the formulation. The data from the fluorescence-based detection of aggregates were successfully correlated with an orthogonal analytical method, size-exclusion chromatography (SEC). Based on the results presented in this manuscript, the authors recommend incorporation of the fluorescence-based high throughput screening tool during early formulation development screening studies followed by comprehensive stability studies using additional analytical methodologies to select the lead formulation. The authors also recommend caution when using this method in the presence of high concentrations of surfactants.
Materials and Methods
Three model protein types (Table 1 ) were used to evaluate the fluorescence-based screening method. Table 1 Model biotherapeutics Protein identifier Molecular wt Construct type Isoelectric point (pI) Protein A 90 kDa Fusion protein 4.5–5.5 Protein B 51 kDa Pegylated protein 8.3 Protein C 146 kDa Monoclonal antibody 8.0
Accelerated Stability Studies
Samples for stability studies were prepared by diluting the respective stock solutions 12–15-fold into the following formulation buffers: 10 mM acetate (pH 4.5 or pH 5.5), 10 mM histidine (pH 6.5), and 10 mM phosphate (pH 7.5 or pH 8.0). The final protein concentrations were 2, 1, and 7 mg/mL for proteins A, B, and C, respectively. All samples were stored in polypropylene tubes. Stressed samples were stored at 40 °C, and initial control samples were stored at −60 °C. The samples were pulled at 1 day (1d), 4 days (4d), 1 week (1w), 2 weeks (2w), and 3 weeks (3w) and then stored frozen at −60 °C until analyzed.
Fluorescence Measurements
Nile Red (NR, Sigma 19123), 8-anilino-1-naphthalenesulfonic acid (ANS, Sigma A1028), and Thioflavin T (ThT, Calbiochem 596200) stock solutions were prepared in ethanol (for NR) or water (for ThT and ANS) and stored frozen at −20° until used. For fluorescence measurements, the protein samples were spiked with either NR, ANS or ThT stock solution to achieve final dye concentration of 2 μM. Prior to data acquisition, the samples were gently mixed to ensure solution homogeneity and protected from light to avoid photobleaching. For NR, excitation and emission wavelengths were set to 575 and 652 nm, respectively. For ANS, excitation and emission wavelengths were set to 378 and 470 nm, respectively, and for ThT, excitation and emission wavelengths were set to 440 and 480 nm, respectively. Additionally, the emission spectra were acquired to evaluate profile changes, if any (scan rate = 600 nm/min, average time = 0.1 s, data interval = 1 nm). The samples were loaded in 96-well plates (Costar 3915) and analyzed using fluorescence SpectraMax M2 plate reader (Molecular Devices, Software: SoftMax Pro version 4.8). The data acquisition was performed under room temperature conditions. The emission intensity was evaluated as a function of stability time point to determine the impact of various formulation pH conditions on proteins’ physical stability overtime.
Method Performance Studies
Protein A in 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5, and Nile Red dye were selected for method performance. The samples were loaded in 96-well plates (Costar 3915) and analyzed using fluorescence SpectraMax M2 plate reader. The data acquisition was performed under room temperature conditions. For NR, excitation and emission wavelength were set to 575 and 652 and/or 630 nm. All measurements were performed with 200 μL protein A solution spiked with a NR stock solution to get a final concentration of 2 μM in the experiments (with the exception of NR concentration linearity experiments).
During evaluation of method linearity with respect to protein concentration, 2 μM NR dye was added to 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, and 20 mg/mL protein A ( T = 0 and T = 2w, 40 °C). During evaluation of fluorescent dye concentration linearity, 5 mg/mL protein A solution was spiked with sufficient dye stock solution to achieve concentrations of 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, and 4 μM. Note that the volume of NR stock solution added to protein A was maintained constant in these studies. To determine the effect of sample volume, 10, 25, 50, 100, and 200 μL of the solution of 5 mg/mL protein A+ 2 M NR was added to the 96-well plate, and the FI was measured at 652 nm. To assess method repeatability, five independent measurements were acquired as described above for 5 mg/mL protein A and 2 μM NR at the initial ( T = 0) and 2w, 40 °C time points. To assess stability of NR fluorescence overtime, 2 μM NR was used for 200 μL of protein A solutions under measurement in 96-well plates. The solutions were mixed for 15 min while protected from light. FI measurements were performed on the same sample at 0, 30, 60, and 90 min.
Size-Exclusion Chromatography
SEC analysis was performed using Waters e2695 liquid chromatography system equipped with a PDA 2998 detector and a detection wavelength of 280 nm. SEC-HPLC analyses were performed using either a Tosoh Biosciences, TSKgel G3000SW XL (Cat. No. 08541, for proteins A and C) or Superdex 200 10/300 GL (GE Healthcare catalog number 17-5175-01, for protein B). The chromatograms were integrated to determine the percent peak area associated with various species. The percent peak area values for all species that elute prior the main peak for any given sample were combined and reported as % high molecular weight (%HMW).
Polysorbate 80 Quantitation Assay
Calculated quantities of polysorbate 80 (PS80) were dissolved in 200 μL of Water for Injection (WFI) to achieve target concentrations ranging from 0.001 to 1 % in a 96-well plate. To these samples, NR was spiked to a final concentration of 2 μM. The samples were gently mixed, and FI was measured for each concentration of PS80 using SpectraMax M2 plate reader. The excitation λ max of 575 nm and emission λ max of 652 nm was used for the measurements. For filtration experiments, 10 mL each of different concentrations of PS80 were filtered through 13-mm syringe filters (Acrodisc 0.22 μm, PES) with an aliquot volume of 3 mL. The fluorescence assay was performed as described using 2 μM NR in 200 μL volume.
Results and Discussion
Protein Aggregation Causes a Significant Shift in the Fluorescence Spectral Profile of NR
In order to evaluate the utility of fluorescence-based screening method for a variety of protein types, three prototypes (A, B, and C) with different characteristics (type, size, and isoelectric point) were selected (Table 1 ). NR, ThT, and ANS were utilized as the extrinsic dyes used in the study to compare extent of protein aggregation in various formulations. These dyes are termed as environment-sensing dyes, meaning that the fluorescence spectral properties are dependent on the dielectric constant of dye environment. In a polar environment like that of a native protein in its aqueous formulation, the dyes exhibit little to no fluorescence signal. However, in the presence of aggregated or perturbed/unfolded species, which are characterized by higher surface hydrophobicity relative to the corresponding native species, fluorescence spectra of these dyes undergo significant changes as the polarity of the sample environment decreases. The change is manifested as a bathochromic shift (blue shift) in the emission wavelength of the dye as well as increase in the quantum yield of the dye, both of which can be used to track protein aggregate levels in a formulation. The increase in the FI of the dye can be quantitated at the original emission λ max or at the shifted emission λ max . For these dyes in the presence of proteins, the FI may also depend on the surface hydrophobicity of the protein (or protein complex) and the formulation components.
For protein A formulation in 10 mM phosphate (pH 7.5, Fig. 1a ), the placebo fluorescence measurements were performed in the absence of protein for NR in water only or NR in buffer solution with standard formulation excipients. The FI for the native protein as well as aggregated protein was compared with the FI obtained in buffer-only samples. Relative to the buffer-only sample, the presence of native protein did not result in a shift in the emission wavelength but showed a slight increase in the FI of NR. This was expected as the FI may be dependent on differential surface hydrophobicity of the protein, as discussed earlier. The native protein showed an emission peak at ∼652 nm. Compared to native protein, the thermally stressed samples showed a blue shift in the emission peak from 652 to 630 nm. The stressed sample also showed an increase (∼2.5-fold) in FI relative to the native protein. This increase could be attributed to increase in protein aggregates in solution which was confirmed using SEC-HPLC analysis. Similar observations were made for proteins B and C (Fig. 1b, c ). The native versus aggregated protein spectral profiles in the presence of two other dyes (ANS and ThT) showed similar trends as NR (data not shown). These observations are consistent with the previously published results [ ] and confirm the utility of either emission peak or FI as a probe to monitor aggregate level and rank order various formulation prototypes. Fig. 1 Spectral characteristics of Nile Red in the presence of native and aggregated protein: 2 μM Nile Red was added to 2 mg/mL proteins A, B, and C. The dyes were excited at their 575 nm and emission spectra were collected over 620–680 nm wavelength range
Method Performance Using NR
For the high throughput fluorescence screening tool, method performance was evaluated with respect to linearity (both protein and dye concentrations), repeatability, and sample volume. These studies were conducted using protein A and NR dye, and the parameters considered during these studies are summarized in Fig. 2 . Fig. 2 Method performance using protein A and Nile red: a NR FI as a function of protein A concentration, b NR FI in the presence of increasing concentrations of NR for 5 mg/mL protein A, c NR FI as a function of well volume in the 96-well plate, and d NR FI for repeatability measurements for samples at t0 and samples stressed at 2w, 40 °C. Samples were measured for five independent ( I ) samples, or five aliquots from the same ( R ) sample
The following variables were evaluated: protein concentration (1–20 mg/mL with 2 μM dye) (Fig. 2a ), dye concentration (0.125–4 μM with 5 mg/mL protein) (Fig. 2b ), and sample volume in a 96-well plate (10–200 μL with 5 mg/mL protein and 2 μM dye) (Fig. 2c ). The FI was determined to be linear for the entire range of evaluated protein and dye concentrations. However, linearity plots for protein concentration range showed a noticeable increase in the slope of best-fit lines for stressed (40 °C, 2w) samples when compared to those for the native protein. Since the extent of dye binding is directly proportional to the hydrophobicity of the aggregate species, the increase in slope for stressed samples indicate a significant increase in the hydrophobicity of aggregate species present in the stressed samples. In order to ensure that the change in linearity slope for stressed versus native samples does not interfere with utilization of fluorescence screening tool, FI should be compared between samples with very similar protein concentration and for the same time point during the course of stability studies. The change in FI was observed to be linearly dependent on the entire range of evaluated sample volume used in the experiment. These results helped in establishing the range of acceptable sample volume in a 96-well plate since the measurements were performed using a top read fluorimeter, and the sample volume affects the pathlength of the solution inside the well. In addition to concentration and sample volume, method performance was evaluated with respect to reproducibility using acquisition of five independent measurements for 5 mg/mL protein A and 2 μM NR at the initial ( t = 0) and stressed samples (40 °C, 2w time point, Fig. 2d ). The relative standard deviation (RSD) between five replicate measurements was determined to be less than 5 %, demonstrating excellent method reproducibility. Method performance was also evaluated with respect to the duration over which sample measurements can be reliably performed. The FI remained unchanged at all time points for up to 60 min (data not shown) indicating that FI measurements can be performed under these experimental conditions within 60 min after dye addition with no adverse effect (for e.g., photobleaching).
Fluorescence-Based Assay in Formulation Development of Biologics
Fluorescence spectroscopy was evaluated as a screening tool based on the physical stability of test protein systems to rank order formulation prototypes. The studies were conducted for three different protein model systems (Table 1 ), which were selected to cover a broad range of molecule types, molecular weight, and isoelectric point. The evaluated formulation prototypes covered a broad pH range (4.5–8.0) and were stored under accelerated stability condition (40 °C) prior to testing at various time points. The evaluated pH conditions cover the range that is typically observed to be optimum for protein therapeutics. pH was selected as the only variable (and not excipient type/concentration, etc.) to be studied since this formulation component is expected to have the most significant impact on protein physical stability and is therefore usually screened first during a typical preformulation development workflow.
The thermal stress condition (40 °C) was selected based upon thermal stability (Tm) of the evaluated proteins. Under all experimental conditions, a thermodynamic equilibrium exists between native (or folded) and denatured (or unfolded) forms of the protein. The goal of thermal stress during stability studies is to only slightly shift the equilibrium towards the denatured species, which in turn is expected to increase the rate of aggregate formation. Therefore, use of higher temperature condition compresses the time required to enable comparison of various formulation prototypes. However, for representative results, the selected stress condition should not be higher than Tm onset beyond which significant extent of protein unfolding occurs.
Following experimental setup, fluorescence spectroscopy was utilized for sample analysis at all time points to compare the various formulation prototypes. For fluorescence measurements, the protein stability samples were analyzed in the presence of the three external binding dyes: NR, ThT, and ANS. For these studies, multiple dyes were selected in order to evaluate the potential impact of dye type on relative physical stability profile from all formulations. In addition to the fluorescence method, the samples were analyzed using SEC-HPLC as an orthogonal and comparative tool to determine the relative physical stability of formulations. SEC-HPLC is routinely used during biologics formulation development studies. The throughput for SEC-HPLC is significantly lower than the plate-base fluorescence method; however, the method provides quantitative estimate for the aggregates and hence is the preferred method for detailed aggregates analysis. The SEC-HPLC and fluorescence data (pH vs aggregates) were also plotted for the last evaluated time point for the thermally stressed samples (40 °C, 3w, Fig. 3c ) to allow visualization of the trends between the two methods. Fig. 3 Stability studies data using SEC-HPLC and Nile Red and proteins A, B, and C. Proteins A, B, and C were formulated in buffers from pH 4.5 to pH 8.0, and stability samples were evaluated using SEC-HPLC to determine % aggregates using and evaluated using NR fluorescence assay ( b , e , and h ) and SEC-HPLC ( a , d , and g ). pH vs aggregates profile for proteins A, B, and C is plotted for the SEC ( bars ) and fluorescence data ( dotted line ) for the 40 °C, 3w time point ( c , f , and i ). The description for the individual data points is shown in ( b )
The results from fluorescence spectroscopy using NR and SEC-HPLC for the three test proteins are compared in Fig. 3 . For protein A, based on the NR fluorescence, the highest levels of aggregates were seen at pH 4.5 and the pH of optimum stability around pH 7.5–8.0 (Fig. 3a ). This conclusion is also supported by the other dyes used in our study, ANS and ThT (Supplementary figure 1 ). SEC-HPLC showed the same trend as the fluorescence assays capturing the pH of optimum stability at pH 7.5–8.0 and highest level of aggregates at pH 4.5. The SEC and fluorescence data was plotted for the last evaluated time point for the thermally stressed samples (40 °C, 3w, Fig. 3c ). For protein A, a good correlation was seen between the two assays. This correlation was also observed between ANS/ThT fluorescence and SEC (Supplementary figure 2 ).
For protein B, both SEC-HPLC and the NR (and ThT) fluorescence determined the pH of optimal stability to be around 4.5–5.5. For protein B, the effect of pH on protein physical stability as determined using SEC was observed to be dependent on time point. Formulations at pH 4.5 and 5.5 were observed to be very comparable until the 1w time point, but pH 4.5 is observed to be significantly less stable for 2w and 3w samples. This change in pH trend profile after 1w time point was also observed using the fluorescence method. Another important trend that was consistently observed for both methods included the highest extent of physical instability for the pH 6.5 samples at later time points. Overall, the formulation at pH 5.5 was determined to be an optimal using the two orthogonal techniques. The SEC-fluorescence plots for 40 °C, 3w time point showed a good correlation for all the three dyes tested in this study. Some of the ANS data did not correlate well with SEC at the initial time points, possibly due to the low level of aggregates at these time points, but showed a good correlation at the later time points in the study (Supplementary figures 1 and 2 ).
For protein C, both NR fluorescence and SEC-HPLC showed the pH of least stability to be pH 7.5–8.0. However, the pH of optimum stability could not be clearly identified using NR. Also, NR fluorescence failed to detect the subtle differences between physical stability profiles under different pH conditions, which were obvious using SEC analysis (Fig. 3g, h ). When the fluorescence experiments were conducted using ANS or ThT as the external dyes (Supplementary figure 1 ), the trend plots identified pH 4.5–5.5 with minimum aggregate level, which is consistent with SEC data (Fig. 3h ). For protein C, the SEC-fluorescence comparison plots for all three dyes (Fig. 3i and Supplementary figure 2 ) show very similar relative stability profile of the tested formulations.
For the stability with aggregate level lower than 1 % (proteins B and C at the pH of optimum stability for the early time points like initial and 1w), the FI of NR did not increase substantially relative to the initial time point. Owing to this observation, we could not compare formulations if the % aggregates were less than a total of 1 %. This observation is critical to be considered while evaluating the utility of fluorescence method for comparing formulations during development screening studies. In case the aggregate levels or the changes in them are lower than 1 %, fluorescence spectroscopy will unlikely be able to show the stability difference between various formulations.
Quantitation of Surfactants in Formulations
During the course of the experiments, an important observation was made regarding the impact of surfactant (for e.g., PS80) in formulation. A formulation containing a non-ionic surfactant showed a higher basal level FI in the presence of NR than the formulation in absence of the surfactant (data not shown). Non-ionic surfactants are amphiphilic molecules comprised of hydrophilic and hydrophobic species. The results presented in Fig. 4 show that NR fluorescence was sensitive to the presence of surfactant in the formulation and hence must be used with caution under these conditions in the presence of surfactants. Interestingly, the “interference” from surfactant was used as the premise for development of fluorescence-based method to quantify this excipient level in a protein formulation. To quantify the surfactant levels in one of the selected formulations, 2 μM NR was added to increasing concentrations of polysorbate 20 (PS20) and polysorbate 80 (PS80). FI of NR increased as the concentration of PS20/ PS80 was increased from 0.001 to 1 % (Fig. 4a ). The NR FI saturated at PS20/PS80 concentrations of ∼0.05 %. The FI for both PS20 and PS80 was linear in the concentration range of 0.001 to 0.01 % (Fig. 4b ). These results demonstrate that NR can be used with precision and accuracy, for quantitative determination of the concentration of non-ionic surfactants in formulations. The linear range of this method is determined to be consistent with the surfactant level range that is typically used for protein formulations. Since the presence of protein does not interfere with the utility of the fluorescence assay to measure surfactant concentration, the reported experiments can be extended to protein containing formulations as well. The fluorescence tool was successfully used to determine surfactant concentrations for PS80 sourced from two vendors and with different purity grade (Fig. 4c ) demonstrating utility of the developed assay for multiple reagent grades for concentration measurements. Fig. 4 Quantitation of PS80 using Nile Red: a change in NR FI in the presence of water and increasing concentrations of PS20 and PS80. b Linear response of NR FI to increasing concentrations of PS20 or PS80. c FI of NR in the presence of two grades of PS80. d NR FI in the presence of unfiltered and two filtered aliquots of PS80 through a sterilizing grade filter
Case Study: Adsorption of PS80 on Sterilizing Grade Filters
The assay discussed above to determine surfactant concentration was successfully implemented to address the question whether PS80 adsorbs on common sterilizing grade (0.22 μm) filters. This is a common issue in biologics formulation development. PS80 solution (multiple concentrations) in water was filtered through lab-scale PES syringe filters (13 mm), and two aliquots (3 mL each) were collected during the filtration process. The standard curve obtained from PS80 solution before filtration was compared to that after filtration. As expected, FI increased with increasing concentrations of PS80 and showed a linear trend between 0.001 and 0.01 % PS80 concentration. The FI for the first aliquot after filtration also showed a linear trend between 0.001 and 0.01 % PS80 concentration. However, the FI for post-filtration solution was lower than that of the pre-filter sample. The FI of the second aliquot however was identical to the PS80 solution before filtration (Fig. 4d ). This indicates that some PS80 was initially adsorbed on the filter membrane, but the target concentration following filtration can be recovered after saturation of the membrane. This observation was made at all tested concentrations between 0.001 and 0.01 % PS80. Hence, during the filtration process for formulations containing PS80, it is advisable to flush the filters with a pre-determined volume of PS80 containing solution to saturate the filter surface area. The actual volume required to be flushed is dependent on the surface area of the filter and hence can be determined on a case by case basis. This fluorescence-based method for determination of surfactant concentration is recognized to be especially useful during the early formulation development studies when a qualified analytical method may not be available for such measurements.
Conclusions
The results presented above clearly show that a fluorescence-based screening assay can be reliably used in lieu of SEC-HPLC analysis to rank order formulations for a variety of protein types. When incorporated into the preformulation workflow as a plate-based, high throughput format, fluorescence assay is expected to significantly reduce the resource, time, and sample requirements. Based upon discussion of the data from three model proteins presented above, the authors recommend the following points to be considered while incorporation of fluorescence spectroscopy as the only screening tool during preformulation development screening studies. Firstly, the relative stability of evaluated formulations should be determined at multiple time points. An overall assessment of the time-course of relative stability profiles will enable selection of an optimum formulation. Secondly, the fluorescence experiments are recommended to be conducted using two dyes to increase the level of confidence while selection of the optimum formulation. Since the fluorescence assay is proposed to be using a plate-based high throughput screening mode, the use of an additional dye is not expected to significantly increase either the screening time or sample requirements. It is important to note that the fluorescence assay presented here is not recommended to be used for determination of absolute aggregate levels in various formulations, but to be implemented only for rank ordering of formulations. Once the lead formulation(s) has been identified based upon this fluorescence-based screening assay, acceptable physical and chemical stability profiles of the protein should be confirmed using the typical analytical tools including SEC-HPLC. In addition, our studies also showed the merit of NR fluorescence to accurately quantify very low concentrations of surfactants in formulations. This method is very valuable for early stage projects where qualified analytical methodologies may be very limited for determination of surfactant level, for example, to confirm required level over stability studies and impact of various unit operations (filtration, etc.).