Introduction
Current pharmaceutical manufacturing processes primarily involve batch processes. These batch processes require that considerable development efforts be dedicated to product scale-up and transference of the process from development to manufacturing facilities [ , , , ]. The use of a continuous manufacturing process, as described in this work, will eliminate scale-up efforts as the same mixing unit used in development could be used in product manufacture.
The continuous manufacturing process described in this paper uses a small custom-made mixer that offers significant flexibility at a maximum of 80 kg/h at 70 rpm [ ]. The excipients and active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) are added to the mixer through volumetric feeders. The size of a lot will not be restricted by the manufacturing equipment available at a pharmaceutical site. Lot size will be adjusted by the amount of time employed during manufacture. Thus, the system will be used for a certain time to fulfill a customer’s order of 100,000 tablets and for a longer period for a 500,000 tablet order. The continuous manufacturing system is also a very compact system, thereby reducing product hand-offs and transfers, reducing the potential for product cross-contamination and simplifying cleaning validation efforts. Due to the small size of continuous manufacturing systems, product isolation could be facilitated for potent drugs, although the design presented in this study is not designed for these purposes. The small size of continuous manufacturing mixers is also an advantage in early product development when supplies of a new API are often limited. The increased flexibility may be achieved within a smaller manufacturing area leading to considerable savings in energy and site maintenance.
Near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy has been extensively used for monitoring batch processes [ , , ], but this work describes the monitoring of a continuous mixing process with NIR spectroscopy. The NIR methods for batch manufacturing have been used to evaluate the endpoint of the mixing process [ , ]. The NIR methods for continuous blending need to monitor the variation in the mixing after steady state is achieved [ , ]. The evaluation of method precision is extremely important to discern between the variation from the mixing process and the variation associated to the NIR method that is monitoring the blending process. Thus, in this work, the precision and accuracy of the NIR method are thoroughly evaluated. A five-component blend is analyzed and significant efforts to incorporate previous knowledge from this field which has shown the importance of carefully constructing calibration sets capable of predicting the future manufacturing process [ ].
Materials and Methods
Materials
Ibuprofen (90 grade, BASF Corporation) was chosen as a representative cohesive API, lactose monohydrate (Tablettose 70, Mutchler Inc., NF, EP, JP) and microcrystalline cellulose Type 102 (JRS Pharma, PhEur, JP, USP, NF) were chosen as main excipients and accounted for roughly 90 % of the target blend. Colloidal silicon dioxide (99.0–100.8 % ( w / w ), Cabot Corporation) and magnesium stearate (Mallinckrodt Inc., NF) were also included as minor excipients to enhance ease of flow and final product parameters.
Manufacturing Setup
Figure 1 illustrates the experimental continuous manufacturing setup used for these experiments (model development, validation runs, and continuous process). Pilot-scale feeders allowed flow rate control of powder to the mixer. The NIR instrument was placed on a holder over the conveyor belt. Preblended formulations were placed in a Gericke feeder initially filled up to 80 % of its maximum capacity and operated in volumetric mode (the screw operated at constant speed, 76.5 kg/h). For the continuous blending process run, API preblend was placed in feeder #1 and the excipient preblend in feeder #2 (the screw operated at constant speed, 9.96 and 66.5 kg/h, respectively). Fig. 1 Schematic of the experimental setup for the continuous mixing experiments: a two pilot plant powder feeders, b custom-made continuous mixer, c conveyor belt, d NIR spectrometer, and e sampling point for reference method
NIR Spectral Acquisition
A Control Development, Inc. (CDI) spectrometer series 1402 NIR analyzer (South Bend, IN) governed by CDI Spec32 data acquisition package version 1.7.1.3 was used to obtain the NIR spectra. This spectrometer is equipped with an indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) diode array that is thermoelectrically cooled and has 256 elements covering a spectral response from 905 to 1,681 nm and includes a diffuse reflectance measurement probe that illuminates a 2.5-cm diameter. The NIR instrument was placed approximately 1 cm over the sample. The system’s integration time was set at 6.6 ms per scan. A total of 36 spectra were averaged.
Reference spectra were obtained with a CDH 50 Standard White disk, made with Albrillon, an organic microcrystalline fluorinated polymer that provides a strong reflectance. This disk was also used to characterize the spectral noise. The spectrum of this material was used for both background and sample spectra, and the ratio of the spectra was used to estimate the instrument noise. The standard deviation of the mean signal among days ranged from 1.7 to 2.0 × 10 −4 . Spectra were acquired during five consecutive days. The system was turned off and on for periods of 20 min each day. A 15-min wait time for lamp stability was employed as recommended by the manufacturer prior to collecting spectra. This result represents the minimum standard deviation estimated to be observed throughout the experiments.
The sample volume analyzed by the NIR was estimated by placing layers of different width of sample on top of an acrylic surface. As the sample thickness on top of the acrylic surface was decreased, the distinct absorption bands of the acrylic surface around 1,331 and 1,344 nm were observed. These characteristic bands were first observed at approximately 0.5 mm of powder sample thickness at a constant probe-sample distance of approximately 1 cm. These experiments showed that the signal returning to the detector comes approximately from the top 0.5 mm of the powder sample. The approximate sample volume when 12 scans are averaged is 312 mg and was calculated from the equation below which takes into consideration that the sample is moving while the spectra are being obtained. $$ M=\rho\ \left[\pi {\left(\frac{d}{2}\right)}^2 + d\left(\varDelta x\right)\right] H $$ (1)
where ρ is the sample bulk density (0.60 g/cm 3 ), d is the NIR beam diameter, Δx is the sample displacement, and H is the experimental depth of penetration of the NIR beam.
Preparation of Calibration and Validation Blends
A total of five calibration blends and three validation blends were prepared spanning a concentration range from 7 to 13 % w / w ibuprofen (Ibu). The Solver Excel tool was used to create an experimental design that reduced correlation between the concentrations of the main excipients and ibuprofen.
All eight blends were individually prepared by placing ibuprofen over a standard sieve (USA Standard Testing Sieves ASTM Specification: Sieve Designation No. 30). Colloidal silicon dioxide (SiO 2 ) was placed over the ibuprofen along with a portion of preweighed lactose in order to prevent the cohesive mixture from sticking to the sieve. Components were rubbed together through the sieve [ ]. This preliminary mixture was used as the API preblend. A 16-qt PK Shell V-Blender was charged with the components in the following order: remaining preweighed lactose (Lac), API preblend, and microcrystalline cellulose (MCC). The V-Blender was operated at 15 rpm for a total time of 60 min. Afterward, magnesium stearate (MgSt) was added and the blend mixed for an additional 4 min. The API content in each sample was calculated from the values obtained by weighing. The blending endpoint of the calibration blends was monitored by calculating the standard deviation of the 1,202-nm peak intensity at 12 different points of the blend after first derivative pretreatment for every 15 min during the 60-min preblending process [ ].
Preparation of Continuous Blending Process Preblends
Two preblends were individually prepared for the continuous blending process: the API preblend and the Excipient preblend. The API preblend was prepared as described above and placed in the 16-qt PK Shell V-Blender operated at 15 rpm for a total time of 30 min. The excipient preblend was prepared by charging the excipient components in the following order: preweighed lactose (Lac), API preblend, and MCC. The V-Blender was operated at 15 rpm for a total time of 60 min. Afterward, magnesium stearate (MgSt) was added and the blend mixed for an additional 4 min.
NIR Calibration Model Development and Data Analysis
In-line NIR spectra of the calibration blends were obtained as the powder moved underneath the NIR beam on the moving conveyor belt as shown in Fig. 1 . Data pretreatment and NIR calibration model development was performed using SIMCA-P (Umetrics Software Prediction Engine) and the partial least square (PLS) algorithm. The NIR calibration model was developed after evaluation of spectral regions, data pretreatments, and number of PLS components. The calibration model’s performance was first assessed in terms of root mean standard error for calibration (RMSEC). The calibration models’ performance was also evaluated in terms of root mean standard error of prediction (RMSEP) using a prediction sample set (Eq. 3 ). $$ RMSEC = \sqrt{\frac{{\displaystyle {\sum}_{i=1}^m}{\left({\widehat{y}}_i-{y}_i\right)}^2}{N- f-1}} $$ (2) $$ RMSEP = \sqrt{\frac{{\displaystyle {\sum}_{i=1}^m}{\left({\widehat{y}}_i-{y}_i\right)}^2}{N}} $$ (3)
where \( {\widehat{y}}_i \) is the API concentration predicted by the NIR calibration model, y i is the reference (gravimetric) concentration, N is the number of samples in the prediction or validation sets, and f is the number of factors used in the model. All spectra were mean centered. The spectral pretreatments tested for model construction included first and second derivative and standard normal variate (SNV). Derivatives were obtained by applying the Savitzky-Golay (SG) algorithm using a 21-point moving window [ , ]. The effect of different spectral regions was also evaluated.
Variograms were calculated using in-house developed software with MATLAB (The MathWorks, Natick, MA) version 7.10 (R2010a). Fast Fourier transform (FFT) analysis was performed with a MATLAB discrete Fourier transforms (DFT) to study the variability observed in the continuous manufacturing results.
Ibuprofen UV Method
To confirm the prediction of the NIR calibration model, an in-house validated UV method was used as the reference method for the quantification of the ibuprofen. The absorbance of samples and standards was measured at 266 nm with a 10-mm optical path length. Each powder sample collected was weighed and transferred to 500-mL volumetric flasks using a solution of 75 % methanol: 25 % distilled water as diluent. After sample preparation, the solution was analyzed using a Thermo Electron Corp. UV spectrometer (Marietta, OH). A day of use accuracy assessment was performed at the beginning of the analysis over three concentration levels to evaluate the system’s and the analyst’s performance. Readings were made in duplicate for accuracy standards and samples. A standard deviation of 0.9 % and an average recovery of 100.7 % ( n = 36) for ibuprofen were obtained. The method’s linearity study showed a correlation coefficient ( r 2 ) of 1.000 over the range of 0.05–0.70 mg/mL ibuprofen.
Blend Sampling
Samples were retrieved at the end of the conveyor belt for each test sample set and continuous mixing run. The flowing powder coming out at the end of the conveyor belt was sampled every 5 s using a plastic cup to sample the flowing stream obtaining approximately 3 g of powder per time point [ ]. Afterward, API quantification of each sample was performed off-line by the in-house validated UV method.
Results and Discussion
Development of NIR Calibration Model
NIR spectra for the main components of the formulation (Ibu, Lac and MCC) were measured off-line as illustrated in Fig. 2 . Ibuprofen (API) is characterized by a group of absorption bands at low wavelengths corresponding to the first and second overtone vibrations, while the major excipients have absorbance bands at higher wavelengths. The API concentration is the greatest source of variation in the 1,090–1,428-nm wavelength region as shown in Fig. 3 . Well-defined clusters can be seen in the PCA score plot for each API concentration level when using first derivative pretreatment, capturing 93.8 % of the spectral variation between the first two factors. Fig. 2 Raw NIR spectra for the three major components in the pharmaceutical blend: ibuprofen, lactose, and microcrystalline cellulose. The shaded area corresponds to the spectral region associated with the API spectral bands Fig. 3 PCA score plot for the calibration sample set in the 1,090–1,428-nm wavelength region
Random sample selection was used to select 40 % of the calibration sample set spectra to develop the NIR calibration model and the remaining 60 % as the prediction sample set. Calibration models developed with several spectral regions and number of PLS factors were evaluated to optimize the ability of the NIR calibration model to predict the prediction sample set. This first assessment was based on the RMSEC (Eq. 2 ) and the RMSEP (Eq. 3 ). Table 1 shows the fraction of the variation of the Y variables explained by the model (R2Y cum ) and the error of prediction for the prediction sample set for some of the NIR calibration models evaluated. Not all NIR calibration models were included for clarity purposes. Table 1 Parameters of the NIR calibration models constructed and evaluated NIR calibration model no. Spectral range (nm) Data pretreatment Principal Components (#) Percent of variation RMSEC (%) RMSEP (%) R2Y cum 1 1,090–1,605 SNV + 1st derv 1 87.1 0.77 0.79 2 1,090–1,428 1st derv 1 99.0 0.22 0.27 3 1st derv 2 99.5 0.15 0.24 4 SNV + 1st derv 1 93.6 0.54 0.55 5 SNV + 1st derv 2 97.9 0.31 0.37 6 1,090–1,255 1st derv 1 95.0 0.48 0.59 7 1st derv 2 98.9 0.22 0.40 8 SNV + 1st derv 1 94.6 0.50 0.59 9 SNV + 1st derv 2 98.5 0.26 0.42 NIR near infrared, RMSEC root mean standard error for calibration, RMSEP root mean standard error of prediction, derv derivative, SNV standard normal variate
Results showed that when a wide spectral region (model no. 1) was used to develop the NIR calibration model, the first PLS factor describes less variation of the Y variable (API concentration) than models developed using shorter spectral range (model nos. 2, 4, 6, and 8). This is likely related with the inclusion of high wavelengths into the model, which are associated with the excipients of the formulation. The calibration model with 2 PLS factors provided a better prediction of the Y variable as seen by the R2Y cum . Therefore, when comparing shorter spectral regions, 1,090–1,428-nm spectral region and 2 PLS factors (model nos. 3 and 5) are determined as the optimal parameters to develop the preliminary NIR calibration model with an average RMSEP of 0.3 % ( w / w ) as shown in Table 1 .
Method Robustness
The amount of blend over the conveyor may change over time in the continuous manufacturing setup used in this process (Fig. 1 ). The distance between probe and sample will vary as a consequence of powder flow rate changes in the process. The probe distance to the powder will be reduced when more powder is accumulated or increased if less powder is present in the conveyor belt. The effect of this variation was assessed by varying the probe to sample distance to a maximum of 0.5 cm and determining its effect on the predictions. Table 2 presents the NIR predicted concentrations of API and repeatability assessment for both preliminary NIR calibration models at different probe to sample distance. Table 2 Probe to sample distance effects in NIR model predicted concentration Sample-probe distance (cm) NIR calibration model response Model no. 3 (1st derivative) Model no. 5 (SNV/1st derivative) Average predicted concentration % ( w / w ) SD ( n = 6) Average predicted concentration % ( w / w ) SD ( n = 6) 0.79 8.90 0.04 8.29 0.16 0.83 9.04 0.05 8.27 0.17 0.90 9.24 0.09 8.41 0.07 0.97 9.51 0.08 8.48 0.08 1.10 9.89 0.09 8.40 0.16 1.19 10.20 0.12 8.38 0.16 1.29 10.56 0.04 8.48 0.14 NIR near infrared, SNV standard normal variate
The results show that using first derivative to pretreat the data lead to concentration predictions varying up to 1.66 % w / w when the probe to sample distance varied 0.5 cm. On the contrary, when using SNV prior to first derivative, the concentration predictions varied as little as 0.2 % w / w as the probe to sample distances varied. Figure 4 illustrates the drug concentration predictions as a function of probe to sample distance. The predictions remained practically invariant when SNV-first derivative is performed. All remaining predictions were performed with SNV-first derivative because of the robustness of this NIR calibration method to variations in powder level and powder distance to NIR probe. Fig. 4 Comparison of NIR calibration model response when using SNV pretreatment
The effect of instrument noise on PLS predictions was also evaluated as part of method robustness. The background noise spectra acquired from the polymer standard were multiplied by a factor of 3 and added to the spectra obtained from a 10 % ( w / w ) API target blend. These new spectra were then predicted by the NIR calibration model. The additional error did not affect the NIR predictions.
Prediction of Validation Blends
The NIR calibration model was further evaluated for precision and accuracy. Three independent validation blends of known concentrations ranging from 9 to 11 % ( w / w ) API were predicted as they passed through the continuous manufacturing setup. For each run, the feeder was filled with a validation blend. The blend was passed through the blender, and NIR spectra were obtained for approximately 4 min as the powder moved over the conveyor belt. Blend samples were obtained every 5 s for the determination of API by UV analysis [ ]. Table 3 shows the excellent results obtained. Figure 5 further illustrates the NIR predictions obtained from the validation blends and the UV results measured at certain time points. Table 3 NIR model prediction of validation blends API target concentration % ( w / w ) NIR UV Predicted API mean % ( w / w ) SD RSEP (%) CI (95 %) Measured API mean % ( w / w ) SD CI (95 %) 9 8.89 0.24 2.81 ±0.02 8.78 0.47 ±0.27 10 9.61 0.20 2.82 ±0.02 9.81 0.43 ±0.25 11 11.17 0.21 3.93 ±0.02 10.81 0.49 ±0.28 NIR near infrared, API active pharmaceutical ingredient, RSEP relative standard error of prediction Fig. 5 NIR predictions obtained from the monitoring of three validation blends. UV measurements of API content for each run are also illustrated
The largest difference between UV and NIR results was 0.36 % ( w / w ), for the 11 % ( w / w ) blend. Close evaluation of these experimental runs showed that after steady-state condition (approx. 80 to 90 s), average NIR predictions from the 9 and 10 % ( w / w ) validation blends were within the 95 % conflict of interest (CI) of the average target concentration range. The average NIR prediction of the 11 % validation blend is within the 99 % CI (±0.36) of the average target concentration range. Therefore, results between the two methods were comparable.
The validation blends also provided valuable information in terms of method precision. The standard deviations obtained by the NIR method were NMT 0.2 % and with an RSEP below 4 %. The standard deviation for the validation blends is two to three times larger than those observed for the repeatability studies shown in Table 3 . The repeatability studies were performed by obtaining six consecutive spectra without moving the sample (same sample) and ranged from 0.08 to 0.17 % ( w / w ) (Table 2 ). Thus, the repeatability study represents the method error, the minimum error that may be expected for the NIR method. Since the blends were well mixed before they were placed in the feeder, the 0.2 % ( w / w ) standard deviation is considered the minimum variation that could be expected in the continuous manufacturing setup discussed in this study. However, the 0.2 % ( w / w ) standard deviation was obtained when the blends were preblended, passed through one feeder, through the mixer, and deposited over the conveyor belt. The next phase of the study included the entire system where the two feeders were used.
Real-time Monitoring of Continuous Blending Process
The validated calibration model was used to monitor a continuous blending process for 3 min. Figure 6 shows the real-time monitoring of a continuous powder blending operation. The system was set up to target a 10 % w / w ibuprofen blend. Blend samples were collected for the corresponding off-line UV analysis. The NIR method predicted the API concentration approximately every 0.24 s. The UV samples were collected approximately every 60 s, and the results obtained are shown in Table 4 . Fig. 6 NIR predictions obtained from real-time monitoring of a continuous blending process. UV measurements of API content are also illustrated Table 4 Evaluation of the continuous blending process NIR UV Predicted API mean % ( w / w ) SD CI (95 %) Measured API mean % ( w / w ) SD CI (95 %) 10.5 0.49 ±0.04 9.3 0.71 ±0.23 NIR near infrared, API active pharmaceutical ingredient
All individual predictions were within 3 standard deviations of the average after steady-state conditions were achieved. The standard deviation for the NIR predictions was 0.49 % w / w . The standard deviation was approximately two times greater than obtained for the validation blends. Since the validation blends were premixed before being monitored in the continuous manufacturing setup, the increase in the standard deviation in the continuous blending process was expected. These are considered excellent preliminary results since the choice and operation of the custom-made mixing equipment still require optimization [ ].
Table 4 also reveals that NIR predicts a higher drug concentration than that determined by the UV method. This difference was not observed in the validation blends (Table 3 ) and is not understood at the present time. The main difference in the experimental setup is that the full continuous manufacturing system used two feeders (for API and excipient), while the setup for the validation blends used only one feeder. These results are in the same range of prediction concordance as the results obtained by monitoring real-time on-line blend uniformity by Sulub et al., which obtained an average prediction difference of 2.2 % between API NIR predictions (%) and HPLC (%) measurements [ ]. This is further evidence of the difficulty of analyzing blends. A careful review of previous publications revealed that very few studies have compared real-time NIR measurements and off-line measurements [ , , , ]. This comparison is not easy since the NIR method is providing the concentration of a sample volume that is approximately 300 mg while the sample analyzed by UV is about 3 g. The authors recognize that additional experimental work is required to evaluate the difference between UV and NIR results.
The variation after steady state was also evaluated with the use of a variogram. The theory of sampling defines one-dimensional (1-D) heterogeneity for processes where samples are obtained along one dimension in space, and there is a natural linear order among the increments [ ]. In continuous manufacturing, the drug concentration in the blend may vary over time, and time constitutes the dominant dimension. The variogram was used to optimize the NIR sampling rate for the process. The variogram was used to identify trends in the process data by calculating the correlation between NIR predictions [ ]. Thus, a lag of 1 measures the correlation between consecutive NIR predictions, and a lag of 2 measures the correlation between every other NIR prediction. $$ V(j) = \frac{1}{2\left( N- j\right)}{\displaystyle \sum_{N=1}^N}{\left({a}_{\left( N+ j\right)}-{a}_{(N)}\right)}^2 $$ (4)
where N is the number of data points in the time series (or lot), j is the lag (which refers to the distance in time between two NIR predictions, and a is the concentration. Low values of V ( j ) result from similar drug concentration predictions and indicate high correlation between the NIR predictions.
Figure 7 shows the variograms obtained for the NIR predictions from the continuous blending process and the validation blends. The lag (inter-distance) between any two measurements is measured in seconds (equidistant intervals). The variogram function, V ( j ), was evaluated from 1 to 100 increments. Each variogram shows a cyclic behavior as well as a slight increase in the variogram function ( V ( j )) as the lag becomes increasingly larger. A cyclic variogram is typically observed when the variability of the process is influenced by a factor causing this behavior. This is representative of the quasi-steady state of the system and demonstrates that the variogram analysis is an effective tool to determine if the system is operating in steady state. Fig. 7 Variographic analysis of the validation blends and the real-time monitoring of the continuous blending process
In the validation blend runs, results for V ( j ) and the change in the autocorrelation function are minimal (approx. 0.04) for consecutive lag times since these blends are less heterogeneous (previously blended) when compared to the continuous blending run. In the validation runs, only one feeder was used, and the ascending tendencies in the variograms were related to small changes in powder feed rate affecting the distance between the NIR sensor and the powder bed.
During the continuous blending run, the autocorrelation function varied approximately ten times (approx. 0.4) more than for the validation blends describing more heterogeneity between consecutive measurements. In addition, the continuous blending run variogram increases less rapidly with increasing lag time compared to the validation blend runs. The autocorrelation function varies from 0.4 and 0.9, but with minimal change from a lag time of 10 to values as high as 100. This low variation may be a result of steady state. During the continuous blending run, two feeders were used; therefore, more powder remained in the feeder extending the time to get to the emptying stage, but additional studies are necessary to confirm this observation. This run also shows a minimum at lag ( j ) = 21 and additional minima at j = 35, 48, 61, 74, 84. This indicates a period of 13 NIR measurements (approximately 3.1 s). According to the Nyquist theorem, it is recommended to sample at a higher frequency than two per period to capture the process variation. NIR measurements of the continuous process could be taken every 1.4 s, more than half the observed frequency of 3.1 s. In future experiments, the sampling rate will be set to the optimized parameters found. Thus, the variogram is a useful tool for determining how frequently to sample.
FFT analysis was performed to study the variability observed in the continuous manufacturing results. Figure 8 shows the frequencies associated to the measurements of NIR API prediction concentration obtained through time. In this continuous manufacturing setup, the screw feeders [ ] and the mixer influence in the observed cyclic behavior. Two dominant frequencies at approximately 0.98 and 1.32 Hz were observed in the validation runs. These frequencies could be associated to the mixer and screw feeder speed cyclic behavior, respectively. These units were operated under the same conditions in all validation runs. Three dominating frequencies were observed in the continuous blending run. One of dominating frequencies (0.98 Hz) was also observed in the validation runs. This observation is not unexpected since the mixer conditions were the same as for those runs. The other two dominating peaks (0.62 and 0.96 Hz) were unique for the continuous run. This could probably be associated to the use of two feeders in the continuous blending process. Moreover, both peaks are at lower frequencies compared to the 1.32 Hz associated with the screw feeder speed in the validation runs. This is in agreement with the fact that during the continuous blending process, the screw feeder speed in feeder #2 was set at a lower RPM to maintain the total feed rate since an additional feeder (feeder #1) was used. Therefore, the two 0.62 and 0.96 Hz peaks can be associated to the two different screw feeder speeds used in the continuous blending run. Thus, the use of FTT complemented the variogram results in identifying the root causes of the cyclic behavior observed. Fig. 8 FFT analysis of the validation blends and the real-time monitoring of the continuous blending process
Conclusions
The sources of error in the NIR method used to monitor a continuous mixing process have been investigated. Repeatability studies measured the instrumental error that ranged from 0.07 to 0.17 % ( w / w ). The precision and accuracy in determining well-mixed blends were also determined by monitoring previously mixed blends as they passed through the continuous manufacturing setup. The standard deviation of the well-mixed blends was about 2.5 times greater than the variation observed in the repeatability study. This increase in standard deviation is due to variations in the composition of the powder mixture and powder flow. Powder flow differences affect the level of powder over the conveyor belt and vary the distance between the powder and the NIR instrument. NIR predictions were affected by the probe to powder distance in the initial calibration models. However, the use of the SNV transform significantly reduced the effect of differences in powder flow on the NIR predictions. The standard deviation of the continuous mixing experiment ranged from 0.47 to 0.53 % ( w / w ) about twice the variation observed for the validation mixtures. The increase is associated with the use of two feeders and the mixing of excipients and API. This thorough characterization of the precision of the NIR method is necessary in continuous manufacturing where the NIR system is used to monitor drug concentration after steady state is achieved.
The cyclic variation observed in the variograms and the results from the analysis of the FFT can identify the units in an operation causing variation in the measurements in this continuous manufacturing setup. The variogram and the FTT showed to be effective tools to investigate the variability of the blend under study and present an approach to understand how frequently a continuous process has to be sampled.