Introduction
In recent years, the expeditiousness, nondestructive nature and high flexibility of near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), amongst other favourable features, have fostered its use for the determination of quality-related parameters by the pharmaceutical industry. The quantification of the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) from the early stages to the end of the process is critical to achieve a high quality of the pharmaceutical products. These advantages have turned NIRS into an effective alternative to more expensive and labour-intensive techniques as HPLC. Also, the greatest disadvantage of NIRS (viz., its limited selectivity due to wide-overlapped bands) can hinder its use for the identification/quantification of components present in a mixture in low concentration. The determination of an API in low dose may present some difficulties depending of the nature of the sample such as homogeneity and API aggregation that could hinder a good spectroscopic measurement, etc. Some previous studies have shown the effectiveness of near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy joint to chemometrics to quantify low concentration API in tablets, suspension and other forms [ , , , ]. Quantification studies for API present in such a small quantity are required for powder mixtures and blends in order to assess and ensure a high quality of the products from the early stages to the end.
The NIR limitations mentioned before can be overcome by using multivariate procedures to extract important information with the aid of an appropriate chemometric algorithm as partial least squares (PLS). At present, all NIRS instruments come with chemometric softwares [ , , , ] intended to facilitate application of the technique to samples of highly diverse nature and easy data collection-further analysis.
Near infrared spectra contain both physical and chemical information about samples. This affords analyses of both the qualitative type (e.g., identification and characterization of raw materials, monitoring of reactions and/or processes, identification of polymorphs, assessment of mixture homogeneity) and the quantitative type (e.g., quantitation of API, excipients, moisture or particle size). Many of these determinations are critical with a view to assessing quality in pharmaceutical products [ , , ].
Developing robust, accurate, precise methodologies for these determinations requires using calibration sets containing as much variability as possible in the nature and properties of the target samples. In addition, the samples to be included in the calibration set for a quantitative determination should span a wide enough concentration range to ensure accurate quantitation of normal samples and easy identification of the abnormals [ , ].
Constructing calibration sets containing all potential sources of variability in the samples to be predicted is usually difficult and occasionally impossible. Also, it requires exercising due care to avoid developing inaccurate models. Pharmaceutical samples are prepared from high-purity raw materials with similar physical properties (reduced variability); also, they are usually subjected to simple, reproducible processes. Such a low variability in the raw materials and manufacturing procedures of pharmaceutical samples can be expected to ensure easy incorporation of their whole variability into a calibration set consisting of a few samples. For accurate determination of unknown samples, calibration samples should exhibit enough chemical variability (viz., API and excipient concentrations ±20 % around their nominal values as per ICH guidelines) and physical variability (particle shape, size and distribution, etc., which are subject to changes arising from the manufacturing process).
Constructing a correct calibration set from production samples alone is impossible since their concentrations will typically span too narrow a range (usually not greater than ±5 % around the nominal API content) for a robust, accurate model to be constructed. A number of strategies have been proposed to develop accurate calibration sets spanning the desired concentration ranges and containing physical variability in the manufacturing process [ , ]. The following are amongst the most salient proposals. (a) Using pilot plant samples . With this strategy, the calibration set is constructed from samples prepared at a pilot plant mimicking the operations of the target industrial process (viz., granulation, grinding, compacting). The ensuing samples can thus be expected to be physically similar to actual production samples. The API and excipient contents to be used should span the preset range. Although this strategy ensures incorporation of most of the variability’s source in the samples into the calibration set, it involves a labour-intensive process in addition to setting up a pilot plant to conduct the industrial process at a smaller scale—which is often impossible. This strategy was omitted here as we had no pilot plant. (b) Underdosing and overdosing industrial samples . This strategy expands the concentration range spanned by samples of industrial origin by adding a small amount of API or excipients to powder or granulate samples in order to obtain new doped samples with an API content above (overdosed samples) or below the nominal value (underdosed samples). Because a small addition of API or excipient causes no appreciable physical change, the physical variability of overdosed and underdosed samples is intrinsically identical with that of production samples [ , ]. (c) Laboratory samples . Laboratory samples are obtained by weighing and homogenization of appropriate amounts of API and excipient powders close to the nominal values and spanning the desired concentration range. However, a calibration set obtained from laboratory samples alone does not represent the whole physical variability of production samples and must thus be expanded with samples from the industrial manufacturing process [ , ]. As shown in previous work, expanding the calibration set with about 30 % of samples of industrial origin suffices to this end. (d) Calculation and addition of the process spectrum . This strategy, proposed by Blanco et al. [ ], relies on the fact that physical variability in industrial samples can be mathematically added to the spectra for powder laboratory samples in order to enable incorporation of all sources of variability into the calibration set. The variability in the production process is incorporated by calculating a virtual spectrum called the process spectrum ( S p ) and adding it to a calibration set consisting of powder samples obtained by weighing of the different components. The concentration of each mixture component in the samples is previously established in order to encompass the desired API concentration range while reducing collinearity between concentrations. This procedure requires no reference method to determine the concentration of the target species.
In this work, we compared the efficiency of the last three strategies by using calibration sets constructed from doped samples or laboratory samples, or by calculation and addition of the process spectrum. The calibration sets were constructed using a small number of samples in order to reduce experimental work but still large enough to ensure accurate prediction of industrial production samples.
The strategies were applied to a pharmaceutical preparation with a low content in API and a high content in the major excipient in order to enhance their advantages and disadvantages for easier comparison.
Experimental
Production Samples
The target pharmaceutical formulation was a granulated solid containing 10 mg g −1 dexketoprofene trometamol as API, sucrose (96 % w / w ) as major excipient and lemon flavour, neohesperidine, dihydrochalcone, Quinoline Yellow and ammonium glycyrrhizinate as minor excipients. All pure components and production samples were supplied by Laboratorios Menarini, S.A. (Badalona, Spain). The API content of the samples was determined by HPLC.
Laboratory Samples
Powder Samples
Laboratory samples in powder form were prepared by mixing appropriate amounts of API, placebo (a mixture of minor excipients jointly accounting for about 3 % of the total content) and sucrose to span the API concentration range of 8–12 mg g −1 (i.e., ±20 % around the nominal value). The samples contained various placebos differing slightly in excipient concentrations, which span a content range of ±5 % around the nominal value. Samples were prepared by randomly supplying each placebo with the required amounts of API and sucrose and homogenized on a Turbula shaker prior to recording of their NIR spectra. The reference values of these samples were obtained by weighing. The large differences between excipient concentrations precluded the use of sampling design techniques to reduce correlation between the concentrations of API and sucrose (the major excipient).
Doped samples were obtained by adding an appropriate amount of API (overdosing) or placebo (underdosing) to three randomly chosen industrial granulates whose API content was determined by HPLC to obtain a wide enough range of API concentrations. The resulting doped samples were homogenized prior to recording of their NIR spectra. The API reference values for these samples were obtained by weighing, and the concentrations in the industrial samples were determined by using the reference (HPLC) method.
Recording of NIR Spectra
The previously prepared laboratory samples were homogenized in a Turbula T2C WAB shaker mixer and their NIR reflectance spectra recorded by using a FOSS NIRSystems 5000 spectrophotometer equipped with a rapid content analyser (RCA) module and governed via the software Vision v. 2.22. Spectra were recorded at 2-nm intervals over the wavelength range if 1,100–2,500 nm. Samples were placed in a glass cell and turned over with a spatula prior to measurement. A blank spectrum was obtained from an empty cell at the start of each working session. A ceramic plate bundled with the instrument was used as reference for measurements.
Preparation of Calibration and Validation Sets
The prepared samples were split into two subsets: one to construct the calibration model and the other to validate it. The number of samples used in the calibration set for the different strategies was similar comprising 18 samples with the doping strategy, 23 with the mixed calibration strategy (powder samples + industrial granulates) and 20 with the process spectrum strategy. For the calculation and addition of process spectrum ( S p ) methodology, the preparation of the samples involved firstly obtaining the Sp as the difference between the spectrum for an industrial granulate ( S ind ) and a powder laboratory sample ( S lab ) containing an identical concentration of API (Fig. 1 ); the calculated difference is expressed as a mathematical vector defining variability in the production process. Fig. 1 NIR spectrum of industrial granulate, powder laboratory and calculated process spectrum $$ {S}_{\mathrm{p}}={S}_{\mathrm{ind}}-{S}_{\mathrm{lab}} $$ (1)
Subsequently, the reduced process variability matrix is obtained by the addition of the calculated vector ( S p ) to the spectral matrix from several powder mixtures ( S con ) spanning the desire range of API concentrations. This new calculated matrix contains both the physical and chemical variability and was used for both calibration and validation set. $$ {S}_{\mathrm{red}}={S}_{\mathrm{p}}+{S}_{\mathrm{con}} $$ (2)
In order to increase or decrease the variability in the process spectrum S p , the calculated vector can be multiplied by a factor m , which is near-unity, and by a simple spectra addition as it was mentioned before an extended variability matrix can be obtained.
The confirmation of the incorporated variability was performed by an analysis of a scatter plot of scores obtained from spectra for laboratory samples that were combined with the process spectrum ( S lab + S p ) and that for production samples [ , ].
Construction of Calibration Models
Spectra were subjected to various pretreatments including the standard normal variate (SNV) and the first and second derivatives. Derivative spectra were obtained by using the Savitzky–Golay and Norris algorithms with a moving window or Gap of variable size in addition to a second-order polynomial. All spectra were processed and multivariate calibration models constructed with the aid of the software Unscrambler v. 9.8 from CAMO (Trondheim, Norway).
Calibration models were constructed by cross-validation (leave-one-out method) using the PLS algorithm. The individual models exhibiting the lowest residual variance in terms of the number of latent variables were selected for refining, using the number of PLS factors leading to the smallest root mean square error of prediction (RMSEP) for an external set consisting of production samples.
Validation of Proposed Calibration Models
The potential industrial usefulness of the selected calibration strategies was assessed by validating their results in accordance with ICH and EMA guidelines [ , ]. The specific parameters assessed included selectivity, linearity, accuracy, precision (repeatability and intermediate precision) and robustness.
Results and Discussion
Obtaining effective calibration models for the target pharmaceutical preparation is made difficult by its low API content (10 mg g −1 ) and the high spectral (0.879) and concentration correlation (0.939) between the API and sucrose—the major excipient, which accounts for 96 % of the formulation. The high correlations between these two components cannot be ignored owing to the high content in sucrose of the mixture and the additional high-spectral correlation. In order to circumvent these shortcomings, we used various spectral pretreatments and wavelength ranges to obtain more simple models of adequate predictive ability.
Thus, shifts due to scattering were addressed by using the SNV, and spectral discrimination was improved by using derivative spectra obtained with the Savitzky–Golay (S.G) or Norris algorithm, which typically lead to simpler, better models. Using the first spectral derivative in combination with SNV in either sequence failed to improve the predictive ability (i.e., to decrease the RMSEP) of the models. On the other hand, a combination of second SNV–derivative (S.G) spectra was highly efficient in improving the calibration sets obtained with two of the three strategies. Also, the spectra pretreatment with SNV followed by derivatives led to slightly better predictions.
The use of second derivative from both Savitzky–Golay and Norris resulted to be the most suitable for processing the NIR spectra for this formulation. Since the nature of the samples is different for each strategy, it is presumed that one algorithm is more effective in one methodology than in the others due to the noise attenuation factor in each derivative. Therefore, the second derivatives were chosen for further spectral pretreatment in this study [ ].
As can be seen from Fig. 2 , the combination of the previous spectral pretreatments corrects the shifts due to scattering effects and hence the differentiation amongst characteristic bands. Additionally, after these pretreatments were applied, the spectral correlation coefficients between the API and sucrose to 0.080 with SNV + second derivative and 0.077 with 2D Norris + SNV were considerable reduced. This reduction was expected to facilitate construction of effective calibration models and led us to adopt the two spectral treatments for further testing. Fig. 2 Absorbance NIR spectra of API, industrial granulate and power laboratory sample and pretreated with SNV and SNV + 2D (S.G)
The figure mentioned above also illustrates that the spectrum for the API exhibits no characteristic bands and should therefore be used in its entirety. However, the reduced wavelength range from 2,114 to 2,488 nm, selected in terms of the regression coefficients and loading weights of the models, was used instead for potentially improved model accuracy and predictive ability. Application of the previous spectral treatments over the reduced wavelength range decreased the effects due to scattering and improved discrimination between the spectra for the API and sucrose.
One crucial step in constructing calibration models is selecting appropriate samples for inclusion in the calibration set. In fact, the sample set should contain all chemical and physical variability in production samples since such variability has a strong effect on NIR spectra (see spectral changes due to concentration increased in Fig. 3 ). Also, the spectra for all samples should be recorded under identical conditions as those for the samples to be predicted in order to avoid introducing additional sources of variability such as the way spectra are acquired, their noise level or the equipment used. Therefore, all calibration sets should meet two essential requirements, namely (a) the API contents of the samples should span the preset concentration range and (b) the sample set should contain all potential physical and spectral variability. Both requirements can be met with the three strategies used here. Fig. 3 Spectral changes due to API concentration increase
One of the aims of this work was to develop calibration models based on a small number of samples in order to reduce experimental work but still large enough to ensure accurate prediction of industrial production samples. We used the three above-described strategies to prepare the samples for inclusion in the calibration set and compared their results. Then, we validated the ensuing models and selected the most suitable amongst them for use in routine production control analyses. The samples used to construct the models were selected amongst those described under experimental and imposed the requirement that their concentrations should span a range ±20 % around the nominal value of the formulation. The number of samples used to construct the models was similar between strategies and was suited to the spectral range to be spanned and to physical variability in the manufacturing process.
Most of the models constructed with the sample doping strategy provided accurate predictions of production samples; the best results were obtained by using SNV in combination with a second derivative treatment based on the Savitzky–Golay algorithm with an 11-point moving window and a second-order polynomial. Table 1 shows the characteristics of selected models. The best results were provided by two models using the whole wavelength range and the reduced range (2,114–2,488 nm), with a prediction error (RMSEP) of 0.276 and 0.228 mg g −1 (relative standard error of prediction (RSEP)% = 2.812, 2.321), respectively. Although the predictive ability for both models was similarly good, the model using the whole wavelength range required four factors for calculation and accounted for 98.7 % of the predictive variance, whereas that using the reduced wavelength required six factors and accounted for 99.9 % of the variance. The bias for the model with the whole spectral range is lower than the one using the short wavelength (−0.008 and 0.054, respectively), demonstrating the accuracy of it. We selected the former because it was simpler—it used fewer factors—and yet provided accurate predictions. Table 1 Figures of merit of calibration model Doping strategy Mixed calibration strategy Calculation and addition of process spectrum strategy *1,100–2,498 nm **2104-2498 nm Calibration of 18 samples Prediction of 41 samples Calibration of 23 samples Prediction of 41 samples Calibration of 20 samples Prediction of 41 samples %Exp Y-var. No. of factors RSEC (%) RSEP (%) %Exp Y-var. No. of factors RSEC (%) RSEP (%) %Exp Y-var. No. of factors RSEC (%) RSEP (%) SNV + 1D (S.G)* 98.7 4 1.33 4.19 97.6 9 1.34 7.28 99.5 7 0.82 16.68 SNV + 2D (S.G)* 98.7 4 1.33 2.81 98.3 8 1.17 4.80 99.5 6 0.88 2.29 SNV + 2D (S.G)** 99.9 6 0.46 2.32 98.3 8 1.28 6.29 99.7 6 0.79 3.23 2D (Norris) + SNV* 99.1 4 1.16 3.52 98.7 5 1.02 1.90 99.3 5 0.97 8.89 2D (Norris) + SNV** 99.4 4 0.91 3.84 98.9 6 0.92 3.29 99.5 5 0.85 4.87 RSEC/P relative standard errors of calibration/prediction
The calibration models obtained from laboratory samples and industrial granulates (i.e., mixed calibration sets) were constructed from 13 powder samples containing amounts of API and excipients obtained by weighing and 10 granulate samples whose API contents were determined by HPLC. Table 1 describes the models obtained with different spectral treatments. As can be seen, the model based on SNV in combination with a second-derivative treatment with the Norris algorithm (Gap size = –1, second-order polynomial) provided the most accurate predictions (RMSEP = 0.187; RSEP% = 1.902). The model used five factors and accounted for 98.7 % of the Y-variance. Using this strategy with the reduced wavelength range led to slightly better calibration results; however, the ensuing model was more complex—it required six factors—accounted for 98.9 % of the Y-variance and failed to improve predictions (RMSEP-RSEP).
For the strategy based on calculation and addition of the process spectrum, the plot revealed that the clusters of production samples and ( S lab + S p ) samples were rather distant and hence that the two sample clusters were rather different. This may have resulted from S p not being representative of the whole physical variability in the process. Such variability was increased/decreased by using factor m ( m = 1 or 0.5). Multiplying S p by m provided a cluster of production samples surrounded by the laboratory samples combined with the process spectrum ( S lab + mS p ). Figure 4 shows the score plot of the spectra for calibration and production samples. Fig. 4 Projection of Industrial samples in scores plot fo Laboratory samples and laboratory samples + S p
Table 1 summarizes the figures of merit of the ensuing models. As can be seen, the model with the highest predictive ability (RMSEP = 0.225; RSEP% = 2.295) was that constructed by using powder samples and powder samples + mS p (with m = 1 or 0.5), six factors, the whole wavelength range and a Savitzky–Golay second-derivative treatment with a three-point moving window and a second-order polynomial in combination with SNV.
Validation
Selectivity of the proposed NIR methods is achieved by identifying the pharmaceutical preparation in a spectral library [ ]. The library allows the identification of the pharmaceutical preparation rather than the pure raw materials (active ingredient and excipients) using a supervised pattern recognition method (PRM) criterion. The PRMs rely on similarity measurements, where similarity here is taken to the extent to which an object (spectrum) is identical to one another. While unsupervised methods search for clustering in an N-dimensional space without knowing the class to which the sample belongs, the supervised methods depend on a previous training of the system using a set of objects belonging to the specific previously known class. In this work, the applied identification criterion was the residual variance of the principal components, which is primarily based on a spectra PCA calculation defining the model of the known class and establishing a threshold as an indicative value. Then, the spectrum from the sample to be analysed is reconstructed through the created PCs and the obtained residuals are used to calculate the sample’s probability of belonging to the known class [ ]. The library was constructed using 21 granulates belonging to different production batches and the software Vision v2.51 (FOSS NIRSystem, Silver Spring, USA). The second-derivative spectra (S.G), the wavelength range of 1,100–2,488 nm and a threshold of 0.94 (positive identification for values lower than this value) were used. All 40 samples were successfully identified showing values between 0.645 and 0.933. The values for the pure raw materials were 0.99 and higher.
Linearity was assessed by using 11 samples uniformly spanning the working concentration range (viz., ±20 % around the nominal value) to quantify the API with the three NIR strategies. A plot of responses against reference values had a slope and intercept containing unity and zero, respectively, at the 95 % confidence level.
Accuracy was assessed as the degree of agreement between reference and NIR values for 23 samples spanning the working concentration ranges. The sample doping strategy showed a higher bias (−0.165), while for the mixed calibration and the calculation and addition of process spectrum strategies, this value was similar (−0.028 and −0.025, respectively). A t test on the residuals confirmed the absence of significant differences between methods at the 95 % confidence level with each of the three strategies.
Precision was assessed as repeatability and intermediate precision. Repeatability was determined by having the spectrum for an industrial granulate recorded by the same analyst six times and calculating its relative standard deviation (%RSD) in order to quantify the coefficient of variation for each method. The highest %RSD value was that obtained with the strategy involving the process spectrum. Intermediate precision was determined by having the NIR spectra for an industrial granulate sample recorded by two different analysts on three different days. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) with two factors (analyst and day) revealed the absence of significant differences from the reference method.
Robustness was assessed by predicting the values for a second set of industrial granulates consisting of 34 samples. The samples were obtained from various production batches manufactured after the first sample set studied and analysed by using the previously developed models a few months after the samples used to construct the models were measured. The results testified to the good predictive ability of the three models for external samples not included in the calibration set and measured after development of the models.
Table 2 summarizes the results for each parameter. Based on them, the proposed strategies meet all validation requirements set in the abovementioned guidelines. Table 2 Results obtained from calibration model validation Parameter Strategy under- and overdosage Mixing set calibration strategy Strategy calculation and addition of process spectrum Linearity n 11 11 11 Concentration range (mg g −1 ) 7.98–11.80 8.02–11.90 8.27–12.03 Intercept 0.07 ± 1.80 0.21 ± 1.57 0.05 ± 1.45 Slope 1.01 ± 0.18 1.04 ± 0.16 1.0 ± 0.15 R 0.972 0.98 0.982 Accuracy n 23 23 23 Bias −0.165 −0.028 −0.025 S.D 0.266 0.162 0.185 t. Experimental 0.725 0.204 0.16 t. Critic 2.074 2.074 2.074 Repeatability RSD (%) 1.099 1.754 3.001 Mean NIR (mg g −1 ) 9.531 10.300 10.284 Intermediate precision Day F. Experimental 0.591 1.354 0.192 F. Critic 19 19 19 RSD (%) 0.103 0.632 1.704 Analyst F. Experimental 0.057 1.04 0.015 F. Critic 18.51 18.51 18.51 RSD (%) 0.119 0.742 1.508 Robustness N 34 34 34 RMSEP (mg.g −1 ) 0.254 0.500 0.239 Bias −0.017 −0.391 0.008 S.D 0.257 0.316 0.243 t. Experimental 0.08 1.473 0.039 t. Critic 2.035 2.035 2.035
Comparison of Calibration Models Obtained with the Three Strategies
The three calibration models confirm their ability to predict industrial granulates; therefore, the proposed strategies successfully incorporate the whole variability of the industrial samples. Projecting the results for industrial granulates on a scores plot for the calibration samples used with each strategy revealed that the calibration set contained all industrial samples and hence that the proposed strategies allow effective calibration sets to be constructed with a view to developing accurate models for quantitation of the API (see Fig. 5 ) [ ]. This was particularly so with the strategy based on the process spectrum, which was the most efficient in including the production cluster in the calibration set. Fig. 5 Projection of Industrial granulates in calibration scores plot of used strategies
The optimum number of PLS factors for constructing the models with the three strategies that ranged from 4 to 6; also, the bias and their standard deviations were similar for all models.
The model based on mixed calibration sets and the first set of industrial granulate samples was that providing the most accurate predictions (RMSEP = 0.187; RSEP% = 1.902), followed by those based on doped samples (RMSEP = 0.276; RSEP% = 2.812) and addition of the process spectrum (RMSEP = 0.225; RSEP% = 2.295), which performed similarly in this respect. However, the analysis of a second set of production samples led to substantially increased prediction statistics with the model using mixed calibration sets (RMSEP = 0.500; RSEP% = 5.029), but essentially unchanged statistics with those based on doped samples (RMSEP = 0.254; RSEP% = 2.552) and the process spectrum (RMSEP = 0.239; RSEP% = 2.407). All RMSEP values, however, were good enough to afford application of the three strategies to the industrial manufacturing process.
One other major factor in choosing a particular methodology is the amount of experimental work needed to prepare samples for inclusion in the different models. Thus, laboratory samples are prepared by weighing of their components, which facilitates obtainment of high-quality reference values; on the other hand, industrial samples must be analysed with a reference method that may be complicated and sluggish.
The mixed model using laboratory and industrial samples ensures incorporation of all physical variability via appropriate industrial samples and all chemical variability via laboratory samples. Although the model requires using an increased number of samples, it can be expected to provide high-quality predictions of industrial samples. However, the obtained experimental data showed a considerable increase of errors amongst the two tested groups of granulates, implicating the robustness of this strategy. The model using doped industrial granulates ensures inclusion of physical and chemical variability; however, this methodology presents some drawbacks as the sample preparation process is time-consuming and reference values are less accurate as they are obtained by application of the reference method and consideration of the amount of API or placebo added—or alternatively, by analysing all samples with the reference method, which means an extra experimental effort. Moreover, homogenizing the small amounts of components added to the samples can be quite difficult.
The strategy involving calculation and addition of the process spectrum requires using no reference method to construct the models as reference values can be obtained simply by weighing—time saving and less experimental work and hence more accurately than with a reference method. This strategy affords optimal incorporation of physical and chemical variability by virtue of sample preparation, and calculation and addition of the process spectrum, being two simple, expeditious processes.
Conclusions
An API present in a pharmaceutical granulate in low concentration was successfully quantified using the three proposed methodologies. The chemical and physical variability was incorporated to the calibration sets through different strategies showing a good predictive ability and the developed analytical methodologies were validated according to the normative (EMA and ICH). The calculation and addition of process spectrum methodology was selected as the most suitable strategy for the purpose due to a higher performance in terms of robustness, easy inclusion of variability in the samples without reference method and less experimental work.