INTRODUCTION
Oral drug delivery is of high interest due to ease and convenience of administration, reduced healthcare resources, decreased the frequency of hospital or clinic visits, and improved patient quality of life. Though the oral route has been the preferred method of treatment for various chronic disease states, development of 40% of NCEs is limited due to low aqueous solubility ( ). Issues that arise as a result of poor solubility include poor and variable bioavailability, high intra- and inter-subject variability, and lack of dose proportionality ( , ). To overcome these challenges, various drug delivery techniques such as lipid nanoparticles, polymeric nanoparticles, and amorphous systems have been utilized ( , , , , , , ). Targeted drug delivery for various types of cancers is being investigated. Current examples include monoclonal antibody conjugated docetaxel-loaded PLGA nanoparticles targeted to deliver to lung tumor cells ( ). Delivery of docetaxel has also been studied in breast cancer cells by loading the drug in immuno-nanoparticles. These new drug delivery systems show promising results and have potential to provide alternative cancer therapy ( ). In recent times, researchers have combined two delivery techniques to improve solubility of poorly soluble drugs and its efficacy. One such example is the conjugation of cyclodextrin-paclitaxel and encapsulating this conjugated complex in immunoliposomes ( ). An alternative drug delivery system is the development of SLNs. SLNs are a type of drug carrier system formulated as submicron-sized lipid emulsions composed of a solid lipid and emulsifier (surfactant). Advantages of SLNs include the possibility of controlled drug release and drug targeting, physical stability, ease of large-scale production, protection of labile drugs from degradation, low toxicity due to avoidance of organic solvents, and high drug load ( , ). Improved bioavailability of hydrophobic drugs can also be achieved by SLNs using suitable lipids and surfactants ( ). FLT, the model drug used in the study (2-Methyl- N -[4-nitro-3-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]-propanamide) is classified as an acetanilide, nonsteroidal drug used in the treatment of prostate cancer ( ). FLT inhibits the uptake and or binding of dihydrotestosterone to target cell receptors exhibiting its antiandrogenic activity ( ). Poor oral bioavailability of this anticancer agent is attributed to low aqueous solubility, high hydrophobicity, and poor wettability and permeability along with rapid first-pass hepatic metabolism ( ). FLT has a molecular weight of 272.2 g/mol and a moderate melting temperature of 113°C required for the study ( ). The main objective of this study was to develop optimal SLNs through a selection of miscible drug-lipid-emulsifier tertiary systems and analysis of particle size and stability of these formulations of FLT. Four lipids, GMO, PRE, GMS, and COM, along with two surfactants, GEL 44/14 and GEL 50/13, were used in various combinations for the preparation of FLT SLNs. Table I lists the physicochemical properties of FLT, lipids, and surfactants used in the study. Table I Physiochemical Properties of FLT, Lipids, and Surfactants Molecular weight (g/mol) Melting temperature (°C) Crystallization temperature (°C) Drug FLT 276.2 113 – Lipids GMO 356.54 14, 22 − 13 PRE 633 50–55 54 GMS 358.57 58–60 56 COM 1059.8 68–72 71 Surfactant GEL 44/14 – 44 26 GEL 50/13 – 50 26, 43
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
FLT was purchased from TGI America (Portland, Oregon). GEL 44/14 and 50/13 along with COM 888 ATO and PRE ATO 5 were purchased from Gattefosse (St. Priest, France). The two other lipids used, glyceryl monostearate (GMS) and glyceryl monooleate (GMO), were purchased from Spectrum Chemical Mfg. Corp (Gardena, CA). Table I lists the physicochemical properties of FLT, lipids, and surfactants.
Preparation of Drug, Lipids, and Surfactants Physical Mixtures
Accurately weighed quantity in 5:2 w / w ratio (lipid:surfactant), FLT:GEL 50/13 (2:1 w / w ), and FLT:lipids (2:1 w / w ) were placed in a glass vial and mixed by vortexing at 300 rpm. This mixture was heated to 90°C for all PMs, except for COM PM which was heated to 125°C and maintained at this the temperature until both the components melted completely. Melted mixtures were uniformly mixed using a stirring bar at 300 rpm. The solutions were cooled at room temperature. All PMs were stored at room temperature in screw-capped vials until use.
Modulated Differential Scanning Calorimetry (MDSC)
Modulated differential scanning calorimetry was performed by DSC Q2000 (TA Instruments, New Castle, DE). The equipment was calibrated with indium. The inert atmosphere was maintained by a nitrogen flow rate of 40 mL/min. An empty aluminum pan was used as a reference. Samples in MDSC were modulated at a heating/cooling rate of 2°C/min. Thermal behavior of pure lipids and surfactants, PMs, and drug-loaded PMs was characterized by a series of heating and cooling cycles. Samples were heated from room temperature to 90°C (Cycle 1, except for COM which was heated till 125°C), cooled from 90°C down to − 40°C (Cycle 2), and then reheated to 90°C (Cycle 3, except for COM which was heated till 125°C).
Raman Spectroscopy
Raman spectra were obtained using Bruker Vertex series 80 V Raman spectrometer and data processing was performed using OPUS software (Billerica, MA). Data acquisition was done using an exposure time of 10 s for 10 accumulations and a laser power setting of 400 mW. Raman spectroscopy was used for characterization of precipitate and to explore the drug-polymer interactions in various mixtures.
Preparation of Nanoparticles
Lipid and surfactant (GEL 50/13) mixture was weighed and heated as mentioned in “ Preparation of Drug, Lipids, and Surfactants Physical Mixtures ” section. As this mixture was heated, distilled water was placed into a separate beaker and heated to 90°C and 125°C, respectively. Addition of water to the lipid-surfactant mixture was carried out at a similar temperature to prevent recrystallization of both components. A stir bar was added to the screw-capped vial to help create a homogeneous mixture and stirred at 300 rpm. Once melted, 20 mg of FLT was added to the lipid and surfactant. Clarity of the mixture was ensured before proceeding. With the vial still on the hot plate, 10 mL of the heated, distilled water was added dropwise to the vial loaded with the drug to create a primary emulsion. Ultra-sonication of the primary emulsion was performed using the Sonicator 3000 (Misonix, Farmingdale, New York) at 18 W with an output setting of 4.0 for 5 min to create a secondary emulsion. This method was performed in triplicate.
Lyophilization
The secondary emulsion was then subjected to freeze-drying using the Millrock Technology LD85 freeze dryer (Kingston, NY) and following freeze-drying parameters were employed: shelf setpoint (°C): − 50; time (min): 240; final freeze (°C): − 60; followed by primary and secondary drying. Table II lists the conditions utilized during the freeze-drying. Table II Primary Dry Cycle for Freeze-drying 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Shelf set point (°C) − 20 − 20 − 10 − 10 0 0 10 10 20 20 Time (min) 25 240 30 240 30 240 30 240 30 360 Vacuum setpoint (MT) 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50
Characterization of Nanoparticles
The particle size of the prepared secondary emulsions was obtained to characterize the FLT nanoparticles. Data was acquired from a ZetaPlus, Zeta Potential Analyzer (Brookhaven Instruments Corp., Holtsville, New York). To attain these values, 10 μL of the secondary emulsion was placed in a test tube and diluted with 10 mL of water. Lyophilized SLNs were re-dispersed in DI water followed by 2 min of sonication for particle size analysis. The test tube was placed on a Genie 2 vortex (Fisher Scientific, Hampton, New Hampshire) to ensure homogenous mixing. The test tube containing the sample was then sonicated for 5 min using a Sonicator FS60 (Fisher Scientific, Hampton, New Hampshire).
Stability Studies
Stability of the prepared nanoparticles was studied at room temperature. The particle size of the secondary emulsions were obtained on the day of preparation and 14 days after preparation. Secondary emulsions containing GMS formed a gel-like consistency upon cooling. GMS emulsions were reheated at 90°C to liquefy the mixture. The samples were prepared in a test tube with 10 μL of the secondary emulsion and 10 mL of water. The samples were mixed on a Genie 2 vortex (Fisher Scientific, Hampton, New Hampshire) and sonicated for 5 min using a Sonicator FS60 (Fisher Scientific, Hampton, New Hampshire). Particle size was obtained using the ZetaPlus, Zeta Potential Analyzer (Brookhaven Instruments Corp., Holtsville, New York).
RESULTS
GMO, PRE, GMS, and COM were selected due to the variation in molecular weight, melting and crystallization temperatures along with their common use in the pharmaceutical industry. GMO is a polar lipid used as an emulsifying agent and stabilizer, gelling agent, and surfactant ( ). PRE is classified as an oral formulation diluent and lubricant, coating and gelling agent. The effect of PRE on drug release rates is dependent upon concentration; the lower the concentration of PRE in the formulation, the faster the release rate ( ). GMS is an emulsifier, solubilizer, stabilizer, and lubricant. COM has the largest molecular weight of all the lipids used in the study with the least difference in melting temperature when compared to FLT. COM is amphiphilic and its high melting temperature is a desirable property for its use in colloidal dispersions, such as SLN. COM is used as a tablet binder, lubricant, and coating agent ( ). The rank order of increasing lipid molecular weight is as follows: GMO < GMS < PRE < COM. GEL 44/14 and 50/13 were used as surfactants in the formulation of SLN composed of triglycerides containing lauric acid (12-carbon chain) and stearic acid (18-carbon chain), respectively. As polyoxylglycerides, GEL 44/14 and 50/13 are used as dissolution enhancers, self-emulsifying and solubilizing agents for oral formulations ( ). Aside from their differences in structure, the other variances are defined by their name. The first value designates melting temperature, while the second value is the hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB) of a surfactant. The HLB values of the selected GEL correspond to the more hydrophilic character associated with detergents and oil in water emulsifiers ( ). These higher HLB surfactants are composed of partially saturated glycerides and PEG esters ( ). Thus, this study is significant to formulate SLNs of poorly soluble FLT by correlating miscibility between various components of SLNs to particle size for improved therapeutic outcomes.
Thermal Analysis
MDSC for Pure Lipids and Surfactants
MDSC of pure lipids, surfactants, and their PMs was carried out to determine the miscibility between lipids and surfactants. Figure 1 compares the DSC thermograms of pure lipids, surfactants, and PMs. MDSC experiments showed that GMO, PRE, GMS, and COM melted at 21.59°C, 53.69°C, 58.88°C, and 71.4°C, respectively. These lipids showed exothermic crystallization peak at − 13.05°C (GMO), 51.69°C (PRE), 55.69°C (GMS), and 70.01°C (COM). Similar melting of GEL 44/14 and GEL 50/13 was observed at 43.22°C and 43.60°C respectively with crystallization peaks at 22.84°C and 25.94°C, respectively. Furthermore, GEL 50/13 showed an additional crystallization exotherm at 43.22°C not seen in GEL 44/14. Fig. 1 MDSC thermograms of pure lipids (I) and pure surfactants (II). Characteristic melting endotherms and crystallization exotherms of these individual materials are observed in respective thermograms
Miscibility of Lipids with Surfactants
MDSC thermograms of lipid-surfactant PMs shown in Fig. 2 were assessed for subsequent changes to assess the miscibility of these components. The physical mixture of GMO-GEL 44/14 and GMO-GEL 50/13 exhibited a decrease in the characteristic endotherm of GMO from 21.59 to 20.49°C in the presence of GEL 44/14, but an increase from 21.59 to 27.74°C was seen in the GEL 50/13 PM. GMO-GEL PMs showed a decrease in the melting temperature of the GEL 44/14 and GEL 50/13 from 43.22°C and 43.60°C to 36.19°C and 34.56°C respectively. No crystallization peak was seen in case of GMO-GEL 44/14 PM, while the one characteristic exotherm at 43.22°C of GEL 50/13 was absent in GMO-GEL 50/13 indicating miscibility of GMO and GELs. Minimal decreases in melting and crystallization temperature of PRE and GELs were seen in PRE-GEL PMs; although multiple endothermic peaks were observed in the case of PRE. PRE-GEL 50/13 displayed an additional endotherm and exotherm at 37.69°C and 17.80°C, respectively, which was not characteristic of either lipid or surfactant. A second exotherm was also seen in the PRE-GEL 44/14 PM at 10.96°C. Miscibility between PRE and GELs was considered less favorable than GMO. In the case of GMS-GEL, similar decreases in melting and crystallization temperature of both lipid and surfactant were observed. Melting endotherms of GMS in the presence of GEL 44/14 and GEL 50/13 were seen at 53.95°C and 55.09°C, respectively. Both endothermic peaks of surfactant were present at lower temperatures at 35.62°C (GEL 44/14) and 40.74°C (GEL 50/13). The absence of GEL crystallization peaks along with a decrease in the exothermic peaks of GMS in GMS-GEL PMs indicate good miscibility between GMS and GELs. In contrast, COM-GEL PMs displayed separate melting and crystallization peaks signifying immiscibility of these two components. Thermal data indicates good miscibility between GMO and GMS with GEL. Thus, the rank order of lipid miscibility with GEL is GMO, GMS > PRE > COM. Initial miscibility studies assessing lipid-surfactant PMs prepared were prepared with GEL 44/14 and GEL 50/13. Since both GEL have similar physiochemical properties, further miscibility studies with FLT were prepared with GEL 50/13. Fig. 2 MDSC thermograms of physical mixtures: GMO and GELs (I), PRE and GELs (II), GMS and GELs (III), and COM and GELs (IV). The absence of GMO and GMS crystallization peaks and presence of melting endotherms at lower temperatures indicated good miscibility between GMO-GEL and GMS-GEL
Miscibility of the Drug with Lipids and Surfactant (GEL 50/13)
Figure 3 depicts the DSC thermograms of FLT-loaded lipids and surfactant (GEL 50/13). Pure FLT has a characteristic sharp, melting endotherm at 113°C. The absence of this peak in the presence of GMS, GMO, or GEL 50/13 is indicative of the conversion of FLT from the crystalline to amorphous state and miscibility between drug and lipid or surfactant. Moreover, these observations correlate well with the MDSC results obtained from analysis of PMs where GMO and GMS were found to be miscible with GEL 50/13. Miscibility of FLT within these systems suggests successful formulation of FLT SLNs. In contrast, reduced FLT crystallinity is observed in the FLT-PRE and FLT-COM systems evidenced by the near disappearance and broadening of the characteristic FLT endotherm. PRE appears to reduce FLT crystallinity to a greater extent than COM. These results agree with the thermal analysis of PRE and COM PMs. Overall, the rank order of lipid ability to reduce FLT crystallinity is GMO, GMS > PRE > COM. Fig. 3 MDSC thermograms of pure FLT (a), FLT-GMO (b), FLT-PRE (c), FLT-GMS (d), FLT-COM (e), and FLT-GEL 50/13 (f). The absence of the characteristic melting peak of FLT is observed in the presence of GMO, GMS, and GEL 50/13 indicating miscibility of FLT with these lipids and surfactant
Raman Spectroscopy of Lipids and Surfactants
Raman spectroscopy was obtained for PRE, COM, GELs, and PMs of lipids with both GELs as seen in Fig. 4 . Three characteristic peaks of PRE are seen at 1459, 1438.4, and 1102.4 cm −1 . These respective peaks are shifted to higher wavenumbers at 1464.8, 1440.2, and 1103.9 cm −1 when mixed with GEL 44/14, but remain unchanged in the presence of GEL 50/13. Miscibility studies of PRE with GELs displayed an additional endotherm or exotherm not associated with pure PRE or GEL. This may be indicative of complex formation between lipid and surfactant and thus potential interaction may be possible. Minor peak shifts seen in PRE-GEL 44/14 spectra correlated well with the notion that interactions may have formed. This minimal change or lack of change as observed with PRE and GEL 50/13 were in agreement with the results obtained from miscibility studies. Miscibility of GELs with PRE was considered less favorable in comparison to GMO and GMS. The Raman spectrum of pure COM had several characteristic peaks located at 1460, 1439, 1130, and 1062 cm −1 . These peaks remained unchanged in the presence of both GELs. This suggested the lack of potential interactions formed between lipid and surfactant. These results correlated well with miscibility studies, which showed that COM was immiscible with GEL 44/14 and GEL 50/13. Further studies to obtain the Raman spectra of pure GMO, GMS, GELs, and their PMs would significantly contribute to the conclusions of this research. Fig. 4 Raman spectra of pure lipids, surfactants, and PMs. No peak changes observed in COM with GELs indicated no interactions formed between these compounds. Minimal changes were seen in the characteristic peaks of PRE with GEL 44/14 indicating the potential for interactions
Particle Size Analysis
Unloaded Solid Lipid Nanoparticles
Figure 5 depicts the particle size of unloaded SLNs. The particle size of prepared GMO and GMS nanoparticles with GEL 50/13 was found to be 70.2 ± 5.4 and 92.6 ± 8.5 compared to > 200 nm particles obtained from PRE and COM. The reduced particle size observed in GMO and GMS SLNs correlates well with the results obtained from miscibility studies of lipid and surfactant PMs as GMO and GMS were found to be miscible in the presence of GEL. Miscible compounds were thus expected to incorporate FLT and maintain small particle size and stability. Fig. 5 Particle size of unloaded SLNs. The resultant particle size of GMO- and GMS-prepared SLN was lower than PRE and COM
Flutamide-Loaded Solid Lipid Nanoparticles
Figure 6 shows the particle size of loaded SLNs. SLNs containing FLT (Day 1) displayed similar particle size trends compared to the unloaded SLNs. GMO- and GMS-prepared SLNs had smaller particle size compared to PRE and COM. The rank order of increasing particle size for FLT-loaded SLNs was found to be GMO < GMS < COM < PRE. Fig. 6 Particle size of loaded SLNs on day 1 and day 14. Drug loading did not affect particle size of GMO- and GMS-prepared SLN. Smaller particle size and minimal change in particle size was observed in GMO and GMS SLN
Miscibility of lipid and surfactant PMs showed promising results in terms of preparing optimal SLNs. GMO-GEL 50/13 and GMS-GEL 50/13 PMs were able to create a favorable matrix for encapsulation of FLT. With a reduction of particle size, there is an increase in the surface area around each nanoparticle; consequently, the extent of dissolution is expected to increase along with bioavailability of the drug.
Stability Studies of Drug-Loaded Solid Lipid Nanoparticles
The particle size of the prepared drug-loaded SLNs was obtained on day 1 after preparation and subsequently on day 14 as seen in Fig. 6 . No increase in particle size after 2 weeks was observed with GMO and GMS SLNs. However, a prominent increase in particle size after 2 weeks was observed in PRE and COM SLNs. It was determined that FLT SLNs prepared with GMO and GMS were more stable compared to FLT SLNs prepared with PRE and COM due to miscibility and ability of the former lipids to reduce FLT crystallinity.
DISCUSSION
The extent of changes observed in melting temperature of pure FLT in comparison to FLT prepared SLN signified miscibility of these ternary complexes and potentially improved performance of SLN as discussed in the thermal analysis. The rank order of increasing lipid molecular weight is as follows GMO < GMS < PRE < COM. And as per miscibility studies, the rank order of lipid ability to reduce FLT crystallinity is GMO, GMS > PRE > COM. This indicates that lipids (GMO, GMS) with molecular weight nearer to the molecular weight of FLT have better miscibility properties as compared to larger lipid molecules (PRE, COM). SLNs are mixtures of solid lipids and surfactants capable of containing poorly water-soluble drugs. It was considered that the excipients selected for the formulation of SLNs could enhance the dissolution of the drug by decreasing particle size (increasing surface area available for dissolution) of the drug released from SLN when dispersed in an aqueous medium. To develop the optimal formulation of SLNs, it was necessary to evaluate drug and excipient miscibility along with particle size and stability. Miscible lipid and surfactant combinations, as observed between GMO-GEL and GMS-GEL, contributed to form stable SLNs with reduction of particle size. These excipients reduce interfacial energy, increase absorption at the interface, and decrease free energy of the system. This leads to a decrease in the tendency for nanoparticles to coalesce and improvement of thermodynamic stability ( ). Moreover, utilization of a solid lipid component prevents nanoparticles from coalescing ( ). Incorporation of FLT into SLNs immobilizes the drug within the lipid matrix and minimizes drug exposure to the aqueous environment. Encapsulation of the drug also protects FLT from degradation ( ). Since PRE-GEL and COM-GEL produced larger-sized nanoparticles, it can be stated that miscibility plays a significant role in the maintenance and production of smaller SLNs. Preparation of SLN with the selected lipids and surfactant was advantageous because of their physiological compatibility, thus reducing inherent toxicity, an added benefit for anticancer agents like FLT. GEL is widely used due to its emulsifying and amphiphilic properties. In a study by Bandari and colleagues, GEL 50/13 was used to prepare loratadine solid dispersions. As a BCS class II drug, loratadine exhibited poor solubility and slow dissolution rate. The investigation determined that solubility of loratadine increased by 100-fold in the presence of 10% concentration of GEL 50/13 compared to pure loratadine. Additionally, the mean dissolution time of loratadine also decreased meaning an improvement in dissolution rate ( ). Other studies involving GEL 44/14 have been found to increase the dissolution rate of poorly water-soluble drugs, such as curcumin, fexofenadine hydrochloride, and ritonavir ( ). The resultant increase in bioavailability of these agents warranted use of GEL in this research for application with FLT. The study aimed to evaluate the performance of SLNs through assessment of particle size. As an anticancer agent, the therapeutic efficacy of FLT is dependent upon its bioavailability. The advantages of SLNs in relation to anticancer therapy include facilitated deposition into tumors, increased accumulation and cellular uptake by cancer cells, and decreased systemic toxicity ( , , ). Reddy et al. conducted a study that examined tumor uptake of etoposide SLNs. Tumor uptake of free etoposide was found to be less than that of etoposide SLNs. It was concluded that the SLN design increased site-specific targeting. Furthermore, this resulted in fewer adverse toxicity effects of anticancer therapy ( ). Preparation of docetaxel-loaded SLNs was performed by Yuan et al. to study the effects of SLN formulation on therapeutic efficacy and toxicity. Docetaxel SLNs were advantageous due to their ease of preparation, better stability, use of safe materials, and potential for controlled release. Myelosuppression is a common side effect of therapy with docetaxel and SLNs were found to produce a lower incidence of myelosuppression along with other dose-limiting side effects while maintaining anticancer activity ( ). Therapeutic efficacy and avoidance of side effects are significant benefits of SLN for the treatment of cancer. FLT was selected as the model drug of this study because of its poor water-solubility and thus low bioavailability. The ability of SLN to incorporate hydrophobic drugs provided additional rationale for the selection of this formulation for optimal performance of FLT. Since many NCE are classified as poorly water-soluble, additional studies of FLT SLNs could contribute to the advancement of other novel agents. This study concluded that GMO- and GMS-prepared SLNs showed promising results, including decreased particle size and stability. GMS was also used to prepare Efavirenz SLN in a study conducted by Gaur and colleagues. The mean particle size of Efavirenz SLN was 124.5 + 3.2 nm, which was achieved with the addition of Tween 80 as a surfactant ( ). Tween 80 was found to stabilize the interfacial film of the SLNs resulting in increased drug entrapment efficiency, but limited drug release. A similar rationale was used for selection of GEL in this study. The reduced particle size and stability displayed by FLT SLN prepared with GMO and GMS along with GEL may provide essential bioavailability and physiochemical properties necessary for optimal formulation and treatment of prostate cancer with FLT.
CONCLUSION
MDSC provided useful information about the melting (endothermic transition) and crystallization (exothermic transition) of lipids and surfactants. Lipids who have good miscibility with surfactants as evidenced by a decrease or broadening of melting and crystallization transition were found to have smaller particle size. Drug loading did not affect order of particle size (GMO < GMS < COM < PRE) of prepared SLNs. Good correlation between miscibility of lipid-surfactant and particle size was observed. GMO and GMS showed good miscibility with GELs and were used successfully in the formulation of SLNs.