INTRODUCTION
Statins are commonly used in the middle-aged and elderly people for treatment of hyperlipidemia. Some reports have also revealed the role of statins in cancer therapy because statins have pleiotropic properties that are useful for this therapy ( ). Statins can influence a few imperative cell capacities, and mitochondrial targeting by using drug carriers currently has gained attention.
Various reviews have attempted to investigate the combination of statins with other cytotoxic agents. Statins combined with potent antioxidants are quite compelling because they may affect the efficacy of tumor medications ( ). In general, in such mixes, an additive or synergistic reaction is observed. Simvastatin and alpha lipoic acid (ALA) were combined to enhance the toxicity of simvastatin against breast carcinoma cell lines ( ). ALA is a potent antioxidant and is essential for aerobic metabolism. Its role is to turn glucose into energy, thus helping to improve insulin sensitivity ( ). Several studies suggest that ALA has many medical uses. Recently, it has been found to interact with free radicals, which decreases the risk of chemotherapy complications ( ). ALA has been used for targeting cancer tissues, thereby improving the efficacy of anticancer drugs ( ).
Ellagic acid (EA) is a polyphenolic compound, which is a dimeric subordinate of gallic acid found in natural products such as grapes, berries, and nuts, including pomegranates, strawberries, raspberries, and blackberries ( ). It is thought that the organic properties of EA indicate a role as a cancer-prevention agent, i.e. , it has antiviral, anticarcinogenic, antifibrosis, and chemopreventive properties. In addition, the oral organization of EA can protect against the toxic effects of alcohol by diminishing lipid peroxidative markers by expanding the antioxidant course. Prior reviews additionally demonstrated that EA’s corrosive effects prompted cell-cycle capture and apoptosis in T24 human bladder growth cells. Nonetheless, the subatomic flagging pathways in EA corrosive-treated cells are hazy ( ). Both of ALA and EA were chosen for their cytotoxic properties against cancer cells and furthermore solubility characters which similar to FLV that allow high entrapment efficiency inside fatty carriers as solid lipid nanoparticles and similar dosage forms.
Recently, nanostructured lipid carriers (NLCs) have gained much attention because of their safety, extended circulation, and high ability to penetrate cancer cells and tissues ( ). The aim of this study is to investigate the synergy of fluvastatin (FLV) cytotoxicity with two potent antioxidants, ALA and EA, against PC3 prostate carcinoma cell lines and improve cellular uptake via loading on fatty carriers in the nanosize range to enhance their cellular uptake.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
FLV, ALA, and EA were gifted from the Jamjoom pharmaceutical company (Jeddah, Saudi Arabia); Gelucire ® 44/14 and Compritol ® 888 ATO were gifted from Gattefossé (Saint-Priest, France); and L-alpha-phosphatidylcholine (soya 95%) was purchased from Shanghai Growingchem Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Almond oil was purchased from Fluka (Steinheim, Germany). Prostate cancer cell line types (PC-3 ATCC ® CRL-1435 ™ ) and all media used were gifted by Dr. Tamer Ashour of the Pharmacology Department, Faculty of Pharmacy at Al Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt.
Preparation of FLV-ALA-EA NLCs
The hot emulsification–ultrasonication method was used to prepare FLV-ALA-EA NLCs in the method used by Elhelw et al . ( ). Briefly, a 20 mL of a mixture of ethyl acetate and chloroform (1:1) was added to the fatty phase of FLV (0.25%), almond oil (1%), Compritol ATO (3%), L-alpha-phosphatidylcholine (0.5%), ALA (0.3%), and EA (0.02%), which were then melted together at 50°C. The organic solvents were evaporated at 40°C using a rotatory evaporator (Büchi rotavapor, Büchi Laboratoriums-Technik, Flawil, Switzerland). Gelucire ® 44/14 (1%) was dissolved in 20 mL of hot water, which was then poured to extract the lipid layer. Then, the mixture was ultrasonicated by Sonics VC750 (Newtown, CT, USA) for 5 min. Finally, the formulated FLV-ALA-EA NLCs were ultracentrifugated using the Hitachi model E ultracentrifuge (Hitachi, Ltd., Tokyo) at 100,000 rpm for 30 min.
Characterization of FLV-ALA-EA NLCs
Surface Morphology
A few drops of the prepared FLV-ALA-EA NLCs were placed on a carbon-coated grid, and excess liquid was removed. Next, one drop of phosphotungstic acid (1%) was added. NLCs were studied via transmission electron microscope (TEM).
NLC Size and Zeta Potential
A zetasizer (Zetatrac, Montgomeryville, PA, USA) was used to determine the size and zeta potential of the sample. The sample was diluted to reach the proper concentration, according to manufacturer instructions, to obtain an optimal 50–100 kcps.
Entrapment Efficiency
FLV, ALA, and EA entrapped in NLCs were quantified indirectly. FLV-ALA-EA NLCs were ultracentrifugated at 90,000 rpm for 45 min using a Thermo Scientific ™ Sorvall ™ (Pittsburgh, PA, USA). The supernatant was diluted and analyzed by a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC; Agilent 1200 series, Germany) system using the method of Gomes et al . ( ) after modification.
Entrapment efficiency (%EE) was calculated from the following equation: $$ \%\mathrm{EE}=\left(\mathrm{initial}\ \mathrm{amount}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{drug}\ \mathrm{added}-\mathrm{free}\ \mathrm{drug}/\mathrm{initial}\ \mathrm{amount}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{drug}\ \mathrm{added}\right)\times 100 $$ (1)
Stability Study
Particle size, zeta potential, and %EE of FLV-ALA-EA NLCs were measured after three cycles of free and thaw (− 20°C and + 25°C).
FLV Release Study
The study was carried out using a Franz diffusion cell apparatus (MicroettePlus ™ ; Hanson Research, Chatsworth, USA) in the diffusion release study of the raw FLV and FLV-ALA-EA NLCs. Samples were placed in the donor chamber; to pass through, a cutoff molecular weight of 12 kDa was placed on the dialysis bags used as a membrane to the donor chamber. Phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.0) was used as a diffusion medium, and samples were withdrawn automatically at 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 h. FLV diffused was measured by HPLC using the same method described in the %EE paragraph.
In Vitro Cytotoxic Screening
The cytotoxicity of FLV-ALA-EA NLCs, FLV, ALA, and EA, using the same drug formula concentrations, were tested against PC3 cells by sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay, as previously described ( ). Briefly, exponentially growing cells at a cell density of 5 × 10 4 cells/mL were trypsinized by 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA and seeded in 96-well plates at 2000–5000 cells/well. Cells were treated with FLV, FLV-ALA-EA NLCs, FLV-ALA-EA, ALA, EA, and doxorubicin (DOX) as a control, with concentrations of 0.1–1000 μg/mL, for 72 h and then fixed with TCA (10%) for 2 h at 3°C. Cells were washed with water several times and then exposed to 0.4% SRB solution in the dark at room temperature. Cells were then washed with 1% glacial acetic acid. Tris-HCl was used to dissolve the SRB-stained cells after the plates dried overnight, and color intensity was measured at 540 nm with an ELISA microplate reader.
Caspase-3 Enzyme Assay
FLV, FLV-ALA-EA NLCs, and plain formula (formula free of the drugs) were tested. Cells were grown in RPMI 1640 containing 10% fetal bovine serum at 37°C to be tested for caspase-3 and were lysed with a cell extraction buffer. This lysate was diluted in standard diluent buffer over the range of the assay and measured for human active caspase-3 content; cells are plated in a density of 1.2–1.8 × 10,000 cells/well in a volume of 100 μL complete growth medium, and 100 μL of each sample was seeded on 96-well plates for 24 h before the caspase-3 enzyme assay; the assay was carried out for spectrophotometry at 450 nm, according to manufacturer’s kit procedure (USCN Life Science Inc., China).
In Vitro DNA Flow Cytometric Analysis
PC3 cells at a density of 1 × 10 6 cells were exposed to the same treatment of the previous test for 24 h. After that, the cells were trypsinized for collection and then washed in PBS and fixed. Cells were tested using a cycle TESTTM PLUS DNA reagent kit (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. An FACS caliber flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) was used for cell-cycle distribution testing.
Annexin V–FITC Apoptosis Assay
PC3 cells were seeded as described above and then incubated with different treatments for 24 h. In brief, 1 × 105 of cells were treated with annexin V–FITC and propidium iodide (PI) using the apoptosis detection kit (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Annexin V–FITC and PI binding were analyzed by flow cytometry on an FACS caliber (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) without gating restrictions using 10,000 cells. CellQuest software was used for the quadrant analysis.
Statistical Analysis
Data expressed as mean ±SD were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 6 (GraphPad Software, CA, USA). Analysis of variance accompanied by the post hoc Newman–Keuls test was used to determine the statistical significance among groups, and p values less than 0.05 were considered significant.
RESULTS
FLV-ALA-EA NLC Characterization
Figure 1 shows a TEM image of spherical particles that are homogenous in size and have regular edges. The prepared FLV-ALA-EA NLCs particle size was 85.2 ± 4.1 nm, with a polydispersity index of 0.58 and zeta potential of − 25.1 ± 3.4 mV. The FLV %EE of the prepared NLCs was 98.2 ± 3.1%, ALA content was 92.1 ± 4.1%, and EA was 96.1 ± 2.1%. Fig. 1 TEM image of FLV-ALA-EA NLCs
Figure 2 shows the FLV release. The FLV suspension shows a fast dissolution rate of approximately 80% after 1 h, which is normal because there are no solid carries. On the other hand, FLV-ALA-EA NLCs experienced an initial burst effect followed by slow release. Fig. 2 FLV release as a FLV-raw and from FLV-ALA-EA NLCs in 0.1 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, for 12 h (mean ± SD, n = 3). Asterisks indicate p < 0.05 FLV-raw compared to FLV-ALA-EA NLCs
Deep FLV entrapped in the NLCs is affected by factors such as the nature of the lipid carrier and formula composition, the pH of the medium, and particle size ( ).
Regarding the stability study, there was no significant difference in particle size and zeta potential or %EE. Six treatments (FLV, FLV-ALA-EA NLCs, FLV-ALA-EA, ALA, EA, and DOX as a control) with concentrations of 0.1–1000 μg/mL were applied to prostate carcinoma cell line PC3. As presented in Fig. 3 , all treatments reduced cell viability in a dose-dependent manner. The IC 50 values for the treatments were as follows: FLV, 24.5 ± 3.2 μM; FLV-ALA-EA NLCs, 13.3 ± 2.1 μM; FLV-ALA-EA, 18.3 ± 3.2 μM; ALA, > 1 μM; EA, 162.4 ± 12.3 μM; and DOX, 1.8 ± 0.5 μM. Data has shown improvement of FLV in FLV-ALA-EA NLCs by about 1.84-fold in comparing with raw FLV. Data revealed that there were a significant deference between FLV and FLV-EA-ALA NLCs and FLV-EA-ALA furthermore between FLV-EA-ALA NLCs and FLV-EA-ALA as represented in Fig. 3 . Fig. 3 Effect of FLV, FLV-ALA-EA NLCs, ALA, EA, and DOX on the viability of prostate cancer cells (PC3) cells. Cytotoxicity was evaluated by the SRB assay after 72 h of cell incubation. The values represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments ( n = 9). Asterisks indicate p < 0.05 FLV-raw compared to FLV-ALA-EA NLCs; number signs indicate p < 0.05 FLV-ALA-EA NLCs compared to FLV-ALA-EA; dollar signs indicate p < 0.05 FLV compared to FLV-ALA-EA
Caspase-3 Enzyme Assay
Our study revealed that a significant amount of caspase-3 enzyme was detected in PC3 cells treated with FLV-ALA-EA NLCs compared with raw FLV or FLV-ALA-EA. The measured data were 641.8 ± 11.2, 415.8 ± 8.7, and 503.3 ± 6.5 pg/mL for FLV-ALA-EA NLCs, FLV, and FLV-ALA-EA, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4 . Fig. 4 Caspase-3 enzyme concentrations in PC3 cells treated with FLV-ALA-EA NLCs, FLV, FLV-ALA-EA, and solvent-free formula (control); data are presented as the mean ± SD. ( n = 6)
In Vitro DNA Flow Cytometric Analysis
As shown in Fig. 5 , control PC3 cells exhibited proliferative properties with about 67% at G0/G1 phase and 25% at S phase and only 0.48% were at pre-G1 phase. Both FLV-ALA-EA NLCs and FLV-ALA-EA induced accumulation of PC3cells at pre-G1 apoptotic phase; the percentage of cells at pre-G1 was increased by about 4.25 and 2.93 fold, respectively, compared with the FLV, while treatment with FLV-ALA-EA NLCs caused a significant increase in pre-G1 phase by about 1.44-fold in comparison with FLV-ALA-EA. Fig. 5 Effect of the a FLV-ALA-EA NLCs, b FLV, c FLV-ALA-EA, and d control treatments on DNA ploidy flow cytometric analysis of PC3 cells
Annexin V–FITC Apoptosis Assay
As shown in Fig. 6 , cytometric analysis revealed that PC3 cells treated with FLV-ALA-EA NLCs and FLV-EA-ALA showed obvious increases in the percent of annexin V–FITC-positive apoptotic cells (both early and late apoptosis), compared to control and FLV only. Fig. 6 Effect of the a FLV-ALA-EA NLCs, b FLV, c FLV-ALA-EA, and d control treatments on the percentage of annexin V–FITC-positive staining in PC3 cells
DISCUSSIONS
Formula components are known to be the major factor in produced particle size and encapsulation efficiency. Moreover, surfactants are the most important component and play a significant role in particle size via increasing the cohesive forces between aqueous and nonaqueous phases and decreasing droplet contact to enhance emulsion stability. In our study, we used several surfactants ( ). Gelucire is a natural surfactant composed of an oily phase (diglycerides and triglycerides), cosurfactants (monoglycerides), and surfactants (monoesters and diesters of polyethylene glycol ( ) that make it a unique surfactant). Moreover, ALA has nonionic surfactant properties due to its carboxyl group, as studied by Nishiura et al . ( ). Both almond oil and Compritol 888 also are widely used as lubricant and emulsifying agents ( ) to increase emulsion viscosity and stability, which could explain the high %EE of FLV, ALA, and EA within NLCs. In addition to the formula components’ effect on the particle, ultrawaves from ultrasonication produce a squeezing force that transfers though the emulsion and segment large particles into smaller particles ( ).
In regard to the FLV release study, the fast FLV release stage from FLV-ALA-EA NLCs is usually attributed to the fast release of FLV entrapped near the surface of the NLCs. After this initial stage, FLV underwent an initial fast release followed by a slow release from FLV-ALA-EA NLCs. For the release study, after the fast-initial stage, sustained FLV release could be attributed to FLV deeper in the NLC body. FLV takes a longer time to reach the surface, but FLV on the particle surface is released immediately.
The high cytotoxicity of FLV is a result of the restraint of HMG-CoA reductase, which prompts decreased mevalonate levels and decreasing of cholesterol, ubiquinone, dolichol, and, generally imperative, lessened levels of the isoprenoid intermediates geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP) and farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP). GGPP and FPP, largely known as isoprenoids, link to a few critical proteins, including the GTP-restricting Ras and Rho proteins ( , ). Protein prenylation encourages protein translocation from the cytosol to the layer, advancing protein–protein and protein–layer connections and managing protein work.
Initiated Ras and Rho GTPases communicate with an extensive number of effector atoms, which assume critical roles in the basic cell pathways for malignancy development and movement, such as layer uprightness, cell bond, cell motility, cytoskeleton redesigning, cell flagging, cell-cycle movement, survival, change, angiogenesis, phagocytosis, endocytosis, oxidative anxiety, and the cell reaction to genotoxic stretch ( , , , ). Statins exhaust the cell’s pools of isoprene antecedents and decrease the isoprenylation of Ras and Rho proteins, thus disabling their work. The antitumor effects of statins incorporate hindrance of development brought on by cell-cycle capture and the acceptance of apoptosis, diminishment of metastatic potential, and hindrance of angiogenesis and the separation of tumors ( , , , ). The significance difference in IC 50 between FLV-EA-ALA NLCs and FLV-EA-ALA could be attributed to NLC features like high affinity to Pgp efflux transporters and ultimately enhanced drug cellular uptake by clathrin-mediated endocytosis in addition to micropinocytosis in comparing with FLV-EA-ALA ( ).
Although ALA is a potent antioxidant, many reports have fixed on its ability to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) with concentrations of more than 100 mM in many types of cancer cells. ROS-related decrease in the expression of antiapoptotic protein Bcl-XL also leads to the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis via activation of cytochrome c, which, as a result, activates PARP-1 cleavage and DNA fragmentation ( , ). Other reports revealed that ALA concentrations of more than 0.5 mM initiate caspase-3 cleavage and downregulate antiapoptotic factors Bcl-XL and Mcl-1 ( , ).
Many published papers have confirmed the anticancer effects of EA in reducing cancer carcinogenesis. EA activates the mitochondrial death pathway in human pancreatic carcinoma cell line MIA PaCa-2 via downregulation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB), which activates cytochrome c release that activates cytochrome 3, as a result of mitochondrial membrane damage, loss of mitochondrial function, and finally mitochondrial death. In other studies on ovarian carcinoma ES-2 cell lines ( , ), EA was found to increase the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio, which activates caspase-3-mediated apoptosis. In other studies on prostate cancer cells, EA was found to decrease levels of antiapoptotic proteins human antigen R, regulator 1, and heme oxygenase-1a and increase P21 protein, which is a tumor suppressor protein ( , , , ).
Activation of caspases (cysteinyl aspartate-specific proteinases) is essential in the regulation of apoptosis. It is logical that cytotoxicity and the amount of cellular drug uptake are highly correlated. Thus, smaller FLV-ALA-EA NLCs can pass through leaky neovasculature to cancer tissue, especially when NLC size is 30–100 nm. Furthermore, smaller NLCs are cleared more slowly than larger particles by the reticuloendothelial system in the liver, and Gelucire’s role through inhibition of Pgp-mediated efflux decreases cellular membrane resistance to the entrance of NLCs ( ).
CONCLUSION
The study confirms the synergistic effect of ALA and EA on FLV cytotoxicity against PC3 prostate cancer cells. Moreover, particle size has an impact on cellular cytotoxicity. The prepared NLCs achieved high %EE with a relatively extended release profile. Both caspase-3 enzyme assay and cell-cycle analysis confirmed that the incidence of apoptosis with FLV-ALA-EA NLCs was increased significantly compared with the other treatments. Finally, loading FLV, ALA, and EA on NLCs may provide a novel strategy for targeting PC3 cells in prostate cancer therapy.