INTRODUCTION
The epidermis is a complicated layer of human skin. It consists of the stratified squamous keratinized epithelium which maintains the skin hydration and responsible for the protection against attacks from external environment ( ). For many years, it was advised to apply moisturizers to keep skin hydrated, but now the efficacy of these moisturizers is in question and doubts are rising whether these are actually beneficial or harmful to the skin’s natural hydration process. To moisturize skin or not using external moisturizer products is the basic question. Normal skin has oil producing sebaceous glands that naturally lubricate the skin thus acting as emollients and keep it properly hydrated by preventing excessive water loss. Natural moisturizing factor (NMF) of stratum corneum constitutes a complex of ingredients having hygroscopic nature like free amino acids, urea, and lipids that are responsible for keeping the skin moist and pliable by attracting and holding water ( , ).
Dry skin is mainly related to the loss of water from stratum corneum, which fluctuates with environmental humidity levels. This condition of skin mainly occurs due to the damage of the skin barrier mainly by denaturing keratin protein, NMF, and interrupting lipid bilayers. This structural degradation of skin exposes cells to external threats and contributes to enhanced levels of trans-epidermal water loss (TEWL) causing dehydration of skin ( , , ).
Moisturizers mainly prevent this water loss by occlusion of the skin with a substance to trap moisture replicating the functions of endogenous sebum. Gammal et al. developed a model to assess the efficacy of moisturizers, and they reported that these moisturizers are effective for dry skin syndromes like xerosis ( ). In most of the cases, these external moisturizing agents offer temporary relief as these topical moisturizers simply supplement the moisture rather than facilitating the natural hydration process by correcting the abnormal skin condition.
Instead of facilitating and supporting the natural hydration process of skin, these external moisturizers can be harmful to the natural hydration process. Certain studies reported that the regular long-term usage of the moisturizer products interfered with the functional organization of stratum corneum and with the synthesis of endogenous lipids thus affecting the natural hydration process of skin ( ). These reports indicate that regular application of these products over time makes skin less able to care for itself.
There are some studies conducted to demonstrate the effect of moisturizers on skin barrier function. Berardesca et al. tested the effect of weak alkaline moisturizers on skin barrier function when applied for 4 weeks and found significant impairment of skin barrier function ( ). Study conducted by Buraczewska et al. clearly demonstrated the effects of longer-term usage of moisturizers on the skin barrier function and reported that these effects are mainly attributed to the composition of the moisturizer products ( ). Loden conducted a study to assess the effect of the excipients of moisturizers on the skin barrier function and found out that certain types of emulsifiers used in these moisturizers affect the skin barrier function ( ). A study conducted in the University of Copenhagen confirmed that skin barrier function is adversely affected by the use of moisturizers ( ). In this study, TEWL was significantly higher on the arm treated with moisturizer than on the control arm suggesting that the long-term treatment of normal skin with moisturizers increases its susceptibility to these products. However, it is not quite clear whether the natural hydration process is quelled because of the moisturizers’ regular usage or if the ingredients in these products are simply damaging the cells and causing irritation ( ). Apart from this, there are some studies reporting enhanced susceptibility of skin to certain irritants upon usage of these moisturizer products ( ).
A study conducted by Jemec et al. indicates that the moisturizer’s inherent capacitance is a source of false positive results of skin hydration ( ). Too much moisturizing comes with various problems like the risk of clogging of the skin pores by the lipophilic moisturizers, and there are certain studies questioning the efficacy of the hydrophilic ingredients like the humectants in the hydration of skin ( ). These reports present lot of questions to answer and prove scientifically with valid results.
Studies of skin hydration and the influence of external moisturizer actives on skin are generally carried out using corneometry ( , ), which is based on the principle of measurement of capacitance for analyzing the water content ( ), but this quantitative technique does not provide any information about structural and molecular conformations of various components of NMF in the stratum corneum of the skin. For these in vivo applications, Raman spectroscopy has an important role to play owing to its fast, non-invasive, and non-destructive analysis of biological data ( ). Raman spectroscopy is an inelastic light scattering technique. It is a vibrational spectroscopy based on Raman effect ( ). In this technique, the sample under investigation is illuminated by monochromatic laser light which interacts with the molecules in the sample originating the scattered light. This scattered light having a different wavenumber to that incident light is used to construct Raman spectrum. During this process, a sharply defined amount of energy is transferred from the photons of light to the sample molecule, in which a vibrational mode is excited ( ).
Many studies have reported that Raman spectroscopy is a powerful tool in biological, diagnostic, forensic, chemical, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic areas ( , , ). It provides a highly sensitive approach to analyze the subtle molecular and biochemical changes taking place in these in vivo systems ( ). Advances in this field allow the use of more versatile equipment for in vivo analysis without loss of quality information ( ) especially the use of confocal Raman spectroscopy in various studies related to skin ( , , , ). Some studies have successfully demonstrated the determination of water content of skin using confocal Raman spectroscopy ( , , ). Chrit et al. applied this technique for assessing the efficacy of a glycerol-based cream in skin moisturization ( ). Few studies have also compared confocal Raman spectroscopy with the traditional methods like corneometry in studying skin hydration ( ). In this context, this study aims to determine the efficacy of the moisturizers and its correlation to the NMF content in the SC by in vivo confocal Raman spectroscopy.
METHODOLOGY
Study Design
This work was developed in the Laboratory of Biomedical Vibrational Spectroscopy (LEVB), Brazil, following the guidelines and standards for research involving human beings, according to Resolution 196/969 of the National Health Council. Prior approval from the Research Ethics Committee was obtained with the protocol number H48/CEP/2008. All volunteers signed consent form before the study and received detailed information on study procedures.
The study involved 12 healthy human female volunteers aged in-between 19 to 37 years with skin phototype II, classified according to skin color and reaction to sun exposure as shown in the Table I ( ). Even though this technique is applicable for skin phototypes I and II, phototype II was selected due to the demographic and geographic conditions of Brazil. The following exclusion criteria were used for the study: women with skin phototypes III and IV as their skin shows melanin interference in their spectra masking the Raman modes, unhealthy youth, presence of skin disease, irritation or esthetic sensibility to products with active ingredients, use of moisturizer over the last 48 h before the analysis, and the presence or history of skin diseases. Table I Fitzpatrick Classification of Skin Phototypes Skin type Erythema and tanning reactions to first exposure in summer I Always burn, never tan II Usually burn, tan less than average (with difficulty) III Sometimes mild burn, tan about average IV Rarely burn, tan more than average (with ease) Taken from “T.B. Fitzpatrick, The validity and practicality of sun-reactive skin types i through vi, Archives of Dermatology , 124 (1988) 869–871”
In Vivo Measurements
As mentioned, confocal Raman spectroscopy was used to evaluate possible biochemical and content changes in the NMF and variations in skin water content in the forearm of the volunteers using commercial moisturizers over the total study time. The total study duration was fixed to 30 days as it is more correlated to routine practices, and it was conducted for four commercial moisturizer products coded 1 to 4 (products composition presented in Table II ). Each product was used by six volunteers ( n = 6 by product). To minimize the interference from any other cosmetic product, a washout period was started 7 days prior to onset of the study. During this time, the volunteers were only allowed to wash their arms with supplied soap. The application of other cosmetic, cosmeceutical products, topical drugs, and perfumes on the arms was not allowed during this period. On the day of the measurements, the use of alcohol, caffeine containing products, and vasoactive medications was forbidden due to their effect on skin microcirculation which could influence the skin hydration profile. During the study, the guidelines for the assessment of SC hydration by the European Group for Efficacy Measurements on Cosmetics and Other Topical Products (EEMCO) were followed ( ). The volar forearm skin of both arms of each volunteer was divided into four sites of 2 × 2 cm 2 each, bordered with a porous hypoallergenic skin tape. To prevent any possible cross-contamination, an open space between the sites was left. The analyzed skin area was cleaned with cotton to remove excessive sebum and possible superficial dirt. No other pre-treatment was applied. Eight milligrams of each product (four products in total) following the predetermined randomized schedule was applied on each sight (four sites × arm × volunteer) to achieve the final amount of 2 mg of each product per 1 cm 2 of the skin. So all the products were tested on every volunteer. The initial measurement (T0) was made in the absence of product, and the volunteers were instructed to apply the product for 30 consecutive days, twice a day (morning and afternoon), on the forearm. In this 30-day period, measurements were taken on day 7 (T7) and day 30 (T30) intervals from the time T0. The 7-day time point was included to assess the effect of short term application of these moisturizer products. Table II Composition of Moisturizer Products (Main Active Substances) Product Main active substances Product 1 Canola oil, butyrospermumparkii butter, cetearyl alcohol, caprylic/capric triglyceride, steareth-21, cetyl palmitate, ricinuscommunis seed oil, irvingiagabonensis kernel butter, isohexadecane, helianthus annus seed extract, tocopheryl acetate, caprylic/capric triglyceride, glycerol Product 2 Petrolatum, dimethicone, distearyldimonium chloride, colloidal oatmeal, cetyl alcohol, tocopheryl acetate, glycerol Product 3 Dicaprylyl ether, Passiflora edulis seed oil, cyclopentasiloxane, caprylic/capric triglyceride,cetyl lactate, sorbitol, glycerol Product 4 Liquid paraffin, butyrospermumparkii butter, dimethicone, dimethiconol, isohexadecane, niacinamide, caprylic/capric triglyceride, brassica campestrisoleifera oil, rapeseed oil, propylene glycol, glycerol
Before starting the measurements, volunteers were acclimatized for 30 min in an environment of 23 ± 1 °C temperature and 40–50% relative humidity. Analyses were performed on the right and left forearm of the volunteer, each containing a particular product. Raman measurements were recorded vertically from the skin surface to 50 μm depth. They were taken at two different points, P1 and P2, separated by a horizontal distance of 30 μm for variance. Each measurement was made in two spectral regions, classified as high (2500–4000 cm −1 ) and low wavenumber or fingerprint (400–1800 cm −1 ). The high wavenumber spectral region corresponds to the analysis of water content, and the low wavenumber spectral region corresponds to the NMF content analysis.
Confocal Raman Instrumentation
The non-invasive analyses were performed by confocal Raman spectroscopy using RiverDiagnostics 3510 Skin Analyzer (RiverDiagnostics, Rotterdam, Netherlands). This system has two excitation lasers of 785 nm and 671 nm wavelengths with energies of 23 mw and 25 mw, respectively. Both these diode lasers are nondestructive for biological material. These lasers are coupled to the spectrometer, which was equipped with a 600 g/mm diffraction grating, thermo-electrically cooled CCD detector (Newton, Andor Technology) and a camera of 128 × 1024 pixels. The spectral resolution of the system is 4 cm −1 in full spectral range (400–4000 cm −1 ). A video image (uEye camera software) was used to locate the accurate position of the laser spot on the study participant’s skin. Spectral acquisition was performed using RiverIcon software (RiverDiagnostics, Rotterdam, Netherlands).
Confocal Raman Template
For the fingerprint region (400–1800 cm −1 , λ = 785 nm) data were obtained at depths of 0–50 μm with 2 μm step size, exposure time of 10 s, 1 frame, and 1 accumulation for each depth. For high wavenumber region (2500–4000 cm −1 , λ = 671 nm) data were obtained at depths of 0–50 μm with 2 μm step size, exposure time of 2 s, 1 frame, and 2 accumulations for each depth. In both these spectral regions, two measurements were taken for each time point. The study was conducted up to 50 μm depth even though the stratum corneum thickness may range up to 20 μm in depth in forearm region ( ) in order to calculate the thickness of stratum corneum at different time points before and after the application of these moisturizer products. It is obtained from the point of intersection between the two lines representing the stratum corneum and epidermis regions of water content profile ( , , ).
Data Processing
Calculation of Water Content and NMF
The concentration of the components of the stratum corneum i.e. , water content and NMF at different depths was calculated semi-automatically by Skintools software®. “Default method water” in the Skintools ® software uses the high wavenumber region (2500–4000 cm −1 ). This method is mainly used to estimate, display, and export the water concentration profiles. It can also automatically detect and label outliers. This method was well described by Caspers et al ( ). The skin water content as function of depth was determined by the ratio of the integrated peak areas of protein keratin (between 2910 and 2960 cm −1 ) and water molecule (between 3350 and 3550 cm −1 ), resulting from CH and OH stretching vibrations, respectively ( , , ). The integration was carried out assuming a linear baseline between 2600 and 3800 cm −1 . The water content is expressed in terms of grams of water per 100 g of tissue. The following equation was used to calculate the water content: $$ \mathrm{Water}\ \mathrm{content}\ \left(\%\right)=100\left\{\frac{\left(\frac{W}{P}\right)}{\left(\frac{W}{P}+R\right)}\right\} $$ where W and P are the integrated peak intensities of water and keratin, respectively, and R is an empirical constant ( ).
“Default method NMF” in the Skintools® software uses the fingerprint or low wavenumber region (400–1800 cm −1 ). In this method, spectra from a built-in library of pure stratum corneum compounds are fitted to the experimental Raman spectra of the human stratum corneum. It also plots the fit data (spectrum, fit, and residual) and displays the fit coefficients as a function of depth, which are called NMF profiles ( ). The components of NMF are pyrrolidone carboxylic acid, urocanic acid, urea, lactate, alanine, serine, phenylalanine, glycine, ornithine, arginine, citrulline, and histidine. All these components are represented in the fingerprint or low wavenumber Raman spectral region. Therefore, this method uses low wavenumber Raman spectral region to estimate the NMF from the bands corresponding to these components ( ).
Determination of Efficacy of Moisturizer Products
As there were two measurements taken for each time point of analysis for these six study participants, 12 profiles for water content and 12 profiles for NMF content were obtained for each time point per product. The areas under the curves (AUC) obtained for these water content and NMF profiles based on their respective stratum corneum thickness were calculated. From these 12 AUCs indicating the water and NMF contents, the average AUC along with their standard error were calculated to represent their respective group. These average AUCs along with their standard error representing the water and NMF contents were plotted against their respective time point of analysis for each product to assess their efficacy in hydrating the skin. In order to compare the variation of water and NMF content of skin after the application of the moisturizer products, the water content and NMF contents of T0, T7, and T30 measurements were divided by their respective T0 measurements, and the calculated ratios along with their standard error values were plotted against the respective time point of analysis.
RESULTS
Raw Data
Figure 1 shows the confocal Raman spectra at low and high wavenumber spectral regions obtained for one of the volunteers. Figure 1 a depicts the peaks of keratin and water in the high wavenumber spectral region from which the water content was calculated using the equation ( ) as discussed in the methodology. As shown in Fig. 1 b, NMF was determined from the fit coefficients obtained by fitting the experimental spectra with the pure spectra of compounds of stratum corneum in low wavenumber or fingerprint spectral region. It also shows the residual spectra obtained from these experimental and pure spectra. Fig. 1 Confocal Raman spectra. High wavenumber spectra indicating water and keratin peaks ( a ) and low wavenumber spectra (experimental, pure, and residual spectra) ( b )
Figure 2 depicts the confocal Raman spectra of the four pure commercial moisturizer products which were used for this study. Fig. 2 Confocal Raman spectra of pure moisturizer products
Water Content Profiles
The water content values calculated from these 12 spectra at each time point of analysis per product were plotted against their skin depths. The results shown in Fig. 3 represent the water content profiles obtained before and after the application of all the four moisturizer products. The water content profiles obtained before the application of moisturizer were indicated as T0 whereas the water content profiles obtained after regular application of these moisturizers as per the protocol at 7 days and 30 days were indicated as T7 and T30, respectively. Fig. 3 Skin water content profiles before (T0) and after 7 days (T7) and 30 days (T30) of moisturizers application
When the calculated water content is plotted against their respective depths, it shows a profile as presented in Fig. 4 . The intersection point between the two lines drawn at the stratum corneum and epidermis region gives a good estimation of the stratum corneum thickness ( , , ). This thickness was used to calculate the area under the curve of water content profile in order to estimate the water content in the stratum corneum. Fig. 4 Determination of stratum corneum thickness from water content profile
NMF Profiles
Similar to the average water content, the total NMF contents from these 12 spectra at each time point of analysis per product were plotted against their skin depths respectively. The results shown in Fig. 5 represent the total NMF profiles obtained before and after the application of all the four moisturizers products. Similar to the water content profiles, NMF profiles obtained before the application of moisturizer were indicated as T0 whereas the NMF profiles obtained after regular application of these moisturizers as per the protocol at 7 days and 30 days were indicated as T7 and T30, respectively. The thickness of stratum corneum estimated from the water content profiles was used to calculate the AUC under that respective NMF profile in order to estimate the NMF content in the stratum corneum. Fig. 5 Total NMF profiles before (T0) and after 7 days (T7) and 30 days (T30) of moisturizers application
AUCs of Water Content and NMF Profiles
The AUCs of the water content and NMF profiles lying under their respective thickness of stratum corneum of volunteers were calculated. These AUCs represent the water and total NMF contents in the stratum corneum. From these AUCs of all volunteers at each time point, the average AUC along with their standard error for water content and NMF were calculated and presented in the Table III and Fig. 6 . Table III Results of Average Areas Under the Curve Along with Their Standard Error for Water Content and Total NMF Time (days) Product 1 Product 2 Product 3 Product 4 Water content 0 801 ± 35 853 ± 42 843 ± 52 835 ± 67 7 885 ± 50 814 ± 48 817 ± 29 821 ± 37 30 875 ± 60 885 ± 35 832 ± 46 807 ± 23 NMF 0 19.6 ± 1.8 17.5 ± 2.5 18.8 ± 2.9 15.5 ± 1.6 7 17.4 ± 1.8 15.2 ± 1.8 16.1 ± 2.6 14.7 ± 1.2 30 18.2 ± 1.5 16.9 ± 2.1 15.7 ± 2.4 14.0 ± 0.7 All the values of average AUCs of water content and NMF are in arbitrary units NMF natural moisturizing factor Fig. 6 Variation of mean areas under the curve of water content ( a ) and total NMF profiles ( b ) before (T0) and after 7 days (T7) and 30 days (T30) of moisturizers application
The average AUCs at different time points of analysis (T0, T7, and T30) were compared to assess the efficacy of these moisturizer products on skin hydration. The average AUCs of water content profiles in Fig. 6 a and the average AUCs of NMF profiles in Fig. 6 b were plotted along with their standard error values against their respective time point of analysis to indicate the variation of water content and NMF before and after application of the moisturizer products.
The following are the results of variation of stratum corneum water content and NMF from their average AUCs (as shown in Fig. 6 ) after twice-daily application of these moisturizer products up to 7 days (T7) and 30 days (T30) compared to T0 measurements taken before the moisturizer application: 1. Product 1 has shown increased stratum corneum water content at both T7 and T30 when compared to T0. 2. Product 2 decreased stratum corneum water content at T7, but it has shown increased water content at T30 when compared to T0. 3. Products 3 and 4 have shown a similar pattern by decreasing the water content at both T7 and T30 when compared to T0. 4. Out of all the products, the maximum percentage increase in the stratum corneum water content was attained by moisturizer product 1, which was found to be 10.48% at T7. 5. All the products decreased the stratum corneum NMF at T7 and T30 when compared to their respective T0 values.
Comparison of Water Content and NMF Profiles
To study the effect and efficacy of moisturizers on the skin, the results of water content and NMF measurements before and after the application of moisturizers were compared. To compare these results and to find out the correlation between the water content and total NMF, the T0, T7, and T30 measurements of these parameters were divided by their respective T0 measurements. The respective T0/T0 measurements ratio will be 1, and it serves as a reference to compare the values of T7/T0 and T30/T0. The results of these comparisons are shown in Fig. 7 . Fig. 7 Comparison of water content and total NMF before (T0) and after 7 days (T7) and 30 days (T30) of moisturizers application
The following results can be deduced from these comparisons of stratum corneum water content and NMF as depicted in Fig. 7 : 1. Variations in stratum corneum water content and NMF have clearly shown an opposite trend when product 1 was applied in both the phases of T0 to T7 and T7 to T30. Initially from T0 to T7, water content was increased but NMF was decreased and from T7 to T30, water content was decreased but NMF was increased. 2. Variations in stratum corneum water content and NMF shown a similar trend after the application of product 2. Both water content and NMF were decreased from T0 up to T7 but after T7, both these parameters increased until T30. 3. Water content and NMF variations shown a similar trend by decreasing after product 3 was applied until T7 but after T7, their variations were inversely related as water content was marginally increased until T30 whereas NMF has decreased further from T7 to T30. 4. Similar to product 2, water content and NMF variations of stratum corneum were directly related after application of product 4 at both T7 and T30 but these parameters have decreased at both T7 to T30 when compared to T0.
DISCUSSION
The results of this study clearly indicate that not all the tested commercial moisturizer products hydrated the skin to the same extent. In fact, some of these products (products 3 and 4) dehydrated the skin after their application. This finding will clearly support and strengthen the studies reporting the adverse effect of moisturizer products application on skin barrier function, which might be the probable reason for the dehydration of skin after the moisturizers application as the altered skin barrier function can increase the TEWL. The results of product 2 indicate that this product need to be applied regularly for longer duration of time for hydrating the skin as it could hydrate the skin only after 30 days of application. Therefore, the duration of application of these moisturizer products has an important role to play in their activity. The results of product 1 indicate that some moisturizer products do hydrate the skin as expected by increasing the water content at both 7 days and 30 days of their application when compared to T0.
With respect to NMF content of stratum corneum, the results indicated that all these tested products have decreased the NMF content after their application at both T7 and T30 when compared to T0, which clearly prove that the moisturizer products intervene with the natural hydration processes of skin and adversely affect these processes. These findings support the various reports stating that regular long-term usage of the moisturizer products can interfere with the functional organization of stratum corneum or with the synthesis of endogenous lipids thus affecting the natural hydration process of skin leading to a reduction in its innate ability to hydrate using the various components of NMF in stratum corneum. These results will also strengthen certain statements given by dermatologists of negative signaling to the skin cells on its natural hydration process upon the application of moisturizers.
The comparisons of water content and NMF values of product 1 and product 3 (from T7 to T30 for product 3) show that these parameters are inversely related, but this trend was not observed in products 2, 3, and 4 (from T0 to T7 for product 3) as the variations in these parameters (water content and NMF) have shown a similar trend. Therefore, the theories and studies reporting inverse relationship between the variations of water content and NMF in stratum corneum after moisturizers application are product specific and cannot be generalized for all the moisturizer products.
These observations affirm that not all the moisturizer products are efficacious in hydrating the skin, and these differences in the rate and extent of skin hydration are mainly attributed to their varying formulation compositions. All these tested moisturizer products contain various categories of actives responsible for their moisturizing property with different mechanisms of action. Based on their mechanism of action, these actives are classified as occlusives, emollients, and humectants. The moisturizing ability of the final products is a combined effect of all these various categories of actives.
Even though the products contain these various classes of actives, each active is different from the other with respect to the rate, duration, and extent of its activity. For example, the rate of film formation and the stability of the film formed can differ from one occlusive to the other. Therefore, adequate care has to be taken while selecting the actives in the formulation. Since these formulations contain various classes of actives, proper monitoring is required in combining these actives with varied mechanisms of action in order to avoid any adverse effects that can interfere with efficacy of the final product.
Apart from the actives, these products contain various types of excipients like vehicles, emulsifiers, solubilizers, viscosifying agents, colorants, flavoring agents, preservatives, etc. Even though they are inactive, they have a great potential to interact not only with the formulation actives but also with the skin components, and these interactions can often lead to altered activity of the final product. Therefore, the compatibility of these excipients with the actives as well as with the skin must be tested before selecting them for the formulation.
Therefore, the selection, combination of various actives and excipients along with the type of formulation of these products are the probable reasons for the differences in their activity. Apart from that, product 1 contains various moisturizer actives of vegetable source like canola oil, butyrospermumparkii butter, ricinuscommunis seed oil, irvingiagabonensis kernel butter, and helianthus annus seed extract whereas the other products (products 2, 3, and 4) do not contain these many moisturizer actives from vegetable source. This can be one of the possible reasons for the enhanced activity of product 1 over other products in hydrating the skin.
CONCLUSIONS
Based on the results obtained from these 12 volunteers of skin phototype II, the following conclusions can be made: 1. The results of water and NMF contents of skin obtained after the application of product 1 suggest that certain moisturizer products do hydrate the skin after their application. 2. The comparison of the results of water and NMF contents of skin after the application of tested commercial moisturizer products indicates that they do not hydrate the skin to the same level. Variations in the results of water and NMF contents of skin after their application confirm this observation. 3. Certain moisturizer products can even dehydrate the skin as shown by the water and NMF content results obtained after application of moisturizer products 3 and 4. 4. With reference to the results obtained, there can be a mismatch between the experimental and the expected outcome on the application of these moisturizer products. 5. The mismatch is mainly attributed to the various formulation aspects like the type or nature of formulation, preparation technique used, and the inclusion of different moisturizer actives and excipients in the formulation. 6. This mismatch can be sorted out or minimized by taking requisite care in their formulation by incorporating the moisturizer actives that can produce additive if not synergistic effect and also by including the excipients that are inert and compatible with both the moisturizer actives and skin components. 7. The present research work reconfirms the application of confocal Raman spectroscopy to various in vivo studies involving human skin.