INTRODUCTION
Paclitaxel (PTX) is a natural plant product obtained from the bark of western Taxus brevifolia . It is active against various types of cancers mostly by stabilizing the polymerization of the microtubules of cancer cells ( ). Paclitaxel has also proven to act directly on isolated mitochondria from cancerous cells as well as on mitochondria of normal cells resulting in apoptosis and death of cancer cells ( ). However, poor aqueous solubility of PTX significantly hinders its anticancer activity ( ). Studies have shown that intravenous administration of currently used paclitaxel formulation cause allergic reactions and precipitation at the spot of injection ( , ). Hydrophobic drugs are generally not easy to administer in aqueous solutions. Nanoformulation may be a strategy for improving the delivery of drugs with low solubility and absorption ( , ). One type of nanoformulation known as nanomicelles (NM) has recently attracted pharmaceutical researchers in their quest to achieve adequate blood drug levels ( ). Currently, various polymers and non-polymers are utilized to prepare nanomicellar formulations in order to obtain good absorption and delivery of therapeutics in vivo ( ) . Nanomicelles are formed as a result of micellization, which occurs when amphiphilic molecules undergo self-assembly in contact with a hydrophilic solvent. Polar parts of the amphiphile face towards the polar solvent, while the hydrophobic part of the molecule faces away from the solvent resulting in a nanomicelle with hydrophobic core ( ). Opposite orientation in a non-polar environment generates reverse nanomicelles with a hydrophilic core ( ). While normal nanomicelles are applied to encapsulate hydrophobic drugs, reverse nanomicelles may be designed to encapsulate and deliver hydrophilic drugs. Reverse nanomicelles can be applied to deliver proteins and peptide drugs and hydrophilic small molecules ( , ). Until recently, surfactants were the main materials for nanomicelle formation. However, these surfactants have proven inadequate due to high cytotoxicity and critical micellar concentrations (CMC) ( , ). High CMC means that nanomicelles can easily disintegrate in blood circulation after administration. Due to this obstacle, various materials including amphiphilic copolymers are being developed with the aim of forming nanomicellar structures in aqueous environments with lower CMC ( ). Various polymers such as Ɛ-polycaprolactone, polylactide, chitosan, and many others can be employed for preparing nanomicelles with suitable biocompatibility ( ). Nanomicelles exhibit several advantages as a delivery system i.e. , simple preparation, enhanced drug solubility, reduced toxicity, increased circulation time, and better tissue penetration and targetability ( , ). However, conventional nanomicelles have several disadvantages such as system instability over certain periods of time, sustained release for short periods of time, unsuitability for hydrophilic drugs, and the need for system optimization with each drug ( ). It is for this reason we sought to synthesize pentablock copolymers that are stable, less cytotoxic, and that can provide better entrapment for the hydrophobic paclitaxel drug.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Polyethylene glycol (PEG) of different molecular weights, l -lactide and ε-caprolactone monomers, stannous octoate, Triton X-100, and coumarin-6 were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis). A Cyquant™ cell proliferation assay kit was obtained from Invitrogen Life Technologies Inc. through Thermos Fisher Scientific. Paclitaxel was procured from ADOOQ Bioscience, Irvin, CA, USA. All other reagents utilized in this study were of analytical grade.
Methods
Pentablock copolymers were prepared in two steps. The first step involved the preparation of triblock and in the second step; the synthesized triblock was used to prepare pentablock.
Synthesis of Triblock Copolymers
Triblock copolymers composed of monomers of ε-caprolactone and poly(ethylene glycol) (PCL–PEG–PCL) were synthesized by a reaction involving ring-opening polymerization of ε-caprolactone, where PEG was utilized to commence the reaction and stannous octoate acting as a catalyst ( ). Before polymerization, a specific amount of PEG (4.0 g) was heated in a round bottom flask at 130°C until melting of the polymer, followed by addition of ε-caprolactone (8.0 g). The reactants were degassed under vacuum for 30 min at every stage while being heated at 130°C. The flask was then purged with nitrogen gas, followed by addition of stannous octoate (0.5 wt%). The reaction was carried out continuously for 24 h with a temperature maintained at 130°C. The resultant polymer was then dissolved in dichloromethane and precipitated by transferring dropwise into a tube containing cold diethyl ether. Precipitates were centrifuged at 1200 rpm and the sediments were vacuum-dried for 12 h to remove any residual solvents. The purified polymers were stored at − 20°C for future use ( , ).
Synthesis of Pentablock Copolymers
To prepare pentablock copolymer, the triblock copolymer (PCL1250-PEG1500-PCL1250) which was first synthesized (Table I ) was used. Briefly, the whole amount (3 g) of synthesized triblock copolymer was added into a round bottom flask and heated until melting point. A predetermined amount (0.8 g) of l -lactide (250 Da) was added into the flask containing the melted triblock copolymers. This step was then followed by degassing under vacuum for 30 min while heating at 130°C. The flask was then injected with nitrogen gas followed by addition of stannous octoate (0.5 wt%). The reaction was continued at 130°C for 24 h. The resultant pentablock copolymers were purified and stored in a similar manner as described earlier ( ). Table I Triblock and Pentablock Copolymers with Their Respective Chains and Molecular Weights Copolymer Chain MW (Da) Total MW (Da) Triblock 1 PCL–PEG–PCL 1250–1500–1250 4000 Pentablock 1 PLA–PCL–PEG–PCL–PLA 250–1250–1500–1250–250 4500
1H-NMR Analysis for Block Copolymers
To ascertain molecular structure of the formed block copolymers, samples of both triblock and pentablock copolymers were analyzed with a 1 H-NMR spectrometer. Spectra were acquired at room temperature using a Varian Inova 400 MHz spectrometer (Varian, Palo Alto, CA). Briefly, triblock and pentablock copolymers were dissolved in deuterated chloroform CDCl 3 and sample solutions were transferred into NMR glass tubes before being submitted to the NMR chamber one by one. Chemical shift values were reported in parts per million (ppm) ( ).
XRD Analysis of Pentablock and Triblock Copolymers
Physical states of synthesized pentablock and triblock copolymers were determined by XRD analysis. Triblock and pentablock copolymers were analyzed at room temperature by MiniFlex automated X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, The Woodlands, and Texas, USA) equipped with Ni-filtered Cu Kα radiation (30 kV and 15 mA). The diffraction angle (2 θ ) ranged from 5° to 45° with 1° per min of increment ( ).
Cytotoxicity Studies on Pentablock Copolymer
Human prostate tumor cells (PC-3) were cultured and maintained according to a protocol provided by ATCC. In brief, PC-3 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s F-12 medium containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), sodium bicarbonate, HEPES, streptomycin (100 mg/L), and penicillin (100 mg/L). The solution samples of PB copolymer (20 mg/mL) and Triton X-100 (0.005 mg/mL) were then transferred into 96-well plate containing already cultured PC-3 cells. The plate was incubated under humidified environment at 37°C and 5% CO 2 for 24 h. The wells were then washed three times with PBS followed by addition of Cyquant ™ cell proliferation assay reagent in each well and incubation for 4 h before being analyzed using fluorescent plate reader at 480 and 520 nm excitation and emission wavelengths, respectively ( ).
Viscosity Measurements
Rheological properties of 15 wt% aqueous solution of pentablock copolymers was determined with the help of Ostwald capillary viscometer at room temperature (25°C). The viscometer temperature was kept constant. Viscosity values were noted as average of triplicate measurements (kinematic viscosity, stoke (cSt) ± 1 standard deviation) and the values calculated by applying the Eq. 1 . $$ {\displaystyle \begin{array}{l}{\mathrm{Vis}}_{\left(\mathrm{liq}\right)}=\left({\mathrm{density}}_{\left(\mathrm{liq}\right)}\times {\mathrm{time}}_{\left(\mathrm{liq}\right)}\times {\mathrm{Vis}}_{\left(\mathrm{water}\right)}\right)\\ {}\kern2.639999em /\left({\mathrm{density}}_{\left(\mathrm{water}\right)}\times {\mathrm{time}}_{\left(\mathrm{water}\right)}\right)\end{array}} $$ (1)
Statistical Analysis of Pentablock Copolymer
In order to measure the cytotoxic effect of PB on the PC-3 cells, statistical analysis of the data obtained from the cytotoxicity assay was conducted using analysis of variance (ANOVA). Depending on the results of the ANOVA Student–Newman–Keuls comparison test, the evaluation data was applied to ascertain significance of differences. To make comparison on the significance of the difference between the means of two groups, Student’s t test p < 0.05 was considered as significant.
Preparation of Nanomicelles
Nanomicelles were prepared by hydration-dehydration method ( ). Briefly, a small amount (0.1% w / v ) of drug (paclitaxel) was dissolved in 1 mL of ethanol. Separately, 2% w / v of pentablock copolymer was dissolved in 1 mL ethanol. The two solutions were mixed together, homogenized, and evaporated in speed vacuum until a thin film was formed. Deionized (DI) water was then added to the resultant thin film followed by vortexing until complete dissolution was achieved ( ). Solution was then filtered using 0.22-μm filter membrane to obtain uniform sizes in a clear solution. It was further freeze-dried using glucose as a cryo-protectant (Figs. 1 and 2 ). Fig. 1 A schematic illustration showing the preparation procedure for PTX-loaded Pentablock nanomicellar formulation Fig. 2 Micellization process of pentablock copolymer with paclitaxel drug in aqueous environment
Freeze-Drying of Paclitaxel-Loaded Pentablock Nanomicelles
During the freeze-drying process, 1 mL of nanomicelle suspension was transferred to a 5 mL freeze-drying bottle. On the other hand, 0.2% w / v of glucose solution was prepared with deionized water ( ). A specific amount (1 mL) of glucose solution was then added to the nanomicelle suspension. The solution was homogenized before being submitted to a freeze-dryer (Labconco Corporation, Kansas City, MO, USA) for 24 h to obtain powdered NM which was then collected and stored at 4°C for future use ( , , ).
CMC Determination
The micellization mechanism of the pentablock copolymer was monitored by iodine as a hydrophobic probe. A standard solution of KI/I 2 was prepared by dissolving 0.5 g of iodine and 1 g of potassium iodide in 50 mL of DDI water. Pentablock solution with different concentrations was prepared. To each of the pentablock solution, 25 μL of KI/I 2 solution was added. Mixed solutions were then kept for 12 h at room temperature away from light. Values of UV absorbance for varying pentablock concentrations were measured with a UV–Vis spectrometer at 400 nm. The absorbance values were plotted against logarithm of PB concentration. CMC values correspondent to the concentration of PB copolymer with significant increase in absorbance was noted and registered. CMC of pentablock copolymer was calculated in weight percentage ( , ).
Nanomicelles Size and Zeta Potential Determination
Mean diameters and polydispersity indices (PDI) of both paclitaxel-loaded pentablock nanomicelle PTX-PBNM and the empty pentablock nanomicelles (PBNM) were determined by dynamic laser scattering (DLS) using a Zetasizer HS 3000 (Malvern Instruments, UK), with a detection angle of 90° at 25°C. The average values of 3 measurements in 12 runs were calculated for all samples. The peaks for zeta sizes, PDI and zeta potentials were recorded accordingly ( ).
H1-NMR for PTX-PBNM
PTX-PBNM and empty PBNM were dissolved in either CDCl 3 or D 2 O then subjected to H 1 -NMR analysis. An adequate amount of pure paclitaxel sample was dissolved in CDCl 3 before being analyzed. The spectra were acquired at room temperature using a Varian Inova 400 MHz spectrometer (Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Chemical shift values reported in parts per million (ppm) ( ). 1 H-NMR spectra were recorded from 12 to 0 ppm with a delay time of 4 s.
FTIR Spectroscopy Analysis for Pentablock Nanomicelles
To determine structural properties of nanomicelles, samples of synthesized pentablock nanomicelles were subjected to FTIR (Thermo Scientific Nicolet iZ10) with an ATR diamond and DTGS detector. Freeze-dried samples of paclitaxel-loaded pentablock nanomicelles, empty nanomicelles, and pure paclitaxel drug were analyzed at a scanning range of 650–4000 cm −1 .
Drug Encapsulation Efficiency
The amount of paclitaxel encapsulated in the nanomicelles was measured by UV–Vis. Briefly, a portion of the nanomicellar formulation was freeze-dried. Then, 2 mg of the dry formulation was dissolved in 1 mL dichloromethane (DCM) to break the nanomicelle structure followed by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 5 min and then eventually evaporation to remove DCM. Subsequently, dry content was dissolved in ethanol. The resultant ethanolic solution was then filtered through 0.22-mm nylon syringe filter. The filtrate was analyzed with UV spectrophotometry at 221 nm (Beckman, DU® 530, UV–Vis spectrophotometer, Life Science, CA, USA), for the determination of paclitaxel concentration. This process was performed in triplicate and a calibration curve with pure paclitaxel dissolved in ethanol at different concentrations produced an equation Y = 38.059 + 0.029 and R 2 = 0.9984 ( ). Percentage encapsulation efficiency (%EE) and drug loading were calculated according to Eqs. 2 and 3 . $$ {\displaystyle \begin{array}{l}\mathrm{Encapsulation}\ \mathrm{efficiency}\ \left(\%\right)=\frac{\mathrm{Total}\ \mathrm{drug}\ \left(\mathrm{mg}\right)-\mathrm{Free}\ \mathrm{drug}\ \left(\mathrm{mg}\right)}{\mathrm{Total}\ \mathrm{drug}\ \left(\mathrm{mg}\right)}\times 100\\ {}\end{array}} $$ (2) $$ \mathrm{Drug}\ \mathrm{loading}\ \left(\%\right)=\frac{\mathrm{Mass}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{PTX}\ \mathrm{in}\ \mathrm{nanomicelles}}{\mathrm{Mass}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{PTX}\ \mathrm{used}+\mathrm{Mass}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{PB}\ \mathrm{used}}\times 100 $$ (3)
Statistical Analysis on Pentablock Nanomicellar Formulation
Statistical analysis was conducted with full factorial design on JMP® software. Six formulations of pentablock nanomicelles with PB concentrations varying from 0.5 to 2.0% and paclitaxel concentrations varying from 0.05 to 0.2% were treated as independent variables, and their respective sizes, zeta potentials, percentage drug loading, and entrapment efficiencies were recorded as dependent variable factors. The polymer amount was the main determinant of nanomicelles size, showing the P value of 0.0435 with the intercept probability greater than [ t ] ˂ 0.0001 *. where p ˂ 0.05 is considered significant (Table II ). Table II Prediction Profiler and Parameter Estimates Showing the Effect of Drug and PB Copolymer Percentages on EE, LD, PDI, size, and Overall Desirability of the PTX-Loaded Pentablock Nanomicelles Effect summary Source LogWorth P value Polymer % (0.5, 2) 1.361 0.04351 Drug % (0.05, 0.2) 1.180 0.06614 Parameter estimate Term Estimate Std error t ratio Prob > I t I Intercept 19.442857 0.609659 31.89 < .0001* Polymer % (0.5, 2) 2.35 0.806503 2.91 0.0435* Drug % (0.05, 0.2) − 0.3 0.806503 − 0.37 0.7288
Transmission Electron Microscopy Analysis
Morphology of nanomicelles was determined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM; Philips CM12 STEM, Hillsboro, OR). Briefly, freeze-dried drug-loaded and empty nanomicellar formulations were separately dissolved in DI water to prepare aqueous solutions. The samples were further stained with 1% uranium salt. One drop of each solution containing nanomicelles was placed on a carbon-coated copper grid, and excess fluid was removed with a piece of filter paper. TEM images were then obtained after the samples on the grids were completely dried.
In Vitro Drug Release Studies
Aqueous solutions of paclitaxel-loaded pentablock, nanomicellar formulation samples (2% w / v ) were poured into a dialysis bag. Equal volume (1 mL) of Paclitaxel solution (0.1% w / v ) was prepared and placed in dialysis bag ( ). The bags were dipped in separate 15-mL tubes containing 10 mL buffer solution (PBS) each. Tubes were closed and placed in oscillating water bath at 37°C ( ). Buffer containing released drug was collected and completely replaced at different time intervals (3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 72, 120, 168, 240 h), respectively ( ). PTX content was detected by UV–Vis spectrophotometry as described above, and a calibration curve was generated to calculate the PTX concentrations.
Release Kinetics
To determine the release kinetics mechanisms, the obtained release data were submitted to various kinetic models, i.e. , Korsmeyer–Peppa ( M t / M ∞ = K t n ), Higuchi ( Q t = K t 1/2 ), Hixon–Crowell ( C 0 1/3 − C t 1/3 = K t ), first-order (Log C = Log C 0 − K t /2.303), and zero-order ( C = K 0 t ). The most appropriate model was identified based on R 2 values. Exponent of diffusion ( n ) of Korsmeyer–Peppa’s equation was applied to determine the release mechanism ( ).
Cell Uptake Studies for Coumarin-6-Loaded Pentablock Nanomicelles
Coumarin-6-loaded PBNM at different concentrations of 10 and 20 μg/mL and two solutions of coumarin-6 at 10 and 20 μg/mL were used in the uptake experiment. These solutions were transferred into four chamber slides with PC-3 cells grown for 72 h. Drug uptake was carried out at 37°C for 1 h. Then, the drug was removed before washing the slides three times with cold PBS to stop further uptake. The slides were further treated with 4% paraformaldehyde, washed three times with PBS, and then kept in mounted with cover slip and kept at 4°C. The slides were then observed using confocal laser scanning microscopy (LEICA® , microsystem, Wetzlar, Germany) with 488 and 536 nm excitation and emission wavelengths respectively for coumarin-6 detection ( , ).
Cell Proliferation Assay for PTX-PBNM
Cell proliferation assay analysis was conducted using a DNA-based Assay Kit called CyquantTM® Cell Proliferation (C7026) that contains fluorescent dye called CyquantTM® GR dye ( ). Briefly, PC-3 cells were cultured in a 96-well plate with Dulbecco’s F-12 medium as described previously. Cells were incubated in 96-well plate at 37°C and 5% CO 2 until confluence. The medium was then removed followed by addition of different medium solutions made of empty PBNM (10, 20 μg/mL), pure PTX (5, 10, 20, and 30 μg/mL) and PTX-loaded PBNM (5, 10, 20, and 30 μg/mL) in specific row of the plate. The plate was then incubated under humidified atmosphere at 37°C and 5% CO 2 for 24 h. The wells were then washed with PBS three times. Cyquant reagent solution was prepared and added in each well. The plate was then kept for 1 h at 4°C. The plate was submitted to the fluorescent plate reader where detection of cell proliferation is caused by fluorescence enhanced when the dye is bound to cellular nucleic acids (DNA).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Pentablock Synthesis and Analysis
1H-NMR Analysis for the Block Copolymers
1 H-NMR was applied to determine the structure of the synthesized PCL–PEG–PCL triblock copolymer and polylactic acid PLA-PCL-PEG-PCL-PLA pentablock copolymers ( ). Figure 3 depicts 1 H-NMR spectra of TB, and PB copolymers dissolved in deuterated chloroform. As described in the Fig. 3 , 1 H-NMR characteristic peaks of the copolymers are observed at 1.40, 1.65, 2.30, and 4.06 δppm which represent methylene protons of –(CH 2 )3–, –OCOCH 2 –, and –CH 2 OOC– of ε-caprolactone, respectively. A well-pronounced peak at 3.65 δppm was designated to methylene protons (–CH 2 CH 2 O–) indicating the presence of PEG in both TB and PB. Characteristic signals at 1.50 (–CH 3 ) and 5.17 (–CH–) δppm designate l -lactide blocks of pentablock. Deuterated chloroform (–CH) shows at deuterated chloroform (-CH) shows at 7.0 ppm. Fig. 3 H-NMR peaks showing protons for PB and TB copolymers
Viscosity Determination of Pentablock Copolymer
Rheological characteristics of pentablock copolymers were analyzed with Ostwald glass viscometer, and the result generated a value of 0.7883 cSt , which is close to the kinematic viscosity of water (0.8880 cSt). These results suggest that pentablock is suitable for preparation of IV nanoformulations ( ).
X-Ray Diffraction Analysis
Crystallinity and phase composition of triblock and pentablock copolymers were evaluated with XRD analysis (Fig. 4 ). There were no peaks corresponding to PEG in all block copolymer samples analyzed. All block copolymers provided more pronounced crystallinity peaks of PCL at two-theta (2 θ ) between 21° and 22° for both TB and PB. PLA showed crystallinity peaks between 2 θ of 22° and 24° for PB copolymer. XRD peaks for TB on the other hand did not show PLA blocks in the composition as it was not used during its synthesis. Therefore, only the PCL crystallinity peak was present in TB at 2 θ around 23°. Attachment of PLA blocks at the terminals of triblock copolymers showed a small reduction in the peak intensity indicating semi-crystalline structures of the triblock. Crystallinity of block copolymers can be determined by the arrangement of monomer blocks in its structure. Furthermore, recently published reports suggest that reduction in crystallinity significantly influences degradation of block polymer ( ). Fig. 4 The XRD peaks showing a comparison between TB and PB copolymers
Pentablock Cytotoxicity Analysis
Cytotoxicity assay was performed on the pentablock copolymers for a period of 48 h to evaluate the cytotoxic effects of both the pentablock copolymers. The test was conducted using cell proliferation assay (Cyquant) Kit. Triton X-100 was used as positive control. Pentablock copolymer did not demonstrate any cytotoxic effects (Fig. 5 ). Furthermore, the results observed in assay were again confirmed by statistical test (ANOVA) which revealed F greater than F-critical, depicting no significant deference between the pentablock copolymer and the empty nanomicelles. Results from this assay clearly suggest that pentablock copolymers were safe for both topical and intravascular application. Fig. 5 Cytotoxicity of the pentablock copolymer relative to positive control (Triton X-100)
Freeze-Drying of Pentablock Nanomicelles
Freeze-drying (also known as lyophilization) serves to ensure the preservation of physical and chemical characteristics of a product, i.e. , neat appearance, short time of reconstitution, adequate suspension, narrow size distribution of nanomicelles, and un-altered encapsulated drug property and activity. Furthermore, it ensures appropriate relative humidity and sufficient stability ( ). Cryoprotectants are a group of stabilizers that are added to nanosuspensions during freeze-drying process to prevent stresses caused by freezing and drying process. The recommended cryoprotectants used in pharmaceutical industry include the following: sucrose, lactose, glucose, trehalose, glycerol, mannitol, sorbitol, glycine, alanine, lysine, polyethylene glycol, dextran, and PVP ( ). These sugars tend to undergo vitrification at specific temperature ( T g′ ) ( ). The fixing of nanomicelles within a glassy matrix of cryoprotectant limits their aggregation and prevents mechanical stress of the formed ice crystals. Generally, freezing should occur below T g′ of frozen amorphous sample or below eutectic crystallization temperature ( T eu ), which denotes the crystallization temperature of soluble component as a mixture with ice, while in a crystalline state to obtain total sample solidification ( , ). In this study, glucose was use as cryoprotectant during the freeze-drying process to achieve the same effect ( ). The freeze-drying process lasted 24 h, and the paclitaxel-loaded pentablock nanomicelle (PTX-PBNM) powdered was obtained and stored at 4°C for future use ( , , ).
CMC Determination
CMC is a characteristic of in vitro and in vivo stability of nanomicelles. Low CMC values of pentablock copolymers cause high stability of nanomicelles in solutions upon dilution ( ). Nanomicellization mechanism of pentablock copolymer can be studied with Iodine as a hydrophobic probe for determination of critical micellar concentration of pentablock copolymer. Solubilized I 2 tends to partition in microenvironment of the pentablock copolymer which is amphiphilic. The results in the conversion of I 3 to I 2 cause excessive KI in the solution. CMC of pentablock copolymer was calculated to be 0.035 wt% (Fig. 6 ). This low CMC of pentablock suggests that the PB copolymer displays stability and ability to maintain integral structure even after dilution. Fig. 6 CMC graph showing percentage of pentablock concentration versus UV–Vis absorbance
Drug Encapsulation Efficiency
Percentage of drug encapsulation efficiency (EE) is a crucial factor for drug delivery carriers. The percentage EE of paclitaxel loaded in pentablock nanomicelles was calculated to be 99% while the drug loading was found to be approximately 11%. These results demonstrate that pentablock nanomicelles achieved high paclitaxel entrapment efficiency and adequate drug loading which might be attributed to the hydrophobic core formed by hydrophobic PCL and PLA. This property allows for efficient entrapment of the hydrophobic paclitaxel drug.
FTIR Analysis
FTIR spectra were obtained for freeze-dried samples of PTX-PBNM and empty NM as well as pure paclitaxel drug and PB samples. The result shows absorption band at 1700 cm −1 and multiple bands that range from 1000 to 1500 cm –1 , depicting the presence of ester bonds in pentablock copolymer (Fig. 7 ). C–O bands at 1100 cm −1 and O–H band stretching at 3300 cm −1 are for PEG and PLA and PCL. C–H stretching bands at 2940 and 2900 cm −1 indicate the presence of PCL blocks. Bands manifested in the region around 3000 cm −1 can be assigned to aromatic C–H stretching of PTX. The C–C ring stretching of PTX occurs in the region from 1652 to 1579 cm −1 . However, primary aliphatic amines in PTX are present in the region 3450–3250 cm −1 . Fig. 7 FTIR spectrum for the samples of PTX-PBNM compared to the empty PBNM and pure PTX drug
Size Distribution for Pentablock Nanomicelles
Solvent evaporation method was applied for the preparation of both PTX-PBNM and empty PBNM. These PBNM formulations were analyzed to determine the size, polydispersity index (PDI), and zeta potential (Table III ). Average mean diameters for empty PBNM and PTX-PBNM are11.96 ± 5.00 and 20.98 ± 5.00 nm, respectively (Fig. 8 a, c). Small negligible peaks appeared at regions beyond 1000 nm for PTX-PBNM, perhaps due to a small aggregation in the sample, but still the majority peak (around 98%) was 20.98 ± 5.00 nm (Fig. 8 c). Average PDI for PTX-PBNM and empty PBNM are 0.049 ± 0.005 and 0.042 ± 0.005, respectively. PDI values suggest that the nanomicelles exhibit uniform particle size distribution with less aggregation. Both unloaded and drug-loaded nanomicelles display neutral zeta potential (around 0 ± 2.5 mV) as shown in Fig. 8 b, d. This makes it possible for the pentablock nanomicelles to be an excellent candidate for intravenous application since it is unlikely to produce interactions with blood components ( , ). Table III Zeta Analysis Results Showing the Sizes, Zeta Potentials, and PDI of Both the Empty and the Paclitaxel-Loaded Pentablock Nanomicelles Sample Size (nm) Zeta potential (mV) PDI PTX-PBNM 20.98 ± 5.00 0 ± 2.5 0.049 ± 0.005 Empty PBNM 11.96 ± 5.00 0 ± 2.5 0.042 ± 0.005 Fig. 8 Comparison between two pentablock nanomicelles in terms of size and zeta potential, where a and b denote the respective size and zeta potential distribution curves for the empty PBNM. c , d The size and zeta potential curves for PTX-loaded PBNM
1H-NMR Analysis for Pentablock Nanomicelle Formulation
H-NMR analysis was conducted in order to understand the structure and polymerization of PTX drug and PB copolymer during NM formation. Both CDCl 3 and D 2 O were applied as solvents to analyze samples. PTX-PBNM and empty PBNM were dissolved in D 2 O while free PTX was dissolved in CDCl 3 due to its hydrophobicity (Fig. 9 ). Although known to be insoluble in water, the solubility in D 2 O was significantly improved in the presence of PB copolymer as a result of nanomicellization. Samples containing PB copolymer and paclitaxel in CDCI 3 showed sharp peaks representing various protons of PEG, PCL, PLA, and paclitaxel. Interestingly, a sample containing PB copolymer and paclitaxel in D 2 O was devoid of paclitaxel signal suggesting that paclitaxel is inside the nanomicellar core. Broad peaks observed at 3.75 and 2.30 δppm were attributed to the protons of PEG (–CH 2 –CH 2 –) and PCL (–OCO–CH 2 –), respectively. Proton peaks for PLA and PTX were absent. NMR analysis carried out in CDCl 3 exhibited sharp peaks for all the protons indicating free movement of polymer chains and paclitaxel in organic solvent. However, NMR spectra carried out in D 2 O exhibited very few broad peaks representing PEG and PCL blocks only and no paclitaxel or PLA. These results suggest that paclitaxel was located in the core of nanomicelle along with PLA blocks, hence very weak NMR signals for PCL in D 2 O. This could as well be due to their restricted molecular movement in the structure. Strong peak of PEG in D 2 O indicates the location of PEG in outer surface of nanomicelles. Results from this study suggest that PBNM are solubilized in water via micellization process where core is composed of PCL–PLA and shell is of PEG. Fig. 9 H-NMR peaks of PTX-PBNM in both CDCl 3 and D 2 O, free PTX in CDCl 3 , and empty PBNM in D 2 O
Transmission Electron Microscopy Analysis
Morphology of pentablock nanomicelles was investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). This analysis showed that the nanomicelles were spherical, homogenous, and did not produce aggregates (Fig. 10 ). In regard to size, paclitaxel-loaded pentablock nanomicelles had an average of 20 ± 2.5 nm and the empty pentablock nanomicelles were around 10 ± 2.0 nm. Unloaded (empty PBNM) and PTX-PBNM did not differ in terms of morphology, with both having uniform appearance. The particle sizes visualized in the TEM images corroborated with the sizes obtained by DLS which already depicted the PTX-PBNM and the empty PBNM sizes as 20.98 ± 5.00 and 11.96 ± 5.00 nm, respectively. Fig. 10 TEM images of a paclitaxel-loaded pentablock nanomicellar formulation and b empty PBNM
In Vitro Drug Release Studies
In vitro release profile of paclitaxel from pentablock nanomicelles was investigated at a physiological pH of 7.4 at 37°C. A substantial quantity of pure PTX (0.1% w / v ) dissolved in 1 mL of ethanol/water (0.5:9.5) was used as a control. Equal amounts of freeze-dried PTX-loaded PBNM formulations with different PB copolymer concentrations (0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2%) were also dissolved in DI water under the same condition. PTX release from hydroethanolic solution was rapid in comparison to PTX in PBNM, with almost 100% drug release occurring within 72 h. Release trend of paclitaxel from the pentablock nanomicelles was slow with no significant burst effect. Results suggest a sustained release of the PTX drug from the pentablock nanomicelles (PTX-PBNM) over a period of 200 h (Fig. 11 ). A small amount ethanol (5% w / v ) was added to overcome the hydrophobicity of PTX resulting in a homogenized drug solution. All the four PTX-PBNM formulations could be dissolved in DI water easily. The presence of PEG in the pentablock structure affords interactions with aqueous environment, resulting in a clear homogenized solution. There were variations in the release trend among the PTX-PBNM formulations. At a time point of 172 h, the formulation containing 0.5% PB released around 95% of the drug followed by 80, 50, and 40% for formulations containing 1% PB, 1.5% PB, and 2% PB, respectively. This trend shows that the more the polymer in the formulation, the longer it takes for the nanomicelles to release the drug (Fig. 11 ). This may be attributed to the thick wall which forms with higher polymer concentrations. Fig. 11 Cumulative drug release from PTX-loaded nanomicelles in PBS (pH 7.4), at 37 ± 0.5°C. Each point represents the mean value of three different experiments ± standard deviation
Release Kinetics
The data obtained from In vitro release profile were applied to Higuchi, Korsmeyer–Peppa, Hixson–Crowell, as well as zero- and first-order models to determine the kinetics of paclitaxel release. Our best fit model was the Korsmeyer–Peppa’s based on average R 2 value (0.995). The diffusion exponent, n value, ranged from 0.267 to 0.372 for the PB copolymer samples tested. The n values below 0.43 depict diffusion dependent mechanism of paclitaxel release ( ).
In Vitro Cell Uptake Studies
Studies were conducted in order to analyze nanomicelle uptake by PC-3 prostate cancer cells. In this study, PTX was replaced with coumarin-6 due to its ability to emit fluorescence compared to the non-fluorescent paclitaxel. Cell monolayers were incubated in chamber slides with coumarin-6 loaded pentablock nanomicelles or coumarin-6 only. Coumarin-6 loaded nanomicelles were prepared in the same manner as described previously. Cell uptake of nanomicelles was monitored by fluorescent confocal microscopy. Images were taken after incubation of confluence PC-3 cells with 0.25 mg/mL coumarin-6 loaded nanomicelles formulation and naked coumarin-6 for 48 h at 37°C (Fig. 12 a, b). In Fig. 12 b, green coumarin-6 was observed with high intensity all over the cytoplasmic region excluding the nucleus (DAPI stained). This indicates that nanomicelles are internalized by PC-3 cells. A large amount of coumarin-6 was taken inside the cells with pentablock nanomicelle formulation compared to less intensity of coumarin-6 concentration observed with naked coumarin-6 (Fig. 12 a). Therefore, it can be concluded that fluorescent coumarin-6 loaded nanomicelles are in the intracellular space. There was a significant ( p < 0.05) intracellular accumulation of coumarin-6 loaded nanomicelles when compared to free coumarin-6. This observation suggests that high accumulation of coumarin-6-PBNM may be due to endocytosis or pinocytosis that may have allowed coumarin-6 loaded pentablock nanomicelles to generate higher uptake in comparison to free coumarin-6. Fig. 12 Confocal imaging depicts a comparison between a cell uptake of naked coumarin-6 (10 μg) and b cell uptake of coumarin-6 loaded in PBNM (10 μg) in PC-3 cells
Cell Proliferation Assay of PTX-PBNM
Cytotoxicity of paclitaxel-loaded pentablock nanomicelles formulation was evaluated in PC-3 cell lines using a Cyquant™ cell proliferation assay. It works under a principle of interactions of fluorescence emitted by DNA with a special dye in the assay. Percentage of cell growth inhibition was measured by fluorescence caused by DNA of surviving cells after 48 h incubation. Paclitaxel concentration in the formulations was adjusted to the same as that of free drug. PTX-PBNM formulation showed significant cytotoxic effect in PC-3 cells as the free drug after 48 h incubation ( p < 0.05) as shown in Fig. 13 . It is worth noting that at 48 h, the drug is not completely released from the PTX-PBNM (only 30–40%was released) as earlier depicted by the release profile. Nanomicelle formulation showed a significant difference in reduction of cell proliferation than the free drug ( p < 0.05). One of the reasons for this difference may be due to the multi-drug resistance effect on free drug (efflux) through p -glycoprotein which may have resulted in lower intracellular concentration of paclitaxel drug. Large amount of PTX within the PTX-PBNM was delivered into PC-3 cells by endocytosis, causing cytotoxic effect ( ). Direct impact of efflux mechanism on paclitaxel inside the cells may have been reduced by loading drug into the core of the PTX-PBNM. Empty nanomicelles (without drug), showed no cytotoxicity in PC-3 cells. These results demonstrate that incorporation of drug in pentablock nanomicelles strongly enhanced the cytotoxic effect, probably due to more drug molecules ferried into the cells by nanomicelles. Furthermore, sustained drug release within the cell and reduction of efflux may have played a great role on effectiveness of the delivery system. Fig. 13 Cell proliferation assay fluorescence graph showing: control (cells only), empty PBNM, and pure PTX at concentrations of 5, 10, 20, and 30 μg/mL respectively and PTX-PBNM at 5, 10, 20, and 30 μg/mL, respectively
CONCLUSIONS
From the results obtained in this study, it can be concluded that synthesized pentablock copolymers are safe for the cellular delivery. Pentablock copolymers can be utilized for preparation of drug-loaded nanomicelles of adequate sizes (20.98 ± 5.00 nm). This formulation can be ideal for delivering drugs into specific cells if conjugated with a targeting moiety. Viscosity of the formulation is similar to that of water. Hence, it is suitable for application through IV route. Cell analysis displayed an excellent uptake profile demonstrating that the nanomicelles facilitated the entry of more drug molecules into the cells. Release studies showed long-term release, which can be significant in cancer chemotherapy. Cell proliferation assay showed a high effectiveness of this drug delivery system. In general, this method can be directed to delivery of hydrophobic anticancer drugs like paclitaxel in cancer therapy. This strategy may reduce side effects and diminish frequency and drug dosage.