INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, different methods are employed to deliver the effective and safe therapeutic agents to human cancer cells. Targeting the right material is important when designing such drug delivery systems [ ]. For this purpose, nanoparticles and micelles are utilized for the investigation of drug delivery [ ]. Pharmaceutical nanotechnology relates to the use of nanoscale agents, such as active and biocompatible micellar systems, nanoparticles, and conjugates [ ]. Poly (lactic acid) (PLA) is the hydrophobic core of micelles, which provides an environment for the integration of hydrophobic drugs, and poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG) makes up their hydrophilic outer shells that create a stable relationship between PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles and the external environment [ ]. The previous reports indicated that PLA-PEG-PLA can be introduced as a novel drug delivery carrier due to its good stability, high encapsulation efficiency, good release profile, biodegradability, and biocompatibility [ , , , ]. Lantibiotics are a class of bacteriocins that have lanthionine and methyl-lanthionine amino acids in their structures. A subset of lantibiotics is stretched and flexible with positively charged peptides like nisin, which create some pores in the membranes of the target bacterial species [ ]. Nisin is a water-soluble poly-cyclic peptide with 34 amino acids produced by gram-positive bacteria Lactococcus lactis , which can be obtained from the culture medium. This peptide has an amphipathic structure with a charge of + 4. The N-terminal of the peptide is more hydrophobic than its C-terminal. Nisin is a non-toxic peptide that is quickly inactivated by the digestive enzymes. For this reason, in 1969, Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and World Health Organization (WHO) allowed its use as a preservative in food industry. In recent years, many researches have been done on the various biological activities and therapeutic effects of nisin and some studies have provided scientific evidence on its anti-cancer effects [ , , ].
Gastrointestinal cancers associated with hereditary and environmental factors have high worldwide prevalence [ , , , ]. Almost 50% of the gastrointestinal cancers are related to gastric cancer [ ], which is the second cause of death from cancer in the world [ , ]. Today, gastric cancer treatment remains a major challenge [ , ]. Esophageal cancer is another common cancer in the world with a high offensive power [ ]. Despite some progress in the treatment, esophageal cancer has still remained as a challenge for researchers [ , , , ]. In many parts of the world, liver cancer has high prevalence, while its treatment currently has been associated with the relatively low effects of the related drugs [ , , ]. Leukemia is a progressive disease and malignant hematopoietic tissues in the body like K562 human chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cell line [ , ].
Due to the numerous biological effects of nisin and lack of a comprehensive study on its functional mechanism in cancer cell lines, we tried to formulate a biocompatible PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles in the present work. After loading nisin onto the nanoparticles, their physical characteristics were determined. The cytotoxic effects of free nisin and the nisin-loaded nanoparticles on AGS, KYSE-30, HepG2, and K562 cancer cell lines were evaluated and compared by MTT and Neutral Red (NR) uptake assays. Also, their cytotoxic effects on the Vero cell line were assessed to determine their non-specific responses on non-tumor cell lines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
L-lactic acid, antimony trioxide (Sb 2 O 3 ), dichloromethane (DCM), toluene, polyethylene glycol (PEG Mn = 2000), acetic acid, ethanol, comassie brilliant blue, ethyl acetate, nisin, Neutral Red, Acridine Orange, MTT, and dimethyl sulfoxide were purchased from Merck Co (Germany). Fluorescein isothiocyanate, stannous octoate, and Drabkin’s Reagent were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co (USA). RPMI-1640, fetal bovine serum, and trypsin-EDTA were purchased from Gibco Co (UK). All cancer cell lines including human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (KYSE-30), human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2), human gastric carcinoma (AGS), K562, and Vero cell line (kidney epithelial cells of the normal adult African green monkey) were provided from Pasteur Institute of Iran Cell Bank (Tehran, Iran). Before use, all medium and reagents were prepared.
Methods
Preparation of PLA-PEG-PLA Copolymer
PLA-PEG-PLA copolymer was synthesized by respectively using 45.5% PLA, 9% PEG, and 45.5% PLA with a molecular weight of 88,000 through the following procedure:
First, PEG was dried under vacuum at 40°C overnight. Then, toluene was dried and stored together with metal sodium in a bottle. Finally, antimony trioxide (Sb 2 O 3 ) was utilized to catalyze L-lactide synthesis using L-lactic acid. The two steps of oligomerization at 180–200°C and depolymerization and dimerization at 250°C were followed in this process. L-lactide recrystallization from ethyl acetate was done three times. Then, the product was dried under vacuum at 40°C overnight (Fig. 1 ). Afterwards, 6.5 g of the purified L-lactide was poured into a 100 mL round-bottom flask containing 1 g of pre-dried PEG 2000 and protected by nitrogen. 0.15% ( w/w ) of L-lactide and stannous octoate dissolved in dry toluene was added to the flask. Then, the mixture was heated to 130°C for 12 h (Fig. 1 ). The final products were repeatedly dissolved into dichloromethane to purify them. Subsequently, they were precipitated by the addition of cold ethanol to later examine their structures. Ultimately, the segregated polymers were dried under vacuum at 40°C for 24 h [ ]. Fig. 1 Synthesis of L-lactide and PLA-PEG2000-PLA triblock copolymers
PLA-PEG-PLA Nanoparticle Formation
PLA-PEG-PLA copolymer (20 mg) was dissolved in dimethylformamide (DMF) (1 mL), and the solution was added slowly into 20 mL stirring deionized water. After the polymer addition, the water turned into cloudy, and the aqueous emulsion was stirred for 4 h. Dialysis method was used to eliminate DMF. Briefly, the micellar solution was transferred into a dialysis bag and dialyzed in a water bath. The bath water was changed at certain intervals. Required concentrations were ready by dilution of the stock solutions [ ].
Preparation of Nisin-Loaded PLA-PEG-PLA Nanoparticles
Nisin is an amphipathic polypeptide with a charge of + 4 at physiological pH due to having lysine amino acid. Thus, in acidic conditions (pH < 7.4), it has the most activity and highest solubility. For this reason, to load nisin onto the nanoparticles, it was dissolved in HCl (0.02 N) to prepare 10 mg/mL of its solution. 1 mL of nisin solution was added to 10 mL of PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticle solution (100 mg/mL). The two solutions were mixed and stirred for 2 h. The loaded nanoparticles were gained through an ultrafiltration technique (Amicon, Ultracel-100 K, 100-kDa cutoff). Then, the nisin-loaded nanoparticles were washed with DMF and centrifuged at 8000× g rpm at 4°C for 10 min to remove the untreated polymeric nanoparticles. After that, the nanoparticles were thoroughly washed with deionized water to remove any unreacted nisin.
Nanoparticle Characterization
Morphology of the PLA-PEG-PLA Nanoparticles
The surface morphology of the polymeric nanoparticles, such as aggregation phenomenon and shape, were studied via scanning electron microscopy (SEM). To prepare the samples for SEM, the nanoparticle suspensions were mounted on aluminum stabs and plating-coated under vacuum. Then, the samples of the nanoparticle suspensions were examined through SEM (LEO 1430 VP, UK).
Size Determination of the Nanoparticles by Dynamic Light Scattering
Before measurement, 0.1 mg/L and 0.01 g/L of PLA-PEG-PLA and the nisin-loaded nanoparticles were dissolved in DMF and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) after sonication, respectively. To perform a dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurement, the size distributions and average sizes of the nanoparticles and the nisin-loaded nanoparticles were determined at a wavelength of 633 nm at 25°C by a light scattering spectrometer (Zetasizer 3000 HS, Malvern Instruments, UK).
Zeta Potential Measurements
To assess the colloidal stability, the surface charges of the PLA-PEG-PLA and nisin-loaded nanoparticles were determined by zeta potential analyzer (Malvern Instruments, UK). Before the analysis, 1.5 mg/mL of each type of the nanoparticles was dispersed in PBS at a pH of 7.4. The dispersion was sonicated in a bath-type ultrasonicator for 1 min.
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy Analysis (FTIR)
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR; RXI, Perkin Elmer, UK) was applied to analyze PLA-PEG-PLA powder, nisin powder, and the powder of nisin-loaded PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles. The specimens were blended with dry KBr at a ratio of 2% ( w / w ). Then, KBr discs were produced under 10,000 psi hydraulic pressure. FTIR spectra were recorded on each KBr disc at 4 mm/s with a resolution of 2 cm over a wavenumber range of 400–4000 cm −1 . The experiment was repeated three times for each sample [ ].
Loading Efficiency of the Nanoparticles
The dispersions of the nisin-loaded nanoparticles were centrifuged at 11,000× g through a 100-kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) ultrafiltration at 25°C for 10 min. The protein amount in the supernatant was determined by Bradford protein assay [ , ]. The experiment was repeated three times. The nisin-loading efficiency was calculated using the following equation: $$ \mathrm{Loading}\ \mathrm{Efficiency}=\frac{\mathrm{Nisin}\ \mathrm{total}-\mathrm{Nisin}\ \mathrm{supernatant}}{\mathrm{Nisin}\ \mathrm{total}} $$
Evaluation Release of Nisin from the PLA-PEG-PLA Nanoparticles
The three tubes were filled with 5 mL of PBS solution (1 mg/mL) at the pH values of 4, 7.4, and 8.5 (release media) for the experiment. A 12-kDa MWCO membrane was employed for nisin to be able to pass through its pores. The membrane was at the interface between the solution containing the nisin-loaded nanoparticles (upper part of the tube) and the release media of PBS (lower part of the tube). The release media were constantly stirred at 300 rpm by a magnetic stirring bar to prohibit the formation of an unstirred water layer between the outer solution and the membrane. The released amount of nisin from the nanoparticles was determined by sampling the outer solution at the periodic intervals of 0, 15, 30, 60, 120, 240, 300, 360, 420, 520, 560, 600, 700, 800, 900, and 1000 min at 37°C [ , ].
Hemolysis Evaluation of Nanoparticles
A common test for assessing the biocompatibility of nanoparticles is to determine their hemolytic properties. In the hemolysis assay, Drabkin’s Reagents are employed to convert the released hemoglobin by damaged cells into red-colored cyanmethemoglobin. Any forms of hemoglobin can be involved in a reaction with Drabkin’s solution, except for sulfhemoglobin, which is a pigment with a very low concentration normally appearing in the blood. The mentioned solution is prepared by mixing its dry reagent with a surfactant. This is done by oxidizing hemoglobin and its derivatives (except for sulfhemoglobin) into methemoglobin in the presence of alkaline potassium ferricyanide. Cyanmethemoglobin, which has maximum absorption at 540 nm, is formed through the reaction between potassium cyanide and methemoglobin.
In this assay, the nanoparticle samples (1 mL) were added to a 2% erythrocyte suspension (1 mL) at the concentrations of 2.5, 5, 10, and 20 mg/mL. Distilled water and PBS were considered as the positive and negative controls, respectively. The reaction was allowed to occur at 25°C and continue for 3 h. Then, the centrifugation of erythrocyte suspension at 2000 rpm was followed for 10 min to remove the undamaged red blood cells (RBCs) and the nanoparticles. To detect the supernatant of erythrocyte suspension containing cyanmethemoglobin at 540 nm and thus specify the hemolytic ratio, a Sinco UV/Vis spectrophotometer (Model S4100, Korea) was applied. The standard non-hematotoxicity grade was obtained since the hemolytic percentage was lower than 5%. The hemolysis percentage was measured via the following equation [ , , ]: $$ \mathrm{Hemolysis}\ \mathrm{Ratio}=\frac{\ \mathrm{Optical}\ \mathrm{Density}\ \mathrm{supernatant}-\mathrm{Optical}\ \mathrm{Density}\ \mathrm{Negative}\ \mathrm{Control}}{\mathrm{Optical}\ \mathrm{Density}\ \mathrm{Positive}\ \mathrm{Control}-\mathrm{Optical}\ \mathrm{Density}\ \mathrm{Negative}\ \mathrm{Control}}\times 100 $$
The data were totally obtained from the three experiments and expressed as mean ± SD (SD = standard deviation) ( n = 3).
Evaluation of Nanoparticles’ Ability to Entrance in Cells
To detect the uptake and internalization of PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles into the cancer cell lines, the nanoparticles were labeled with FITC. The FITC-loaded nanoparticles were prepared by direct dissolution method [ ]. Briefly, FITC together with an appropriate amount of the nanoparticle was dissolved in PBS, and after 30 min of sonication, the solution was maintained at room temperature for further 30 min. The unloaded FITC was removed by centrifugation and washed twice in PBS. After 4 h of treatment, the outer medium of the cells labeled with FITC nanoparticles were removed, the cells were washed in PBS, fixed with 150 mL of a fixation solution (0.2% glutaraldehyde and 2% formaldehyde in PBS) for 10 min, and then evaluated via fluorescence microscopy. The cells treated with no FITC-loaded nanoparticles were considered as the control group.
Cell Culture and Treatment
The cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 unit/mL of penicillin, and 100 μg/mL of streptomycin. Then, they were incubated under an atmosphere of 5% CO 2 and 95% air at 37°C. They were removed by a solution of 0.25 ( w / v ) trypsin and 0.02 ( w / v ) ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid after 1 week. To investigate the cytotoxicity impacts of the nanoparticles, nisin and nisin-loaded nanoparticles, they were placed in 96-well culture plates at a density of 1 × 10 4 cells per well and incubated for 24 h. After removing the medium (200 μL), the cells were treated with a FBS-free medium at 0, 15, 30, 40, 60, 75, 150, 250, 350, and 450 μM concentrations of the free nisin and nisin-loaded nanoparticles. It should be noted that nisin concentrations in the nisin-loaded nanoparticles were considered to be equal to the free nisin concentrations. 0, 2.5, 5, 10 and 20 mg/mL of the nanoparticle concentrations were affected in each cell line. After the intervals of 24, 48, and 72 h, the cell viability was determined via the NR uptake and MTT assays. The wells not treated with the nanoparticles, free nisin, and nisin-loaded nanoparticles were used as the control groups. The experiments were done in triplicate and the averages of the results were reported as mean ± SD ( n = 3). The statistical significance of the results was evaluated by Student’s t test. P < 0.05 was considered significant.
MTT Assay
After removing the medium and 4 h before the end of each treatment period, 20 μL of 2.5 mg/mL MTT and 180 μL of FBS-free medium were added to each well. To complete the incubation time, the plates were incubated for further 4 h. Then, after removing the supernatants, 200 μL of DMSO was added to each well. The plates were shaken for 10 min. The absorbance of each well was measured at 570 nm on an ELISA plate reader (ELX808 Biotek, USA). The wells without any cells were used as blanks [ , , , ]. The assay was repeated three times and the average of the results was expressed as mean ± SD ( n = 3).
Neutral Red Uptake Assay
This method was used to assess the number of live cells in the culture medium. It was based on the ability of living cells to accumulate NR within their lysosomes. To prepare an NR stock solution of 0.05%, 1 g of NR was added to 200 mL of PBS and filtered through a 0.45-μm filter. For preparing the fixative solution, 1 mL of glacial acetic acid was added to 99 mL of 50% ethanol solution. Three hours before finishing each incubation time (24, 48, and 72 h), the medium was removed from each well and 180 μL of FBS-free medium and 20 μL of NR 0.05% stock solution were immediately added to each well to be subsequently incubated for 3 h. After completing the incubation time, the supernatants were removed and each well was washed twice with PBS at 37°C. To elute the NR of the cells into the solution and fix them, 150 μL of the fixative solution was added to each well. The plates were shaken for 5 min and the absorbance measurement of each well on the plate reader was done at 540 nm [ , ]. The assay was repeated three times and the average of the results was expressed as mean ± SD ( n = 3).
Ethidium Bromide/Acridine Orange Staining for Apoptotic Cells
Many biological studies require apoptosis analysis. However, the current methods of measuring apoptosis have many limitations, including unwanted cellular damage, inability to gather only apoptotic and necrotic cells, inability to measure cell life-span, and misdiagnosis. To overcome these problems, we applied Ethidium Bromide/Acridine Orange (EB/AO) staining. Cancer cells were cultured at a density of 1 × 10 3 cells per well in 96-well plates and incubated for 24 h to be then treated with different concentrations of free nisin and nisin-loaded nanoparticles within a range of IC50 values obtained for each cell line. The plates were centrifuged at 1000 rpm at 4°C for 5 min. 10 µL of EB/AO dye mix (100 μg/mL of EB and 100 μg/mL of AO) was prepared in PBS and then added to each well. The cells were viewed and counted using an inverted fluorescence microscope (IX71, Olympus, Japan). The green uptaking AO fluorescence determined the live cells. The live and dead apoptotic cells associated with dense chromatin fractions were stained with AO and EB, respectively, so as to create apoptotic bodies. The necrotic cells were uniformly labeled with EB [ , , ]. The tests were performed three times and at least 100 cells were counted each time. The results were reported as mean ± SD ( n = 3).
Statistical Analysis
The concentration value for 50% inhibition of cell growth (IC50) was calculated using GraphPad Prism software. All the experiments were repeated at least three times and measured at least in triplicate. The results were expressed as mean ± SD. Analysis of the statistical significance was done by Student’s t test. The differences between the experimental groups were regarded to be significant at a P value of less than 0.05 ( P < 0.0 5).
RESULTS
Microscopic Image Evaluation
Figure 2 displays the SEM images of PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles (Fig. 2 a) and nisin-loaded nanoparticles (Fig. 2 b). The images portray the formation of spherical micelles with distinct and smooth surfaces of 50–100 and 50–250 nm particle sizes for the nanoparticle and nisin-loaded nanoparticles, respectively. As shown by the results, the polymeric nanoparticles size is enhanced after nisin loading. As a big molecule, nisin could increase the diameters when immobilized on the surfaces of the polymeric nanoparticles and subsequently decrease their surface smoothness (Fig. 2 b). The nisin-loaded nanoparticles had a good size for circulating in the blood stream and passive targeting for a long time. Fig. 2 a SEM image of PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles; b SEM image of the nisin-loaded PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles
Size Distribution of Nanoparticles
The DLS results showed the average size of 100 and 200 nm for PLA-PEG-PLA and nisin-loaded nanoparticles, respectively.
Zeta Potential Measurements
Zeta potential measurements revealed that PLA-PEG-PLA and nisin-loaded nanoparticles had the surface charges of − 28.90 and − 22.63 mV, respectively. The lower zeta potential of PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles could be related to PEG arrangement on the nanoparticle surface.
Evaluation of Released Nisin from the Nanoparticles and Loading Efficiency
The release of an encapsulated protein from the particles includes the swelling and weakening of the nanoparticle compact structure. The protein and peptide molecules were entrapped at sub-layers of the particles under hydrolytic activities then spread and finally separated from the particle structure.
Nisin cumulative releases from the nanocapsules at the pH values of 4, 7.4, and 8.5 are exhibited in Fig. 3 . The lower values of pH demonstrated faster releases of nisin (pH 4 > 7.4 > 8.5). The cumulative release of nisin was 95% at a pH of 4 within 240 min, while no significant augmentation was observed at a later time. At the pH values of 7.4 and 8.5, nisin releases reached a balance within 420 and 600 min and its cumulative releases were 90 and 75%, respectively. Nearly 85% of nisin molecules were transitionally released 240, 420, and 600 min after initiation. This amount was found to be much higher than those of the small drug molecules (almost 30%) released from other polymeric nanoparticles at the early stages [ ]. Assessment of the loading efficiency (85–90%) was done through the equation mentioned in “Loading Efficiency of the Nanoparticles” section. Fig. 3 Release diagram of nisin from the nanoparticles at different pH and times
FTIR Evaluation
To evaluate the interaction of the various ingredients of the nanoparticles to form the polymeric and nisin-loaded nanoparticles, a study was done on the electrolyte interactions (Fig. 4 ). In the polymeric nanoparticles structure (Fig. 4 a), the bands presented at around 2927 and 2890 cm −1 were related to the vibrations of C-H bond. C=O bond stretching vibration could be seen within the area of 1790 cm −1 . The bands observed within the regions of 1350–1450 and 1090–1200 cm −1 were related to C-H and C-O bending vibrations, respectively, which showed the formation of PLA-PEG-PLA polymeric nanoparticles. Fig. 4 FTIR spectra of: a PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles; b nisin-loaded PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles
In the nisin-loaded nanoparticle structure (Fig. 4 b), the absorptions of the bonds in 2999 and 2949 cm −1 were related to the vibrations of C-H, which was dislocated compared to the polymeric nanoparticles structure. The absorption of the bond observed in 1758 cm −1 was related to the stretching vibration of the bond of C=O, which had been moved to a lower frequency region. The bond stretching vibration of amide carbonyl in nisin at about 1620 cm −1 was shifted to a lower frequency region. This shift confirmed the link between nisin and the nanoparticles. The absorption bond in the regions of 1450 and 1500 cm −1 were related to C-N and N-H bonds in nisin, respectively. C-O vibrations were seen to be slightly displaced in comparison with the polymeric nanoparticles spectra. C=O bond of the polymeric nanoparticle in the nisin-loaded nanoparticles was weaker. The absorption of the bond in 3400 cm −1 was related to O-H and N-H stretching vibrations, which were much smaller than those of nisin. This indicated the possibility of these functional groups of nisin bonding to C=O of the polymeric nanoparticles. The physicochemical interactions could corroborate the evidence of nisin presence inside PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles.
Evaluation of Hemolysis
As shown in Fig. 5 , PLA-PEG-PLA polymeric nanoparticles at a concentration range of 2.5–20 mg/mL demonstrated a hemolysis percentage of less than 5%, which was similar to that of the negative control. Significant differences ( P < 0.05) were observed between all our polymeric nanoparticles solutions as compared to the positive control, which was set as 100% hemolysis. Hence, a negligible hemolysis capacity of PLA-PEG-PLA co-polymeric nanoparticles was achieved and the nanoparticles were thus deemed as biocompatible. Fig. 5 a Hemolytic diagram of PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticle. b Macroscopic image of hemolysis test for PLA-PEG-PLA polymeric nanoparticles: A, negative control; B, 2.5 mg/mL; C, 5 mg/mL; D, 10 mg/mL; E, 20 mg/mL; F, positive control
Ability of Entrance PLA-PEG-PLA Nanoparticle into Cells
The fluorescence microscopy images of the cells treated with FITC-loaded nanoparticles revealed that the nanoparticles was able to enter the AGS, KYSE-30, HepG2, and K562 cell lines and deliver intracellular FITC. The control cells treated with non-labeled nanoparticles did not display any fluorescence. Figure 6 a–d are illustrations of the AGS, KYSE-30, HepG2, and K562 cell lines treated with FITC-loaded nanoparticles, respectively. Fig. 6 The fluorescence microscopy images of cell lines treated with nanoparticle-FITC: a AGS; b KYSE-30; c HepG2; d K562
Evaluation of Cytotoxic Effect
The treatments induced in the cancer cell lines by the nanoparticles were indicative that these nanoparticles did not show any cytotoxic effect as shown in Fig. 7 a, which was a sign of the polymer biocompatibility as one of the main essential characteristics for its use as a vector. The results of the viability assays of nisin and nisin-loaded nanoparticles indicated that nisin had a cytotoxic effect on the cancer cell lines after 24, 48, and 72 h, while this effect was dependent on time and concentration (Fig. 7 b–e). Nisin had the greatest cytotoxic effect on AGS cell line. The IC50 values of the free nisin and nisin-loaded nanoparticles for the cancer cell lines are listed in Table I . These values indicated that the nisin-loaded nanoparticles had a higher cytotoxic effect on the cell lines compared to the free nisin ( P < 0.05 vs. control). As shown in Fig. 7 f, nanoparticle, nisin, and nisin-loaded nanoparticles have no cytotoxic effects on Vero (non-tumor) cell line at the studied concentrations. Fig. 7 a MTT assay of cytotoxic activity of PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticle on AGS, KYSE-30, HepG2, K562, and Vero cell lines; MTT assay of cytotoxic activity of nisin and nisin-loaded nanoparticles on b AGS, c KYSE-30, d HepG2, e K562, and f Vero cell lines after 24, 48, and 72 h compared to normal (control), respectively. P < 0.0 5 vs. control Table I IC50 Values of (a) Nisin (b) Nisin-loaded Nanoparticles, on AGS, KYSE-30, HepG2, and K562 Cell Lines After 24, 48, and 72 h Determined by MTT, Neutral Red Assays; Data are Presented as Mean ± SD ( n = 3), P < 0.0 5 vs. Control (a) Cell line (time) IC50 by MTT assay (μM) IC50 by Neutral Red assay (μM) Total IC50 (μM) AGS 24 h 227 ± 2 237 ± 3 232 ± 3 AGS 48 h 143 ± 3 152 ± 2 147 ± 2 AGS 72 h 62 ± 3 60 ± 3 61 ± 3 KYSE-30 24 h 405 ± 4 413 ± 4 409 ± 4 KYSE-30 48 h 321 ± 2 347 ± 2 334 ± 2 KYSE-30 72 h 131 ± 6 129 ± 3 130 ± 5 HepG2 24 h 147 ± 5 143 ± 5 145 ± 5 HepG2 48 h 154 ± 5 146 ± 5 150 ± 5 HepG2 72 h 97 ± 4 94 ± 2 95 ± 3 K562 24 h 287 ± 4 273 ± 4 280 ± 4 K562 48 h 239 ± 3 235 ± 2 237 ± 3 K562 72 h 157 ± 6 136 ± 3 146 ± 5 (b) Cell line (time) IC50 by MTT assay (μM) IC50 by Neutral Red assay (μM) Total IC50 (μM) AGS 24 h 98 ± 4 90 ± 4 94 ± 4 AGS 48 h 65 ± 3 72 ± 2 69 ± 3 AGS 72 h 37 ± 3 32 ± 5 34 ± 4 KYSE-30 24 h 345 ± 4 339 ± 4 342 ± 4 KYSE-30 48 h 250 ± 5 255 ± 3 252 ± 4 KYSE-30 72 h 79 ± 5 83 ± 5 81 ± 5 HepG2 24 h 134 ± 4 141 ± 2 137 ± 3 HepG2 48 h 121 ± 2 119 ± 4 120 ± 3 HepG2 72 h 87 ± 5 84 ± 4 85 ± 5 K562 24 h 240 ± 4 248 ± 4 244 ± 4 K562 48 h 143 ± 6 145 ± 2 144 ± 4 K562 72 h 124 ± 3 158 ± 3 141 ± 3
Morphological Changes of Cancer Cell Lines
To investigate the effects of the free nisin and nisin-loaded PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles on the morphologies of AGS, KYSE-30, HepG2, and K562 cell lines, the cells were treated for 24, 48, and 72 h. The microscopic images represented the enhanced unusual shapes of the cells and cytotoxicity and growth-inhibitory effects with the increasing concentrations of the nisin and nisin-loaded nanoparticles. The cytotoxicity effects on the cells were greater at the concentrations of 250, 350, and 450 μM and decreased cell densities. The cytotoxic effects were higher with the time intervals of longer than 72 h. The effects of the free nisin and nisin-loaded nanoparticles on the cells in the concentration and time-dependent manners were confirmed through the comparison of the images obtained from the three experimental time periods as they had caused cell deformation and reduced cell density. Moreover, further increases in the concentrations and durations of the treatments led to more reductions in the intercellular connections (Fig. 8 ). Fig. 8 The invert microscopy images of AGS cell line treatment with different concentrations of nisin after 72 h
Ethidium Bromide/Acridine Orange Staining for Apoptosis Cells
The morphological changes on the cancer cell lines were assessed by EB/AO staining and analyzed under a fluorescent microscope (Table II and Fig. 9 ). The results revealed morphological changes to all the cancer cell lines like chromatin condensation and fragmentation and apoptotic body formation occurred at the different nisin and nisin-loaded nanoparticle concentrations (IC50 values) of 235, 410, 145, 280 μM and 95, 345, 140, 245 μM for AGS, KYSE-30, HepG2, and K562 cell lines after 24 h treatments, respectively. These alterations were taken as evidence for the presence of apoptotic bodies (Fig. 9 b). The control cells showed a normal appearance (Fig. 9 a). After the cells were further treated with the nisin and nisin-loaded nanoparticles, a significant increase occurred to the number of apoptotic cells in the cancer cell lines. Table II Apoptosis Induction of Nisin and Nisin-loaded Nanoparticles on AGS, KYSE-30, HepG2, and K562 Cell Lines, Data are Expressed as Percentage of Cells, Data are Presented as Mean ± SD ( n = 3), P < 0.0 5 vs. Control Cell line Live cells (%) Apoptotic cells (%) Necrotic cells (%) AGS control 98 ± 2 2 ± 2 1 ± 1 AGS treated with nisin 51 ± 2 46 ± 2 4 ± 1 AGS treated with nisin-loaded nanoparticle 45 ± 2 51 ± 4 4 ± 1 KYSE-30 control 95 ± 2 4 ± 1 1 ± 0 KYSE-30 treated with nisin 66 ± 3 30 ± 1 4 ± 1 KYSE-30 treated with nisin-loaded nanoparticle 56 ± 3 40 ± 3 4 ± 2 HepG2 control 98 ± 1 1 ± 2 1 ± 1 HepG2 treated with nisin 59 ± 7 38 ± 4 2 ± 1 HepG2 treated with nisin-loaded nanoparticle 52 ± 3 45 ± 4 3 ± 2 K562 control 94 ± 5 4 ± 5 1 ± 0 K562 treated with nisin 62 ± 5 34 ± 2 4 ± 1 K562 treated with nisin-loaded nanoparticle 55 ± 4 40 ± 1 5 ± 1 Fig. 9 Apoptosis induction of nisin on HepG2 cell line. a Normal untreated cells, b cells treated with nisin (145 μM). The histogram indicates that after treating with: c nisin (145 μM according to IC50 value for HepG2 after 24 h) and d nisin-loaded nanoparticles (140 μM according to IC50 value for HepG2 after 24 h) there was a significant increase of apoptotic cells in cancer cells
DISCUSSION
Many peptides and proteins with biological activities have been introduced as therapeutic (particularly anti-cancer) agents. Applications of pharmacological agents have some limitations, including their rapid removal of blood flow through kidney filtration, enzymatic degradation induced by the reticuloendothelial system, and accumulation in the non-target tissues and organs. These anti-cancer drugs have been designed to kill cancer cells, but drug release may occur inside the healthy organs and tissues and subsequently cause severe side effects in some cases. Some of these peptides or proteins follow the intracellular targets since they need to enter into the cells to perform their functions, while transportation of these biomacromolecules through the cell membrane is another limitation [ ]. Many of these restrictions can be overcome by the use of nanoparticles. Nanocarriers with encapsulated pharmaceutical agents avoid any contacts with the biological environment before they can reach the diseased tissues. Thus, they not only protect the detection of drugs via the immune system, but also increase their sizes by making a complex with them so that they cannot be rapidly removed through kidney filtration. Loading proteins and biomacromolecules onto nanocarriers not only enhances their stabilities and prolongs their circulation time, but also causes drug molecules to be efficiently released into the cytoplasm, and endosomal escape [ ]. The results of our study revealed that PLA-PEG-PLA polymeric nanoparticles were capable of forming distinct spherical micelles with smooth surfaces. The mean sizes of the nanoparticles and nisin-loaded nanoparticles were 100 and 200 nm, respectively. In the FTIR diagrams, some variations in the absorption bands could be observed before and after loading nisin onto the nanoparticles. These changes could be resulted from the physicochemical interactions between the nanoparticles and nisin to form nisin-loaded nanoparticles [ ]. The loading efficiency of nisin onto the nanoparticles was 85–90%, which was acceptable.
As shown by the results, nisin release was related to the pH of the release medium in a way that higher amounts of nisin were released at a lower pH. The medium penetrated into the nanoparticles and dissolved the encapsulated nisin. Therefore, the major factor determining the drug release from the nanoparticles was its solubilization rate in the release medium. Nisin had the highest solubility in the pH range of 2–5. Accordingly, a pH of 4 caused its further solubilization and separation into the release medium. Its initial release might be caused by the fast dehydration of the hydrophilic nature of the PEG segment of the nanoparticles [ , ].
Hemolysis test proved the biocompatibility of the nanoparticles. Also based on non-cytotoxicity of the nanoparticles, it could be concluded that the synthesized nanoparticles in this study were biocompatible. The FITC-labeled nanoparticles successfully entered into the cells and were thus capable of delivering nisin to them.
Nisin had a cytotoxic effect on gastrointestinal, hepatic, and K562 cell lines and induced apoptosis. Vero cell line as a normal cell line was observed not to be influenced by nisin cytotoxicity at micromolar concentrations. This finding was in line with that of Kordell and Sahl’s study [ ]. As more receptors on the cellular membrane surfaces are developed by malignant cells, various biological substances like nisin can be well impelled to attach to them [ , ]. After nisin loading, zeta potential was enhanced. Nisin has a positive charge, thus the surface charge of nisin-loaded nanoparticles was more positive than PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles (− 28.90 < − 22.63 mV). This is considered as the main factor that provides good stability of nanoparticles. The importance of an electrostatic charge is that it causes a better release and higher load capacity. On the other hand, since a nanoparticle structure protects nisin against any unwanted interactions with other molecules and maintains its activity until it reaches the target, nisin-loaded nanoparticles can provide more efficiency than free nisin [ ]. Bench and colleagues found that nisin encapsulation within the liposome can provide a powerful tool to improve its stability and inhibitory activity [ , ]. Our research suggested that the cytotoxicity of nisin and encapsulated nisin was dependent on the concentration and time factors as its cytotoxic effect was enhanced by increasing the concentrations and durations of the treatments. The results of our study were almost similar to those obtained by Bedge and colleagues, who examined nisin effect on a variety of lymphoma cells.
Nisin induced apoptosis on the studied cancer cell lines. This was verified by the morphological changes detected through EB/AO staining. After comparing the results of the MTT and NR uptake assays for the free nisin and nisin-loaded nanoparticles, a significant reduction was seen in the IC50 values of the latter substance. Therefore, we could conclude that the nisin-loaded nanoparticles were more effective on the cell growth reduction compared to free nisin. AGS cell were the most sensitive cell line to nisin cytotoxic effects. Although there are few reports on its effects, especially those of its encapsulation form, on cancer cells, our research was found to be in line with Shaowen, Nam, and Preet’s studies. Shaowen investigated nisin encapsulation into PLA nanoparticles and showed the uniform dispersion of hydrophilic nisin in the matrix of a hydrophobic polymeric nanoparticles in an aqueous solution and its subsequent adsorption onto the particle surface [ ]. In his investigation, Nam assessed the therapeutic potential of nisin for treating head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and observed reduced HNSCC cell proliferation to be induced by cell cycle arrest and preferential apoptosis [ ]. The anti-cancer effect of nisin and doxorubicin (DOX) mixture on mouse skin carcinogenesis was studied by Preet et al. in vivo [ ]. This finding further delineated the underlying anti-cancer mechanism of nisin-DOX additive against skin carcinogenesis in a murine model in vivo . Additionally, its in vitro mechanism against HaCaT cell lines [ ] was demonstrated in another study. This is the first study to show that nisin treatment of AGS, KYSE-30, HepG2, and K562 cancer cell lines leads to their apoptosis. These results proved nisin application as a potentially new approach to treating these cell lines. Moreover, its use in a clinical setting can be facilitated by the fact that it is currently utilized for food preservation since being safe for human consumption. Nisin encapsulation into PLA-PEG-PLA nanoparticles can provide a promising technology by delivering therapeutic peptides to target cells with higher performance. A more stable system was exhibited by PLA-PEG-PLA as a polymeric nanoparticle compared to liposome encapsulation. However, the potentiality of this approach to delivering peptides should be further investigated by developing fundamental research on nanoparticles in the field of medical sciences in the future.
CONCLUSION
Nisin hydrophobic side shows a more tendency to attach to a hydrophilic substrate and its hydrophilic side represents a further tendency towards a hydrophilic substrate [ ]. This property provides a simple efficient option for enhancing nisin incorporation into polymeric nanoparticles. Its incorporation into polymer particles provides better protection of active substances like nisin and their sustained release [ ]. Nisin is decomposed by proteases in the digestive system, while it is unstable at physiological pH. Thus, its application to clinical practice would be difficult. This was the first study to report the cytotoxic effects of nisin and its encapsulated forms on the gastrointestinal, hepatic, and K562 cell lines. Accordingly, application of nisin as a harmless peptide for anti-tumor purposes can be promising in the future. In addition to its reduced IC50 values when it is encapsulated with biocompatible polymeric nanoparticles and decreased doses, nisin could herald the emergence of a new generation of anti-cancer drugs with minimal side effects in comparison with the conventional chemotherapeutic agents. Based on this study, we can conclude that the synthesized PLA-PEG-PLA polymeric nanoparticles are biocompatible and capable of forming nanosized micelles to transfer peptide drugs. Hence, it can be used as a good candidate for transporting such drugs in the release systems. Taking into consideration all the concentrations obtained by the laboratory studies in this research, more investigations are required to probably generalize them to those usable in clinical trials. Nonetheless, further research on nisin and its encapsulated forms, especially on animal tumor models, is needed to determine their anti-tumor activities and approved applications in cancer chemotherapy in vivo .