INTRODUCTION
Free radicals naturally occur in energy production processes, cell growth regulation, intercellular signaling, phagocytosis, dysfunctions, and radiation exposure, among others. In metabolic processes, involving electron transfer energy, oxidation reactions optimize aerobic life, but, concurrently, produce free radicals ( , , ). The deleterious effects of free radicals can be exemplified by peroxidation of membrane lipids, damage to protein membranes and tissues, DNA, enzymes, and carbohydrates and such effects are related to aging, cardiovascular system degenerative diseases, cognitive dysfunction, cataracts, and cancer ( , , ).
Topical application of products containing antioxidants and/or the intake of antioxidants through diet or supplementation are noteworthy tools in an attempt to slow down some of the harmful effects of free radicals, like premature skin aging ( , ). As antioxidants, we can cite vitamins A, C, and E; carotenoids; and flavonoids, especially found in fruits and vegetables ( , ). Rutin is a flavonoid that belongs to the class of flavonols. Due to its strong antioxidant activity, rutin is used in food and pharmaceutical industries to prevent or to treat venous or lymphatic insufficiency or capillary fragility and permeability, as well as being used in the prevention of the damage caused by UV radiation ( , , ).
It was established that rutin presents low skin permeation rate, i.e. , a lack of ability to overcome the stratum corneum barrier, a property that could be considered an inconvenience to the efficacy of a cosmetic formulation to perform its antioxidant activity onto the skin. Therefore, it is indispensable to improve its delivery, aiming at increasing its antioxidant capacity in deeper layers of the epidermis, being a possibility to associate the rutin to liposomal vesicles, such as ethosomes ( , , , ).
Classic liposomes were the pioneer carrier system in the development of vesicles at a nanoscale. They are vesicles composed of lipid molecules (such as phospholipids), usually produced by the method of the lipid film hydration ( , , ). The liposome type called “ethosome” has gained considerable attention in recent studies, since it is able to penetrate to deeper layers of the skin, providing better transdermal delivery of compounds with poor percutaneous permeability ( , , , , ).
Ethosomes are mainly composed of phospholipids, ethanol, and water. Godin and Touitou ( ) demonstrated that the coexistence of phospholipids and ethanol in high concentrations is feasible and provides the formation of an improved carrier system. The effect of ethanol fluidizing the bilayers of phospholipids contributes to the creation of vesicles with a malleable structure which enable to attain molecules (drugs, pharmaceuticals, or active agents) to deeper layers of the skin ( , , , ). The proposed mechanism for ethanol in the improvement of skin permeation is by both fluidizing the lipid bilayers of ethosomes and the lipids present in the stratum corneum . Two distinct effects are observed: ethanol increases the fluidity of the membrane lipids and decreases the density of the multilayer cellular lipid membranes; while ethosomes increase lipid fluidity of the cell membrane, resulting in increased permeability. Therefore, ethosomes are able to penetrate into the deeper layers of the skin, where they merge with the cutaneous lipids, releasing the active permeants ( , ).
In this research work, the pre-clinical safety of rutin-loaded ethosomes (ER) and ethosomes without rutin (EB) was investigated employing an in vitro method, and the clinical safety and efficacy of ER and EB were also assessed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
l -α-Phosphatidylcholine from egg yolk (60%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich ® (USA). Rutin (95%) were obtained from Fragon ® (Brazil). Ethyl alcohol and chloroform were supplied by Synth ® (Brazil). Acetonitrile, methyl alcohol, and acetic acid (HLPC grade) were purchased from Merck ® (Germany). The water used was purified in a Milli-Q Plus System (Merck Milipore ® , USA). Ultrafiltration of ethosomes applied an ultrafiltration unit (10 kDa Amicon; Millipore ® , USA).
Methods
Preparation of Ethosomes
Ethosomes were prepared according to the thin-film hydration method, with modifications ( ). l -α-Phosphatidylcholine from egg yolk (2.0% w / v ) and rutin (0.03% w / v ) were dissolved in chloroform in a round-bottom flask. Solvent traces were removed in a rotary evaporator. The thin-films were hydrated with ethanolic solution (etanol/water, 20:80, [ v / v ]) at above the lipid transition temperature for 1 h. The suspension was dispersed using an ultrasonic bath for 30 min. Ethosomes without rutin (blank) were also obtained (EB).
Measurement of Vesicle Size (Size Distribution) and Zeta Potential
Particle size distribution was determined by dynamic light scattering method (DLS) (Zetasizer ® ZS90, Malvern, UK). Ethosomes were dispersed in 1.0 mL of ultrapure water in order to obtain suitable conditions for the measurements. Analyses were performed at 24.0 ± 2.0°C. Zeta potential was determined by electrophoretic light scattering (ELS) in which the samples were suspended in 1.0 mL of aqueous medium (2.0% v / v ) and placed in a cuvette at 24.0 ± 2.0°C. The viscosity and refractive index of the continuous phase were set to those specific for purified water. All tests were carried out in triplicates.
Measurement of Loading Efficiency (Entrapment Efficiency)
In order to calculate the amount of rutin entrapped in the ethosomal structure, according to ( ) with modifications, the suspension was added to an ultrafiltration unit and centrifuged at 21,400 g for 30 min at 25.0 ± 1.0°C. Free rutin presented at the supernatant was quantified by a validated high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method ( ). We used a C18 column (250 × 4.6 mm, 5 mm particle size) (Shimadzu, Japan) preceded by a guard column (10 × 4.6 mm). Mobile phase was composed of acetonitrile/formic acid (0.3%) (20:80) and the flow rate was 1.2 mL/min. Analytical quantification of rutin was carried out at 40.0°C. Detection was performed at 350 nm using a diode-array UV detector (Shimadzu, Japan). The retention time was found to be 5.942 min. The loading efficiency at/into ethosomes was calculated by the difference between the total amount of rutin employed to prepare ER and the amount of free rutin in the suspension, according to Eq. 1 . (Loading/entrapment efficiency (%)). $$ \mathrm{Loading}\ \mathrm{efficiency}=\frac{\mathrm{Ct}-\mathrm{Cf}}{\mathrm{Ct}}\times 100 $$ (1) where Cf is rutin that passed through the 1.2-μm filter, and Ct is the rutin added initially.
In Vitro Antioxidant Activity of Ethosomes
Antioxidant activity of rutin-loaded ethosomes and blank samples was performed by the DPPH method. Spectrophotometric readings (UV-Vis Evolution 300; Thermo Scientific, USA) were obtained using ethanolic solutions of the samples and 100.0 μM DPPH solution at a ratio of 1:29, after 60 min of reaction at 22.0 ± 2.0°C. All samples were tested in triplicate. The positive control was a rutin methanolic solution at 0.5 mg/mL. The absorbance values were measured at 515.0 nm with quartz cuvette of 1.0 cm path length, and converted into the percentage of free radical scavenging using the Eq. 2 ( ) (Determination of percentage of free radical scavenging). $$ \%\mathrm{FRS}=\frac{\left({\mathrm{Abs}}_{\mathrm{control}}-{\mathrm{Abs}}_{\mathrm{sample}}\right)\times 100}{{\mathrm{Abs}}_{\mathrm{control}}} $$ (2) where FRS is the percentage of free radical scavenging; Abs control is the absorbance of negative control sample; and Abs sample is the absorbance of samples.
Irritant Potential Assay
HET-CAM (hen’s egg test-chorioallantoic membrane) was used to assess the irritation potential of the ethosome samples. Fresh, fertile white leghorn hen’s eggs were obtained from the Mário Salviato Ovos Férteis (São Paulo, Brazil). Eggs were kept in an incubator with automatic rotation device for 9 days at 37°C and 65% relative humidity ( ). Any non-fertilized egg, or not containing a live embryo, was discarded. The eggshell was cut around the marked air sac, exposing the outer membrane. The CAM outer membrane was moistened with 300.0 μL of 0.9% NaCl solution. After, it was carefully removed using blunt forceps. On undamaged CAM, 300.0 μL of a 1.0% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution was applied, as positive control (vascular hemorrhage and lysis), and 300.0 μL of NaCl solution (0.9%) was used as the negative control. Also, 300.0 μL of rutin-loaded ethosomes and blank sample were applied. The assay was performed in triplicate. The appearance of hemorrhage, lysis, and coagulation was monitored for 300 s and the onset time of these was recorded ( ). The standard irritation scores were calculated as described in the Eq. 3 ( ). $$ 300\left[\mathrm{IS}\right]=5\left[301-H\right]+7\left[301-L\right]+9\left[301-C\right] $$ (3)
IS irritation score H onset time in seconds for the start of the hemorrhage L onset time in seconds for the start of the lysis C onset time in seconds for the start of the coagulation
The tested solutions and ethosomes were classified in relation to the irritant scores: 0–0.9 = non-irritant, 1.0–4.9 = slight irritant, 5.0–8.9 = moderate irritant, and 9.0–21.0 = strong irritant.
Preparation of Antioxidant Formulations
Two formulations were prepared by the incorporation of rutin-loaded ethosomes (F1) or rutin (F2) into a gel formed by ammonium acryloyldimethyltaurate/VP copolymer in water. Qualitative and quantitative compositions of the formulations are described in Table I . Table I Qualitative and Quantitative (% w / w ) Composition of the Formulations Ingredients Concentration (% w / w ) Samples F1 F2 Ammonium acryloyldimethyltaurate/VP copolymer 1.0 1.0 Rutin-loaded ethosomes 60.0 – Rutin (in its free estate) solution – 0.03 Purified water a a a Sufficient to complete to 100%
Human Repeat Insult Patch Test (HRIPT)
The 6 weeks cutaneous compatibility assay was performed with 55 volunteers, after oral informed and written consent. These subjects were between 18 and 60 years and had skin phototypes of II to IV. Epicutaneous patches were applied to the back of the subjects for 48 h, three times a week. Each patch had three chambers, containing each of the formulations tested, as well as, purified water, as negative control. The skin of the subjects, after patch removal, was scored 30 min later, and new material was applied, for two more weeks. The next 2 weeks were characterized as a rest period, and no new samples were applied. After the rest period, fresh patches were applied for one last week, the challenge phase. The scores used were 0 for no erythema, 1 for well-defined erythema, 2 for erythema and induration, and 3 for the vesiculation and a bullous reaction ( , ). The procedure was performed in accordance with ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (CEP-FCF process number 1.141.850) and with the Helsinki declaration.
Rutin Ex Vivo Skin Penetration and Antioxidant Activity Investigation
A skin area of 6.25 cm 2 was marked in the subject volar forearms and aliquots of F1 and F2 were applied at the rate of 8.0 mg/cm 2 . Two applications of each sample were performed and the interval between applications corresponded to 2 h. The tape stripping technique was performed 2 h after the last sample application. A stencil was attached to the subject’s forearms, marking the stratum corneum site (area of 2.25 cm 2 ). Adhesive tapes (Scotch Tape Magic™) were adhered to the application site with a roller and quickly removed. Twenty strips per subject were collected and they were divided into three portions: (1) first tape, (2) tapes 2 to 10, and (3) tapes 11 to 20. Each portion was transferred to a tube containing 5.0 mL of methanol. Then, for the ex vivo skin penetration test, samples had the rutin quantification by the validated HPLC method (previous described).
Antioxidant activity of the subjects’ epidermis from F1 and F2 application was obtained by the DPPH method, earlier described, by investigating the solutions from the tape-stripped samples. Spectrophotometric readings were performed using ethanolic solutions from the tape stripping samples. Methanol and free rutin solution were the negative and positive controls, respectively. Samples were analyzed in triplicate. The absorbance values were converted into the percentage of free radical scavenging using Eq. 2 ( ). The protocol involving subjects for F1 and F2 was conducted with 10 healthy volunteers with phototypes II to IV, after oral and written informed consent (CEP-FCF process number 1.141.850). The mean age of the subjects was 26.8 ± 6.46 years.
RESULTS
Measurement of Vesicle Size (Size Distribution) and Zeta Potential
Table II presents the pH values, diameter (size distribution), zeta potential, and polydispersity index for EB and ER. Table II pH Value, Diameter, Zeta Potential, and Polydispersity Index of the Ethosomes (With or Without Rutin) ( n = 3) Ethosomes pH value Diameter (nm) Zeta potential (mV) Polydispersity index EB 4.11 ± 0.04 A 247.0 B ± 7.0 − 39.3 A ± 1.7 0.196 A ± 0.015 ER 3.90 ± 0.03 B 369.5 A ± 4.2 − 19.6 B ± 0.4 0.434 B ± 0.010 Results were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Different letters in the same column represent statistically significant differences between groups. The results were evaluated according to the one-way ANOVA, followed by the Tukey test for comparison between groups (significance level = 0.05) EB ethosomes without rutin, ER rutin-loaded ethosomes
Loading/Entrapment Efficiency
It was verified that 80.20 ± 0.02% of the rutin used to obtain the ER were entrapped with/into the ethosomes.
In Vitro Antioxidant Activity of Ethosomes
The antioxidant performance of the ethosomes (ER and EB) is shown in Fig. 1 . ER presented superior antioxidant activity (95% free radical sequestration) in comparison with EB and the positive control (80%), being the latter a methanolic solution of rutin (free sate) in an equal concentration in the ethosomal suspension (0.5 mg/mL). EB did not develop significant antioxidant activity (2.0%). Fig. 1 Antioxidant activity of ethosomes. EB, ethosomes without rutin; ER, rutin-loaded ethosomes. Different letters in the bars represent statistically significant differences between the groups. The results were evaluated according to the one-way ANOVA, followed by the Tukey test for comparison between groups (significance level = 0.05)
Irritant Potential Assay
Results for in vitro safety assay, by HET-CAM, are presented in Table III ( ). Table III In Vitro Safety Data by HET-CAM NaCl (0.9%) SDS (1.0%) ER Rutin (0.5 mg/mL) Assessment of irritancy 0 6.32 0 0 SDS sodium dodecyl sulfate
HRIPT
The results from the in vivo assay for F1 and F2 were interpreted according to the Draize scale (Table IV ) and are presented in Table V . Table IV Draize Scale for Skin Irritation Degree Scale Observable reactions Score Erythema No erythema 0 Slight erythema 1 Well-defined erythema 2 Moderate to strong 3 Severe erythema 4 Edema No edema 0 Slight edema 1 Well-defined edema 2 Moderate to severe 3 Severe 4 Table V In Vivo Safety Assay by Human Repeat Insult Patch Test Clinical Trial Number of subjects Draize scale (edema and erythema) F1 (rutin-loaded) F2 (blank) Primary and accumulated skin irritation 55 0 0 Dermal sensitization 55 0 0
Ex Vivo Skin Penetration and Antioxidant Efficacy Assays
The results of the ex vivo skin penetration assay are presented in Table VI and, the data from the ex vivo antioxidant efficacy test, in Table VII . Table VI Rutin Concentration from Ex Vivo Permeation Assay Quantified Through the Tape Stripping in Subjects Samples Tape 1 Tapes 2–10 Tapes 11–20 Total Rutin (μg/mL) F1 0.135 ± 0.081 A 0.292 ± 0.092 A 0.090 ± 0.037 A 0.518 ± 0.211 A F2 0.471 ± 0.261 B 0.279 ± 0.194 A 0.027 ± 0.023 B 0.777 ± 0.478 A Results were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Different letters represent statistically significant differences between the groups. The results were evaluated according to the one-way ANOVA test, followed by the Tukey test for comparison between groups (significance level = 0.05) Table VII Antioxidant Activity of the Epidermis After Treatment with the Samples, According to the Ex Vivo Assay, in DPPH Inhibition (%) Samples Tape 1 Tapes 2–10 Tapes 11–20 DPPH inhibition (%) Control 23.89 ± 6.71 A 66.66 ± 4.61 B 66.78 ± 5.68 B F1 24.61 ± 8.35 A 60.34 ± 13.36 B 65.71 ± 2.97 B F2 25.45 ± 6.81 A 63.27 ± 7.04 B 60.53 ± 10.57 B Ex vivo antioxidant activity was expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Different letters represent statistically significant differences between the groups. The results were evaluated according to the one-way ANOVA, followed by the Tukey test for comparison between groups (significance level = 0.05)
DISCUSSION
Rutin-loaded ethosomes herein presented the largest particle size when compared to those without the flavonoid, corroborated by Park et al . ( ), that produced “blank” ethosomes with a smaller diameter dimension than those with rutin. The polydispersity index describes the particle size distribution of the samples. Values ​up to 0.3 suggest monomodal distribution, which was not observed in this study for rutin-loaded ethosomes, but was observed for the blank ethosomes EB.
Notwithstanding being a great tool for size measurement, DLS is known to present drawbacks, which are essentially connected to the principles of the method. Fluctuations in scattered light intensity due to the Brownian movement of the particles define the hydrodynamic diameter of them. The intensity of the scattered light is equivalent to the particle diameter, which makes this method susceptible to the presence of large particles, that could be a drawback for accurate size determination. The number distribution registers the number of particles in the different size range. On the other hand, the intensity distribution describes how much light is dispersed by the particles in the different size bins. In summary, this means that intensity distributions highlight the larger particles in the population, whereas the number distributions emphasize the smaller particles. Nevertheless, it is crucial to note that both measures are just different descriptions of the same physical reality of size distribution, as presented in Figs. 2 and 3 ( ). Fig. 2 EB and ER particle size according to DLS intensity distributions. EB, ethosomes without rutin; ER, rutin-loaded ethosomes Fig. 3 EB and ER particle size according to DLS number distribution. EB, ethosomes without rutin; ER, rutin-loaded ethosomes
During their production, ethosomes initially adhered to the sides of the reaction vial in stacks, and the fully assembled vesicles could subsequently be dispersed in the solution by stirring. However, as the ethosomes in bulk solution are in thermodynamic equilibrium, their stability is also affected by solution conditions. The addition of rutin in the ethanolic solution influenced the formation of the vesicles; hence, the polydispersity index higher than 0.3 could be attributed to the formation of agglomerates or the formation of vesicles of different diameters during development ( ).
As for the zeta potential, it is known that the larger the modulus value, the more stable the formulation and the fewer the possibility of particle aggregation. Particles with a zeta modulus of 30 mV are considered stable ( ); therefore, it was found that blank ethosomes stable, whereas those with rutin showed zeta potential, in modulus, equal to 19.6 mV. The values observed were similar to those described in the literature when preparing nanoparticles by lipid film hydration. Additionally, the values ​of standard deviation indicated adequate reproducibility of the method used. Ascenso et al . ( ), incorporated caffeine into ethosomes by the cold method. The ethosomes presented particle size, zeta potential, and polydispersity index of 137.07 ± 1.93 nm, − 19.47 ± 6.07, and 0.171 ± 0.0067, respectively. Paolino et al . ( ), incorporated ammonium glycyrrhizinate, a drug used in inflammatory skin diseases, in ethosomes through the classical method, varying the concentrations of ethanol and lecithin. It was observed that ethosomes with 30% ethanol ( v / v ) and 3% lecithin ( w / v ) presented a larger particle size (342 ± 31 nm) and a polydispersity index of 0.415 ± 0.041, while the ethosomes with 45% ethanol ( v / v ) ethanol and 1% lecithin ( w / v ) presented a particle size of 102.0 ± 5.5 nm and polydispersity index of 0.417 ± 0.007. Thus, parameters such as particle size, zeta potential, and polydispersity index vary according to the method used to obtain the vesicles, the concentrations of ethanol and phospholipid, and the active substance to be incorporated ( ).
Park et al . ( ), developed rutin-loaded ethosomes by lipid film hydration technique, and rutin association rate was equal to 73.77 ± 0.01%. Kerdudo et al . ( ), encapsulated rutin in multilamellar lipid vesicles and the encapsulation rate of the active compound was 65.4 ± 0.3%. In our research, we verified that, approximately, 80% of the rutin amounts used to obtain the ethosomes were associated with these structures, a value compatible with those described in the aforementioned specialized literature. This result allows inferring that the method used to obtain the vesicles, as well as the materials used, corresponds to determinant factors in the efficiency of encapsulation of active molecules in liposomal/ethosomal organizations ( , , ).
Sodium dodecyl sulfate solution (1.0%) was a positive control for coagulation, lysis, and hemorrhage phenomena. According to the classification presented in Table IV , positive control was categorized as moderately irritant (range 5 to 8.9), whereas the ER and rutin solution (0.5 mg/mL) presented no irritant potential ( ). Besides, no reactions that could be characterized as events of primary and accumulated skin irritation or dermal sensitization were observed.
According to the rutin concentrations obtained from the tape stripping technique, free rutin (F2) remained in the upper layers of the stratum corneum (“tape 1”), while the rutin into ethosomes showed to penetrate across the tissue in some extent (“tapes 11–20”). This response was an indicative that the incorporation of rutin in ethosomes provided an increased interaction with the skin, contributing with the cutaneous penetration rate of the bioactive compound. Such kind of interaction with the tissue could have occurred, probably, by the ethosomes physicochemical properties, like, malleable vesicles able to penetrate among the corneocytes, facilitating the passage of molecules of interest, as demonstrated in the literature ( , ).
In addition, from the ex vivo penetration test, the total amount of penetrated rutin across the stratum corneum was not completely recovered (0.518 ± 0.211 μg/mL for the rutin in ethosomes from F1 and 0.777 ± 0.478 μg/mL for free rutin from F2). The total concentration of 1.5 μ/mL, corresponding to the total mass of rutin applied to the skin of the volunteers, was expected to be found. These results could be attributed to the used protocol. Subjects could have rubbed-off the samples applied over the skin, promoting mechanical removal of formulations, for example. Thus, it could be suggested that, in future studies, the sample application should occur in an occlusive way, for instance, or even considering a higher number of applications.
Paolino et al . compared the permeation of methyl nicotinate in ethosomes with its free form in ethanolic and aqueous solutions. Cutaneous permeation was evaluated through the stratum corneum of the human epidermis from the abdomen reduction surgery, using vertical diffusion cells. The researchers observed that the ethosomes were able to optimize the permeation of methyl nicotinate by up to 40% after 24 h application of the formulations ( ).
Ascenso et al . evaluated the cutaneous permeation of caffeine in ethosomes, transfersomes, and transethosomes through pig ear skin in diffusion cells. These results showed that the different vesicles presented different permeation profiles (caffeine in the transethosomes permeated more, followed by ethosomes and transfersomes), but all were adequate for deeper penetration of the alkaloid ( ).
Li et al . associated tacrolimus with ethosomes and compared cutaneous permeation of the ethosomal vesicles with an ointment commercially available with the same drug. The study involved the use of vertical diffusion cells and Wistar rat skin. The researchers observed that the remaining amount of tacrolimus in the epidermis at the end of 24 h of the experiment was higher with the application of ethosomes than the application of the commercial ointment, suggesting that ethosomes developed greater penetration capacity in the deeper layers of the skin ( ).
Park et al . evaluated the permeation of rutin in ethanolic solution, in aqueous solution, and in liposomal and ethosomal vesicles by using diffusion cells and albino rat skin. They found that 61.3% of the rutin present in ethosomes was able to permeate the skin, against 44.2% of rutin in ethanolic solution, 37.8% of rutin in liposomes, and 18.31% of flavonoid in aqueous solution ( ).
Antioxidant activity values were expressed as percent of DPPH free radical inhibition. Regardless of the formulation applied or lack of application (control), the antioxidant response of the cutaneous tissue did not change, even though ER developed relevant antioxidant potential.
The antioxidant activity from “tape 1” ( ex vivo test) was not different from the samples of untreated skin nor treated with F1 and F2. The same occurred for the other groups (“tapes 2–10” and “tapes 11–20”). Although we observed antioxidant action from rutin-loaded ethosomes in vitro , in the ex vivo trials, no activity was detected that was superior to the antioxidant profile of the untreated cutaneous tissue. Such results could be justified as a function of the rutin concentration into F1 and F2, for instance, being not sufficient to interfere positively with the stratum corneum antioxidant activity in function of time. Thus, theoretically, the results may be related to the cutaneous antioxidant system, formed by enzymatic and non-enzymatic substances. Among the enzymatic antioxidants, we can mention glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, and catalase. The skin non-enzymatic antioxidants are represented by the most diverse endogenous or exogenous compounds, among them, estradiol, estrogen, melatonin, and lipoic acid, for example ( ).
Alonso et al . ( ) determined the efficacy of antioxidant formulations (one containing vitamins A, C, and E and another containing fish extract). Both samples were applied over volunteers’ forearms and the tape stripping technique was applied. Lipid peroxidation was determined after UV artificial irradiation of the stratum corneum tape-stripped samples and it was observed an antioxidant action, by lipid peroxidation inhibition between 40 and 58%, on the stratum corneum treated with the preparations. In comparison with the present study, it could be suggested that the increase in number and frequency of sample applications as well as the adjustment of the application form would be strategies for ascertaining the antioxidant capacity of the formulations ( , ).
CONCLUSION
Rutin-loaded ethosomes were efficaciously obtained in a nanoscale dimension with a relevant bioactive compound loading association and established antioxidant in vitro activity in comparison with the blank sample. Pre-clinical and clinical safety tests assured the innocuous profile of the rutin-loaded ethosomes by HET-CAM and HRIPT, respectively, all samples being found safe under the test conditions. The ethosomes containing the bioactive compound accomplished a more functional delivery system profile, since the deeper stripped tapes (“tapes 11–20”) presented the highest rutin amount compared with the active in its free state in solution. The antioxidant efficacy test performed ex vivo in subjects detected no positive antioxidant profile from the rutin-loaded ethosomes, even though the in vitro assay demonstrated an affirmative antioxidant action.