INTRODUCTION
Meloxicam (MX), a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), exhibits efficacy for reducing pain and inflammatory symptoms and has definite activity in treating osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis ( ). Although MX has relatively low toxicity ( , ), oral administration is also related to frequent gastrointestinal side effects, such as gastrointestinal perforation and ulceration ( , ). Therefore, an alternative route of administration for MX is needed to avoid the disadvantages related to the existing oral medications. Drug delivery through the skin may be a good choice, which provides an advantage of delivering drugs directly to the disease site, resulting in maximal local effects with minimum systemic activity ( ). Most topical NSAIDs have been shown to present more safety and tolerability than their oral formulations ( ). However, few transdermal preparations of MX are available in the market. This is due to the fact that the stratum corneum forms a natural barrier to the entry of drugs ( ). Many skin penetration enhancement techniques have been developed to overcome the skin’s barrier function and improve the transdermal delivery of MX. Formulations such as patch ( ), emulsion ( ), nanoemulsion ( ), gel ( ), and liposome ( ) have all been used to enhance MX penetration through the skin. In addition, physical approaches, like electroporation ( ), iontophoresis ( ), and phonophoresis ( ), have been found suitable for creating aqueous pathways across the skin for MX permeation.
The concept of MNs for transdermal drug delivery was first conceived in 1976 ( ). However, the first report to demonstrate MNs for transdermal delivery was not published until 1998 ( ) when the microelectronics industry provided the microfabrication tools for the manufacture of MNs ( ). MNs consist of a plurality of needle-like structures, generally ranging from 25 to 2000 μm in length, of different shapes, which are attached to a backing ( ). Application of such structures to the skin surface can create transport pathways of micron dimensions ( ), through which therapeutics can be easily delivered across the skin. MNs can be generally divided into five categories, including solid MNs ( ), coated MNs ( , , ), dissolving MNs ( ), hollow MNs ( ), and hydrogel-forming MNs ( ). Some kinds of MNs which moved beyond standard developments were also proposed, for example, patch forming MNs ( ). Recently, dissolving MNs encapsulating drugs had been studied intensely because they were fabricated easily from polymers, which were biocompatible, biodegradable, and demonstrated extended safety profiles. Improving the penetration of MX across the skin using dissolving MNs technique has also been reported recently ( ). They reported the MNs with dissolving tip and backing (different from ours), which were evaluated for in vitro dissolution, drug release, stability, ex vivo skin permeation/deposition, histopathology, and in vivo pharmacodynamic study ( ). However, the fabrication process of dissolving MNs still faced some challenges, like significant time consumption (more than 24 h) ( ), loss of drug activity, and difficulty in regulating MNs drug loading. Besides, the applications of MNs were limited to the transdermal delivery of highly effective drugs, such as biomacromolecules and vaccines, due to the restricted amount of drug that can be encapsulated in MNs. Therefore, there are only few chemical drugs that are being delivered across the skin using MNs.
Thus, this paper proposed the TD MNs to tackle with the low MX skin permeability and issues faced by dissolving MN systems. The TD MNs were composed of two layers: dissolving tip encapsulating drugs, which were made of water-soluble polymers, and an undissolving backing, which was made of water-insoluble polymers. The TD MNs were fabricated by adding the polymer aqueous solution containing drugs into the cavities of the TD MN mold. When the polymer solution was dried, the dissolving tips were developed. Then, molten polymer was poured into the mold to create the backing of the TD MNs. Finally, the TD MNs were peeled out of the mold when the molten polymer solidified under room temperature. The whole process for the fabrication of MNs only takes approximately 1 h. The applications of the TD MNs to encapsulate chemical drugs, biomacromolecules, and nanoparticles have been discussed. In vitro and ex vivo release experiments of the TD MNs were carried out followed by safety evaluation, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamic studies, where MX was chosen as a model drug.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Meloxicam (MX, MW = 351.40 Da, > 99%) was bought from Meilune Biotechnology (Dalian, China). Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, MW = 30 kDa) was purchased from Boai NKY Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (Henan, China). Carrageenan of regent grade, dimethyl formamide (DMF), and silicon dioxide (nanoparticle, 30 nm) were purchased from Aladdin Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). Polycaprolactone (PCL, MW = 14,000 Da), methylene blue (MB, MW = 319.86 Da), piroxicam (MW = 331.35 Da), and tyrosinase (EC 1.14.18.1, 119.5 kDa by electrophoresis) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). All other chemicals used were analytical or pharmaceutical grade. A Milli-Q Plus ultrapure water system from Millipore (Sartorius 611, Germany) was used throughout the study to obtain water used in the experiments.
Animals
Male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (220–250 g) and female BALB/c mice (18–20 g) were used in the experiments. The animals were housed in laminar flow cages, 6 rats or 10 mice to a cage, and were given free access to food and water. They were maintained at 22 ± 1°C, relative humidity of 40–60%, and a 12-h light–dark cycle. The animals were allowed to acclimatize for at least 1 week before the experiments. All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with the protocols of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, Peking University.
Fabrication of the TD MNs
The polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) mold of the TD MNs was a gift from Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry CAS, China. It provided the template for the fabrication of the TD MNs. The fabrication of the TD MNs consisted of the following steps. First, polymer solutions containing drugs (tip solutions) were added to the mold which was put in a high pressure (2 or 3 atm) airtight cylinder for 2–3 min. Second, the cavities of the mold were filled with the tip solutions, and the residual solutions on the surface of the mold were removed carefully by pipette. Third, the mold was placed at room temperature (22 ± 1°C) in a dry place, and the polymer solutions were then dried to form the tips. Fourth, the molten PCL poured into the mold was processed by high pressure and solidified under room temperature to develop the PCL backing. Finally, the TD MNs were peeled out of the mold and photographed using the camera (EOS 700 D, Canon) with macro lens. Figure 1 illustrates the process for the fabrication of the TD MNs. According to the process for the fabrication of the TD MNs, different kinds of drugs could be encapsulated within the TD MNs by altering the tip solutions which contained various drugs. Fig. 1 Fabrication process of the TD MNs. First, add polymer solutions containing drugs into the PDMS mold and drive the air bubbles out of the cavities of the mold by high-pressure processing. Second, remove the residual solutions on the surface of the mold and let the tip solutions in the cavities dried. Third, pour molten PCL into the mold and following by high-pressure processing again. Finally, after PCL solidified under room temperature, the TD MNs were peeled out of the mold
Encapsulate Model Drugs Within the TD MNs
Four kinds of drugs have been encapsulated within the TD MNs successfully. In order to encapsulate water-soluble drugs within the TD MNs, MB was taken as a model drug. Adding different amount of MB to 10% ( w / w ) PVP aqueous solutions produced the tip solutions containing 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 mg/mL MB. In order to encapsulate water-insoluble drugs within the TD MNs, MX was taken as a model drug. MX was added to 10% ( w / w ) PVP organic solutions using DMF as solvent to produce the tip solutions containing 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40 mg/mL MX. In order to encapsulate particles contained drugs in the TD MNs, silicon dioxide (nanoparticle, 30 nm) was used as a model drug. Silicon dioxide was dispersed in 10% ( w / w ) PVP aqueous solution as the tip solution containing 5 mg/mL silicon dioxide, which was added to the mold within 5 min after ultrasonic treatment to make the suspension equal. In order to encapsulate biomacromolecules in the TD MNs and evaluate whether the process for the fabrication of the TD MNs has effects on the activity of biomacromolecules, tyrosinase (119.5 kDa by electrophoresis) was used as a model drug. Tyrosinase dissolved in 10% ( w / w ) PVP aqueous solutions to make the final concentration of 5000 U/mL. As tyrosinase belongs to biomacromolecules, the effect of the fabrication process on the activity of tyrosinase was investigated by comparing the TD MNs encapsulated 50 U tyrosinase with PCL backing to the TD MNs encapsulated 50 U tyrosinase without PCL backing. All the tip solutions were used to fabricate the TD MNs according to the process for the fabrication of the TD MNs mentioned above unless otherwise specified. Then, all kinds of the TD MNs were photographed by using the camera (EOS 700 D, Canon) with macro lens.
Quantification Methods
The samples in all experiments were prepared and quantified by using the following methods. The samples of MB were analyzed using ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer (UV 2550, Shimadzu) at a wavelength of 664 nm ( ). The samples of MX in vitro experiments were determined spectrophotometrically at 362 nm ( ). The samples of MX in pharmacokinetic studies were determined using HPLC method according to previous study with several adjustments ( ). In brief, the HPLC system (Agilent 1200) equipped with photodiode array detector (DAD) was used by using the following conditions: mobile phase, 40% methanol, 10% acetonitrile, and 50% aqueous solution with 50 mM di-ammoniumhydrogenphosphate; flow rate, 1.0 mL/min; column, Agilent XDB C 18 250 mM × 4.6 mM i.d.; DAD detector wavelength, 362 nm. The HPLC analysis was carried out at room temperature using isocratic conditions, and the volume of injection was 20 μL. The samples of tyrosinase were determined by tyrosinase activity assay which was performed as the previous method with several modifications ( ). In brief, the assay used 3 mL of reaction medium containing 0.5 mM L-DOPA as a substrate in 50 mM Na 2 HPO 4 -NaH 2 PO 4 buffer (pH 6.8). The TD MNs encapsulating tyrosinase with PCL backing or the TD MNs encapsulating tyrosinase without PCL backing were dissolved in 3 mL reaction medium as experimental group. Tyrosinase concentration of 16.67 U/mL (equal to the amount of tyrosinase used to fabricate the TD MNs) in 3 mL reaction medium was taken as a positive control. The reactions were carried out at 305 K and pH 6.8. The optical densities of the samples were then determined at each time interval using spectrophotometer (475 nm, UV 2550, Shimadzu). Relative enzymatic activity (%) = \( \frac{k_1}{k_2}\times 100\% \) , where k 1 and k 2 is the slope of reaction kinetics equation obtained by experimental group and the control, respectively. The experiment of each group was replicated five times ( n = 5).
In Vitro Release Experiments of MX TD MNs
In vitro release experiments of MX TD MNs were carried out according to the previous study ( ) with a few adjustments. In brief, the TD MNs penetrated a single parafilm (PF) layer using an air compressor. The PF membrane was placed on the TD MNs, and the outlet of the air compressor was directed at the PF membrane. When the air compressor started, the airflow pushed the PF membrane toward the bottom of the TD MNs and the tips of the TD MNs would break through the PF membrane. The PF membrane was then folded around the backing of the TD MNs and thermally sealed to create a hermetic “pouch.” A Chinese five dime coin was attached to the back part of the pouch as a sinker (diameter = 20.5 mm; weight = 3.80 g; thickness = 1.65 mm). The equal amount of MX (suspending in 10% PVP solution) sealed by PF was taken as a control. The release experiments were carried out by placing one pouch into a beaker containing 25 mL of phosphate buffer solution (PBS, pH = 7.4) in a thermostatic bath at 305 K with a stirring speed of 52 strokes/min. Samples (2 mL) were extracted from the beaker at the defined time intervals, while an equal volume of PBS was supplemented to the beaker. In order to increase the absorbance value of MX at 362 nm, 40 μL of 1 M HCl solution was added to the sample, and the final concentration of HCl in the sample is 20 mM. These experiments were replicated five times ( n = 5).
Ex Vivo Release Experiments and Safety Studies of MX TD MNs
In order to carry out ex vivo release experiments, the abdominal hair of male SD rat was removed carefully with electric clippers, and then, the rat was fixed by a homemade apparatus. The TD MNs were put on the surface of the skin and pressed by hand for 5 min. After removing the residual TD MNs, scotch tape adhered to the treated site to collect the drug on the surface of the skin, which did not transport into the skin. After that, the residual of the TD MNs and the scotch tape were dissolved in PBS containing HCl (20 mM) for further determination. These experiments were replicated six times ( n = 6).
In order to evaluate the safety and the tolerability of the TD MNs, the duration of micropores induced by the TD MNs was detected by taking photos. In brief, the TD MNs were administered to the abdominal skin by hand for 5 min to induce micropores. The micropores were recorded by a camera, before the administration, just after the administration and at 0, 5 min, 30 min, 2, 4, 8, 12, and 24 h after the administration. To improve the quality of detection, male SD rat and BALB/C mouse were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of chloral hydrate (350 mg/kg) before taking photos.
Pharmacokinetic Studies
Twelve male SD rats (220–250 g) were used in the pharmacokinetic studies. These animals were divided into two groups, MX TD MN group and intragastrical (IG) administration group. The TD MNs encapsulating MX of 332.53 ± 13.37 μg were pressed on depilated skin of the abdomen, and equal amount of MX solution was given intragastrically. Blood samples (0.3 mL) were collected from the caudal vein at 0.33, 0.67, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, and 12 h after drug administration. After 30-min standing, blood sample was centrifuged for 10 min at 3000 rpm to obtain serum samples. Then, the serum samples were supplemented by 1 mol/L HCl and piroxicam as internal standard, and extracted with dichloromethane. The dichloromethane layer of each sample was vaporized and re-dissolved with the mobile phase of HPLC. The re-dissolved samples were determined using HPLC method described in “ Quantification Methods ” section. Pharmacokinetic parameters of MX in rats were measured using WinNonlin software (London, England). The experiment of each group was replicated six times ( n = 6).
Studies on the Anti-Inflammatory Activity of MX TD MNs
The anti-inflammatory activity of MX TD MNs was measured using the carrageenan-induced rat paw edema model described by Winter et al . ( ). Twenty-four male SD rats were distributed into one control group and three treated groups of six animals each. The abdominal hair of the rat was removed carefully with electric clippers 1 day before the experiments. The treated groups included MX TD MNs with doses of 168.33 ± 10.95 (low dose), 332.53 ± 13.37 (medium dose), and 665.06 ± 26.74 μg (high dose). Blank TD MNs without MX was taken as the control group. The TD MNs were pressed on the abdominal skin of rats for 5 min by hand. After 30 min, carrageenan in the volume of 0.1 mL (1% w / v ) in normal saline was injected into the plantar region of the right hind paw of each rat. One, 2, 3, 4, and 5 h after carrageenan injection, paw volume of each rat was measured. The plethysmograph filled with water was used to measure the change in paw volume before and after the drug treatment. The percentage of the change in paw volume was calculated according to the formula, change (%) = 100% × ( V t − V 0 ) / V 0 , where V t is the paw volume at 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 h after carrageenan injection and V 0 is the paw volume before carrageenan injection. The experiment of each group was replicated six times ( n = 6).
Analgesic Effects of MX TD MNs
Inhibition of Acetic Acid-Induced Writhing
Abdominal writhing was induced by intraperitoneal injection of acetic acid (1.0% in distilled water, 10.0 mL/kg) as described previously with several modifications ( ). Twenty-four mice were divided into four groups, one treated with blank TD MNs without MX as a control whereas the others were treated with 75.97 ± 9.13 (low dose), 168.33 ± 10.95 (medium dose), and 332.53 ± 13.37 (high dose) μg MX TD MNs. The abdominal hair of mouse was removed carefully with electric clippers 1 day before the experiments. Acetic acid was administered 1 h after application of the TD MNs. The total number of writhes made between 0 and 10 min was counted. The results are expressed as percent inhibition (%) = 100% × ( W c − W d ) / W c , where W c = average number of writhes without any treatment and W d = average number of writhes after drug treatment. The experiment of each group was replicated six times ( n = 6).
Increasing of Thermal Pain Threshold
Thermal pain threshold was measured with the hot-plate method as described by Kitchen et al . ( ). In brief, a copper plate surrounded by clear perspex was maintained at 55 ± 0.5°C by a heated water bath. Twenty-four mice were divided into four groups, one treated with blank TD MNs without MX as a control whereas the others were treated with 75.97 ± 9.13 (low dose), 168.33 ± 10.95 (medium dose), and 332.53 ± 13.37 (high dose) MX TD MNs. The abdominal hair of mouse was removed carefully with electric clippers 1 day before the experiments. The TD MNs were pressed on the abdominal skin of the mouse by hand for 5 min. One half, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 h after drug administration, the mouse was placed on the hot plate and the nociceptive end-point was taken as paw licking or jumping on the few occasions when the paw-licking response was absent. Any lifting associated with normal locomotion was excluded. A maximum response time of 60 s was used, and animals failing to respond within this time were recorded as 60 s for statistical analysis. In all experiments, mice were tested only once. The experiment of each group was replicated six times ( n = 6).
Statistical Analysis
Means and standard deviations (SD) of at least five replicates per point were calculated. Statistical significance in studies on anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects of MX TD MNs was determined by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using Microsoft Excel 2007. A P value (< 0.05) was considered to be significant.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Encapsulate Model Drugs Within the TD MNs
As shown in Fig. 2 , four kinds of drugs were successfully encapsulated in the TD MNs, including MB, MX, silicon dioxide, and tyrosinase, which demonstrated that the process for the fabrication of the TD MNs was suitable for water-soluble drugs, water-insoluble drugs, nanoparticles, and biomacromolecules. Figure 2 shows apparently that the TD MNs have needle-like structure with a square base (length of 10 mm), on which lied 144 needles arranged in 12 × 12 square. Each needle of the TD MNs had a quadrangular pyramid-shaped with 380 μm in length and 680 μm in height. The TD MNs were composed of two layers: one called dissolving tips, which were made of dissolving polymers and drugs, and the other called undissolving backing, which was made of undissolving polymers (PCL). Fig. 2 Pictures of the TD MNs encapsulated MB ( a ), MX ( b ), silicon dioxide ( c ), and tyrosinase ( d ) in the tips
Previous studies showed that the common dissolving MNs also included tips and backing, which were both made of dissolving polymers ( ). Most dissolving MNs encapsulated drugs both in the tips and the backing, which may induce difficulty in regulating MN drug loading and decrease the utilization of drugs. It seemed that the MNs with dissolving backing encapsulating drugs only in the tips could solve the issues mentioned above, but it still faced some challenges. The fabrication of these MNs took a long time (commonly over 10 h) to wait the backing dried, by which the stability of the encapsulated drugs or biomacromolecules might be negatively affected ( ). Moreover, during the drying process, the drugs may diffuse from the tips to the backing, which would induce difficulty in controlling the amount of the drugs ( ). The MNs with dissolving backing also increased the risk of transporting substantial polymers without pharmacological effects to the circulatory system. Therefore, the TD MNs with undissolving backing were designed to tackle with these issues. It only took appropriately 1 h to fabricate the TD MNs, because the undissolving backing solidified within 10 min. The quicker the backing solidified, the fewer the drugs diffused from the tips to the backing.
Drug Loading Capacity of the TD MNs
Dissolving MNs were restricted to encapsulate water-soluble biomacromolecules, such as insulin, human growth hormone, erythropoietin, and vaccines ( ). To break through the bottle neck of the dissolving MNs, the TD MNs were designed for transdermal delivery of chemical drugs, like MB (stand for water-soluble drugs) and MX (stand for water-insoluble drugs). In order to study the MB loading capacity of the TD MNs, the tip solutions with different MB concentrations of 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 mg/mL were used to produce MB TD MNs with various doses. Each experiment was replicated six times ( n = 6). The results showed a great linear relationship between the MB content in the tips and the concentration of solutions, which satisfied the linear equation ( y = 7.312 x − 13.92, R 2 = 0.990). As shown in Fig. 3 a, MB content ranging from 56.36 ± 3.96 to 362.19 ± 24.57 μg can be encapsulated in the tips. As for MX, due to the water insolubility of MX, the DMF organic solutions containing 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40 mg/mL MX were prepared to produce MX TD MNs. Each experiment was replicated six times ( n = 6). The results showed a great linear relationship between MX content in TD MN tips and the concentration of MX, which satisfied the linear equation ( y = 8.504 x − 5.666, R 2 = 0.999). As shown in Fig. 3 b, MX content ranging from 37.23 ± 8.40 to 332.53 ± 13.37 μg can be encapsulated in the tips. The above results demonstrated that the TD MNs with controllable dose of drugs in the tips have been produced by adjusting the concentration of the tip solutions, which was important to accurate administration of drugs because of the therapeutic window of drugs ( ). Fig. 3 The relationship between drug loading capacity of the TD MNs and concentration of the tip solutions containing drugs. a MB. b MX
Effects of the Fabrication Process on the Stability of Biomacromolecules
In order to investigate the effects of the fabrication process on the stability of biomacromolecules, tyrosinase was chosen as a model drug. The fabrication process was simply divided into two steps, including the drying process of the tip solutions and the solidifying process of the PCL backing. Thus, the experiments were divided into three groups: tyrosinase TD MNs fabricated regularly were taken as group 1; tyrosinase solutions dried in mold but without PCL backing were taken as group 2; the equal amount of tyrosinase without fabrication process was used as a control. The samples were tested by the method described in “ Quantification Methods ” section. As shown in Fig. 4 , there was no significant difference between the control and the group 2 ( P > 0.05), which suggested that the drying process of the tip solutions did not influence the activity of tyrosinase. However, there was significant difference between the group 1 and the group 2 ( P < 0.05), which demonstrated that the solidifying process of the PCL backing might do harm to the activity of tyrosinase. Even so, tyrosinase in the group one still maintained the relative enzymatic activity of 90.4%, which suggested that the complete process of the TD MN fabrication only had slight effects on the stability of tyrosinase. Donnelly et al . reported that galactose MN fabrication process resulted in substantial losses of the incorporated 5-aminolevulinic acid and bovine serum albumin (40 and 100%, respectively) ( ), whereas only 9.6% loss of tyrosinase in the TD MN fabrication. This may be due to the short producing period (appropriately 1 h) and relative low melting point of PCL (62°C) ( ). Fig. 4 Effects of the TD MN fabrication process on the stability of tyrosinase: group 1 for studying the effects of the complete process and group two for studying the effects of the drying process of the tip solutions. The error bar represents the standard deviation of the mean ( n = 5)
In Vitro Release of MX TD MNs
Figure 5 shows the release of MX from the TD MNs using the hermetic pouch experimental system, which has been proved to be a good alternative to the use of Franz cells ( ). The MX concentration of the samples collected from the control was below the limit of quantification. So, the data of the control were not shown. As shown in Fig. 5 a, the release profile suggested that MX released effectively from the pouch, and appropriately 327.05 ± 30.82 μg ( n = 5) MX was released within 45 min. The previous study showed that there were two steps involved in the hermetic pouch experimental system ( ). The first step was involved with the dissolution of the tips, and the second step was involved with the dissolution of the backing. However, the shape of the release profile in our experiment was different, which suggested that there was only one step involved in the release process. This may be because MX TD MNs we used only encapsulated drugs in the tips. As shown in Fig. 5 b, the release percentage of MX reached 91.72% at 30 min, and closed to 100% at 45 min. Interestingly, in the process of the experiment, it was observed that the tips were broken away from the backing in the first few minutes. That is to say, the release profile was the dissolution of the TD MN tips in the release medium. This phenomenon was similar to the release profile of the separable arrowhead MNs, which were reported by Chu et al . in 2011 ( ). Actually, the structure of the TD MNs was similar to the separable arrowhead MNs, so the tips were shown to separate in the release medium within a few minutes. Besides, we used PCL to make the TD MNs backing instead of stainless steel which was used as the backing in the separable arrowhead MNs, and it would be more eco-friendly and cheaper. According to the report, arrowheads were shown to separate in skin within 1 s and administer over 80% of encapsulated compounds ( ). Therefore, it could be speculated that the time for the TD MN insertion into skin might only take seconds. Fig. 5 MX release from one PF/MN pouch containing MX of 332.53 ± 13.37 μg ( a ). Release percentage of MX at each time interval ( b ). The residual of the TD MNs after the tips dissolved ( c ). Means ± standard deviation, n = 5
Ex Vivo Release and Safety Studies of MX TD MNs
The various doses of MX TD MNs made by adding 10, 20, and 40 mg/mL tip solutions to the mold were used to investigate the delivery efficiency in rats. The low, medium, and high doses of the TD MNs contained 75.98 ± 9.13, 168.33 ± 10.95, and 332.53 ± 13.37 μg of MX in the tips, respectively, were pressed on the abdominal skin of rats by hand for 5 min. After removing the residual TD MNs, the MX remained in the TD MNs and the scotch tape was determined by the method mentioned before. Therefore, the amount of MX delivered into the skin could be calculated, which are shown in Table I . It was found that the delivery efficiency of various doses of the TD MNs had no significant difference ( P > 0.05) with average delivery efficiency of 79.18%, which was much higher than the common dissolving MNs (49.2%) ( ). This can be explained by the avoidance of drug diffusion to the backing during the drying process, which ensured that the drug only located in the tips. The more amount of MX located in the tips, the more MX delivered into the skin. Table I Delivery Efficiency of the MX TD MNs in Rats MX concentration of the tip solutions (mg/mL) MX amount of one TD MNs (μg) Residual on the backing and the scotch tape (μg) Dissolved into skin (μg) Delivery efficiency (%) RSD (%, n = 6) 10 75.98 ± 9.13 17.96 ± 1.06 58.01 76.36 5.88 20 168.33 ± 10.95 35.19 ± 1.69 133.14 79.10 4.80 40 332.53 ± 13.37 59.58 ± 2.99 272.96 82.08 5.02
To investigate the duration of micropores created by the TD MNs, the healing process of rat and mouse skin is recorded in Fig. 6 . The recovery of the skin can be monitored by observing the size of micropores on the treated site. It was observed that the micropores on both rat and mouse skin were clear at 0 min after removing the TD MNs. Moreover, erythema was found only in the first few hours. However, the micropores and erythema were gradually disappearing. Then, after 24 h, the skin of both rat and mouse seemed to restore. Fig. 6 The recovery time of skin of rat ( a ) and mouse ( b ) treated by the MX TD MNs. Specifically, after the abdomen skin of rat and the dorsal skin of mouse treated by the MX TD MNs, photos were taken at each time interval
Pharmacokinetic Studies
The serum concentration–time profile after administration of MX TD MNs is shown in Fig. 7 . For the TD MN group, the peak level, C max , and the time when serum MX level reaches to C max , T max , and the area under the curve (AUC 0–12 h ) were 265.76 ± 40.12 ng/mL, 3 h, and 1762.61 ng h/mL, while in the IG group, they were 215.89 ± 24.60 ng/mL, 2 h, and 1441.37 ng h/mL, respectively. As Fig. 7 showed, the serum MX concentration of the TD MN group was higher than that of the IG group in the first 8 h after administration. This may be due to the fact that the absorption of MX from the TD MN group into the systemic circulation through the capillaries without the first-pass hepatic metabolism, while the absorption of MX from the IG group would be degraded by the first-pass hepatic metabolism. The time to the peak of serum concentration of the TD MNs group was 1 h later than the IG group. This can be explained by the fact that the diffusion rate of MX in the epidermal and dermal regions of the skin and permeation through the capillaries into the systemic circulation was lower than the rate of the gastrointestinal absorption. Compared to the IG group, the relative bioavailability (RBA) of the TD MN administration reached 122.3%, which was calculated using the following equation: \( \mathrm{RBA}\left(\%\right)=\frac{{\mathrm{AUC}}_{\mathrm{MNs}}}{{\mathrm{AUC}}_{\mathrm{IG}}}\times \frac{{\mathrm{AUC}}_{\mathrm{MNs}}}{{\mathrm{AUC}}_{\mathrm{IG}}}\times 100\% \) . These results proved that the TD MNs could substitute for oral administration as a novel administration route of MX. Fig. 7 The concentration–time curve of the MX TD MN group and the intragastrical (IG) group was presented, using SD rat as an animal model; all data represent the means of the experiments ± SD ( n = 6)
The Anti-Inflammatory Activity of MX TD MNs
In order to investigate the anti-inflammatory activity, MX TD MNs with various doses were pressed into the abdominal skin of rats. The results are shown in Fig. 8 . It was obvious that intraplantar injection of carrageenan in the rats led to a time-dependent increase in paw volume (paw edema) which was maximal at 4 h after carrageenan injection. However, carrageenan-induced paw edema was significantly reduced in a dose-dependent manner after treatment with various doses of the TD MNs at 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 h. Compared to the control at the fourth hour, low, medium, and high doses of MX TD MNs significantly ( P < 0.05) reduced carrageenan-induced paw edema change (%) from 66.4% (the control) to 33.5, 22.6, and 18.8%, respectively. Therefore, the results demonstrated that all doses of MX TD MNs had significant anti-inflammatory effects on the paw edema caused by carrageenan. Fig. 8 Effects of the MX TD MNs with doses of 168.33 ± 10.95 (low dose), 332.53 ± 13.37 (medium dose), and 665.06 ± 26.74 μg (high dose) on the changes in rat paw volume ( n = 6)
Inhibition of Acetic Acid-Induced Writhing
In order to study the analgesic activity of MX TD MNs, experiments of acetic acid-induced writhing were carried out. It was observed that the average number of writhing in blank TD MN group, which was taken as a control, was 38.2 ± 5.6 within 10 min. Compared to the control, the writhing inhibition (%) of MX TD MNs, which were calculated by the equation mentioned in “ Inhibition Of Acetic-Acid-Induced Writhing ” section, is shown in Fig. 9 . The results demonstrated that MX TD MNs with low, medium, and high doses had shown inhibition of 20.2, 36.4, and 68.9%, respectively. The analgesic activities of MX TD MNs with various doses were exhibited significantly ( P < 0.05) in a dose-dependent manner. Therefore, the results showed that all doses of MX TD MNs had significant analgesic activities on the mice writhing test induced by acetic acid. Fig. 9 Analgesic activity of the MX TD MNs with low, medium, and high doses in acetic acid-induced writhing test in mice. Results are expressed as mean ± SD ( n = 6)
Increasing of Thermal Pain Threshold
The experiments of thermal pain threshold were designed to investigate the analgesic activity of MX TD MNs on the mice. As shown in Fig. 10 , the thermal pain threshold of the mice increased with the various doses of the TD MNs in a dose-dependent manner. The TD MNs with medium and high doses both increased the thermal pain threshold significantly at each time interval ( P < 0.05). However, there was no significant difference between the TD MNs with low dose and the control at each time interval ( P > 0.05), except the fourth hour. The increase of the thermal pain threshold reached the peak at 4 h after the administration of MX TD MNs. Specifically, the thermal pain threshold of the mice had been increased by MX TD MNs with low, medium, and high doses from 11.3 s (the control) to 17.6, 36.8, and 55.0 s at fourth hour, respectively. The results demonstrated that the MX TD MNs had significantly increased the thermal pain threshold of the mice. Fig. 10 Effects of the administration of the MX TD MNs with low, medium, and high doses on thermal pain threshold in mice. The error bar represents the standard deviation of the mean ( n = 6)
CONCLUSIONS
This study introduced the TD MNs for transdermal delivery of drugs. The TD MNs consisted of dissolving tips and an undissolving PCL backing. Four kinds of drugs including water-soluble drugs, water-insoluble drugs, nanoparticles, and biomacromolecules had been encapsulated in the tips of the TD MNs successfully. Drug loading amount of MB and MX in the tips were also investigated, which could be controlled by the concentration of the tip solutions. The MX TD MNs ensured the rapid and efficient delivery (79.18%) of MX into the skin. The novel design of the TD MNs reduced the time of fabrication (appropriately 1 h), located the drugs only in the tips, and maintained the stability (90.4%) of biomacromolecules during the fabrication process. As for the safety, the micropores induced by MX TD MNs restored within 24 h, which demonstrated that the TD MNs were a relatively safe technique. In pharmacokinetic studies, the relative bioavailability of MX TD MN administration was 122.3% when compared to the IG group. The pharmacodynamic studies demonstrated that MX TD MNs had significant anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities when compared to the control. In conclusion, the TD MNs as a quick, convenient, safe, and effective method for transdermal drug delivery of MX have a promising prospect in the near future.