INTRODUCTION
Cancer is among the most serious diseases faced by the humanity and a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. With the progress in scientific research and technologies, the different anticancer strategies including surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and small biological agents have been developed for the treatment of cancer ( ). Though various chemotherapeutic agents are available for cancer treatment, there are still many problems confronted during their clinical application which require their effective delivery to tumor tissues with a minimal amount to other sites ( ). Single therapeutic agents are commonly used in drug delivery systems (DDS) ( ). However, the use of controlled DDS of two or more chemotherapeutic drugs via nanocarrier has attracted much attention for effective and safe treatment of cancers. Moreover, combination chemotherapy can be applied against many cancer types to improve the treatment efficacy. Combination therapy, unlike single-drug therapy, can regulate distinct signaling pathways, hence can maximize cytotoxicity and reduce dosage of each drug as well as can possibly overcome mechanism of resistance ( , , ).
There are growing evidences that the combination of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) with various conventional chemotherapeutic drugs increase the killing of cancer cells. Pre-clinical and clinical data have shown the synergistic effects of HDACi with DNA topoisomerase inhibitors (camptothecin, irinotecan, topotecan, and etoposide) and other DNA-damaging agents (cisplatin, oxaliplatin, and bleomycin) ( ). An important attribute of HDACi is that they induce cancer cell death at concentrations to which normal cells are relatively resistant, possibly due to potentially large differences in the acetylome of normal versus tumor cells, making them well suited for cancer therapy ( ). Vorinostat (VOR) was the first HDACi approved by the US FDA for the treatment of patients with progressive, persistent, or recurrent cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL) ( , ). However, the drug faces challenges of low aqueous solubility, low cell permeability, short elimination half-life, extensive serum clearance, and several side effects ( , , , ). Etoposide (ETOP), a DNA topoisomerase II inhibitor, is widely used in chemotherapy of various solid tumors, including small cell lung carcinoma, testicular tumor, stomach cancer, ovarian cancer, and retinoblastoma ( , ). The drug is commercialized in the form of non-aqueous parenteral solutions for intravenous use and oral soft gelatin capsules. However, both of these formulations have disadvantages of precipitation, hypersensitivity reactions, and low and variable bioavailability ( ).
Nanocarrier systems provide an innovative approach for efficient combination drug delivery. It is very difficult to maintain the specific drug ratios systemically which were previously selected in vitro , due to the independent pharmacokinetics and bio-distribution of individual drugs. Therefore, nanocarriers can be used to deliver the drug combination to maintain effective drug ratio after systemic administration which leads to expose tumor more efficiently ( ). Among various nanocarriers, PEG-based polymeric nanogels are one of the most promising drug carriers because of their high anticancer drug payload, prolonged circulation half-life, higher stability, control over drug release kinetics, flexibility, and ease of functionalization with variety of surface specific ligands ( ). As a result of advancement in nanomedicine, the doxorubicin (topoisomerase II inhibitor) loaded liposome formulation containing a PEG-derived phospholipid hit the market as the first therapeutic nanomedicine with the US FDA approval in 1995 ( ). Our research group has also reported the use of poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG)-based disulfide cross-linked nanogels for the delivery of polyphenolic antioxidants gallic acid and ellagic acid ( , ). S. Ganta et al. have examined the paclitaxel (PTX) and curcumin (CUR) combination delivery through flaxseed oil nanoemulsion for the enhancement of efficacy in SKOV3 cells and drug-resistant SKOV3TR human ovarian adenocarcinoma cells ( ). In another study, they have also shown that tamoxifen and PTX efficiently encapsulate into the poly(epsilon-caprolactone) (PEO-PCL) nanoparticles, enhanced the antitumor efficacy, and overcome multidrug resistance in ovarian cancer ( ). Also, in another study, co-delivery of hydrophilic doxorubicin (DOX) and hydrophobic paclitaxel (PTX) through an amphiphilic copolymer methoxy poly(ethylene glycol)-poly(lactide-coglycolide) (mPEG-PLGA) showed the anticancer activity towards A549, B16, and HepG2 cells ( ).
In the present study, we explored the potential of combination treatment of pan-HDAC inhibitor, VOR and DNA topoisomerase II inhibitor, ETOP. The simultaneous administration of both the drugs resulted in synergistic effect on human cervical cancer HeLa cells. Based on this result, we investigated the efficacy of drug-encapsulated nanogels. We report the synthesis and characterization of poly(ethylene glycol) monomethacrylate (POEOMA)-based disulfide cross-linked nanogels encapsulating VOR and ETOP using activators generated by electron transfer for atom transfer radical polymerization (AGET-ATRP). The nanogels have been shown to degrade in glutathione (GSH), a natural reducing agent inside the cells. The in vitro VOR and ETOP release behavior from POEOMA nanogels was studied at the physiological pH. We then examined the effect of VOR-POEOMA and ETOP-POEOMA either alone or in combination on cell proliferation, cell cycle, and apoptotic response. VOR and ETOP encapsulated POEOMA nanogel combination treatment showed synergistic cell death and enhanced cell killing efficiency.
EXPERIMENTAL
Chemicals and Materials
ETOP and VOR were purchased from Selleck Chemicals. Oligo(ethylene glycol) monomethyl ether methacrylate (OEO 300 MA) with M n = 300 g/mol, poly(ethylene glycol) monomethacrylate (PEOMA 526 , M n = 526 g/mol), poly(ethylene glycol) monomethylether with M n = 2000 (PEO 2000 -OH), 2-Bromo-2-methylpropionic acid (98%), 3,3-dithiopropionic acid, copper(II) bromide (CuBr 2 , 99%), sorbitan monooleate (span 80), and L-ascorbic acid (99%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 4-Dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP) was purchased from Spectrochem. 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-yl) 2,5-diphenyltetrazoliumbromide (MTT), fetal bovine serum (FBS), DMEM, and propidium iodide (PI) were purchased from Himedia. 2-Bromo-2-methyl propionyl poly(ethylene glycol) monomethyl ether (PEO 2000 -Br) - macroinitiator, tris-[(2-pyridyl)methyl] amine (TPMA) - ligand, and dithiopropionyl poly(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate (ssDMA) - cross-linker were synthesized according to the procedure reported earlier ( , , ). OEO 300 MA was purified by passing it through basic alumina to remove inhibitor, and PEOMA 526 was purified according to the procedure reported elsewhere ( ). All other chemicals used were of analytical reagent quality.
Cytotoxicity Evaluation of Free Drugs and Combination Index
Human cervical cancer HeLa cell line was purchased from NCCS, Pune, India, and maintained in DMEM containing 10% FBS and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic solution at 37°C with 5% CO 2 . Cell viability assay was performed using MTT as described previously ( , ). Cytotoxicity of free VOR and ETOP was measured on HeLa cells to calculate the IC 50 values at 72 h and combination index (CI) (Table I and Fig. 1 ) according to the Chou and Talalay method ( ). Table I Combination index (CI) of vorinostat/etoposide combination in HeLa cells Combination Concentration (μM) Fraction affected (Fa) Combination index (CI) Interaction VOR 3.03 6.06 12.13 15.16 18.19 0.20 ± 0.02 0.38 ± 0.02 0.57 ± 0.03 0.70 ± 0.05 0.71 ± 0.07 ETOP 0.95 1.9 3.8 4.75 5.7 0.37 ± 0.04 0.40 ± 0.03 0.46 ± 0.01 0.52 ± 0.03 0.66 ± 0.01 VOR + ETOP 0.95 + 3.03 1.9 + 6.06 3.8 + 12.13 4.75 + 15.16 5.7 + 18.19 0.70 ± 0.05 0.81 ± 0.01 0.86 ± 0.02 0.88 ± 0.006 0.90 ± 0.01 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 Strong synergism Strong synergism Strong synergism Synergism Synergism Fig. 1 Effect of a VOR and b ETOP on the viability of HeLa cell line. HeLa cells were treated with increasing concentrations of VOR and ETOP for 72 h. Cell viability was determined by MTT assay. The results are presented as mean ± SD. The IC 50 72h values were calculated from sigmoidal dose-response curves generated in Prism 5.0 (GraphPad)
Preparation of Poly(Oligoethylene Glycol) Monomethacrylate Nanogels
Poly(oligoethylene glycol) monomethacrylate (POEOMA) nanogels were synthesized by inverse mini-emulsion AGET-Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization (ATRP) method ( ). PEO 2000 -Br (33.4 mg, 0.016 mmol), OEO 300 MA (1.4 g, 4.67 mmol), CuBr 2 (1.7 mg, 0.008 mmol), TPMA (2.3 mg, 0.008 mmol), and milli-Q water (1.4 mL) were mixed in a round bottom flask (50 mL), and 1.5 mol% ssDMA cross-linker was introduced in aqueous solution. The resulting clear solution was then mixed with solution of Span 80 (1.0 g) in cyclohexane (20 g) and sonicated for 2 min in an ice bath at 0°C to get a stable inverse mini-emulsion. This dispersion was transferred to a schlenk flask (50 mL) and then degassed by bubbling with N 2 for 30 min. The schlenk flask was immersed in a water bath preheated to 30°C, and then, a nitrogen-purged aqueous solution of ascorbic acid (0.094 mmol/mL, 0.007 mmol, 74 μL) was injected via syringe to start the polymerization. The reaction mixture was exposed to air after 2 h to stop the polymerization. The obtained nanogels were purified by removal of cyclohexane, addition of tetrahydrofuran, and the resulting heterogeneous solution was then stirred for 5 h at room temperature (Fig. 2 ). The nanogels were separated by centrifugation (12,000 rpm, 30 min), and the supernatant was discarded. Same procedure was repeated twice to ensure the complete removal of unreacted monomers and cyclohexane. After the final wash, the nanogels were dried in a speed vacuum (Thermo Scientific, SAVANT SPD2010) for 4 h and stored at room temperature for further use. Fig. 2 Schematic representation of the nanogel synthesis by ATRP via inverse mini-emulsion and degradation in the presence of GSH to get water-soluble chains
Biodegradation Study in the Presence of GSH
The extent of nanogel degradation was assessed by measuring the weight loss of swollen nanogels with different concentration of glutathione (GSH) for 24 h. Twenty milligrams of the dried nanogels was swollen in 1.5 mL of deionized water for 2 days with repeatedly changing the water and then centrifuged (14,000 rpm, 20 min) to separate swollen nanogels (W 1 ). The swollen nanogels were then mixed with highest extracellular (20 μM), lowest intracellular (2 mM), and highest intracellular (10 mM) GSH concentration in water (1.5 mL) ( ) and stirred at room temperature for the required time and finally centrifuged (14,000 rpm, 20 min) to separate the nanogels (W 2 ). The amount of nanogels remained was calculated from the weight fraction (W 2 /W 1 × 100) (Fig. 3 ). A control experiment was also carried out in the absence of GSH using similar conditions. Fig. 3 Biodegradation study of the disulfide cross-linked POEOMA nanogels at extracellular (20 μM) and intracellular (2 and 10 mM) GSH concentration (mean ± SD, n = 3)
Drug Loading
Twenty milligrams of POEOMA nanogels was allowed to completely swell in deionized water (1.5 mL) for 2 days with repeatedly changing the water (after every 8 h) and then centrifuged to separate swollen nanogels. Two milligrams of drug (VOR or ETOP) dissolved in methanol (0.5 mL) was added to the swollen nanogels and allowed to stir for 2 days. Supernatant was collected to calculate the amount of VOR/ETOP loaded into the nanogels indirectly by measuring absorbance at 283 and 241 nm for VOR and ETOP, respectively, in a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer Lambda 25, USA). The calibration curve for VOR ( R 2 = 0.9912) and ETOP ( R 2 = 0.9955) standards was obtained in the concentration range 3–20 and 10–170 μg/mL, respectively. The drug loading experiment was performed in triplicate ( n = 3) and presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) of three independent experiments (Table II ). The resulting VOR- and ETOP-loaded POEOMA nanogels were dried in speed vacuum for 4 h. Table II Physicochemical properties of nanogels loaded with VOR and ETOP Drug Theoretical drug loading (wt. percentage of drug) (% w / w ) Encapsulation efficiency (% w /w ± SD) Actual drug loading (% w / w ± SD) Size (d.nm ± SD) ___ ___ ___ ___ 86.35 ± 4.64 VOR 10 34.81 ± 0.27 3.48 ± 0.03 112.7 ± 11.88 ETOP 10 26.31 ± 2.28 2.62 ± 0.23 142.4 ± 4.92 Data represents mean ± SD ( n = 3)
The encapsulation efficiency (EE) and drug loading (DL) of VOR and ETOP in POEOMA nanogels were calculated by using the following equation:
$$ {\displaystyle \begin{array}{c}\kern1.00em \mathrm{Encapsulation}\kern.5em \mathrm{efficiency}\kern.5em \left(\mathrm{EE}\right)\%=\frac{\mathrm{Total}\kern.5em \left[ VOR/\mathrm{ETOP}\right]\kern.5em \mathrm{used}-\mathrm{unencapsulated}\kern.5em \left[ VOR/\mathrm{ETOP}\right]\kern.5em }{\mathrm{Total}\kern.5em \left[ VOR/\mathrm{ETOP}\right]\kern.5em \mathrm{used}}\times 100\kern1.00em \\ {}\kern1.00em \mathrm{Drug}\kern.5em \mathrm{loading}\kern.5em \left(\mathrm{DL}\right)\%=\frac{\mathrm{Total}\kern.5em \left[ VOR/\mathrm{ETOP}\right]\kern1.00em \mathrm{used}-\mathrm{unencapsulated}\kern.5em \left[ VOR/\mathrm{ETOP}\right]\kern.5em }{\mathrm{Total}\kern.5em \mathrm{amount}\kern.5em \mathrm{of}\kern.5em \mathrm{nanogels}\kern.5em \mathrm{used}}\times 100\kern1.00em \end{array}} $$
Dynamic Light Scattering and Transmission Electron Microscopy
Size distribution characterization of the nanogels was carried out using dynamic light scattering (DLS) by suspending the nanogels in Milli-Q water (1 mg/mL) on a Zetasizer Micro V/ZMV 2000 (Malvern, UK) at 689 nm with the scattering angle of 90° and at 25°C (Fig. 4 ). The average diameter was calculated using the cumulative method. The stained POEOMA and VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogels were visualized directly by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (TECNAI G2 20 S-TWIN (Czech Republic) FEI). Samples were prepared by placing a drop of freshly prepared nanogel suspension onto a 300-mesh carbon-coated copper grid followed by phosphotungstic acid (PTA) staining at room temperature. All the pictures were captured at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV and observed at 200 nm scale bar (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 Hydrodynamic size distribution and TEM images of a POEOMA nanogels, b VOR-POEOMA nanogels and c ETOP-POEOMA nanogels
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
Functionalization of the nanogel was examined by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). The FTIR spectra (Fig. 5 ) of free VOR, free ETOP, blank POEOMA nanogels, VOR-POEOMA nanogels, ETOP-POEOMA nanogels, and physical mixture of VOR and ETOP with POEOMA nanogels were recorded in the range of 4000 to 600 cm −1 in the transmission mode using Perkin-Elmer spectrum-two spectrometer having Ze-Se ATR (USA). Fig. 5 FT-IR spectra of a POEOMA nanogels, b VOR, c ETOP, d VOR-POEOMA nanogels, e ETOP-POEOMA nanogels, f physical mixture of VOR and POEOMA nanogels, and g physical mixture of ETOP and POEOMA nanogels
X-ray Powder Diffraction
The free VOR, free ETOP, blank POEOMA nanogels, VOR-POEOMA nanogels, ETOP-POEOMA nanogels, and physical mixture containing VOR, ETOP with POEOMA nanogels were evaluated for crystallinity by scanning the X-ray powder diffraction pattern on a Bruker AXS D8 Discover (Germany) with Cu-Kα radiation source (λ = 1.54184 Å) and a highly sensitive D/tex ultra detector. The samples were placed in glass sample holders, and the patterns were obtained with diffraction angle 2θ from 5° to 60° at a scanning speed of 2°/min at room temperature (Fig. 6 ). The current and voltage used were 44 mA and 40 kV, respectively. Fig. 6 Powder X-ray diffraction of a POEOMA nanogels, b VOR, c ETOP, d VOR-POEOMA nanogels, e ETOP-POEOMA nanogels, f physical mixture of VOR and POEOMA nanogels, and g physical mixture of ETOP and POEOMA nanogels from 5° to 60° at scanning speed of 2°/min
Thermal Analysis
The thermal behavior of free VOR, free ETOP, blank POEOMA nanogels, VOR-POEOMA nanogels, and ETOP-POEOMA nanogels were analyzed using a differential scanning calorimeter (Pyris 6 DSC, Perkin-Elmer, USA). The dried samples (5 mg) were sealed into aluminum pans and then heated from 40 to 300°C temperature at a rate of 10°C/min with a constant supply of N 2 (Fig. 7 ). An empty sealed pan was used as a reference. Fig. 7 Differential scanning calorimetry of a POEOMA nanogels, b VOR, c ETOP, d VOR-POEOMA nanogels, e ETOP-POEOMA at scanning speed of 10°C/min
In Vitro Drug Release Studies
In vitro release of VOR and ETOP from POEOMA nanogels was evaluated by dialysis method. Twenty milligrams of each drug-loaded nanogels was suspended in 2 mL of phosphate buffer saline (PBS) (pH = 7.4) and sealed into the dialysis bags (MW Cut off = 2 KDa, Sigma, USA). The dialysis bags were incubated in 118 mL of PBS buffer with constant stirring at 60 rpm maintained at 37°C. One milliliter of incubated medium was removed and replaced with the same volume of fresh PBS buffer immediately. The amount of VOR and ETOP released at each time point was determined by UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer Lambda 25, USA) from the pre-determined calibration curve. The in vitro release study of free VOR and ETOP was also carried out for comparison with VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogels (Fig. 8 ). The release measurements were performed in triplicate ( n = 3). Fig. 8 Release profile of VOR and ETOP from POEOMA nanogels along with free VOR and ETOP (mean ± SD, n = 3)
In Vitro Cytotoxicity
Based on the results of synergistic combination index of free VOR and ETOP, the experiment was designed to check the impact of drugs encapsulated POEOMA nanogel as an efficient method for anticancer drug delivery. Briefly, cells were seeded into 96-well plates and then treated with IC 50 72h concentration of VOR and ETOP, either as free drugs, their combination, VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogels, or their combination. After 48 h of incubation, the amount of viable cells was evaluated using MTT assay as described previously ( ). The results are presented as a percentage of cell viability in comparison to untreated controls (Fig. 9 ). Fig. 9 Effect of VOR/ETOP-encapsulated POEOMA nanogel combination on cell viability of HeLa cell line. Cell viability of HeLa cells was measured after 48 h of exposure to VOR, ETOP, VOR + ETOP, VOR-POEOMA, ETOP-POEOMA, and VOR-POEOMA + ETOP-POEOMA of 1:1 concentration (VOR 12.13 μM: EP 3.8 μM) at a fixed ratio of 1:0.3 calculated from the IC 50 72h of each drug. ** P < 0.01 VOR + ETOP vs VOR-POEOMA + ETOP-POEOMA
Cell Cycle Analysis
Cell cycle analysis is a useful method in determining the changes from normal kinetics of cell cycle after exposure to various agents under study ( ). Cell cycle analysis was done as described previously ( ). Briefly, HeLa cells were treated with free VOR/ETOP, their combination, VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogels, and the combination of VOR-POEOMA and ETOP-POEOMA nanogels for 24 h and then analyzed for cell cycle kinetics using propidium iodide (PI) (Fig. 10 ). The data acquisition and analyses were carried out using FACS Calibur and CellQuest Pro software (BD Biosciences, NJ, USA). Fig. 10 Effect of VOR/ETOP encapsulated POEOMA nanogel combination on cell cycle kinetics of HeLa cell line. a Representative cell cycle plots of HeLa cells untreated or treated with the indicated drugs and their combination and analyzed after 24 h of treatment are shown. b Quantification of cell cycle phases of HeLa cells untreated or treated with indicated drugs and their combination. The relative percentage of cells in different cell cycle phases as well as the percentage of sub-G1 events is reported. The cell cycle progression was determined by PI staining and FCM analyses
Assessment of Apoptosis
After drug exposure, apoptotic cells were detected by Annexin V-APC-PI double staining using the Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit APC (eBioscience Inc., CA, USA), which allowed identification of apoptotic and necrotic cells. Briefly, cells after drug treatment were washed with PBS and stained with Annexin V-APC and PI. The flow cytometry analyses were carried out by using FACS Calibur. Twenty thousand events were acquired, and data was collected using logarithmic amplification of both the FL4 (APC) and FL2 (PI) channels. Unstained cells were used as control for autofluorescence. Quadrant analysis of coordinated dot plots was done using CellQuest Pro software (Fig. 11 ). Fig. 11 Induction of enhanced cell death in HeLa cells after combination treatment of VOR and ETOP encapsulated POEOMA nanogel formulation. HeLa cells were treated with the indicated drugs and their combination for 48 h and the extent of apoptosis was determined by AnnexinV/PI staining following FCM. a Representative dot plots for AnnexinV/PI staining of HeLa cells. Cells in the lower right quadrant (AnnexinV positive) represent early apoptotic cells; cells in the upper right quadrant (AnnexinV/PI positive) represent later apoptotic cells. b The sum of percent positive cells in the upper right and lower right quadrants representing the total apoptotic cell population. *** P < 0.001: VOR + ETOP vs VOR-POEOMA nanogels + ETOP-POEOMA nanogels
Caspase 3/7 Activity Assay
The activity for caspase-3 and the other DEVD-specific protease (caspase-7) in the cells after various drug treatments was determined using the EnzChek® caspase-3 assay kit #1 (Molecular Probes) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, cells were harvested after respective treatments, washed with ice-cold PBS, and re-suspended in cell lysis buffer. The supernatant from each sample was mixed with 50 μL of Z-DEVD-AMC (7-amino-4-methylcoumarin) substrate solution and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. The production of fluorescence generated by the cleavage of the AMC-labeled caspase-3 substrate was measured at Ex/Em wavelength of 342/441 nm (Fig. 12 ). Fig. 12 Synergistic cell killing by combination treatment of VOR- and ETOP-encapsulated POEOMA nanogel formulation augments caspase-3/7 activation. The HeLa cells were treated with the indicated drugs and their combination and analyzed after 48 h for the caspase 3/7 activity. The data represents the fold change in caspase-3/7 activity as compared to the untreated controls
Statistical Analysis
All measurements were done in triplicate, and each experiment was repeated thrice. The values are expressed as mean ± SD. The statistical analysis was performed using Student’s t test with GraphPad Prism 5.0. The p < 0.05 values were considered statistically significant.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Synergistic Effect Between pan-HDAC Inhibitor(VOR) and DNA Topoisomerase II Inhibitor (ETOP)
The cytotoxic effect of free VOR and ETOP on cervical cancer HeLa cells was examined using MTT assay. VOR and ETOP reduced the viability of HeLa cells in a dose-dependent manner as evident from Fig. 1 . The IC 50 72h for VOR and ETOP was 12.13 and 3.8 μM, respectively, which were used further to design and perform the combination treatment study. To determine the combination index (CI), HeLa cells were treated with serial dilutions at a fixed ratio of 1:0.3 of IC 50 72h of free VOR and ETOP, respectively. After 72 h of exposure, growth inhibition was measured. The combined drug effect was analyzed using simultaneous addition of both the drugs. The Table I shows the calculated combination index (CI). A strong synergistic effect with low CI (CI ≤ 0.4) was obtained when pan-HDAC inhibitor, VOR, was given simultaneously with DNA topoisomerase II inhibitor, ETOP, resulting in higher therapeutic efficacy. Based on this result, we planned to encapsulate VOR and ETOP in disulfide cross-linked POEOMA nanogels and to investigate if the combination of nanogel-encapsulated drug combination has enhanced cell killing efficacy and the apoptotic response over the free drugs.
Synthesis of POEOMA Nanogels by AGET ATRP
ATRP is among the most widely used method of controlled radical polymerization which enables the fabrication of uniformly cross-linked gels having well-controlled polymer segments ( , , ). Nanogels synthesized through this technique have several advantageous features such as narrow molecular weight distribution, high drug loading capacity, uniform network, degradable interior, and a high degree of chain end functionality ( ). Fabrication of polymeric drug delivery carriers having degradable cross-linking to get biodegradability is a major area of research in the field of drug delivery. Based on this, we synthesized disulfide cross-linked biodegradable POEOMA nanogels by AGET ATRP via cyclohexane-water inverse mini-emulsion. The nanogels obtained were insoluble in many solvents including methanol, THF, chloroform, and water making it a favorable candidate for drug entrapment. The spherical morphology of the nanogels was verified by TEM micrographs. The size of the synthesized neat POEOMA nanogels was found to be 86.35 ± 4.64 nm by DLS measurement (Fig. 4 ). The intrinsic viscosity [ ɳ ] of the nanogel was determined with Ostwald capillary viscometer ( ), and the value was found to be 0.3506 cm 3 g −1 ( Supplementary material ).
Biodegradation Study of POEOMA Nanogels in the Presence of GSH
Biodegradability of nanogels can be fabricated in response to external stimuli such as temperature, pH change, and enzymes, which provides a number of advantages to the nanogels as selective drug delivery carriers. The responsiveness to the enzymes could facilitate the controlled release of entrapped molecules from the nanogels and ensure the excretion of empty and degraded vehicles after the release of drugs. The synthesized disulfide cross-linked nanogels showed the concentration-dependent degradation in the presence of GSH which was verified as decrease in weight fraction of the nanogels with time (Fig. 3 ). Incubation of POEOMA nanogels with 2 mM GSH (lowest intracellular concentration) resulted in 18% degradation within 1 h which increased to 73% after 24 h. While 10 mM GSH (highest intracellular concentration) led to 83% degradation within 1 h and complete degradation after 24 h. With 20 μM GSH (highest extracellular concentration) and in the absence of GSH, there was almost no nanogel degradation as indicated by 100% weight fraction obtained after incubation. This clearly showed that the synthesized nanogels were capable of degrading only at high GSH concentrations corresponding to intracellular concentration. These types of nanogels are known to degrade into water-soluble chains, which are nontoxic and biocompatible to the cells ( ). Therefore, the strategy adopted here would be beneficial to use these nanogels as suitable drug delivery carrier inside the cells.
Drug Loading, Size, and Morphology of VOR/ETOP-POEOMA Nanogels
Weight percentage used, encapsulation efficiency (EE), actual drug loading (DL), and the mean size of the nanogels are given in Table II . The encapsulation efficiency and drug loading of the VOR/ETOP-loaded POEOMA nanogels were determined according to the formulae given in the methods section. The encapsulation efficiency of 34.81 ± 0.27% was achieved with a drug loading of 3.48 ± 0.03% for VOR whereas encapsulation efficiency of 26.31 ± 2.28% was achieved with a drug loading of 2.62 ± 0.23% for ETOP at 10 weight percentage. The size and size distribution of the nanogels are crucial parameters in the fabrication of drug delivery systems, which greatly influence the drug release behavior and cellular uptake. It has been reported that the particle with size between 20 and 200 nm is suitable to achieve the high cellular uptake and “passive targeting” function to the tumor through enhancing permeability and retention (EPR) effect ( , , ). From Table II and Fig. 4 , it can be seen that the size of the blank nanogels was 86.35 ± 4.641 nm, while the sizes of VOR-POEOMA nanogels and ETOP-POEOMA nanogels were 112.7 ± 11.88 and 142.4 ± 4.92 nm, respectively. We used transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to further confirm the sizes and morphology of the nanogels. TEM micrographs revealed that POEOMA nanogels, VOR-POEOMA nanogels, and ETOP-POEOMA nanogels were spherical (Fig. 4 ). Moreover, their sizes were in good agreement with the DLS measurement where the sizes obtained by TEM were little lower as compared to the sizes obtained by DLS. A bigger particle size by the DLS measurement is due to the swelling state of the nanogels in water, while shrinking of nanogels in TEM measurement can be attributed to the drying process during the sample preparation ( , ).
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy is a versatile non-destructive tool for surface characterization of nanogels. This is a suitable technique for the characterization of fabricated nanoformulation and interaction between the drug and nanogel matrix ( , , ). To serve as an ideal carrier for drug delivery, there should not be any kind of chemical interaction between entrapped molecule and its carrier which often leads to adverse effects and decrease the therapeutic efficacy of the entrapped drug. The FTIR spectra of free VOR, free ETOP, blank POEOMA nanogels, VOR-POEOMA nanogels, ETOP-POEOMA nanogels, and physical mixture of VOR/ETOP with blank POEOMA nanogels are shown in Fig. 5 . The blank POEOMA nanogel spectrum shows the characteristic bands at around 1730 and 1108 cm −1 which correspond to the C=O stretch of the ester groups and C–O–C skeletal stretch of poly(ethylene glycol) backbone, respectively. The characteristic peaks of VOR (1660, 1600, 732, and 697 cm −1 ) were also present in the spectrum of VOR-POEOMA nanogels at 1668, 1600, 733, and 692 cm −1 . Similarly, the characteristic peaks of ETOP (1764, 1486, 994, 805, and 767 cm −1 ) were also present in the spectrum of ETOP-POEOMA nanogels at 1776, 1486, 994, 805, and 767 cm −1 . On the other hand, almost all the peaks of VOR and ETOP were present in the physical mixture of free VOR/ETOP and blank POEOMA nanogels. Therefore, these results could be the strong evidence suggesting that VOR and ETOP have been physically encapsulated without exerting any chemical interaction with the nanogels.
X-ray Powder Diffraction
The interest in the amorphous formulations of low water soluble drugs is growing among the pharmaceutical scientists due to their ability to achieve higher temporary concentrations of the drug on dissolution as compared to formulations having drugs in crystalline form ( ). It is well reported that increasing drug concentration results in enhanced bioavailability of the drug molecule ( ). There are many commercial amorphous solid dispersions including Kaletra®, Belsomra®, Incivek®, and Sporanox® which have successful clinical use. The XRD spectra of free VOR, free ETOP, blank POEOMA nanogels, VOR-POEOMA nanogels, ETOP-POEOMA nanogels, and physical mixture of VOR/ETOP with blank POEOMA nanogels are shown in Fig. 6 . The presence of sharp peaks in the VOR/ETOP diffractogram indicates their crystallinity whereas POEOMA nanogels showed an amorphous pattern. Further, no such VOR/ETOP peaks were visible in VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogel diffractogram. Therefore, the change in the form of VOR/ETOP from crystalline to amorphous was indicated by loss of their characteristic peak in the XRD patterns. In contrary to this, almost all the peaks of VOR/ETOP are visible in the physical mixture of VOR/ETOP and blank POEOMA nanogels ( ).
Thermal Analysis
DSC studies were also carried out to explore the physical state of the drug in the nanoparticles which influence the in vitro and in vivo release mechanism of the drug from the nanocarriers. Different combinations of polymer and drug conjugate may coexist in the polymeric nanocarriers, such as (a) crystalline drug in either crystalline or an amorphous polymer and (b) amorphous drug in either crystalline or an amorphous polymer. The DSC thermograms of free VOR, free ETOP, blank POEOMA nanogels, and VOR-POEOMA nanogels and ETOP-POEOMA nanogels (Fig. 7 ) were plotted simultaneously for comparison. The free VOR and ETOP showed the endothermic melting peak at 162.70°C [163°C ( )] and 288.36°C [285°C ( )], respectively. DSC thermogram of VOR-POEOMA/ETOP-POEOMA did not exhibit the characteristic endothermic melting peak of VOR/ETOP indicating that VOR/ETOP gets molecularly dispersed and was present in the amorphous form in POEOMA nanogel network that confers improved stability to the nano-formulation. These results are consistent with similar studies where doxorubicin (DOX) melting peak disappeared from the DSC curve of DOX-loaded nanogels ( ), and in another study, docetaxel (DTX)-loaded nanoparticles did not show any melting peak of DTX ( ).
In Vitro Release Study
The entrapment of the drug for an extended time period during circulation is crucial for the carriers to promote the drug extravasation into tumors via enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect. The in vitro release profile of VOR and ETOP showed the complete release of free VOR and free ETOP after 3 h at physiological pH (7.4). However, VOR/ETOP release from the nanogels was relatively slow in this process (Fig. 8 ). The VOR and ETOP release from the nanogels occurred in sustained and controlled manner. It may be due to direct diffusion of free VOR/ETOP from the dialysis membrane, whereas encapsulated VOR/ETOP first get released from the nanogels and then diffuse through the dialysis membrane. The amount of VOR released from nanogels reached about 86.22% (10 h) and 93.79% (19 h), respectively, while the amount of ETOP released from the nanogels reached about 74.70% (10 h) and 82.72% (19 h). This similar release pattern for both the drugs might be beneficial to achieve the synergistic therapeutic efficacy during simultaneous treatment.
Effect of VOR/ETOP-Encapsulated Nanogel Formulation and Their Combination on HeLa Cell Proliferation
Cell viability assay was performed to address whether the combination treatment of VOR and ETOP encapsulated into POEOMA nanogels could enhance the cytotoxicity as compared to free drug combination on HeLa cells. The HeLa cells were treated either with the free VOR/ETOP, their combination, VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogels, their combination, and the blank POEOMA nanogels, and the cell viability was calculated after 48 h. As shown in Fig. 9 , the blank POEOMA nanogels exhibited similar cell viability compared to the untreated controls (99 ± 2.4%). This result indicated that POEOMA nanogels were non-cytotoxic to HeLa cells after 48 h incubation. The drug-encapsulated POEOMA nanogels significantly reduced the viability of the HeLa cells in comparison to the free drug-treated cells. VOR-POEOMA: 40.04 ± 0.8% vs free VOR: 54.9 ± 4.5% and ETOP-POEOMA: 35.3 ± 2% vs free ETOP: 56.9 ± 0.8%. However, the simultaneous administration of VOR-POEOMA and ETOP-POEOMA nanogel combination showed significant reduction in the viability of HeLa cells (9.09 ± 0.6%) as compared to the free VOR and ETOP combination (16.05 ± 1.5%) (Fig. 9 ). These results showed that drug encapsulated in POEOMA nanogel formulation has enhanced the anticancer effect of VOR and ETOP. Importantly, the simultaneous addition of VOR- and ETOP-encapsulated POEOMA nanogels has more synergistic anticancer effect compared to either encapsulated alone drugs or the combination of free drugs. This may be attributed to the high drug release percentage and nearly similar release profiles of VOR/ETOP from the POEOMA nanogel formulation. The results reported here are in accordance with the previous studies where enhanced anticancer efficacy was shown by co-delivery of drugs encapsulated into nanocarriers ( , ). Therefore, the use of VOR- and ETOP-encapsulated POEOMA nanogel formulation resulted in enhanced therapeutic potential.
Cell Cycle Kinetic Studies
The potential for rational design of drug carriers to enhance drug potency and efficacy depends on the attributes that nanogel formulations do not affect the parent drug ( ). Therefore, to address this property of synthesized POEOMA nanogels, that it does not affect the encapsulated drugs used in our study, we performed the cell cycle analysis. The cytotoxic effects of chemotherapeutic drugs are mediated through cell cycle arrest and cell death, mostly via apoptosis ( ). Analysis of cell cycle kinetics induced by free VOR/ETOP, their combination, blank POEOMA nanogels, VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogels, and the combination of VOR-POEOMA and ETOP-POEOMA nanogels after 24 h of treatment is shown in Fig. 10 a, b. The results revealed that HeLa cells showed an increase in G0-G1 phase content treated with either free VOR (58.26%) or VOR-POEOMA (58.61%) compared to untreated control (53.74%). Moreover, a pronounced G2 + M arrest was observed considering free ETOP (83.14%) and ETOP-POEOMA (87.85%) compared to untreated control (12.4%). The results, therefore, demonstrated that the VOR resulted in G0-G1 arrest, whereas ETOP induced a prominent G2 + M arrest which remained unaltered after encapsulation of drugs into synthesized POEOMA nanogels. Furthermore, the combination treatment of either free drugs or drugs encapsulated POEOMA nanogel increased the sub-G1 (hypodiploid) fraction indicative of cell death (Fig. 10 b). However, the accumulation of cells in sub-G1 phase is much higher in drug-encapsulated POEOMA nanogel combination treatment (39.97%) compared to the combination of free drugs (25.32%). The blank POEOMA nanogels did not show any deviation in cell cycle kinetics compared to the untreated control. The results of cell cycle analysis confirmed that there is no difference between cell cycle kinetics caused by either the free drugs or drug-encapsulated POEOMA nanogels, implying maintenance of the pharmacological effects of the parent drug also in nanogel formulation. Moreover, there is significant accumulation of cells in sub-G1 of VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogel combination treatment indicative of the enhanced cell killing efficiency by using POEOMA nanogel formulation as drug delivery system.
Apoptosis Assay
Significant accumulation of cells in sub-G1 phase, indicative of apoptotic mode of cell death, was verified using Annexin V/PI assay ( ). Induction of apoptosis is one of the important outcome after treatment with anticancer drugs and has been linked to therapeutic efficacy ( , ). HeLa cells were treated for 48 h with free VOR/ETOP, their combination, blank POEOMA nanogels, VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogels, and the combination of VOR-POEOMA and ETOP-POEOMA nanogels. The percentage of apoptotic cells shown in Fig. 11 b was calculated by adding the number of cells from upper right and lower right quadrants indicative of late and early apoptosis, respectively (Fig. 11 a). The data revealed enhanced apoptosis in HeLa cells when VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogel formulation was administered in combination (71.07 ± 3.4%) as compared to the treatment with free drugs: VOR (14.63 ± 0.4%), ETOP (13.17 ± 0.6%), drug-encapsulated POEOMA nanogels: VOR-POEOMA nanogels (16.01 ± 0.34%), ETOP-POEOMA nanogels (13.98 ± 0.5%), and free drug combination (47.8 ± 0.7%). Blank POEOMA nanogels did not exhibit apoptosis (2.99 ± 0.2%) compared to untreated control cells (3.1 ± 0.2%). Thus, this data is a clear reflection of enhanced apoptosis index for VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogel combination among other treatments on cervical cancer HeLa cells.
Synergistic Therapeutic Effect of VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogels Combination Augments Caspase-3/7 Activity
To further explore for the observed enhanced apoptotic cell death mechanism, caspase-3/7 activity was assessed. The induction of caspase-3/7 is the well-known indication of the apoptotic cell death in a caspase-dependent manner ( ). The results showed that simultaneous addition of VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogels induced a significant fold change in the caspase-3/7 activity compared to the combination of free drugs (Fig. 12 ). The free VOR/ETOP and VOR/ETOP-POEOMA showed approximately 2-fold increase in the caspase-3/7 activity. Meanwhile, the free drug combination of VOR/ETOP induced a 7-fold increase in the activity of caspase-3/7 compared to the untreated control cells. However, the combination treatment of VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogels resulted in 9-fold increase in the activity of caspase-3/7 compared to the untreated control cells. Therefore, this data collaborated with the cell viability and Annexin V/PI data to confirm that drug-encapsulated POEOMA nanogel formulation effectively delivered the payload to the cells, and simultaneous addition of VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogel formulation produced as well as enhanced the potential therapeutic anticancer effects.
CONCLUSION
In the present study, the combination treatment of pan-HDAC inhibitor, VOR and DNA topoisomerase II inhibitor, ETOP resulted in a synergistic anticancer effect on cervical cancer HeLa cells, when both the drugs were added simultaneously. The VOR- and ETOP-encapsulated biodegradable POEOMA nanogels were successfully synthesized to examine the efficacy of combination anticancer therapy via nanocarrier drug delivery. VOR and ETOP were loaded into the disulfide cross-linked POEOMA nanogels by physical encapsulation method. Both VOR- and ETOP-loaded nanogels were found to be uniformly spherical in shape with a particle size of around 112.7 ± 11.88 and 142.4 ± 4.92 nm, respectively, which is important as a drug carrier for passive target effect. Furthermore, the nanogels were capable of degradation in the presence of intracellular GSH concentration but not in extracellular GSH. Importantly, simultaneous administration of VOR/ETOP-POEOMA nanogels demonstrated an increased in vitro cytotoxicity compared to either free VOR/ETOP or their combination. Moreover, the prepared VOR/ETOP-loaded biodegradable POEOMA nanogels enhanced the apoptotic index of tumor cells and thus provide a promising combination therapeutic strategy for the anticancer therapy.