INTRODUCTION
Emulsions are generally metastable systems which require the input of mechanical energy to be formed and eventually evolve toward phase separation. Yet, in some cases, the formation of an emulsion, or microemulsion, produces a thermodynamically stable dispersion [ ]. The formation of microemulsions can be spontaneous [ , ] or obtained under gentle agitation, known as self-emulsification [ ], when an anhydrous mixture with a specific ratio of oil, surfactant(s), co-surfactant(s), and/or co-solvent(s) is brought into contact with an aqueous medium [ , ].
Self-emulsification constitutes a safe and easy process which is used to deliver active pharmaceutically ingredients (API) using many different administration routes and presents the advantage of improving the bioavailability of drugs with poor solubility in water [ , , , ]. Yet, due to the limited understanding of the process, the formulation of self-emulsifying drug delivery systems (SEDDS) is based on trial and error. Practically, mixtures of excipients, selected to dissolve the drug of interest, are tested for their ability to self-emulsify by using qualitative (e.g., CPAC test [ , ]) and/or quantitative approaches (e.g., turbidimetry [ ] or droplet size measurements [ ]). This time-consumming and costly formulation approach has long been restricting the use of SEDDS in the pharmaceutical market [ ].
The aim of this work focusing on placebo SEDDS has been to better understand the physicochemical processes at stake in these systems to enable the development of a reliable drug delivery platform. So far, most of the studies have been very specific, focusing on given actives and defined delivery routes [ ]. In the present study, a generic approach is followed which fills this gap and shows how the properties of the aqueous phase influence the self-emulsification and affect the properties of the resulting microemulsions. This approach paves the way to further understand how the excipients interact within the SEDDS formulation and possibly modifies the drug release and absorption for a wide variety of delivery routes. More precisely, we prepared SEDDS composed of a mixture of two non-ionic surfactants and a medium chain triglyceride, and we have evaluated its behavior when dispersed in water or in a binary mixture of water and glycerol 58.5% w / w .
The choice of glycerol has been made considering both pharmaceutical and physicochemical aspects. Glycerol is known to be a co-solvent and a co-surfactant, and the mixture of water and glycerol has shown to interact with surfactants micellisation [ , , , , , ]. Glycerol is less polar than water with a comparable surface tension [ ] and at high concentration significantly modifies the polarizability of the aqueous solution, bringing it closer to the one of triglycerides. The choice of glycerol was also made considering the applicability of our results for pharmaceutical formulations. Glycerol is widely used as excipient, generally regarded as safe [ ]. It is found in various SEEDS and microemulsion formulations intended for different delivery routes. To give a few examples, glycerol can be found in oral formulations in the form of self-emulsifying delivery systems [ ] or in the form of microemulsions in elixirs and syrups, especially for pediatric applications and up to relatively high concentrations [ ]. Glycerol is also administrated parenterally, for example, in microemulsions for which the use of concentrations ranging from 30 up to 70% ( w / w ) has been reported [ ]. The inherent stability of microemulsions makes them good candidate to parenteral administration which can be easily obtained from the self-emulsification of anhydrous pre-concentrates as mentioned in Date et al . [ ]. Glycerol is also appropriate for topical, dermal, and transdermal formulations where the use of microemulsions for both water in oil and oil in water formulations has already been reported [ , , ]. The results could be further used in the development of, e.g., vaginal or rectal administrations; see a recent review [ ]. The concentration of glycerol (58.5% w / w ) was selected considering preliminary results obtained by screening various concentrations (24, 46.75, 58.5, 80% w / w ) and which are presented in supplementary material [ ].
We characterized the SEDDS behavior upon contact with the binary mixture of glycerol/water at 58.5% w / w and compared it to that observed upon contact with water. Major differences could be identified in the phase diagrams, in the self-emulsification mechanisms via optical microscopy, in the microstructure of the resulting mixtures via SAXS (small angle X-ray scattering) and in the particle size distributions of the resulting microemulsions via dynamic light scattering. We also characterized via surface tension measurements the critical micellar concentration (CMC) for our surfactant mixture with and without the presence of glycerol and proposed an interpretation of our dataset involving surfactant solvation. We finally verified that the results obtained with the placebo formulation also apply to loaded formulations using Ibuprofen as model drug.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
SEDDS Preparation
A series of 27 mixtures have been prepared by weighing Tween 80 (polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan monooleate) (Sigma-Aldrich), Span 80 (sorbitan monooleate) (Sigma-Aldrich), and Captex 300 Low C6 (triglycerides of caprylic/capric acid, EP/NF/JPE grade, kindly provided by Abitec). Each formulation has been mixed with a vortex mixer to ensure homogeneity. The SEDDS used in this work have been selected from these 27 compositions after evaluation of their ability to spontaneously form an emulsion by CPAC (Collaborative Pesticide Analytical Committee of Europe) test [ ] (data not shown). The selected SEDDS formulation was composed by 20% w / w Tween 80, 15% w / w Span 80, and 65% w / w Captex 300 Low C6. Ibuprofen (Ibuprofen 25, BASF, Germany, batch IB1W0038) was used in the drug-loaded SEDDS at a concentration of 6% ( w / w ), similar to the one by Mercuri et al . [ ], and below its solubility limit (15% w / w , in house data). The SEDDS physical chemical properties were investigated in water (MilliQ grade) and in a water/glycerol mixture (containing 58.5% w / w of glycerol, ACS reagent grade ≥ 99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich). Except for the measurement of the droplet size distributions which were performed at 25°C, all experiments were carried out at room temperature (22°C +/−2°C).
Phase Diagram
Phase diagrams have been established by varying the relative amounts of the SEDDS (i.e., the lipidic phase containing the surfactants) and the aqueous phase. The aqueous phase was either pure water or a binary mixture of glycerol and water (58.5% ( w /w) of glycerol). This concentration has been chosen because it is just above 46% ( w / w ), the concentration of free water depletion [ ], provides an almost index-matching situation, and corresponds to a viscosity increase of a factor 10 providing an inversely proportional expected change of diffusion kinetics (not studied here). The identification of each phase was based on a combination of macroscopic observations (viscosity, optical transparency, macro-phase separation).
Surface Tension and CMC
Surface tensions of Tween 80:Span 80 4:3 mixture in water and water/glycerol mixture (58.5% w / w ) were measured using the pendant drop method (Easy Drop, Krüss, Hamburg, Germany). The relative amount of Tween 80 and Span 80 corresponded to the one used in our selected SEDDS formulation. The drop images were analyzed with the drop shape analysis software from the tensiometer Easy Drop using the Young-Laplace equation [ ]. Samples with various concentrations of the surfactant and surfactant mixtures (Tween concentration ranging from 0.0001 to 1 mM) were prepared by accurately weighting the surfactants in a volumetric flask and by reaching the final volume using water or the water/glycerol mixture (58.5% w / w ). Each sample was filled into a gas-tight Hamilton syringe with a stainless steel needle diameter of 1.80 mm. For each concentration, a drop was formed until the volume approached the rupture point. The surface tension was measured as a function of time after drop formation, till the equilibrium was reached. Equilibration times corresponded to 45 min for the surfactants in water and ranged from a minimum of 75 up to 290 min for the surfactants in the binary mixture of glycerol and water. In all cases, to avoid evaporation from the drop, each measurement was performed in a closed quartz cuvette in vapor contact with the solution under investigation. The critical micelle concentration (CMC) was calculated by plotting the surface tension values against Tween 80 concentrations.
Visual Observations: Injecting the Aqueous Phase into the SEDDS Phase
The dynamics of the emulsification process was characterized by observing through the SEDDS phase the temporal evolution of the interface with the aqueous phase. The aqueous phase (pure water or a binary mixture of water/glycerol 58% ( w / w )) was placed into Hamilton syringe (diameter 500 μm) of a pendant drop tensiometer (Easy Drop, Krüss, Hamburg, Germany) and was slowly injected at a constant rate of 30 μL/min into a quartz cuvette filled with SEDDS. Movies were recorded for approximately 1 min using the camera of the tensiometer at its maximal magnification (approximately 236 pixels/mm).
Optical Microscopy: Injecting SEDDS into the Aqueous Phase
The dynamical emulsification process was also observed through the aqueous phase using an optical microscope (Leica DM 4000 M, Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) with the magnifications of ×5, ×20, ×50, and ×100 during typical time periods of 10 min. Thin hollow borosilicate glass capillaries (VitroCom) having an internal section of 0.6 × 6 mm and a wall thickness of 0.4 mm were filled with the aqueous phases (water or binary mixture of water/glycerol 58% ( w / w )) and placed under the microscope. SEDDS samples were thus injected within the aqueous phases using the thin tip of a needle (ga26s/51 mm/pst3) from Hamilton syringe (Glass syringe of 10 μL). Typical volumes injected were found to be approximately 1.5 μL and when required, polarized light was used to identify the possible presence of liquid crystals. This protocol has been previously described in Mercuri et al . [ ].
SAXS
X-ray scattering measurements were performed using a microfocus small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) instrument (Hecus S3-MICRO Bruker AXS, Karlsruhe, Germany). The instrumental setting of 30 kV/0.4 mA was applied for the Cu Kα X-ray microsource. The counting time employed for each measurement was 600 or 3600 s, respectively, depending on the sample concentration. Samples were prepared by mixing the required amounts of SEDDS with either pure water or the binary mixture of water/glycerol at 58.5% ( w / w ). The mass fraction of the aqueous solution was varied from 5 to 90% to obtain nine compositions (5%, 7%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 28%, 50%, 63%, and 90%) for each aqueous solution. The samples were filled in sealed glass or quartz capillaries. SAXS diffractograms were acquired after equilibration of the samples within the capillaries for 1 week. Blank subtraction was made on all the diffractograms using an empty capillary.
Droplet Size Distribution
Droplet size distributions of o/w emulsions produced by bringing the SEDDS into contact with the aqueous phases (water or binary mixture of water/glycerol 58.5% ( w / w )) were recorded using dynamic light scattering.
Prior to the measurements, the refractive indexes of SEDDS and aqueous phases were determined using a density and sound velocity meter (DSA 5000 M, Anton Paar, Graz, Austria). Dynamic light scattering was performed using a Zetasizer (Nano ZS, Malvern, Malvern, England). The analyzed emulsions were prepared by mixing 50 μL of SEDDS in 10 mL of the chosen aqueous phase. After mixing, 200 μL of the resulting emulsions were directly placed in a plastic disposable microcuvette for measurements. The scattered signals were recorded at 25°C, with the back-scattered light detector operating at 173 degrees. For each sample, three recordings were made and the average particle size distribution was calculated, accounting for the standard deviation in the form of error bars.
RESULTS
The phase diagrams for the SEDDS in water and water/glycerol mixture are presented in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 Phase diagrams of the SEDDS with pure water ( above ) and water/glycerol mixture (58.5% of glycerol (w/w)) ( below ). Phase separation is observed with water (clear phase and opaque gel or viscous phase), but not for the binary mixture
Surface tension measurements are reported as a function of Tween 80 concentration in Fig. 2 and show the importance of the system kinetics. For short time periods (10 min after drop formation, gray symbols), the results obtained with water (squares) and with the binary mixture (circles) were comparable and lead to similar CMC of 0.08 mM (Fig. 2 a). The equilibrium data obtained after approximately 45 min for water and up to 200 min for the binary mixture were found to differ (Fig. 2 b), providing CMC of 0.07 and 0.03 mM for pure water and for the binary mixture, respectively. The temporal variations obtained for pure water remained moderate indicating fast kinetics, in contrast to those observed for the binary mixture. Significant decrease of surface tension indicated slower kinetics, in accordance with the higher viscosity (10 mPa.s instead of 1 mPa.s for pure water) and with the lower self-diffusion coefficients of surfactants, as reported for C12EO8 in binary mixtures of glycerol/water [ ]. Fig. 2 Surface tension of Tween80:Span80 (4:3) mixture in pure water ( squares ) and in the glycerol/water binary mixture ( circles ), 10 min after drop formation ( gray ) and at equilibrium ( black ). The CMC are indicated by the vertical lines
We observed through the SEDDS droplet the interface of a pure water drop and presented the results in Figs. 3 and 4 from 0 to 25 s and 4 to 12 min, respectively. Upon contact between the two liquids, the interface acquired a microstructure presenting crater-shaped irregularities. These irregularities remained visible for approximately 6 s and afterwards, they were replaced by a hairy-like structure (boxed picture in Fig. 3 ). The transition between these two regimes was marked by a minimum of drop width and a maximum of drop height, indicating a modification of the surface stress and thus possibly a phase transition. In the second regime, the hairs grew with time (Fig. 4 ) allowing the interpenetration of the phases at play. After some minutes, the structure significantly eroded to leave a less dense phase, probably comprising microdroplets of lipid in water. Fig. 3 Temporal evolution of a water drop injected into the SEDDS, observed from the SEDDS phase. The scale bar represents 500 μm. A “crater-like”microstructure immediately forms at the interface (1 s, enlargement), disappears, and is replaced by a hairy-like interface (6 s, boxed picture ) whose “hairs” grow with time. The change of microstructure is marked by a change of drop shape evolution with a minimum of the drop width ( black dashed line , inset ) and a maximum of drop height ( continuous gray line , inset ) Fig. 4 Structure of the interface between water and SEDDS observed from the SEDDS at three sequential time points. Scale bar 500 μm
A similarly conducted experiment with the binary mixture of water and glycerol evidenced a very different evolution, as illustrated in Fig. 5 . In the presence of 58.5% ( w / w ) of glycerol, the interfacial tension between the aqueous phase and the SEDDS approached zero, preventing the droplet to hang from the tip of the needle. Instead, the droplet fell to the bottom of the cell and slowly disappeared (not shown) to leave a gray diffuse phase. Fig. 5 Temporal evolution of a drop of the water/glycerol binary mixture (58.5% w / w of glycerol) injected into the SEDDS, observed from the SEDDS phase. The bar represents 500 μm; 3 s separate consecutive images. The injected drop falls from the needle tip indicating a very low surface tension. The drop slowly turns into a gray diffuse phase (not shown)
The injection of the SEDDS into pure water was monitored under a microscope without and with polarized light, as shown in Fig. 6 , upper left and lower right series, respectively. In the first 30 s, the injected SEDDS remained elongated, as it came out from the needle tip, indicating that the interface was immediately sufficiently rigid to prevent any recoil due to interfacial tension. After some time (approximately 52 and 66 s in upper and lower series, respectively), a drop of a separate phase appeared (dashed white circles). The surface of the gray phase (black triangles) and the surface of the appearing phase normalized by the surface of the gray one (bright diamonds), measured on the upper sequence of images shown in Fig. 6 , are reported as a function of time. The phase separation coincided with a sudden increase of expansion speed of the dark phase (SEDDS) clearly visible after 52 s. Observed under polarized light, the appearance of the new phase seems to be associated with the presence of liquid crystals. Yet, no typical patterns could be recognized to identify this microphase. Fig. 6 Injection of the SEDDS into pure water as observed under a microscope through the aqueous phase. The bars represent 500 μm. Upper series , approximately 18 s separate consecutive images. In the first phase, the injected SEDDS ( appearing dark ) remains elongated and it s area expands slowly ( black triangles ). This phase ends with the appearance of a drop of a separate phase (visible at 52 s, boxed picture , as indicated by the white dashed circle ). Lower series : observation under polarized light of the SEDDS injected into pure water and revealing the presence of liquid crystals in the immediate surroundings of the drop (separate phase)
By injecting the SEDDS into the glycerol/water binary mixture, we observed no phase separation under the microscope, as seen in Fig. 7 . Instead, the SEEDS phase slowly eroded and was replaced after approximately 5 min (352 s) by a cloud of microdroplets which further expanded, leaving an oil-in-water/glycerol emulsion. The non-spherical shape of the interface and the presence of folds in it, a few seconds after injection, seem to indicate a very low interfacial tension and rigidity, as already indicated by the data in Fig. 5 . In contrast to the observations made with pure water, the use of polarized light did not reveal the presence of liquid crystals (data not shown). Fig. 7 Injection of the SEDDS into the glycerol/water binary mixture, observed under microscope through the aqueous phase. Scale bar is 500 μm
The droplet size distributions obtained with pure water and with the binary mixture of water and glycerol are reproduced in Fig. 8 . In the presence of 58.5% of glycerol ( w / w ), the droplet size distribution was found to be shifted toward smaller sizes, typically centered at 0.1 μm instead of 0.2 μm when pure water was employed. The width of the distribution itself was significantly reduced in the glycerol/water mixture. Both distributions appear to be log-normal as expected for most fragmentation/agglomeration kinetics relying on processes involving multiplicative effects [ , ]. Fig. 8 Droplet size distributions obtained with pure water ( squares ) and the binary mixture of water and glycerol ( circles ). Bars represent the standard deviation ( n = 3)
Mixtures of the SEDDS with either pure water or the binary mixture water/glycerol were analyzed with SAXS providing nine scattering curves for each aqueous solution, Fig. 9 a, b. Replacing pure water by a binary mixture of water and glycerol at 58.5% induced significant changes in the structure of the mixtures. The most obvious modification lies in the suppression of the lamellar phase clearly observed in the presence of 10 and 15% of water and still visible, but combined with another structure, at 20% of water. The typical lamellar peaks indicated by the arrows, with a spacing of 100 Å, were not visible with the binary mixture of water and glycerol. Instead, we observed particle scattering where the corresponding diameters and surface smoothness increased with the aqueous phase fraction up to 28%. For these scattering curves, the radius of gyration R g and the shape factor P of the reverse micelles were extracted from Guinier and log-log plots [ ], respectively. An example is given in Fig. 10 a, b with the scattering curve of the 5% aqueous phase mixture. The Guinier plot was fitted by 3817.exp.(−895.q 2 ) leading to \( {\mathrm{R}}_{\mathrm{g}}=\sqrt{3^{\ast }895}\approx 52\ \dot{\mathrm{A}} \) . The log-log plot was fitted by 0.0305 q -3.21 immediately providing P = 3.2. Fig. 9 SAXS patterns of SEEDS mixtures with pure water ( figure above ) or a binary mixture glycerol water at 58.5% glycerol ( w / w ) ( figure below ). The red arrows ﻿point to ﻿﻿the﻿ typical peaks of a lamellar phase﻿. Smaller peaks circled in red correspond to elements twice as big as the spacing of the lamellar structure and may originate from its fusion.The percentages indicate the mass fraction of the aqueous phase Fig. 10 Guinier ( a ) and log-log ( b ) plots of the 5% binary mixture water/glycerol and SEDDS and the fits providing the radius of gyration and the Porod exponent, respectively
Repeating this operation with all SAXS data up to an aqueous fraction of 28%, we obtained the values plotted in Fig. 11 as a function of the aqueous phase content. These results indicate that the reversed micelles are swelling as the aqueous phase is increased. The increase of the radius of gyration (experimental exponent 0.31) corresponds to the expected swelling law (theoretical exponent 0.33) and the evolution of the Porod exponent indicates a continuous transition from rough interfaces (value of 3.2 for law aqueous content) to smooth interfaces (exponent of 4 for larger aqueous content). Fig. 11 R g ( filled diamonds , a and c ) and P ( empty circles , a ) as a function of the aqueous volume fraction. b Illustration of the interface roughness variation with P
At 28% glycerol/water binary mixture, the reverse micelles are concentrated and a closer look into the diffractogram reveals traces of cubic structures. The corresponding peaks are difficult to be indexed precisely, probably because they resulted from the co-existence of different cubic structures such as Pn3m and Fm3m, as illustrated in Fig. 12 a. Nevertheless, the peaks remained visible up to 63% of aqueous phase (details not shown), after which phase inversion was accomplished. Fig. 12 Peak indexing for the SAXS patterns obtained with SEDDS and a 28% of glycerol/water binary mixture ( dashed line Fm3m—spacing 270 Å, continuous line Pn3m—spacing 240 Å) and b 28% of pure water ( dashed line Im3m—spacing 530 Å, continuous line Pn3m—spacing 520 Å)
For 90% of glycerol/water binary mixture (data not shown), no structure was detected anymore with SAXS, in accordance with the expected formation of an oil in water/glycerol emulsion whose typical droplet size lied around 1000 Å, as shown in Fig. 8 .
When pure water was used, we noted a peak at approximately 200 Å (15% of water, red circle in Fig. 9 a) suggesting that the lamellar structure—still partially present—fused and generated elements twice as big as the lamellar repeat spacing. Additionally, traces of cubic structures appeared, and the higher the water content, the more important the peaks of the cubic structures were found to be (red circle, Fig. 9 a). Similar to the binary mixture of glycerol and water, traces of the cubic structures were difficult to be indexed (Fig. 12 b). They remained visible for 63% of water, but could not be observed with 90% of water (not shown), widely apart from the phase inversion in agreement with the formation of an oil-in-water emulsion, whose typical drop size was in the range of 2000 Å.
The comparison of placebo and ibuprofen-loaded SEDDS and more precisely their self-emulsification in pure water and in the water/glycerol mixture at 58.5% w / w did not show a significant impact of ibuprofen of the self-emulsification. Typical pictures of the self-emulsification process of these two formulations in both pure water and the glycerol binary mixture are presented in the supplementary material [ ].
DISCUSSION
For microemulsions to form, it is necessary to diminish the interfacial energy of the whole system which implies both a diminution of the interfacial tension and an increase of the interface flexibility [ , ].
One common way to achieve this is to combine one rather hydrophilic surfactant (such as Tween) with one rather hydrophobic surfactant (such as Span) [ ]. This strategy relies on the tunable association of the surfactants and was therefore used to obtain SEDDS mixture, e.g., Tween 80/Span 80 at a molar ratio of 1/3 [ ]. We note that the molar ratio of Tween80/Span80 used in our SEDDS formulation, 1/2.3, is very close to that reported in the literature[ ], indicating the importance of a balanced surfactants mixture, commonly leading to a HLB value of 10 ± 1 [ ].
Further increase of interface flexibility and fluidity is classically obtained using short-chain alcohols or polyols which have the faculty to intercalate into the surfactant monolayer [ , ]. Already in 1963, Osipow reported how 2-ethylhexanedioli-1,3 penetrates the interfacial film, increases its fluidity, and enables smaller droplets to be formed, leading to transparent emulsions [ ]. In this context, we understand that the addition of glycerol enables the interface to expand more easily which could explain why, for the same ratio of SEDDS/aqueous phase, smaller droplets and thus more interface, are obtained with the binary mixture, Fig. 7 . Indeed, considering the lipid volume as constant, the formation of droplets twice as small as those with water corresponds to twice as much interface. This is also in agreement with a decrease of the CMC observed in Fig. 2 , as well as with the tremendous reduction of the interfacial tension in the presence of the SEDDS, as seen in Figs. 4 and 6 , by comparison to Figs. 3 and 5 when pure water is used. Note that the CMC results are difficult to compare with those reported in the literature, since the present system has, to the best of our knowledge, not been characterized elsewhere.
Arakami [ ] observed, in agreement with our SAXS results (Fig. 9 ), that the well-ordered liquid crystals observed in the presence of pure water (H1 in the presently mentioned study) were suppressed by increasing the alcohol content. Instead, bicontinuous structures were formed. This phenomenon was attributed to the higher flexibility of the interface caused by the entropy increase due to the solvation of the polyethylene oxide chains by the alcohol. Yet, if the increased fluidity and flexibility of the interface certainly favors the swelling of reverse micelles[ ], as observed in this work for a wide range of binary mixture fractions, from 5 to 28%, it remains probably insufficient to explain the disappearance of regular lamellar phases as obtained with 10% of pure water, Figs. 9 and 11 .
Indeed, the formation and stabilization of such macrocrystals, or any macroscopic patterns in biphasic physical-chemical systems, involve long-range interactions [ , , ]. It has been for example evidenced, studying mixtures of ionic surfactants with small angle neutron scattering [ ], that the suppression of electrostatic repulsions by addition of salts induces a phase transition from vesicles to regular stacks. We thus complete the above analysis by proposing two possible origins of long-range and large scale effects to explain how the addition of concentrated glycerol induces the disappearance of regular macrostructures.
The amount of glycerol in the presently studied binary mixture makes it not only a co-surfactant, but also a co-solvent. Indeed, we observed that for lower concentrations of glycerol, the self-emulsification of the SEDDS and the properties of the corresponding micro emulsions are similar to that observed with pure water [ ] in contrast with the binary glycerol/water mixture at 58.5% of glycerol ( w / w ), for which no free water remains available [ ]. In their study, Dashnau et al . have shown that for 46% ( w / w ) of glycerol, the free water pool is so depleted that no free water molecules can be transferred to the first hydration shell of the glycerol. As a result, glycerol compensates for the lack of water molecules by disrupting the water H-bond network of the first hydration shell, glycerol/glycerol bonding becomes more prominent than that of water/glycerol for 58% ( w / w ), while glycerol hydrogen bonds start to orientate to mimic the ice structure for 65% ( w / w ). With 58.5% of glycerol, the solvation of the hydrophilic groups of Tween and Span, such as the ethylene oxide chains and the sorbitan ring, cannot be solely ensured by water molecules. Similarly, the dehydration of polyoxyethylene-type non-ionic surfactants by polyols has been evidenced [ ]. The origin of this dehydration remains difficult to quantify but it appears qualitatively reasonable to attribute it to a gain of entropy. This interpretation is in agreement with the results of Lin and Alexandridis who have demonstrated in their study of copolymer adsorption onto carbon black particles that the modification of solvent quality induced by the addition of glycerol produces the same effect as a temperature increase [ ] and consequently as an entropic gain. Yet, it has been shown, for example, by Liu and Guo [ ], who formed niosomes using Tween 80/PEG 6000/Span 80/H 2 O, that increasing the system entropy by introducing mixing steps keeping its composition unchanged, resulted in the disappearance of well-ordered structures such as lamellar liquid crystals in favor of less ordered but more stable structures. The introduction of glycerol may thus give rise to repulsive surface-solvent mediated forces of entropic origin, in some way similar to the hydration forces described by Evans and Ninham for zwitterionic aggregates [ ] potentially preventing swollen reverse micelles to coalesce.
Beside this interpretation based on entropy considerations, a second analysis can be made that attributes the effects of glycerol to Van-der-Waals interactions. The intensity of the Van-der-Waals forces of the phase A mediated via a phase B is known to be proportional to the Hamaker constant, which dominating term is proportional to the difference between the squared refractive index of both media [ ]. The strategy of minimizing these interactions, classically known as index matching, has proven its efficiency in colloidal science [ ], especially its impact on lamellar phases has been reported [ , ]. Taking a closer look at the refraction indexes of the various phases (water 1.333, binary mixture 1.413, and SEDDS 1.458) shows that these interactions are considerably reduced in the presence of glycerol. Thus, the stabilization of reversed micelles at the expense of regular lamellar phase presently observed up to high concentrations, Fig. 10 , could find its origin in the reduction of the Van der Waals interactions.
Finally, the long-range interactions induced by glycerol as a co-solvent may be more complex than above mentioned. Especially, the importance of interface fluctuations may play a considerable role as well [ ].
CONCLUSION
Combining various experimental methods such as optical microscopy, surface tension measurements, dynamic light scattering, or small angle X-ray scattering, we have shown that the introduction of 58.5% ( w / w ) of glycerol into the aqueous phase employed for self-emulsifying systems has significant impacts onto the phase diagrams of such systems, and more precisely onto the structures that form as well as onto the droplet size distribution of the resulting microemulsions. In the presence of glycerol, regular structures such as lamellar liquid crystals, as observed with pure water, disappear; the surface and interfacial tensions (with air or the lipidic phase, respectively) are reduced and the droplets of the oil-in-water emulsion are smaller.
We interpret these observations considering the effects of glycerol on the interface and on the long-range interactions of the system. As a co-surfactant, glycerol can intercalate within the interface thus modulating its surface and curvature enabling smaller droplets to form. At large fractions, glycerol modifies the system long-range interactions causing the disappearance of macroscopic organization such as the lamellar phase, only observed with water. These interactions may comprise Van-der-Waals forces and/or originate from an entropic gain caused by surfactant dehydration as well as more complex effects induced by membrane fluctuations.
The present work will thus help rationalizing SEDDS formulation which could indeed benefit from the exploitation of glycerol (or similar small alcohols) effects. It constitutes an initial basis to which complexity can be added by introducing pharmaceutically active ingredients and biorelevant media [ , , , , , , ].
Since our study was based onto systems at equilibrium, it may be interesting to consider the kinetics at play. Time-resolved SAXS measurements may be very useful to compare the succession of equilibrium states with the phases effectively selected along the dilution path taken from the SEEDS upon its contact with the aqueous phase.
CMC , critical micellar concentration; CPAC , Collaborative Pesticide Analytical Committee of Europe; SAXS , small angle X-ray scattering; SEDDS , self-emulsifying drug delivery system