INTRODUCTION
Insulin, interferon-β (INF-β) and erythropoietin (EPO) are among the most effective and widely used peptides for the treatment of severe disorders ranging from autoimmune, endocrine, and endogenous protein deficiencies. Uncontrolled diabetes leads to renal failure and severe anaemia, impacting on a greater number of people in comparison to multiple sclerosis. There are endless causes of these diseases, and patients have significant factors that worsen the condition due to the lack of patient compliance with insulin injections ( ). The need for an oral insulin and erythropoietin formulation has long passed its time, in comparison to the significant number of people affected with diabetes and renal failure that are unable to meet the daily requirements of administering the injection.
According to the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, research claims that approximately 200 new cases of MS are diagnosed each week in the United States. People diagnosed with MS endure life-long chronic disease, primarily in young adults who have a virtually normal life expectancy. Consequently, the economic, social and medical costs associated with the disease are significant. Estimates place the annual cost of MS in the United States in the billions of dollars ( ).
Erythropoietin (EPO) has primarily been used to treat anaemia for chronic conditions of kidney disease and cancer chemotherapy for nearly 20 years in injectable forms. The interaction of EPO with its receptor (EPO-R) has significant cytoprotective cellular responses, including mitogenesis, angiogenesis, inhibition of apoptosis and promotion of vascular repair through mobilisation of endothelial progenitor cells from the bone marrow. EPO was also shown to display substantial renoprotection in experimental ischaemic and toxic acute renal failure, in which studies proved suppressed tubular epithelial apoptosis, enhanced tubular epithelial proliferation and hastened functional recovery ( ). Presently, these protein therapeutics are administered via the parenteral route. These injectable therapies (subcutaneous or intramuscular) have various disadvantages associated with challenges such as pain, allergic reactions, poor patient compliance and risk of infection ( , ). To overcome these challenges, researchers are investigating alternative routes of delivery such as oral or pulmonary which may increase patient compliance and relieve side effects ( ). The demand for oral peptide and protein delivery is an attractive alternative to parenteral formulations. There are, however, challenges associated with the oral route, including pre-systemic enzymatic degradation and poor permeation through the intestinal membrane ( ). Translocation through the mucus layer is also an essential component, since this can severely hinder the absorption if the polymer system does not adhere to the mucus layer and release the peptide concurrently ( ).
Many studies previously reported, to date, have successfully achieved oral protein delivery, with a variation in results of bioavailability obtained ( , ). Extensive research undertaken by Peppas et al ., Singh et al . and other experts in the field investigated oral protein delivery systems using insulin, interferons, salmon calcitonin and many other proteins. pH-responsive (MAA, DMAEMA, EAA, PEGDMA), thermo-responsive (NIPAM, HMPMA, DEAAm, PF 127®, PEG), mucoadhesive (Chitan, Chitosan, Tragacanth, Hyaluronic acid, Alginic acids, Methylcellulose) as well as polyelectrolyte complexes (Pegylated TMC protein complexes, Cationic b-cyclodextrin/alginate protein complexes, Dextran sulfate protein complexes), monomers and polymers have been evaluated significantly for the delivery of oral proteins ( , , ). Extensive research published in the field of oral protein delivery has focussed particular attention in the avenue of diabetes research. Common objectives were obtained in therapeutically decreasing blood glucose in diabetic-induced in vivo models. An average decrease in blood glucose was reported in many papers between 2.5 and 4 h in diabetic rats; however, delivery systems reporting ‘almost immediate protein gastric absorption’ have not been researched extensively ( , ).
In this study, pH responsive copolymeric microparticles, trimethyl chitosan-poly (ethylene glycol) and dimethacrylate-methacrylic acid (TMC-PEGDMA-MAA) were successfully prepared to demonstrate the loading of the respective proteins: insulin, INF-β and EPO, in separate formulations. Using a Box-Behnken experimental design, a series of formulations were synthesised and evaluated using insulin as a prototype peptide for loading and release studies. This copolymeric microparticulate system is a trajectory from previous work in this area ( ) with further significant findings and discussion on the in vitro and in vivo performance and mechanistic behaviour of the multi-functional platform. The optimised formulation was determined according to the responses from the design formulations on insulin and further evaluated for INF-β and EPO.
The novelty of this research, in comparison to other oral protein systems published to date, entails the unique free radical polymerisation and crosslinking approach. This provides conjugation between two extremely mucoadhesive polymers (TMC and poly-MAA). There is also crosslinking between a synthetic (poly-MAA) and natural polymer (TMC). In addition, two pH responsive polymers (poly-MAA and TMC), forming a semisynthetic mucoadhesive-pH responsive conjugated polymeric system, are capable of encapsulating proteins and peptides due to the presence of –COOH moieties. This consequently protects the peptide from the harsh gastric environment, retaining the microparticulate system in close proximity to the intestinal surface area for a prolonged period. Additionally, the TMC-PEGDMA-MAA polymeric architecture is characterised by three-in-one matrix types: (1) a semi-interpenetrating polymer network consisting of TMC and PEGDMA crosslinked MAA wherein one polymer is crosslinked in the presence of another polymer; (2) a polyelectrolyte complex formed between the –COOH functionalities of PEGDMA crosslinked MAA and –NH 3+ functionality of TMC; and (3) PEGDMA crosslinked MAA conjugated to TMC forming TMC-PEGDMA-MAA. Due to these chemical strategies employed, we have thus formulated a novel immediate absorptive oral protein system, demonstrating controlled 24-h plasma protein concentrations in vivo using New Zealand White (NZW) rabbits. Comparative plasma concentrations of the oral proteins to commercial formulations were also undertaken, evaluating the efficacy of the oral system to injectable delivery. All experiments reported have been undertaken in triplicate.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Chitosan (CHT) (medium M w = 450 kDa), PEG (M w = 4000 g/mol), MAA, methyl iodide, polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGDA) (M w = 575 g/mol), sulphonic acid and azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Human insulin-R (Actrpid®, r-DNA origin) of 100 IU/mL was purchased from Eli Lilly and Company (USA). INF-β 1a (Rebif®) and N -methyl-2-pyrrolidone were procured from Merck (Pty) Ltd, Estate South, Modderfontein, Gauteng, South Africa, at reagent grade and were used without further purification. EPO beta was obtained from Roche Pharmaceuticals (Recormon®). All other reagents were of analytical grade and were employed as received.
Preparation of TMC-PEGDMA-MAA Copolymeric Microparticles
pH-sensitive copolymeric particles were prepared by free radical suspension polymerisation technique. PEGDMA and MAA were taken in molar feed ratios of 1:2 while TMC and crosslinker PEGDA proportions were optimised at 0.5 g/100 mL and 3% w / w of monomer concentration, respectively, as quantified from the Box-Behnken design study. Free radical initiator AIBN was used as 0.6% w / w of monomer concentration and carried out at a constant temperature of 75°C, under inert conditions for 6 h at 400 rpm. The resultant copolymeric microparticles were then repeatedly washed with water and lyophilised for drug loading ( ). The high resilience acrylate polymer (PEGDA crosslinked MAA) on the TMC backbone provides for a long side-chain molecular conformation capable of entrapping higher amount of peptide.
This entrapment was further enhanced by the use of a long chain crosslinker (PEGDA) providing an inter- and intra-chain crosslinked network. The retention of this conjugate polymer in ‘tetheredʼ intestinal mucosa was mediated via two different mechanisms: (1) the entangling of PEGDA crosslinked MAA side chains into the mucus lining and (2) the charged electrostatic interaction provided by the cationic polyquaternium chitosan backbone. Additionally, the unique mechanical properties provided by high molecular weight TMC and PEGDA crosslinked MAA aids prolonged retention in the intestine via a unique hard-to-soft swollen hydrogel architecture.
Determination of Chemical Functionality and Intensity Diffraction of the Copolymeric Microparticulate System
Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (ssNMR)-1D 13 C cross-polarisation (CP), magic angle spinning (MAS) spectra, was conducted on a 600 MHz Avance III Bruker spectrometer (Bruker BioSpin, Germany) with spinal 64 decoupling, equipped with a 4 mm MAS probe, calibrated with glycine, with a spin rate of 10 kHz. The powder sample was packed into a 4-mm Bruker MAS rotor. The MAS spinning rate was maintained at 10 kHz, and all samples were run for 4.5-h duration. Functional groups and the transition of signal peaks were analysed, resulting in a proposed structural design of the crosslinked copolymeric formulation. This technique was further used to confirm the crosslinking occurrence, thereby confirming successful organic synthesis of the copolymer. Samples were so analysed using a Rigaku MiniFlex600 Benchtop X-ray Diffractometer (Rigaku Corporation, Tokyo, Japan), using a 600 W (40 Kv–15 mA) X-ray generator, a counter monochromator to cut X-rays besides Cu Kα X-rays, implementing a D/tex Ultra high speed 1D detector. Samples were evaluated on the basis of operating the software Rigaku MiniFlex Guidance version 1.2.0 and analysed on Rigaku PDXL Basis software, for calculations of determining the degree of crystallinity of monomers and the crosslinked copolymeric microparticles. Parameters for the measurement of samples were selected as a divergence slit (DS) of 1.25°, 0.3 mm receiving slit (RS), Goniometer radius of 150 mm and a scattering slit (SS) of 1.25°. Samples were scanned at 0–100°/min, using an angle diffraction range of 3°–60° 2θ.
Determination of Thermal Characteristics and Crystalline Behaviour of Monomers and Copolymeric Microparticles
The thermal properties of monomers and copolymeric microparticles were evaluated on the basis of their characteristic melting points and crystallisation behaviour using a Mettler Toledo DSC-1 STAR e system. Samples of 15 mg were accurately weighed and sealed in a 40-μL aluminium crucible pan, with a 0.2 mm puncture on the lid of the pan, before sealing the contents. All samples were run twice, the first for removing extra water in the polymer at a temperature range of 25–110°C at 10°C/min, and the second run from 25 to 250°C at 10°C/min, to achieve optimum results with least deviations ( ). Inert atmospheric conditions were maintained throughout the analysis with a flow rate of 50 mL/min of N 2 gas. A TGA 4000 thermogravimetric analyzer (PerkinElmer Inc, Massachusetts, USA), set from 50 to 500°C, at a ramping rate of 10°C/min, under inert nitrogen conditions, was used to analyse monomers and the copolymeric microparticles for specific thermal degradation. Fifteen milligrams of polymer was loaded in a ceramic pan, generating thermograms and their first derivatives, to determine the amount of moisture liberated from the sample and the percentage of degradation of the polymer.
Determination of Viscoelastic and Mechanical Deformation Properties of the Copolymeric Microparticles
The viscoelastic behaviour of the copolymeric microparticles was determined using a 0.1% w / v formulation in gastric (pH 1.2) and intestinal (pH 6.8) fluid, respectively, incubated for 2-h duration. All samples were evaluated in triplicate, and the best graphs selected for representation. The strains employed were in the linear viscoelastic (LVE) region, where G′ (dynamic storage modulus) and G″ (loss modulus) were evaluated using a Modular Advanced Rheometer (ThermoHaake MARS Modular Advanced Rheometer, Thermo Electron, Karlsruhe, Germany), comprising of a C35/1° Ti sensor. G′ is a measure of deformation energy stored in the particles, indicating the elastic, solid phase property of the particles, while G″ is the measure of the viscous behaviour and deformation energy used and lost in the particles during application of applied strain. Rheological measurements were employed using a Cone and plate gap of 0.051 mm, inertia of 1.721 × 10 −6 kg/m 2 and A and M factor of 89051.00 Pa and 57.010 rad/s, respectively. A constant temperature of 37°C was maintained throughout the study. A sample volume of 0.5 mL was analysed over a fine range of 0–1.0 Hz, falling within the shear independent plateau of the strain amplitude sweep test. The study of dynamic oscillation involves the aspect of complex modulus (G*), indicating the total resistance in relation to the applied strain, resulting from the amplitude of stress (Ƭ Ɵ ) and deformation (ƴ Ɵ ).
After lyophilisation of the copolymeric particles, a cylindrical tablet of 4 mm diameter, having a mass of 120 mg, was compressed at 0.6 MPa, for evaluation of its mechanical deformation properties in tableted form. A well-calibrated textual analyzer (TA.XT plus , Stable Microsystems, Surrey, UK), under standard conditions of 25°C, 1 atm pressure, using a steel cylindrical probe of 50 mm diameter for matrix resilience (MR) and a steel flat tip probe of diameter 2 mm for matrix hardness (MH), was employed, respectively. A force-time graph obtained from MR evaluations yielded the percentage MR of the copolymeric tablet. The force-distance graph obtained from MH evaluations yielded the maximum force required for deformation of the tablet. A pre-test speed, test speed and post-test speed of 1, 0.5 and 10 mm/s were employed, respectively, for both MH and MR evaluation, with a trigger force of 0.05 N and a load cell weight of 5 kg in both categories.
Particle size distribution, protein loading efficiency and in vitro analysis
After lyophilisation of the copolymer, 5 mg each was added to 12 mL gastric and intestinal USP buffer, pH 1.2 and 6.8, respectively. The particles were then analysed for their size using a ZetaSizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). Protein loading was undertaken by dispersing 1 g of copolymer (which was thoroughly washed and lyophilised before loading) in 5-mL respective protein solution (pH 7.4) for a time period of 8 h. The pH was then gradually lowered to 2.5 by adding 1 N HCL solution to allow maximum protein entrapment in the particles. The particles were thereafter filtered and lyophilised using a Freezone 12 freeze drier (Lanconco, Kansas City, USA). Concentration of left over protein in the filtrate was evaluated for determination of protein entrapment efficiency, as referred to in Eq. 1 ( , , ). $$ \%\mathrm{Entrapment}\ \mathrm{Efficiency}=\frac{\mathrm{Theoretical}\ \mathrm{amount}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{protein}\ \mathrm{loaded}-\mathrm{amount}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{protein}\ \mathrm{measured}\ \mathrm{from}\ \mathrm{filtrate}}{\mathrm{Theoretical}\ \mathrm{amount}\ \mathrm{of}\ \mathrm{protein}\ \mathrm{loaded}}\times 100 $$ (1)
Insulin was analysed using HPLC by employing C 18 silica phase Symmetry 300 column of particle size 5 μm with a Waters 1525 Binary Pump with 2489 UV/visible detector. Wavelength absorbance of 214 nm and a constant column temperature of 25°C were maintained. The mobile phase comprised a mixture of solvent A (pure acetonitrile) and solvent B (sodium sulphate buffer of pH 2.3) in a ratio of 24:76 with a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min.
The concentration of INF-β in the filtrate was analysed using a VICTOR X3 Multilabel Reader (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA) on a Verikine™ Human INF-β ELISA kit, at 450 nm wavelength, and EPO was analysed using Abcam® Erythropoietin Human ELISA Kit with the same settings as mentioned with INF-β. In vitro protein release studies were performed at both gastric and intestinal pH conditions for all 3 protein-loaded copolymeric microparticles. For conducting these studies, lyophilised insulin, INF-β and EPO-loaded microparticles were accurately weighed individually and placed on a punch and dye apparatus for preparing a tablet of 4 mm diameter, using a hydraulic pressure of 0.6 MPa. For insulin release studies, 2 tablets with 100 IU each of insulin were placed in 50 mL of simulated gastric (pH 1.2) and intestinal (pH 6.8) USP buffer for duration of 2.5 and 24 h, respectively. An Orbit shaker incubator (LM-530-2, MRC Laboratory Instruments Ltd, Hahistadrut, Holon, Israel) at 37 ± 0.5°C at 50 rpm was used to incubate all samples during the release duration. At every time point, 0.5 mL of sample withdrawn for analysis was replaced with the same volume of fresh buffer, in order to maintain physiological sink conditions throughout the study. Samples were withdrawn every half an hour for 2.5-h duration, and at an hourly interval from the intestinal release buffer for 24 h. INF-β drug release studies were similarly undertaken in both mediums (1 tablet of 14.6 μg of INF-β) as elucidated for insulin release studies, with samples analysed using a Verikine™ Human Interferon beta ELISA kit, at a wavelength of 450 nm, using a VICTOR X3 Multilabel Reader (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA). EPO tablets contained a loaded dose of 100 IU, using 2 tablets for each release study medium, with the same procedures undertaken for insulin and INF-β. EPO concentration was calculated using an ELSIA kit (Abcam® Human EPO ELISA kit), detected at wavelength 450 nm.
In Vivo Evaluation Using a New Zealand White (NZW) Rabbit Model
The insulin, INF-β, and EPO-loaded copolymeric microparticulate systems were evaluated in the NZW rabbit model. Animal ethics clearance was granted from the Animal Ethics Screening Committee (AESC) of the University of Witwatersrand, South Africa, with a clearance certificate number of 2012/41/05. For rabbits in the insulin study, all were induced with diabetes by administering Alloxan® (50 mg/kg) in order to destroy the pancreatic cells of the rabbit in an attempt to measure blood glucose level reduction due to the effect of the oral insulin formulation rather than from endogenous insulin produced from the animal itself, in which these conditions cannot be fully simulated by cell cultures or other in vitro systems. INF-β and EPO groups were not induced with any condition and remained healthy through the entire duration of the study. A total of 9 rabbits (for each protein-loaded copolymeric system) were divided in 3 groups each (group 1: experimental; group 2: control; and group 3: comparator product evaluation). Group 1 (experimental group): The protein-loaded microparticles were administered to three rabbits via gastric gavage using a 5 mm diameter intragastric tube. The orally administered dose for this group was evaluated using an ELISA kit for INF-β and EPO-loaded formulations, using a blood glucose meter to evaluate glucose concentrations due to the release of insulin, respectively. Group 2 (control): This group of rabbits was administered the protein-free (placebo) oral microparticulate system. Group 3 (comparator product evaluation): This group of rabbits was administered the commercially available subcutaneous formulations of the respective proteins. This study was undertaken to determine the oral efficiency of the protein-loaded microparticles, in comparison to the subcutaneous marketed formulations.
All experimental procedures were conducted under anaesthesia using ketamine (40 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg), as well as topical procaine HCl (0.5%) at the site of blood sampling. After dosing, rabbits were carefully monitored, and blood samples were taken at the specified time intervals. Blood samples were collected in lithium heparin vials and centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 4 min, for evaluation of protein serum concentration. Blood sampling was undertaken at 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 24 h after each formulation administration. All rabbits were used once in the study and were euthanised after completing the study. For insulin, 100 IU was administered orally in the experimental group, with a SC dose of 10 IU administered in group 3. For INF-β and EPO, an oral dose of 44 μg and 12,000 IU was administered to group 1, with group 3 injected with 44 μg and 5000 IU, respectively. The differences in experimental and comparator dosage concentrations are due to the maximum concentration the rabbit could be administered as a subcutaneous dosage.
Histopathological Tissue Evaluation upon Completion of In Vivo Studies
Histopathological evaluation was undertaken on the GIT, kidney and liver tissues of the rabbit for evaluating the potential of inflammation or tissue necrosis to the epithelial cells, after administration of the protein-loaded copolymeric microparticles. Tissue was fixed in formalin and was processed overnight, acquiring sections of 5 μm, stained in haematoxylin and eosin. Each rabbit was evaluated pathologically to determine the safety of the protein-loaded copolymeric microparticles.
Determination of Protein Stability Using Attenuated Total Reflectance-Fourier Transform Infrared (ATR-FTIR) Spectroscopy
All proteins (insulin, INF-β and EPO) were analyzed before and after microparticulate loading, with protein-loaded in vitro release samples evaluated after 2.5 and 8 h in gastric and intestinal medium, respectively. All samples were analysed using a Perkin Elmer Spectrum 2000 FTIR spectrometer, using a single-reflection diamond MIRTGS detector (PerkinElmer Spectrum 100, Llantrisant, Wales, UK).
All samples were compared to a denatured protein sample, which was denatured by exposure to a temperature of 100°C for 2 min, thereafter adding 0.2 mL of ethanol to the 0.5-mL protein samples. All samples (pure protein, protein release samples in gastric medium after 2.5 h, protein release samples in intestinal medium after 8 h and pure protein denatured after exposure to 100°C and addition of ethanol) were evaluated using a universal ATR polarisation accessory for the FTIR spectrum series in the range of 4000–600 cm −1 , with a constant pressure of 120 psi at a resolution of 4 cm −1 . Samples were placed on a diamond crystal, evaluating each sample 100 times to minimise the noise ratio to a minimum of 10. As an alternative to CD measurement, with studies conducted by numerous researchers to prove viability of proteins ( , , , , ), amide 1 bands were studied in detail, to analyse the α-helix bands using ATR-FTIR, which is the main characteristic of denaturation. This result is highly reliable, and thus confirms the integrity of the proteins after protein release analysis ( ). This method analyses deconvolution evaluation of the proteins using a 95% smoothing length and 100 times deconvolution Gamma factor, employing Bessel filter analysis, thus reassuring the integrity of the protein molecules.
Pharmacokinetic Modelling Using Non-compartmental and Compartmental Analysis
Pharmacokinetic (pK) compartmental and non-compartmental data analysis was undertaken using PKSolver software (Microsoft Excel add-in) (Visual Basic for Applications, VBA) ( , ). Data comprising in vivo results using INF-β was pharmacokinetically evaluated using a non-compartmental and a one compartmental model with lag, determining the relationship between the predicted and actual behaviour of the copolymeric microparticles.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Chemical Functionality and Intensity Diffraction Analysis of the Copolymeric Microparticulate System
NMR analysis was conducted on the monomers and copolymeric microparticulate system. As seen in Fig. 1 , peaks at 25 and 175 ppm are indicative of the presence of acetyl functional groups in TMC. Similar peaks were observed in chitosan (CHT), since CHT is the precursor to synthesis of TMC. The peak represented at 55 ppm is diagnostic of the quarternisation of NH 2 to N(CH 3 ) 3 as an appearance of a trimethylated signal. The signal for C 6 and C 2 is now slightly downfield, depicting a change in the structural arrangement of the carbons. Looking at the crosslinked copolymeric microparticles, there is an additional CO, CH 3 bond in the spectrum, indicating the presence of the crosslinking to PEGDMA. The peak for MAA is also evident in the spectrum in the region of 48 ppm, illustrating the OCH 3 functionalities in the crosslinked copolymeric system. The peak at 55 ppm is thus indicative of trimethylation of the amine moiety. This peak is not observed for the spectra of CHT. For the spectrum of CHT, we observe a doublet diagnostic of CH 2 -NH 2 and CH 2 -OH (only protons bonded to an alcohol and amine), with these chemical shifts also comparable to those values reported in literature. There is a broadened set of signals in the region of 185 ppm, which can be assigned to C═O, indicative of the crosslinked PEGDMA-MAA. The functional groups on TMC and PEGDMA are similar in nature, i.e. there have CH 3 , CH 2 , CH and C–O. With the exception for C═O, we observed these carbon signals, but could not be easily assigned directly to TMC or PEGDMA, respectively; however, we observe different carbon signals confirming that the integrity of the structure was maintained with most peaks collectively appearing at same chemical shifts, respectively, for the hybridisation of the carbon. Figure 2 depicts the proposed reaction scheme based on AIBN-free radical polymerisation reaction. Fig. 1 13 C solid-state NMR spectra of a chitosan, b TMC, c MAA and d TMC-PEGDMA-MAA spinning side band CO peak Fig. 2 Proposed reaction scheme based on AIBN-free radical polymerisation reaction
Figure 3 represents powder X-ray diffraction, demonstrating the intensity of the crystalline nature of the polymers, proportional to the area of the peaks. It was found in XRD diffractogram of TMC-PEGDMA-MAA that the degree of crystallinity was greater than TMC and PEGDMA. This could possibly account for the fact that in the solid-state spectrum of TMC-PEGDMA-MAA, there is a greater occurrence of chemically equivalent signals possibly due to fewer structural conformation that would lead to chemical inequivalence, hence more signals. This is a desired goal in the rational design of the optimised copolymer, as this leads to controlled drug release. Fig. 3 Diffractogram representing the intensity of crystalline nature of PEGDMA ( red ), PMAA ( blue ), TMC ( green ), TMC-PEGDMA-MAA ( yellow )
The percentage crystallinity of each sample was calculated, indicating that the impact crosslinking has on the state of the copolymer. TMC and PMAA showed less than 0.1% crystallinity, while PEGDMA and TMC-PEGDMA-MAA showed a 15.42 and 37% crystallinity, respectively.
Each ring diffraction is correlated to a lattice vector in the crystalline sample. The scattering angle is the angle between the beam axis and the ring. Analysis of the polymers thus produces a diffractogram, representing the intensity of diffraction to the scattering angle. The greater the crystalline nature of the sample, the narrower the peaks produced. The lower the crystalline nature, the greater the peak broadening. It can be seen in Fig. 3 that polymer PEGDMA and copolymer TMC-PEGDMA-MAA are significantly crystalline in nature, identified by narrow peaks in the diffractogram, reflecting the extent of ordered molecular arrangement in the crystal lattice. Since the degree of crystallinity is dependent on factors such as chain length, chain branching and inter-chain bonding, crosslinking to form the copolymeric system increases these properties, resulting in greater molecular order of the crystal lattice ( www.chemistry.msu.com ).
Thermal Characteristic Evaluation of Monomers and Copolymeric Microparticles
DSC thermograms, as seen in Fig. 4 , were evaluated for thermal properties of the copolymeric particles, thereby determining the melting and crystallisation points of the polymer and copolymeric particles. TMC displayed an endothermic peak at 214°C and an exothermic peak at 256 and 300°C. TMC displayed decomposition of amine functionalities, approaching crystallinity of the polymer ( , ). PMAA indicated a distinctive endothermic melting peak at 211°C, while PEGDMA gave double melting points at 52.61 and 57.91°C. The copolymeric microparticles of TMC-PEGDMA-MAA gave a single melting peak at 54.59°C, indicating that crosslinking was evident due to the modification of the melting peaks from the original polymer. TGA was also undertaken for determination of degradation and moisture content. TMC displayed 3.37% of water content emitted at 110°C and 23.34% of degradation at 241°C. PEGDMA showed negligible liberation of moisture content at 110°C; however, at 415°C, 40% of the polymer showed thermal degradation. Evaluation of TMC-PEGDMA-MAA liberated 14.5% of water at 110 and at 407°C, and 50% of the polymer showed thermal degradation. TGA calculated the amount of moisture loss from 50 to 110°C and polymer degradation at much higher temperatures. The moisture content of the copolymer was proportional to the hydrophilic nature of the copolymer. The copolymeric particles also demonstrated great sensitivity to degradation, thereby requiring less energy to yield thermal decomposition. At this stage of the reaction, it can be explained that decarboxylation occurs in the copolymeric particles, during which functional groups no longer sustain their intact structures ( ). Fig. 4 DSC thermogram of a TMC, b PEGDMA, c TMC-PEGDMA-MAA and d PMAA
Viscoelastic and Mechanical Deformation Analysis of the Copolymeric Microparticles
The viscoelastic nature of the copolymeric particles was determined in the respective gastric and intestinal pH medium, evaluating the degree of characteristic responses of the particles due to change in pH. As observed in Fig. 5a , particles in gastric medium display distinctive solid phase characteristics, with great elastic properties, since G′ dominates above G″. Towards the end of the graph, where the frequency is substantially high, the viscous behaviour exceeds the elastic property of the particles, displaying greater flow characteristics with greater strain applied. Figure 5b illustrates particles in intestinal medium, demonstrating greater viscous behaviour than elastic behaviour of the particles during the initial stage, with dynamically shifting phases of solid and viscous properties during progression of the applied strain. The viscous nature, however, still remains significantly lower than the solid phase property of the particles, indicating greater elasticity of the particles as the strain increases. Fig. 5 Oscillation curves representing storage modulus (G′ in red ) and loss modulus (G″ in green ), using a 0.1% constant strain in a gastric medium and b intestinal medium
Yield stress (Ƭ) is a measure of minimum force necessary to cause deformation or flow, dependant on time. Bellow the yield stress, the degree of deformation that occurs is a linear manner, increasing in shear stress, thus categorizing the sample as a solid phase behaviour. Above this critical yield value, the sample displays deformation and flows in nature, displaying a greater liquid phase property ( ). The test undertaken oscillates the cone at a fixed frequency sinusoidal time basis, producing a sinusoidal shear strain in a non-destructive manner as given in Eq. 2 . $$ \mathrm{T}={\mathrm{T}}_{\uptheta} \sin \left(\overset{'}{\upomega}.\mathrm{t}\right) $$ (2)
In which Ƭ Ɵ is the stress amplitude, ὠ is the angular velocity and t is the time. Data points are derived from the phase angle of the applied stress and the amplitude of the stress. As the sample is being analysed, deformation occurs due to the stress imposed on the sample. The amplitude of deformation is not achieved in conjunction with the stress amplitude, due to the variations of vicious and solid phase elastic properties of the particles. The resultant phase shift occurs between the deformation and the stress applied, thus referred to as Ɵ or phase shift angle. Samples that are completely elastic in nature possess a phase shift close to 0°, as could be seen with the copolymer in gastric conditions. It was observed that the particles in gastric medium display greater elastic behaviour, due to the clumping of particles and formation of hydrogen bonding. This further provides protection of the loaded protein in the particles with greater elasticity, confirmed by G′ being greater than G″.
Samples that are more viscous in nature display a closer 90° phase shift, as seen with the copolymer in intestinal conditions. It was observed that particles in intestinal medium clearly show a transition of viscous and elastic properties, G″ and G′ interchange, since particles are swelling in nature. This can also be attributed to the absorption of substantial amount of water in the copolymer, predominantly displaying greater viscous behaviour and releasing the loaded protein from the copolymer network.
As discussed by the rheological results of the copolymeric microparticles, in the stomach, it is essential that the particles maintain their elastic nature in gastric medium, clumping to preserve the loaded protein from the acidic environment. In the small intestine, the particles have greater viscous properties, absorbing a substantial degree of water and releasing its loaded protein to be absorbed. Equation 3 indicates these properties of the viscoelastic sample. $$ \mathrm{T}={\mathrm{T}}_{\uptheta} \sin \left(\overset{'}{\upomega}.\mathrm{t}+\upalpha \right) $$ (3)
Ƭ is the stress, Ƭ Ɵ is the stress amplitude, ὠ is the angular velocity, t the is time and α is the phase shift (ὠ=2π.f; f is the oscillation frequency) ( ).
The copolymeric particles in tableted form were evaluated for properties of MH and MR. MH, with a force-distance ratio, Fd = 0.011 and a gradient net Fd = 95.37, which can be interpreted as having significantly strong bonds between the particles, thus maintaining an intact mini-tablet structure.
A force-time profile for MR, with a ratio of the area under the curve (AUC), from peak to baseline, after removing the force initiated (AUC 2–3 ), over the baseline to peak, before removing force (AUC 1–2 ), yielding a percentage of 22.27% MR, indicating a firm, minimally elastic property of the tablet at room temperature, in the dry, solid compressed state. Physical properties of MH of the copolymeric particles were evaluated to determine the intensity of force required per millimetre of distance to induce an indentation on the tablet. The gradient of the curve represents the flexibility of the tablet, whilst the AUC is the amount of deformation energy of the tablet. The stability of the tablet in terms of its physicomechanical properties are essential for maintaining appropriate drug release kinetics, in which the time taken for the tablet to dissociate into its powder form will yield proportional amounts of drug release ( ). MH demonstrated a significant value of 0.011 N/mm, depicting the copolymeric tablet as a significantly strong matrix system, which is essential for a tableted system due to mechanical protocol undertaken during manufacture and packaging.
MR is the ability of a given substance to deform elastically, but revert to its original state, once the force is removed. Many polymers do not possess high resilience since the interfacing surfaces from the interparticulate granules have minimum voids within the matrix structure, which are reduced in the process of compressing the tablet. The greater the void volume capacity, the greater the ability of the tablet to return to its original form to a certain extent after compression, until the interfacing surfaces collapse to a state where elastic deformation is replaced with placticity deformation, i.e. permanent alteration in shape/structure of the tablet. As the number of interfacing particle surfaces (physical interaction) or a higher strength of interfacing particle surfaces (chemical interaction) increase in the copolymeric particles, the compression induced will not create elastic deformation in the structure, allowing a proportional relationship between the intermolecular bond stretch and the resilience properties of the tablet ( ).
A 22.27% MR indicated that the tablet possesses minor elastic properties, representing strong particle bonding with least amount of air spaces between the particles, despite the minimum amount of force of 0.6 MPa used to compress the copolymeric particles. This is also an essential aspect for consideration when packaging of tablets, as well as more physiological parameters of force to withstand swallowing and delayed release disintegration parameters for desired drug release.
The results obtained thus display sufficient evidence that the copolymeric particles possess superior mechanical properties for oral drug delivery; however, when ingested, they behave differently in gastric and intestinal conditions, thereby allowing maximum protection in its gastric medium, clumping in nature to preserve the protein-loaded matrix, due to its solid-state elastic properties, and behaving more viscous in nature when entering the intestinal medium, swelling to release the loaded protein.
Particle Size Distribution, Protein-Loading Efficiency and In Vitro Evaluation of the Copolymeric Microparticles
The average size of the copolymeric particles analysed in gastric and intestinal conditions was found to be 4.7 and 1.2 μm, respectively ( n = 3). These results further support the pH responsive nature of the copolymer. In acidic environments, the particles clump, having greater affinity to each other, resulting in a greater size per unit volume. The opposite is evident in basic pH conditions, where particles repel each other, characteristically exploding in morphology (as seen in Fig. 5 ), resulting in greater distribution of particles per unit volume. The mechanism of insulin, INF-β and EPO loading can simply be analysed with respect to the pH at which loading is accomplished. The copolymeric microparticulate carrier system significantly swells at pH 7.4, expanding large enough to allow the protein to diffuse into the particles.
The strong ionisation of MAA due to carboxylic functional groups significantly allowed higher absorption level of these proteins into the particles. Further upon reducing the pH of the encapsulating medium to 2.5, carboxylic groups complex with etheric groups of PEG, decreasing the size of the polymeric network, due to strong hydrogen bonding occurring between the particles, thus entrapping the absorbed protein within the particulate system. All proteins were loaded using a transitional pH encapsulation method, to obtain maximum drug loading efficiency. Insulin showed 58.78% drug entrapment, in comparison to INF-β and EPO, which showed a lower entrapment of 53.25 and 44.2%, respectively. It was significantly noted that as the size of the protein molecule increased from insulin to INF-β and greatest in EPO, the loading capacity decreased in the copolymeric particles due to the significant size transitions of the proteins. Each formulation was intended for minimum drug release in gastric conditions and maximum release in intestinal condition. After a maximum of 2.5-h duration in gastric simulated fluid, insulin showed a fractional release of 3.2% in comparison to intestinal fluid, in which a maximum of 83% of insulin was released. INF-β released a similar 3% in gastric medium after 2.5 h and a maximum of 74% in intestinal conditions. EPO drug release studies showed a 9.7% release in gastric medium and 81.3% drug release in intestinal conditions, observed in Fig. 6 . These diverse characteristic release rates at gastric and intestinal pH conditions further exemplify minimum loss of the peptide in gastric environment and maximum release at the intestinal site of absorption. Fig. 6 a Fractional release of proteins in gastric medium, b fractional release of proteins in intestinal medium (standard deviation ±0.005)
In Vivo Evaluation of Protein-Loaded Copolymeric Microparticles Using NZW Rabbits
Insulin-loaded copolymeric microparticles significantly decreased the blood glucose by 54.19% within 4 h, and thereafter, a gradual escalation in blood glucose occurred. The comparator commercial SC insulin formulation provided a 74.6% decrease in blood glucose within 4 h as shown in Fig. 7 . For INF-β, both SC and oral formulations were observed to maintain steady-state concentration for a period of 24 h, and the peak concentrations in both cases were observed at 2-h duration. The peak serum concentration (C max ) of INF-β for the copolymeric microparticulate system was calculated to be 1.3% of the original oral administered dose to the rabbits in comparison to the SC formulation, having a peak concentration of 0.9% of the original SC administered dose. The SC formulation was observed to have a lower peak concentration, due to the slow diffusion into the systemic circulation over time. The copolymeric microparticulate system also displayed steady-state drug release for 24 h. INF-β in vitro release was sustained up to 8 h; however, in vivo analysis demonstrated release over 24-h duration. EPO-loaded copolymeric microparticles were observed to have a 1.6% peak concentration to the original oral administered dose, in comparison to a 6.34% peak concentration to the original SC administered dose, after 8 h in the comparator formulation. Fig. 7 In vivo evaluation of protein serum from oral experimental protein-loaded copolymeric microparticles, placebo of unloaded-copolymeric microparticles and commercial SC formulation for a INF-β, b EPO and c insulin
Initial absorption of the protein from the microparticulate system begins in the stomach, by which the permeation enhancing, mucoadhesive properties of the microparticles adhere to the mucosal lining, releasing the loaded protein passively to be absorbed into the systemic circulation. The microparticles, after adhering to the mucosal lining of the stomach, pass into the proximal intestine after gastric emptying, swelling significantly for protein release and absorption, in which peak concentration of protein was observed within the first hour, following absorption of the remaining protein-loaded microparticles in the proximal intestine.
As seen in Fig. 7 , blood glucose therapeutic responses were studied in depth in diabetes-induced rabbits, reflecting substantial decrease in blood glucose of the rabbits, dosed with the insulin-loaded copolymeric formulation. We can therefore conclude that loading proteins in the copolymeric microparticles did not affect the stability of the proteins, thereby successfully delivering a significant therapeutic response in vivo , after dosing the protein-loaded drug delivery system.
INF-β displayed a concentration of 560 pg/mL after the first hour of dosing, representing significant gastric absorption. Insulin and EPO-loaded copolymeric microparticles displayed similar immediate protein detection at the first hour of blood sampling, due to its significant affinity of the microparticles to adhere to the mucous lining of the stomach and release protein. It can be confirmed that the microparticles have a specialised protective mechanism of protein shielding, where denaturing of the protein is minimum, resulting in a high concentration of absorbable protein early on in the GIT.
In addition to the permeation enhancing properties of the particles, PEGylation of a protein molecule modifies the charge distribution, epitope shielding, as well increases the size of the protein molecule which decreases kidney ultrafiltration and increases the passive permeability into tissue ( ). Reduced phagocytosis by liver cells is another fundamental aspect due to charge and glycosylation masking, further reducing proteolysis and immune recognition which are essential for elimination identification mechanisms. This effect of PEGylation is further modified by the significant properties of TMC, which complement and enhance passive diffusion of the loaded protein.
Histopathological Tissue Evaluation upon Completion of In Vivo Studies
Tissue samples from rabbits were evaluated for effects of the protein-loaded microparticles on GIT, kidney and liver tissue. All rabbits in the study revealed normal histological findings. Figure 8a represents GIT intestinal sample, showing normal mucosal crypts and a mild population of lymphoplasma cells in the lamina propria, confirming normal intestinal mucosa. Figure 8b depicts a section of intestinal tissue, showing normal epithelium and mucosal intestinal villi. The lymphoplasma cells in the lamina propria also appeared normal in nature. Figure 8c represents the fundic portion of the stomach, showing normality of the fundic glands with no pathology evident. No signs of inflammation or ulceration in any of the GIT tissue samples were noted, therefore confirming the biosafety of the microparticles. Figure 8d shows severe loss of cellularity and necrosis in the islet of Langerhans. This was due to the administration of Alloxan® to induce diabetes in rabbits of the insulin study. GIT samples were a crucial area of concern, due to direct contact of the microparticles with the GIT tract. Samples from all protein formulations revealed no pathology in gastric and intestinal tissue. There was absence of inflammation, necrosis or degeneration, therefore proving the oral protein-loaded microparticles completely biodegradable and nontoxic for oral administration. Fig. 8 Histological evaluation of tissue samples from rabbits in the experimental oral microparticles. a Intestinal mucosal crypts confirm normal intestinal mucosa (×10 magnification), b intestinal mucosa which shows normal epithelium (×10 magnification), c fundic portion of the stomach which shows normal fundic glands (×10 magnification), d severe loss of cellularity and necrosis of the islet cells in the islet of Langerhans of rabbits induced with diabetes in the insulin study (×20 magnification)
Protein Stability Evaluation by ATR-FTIR Spectroscopy
ATR-FTIR spectroscopy was undertaken on all proteins before and after copolymeric microparticulate loading. Figure 9 represents all three proteins in comparison to the reference denatured protein sample, exposed to a temperature of 100°C for 2 min, with the addition of 0.2 mL ethanol to the protein sample (0.5-mL protein sample). All proteins reflected similar patterns of spectral absorbance, due to the multiple folding arrangement of the proteins, producing amide I and amide II absorption ( , ). Amide I absorption is responsible for linking the amino acids, with a significant C═O streching vibration and minor C–N streching, related to the backbone conformation of the proteins. The amide I band corresponds to the α-helix band, which is the main characteristic of denaturation, in relation to the β-sheet and β-turn bands, which do not have as significant effects on the secondary structure of the protein ( , , ). Fig. 9 ATR-FTIR spectroscopy and deconvolution analysis for a insulin, b INF-β and c EPO. All proteins were analysed as follows: pure protein before microparticulate encapsulation, protein encapsulated in microparticles after a release time of 2.5 h in gastric simulated medium, protein encapsulated in microparticles after a release time of 8 h in intestinal simulated medium and denatured protein at 100°C with the addition of ethanol
ATR-FTIR analysis displayed non-significant variations in band shifts of the proteins before and after loading in the copolymeric microparticles, however displaying a significant shift in bands from 1634 to 1643 cm −1 in the denatured protein samples. Deconvolution images also displayed not much structural variations in the β-sheets of the proteins after particle entrapment; however, a significant change was observed in the denatured protein samples ( , ). All proteins obtained significant in vivo responses, as discussed extensively in the following section. In vivo results further motivate the stability of the proteins in the copolymeric microparticles, as seen in Fig. 7 , with substantial decrease in blood glucose for example in the insulin-loaded copolymeric formulation in diabetic rabbits. We can therefore conclude that loading proteins in the copolymeric microparticles did not affect the stability of the proteins, thereby successfully delivering a protein-loaded drug delivery system, for maximum targeted effect.
Pharmacokinetic Modelling Using Non-compartmental and Compartmental Analysis
Blood samples were centrifuged, separating the red blood cells, and using the remaining serum to analyse protein concentrations at each blood sample. Using ELISA specific protein kits, the concentrations of the proteins in the serum were evaluated and recorded, respectively, undertaking further pharmacokinetic analysis using INF-β protein concentrations ( ). Copolymeric INF-β-loaded microparticles were evaluated using pK parameters, with the mean serum drug concentration-time evaluated. INF-β concentration peaked within the first hour after dosing, maintaining a steady-state concentration over 24 h with a t 1/2 of 26.4 h for evaluation of non-compartmental and one compartmental analysis without lag, respectively. Results derived from non-compartmental and one compartmental analysis reflected similar parameter responses, with differences in Ka and T max (Ka of 15.64 and 112.5 h −1 , respectively, and T max of 0.628 and 0.84 h, respectively). The measure of percentage error deviation for C max for non-compartmental and one compartmental analysis was calculated to be 7.85% deviation in relation to INF-β in vivo results. T max percentage error deviation for non-compartmental and one compartmental analysis was calculated as 37.2 and 16% in relation to INF-β in vivo results. The variations in responses can be attributed to the microparticles pH responsive nature, changing its morphological properties towards this response. The results obtained illustrate the superior composition of the copolymer in relation to its structural activity relationship, conserving the protein for maximum absorption. A C max of 0.516 μg/mL was observed in both models. Equation 4 explains the relation of protein concentration absorbed and volume of distribution in a one compartmental model. $$ \mathrm{C} = \left(\mathrm{FD}/\mathrm{Vd}\right)\ \left(\mathrm{k}/\mathrm{k}\hbox{-} \mathrm{K}\right)\ \left({\mathrm{e}}^{\hbox{-} \mathrm{K}\mathrm{t}}\hbox{-} {\mathrm{e}}^{\hbox{-} \mathrm{kt}}\right) $$ (4)
Where F represents the dose fraction absorbed, with dose D, k representing absorption, K representing elimination rate constants and V representing the apparent volume of distribution ( , , , , ). This compartmental model without lag demonstrates the slow release behaviour of the copolymeric formulations, explaining the time-delayed response for the transition in pH for desired release kinetics. A one compartmental model without lag demonstrated the ability of the formulation to be absorbed across the epithelial membranes via adhering to the mucus lining, releasing INF-β in a constant slow release manner, displaying a biphasic concentration-time profile.
CONCLUSIONS
Copolymeric microparticulate system of TMC-PEGDMA-MAA was synthesised by free radical polymerisation reaction, delivering 3 diverse proteins of insulin, INF-β and EPO, as separate formulations, evaluating its physiochemical and physicomechanical properties, undertaking in vivo studies using a NZW rabbit model. Insulin-loaded microparticles significantly decreased the blood glucose by 54.19% within 4 h (from the original blood glucose concentration), in comparison to the commercial SC insulin formulation, providing a 74.6% decrease in blood glucose (from the original blood glucose concentration). The peak serum concentration (C max ) in serum for the microparticulate system of INF-β was calculated to be 1.3% of the original oral administered dose to the rabbits in comparison to the SC formulation, having a peak concentration of 0.9% of the original SC administered dose. EPO-loaded microparticles demonstrated a 1.6% peak serum concentration to the original oral administered dose, in comparison to a 6.34% peak concentration to the original SC administered dose, after 8 h in the comparator formulation. In comparison to current research published to date on oral protein therapeutics, it can be noted that this copolymeric microparticulte system has significant potential as an immediate responsive oral protein therapeutic, using strategic polymers to obtain the desired effect.