Introduction
Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) is a widely used plasticizer that enhances flexibility, pliability, and elasticity to otherwise rigid polymers, such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC) products [ ]. This compound may be up to 40% of the total plastic weight and has been found in a large variety of consumer products, including building materials, cables and wires, toys, and food packaging, and also in medical tubing and devices [ , , , ]. It is important to note that DEHP is hydrophobic and not covalently bound to PVC, being highly susceptible to leach when in contact with lipophilic fluids [ ]. Therefore, and since it has the ability to deregulate hormonal homeostasis, it is considered as an endocrine-disrupting compound (EDC).
Phthalate exposure has been extensively studied in rodents, especially when it comes to the development and reproductive system, where it seems to affect its deregulation and also steroidogenesis [ ]; however, in the cardiovascular system the information is scarcer. The first animal studies performed with phthalates were in the 70’s, in which Rubin et al. showed that DEHP caused cessation of contractile function and posterior death of chick embryonic cardiomyocytes [ ], and later, Aronson et al. demonstrated that DEHP leads to electrophysiological changes in isolated rat heart [ ].
More recently, Posnack et al. have been studied DEHP exposure effects in rat cardiomyocytes. In 2009, using neonatal rat cardiomyocytes, they found a delay in the conduction velocity due to increased concentrations and time of exposure to DEHP, causing a loss of cardiac network synchronicity by disrupting the main component of cardiac gap junctions, connexin-43 [ ]. Later, in 2011, microarray analysis of neonatal rat cardiomyocytes treated with DEHP showed significant changes in a variety of calcium-handling proteins; there was a decrease in gene expression for calponin, troponin C, and calsequestrin 2, and on the other hand DEHP-treatment enhanced gene expression for ryanodine receptor 2, cardiac calcium transporting ATPase, triadin, voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel, phospholamban, sodium/potassium transporting ATPase, and myosin heavy chain 6 [ ], concluding that DEHP adversely affects cardiac function in rat cardiomyocytes.
Other authors investigated the effect of maternal exposure to DEHP on the vascular function in mice offspring [ ]. Their results suggested that maternal DEHP exposure increased the blood pressure of mice offspring by 20%, approximately. This result can be due to the reduction of endothelium-derived nitric oxide (NO) production and the increase in angiotensin II—AT1R signalling. NO is produced by eNOS and has an important role in the regulation of the vascular tone. When compromised, eNOS activity can lead to the development of cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension [ , , ]. The binding of angiotensin II to its receptors regulates blood pressure, and the activation of AT1R is responsible for vasocontraction, whereas activation of AT2R causes vasorelaxation [ , , ].
According to the literature, DEHP has vascular actions that may be responsible for vasocontraction, but most of these results are from genomic studies and the mechanistic pathways implicated in this effect are not fully understood.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to analyse the rapid/short-term effects of DEHP in rat aortic smooth muscle and the mechanisms implicated in such effect. To elucidate this, the DEHP effect on contracted endothelium-denuded rat aorta was analysed. Also, the whole-cell configuration of the patch clamp technique was used to analyse DEHP effects on voltage-dependent Ca 2+ current ( I Ca ) in A7r5 cells.
Methods
Contractility Experiments in Isolated Rat Thoracic Aorta Rings
Male adult Wistar rats (Charles-River, Barcelona, Spain) weighing 400–500 g were housed and acclimatized with light cycles (12-h light/12-h dark), food and water ad libitum for at least 1 week before performing the experiments. The rats were used in accordance with the European regulations about protection of animals (Directive 86/609) and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals promulgated by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH Publication No 85-23, revised 1996).
The animals were killed by decapitation, and after thoracotomy, the thoracic aortas were removed and placed in a Krebs’ modified solution at 37 °C. The fat and connective tissue were cleaned from the artery, and the vascular endothelium was mechanically removed by soft rubbing with a swab inserted through the arterial lumen. The rat aorta artery rings were placed in an organ bath (LE01.004, Letica) containing Krebs-bicarbonate solution at 37 °C continuously gassed with carbogen. The composition of the Krebs’ modified solution was (mmol/L): NaCl (119), KCl (5), CaCl 2 ·2H 2 O (0.5), MgSO 4 ·7H 2 O (1.2), KH 2 PO 4 (1.2), NaHCO 3 (25), EDTA-Na 2 (0.03), l -(+)-ascorbic acid (0.6), and glucose (11)—pH 7.4. The artery rings were suspended by two parallel stainless steel wires, and tension measurement was taken using isometric transducers (TRI201, Panlab SA, Spain), amplifier (ML118/D Quad Bridge, ADInstruments), interface PowerLab/4SP (ML750, ADInstruments), and computerized system with Chart5 PowerLab software (ADInstruments). The organ bath solution was changed every 15 min, during the resting periods.
After the equilibration period (60 min until a resting tension of 10 mN), the aortic rings were firstly contracted with Noradrenaline (NA; 1 μmol/L) and the absence of endothelium functionality was confirmed by the lack of relaxant response to acetylcholine (1 μmol/L). After that, the arteries were washed for at least 45 min before the next stimuli. The rings were contracted using NA (1 μmol/L) or KCl (60 mmol/L), and the effect induced by DEHP (1 nmol/L–100 μmol/L) on these contractions was analysed. Control experiments were performed using ethanol, and the vehicle used to dissolve DEHP.
Cell Culture of Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells (VSMC)
For this study, culture of A7r5 cell line was performed. This is a commercial vascular smooth muscle cell line obtained from embryonic rat aorta (Promochem, Spain). The cells were grown in culture medium Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium/Nutrient Mixture F-12 Hams (DMEF-F12; Sigma-Aldrich, Portugal) supplemented with NaHCO 3 (1.2 μg/L), l -ascorbic acid (20 μmg/L; Sigma-Aldrich), bovine serum albumin (0.5%; Sigma-Aldrich), heat-inactivated foetal bovine serum (FBS; 10%; Biochrom), and a mixture of penicillin (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100 g/mL), and amphotericin B (250 ng/mL) (Sigma-Aldrich). The cells were kept in culture at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO 2 . When the cells reached confluence, they were placed in a culture medium without FBS (FBS-free culture medium) for 24 h. Before each experiment, the cells were trypsinized using a solution of trypsin (0.3%) in Ca 2+ –Mg 2+ -free phosphate-buffered solution with EDTA (0.025%). Subsequently, the cells were kept at 4 °C in FBS-free medium until the initiation of the electrophysiological experiments.
Electrophysiology Experiments
The whole-cell configuration of patch clamp technique was used to analyse the LTCC current ( I Ca,L ), according to Mariana et al. [ ]. In order to analyse the I Ca,L , a specific control external solution, containing (mM): NaCl 124.0, CaCl 2 5.0, HEPES 5.0, tetraethylammonium sodium salt (TEA) 10.0, KCl 4.7, and glucose 6.0 with pH 7.4 adjusted with NaOH, was used. Patch electrodes (2–4 MΩ) were filled with internal solution, consisting of (mM): CsCl 119.8, CaCl 2 0.06, MgCl 2 4.0, Na-ATP 3.1, Na-GTP 0.4, EGTA 5.0, HEPES 10.0, and TEA 10.0 with pH 7.3 adjusted with CsOH. The presence of Cs + instead of K + in the solutions blocked the potassium currents. The cells were maintained at a holding potential of − 80 mV and routinely depolarized every 8 s to 0 mV test potential during 500 ms to measure I Ca,L .
Basal I Ca,L was measured 3–5 min after patch break in order to allow the equilibration between pipette and intracellular solutions. Currents were not compensated for capacitance and leak currents. All experiments were done at room temperature (21–25 °C), and the temperature did not vary by more than 1 °C in each experiment. The cells were voltage clamped using the patch clamp amplifier Axopatch 200B (Axon instruments, USA). Currents were sampled at a frequency of 10 kHz and filtered at 0.1 kHz using the analogue–digital interface Digidata 1322A (Axon Instruments, USA) connected to a compatible computer with the Pclamp8 software (Axon Instruments, USA). The external solution was applied to the cell proximity by placing the cell at the opening of a 250 –m-inner-diameter capillary tube flowing at a rate of 20 μL/min. The basal and BAY K8644-stimulated (10 nM) I Ca,L were studied in the presence of different concentrations of DEHP (1 nM–100 μM) dissolved in the external solution.
Drugs
BAY K8644, nifedipine, noradrenaline, NaCl, CaCl 2 , HEPES, TEA, KCl, CsCl, MgCl 2 , Na-ATP, Na-GTP, and EGTA were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Química (Sintra, Portugal). DEHP was purchased from Acros Organics.
DEHP and BAY K8644 were initially dissolved in ethanol, and noradrenaline was made up in distilled water. Appropriate dilutions in Krebs’ modified solution or in the corresponding electrophysiology external solution were prepared every day before the experiment. Final concentration of ethanol never exceeded 0.01% in the experiments.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical treatment of data was performed using the SigmaStat Statistical Analysis System, version 4.0 (2005). Results are expressed as mean ± SEM of n experiments. Comparison among multiple groups was analysed by using a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc test to determine significant differences among the means. Comparison between two groups was analysed by using Students t test. Probability levels lower than 5% were considered significant ( P < 0.05).
The I Ca,L amplitudes were automatically calculated between the maximum current peak and the stable current plateau near the final of the every 8 s pulse. The I Ca,L variations induced by the different drugs used are expressed as a percent of the basal or BAY K8644-stimulated I Ca,L .
Results
Effects of DEHP on Isolated Rat Aorta
The rat aortic rings without endothelium were contracted by depolarization with isosmotic KCl (60 mmol/L) solution and also by NA (1 μmol/L). The maximal contractions elicited by NA and KCl were 16.28 ± 0.11 mN ( n = 31) and 20.42 ± 0.15 mN ( n = 28), respectively, being significantly different ( P = 0.016, Student’s t test). These contractile effects were reversible after washing out with Krebs’ solution. Ethanol, the vehicle used to dissolve DEHP, did not have significant relaxant effect at the concentrations used (Table 1 ). Table 1 Basal tension of DEHP (0.001–100 µmol/L) on rat aortic rings DEHP (µmol/L) Basal tension of DEHP (mN) 0.001 − 0.07 ± 0.10 ( n = 18) 0.01 − 0.19 ± 0.15 ( n = 18) 0.1 − 0.10 ± 0.18 ( n = 18) 1 − 0.12 ± 0.21 ( n = 18) 10 − 0.14 ± 0.19 ( n = 18) 100 − 0.02 ± 0.24 ( n = 18) Each value represents the mean of the basal tension ± SEM (mN) from the number of experiments shown in the brackets
Afterwards, the effect of DEHP (0.001–100 μmol/L) on the contractions induced by KCl and NA was analysed. Increasing concentrations of DEHP were administered, and there was no significant effect on NA contraction (Fig. 1 ), but at higher concentrations, DEHP caused a small relaxation on KCl-induced contraction (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 1 Effect of DEHP in NA-induced contraction of rat aorta. a Effect of increasing concentrations of DEHP (0.001–100 μmol/L) in endothelium-denuded rat aortic rings contracted with NA (1 μmol/L). Each column represents the mean values and the lines the SEM of number of experiments stated above the columns. * P < 0.05 one-way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc test. The effects are expressed in percent relaxation over the initial area. b Original traces showing responses of DEHP (0.001–100 μmol/L) in NA (1 μmol/L) precontracted endothelium-denuded rat aortic rings Fig. 2 Effect of DEHP in KCl-induced contraction of rat aorta. a Effect of increasing concentrations of DEHP (0.001–100 μmol/L) in endothelium-denuded rat aortic rings contracted with KCl (60 mmol/L). Each column represents the mean values and the lines the SEM of number of experiments stated above the columns. * P < 0.05 one-way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc test. The effects are expressed in percent relaxation over the initial area. b Original traces showing responses of DEHP (0.001–100 μmol/L) in KCl (60 mmol/L) precontracted endothelium-denuded rat aortic rings
As shown in Fig. 1 a, DEHP has no significant effect in aortic rings contracted with NA. This effect is much lower than the one induced on KCl contraction and similar to the control arteries. Figure 1 b shows an example of the original traces of DEHP effects in NA precontracted aortic ring, in which there is no effect observed.
Figure 2 summarizes the results of DEHP on KCl-induced contraction and shows that at higher concentrations there is a significant increase in the arteries relaxation. DEHP effect on KCl-induced contraction is concentration dependent, since the percentage of relaxation increases with cumulative concentrations of the compound. Thus, according to these results DEHP induces relaxation of rat aortic rings contracted by KCl. Figure 2 b shows an example of an aortic ring where the relaxation induced by DEHP on KCl contraction is visible.
Effects of DEHP on LTCC
The whole-cell patch clamp technique was used to record LTCC currents in A7r5 cells [ ]. The mean value of I Ca,L was of − 0.76 ± 0.08 pA/pF ( n = 21). Basal current amplitude was measured 3–5 min after patch break to allow the equilibration between the pipette and the intracellular solutions.
Figure 3 a summarizes these effects and shows that at concentrations of 10 and 100 μM, DEHP inhibits basal I Ca,L and this inhibition is rapid and reversible after washout. These results indicate that DEHP inhibits LTCC at the highest concentrations (10 and 100 μM), being 10 μM the most pronounced. Figure 3 b also shows a typical experiment in which different concentrations (0.001–100 μM) of DEHP inhibited the basal I Ca,L in a reversible way. Fig. 3 Effects of DEHP on basal I Ca . a Summary of the inhibitory effects of DEHP (0.001–100 μmol/L) on A7r5 basal I Ca,L . Each column represents the mean value and the lines the SEM of the number of experiments stated above the columns. The effects are expressed in percent variation over the amplitude of basal I Ca . b Original records of patch clamp experiment showing the effect of increasing concentrations of DEHP (0.001–100 μM) on basal I Ca,L amplitudes in a single A7r5 cell
Nifedipine is a selective antagonist of LTCC that blocks the calcium current, and Fig. 4 shows the time course of an experiment which confirms that nifedipine, at different concentrations (10 nmol/L, 100 nmol/L and 10 µmol/L), inhibited the basal current. BAY K8644, a direct activator of the LTCC, was used to analyse DEHP effect on stimulated I Ca,L . The application of BAY K8644 (0.01 µM) significantly stimulated the calcium current by 58.60 ± 8.26% ( n = 6) above the basal level. The effects of BAY and/or nifedipine were completely reversible upon washout of the drug. These results indicate that the current analysed is a I Ca, L . Fig. 4 Effects of DEHP on BAY-stimulated I Ca . a Summary of the inhibitory effects of DEHP (0.1–100 μmol/L) on the I Ca stimulated by BAY (0.01 μmol/L). Each column represents the mean value and the lines the SEM of the number of experiments stated above the columns. The effects are expressed in percent variation over the amplitude of BAY-stimulated I Ca . b Original records of patch clamp experiment showing the effect of increasing concentrations of DEHP (0.001–100 μmol/L) on BAY-stimulated I Ca,L amplitudes in a single A7r5 cell
Figure 5 a shows that DEHP, at concentrations of 1–10 μM, slightly inhibits the stimulated I Ca,L . This inhibition seems to be higher at 1 µM, with the maximal effect of DEHP being 12.44 ± 6.94%. These results indicate that DEHP also inhibits stimulated I Ca,L at higher concentrations. Fig. 5 Original records showing direct inhibition of different concentrations Nifedipine (10 nmol/L, 100 nmol/L and 10 µmol/L) on basal I Ca,L amplitudes measured in patch clamp experiments performed with A7r5 cells
Figure 5 b shows a typical experiment in which DEHP reversibly inhibited the I Ca,L stimulated by BAY at concentrations of 1–10 μM.
The maximal concentration of ethanol (0.01%), the vehicle used to dissolve DEHP, did not affect basal or stimulated I Ca,L (− 1.85 ± 2.53%, n = 8). Figure 6 shows the original records of cumulative percentages of ethanol used, demonstrating that it has no effect on the LTCC currents. Fig. 6 Original records showing direct inhibition of different concentrations Nifedipine (10 nmol/L, 100 nmol/L and 10 µmol/L) on basal I Ca,L amplitudes measured in patch clamp experiments performed with A7r5 cells
Discussion
In the present study, we analysed the effect of di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate on contracted endothelium-denuded rat aorta arteries and on the I Ca,L measured by whole-cell voltage-clamp in A7r5 cells.
Since our purpose is to study the effect of DEHP at the smooth muscle level, the vascular endothelium was previously removed, and then increasing concentrations of DEHP (0.001–100 μmol/L) were administered. There was a rapid and concentration-dependent relaxation in the aortic rings contracted with KCl; however, no significant effect on NA contraction was found. Knowing that the [Ca 2+ ] i is the main determinant of smooth muscle contraction/relaxation [ ] after analysing the effect of DEHP on aortic rings contractility, it became necessary to study the effect that this EDC might have on voltage-dependent Ca 2+ influx currents. These voltage-dependent slow inactivated inward currents were measured in A7r5 cells and were characterized electrophysiologically and pharmacologically as I Ca,L [ ]. The highest concentrations of DEHP inhibited basal and BAY-stimulated I Ca,L , with the maximum inhibition at 10 and 1 μmol/L, respectively. Therefore, these results seem to demonstrate a non-genomic inhibitory effect induced by DEHP on LTCC that appears to be responsible for the endothelium independent vasorelaxant effect of this EDC.
The vasorelaxant effects of DEHP on aortic rings contracted with KCl seem to be dose dependent; however, the maximal relaxation achieved was only 13.7%. On the other hand, on aortic rings contracted with NA, although there was no significant effect, when compared to the control, DEHP induced a slight relaxation. That is, in arteries contracted with KCl, this relaxation is more pronounced than the ones contracted with NA. This difference may be explained by the different vascular action mechanism of both contractile agents. High extracellular KCl concentrations induce plasma membrane depolarization. This depolarization can activate voltage-dependent channels, among them LTCC whose opening increases intracellular calcium levels and leads to muscle contraction [ ]. Moreover, vascular smooth muscle cells express different adrenoceptor subtypes, including α1A-, α1B-, α1D-, β1-, and β2-adrenoceptors. Noradrenaline is involved in the contraction, by binding to α1-adrenoceptors, which are associated with different Gq proteins, causing the increase in [Ca 2+ ] i which results in contraction [ , ]. On the other hand, the β1- and β2-adrenoceptors are coupled to Gs protein, which stimulates adenylate cyclase-inducing vasorelaxation [ , ]. Besides, the stimulation of NA receptors can also induce the influx of extracellular calcium via voltage- or receptor-operated calcium channels [ ], so we can hypothesize that this vasorelaxant effect induced by DEHP in A7r5 could be due to a decrease in calcium influx by blocking the voltage-operated channel.
So, to confirm this, we performed patch clamp studies in A7r5 cells to analyse the DEHP effect on the activity of LTCC that are the main channels responsible for the contractile or relaxant effect. The characterization of the I Ca,L was made by analysing the effect of BAY, a known agonist of this type of channels, which clearly stimulates the basal I Ca,L , and nifedipine, a selective antagonist of LTCC, that blocks the calcium current, insuring the LTCC nature of this current. Our results show that DEHP has the ability to inhibit LTCC activity in vascular smooth muscle cells from rat aorta, with its higher effect at the 10–100 μmol/L. Furthermore, it also inhibits BAY-stimulated I Ca,L , with its maximum effect observed for the concentration of 1 μmol/L. Although it is a weak inhibition, it is possible to confirm the inhibitory effect of DEHP on I Ca,L .
The effects of EDCs, including phthalates, are still not fully understood, regarding their mechanisms and/or their doses. According to Diamanti-Kandarakis, even small doses of exposure can lead to endocrine abnormalities; in fact, it has been shown that small doses can exert more potent effects than higher doses. Also, EDCs may exert non-monotonic dose–response curves, such as inverted-U or U-shaped curves, known for hormone and neurotransmitter actions [ , ]. Thus, it is important to study a broad range of concentrations, since exposing tissues to a narrow range of doses may lead to erroneous conclusions, as it has been shown in in vitro mechanistic studies regarding other EDCs [ , , ]. Thus, the concentrations used in this study range from 1 nmol/L to 100 μmol/L.
Studies performed with animals can offer a quicker and more flexible approach for health effect studies and lead to the discovery of the mechanism of action and dose–response characteristics [ ]. Several investigators have demonstrated the adverse effects of DEHP in in vivo and in vitro models. Rubin et al. showed that DEHP (4 µg/mL) caused cessation of contractile function and posterior death of chick embryonic cardiomyocytes [ ]. Aronson et al. demonstrated that DEHP, in a much higher concentration (250 µmol/L), leads to electrophysiological changes such as the elongation of PR and QT intervals on isolated rat heart [ ]. More recently, Gillum et al. reported that DEHP exposure (1–50 µg/mL) resulted in a concentration-dependent decrease in conduction velocity and affected the synchronicity of the cell network by disrupting the main component of cardiac gap junctions, connexin-43 [ ]. Another study performed by Posnack et al. revealed that DEHP exposure (1–50 µg/mL) alters the expression of key genes associated with ion channel and calcium-handling proteins of neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. DEHP-treated samples reduced the expression of calcium-handling genes, including calponin, troponin C, and calsequestrin 2; however, gene expression for voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel was heightened [ ]. Intracellular calcium is an important regulator of cardiac function, concerning the cardiac electrophysiology, excitation–contraction coupling, and mechanical function [ , ].
Regarding the potential mechanisms of DEHP, in vitro studies demonstrated that phthalates may bind to androgen receptors (ARs) having a strong anti-androgen activity, and also to estrogen receptors (ER) with a weak estrogenic activity [ ]. Phthalates anti-androgenic activity does not occur by the binding to the androgen receptor and its consequent inhibition, but by disrupting the development of androgen-dependent structures mainly by inhibiting foetal testicular testosterone biosynthesis [ , , , ]. On the other hand, Mankidy et al., using an angiotensin II-responsive steroid-producing adrenocortical cell line, concluded that DEHP targeted steroid biosynthesis pathways resulting in greater production of 17β-estradiol with a concurrent reduction in concentration of testosterone [ ]. These studies are in agreement with one performed by Andrade et al., in which the authors concluded that phthalate exposure might be associated with disturbances of the normal balance between androgens and estrogens. Using brain of neonatal males, they discovered a biphasic dose–response for aromatase enzyme activity, a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of oestrogens, in which, with low-dose led to inhibition and high-dose to stimulation [ , ]. Furthermore, Cairrão et al. have already demonstrated that the vasorelaxant effect of 17β-estradiol in rat aortic smooth muscle is due to the inhibition of LTCC. They also established that this inhibitory effect of 17β-estradiol is mediated by a non-genomic pathway, since they were rapid and reversible effects [ ]. Our data seem to agree with the idea that the mechanism of DEHP may have the same pathway as 17β-estradiol, because DEHP leads to a small inhibition of the LTCC, resulting in a vasorelaxant effect.
On the other hand, there is one genomic study where in vivo rat incubation with DEHP can lead to vasoconstriction and increased blood pressure in mice offspring [ ]. The results can seem contradictory; however, this is a genomic study where the effects were only observed in the next generation of mice, and these effects are not according to the genomic estrogenic effect [ ]. So, our results showed for the first time an inhibition of basal and BAY-stimulated I Ca,L induced by DEHP in vascular smooth muscle cells, which supports and confirms the observed vasorelaxant effects in rat aortic rings. Although it is a weak inhibition of LTCC, it will result in the reduction of intracellular-free Ca 2+ concentration, being responsible for the rat aorta relaxation. Our data also correlate with the idea of a rapid relaxant effect of DEHP through a mechanism independent of the endothelium and not mediated by intracellular receptors.
In regulatory toxicology, the human health risk due to the exposure to an EDC is normally assessed using in vivo and in vitro models, followed by an extrapolation of the data to humans. However, the range of doses typically used in animal studies is three to four orders of magnitude greater than the estimated daily exposure of humans [ ]. The results reported in this article suggest that DEHP may cause vasorelaxation by inhibition of the LTCC, but are the levels of exposure to humans sufficient to cause these effects on human health? Therefore, it is important to continue the research of possible biological changes and their mechanisms at doses within the range of median human phthalate exposure.