Introduction
Acute myocardial infarction (MI) occurs when myocardial ischemia reaches a critical threshold and exceeds myocardial cellular repair mechanisms. At this level, ischemia results in irreversible myocardial cell damage [ ]. Nowadays, the mortality and morbidity of MI are reaching epidemic percentage throughout the world [ ]. In Egypt, the prevalence of ischemic heart disease is 8.3% [ ]. Worldwide, MI is a leading cause of mortality in cardiovascular diseases [ ].
Isoprenaline (ISP) is a synthetic catecholamine that acts as a β-adrenergic agonist. In high doses, it could yield acute myocardial necrosis like myocardial infarction [ ]. Isoprenaline-induced cardiac necrosis is considered as one of the most common used experimental models of myocardial infarction. It is used to study the protective effects of many drugs on the myocardial structure and function [ ].
N -Acetylcysteine (NAC) is a sulfur-containing amino acid. It is found in onion, garlic and protein-rich food. NAC was shown to have anticancer, antiangiogenic and antioxidant [ ]. It prevents damage of the DNA and inhibits the oxidative stress. It increases the intracellular levels of glutathione which is a major protective factor for the cells from free radicals. Moreover, it inhibits the increase in low molecular weight iron in the myocardium [ ]. NAC protects the heart by its anti-inflammatory effect. It decreases the release of inflammatory mediators such as NF-κβ expression in the myocardium [ ]. Moreover, NAC promotes coronary dilatation and has anti-platelet effect [ ].
Some researchers studied the protective effect of NAC when given before the induction of MI [ , ]. Others studied its protective effect when given both before and after the induction of myocardial infarction [ ]. The missing data are the comparison between the protective effect of NAC before myocardial injury with its protective effect both before and after myocardial injury. So, the aim of the present work was to compare the cardioprotective effect of NAC on the isoprenaline-induced myocardial injury before the ISP injection with its protective effect both before and after the ISP injection. This study was applied over both short and long time periods. The study was directed on adult male albino rats using histological, immunohistochemical and histomorphometric analysis.
Materials and Methods
Chemicals
Isoprenaline was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA. The used vehicle was (1 ml) saline per dose, and the ISP dose of (200 mg/kg/day) was injected subcutaneously (SC) in the skin of the nape [ ].
N -Acetyl cysteine was obtained from SEDICO Pharmaceutical Company, 6th of October city, Egypt. The used vehicle was (1 ml) saline per dose and the NAC of (100 mg/kg/day) was given orally using blunted tip syringe [ ].
Animals
A total of 90 adult Wistar male albino rats were used in this study. Their body weights ranged from 180 to 200 g. Animal care was provided by laboratory animal house unit, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University. The rats were acclimatized in the laboratory for a period of two weeks before carrying out the experiment. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University. All animal procedures followed the ethical guidelines of experimental animals.
Experimental Design
Table 1 . Table 1 Experimental design Group Rat’s number Time of scarification Group I (control group) 40 With each group per the experimental schedule Group II (ISP-treated group): The rats were injected with ISP for two consecutive days [ ] Subgroup-a 10 24 h after the last ISP injection Subgroup-b 10 12 days after the last ISP injection Group III (NAC-pretreated group): NAC was given for 14 consecutive days. Then, concomitant ISP and NAC were given for another two consecutive days [ ] Subgroup-a 10 24 h after the last ISP injection Subgroup-b 10 12 days after the last ISP injection Group IV (NAC-pre-& posttreated group): NAC was given for 14 consecutive days. Then, concomitant ISP and NAC were given for another two consecutive days [ ]. Then, NAC was given for another 12 consecutive days [ ] 10 12 days after the last ISP injection
Methods
Blood Sampling
At the end of the time schedule of each group, blood samples from the control and experimental rats were collected by retro-orbital puncture using fine heparinized capillary tube. The blood samples were delivered into centrifuge tubes, and the plasma was collected and used for the determination of creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) as diagnostic marker enzyme for myocardial injury. The blood analysis was done at the laboratory unit of the Biochemistry Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University using Biomed Diagnostics, Hannover, Germany kit obtained from EGY-CHEM for laboratory technology, Badr city, Egypt.
Light Microscopic Examination
The specimens were obtained from the left ventricle of each rat of all groups, 3 mm from the apex [ ]. They were kept in 10% formol saline, processed for paraffin sections of 5–7 µm thickness and mounted on glass slides for histopathological examination. They were stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (Hx &E) stain to study the changes in histological architecture and Masson’s trichrome stain to demonstrate the collagen fibers.
Immunohistochemical Staining
Alpha smooth muscle Actin (α-SMA) antibody (Clone 1A4) is a mouse monoclonal antibody (abcam Medical, Cambridge, USA, catalogue number ab7817). It was supplied as antibody (200ug/ml) and stored at 2–8°C. It was diluted 1:50–1:100 in 0.05 mol/L Tris–HCl, pH 7.6 containing stabilizing protein and 0.015 mol/L sodium azide. Histostain SP kit (LAB-SA system, Zymed laboratories Inc, San Francisco, CA 94080, USA, catalogue number 95-9643).
Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) antibody (Clone PC-10) is a mouse anti-rat monoclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, catalogue number sc-56). It was supplied as antibody (200 ug/ml) prediluted 1:2000 using PBS-based antibody diluent, PH: 7.4 to reduce background and unspecific staining. It was stored at 2–8°C. No special pretreatment was required for immunohistochemical staining of formalin-fixed tissues. Histostain SP kit (LAB-SA system, Zymed Laboratories Inc, San Francisco, CA 94080, USA, catalogue number 95-9643). The kit of both antibodies included serum blocking solution, a biotinylated secondary antibody, a horseradish peroxidase streptavidin and a substrate chromogen mixture to demonstrate antigen in cells and tissues.
Electron Microscopic Examination
Specimens from the left ventricle were fixed in 4% glutaraldehyde then washed in phosphate buffer and post-fixed in 1% osmium tetraoxide. Fixation was followed by dehydration and embedding in epoxy resins. Semithin sections (1 µm) were stained with toluidine blue. Ultrathin sections (50–60 nm) were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. These sections were examined and photographed using a Joel, 100 CX II transmission electron microscope.
Histomorphometric Studies
Quantitative data were obtained using “Leica Qwin 500 C” image analyzer computer system Ltd. (Cambridge, England). The following parameters were measured in different fields with fixed field area 4 × 10 4 µm 2 : Area percent of collagen fibers. Area percent of α-SMA immunopositive cells. Area percent of PCNA immunopositive nuclei.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using statistical package for the social sciences (SPSS) version 21.0 (IBM Corporation, Somers, NY, USA) statistical software. The data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Statistical evaluation was done using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni pairwise comparisons. Significance was considered when p value was less than 0.05. The percentage of increase or decrease (difference) in all study parameters was calculated per the following formula. $$\text{Percentage}\;\text{of}\;\text{difference} = \frac{{\text{Mean}\;\text{difference}\;\text{value}\;\text{between}\;\text{two}\;\text{groups}}}{{\text{Value}\;\text{of}\;\text{the}\;\text{compared}\;\text{group}}} \times 100$$
Results
Histological and Ultrastructural Observation
The cardiac myocytes of the control group showed normal histological architecture (Fig. 1 a). Fig. 1 a Transversely cut cardiac muscle fibers ( asterisk ) in bundles separated by connective tissue septa (CT), acidophilic sarcoplasm (SP) and central vesicular nucleus (N) in a control rat (Hx. & E.; ×400). b Inflammatory cellular infiltrate (CI); lymphocytes (L), neutrophils (Ne) and macrophages (Mc) with interstitial edema (E) between fragmented, disrupted ( asterisk ) cardiac muscle fibers. Some degenerated myocytes show karyolysis (K) in a rat group II-a (Hx. & E. ×400). c Focal degeneration ( asterisk ) of cardiac muscle fibers. The cardiac myocytes have normal acidophilic sarcoplasm (SP) and central vesicular nuclei (N). Minimal cellular infiltrate (CI) in the form of macrophages (Mc), neutrophils (Ne) and lymphocytes (L). Note congested dilated blood vessel (BV) in a rat group III-a (Hx. & E.; ×400)
In the short-term groups, inflammatory cellular infiltrate with interstitial edema was observed in group II-a (Fig. 1 b). In contrast, minimal cellular infiltrate was seen in group III-a (Fig. 1 c). In addition, blood vessels were dilated, congested with extravasation of blood in groups II-a, III-a (Figs. 1 c, 2a ). Tissue exudate and fibroblasts were seen in group II-a (Fig. 2 a). Focal degeneration of the cardiac muscle fibers was seen in group III-a (Figs. 1 c, 2b ). Fig. 2 a Wavy (W) cardiac muscle fibers, blood extravasation (Bl), dilated congested blood vessel (BV), tissue exudate (Ex) and fibroblasts (FB) in a rat group II-a (Hx. & E.; ×400). b Cardiac muscle fibers with central rounded nuclei (N) and normal acidophilic sarcoplasm (SP). Note focal degeneration of the cardiac muscle fibers ( asterisk ) separated by thin connective tissue septa (CT) in a rat group III-a (Hx. & E. ×400)
Inflammatory cellular infiltrate was observed in the long-term group (group II-b) with formation of granulation tissue (Fig. 3 ). Degenerated, disorganized cardiac muscles fibers with pyknotic nuclei was observed in this group (Figs. 3 – 4 a, b). Fewer of these effects were noted in groups III-b suggesting improvement (Fig. 4 c, d). The cardiac muscle fibers in group IV were regularly arranged. The myocytes exhibited apparent striations, normal acidophilic sarcoplasm and central vesicular nuclei (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 3 a Fragmented, disrupted, markedly thinned ( asterisk ) and widely separated (S) degenerated cardiac muscle fibers with diffuse inflammatory cellular infiltrate (CI) in a rat group II-b (Hx. & E. ×200). b Granulation tissue between degenerated cardiac muscle fibers, cellular infiltrate (CI); lymphocytes (L) and neutrophils (Ne), dilated congested capillary (C) and blood extravasation (Bl) in a rat group II-b (Hx. & E.; ×400). c Disrupted, widely separated and degenerated cardiac muscle fibers with vacuolation (V), deeply acidophilic sarcoplasm (SP), interstitial edema (E) and dark pyknotic nuclei (P). Note inflammatory cellular infiltrate (CI); macrophages (Mc), lymphocytes (L) and neutrophils (Ne) in a rat group II-b (Hx. & E.; ×400) Fig. 4 a Disorganized, remodeled degenerated ( asterisk ) cardiac muscle fibers which run in a non-parallel manner with fibroblasts (FB) and extravasation of the blood (Bl) in a rat group II-b (Hx. & E; ×400). b Degenerated ( asterisk ) cardiac muscle fibers with perinuclear sarcomeric depletion (myolysis) (My) around dark pyknotic nuclei (P). Some cardiac muscle fibers show eosinophilic degeneration (Eo). Note markedly dilated capillary (C) and many fibroblasts (FB) in a rat group II-b (Hx. & E.; ×400). c Regularly arranged longitudinal cardiac muscle fibers ( asterisk ) with minimal spacing. Note cardiac myocytes with apparent striations (ST) with non-congested thin walled blood arteriole (Ar) in a rat group III-b (Hx. & E.; ×400). d Regularly arranged cardiac muscle fibers ( asterisk ) with minimal spacing. The cardiac myocytes have normal acidophilic sarcoplasm (SP), vesicular centrally located nuclei (N) with few dark nuclei of the fibroblasts (FB). Minimal blood extravasation (Bl) and some wavy (W) cardiac muscle fibers are seen in a rat group III-b (Hx. & E; ×400) Fig. 5 a The cardiac muscle fibers are regularly arranged ( asterisk ) with minimal spacing. The cardiac myocytes exhibit apparent striations (ST), normal acidophilic sarcoplasm (SP) and central vesicular nuclei (N). Note dark flat nuclei of fibroblast (FB) in a rat group IV (Hx. & E. ×400). b Preserved bundles ( asterisk ) separated by thin connective tissue septa (CT). The cardiac myocytes show central rounded nuclei (N) with normal non-congested blood capillary (C) in a rat group IV (Hx. & E.; ×400)
The collagen fibers were minimal in the control group. Increased amount of collagen fibers was seen in the other experimental groups as compared with that of the control group (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Collagen fibers (arrows) between the cardiac muscle in the different groups (Masson’s trichrome ×400). a Minimal amount of collagen fibers in the control group. b Increased amount of collagen fibers in a rat group II-a. Note blood vessels (BV), blood extravasation (Bl) and degenerated cardiac muscle fibers ( asterisk ). c, d Increased amount of collagen fibers in the rat’s groups II-b and III-a, respectively. Note blood vessels (BV) and degenerated cardiac muscle fibers ( asterisk ). e, f Increased amount of collagen fibers in the rat’s groups III-b and IV, respectively. Note blood vessels (BV)
The immunoreactivity of the α-SMA was negative in the myocardium in the control group, while it was localized positive in the smooth muscle of the blood vessel wall in the same group. Positive immunoreactivity in the myofibroblasts and in the smooth muscles of the blood vessel wall in the different experimental groups is shown in Fig. 7 . Fig. 7 Immunoreactivity ( arrows ) in the myofibroblasts and in the smooth muscles of the blood vessel wall (BV) in the different groups (α-SMA ×400). a Negative immunoreactivity in the myocardium with localized positive immunoreactivity ( arrowheads ) in the smooth muscle of the blood vessel wall in the control group. b – f Positive immunoreactivity in the myofibroblasts ( arrowheads ) and in the smooth muscles of the blood vessel wall in the different experimental groups II-a and II-b, respectively
The immunoreactivity of PCNA in the nuclei of the proliferating cells of the myocardium was weak in the control group and group IV, while it was strong positive in the rat’s groups II-a, II-b, III-an and III-b (Fig. 8 ). Fig. 8 a – f Immunoreactivity ( arrows ) in the nuclei of the proliferating cells of the myocardium in the different groups (PCNA ×400). a Weak reaction in the control group. b – e Strong positive reaction in the short- and long-term rat’s groups. f Weak reaction in the rat’s group IV
The myocardium of the control group has regular strands of myofibrils, sarcomeres limited by regular Z lines, light I and dark A bands and mitochondria with closely packed cristae (Fig. 9 a). On the other side, the myofibrils in group II-a were lost and disrupted with nuclear degeneration and chromatin aggregation. The mitochondria diminuend at the nuclear poles. They were degenerated with disrupted cristae and raptured membranes (Fig. 9 b). Fewer of these effects were noted in groups III-a suggesting improvement (Fig. 9 c). Fig. 9 Electron photomicrograph of the myocardium in the different groups. a Regular strands of myofibrils (MF) with clear cross-banding formed of repeated contractile units; sarcomere (SM) limited by two regular Z lines (Z), light I bands (I) and dark A bands (A). IFM are seen on either side of Z line ( blue arrowheads ) or spanning the sarcomere ( blue arrow ). Mitochondria (M) with closely packed cristae, mitochondrial membranes form a contact sites which appear electron dense ( thick arrow ), constriction of some mitochondrial membranes and some T tubules (T) are detected between the myofibrils near the Z lines in a control rat (TEM ×15000). b Nuclear (N) degeneration, chromatin (Ch) aggregation in some parts of the nucleus, mitochondrial diminution at the nuclear poles ( ellipse ), disrupted myofibrils (MF) with loss of continuity and degenerated mitochondria (M) with raptured membrane ( arrows ). Note mitochondrial constriction ( arrowhead ) in a rat group II-a (TEM ×10000). c Regular arrangement of the myofibrils (MF), regular Z lines (Z), preserved sarcomere (SM) and alternating dark A band (A) and light I band (I). Minimal loss of myofibrillar continuity ( asterisk ), mitochondria with closely packed cristae(M), constricted mitochondrial membranes ( arrowheads ) and increased electron density of mitochondrial membranes ( thick arrow ) in a rat group III-a (TEM ×15000) (Color figure online)
Loss of myofibrillar, disrupt of sarcomere and fragmentation of the mitochondria were observed in group II-b (Fig. 10 a, b). Fewer of these effects were noted in groups III and IV suggesting improvement. The myofibrils were regular; sarcomeres were preserved with normal alternating dark A and light I bands. The nuclei were euchromatic. The mitochondria had closely packed cristae and increased electron density of their membranes (Fig. 10 c–e). Fig. 10 a Widely lost disrupted Myofibrils ( asterisk ), swollen degenerated mitochondria (M) with disrupted cristae, diminution of mitochondria at the nuclear poles ( ellipse ) and mitochondrial constriction ( arrowhead ). Note nuclear (N) degeneration, chromatin (Ch) is aggregated in electron-dense clumps in a rat group II-b (TEM ×12000). b Loss of myofibrillar and its continuity ( asterisk ), disrupted sarcomere (SM), empty vesicles (M) with electron-dense membrane and fragmented mitochondria (Fr) in a rat group II-b (TEM ×15000). c Euchromatic nucleus (N), distinct nucleoli (Nu), mitochondria (M) at the poles of the nucleus ( ellipse ), regularly arranged myofibrils (MF) with regular Z lines (Z) and preserved sarcomere (SM) in a rat group III-b (TEM ×4000). d Regular arrangement of the myofibrils (MF), regular Z lines (Z), T tubule (T) near the Z line , preserved sarcomere (SM), mitochondria with closely packed cristae (M) and mitochondrial membrane constriction ( arrowhead ). Note : minimal degeneration and loss of myofibrillar continuity ( asterisk ) in a rat group III-b (TEM ×15000). e Regular strands of myofibrils (MF), sarcomere (SM) limited by two regular Z lines (Z) and alternating light I bands (I) and dark A bands (A). Euchromatic nucleus (N), mitochondria with closely packed cristae (M) near the nucleus ( ellipse ) in a rat group IV (TEM ×20000)
Morphometric measurements (Table 2)
Mean CK-MB Level
The mean CK-MB levels of groups II-a and III-a were significantly higher by 131.1 and 26.6% than that of the control group and were significantly higher by 120.8 and 20.9% than that of group IV. Contrary, the levels of groups III-a and b were significantly lower by 45.5 and 52% than that of group II-a. Finally, the levels group II-b was 50% lower than that of group II-a. Table 2 Mean and SD of the different variables of the different studied groups Groups KPC-MB level Collagen fibers area percent α-smooth muscle area percent PCNA optical density Control Mean ± SD 120.74 ± 6.33 .53 ± .10 .20 ± .02 1.45 ± .43 II-a Mean ± SD 279.04 ± 15.17 +#$% 4.93 ± .87 +#$%! 2.64 ± .36 +#$%! 3.29 ± .38 +$%! II-b Mean ± SD 139.60 ± 32.15* 5.90 ± 1.07 + * $%! 4.97 ± .64 + * $%! 3.84 ± .99 +$%! III-a Mean ± SD 152.81 ± 12.63 + * ! .95 ± .41* # .47 ± .12* # 2.02 ± .30* # III-b Mean ± SD 133.93 ± 6.56* .99 ± .38* # .57 ± .36* # 2.08 ± .59* # IV Mean ± SD 126.40 ± 5.50* $ .76 ± .39* # .31 ± .11 *# 1.59 ± .58* # SD standard deviation + P ≤ 0.05, significant difference compared to that of the control group * P ≤ 0.05, significant difference compared to that of group II-a # P ≤ 0.05, significant difference compared to that of group II-b $ P ≤ 0.05, significant difference compared to that of group III-a % P ≤ 0.05, significant difference compared to that of group III-b ! P ≤ 0.05, significant difference compared to that of group IV
Mean Collagen Fiber Area Percent
The mean collagen fiber area percent of group IV showed an insignificant increase as compared with that of the control group. In contrary, the mean collagen fiber area percent of groups II-a, b was significantly higher by 8.3-folds and 10.1-folds as compared with that of the control group and was also significantly higher by 5.5-folds and 6.8-folds as compared with that of group IV.
The mean collagen fiber area percent of groups III-a, b was significantly lower by 0.81-folds and 0.80-folds as compared with that of group II-a and was significantly lower by 0.84-folds and 0.83-folds compared with that of group II-b.
The mean collagen fiber area percent of group II-b was 0.19-folds significantly more than that of group II-a.
Mean α-SMA Area Percent
The α-SMA area percent of groups II-a, b was significantly higher by 12.2-folds and 23.9-folds as compared with that of the control group and was significantly higher by 7.5-folds and 15-folds as compared with that of group IV.
The mean α-SMA area percent of groups III-a, b was lower by 0.82-folds and 0.78-folds, respectively, as compared with that of group II-a and was also lower by 0.91-folds and 0.89-folds, respectively, as compared with that of group II-b ( P = 0.000).
The mean α-SMA area percent of subgroup II-b was 0.88-folds significantly more than that of group II-a.
Mean PCNA Area Percent
The mean PCNA area percent of groups II-a, b was significantly higher by 126.2 and 164.8% as compared with that of the control group and was higher by 106.3 and 141.5%, respectively, as compared with that of group IV.
The mean PCNA area percent of groups III-a, b was 38.6 and 36.8% significantly lower than that of group II-a and was 47.4 and 45.8% significantly lower than that of group II-b.
Discussion
Myocardial infarction remains the greatest killer in the Western world and is the principal cause of chronic heart failure [ ]. The left ventricle was preferred in the present study as ISP treatment resulted in an extensive myocardial damage which mainly affected the left ventricle [ ].
Deterioration of the histological architecture of the myocardium was obvious in the rat’s groups II-a, b. This could be attributed to the capability of the IPS to induce myocardial hypoxia and to increase oxidative stress [ ]. The myocytes finally are destructed either by apoptosis or necrosis [ ]. Haleagrahara et al. (2011) added that the beta-adrenergic receptor over-stimulation by ISP in the myocardium caused intracellular calcium overload, positive inotropic and chronotropic effects. These consequences increase the oxygen demand of the myocardium leading to ischemia and infarction [ ].
Cardiac myocyte damage detected in the ISP-treated groups can be attributed to necrosis, apoptosis and autophagy [ ]. Cardiomyocyte apoptosis after ISP treatment may be due to hypoxia, ischemia and excessive adrenergic receptor stimulation [ ]. In addition, ISP increases reactive oxygen species (ROS) which subsequently initiate the caspase cascade inducing cardiac myocyte apoptosis [ ]. The occurrence of necrosis was attributed to dysregulation in intracellular Ca 2+ homeostasis within myocytes [ ]. The myolysis observed in the myocardium in group II-b could be resulted from the myocyte–fibroblast interactions [ ].
Edema, exudate with subsequent blood extravasation observed in groups II-a, b could be related to the vascular endothelial damage and vasodilatation effect of the ISP which lead to leakage of fluid and blood into the myocardium [ ]. IPS promotes vascular vasodilatation by the activation of β -adrenoceptors on the endothelium or by the activation of cAMP [ ]. Moreover, oxidative stress increases heme-oxygenase production which leads to oxidative vascular endothelial cells injury [ ].
The cellular infiltrate was observed in groups II-a, b. Many authors attributed the cellular infiltration to the overproduction of ROS [ ]. Liu et al. (2009) linked the inflammatory response with subsequent expression of TNF-α and IL-1 to myocardial damage. Neutrophilic infiltration of the infarct site may be also due to secretion of cytokines and chemokines, as well as expression of adhesion molecules on endothelial cell surface [ ]. The observed granulation tissue in group II-b may be a reaction to the long inflammatory process as prolonged induction of inflammatory chemokine in the infarcted heart may result in granulation tissue formation [ ].
The arteriolar wall thickening in ISP-treated groups, especially group II-b, was most probably due to vascular tunica media cellular proliferation [ ]. Moreover, ischemia promotes smooth muscle migration to the intima and promotes intimal proliferation resulting in narrowing of the lumen [ ]. In addition, the angiotensin II stimulation and ROS production caused by ISP administration provide a mitogenic stimulus for vascular smooth muscle cells [ ].
A constant ultrastructural finding in the previously mentioned groups was the presence of mitochondrial injury. This may be a result of oxygen deprivation [ ]. The mitochondrial membrane damage observed in these groups may be caused by lipid peroxidation or by altered cholesterol levels which affect permeability of ions through mitochondrial membranes and activities of membrane-bound enzymes [ ]. Altered mitochondrial structural and function plays a chief role in the pathology of myocardial infarction [ ].
Another important finding in the present study was the significant increase in mean collagen fiber area percent in the myocardium and around the blood vessels in ISP-treated rats’ groups II-a, b being significantly higher in group II-b. This might be caused by the direct activation of β-adrenergic receptors of fibroblasts by ISP which induces collagen synthesis [ ]. In addition, increase collagen deposition after MI may be due to the production of inflammatory and fibrotic mediators [ ].
The mean area percent of myofibroblast α-SMA showed a significant increase in the ISP-treated groups II-a, b being significantly higher in group II-b. This finding reflects the ability of ISP to increase the number of the myofibroblasts. The adult mammalian heart contains an abundant population of interstitial and perivascular fibroblasts. These cells can be differentiated into myofibroblasts, which express contractile proteins (such as α-smooth muscle actin) and are key for repair of the infarcted myocardium [ ].
A significant correlation between the area percent of collagen fibers and area percent of α-SMA immunopositive cells was observed in the all studied groups suggesting that α-SMA immunopositive cells could be the source of collagen fiber deposition in myocardial fibrosis [ ]. Cardiac myofibroblasts are much more active in collagen production compared to fibroblasts and are responsible for excessive building of connective tissue in the heart under pathologic conditions [ ].
The mean area percent of PCNA immunoreactivity showed significant increase in groups II-a, b. Frangogiannis et al. (2000) detected a peak of PCNA immunoreactivity 5–7 days after the reperfusion. This time overlaps with the peak α-SMA immunoreactivity suggesting that the proliferation was mainly attributed to myofibroblast proliferation [ ]. Moreover, Jankowski et al. [ ] attributed the intensive PCNA staining found in the scar region to fibroblasts and myofibroblasts.
The use of NAC before the ISP injection in groups III-a, b ameliorated the deleterious effect of ISP. The cardiac architecture was preserved with few degenerative changes. More protection was observed in group IV. The ability of NAC to reduce the cardiac edema, exudate and blood extravasation might be attributed to its anti-inflammatory effect. NAC decreases the leukocytes adhesion to endothelial cells preventing the endothelial vascular damage and improving the peripheral and coronary endothelium-dependent vasodilation [ ]. The protective effect of NAC might be also attributed to its antioxidant properties as it increases the levels of glutathione, endogenous antioxidants, superoxide dismutase, and decreases lipid peroxidase levels in the myocardium [ , ].
The NAC decreases the inflammatory infiltrate in these groups as it inhibits the neutrophil activation and aggregation [ ]. It also increases the microvascular blood flow, decreases the ROS production, decreases the pro-inflammatory cytokines and reduces the monocytes and leukocytes adhesion to endothelial cells which improves coronary blood flow [ ]. NAC may also acts as TNF-α antagonist [ ]. NAC may decrease the neutrophil recruitment in the myocardium due to its antioxidant ability as the neutrophils are a powerful source of ROS [ ].
Thin walls of the myocardial arterioles with preserved wide lumen in all NAC and ISP-treated groups were observed in the present study could be explained by the anti-mitogenic action of NAC [ ]. NAC can decrease the tunica media smooth muscle proliferation and their migration to the tunica intima decreasing the vessel wall thickness [ ].
The mitochondrial injury decreased in the previously mentioned groups due to the lipid peroxidation inhibiting effects of NAC [ ] and due to the ability of NAC to maintain calcium homeostasis [ ] as the mitochondrial calcium influx is the most common factor inducing mitochondrial-derived ROS generation [ ]. In addition, NAC prevents the prolonged excessive ER stress which in turn prevents the mitochondrial ROS dysfunction [ ].
Minimal necrosis and apoptosis observed in these groups. NAC downregulates the expression of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase which is a major inducer of apoptosis [ ]. NAC acts as TNF-α antagonist preventing apoptosis [ ]. In addition, NAC decreases the nuclear factor kappa (NF-κB) which initiates the expression of pro-apoptotic genes [ ]. Moreover, NAC to prevent prolonged and excessive ER stress which may be the cause of cell apoptosis or death [ ].
The use of NAC in these groups significantly lowers the mean collagen fiber area percent. NAC decreases both inflammatory mediators as IL-6 and TNF-α and fibrotic mediators as TGF-β responsible for cardiac remodeling after MI [ ].
The mean area percent of α-SMA was significantly lower in these groups. These findings agreed with Felton et al. [ ] and Demiroren et al. [ ] who detected a significant decrease in the α-SMA in NAC-treated rats in alveolar epithelial-mesenchymal cells injury and in ischemia–reperfusion model of liver fibrosis. This protective effect of NAC is related to its ability to suppress the inflammation and decrease the leukocyte count with subsequent decrease in the inflammatory and fibrotic cytokines as TNF-α, IL-6 and TGF-β expression stopping the process of remodeling as their activation represents a critical event in the process of fibrosis [ ]. Moreover, NAC acts as oxidative scavenger and increases the tissue content of glutathione which may contribute to its protective action [ ].
The PCNA area percent in these groups decreased as compared to that of ISP-treated groups II-a, b. NAC can stop the process to remodeling by preventing the fibroblast and myofibroblast action and proliferation [ ]. NAC reversed the antiproliferative effects of Icariside II, a metabolite derived from Herba Epimedii, in human melanoma cell lines and resumed cell division cycle by scavenging reactive oxygen species suggesting proliferative action of NAC [ ].
It could be concluded that ISP had deleterious effects on the heart. Administration of NAC before ISP injection could largely reduce the ISP-induced short- and long-term alterations. The protection was maximum with the use of NAC before the ISP injection and continued after the injection for 12 days.