Introduction
Peroxynitrite (ONOO − ) is a well-known potent oxidant and nitrating agent that is formed through the interaction of nitric oxide (NO · ) with superoxide ion (O 2 ·− ). Its production is linked to the superoxide sources, such as mitochondrial respiratory complexes or NAD(P)H oxidases present on plasma membrane. Superoxide is a short-lived species that shows constrained diffusion across biological membranes, while NO · is quite stable and an extremely diffusible free radical. In vivo, the rate of production of peroxynitrite in particular organelles (such as phagocytic vacuoles in macrophages) is as high as 50–100 μM/min. The ability of peroxynitrite to cross cell membranes, despite having a short half-life at physiological pH (~10 ms), suggested that peroxynitrite formed could influence the adjoining target cells within one to two cell diameters (~5–20 μm) range [ ]. The decomposition of peroxynitrite occurs via proton-catalyzed reaction to form OH · and NO 2 · radicals in hydrophobic phases, and this initiates lipid peroxidation [ , ].
Peroxynitrite can either oxidize or nitrate different biological molecules such as thiols, tyrosine residues in proteins and phospholipids having unsaturated fatty acids. Radicals derived from peroxynitrite carry out one-electron reactions and form sulfilic and sulfonic acid derivatives [ , ]. In DNA, purine bases are susceptible to oxidation and adduct formation [ , , , ]. Peroxynitrite reacts with nitrogenous bases in DNA to form two major products, namely 8-oxoguanine and 8-nitroguanine (Fig. 1 ), and oxidized deoxyribose causing single-strand breaks [ ]. Different adducts, namely 3-nitrotyrosine, 3,3′-dityrosine and 3,4′-dihydrophenylalanine, are produced upon interaction of peroxynitrite with tyrosine residues in proteins [ ]. The reaction between peroxynitrite-derived radicals and lipids causes peroxidation that leads to the formation of conjugated dienes, malondialdehyde and lipid hydroperoxides [ ] along with the formation of nitro-, nitrito-, nitrosoperoxo- and/or nitrated lipid oxidation adducts [ , , ]. The nitration of fatty acids can also cause secondary inhibition of protein function through thiol-based modifications [ ], whereas nitrated lipids play an important role in anti-inflammatory functions via peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ)-dependent and PPARγ-independent pathways [ ]. Both oxidation and nitration of protein tyrosine residues were assisted by lipid peroxidation occurring in biological membranes and lipoproteins [ ]. Fig. 1 Formation of 8-Nitroguanine (8-NitroG) and 8-Oxoguanine (8-OxoG). Reaction of peroxynitrite with guanine leads to the formation of 8-NitroG and 8-OxoG (as major products) and 5-guanidino-4-nitroimidazole (NI), 2,5-diamino-4H-imidazol-4-one (Iz) and it undergoes hydrolysis to form 2,2,4-triamino-5(2H)-oxazolone (Oz) at physiological pH
Various studies have reported the in vivo formation of peroxynitrite [ , ]. Peroxynitrite primarily causes more DNA damage (mostly oxidative) as compared to the equivalent amount of nitric oxide. It modifies guanosine in DNA to form 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine/8-oxoguanine [ ] and 8-nitroguanine [ ]. 8-nitroguanine is a yellow-colored adduct that is most favorably formed at approximately pH 8 in a dose-dependent manner. Koppenol et al. [ ] proposed that either heterolytic cleavage of peroxynitrite to form a nitronium ion (NO 2 + ) or a high-energy intermediate (ONOOH) derived from trans -peroxynitrite (pKa 7.9) may be involved in the formation of 8-nitroguanine. Different deoxynucleosides are also capable of interacting with peroxynitrite to form 2-thiobarbituric acid (TBA)-reactive substances in a dose-dependent manner [ , ].
Among different reactive nitrogen species, namely peroxynitrite, nitrous acid, tetra-nitromethane and NO-releasing compounds, only peroxynitrite is capable of forming 8-nitroguanine. This reaction was impeded by antioxidants such as ascorbate, urate, N -acetylcysteine and desferrioxamine [ ].
It has also been reported that exposure of human skin epidermal keratinocytes to preformed peroxynitrite or SIN-1 leads to extensive DNA base modification [ ]. Increase in the amounts of xanthine, hypoxanthine and 8-nitroguanine was observed, whereas only a slight increase was seen in the levels of some oxidized bases, including 8-oxoguanine and fapy-guanine [ ]. Studies on plasmids have demonstrated the induction of single-strand breaks in DNA after peroxynitrite exposure [ , , ]. Significantly, more single-strand breaks were observed at acidic pH than at neutral or alkaline pH, suggesting that hydroxyl radical-like intermediate(s) (ONOOH · ) or peroxynitrous acid (ONOOH) are responsible for the damage [ ].
The two main pathways involved in cell death after peroxynitrite-induced damage are apoptosis and necrosis. Apoptosis is a well-programmed sequence of different morphological events, distinguished by nuclear and cytoplasmic condensation along with plasma membrane blebbing, whereas necrosis is caused by secondary inflammation through the exhaustion of cellular ATP resulting in membrane disintegration and release of deleterious cellular debris. Various studies have reported necrosis and apoptosis in different cell types after NO and peroxynitrite treatment [ , , , ].
Role of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase (PARP) in Cellular Damage Progression
Messmer et al. [ ] have reported that NO · -driven apoptosis is related to the proteolytic cleavage of PARP that involves mechanisms different from apoptosis triggered by peroxynitrite and hydroxyl radicals. PARylation, one of the post-translational modifications of nuclear proteins, causes polyadenosine diphosphate ribosylation. The initiation step involves PARP that converts nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD + ) to ADP-ribose and nicotinamide and then catalyzes the polymerization on nuclear acceptor proteins [ , ]. The major acceptor proteins are DNA polymerases α and β, topoisomerases I and II, DNA ligase 2 and PARP itself (auto-modification domain). ADP-ribosylation causes reduction in the catalytic activities of these enzymes, and the occurrence of ADP-ribose on histones (mainly histone H1) causes chromatin relaxation [ ]. PAR glycohydrolase (PARG) regulates PAR turnover by degrading poly(ADP-ribose) into free ADP-ribose (ADPr) and adenosine monophosphate [ ]. About 17 PARP isoforms have been identified that differ in functions and their structural domains [ , ]; PARP-1 (116 kDa) is the most abundant and well-studied isoform. It is composed of three functional domains, namely central auto-modification domain (16 kDa), C-terminal catalytic domain (55 kDa) and N-terminal DNA binding domain (46 kDa) having a nuclear localization signal. Two zinc-finger motifs in the DNA binding domain assist in binding to both single-and double-stranded breaks in DNA [ ]. Poly(ADP)-ribosylation is involved in the regulation of various physiological cellular functions, including gene transcription, DNA repair, cell death and cell cycle progression [ ]. Free radicals hyperactivate PARP-1 resulting in depletion of NAD + along with ATP ultimately causing cell death and organ dysfunction. The upregulation of proinflammatory gene expression is driven by PARP through the activation of different transcription factors. Therefore, significant participation of PARP-1 in the pathogenesis of several diseases, including circulatory shock, stroke, diabetes and other inflammatory disorders, has been reported [ , ]. Several researchers have documented the involvement of peroxynitrite in eliciting PARP activation [ , ]. Peroxynitrite can also induce different pathophysiological changes independently from PARP as well. These alterations, ranging from DNA and protein modifications to changes in cellular signal transduction pathways, cause inflammatory responses and finally cell death via necrotic or apoptotic routes [ , ]. In cell damage, PARP activation depletes intracellular NAD + causing inhibition of glycolysis, electron transport, resulting in cellular dysfunction and cell death. Two main pathways are involved in the progression of various diseases through PARP activation. The first pathway drives the cell into energy-deprived state causing dysfunction, and the second one activates proinflammatory pathways [ , , ]. Numerous reports have shown the association of pathophysiological pathways with peroxynitrite production and PARP activation in human diseases. In vivo, PARP activation requires single-stranded breaks in DNA that can be induced by various oxidants and free radical species, including peroxynitrite and hydroxyl radical. Peroxynitrite has the ability to pass through cell membranes, entering the nucleus and causing DNA single-strand breaks [ , ]. It is a unique species that has enough half-life to travel within and between cells and also has DNA breaking ability [ ]. In addition to the above-mentioned roles, a novel function of PARP has been revealed in the regulation of mitochondria-to-nucleus translocation of apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF). This AIF translocation seems to be a vital event, causing condensation of chromatin and fragmentation of DNA and eventually cell death [ ]. AIF plays a major part in mediating PARP-1-dependent cell death.
Participation in Disease Progression
A variety of diseases including stroke, atherosclerosis, diabetes, ischemic heart diseases and neurodegenerative diseases are caused from disturbances in mitochondrial functions. The production of peroxynitrite occurs either within mitochondria or in extra mitochondrial compartments. Peroxynitrite inhibits Mn-SOD by nitration [ ] reducing the conversion of superoxide to H 2 O 2 that further promotes peroxynitrite formation. It also causes mitochondrial toxicity: either by direct oxidative reactions or by free radical-induced damage involving CO 2 that forms CO 3 −· and NO 2 · radicals [ , ]. The latter reaction is highly feasible in mitochondria due to the CO 2 production during decarboxylation reactions in main organelles [ , ]. Furthermore, peroxynitrite also affects tricarboxylic acid cycle by inhibiting aconitase (mitochondrial matrix enzyme) by oxidatively disrupting 4Fe–4S center of the enzyme [ , ] and mitochondrial creatine kinase (mitochondrial inter-membrane space enzyme) [ ].
Circulatory Shock
Circulatory shock is a syndrome of widespread cellular hypoxia, triggered by a systemic alteration of perfusion and delivery and/or utilization of tissue oxygen, eventually causing end-organ dysfunction and death [ ]. It can be subdivided into four distinct categories according to its primary pathophysiological mechanism, namely cardiogenic, hypovolemic, obstructive and distributive [ ]. In the first three types, perfusion changes as a consequence of decrease in cardiac output, whereas distributive types of shock are related to a primary dysfunction of the resistive component of the cardiovascular system. In vasoplegia, vascular tone is reduced and there is a noticeably depressed constrictive response of arterioles to vasoconstrictors; it is the main cause of septic shock [ ]. Sepsis-induced vasoplegia is a component of a generalized circulatory dysfunction that involves the macro- and micro-circulation, heart and endothelium, as an outcome of a systemic inflammatory response accumulated by the host in response to invading microorganisms [ ]. Research over the past two decades has shown that the enhanced formation of free radicals and oxidant species symbolizes a key pathophysiological mechanism of cardiovascular dysfunction and organ damage during sepsis [ ]. Among such oxidizing agents, peroxynitrite has received particular interest as an essential mediator of systemic inflammation and circulatory collapse in septic shock [ ]. Moreover, the inflammatory conditions prevailing in the situations of septic shock favor the generation of abundant amounts of both NO · (due to diffused expression of iNOS) and O 2 ·− (due to enhanced mitochondrial dysfunction and increased expression/activity of O 2 ·− generating enzymes) [ ] (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 PARP-mediated cellular injury after ischemia–reperfusion in circulatory shock. Superoxide and nitric oxide are combined to form peroxynitrite triggered by proinflammatory stimuli/ischemia–reperfusion. Peroxynitrite breaks DNA, and PARP is activated leading to inhibition of mitochondrial respiration and cellular energetics and ultimately cellular injury
Vascular Contractile Failure
The hallmark feature of circulatory shock is vascular dysfunction, which is characterized by a reduced vascular tone with impaired vasoconstrictive response to vasoconstricting agents (vasoplegia), impaired microcirculatory blood flow and endothelial dysfunction. Different types of mechanisms have been put forward to explain peroxynitrite-mediated reduction in vascular tone. Bioenergetic failure, associated with direct effects of peroxynitrite on the mitochondrial electron transport chain or to DNA-damage-mediated activation of PARP with successive reduction in cellular NAD + and ATP, has been suggested as the primary mechanism connecting peroxynitrite generation with vascular contractile dysfunction [ , ]. Therefore, pharmacological inhibition of PARP [ , ] or its genetic deletion [ , ] has been linked to significant improvements in vascular contractility and reduced hypotension in different animal models of septic and hemorrhagic shock. Other mechanisms include the opening of K ATP channels in response to peroxynitrite, causing induction of vascular hyperpolarization [ , ] and activation of matrix metalloproteinases (especially MMP-2) in the vessel wall by peroxynitrite [ ]. These mechanisms ultimately impair myosin light chain phosphorylation by peroxynitrite-activated myosin phosphatase causing disturbances in calcium trafficking, thus restricting the activity of calcium channel in the plasma membrane [ ] or at the level of the sarcoplasmic reticulum [ ]. Recent studies report the association of peroxynitrite elevation in ventilation-mediated pulmonary and vascular dysfunction [ ].
Endothelial Dysfunction
The main feature of vascular failure during circulatory shock is the loss of endothelial regulatory functions. Impairment of endothelium-dependent vasodilation changes the well-regulated mechanism connecting tissue metabolic needs and regional blood flow, whereas the loss of the anti-adhesive and anti-aggregative properties of endothelium favors the accumulation of leukocytes and platelets in microcirculation. This leads to impaired microvascular perfusion and organ functions. Villa et al. [ ] provided the first observation projecting peroxynitrite as a mediator of endothelial dysfunction by peroxynitrite infusion in isolated perfused hearts resulting in severe impairment of endothelial-dependent relaxation in coronary vessels. In conclusion, peroxynitrite could also trigger endothelial dysfunction during shock by an indirect way involving the activation of PARP, as shown in endothelial cells in vitro [ ], as well as in vivo models of shock in which endothelial dysfunction could be corrected by pharmacological PARP inhibitors [ , ] or its genetic deletion [ , ].
Cardiac Dysfunction
Cardiac function impairment, due to reduced myocardial contractility, is an important pathophysiological alteration during circulatory shock, particularly septic shock. Various contributing mechanisms have been identified, including the negative inotropic effects of different circulating factors, especially cytokines (TNFα, IL-1β and IL-6), lysozyme c and endothelin-1, disturbances of intracellular calcium trafficking within cardiac myocytes, alterations of myocardial microvascular blood flow, mitochondrial abnormalities and autonomic dysfunction [ , , ]. There are various factors which may be responsible for the toxic actions of peroxynitrite on the heart, including myocardial cell death, either by caspase-3-dependent apoptosis [ ] or PARP-mediated necrosis [ ]. A direct correlation linking the degree of myocardial PARP activation and the severity of cardiac functional alterations has been established in humans with septic shock [ ]. Myocardial contractility can also be impaired by peroxynitrite due to disturbance in regulatory mechanism of intracellular calcium through the inactivation of SERCA2A, an isoform of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ ATPase [ ], by altering different myofibrillar proteins including actin, myosin [ ] and alpha-actinin [ ], by interrupting myofibrillar energetics through inactivation of the myofibrillar isoform of creatine kinase [ ] and by activating matrix metalloproteinases [ ] which promotes contractile failure by cleaving key sarcomeric proteins including troponin and myosin light chain [ ].
Moreover, peroxynitrite may also augment intra-myocardial inflammation by modulating NF-κB [ ] and MAP kinase signaling [ ] and by eliciting myocardial release of high-mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1) [ ] with subsequent increase in the formation of cytokines with negative inotropic effects.
Multiple Organ Dysfunction of Septic Shock
The development of progressive organ dysfunction affecting nearly all organ systems is one of the major complications of septic shock, resulting in a clinical depiction of “multiple organ dysfunction syndrome” (MODS) with high mortality. The activation of inflammatory cascades, apoptosis and abnormalities of tissue oxygenation (tissue dysoxia) are the main pathogenic processes precipitating MODS. One strategy involves inhibition or genetic deletion of PARP, activated in response to peroxynitrite-driven DNA damage. It has been associated with considerable improvement in organ function during circulatory shock as PARP is an important mediator both in the progression of early cardiovascular dysfunction and in the delayed systemic inflammatory syndrome related to multiple organ failure [ , ].
Studies have shown that peroxynitrite may be an important mediator of the intestinal microvascular injury and epithelial damage during LPS-induced shock [ ]. Further, the pathogenic participation of peroxynitrite in lung and renal dysfunction in conditions of circulatory shock has been also reported [ , ].
Sepsis and Inflammation
The most feared pathophysiological effect of sepsis is the disturbance of the cardiovascular system through vasodilation and fluid loss from the vascular system in the tissue induced by elevated NO · concentrations. The successive drop in blood pressure and reduced blood supply to tissues leads to systemic circulatory failure and death of the patient. Inhibitor studies have shown that PARP-1 is not only involved in DNA repair, but also in septic shock. Hauschildt et al. [ ] have shown that the induction of proinflammatory cytokines by LPS treatment of macrophages could be prevented by inhibiting PARP. An anti-inflammatory effect of PARP activity suppression, either induced by Parp1 gene knockout or pharmacological inhibition, was also reported [ ]. Moreover, LPS treatment of rats led to weakened endothelial functions, which could be alleviated by the administration of PARP inhibitor, 3-aminobenzamide (3AB) [ ].
The bacterially inoculated pigs (porcine model of sepsis) showed improved cardiovascular performance and higher survival rates after treatment with the PARP inhibitor PJ34 [ ]. Similarly, other reports have shown beneficial effects on organs such as liver with systemic improvements after the application of PARP inhibitors only [ , ] or in combination with inhibitors of nitric oxide production [ ], probably reducing DNA damage and vasodilation. Mitochondrial dysfunction, induced by sera from septic patients, in the endothelial cell system was prevented by administration of 3AB [ ].
In brief, PARP activity blockage reduces cell death resulting from energy depletion. It also dampens the inflammatory response of immune cells, resulting in reduction of affected (necrotic) area by impairing NFκB-dependent transcription. Suppressed iNOS induction leads to reduced NO · and direct and indirect DNA damage. Diminished NO · production also reduces vasodilation, suppressing this part of the response to sepsis [ ].
PARP inhibition prevents stimulation of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) via tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) in fibroblasts [ ] or by interferon gamma (IFNγ) in vascular smooth muscle cells [ ]. Moreover, inflammation and neutrophil adhesion was reduced in experimentally induced peritonitis [ ]. It is quite clear that the transcriptional activity of the master regulator of inflammatory reactions, nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB), depends on the poly-ADP-ribosylation system. Many cytokines, including TNFα, MIP1α, IL1β and IFNγ as well as iNOS along with adhesion molecules, are not (or only marginally) induced without PARP-1 activity [ , , , , ].
DNA strand breaks activate repair-PARPs and result in energy depletion, leading to necrotic cell death. Necrosis elicits inflammatory reactions through NFκB and iNOS induction with increased load of NO · and subsequently more DNA damage. Released cytokines recruit immune cells such as neutrophils, macrophages and cytotoxic T-cells and consequently release ROS or lytic proteins such as perforins, which also contribute to cell damage. The relationship between NFκB-dependent immune response and PARP-1 is dependent on energy depletion that further increases the necrotic area [ ] (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Peroxynitrite- and PARP-mediated tissue injury in sepsis and inflammation. Nitric oxide (released by macrophages) and superoxide (released by neutrophils) interacted together forming peroxynitrite. Peroxynitrite along with hydrogen peroxide causes single-strand breakage in DNA. This breakage triggers PARP causing ATP depletion resulting in inhibition of mitochondrial respiration and finally causing organ function compromise
Intestinal Injury
Crohn’s disease, one of the inflammatory diseases of the gut, shows a constant loss of intestine functionality, and as a result, large areas become necrotic and are surgically excised to prevent further amplification of the symptoms by necrotic tissue. Rats exposed to either trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS) or dinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (DNBS) showed colonic erosion, ulceration, necrosis, neutrophil infiltration, apoptosis, elevated nitrotyrosine formation along with the activation of NFκB and downstream targets including ICAM-1 [ , ]. The application of PARP inhibitors before the administration of drug resulted in the reduction of all these symptoms. Even when the inhibitor was applied, after damage induced either by DNBS or ischemia–reperfusion (IR) by occlusion of the splanch splanchnic artery [ ], it exhibited beneficial effects. These caused overall anti-inflammatory effect resulting in less PAR formation and infiltrating immune cells along with a delay in clinical signs of the disease [ , ].
Cuzzocrea et al. [ ] showed that intestinal permeability, nitrotyrosine quantity and PARP activity were improved after ischemia–reperfusion injury. 3AB treatment brought the values back to control levels and lessened mortality. Likewise, endothelial dysfunction and vascular hyporeactivity was improved by 3AB and the overall tissue damage was reduced by PARP inhibition [ ]. The IL10-knockout mice showed increased intestinal permeability, ulceration and disturbed cellular energy balance. Inflammatory markers such as TNFα, INFγ and iNOS are also highly elevated. Fourteen days of 3AB treatment brought the permeability back to normal and decreased the cytokine levels [ ]. In summary, PARP inhibition has proved to be an effective strategy to reduce tissue injury in colitis or ischemia–reperfusion injury of the gut.
Liver Injury
Ischemia–reperfusion injury followed by necrotic cell death in the liver is a common consequence of liver resection. A controversy exists on the effects of PARP inhibitors on liver damage either by ischemia–reperfusion or after application of chemicals, whereas some studies showed protection [ , ]. The pre-treated rats with inhibitor PJ34 preserved hepatic microcirculation, and the cell death rate became lower [ ]. Also, there was a shifting of cell death from necrosis to apoptosis. Chen et al. [ ] reported that ischemia–reperfusion of the liver not only caused impaired function of the respective organ, but also affected the heart as shown by increased blood levels of cardiac troponin I, an established biomarker of myocardial damage. They also hypothesized that with an increase in the levels of inflammatory cytokines like TNFα and free radicals (such as reactive oxygen and nitrogen species), the systemic inflammatory response may also damage other tissues such as the heart. The administration of 3AB resulted in decreased injury in both liver and heart.
The inflammatory response and cell death were attenuated by the inhibitor 5-aminoisoquinoline (5-AIQ) in mice after ischemia–reperfusion [ ]. The level of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was reduced, while alanine aminotransferase (ALT) remained unaffected. Moreover, protection against the post-ischemic oxidative stress was not observed and mortality rates between the two ischemia–reperfusion groups (with and without inhibitor) were similar, while the survival was prolonged by administration of 5-AIQ [ ].
The induction of cell death in hepatocytes resulted from the treatment of mice with high doses of the analgesic drug acetaminophen (AAP). 3AB pre- and post-treatment protected against liver injury as demonstrated by the reduction in ALT release and DNA fragmentation [ ]. Both 5-AIQ application and Parp1 knockout showed no beneficial effects. Similarly, 3AB administration attenuated the liver injury both in wild-type and Parp1 knockout mice, suggesting that PARP inhibition was an independent effect of 3AB like reduced metabolic activation of the AAP or antioxidant properties of 3AB.
On the contrary, data from older studies showed no inherent antioxidant potential of 3AB and other PARP inhibitors. For instance, the oxidant tert -butyl hydroperoxide ( t -BOOH) induces cell death in mouse fibroblasts and primary rat hepatocytes in two ways: one is sensitive to the administration of the antioxidant N , N′ -diphenylphenylene diamine, the other is not [ ]. The deferoxamine, an iron chelator, prevented both types of death pathways, whereas PARP inhibitors 3AB and benzamide prevented cell death in the presence of N , N′ -diphenylphenylene diamine. The iron-dependent induction of single-strand breaks in DNA was not affected by PARP inhibitors, but there was a loss of ATP and NAD + . Thus, it can be inferred that both the level of DNA damage and energy loss are dependent on PARP activity.