Introduction
Flecainide is a Vaughan-Williams Class 1c antiarrhythmic drug which causes rate-dependent slowing of phase 0 of the fast sodium channel, leading to membrane stabilization as well as decreased conduction velocity of His–Purkinje and myocardial electrical propagation. In higher doses, flecainide can also inhibit the slow calcium channel. It carries a Class I recommendation for pharmacologic cardioversion and maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial fibrillation in patients without structural heart disease, according to the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guidelines and the 2012 update of the ESC guidelines [ , ]. It is also used clinically in a variety of other supraventricular tachycardias and carries a Class IIa recommendation for maintenance of sinus rhythm for recurrent atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia (AVNRT), atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia (AVRT), or atrial tachycardia unresponsive to beta blockade or calcium channel blockers in patients not desiring radiofrequency ablation, according to the 2003 ACC/AHA/ESC guidelines [ ].
Flecainide has low protein binding, negligible first pass metabolism, and lacks active metabolites, leading to reproducible dose-dependent pharmacodynamic activity [ ]. However, flecainide has a narrow therapeutic index (0.2–1.0 mcg/mL) which leads to the possibility of drug toxicity. In fact, some patients may experience adverse effects at serum levels >0.7 mcg/mL [ ]. In flecainide overdose, the adverse effects are mainly due to excess cardiac sodium channel blockade causing delayed conduction, negative inotropy, and cardiac dysrhythmias, including bradyarrhythmias, AV nodal block, ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation, and asystole [ , ]. A mortality rate of 22 % in Class 1c antiarrhythmic drug overdose has previously been reported [ ].
Flecainide slows conduction in all cardiac fibers and increases conduction times in the atria, AV node, His–Purkinje system, and ventricles. This manifests as prolongation of the PR and QRS intervals on the electrocardiogram (ECG). In the setting of flecainide toxicity, supraventricular rhythms can present with bizarre, wide QRS complexes with either right or left bundle branch block and varying frontal axes, which can easily be mistaken for ventricular tachycardia. The diagnosis of flecainide toxicity is based on clinical suspicion and ECG findings, as serum flecainide levels are not readily obtainable.
With this in mind, we sought to (1) describe the ECG pattern of flecainide toxicity and (2) use these data to determine whether there are specific features which impart diagnostic and prognostic value. We conducted a systematic review of the literature to identify the ECG patterns of flecainide toxicity. Our effort was triggered by a case at our institution which demonstrated the systemic side effects as well as electrocardiographic findings seen in flecainide toxicity.
Methods
Case Identification
An extensive search of the literature was performed with the journal search engines Scopus and Medline. We used the MeSH terms flecainide AND toxicity, overdose, intoxication, or poisoning in different permutations. Additionally, we examined the citations of all resulted articles for any additional relevant references. Each article was reviewed, and those which included a 12-lead ECG performed during flecainide intoxication were included for analysis. Only articles including 12-lead ECGs in adolescent (10–17 years old) or adult (≥18 years old) patients with flecainide toxicity were analyzed. Those articles reporting ECGs of flecainide toxicity in patients <10 years ( n = 4) were excluded.
Data Extraction and Analysis
For each article, we tabulated relevant demographic and clinical data from the case. Next, a thorough analysis of each ECG was performed and the following data were extracted: (1) heart rate, (2) RR interval, (3) QRS width, (4) QRS axis, (5) QRS quadrant, (6) T wave axis, (7) T wave quadrant, (8) QRS-T angle, (9) QT interval, (10) QTc, (11) QRS morphology, and (12) P wave visibility. Most reports did not include a baseline ECG for comparison. However, the baseline ECG was normal in those cases in which it was published. Therefore, ECG analysis was performed assuming a normal baseline ECG.
Once the ECG data were tabulated, a normal distribution based on QRS duration was observed with a median and mode of 200 ms. Therefore, comparisons were made between ECGs with QRS duration ≤ 200 and > 200 ms. Numerical data between these groups were analyzed with Student’s t test (two tails assuming unequal variances). Categorical data were analyzed with Fisher’s exact test. For these statistical analyses, a value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Case Report
A 46-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with dizziness and nausea. He had a history of a patent foramen ovale closed with an Amplatzer closure device and symptomatic premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) for which he was recently started on flecainide 50 mg every 12 h. He had been seen in the ED 2 days earlier for dizziness causing a fall down six steps. His ECG at that time revealed normal sinus rhythm with a right bundle branch block (RBBB) (Fig. 1 ). An echocardiogram was performed which showed normal left ventricular function, and the Amplatzer ASD closure device was well seated without evidence of leak. He was hydrated with normal saline and discharged. Fig. 1 Patient’s baseline ECG
On the index presentation, he complained of dizziness, nausea, and lethargy. He reported to the nurse that he believed he “took too many” of his medications. When seen by the ED physician, he was minimally responsive. An ECG was performed which revealed a wide complex tachycardia (Fig. 2 ). His blood pressure was low at 91/69 mmHg. A 150 mg amiodarone bolus was delivered for suspected ventricular tachycardia. However, there was no improvement in his mental status and pulses remained feeble, so synchronized cardioversion at 200 J (biphasic) was delivered twice without any change in the patient’s rhythm. He was intubated for airway protection and then given a second bolus of amiodarone 150 mg along with 2 g magnesium sulfate. He was subsequently admitted to the medical intensive care unit. At this time, his blood pressure had stabilized at 150/92 mmHg after receiving several liters of normal saline solution. Fig. 2 Patient’s ECG on presentation
Given the patient’s history of flecainide use and wide complex tachycardia which did not terminate with two 200-J cardioversion attempts and 300 mg of IV amiodarone, the case was reviewed with the attending electrophysiologist. On review of the ECG (Fig. 2 ), the attending electrophysiologist suspected flecainide toxicity based on a combination of factors: clinical history, ECG characteristics, and failure to respond to repeated shocks. Additionally, the patient was found to have acute renal failure with a creatinine of 1.9 mg/dl compared to a baseline creatinine of 0.7 mg/dl, which may have contributed to flecainide toxicity. A blood sample for measuring the serum flecainide level was drawn. He was given a 100 mEq bolus of sodium bicarbonate and was then initiated on a continuous infusion of a 150 mEq/L sodium bicarbonate solution. He was then transferred to the cardiovascular intensive care unit.
An ECG performed the next morning revealed sinus rhythm with a right bundle branch block which was similar to the patient’s baseline ECG except for persistently prolonged PR and QT intervals (Fig. 3 ). His flecainide level on presentation was later found to be elevated at 1.76 mcg/mL (therapeutic range = 0.2–1.0 mcg/mL). Admission arterial blood gas showed a normal pH, and no electrolyte abnormalities or drug–drug interactions were identified which may have precipitated flecainide toxicity. The patient’s mental status improved, and he was extubated. The sodium bicarbonate infusion was discontinued, and by the time of discharge his ECG had returned to baseline (Fig. 4 ). His acute renal failure was likely due to hypotension from flecainide overdose and improved with treatment of his flecainide toxicity. He was instructed to discontinue his flecainide and was given metoprolol for his PVCs. Fig. 3 Patient’s ECG on hospital day 1 Fig. 4 Patient’s ECG at discharge
Review of the Electrocardiograms of Flecainide Toxicity
We found 21 published articles (Supplementary Data 1) of flecainide toxicity in adolescent and adult patients published between 1997 and 2015 with 22 ECG tracings, in addition to the case presented in this report. A summary of the data obtained from these ECGs is presented in Table 1 . Upon review of the data, two morphologically distinct patterns emerged based upon the duration of the QRS interval. In patients with flecainide toxicity and QRS duration ≤ 200 ms, the ECGs were more likely to show RBBB, visible P waves ( p = 0.03), and shorter QT ( p = 0.02) and QTc intervals ( p = 0.004). Conversely, in patients with QRS duration > 200 ms, the ECGs were more likely to show LBBB, loss of P waves, a northwest axis ( p = 0.01), and longer QT and QTc intervals. Deaths were reported only in patients with QRS duration > 200 ms, and the outcome of death or requirement for mechanical circulatory support was more prevalent in patients with a QRS duration > 200 ms [6/10 (60 %) vs. 2/13 (15.4 %), p = 0.04]. Table 1 ECG and clinical characteristics of flecainide toxicity cases Variable QRS duration ≤ 200 ms ( n = 13) QRS duration > 200 ms ( n = 10) P value Mean QRS width (msec) 168.8 ± 23.4 269 ± 62.3 Age (years) 46.2 ± 23.4 43.1 ± 21.9 0.75 Gender (% male) 46 22 0.38 Mean flecainide dose consumed (mg) 2116.6 ± 1850.7 3042.9 ± 3476.6 0.50 Clinical indication SVT (%) 46.2 30 0.67 Afib/Aflutter (%) 23.1 40 0.65 PVCs (%) 15.4 0 0.49 Unreported (%) 15.4 30 0.62 Co-morbidities Hypertension (%) 23.1 20 1.00 Psychiatric illness/substance abuse (%) 23.1 30 1.00 COPD (%) 7.7 0 1.00 Diabetes (%) 0 10 0.44 Chronic kidney disease (%) 0 10 0.44 Cause of overdose Accidental (%) 58.3 44.4 0.67 Intentional/suicide attempt (%) 33.3 44.4 0.67 Drug interaction (%) 8.3 0 1.00 Electrolyte abnormality (%) 0 11.1 0.43 Mean flecainide level (mcg/mL) 4.2 ± 5.6 (n = 9) 3.7 ± 2.3 (n = 7) 0.82 HR (bpm) 88.4 ± 27.8 85.5 ± 20.4 0.78 NW axis 0/12 (0 %) (one indeterminate axis) 5/10 (50 %) 0.01 Mean QRS-T angle (degrees) 114.5 ± 58.4 156 ± 51.3 0.09 Mean QT (ms) 455.2 ± 54.0 573.6 ± 166.7 0.02 Mean QTc(ms) 538.4 ± 68.0 660.5 ± 112.0 0.004 LBBB (%) 15.4 40 0.34 RBBB (%) 84.6 60 0.34 Visible P waves (%) 7/13 (61.5 %) 1/10 (10.0 %) 0.03 Death (%) 0/13 (0 %) 2/9 (22.2 %) (one unreported outcome) 0.16 Death or mechanical circulatory support (IABP, ECMO) 2/13 (15.4) 6/10 (60 %) 0.04 Significant values are given in bold ( p < 0.05)
Discussion
Our case illustrates the importance of the recognition of flecainide toxicity, especially by emergency room physicians. Our patient presented to the emergency department 2 days prior to his hospitalization with a non-specific complaint of dizziness, which likely represented early flecainide toxicity. He subsequently presented with worsening systemic symptoms of lightheadedness, nausea, and lethargy which are known symptoms of flecainide toxicity. Moreover, altered mental status leading to coma in severe cases has been associated with acute flecainide poisoning [ ]. Identification of flecainide as the etiology of his symptoms and wide complex tachycardia was crucial to the timely reversal of its toxic effects.
Review of the published ECGs of patients with flecainide toxicity revealed that two patterns typically emerge based on the duration of the QRS interval. Interestingly, the duration of the QRS interval and associated morphological features were not related to the amount of flecainide consumed, serum flecainide level, or heart rate (Table 1 ). The duration of the QRS interval and development of LBBB in flecainide toxicity also appears to have an important prognostic value, as mortality and the requirement for mechanical circulatory support were more common in patients with a QRS > 200 ms. Indeed, our patient, who had a QRS interval < 200 ms with a RBBB pattern, experienced a rapid recovery without the need for mechanical circulatory support.
The degree of widening of the QRS complex with flecainide is rate-dependent, becoming dramatic at accelerated heart rates. In the setting of flecainide toxicity, supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) can manifest as a bizarre bundle branch block with varying frontal axes and broad QRS [ ]. Indeed, in all the published ECGs of flecainide toxicity there was a very broad QRS—21/23 (91.3 %) of cases had a QRS ≥ 150 ms, with 14/23 (60.9 %) having a QRS ≥ 200 ms. The ECG of SVT in the setting of flecainide toxicity has a QRS duration much broader than typically seen in SVT with aberrancy and may help in the diagnosis of flecainide toxicity. On the other hand, this ECG can easily be confused with ventricular tachycardia, leading to unnecessary attempts at cardioversion, as in our patient.
Based on review of the cases and ECGs of flecainide toxicity, the following clinical and electrocardiographic criteria may be useful in diagnosing this condition and differentiating it from ventricular tachycardia: 1) Patient has access to flecainide 2) RBBB morphology with QRS ≤ 200 ms; RBBB or LBBB morphology with QRS ≥ 200 ms 3) Hemodynamic instability in the presence of wide complex QRS with a HR < 115 BPM. In 22/23 (95/7 %) of cases, the HR was ≤115 bpm with 17/23 (73.9 %) having a HR ≤ 100 bpm.
Treatment of flecainide toxicity can be divided into three approaches: (1) reducing the absorption of recent ingestion, (2) antagonizing or neutralizing the drug’s effect, and (3) providing hemodynamic support while natural renal and hepatic metabolism unfolds [ ]. If a suspected large ingestion of flecainide has recently occurred, activated charcoal may be used in an attempt to reduce the absorption of additional drug. Intravenous 8.4 % sodium bicarbonate is considered a mainstay of treatment and has been used in several case reports. Sodium bicarbonate usually mediates its effects within minutes, with improvement in ECG abnormalities and subsequently hemodynamics. Sodium bicarbonate reduces flecainide activity by two mechanisms: (1) the resultant increase in sodium concentration displaces flecainide from its receptor sites on the cardiac membrane, and (2) serum alkalinization reduces sodium channel blockade by flecainide; however, the molecular mechanism remains under investigation [ , ]. Between 100 and 500 mEq of intravenous 8.4 % sodium bicarbonate is typically administered, with an initial bolus usually followed by an infusion over the next few hours. In one case report of severe flecainide toxicity, sodium bicarbonate along with hemodynamic support was enough to avoid extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and death [ ]. These authors advocate targeting a pH of 7.5 and argue that previously reported failures of treatment with sodium bicarbonate may have been due to inadequate infusion amounts [ ].
Intravenous fat emulsion (IFE) has been used as adjunctive therapy in the successful treatment of flecainide toxicity. The proposed mechanism involves creation of a lipid sink, which recruits and sequesters lipophilic medications in the blood away from their binding site on cardiac myocytes [ ]. Interestingly, IFE has also been shown to open voltage-gated calcium channels, which can therefore lead to increased contractility of cardiac myocytes [ ]. In a case report by Ellsworth et al. [ ], 90 min after a witnessed ingestion of 2.5 g of flecainide, a patient was given activated charcoal, 100 mEq of IV sodium bicarbonate, and 1 L normal saline solution (NSS). Forty-five minutes later, ECG intervals and systolic blood pressure were significantly worse. The patient was subsequently given another 1 L NSS, 100 mEq IV sodium bicarbonate, and a 100 mL IV bolus of 20 % IFE. He received an additional 1-L infusion of 20 % IFE over the next hour. Within a few hours, his heart rate, blood pressure, and QRS interval normalized. A second case study by Sivalingam et al. [ ] involved a severe overdose of flecainide causing an out-of-hospital pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest. The patient was promptly given sodium bicarbonate, intravenous fat emulsion, and activated charcoal. Subsequently the patient was placed on extracorporeal life support for 24 h. The patient made a remarkable recovery and was discharged from the hospital.
When hemodynamic compromise persists through attempts to antagonize flecainide’s effects, invasive hemodynamic support must be implemented. This is usually achieved by ECMO as a temporizing measure to allow for cardiac recovery and drug elimination [ ]. As with other clinical scenarios, ECMO use in the setting of flecainide toxicity should be reserved for refractory hemodynamic compromise.
Conclusions
Supraventricular tachycardia in the setting of flecainide toxicity can lead to a bizarre wide QRS morphology, sometimes with northwest axis, which can mimic ventricular tachycardia. Recognizing the patterns of flecainide toxicity is extremely important, especially in the emergency room environment, in order to prevent misdiagnosis and mistreatment. There are several clues to the diagnosis of flecainide toxicity which can be obtained from the ECG and the clinical presentation. Furthermore, besides being useful in the diagnosis of flecainide toxicity, the ECG has prognostic value as well, with longer QRS intervals correlating with less favorable outcomes. Treatment of flecainide toxicity involves aggressive administration of intravenous sodium bicarbonate. Intravenous fat emulsion and ECMO should be considered on a case-by-case basis.