Introduction
Antiarrhythmic drug-induced arrhythmia has been a major concern for clinicians as well as pharmaceutical companies, particularly when treating patients with atrial fibrillation [ ]. However, standard protocol is still lacking for evaluating the antiarrhythmic efficacy of anti-atrial fibrillatory drugs together with their proarrhythmic potential. In this study, we began to prepare a reliable protocol for clarifying both the efficacy and adverse effects of anti-atrial fibrillatory drugs. We selected amiodarone as a standard medicine, since the drug is one of the most efficient and safe antiarrhythmic drugs for the treatment of atrial fibrillation [ ].
Amiodarone belongs to class III antiarrhythmic drugs based on its electrophysiological profile, which prolongs the repolarization phase and effective refractory period to exert antiarrhythmic action. Meanwhile, amiodarone has been reported to shorten the terminal repolarization period, which can reflect the decrease in ventricular electrical vulnerability [ ], moreover to decrease the short-term variability of repolarization in beat-to-beat analysis [ ], indicating a lack of trigger for torsade de pointes [ , ]. Recently, net increase in the inward currents during early repolarization phase was known to induce early after depolarization, leading to the onset of premature ventricular contractions and torsade de pointes [ , , ], which can be well estimated by the prolongation of corrected J – T peak ( J – T peak c) interval [ ]. Thus, evaluation of early repolarization by the J – T peak c interval together with that of late repolarization by the T peak – T end interval has been found to provide deep understanding of the mode of multi-channel blockade that is closely of relevance to cardiac safety evaluation [ ].
In the present study, we simultaneously estimated the anti-atrial fibrillatory and proarrhythmic potentials of amiodarone by using the halothane-anesthetized dogs [ ]. The extent of prolongation of atrial effective refractory period (AERP) and that of ventricular effective refractory period (VERP) were directly compared to characterize the anti-atrial fibrillatory profile of amiodarone. At the same time, the J – T peak c and T peak – T end intervals were assessed to better examine the safety profile of amiodarone, which will make it feasible to better understand why amiodarone lacks torsadogenic potential in spite of the QT interval prolongation.
Materials and Methods
Experiments were performed by using 4 beagle dogs of either sex weighing approximately 10 kg, which were obtained from Kitayama Labes Co., Ltd. (Nagano, Japan). All experiments were approved by the Animal Research Committee for Animal Experimentation of Toho University (No. 12-52-151) and performed in accordance with the Guidelines for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of Toho University.
Surgical Preparations
Dogs were initially anesthetized with thiopental sodium (30 mg/kg, i.v.). After intubation with a cuffed endotracheal tube, 1 % halothane vaporized with 100 % oxygen was inhaled with a volume-limited ventilator (SN-480-3; Shinano Manufacturing Co., Ltd. Tokyo). Tidal volume and respiratory rate were set at 20 mL/kg and 15 strokes/min, respectively. Three clinically available catheter sheath sets (FAST-CATH™ 406119; St. Jude Medical Daig Division, Inc., Minnetonka, MN, USA) were used; one was placed in the right femoral artery for monitoring the aortic pressure, and the other two were inserted into the right and left femoral veins, respectively, for introducing the electrodes catheters as described below. To prevent the blood clotting, heparin calcium (100 IU/kg) was intravenously administered through a flush line of the catheter sheath placed at the right femoral vein.
Electrophysiological Variables
The lead II electrocardiogram was obtained from the limb electrodes. Corrected QT interval (QTc) was calculated with the formula by Van de Water et al. [ ]. The J – T peak and T peak – T end were measured. The J – T peak was corrected for heart rate by using coefficient as previously reported ( J – T peak c = J – T peak /RR 0.58 with RR in seconds) [ , ]. Correction was not performed for the T peak – T end , since thorough QT studies have shown that the T peak – T end exhibited minimal heart rate dependency at resting heart rate [ , ].
A 6-French quad-polar electrodes catheter (Cordis-Webster, Baldwin Park, CA, USA) was positioned at the sinus nodal area of the right atrium through the right femoral vein to electrically pace and to record the local electrogram. Another 6-French quad-polar electrodes catheter (Cordis-Webster) was positioned at the endocardium of the interventricular septum in the right ventricle through the left femoral vein to electrically pace and to record the local electrogram. The heart was electrically driven by using a cardiac stimulator (SEC-3102, Nihon Kohden Co., Tokyo, Japan) via the pacing electrodes of the catheter placed in the right atrium or ventricle. The stimulation pulses were rectangular in shape, 1–2 V (about twice the threshold voltage) and of 1-ms duration. The AERP and VERP were assessed by the programmed electrical stimulation; namely, the pacing protocol consisted of 5 beats of basal stimuli in a cycle length of 400 ms followed by an extra stimulus of various coupling intervals. Starting in late diastole, the coupling interval was shortened in 5-ms decrements until the additional stimulus could no longer elicit a response. The AERP and VERP were defined as the shortest coupling interval that could produce a response.
Experimental Protocol
The aortic pressure, electrocardiogram, and right atrial and ventricular electrograms were monitored with a polygraph system (RM-6000, Nihon Kohden Co.) and analyzed by using a real-time full automatic data analysis system (Win VAS 3 for Windows ver. 1.1R24v; Physio-Tech, Tokyo, Japan). Three recordings of consecutive complexes were used to calculate the mean of the electrocardiogram variables. The cardiovascular variables were assessed in the following order. The electrocardiogram was recorded under sinus rhythm. Then, the VERP was measured followed by the AERP. All parameters described above were usually obtained within 1 min at each time point.
After the basal pre-drug assessment, amiodarone hydrochloride in a low dose of 0.3 mg/kg was intravenously administered over 30 s, and each variable was assessed at 5, 10, 15, 20, and 30 min after the start of administration ( n = 4). Then, amiodarone hydrochloride in a high dose of 3 mg/kg was intravenously administered over 30 s, and each variable was observed at 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 45, and 60 min after the start of administration. The doses of amiodarone in this study were determined based on our previous report [ ].
Drugs
Amiodarone hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA) was dissolved with ethanol in a concentration of 20 mg/mL. Administration of ethanol in volume of ~150 μL/kg, i.v. over 30 s has been shown to hardly affect cardiovascular variables in the halothane-anesthetized dogs [ ]. The other drugs used were thiopental sodium (Mitsubishi-Tanabe Pharma Co., Osaka, Japan), halothane (Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Ltd, Osaka), and heparin calcium (Sawai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan).
Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. The statistical significances within a parameter were evaluated by one-way, repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Contrasts as a post hoc test for mean values comparison. A p value <0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
Results
Effects on the Electrocardiogram Variables During Sinus Rhythm
Time courses of changes in the QT, QTc, J – T peak c, and T peak – T end are summarized in Fig. 1 ( n = 4), and that in the P-wave duration is shown in Fig. 2 ( n = 4). The QT, QTc, J – T peak c, T peak – T end, and P-wave duration at the pre-drug control ( C ) were 253 ± 16, 298 ± 15, 168 ± 8, 84 ± 18 and 56 ± 3 ms, respectively. The low dose hardly affected any of the variables. The high dose prolonged the QT for 10–60 min, whereas no significant changes were detected in the other variables. The changes in the J – T peak c (∆ J – T peak c) and T peak – T end (∆ T peak – T end ) were −10 and +18 ms at 15 min after the high dose, respectively, when the extent of the QT-interval prolongation was the greatest, as shown in Table 1 . Fig. 1 Time courses of changes in the QT, QTc, J – T peak c, and T peak – T end following the administration of 0.3 and 3 mg/kg of amiodarone hydrochloride. Data are presented as mean ± SEM ( n = 4). Closed symbols represent significant differences from the pre-drug control ( C ) by p < 0.05 Fig. 2 Time courses of changes in the P-wave duration (P wave) of the electrocardiogram, atrial effective refractory period (AERP), and ventricular effective refractory period (VERP) following the administration of 0.3 and 3 mg/kg of amiodarone hydrochloride. Data are presented as mean ± SEM ( n = 4). Closed symbols represent significant differences from respective pre-drug control ( C ) by p < 0.05 Table 1 Comparison of the effects of antiarrhythmic drugs on the early ( J – T peak c) and late ( T peak – T end ) repolarization periods Drugs (time after administration) Amiodarone hydrochloride (15 min) Bepridil hydrochloride (20 min) dl -Sotalol hydrochloride (10 min) Dose (mg/kg, i.v.) 3 3 3 Δ J – T peak c (ms) −10 +31 +35 Δ T peak – T end (ms) +18 +14 +17 The data of bepridil and dl -sotalol were obtained from our previous studies [ ]. Δ J – T peak c and Δ T peak – T end represent the changes from their corresponding pre-drug control values, at which the extent of the QT interval prolongation was the greatest
Effects on the AERP and VERP
Time courses of changes in the AERP and VERP are summarized in Fig. 2 ( n = 4). Typical tracings showing the atrial electrogram and electrocardiogram during the assessment of AERP are depicted in Fig. 3 . The AERP and VERP at the pre-drug control ( C ) were 140 ± 6 and 201 ± 4 ms, respectively. The low dose hardly affected either of the variables. The high dose prolonged the AERP and VERP for 5–60 min. The maximum changes in the AERP (∆AERP) and VERP (∆VERP) were +29 and +18 ms at 60 min, respectively, after the high dose, as shown in Table 2 . Fig. 3 Typical tracings showing the high right atrial electrogram (HRA) and lead II electrocardiogram during the programmed electrical stimulation, which estimates the atrial effective refractory period at pre-drug control (Control) and 45 min after the administration of 3 mg/kg, i.v. of amiodarone hydrochloride. At pre-drug control ( upper panels ), premature electrical stimulation with a coupling interval (CI) of 150 ms induced atrial electrical activity ( left ), whereas that of 145 ms did not develop it ( right ), indicating that the atrial effective refractory period was 150 ms. After the administration amiodarone ( lower panels ), premature electrical stimulation with a CI of 180 ms induced atrial electrical activity ( left ), whereas that of 175 ms did not develop it ( right ), indicating that the atrial effective refractory period was 180 ms Table 2 Comparison of the effects of antiarrhythmic drugs on the atrial (AERP) and ventricular (VERP) refractory periods Drugs (time after administration) Amiodarone hydrochloride (60 min) Bepridil hydrochloride (10 min) dl -Sotalol hydrochloride (20 min, 30 min) Dose (mg/kg, i.v.) 3 3 3 ΔAERP (ms) +29 +53 +60, +56 ΔVERP (ms) +18 +55 +53, +54 Atrial selectivity (ΔAERP/ΔVERP) 1.6 1.0 1.1, 1.0 The data of bepridil and dl -sotalol were obtained from our previous studies [ ]. ΔAERP and ΔVERP represent the maximum changes from their corresponding pre-drug control values
Effects on the Heart Rate and Mean Blood Pressure
The heart rate and mean blood pressure at the pre-drug control ( C ) were 124 ± 8 beats/min and 123 ± 5 mmHg, respectively (data not shown in figure). The low dose decreased the heart rate at 30 min (110 ± 7 beats/min), and the mean blood pressure for 20 min (113 ± 8 mmHg) to 30 min (114 ± 9 mmHg). The high dose decreased the heart rate and mean blood pressure for 5–60 min. Maximum change in the heart rate was observed at 60 min (99 ± 7 beats/min), and that in the mean blood pressure was confirmed at 45 min (108 ± 8 mmHg).
Discussion
In the present study, we assessed the integrative electrophysiological effects of amiodarone in order to begin to prepare an effective protocol for clarifying utility and limitation of anti-atrial fibrillatory drugs in vivo. We confirmed experimental evidences that may explain clinically demonstrated anti-atrial fibrillatory action and safety profile of amiodarone. Meanwhile, the effects of amiodarone on the heart rate and mean blood pressure were essentially identical to those reported in our previous study, in which the same experimental system was used [ ], indicating reliability and reproducibility of currently used halothane-anesthetized canine model even though only 4 dogs were used for this entire study.
Antiarrhythmic Potential
Amiodarone prolonged both the AERP and VERP. The increment of the AERP was 1.6 times greater than that of the VERP. Such atrial selectivity of amiodarone has been reported previously [ , ]. Potential mechanisms for this atrial selectivity may involve an inhibition of muscarinic acetylcholine-activated K + current ( I K,ACh ) and/or a selective inhibition of atrial Na + channel, which have been reported to play an important role in the antiarrhythmic action of amiodarone against atrial fibrillation [ , ]. However, the latter may be less plausible, since amiodarone hardly affected the P-wave duration as shown in Fig. 2 . In order to better characterize the anti-atrial fibrillatory potential of amiodarone, its effects on the AERP and VERP were compared with those of bepridil and dl -sotalol in our previous studies, in which the same experimental system was used [ ], as shown in Table 2 . Atrial selectivity for prolonging the AERP compared with VERP was in the order of amiodarone ≫ dl -sotalol ≥ bepridil, which is considered to reflect clinically observed acute efficacy of these drugs against atrial arrhythmias.
Proarrhythmic Potential
It has been reported that the prolongation of the terminal repolarization, which could reflect the duration of phase 3 repolarization, would enhance the chance of conduction delay at less complete repolarization level when triggered activity occurred, which may be closely associated with a high incidence of torsade de pointes [ , , ]. In our previous report [ ], amiodarone prolonged the QT interval, but shortened the terminal repolarization period, suggesting its antiarrhythmic potential. Indeed, amiodarone did not increase the short-term variability of repolarization or induce torsade de pointes in the chronic atrioventricular block dogs [ , , ]. In this study, amiodarone prolonged the QT interval and tended to prolong the QTc, whereas tendency of shortening was observed in the J – T peak c, suggesting that inhibition of K + channel may be offset by sum of inhibitions of Ca 2+ and Na + channels during the early repolarization. Since a drug that prolongs the early repolarization period is known to be proarrhythmic [ ], amiodarone can be considered to have little risk of proarrhythmia. Moreover, in order to better characterize such potential of amiodarone, its effects on the J – T peak c and T peak – T end were compared with those of bepridil and dl -sotalol in our previous studies, in which the same experimental system was used [ ], as shown in Table 1 . Proarrhythmic potential evaluated by the extent of prolongation of the J – T peak c was in the order of dl -sotalol > bepridil ≫ amiodarone, which is considered to reflect the clinically observed safety profile of these drugs against the onset of torsade de pointes.
Conclusions
While further studies are needed including more referenced compounds and clinical predictability, information described in this paper may become a guidance in simultaneously assessing efficacy and adverse effects of new anti-atrial fibrillatory drugs in vivo.