Introduction
Energy products are conventionally defined as items marketed and sold as beverages, energy shots (e.g., dietary supplements), as well as in pill or tablet form. More specifically, an energy drink (ED) is any type of beverage containing stimulant agents which is consumed for increasing mental and physical stimulation [ ]. EDs consumption has dramatically increased in USA from 2001 to 2010 [ ]. The use of these beverages is also increasing around the globe, with a prevalence reported to be as high as 18 % in children aged 10 years or younger, 68 % in adolescents and 30 % in adults [ ]. Accordingly, reports of toxicity from EDs consumption have also recently increased, especially in adolescents [ ]. The leading health concerns associated with the large intake of these beverages have been mostly attributed to the large amount of vasoactive compounds that may be assumed, especially caffeine (80–160 mg of per can), taurine, ginseng and guarana [ ]. It is hence not surprising that a large intake of EDs may be implicated as a trigger mechanism for a vast array of clinically significant atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, including QT prolongation, atrial fibrillation, up to fatal ventricular arrhythmia [ ]. In addition, EDs consumption can cause endothelial dysfunction and increased platelet aggregation [ , ], which might predispose to development and complication of vascular diseases [ ], namely myocardial ischemia and infarction. Therefore, this article is aimed to systematically review the current scientific literature about epidemiological evidence linking EDs and episodes of myocardial ischemia.
Search Methodology
An electronic search was performed in Medline (with PubMed interface), Scopus and ISI Web of Science using the keywords “energy drink” AND “myocardial infarction” OR “coronary heart disease” OR “coronary artery disease” OR “acute coronary syndrome” OR “ischemic heart disease” in “Title/Abstract/Keywords” with no language or date restriction, in order to identify prospective investigations, randomized trials, case–control studies or case reports linking consumption of EDs and episodes of myocardial ischemia. All articles identified according to the search criteria were systematically reviewed by two authors (G.L. and G.C.). The references of selected articles were also hand-searched to identify other pertinent items. A total number of 25 documents were identified after elimination of replicates, and 17 were excluded after accurate reading of title, abstract or full text since they did not report information about episodes of myocardial ischemia related to EDs consumption. Therefore, 8 case reports were finally selected for this systematic literature review (Table 1 ) [ , , , , , , , ]. Inter-rater agreement was 100 % (kappa statistics, 1.00). Table 1 Description of the case reports linking large intake of energy drinks and myocardial ischemia Authors Study design Study subjects Outcome Associated acute triggers References Berger et al. (2009) Case report 28-year-old man Large consumption of energy drink associated with STEMI Motocross racing [ ] Scott et al. (2011) Case report 19-year-old man Large consumption of energy drink associated with STEMI None [ ] Benjo et al. (2012) Case report 24-year-old man Consumption of energy drink associated with STEMI None [ ] Hanan Israelit et al. (2012) Case report 24-year-old man Large consumption of energy drink associated with STEMI 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) [ ] Wilson et al. (2012) Case report 17-year-old man Large consumption of energy drink associated with STEMI None [ ] Polat et al. (2013) Case report 13-year-old man First consumption of energy drink immediately followed by STEMI None [ ] Unal et al. (2015) Case report 32-year-old man Large consumption of energy drink associated with STEMI None [ ] Solomin et al. (2015) Case report 26-year-old man Huge consumption of energy drink associated with STEMI None [ ] STEMI ST elevation myocardial infarction
Epidemiological Reports
The first case report potentially linking excess consumption of EDs with cardiovascular disease was published by Berger and Alford [ ]. The authors described the case of an otherwise healthy 28-year-old man, who experienced a cardiac arrest after consuming an excessive amount (i.e., 7–8 cans) of a caffeinated ED throughout a day of motocross racing. The patient denied any previous episodes of chest pain or syncope, was apparently healthy and was not taking regular medication. Moreover, the family history of premature coronary disease, sudden cardiac death and unexplained syncope was negative. The subject was a smoker with a six pack-year history of smoking, but denied excessive alcohol intake or illicit drug use. The patient was restored to sinus rhythm after receiving two 150 J biphasic direct-current shocks and immediately transported to the hospital. An electrocardiogram (ECG) performed on admission initially showed elevated anteroseptal ST segments with reciprocal inferior ST depression, although a coronary angiography performed only few hours after failed to show relevant abnormalities. It was hence concluded that excessive consumption of EDs was the probable cause of the life-threatening cardiac event. A second case report was described by Scott et al. [ ]. The authors reported on a case of a 19-year-old male with history of gastroesophageal reflux disease, who was admitted to the emergency department with acute chest pain. Electrocardiographic and biochemical findings (i.e., troponin I 34.7 μg/ml; normal values <0.07 μg/ml) were consistent with a final diagnosis of ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). Risk factors for coronary heart disease were absent, the patient was a non-smoker, drank alcohol only occasionally and denied the use of performance-enhancing or illicit drugs. Coronary angiography revealed normal coronary arteries, whereas transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed good left ventricular (LV) systolic function. Prinzmetal’s angina and cardiomyopathies (hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy or Tako–Tsubo syndrome) could also be ruled out. Interestingly, the patient had consumed 2–3 cans per day of a popular ED the week before hospital admission, which led the authors to suggest that cardiac ischemia could have been secondary to high intake of ED during the previous days. In the following year, Benjo et al. [ ] described the case of a 24-year-old man who was admitted to the emergency room with a history of nausea, emesis, palpitations and severe retrosternal chest pain lasting for 10 h. The symptoms onset 1–2 h after drinking three glasses of vodka mixed with an ED. Repeated ECGs showed evolution toward marked ST elevation, thus consistent with a STEMI. The patient was a smoker (no more than 5 cigarettes/week) and a marijuana consumer, but denied cocaine or other recreational drug consumption. The family history for premature coronary artery disease was negative. The initial troponin I was not increased and the echocardiogram showed apical hypokinesis and normal ascending aorta. Coronary angiography showed a large thrombus, occupying approximately 70 % of the diameter of the left main coronary artery and almost 90 % occlusion of the origin of the circumflex. A second thrombus occluding the distal left anterior descending coronary artery was also detected. Nevertheless, no atherosclerotic lesions or coronary malformations were found. The lipid profile and the coagulation parameters were within normal limits. Anticardiolipin antibodies, homocysteine level, β2-glycoprotein antibodies, plasminogen activator inhibitor activity, protein C and protein S activity were also negative or within the normal range of values. This evidence persuaded the authors to conclude that the large intake of EDs may have contributed to trigger platelet hyperaggregation and endothelial dysfunction, thus promoting the development of coronary thrombosis.
In the same year, Hanan Israelit et al. [ ] described another case of a 24-year-old man who was admitted to the emergency department with a 1-h history of crushing chest pain, nausea and vomiting. The ECG findings on admission showed widespread ST segment elevation, which was suggestive for a final diagnosis of STEMI. The patient was overweight (body mass index ~40), with untreated mild hypertension but no family history of ischemic heart disease. Interestingly, the patient reported to have consumed approximately 20 cans of an ED over the previous night in combination with 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), but denied taking drugs or drinking alcohol.
Wilson et al. [ ] also described the case of a 17-year-old man who was admitted to the emergency department with angina after drinking a disproportionate number of caffeinated EDs (i.e., 5–7 cans). The values of cardiac biomarkers and the ECG changes on admission were consistent with a final diagnosis of STEMI. The patient denied illicit drug use. The family history of premature coronary artery disease, collagen vascular disease, or systemic autoimmune diseases was negative. He had suffered an episode of pericarditis 1 year before, probably secondary to a viral infection. The transthoracic echocardiogram revealed mildly LV systolic dysfunction (i.e., 50 %) with apical hypokinesis and no evidence of pericardial effusion or pericardium thickening. As for previous cases, the authors suggested that the case of acute coronary artery vasospasms could have been directly related to excessive caffeinated EDs overconsumption.
Another paradigmatic case was reported by Polat et al. [ ], who described the case a 13-year-old boy experiencing a STEMI associated with spontaneous coronary artery dissection immediately after consumption of an ED for the first time in his life, during the previous night. The child had no history of diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, cigarette smoking, and no family history of familial hypercholesterolemia, early coronary artery disease, or sudden death. He also denied use of cocaine, amphetamines, hormones, steroids, alcohol, or other recreational drugs. The TTE showed reduced LV ejection fraction (i.e., 54 %) and moderate apical hypokinesis, whereas the chest X-ray was normal the troponin I concentration remained increased after 24 h (i.e., 3.96 ng/mL; normal values <0.06 ng/mL). Coronary angiography revealed an extensive dissection with a visible tear from the distal part of the left anterior descending artery. It was hence concluded that EDs consumption may be regarded as a potential risk factor for spontaneous coronary artery dissection.
Another case report was described by Unal et al. [ ]. A 32-year-old healthy man was admitted to the emergency room with a 6-h history of retrosternal chest pain, palpitations and emesis. The symptoms onset 5 or 6 h after drinking approximately 5 bottles of ED. The ECG findings on admission were consistent with ST segment elevation, thus confirming the diagnosis of a STEMI. The patient denied cigarettes, alcohol, cocaine or other drug consumption, and had no family history of premature coronary artery disease. Coronary angiography showed a thrombus occupying nearly 90 % of the diameter of the left main coronary artery and a second thrombus occluding the proximal left anterior descending artery. Blood lipids and thrombophilia screening tests were negative or within normal levels.
More recently, Solomin et al. [ ] described the case of a 26-year-old man who was admitted to the emergency department with left-sided chest pain lasting from approximately 9 h. The ECG performed on admission showed significant ST elevation, thus consistent with a final diagnosis of STEMI. The patient reported a huge consumption (i.e., eight to ten 473 mL drinks) of EDs immediately before the onset of symptoms. The patient denied the use of illicit drugs or stimulants, as confirmed by negative results of the urine toxicology screen. Initial troponin was 0.02 μg/L (normal values <0.08 μg/L), and creatine kinase isoenzyme MB (CK-MB) was 160.1 μmol/L (normal values <266.9 μmol/L). The patient reported to have smoked approximately 20 cigarettes/day for the last 2 years, whereas the history of diabetes was negative. Lipid profile results were as follows: total cholesterol 5.65 μmol/L (range 1.30–5.18 μmol/L), HDL 0.96 (range 1.04–1.53 μmol/L), LDL 2.69 μmol/L (range <2.59 μmol/L), and triglycerides 4.36 μmol/L (range 0.40–1.70 μmol/L). Coronary angiography showed a thrombus in the left circumflex artery with 100 % occlusion, as well as mild irregularities in the left anterior descending coronary artery.
Discussion
The first conclusion that can be drawn from our systematic literature search is that the current evidence linking EDs consumption and episodes of myocardial ischemia is entirely based on case reports. Although the lack of randomized or prospective investigations represents a major drawback in establishing an unequivocal link between abuse of EDs and myocardial ischemia or infarction, the available evidence should not be underestimated to the best of our knowledge. This is due to the fact that no additional acute triggers of myocardial ischemia other than EDs could be identified in the vast majority of cases (i.e., 6/8) that have been described so far (Table 1 ). Even more importantly, adolescents consuming EDs early in life were found to be at greater risk for abuse of alcohol and illicit drugs [ , ], as well as for unhealthy dietary behaviors and obesity [ ], thus further increasing their future cardiovascular risk.
Indeed, many plausible explanations can be brought in support of a link between abuse of EDs and myocardial ischemia (Fig. 1 ). Worthley et al. [ ] administered 1 can of a sugar-free ED to 15 healthy young adults and observed that platelet aggregation was substantially increased by up to 134 %, whereas endothelial function was inhibited. Mean arterial blood pressure was also found to be significantly increased (~4 mmHg higher) after ED intake. This was in accordance with results observed by Usman and Jawaid [ ]. Likewise, it has also been observed that carnitine, a compound abundant in EDs, promotes atherosclerosis [ ]. Worthley et al. also suggested that glucuronolactone can be directly implicated in increasing platelet aggregation, generate endothelial dysfunction and increase blood pressure [ , ]. Accordingly, both short- and long-term EDs consumption could represent a potential cause of ischemic heart disease. Fig. 1 Potential biological mechanisms linking excessive intake of energy drinks and myocardial ischemia
In another placebo-controlled randomized crossover study, Miles-Chan et al administered 355 mL of an ED to eight young, healthy men [ ] and reported that the beverage was effective to induce a positive inotropic effect on cardiac function (i.e., increase in heart rate, stroke volume, cardiac output and contractility, arterial blood pressure and reduction of decreased total peripheral resistance). An increase in right and LV myocardial function was also observed by Menci et al in 35 healthy young subjects who drank 168 mL/m 2 of an ED [ ]. Similar results were published by Grasser et al. [ ], who administered 355 mL of an ED to 25 healthy young subjects and reported that heart rate and cardiac output were significantly increased, whereas cerebral blood flow velocity was found to be significantly reduced. Additional metabolic abnormalities have been reported after intake of EDs. Olateju et al. [ ] administered 650 mL of an ED to 35 healthy young adults and found an early and sustained increase in blood glucose concentration. Even more interestingly, Ebuehi found that the intake of 5 mL of EDs was effective to increase the concentration of a number of cardiovascular risk factors in rabbits (i.e., total cholesterol, triglyceride and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol) compared to animals which received caffeine alone or saline [ ], thus suggesting that the combination of compounds contained in these beverage may produce a much greater cardiovascular risk than any component alone. An increase in serum creatinine and total bilirubin and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol was also observed in rats receiving 7.5 mL/kg of an ED [ ].
Conclusions
Although a causal relationship between large consumption of EDs and myocardial ischemia cannot be definitely established so far, the considerable number of published case reports and the plausible biological abnormalities suggest that the concerns raised about the health risks of excessive consumption of these beverages may be in part justified. Long-term monitoring of cardiovascular events should hence be established to understand the effects that large consumption of these beverages may produce in the general population, especially in subjects with suspected ischemic heart disease or at increased risk of myocardial infarction.