Introduction
Mycotoxins are structurally diverse secondary metabolites produced in nature by fungi which grow on foodstuffs such as cereals, dried fruits, nuts and spices (Desjardins et al. ). Mycotoxins usually cause food contamination, resulting in mycotoxicosis in animals and humans (Desjardins et al. ). The most commonly detected mycotoxins in the food chain include aflatoxins, ochratoxin A, patulin, fumonisins, zearalenone and nivalenol/deoxynivalenol. Mycotoxins contamination is a worldwide problem, especially in low-income countries (Wild and Gong ). Thus far, there are more than 700 mycotoxins that have been identified which present a concern to human health and livestock (Hussein and Brasel ; Zain ). T-2 toxin and its major metabolite HT-2 toxin (i.e., the deacetylated form of T-2 toxin; Fig. 1 ) are the most common and toxic of the A subtype trichothecene mycotoxins (Bouaziz et al. ; Desjardins et al. ; Sudakin ). T-2 toxin is produced by various species of Fusarium , such as F. sporotichioides , F. poae , F. equiseti , and F. acuminatum , which commonly contaminate wheat, corn, and rice crops in the field or during storage (Desjardins et al. ). T-2 toxin has also been detected in drinking water in endemic areas of China (e.g., Qinghai and Sichuan Provinces) and in traditional Chinese medicines (Lei et al. ; Sun et al. ; Tan et al. ; Wang et al. ). The most common route of T-2 toxin exposure in humans is through dietary ingestion and in livestock due to feed contamination. Farmers may also be exposed via direct contact with contaminated hay and grain dust (Arcella et al. ). T-2 toxin is purportedly a predisposing factor in the etiology of Kashin–Beck disease, a chronic endemic type of osteochondropathy (Lei et al. ). A recent report on the occurrence of mycotoxin poisoning in Chinese feedstuffs between 2014 and 2015 showed that 98% of the samples were positive to one or more mycotoxins and 28% of the samples is positive for T-2 toxin ( http://www.plusvet.eu/occurrence-of-mycotoxins/ ). An earlier report in 2002 year showed that T-2 toxin and its metabolite HT-2 toxin accounted for the dietary intake of mycotoxin levels well beyond the tolerable daily limits of 100 ng/kg body weight in 12 EU countries (Schothorst and van Egmond ). Fig. 1 Structures of T-2 toxin and its major metabolite HT-2 toxin
The lipophilic nature of T-2 toxin means it is easily absorbed through the skin, gut and pulmonary mucosa (De Ruyck et al. ). Animal studies showed that oral, parenteral and cutaneous exposure to T-2 toxin could cause multiple organ damage to the skin, kidney, liver, brain, hematopoietic, lymphoid, gastrointestinal bone marrow, and reproductive system (Aksoy et al. ; Arcella et al. ; Mackei et al. ; Ohta et al. ; Yang et al. ; Zhang et al. ). T-2 toxin-induced neurotoxicity is of particular concern. In mice or rats exposed to T-2 toxin, neurological symptoms were grossly evident including muscular weakness, and ataxia anorectic responses (Fairhurst et al. ; Sheng et al. ). T-2 toxin can easily penetrate and damage the blood–brain barrier (BBB), then accumulate in brain tissue and cause neurotoxicity (Ravindran et al. ; Weidner et al. , ). A previous study showed that rats were administrated with a signal subcutaneous dose of T-2 toxin at 1.54 mg/kg body weight experienced significant brain damage (Chaudhary and Rao ). Similarly, a study by Guo et al. showed that rats administered T-2 toxin at 2 mg/kg body weight experienced marked CNS edema around blood vessels in the brain (Guo et al. ). More recently, Nakajima et al. demonstrated that developmental exposure of mice to T-2 toxin increased the expression of metallothionein in fetal astrocytes and hippocampal neural stem cells (Nakajima et al. ). Furthermore, Zhang et al. showed that oral exposure to T-2 toxin at 0.1 mg/kg body weight can induce marked anorectic potencies in mice (Zhang et al. ). The developmental exposure of mice to T-2 toxin significantly increased the expression of metallothionein in the astrocytes and hippocampal neural stem cells in offspring male pups; this indicates that oxidative stress plays a critical role during T-2 toxin-induced developmental neurotoxicity (Nakajima et al. ). Taken together, these reports suggest that oxidative stress plays a critical role in T-2 toxin-induced neurotoxicity.
Cellular oxidative stress is a result of an imbalance between the generation and detoxification of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The brain is highly vulnerable to oxidative damage due to its high energy demand, high oxygen consumption and abundance of peroxidizable fatty acids (Dai et al. ). Oxidative stress induced by the generation of ROS is the primary mechanism of neurotoxicity for several prominent environmental pollutants and food contaminants including T-2 toxin, deoxynivalenol, citreoviridin and fumonisin B (Cid-Castro et al. ; Dai et al. ; Nakajima et al. ; Pearson and Patel ; Poersch et al. ; Wang et al. , ). Studies with animal models and in vitro neuronal cell culture systems have demonstrated that oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction play a prominent role in T-2 toxin-induced neurotoxicity (Chaudhary and Rao ; Liu et al. ; Zhang et al. ). This review covers our contemporary understanding these mechanisms and highlights important advances in novel therapeutic strategies for the treatment of T-2 toxin neurotoxicity.
Neurological symptoms of T-2 toxin poisoning
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) evaluated the experimental data on the carcinogenicity of T-2 toxin and classified it as a Group 3 carcinogen (IARC ). As mentioned above, in animal studies, the acute neurological symptoms following T-2 toxin exposure include muscular weakness, anorectic responses, ataxia and CNS disturbances (Chaudhary and Rao ; Fairhurst et al. ; Guo et al. ; Sheng et al. ; Zhang et al. ). However, there is little information regarding the neurotoxicity caused by T-2 toxin in humans. An old literature report described that individuals in Russia poisoned with T-2 toxin as a result of the consumption of cereal grains contaminated by F. sporotrichioides and F. poae presented neurological symptoms, including as vertigo, mucous membrane hyperaemia, oesophageal pain, laryngitis, asphyxiation and gastroenteritis (Lewis et al. ).
T-2 toxin metabolism contributes to its neurotoxicity
T-2 and HT-2 toxins display interesting pharmacokinetic properties; both compounds are unstable in whole blood and their in vitro half-lives are 6.9 and 0.84 h, respectively (Sintov et al. , , ). Albeit, both toxins are stable in plasma for 7 h, suggesting their instability in whole blood may be a result of degradation by carboxyl-esterase enzymes present within the red blood cells (Sintov et al. , , ). The metabolism pathways of T-2 toxin involve diverse reactions such as hydroxylation, de-epoxidation, and conjugation (Dohnal et al. ; Yang et al. ). Neosolaniol (NEO), 3′-OH-T-2, 3′-OH-HT-2, and T-2 triol were amongst the detectable metabolites as well as HT-2 toxin in pigs, chicken, fish (grass carp and common carp), rats and cultured human cells (Fig. 2 ) (Wu et al. , , , , ). New evidence has shown that CNS cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP450 s) play an important role in T-2 toxin metabolism (Ghosh et al. ). CYP450s expression in brain cells usually contributes to neurotoxicity and/or neuroprotection (Ghosh et al. ). For example, CYP450s expression in brain cells play a critical role in organophosphorus pesticide monocrotophos-induced neurotoxicity (Tripathi et al. ). CYP450s were deemed responsible for catalyzing C-3′ hydroxylation of T-2 and HT-2 toxins (Wu et al. ). In this respect, we refer the reader to the in-depth review on metabolism pathways from Wu et al. ( ). Fig. 2 Major T-2 toxin metabolites detected in human primary cells or cell lines (Wu et al. , ; Königs et al. )
The uptake kinetics and metabolism of T-2 toxin in human astrocytes in primary culture (NHA) and the HT-29 human cell line revealed some interesting findings (Weidner et al. ). In primary human astrocytes, T-2 toxin treatment at 10 μM displayed fast (within 15 min) uptake kinetics and was rapidly metabolized to HT-2 toxin. However, the higher dose of T-2 toxin may affect the CYP4501A1 and CYP4503A activities, which govern the metabolism of T-2 toxin (Ye et al. ). The low-dose T-2 toxin treatment (10 ng/mL) rapidly produced a dramatic increase of ROS (increased to ~ twofold during 30 min) and decreased cell viability in human cervical cancer cells (Chaudhari et al. ; Reed et al. ). It has been reported that T-2 toxin exposure decreased the levels of microsomal cytochrome CYP450s in rat and pig liver tissues (Galtier et al. ; Meissonnier et al. ). A study by Guo et al. showed that following 24-h post-oral adminstration at 2 mg/kg in a rat model, T-2 toxin is rapidly metabolized to HT-2 and only low levels of T-2 toxin were detectable in the brain tissue of the female rats (Guo et al. ). Königs et al. demonstrated the cytotoxicity of T-2 toxin and HT-2 is greater than their metabolites NEO, T-2 triol, T-2 tetraol using human primary renal proximal tubule epithelial cells (RPTEC) and normal human primary lung fibroblasts (NHLF) (Konigs et al. ). Overall, these studies highlight that the metabolism of T-2 toxin in neuronal cells and tissues is dependent on the dose, route of administration and the expression levels of CYP450 metabolic enzymes. It is also apparent from these studies that the accumulation of the major metabolite HT-2 toxin significantly impacts T-2 toxin neurotoxicity. Clearly further studies in this area are warranted.
An overview of T-2 toxin-induced neuronal cell death signaling pathways-
In terms of structure–toxicity relationships, T-2 toxin neurotoxicity appears to be due to the specific structure of 12,13-epoxy ring (Wu et al. ). T-2 toxin undergoes metabolism to produce epoxides that are extremely toxic compounds reacting with nucleophiles and promoting ROS production. In vitro studies suggest that T-2 toxin interacts with the peptidyl transferase of the 60S ribosomal subunit to inhibit the formation of the new peptide bond thereby disrupting protein synthesis (Bertero et al. ; Hiller et al. ). The overarching consensus in the literature is that oxidative stress plays the most critical role in T-2 toxin-induced toxicity. Several studies demonstrated T-2 toxin-induced ROS production as the primary mechanism responsible for toxicity in broiler and rat hepatocytes, mouse Leydig cells, rat ovarian granulosa cells and neuronal tissue (Wu et al. ; Yang et al. , ). T-2 toxin-induced toxicity also appears to involve other signaling pathways that are inextricably linked to cellular ROS responses, such as the mammalian target of rapamycin/serine/threonine protein kinase (mTOR/Akt), mitochondrial pathway, nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2/heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) (Nrf2/HO-1) pathway, p53 pathway, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress pathway, death receptor pathway, nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) pathway, c-Jun N -terminal kinase (JNK) pathway and Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathways (Liu et al. ; Wang et al. ; Wu et al. ; Zhang et al. ). ER stress has been demonstrated to be involved in T-2 toxin-induced apoptosis in goat endometrium and rat myocardiocytes (Xu et al. ; Yi et al. ). The up-regulation of the inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)/nitric oxide (NO) pathway is also known to participate in T-2 toxin-induced apoptosis and neurotoxicity (Liu et al. ) (Fig. 3 ). The proceeding sections elaborate in greater detail our current knowledge base on the role of each of these ROS response pathways in T-2 toxin-induced neurotoxicity. Fig. 3 Main pathways of T-2 toxin-induced neurotoxicity. T-2 toxin can cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and enter brain tissue. T-2 toxin promotes the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the release of NO, activation of death receptor and mitochondrial pathways (up-regulation of Bax, downregulation of Bcl-XL). This culminates in neuronal apoptotic cell death in a caspase-dependent manner (with an increase of caspase-3, -8, and -9 activities). The activation of the p53 pathway, ER stress, JAK/STAT pathway, c-Jun N -terminal kinases (JNKs)/MAPK pathway and the inhibition of the PI3 K/Akt, Nrf2/HO-1 pathways may also contribute to T-2 toxin-induced apoptosis. The activation of NF-κB pathway may inhibit T-2 toxin-induced apoptosis
Oxidative stress in T-2 toxin neurotoxicity
ROS and antioxidant defense systems
ROS are defined as one class of reactive chemical species containing oxygen (Chandel ). ROS include the superoxide anion (O 2 ·− ), hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), and hydroxyl radicals ( · OH), and singlet oxygen ( 1 O 2 ), all of which have inherently different chemical properties and different biological targets (Drechsel and Patel ; Schieber and Chandel ). Under balanced physiological conditions, the cellular redox systems rapidly act to neutralize ROS, for example, O 2 ·− derived from the one-electron reduction of molecular oxygen (O 2 ) is rapidly converted by superoxide dismutase (SOD) into H 2 O 2 , which is in turn catalyzed into its harmless components H 2 O and O 2 by catalase (CAT), or glutathione peroxidase (GPX) (Chandel ) (Fig. 4 ). · OH is generated from H 2 O 2 and O 2 ·− , which is catalyzed by iron ions through the Fenton reaction (Koppenol ) (Fig. 4 ). However, under conditions wherein the redox balance has been tipped towards excessive ROS, such as in cases where the antioxidant defense systems have become overwhelmed, oxidative damage of cellular macromolecules (i.e., lipids, proteins, and DNA) and changes of intracellular signaling pathways ensue, ultimately resulting in cell death (Fig. 4 ) (Cid-Castro et al. ; Drechsel and Patel ). Fig. 4 The process of ROS/RNS formation in mitochondria during T-2 toxin-induced oxidative stress
The CNS is particulary susceptibly to the deleterious effects of T-2 toxin-induced ROS production (Doi and Uetsuka ). In mouse primary cultured neurons, T-2 toxin treatment at 10 ng/mL for 20–30 min induced a marked increase of ROS (Gaige et al. ). Similarly, Agrawal et al. reported that T-2 toxin treatment of human neuroblastoma IMR-32 cells at 40 ng/mL induced ROS production as early as 15 min post-exposure and led to a marked increase in apoptosis (Agrawal et al. ). Our laboratory showed that T-2 toxin-induced ROS production in neuroblastoma-2a (N2a) cells coincided with decreased SOD and CAT activities, as well as reduced cellular GSH levels (Zhang et al. ). Moreover, T-2 toxin treatment at 5 ng/mL for 24 h significantly up-regulated the levels of cellular malondialdehyde (MDA), a marker of lipid peroxidation (Zhang et al. ). We demonstrated that pretreatment with the antioxidant N -acetyl-cysteine (NAC) markedly suppressed T-2 toxin-induced N2a neuronal cell death (Zhang et al. ). Similarly, studies in mice subcutaneously administrated 1.57 mg/kg T-2 toxin showed that the levels of SOD, CAT and GPX were markedly decreased in brain tissue 1 day after adminstration, which was followed by an opposite trend latter in the time course of the experiment (Chaudhary and Rao ). These findings suggest neuronal cells have the capacity to recover from T-2 toxin acute exposure through the induction of cellular antioxidant enzymes, albeit this compensatory effect takes time and as such may not rescue the cell if the initial T-2 toxin exposure levels are excessively high (Zhang et al. ).
Cellular GSH deletion is a hallmark feature of T-2 toxin toxicity in all cell lines and tissues tested this far (Bouaziz et al. ; Chaudhary and Rao a; Fairhurst et al. ; Fatima et al. ; Guo et al. ; Liu et al. ; Mackei et al. ; Moosavi et al. ; Nakajima et al. ; Pelyhe et al. ; Sun et al. ; Wang et al. ; Wu et al. , , ; Yang et al. ; Zhang et al. ). GSH is a tripeptide comprised of cysteine, glycine and glutamate; notably it is the most abundant antioxidant found in brain tissue. GSH is synthesized in brain neurons, glial cells and is most abundant within astrocytes (Kramer et al. ). Notably, normal human astrocytes are very sensitive to T-2 toxin treatment (Weidner et al. ). GSH, together with the enzymes GSH peroxidase and GSSG reductase, serve to detoxify H 2 O 2 to water and molecular oxygen and help maintain the cysteinyl thiols (R-CH 2 –SH) groups of proteins in their reduced state, which is often necessary for the maintenance of their functional integrity. GSH depletion culminates into an unbalance of cellular redox homeostasis and oxidative stress (Tye et al. ). Depletion of GSH is known to significantly affect the survival of dopaminergic neurons, particularly if they are under oxidative stress (Morris et al. ). Dopaminergic neurons modulate neural encoding and expression of depression-related behaviors (Tye et al. ). This specific effect could potentially account for the clinical symptoms of depression seen in patients and animals exposed to T-2 or HT-2 toxins (Chaudhary and Rao ; Guo et al. ; Ratnaseelan et al. ).
Role of reactive nitrogen species (RNS)
Similar to ROS, reactive nitrogen species (RNS) play a major role in cellular oxidative stress. RNS species include various NO-derived compounds such as the nitroxyl anion, S -nitrosothiols, nitrosonium cation, higher oxides of nitrogen, and dinitrosyl iron complexes (Martinez and Andriantsitohaina ). A marked increase of iNOS and NO levels is seen in rat anterior pituitary GH3 cells after T-2 toxin treatment. This was corroborated by the observation that pretreatment of the cells with the NO-scavenging agent hemoglobin markedly decreases T-2 toxin-induced mitochondrial damage and cell death (Liu et al. ). Furthermore, the researchers found that T-2 toxin treatment can up-regulate the levels of NF-κB p65 mRNAs and protein phosphorylation (Liu et al. ). It is known that the activation of NF-κB induces the expression of iNOS (Dai et al. ). In addition, O 2 ·− may react with nitric oxide (NO · ) to produce peroxynitrite (ONOO−), which can cause DNA damage (Cid-Castro et al. ; Drechsel and Patel ) (Fig. 4 ). Taken together, these data indicated the NF-κB/iNOS/NO signal cascade is intimately involved in T-2 toxin-induced oxidative stress and neurotoxicity.
The role of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)
Nrf2 is a member of the cap ‘n’ collar (CNC) subfamily of basic region leucine zipper (bZip) transcription factors (Dodson et al. ). Nrf2 is considered as the housekeeper gene in antioxidant defense systems due to its special ability to bind to cognate antioxidant response elements (ARE) to regulate a plethora of antioxidant genes encoding phase I and II enzymes, such as SOD, CAT, GPX, heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1), NAD(P)H quinone dehydrogenase 1 (NQO1), catalytic (GCLC) and regulatory (GCLM) subunits of glutamate–cysteine ligase, and ~ 100 additional downstream targets (Dai et al. ). The Nrf2 pathway is partly responsible for the attenuation of oxidative damage in response to certain drugs and noxious compounds, such as colistin, paraquat and arsenic (Dai et al. , ; Wang et al. ; Zhang et al. ; Zhao et al. ). Our previous study showed that T-2 toxin treatment at 10 ng/mL for 6 h significantly decreased the expression of Nrf2 and its downstream gene HO-1 in N2a neuronal cells (Zhang et al. ). Similarly, in mice treated with T-2 toxin at 5.94 mg/kg, the mRNA levels of Nrf2 and the phase II detoxifying enzymes NQO-1, GCLC, GCLM and HO-1 were significantly decreased on the 1st, 3rd and 7th days post-percutaneous treatment (Chaudhary and Rao ). The mycotoxin ochratoxin A has also been shown to strongly inhibit the expression of Nrf2 (Limonciel and Jennings ; Loboda et al. ). In an Nrf2 knockout mouse model, it was demonstrated that Nrf2 deficiency exacerbates ochratoxin A-induced toxicity (Limonciel and Jennings ). Inhibition of Nrf2 or HO-1 has been shown to exacerbate T-2 toxin-induced neuronal cell death (Chaudhary and Rao ). Huang et al. showed that knockdown of Nrf2 significantly decreased T-2 toxin-induced mitophagy and increased apoptosis, not purringly as this is a phenomenon that is known to serve a protective role against cellular apoptosis (Huang et al. ). Taken together, these data indicate that the Nrf2/HO-1 pathway plays a protective role against T-2 toxin-induced oxidative stress and neurotoxicity.
Recently, an opposing phenomenon was reported wherein T-2 toxin treatment of GH3 neuronal cells at 40 nM (~ 20 ng/mL for 24 h) markedly increased the expression of Nrf2, SOD, GPx-1 and CAT (Huang et al. ). These conflicting findings present the question whether Nrf2 pathway inhibition is a cause or result of T-2 toxin-induced oxidative stress? The answer potentially lies in the findings of Pelyhe et al.’s study which employed 1-year-old juvenile common carp specimens. These researchers showed that oral exposure to T-2 toxin over a short period (8 h) at low doses (0.15 and 0.33 mg/kg body weight) inhibited Nrf2 mRNA expression whereas longer exposure periods (16 h) and at higher doses (0.33 mg/kg body weight) increased expression levels (Pelyhe et al. ). Similar dynamic changes of Nrf2 mRNA were detected in a mouse model (subcutaneous exposure with T-2 toxin at 1.54 mg/kg body weight) (Chaudhary and Rao ). The dynamic changes of the Nrf2/HO-1 pathway at the latter stages of T-2 toxin exposure may be attributed to cellular oxidative stress feedback processes which serve to rescue the cell from apoptotic death (Ma ).
The role of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) signaling
5-HT (also called serotonin), a monoamine neurotransmitter, is derived from tryptophan and synthesized both centrally and systemically (Hannon and Hoyer ). An earlier study showed that acute systemic T-2 toxin administration (10 μg/kg, intraperitoneal injection) increased cerebellar and brainstem tryptophan while decreased 5-HT in these same brain regions; however, chronic T-2 toxin administration increased cerebellar levels of tyrosine, tryptophan and 5-HT in the female rats (Weekley et al. ). Consistently, Wang et al.’s study also showed that lower doses of T-2 toxin significantly increased the levels of 5-HT as well as other monoamine concentrations in the brain of male rats (Wang et al. ). In another study, it was found that oral adminstration of T-2 toxin at 0.1 mg/kg significantly increased the levels of 5-HT and its metabolic product 5-hydroxy-3-indoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) throughout the brain tissue in the male rats, but did not alter the heart function. Very recently, Sheng et al. demonstrated that oral adminstration of T-2 toxin at 1 mg/kg significantly elevated 5-HT and substance neurotransmitter levels mediated T-2 toxin-induced anorexia. Furthermore, 5-HT3 receptor antagonist granisetron and neurokinin-1 receptor (NK-1R) antagonist aprepitant (also named Emend) effectively attenuated the T-2 toxin-induced anorectic responses in a dose-dependent manner (Sheng et al. ). These results indicate that 5-HT plays an important role during T-2 toxin-induced anorectic responses.
Recently studies showed that 5-HT plays a critical role in the process of oxidative damage (Fanibunda et al. ; Maggiorani et al. ). 5-HT is metabolized to 5-HIAA via the monoamine oxidase and contributes to the formation of ROS via the H 2 O 2 production during substrate degradation (Fanibunda et al. ; Maggiorani et al. ). 5-HT is also a potent antioxidant against lipid peroxidation and ROS formation (Azouzi et al. ). To date there is a dearth of information about the role of 5-HT in T-2 toxin-induced oxidative damage. It has been demonstrated that 5-HT can promote mitochondrial biogenesis by activating sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator (PGC-1α) expression early post-treatment (~ 4–6 h after 5-HT treatment), and inhibit oxidative stress by scavenging ROS in rat cortical neurons (Fanibunda et al. ; Maggiorani et al. ). These data indicate that 5-HT release following T-2 toxin exposure may play a critical role in oxidative damage and neurotoxicity.
The role of mitochondria
Mitochondria are the ‘power plant’ of cells and produce most of the cellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) via oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Mitochondrial dysfunction is vastly related to production of the excessive ROS, which leads to damage to cellular lipids, proteins, and DNA, cascading to cause cell apoptosis or necrosis (Dai et al. ; Islam et al. ). Several studies have demonstrated that mitochondrial dysfunction plays a the critical role in T-2 toxin-induced oxidative stress and apoptotic cell death (Bouaziz et al. ; Chaudhari et al. ; Liu et al. ; Mu et al. ; V et al. ; Wu et al. ). There is a dual role of mitochondria in responses to T-2 toxin-induced cell death (Jezek et al. ). In response to mild stress caused by T-2 toxin, activated mitophagy plays a protective role; on the contrary, severe stress will directly switch on the mitochondrial apoptotic death pathway, which is regulated by the Bax and Bcl-2 genes (Huang et al. ). Downregulation of Bcl-2 combined with up-regulation of Bax can induce mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization, followed by the release of cytochrome C (CytC) and ATP (Jezek et al. ). Subsequently, CytC binds to apoptotic peptidase-activating factor 1 (APAF-1), dATP and activates the caspase-9 and caspase-3 apoptotic cell death pathway (Dai et al. ). This signaling pathway was implicated in T-2 toxin-induced neurotoxicity (Guo et al. ; Zhang et al. ). Mitochondrial swelling, vacuole formation, and loss of crests were evident in the brains of rats treated with a low dose of T-2 toxin (2 mg/kg body weight) (Guo et al. ) and a rat pituitary tumor cell line (GH3) with T-2 toxin treatment (40 nM for 12 h) (Fatima et al. ).
In 1988, Pace and colleges were the first to demonstrate that T-2 toxin exposure at 20 ng/mL can markedly inhibit mitochondrial protein synthesis in vitro using mitochondria isolated from rat liver (Pace et al. ). Similarly, a significant decrease of total protein levels was observed in human chondrocytes treated with T-2 toxin (20 ng/mL for 5 days) (Liu et al. ). The study by Anwar Bin-Umer et al. showed type A and B trichothecenes including T-2 toxin can directly inhibit mitochondrial protein translation (Bin-Umer et al. ). Interestingly, integrated transcriptional and proteomic analyses revealed that T-2 toxin exposure (40 nM treatment for 24 h) decreased the expression of heat-shock proteins (Hsp) 60 and Hsp70 in rat GH3 cells (Wan et al. ). It is known that Hsp60 is a mitochondrial chaperonin (Jovaisaite et al. ). Hsp60 and Hsp70 control the transport and refolding of proteins from the cytoplasm into the mitochondrial matrix (Azem et al. ; Jovaisaite et al. ). Notably, inhibition of Hsp70 has been shown to impair mitochondrial proteostasis and function (Leu et al. ). It is, therefore, likely that the inhibition of Hsp60 and Hsp70 by T-2 toxin exposure is partly responsible for the observed effects on mitochondrial DNA transcription, replication and protein synthesis.
Wan et al.’s study demonstrated that T-2 toxin exposure significantly deregulated cellular metabolism, especially the TCA cycle using a GH3 cell culture model (Wan et al. ). They found that the expression of multiple genes and proteins in the glycolytic process such as ATP citrate lyase (Acly), pyruvate kinase isozymes M1/M2 (PKM1/2), aconitate hydratase (Aco2), isocitrate dehydrogenase (NAD) subunit α (IDH), and malate dehydrogenase (MDH) was significantly decreased (Wan et al. ). These are of great importance in the TCA cycle. The weakened energy metabolism might be an adverse downstream effect relating to the impaired protein synthesis and transport in mitochondria and other proteins to and from the ribosome and ER.
T-2 toxin induced the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential has been confirmed in many studies from different groups (Fatima et al. ; Guo et al. ; Wu et al. ; Zhang et al. ). The mitochondrial membrane potential (Δ Ψ m ) is generated by proton pumps (mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I, III and IV) (Zorova et al. ). Coupled with the proton gradient, Δ Ψ m , which forms the transmembrane potential of hydrogen ions, is harnessed to make ATP (Zorova et al. ). Therefore, Δ Ψ m is an essential component in the process of energy storage during OXPHOS. Mitochondrial respiratory complexes I, III and IV also contribute to mitochondrial ROS generation (Zorova et al. ). Liu et al. showed that T-2 toxin exposure (20 ng/mL treatment for 5 days; cell viability decreased to ~ 55%) reduced the activities of mitochondrial complexes III, IV and V with the decreased levels of Δ Ψ m and cellular ATP in cultured human chondrocytes (Liu et al. ). Similarly, the study of Fang et al. showed that T-2 toxin treatment (0.5 ng/mL for 72 h) significantly decreased the mitochondrial respiratory chain complex IV expression levels in murine embryonic stem cells (Fang et al. ). The subunits of each mitochondrial respiratory complex are encoded by both nuclei DNA (nuDNA) and mtDNA, except for complex II (completely encoded by nuDNA) (Raimundo ). A recent study showed that low doses of T-2 toxin (10 or 40 nM treatment for 24 h; apoptotic rates increased by ~ 5.2% and ~ 10%, respectively, compared to control) caused dynamic changes in the expression of genes encoding mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I, II, III, IV and V (Fig. 5 ). Almost of all of the nuclear DNA-encoded genes for complexes I, II, III, IV and V were significantly up-regulated. Significantly increased ROS levels were coincident with the decreased Δ Ψ m (Huang et al. ). Δ Ψ m collapse will result in the electron leakage of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes which is used to generate ROS and apoptosis. ROS burst can also induce the loss of Δ Ψ m (Lemarie and Grimm ). Taken together, it is clear that the mitochondrial respiratory damage plays a critical role during T-2 toxin-induced mitochondrial dysfunction. Fig. 5 Heatmap of the fold changes in mRNA expressions of 32 genes encoding mitochondrial complexes I, II, III, IV, and V subunits in GH3 cells treated with 10 or 40 nM T-2 toxin. Ndufs, NADH dehydrogenase iron–sulfur protein; Ndufv, NADH dehydrogenase flavoprotein; Ndufaf, NADH dehydrogenase alpha subcomplex assembly factor; ND, NADH dehydrogenase subunit; Sdh, succinate dehydrogenase flavoprotein subunit; mt-Cytb, mitochondrial cytochrome b; Cyc1, cytochrome c-1; Uqcrfs1, Rieske iron–sulfur polypeptide 1; COX, cytochrome c oxidase subunit; mt-Atp, mitochondrial ATP synthase F0 subunit 6. Fold change compared to control was filled in each cell and stars indicate the p values less than 0.05. Original data from Huang et al. ( )
Mitochondrial biogenesis is a process by which cells replenish the damaged and degraded mitochondria to maintain their mitochondrial number and cellular respiratory functions (Jornayvaz and Shulman ). The regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis involves over 1000 genes encoded by both mtDNA and nuDNA. It is well known that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPRC1) and PGC-1α play a critical role in the processes of mitochondrial biogenesis (Jornayvaz and Shulman ). T-2 toxin treatment (0.5 ng/mL for 72 h or 120 h) inhibits mitochondrial biogenesis proteins including PPRC1 and PGC-1α, nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA) in murine embryonic stem cells (Fang et al. ). Huang et al. showed that exposure of GH3 cells to a low dose of T-2 toxin (10 nM for 24 h) significantly up-regulated the expression of PGC-1α and PPRC1 mRNAs, but significantly down-regulated the expression of genes regulating mitochondrial biogenesis, namely Nrf1, mtTFA, mtTFB1, and mtTFB2 mRNAs (Huang et al. ). The latter effects coincided with mild mitochondrial damage and apoptotic rates increased by 5.2%, compared to the untreated control. In comparison, exposure to the T-2 toxin at a higher dose of 40 nM significantly up-regulated the mRNA expression of the aforementioned mitochondrial biogenesis genes (Fig. 5 ) (Huang et al. ). In line with these findings, the study of Ma et al. demonstrated that miR449a/SIRT1/deacetylated PGC-1α axis plays an essential role in the ability of moderate concentrations of T-2 toxin to stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis and ROS production (Ma et al. ). Overall, dynamic changes of mitochondria function are dependent on the dose, time and cell type (Fig. 6 ). For example, the expressions of PGC-1α and PPRC1 genes at the low doses over early periods of exposure was markedly up-regulated, but the opposite trends presented at higher dose and long exposure times (Huang et al. ). These differential changes may be attributed to the feedback pathways regulating cellular ROS responses and require further investigation. Fig. 6 Oxidative damage and mitochondrial dynamics in neuronal cells exposed to T-2 toxin. Under mild oxidative stress conditions (top) induced at low doses or short-term exposures to T-2 toxin, mild mitochondrial stress ensues, increased mitochondrial respiratory chain complex activity, biogenesis and production of ATP. These mildly stressed mitochondria (yellow) can be cleared by mitophagy which promotes cell survival. Acute oxidative stress (bottom) caused by higher doses or longer exposures of T-2 toxin promotes extensive mitochondrial fission and dysfunction that ultimately leads to elevated ROS, loss of mitochondrial integrity (green) with decreased mitochondria function and culminates in apoptotic cell death (color figure online)
T-2 toxin-induced autophagy
Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved catabolic degradation process by which cellular proteins and organelles are engulfed by autophagosomes, digested in lysosomes, and recycled to sustain cellular homeostasis in the phase of various stresses including oxidative stress, nutrient deprivation, hypoxia, and DNA damage (Tang et al. ). It has been reported that the activation of autophagy is involved in the maintenance of neuronal homeostasis, particularly in response to drug and environmental toxin (such as colistin, methylmercury, and bupivacaine) induced oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction (Dai et al. ; Gao et al. ; Wang et al. ). In general, the fate of the cell depends on the interplay between pro-apoptotic factors and autophagy, wherein the latter blocks the induction of apoptosis or acts to delay apoptotic cell death, and conversely the pro-apoptotic caspase activation shuts off autophagy. A recent study showed that T-2 exposure of rats significantly down-regulated the expression of the autophagy-related gene 5 (ATG5) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) mRNAs on the 1st day, but significantly up-regulated the expression of ATG5 and mTOR mRNA in brain tissue on the 3rd day post-T-2 exposure; the autophagy gene LC3B was significantly up-regulated (Guo et al. ). This indicates that T-2 toxin-activated autophagy could be regulated by various autophagy-related genes. Notably, the formation of autophagosome was observed using transmission electron microscopic examination in neuronal cells exposed to low doses of T-2 toxin (Huang et al. ). It is known that mTOR controls protein synthesis by activating S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) and 4E-binding protein 1 (Yoon ). So it follows, the increased expression of mTOR may be a feedback response to the inhibition of protein synthesis caused by T-2 toxin. On the other hand, mTORC1 is known to downregulate unc-51-like Autophagy Activating Kinase 1 (ULK1) activity via a direct interaction with the ULK1/2–Atg13–FIP200 complex to regulate autophagy (i.e., activation of mTOR may inhibit ULK1-mediated autophagy) (Efeyan et al. ). Furthermore, Huang et al. reported that T-2 toxin treatment significantly up-regulated the expression of NIP-like protein X (NIX), PTEN-induced kinase 1(PINK1) and Parkin with an increased ATG3 and LC3II/I ratio (Huang et al. ). These findings suggest that T-2 toxin activates mitophagy. Wu et al. showed that autophagy activation by rapamycin inhibited T-2 toxin-induced apoptosis, while autophagy inhibition by chloroquine greatly enhanced the T-2 toxin-induced cell apoptosis (Huang et al. ). Consistently, Yang et al. found that autophagy activation by rapamycin protected against T-2 toxin-induced apoptosis in mouse primary Leydig cells (Wu et al. ). Taken together, these data indicated that autophagy plays a protective role in T-2 toxin-induced cell death (Fig. 6 ).
Potential therapies to ameliorate T-2 toxin-induced neurotoxicity
Amelioration of T-2 toxin-induced oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction by rebalancing the perturbed antioxidant system has been studied through supplementation of several free radical-scavenging agents using in vitro cell culture systems and animal models (Huang et al. ; Moosavi et al. ; Wu et al. ; Yang et al. ; Zhang et al. ). Certain agents including NAC, α-tocopherol, ascorbic acid, quercetin, vitamin E, coenzyme Q10, L-carnitine, selenium and some plant-based supplements have been found to ameliorate T-2 toxin-induced cytotoxicity, liver damage and/or immuno-toxicity (Atroshi et al. ; Capcarova et al. ; Dvorska et al. ; Moosavi et al. ; Rizzo et al. ; Salimian et al. ). However, there is a dearth of studies on the utility of these treatment strategies for T-2 toxin-induced neurotoxicity. In fact, the neuroprotective potential of these agents has been highlighted in numerous systems (He et al. ; Kumar and Reddy ; Nam et al. ). Quercetin (3,3′,4′,5,7-pentahydroxyflavone), a common flavonol found in many fruits and vegetables such as apples, berries, onions, and capers, is known to have many pharmacological activities including anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anti-cancer and immuno-modulatory. Importantly, quercetin can cross the BBB and enter the brain tissue (Huebbe et al. ; Ishisaka et al. ). There are many animal experiments demonstrating that quercetin supplementation can improve drug- or heavy metal-induced neurotoxicity by directly scavenging ROS, activating Nrf2/HO-1, SIRT1 and autophagy pathways (Arredondo et al. ; Hu et al. ; Lakroun et al. ; Lv et al. ; Zhang et al. ). Additionally, quercetin and α-tocopherol can both protect against T-2 toxin- induced toxicity, and their coadministration has been shown to increase the transport of quercetin across the BBB (Ferri et al. ). In addition, since elevated 5-HT plays a critical role during T-2/HT-2 toxin-induced nervous depression, it is tenable to speculate that FDA-approved 5-HT antagonists may provide some neuroprotection (Fig. 7 ). Fig. 7 Potential molecular mechanisms of T-2 toxin-induced neurotoxicity and potential neuroprotective strategies. T-2 toxin can cause oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, which lead to neurotoxicity. The cascade signaling pathways involve p53, MAPK, Akt/mTOR, ER stress and Nrf2/HO-1 pathways. Some agents including NAC, α-tocopherol, ascorbic acid, quercetin, vitamin E, and L-carnitine, supplementation ameliorates T-2 toxin-induced oxidative stress and mitochondria dysfunction. Induction of autophagy by rapamycin or quercetin and the activation of Nrf2/HO-1 pathway can improve T-2 toxin-induced neurotoxicity
Summary
T-2 toxin is a potent neurotoxin exerting its unwanted effects by exacerbating oxidative stress in the CNS. The results from animal studies and in vitro studies highlight that ROS-mediated oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction may play a critical role in T-2 toxin-induced neurotoxicity. These effects are compounded by the activity of T-2 toxin to produce depletion of GSH in neuronal cells and brain tissues. At low doses, T-2 toxin increases mitochondrial respiratory chain activity and mitochondrial biosynthesis, whereas at higher doses, T-2 toxin suppresses the mitochondrial membrane potential, causes mitochondrial dysfunction which culminates in apoptosis. Excess ROS production induced by both T-2 toxin and its major metabolite HT-2 toxin activates several antioxidant signaling pathways including p53, MAPK, Akt/mTOR, ER stress, and Nrf2/HO-1. T-2 toxin exposure also induces the activation of autophagy and mitophagy, which play a protective role against neurotoxicity by eliminating damaged organelles. In addition, induction of 5-HT release may play a dual role during T-2 toxin-induced oxidative stress and neurotoxicity in neuronal cell. 5-HT could protect against oxidative stress-mediated neurotoxicity by activating SIRT1/PGC-1α pathway, or preventing lipid peroxidation and ROS formation. In addition, it also could induce anorectic responses by activating 5-HT3 receptor. Ameliorative effects of antioxidants such as NAC, quercetin, and α-tocopherol are emerging as a new therapy for intervention against T-2 toxin poisoning.