Introduction
The formation of covalent protein and DNA adducts with reactive chemicals or their metabolites may play a key role in the onset of several adverse health outcomes including cancer, and cardiovascular and autoimmune diseases (Carlsson and Tornqvist ; Farmer and Singh ). Kanaly et al. ( ) introduced the term ‘Adductome’ in their novel work on LC–MS/MS-based screening of DNA adducts in human lung tissue. Identifying the nature of the covalent modifications along with the site of adduction within the protein or other biomolecules is referred as ‘Adductomics’. Protein and DNA adducts can be derived from chemical compounds that have inherent reactivity or undergo bioactivation of the compound to a reactive product. Exposure to electrophilic compounds can directly or indirectly produce reactive oxygen species, and therefore, adducts of these species can serve as indirect exposure biomarkers (Fabisiak et al. ; Grigoryan et al. ). Adductomics is useful in better understanding of the molecular basis of diseases, in general and chemically induced toxic events, in particular and also helps in identifying the biomarkers for effective diagnosis and prognosis in accurately assessing human exposure to chemical toxicants (Grigoryan et al. ; Rappaport et al. ). Recent studies applied approaches based on adducts to study the toxicity mechanisms and biomarker proteins. Measurement of protein adducts of acetaminophen in the serum of acute liver failure patients reliably identifies acetaminophen toxicity, and is useful diagnostic markers in acetaminophen-induced hepatic injury and correlates well with hepatic transaminase elevation (Davern et al. ; James et al. ). Protein adducts have several advantages over DNA adducts as proteins are much more abundant than DNA in blood (hemoglobin ~ 150 mg/mL, albumin ~ 40 mg/mL, DNA ~ 0.005 mg/mL). The longer life spans of hemoglobin (Hb) (120 days in humans) and albumin (20 days) are also an important reason for favoring proteins adducts over DNA (Tornqvist et al. ). DNA adducts can decompose spontaneously, and a number of them can be removed by enzymatic repair systems at varying rates (Tornqvist et al. ). Protein adducts are not subjected to excision repair processes unlike DNA adducts; this offers simpler calculations of systemic dose (Skipper and Tannenbaum ); thus, protein adducts can serve as better biomarkers. The purpose of this review is to discuss the potential use of adductomics approach in the verification of chemical warfare agent exposures in the biological samples in the case of any accidental or military misuse.
The extent of adduct formation depends on the reactivity of the electrophile, nucleophilicity, and pKa of the nucleophilic atom, and steric factors. Major sites in proteins for adduct formation are the sulfur of the cysteine thiol group, the hydroxyl group of serine, tyrosine and threonine, the nitrogens of the histidine imidazole group, and the NH 2 -group of N-terminal amino acids for many electrophilic compounds including CWAs (Tornqvist et al. ). Cys-34 is the only free thiol in human serum albumin (HSA), and it is a nucleophilic hotspot that accounts for most of the antioxidant capacity of serum, Lys-199, and His-146 which are other nucleophilic hotspots of HSA (Grigoryan et al. ). The ‘HSA adductome’, representing the totality of such adducts, has great potential for CWAs detection. Enrichment of adducts is normally needed to separate the modified proteins/DNA from the much larger bulk of unmodified biomolecules. Adductomics is useful to study the adduct patterns of different populations in different exposure conditions or diseases to get a valuable information, which is not possible with targeted approaches (Grigoryan et al. ). The aim of the adductomics is the simultaneous screening of all possible adducts including the detection of previously unknown adducts (Fig. 1 ). Identification of the adducts is based on the mass-to-charge ( m / z ) values of the precursor ions ([M + H] + ) from the mass spectrum and the retention times from the chromatograms obtained by screening of adducts. The strategy involves several steps, including the calculation of the mass of the protein modifications by subtracting m / z from the precursor ions corresponding to an unmodified protein. From the obtained masses, the corresponding precursor electrophiles and probable adduct precursors may be suggested by the use of databases such as ‘Search for Species Data by Molecular Weight’ provided by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST, USA) as it searches for species with molecular weights within 0.5 units of the input value, based on single isotope atomic masses. This kind of strategy has recently been used to study hemoglobin and albumin adductomics in large set of samples (Carlsson and Tornqvist ; Grigoryan et al. ). Further automation and simplification of methods for adducts detection can be expected as the advances in ‘‘-omic’’ techniques, MS instrumentation, and data processing facilitate the identification of protein adducts in complex mixtures. It may also be expected that adducts of CWAs with proteins other than hemoglobin, albumin, and cholinesterases will be identified in near future for screening the CWA exposure for diagnostic and forensic purposes.
Fig. 1 Typical workflow of an adductomics
Despite of continuous efforts to implement the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), to prohibit the development, production, stockpiling, and use of CWAs, a large stockpile of CWAs still exists and awaits destruction. Personnel working in destruction facilities might also have an elevated risk of exposure (Black and Noort ). Recent alleged nerve agent attacks on civilians in Syria (2013 and 2017) indicate their potential threat to both civilian and military population as acute nerve agent exposure can cause death within minutes (John et al. ; Golime et al. ). Careful biomonitoring is required to minimize the risks associated with these agents in case of any misuse. Nerve agents have been used in the wars (Iraq–Iran war of the 1980s) and by terrorist groups during terrorist attacks in Japan (Matsumoto, 1994 and Tokyo subway, 1995) and very recently in Syria (2013 and 2017) and in Iraq–Iran war (John et al. ; UN Report 2013; Miyaki et al. ). Recent incidents involving assassination of Kim Jong-nam, the eldest son of former North Korean leader in 2017 using lethal nerve agent, VX, in Malaysia (Chai et al. ) and of Sergei Skripal, a former Russian Spy, and his daughter and a police officer were exposed to a deadly organophosphate called novichok in Salisbury, UK in 2018; indicate the constant threat posed by CWAs (Vale et al. ; Chai et al. ). Due to their low cost, ease of synthesis and use in weapon systems (shells, rockets, bombs) to cause mass mortality have made these compounds eminently suitable as a chemical weapons for mass destruction and are also called as “poor man’s nuclear weapons”. Nerve agents irreversibly inhibit the acetylcholinesterase, leading to excessive acetylcholine accumulation at neuronal synapses and cause the classic cholinergic toxidrome (muscarinic effects: miotic pupils, copious secretions, emesis, bronchorrhea, and diarrhea. Nicotinic effects include muscle fasciculations, tremors, muscle paralysis and cardiac arrest. Central nervous system effects include seizures, convulsions, memory loss, confusion, and coma) and ultimately death due to respiratory failure (Golime and Bhattacharya ; Golime et al. ). CWAs are defined as the chemicals that can cause death, temporary incapacitation, or permanent harm to humans or animals by chemical action on life processes (CWC Annex on Chemicals, OPCW, The Hague, 1994). Numerous toxic chemicals are listed under the CWA category; some of the most toxic chemicals are grouped as follows:
1. Nerve agents: these are ester derivatives of phosphonic acid, viz., Tabun, Sarin, and Soman. 2. Vesicants (blister agents): these include sulfur, nitrogen, and oxygen mustards and arsenicals. 3. Blood agents affect the oxygen carrying capacity of blood either by damaging the RBCs (arsenicals) or by acting on cytochrome oxidase (cyanide containing compounds). 4. Choking agents: choking agents injure an unprotected person through the respiratory tract (nose, throat, and, particularly, the lungs). 5. Incapacitating agents: these produce disabling conditions by alterations of the higher regulatory activity of the central nervous system, viz., 3-quinuclidinyl benzilate.
Chemical warfare agents can react and induce covalent modifications at nucleophilic sites within macromolecules such as DNA and proteins to form stable adducts. Reactive chemicals are difficult to measure in in-vivo conditions due to their high reactivity, toxicity, instability, and low concentrations (nanomolar). Systemic concentrations can be estimated by measuring the CWA adducts with blood proteins, such as human serum albumin and hemoglobin (Black ; Black and Read ). Sample collection timing is also critical factor in measuring the intact agents and metabolites for their sensitive detection (nanogram level). Unfortunately, detecting the intact CWAs in blood is difficult due to their instability and rapid elimination from the body (Black ; Black and Read ). In the case of an investigation of alleged use of CWAs, analyses of biomedical samples can provide evidence in a court of justice for forensic investigations. In 2013, OPCW, The Netherlands, commissioned by the United Nations, collected environmental and biomedical samples. A biomedical sample analysis has confirmed the offensive use of sarin in the suburbs of Damascus in August 2013 (UN Report 2013). Vertox-Biochemistry laboratory, DRDE, Gwalior has been successfully participating in the OPCW, conducted confidence building exercises (05 Nos) and international proficiency tests (03 Nos) for the analysis of CWAs and their biomarkers in biomedical samples. The submitted results and reports were evaluated by OPCW and got designation laboratory status (Table 1 ) and A-grade for correctly identifying the all chemicals related to CWC in unknown samples. Several recently published studies and results from our laboratory successful participation in these OPCW conducted tests on the verification of chemicals related to CWCs form a basis for the present review discussion. The relevance of adductomics concept will be discussed for the screening, identification, and detection of CWA adducts. The growing global concern about the terrorist’s use of chemical weapons urgently requires the development of high-throughput approaches such as adductomics in support of homeland security and public health. The present review focuses on the nerve and blister agents that have recently been used in warfare and assassinations and still pose a major threat in today’s scenario.
Table 1 List of OPCW-designated laboratories for the analysis of authentic biomedical samples Laboratory State party 1 Defence Science and Technology Group Australia 2 Laboratory of Toxicant Analysis Academy of Military Medical Sciences China 3 Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry Research Institute of Chemical Defence China 4 Finnish Institute for Verification of the Chemical Weapons Convention (VERIFIN) Finland 5 DGA Maitrise NRBC, Departement d analyses chimiques France 6 Bundeswehr Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology Germany 7 Vertox-Biochemistry Division, Defence Research and Development Establishment India* 8 TNO Defence, Security and Safety Netherlands 9 Chemical Analysis Laboratory, CB Department Agency for Defence Development Republic of Korea 10 Laboratory for the Chemical and Analytical Control of Military Research Center Russian Federation 11 Laboratory of Chemical Analytical Control and Biotesting Research Institute of Hygiene, Occupational Pathology and Human Ecology (RIHOPHE) Russian Federation 12 Verification Laboratory, Defence Medical and Environmental Research Institute, DSO National Laboratories Singapore 13 Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI) Sweden 14 Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Chemical and Biological Systems, Porton Down United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 15 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention United States of America 16 Edgewood Chemical and Biological Forensic Analytical Center United States of America 17 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory United States of America *Authors of this review belong to the Vertox-Biochemistry Division, Defence Research and Development Establishment, Gwalior, India
Sampling and methods in adductomics for CWAs detection
Unbiased approaches such as adductomics together with other ‘‘-omics’’ strategies (proteomics and metabolomics) require great attention to identify the unknown biomarkers. High-throughput screening methods are useful for quantifying candidate biomarkers of CWAs in the population-based studies, where large numbers of acutely exposed cases possible as in Syria (John et al. ). In case of any exposure to CWAs, unambiguous verification is needed to identify the type of CWA using intact agent or biomarker detection. Biomarkers include hydrolysis products, metabolites, DNA, or protein adducts (Black and Read ). Most of the studies on CWAs and their biomarkers detection have been directed at blood (whole, plasma, serum, or red blood cells) and urine samples (Mesilaakso ). These are most easily accessible body fluids and non-invasive except venepuncture, and they accumulate a high proportion of the dose in surviving casualties (Black ). Dried Blood Sampling (DBS) drops of whole blood collected on filter paper following a simple heel or finger stick is a minimally invasive and cost-effective alternative to venous blood draws in case of perinatal and pediatric populations (Funk et al. ). The DBS sample format has been applied to detect nerve agent adducts with BChE and sulfur mustard–albumin adduct detection (Perez et al. ; John et al. ). Breath, saliva, and hair have attracted mostly exploratory and forensic studies. Saliva specimen collection is simple and also offers an alternative to blood to characterize individual exposure to certain toxic compounds as saliva contains some molecular information (Bessonneau et al. ). Screening of protein adducts such as cysteine and valine adducts of albumin and Hb with mustard agents and cholinesterase and albumin adducts of nerve agents can be used complementary along with DNA adducts in parallel to get greater information about the kind of agent exposed in the context of complex CWA exposure scenarios. Selective proteins can be isolated using ligand-based affinity chromatography or immunoaffinity chromatography and total proteins by protein precipitation, followed by enzymatic cleavage and sample clean-up with C 18 -based solid-phase extraction of peptides or analytes is most commonly used sample preparation strategy for CWA analysis in biomedical samples (Fig. 2 ).
Fig. 2 Steps involved in sample preparation of CWA adducts analysis
Challenges during biomedical analysis of CWAs
Complex biological sample matrices such as plasma and urine can create hindrances during analysis due to the presence of several components. Extensive sample preparation is required to enrich the less abundant analytes present in high background levels, which requires to apply numerous sample clean-ups including solid-phase microextraction (SPE) and separation strategies (Fig. 2 ). The degree of chemical modification on the biomolecules is low, which makes it difficult to achieve low detection limits with high specificity. At least two analytical methods or two biomarkers per CWA are necessary requirements by OPCW to confirm the agent of exposure. Sample clean-up procedures used to reduce background may sometimes result in loss of analytes. Protein and DNA adducts can serve as exposure biomarkers to variety of xenobiotics and reactive endogenous species. However, proteins/DNA adducts have rarely been used in epidemiology due to their low in abundance compared with unmodified proteins, high costs, difficulty in obtaining blood, and sample processing, which frequently limits the use of protein/DNA adducts as measures of exposure in large-scale studies. Millions of chemicals come under CWC category, but only limited analytical techniques and databases are available for few CWAs (CWC, Annex on Chemicals, OPCW, The Hague, 1994).
Analytical techniques for adducts’ measurement
It is important to develop robust analytical methods for the qualitative and quantitative measurements of a wide range of protein and DNA adducts that can be implicated in the human exposures to various types of CWAs. Any agreed set of criteria for the identification of CWA biomarkers at trace levels should be broadly consistent with criteria defined by regulatory bodies in other contexts such as drug testing in sports and banned substances in animal products (Table 2 ). For example, identification by two independent analytical techniques or two biomarkers detection is required by the OPCW, during proficiency tests for the unequivocal detection and identification of CWAs (Koc and Swenberg ). Several international authorities including the European Union (EU) Commission (EU Commission Decision ) and the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) (WADA Technical Document; TD2010IDCR, 2010) have established the identification criteria for the advanced analytical approaches. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued guidelines for different bioanalytical methods and methods validation for drug industry (U.S.FDA, Guidance for Industry, Bioanalytical Method Validation ). Since the year 2010, the OPCW has organized the confidence building exercises for biomedical sample analysis with their own specified instructions for identification (OPCW, Guidelines for the Biomedical Sample Analysis Exercise ; Technical Secretariat for designating laboratories ). The general criteria by the EU, WADA, and OPCW for chromatographic separation by GC or LC and for Mass spectrometry (MS) identification are listed in Table 2 . These identification criteria assure reliability in trace level bioanalyses in the investigation and the verification of alleged use of CWAs and must be reliable enough to stand up to legal examination in the court, in forensic toxicology, and doping control. In most of these cases, the analyst does not know the exact chemicals to look for, but has to produce unequivocal evidence of the presence of well-defined or forbidden substances in the complex biological matrices.
Table 2 Comparison of identification criteria for GC, LC, and MS [ , , , , ] Chromatographic separation (GC, LC ) EU WADA OPCW Retention time (RT) S/N GC ± 0.5% LC ± 2.5% ≥ 3:1 GC ± 1% or ± 0.2 min LC ± 2% or ± 0.4 min > 3:1 GC ± 0.1 min LC ± 0.2 min ≥ 1:5 MS identification Full scan MS and MS/MS SIM SRM HR-MS All diagnostic ions when their relative intensity is > 10% a Preferably at least the molecular ion b Not defined Resolution > 10,000 for the entire mass range at 10% valley All diagnostic ions when their relative intensity is > 10% a ≥ 3 diagnostic ions 2 transitions c Not defined All diagnostic ions when their relative intensity is > 10% a ≥ 2 diagnostic ions ≥ 1 transition Resolution > 10,000 for the entire mass range at 10% valley a In the reference spectrum of the calibration standard b The other selected diagnostic ions should not originate from the same part of the molecule c When more than one transition is monitored, the relative abundance of a diagnostic ion shall be determinate SIM single ion monitoring, SRM selected reaction monitoring
Mass spectrometry (MS) is the method of choice for the detection of protein adducts with CWAs. MS provides selectivity and structural information, and also enables reliable quantitative measurements using internal standards substituted with stable isotopes. Highly sensitive analytical methods such as GC–MS and LC with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) have been used for the detection of hydrolysis products of the nerve agents and vesicants (sulfur, nitrogen mustards and lewisites), in blood and urine. Recently, the trend has been changing more towards the increasing use of LC–MS/MS rather than GC–MS. LC–MS/MS avoids the need for derivatisation and time saving, and MS/MS generally provides lower limits of detection than single MS, combined with a greater selectivity. LC–MS is more versatile technique for protein adducts compared to GC–MS, and is useful for the analysis of thermolabile, hydrophilic, and non-volatile compounds. Electrospray ionization in the positive mode is normally used for adduct measurements and tandem MS is typically employed in the multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode when performing targeted analysis (Carlsson and Tornqvist ). Adductomics screening by high-resolution MS (HR-MS) such as Orbitrap compared to triple quadrupoles has the high resolving power and accuracy in measurements. Accurate mass measurements are often helpful for the identification purposes and can be used to propose the elemental composition by the instrument software. The high-resolution data also provide a better foundation for qualification and disqualification of adduct candidates, compared to the unit resolution data obtained with triple quadrupole instruments (Grigoryan et al. ). Data-dependent acquisition is a good approach for the analysis of clean samples that do not contain contaminants or interfering compounds at high concentrations. A wide range of methodologies other than MS have also been used for adduct detection including laser-induced fluorescence and immunochemical approaches (Ozbal et al. ). Adductomics screening with high-resolution mass spectrometry can facilitate the process of identifying the unknown adducts. Highly sensitive MRM approach is useful for quantifying the panels of targeted adducts in the biological samples, referred as the multiple adduct panel (MAP) assay. MAP assays can be useful in the simultaneous and high-throughput screening of several modifications on proteins in human samples by LC–MS/MS, and provides more information about the type of chemical exposed in less time.
Analysis of CWAs in biomedical samples
Analysis of intact CWAs for diagnostic and forensic applications is possible in a few cases only if blood should sampled within a limited time period (few minutes to few days) after exposure. Most CWAs and their metabolites have shorter half-lives in-vivo, and, thus, provide evidence only of recent exposure and have very limited utility as markers of exposure (Black ; Noort et al. ; Mesilaakso ). The major fraction of an absorbed dose is metabolized or chemically hydrolyzed and eliminated as more polar metabolites, predominantly in the urine but with a small fraction in the feces. The remaining absorbed dose undergoes covalent reactions with nucleophiles on macromolecules, mainly on proteins and DNA (Black and Read ; Noort et al. ). Increasing efforts are being directed towards identifying long-lived and cumulative biomarkers that could be used for monitoring acute, chronic or sub-chronic exposures of CWAs. Nerve agents, vesicants, and phosgene are electrophilic compounds with varying degrees of reactivity and selectivity towards nucleophiles in the body. Examples include CWA-modified albumin, hemoglobin, cholinesterase, and sulfur mustard-alkylated DNA. Proteins adducts are abundant, stable and specific for CWAs and can serve as better biomarkers for the analytical detection (Black ; John et al. ; Barr ).
Analysis of nerve agent adducts
Organophosphorus (OP) nerve agents are the most notorious among all CWAs due to their high toxicity and ease of synthesis and use. Metabolic reactions of nerve agents are selective and mostly dominated by chemical or enzyme mediated hydrolysis to alkyl methylphosphonic acids (AMPAs) and finally into methylphosphonic acid (MPA) (Black and Read ; Noort et al. ), and these are regarded as biomarkers of nerve agents’ exposure (Fig. 3 ). Sarin bound to cholinesterases was regenerated by fluoride and used for the verification of Japanese terrorist victims’ (Polhuijs et al. ) blood samples using GC–MS. Serine (S) is the active site of acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) present in blood and nerves, which is the primary biochemical target of nerve agents. Tyrosine-411 adduct of plasma albumin with nerve agents is more stable, abundant and easy to extract compared to less abundant and ageing prone cholinesterase adducts. Fidder et al. ( ) and Van der Schans et al. ( ) have enzymatically cleaved the BChE using pepsin to detect nonapeptide (FGE S ∗ AGAAS) phenyl alanine (F)-glycine (G)-glutamic acid (E)-serine (S)-glycine (G)-alanine (A)-alanine (A)-serine (S) adduct of nerve agents. These methods can also be used for the detection of BChE adducts with other OP pesticides. Recent studies identified a novel cysteine-containing disulfide of albumin adducts with V-type nerve agents and used for their simultaneous detection together with phosphonylated tyrosines (John et al. 2016; Kranawetvogl et al. , , ). The analysis of specific exposures are suitable in some cases but to identify the unknown human exposures to different nerve agents exposures needs the development of untargeted assays such as ‘‘adductomics’’ for the screening unknown adducts. The knowledge about the known nerve agent-protein adducts can be potentially applied in exploring the detection newer group of nerve agents such as novichok in future.
Fig. 3 Nerve agent metabolic and biomarker pathway in the human body
Analysis of adducts with vesicants
Blister causing CWAs including sulfur and nitrogen mustards have highly reactive chlorine atoms, which can form adducts with biological macromolecules via alkylation. The N-terminal valine of hemoglobin is detected in the mustard gas-exposed humans using GC–MS after modified Edman degradation followed by heptafluorobutyryl derivatization. The Edman degradation reaction has the following steps, coupling, and cleavage and ring conversion. Phenylisothiocyanate (PITC) is first coupled with N-terminal amino group of peptide at slightly alkaline pH (pH 8) followed by cyclization to form a five-membered phenyl thiazolinone ring after cleaving the remaining part of the peptide by heating. Thiazolone is extracted from the reaction medium using organic solvent and heated it in acidic medium to convert the less stable thiazolinone into stable thiohydantoin for further analysis (Ilse and Edman ; Nie et al. ). Mustard gas alkylates cysteine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, and histidine residues on hemoglobin (Noort et al. ). Sulfur mustard (SM), alkylated glutathione undergoes a β-lyase metabolism to produce urinary metabolites (Fig. 4 ). β-lyases are enzymes that catalyze β-elimination reactions with cysteine S-conjugates that possess a good leaving group in the β-position. These cysteine S-conjugate β-lyases play an important key role in the bioactivation of many environmental toxicants including SM (Black et al. ). LC–MS/MS analysis of trypsin enzymatic cleavage of hemoglobin treated with radiolabelled sulfur mustard identified alkylation on 6 different histidine residues, 3 glutamic acid residues, and on both of the N-terminal valines. The N1 and N3 histidine adducts were the most abundant adducts analyzed by LC–MS/MS after derivatization (Black et al. ). SM-alkylated cysteine-34 residue of HSA is used to verify SM exposure (Noort et al. ). These results indicate the possibility of detection of protein adducts of mustards in the blood at longer times, since proteins have longer residence time. Recent studies have detected albumin adduct of mustard gas successfully as a (S-2-hydroxyethylthioethyl)-HETE-Cys-Pro-Tyr and HETE-Cys-Pro until several days after exposure and the N-terminal valine adduct of hemoglobin was detected after 28 days in in-vivo samples (Noort et al. ; Black et al. ; Steinritz et al. ; Gandor et al. 2015; John et al. ). Protein adducts are better indicators of exposure and internal dose and the high abundance of HSA and Hb in the blood compared to DNA, which also allow the analysis of samples in small volumes (Farmer and Singh ; Tornqvist et al. ; John et al. ).
Fig. 4 Sulfur mustard metabolic and biomarker pathway in the human Body: SM undergoes hydrolysis into TDG-(thiodiglycol), SMO-(bis-β-Chloroethyl sulfoxide) and TDGO-(thiodiglycolsulfoxide). SM-glutathione adduct undergoes oxidation to produce sulfone followed by β-lyase cleavage, leading to the formation of SBSNAE-(1,1-sulfonylbis[2-S-(N-acetylcysteinyl)-ethane]),SBMTE-(1,1-sulfonylbis[2-(methylthio)ethane),MSMTESE-(1-methyl sulfinyl-2-[2-(methylthio)ethyl-sulfonyl]ethane), and SBMSE-(1,1sulfonylbis-[2-(methylsulfinyl) ethane),HETEG(hydroxyethylthioethyl)guanine,HETEA-(hydroxyethylthioethyl) Adenine
DNA adducts
DNA adducts are mechanistically interesting, since DNA is the primary target for many carcinogenic and mutagenic agents. Exposure to strong alkylating blister agents such as SM causes various carcinogenic effects in living bodies. Blister agents potentially alkylate DNA bases to produce structurally modified adducts, which can serve as valuable and toxicologically relevant biomarkers of blister agent exposures (Rao et al. ; Jowsey et al. ; Niu et al. ). In DNA, sites for adduct formation include N7-guanine, O6-guanine, and N3-adenine, (Koc and Swenberg ). Retrospective analysis of DNA adducts in different biological matrices such as blood, urine, and tissue provides significant forensic evidence during the alleged exposures. Four major DNA adducts (N7-[2-[(2-hydroxyethyl)thio]-ethyl]guanine (N7-HETEG), bis-(2-ethyl-N7guanine)thioether(Bis-G),N3-(2-hydroxyethylthioethyl)-2-adenine(N3-HETEA), and O6-[2-[(2hydroxyethyl)thio]-ethyl] guanine (O6-HETEG) were identified for the retrospective detection of SM exposure cases (Fig. 4 ). N7-HETEG is the most abundant (61%), followed by Bis-G (16%), N3-HETEA (11%), and O6-HETEG (0.1%) is the less abundant of the total SM-DNA adducts (Zubel et al. 2018). For the determination of DNA adducts, HPLC with fluorescence or electrochemical detection, mass spectrometry, immunoassay-based techniques, and the 32 P-post labeling method have been used (Zubel et al. 2018; Niu et al. ; Van der Schans et al. ; Benschop et al. ). 32 P isotope labeling procedure successfully applied for the detection of DNA adducts of human fibroblasts exposed to sulfur mustard, but the use of radio isotope is hazardous and time consuming process (Niu et al. ). Immunoassays such as enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) are more suitable for large-scale epidemiological studies or chemical evaluation. Immunochemical methodology provides only indicative evidence for any exposure case due to less sensitivity and specificity (Van der Schans et al. ). Isotope dilution high-performance liquid chromatography–electrospray ionization–tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC–ESI–MS/MS) and gas chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (GC–MS/MS) showed superior selectivity, sensitivity, accuracy, specificity, and reproducibility in measuring DNA adducts of sulfur mustard in biological samples (Zubel et al. ; Tretyakova et al. ). DNA adducts usually have shorter half-lives due to DNA repair, but can be measured in several human tissues, urine, and saliva. N7-guanine adduct of DNA was detected from the lymphocytes and granulocytes of victims from Iran–Iraq conflict after mustard exposure (Benschop et al. ). Nitrogen mustard (HN) adducts with DNA N7-guanine and N3-adenine were detected using UV, and mass and proton magnetic resonance spectra (Mattes et al. ; Osborne et al. ).
Conclusion
Accurate and timely detection and verification of CWA exposure is challenging due to rapid disappearance of most CWAs from serum and due to the difficulties of getting biological specimens from victim’s in-time to detect CWAs and their metabolites. Testing for protein adducts formation extends the time window for detection of CWAs to nearly 3 week post-exposure with albumin to over 3 month post-exposure with hemoglobin and quantify the exposed dose of chemical unlike repairable DNA adducts. Adductomics is a very promising approach to detect more number of adducts compared to targeted approaches. Adductomics is still largely unexplored in the field of CWAs analysis. The rapid advances in the field of mass spectrometry with high resolution and improvements in sample preparation methodologies with increased sensitivity and robustness, unknown adducts will likely to be detected in the future. Blood, saliva, urine, and DBS samples are especially well suited for adductomic experiments as adducts reflect an integration of exposures over the period and permit direct assessment of unknown chemical exposures that are otherwise go undetected. The field of adductomics is still in infancy and mostly concentrated towards the method development and further studies are needed for the screening of unknown adducts to reach its full potential as most of the published studies on human samples are limited to small sample series. After identification of previously unknown adducts, a large range of follow-up studies may be required. Recent efforts are focused on the development of methods that allow practical applications of protein adduct measurements to assess the exposures to chemicals as well as to study the effects of toxicant exposures. The ability to measure blood protein adducts also helps in understanding the complex metabolic processes. In addition to advancing technology associated with a variety of analytical methods, these studies generate valuable information about the type of exposure and metabolism of xenobiotics.
Most of the studies are directed towards the development of compound-specific early biomarkers, and establishment of biomarkers for therapeutic drugs and for disease diagnosis. The possibilities with adductomics have not been fully explored, and the methodology could potentially be used for many different applications. A major challenge for adductomics experiments lies in the lack of database softwares and reference libraries for the identification of unknown adducts. There is an urgent need for the development of such databases for convenient evaluation of adductome data. Grigoryan et al. ( ) have recently described an ‘adductomics pipeline’ in which a specifically designed software is used to select adducts based on mass spectra (selecting ions displaying a number of characteristic fragments as adduct candidates). Such kind of softwares could greatly facilitate the time-demanding evaluation of adductome data and allow evaluation of large sample series. Currently, there is no suitable commercial software that could be used for such tasks in the case of CWA exposure. To assess the whole adductome, different approaches and methodologies are needed to be combined to screen several nucleophilic targets for identifying a larger range of adducts. Existing methods used to screen the DNA adducts, Cys-34 in HSA, Val in Hb and tyrosine of albumin, and cholinesterase adducts of CWAs can be complementary to each other if used in parallel, and provide greater insight into the CWA adductome.
Adductomic approaches is expected to be useful in characterization of unknown CWAs adducts and other several toxic chemicals. It is pertinent that if biomedical sample analysis has to be screened for the verification, then much greater knowledge of the biological fate of CWAs is also required for better understanding of biological mechanisms responsible for the adduct formation. DNA is much less common in serum, but DNA adducts may become useful in exposures to vesicants. This may enable accurate detection in survivors who flee a conflict zone, or possibly in stored serum of dead victims. Refinement of these techniques should meaningfully contribute to the work of the OPCW in identifying and confirming CWA use with the hope of better controlling the spread and use of CWAs and making the world free of CWAs and peaceful.