Introduction
Humans cannot synthesize folate and depend on diet for an adequate supply (Sen Gupta et al. ). Folate levels are dependent on dietary folate intake, and are additionally modulated by genetic predisposition and medicines that interfere with the folate methionine cycle (Worthington et al. ).
Folate, also called vitamin B 9 , is water soluble and is a polyglutamate derivative. It is found in high concentrations in natural food, such as fresh green leafy vegetables, beans, yeast, fruits and liver (van Gelder et al. ; Worthington et al. ). The folate molecule is composed of three moieties: pterin, para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) and finally a glutamate tail containing a variable number of glutamate units (Fig. 1 a). The synthetic form, folic acid ( N -(4-{[(2-amino-4-oxo-1,4-dihydropteridin-6-yl)methyl]amino}benzoyl)- l -glutamic acid) is a monoglutamate form. It is used in food fortification and vitamin preparations; it has higher bioavailability compared to folate from food (Brouwer et al. ). Three forms of folate are commercially available: metabolically active 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF) in the form of a calcium or glucosamine salt in food supplements, and folic acid, which is not metabolically active (it needs enzymatic activation) and can be obtained either as a dietary supplement or as a prescription medicine (Fig. 1 b) (De-Regil et al. ).
Fig. 1 Chemical structure of folates ( a ) and three currently commercially available forms of folate ( b ). a The folate molecule consists of pterin, PABA and glutamate tail. The shown folate is the fully reduced tetrahydrofolate (THF). Naturally occurring folates are pteroylpolyglutamates, containing two or seven glutamates. C1 units at various levels of oxidation can be attached to N5 (R 1 ) and/or N10 (R 2 ). The list of naturally occurring C1 units is shown beside the structural formula. b Three currently available forms of folate are folic acid, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate calcium and 5-methyltetrahydrofolate glucosamine salt. THF tetrahydrofolate, 5-MTHF 5-methyltetrahydrofolate
Serum and red blood cell (RBC) folate concentrations serve as sensitive biomarkers for folate levels. Serum concentrations of less than 6.8 nmol/L and RBC concentrations below 317 nmol/L indicate folate deficiency. In addition, folate concentrations can be measured in plasma, whole blood, cerebrospinal fluid, tissues and in food (EFSA ). Since 1930, microbiological assays have been used to determine the folate status of individuals and are based on folate-sensitive microorganisms, most commonly Lactobacillus casei and Streptococcus faecium , whose growth is proportional to the amount of folate present in the sample. Microbiological assays have been supplemented by competitive folate protein-binding assays, such as the radioimmunoassays (RIA) or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). These newer assays are simpler, faster and more user friendly. There are several limitations to the microbiological and protein-binding assays. Microbiological assays require microbiological expertise, they are tedious and time consuming, test organisms may be stimulated or inhibited by non-folate substances, and they need proper transfer and maintenance. Protein-binding assays have considerable variation between different kits, shelf-life of kits is very short and the response between individual monoglutamates may vary. However, the biggest limitation to both assays is the lack of information they provide on the concentrations of the individual folate forms. When chromatographic methods were developed, they not only rapidly and effectively separated the folate compounds, but could meet the requirements of a low detection limit and they showed great advantages in the qualitative and quantitative analysis of folate metabolites (Arcot et al. ; Shane ).
Folate from food, mainly fruits and vegetables, predominantly exists in the form of polyglutamates, which have to be hydrolyzed to monoglutamates in the gut prior to absorption by the enzyme glutamate carboxypeptidase II (GCPII). The synthetic form of folate, folic acid, is absorbed directly without modification (Blom ; Pietrzik ). Both forms of folate are absorbed via the proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT) in the proximal small intestine (Pietrzik ). The subsequent conversion of monoglutamates to polyglutamates ensures the retention of folate that would otherwise be lost by efflux from cells. In the next step folate is reduced to its bioactive form, tetrahydrofolate (THF). The polyglutamated and reduced metabolites then either enter the cycle of folate metabolism or couple with vitamin B 12 metabolism and remethylation cycle (Mahmood ; Nazki et al. ; NIH ). Alternatively, THF can be directly used for the synthesis of purines. Its metabolite 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (5,10-methylene-THF) can act as a substrate for conversion of dUMP into dTMP and for the subsequent synthesis of DNA. The main folate metabolite in the blood, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF), is an essential co-enzyme (acting as an acceptor or donor of one-carbon units) in many biochemical reactions; e.g. pyrimidine and purine syntheses, and DNA methylation reactions (Blom ; van Gelder et al. ). The folate cycle is connected with homocysteine metabolism with the enzyme methionine synthase (MTR) (Blom ). Intracellular folate metabolism is shown in Fig. 2 .
Fig. 2 Folate transport into the cell, polyglutamation and reduction of folates, folate cycle and remethylation cycle. Folates are transported from blood into cells via SLC19A1, polyglutamated by FPGS and reduced to DHF and THF by DHFR. The latter enters the folate cycle, which includes the enzymes MTHFD1, MTHFR, MTR and MTRR, and is tightly connected to the methionine cycle, where homocysteine is re-methylated back to methionine. Methionine can also be converted to SAM, which is a main methyl donor in numerous reactions catalyzed by methyltransferases. The quantitatively most important methyltransferse is GNMT. FOL-MG folate monoglutamate, SLC19A1 reduced folate carrier protein, FPGS folylpolyglutamate synthase, FOL-PG folate polyglutamate, DHFR dihydrofolate reductase, DHF dihydrofolate, THF tetrahydrofolate, MTHFD1 methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1, MTHFR 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase, MTRR methionine synthase reductase, MTR methionine synthase, MAT methionine adenosyltransferase, SAM S -adenosylmethionine, MT methyltransferase, SAH S -adenosylhomocysteine, SAHH S -adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase, dTMP deoxythymidine monophosphate, TYMS thymidylate synthase, SHMT serine hydroxymethyltransferase
Folate metabolism is a complex process and the term “folate” is used inconsistently. “Folate” is frequently used in its generic sense to designate any member of the pteroylglutamate family or their derivatives, which have various reduction levels of the pteridine ring, different numbers of glutamate residues and one-carbon substitution. In this context, the term can denote folic acid, the biologically active form THF, the main circulating form 5-MTHF, folinic acid, and others (IUPAC-IUB Commission on Biochemical Nomenclature ; Linus Pauling Institute ).
Maintaining an adequate folate level is important for homeostasis and is influenced by genetic and environmental factors. Various polymorphisms have been found in genes encoding enzymes involved in folate metabolism and transport pathways (Hiraoka et al. ). The most common and well-known genetic factor influencing folate levels is polymorphisms in MTHFR gene which influence the level of biologically active folate. There are two common genetic polymorphisms that decrease the activity of MTHFR, C677T (rs1801133) and A1298C (rs1801131) (Sharp ). Other polymorphisms in the folate pathway are associated with hyperhomocysteinemia and other pathologies, including MTHFD1 G1958A, MTRR A2756G, SLC19A1 A80G and others (Hiraoka et al. ; Vidmar ; Worthington et al. ). These polymorphisms can also have an influence on drug response and treatment outcomes (Worthington et al. ). In addition to genetic factors, folate metabolism can be modulated by a variety of environmental factors, such as alcohol consumption, smoking, obesity and exposure to medication. Several medicines disturb folate metabolism through a variety of mechanisms. Medicines can impair intestinal absorption, alter protein binding of folate in circulation, interfere with enzymes involved in folate metabolism or block the release of the vitamin from the cells (Lambie et al. ).
Pathologies associated with folate deficiency
Optimal folate levels have long been known to play an important role in human health throughout all phases of the life cycle, and folate deficiency is associated with various pathologies.
Folate deficiency and congenital birth defects
Folate is pivotal in DNA synthesis and cell replication, and it can influence fetal growth and the duration of gestation (Scholl et al. ). Folate consumption is greater during pregnancy, as folate is needed for the growth of the fetus, the placenta and maternal tissues. Low folate levels are linked to serious congenital birth defects such as orofacial clefts (OFCs), congenital heart defects (CHDs), neural tube defects (NTDs) and other birth defects (De-Regil et al. ).
CHDs are structural abnormalities of the heart and great vessels that are present at birth. CHDs are the most common major birth defects, and they affect over 1% of newborns (Marelli et al. ; Triedman et al. ). The use of medicines which disrupt the folate system during pregnancy has been reported to increase the risk of having a baby with a CHD. Hernandez-Diaz et al. ( ) have shown that the use of medicines such as trimethoprim, triamterene, carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital and primidone, during pregnancy may increase the risk of CHD. Among 3870 mothers with an affected child, 1.6% reported taking a folate system disruptor during the first trimester of pregnancy, compared with 0.8% of control mothers. It was also reported that supplementation with folic acid can reduce the negative impact of folate system disruptors on CHD risk (Csáky-Szunyogh et al. ; Hernandez-Diaz et al. ; Mulder et al. ).
OFCs are the second most common congenital malformations, they affect the lip, palate or both, and occur in 1 out of every 700 live births (Brito ; Luo ). Multiple genetic and environmental factors are involved in the development of OFCs. OFCs frequently occur in combination with a wide range of chromosomal abnormalities and syndromes (which include trisomy 13, amniotic band anomalad, Fryns syndrome, Meckel syndrome, van der Woude and others). Key environmental factors include maternal alcohol consumption, smoking, diabetes, dietary and vitamin deficiency, and overuse of medicines during pregnancy (Agbenorku ; Gil-da-Silva-Lopes et al. ; Karas Kuželički et al. ). Maternal use of medicines which contain acetylsalicylic acid, amphetamine and ibuprofen has been associated with a higher risk of OFCs (Agbenorku ). Anti-epileptics have, likewise, been documented to increase the incidence of OFCs (Holmes et al. ; Källén ).
NTDs are caused by the failure of the neural tube to close; this process is usually completed within 28-day postconception. There are several types of NTDs. The most common is spina bifida and it is found in 4.7 per 10.000 of live born children worldwide (Ryznychuk et al. ). Other more severe, but less common NTDs are anencephaly, encephalocele and iniencephaly (Eunice Kennedy Shriver Nation Institute of Children Health and Human Development ). The prevalence of all NTDs ranges from 1 to 10 per 1000 births. Prevalence is highest in north-central China and lowest in Scandinavian countries (Li et al. ; Seidahmed et al. ). Risk factors for NTDs include genetic and non-genetic factors, such as maternal exposure to teratogens (aminopterin, methotrexate, valproic acid) and folate deficiency (Chen ).
Other birth defects which are also associated with folate deficiency include urinary tract defects, limb reduction, omphalocele, anophthalmia and microphthalmia. There are few reports on the relationship between these defects, folate status and anti-folate drugs. Only a few studies describe a decreased risk of these defects after folic acid fortification (Canfield et al. ).
Folate deficiency and cancer
Folate plays critical roles in DNA methylation and DNA synthesis. Altered folate concentrations may influence methyl group availability for DNA methylation and limited conversion of dUMP to dTMP. Increasing depletion of thymidine leads to misincorporation of uracil into DNA and inappropriate DNA repair. The destabilization of the DNA molecule may lead to DNA strand breaks, chromosome aberrations and malignant transformation (McKinnon et al. ). Animal studies showed that folate deficiency in normal epithelial tissues predisposes them to neoplastic transformation, and that even small amounts of folate supplementation suppress the development of neoplasms in normal tissues (Kim ). Epidemiological studies have proposed an inverse association of folate status with the risk for cancer of the colorectum, breast, lungs, pancreas, esophagus, stomach, ovary and cervix, and the risk of leukemia and neuroblastoma. Colorectal and breast cancer are the most extensively studied and evidence supports a protective role of folate; however, the role of folate level in other cancers has not been clearly established. Additional research is needed to fully understand the role of appropriate folate level and development of cancers (Larsson et al. , ; Sanjoaquin et al. ; Sauer et al. ).
Folate and/or vitamin B12 deficiency and cardiovascular disease
The metabolism of homocysteine depends on both folate and vitamin B 12 ; therefore, a deficiency in either vitamin could lead to hyperhomocysteinemia. The amino acid homocysteine is a toxic metabolite, hence it needs to be neutralized in the human body (Czeizel ). Hyperhomocysteinemia is a predictive factor for stroke and coronary heart disease. Elevated homocysteine is also associated with essential hypertension, hyperlipidemia, retinal vein occlusion and venous thromboembolism (Liew et al. ). A number of studies show that low folate levels are associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular diseases (CVD). However, studies also show that supplementation of folate can prevent or reverse the progression of CVD in those patients with overt disease or elevated CVD risk (Li et al. ; Porter et al. ; Stanhewicz et al. ).
Folate and/or vitamin B12 deficiency and neurological disease
Folate and vitamin B 12 have essential roles in central nervous system (CNS) function at all ages. They are important in the prevention of CNS developmental disorders, behavioral disturbances, mental retardation, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease in elderly people, bipolar disorder and dementias, including vascular dementia (Bottiglieri ; Liew et al. ). A large, prospective study in the Framingham community showed that hyperhomocysteinemia is a strong, independent risk factor for the development of dementia and Alzheimer´s disease (Seshardi et al. ). Complementary to these findings, a Swedish research group showed that decreased concentrations of folate or vitamin B 12 increased the risk of Alzheimer’s disease by a factor of 2 (Wang et al. ). Mechanisms associated with neurological diseases involve defects in methylation-dependent pathways, DNA synthesis, effects of hyperhomocysteinemia and also decreased synthesis of monoamine neurotransmitters (Bottiglieri et al. ).
Medicines associated with folate deficiency
The use of prescription medicines during pregnancy has been increasing over the past 3 decades. It is estimated that between 30 and 90% of pregnant women take at least one medicine (Honein et al. ). Medicines such as anti-epileptics, oral contraceptives or anti-tumor agents which require long-term treatment are controversial not just for pregnant women but also in other vulnerable population groups: women of childbearing age, children, particularly during their first years, and the elderly.
Anti-folates are agents that impair the action of folate. Their mechanism of action is due to the disruption of the metabolic pathways that require one-carbon moieties supplied by folate. Anti-folates disturb folate–homocysteine metabolism through a variety of mechanisms: they inhibit different enzymes of the folate cycle, such as DHFR, TYMS and/or GARFT, impair folate and vitamin B 12 absorption, alter elimination of folate, induce liver enzymes and act in numerous other ways.
As expected from their mechanisms of action, some of the medicines interfering with folate metabolism (Tables 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ) can cause serious adverse effects. Toxicity is especially common with folic acid analogs, such as methotrexate or pemetrexed (Mahmoud et al. ; Sakhri et al. ). Tissues which contain fast-dividing cells, such as the bone marrow or the mucosa, are more susceptible to the effects of anti-folates; hence, these tissues are more prone to toxic effects. Myelosuppression, gastrointestinal mucosal ulceration and mucositis are thus the most commonly reported undesirable effects when taking folic acid analogs (EMA , ; FDA Label ; NIDDK U.S. ). High-dose regimens are especially risky, and should be administered under close supervision: periodic hematological screening is often required.
Table 1 DHFR inhibitors and their therapeutic use Medicines Main indication References Aminopterin (i) Childhood leukemia Seeger et al. ( ) Edatrexate (ii) Head and neck cancer, squamous cell cancer Jolivet et al. ( ) Lamotrigine Epilepsy, bipolar disorder Mischoulon et al. ( ), NIH ( ) Methotrexate a Acute lymphoblastic leukemia, osteosarcoma, breast cancer, some auto-immune diseases (rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis) de Mattia et al. ( ), Ulrich et al. ( ) Pemetrexed b Malignant pleural mesothelioma, non-small cell lung cancer Adjei ( ) Piritrexim (iii) Kaposi’s sarcoma, bladder cancer de Vries, et al. ( ), Duch et al. ( ) Pralatrexate Relapsed or refractory peripheral T-cell lymphoma Hagner et al. ( ), Matherly et al. ( ) Pyrimethamine Uncomplicated falciparum malaria NIH ( ), Ouma et al. ( ) Sulfasalazine b Inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis Jansen et al. ( ), NIH ( ) Talotrexin Acute lymphoblastic leukemia, non-small cell lung cancer Rosowsky ( ) Triamterene Hypertension, edema NIH ( ), Zimmerman et al. ( ) Trimethoprim Urinary tract infection Petersen et al. ( ), Quinlivan et al. ( ), Smulders et al. ( ) Trimetrexate (iv) Sarcoma, colorectal cancer, Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in immunocompromised patients (AIDS) NIDK U.S. ( ) (i)–(iv) Medicines currently not authorized in either USA or the EU for the following reasons: (i) less favorable benefit/risk ratio compared to methotrexate, (ii) unfavorable benefit/risk ratio in phase II clinical studies, (iii) lack of efficacy in phase II clinical studies, (iv) commercial reasons a Main mechanism of action; inhibits also other enzymes; see Table 2 b Inhibits also other enzymes/transporters, see Table 2
Table 2 Inhibitors of other enzymes/transporters of the folate–homocysteine–methionine pathway Medicines Main indication Affected enzyme/transporter References Lometrexol (i) Breast cancer GARFT Alati, et al. ( ), NIH ( ) Methotrexate Acute lymphoblastic leukemia, osteosarcoma, breast cancer, some auto-immune diseases (rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis) GARFT, AICARFT, TYMS, MTHFR de Mattia et al. ( ) Nolatrexed (ii) Hepatocellular carcinoma TYMS Van der Wilt et al. ( ), Jhawer et al. ( ) NSAIDs (e.g. sulindac, indomethacin, naproxen, salicylic acid, ibuprofen) Inflammation and pain Folate-mediated synthesis of glycine Baggott et al. ( ), Linus Pauling Institute ( ) Pemetrexed Malignant pleural mesothelioma, non-small cell lung cancer TYMS, GARFT, AICARFT Adjei ( ) Phenytoin Epilepsy MTR, MTHFR Van Gelder et al. ( ) Raltitrexed Colorectal cancer TYMS Maughan et al. ( ), Van Cutsem et al. ( ) Sulfasalazine Inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis MTHFR, SHMT, RFC Jansen et al. ( ), Selhub et al. ( ) Valproic acid Epilepsy, bipolar disorder, migraine headache FTCD, MTHFR Fathe et al. ( , ), Wegner et al. ( ) (i)–(ii) Currently not authorized in either USA or the EU for the following reasons: (i) unpredicted toxicity in phase III clinical studies, (ii) unfavorable benefit/risk ratio in phase III clinical studies FTCD glutamate formimidoyltransferase
Table 3 Medicines interfering with folate disposition Medicines Main indication Affected process References Carbamazepine Epilepsy, bipolar disorder Absorption ↓, metabolism ↑ Apeland et al. ( , ), Vilaseca et al. ( ) Cholestyramine Hypercholesterolemia Absorption ↓ Desouza et al. ( ), Matsui et al. ( ) Gabapentin Epilepsy Absorption ↓ a Linnebank et al. ( ) Loop diuretics (e.g. furosemide) Hypertension, edema Elimination ↑ Dierkes et al. ( ), Gervasio et al. ( ) Oral contraceptives (ethinyl estradiol) Contraception Absorption ↓, metabolism ↑, elimination ↑ Lewis et al. ( ) Oxcarbazepine Epilepsy Absorption ↓ a Linnebank et al. ( ) Phenobarbital Epilepsy Absorption ↓ Stargrove et al. ( ) Phenytoin Epilepsy Absorption ↓ Brunet et al. ( ), Nayyar et al. ( ) Potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g. amiloride) Hypertension, congestive heart failure Elimination ↑ Dierkes et al. Primidone Epilepsy Absorption ↓ Stargrove et al. ( ) Triamterene Hypertension, edema Absorption ↓ NIH ( ), Zimmerman et al. ( ) Valproic acid Epilepsy, bipolar disorder, migraine headache Absorption ↓ Fathe et al. ( , ), Wegner et al. ( ) Effect on the process: ↓—impairment; ↑—enhancement a Presumed mechanism
Table 4 Medicines interfering with vitamin B 12 Medicines Main indication References Chloramphenicol Cholera, bacterial conjunctivitis Busti ( ) Cholestyramine Hypercholesterolemia Desouza et al. ( ), Matsui et al. ( ) Colchicine Gout, familial mediterranean fever Palopoli et al. ( ), Stopa et al. ( ) Histamine 2 receptor antagonists (e.g. ranitidine) Active duodenal ulcer Force et al. ( ) and Lam et al. ( ) Metformin Diabetes de Jager et al. ( ), Gatford et al. ( ), Palomba et al. ( ) Proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole) Duodenal ulcers, benign gastric ulcers, gastroesophageal reflux disease, heartburn, etc. Lam et al. ( ), Ruscin ( )
While anti-folate toxicity is an expected side effect during anti-neoplastic treatment (Cole et al. ; Van Gelder et al. ), it might be less expected in other therapeutic areas and in those situations where interference with the folate cycle is due to secondary pharmacological effects. Caution is, therefore, warranted in patients on long-term treatment with medicines which interfere with folate uptake and metabolism as for example, anti-epileptics, oral contraceptives, trimethoprim as well as in more vulnerable patient groups, such as the elderly, women of childbearing potential, pregnant women and children (Baggott et al. ; Kremer et al. ; Linus Pauling Institute ; Van Gelder et al. ; Worthington et al. ).
Anti-folate inhibitors of enzymes/transporters involved in folate metabolism
Inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase
Inhibition of the DHFR enzyme results in the accumulation of DHF and the depletion of the bioactive folate form (De Mattia et al. ). Medicines sharing this mechanism of action include aminopterin, methotrexate, trimetrexate, piritrexim, pralatrexate, edatrexate, pyrimethamine, sulfasalazine, triamterene, trimethoprim and lamotrigine (Fig. 3 ) (McGuire ; Van Gelder et al. ); their therapeutic use is presented in Table 1 . Many of these are anti-neoplastic agents from the class of anti-metabolites and are structurally related to folic acid, hence their classification as folic acid analogs. This group is often referred to as the class of anti-folates in the narrow sense of the term, since the interference with folate metabolism represents the primary pharmacodynamic effect of these drugs. Based on their properties they can be further classified into two groups. The first, classical anti-folates, are generally hydrophilic, enter the cell using reduced folate carrier (RFC) and are polyglutamated by FPGS; much of their effects are exerted through their polyglutamates. The second, non-classical anti-folates, are not substrates of FPGS; some of them are lipophilic and do not use RFC to enter the cell (type A), while others (type B) maintain a polar nature and are transported by RFC even though they are non-polyglutamatable due to a modified γ-carboxyl group in the glutamic acid moiety of the molecule (Mader et al. ).
Fig. 3 Chemical structures of anti-folate inhibitors of DHFR
The first anti-folate drug aminopterin (AMT, 4-NH 2 -folic acid) was synthesized in 1947, only a few years after the structure of folic acid was elucidated (Seeger et al. ). This analog was used in the treatment of childhood leukemia, and was the first treatment which induced the remission of this disease. Unfortunately, remissions were short lived. AMT acts by inhibiting folate metabolism; it competes for the folate-binding site of the enzyme DHFR, thereby blocking THF synthesis and resulting in the reduction of nucleotide precursors and inhibition of DNA, RNA and protein synthesis. Because of its toxicity, AMT was soon replaced by a drug with an identical mechanism of action, but a better therapeutic index, methotrexate. Methotrexate (MTX; 4-NH 2 -10-CH 3 -folic acid) is used for the treatment of solid tumors and hematologic malignancies, as well as rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis. In addition to the inhibition of its main target, DHFR, it also inhibits GARFT, AICARFT and TYMS, although to a lesser extent (De Mattia et al. ; Hagner et al. ). Long-term oral treatment of patients diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis with methotrexate was associated with reduced serum and RBC folate levels (Kremer et al. ).
DHFR is an ubiquitous enzyme, whose active site is characterized by a large hydrophobic pocket capped by an acidic functional group at one end [glutamic acid (Glu) or aspartic acid (Asp) at position 30] and by a conserved arginine (Arg) at the other end (position 70). In DHFR complexes with tight binding ligands, a hydrogen bonding network that involves structural water, the conserved residues Thr136, Glu30, Trp23 and N1, N2-amine and N8 of inhibitors is maintained. Similarly, the inhibitor 4-amino group makes hydrogen bonding contacts with the conserved residues Ile7, Val113 and Tyr121 (Cody et al. , ). Folic acid, AMT and MTX consist of a pteridine moiety, para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) and glutamic acid. The main structural difference between these three molecules is at the C4 site, where the hydroxyl group in folic acid is replaced with an amino group in both AMT and MTX, hence yielding a 2,4-diaminopyrimidine unite (Fig. 3 ). This amino group causes tight binding to the hydrophobic folate-binding pocket of DHFR, resulting in the competitive, reversible inhibition of DHFR (Takimoto ).
Despite wide use of MTX, cellular resistance to MTX due to impaired transport of MTX into the target cells considerably reduces its clinical utility in certain patients. To overcome this obstacle trimetrexate and piritrexim were synthesized (Taylor et al. ). Structurally trimetrexate (TMTX; 2,4-diamino-5-methyl-6-[3,4,5-trimethoxyanilino-methyl]quinazoline) retains the 2,4-diamino structure typical of DHFR inhibitors, but it does not contain the p-aminobenzoylglutamate moiety and, therefore, is not a FPGS substrate (McGuire ). TMTX was investigated for efficacy as an anti-neoplastic, usually in combination with other anti-cancer medicines, and an anti-parasitic agent against pneumocystic pneumonia in AIDS patients; however, no studies investigating the effect on folate status have been conducted to date. Piritrexim (PTX; 2,4-diamino-6-(2,5-dimethoxybenzyl)-5-methylpyrido[2,3-d]pyrimidine) is quite similar to TMTX, but it has some major advantages over TMTX; it has higher oral bioavailability, it is rapidly cleared and it does not have effects on histamine metabolism (De Wit et al. ; Takimoto ). Both, TMTX and PTX are considered as lipophilic, non-classical anti-folates, as they do not require the RFC transport system and are not metabolized to poly-γ-glutamate metabolites, although their mechanism of action is similar to that of MTX (Kamen et al. ). PTX was investigated in clinical trials in patients with bladder cancer, urethral cancer and transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvic and ureter. Results were disappointing and development was discontinued in 1998 due to lack of efficacy (de Vries et al. ; Duch et al. ).
Another agent with more efficient intracellular polyglutamation compared to MTX is a classic anti-folate edatrexate (EDX; 10-ethyl-10-deazaaminopterin). As other molecules of this class, EDX also inhibits DHFR, thereby increasing cellular levels of polyglutamates, inhibiting the enzyme thymidylate synthase, and impairing synthesis of amino acids and purine nucleotides (Jolivet et al. ). Improved uptake of EDX is associated with structural changes: a hydrophobic substitution, in which the N10 of AMT is replaced by a carbon, which is further substituted with an ethyl group. Furthermore, improved uptake and retention were observed in tumor cells compared to normal cells. More efficient intracellular polyglutamation compared with MTX in vivo, however, did not lead to better efficacy in patients. In fact, a phase II study in patients with metastatic and recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck confirmed both EDX and MTX were similarly active against the carcinoma, but EDX was associated with a less favorable safety profile (Schornagel et al. ). Although EDX showed activity in previously treated non-small cell lung cancer and T-cell lymphoma, further development was stopped in favor of a similar analog, pralatrexate (PDX; 10-propargyl 10-deazaaminopterin). EDX and PDX differ only in the substitution of the ethyl group at position 10 for a propargyl group in the analog PDX. This substitution has led to better efficacy, as demonstrated in pre-clinical models (Cole et al. ). The change also brings about a better affinity for the RFC and greater anti-tumor effect than MTX. An in vitro study on lymphoma cell lines showed an over tenfold greater cytotoxicity of PDX compared to MTX (IC 50 PDX 3–5 nM, IC 50 MTX 30–50 nM) which was also confirmed in vivo (Wang et al. ). Tumors expressing high levels of RFC might be more susceptible to PDX (Mader et al. ). Similarly to other anti-folate anti-metabolites, PDX also binds to and inactivates DHFR, thereby reducing intracellular folate stores and blocking the synthesis of DNA (Hagner et al. ; Matherly et al. ). While the application of PDX was rejected by the European Medicines Agency on grounds of insufficient data (EMA ), the drug gained U.S. authorization for treatment of relapsed or refractory peripheral T-cell lymphoma in 2009 (Hagner et al. ).
All newer anti-folates, such as talotrexin (PT-523), have been designed with a higher affinity toward DHFR that display substantially greater cell growth inhibition compared to MTX (Cole et al. ). It merges characteristics of both the classical and non-classical anti-folates; while it efficiently utilizes RFC transport for cellular influx, it is not a substrate for FPGS. Like AMT, its core is formed by a substitution of the hydroxyl group at the 4-position on the pteridine ring of folic acid by an amino group, but it does not contain a glutamic acid side chain; therefore, it is safer and less toxic for bone marrow (Rosowsky ). Relative to MTX, PT-523 is 10-fold more tightly bound to the target enzyme DHFR and was 5- to 100-fold more effective in a wide variety of pre-clinical models. However, central nervous system toxicity was detected at higher doses (Norris et al. ).
Folic acid analog trimethoprim (TMP), which is used to treat infection of the urinary tract (NIH ), inhibits bacterial DHFR, leading to folate deficiency in microorganism. It binds to bacterial DHFRs 10 5 times tighter than it does to vertebrate DHFRs; it can bind to human DHFR but with a much smaller affinity (Hitchings et al. ). Studies on the effects of this agent on human folate status are contradictory. Some have found that TMP exposure is connected with diminished folate status (Petersen et al. ; Quinlivan et al. ; Smulders et al. ), while others have found no connection between TMP and folate deficiency (Girdwood ; Kahn et al. ; Petersen et al. ). Next pyrimethamine (PYR) acts on the folate metabolism of the parasites Plasmodium falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii (FDA Label ). As with TMP, it can also affect folate metabolism in humans (NIH ; Ouma et al. ). This can influence folate levels, as shown by a study in which significantly lower serum folate levels were detected in 90 healthy subjects taking PYR in combination with sulfadoxine compared to controls (Stüchler et al. ). It has been shown that PYR lowers plasma levels of 5-MTHF, the active form of folate, in rats, which in turn could be related to PYR teratogenesis (Tsunematsu et al. ).
Sulfasalazine (SSZ) is a synthetic aminosalicylate commonly used for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease and also rheumatoid arthritis in patients whose disease has not responded to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (eMC ; NIH ). SSZ and its metabolites exert immunomodulatory and antibacterial effects; they interfere with the arachidonic acid cascade and also certain enzymes, including some enzymes of the folate cycle (eMC ). SSZ is a competitive inhibitor of DHFR, but also inhibits MTHFR, SHMT and cellular uptake of folate via RFC (Jansen et al. ; Selhub et al. ; Urquhart et al. ). Meenan et al. ( ) measured the folate concentrations in colonic epithelial cells and in serum in patients with ulcerative colitis. The results revealed that folate concentrations measured in colonic epithelial cells obtained from endoscopic colon biopsies were not decreased in SSZ-treated patients compared with controls, while serum concentrations of folate were decreased in patients receiving the medicine.
DHRF inhibitor triamterene is used to treat hypertension and edema. A study from 1986 showed that triamterene is also a competitive inhibitor of folic acid absorption; it inhibited the intestinal absorption from rat jejunum by as much as 50% (Zimmerman et al. ).
Lamotrigine is used in the treatment of epilepsy and bipolar disorders. Its presumed mechanism of action involves the blocking of voltage-gated sodium channels. Pharmacological studies have also shown inhibitory effects on DHFR. Studies in pregnant rats showed a decrease in fetal, placental and maternal folate concentrations after daily dosing during organogenesis. Decreased folate levels were also detected in male rats (Mischoulon et al. ; NIH ). These effects were not confirmed in humans; folate levels were normal in patients exposed to short-term and long-term (up to 5 years) treatments (Morrell ). Most patients undergoing monotherapy with lamotrigine had normal folate levels (Belcastro et al. ; Gidal et al. ; Linnebank et al. ; Sander et al. ; Tamura et al. ), although lower folate levels were also detected (Ni et al. ).
Inhibitors of thymidylate synthase
The enzyme thymidylate synthase (TYMS) catalyzes the conversion of dUMP to thymidylate (TMP) in a reductive methylation that includes the transfer of a carbon atom from the cofactor 5,10-methylene-THF to position 5 of the pyrimidine ring. The inhibition of TYMS results in depletion of TMP and thus of dTTP, which in turn induces alterations in the levels of other deoxynucleotides and disrupts DNA synthesis and repair (Avendaño et al. ). The first TYMS inhibitor, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), was approved in 1966, but its activity as an anti-neoplastic agent is not solely due to its effect on the folate cycle but also incorporation of its metabolites into RNA and DNA. The group of drugs which act as anti-folate inhibitors of TYMS includes raltitrexed, pemetrexed and nolatrexed (Fig. 4 ) (Carreras et al. ; Theti et al. ); their therapeutic use is presented in Table 2 . All these molecules are folic acid analogs.
Fig. 4 Chemical structures of the anti-folate inhibitors of TYMS
Raltitrexed (ZD-1694) is a specific inhibitor of TYMS, which is considered a classical anti-folate. It is approved in many countries (but not in the United States) for palliative treatment of advanced colorectal cancer where 5-FU and folinic acid-based regimens are inappropriate or not tolerated (Mader et al. ; Maughan et al. ; Medicines.ie ; Van Cutsem et al. ). It can also be used in inoperable malignant pleural mesothelioma in chemotherapy-naive patients (Medicines.ie ). Raltitrexed predominantly enters the cell by RFC and then undergoes polyglutamation, with the polyglutamated form being more potent than the parent compound (Clarke et al. ). It is retained in the cells for a prolonged period (Mader et al. ) and prevents TYMS from binding to its folate cofactor (Van Cutsem ). Raltitrexed binds in the same binding pocket as 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolic acid with similar hydrogen bond interactions (Koehn et al. ).
Nolatrexed is a non-classical, lipophilic anti-folate and a noncompetitive inhibitor of TYMS. It causes deficiency of dTMP and consequently an increase of dUMP, leading to thymineless cell death. Due to its lipophilicity, nolatrexed does not require RFC transport, but enters the cell by passive diffusion. It is also not a substrate for FPGS due to the lack of a glutamate moiety in its structure (Jhawer et al. ; Mader et al. ; van der Wilt et al. ). The molecular structure of nolatrexed was developed by design following the structure of the folate cofactor-binding site of enzyme TYMS, which is consequently its main target (Hughes et al. ; Mader et al. ). The presence of the 6-methyl group is key for activity, since it contributes to the optimal alignment of the thiopyridine, leading to an increased effect compared to the des-methyl analog. Further improvements in nolatrexed’s potency are brought by the conversion of the 2-methyl group to an amino group (Mader et al. ). Nolatrexed was granted orphan drug status for the treatment of unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma by the FDA ( ) and EMA ( ). Results of phase III studies were, however, disappointing. Nolatrexed treatment was associated with significant toxicity, while only minimal activity was shown (Gish et al. ). Development was stopped.
Pemetrexed (MTA, LY-231514) is a classical anti-folate inhibitor, which is used to treat malignant pleural mesothelioma and non-small cell lung cancer (EMA ). MTA was discovered through structure–activity relationship studies revolving around the anti-folate lometrexol. In contrast with lometrexol (see GARFT inhibitors below), MTA contains a pyrrolopyrimidine fragment, which shifts activity from the inhibition of purine biosynthesis to the inhibition of thymidylate biosynthesis (Mader et al. ). MTA thus inhibits several targets involved in folate metabolism, but also pyrimidine and purine syntheses. It predominantly inhibits TYMS; the inhibition of this enzyme is 30–200 times greater than the inhibition of glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase (GARFT) and aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase (AICARFT), and six times greater than DHFR (Adjei ; Schultz et al. ). Polyglutamation seems crucial for MTA to significantly inhibit TS and GARFT but not DHFR (Mader et al. ).
No studies investigated the specific effect of raltitrexed, nolatrexed or pemetrexed on folate status.
Inhibitors of glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase
One of the first reactions in the de novo purine biosynthetic pathway involves the conversion of glycinamide ribonucleotide to N -formylglycinamide ribonucleotide, which is catalyzed by the enzyme glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase (GARFT). This conversion involves the transfer of a formyl group (–CHO) from 10-formyl-tetrahydrofolate to glycinamide ribonucleotide.
Inhibition of GARFT results in a breakdown of de novo purine biosynthesis, which is especially useful in anti-tumor chemotherapy (Milstien et al. ). The group of drugs that act as anti-folate inhibitors of GARFT includes pemetrexed, lometrexol and 5-deaza-acyclotetrahydrofolate (Fig. 5 ); their therapeutic use is presented in Table 2 .
Fig. 5 Chemical structures of the inhibitors of GARFT
Pemetrexed is, as previously mentioned, a multitargeted anti-folate and inhibits not only GARFT, but also AICARFT, DHFR and TYMS (Adjei ). On the other hand, lometrexol (LMTX; 6R-dideazatetrahydrofolic acid, 6R-DDATHF) specifically inhibits GARFT. This inhibition causes cells to arrests in the S phase of the cell cycle, therefore inhibiting the proliferation of tumor cells (NIH ). In contrast to pemetrexed, LMTX contains a tetrahydopyrimidine fragment, which is key for the specificity for GARFT (Mader et al. ). It is a good substrate for both RFC and FPGS (Alati et al. ). Polyglutamation is in fact required, since polyglutamates exert a 100-fold stronger inhibition of GARFT compared to the monoglutamate (Pizzorno et al. ). LMTX was the first specific GARFT inhibitor to be investigated clinically, yielding surprising results due to its unexpected potency. Toxicity of LMTX is dependent on folate levels, with folate-deficient patients at very high risk of side effects (Alati et al. ). Both pre-clinical and clinical studies showed concomitant administration with folic acid decreased toxicity without eliminating anti-tumor activity (Bailey et al. ; Roberts et al. ). However, very high levels of folic acid completely blocked the anti-tumor activity of the drug in mice (Alati et al. ). The toxicity of LMTX eventually led to the discontinuation of development, and the search for a next-generation anti-metabolite with a more favorable biochemical, pharmacological and toxicological profiles continues (Mendelsohn et al. ). Such inhibitors of GARFT include 5-deaza-acyclotetrahydrofolate (5-DACTHF), LY254155 and LY222306, which are active as monoglutamates, and LY309887, which is active as polyglutamate. However, very little is known about these compounds and none of them have progressed to studies in humans (Habeck et al. ).
Inhibitors of other enzymes
When non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as sulindac, indomethacin, naproxen, salicylic acid, ibuprofen, piroxicam and mefenamic acid are administered in very large therapeutic dosage, they may also interfere with folate metabolism. In in vitro, they inhibit transformylase- and folate-mediated syntheses of serine from glycine and formate. Baggott et al. ( ) showed that NSAIDs are competitive inhibitors of avian liver phosphoribosylaminoimidazolecarboxamide formyltransferase (AICAR transformylase) and bovine liver DHRF (Linus Pauling Institute ).
Interference with folate disposition
Many medicines have been shown to interfere with folate disposition (Table 3 ). Interference with absorption, however, is the most common mechanism.
Impairment of folate absorption
Several studies have suggested that treatment with various anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs), including valproic acid, carbamazepine, primidone, phenobarbital, phenytoin, gabapentin and oxcarbazepine (Fig. 6 ), is associated with lower mean serum or RBC folate and vitamin B 12 levels (Linnebank et al. ; Milman ; Preece et al. ; Schwaninger et al. ; Van Gelder et al. ).
Fig. 6 Chemical structures of anti-epileptic drugs associated with folate deficiency
The prevalence of epilepsy is between 4 and 10 cases per 1000 people (and some studies suggest that the proportion is even higher, between 7 and 14 per 1000 people) making it the most common serious chronic neurological condition (WHO ). The main goal of treatment with AEDs is prevention of seizures, which requires long-term treatment. Although patients need AED treatment, special care must be taken when selecting treatment for women of childbearing age and pregnant women. The main concern of AEDs is teratogenicity. This differs among AEDs and had been addressed in a large number of studies (Mawhinney et al. ). Some anti-epileptic drugs are generally known to increase the risk of folate metabolism-associated birth defects, such as orofacial clefts, congenital heart diseases, neural tube defects and limb defects (Van Gelder et al. ). Folic acid supplementation is, therefore, advised in all women with epilepsy on AED treatment before any possibility of pregnancy (NICE ). Avoiding valproic acid and carbamazepine is strongly advised, as is the avoidance of combination treatment during the first trimester of pregnancy (American Academy of Neurology ; Morrow et al. ).
Valproic acid (VPA; 2-propylpentanoic acid) is used to treat epilepsy and bipolar disorder. Studies in children consistently report lower mean serum folate levels after medium- or long-term VPA treatment either in comparison with baseline, healthy controls or to untreated epileptic patients (Karabiber et al. ; Sharma et al. ; Verrotti et al. ). However, studies across all age group are inconsistent and report either no changes in serum folate levels (Geda et al. ; Linnebank et al. ; May et al. ), decreased (Linnebank et al. ; Tamura et al. ; Vilaseca et al. ) or even increased folate levels (Attilakos et al. ). A handful of studies measured also RBC folate levels; none of them detected changes in folate levels due to VPA treatment (Gidal et al. ; Tamura et al. ; Verrotti et al. ). Homocysteine levels in these studies were usually increased, while vitamin B 12 levels either remained unchanged or increased. VPA was shown to inhibit the enzyme glutamate formyl transferase and to alter the distribution of folate derivatives (Wegner et al. ( ). VPA interferes with folate absorption, and inhibits MTHFR and folate receptors (Fathe et al. , ; Lloyd ; Stargrove et al. ). However, folate antagonism alone does not explain the increased risk for major congenital malformations; in fact similar rates of malformations were reported in pregnant women exposed to valproate, irrespective of folic acid supplementation (Morrow et al. ). In addition to folate system disruption, the mechanism of VPA’s teratogenic effects could be explained by histone deacetylase inhibition, oxidative stress induction but also drug accumulation within the fetus (Fathe et al. , ; Lloyd ). The observed rate of certain birth defects is higher for VPA compared to other AEDs (Meador et al. ). Consequently, VPA use during pregnancy is contraindicated and should only be undertaken if there is no effective alternative anti-epileptic treatment (EMA ).
Carbamazepine (CBZ) monotherapy has also been associated with low folate levels and high homocysteine concentrations: it might reduce intestinal absorption of folate (Apeland et al. , ; Vilaseca et al. ), possibly through inhibition of RFC (Halwachs et al. ). In contrast to VPA, CBZ acts as a hepatic enzyme inducer (these enzymes contribute to decreased folate levels) (Apeland et al. , ; Isojärvi et al. ; Kampman ; Kishi et al. ). It can cause depletion of folic acid and/or vitamin B 12 cofactors, and it accelerates folic acid degradation (Sener et al. ; Worthington et al. ). The association of CBZ and folate levels was dose dependent (Linnebank et al. ), at higher doses the frequency of patients with folate levels below the reference range increased (Linnebank et al. ; Tamura et al. ), and the frequency of patients with decreased RBC folate increased (Isojärvi et al. ; Tamura et al. ; Verrotti et al. ). Furthermore, CBZ monotherapy was associated with decreased serum levels of vitamin B 12 (Karabiber et al. ; Sharma et al. ).
Primidone and its metabolite phenobarbital both decrease folate absorption, possibly through inhibition of RFC transport (Halwachs et al. , ). Both primidone and phenobarbital are inducers of hepatic enzymes (these enzymes contribute to decreased folate levels) (Kishi et al. ; Stargrove et al. ). Treatment with primidone or phenobarbital was associated with lower serum folate and vitamin B 12 levels, and with higher homocysteine plasma levels (Belcastro et al. ; Kishi et al. ), and with an increased frequency of abnormal serum folate levels (Dastur et al. 1987; Linnebank et al. ). An inverse association between phenobarbital plasma levels, and plasma and RBC folate levels was also reported (Dansky et al. ; Kishi et al. ).
Decreased serum folate level is one of the most commonly reported adverse drug effects of long-term use of another AED, phenytoin (PHT) (Brunet et al. ). Several potential mechanisms have been proposed. One of the first was that PHT raised intestinal pH, and consequently inhibited intestinal conjugase activity, thereby impairing the intestinal absorption of folate. Other proposed hypotheses include competition between PHT and folate for uptake sites, increased catabolism of folate by PHT and enzyme induction (Arakawa et al. ; Nayyar et al. ). It has been reported that folic acid affects PHT metabolism; supplementation with folic acid can lead to decreased PHT plasma levels and possible decreased seizure control. Studies have consistently reported lower serum folate levels in connection with PHT therapy (Dansky et al. ; Dastur et al. ; Klipstein ; Linnebank et al. ; Richens et al. ; Sener et al. ), while reports on RBC folate levels and folate levels in the cerebrospinal fluid are less consistent (Dansky et al. ; Dastur et al. ; Tamura et al. ). The latest Cochrane meta-analysis also linked PHT exposure with an increased risk of congenital malformations such as neural tube defects, congenital heart diseases, orofacial clefts, and skeletal and limb malformations (Weston et al. ).
Gabapentin is an AED which does not affect hepatic enzymes; hence an effect on folate disposition was not expected. Nevertheless in the group of patients treated with gabapentin monotherapy, mean folate serum levels were below the reference range more frequently than in the group of untreated patients or healthy controls (Linnebank et al. ).
Another AED, oxcarbazepine (OXC), is commonly used for the treatment of generalized seizures; it is a non-hepatic enzyme-inducing analog of CBZ. Studies report no significant changes in the levels of serum folate and vitamin B 12 following OXC treatment, which could be a potential advantage over CBZ (Isojärvi et al. ; Rezaei et al. ; Vurucu et al. ). AEDs are often used in combination; this has been associated with a greater reduction of serum folate levels compared to monotherapy (Eldeen et al. ; Ono et al. ).
Increased folate elimination
Long-term diuretic therapy increases the elimination of folate and has been linked to elevated homocysteine levels (Dierkes et al. ). Folate deficiency is usually associated with loop diuretics, such as furosemide and with potassium-sparing diuretics, such as amiloride (Fig. 7 ) (Dierkes et al. ; Gervasio ; Morrow et al. ).
Fig. 7 Chemical structures of diuretics, which are connected with folate deficiency the molecules are too big
Miscellaneous effects on disposition
A meta-analysis of 1389 women in 12 different studies found significantly lower RBC folate status among oral contraceptive (OC) users treated with 35–50 µg of ethinyl estradiol (EE). Another analysis of 17 studies involving 1359 women showed that OC use significantly reduces mean serum folate levels. On the basis of these observations, it appears that OCs can also disrupt folate metabolism (Shere et al. , ), leading to serum and RBC folate deficiency due to decreased absorption of polyglutamated folates from food, induction of liver enzymes, increased serum clearance and increased urinary excretion through changes in renal folate-binding enzymes involved in folate reabsorption (Lewis et al. ; Steegers-Theunissen et al. ; Wilson et al. ). The findings in humans were corroborated in a female rat model: decreased plasma and RBC folate concentrations were associated with moderate hyperhomocysteinemia (Durand et al. ).
Older studies had investigated the effects of high-dosage OCs (50 µg EE), while recent studies have examined the effects of low-dose contraceptives (20–35 µg EE): the results are contradictory. Studies have shown that women taking low-dose OCs have normal serum folate levels (Green et al. ; Lambie et al. ; Lindenbaum et al. ; Lussana et al. ; Steegers-Theunissen et al. ; Sütterlin et al. ). Studies in women taking OCs also reported decreased levels of vitamin B 12 , possibly due to lower total serum vitamin B 12 -binding capacity (Lussana et al. ; Shojania et al. ). Interestingly, the reported effect on folate levels prompted the development of a novel folate-fortified OC which contains EE (20 µg), drospirenone (3 mg) and levomefolate calcium (5-MTHF calcium salt; 451 µg); it is marketed in North America (Taylor et al. ). The 5-MTHF used in this medicine is at least as effective as folic acid alone in raising blood folate concentrations, and a significant increase in both serum and RBC folate concentration was achieved when compared to treatment with OC components alone (Shere et al. ; FDA Label ). Concomitant administration of 5-MTHF with the OC component does not affect absorption or pharmacokinetics of the OC. The use of such a fortified OC may be especially beneficial in reducing the risk of neural tube defects in pregnancy conceived during use or shortly after the discontinuation of the product, and may be suitable for women who may become pregnant soon after cessation of OC use (Shere et al. ).
Impairment of folate and vitamin B12 absorption
Cholestyramine is a non-absorbable anion exchange resin which binds bile in the gastrointestinal tract to prevent its reabsorption and is used to reduce the amount of cholesterol and other fatty substances in the blood (Fig. 8 ). Cholestyramine also binds folic acid, and the folate anion can bind to the resin and other nutrients (Worthington et al. ). Therapy has been associated with malabsorption of vitamins, including folate and vitamin B 12 (Desouza et al. ; Matsui et al. ; NIH ). This effect has been especially notable in children with familial hypercholesterolaemia.
Fig. 8 Chemical structure of cholestyramine, which is associated with impairment folate and vitamin B 12 absorption the molecule is too big
Interference with vitamin B12
Vitamin B 12 (cobalamin) is a cofactor for the enzyme methionine synthase (MTR), which catalyzes the conversion of 5-MTHF and l -homocysteine to THF and l -methionine. Through this mechanism, vitamin B 12 deficiency blocks the methylation cycle and can cause the folate cofactors in the cell to become stuck as 5-MTHF (Fig. 2 ). This process produces a pseudo-folate deficiency (Scott ). Medicines that interfere and lower vitamin B 12 concentrations include metformin, colchicine, chloramphenicol, histamine 2 receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors (Fig. 9 ) (Busti ); their therapeutic use is shown in Table 4 .
Fig. 9 Chemical structures of molecules that interfere and lower vitamin B 12
Metformin, a first-line medication for type II diabetes which was first available in France in 1979 (Stargrove et al. ), influences the folate methionine cycle; this effect has been known since the 1970s (NIH ). It has also been associated with a reduced concentration of vitamin B 12 and increased levels of homocysteine in several patient populations: patients with type II diabetes (de Jager et al. ), pregnant women with gestational diabetes mellitus (Gatford et al. ), and patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome (Palomba et al. ). A recent study shows that the addition of folic acid to metformin therapy decreases its negative effects on homocysteine (Aghamohammadi et al. ). The metabolomic fingerprint reveals that metformin impairs one-carbon metabolism in a manner similar to anti-folate chemotherapeutic agents (Corominas-Faja et al. ) (Table 5 ).
Table 5 Review of unwanted effects induced by medicines associated with the folate–homocysteine–methionine pathway and recommendations on folate supplementation Medicine Unwanted effect associated with folate cycle disruption Recommendation for folate supplementation References Cholestyramine Folate deficiency (children with familial hypercholesterolaemia) Yes Supplementation recommended in children with familial hypercholesterolaemia eMC ( ) Lamotrigine, valproic acid, carbamazepine Folate deficiency, especially with long-term treatment Yes Supplementation is recommended before and during pregnancy eMC ( ), FDA Label ( ), NIH ( ) Metformin Vitamin B 12 deficiency, very rarely associated with anemia Yes Supplementation with vitamin B 12 may be considered FDA Label ( ) Methotrexate Myelosuppression, gastrointestinal symptoms, stomatitis, mucositis alopecia, teratogenic effect Yes Supplementation may be considered with folinic acid in oncologic indications needing high doses, folic or folinic acid in other indications Folinic acid is used in case of toxicity EMA ( ) Oral contraceptives Decreased folate levels Generally no, however, a folate-fortified OC is registered in North America FDA Label ( ), eMC ( , , ) Pemetrexed, pralatrexate Myelosuppression, gastrointestinal toxicity, hepatic toxicity, mucositis, teratogenic effect Yes Supplementation with low dose folic acid and vitamin B 12 on a daily basis is mandatory in all patients Folinic acid is used in case of toxicity EMA ( , ) PPIs (omeprazole) Vitamin B 12 deficiency on long-term therapy No eMC ( ), Lam et al. ( ) Primidone, phenobarbital, phenytoin Megaloblastic anemia Yes Supplementation should be considered in long-term treatment and in pregnant patients Correction of anemia with folic acid and vitamin B 12 eMC ( , , ) Raltitrexed Myelosuppression, gastrointestinal symptoms, hepatic dysfunction No Administration of folic or folinic acid is contraindicated; folinic acid may be used only as an antidote in case of toxicity Medicines.ie ( ) Talotrexin CNS toxicity at high dose levels Currently not authorized (EU/USA) Norris et al. ( ) Trimethoprim, pyrimethamine, sulfasalazine Folate deficiency, potentially causing blood disorders Yes Supplementation with folate may be considered, especially in at risk populations or during long-term treatment Folinic acid can be used in case of toxicity eMC ( , ), FDA Label ( ) Trimetrexate, piritrexim, nolatrexed, lometrexol Myelosuppression, gastrointestinal toxicity, teratogenic effect Currently not authorized (EU/USA) de Vries et al. ( ), Gish et al. ( ), NIDDK U.S. ( ), Ray et al. ( )
Colchicine is commonly used to treat gout and familial Mediterranean fever. Early studies suggest that it disrupts the intestinal absorption of vitamin B 12 by altering ileal mucosa or by impairing or inhibiting the B 12 receptors located in the terminal ileum of the small intestine (Palopolli et al. ; Stopa et al. ; Webb et al. ). However, recent studies report differing results: either decreased serum vitamin B 12 levels in pediatric patients with familial Mediterranean fever on long-term colchicine treatment (Ekinci et al. ; Ozlu et al. ; Yilmaz et al. ) or normal vitamin B 12 levels (Gemici et al. ).
Chloramphenicol is an antibiotic which can antagonize the hematopoietic response to vitamin B 12 . It causes bone marrow suppression and leads to aplastic anemia (Karalliedde et al. ).
Gastric acid is needed to release vitamin B 12 from ingested proteins, so it is not surprising that proton pump inhibitors (PPIs, example: omeprazole) and histamine 2 receptor antagonists, such as ranitidine, which suppress the production of gastric acid by the gastric parietal cells, may lead to malabsorption of vitamin B 12 (Force et al. 1992; Lam et al. ; Ruscin ). Treatment duration of 2 or more years significantly increases the risk of vitamin B 12 deficiency by 65% in patients treated with PPIs and by 25% in patients treated with histamine 2 receptor antagonists (Lam et al. ).
Folate supplements to maintain homeostasis and to reduce unwanted side effects of medicines
Folate–homocysteine homeostasis is of great importance during early embryonic development and also in our everyday lives, since folate is involved in metabolic, genetic and nervous system functions.
The folate–homocysteine–methionine pathway is affected by numerous medicines and awareness of these potential effects is essential, not just for healthcare professionals but also for patients. A number of medicines interact with the folate cycle and lead to several undesirable or even toxic effects; consequently many of them contain recommendations for folate supplementation in their product information presented in short in Table 5 .
Folic acid and its derivatives are among the most widely used food supplements; they can be used either to maintain adequate folate levels or to decrease unwanted effects induced by medicines which interfere with the folate–homocysteine–methionine pathway.
In some countries, fortification of grain products (usually flour) with folic acid is widespread; in the USA it has been mandatory since 1998. Supplementation is specifically targeted at reducing the incidence of neural tube defects in newborns (Crandall et al. ). However, no EU country required folic acid food fortification, as there is some controversy to this issue, mainly due to the individual liberty and toxicity concerns, for example, the masking of vitamin B 12 deficiency and increased risk of cancerogenesis (Smith ). Additionally, some recent studies have shown that extremely high maternal plasma folate was associated with an increased risk for autism spectrum disorder and other negative neurocognitive development outcomes. However, studies on the effect of folic acid fortification on the occurrence of autism are inconsistent and report both a protective effect (Levine et al. ; Schmidt et al. ; Wang et al. ) and an increased risk for autism (DeSoto et al. ; Raghaven et al. , ) in connection with folate supplementation before and during pregnancy.
Some population groups, especially women of childbearing age and pregnant women, are at risk of insufficient folate intake. The World Health Organization (WHO) and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend a folate supplement (daily intake of 400 µg) for these population groups. Currently, as already mentioned, there are three forms of folate that are commercially available as dietary supplements: folic acid, 5-MTHF in the form of calcium salt, and the newest variant glucosamine salt (Fig. 1 ) (De-Regil et al. ).
Folic acid in doses of 1 mg/day has been widely used for treatment and prophylaxis of folate deficiency caused by folate antagonists such as methotrexate and anticonvulsants. A combination of different vitamins is needed to decrease homocysteine levels; this area is subject to extensive research. The Homocysteine Lowering Trialists’ Collaboration ( ) has shown that 800 µg of folic acid is required to achieve the maximal homocysteine-lowering effect that can be reached with folate supplements alone. However, if hyperhomocysteinemia is caused by vitamin B 12 deficiency, folic acid alone will not correct the condition (Allen et al. ). In such case, high-dose vitamin B 12 combined with folic acid is needed to lower the increased concentration of homocysteine (Johnson et al. ). Hyperhomocysteinemia could also be caused by common polymorphisms in genes of folate metabolism. The most important genetic polymorphisms are those of the MTHFR gene; almost half of the population has these genetic variations, consequently they commonly have a decreased concentration of the biologically active form 5-MTHF (Sharp et al. ). In such case, folate supplementation with 5-MTHF could be more efficient, since it can enter the folate cycle directly, without the need for enzymatic modification (De-Regil et al. ; Seremak-Mrozikiewicz ).
Several anti-folates have been associated with significant toxicity, most commonly myelosupression and the ensuing hematologic effects. Severe toxicity can be either prevented or reversed with folinic acid, a reduced analog of folic acid (also known as leucovorin); such use is often referred to as folinic acid rescue. It is, for example, routinely prescribed in oncological patients treated with very high doses of MTX, in patients treated with trimetrexate or pyrimethamine. Folinic acid can be also used as an antidote to pemetrexed- or raltitrexed-induced toxicity. Folate supplementation is recommended during treatment with pemetrexed, pralatrexate, low-dosing methotrexate or sulfasalazine, in women taking conventional OCs and also in patients at higher risk of deficiency (Table 2 ) (Ekinci et al. ; EMA ; eMC ; FDA Label , ; Peters et al. ; Wilson et al. ).
On the other hand, there is a risk that folic acid may lower the effect of some medicines. That is of particular importance for anti-folate medicines that act by inhibiting the enzymes of the folate cycle. For example, pyrimethamine is used to treat malaria and it acts on the folate metabolism of the malaria parasite by inhibiting DHFR, although it can affect also human folate metabolism. In that case, it is preferable to take 5-MTHF, the predominant form of folate in the blood circulation, which does not compete with pyrimethamine for DHFR. This means it could be administered even at high doses concomitantly with anti-folate without affecting anti-folate efficacy (Nzila et al. ). In case of pemetrexed, vitamin B 12 and folic acid supplementation are needed to mitigate toxicity. However, low doses must be used, since they satisfy the needs of normal but not of tumor tissue, which ensures anti-neoplastic activity is maintained (Bajetta et al. ; Schultz et al. ). During therapy with raltitrexed, on the other hand, the use of folinic acid, folic acid or vitamin B 12 is contraindicated since it might lead to loss of efficacy (Medicines.ie ).
Due to above-described interactions, it is advisable that doses of medicines and folate supplements are individually determined for each patient, depending on the course of the disease, type of pharmacotherapy, response to treatment and last but not least, on the genotype of the patient (Worthington et al. ).
Conclusion
A number of medicines are associated with folate metabolism disruption. Some of them can impair the intestinal absorption of folate, alter protein binding of folate in circulation, interfere with enzymes of folate metabolism or block the release of vitamin from the cell. Interactions between therapeutic drugs and folate can impact both the drug levels and vitamin status. Folic acid supplements could improve the folate status, but they could also decrease the efficacy of some medicines. Therefore, it is very important to adjust the dose of both the medicine and the folic acid supplement according to an individual patient’s needs. Folate plays a pivotal role in several processes; consequently changes in folate status are associated with several types of disorders and unwanted effects of drugs. It is, therefore, of prime importance that healthcare professionals, scientists and also patients are aware of folate–drug interactions.