Overview of cardiotoxic drugs
Cardiotoxicity definitely ranks among the most serious adverse side effects of many drugs. Moreover, these side effects can sometimes cause more severe complications than the treated disease itself. Cardiotoxicity as a general term means structural and/or functional damage of heart tissue caused by some toxic substance, e.g., drugs. In spite of the fact that each drug (or chemical group of drugs) affects the heart tissue in a specific way, the consequences are generally quite similar and frequently irreversible. The most serious drug-induced cardiotoxicity is manifested by cardiac contractile dysfunction or ventricular arrhythmias, both of which lead to heart failure and sudden death. Some drugs (e.g., anesthetics) can cause acute cardiac depression, as they lower heart rate, contractility and conduction. Nevertheless, many drugs cause only partial sub-acute damage of heart tissue. In these cases, chronic long-term treatment can gradually impair heart function. Moreover, the negative side effects of some drugs can occur many years after treatment has been terminated.
Many drugs can cause heart damage, including common cardiotoxic drugs such as cytostatics (e.g., anthracyclines, tyrosine-kinase inhibitors, cisplatin), immunosuppressives (e.g., cyclosporine A), beta blockers (propranolol, sotalol), calcium channel blockers, isoprenaline, some tricyclic antidepressants, antihistamines, anticonvulsants, antimalarial and antiarrhythmic drugs (Bellin and Mummery ; Cardinale et al. ; Jain and Rani ; Madonna ; Page et al. ; Slordal and Spigset ). Furthermore, it is necessary to mention that the cardiotoxicity of commonly and very frequently used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) has also been demonstrated. These drugs may cause renal dysfunction and elevated blood pressure, which in turn may potentiate heart failure in vulnerable individuals. Although NSAID-related cardiotoxicity is relatively rare and most commonly seen in elderly individuals with a concomitant disease, the risk of cardiotoxicity due to the widespread long-term use of these drugs should be taken into account (Singh et al. ).
Several pathophysiologic mechanisms regarding how drugs affect cardiac tissue are well known, with others under study. A common and relatively well-discovered mechanism of cardiotoxicity is mitochondrial oxidative stress and dysfunction. Cardiomyocytes, which are in a constant energy-consuming contractile state, are extremely sensitive to substances that inhibit ATP production. If certain agents interfere with mitochondrial function or affect ion channels or pumps, this can certainly cause heart dysfunction (Varga et al. ). In addition to mitochondrial damage, several other pathophysiologic mechanisms of the negative action of drugs in the heart have been proposed. As the most serious cardiotoxicity is associated with anticancer therapy, the mechanisms of heart tissue damage by these drugs have quite often been the subject of studies, with the available information summarized and discussed in several excellent reviews (e.g., Bellin and Mummery ; Cardinale et al. ; Tabernero and Brana ). Therapy with anthracyclines and related compounds (doxorubicin, daunorubicin, idarubicin, epirubicin, and the anthraquinone mitoxantrone) is connected with a significant risk of developing heart failure. For that reason, not only understanding the mechanisms, but mainly determining biomarkers and prevention options is very important. Although the cardiotoxicity of other drugs has been studied much less intensively, their sensitive biomarkers as well as the ways of preventing negative effects from these substances could also be very beneficial.
Introduction to microRNAs
Non-coding RNAs are known to play a significant role in gene expression regulation. Based on their length and differences in molecular structure, regulatory non-coding RNAs are subdivided into several classes including small interfering RNAs, Piwi interacting RNAs, microRNAs and long non-coding RNAs. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small endogenous, one-stranded, RNAs of 20–24 nucleotides in size. MiRNAs originate from long primary transcripts (pri-miRNAs) and hairpin precursor structures (pre-miRNAs) formed in the nucleus and further transported into the cytoplasm. The genes encoding the pri-miRNA are often polycistronic containing several miRNAs under the same promoter. They are mainly located in the intergenic regions, but can also be transcribed from intron regions or the antisense strands of known genes. Matured MiRNAs, together with DNA methylation and histone modifications, form the basis of the epigenetic regulation of gene expression (Moutinho and Esteller ).
MiRNAs regulate gene expression posttranscriptionally via binding mostly within the 3′UTR regions of the target mRNA, a process which leads to mRNA degradation and/or inhibition of translation. This is accompanied by a decrease in the level of the encoded protein, but the target mRNA level may not be affected. The ability of miRNA to bind to the target sequences without perfect complementarity results in a large number of target mRNAs for each individual miRNA. Hence, miRNAs can regulate almost all processes in the endogenous metabolism. Of course, miRNAs are also subject to an extensive system of regulation which is realized on the level of their synthesis, metabolism and own regulatory function (Esteller ; Moutinho and Esteller ; Rotini et al. ). It is evident that miRNAs are of crucial importance in processes such as development, differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis. Moreover, miRNAs can play a significant role in a number of pathological processes (Romaine et al. ).
The medical significance of miRNAs has become even more evident since 2008, when the presence of miRNAs circulating in plasma was described. Circulating miRNAs originate from different tissues and enter the plasma due to the death or transformation of tissue cells or as a result of certain stimuli. As some miRNAs are enriched in specific tissue, the origin of certain circulating miRNAs can be identified. However, several plasma-circulating miRNAs have been described whose origin and function are completely unknown.
Circulating miRNAs are either stored in exosomes or associated with RNA-binding proteins, which gives them considerable stability to pH and temperature changes, factors which enable the possibility of long-term storage of the samples. Considering these reasons, circulating miRNAs are promising candidates for biomarkers of various diseases and tissue destructions (Min et al. ; Min and Chan ). Moreover, miRNAs have been also studied as potential biomarkers for toxicological studies, where they are used as biomarkers of drug- or chemical-induced tissue injury for safety assessment. The tissue specificity and early release of circulating miRNAs upon tissue injury, when damage is still reversible, are main factors for their utility in clinical and preclinical toxicology. In drug safety assessment, miRNAs have been found associated with cardiotoxicity, hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity (Koturbash et al. ; Krauskopf et al. ; Mikaelian et al. ). This review article is focused on miRNAs utilization in drug-induced cardiotoxicity.
MiRNAs in drug-induced cardiotoxicity
In the past few years, many studies have showed that changes in miRNA levels are associated with various cardiovascular diseases and heart tissue damage. It is becoming clear that miRNAs could play a significant role in heart pathologies as well as in their diagnosis and prevention. Changes in levels of certain miRNAs in the heart and/or plasma have been reported in cases of myocardial infarction, acute coronary syndrome, acute heart failure, cardiac hypertrophy, essential hypertension and atherosclerosis (Sayed et al. ; Viereck and Thum ). In particular, miRNAs that are highly expressed in myocardium in comparison to other tissues, e.g., miR-1, miR-133, miR-208a/b and miR-499, are being mostly studied (Ludwig et al. ; Thum et al. ). In addition, a number of toxic substances lead to changes in the profile of miRNAs in heart tissue as well as in plasma. Moreover, the changes of miRNAs are measurable even at low concentrations of toxins when other biomarkers of tissue damage are not detectable (Marrone et al. ; Yokoi and Nakajima ). This suggests that certain cardiospecific miRNAs with changed expression under the toxic effects of drugs could be used in the preclinical in vitro testing of toxicity of potential drug candidates in cardiomyocytes and heart-derived cell lines. In addition, specific circulating miRNAs in patient plasma could be biomarkers of very early cardiac damage, e.g., due to undesirable drug effects during pharmacotherapy. Moreover, some drug-induced changes in the expression of certain miRNAs seem to be not only the consequences, but also causes of heart cell damage. Therefore, targeted changes in these miRNA levels could also be a way toward the prevention and/or amelioration of drug-induced cardiotoxicity.
All of the above-mentioned issues involving miRNAs in drug-induced cardiotoxicity are discussed in the following chapters. An overview of the main miRNAs associated with drug-induced cardiotoxicity is given in Table 1 .
Table 1 The selected miRNAs associated with drug-induced cardiotoxicity miRNA Drug Species System Change References let-7g DOX Rat Heart tissue Decrease Fu et al. ( ) DOX Rat Heart atrium Decrease Novak et al. ( ) miR-1 DOX Rat Plasma Increase Calvano et al. ( ), Nishimura et al. ( ) DOX Human Plasma Increase Rigaud et al. ( ) DAU Rat Heart tissue Decrease Doka et al. ( ) miR-21 ISO Mouse Heart tissue Increase Ning et al. ( ), Yang et al. ( ) miR-22 ISO Mouse Cardiomyocytes Increase Tu et al. ( ) miR-29c ISO Mouse Heart tissue Decrease Liu et al. ( ), Ning et al. ( ), Yang et al. ( ) miR-30c ISO Mouse Heart tissue Decrease Liu et al. ( ), Yang et al. ( ) miR-30e ISO Mouse Heart tissue Decrease Yang et al. ( ) ISO Rat Heart tissue Decrease Zhang et al. ( ) miR-34a DOX Rat Heart tissue Increase Desai et al. ( ) DOX Human Cardiomyocytes Increase Holmgren et al. ( ) DOX Rat Cardiomyocytes Increase Fu et al. ( ) miR-34b DOX Human Cardiomyocytes Increase Holmgren et al. ( ) miR-34c DOX Rat Heart tissue Increase Vacchi-Suzzi et al. ( ) miR-133a DAU Rat Heart Decrease Doka et al. ( ) DOX Rat Plasma Increase Calvano et al. ( ), Nishimura et al. ( ) miR-146a DOX Mouse Cardiomyocytes Increase Horie et al. ( ) DOX Human Cardiomyocytes Increase Holmgren et al. ( ) miR-208 DOX Rat Plasma Increase Calvano et al. ( ), Nishimura et al. ( ) miR-208b DOX Rat Heart tissue Increase Vacchi-Suzzi et al. ( ) miR-208a DOX Rat Heart ventricle Decrease Novak et al. ( ) DAU Rat Heart tissue Decrease Doka et al. ( ) ISO Mouse Plasma Increase Liu et al. ( ) miR-214 ISO Rat Heart fibroblasts Increase Sun et al. ( ) ISO Mouse Heart tissue Increase Duan et al. ( ) miR-216b Rat Heart tissue Increase Vacchi-Suzzi et al. ( ) miR-320a DOX Mouse Heart Increase Yin et al. ( ) miR-377 CsA Human Cardiomyocytes Increase Zhu et al. ( ) miR-1254 Bevacizumab Human Plasma Increase Zhao et al. ( )
Drug-induced changes in expression of microRNAs in the heart
Studies of the relationship between drug-induced cardiotoxicity and changed expression patterns of miRNAs in heart cells have been focused mainly on cytostatics, namely doxorubicin (DOX) and daunorubicin (DAU). Animal models and isolated cardiomyocytes have been used for this purpose.
When rats were treated with DOX in increasing doses (0 mg/kg, 6 mg/kg, 12 mg/kg, 18 mg/kg), the concentration of troponin cTnT was elevated significantly in the plasma of animals treated with the highest DOX concentration. In the heart tissues of these animals, the level of microRNA let-7g decreased significantly ( p < 0.05) in comparison to untreated animals (Fu et al. ). In another study, increasing doses of DOX, but not etoposide (a topoisomerase II inhibitor devoid of cardiovascular toxicity), induced an increase in the levels of miR-208b, miR-216b, miR-215, miR-34c and miR-367 in rat hearts. Furthermore, the lowest dosing regimen (1 mg/kg/week for 2 weeks) led to a detectable increase in miR-216b in the absence of histopathological findings and the alteration of classical cardiac stress biomarkers (Vacchi-Suzzi et al. ).
Desai et al. studied DOX-induced changes in heart miRNAs in male B6C3F mice. The animals were injected intravenously with 3 mg/kg doxorubicin or saline once a week for 2, 3, 4, 6, and 8 weeks, resulting in cumulative DOX doses of 6, 9, 12, 18, and 24 mg/kg, respectively. In the mice exposed to 18 mg/kg and higher cumulative DOX dose, cardiac injury was detected. In the hearts, expressions of 1, 1, 2, 8, and 21 miRNAs were altered in mice treated by 6, 9, 12, 18, and 24 mg/kg DOX, respectively. A pro-apoptotic miR-34a was the only miRNA that was up-regulated in all DOX-treated mice, showing a significant dose-related response. In mice treated with 12 mg/kg DOX, the up-regulation of miR-34a was associated with the down-regulation of hypertrophy-related miR-150 (Desai et al. ).
The expressions of miR-208a and let-7g were studied in rat atria and ventricles after the single dose administration of DOX and liposomal doxorubicin (L-DOX). The rats were killed after 24 h, and samples from the left atrium, left ventricle, right atrium, and right ventricle were obtained. In the control group, miR-208a and let-7g were highly abundant in the atria compared to the ventricles. Administration of both DOX and L-DOX decreased the expression of miR-208a in the left ventricle and let-7g in the left atrium. These changes were considered to partly contribute to the development of anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity (Novak et al. ) The expression of selected miRNAs was analyzed in the hearts of rats treated with DAU both in one dose (15 mg/kg, i.v.) and repeatedly (6 doses, 3 mg/kg, i.p., every 48 h), and compared to the hearts of untreated rats. Interestingly, the levels of miR-208, miR-499, miR-1 and miR-133a were reduced in rats after one high DAU dose, but not in rats after six lower DAU doses (Doka et al. ).
Horie et al. examined the role of miRNAs in acute DOX-induced toxicity in mice cardiomyocytes. MiR-146a was shown to be up-regulated by DOX. Neuregulin ErbB4, the target of miR-146a, is essential for maintaining adult cardiac function. It has been verified that the overexpression of miR-146a, which leads to the decreased expression of ErbB4, induced cell death in cardiomyocytes. The re-expression of ErbB4 in cardiomyocytes ameliorated DOX-induced cell death (Horie et al. ). In cardiomyocytes derived from human pluripotent stem cells, the early and late effects of DOX on the miRNA expression were studied. Several miRNAs, including miR-34a, miR-34b, miR-187, miR-199a, miR-199b, miR-146a, miR-15b, miR-130a, miR-214, and miR-424, were differentially expressed both upon and after DOX treatment (Holmgren et al. ). Enhanced responses to DOX were observed in cardiomyocytes derived from the induced pluripotent stem cells of patients who developed heart failure after chemotherapy in comparison to those from patients without DOX-induce heart damage (Bellin and Mummery ). These findings taken together indicate that patient-derived cardiomyocytes and miRNAs seem to be a promising tool for the prediction of individual susceptibility to drug-induced cardiotoxicity.
The association between cardiotoxic effects and miRNAs changes was also investigated in cyclosporin A (CsA), a potent immunosuppressant widely used in autoimmune disorders treatment and for the prevention of rejection after organ transplantation. Its toxicity, including cardiotoxicity, however, represents a major undesirable effect. In cardiomyocytes, CsA enhanced the expression of miR-377, and the overexpression of miR-377 led to increased apoptosis. Moreover, inhibition of miR-377 expression markedly reduced the ability of CsA to induce cardiomyocyte apoptosis (Zhu et al. ).
Concerning other drugs, several studies of the relationship between cardiotoxicity and miRNAs have dealt with isoprenaline (isoproterenol, ISO). This non-selective β-adrenoreceptor agonist is prescribed for the treatment of bradycardia, heart block, and, on occasion, for asthma. In many experimental studies, ISO was used for preparation of model systems (animals, fibroblasts, cardiomyocytes) with induced cardiac hypertrophy and/or fibrosis. In these experimental models, many miRNAs were shown to be dysregulated upon ISO treatment. These miRNAs include miR-10b, miR-21, miR-22, miR-29c, miR-30c, miR-30e, miR-148b, miR-181d, miR-214, miR-218, and miR-3107 (Liu et al. ; Ning et al. ; Sun et al. ; Yang et al. ). Changes in these miRNAs have often been used in the testing of potential cardioprotective agents in experimental models. This issue is discussed in more detail in “ MicroRNA in the prevention and/or attenuation of drug-induced cardiotoxicity ”.
Changes in circulating microRNA levels in drug-induced cardiotoxicity
The possible use of circulating miRNAs in plasma as biomarkers of drug-induced toxicity, including cardiotoxicity, has been intensively studied for the past several years (Harrill et al. ). Most attention has been devoted to the biomarkers of cardiotoxicity evoked by cytostatic drugs, mainly anthracyclines DOX and DAU. The experiments dealing with these drugs were performed on laboratory animals as well as in oncological patients.
In rats, DOX treatment led to a significant elevation in the plasma levels of miR-1, miR-133a, and miR-208 (Calvano et al. ; Nishimura et al. ). All these miRNAs have been shown to be associated with heart damage. MiR-1 is considered the most abundant miRNA in the heart muscle. In the rat model of acute heart attack induced by coronary ligation, miR-1 level in serum rapidly increased more than 200 times (Cheng et al. ). Moreover, the analysis of circulating miRNAs in breast cancer patients receiving DOX identified miR-1 as a promising candidate for the early detection of DOX-induced cardiotoxicity (Rigaud et al. ). Circulating levels of miR-133a are also associated with cardiovascular diseases. Elevated levels of miR-133a were detected in patients with acute myocardial infarction more rapidly than cardiac troponin T increase (Kuwabara et al. ). The cardiospecific miR-208 family is encoded in the Myh6 intron region, and regulates the heavy chain myosin isomorphic switch, which is involved in cardiac remodeling under pathological conditions. The plasma levels of miR-208a and miR-208b were increased in patients with myocardial damage and were detected much earlier than cardiac troponins (Creemers et al. ). In another study, however, circulating miR-208a failed as a biomarker of doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity in breast cancer patients (Oliveira-Carvalho et al. ).
In plasma samples of 20 breast cancer patients with abnormal cardiac function after DOX chemotherapy, 32 microRNAs were significantly dysregulated in comparison to patients without DOX cardiotoxicity. A functional analysis of these miRNAs suggested association with cell death, cell cycle, and inflammation (Todorova et al. ). Plasma profiling of 24 candidate miRNAs was performed in children before and after a cycle of anthracycline or noncardiotoxic chemotherapy, with relative changes in the plasma miRNA levels before and after treatment determined. In patients receiving anthracyclines, plasma miR-29b and miR-499 were up-regulated after treatment. These miRNA levels were not changed in patients receiving noncardiotoxic therapy (Leger et al. ). The anthracycline-induced level of miR-29b is somewhat surprising, as this miRNA was down-regulated in patients with heart failure and dilated cardiomyopathy (Marques et al. ; Wang et al. ). Moreover, an increased level of miR-29b was shown to improve heart function in mice after heart infarction (Zhu et al. ). On the other hand, the level of miR-499 increased significantly in patients with heart damage, and this miRNA is considered to be a sensitive marker of heart attack (Devaux et al. ).
An overview of circulating miRNAs as biomarkers of DOX-induced cardiotoxicity has been discussed in a recent review by Ruggeri et al. ( ). In addition to anthracyclines, other cytostatics have also shown toxic effects to the heart and biomarkers of their cardiotoxicity have been searched for among microRNAs. Plasma microRNA arrays revealed five miRNAs that were significantly increased in patients with bevacizumab-induced cardiotoxicity compared with those of healthy bevacizumab treatment controls. Two of these (miR-1254 and miR-579) showed high specificity in the validation experiments. MiR-1254 shows the strongest correlation to the clinical diagnosis of bevacizumab-induced cardiotoxicity (Zhao et al. ). In oncological patients, sunitinib elicits a dose-dependent negative inotropic effect in the myocardium, accompanied by a decline in intracellular Ca 2+ and increased ROS generation. However, circulating miRNAs patterns were not altered by sunitinib (Rainer et al. ).
Concerning drugs other than cytostatics, the association between cardiotoxicity and miRNAs expression has intensively been studied only in the case of the non-selective β-adrenoreceptor ISO. When a single intraperitoneal injection of ISO was administered to mice at 0, 80, or 160 mg/kg, plasma miR-208a and cardiac troponin I (cTnI) were increased. MiR-208a plasma levels were dose dependent and correlated with myocardial damage (Liu et al. ).
MicroRNA in the prevention and/or attenuation of drug-induced cardiotoxicity
Findings regarding the dysregulation of miRNAs expression in many cardiovascular pathologies have raised the question of whether miRNAs could also be used for prevention and/ or therapy (Rotini et al. ). Recently, miRNAs have come under consideration as new and powerful candidates in therapeutic intervention against various cardiovascular diseases including drug-induced heart failure. Two possible approaches are used: (1) the targeted decrease or blocking of overexpressed miRNAs and (2) the targeted increase of the miRNAs which are down-regulated due to drug action. MicroRNAs inhibitors (antagomiRs) and miRNAs mimics represent useful tools, especially in studies of individual miRNA actions and functions. In addition, the effects of selected cardioprotective substances on drug-induced changes in miRNAs profile has been studied in various model systems, with the aim of finding a defense against drug-induced cardiotoxicity.
The attenuation of DOX-induced cardiac toxicity by silencing miR-208a, a heart-specific miRNA, was studied in mice. The administration of an miR-208a antagomiR four days before DOX treatment improved heart function in comparison to only DOX treatment. DOX up-regulated miR-208a and promoted cardiomyocyte apoptosis, while the therapeutic silencing of miR-208a attenuated DOX-induced myocyte apoptosis with subsequent improvement in cardiac function (Tony et al. ). The therapeutic potential of targeting miR-208a to prevent cardiotoxicity was highlighted in Dahl hypertensive rats with induced heart failure. Subcutaneous delivery of anti-miR-208a dose-dependently prevented pathological myosin switching and cardiac remodeling as well as improved cardiac function, overall health, and survival. Transcriptional profiling indicates that anti-miR-208a evokes prominent effects on cardiac gene expression (Montgomery et al. ).
The treatment of mice with DOX caused the enhanced expression of cardiac miR-320a, and knockdown of miR-320a attenuated cardiac abnormalities induced by DOX. The overexpression of miR-320a enhanced apoptosis in vitro and aggravated heart injuries in mice. These results indicate that the inhibition of miR-320a may be applied in the treatment of cardiac dysfunction induced by DOX (Yin et al. ). In murine cardiomyocytes, overexpression of miR-21 attenuated DOX-induced apoptosis, whereas the knocking down of miR-21 increased DOX-induced apoptosis. MiR-21 plays a vital role in regulating cell proliferation and apoptosis and probably protects cardiac cells against DOX-induced toxicity (Tong et al. ). Roca-Alonso et al. demonstrated a cardioprotective function of the miR-30 family members following DOX-induced cardiac injury. They provide evidence for direct targeting of these miRNAs on key elements of the beta-adrenergic pathway and further show that this interaction regulates cardiac function and apoptosis (Roca-Alonso et al. ).
MiR-34a was overexpressed in DOX-induced heart injury and also in ischemia–reperfusion heart injury. The suppression of miR-34a attenuated myocardial injury via the altered expression of the silent information regulator 1 (SIRT1), acetylated p53 (ac-p53), and Bcl-2 and Bax genes. The increased expression of miR-34a aggravates heart injury (Piegari et al. ). Moreover, the activation of the miR-34a-5p/Sirt1/p66shc pathway contributed to DOX-induced cardiotoxicity (Zhu et al. ).
The expression of miR-652 increases in heart diseases and decreases in a setting of cardioprotection. The use of miR-652 antagomiR protects the heart against pathological remodeling and improves heart function (Bernardo et al. ). Similarly, miR-212/132 null mice were protected from pressure-overload-induced heart failure, whereas the overexpression of the miR-212/132 family leads to pathological cardiac hypertrophy, heart failure, and death in mice. The pharmacological inhibition of miR-132 by antagomiR injection rescues cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure in mice (Ucar et al. ). However, no information has been forthcoming regarding the effects of antagomiR-652 and antagomiR-132 in drug-induced heart failure.
As ISO is frequently used for experimental development of heart injury in mice and/or induction of cardiac cell damage, many studies have been performed investigating the possibilities of how to attenuate the ISO-induced changes in the profile of miRNAs. The overexpression of miR-22 was observed in cardiomyocytes with ISO-induced hypertrophy, and the administration of antagomiR-22 reversed the up-regulation of miR-22 and its pro-hypertrophic effects (Tu et al. ). The expression of miR-214 was increased in ISO-treated cardiac fibroblasts. The down-regulation of miR-214 by an antagomiR attenuated the proliferation and collagen synthesis (Sun et al. ). MiR-214 was up-regulated in the serum of chronic heart failure patients, and miR-214 silencing attenuated ISO-induced cardiac dysfunction and impairment of cardiac angiogenesis in mice (Duan et al. ). MiR-30e mimics attenuated ISO-induced cardiac dysfunction and cardiac fibrosis in a rat model (Zhang et al. ).
In addition to the direct delivery of miRNA mimics and antagomiRs, drug-induced cardiotoxicity might also be attenuated via some cardioprotectives, which affect the expression of certain miRNAs. Increasing evidence has now come forth that some phytochemicals can also be protective for the heart, having the potential to reduce drug-induced cardiotoxicity. Some studies indicate that miRNA expression is modified following the administration of phytochemicals which function as a protective mechanism against heart injury development (Farias et al. ). Paeoniflorin, a monoterpene glucoside extracted from the dry root of Paeonia with reported beneficial effects on the cardiovascular system, attenuated DOX-induced toxicity in cardiomyocytes. The mechanism of action is at least partly based on the paeniflorin-mediated down-regulation of miR-1 expression (Li et al. ). The protective effect of resveratrol, a well-known polyphenol in red wine, on anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity is supposed to be partly mediated via resveratrol-induced changes in the expression of several miRNAs (McCubrey et al. ).
Several studies have tested the effect of natural compounds on ISO-induced changes in miRNAs expression. For example, therapy with luteolin-7-diglucuronide, a naturally-occurring antioxidant found in edible plants, attenuated the ISO-altered expression of miRNAs associated with induced myocardium injury and fibrosis (miR-29c, miR-30c, miR-21) in mice (Ning et al. ). In C57BL/6J mice with ISO-induced myocardial injury, miR-29c was significantly decreased. When these mice were treated with Panax notoginseng saponins (cardioprotective substances of P. notoginseng , Araliaceae), ISO-induced myocardial injury and fibrosis were attenuated and the cardiac expression of miR-29c increased. These results demonstrate that the cardioprotective effects of P. notoginseng saponins might be implicated in part by the increased expression of miR-29c in the heart (Liu et al. ). A study by Yang et al. showed the decreased expression of miR-10b, miR-29c, miR-30c, miR-30e, miR-148b, miR-181d, miR-218, miR-3107 and the increased expression of miR-21 in mice with ISO-induced myocardial injury. Apocynin, a naturally occurring NADPH oxidase inhibitor, significantly prevented the development of ISO-induced myocardial injury in these mice. Apocynin treatment increased the level of ISO-down-regulated miRNAs and decreased the level of ISO-up-regulated miRNAs, a finding which demonstrates that changes in miRNAs expression are associated with the protective effects of apocynin against ISO -induced myocardial injury (Yang et al. ).
Conclusions and future perspectives
Cardiovascular toxicity remains a major cause of drug failure during preclinical and clinical development and it contributes to the post-approval withdrawal of medicines (Ferri et al. ). Moreover, many drugs widely used in clinical practice for a long time have shown potentially toxic effects on the heart in some patients. The cardiotoxicity of these drugs remains a serious problem, an effect which strongly affects both quality of life and the overall survival of patients. Several strategies for preventing cardiotoxicity have been developed to minimize cardiac-related mortality and morbidity. There is encouraging evidence that the prevention of cardiotoxicity is achievable, but this requires a multidisciplinary approach. Early detection and the prompt initiation of prophylactic treatment comprise the most effective approach for minimizing cardiotoxicity associated with pharmacotherapy (Cardinale et al. ).
MiRNAs seem to be a promising tool regarding several aspects of drug-induced cardiotoxicity. Cardiospecific miRNAs can serve as markers in the identification of potentially toxic compounds through in vitro preclinical screening. They can be also used in testing cardioprotective compounds in heart cells and/or animal models. The detection of cardiospecific miRNAs circulating in plasma, not present under normal conditions, can be useful in the identification of patients with subclinical cardiotoxicity, a seemingly effective strategy in the prevention of serious complications. In addition, the purposeful administration of certain miRNAs and/or antagomiRs has promising potential to attenuate drug-induced cardiotoxicity. Moreover, the cardioprotective effects of some natural compounds could be at least partly mediated through their influence on miRNAs expression.
All ways by which miRNAs might be used in the fight against drug-induced cardiotoxicity deserve further study. In terms of anthracyclines, circulating as well as cardio miRNAs have been studied intensively, with a large amount of data about miRNAs-mediated cardioprotection having been made available. However, the identification and verification of the best miRNA (i.e., highly specific, sensitive, and stable) for the early detection as well as the determination of the optimal miRNAs-mediated approach to minimize anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity will still require many studies. Many other investigations should be focused on the miRNAs profile changes associated with other drugs with proved cardiotoxicity, as these substances have been neglected from this point of view, with information about their effects on circulating and/or heart-specific miRNAs remaining insufficient. All these issues clearly deserve more attention in further research.