Introduction
The researches about lon had experienced a long history. As early as 1946, Witkin ( ) reported that mutations were in favor of the resistance to ultraviolet radiation and X-rays for Escherichia coli . Until 1964, the lon mutants were first isolated from E. coli K-12 as a class of radiosensitive mutants by Howard-Flanders et al. ( ). E. coli possesses a protein selective degradation system (Deg system) which can distinguish abnormal proteins (such as unfinished polypeptides, denatured proteins, aberrant proteins, missense proteins, and mistranslated proteins) from normal proteins (Bukhari and Zipser ; Goldberg ). Bukhari and Zipser ( ) isolated E. coli strains containing deg mutations in 1973. The expression of Deg phenotype was varied but indistinguishable among lon mutants ( deg, capR , and lon ) (Gottesman and Zipser ; Shineberg and Zipser ). In 1981, the lon ( capR ) gene encoded protein in E. coli was first purified and was proved to possess an ATP-dependent proteolytic activity, which was identical to the protease activity of protease La in E. coli (Charette et al. ; Chung and Goldberg ; Swamy and Goldberg ). In addition, after that, mammalian ATP-dependent endoprotease, closely likes protease La, was discovered to degrade proteins in rat liver mitochondrial matrix in 1982 (Desautels and Goldberg ). Adams et al. ( ) identified human Lon protease (LONP) gene. Wang et al. ( ) cloned an ATP-dependent protease, consisted of 963 amino acids and predominantly localized in human mitochondria, that is highly homologous to bacterial LONP. In 1994, Pim1 (proteolysis in mitochondria) gene was identified in yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ), which was more than 30% sequence homology with gene that encoded LONP of bacteria (such as E. coli, Myxococcus Xanthus , and Bacillus brevis ) (Suzuki et al. ; Van Dyck et al. ). Mitochondrial lon homolog (AtLon) was cloned from plant ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) in 1998 (Sarria et al. ). The evolution of LONP is highly conserved throughout almost all prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms from diverse archaea, eubacteria, fungi, plant to mammal (Pinti et al. ; Venkatesh et al. ). In the long-term evolutionary progress, LONP becomes a crucial stress-responsive protein, which is pivotal for cell survival (Bota et al. ; Ngo and Davies ; Zhang et al. ). LONP1 and LONP2 are the major isoform that locates in human mitochondria and peroxisomes, respectively (Pomatto et al. ).
Mitochondrion is a crucial and unique organelle involved in cellular energy metabolism, the biosynthesis of metabolic intermediates (Li et al. ), and the propagation of signaling cascades (McBride et al. ). Mitochondrial energy metabolism is the main endogenous source of cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) in most eukaryotic cells (Kowaltowski et al. ). Under physiological or pathological conditions, the principal source of mitochondrial ROS is superoxide anion (O 2 ·− ), derived from monoelectronic reduction of oxygen, predominantly at complex I (NADH dehydrogenase) of mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) (Kowaltowski et al. ; Murphy ; Turrens ). The major cellular energy (ATP) was produced by ETC through the process of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) (Jacobson et al. ; Voos ). OXPHOS, in addition to meeting cellular energy requirements, also increased the chance that mitochondrial proteins were oxidatively damaged by ROS (Bulteau et al. ). Moreover, mitochondria were also involved not only in the biosynthesis of numerous metabolic intermediates, but also in the propagation of numerous signaling cascades that determine the fate of cells, such as mitophagy, apoptosis, and necrosis (Bulteau et al. ; Rego and Oliveira ; Shen et al. , ; Wang et al. ). Taken together, mitochondria are central to the execution of a wide variety of cellular events (McBride et al. ). Therefore, mitoproteinic dyshomeostasis and mitochondrial dysfunction were related to various cancer (such as colon cancer, bladder cancer, cervical cancer, and brain cancer), stroke, heart disease (Bota and Davies ), and age-related diseases (such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease), as well as the normal process of aging (Baker et al. ; Bulteau et al. ).
Lon functions as a protease in mitochondrial protein quality control (mPQC) system
The first line of cellular defense against mitochondrial damage was provided by mitochondrial proteolytic system to selectively recognize and degrade misfolded, non-assembled, aggregated and damaged proteins within mitochondria to maintain the proteins/polypeptides in a functional and active state, which was termed mitochondrial protein quality control (mPQC) system (Tatsuta and Langer ; Voos ).
LONP in mPQC process
The nuclear-encoded mitoproteins were directed to mitochondria by mitochondrial targeting sequence (MTS) (Rainbolt et al. ). The MTS first interacted with the translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOM) channel on the cytosolic surface of the mitochondria and subsequently with the translocase of the inner mitochondrial membrane 23 (TIM23) complex to pass through the inner mitochondrial membrane (IMM) and enter the mitochondrial matrix (Haynes et al. ). The TIM23 complex is made up of the channel Tim23, the regulatory protein Tim17, and preprotein-combined Tim50 (Schmidt et al. ; Wiedemann et al. ). Translocated preproteins across IMM into the mitochondrial matrix achieved in a process dependent on the ETC-produced membrane potential and the ATPase activity of mtHSP70 (also known as HSPA9/GRP75/mortalin) in the presequence translocase-associated motor (PAM) complex (Rainbolt et al. ), which is made up of mtHsp70 and its five co-chaperones, namely, the translocase-associated fulcrum Tim44, the nucleotide exchange factor Mge1 (also known as GRPEL2 in human), the J-protein Pam18 (also known as DNAJC19 in human), the J-related protein Pam16, and Pam17 (facilitated the association of Pam16-Pam18) (Li et al. ; Schmidt et al. ; van der Laan et al. ; Voos ). Once entering into the mitochondrial matrix, the N-terminal MTS of preprotein was cleaved by mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP) to release the mature polypeptide, followed by the recruitment of mitochondrial chaperones, such as the mtHsp70 chaperonin [HSPA9 (mortalin)/DNAJA3 (Tid1)/GRPEL1], the mitochondrial Hsp90-type chaperone TRAP1 (tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated protein 1, also known as Hsp75), and the Hsp60 chaperonin (Hsp60/Hsp10) of the mitochondrial matrix, which promoted the polypeptide folding into a functional conformation. Alternatively, mitoproteins that were damaged or misfolded during stress or failed to fold into functional conformations were degraded by ATP-dependent mPQC proteases, such as LONP (Rainbolt et al. ). Human Lon, a vital member of AAA+ (ATPase associated with diverse cellular activities) protein superfamily, is an homo-hexameric ring-shaped protein complex with a serine–lysine catalytic dyad, plays an important role in maintaining mitoproteostasis through selectively recognizing and degrading oxidatively modified mitoproteins within mitochondrial matrix (Bota and Davies ; Cha et al. ; Pinti et al. ; Voos ). LONP acts as a central moderator of mitochondrial activity in tumorigenesis (Quirós et al. ). The substrates of LONP are shown in Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1 Lon in mitochondrial protein quality control (mPQC) and mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPR mt ). OMM outer mitochondrial membrane, IMS intermembrane space, IMM inner mitochondrial membrane, MTS mitochondrial targeting sequence, NLS nuclear localization sequence, MPP mitochondrial processing peptidase, TOM translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane, TIM23 translocase of the inner mitochondrial membrane 23, PAM presequence translocase-associated motor, OS oxidative stress, HS hypoxic stress, OX oxidized, ROS reactive oxygen species, TRAP1 tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated protein 1, mtHsp70 mitochondrial matrix heat shock protein 70, ACO2 mitochondrial aconitase, TFAM mitochondrial transcription factor A, PKA cAMP-dependent protein kinase, StAR steroidogenic acute regulatory protein, HIF-1 hypoxia-inducible factor 1, COX4 cytochrome c oxidase 4, ALAS-1 5-aminolevulinic acid synthase-1, CBS cystathionine β-synthase, CYC cytochrome c, HO-1 heme oxygenase-1, GAC Glutaminase C, DPAA diphenylarsinic acid, SDH5 succinate dehydrogenase 5, PINK1 phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)-induced putative kinase 1, Trx2 thioredoxin 2, ATFS-1 activating transcription factor associated with stress-1
LONP in tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle PQC
Mitochondrial aconitase (mAconitase, ACO2) catalyzes the isomerization of citrate to isocitrate through cis-aconitase in the mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and acts as a TCA cycle modulated enzyme that is especially sensitive to oxidation (Lushchak et al. ). ACO2 activity is generally served as a biomarker of oxidative stress (OS) and an intramitochondrial index of redox status (Gardner ; Lushchak et al. ). The accumulation of oxidized ACO2 is a vital pathologic event that gives rise to mitochondrial dysfunction and cellular death in OS- and/or age-associated diseases (Bota and Davies ; Yan et al. ). Mildly oxidative modified ACO2 was selectively degraded by LONP in WI-38 VA-13 human lung fibroblast cells (Bota and Davies ). During OS and aging, the down-regulated expression of LONP might be responsible for the accumulation of oxidatively damaged mitoproteins, such as ACO2 (Bota et al. ). On one hand, LONP was inactivated with aging, and the influence of aging on LONP varied in different organs (Delaval et al. ). On the other hand, the aggregation of damaged ACO2 caused by severe oxidation would result in the decline in availability of LONP (Bota and Davies ).
LONP in OXPHOS PQC
In mammalian cells, hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) regulated the composition of cytochrome c oxidase 4 (COX4) subunits in response to hypoxic stress (HS) by activating the genetic transcription of encoding COX4-2 and LONP. The up-regulated LONP, in turn, facilitated the degradation of COX4-1. The altered COX4 subunits composition optimized the consumption of O 2 and the generation of ATP and ROS allowed for the cells adapting the environment of different O 2 contents (Fukuda et al. ).
The succinate dehydrogenase 5 (SDH5) is a substrate of LONP. SDH5 G78R , a G78R mutation in SDH5, escaped from the degradation of LONP via forming the stable interaction between SDH5 G78R and SDHA, which in turn resulted in hereditary paraganglioma syndrome (Bezawork-Geleta et al. ).
LONP in mitochondrial transcription PQC
LONP modulated mitochondrial transcription by selectively degrading mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) to stabilize the ratio of TFAM/mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) (Matsushima et al. ). Further research showed that TFAM was phosphorylated within its high-mobility group box 1 (HMG1) at serines 55 and 56 by cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) in mitochondria, and the phosphorylation of HMG1 damaged the mtDNA binding ability of TFAM and in turn facilitated rapid degradation of DNA-free TFAM by LONP (Lu et al. ). Of course, nonphosphorylated TFAM could also be degraded by LONP in cells with serious mtDNA deficits, since it is in a DNA-free status (Lu et al. ).
LONP in mitochondrial morphology PQC
The knockdown of Lon resulted in severe accumulation of processed Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog (PTEN)-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) that could activate the PINK1–Parkin pathway, which in turn promoted mitochondrial fission in the model of fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster (Poole et al. ; Thomas et al. ). In rat hippocampal and dopaminergic neurons, the overexpression of PINK1 led to the increase of mitochondrial number, the shrink of mitochondrial size and the decrease of mitochondrial occupancy of neuronal processes, which more likely tended to the process of mitochondrial fission (Yu et al. ). Therefore, LONP played an indispensable role in modulating the PINK1–Parkin pathway through facilitating the degradation of PINK1 in healthy mitochondrial matrix (Thomas et al. ).
LONP in redox PQC
SP-22, a 22-kDa thioredoxin peroxidase (Watabe et al. ), was a substrate protein of LONP isolated from the bovine adrenal cortex mitochondria (Watabe et al. ). SP-22 functions as an antioxidant in mitochondria of the cardiovascular system. The expression of SP-22 was up-regulated by about 1.5–4.6 times in response to OS in bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAEC) (Araki et al. ). The up-regulation of SP-22 was also certified to respond OS in rat myocardial infarction model (Araki et al. ). Compared with normal placentae, the mRNA and protein expression of SP-22/peroxiredoxin III was up-regulated by about two and fourfold in the mitochondria of human pre-eclamptic placentae, respectively. These results indicated that SP-22/peroxiredoxin III played a vital role in the protection of placental function from damaging by OS in mitochondria of human pre-eclamptic placentae (Shibata et al. ). However, there are still insufficient researches on how SP-22 was finely regulated by LONP in response to various environmental stresses.
Mitochondrial thioredoxin 2 (Trx2) is important to cell vitality. The oxidized Trx2 may be a suspicious substrate of LONP (Zhang et al. ), but the degradation of LONP to Trx2 requires further experimental evidences.
LONP in heme metabolism PQC
Mitochondrial 5-aminolevulinic acid synthase-1 (ALAS-1), housekeeping isoform of ALAS, is the first rate-limiting enzyme that controls cellular iron–protoporphyrin (heme) biosynthesis and subjected to feedback inhibition by the end product heme. Heme and other metalloporphyrins such as cobalt protoporphyrin (CoPP) or chromium protoporphyrin (CrPP) reduced ALAS-1 via the proteolysis of LONP. The decline of LONP activity weakened the negative impact of heme on ALAS-1 (Tian et al. ).
Cystathionine β-synthase (CBS), a heme protein, played a pivotal role in the metabolism of cysteine and homo-cysteine as well as the generation of endogenous H 2 S in mammalian cells (Teng et al. ; Welch and Loscalzo ). Under normoxia conditions, redundant mitochondrial CBS proteins were degraded by LONP to control it at a low concentration. While under hypoxia/ischemia conditions, the increased mitochondrial CBS accumulation raised H 2 S generation, which in turn restrained Ca 2+ -mediated cytochrome c (CYC) release from mitochondria and decreased ROS production (Teng et al. ). The degradation/accumulation of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), another mitochondrial heme protein, was also modulated by oxygen concentration and LONP in the same regulatory mechanism as for CBS (Teng et al. ).
LONP in neurotransmission PQC
Glutaminase C (GAC) is a critical mitochondrial enzyme that hydrolyzes glutamine to glutamate and plays a principal role in numerous physiological processes, such as renal ammoniagenesis, renal gluconeogenesis, hepatic ureagenesis, hepatic gluconeogenesis, and the biosynthesis of gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamate for cerebral neurotransmission (Curthoys and Watford ; Kita et al. ). The proteolysis of native tetrameric GAC by diphenylarsinic acid (DPAA) was mediated by LONP with the help of chaperonin mitochondrial matrix heat shock protein 70 (mtHsp70) (Kita et al. ).
LONP in steroidal synthesis PQC
Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) is a crucial mitochondrial protein that promoted the transportation of cholesterol into IMM for steroidal synthesis in steroidogenic cells of the adrenal cortex and gonads (Bahat et al. ; Granot et al. ). LONP was identified as one of the major ATP-dependent proteases responsible for the degradation of StAR (Bahat et al. ; Granot et al. ).
Lon functions as a moderator in mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt)
The mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPR mt ), a crosstalk between mitochondria and nuclear, is triggered by overloaded unfolded or misfolded proteins stress. That is, the accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins exceeds the mitochondrial processing capacity which induced the up-regulated expression of nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial molecular chaperones and mPQC proteases to reestablish mitoproteostasis and decrease proteotoxic stress (Fig. 1 ) (Papa and Germain ; Pellegrino et al. ).
Activating transcription factor associated with stress-1 (ATFS-1), with a nuclear localization sequence (NLS) and an N-terminal MTS, is required for the induction of UPR mt (Haynes et al. ; Nargund et al. ). Under normal conditions, ATFS-1 was imported into mitochondria and degraded by LONP. However, during mitochondrial stress or dysfunction, the lowered mitoprotein-import efficiency resulted in part of ATFS-1 accumulating in the cytosol and transporting into the nucleus via NLS to induce UPR mt (Nargund et al. ). Once entering into the nucleus, ATFS-1 activated a wide and protective transcriptional response to withstand the mitochondrial stress, such as more expressions of mitochondrial chaperones, mPQC proteases, and ROS-eliminating components. In addition, ATFS-1 might switch metabolism from mitochondria-dependent respiration to glycolysis as an alternative way of ATP generation during mitochondrial dysfunction via up-regulating plentiful genes in the glycolysis pathway (Haynes et al. ; Nargund et al. ).
Lon functions as a chaperone in mitochondria
Rep et al. ( ) discovered that Lon possessed dual function, including both favoring the assembly of F 1 F 0 ATPase and cytochrome c oxidase and degrading the misassembled protein complexes in Afg3p and/or Rcalp defective yeast. The growth and protein assembly defects of afg3 rcal double mutant were prevented by protease-defective Lon, but were not improved by ATP-binding motif-mutational Lon, which demonstrated that ATP-mediated chaperone-like function of Lon was distinctly realized via the inactivation of its proteolytic site (Rep et al. ).
Human Lon could be divided into three domains, the proteolytic domain, the ATP-binding domain, and the substrate-binding N-terminal domain (Cha et al. ; Voos ). Since the latter two domains display chaperone-like properties, Lon possesses both proteolytic and chaperone activities (Voos ). At present, Lon has been confirmed to bind NDUFS8 (NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase core subunit S8, an Fe–S protein in complex I of mitochondrial ETC) and Hsp60–mtHsp70 complex (Cheng et al. ; Kao et al. ).
LONP was up-regulated under the representative stress phenotypes (hypoxic and oxidative stresses) in tumorigenesis. The overexpression of LONP increased ROS generation in mitochondria, which was attributed to the up-regulation of NDUFS8 via interaction with Lon rather than proteolysis of Lon. Increased mitochondrial ROS promoted cell survival, cell proliferation, epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT), and cell migration via activating mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and Ras-ERK signal pathways (Cheng et al. ).
The N-terminal region of mtHsp70 could directly bind with Hsp60 (Cheng et al. ), and Hsp60–mtHsp70 complex could take part in the translocation, folding, and assembly of nuclear-encoded mitoproteins (Deocaris et al. ; Kao et al. ). In addition, the Hsp60–mtHsp70 complex was also involved in the balance between apoptosis and cell survival as well as the stability of mtDNA (Kao et al. ). Lon could bind to Hsp60–mtHsp70 complex and the stability of Hsp60–mtHsp70–Lon complex was enhanced with the up-regulation of Lon. Therefore, Lon, as a cytoprotective chaperone, was up-regulated to inhibit apoptosis and promote cell survival via binding with Hsp60–mtHsp70 complex under OS (Kao et al. ).
Lon functions as a maintainer of mtDNA
Human Lon site-specifically bound to single-stranded GT-rich DNA or GU-rich RNA and preferentially interacted with the control region for mtDNA replication and/or transcription (Fu and Markovitz ; Liu et al. ; Lu et al. ), which contained the light strand promoter (LSP) and the heavy strand promoter (HSP) of mtDNA (Fu and Markovitz ). LONP might participate in removing both the dam-methyltransferase and the helical density-lowered protein(s) after each replicative cycle (Maas ). Moreover, Lon could associate with the elements of mitochondrial nucleoids, such as mtDNA polymerase gamma (POLG) and Twinkle helicase. In a word, Lon directly took part in the metabolism of mtDNA (Liu et al. ).
Under OS, though Lon-mtDNA binding was reduced due to oxidatively modified Lon, its binding ability to the mtDNA control region was not affected, which indicated that mtDNA binding was a normal physiological function of Lon and Lon played an essential role in mtDNA maintenance (Lu et al. ).
As mentioned above, LONP modulated mitochondrial transcription by selectively degrading TFAM to stabilize the ratio of TFAM/mtDNA (Matsushima et al. ). In addition, the mtDNA-binding ability of Lon was inhibited by ATP and stimulated by protein substrate (Liu et al. ).
Lon functions as a regulator in endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response (UPRER)
The fold and mature of membrane and secretory proteins were principally achieved in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Jovaisaite et al. ). The ER responding to the stress resulted from the accumulation of unfolded/misfolded proteins in the ER lumen via activating intracellular signal transduction pathways was termed the ER unfolded protein response (UPR ER ) (Hetz and Papa ; Ron and Walter ). Three distinct arms of the UPR ER were induced by three kinds of ER membrane-embedded stress transducers including protein kinase RNA (PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK), inositol-requiring enzyme-1α (IRE1α), and activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6) (Hetz and Papa ; Ron and Walter ; Senft and Ronai ), followed by the activation of signal transduction pathways that increased protein-folding ability and decreased protein load on the ER to restore ER protein-folding homeostasis and to facilitate cell survival (Hetz and Papa ).
Under ER stress, PERK signaling was activated by the dissociation of the ER Hsp70 chaperone binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP, also called 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein, Grp78) from the ER lumen-positioning PERK sensing domain, followed by the autophosphorylation and dimerization of cytosol-located PERK kinase domain (Rainbolt et al. ; Sun et al. ). The activated PERK selectively phosphorylated α subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2α) at serine 51, which in turn inhibited the hetero-pentameric guanine nucleotide exchange factor eIF2B that down-regulated ribosomal translation to alleviate the protein-folding load of newly synthesized proteins importing the mitochondria and ER lumen (Rainbolt et al. ; Ron and Walter ). In addition, under high levels of eIF2α phosphorylation conditions, nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) signaling was activated via inhibiting eIF2B to alleviate the suppression of inhibitor of κB (IκB) (Wiseman et al. ). The gene expression of LONP1 was up-regulated by NF-κB under dual mitochondrial/ER stress caused by the treatment of antiretroviral drug efavirenz (Polo et al. ). Evidences showed that mitochondria and ER were spatially connected via specifically and closely modulated contact sites termed mitochondria-associated ER membranes (MAMs) (Polo et al. ; Vance ). The treatment of efavirenz resulted in the presence of Lon decreasing in the mitochondrial matrix and increasing in the extramitochondrial fractions, such as ER and MAMs (Polo et al. ). Moreover, Kao et al. ( ) have demonstrated that Lon could bind with Hsp60–mtHsp70 complex, and mtHsp70 has been proven a member of MAMs (Polo et al. ). Therefore, Lon, as a member of MAMs, plays an important role in the interorganellar crosstalk between the mitochondria and ER under dual mitochondrial/ER stress (Polo et al. ).
Furthermore, under eIF2α phosphorylation conditions, ATF4 was preferentially translated to induce the expression of genes that encoded antioxidant response, amino-acid transporters, and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP). The activated CHOP in turn induced the expression of ER oxidase 1 (ERO1, required for protein-folding disulphide bond formation), growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein-34 (GADD34), LONP, Hsp60, Hsp10, and pro-apoptotic Bcl2 family proteins (Bernales et al. ; Hetz and Papa ; Li et al. ; Papa and Germain ; Rainbolt et al. ; Ron and Walter ). The activated LONP in turn imported to mitochondria to maintain mitoproteostasis (Fig. 2 ). The PERK signaling pathway was terminated by the dephosphorylation of eIF2α via the stress-induced protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) regulatory subunit GADD34/PPP1R15A with the help of the constitutive repressor of eIF2α phosphorylation (CReP/PPP1R15B) (Jousse et al. ; Rainbolt et al. ; Ron and Walter ).
Fig. 2 Lon in endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response (UPR ER ). OMM outer mitochondrial membrane, IMS intermembrane space, IMM inner mitochondrial membrane, MTS mitochondrial targeting sequence, ATP adenosine triphosphate, MPP mitochondrial processing peptidase, TOM translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane, TIM23 translocase of the inner mitochondrial membrane 23, PAM presequence translocase-associated motor, ER endoplasmic reticulum, TRAP1 tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated protein 1, mtHsp70 mitochondrial matrix heat shock protein 70, PERK protein kinase RNA (PKR)-like ER kinase, BiP endoplasmic reticulum Hsp70 chaperone binding immunoglobulin protein, eIF2 eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2, ATF4 activating transcription factor-4, CHOP CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein, ERO1 endoplasmic reticulum oxidase 1, PP1 protein phosphatase 1, CReP constitutive repressor of eIF2α phosphorylation, GADD34 growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein-34, NF-κB nuclear factor-kappa B, IκB inhibitor of κB, LONP Lon protease
Summary and future directions
Lon, as a pivotal stress-responsive protein that involved in the crosstalks among mitochondria, ER and nucleus, participated in multifarious important cellular processes, such as mPQC, UPR mt , the mtDNA maintenance, and UPR ER , which is crucial for cell survival.
Although Lon’s related researches started very early from the isolation of lon mutants in 1964 (Howard-Flanders et al. ), there are still many problems remain to be solved. For example, Lon, as a protease in mPQC system, its substrates need to be further identified and confirmed, such as oxidized Trx2. Furthermore, 76 possible Lon-associated proteins were identified by Kao et al. ( ) via coimmunoprecipitation-combined shotgun mass spectrometry. However, Lon, as an important cytoprotective chaperone in mitochondria, the solid demonstrations of Lon-binding proteins were very scarce. In addition, the Lon-participant signaling networks between UPR mt and UPR ER , and crosstalks among mitochondria, ER and nucleus urgently called for further enrichment. Moreover, as a multifunctional protein, how Lon finely coordinate or switch among different functions, such as protease and charperone activity, to adapt various stresses needs to be further investigated. Furthermore, Lon was identified as a novel member of MAMs in 2017, and plenty of questions remained to be solved, such as whether its functions in MAMs are the same as that in mitochondrial matrix, which types of cellular MAMs contain Lon, how MAM-located Lon participates in signal transduction between mitochondria and ER, whether Lon-associated signal transduction in MAMs changes the morphology of ER–mitochondria contact sites, and so on (Polo et al. ).