Introduction
Lung cancer is the second most commonly diagnosed cancer nationwide and the leading cause of cancer death [ , , ]. Smoking is the chief cause of lung cancer and is responsible for approximately 90% of lung cancer deaths in the USA [ ]. Early detection can be challenging, as early stage lung disease is often asymptomatic. Only 16% of lung cancer cases diagnosed are localized [ ], and survival rates decrease markedly for regional and advanced stage disease [ ]. Low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) screening is a promising screening modality for high-risk (HR) individuals. The National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) identified a clear benefit in utilizing LDCT for early diagnosis of lung cancer, reducing lung cancer mortality among HR individuals by 20% as compared to individuals screened using chest x-ray [ , , , ]. Recent initiatives in health care policy support LDCT screening, and private and public insurance companies now cover LDCT screening for lung cancer with a written prescription from the physician, with an additional requirement of documentation of shared decision-making for Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) [ ].
Yet lung cancer screening uptake remains generally low [ ]. HR individuals report LDCT concerns about insurance coverage, false positives, whether follow-up or additional procedures are necessary [ , ], radiation exposure, and fear of positive results [ , , ]. Despite skepticism regarding the increased effectiveness of LDCT screening over chest x-ray to produce long-term survival benefits [ ], HR individuals are willing to undergo LDCT screening if referred by their physician [ , ]. Physician referral for LDCT screening referrals is also low [ ], with many primary care providers (PCPs) reporting a lack of knowledge regarding eligibility criteria and reimbursement [ ]. PCPs report additional concerns about the LDCT screening process including false positives, patient stress/anxiety, and exposure to radiation [ , , ]. Taken together, these findings demonstrate the need for LDCT educational materials for both PCPs and HR audiences.
Health communication messages play an integral role in encouraging audiences to engage in early detection and screening behaviors [ ]. Creating and implementing LDCT screening messages require careful consideration, given identified barriers and smoking-associated stigma that function as a screening deterrent [ , ]. Obtaining patient and physician feedback to promotional/education messages is an important step towards creating effective tailored communications for health care provider and patient audiences. In this study, we sought to elicit feedback on existing promotion/education materials to foster LDCT screening behaviors among HR and PCP audiences as well as two informational videos. Findings can be used to inform the development of future LDCT promotional messages.
Methods
This study was approved by Chesapeake IRB (Columbia, MD). A waiver of written informed consent was obtained.
Participants
In-person (HR) and telephone (PCP) focus group discussions were conducted. Eligibility criteria for HR participants mirrored the US Preventive Service Task Force’s (USPSTF) lung cancer screening eligibility criteria. Participants were between the ages of 55 and 80, had a 30-pack-year smoking history, and were either a current or former smoker who quit within the past 15 years [ ]. Individuals who had a previous LDCT screening for lung cancer or were currently undergoing treatment for cancer were excluded. HR participants received a meal and $30. The eligibility criteria for primary care providers included having an active license (MD, DO, ARNP, PA), working in a primary care setting in the state of Florida, working with patients 55+, and having access to a computer or tablet and a telephone. PCP participants received $100 for their participation.
All participants were recruited using flyers posted in medical facilities and the surrounding community. Craigslist ads were placed to aid in the recruitment of HR community participants. For the recruitment of PCPs, recruitment strategies included emails sent to physician liaison groups. All interested participants were invited to call a study telephone number and were subsequently screened for eligibility.
Focus Group Procedures
This study was conducted in two parts. In the first part, we examined knowledge, attitudes, and intentions among HR individuals as well as knowledge, attitudes, and practice behaviors among PCPs; these results are described in a separate publication [ ]. The following results are part 2 of the focus groups, during which we examined perceptions of PE materials created to promote LDCT.
HR Focus Groups
Participants were scheduled for a 1.5-h in-person focus group. Participants were shown two videos about LDCT screening as well as two print materials. Each video was shown separately, with a discussion after each one. Video 1 featured a healthy, active grandmother who quit smoking several years ago and had participated in the NLST. Her stated motivation for screening was to be around longer for her grandchildren. Video 2 featured a frail WWII veteran who described how he began smoking while serving in the war and had an LDCT on advice of his physician. After viewing and discussion of the videos concluded, participants also viewed two types of print materials to review and discuss as a group. Print material 1 was a dual-sided risk assessment tool. Print material 2 was a single-sided brochure listing lung cancer risk factors and the benefits of early detection. These materials are described further in Table 1 . A semi-structured interview guide was used and leads and prompts were offered to encourage discussion of perceptions. Examples questions included “What do you think is the main message of this video/brochure?,” “What information is missing that you would like to see included?,” and “What do you like/dislike about this video/brochure?”. Table 1 HR and PCP participant materials’ description HR participant materials’ description PCP participant materials’ description Print material no. 1 Print material no. 2 Videos Referral pad •Dual-sided Side 1 •Blue and green tones •Risk assessment tool •High risk, intermediate risk, low risk •Boxes to check for patient to determine risk level •Website address listed for additional information Side 2 •Further information about the initiative •Contact information •Single-sided •“Breathe Deep” written at top •Image of man in his 60s or 70s reaching upward as if stretching. He is wearing casual clothing and has water behind him as if standing on the beach •Information written in all caps next to image of man that discusses risk factors and the benefit of early detection •Scheduling information on bottom •Health center logo on bottom Video 1 •Informational video opens with a woman sitting with her feet in her swimming pool surrounded by her grandchildren swimming and playing. The woman is speaking as a success story and a survivor. She was a participant in the NLST. A pulmonologist and radiologist are also interviewed. •Dual-sided Side 1 •Cancer center logo at top •White with blue accents and black print •Directions for filling out referral at top •Box with information related to shared decision-making requirement with options to check off related to screening, consult, and/or management of care •Box for basic patient information and eligibility requirements •Box for referring provider information and space for comments Side 2 •Health center logo at top •Box for patient appointment information •Bulleted patient instructions •Area map •Information about screening for lung cancer provided by Lung Cancer Alliance •Our seal that designates us as a Lung Cancer Screening Center by the American College of Radiology Directions to our health center from various locations in the area Video 2 •Educational video about lung cancer CT screening. A WWII veteran is interviewed about his lung cancer. Criteria about who is considered to be high risk are given. Pulmonologist/oncologist is interviewed. Radiation information given as well as cost.
PCP Focus Groups
We initially planned to recruit physicians; however, HR participant feedback indicated that many were most often seen by nurse practitioners (NP) and physician assistants (PA). We therefore extended recruitment from physicians to include NPs and PAs who worked in the primary care setting. Focus groups were conducted for physicians separately and additional focus groups were comprised of NPs and PAs. Participants were scheduled for a 60-min telephone focus group. They were shown a referral sheet that would ensure all requirements are met for the patient’s LDCT to be covered by CMS. These promotional materials are described further in Table 1 . A semi-structured interview guide was used and questions were posed to encourage a dialog about each material shown. Examples questions included: “What do you think of the content?,” “What are the most important points to include?,” “What is the best way to inform providers about lung cancer screening sites?,” and “What resources would you like to have available for patients regarding LDCT?”.
Data Analysis
All focus groups were audio recorded and verbatim transcripts were created for content analysis using the constant comparative method with the goal of creating summaries of the audiences’ feedback about each material/video. Debriefing discussions were held among investigators after each focus group to examine if new information was forthcoming. After 17 focus groups (8 HR and 9 PCPs) were conducted, it was determined saturation had been reached; that is, no novel perceptions were heard from the group. From the verbatim transcripts, a preliminary code list was developed. Codes were based on a priori themes related to positive and negative attributes, possible impact of the materials/video on HR/PCP communities, and barriers and facilitators to referrals or screening [ ].
Results
High-Risk Individuals
HR participant ( N = 38) characteristics are displayed in Table 2 . Major themes in the form of summaries are presented below. Table 2 High-risk and primary care provider participant demographics HR participants ( N = 38) (%) PCP participants ( N = 23) (%) Gender Gender Male 19 (50) Male 12 (52) Female 19 (50) Female 11 (48) Age Age 55–60 21 (55) ≤ 44 12 (52) 61–70 10 (26) 45–74 11 (48) >71 7 (18) Race/ethnicity Race/ethnicity White 23 (61) White 18 (78) Black 11 (29) Black 1 (4) Asian 0 (0) Asian 3 (13) Other 4 (11) Other 1 (4) Hispanic/Latino 4 (11) Hispanic/Latino 0 (0) Insurance type a Provider type Public 25 (66) MD 16 (70) Military/Tricare 4 (11) ARNP 3 (13) Private 12 (32) PA 4 (17) Uninsured/other 5 (13) Education b Year of prof school graduation High school grad 8 (21) 2010–2014 8 (35) Some college 10 (26) 2000–2009 6 (26) Tech school/AA 4 (11) 1990–1999 4 (17) 4-year degree 10 (26) 1970–1989 5 (22) Professional degree 2 (5) Age began smoking a Average weekly patients 55+ ≤15 20 (53) 0–25 5 (22) 16–21 13 (34) 26–50 9 (39) ≥22 4 (11) 51–75 3 (13) 75–100 3 (13) >100 3 (13) Current smoker Primary practice location Yes 29 (76) Private practice 12 (52) Teaching hospital 5 (22) Community-based center 3 (13) University-based center 2 (9) Cigarettes per day b Practice setting ≤10 7 (18) Rural 2 (9) 11–20 20 (53) Urban 11 (78) ≥21 10 (26) Suburban 10 (43) Times attempted to quit in last year No. of physicians in practice None 7 (18) 1–5 17 (74) 1–4 19 (50) 16–49 3 (13) 5–10 2 (5) 50+ 3 (13) >10 2 (5) Other smokers in household Yes 12 (32) a Participants selected more than one response b Not all questions were answered by all participants
Reactions to Video 1
Participants expressed that the main message of the lung cancer survivor testimonial was “early screening saves lives.” When asked to share what they liked most about the video, a few participants expressed an appreciation for watching the lung cancer survivor that undergoes the actual process, as well as the presentation of an actual CT scan that depicted lung tumors. Other participants remarked that the video prompted them to consider the consequences of smoking and strongly consider lung cancer screening. Although a few participants expressed an affinity for the featured survivor, the majority felt they did not relate to certain characteristics. Most participants were polarized by the lung cancer survivor’s wish to “spend more time with her grandchildren” and the depiction of poolside frolicking. Participants indicated they were unable to relate to the survivor and her socioeconomic status and noted that the depiction contrasted sharply with their own working class realities. Participants shared both positive and negative feelings regarding the survivor’s shared history of smoking, with some participants remarking they were glad that her cancer was found early. Other participants felt that the video’s presentation of her smoking history could be interpreted as if she were being blamed for her cancer. When asked to comment on the usefulness of the video in conveying details concerning lung cancer screening, participants shared their dislike for the apparent omission of details related to eligibility, including risk factors and symptoms. Participants desired greater education about any indicators that signaled the need for screening. Participants also expressed an interest in more information about the test and the test results, including clarification of the difference between an x-ray and CT, the rate of false positives, supplemental tests that may be needed, and test accuracy. A few participants also shared that the video did not address their concerns about potential costs.
Positive Comments
“I like that it actually showed the spots on the lungs. When I got a CT scan, they didn’t show me anything, all they told me was I had a spot on my lung, but here it shows me.” “I liked her idea of showing more of the actual process because patients come in and they’re dumbfounded, they have no idea what’s going to happen.” “I thought it was interesting. To see what it looked like.” “I got scared. Because it’s been ten years, since I quit. And I don’t think I’ve had a CT scan. I’m gonna get one.” “It also made me think, like you said, not to smoke, but then there are those that have been exposed to secondhand smoke for so many years. People just don’t think about it.”
Negative Comments
“Most of us are not sitting around the pool watching grandchildren. Most of us get in our cars and we go to work and we are paying mortgages and we are paying bills and most of us are working people out there, the majority. So, if you are going to address, try to reach a larger percentage of the population, then you’re going to have to, you might get a mix but you’re going to have to identify with a bigger part of the population.” “The lady was a little too much upper middle class.” “She has grandchildren and I don’t have grandchildren so I don’t relate to that.” “The first one is just some, don’t take it wrong but some rich old lady in her backyard and with a swimming pool and wanting to live long to be with her kids.”
Impact of Video
“It could have been a lot clearer. She didn’t seem that happy to be alive.” “It may cause concern unnecessarily.” “It’s too evasive.” “That was a good clip, it wasn’t graphic enough, I don’t think, if you want to convince someone but at the same time, you don’t want to scare people.”
Reactions to Video 2
When prompted to share what they liked most about the video, participants overall felt that the news video was more informative than the lung cancer survivor testimonial. When asked to compare the two videos, participants were divided in their preference for the pathos-driven lung cancer survivor account or the more “balanced reporting” style of the news video. However, participants were united in their preference of the featured individual in video 2, a World War II veteran in his 80s. Several participants remarked that seeing someone in poorer physical health made the screening message more persuasive. When prompted to share what they liked the least and to share suggestions for improvement, several participants objected to what they perceived as a “fear-based” approach. While some participants found the veteran’s health to be an effective persuasive tool, a few others found it demotivating and expressed the desire to see someone who wasn’t experiencing such pronounced breathing problems. In contrast to the survivor testimonial video, most participants responded favorably to how the veteran’s smoking history was presented (i.e., a coping mechanism introduced while fighting in foxholes during WWII) and found his story to be less stigmatizing. When asked to comment on the video’s usefulness in conveying lung cancer screening details, participants overall found the news video to be more informative than the lung cancer survivor testimonial. A few participants expressed the desire for greater information about insurance coverage and risk factors.
Positive Attributes
“The more people know, the more people are going to do it. The way the machine detects it and gives you the leverage and lets you know, let the doctors know what they have to do to remove that cancer or however they have to treat that.” “I like seeing the numbers. How many and how many were saved because of it.” “I like the second one better because it started out with him having trouble breathing. That kind of caught your attention more than the first one did.” “It was grittier, it was more real because it’s obvious that he’s sick but like she said, he didn’t look like the personification of health.”
Negative Attributes
“There is a lot of fear I feel in this one. It bothers me.” “You are going to have people asking for it that really don’t have a need for it. The information is information that the professionals should have and that should be part of an annual checkup process that they go through and then recommend to the individual and if necessary show that to the one on one patient.” “Okay, they could have gotten somebody a little healthier but that was much better. Yeah, I like it better but that poor soul, didn’t look like he had the best quality of life. I would have like to see someone who, was a little more bouncy and didn’t sound like he was gasping for breath.” “Yeah but still, if you get somebody who looked, just a little bit more vital and didn’t sound like he was gasping for breath because the worst thing in the world is when you can’t catch your breath. So, I have treatment for lung cancer and I am still panting, I don’t think so. I want to see somebody, who maybe as frail but at least, isn’t gasping for breath or looking like he is having trouble breathing because he had some definite breathing problems there.”
Reactions to Risk Assessment Print Brochure
Most participants preferred the risk assessment brochure as compared to the one page brochure. When asked to share what they liked the most about the risk assessment brochure, most participants shared their preference for the concise format of the brochure, which they considered interactive and eye-catching. Participants expressed an appreciation for the checklist, as well as the additional information about risk factors, including second hand smoke, military exposure, asbestos, and arsenic. Several participants commented that they found it helpful to be able to quickly identify the information pertinent to them and their individualized level of risk. When asked to share what they liked least about the booklet and suggestions for improvement, a few participants expressed the desire for a checklist to determine their level of risk. “It tweaks your interest right away, especially these little things. Make you kind of stop and take a look at it. Yeah, where you fall into. The little checkmarks would just make me wanna, “Let me see. Yeah, I have to do this. Okay, what about this?” And be quick. You get an idea and then they give you some more information to the point in the back.” “In the second paragraph, the one that has everything about the smoking and everything. Like I said, I’ve been in the military and on them ships; I went through a lot of that. The diesel and all that, that’s what they used to burn all the time and we would breathe it all the time. The coal smoke, there were certain ships that still burn coal and stuff.” “This is just me, but I’d like to see that quantified, like to attach a point value to the different categories based on how much of an impact of possible lung cancer, instead of just hand waving and squishy, you kind of look at it and say, yeah my mother had that and I have a history in the family. 65 ½ that means something to me, you know.” “This assessment tool, I think that’s really good.” “…Every time I see one of these with the boxes, I automatically do it. I just do it in my head and I have all my life, I don’t know where that comes from but that is pretty good right there. It might catch somebody’s eye.” “Yes. You know you’ve got their attention, go hook them in. I think that’s the purpose of the damn thing.
Reactions to Print Brochure—1 Page “Breathe Deep” Brochure
Participants found the esthetics of the one-sided brochure, which featured a man stretching languidly on a beach, to be reminiscent of Florida and the Cancer Center. Some participants wondered if the Cancer Center branding signaled that screening could only take place at that institution. Others shared that they found the brochure to be relatively unremarkable. When asked what they liked most about the brochure, participants were divided in their perceptions of the photo of the man stretching. Some participants liked the idea of the man enjoying his health and ability to breathe deeply, indicating the absence of illness. Other participants thought greater persuasive appeal for LDCT screening could be created with a photo of a visibly sicker individual. Some participants also reported that they would prefer an image that more closely depicted screening (e.g., CT machine). When asked to provide suggested content changes, participants provided alternative slogans to “Breathe Deep,” such as factual statements about the benefit of LDCT screening. A few participants also found the brochure’s language to be vague and unclear concerning risk factors and eligibility for screening. “It should say ‘Try to Breathe Deep on it.” “Well as a former English teacher, it should be “Breathe Deeply.”” “Or, ‘CT scan can find something the size of a grain of rice.’ Because that’s what got my attention on the video, that’s amazing. Not this, “Just Breathe Deep.” “You just think it’s a routine advertisement. You just go on about your business.” “Well it would make sense to show the machine, and tell what it does. This man is just standing here with his hands up.” “I kinda like not a healthy person, but a person who’s been affected by lung cancer. Because when we see this, we can be, “I don’t have to worry about smoking.” But if you see a man with no legs, browbeat, the deepest trouble of his life, and his lungs as black as can be, that will change a person. “I smoked. This is what I don’t wanna be like.” But if I don’t smoke, I’ll be as healthy as him. We need to see what it’s gonna be like, if we keep smoking. “I don’t wanna smoke. I don’t wanna look like that.” That’s my opinion.”
Primary Care Providers
PCP participant ( N = 23) characteristics are displayed in Table 2 . Major themes extracted from the data analyses are presented below.
Reactions to Referral Form
PCP participants responded positively when presented with the concept of a referring mechanism for LDCT screening (i.e., referral form) but commented on several potential communication and logistical errors. Providers identified the need to clearly explain how the form would initiate the testing process, how the referring provider would be kept abreast during this process, and the accountability for communication with patients throughout the subsequent follow-up testing process, such as additional testing, notification of positive results, and making appointments for follow-up. PCP participants also requested practical information to further facilitate the ease of referral, such as diagnostic codes. “…if the person screening thinks that cancer might be present, what happens to the provider who sends that patient? I’m seeing what you all or Moffitt would do, how is that done in conjunction with the provider who makes the referral? Because if you’re referring, if I understand this correctly, you’re referring for the test, but you’re not referring for the workup and treatment for required, or is that just inferred from this?” “I mean, if you’re sending a patient for a procedure, i.e. The CT scan and it comes back positive, who is going to tell the patient that? And then with the follow up the first question is going to be: OMG, you know, there’s possible lung cancer here, what do I do next? I think – I don’t get a clear sense on what happens, how that happens, or how that’s taken care of? Do you call – is the referring physician? Does [the hospital] take on that responsibility and set up an appointment for the patient? You know, I’m just not quite sure of what happens from the patient’s experience.” “Okay, and so yeah, you have the scheduling convenience. But then for the provider, we’d have to know exactly how to print out the request because it sounded like there were particular criteria that needed to be met.” “…so you’re saying – I see it at the top there, it says or you may just call the number. We could use this in office to start the referrals, or patients can self-refer…” “And then that’d be very easy for us to go and take it out of one of our folders and fill it out and then have it scan it.”
Discussion and Conclusion
Discussion
Regardless of the nature of the persuasive appeal, a clear and thorough explanation of LDCT screening (i.e., eligibility, cost, harms and benefits) was of chief importance for both PCP and HR audiences. Although participants were divided in their perceptions of the “actors” featured in the materials, they were unified in their desire for greater clarity in details about eligibility, the actual screening process, next steps if an abnormal result presented, and the ability to clearly identify how this information related to their own personal level of risk.
These findings demonstrate the value of shifting away from media and persuasive appeals that primarily rely upon on emotional appeals to motivate audience members. Woloshin and colleagues [ ] similarly urge a transition from traditional appeals that use fear, guilt, and perceived personal responsibility to promote cancer screening. Instead, screening messages should feature easily understandable text that reviews benefits and harms in the appropriate context. Participant feedback resonated with this, as both HR and PCP participants consistently requested to see the benefits of screening more clearly and prominently stated with a clear explication of the requirements and indicators for LDCT screening.
Although clear presentation of pertinent details is a top priority, persuasion is still an essential component in an effective cancer screening campaign. [ ] As participants noted, the perceived consequences depicted in both print and video mediums prompted them to “really think” about the consequences of their own smoking behavior. Utilizing fear appeals to promote cancer screening can promote attitude change [ ], but it can arouse maladaptive behaviors in audience members such as denial or defense avoidance [ ]. This sensitivity to stigma was present as participants expressed a preference for materials that framed smoking as the result of external pressure as opposed to a personal shortcoming (i.e., the grizzled war veteran who acquired his smoking habit as the result of wartime stress). Participants’ negative reactions to potentially stigmatizing messages clearly point to the need to consider issues of guilt and blame when crafting health communication messages [ ].
Participant responses also suggest the need for careful consideration of tailoring of screening messages. Persuasive appeals tailored to match the characteristics of the target audience are generally more persuasive and allow audience members to more closely identify with the featured content.
PCP participant feedback illuminated the need to carefully and comprehensively assess PCPs’ needs when providing information and referring patients for LDCT screening. While PCPs found it helpful to have readily accessible screening information (i.e., cost, eligibility criteria), their feedback pointed to practical needs as well (i.e., diagnostic codes). Beyond simply informing the patient about LDCT screening, PCPs require support with the coordination of communication [ ] and logistics needed to initiate LDCT screening and meet ongoing patient needs and the coordination of care during any subsequent testing.
Conclusion
LDCT screening is a promising screening modality with the potential to decrease lung cancer mortality. High-risk stakeholders are unaware of the availability of LDCT and are seeking this knowledge from their health care providers. Primary care providers are also not well informed on the specifics of screening eligibility and insurance coverage. A clear and thorough explanation of LDCT eligibility, cost, harms, and benefits was of chief importance for both PCP and HR audiences. LDCT screening promotional materials must provide clear and detailed information about the risks and benefits of screening to increase receptivity in HR audiences.
Lessons for Practice
Successful LDCT screening programs require multi-level coordination and institutional support to increase health care provider knowledge, create pathways to screening, and provide post-screening support for HR individuals. Our results demonstrate the need to increase knowledge of LDCT screening for both patient and provider audiences, as well as consideration for HR individuals’ needs after initial screening. Promotional screening materials for both HR individuals and providers should be easily accessible, clearly highlighting the benefits/and or risks of screening tailored to patient demographics. Creating provider and patient education opportunities will aid in shared decision-making opportunities.