Web-based cancer clinical trial search engines provide users access to information about clinical trials via websites and online applications. The medical jargon and scientific language contained in such search engines require a high level of health literacy and numeracy skills for adequate comprehension. This can present a barrier to users from the general public who may find a clinical trial online but not understand the trial title or purpose and, therefore, not act upon the information provided. Clinical trial participation is crucial for advancing knowledge of cancer, developing new treatments, and improving patients’ quality of life. It is estimated that only 4 % of adult cancer patients enroll in clinical trials [ ] with even lower participation rates for vulnerable populations including minorities, women, and the elderly [ ].
Users are increasingly turning to the Internet for health-related information. Pew Research Center [ ] surveys report that 87 % of US adults use the Internet, and 72 % of adult online users have looked for health information over the past year. Unpublished data gathered by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) from a national sample showed that people considering a clinical trial were likely to use the Internet to find out about them [ ]. In order to identify potential trials online, users must be able to comprehend the terminology related to the cancer diagnosis and treatment [ ]. This is especially true for those with low health literacy. A study done by Utami, Bickmore, Barry and Paasche-Orlowe [ ] showed that 81 % of participants with low health literacy used trial description details to choose among trials found via online search engines. Becoming overwhelmed by medical language or quantity of text caused users to reject the trial presented [ ].
The Joint Commission highlights the need for health information to be offered in a way that is linguistically and culturally understandable for all [ ]. National data has reported that nearly nine out of ten US adults fall below the proficient level in health literacy and that only 12 % have proficient health literacy [ ]. Research has shown that 87 million Americans, representing one third of the total population, had less than adequate levels of health literacy [ ]. The prevalence of limited health literacy is highest among vulnerable populations, such as non-English speaking ethnic minorities, the poor, and the elderly [ ]. Limited health literacy has also been linked to disparities between races in regard to health outcomes [ , , ].
In this study, we test plain language clinical trial purpose statements, integrated into a cancer center clinical trials searchable website/app, to determine their effectiveness in aiding users’ understanding of trial basics. We report the results of three investigations. In the first, five plain language clinical trial purpose statements are tested for comprehension with volunteers from the general public. In the second, the initial five purpose statements are revised and retested, and an additional five purpose statements are tested for the first time. In the third, seven of the ten purpose statements from the first two rounds of user testing are revised and retested. The aim of the project was to test user comprehension of (a) the treatment being studied, (b) cancer type and, (c) basic inclusion/exclusion criteria.
Method
Background
In early 2014, the information technology (IT) department at University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center (UHSCC), Cleveland, Ohio, launched a searchable website/app of open/active clinical trials populated with data from the Oncore® Enterprise Research System and the National Cancer Institute’s clinical trials website. The website/app was reviewed by UHSCC’s Patient and Family Advisory Council who recommended that the UHSCC Office of Patient and Public Education (OPPE) assist with plain language integration for the site. A team of two registered nurses, a master’s-prepared health education specialist and a master’s-prepared health librarian, with experience and training in plain language and health literacy, was assembled.
Over a 10-month period, working with the IT department, the team created plain language short titles and “about this study” descriptions for every trial (more than 140) contained on the website/app. Through collaboration with UHSCC pharmacists, a list of easy to understand words and phrasing was developed to describe pharmaceuticals used and trial phases. Wording and phrasing was kept consistent in all plain language edits made. User testing of plain language purpose statements took place between January and March 2015.
Ethical Approval
The user testing method described in this study was exempted as human subject research by the Center for Research and Technology at University Hospitals Case Medical Center, (UHCMC), Cleveland, Ohio (IRB# NHR-14-88) on 11/13/2014. The testing method is not considered research under 45 CFR 46 or 21 CFR 56.
Materials
Ten “Purpose of the Study” plain language clinical trial descriptions were selected for testing from UHSCC’s clinical trials website. The OPPE team created three to four content questions focusing on the treatment being studied, cancer type, and basic inclusion/exclusion criteria in the purpose statement. Content questions were organized into a tally sheet used by the patient education interviewer to record if questions were or were not answered correctly (see Appendix A ). A printed screenshot of the trial detail page was used with volunteers (see Appendix B ).
Participants and Procedure
Eligible volunteers were adults 18 years of age or older, willing to participate, capable of reading and answering questions, and naïve to cancer clinical trial participation [ ]. Testing was terminated if the volunteer changed their mind about participating, or if at any time during testing the volunteer seemed embarrassed or uncomfortable.
Eligible volunteers, from a convenience sample of adults in a general surgery waiting area, representing both genders, different ages, and multiple ethnicities, were enlisted. They were provided with a screenshot of the trial detail page, and asked to read the highlighted, plain language, purpose of the study statement. After reading the purpose statement, volunteers answered questions about content asked by a patient education staff interviewer. The volunteer was instructed to refer to the highlighted purpose statement for review as needed. The interviewer recorded if questions were answered correctly or incorrectly. Volunteers participated in one round of testing and answered questions related to two of the clinical trials purpose statements being studied.
Questions About Treatment Being Studied
In round one, volunteers were asked: “What is being studied in this trial?” In round two, the question was revised to: “What treatment is being studied in this trial?” In round three, the question was again revised to: “What is being studied?”
Questions About Cancer Type
In rounds one and two, volunteers were asked: “What type of cancer must a person have to take part in this trial?” In round three, this question was revised to: “What type of cancer must a person have”? In all three rounds, volunteers were asked: “What stage cancer (name) can take part in this study?” as pertinent to the purpose statement being tested, and trial details.
Questions About Basic Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Volunteers answered questions about inclusion/exclusion criteria specific to the trial in all three rounds of testing. Inclusion/exclusion criteria questions focused on specifics such as metastasis, recurrence, current and/or previous treatment, and age range required for trial participation.
Data Analyses
Responses to questions were tallied and divided by total number of participants to calculate percentage of correct answers. Responses that were not given in complete detail per the purpose statement content were considered incorrect. For example, in a trial studying both chemotherapy and radiation, a response of “chemo” to the question “What is being studied?” would be considered wrong, due to incompleteness of response. A baseline of 80 % total participant correct answer rate was used to determine adequate user comprehension [ ]. Purpose statements and individual questions in which total participant correct answer rate fell below 80 % were revised and retested.
Results
Results for each round are shown in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 Results of user testing of plain language clinical trial purpose statements
User Comprehension of Treatment Being Studied
Round One
One hundred five user tests of five clinical trial purpose statements were conducted with 46 volunteers. Of 105 responses for the question “What is being studied in this trial?” twenty-six (25 %) were incorrect. Twenty-one of the incorrect responses cited the cancer as being studied (such as breast cancer or lymphoma) instead of the treatment (such as radiation or chemo).
Originally, all five purpose statements were one to two sentences in length. Since the round one results fell below the 80 % correct answer rate, purpose statements were changed to shorter sentences. This was done to more specifically identify the treatment being studied. The question “What is being studied in this trial?” was revised to “What treatment is being studied in this trial?” to add specificity.
Round Two
Ninety-eight retests of the five revised purpose statements were conducted using 54 volunteers. Of 98 responses for the question “What treatment is being studied in this trial?” 42 (43 %) were incorrect. Thirty-six of the wrong responses cited the cancer as the treatment being studied.
Ninety-six tests of an additional five purpose statements were also conducted using 46 volunteers. These purpose statements were one sentence in length and used the question “What is being studied in this trial?” Of 96 responses, 15 (16 %) were incorrect. Fourteen of the wrong responses cited the cancer as the treatment being studied.
Seven purpose statements which fell below the 80 % correct answer rate were revised and rewritten. The phrasing “This trial studies” was changed to say “To study.” The question being asked was revised to “What is being studied?” The words “treatment” and “trial” were removed.
Round Three
One hundred forty two retests of the seven revised purpose statements were conducted with 71 volunteers. Of 142 responses for the question “What is being studied?” 33 (23 %) were incorrect.
User Comprehension of Cancer Type
Round One
Of 102 responses to questions regarding type of cancer, six (5 %) were incorrect.
Round Two
Of 155 responses to questions regarding type of cancer, 13 (8 %) were incorrect.
Round Three
Of 121 responses to questions regarding type of cancer, four (3 %) were incorrect.
User Comprehension of Basic Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Round One
Of 168 responses to questions regarding inclusion/exclusion criteria, 12 (13 %) were incorrect.
Round Two
Of 270 responses to questions regarding inclusion/exclusion criteria, 54 (20 %) were incorrect. Questions focusing on treatment requirements and spread of disease showed the highest incorrect rate.
Round Three
Of 183 responses to questions regarding inclusion/exclusion criteria, 12 (7 %) were incorrect.
Discussion
The primary goal of this study was to evaluate if using plain language in clinical trial purpose statements is easy for users to comprehend. Our results demonstrate that plain language descriptions enabled understanding of the cancer type and basic inclusion/exclusion criteria. This suggests that plain language content is needed within clinical trial websites and other online applications to help users understand trial information they find. Previous studies [ , , ] point to difficult scientific language found on clinical trial websites as a barrier to general public comprehension and use.
We also found that despite the plain language and simple sentence structure of purpose statements, users consistently had difficulty comprehending the treatment being studied in the trial. Utami et al. [ ] found that 47 % of participants used a current or past health condition as the criteria for choosing a clinical trial via online search engines, regardless of health literacy level. This suggests that users tend to consider the disease state that could be helped by a trial more important than the method of treatment under investigation. This may cause users to prioritize or focus upon the cancer even when directly questioned about the treatment being studied. Plain language purpose statements that relate the treatment being studied to the cancer may produce better comprehension results. For instance, instead of stating; “This trial studies more than one chemo drug. It is for people with Ewing Sarcoma,” a more relational description could read; “This study tests how well more than one chemo drug works for Ewing Sarcoma.” Results also indicate that the word “treatment” may be unclear to users especially those naïve to cancer clinical trials.
Incidental Findings
Five volunteers had difficulty reading Roman numerals used to describe cancer stage in one of the purpose statements. The statement was revised using Arabic rather than Roman numerals. The revised purpose statement had a 100 % correct rate when retested.
The phrase “with or without” used in two purpose statements caused confusion about trial eligibility. For example: “This trial studies chemo with or without a cancer drug for T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia or T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma that has not been treated. For patients 2 to 30 years old.” Purpose statements containing the phrase “with or without” were reworded and the statement removed. For example: “This trial studies chemo alone or chemo with a cancer drug. It is for T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia or T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma that has not been treated. For patients 2 to 30 years old.”
Volunteer comments indicated that the term “cord blood,” used in one of the purpose statements, was not understood. This statement was rewritten using the term “umbilical cord blood” instead.
Volunteers also commented that an abbreviation used in parenthesis after the cancer name, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) was confusing and distracting. This abbreviation was removed.
Limitations
Per our preset parameters, this study had several limitations. None of the participants were cancer patients and all were naïve to cancer clinical trials making their knowledge of trials, and trial related language, very limited. Individuals recently diagnosed with cancer would be more likely to be familiar with terms used in the purpose statements. Engagement with the clinical trials website was limited to one static screen shot of the trial detail page. User comprehension may have been enhanced if participants were allowed to interact with the website directly, conduct a search, select a trial title from a list, and then consider trial details contained in plain language statements. The volunteers, enlisted from a surgical waiting area, often faced mental and emotional distractions (due to loved ones having surgery) as well as fatigue (many arriving to the hospital at 6 a.m. or earlier).
Practice Implications
This study is important because the findings represent seminal efforts to incorporate and consider the effectiveness of plain language in the online environment of a clinical trials website/app. Studies done over the past 12 years have highlighted the fact that complex scientific language found on clinical trials search engines presents a barrier to diverse user understanding. Yet, to date, there has been minimal research addressing this problem. Integrating plain language into clinical trial websites and apps is a strategy that can be implemented by cancer centers and other health care organizations to help users understand online information and empower them to pursue relevant clinical trials.
Conclusion
This study has highlighted that plain language purpose statements can help users understand basic clinical trial information found on website and app search engines. User testing is a beneficial method to determine comprehension of plain language descriptions in a clinical trial website. An iterative approach using waves of volunteers is particularly useful for refining and evaluating language used. Further study of plain language purpose statements that relate treatment to disease, as well as user testing methods that include the clinical trials live website environment, are needed to determine health literacy best practices in this domain.