Introduction
Influenza infection is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality with annual estimates of nearly 100,000 hospitalizations and over 6000 deaths in the USA with over 10 billion US dollars spent annually in direct medical costs [ , ]. For patients with debilitating medical conditions, including malignancy, the impact of influenza infection can be significant due to several factors, including limited performance status, compromised immunity, medical co-morbidities, and treatment toxicity [ ]. Morbidity and mortality can be higher in patients with hematologic malignancies and hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients; overall, cancer patients have higher influenza-related hospitalization rates, complications, and deaths compared to the general population [ , , ]. Annual influenza vaccination is a cost-effective tool against influenza and influenza-related complications, including death [ ].
Cancer patients, including those on chemotherapy, can mount (to varying degrees) an immune response to influenza vaccination [ , , , ]. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends annual immunization for all individuals ≥6 months of age, including those who are immune-compromised or chronically ill [ ]. Despite the documented benefits of influenza vaccination and CDC recommendations, vaccination rates remain suboptimal in the general and cancer populations [ , ]. Intervention programs in various populations have increased vaccination rates and reduced influenza-associated illness, hospitalization rates, and deaths [ , , ]. In a large urban, low-income pediatric/adolescent patient population-based trial, text messaging increased vaccination rates by 3.7 %; however, a similar intervention targeting pregnant women did not note a meaningful difference [ , ]. Another study used mailed reminders to children with high-risk conditions and reported a 6.5 % increase in vaccination rates compared to a cohort without reminders [ ]. Although these studies have similar mass intervention strategies, comparisons vary due to diversity in studied populations, nature of interventions, data capturing/reporting methods, and study endpoints. Influenza vaccination programs have led to substantial cost savings among individual patients and health care institutions [ ]. The % increase of vaccination rates is modest in most studies, but the absolute number of additional vaccinations may be meaningful, also considering that each patient may act as host for the influenza virus transmittable to others. Cost-effective, step-wise interventions tailored concurrently to targeted patient populations and providers can increase vaccination rates.
At the University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center (UMCCC), we found an overall, day-of-appointment, vaccination rate of 6.9 % in adults during the 2005–2011 influenza seasons (based on CPT-4 codes). Therefore, we sought to develop and test a multi-step, inexpensive, easily implemented, reproducible provider- and patient-directed intervention to increase influenza vaccination rates. This was implemented as part of a step-wise quality improvement initiative during the 2011–2012 (’11–’12) and the 2012–2013 (’12–’13) influenza seasons. The primary objective was to determine whether this intervention would increase influenza vaccination rates on the same day with clinic appointment. In addition, we sought to identify provider- and patient-related reasons for lack of vaccination during clinic visit.
Methods
Study Design
This was a natural experimental study; the interventions implemented to increase influenza vaccination rates at the UMCCC outpatient clinics were performed as part of a hematology/oncology fellowship quality improvement (QI) project. UMCCC encompasses hematology and oncology clinics, serving >17,000 new patients and >90,000 clinic and infusion encounters annually.
Patient Population
All adult and pediatric patients without influenza vaccination within the season, based on available medical record documentation, prior to their first appointment at the UMCCC outpatient clinic during each influenza season were eligible. Eligibility was established at the patient’s first UMCCC appointment in the season and remained for the entire season. Patients were considered adults if they were 17 years old by February 25 of that year (first date of data acquisition). Medication/vaccination reconciliation at the UMCCC is done primarily by medical assistants, while mid-level providers and physicians clarify/ascertain necessary points.
Intervention
The inactivated influenza vaccine, trivalent (IIV3) vaccination (IM route of administration), was available at the UMCCC. During the ’11–’12 influenza season, a yellow color-coded, pre-prepared influenza vaccination prescription was placed in every patient paper chart during each visit (Supplementary File 1 ), beginning on October 3, 2011, when influenza vaccine became available at the UMCCC. Just prior to the ’12–’13 influenza season, an electronic medical record/ordering system was implemented requiring adjustments to the prior intervention. During the ’12–’13 influenza season, three provider-directed interventions were employed, beginning on September 24, 2012, when the vaccine became available at the UMCCC: (a) a “Best Practice Alert,” a notification visible upon entering the patient’s electronic record (“screen pop-up”) for patients who had not received influenza vaccination for the current season; (b) a laminated reminder, placed in the patient’s physical chart and the clinic room workstations, prompting providers to inquire about the patient’s vaccination status and providing vaccination ordering instructions (Supplementary File 2 ); and (c) a bright pink sticker affixed to the patient’s medication reconciliation list during each visit (Supplementary File 3 ) asking whether the patient had received vaccination during the current season and, if not, whether they want to discuss vaccination with their provider. Patient-focused reminders were employed only in the ’12–’13 influenza season. These included influenza reminders posted nearby UMCCC patient elevators (Supplementary File 4 ), educational information discussing the benefits/risks of influenza vaccination, and information on how to get vaccinated posted on the UMCCC website homepage and Facebook page. The selection of all interventions was based on multi-disciplinary discussions among health care providers, clinical nurse specialists, medical assistants, UMCCC pharmacy, UMCCC leadership/administration, and communication specialists.
Data Collection
We identified the population of outpatients at the UMCCC during the influenza seasons, from September 1 to March 31. For each patient, with the assistance of the University of Michigan Health System (UMHS) Medical Center Information Technology (MCIT) team, we determined their vaccination history for each season using CPT-4 billing codes (90654, 90656, 90658, 90659, 90662, 90724). Eligible patients were considered vaccinated if they received vaccination on the same day as any UMCCC appointment.
To determine the uptake and satisfaction of the intervention, we surveyed providers. At the end of the ’11–’12 and ’12–’13 influenza seasons, providers were invited by e-mail to participate in an electronic survey (Qualtrics), querying the utility and perceived effectiveness of the intervention (Supplementary File 5 ).
Statistical Plan and Analysis
To evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention, we compared the vaccination rates of the ’11–’12 and ’12–’13 influenza seasons to the six prior influenza seasons; only vaccinations occurring/documented within the UMCCC/UMHS were captured. Our primary endpoint was the same-day vaccination rate (ratio of the number of patients receiving vaccination on the same day as any UMCCC appointment to the number of eligible patients at that time). Once vaccinated, each patient was counted as such for the remainder of the season. A same-day vaccination rate was utilized to better capture the intervention’s immediate impact.
To summarize the data, we graphically depicted the cumulative same-day vaccination rate by month and season, using the prior six influenza seasons (2005–2011) as historical comparisons. We also compared the vaccination rates of the UMCCC (intervention) population to the remainder of the UMHS (contemporary control) population to account for possible UMHS-wide changes/trends in vaccination rates. We used a logistic regression model to quantify the association between vaccination rate and the intervention period, adjusting for the month of the UMCCC appointment, patient’s age, and possible effects of the ’09–’10 (“H1N1”) season (Supplementary Files 6 , 7 ). We estimated the increase in vaccination rate due to the intervention by calculating the ratio of and difference in the model-based estimates of vaccination rates with and without the estimated association with the intervention. We also estimated the absolute number of patients who were vaccinated in the ’11–’12 and ’12–’13 seasons because of the intervention. We assumed that the probabilities of vaccination were independent between influenza seasons. The intervention was accounted for by allowing the monthly variation in the probability of vaccination to differ in the ’11–’12 and ’12–’13 seasons. We also investigated whether there was a year-by-year trend in vaccination rates.
Ethical Considerations
The Institutional Review Board of the University of Michigan granted a waiver to conduct this QI project for the ’11–’12 and ’12–’13 seasons. This project was conducted according to institutional policies and medical ethics. The intervention was implemented across the entire UMCCC population as excluding patients may have been considered unethical.
Results
Overall Vaccination Rates
The number of unique patients and appointments at the UMCCC during the eight seasons are reported in Table 1 (>90 % of patients were adults). There was a consistent increase in the number of unique patients and appointments each season. Figure 1 displays the annual same-day (with any UMCCC appointment) vaccination rates for adult and pediatric UMCCC patients. Relative to the prior six seasons, with an average cumulative vaccination rate of 6.9 % (out of 90,400) adults and 12.9 % (out of 6482) pediatric patients, vaccination rates in the ’11–’12 and ’12–’13 seasons increased to 10.1 % (out of 16,947) and 9.4 % (out of 18,761) in adults and 14.4 % (out of 1157) and 20.2 % (out of 1158) in pediatrics, respectively. The highest monthly same-day vaccination rate was in October in both intervention seasons (Fig. 1 ). Table 1 Number of unique patients, total appointments, and unvaccinated patients at the first appointment (based on medical record) at the UMCCC during the most recent eight influenza seasons Influenza season Total number of unique patients (% adults, >17 years) Number of appointments at the UMCCC Number of unique patients, unvaccinated at the first appointment (% of unique patients) ’05–’06 15,389 (92.2) 51,762 14,368 (92.1) ’06–’07 16,206 (92.8) 55,210 14,752 (92.4) ’07–’08 17,934 (93.8) 57,191 16,085 (93.3) ’08–’09 18,834 (94.0) 60,877 16,927 (93.7) ’09–’10 19,535 (94.3) 65,524 17,034 (94.0) ’10–’11 20,457 (94.4) 66,028 17,716 (94.0) ’11–’12 21,582 (94.2) 74,827 18,104 (93.6) ’12–’13 22,150 (94.4) 74,534 19,919 (94.2) Total 152,087 (93.8) 505,953 134,905 (93.5) Fig. 1 Same-day vaccination rates of adult ( a ) and pediatric ( b ) UMCCC patients by month for eight influenza seasons. Rates are cumulative each month and include all patients from prior months, both in the numerator (vaccinated) and denominator (eligible); final seasonal rates are in parentheses
Based on the model, after adjusting for variation in the probability of vaccination using logistic regression, there was an estimated 37.6 % (95 % CI 35–40.3 %) and 56.1 % (95 % CI 40.9–73 %) relative increase in the adult vaccination rates in the ’11–’12 and ’12–’13 seasons, respectively, due to the intervention. The absolute increase in eligible adults vaccinated was 2.4 % ( p < 10 −6 ; 95 % CI 2.1–2.6) and 3.7 % ( p < 10 −6 ; 95 % CI 3.3–4.2), with estimated 399 and 697 additional vaccinations, respectively, for each season (Fig. 2 ; the relative and absolute changes are, respectively, the ratio of and difference in the dotted and dashed lines). These estimates would be larger under different covariate configurations: accounting for the impact of the ’09–’10 (H1N1) season attenuated the estimated intervention-vaccination relationship. Preliminary analysis also suggested a modest season-by-season decrease in vaccination rates; therefore, the linear effect of time was not included in the final model to avoid over-estimating the intervention-vaccination relationship. Fig. 2 End-of-season proportions of same-day vaccinated UMCCC eligible adults. The solid gray line shows the observed vaccination rates over eight influenza seasons; these correspond to the eight end-of-season (March) data points as seen in Fig. 1a . The dotted red and dashed blue lines represent the model-based fitted values of the vaccination rates with (or without) the regression coefficient corresponding to the intervention; the difference between these lines is the estimated effect of the intervention
We also used available information from a contemporary patient population in other UMHS clinics (not exposed to intervention) to determine whether vaccination rates increased regardless of broader institution trends and concurrent confounding interventions/factors. Table 2 reports the total vaccination rates of adults within the UMHS, dichotomized based on whether a patient was seen at the UMCCC during a season or not, and their corresponding ratios per season. Because of differences between these patient populations in the type, frequency, and reasons for appointments, all vaccinations were counted in this analysis without respect to any appointment date. These rates were necessarily larger than, and not directly comparable to, the same-day vaccination rate used as the primary endpoint. The ratios were higher in the intervention seasons compared to all but one previous season. While not a randomized comparison, these findings suggest that the increased UMCCC vaccination rates may be attributed to the intervention rather than global institutional confounders. Table 2 End-of-season vaccination rates for two patient subpopulations. All vaccinations were counted without respect to the appointment dates. In comparison to the prior six seasons, during the two intervention seasons’ period (’11–’12 and ’12–’13), patients with at least one appointment at the UMCCC were more likely to be vaccinated (compared to patients with no appointment at the UMCCC) ( p < 0.0001 ( χ 2 test for equality of binomial proportions)) Influenza season ’05–’06 ’06–’07 ’07–’08 ’08–’09 ’09–’10 ’10–’11 ’11–’12 ’12–’13 +UMCCC a 0.180 0.179 0.200 0.190 0.225 0.215 0.248 0.246 −UMCCC b 0.173 0.207 0.220 0.223 0.242 0.264 0.264 0.215 Ratio (+/−) c 1.04 0.86 0.91 0.85 0.93 0.82 0.94 1.14 a Adult UMHS patients with at least one appointment (+) at the UMCCC during each influenza season b Adult UMHS patients with no appointment (−) at the UMCCC during each influenza season c Ratios >1 indicate a higher vaccination rate in +UMCCC patients compared to −UMCCC patients
Provider Survey
A web-based questionnaire was e-mailed to 140 and 160 providers, respectively, during the two intervention seasons. In the ’11–’12 season, 32.8 % of providers responded with 67.4 % of them noting that the influenza vaccination prescription helped them address vaccination during the encounter and prescribe the vaccine; 80 % of responders favored the implementation of intervention during the following influenza season. In the ’12–’13 season, 45 % of providers responded; 70 % of responders considered the laminated reminder helpful in addressing the issue and prescribing the vaccine. This was in contrast to the “Best Practice Alert,” which was found helpful by 36 % of responders. Overall, 88 % of responders supported continuation of the overall intervention.
Discussion
Influenza remains a major public health issue and a significant challenge for patients and families. According to CDC, the 2012–2013 influenza season was a moderately severe season, with increased number of outpatient visits for influenza-like illnesses, positive influenza tests, and influenza-related mortality [ ]. Our study demonstrated that a multi-step, simple patient- and provider-targeted intervention resulted in increased same-day vaccination rates in cancer patients with an immediate impact lasting throughout each season. It is premature to conclude whether the intervention’s impact is cumulative over subsequent seasons. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported QI project at a large academic cancer center assessing the efficacy of a multi-step intervention to increase influenza vaccination rates. Our data resulted in the permanent implementation of the ’12–’13 vaccination intervention in the routine clinical practice at the UMCCC.
The cumulative same-day vaccination rates during the ’11–’12 and ’12–’13 seasons were higher compared to vaccination rates of the prior six seasons. We estimated that the relative increase in vaccination rate was 37.6 and 56.1 %, respectively, for the two intervention seasons with 399 and 697 additional vaccinations administered within the UMCCC/UMHS, respectively. When comparing the UMCCC (intervention) population to the remaining UMHS (contemporary control) population, we observed a greater increase in vaccinations rates at the UMCCC during the study period, supporting that higher vaccination rates were likely attributable to the intervention rather than global (institution-wide) confounders.
Interestingly, for both intervention seasons, the greatest number of influenza vaccinations was administrated in October. This is probably due to commencement of the influenza season with the first availability of the influenza vaccination, increased patient/physician awareness, study-specific enthusiasm for compliance, and consistent implementation of the intervention elements. Considering that vaccinations outside the UMCCC/UMHS were not captured, the number of truly unvaccinated patients may have decreased over time during each season. The finding may be important suggesting that interventions should be implemented as soon as influenza vaccine becomes available each season; paper reminders were preferred by our providers.
Patients with cancer are often immune-compromised, and protection against influenza can reduce influenza-related complications. A common barrier to vaccination among hematologists-oncologists is the belief that vaccination would not be effective [ ]. Although immunogenicity of influenza vaccination can be reduced during treatment, the degree of reduction is variable across studies. Several confounding variables, including study design/endpoints, immunogenicity definitions, timing of vaccinations, and treatment regimens, render inter-study comparisons difficult [ ]. Despite the variable results across studies, most recommend vaccinating cancer patients, even those receiving myeloablative chemotherapy, as the benefits of vaccination may outweigh potential risks of the inactivated vaccine [ ]. Optimal timing of influenza vaccination in this population is variable due to heterogeneity of diseases and treatments (i.e., ≥2 weeks before chemotherapy starts or, if currently receiving chemotherapy, at the furthest possible time point away from treatment cycle). Despite schedule differences, multiple studies have shown decreased mortality, influenza-like illnesses, and documented influenza rates in influenza-vaccinated cancer patients [ , , , ].
While we measured same-day vaccinations at the UMCCC, the intervention may have also had a delayed and broader impact. More than half of patients probably get vaccinations outside the UMCCC/UMHS based on survey. Reasons for vaccinations outside the UMHS can vary; we hypothesize that primary care visits, convenience, time limitations, chemotherapy schedules, vaccine availability, and cost may affect patient selection of vaccination location/timing. Moreover, the education provided to patients may have influenced families and friends to pursue vaccination. Although intangible, this combined with direct patient vaccination may lead to increased herd immunity and decreased sources of influenza virus transmission. We hypothesize that by repeating the intervention over multiple seasons, vaccination rates may increase further as previously vaccinated patients will expect the vaccine and providers will become more familiar with the process. Considering the immunosuppressive effects of cancer and treatments, frequency of clinic visits, and relationship with the Cancer Care team, addressing influenza vaccination in hematology-oncology clinics can be feasible and impactful; only the inactivated vaccine is recommended in immune-compromised patients.
There is a number of study limitations, including the inability to capture vaccinations outside the UMCCC/UMHS, family member vaccinations due to our intervention, inability to randomize due to ethical considerations, use of CPT-4 codes to measure vaccination rates, and risk of over-fitting in the logistic regression model. The implementation of a new electronic medical record/ordering system on August 15, 2012, may have confounded the estimated association in the ’12–’13 season. We also recognize the low % of survey completion with potential responder-selection bias and the inability to accurately quantify provider compliance throughout each season.
Conclusion
A simple, multi-step, inexpensive patient- and provider-directed intervention significantly increased cumulative influenza vaccination rates at the UMCCC compared to historical and contemporary control populations. The magnitude of the increase corresponds to findings from similar interventional studies. The intervention allowed for easy and sustained implementation throughout the season without impairment of the standard clinic workflow and was well received by providers. The intervention elements are permanently implemented at the UMCCC during influenza seasons. Follow up data can be collected to assess the long-term effects of the intervention over the next few years. Similar interventions could be considered for other immunization programs, i.e., pneumococcal. Utilizing EMR technology, i.e., information and reminders in individual patient portals, and information on screensavers in waiting rooms could further increase influenza education/awareness and contribute to higher immunization rates in this vulnerable population.