Introduction
Decision-making between patients and physicians has shifted from the traditional “paternalistic” model, where doctors provide information while making decisions single-handedly, to the “shared” model, where patients and doctors are equally active in the decision-making process [ ]. Concurrently, in the USA, patients are increasingly going online for health information [ , , , , , ], and the volume of online information with regard to disease education has increased, giving patients more information to consider as they navigate their courses of treatment [ , ]. More than 80 % of patients in the USA are influenced by online research, especially as clinic visits are shorter and physicians have less time to spend on education [ , , ]. It is important for physicians to understand these changes in patient learning, as information online is often inaccurate yet increasingly likely to play a role in patient decision-making [ , , ]. By understanding patient-specific Internet usage patterns, physicians can better direct them to reliable, up-to-date information sources while simultaneously fostering a closer relationship [ ].
Internet usage patterns have been studied in different cohorts including cancer patients (breast, urologic, colorectal, and melanoma), general surgery patients, and orthopedic surgery patients [ , , , , , ]. There are notable differences in Internet usage patterns based on diagnosis. For instance, according to recent literature, colorectal cancer patients used the Internet for health information less than breast or prostate cancer patients [ ]. In contrast, there are limited data on Internet use by patients with thoracic disease, the burden of which is high in the USA. Over 6 % of Americans are diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD); lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the USA; death rates from esophageal cancer in white men have been increasing steadily [ , , ]. Therefore, understanding and improving patient-physician communication in this cohort is of the utmost importance. Finding trends among patients with thoracic disease could help physicians conduct more effective visits by recommending quality references tailored to a patient’s specific needs.
We sought to characterize Internet use surrounding disease education for thoracic surgery patients and their caregivers. We hypothesized that (1) higher income and education levels would correlate with increased Internet use for health information and (2) those patients with a cancer diagnosis would utilize the Internet for research more than those with a non-cancer diagnosis due to higher anxiety associated with cancer.
Methods
To understand the factors that influence patient Internet usage, we developed and conducted a survey of consecutive thoracic surgery clinic patients and their family and friends at a tertiary care academic facility over a 10-week period in 2010. Out of 344 patients, 337 participated in our study, yielding a response rate of 98 %. We assessed subjects for their demographic data, Internet accessibility and use, disease-specific Internet research, and local hospital website utilization. The survey was presented to and validated by a small focus group to assess survey quality prior to distribution. Participation in the survey was voluntary and was completed with the help of study coordinators during clinic visits. A completed response was considered consent to participate. The study was approved by the University of Michigan Institutional Review Board (HUM 00036347).
We specifically investigated the influences of age, income level, employment status, and education level on Internet usage behaviors. Results were analyzed by diagnosis of cancer versus non-cancer to determine whether a cancer diagnosis influenced Internet usage patterns. Additional analyses were performed to examine which types of websites were most popular as well as what level of trust subjects placed in the information they found.
Data were analyzed using StataIC 13 (StataCorp LP, College Station, Texas, USA). Frequency distributions for categorical variables were examined to identify patterns and trends among the subjects. An ordinal logistic regression was performed to determine statistically significant factors influencing likelihood of Internet usage as well as an odds ratio. A Fischer’s exact test was performed to examine factors associated with Internet usage. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05.
Results
The three hundred thirty-seven respondents completed the survey. Overall, the average age of the thoracic surgery patients and their caregivers was 53.6 years old, and the range was 14–86. A majority of the subjects were female, 183 (55 %) versus 152 (45 %) male. One hundred fifty-seven (47 %) were in the clinic with a diagnosis of lung or esophageal cancer. Of all subjects, 203 (60 %) had researched their condition prior to their clinic visit with a thoracic surgeon, and of those, 92 (44 %) reported being “very trustful” of the information they found. Further characterization of the two populations can be seen in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 Percentage of patients who researched their disease based on their age, income level, and education level
When compared as complete populations (all ages included), there was no significant difference in Internet usage found between the cancer and non-cancer subjects. However, there were differences when the entire population was separated into those younger than 60 years old and those at least 60 years old. In the group younger than 60 years old, a cancer diagnosis increased the odds of doing research by 2.29 ( P = 0.008). In those at least 60 years old, a cancer diagnosis decreased the odds of doing research by 0.52, though this finding was not quite significant ( P = 0.065).
Internet usage trends differed among age groups, income levels, and education levels in both cancer subjects and non-cancer subjects (Fig. 1 ). Trends were noted in both populations, showing a reduction in Internet use in older patients, while there was an increase in Internet use seen with increased income and education level. Younger age was found to be a significant predictor of Internet use in both populations, although it was a stronger predictor among cancer patients or their caregivers. Specifically, an odds ratio of 0.44 in the cancer subject population indicated that a subject in one “10-year” age group had 0.44 times the odds of doing Internet research as a subject in the proximate “10-year” younger age group (Fig. 1 , Table 1 ). In the non-cancer subject cohort, a subject in one age group had 0.77 times the odds of doing Internet research as a subject in the proximate younger age group. Table 1 Internet usage statistics by cohort Cancer patients Odds ratio Confidence interval Ordinal logistic regression outcome Age level 0.44 0.31 < OR < 0.61 P < 0.001 Income level 3.11 1.79 < OR < 5.40 P < 0.001 Education level 2.06 1.53 < OR < 2.79 P < 0.001 Yes No Fischer’s exact Currently employed 70 92 P < 0.001 Non-cancer patients Odds ratio Confidence interval Ordinal logistic regression outcome Age level 0.77 0.61 < OR < 0.98 P = 0.031 Income level 1.47 0.94 < OR < 2.28 P = 0.088 Education level 1.4 1.08 < OR < 1.82 P = 0.010 Yes No Fischer’s exact Currently employed 102 87 P = 0.557
Having a higher education level was found to be a significant, positive predictor of Internet usage in both populations, but like age, a stronger predictor among the cancer subjects (OR = 2.06) than the non-cancer subjects (OR = 1.40). Having a higher income level was found to be a significant positive predictor of Internet usage prior to one’s clinic visit among the cancer subjects only. The calculated odds ratio was 2.02; each increase in income level yielded a 2.02-fold increase in odds of having done research online (Fig. 1 , Table 1 ). With regard to trust of information found on the Internet, education level was found to be a significant positive predictor of whether or not the subjects were “very trustful” of the information they had found online only among the cancer subjects ( P = 0.024) (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 “Very trustful” of information by education level in cancer patients
Among the subjects with lung or esophageal cancer, employment status was found to be associated with Internet use; 77 % of employed subjects did research, in comparison with 42 % of unemployed subjects ( P < 0.001). In the non-cancer diagnosis population, 60 % of the employed subjects and 55 % of the unemployed subjects did research; this difference was not statistically significant. Separately, gender differences were analyzed for trends and statistical significance. There were no statistically significant differences observed in Internet usage behavior between genders.
Both populations most frequently visited hospital websites, which included hospital-owned sites such as The Mayo Clinic and Cleveland Clinic websites. The website of the institution at which subjects received care composed the large majority of hospital websites visited. Online sources and their respective popularities are shown in Fig. 3 . Fig. 3 Websites most frequently used by respondents
Discussion
With the rising popularity of the Internet as a resource for health information, it is important to understand the implications that this behavior will have on patient and caregiver education and physician-patient relationships. Our study highlights research trends among cancer and non-cancer thoracic surgery patients and their caregivers in order to improve patient-physician relationships and to better direct patients and their caregivers during their courses of self-education. Our data help predict Internet usage trends and trust levels among thoracic surgery patients and their family and friends based on age, income, employment status, and education level. Some Internet usage trends were similar among patients in other fields such as general surgery and cancer (urologic, breast, prostate, and colorectal): Internet usage increased with younger age, higher income, and more advanced education [ , , ]. Determining patient-preferred Internet sites and usage patterns can help thoracic surgeons understand the needs of patients and caregivers and can help physicians better guide them in their Internet searches.
Some of the data reported here contrasted with those elsewhere reported in the literature. For example, the thoracic surgery subjects (both cancer and con-cancer) reported here were less likely to have done research than the melanoma patients (59 vs. 93 %) [ ], as reported by Hamilton et al. This may relate to the diagnosis of melanoma at a generally earlier stage than lung or esophageal cancer. Patients may be more motivated to do research when they are likely to find information that might change their course, and patients may also gain a sense of empowerment [ ]. We cannot attribute the disparity to differences in median age of diagnosis of the different cancers as they are within several years of each other. Among melanoma cancer patients, Google was the most frequently used (90 %) online resource [ ]. In our cohort, only 27 % of subjects used a search engine, instead opting to visit a hospital site, such as the “Mayo Clinic”, “Cleveland Clinic,” or “University of Michigan Health System”. This may be due to differences in physician recommendations or even a lack thereof. Consistency among physician recommendations could help patients and caregivers feel more secure in their searches. Further studies on quality of sites referenced should be performed to provide patients and caregivers with more reliable information. It is worth noting that, with a study population of only 31, the study by Hamilton et al. might not be an accurate reflection of the melanoma cancer patient population.
Compared to the urological cancer patients, the subjects with thoracic diseases (both cancer and non-cancer) were more likely to use the Internet for health information. According to Valero-Aguilera et al., only 11 % of urological cancer patients in oncology clinics used the Internet for health information, compared to our study where 60 % of the thoracic surgery subjects did Internet research [ ]. As regards patients with thoracic cancer and their caregivers, we hypothesize that this difference may be due to the significantly worse prognosis of lung or esophageal cancer (17 % 5-year survival rate) compared to urological cancer (over 70 % 5-year survival rate depending on type) [ ]. Patients and their caregivers may have a greater need to seek out alternative options or opinions when they know that the prognoses are poor. Factors such as age and education level had the same effects on Internet usage likelihood as in our thoracic surgery subjects. Separately, Valero-Aguilera et al. reported breast cancer patients using the Internet for disease information only 29 % of the time [ ], but other studies reported higher percentages [ , , ]. Independently, the authors conducted further investigation into the research needs of breast and urological cancer patients and found differences in the cohorts. For example, breast cancer patients were more interested in rates of survival and cure, whereas urological cancer patients were more interested in how their disease would affect their sex lives [ ]. Instead, we examined which Internet sites were referenced most; subject needs is an area we aim to investigate in future studies.
Peterson et al. did the most recent focused study concerning Internet use among thoracic disease patients, specifically, lung cancer patients in 2003 [ ]. Internet usage has dramatically increased, calling for updated analysis on this cohort [ ]. In concordance with our results, Peterson et al. found that Internet usage was more common among those with more advanced education levels and higher income. As in 2003, Internet quality and reliability still remain a problem, as reflected in our finding that the majority of our subjects were only “moderately trustful” of the information they found online [ , , , ]. Specifically, our cohort of thoracic cancer subjects with lower levels of education were less trusting of information found online compared to those with higher education levels, highlighting the need to better inform and reassure this cohort. Additionally, we cannot assume that those who were “very trustful” knew they were viewing quality sites with reliable information.
Our study has several limitations. Although the study size can be considered large compared to some other studies, it may still not completely reflect the entire population at hand. This is a single-institution investigation located in the Midwest with a combination of rural and urban patients. This patient population is likely different than those seen in larger urban settings or in more rural locations. Moreover, as with any survey, our study may have suffered from selection bias. It is possible that Internet users were more inclined to fill out our survey than non-Internet users or that some patients or caregivers were uncomfortable sharing personal details such as low income or education levels. Further, the participants included both patients and caregivers, and the results are reported in aggregate. Therefore, our data may not be immediately applicable to either individual group.
Our analyzed data may help thoracic surgeons redistribute their discussion time in clinic. For example, a 45-year-old lung cancer patient with a high income and education level may benefit from more time discussing quality resources he can investigate for unanswered questions. Or, more concretely, based on age-related Internet usage trends, it could be expected that certain thoracic diseases more commonly diagnosed in younger populations, such as hyperhidrosis, sarcoidosis, and thymomas, may be researched more than diseases found in the more elderly population such as COPD, interstitial lung disease, and certain cancers. Thoracic surgeons and other physicians should take these patterns into account when creating departmental websites and information guides and especially when communicating with patients in clinic. Moreover, given that institutional websites were the most popular Internet sites used, it is of the essence that hospitals make critical information easy to find and understand. Follow-up studies on the Internet usage behavior of thoracic surgery patients should include research on patient needs and desires for self-education. This would help direct the creation and management of a reliable institutional site.
Conclusion
Understanding Internet usage of thoracic surgery patients and their caregivers is essential to facilitating patient education and fostering the patient-physician relationship. Different types of thoracic surgery patients and their caregivers had different Internet usage patterns. Cancer subjects were more likely to research their condition online if they were younger, had a higher income, had a higher education level, and were currently employed. Non-cancer subjects were more likely to use the Internet if they were younger and had a higher income. Cancer subjects were also more likely to be “very trustful” of information found online if they had a higher education. Furthermore, subjects with different diseases had unique Internet usage patterns. A higher percentage of the thoracic surgery subjects did research than the urologic, breast, prostate, and colorectal cancer patients, though less than the melanoma cancer patients [ , , ]. In regard to website of choice, the thoracic surgery subjects most frequently used a hospital website, whereas the large majority of the melanoma cancer patients used a search engine [ ]. Institutional websites should be physician-promoted and updated to contain diagnosis-specific information that patients and their caregivers need, since they are the most popular sites referenced. We have used our findings to help guide the creation and organization of our departmental website and have actively started coaching physicians on how to tailor their education counseling based on the demographics of their patient at hand. In addition, we have recently added short videos and diagrams of certain procedures in hopes of better educating our patients seeking information about their care.