Introduction
Venous thromboembolism (VTE), including deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE), is a severe complication in critically ill patients generally affected by multiorgan dysfunction associated with prolonged immobilization [ ]. Today, VTE prophylaxis is included in the requirements for hospital accreditation and maintaining quality of care standards, and is one of the most frequent measures of quality assurance in hospitals [ ]. It is well established that patients undergoing surgery are at increased risk of VTE. Since the early 1990s, the prevention of VTE has largely consisted of the administration of low-molecular-weight heparin upon admission [ , ]. Half of all patients with acute VTE are over 70 years of age, and thus face the added risk of age-related increased risk of major bleeding [ ]. Perioperative risk assessment for the occurrence of VTE includes an evaluation of the patient’s medical history and current drug use. The risk of developing postoperative VTE is strongly influenced by the extent and nature of the surgery. Genetic predisposition may be revealed by evaluation of family medical history [ ]. Not all patients have an equal likelihood of VTE. Thus, effective tools for VTE prediction are needed for appropriate individualization of prophylaxis [ ].
DVT is a multifactorial disease that represents the interaction between genetic and environmental factors, and the majority of patients with incident DVT have either inherited thrombophilia or acquired risk factors [ ]. Poor awareness of risk factors or the importance of VTE prevention may also exist among medical professionals [ ]. Risk factors for thrombosis can be identified in over 80% of patients with VTE, often with more than one factor present in a given patient. In patients with inherited thrombophilia, 50% of thrombotic events are associated with the additional presence of a secondary risk factor (e.g. surgery, prolonged bed rest, pregnancy, oral contraceptives) [ ]. In a population-based study on the prevalence of VTE, 56% of patients had three or more of the following six risk factors present at the same time as VTE: (i) more than 48 h of immobility in the preceding month, (ii) hospital admission, (iii) surgery, (iv) malignancy, (v) infection in the past 3 months, or (vi) current hospitalization [ ]. Accordingly, many patients with VTE fulfill most or all of Virchow’s triad of stasis, endothelial injury, and hypercoagulability (Fig. 1 ) [ , , ]. In addition, oral contraceptives and estrogens are known to cause VTE [ ]. These are summarized in Fig. 2 [ , , , ]. The perioperative period is defined as the period immediately preceding and following a surgical intervention in which optimization of the patient's health is observed [ ]. The preoperative period is the initial phase, which begins with the decision to have surgery to just prior to surgery. The intraoperative period involves the surgery, and the postoperative period begins immediately after surgery and ends when the patient returns home [ ]. The influence of concomitant drug treatments administered to surgical patients during the perioperative period on increased risk of DVT or PE in the postoperative phase has not been sufficiently studied. When reviewing pharmacotherapy in surgical patients, we observed that patients receiving certain drugs (analgesics, sedatives, antidepressants, antipsychotics, and diuretics) more frequently developed postoperative DVT or PE than patients who underwent the same surgery but did not receive these drugs. Among patients who developed postoperative DVT or PE between 1 January 2007 and 31 December 2011 at the Murska Sobota General Hospital in Slovenia, the following drugs were administered: metamizole 53%, diclofenac 13%, other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 10%, benzodiazepines 18%, diuretics 43%, and antipsychotics 15% [ ]. Thus it is important to examine the effect of these drugs on the postoperative incidence of DVT or PE. Fig. 1 Virchow’s triad describes the three broad categories of factors contributing to the risk of venous thrombosis: hemodynamic changes, endothelial injury, and hypercoagulability. VTE, venous thromboembolism Fig. 2 Risk factors for venous thromboembolism. HRT, hormone replacement therapy; OCP, oral contraceptive
Aim of review
The purpose of this review is to present the most common categories of drugs administered to surgical patients during the perioperative period that could increase the risk of DVT or PE in the postoperative phase. The review will focus on analgesics, sedatives, antipsychotics, antidepressants, diuretics, oral contraceptives, and hormone replacement therapy. We will also briefly discuss other factors that potentially influence the risk of VTE including bridging anticoagulation, the need for blood products during surgery, thromboprophylaxis, and pharmacotherapy for HIV or malignancy.
Data evaluating VTE risk in surgery patients are limited; therefore, we will also describe drugs that might affect the risk of VTE during the perioperative period but that were not studied specifically in the perioperative population.
Source of data
Data from the available medical literature were reviewed and pooled to evaluate the risk of drugs causing VTE. Relevant studies published in the English-language literature were retrieved from the PubMed (US National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health) bibliographic database using the search terms “venous thromboembolism” or “pulmonary embolism” or “venous thrombosis” combined with “analgesics” or “nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs” or “opioids” or “sedatives” or “antidepressants” or “antipsychotics” or “diuretics” or “oral contraceptives” or “hormone replacement therapy” or “anticoagulation” or “HIV pharmacotherapy” or “cancer pharmacotherapy” or “thromboprophylaxis” as either keywords or Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms. To reduce reporting bias, only studies that involved the most common drugs prescribed postoperatively were included. These were selected from studies mentioning the possible effects of drugs on the postoperative occurrence of DVT or PE in surgical patients. Almost 50 studies were selected for the analysis, with the database accessed between June 2017 and January 2019.
Analgesics
Analgesics are one of the most frequently prescribed drugs in patients post-surgery. The goal of postoperative pain management is to relieve pain while keeping adverse effects to a minimum [ ]. Patients usually receive opioid analgesics, tramadol, paracetamol, or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and recently, metamizole and acetaminophen.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, metamizole, and acetaminophen
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are a class of drugs used for analgesic and anti-inflammatory benefits. There are now at least 20 different NSAIDs, from six major classes as determined by their chemical structures, available for use in the United States and Europe. These drugs differ in their dose, drug interactions, and side effects. In Slovenia, NSAIDs are often used in the postoperative setting as analgesic monotherapy or in combination with opioids. The most commonly administered NSAIDs are diclofenac, naproxen, and ibuprofen, and in certain cases patients also receive etoricoxib. These drugs represent more than 90% of all NSAIDs prescribed in Slovenia. The use of metamizole has rapidly increased in recent years and is gradually replacing other drugs in hospitals. The primary effect of NSAIDs is to inhibit cyclooxygenase (prostaglandin synthase), thereby impairing the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins, prostacyclin, and thromboxanes [ ]. Many of the toxic effects of the NSAIDs are related to their main mode of action, the inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis. However, this issue has become more complex with the availability of selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors, which have a lower rate of toxicity, particularly gastrointestinal, and possibly a higher rate of cardiovascular adverse events including myocardial infarction (MI), which implies increased thrombosis and atherosclerosis, and have been considered to reflect local loss of the cardioprotective hormone prostacyclin by blood vessels [ , ]. The endogenous endothelial nitric oxide synthase inhibitor asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) was identified as a biomarker and mechanistic bridge between renal COX-2 inhibition and systemic vascular dysfunction. ADMA and other methylarginines are potential biomarkers for cardiovascular risk in patients taking traditional NSAIDs, as well as COX-2 selective inhibitors [ ].
Non-COX-2 selective NSAIDs and acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) inhibit platelet aggregation via inhibition of platelet COX-1 activity. However, aspirin inhibits platelet COX-1 in an irreversible manner and, thus, has proven benefits in reducing the risk of secondary thrombotic cardiovascular events. Renal prostaglandins (PGs) are primarily vasodilators in the kidneys. Under basal conditions, PGs have no significant role in the regulation of renal perfusion. However, in the setting of hypotension and reduced renal perfusion from vasoconstriction stimulated by angiotensin II, norepinephrine, vasopressin, or endothelin, PG synthesis is increased to maintain renal perfusion and minimize ischemia [ , , , ]. In general, NSAIDs are safe when used in patients who are not at high risk of gastrointestinal, renal, or cardiovascular reactions. However, the use of NSAIDs has been independently associated with a risk of serious bleeding and thromboembolism in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) [ ]. In a case–control study in patients with knee osteoarthritis, the risk of VTE was higher for current users of diclofenac (odds ratio [OR] 1.63; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.53–1.74), ibuprofen (OR 1.49; 95% CI: 1.38–1.62), and rofecoxib (OR 1.44; 95% CI: 1.18–1.76), but not naproxen (OR 1.00; 95% CI: 0.89–1.12) [ ]. Bergendal et al. [ ] did not find a higher risk of VTE related to the administration of NSAIDs in women (OR 0.98; 95% CI: 0.80–1.19). However, the authors concluded that women taking high cumulative doses of acetic acid derivatives (95% CI: 0.82–1.70) and coxibs (95% CI: 0.73–4.27) demonstrated apparent elevated (but not statistically significant) risk, indicating a link between cyclooxygenase selectivity and dose [ ]. A systematic review by Goy et al. [ ] analyzing 28,307 subjects found no significant increase in the risk of VTE after rofecoxib administration. The occurrence of VTE was calculated as 86.8 per 100,000 (95% CI: 37.5–171.2) person years in the group with rofecoxib users, and 99.1 per 100,000 person years in the placebo group (95% CI: 45.3–188) [ ]. A meta-analysis of six studies comprising 21,401 cases of VTE showed elevated risk of VTE in NSAID users when compared with nonuser controls. The authors found significantly higher VTE risk in individuals using NSAIDs, with a pooled risk ratio of 1.80 (95% CI: 1.28–2.52). Among subjects taking selective COX-2 inhibitors, the pooled risk ratio was 1.99 (95% CI: 1.44–2.75). The authors concluded that the increase in VTE risk may arise primarily from COX-2 inhibitors, given that aspirin, a COX-1 inhibitor, has been shown to be useful in the prevention of VTE [ ].
In some hospitals in Slovenia, the most commonly prescribed postoperative analgesic is metamizole (i.e. dipyrone). The drug was banned by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1977 because of a high risk of agranulocytosis, but is still available in some countries [ , , ]. Metamizole is a pyrazolone analgesic that can also induce the production of antineutrophil antibodies [ ]. The mode of action is still not entirely clear. Apart from a minor central effect, metamizole and its metabolites act mainly via both COX-1 and COX-2 inhibition [ , ]. In contrast to classical COX inhibitors, metamizole is a stronger inhibitor of platelet aggregation [ ], but has no anti-inflammatory effect and has low gastrointestinal toxicity, indicating a different mode of action [ ]. Measurement of coagulation-induced thromboxane B2 formation showed that after administration of 1000 mg of metamizole, 97% of COX-1 activity was blocked for several hours. Previous data suggested that greater then 95% inhibition of serum thromboxane B2 had a significant effect on platelet function [ ]. Compared with acetylsalicylic acid, the platelet inhibition is potent but reversible [ , , ]. In a case–control study conducted on patients with stable cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, or peripheral arterial disease and acute or chronic pain, metamizole was found to abrogate the antiplatelet effect of aspirin that may result in venous thrombosis [ ]. However, data evaluating the effects of metamizole on subjects undergoing surgery remains controversial. In a prospective randomized study evaluating the possible effects of metamizole on platelet inhibition by aspirin after on-pump coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), the postoperative use of metamizole (± opioids) was not found to alter the response to aspirin compared with treatment with opioids alone [ ]. However, its administration before CABG may promote postoperative bleeding [ ]. NSAIDs and metamizole inhibit thrombocyte aggregation, and thus, in theory, its postoperative nonselective use could increase bleeding risk. In practice, it still remains unclear, as adverse effects associated with NSAIDs and metamizole have not been reported [ , ]. Therefore, metamizole could exert a protective function against the postoperative development of DVT or PE. Metamizole is the least well documented analgesic drug [ ], and further prospective studies are needed to document the dose-related benefit or harm of this drug, especially in the context of postoperative pain management.
In contrast to COX-2 inhibitors, ketorolac is characterized as an NSAID without COX-2 selectivity. Although several studies have reported its safety and efficacy in the perioperative period, ketorolac has been associated with increased risk of cardiovascular thrombotic events, MI, and stroke, and is also contraindicated for pain control after CABG surgery because of the increased risk of cardiovascular adverse events [ , ]. Despite the FDA black box warning against the use of NSAIDs after cardiac surgery, ketorolac was found to be safe and well tolerated for use as a postoperative analgesic when administered after cardiac surgery. Although the specific association between ketorolac and VTE events was not investigated, there was a low incidence of bleeding, renal, and cardiovascular complications [ ]. A retrospective observational study similarly found no association between continuous infusion of ketorolac and increased risk of mortality in CABG patients [ ].
The use of intravenously administered acetaminophen has raised concerns regarding its analgesic efficacy [ ]. Acetaminophen used for the treatment of postoperative pain is considered safe, effective, and well tolerated [ ]. Adverse events associated with intravenous administration of acetaminophen include thrombocytopenia, but these are extremely rare [ ]. Acetaminophen has been shown to exert a dose-dependent anti-aggregation effect on platelets, mediated through inhibition of platelet COX-1 and decreased thromboxane A 2 synthesis. An inhibitory effect was observed after a standard dose of the drug; however, the degree of inhibition was found to be less than in the case of NSAIDs, and surgical bleeding attributable to acetaminophen is unlikely [ ]. Therefore, in light of the evidence, intravenously administered acetaminophen is safe and effective for reducing postoperative pain, and has a favorable side effect profile, with no clinically significant drug-to-drug interactions and no significant effects on platelet aggregation [ ].
In conclusion, the contradictory data regarding different NSAIDs, metamizole, and acetaminophen can be explained by different mechanisms of action. Several studies have demonstrated an association between the administration of NSAIDs and the risk of thromboembolic events. Metamizole may abrogate the antiplatelet effect of aspirin that can result in venous thrombosis. However, postoperative use of metamizole after CABG surgery was not found to alter the response to aspirin. Although ketorolac has been associated with an increased risk of thromboembolic events, and the FDA advises against its perioperative use, it was found to be well tolerated and safe as a postoperative analgesic after cardiac surgery. Similarly, acetaminophen was found to be safe and effective in helping patients cope with postoperative pain. However, clinicians should be aware of the potential association between these drugs and the risk of VTE events when recommending its perioperative use.
Opioids
While they are very effective analgesics, opioids also have many undesirable side effects, including sedation, respiratory depression, nausea, vomiting, hypotension, bradycardia, pruritus, and inhibition of peristalsis. Patients treated with opioids after a surgical procedure may be drowsy and less mobile, which could increase venous stasis. Longer mobilization time is included in the Caprini score: patients who are confined to bed (> 72 h) receive two additional points and are therefore reclassified in a higher category for VE risk [ ]. Longer length of hospital stay is considered a patient-specific risk factor for VTE events; however, if thromboprophylaxis is used appropriately for the defined category, the prolonged hospitalization time is not a critical risk factor for VTE. A Taiwanese study evaluated the association between current morphine use and risk of PE in patients with DVT. Subjects given morphine within 30 days of the index date demonstrated 4.54-fold greater risk of PE (95% CI: 2.30–8.97) in comparison with nonusers. The study concluded that the risk of PE rises with the increase in cumulative and average doses of morphine [ , ].
In summary, opioids are considered effective analgesics; however, patients may be drowsy and less mobile with opioid use during the postoperative period. Importantly, morphine administration has shown increased PE risk. Despite the association between morphine and the risk of PE, the use of other opioids in surgical patients in conjunction with DVT or PE has not yet been sufficiently studied.
Sedatives, antidepressants, and antipsychotics
Sedatives
Sedation should be initiated only after excluding physiological alterations that may present as anxiety or agitation. A variety of agents can be used for sedation, including benzodiazepines and propofol. Benzodiazepines cause a dose-related depression of the central nervous system, resulting in sedation and respiratory depression. Diazepam is currently not recommended due to the pain and thrombophlebitis associated with peripheral vein administration, along with concerns of prolonged sedation related to its lipophilic nature, active metabolites, and long duration of action compared with other benzodiazepines [ ]. Midazolam, because of its short duration of action, is recommended for short-term (less than 24 h) sedation [ ]. However, during long-term sedation, midazolam is associated with prolonged clinical effects, possibly due to an active metabolite and its lipophilic nature, making it less desirable for long-term sedation. Lorazepam, an intermediate-acting benzodiazepine that has no active metabolites and is less lipophilic than diazepam and midazolam, is recommended for prolonged sedation in critically ill patients [ ]. Propofol is a short-acting intravenously administered sedative-hypnotic agent which is commonly used to induce anesthesia during surgery or as routine sedation in the intensive care setting [ ]. Lipid-free propofol was found to be associated with acute venous thrombosis in a 55-year-old woman with well-controlled hypertension [ ]. Similarly, venous thrombosis of the upper limb caused by lipid-free propofol was reported in a patient requiring radiofrequency lesioning for trigeminal neuralgia [ ]. Propofol is highly lipophilic and insoluble in water, and is thus mostly formulated in white oil-in-water solution. The stability of propofol emulsions can be affected by dilution with another preparation, which may lead to unwanted effects [ ]. The addition of lidocaine to propofol resulted in coalescence of oil droplets, which eventually formed a separate visible layer. Depending on the dose of lidocaine and the duration between its preparation and administration, the combination may pose a risk of PE. Therefore, given its thermodynamic instability, mixing propofol with any other drug is not recommended without further consideration [ ].
Dexmedetomidine is characterized as an α- 2 receptor agonist, used to maintain a lighter level of sedation in the intensive care and operative settings [ ], and also as an adjuvant to anesthesia during surgery because of its ability to attenuate perioperative hemodynamic abnormalities. Dexmedetomidine has been associated with protective effects on the heart, brain, and kidney, and with decreased mortality, time to extubation, and length of hospital stay. Results from a retrospective study evaluating the effects of perioperative use of dexmedetomidine in elderly patients undergoing cardiac surgery suggested that dexmedetomidine was associated with reduced in-hospital and operative mortality and a lower incidence of postoperative stroke and delirium [ ]. Closer monitoring of side effects during and after sedative use should be regular clinical practice to provide further evidence of its adverse events.
Antidepressants and antipsychotics
Several clinical investigations have demonstrated increased risk of arterial and venous thromboembolism after the administration of psychotropic drugs. These results should be taken into serious consideration before the application of these medications in clinical practice. It appears that this linkage is complex and multifactorial, and is also vulnerable to certain confounding effects. In a nested case–control study of 1888 patients with VTE and 11,222 matched controls, a significant association was found between current antidepressant use and VTE in the total study sample (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 1.59; 95% CI: 1.27–2.00). With regard to antidepressant classes and potency, tricyclic antidepressants (aOR 1.56; 95% CI: 1.11–2.18), serotonin 5-HT2A receptor blockers (aOR 2.03; 95% CI: 1.27–3.24), and low-potency serotonin reuptake inhibitors (aOR 1.57; 95% CI: 1.18–2.08) were associated with a significantly increased risk of VTE [ ]. In addition, exposure to amitriptyline, particularly at high doses, was linked with an increased risk of idiopathic VTE (OR 1.7; 95% CI: 1.2–2.4) [ ]. Parkin et al. [ ] recently conducted a large prospective study in 734,092 women (mean age 59.9 years) over an average of 7.3 years of follow-up. Subjects using antidepressants demonstrated a significantly higher VTE risk than individuals reporting neither depression nor administration of psychotropic medication (hazard ratio [HR] 1.39; 95% CI: 1.23–1.56). There was no significant increase in the risk of VTE in patients reporting the use of therapy for depression or anxiety that did not include antidepressants or other psychotropic medications (HR 1.19; 95% CI: 0.95–1.49) [ ].
Data regarding antipsychotic-related thromboembolic events have been presented in five autopsy series, three cohort studies, eight case–control and nine case series, and 13 individual case reports. Nine studies provided odds ratios for thrombotic risk for all antipsychotic medications. There was substantial evidence-based agreement that antipsychotic drugs increase the risk of VTE events, with an average reported odds ratio of 3.51 compared with patients not receiving these drugs. The database identified a total of 438 reported VTE events with clozapine, nearly double the next most commonly reported medications risperidone (283) and olanzapine (241) [ ]. In a case–control study designed to evaluate interactions between acquired and inherited risk factors for VTE, neuroleptic exposure was found to be related to increased VTE risk (OR 2.1; 95% CI: 1.4–3.2). Among neuroleptics, antipsychotic agent use was associated with 3.5-fold increased risk of VTE (OR 3.5; 95% CI: 2.0–6.2). No association was found between antidepressant drug exposure and the risk of VTE (OR 1.1; 95% CI: 0.9–1.5) [ ]. In a study investigating the risk of PE associated with antipsychotic drugs, including the risk related to first- and second-generation antipsychotic drugs, current antipsychotic use was found to more than double the risk of PE (OR 2.31; 95% CI: 1.16–4.59), while recent use was not associated with increased risk. Both conventional and atypical antipsychotic exposure was linked with higher risk, and concomitant use of both classes carried a fourfold greater risk (OR 4.21; 95% CI: 1.53–11.6) [ ]. A retrospective cohort study in patients who were first-time users of antipsychotic therapy enrolled a total of 1008 patients (mean age 72.4 years) for a median of 36 months. No changes were observed in the incidence of VTE between patient groups at high and low risk of either drug-induced sedation/metabolic adverse events (HR 1.23; 95% CI: 0.74–2.04) or hyperprolactinemia (HR 0.81; 95% CI: 0.50–1.35) [ ]. Wang et al. [ ] conducted a nested case–control study enrolling 316,132 Taiwanese postmenopausal women. Current administration of antipsychotics was associated with a 1.90-fold (95% CI: 1.64–2.19) greater risk of VTE compared with untreated subjects, with risk increasing in a dose-dependent manner. On the other hand, the risk of VTE was not increased when antipsychotic treatment was discontinued for more than 30 days [ ]. Haloperidol is a butyrophenone neuroleptic drug that is the preferred treatment for delirium, defined as inappropriate response to external stimuli. Opioids and benzodiazepines may worsen delirium by further altering the patient’s perception. Haloperidol has minimal adverse effects on the cardiopulmonary system, but may be associated with prolongation of the QT interval [ ]. In conclusion, several studies have shown an association between antidepressants and a significantly increased risk of VTE. The use of amitriptyline and antipsychotics was also related to elevated risk of VTE. Antipsychotic drugs should be prescribed with caution and attention to the increased risk of VTE. The underlying mechanisms related to the effect of antipsychotics on VTE development warrant further investigation. Clinicians should consider antipsychotic drug exposure as a potential risk factor of VTE, especially if surgery is planned.
Diuretics
Diuretics are among the most commonly used drugs. They act by reducing sodium reabsorption at different sites in the nephron, thereby increasing urinary sodium and water loss. The ability to induce a negative fluid balance has made diuretics useful in the treatment of a variety of conditions, particularly edematous states and hypertension. [ , ]. Loop diuretics are widely used in patients with heart and renal failure, as well as for treating hypertension and peripheral edema. However, there are no randomized controlled trials evaluating their long-term safety, and several observational reports have indicated adverse effects [ ]. Diuretics demonstrate several disadvantages, with particular relevance for the elderly. The most commonly reported adverse effects concern electrolyte disturbances such as hypokalemia and hyponatremia, which is an occasional but potentially fatal complication of diuretic therapy and is also an independent predictor of short-term mortality and hospital readmission. Virtually all cases of severe diuretic-induced hyponatremia are related to thiazide-type diuretics [ , ]. A loop diuretic is much less likely to induce this problem unless the diuretic has induced volume depletion [ ] or water intake is very high (since loop diuretics partially impair urinary diluting capacity). The use of diuretics in the perioperative period is poorly researched, with studies largely limited to the intravenous administration of mannitol. Mannitol is used to reduce the risk of perioperative renal dysfunction during surgery involving the kidney. Its purported effects of increasing renal blood flow (i.e. by way of prostaglandins and atrial natriuretic peptide), decreasing intravascular cellular swelling, free radical scavenging, decreasing renin production, and increasing intravascular volume are thought to mitigate the effects of hypoxia and ischemic renal injury that can occur during related surgical procedures [ ]. Mannitol has been shown to damage endothelial cells and activate coagulation pathways, leading to intravascular thrombosis. Dehydration and hemagglutination have also been associated with mannitol use, although the risk of clinically evident VTE disease is not well defined. In one study, the odds of thrombosis for those exposed to mannitol compared to hypertonic saline alone was 1.11 (95% CI: 0.65–1.73), and remained insignificant after adjusting for year of injury. Therefore, despite a significant change in the pattern of osmotic therapy, the proportion of patients with VTE remained unchanged [ ]. Continuous mannitol injection by intravenous catheterization was found to induce more serious venous thrombus formation and endothelial cell apoptosis, and was also associated with higher tissue factor and von Willebrand factor levels, than normal saline injection. These data suggest that clinical use of hyperosmotic mannitol by intravenous catheter may exert direct deleterious effects on vascular endothelial function [ ]. Furosemide is a diuretic indicated in patients for the treatment of edema associated with cirrhosis of the liver, renal disease, and congestive heart failure. Patients undergoing free flap reconstruction may suffer pulmonary edema, which requires postoperative intervention including the use of diuretics, such as furosemide. One study presented a case of flap loss due to venous thrombosis following intravenous infusion of furosemide in a 36-year-old patient [ ]. However, no data evaluating the perioperative risk of VTE associated with bumetanide, furosemide, or other diuretics were found.
In conclusion, mannitol has been found to damage endothelial cells and activate coagulation pathways, leading to intravascular thrombosis. Different mechanisms of action of diuretics, including the possibility of inducing hyponatremia and volume depletion, could play an important role in surgical patients in the development of VTE, but this has not yet been sufficiently studied.
Contraceptives and hormone replacement therapy
When surgery is planned in women of childbearing age, the use of oral contraceptives must be taken into consideration. VTE risk increases within months of the initiation of combination oral contraceptives (COC). Several studies have found elevated endogenous thrombin potential (ETP) to be a VTE risk factor. The early increases in ETP may provide biological support for the rapid increase in VTE risk during initial COC use [ ].
Drospirenone (used in estrogen-progestin contraception) has a minor diuretic effect and is associated with a risk of VTE. In a population-based nested case–control study that included 339,743 women followed over a mean of 4.4 years, 228 cases of arterial thromboembolism occurred [ ]. Evaluating 12 case–control and three cohort studies, van Vlijmen et al. [ ] published a meta-analysis regarding VTE risk in thrombophilic oral contraceptive users. In women with mild and severe thrombophilia, the use of oral contraceptives increased the risk of VTE almost sixfold (rate ratio [RR] 5.89; 95% CI: 4.21–8.23) and sevenfold (RR 7.15; 95% CI: 2.93–17.45), respectively. The cohort analyses demonstrated that absolute VTE risk was higher in users (taking 100 pills per year) with severe thrombophilia than in women with mild thrombophilia (4.3–4.6 vs. 0.49–2.0, respectively). Similar differences in absolute risk were found in non-affected subjects (0.48–0.7 vs. 0.19–0.0) [ ].
Researchers in 2016 found a greater incidence of arterial thrombosis with drospirenone versus levonorgestrel contraceptives [ ]. The same group assessed the risk of VTE among first-time users of drospirenone-containing combined oral contraceptives and also evaluated the differences in VTE risk among 55,139 first-time users and 162,959 re-starters. The hazard ratios for VTE related to the use of drospirenone versus levonorgestrel were 3.19 (95% CI: 1.12–9.08) for first-time users and 1.96 (95% CI: 1.12–3.41) for re-starters, indicating an apparently higher risk of VTE associated with the use of drospirenone versus levonorgestrel in both cohorts [ ]. Administration of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can also induce a hypercoagulable state. HRT has been associated with a twofold increased risk of PE [ ]. Results from a systematic review and meta-analysis for the US Preventive Services Task Force showed that postmenopausal replacement therapy was associated with a greater risk of VTE (relative risk 2.14; 95% credible interval: 1.64–2.81), with the highest risk in the first year of use [ ]. Similarly, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial showed that postmenopausal therapy with estrogen plus progestin increased the risk of VTE in women with coronary heart disease. Interestingly, VTE risk was increased among women who had cancer (relative hazard 3.9; 95% CI: 1.6–9.4) or lower-extremity fractures (relative hazard 18.1; 95% CI: 5.4–60.4) and for 90 days after inpatient surgery (relative hazard 4.9; 95% CI: 2.4–9.8) or nonsurgical hospitalization (relative hazard 5.7; 95% CI: 3.0–10.8) [ ]. However, there is uncertainty about whether HRT should be temporarily stopped during the perioperative period in patients undergoing elective surgery. Perioperative use of HRT may increase the risk of DVT beyond that conferred by the surgical procedure. However, it is a relatively weak risk factor when compared with the risk associated with the surgery itself. Therefore, a possible additive effect of HRT may not be important in terms of overall risk. One study reported that the continued use of HRT in the perioperative period did not seem to have an impact on the overall risk of postoperative VTE (OR 0.66; 95% CI: 0.35–1.18) [ ]. Furthermore, the results of a case–control study of 318 postmenopausal women who underwent hip and knee arthroplasty (108 cases of VTE, 210 controls) showed no significant difference in the incidence of postoperative thrombosis between women who received perioperative HRT and those who did not (17% vs. 23%; OR 0.66; 95% CI: 0.35–1.18) [ ]. Testosterone treatment among men was also associated with an increased risk of VTE, which peaked within 6 months and declined thereafter. The adjusted rate ratio for VTE was 1.25 (95% CI: 0.94–1.66) for current versus no testosterone treatment [ ]. Testosterone replacement therapy may reduce the risk of cardiovascular events by reducing insulin resistance, decreasing fat mass, and modifying other components of metabolic syndrome. However, there are several mechanisms indicating an increased risk of cardiovascular events associated with testosterone replacement therapy, including an increase in thromboxane A2 receptor density, leading to promotion of platelet aggregation and vascular smooth muscle contraction. Testosterone replacement therapy may also stimulate erythropoiesis, and the resulting polycythemia can predispose to thrombosis. However, a retrospective, propensity score-matched study was conducted to evaluate the impact of preoperative testosterone replacement therapy on postoperative in-hospital mortality and cardiovascular events in men undergoing noncardiac surgery. The incidence of MI was 0.2% in the testosterone group and 0.6% in the no-testosterone group (OR 0.34; 99% CI: 0.05–2.28; P = 0.15). Similarly, no significant difference was found in stroke incidence (testosterone vs. non-testosterone; 2.0% vs. 2.1%), DVT (2.0% vs. 1.7%), or PE (0.5% vs. 0.7%). In conclusion, preoperative administration of testosterone was not associated with postoperative in-hospital mortality or cardiovascular events, including stroke, MI, PE, and DVT [ ].
In summary, the use of oral contraceptives was associated with an increased risk of VTE in women with mild or severe thrombophilia, and drospirenone was related to higher VTE risk for first-time users and re-starters. HRT may also increase the risk of VTE. However, no significant difference was found in the incidence of postoperative VTE in women who did and did not receive perioperative HRT. Similarly, preoperative administration of testosterone was not associated with postoperative mortality in cardiac surgery among male patients.
An overview of clinical studies evaluating the effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, opioids, antidepressants, antipsychotics, diuretics, contraceptives, and HRT on the risk of VTE is summarized in Tables 1 and 2 . Table 1 Overview of clinical studies evaluating the effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, opioids, antidepressants, antipsychotics, and contraceptives on the risk of venous thromboembolism Compound Type of patients ( n ) Perioperative population Type of study VTE risk Mechanism of action Ref. NSAIDs: - Diclofenac - Ibuprofen - Naproxen - Meloxicam - Celecoxib - Rofecoxib Knee osteoarthritis patients ( n = 24,079) No Population-based case–control study ↑ ↑ 0 ↑ ↑ ↑ Imbalance between prostacyclin and thromboxane and consequent expression of thromboxane due to the selective inhibition of COX-2; increased production of ROS by NSAIDs [ ] Acetic acid derivates (AAD), coxibs (COX) Young and middle-aged women ( n = 2835) No Case–control study Tendency of increased risk with high cumulative doses of AAD and COX Inhibition of prostacyclin synthesis and stimulation of thromboxane release from activated platelets; blocking of prostaglandins [ ] Rofecoxib Rofecoxib users ( n = 28,307) No Systematic review of 14 randomized controlled trials 0 Further investigation needed [ ] NSAIDs NSAID hospitalized and/or ambulatory users ( n = 21,401) No Meta-analysis of 6 case–control or cohort studies ↑ COX-2 inhibition [ ] Metamizole-aspirin administration Patients with stable cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, or peripheral arterial disease and acute or chronic pain ( n = 27) No Case–control study ↑ Metamizole abrogates the antiplatelet effect of aspirin [ ] Patients with CAD undergoing CABG ( n = 43) Yes Prospective single-blind randomized trial 0 – [ ] Morphine DVT patients ( n = 3668) No Population-based nested case–control retrospective analysis ↑ Promotion of platelet aggregation [ ] Lipid-free propofol 55-year-old hypertensive woman ( n = 1) No Case report ↑ Further investigation needed [ ] Antidepressants - Tricyclics - Serotonin 5-HT2A receptor blockers - Low-potency serotonin reuptake inhibitors Asian population ( n = 13,110) No Case–control study ↑ ↑ ↑ Further investigation needed [ ] Amitriptyline Patients aged 70 years and younger ( n = 3867) No Nested case–control study ↑ Further investigation needed [ ] Antidepressants Women, mean age of 59.9 years ( n = 734,092) No Large prospective cohort study ↑ Further investigation needed [ ] Antipsychotics (clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine) Antipsychotics users No Systematic review of 38 autopsy series, cohort studies, case–control and case series, or individual cases reports ↑ Further investigation needed [ ] Antipsychotics (neuroleptics) Antidepressants Antipsychotic and antidepressant users ( n = 1354) No Hospital-based case–control study ↑ 0 Increase in weight and BMI Induced sedation Enhancement of platelet aggregation [ ] Antipsychotics Italian adult users ( n = 84,253) No Case–control study ↑ Inactivity, immobilization, raised levels of antiphospholipid antibodies, and hyperhomocysteinemia [ ] Adults (mean age 72.9 years) ( n = 1008) No Retrospective cohort study 0 – [ ] Taiwanese postmenopausal women No Nested case–control study ↑ (dose-dependent manner) Enhanced platelet aggregation and hyperprolactinemia [ ] Diuretics - Furosemide 36-year-old patient ( n = 1) Yes Case report ↑ Blood hyperviscosity triggers venous thrombosis [ ] Contraceptives Women with thrombophilia ( n = 11,886) No Meta-analysis of 15 case–control or cohort studies ↑ (higher risk in severe cases) Presence of mild/severe thrombophilia increases the risk in COC-users [ ] Contraceptives - Drospirenone 16–45-year-old women ( n = 218,098) No Retrospective cohort study ↑ (higher risk in first-time users) Further investigation needed [ ] Postmenopausal estrogen replacement Postmenopausal women No Meta-analysis of 12 studies Estrogen affects vascular endothelium and coagulation [ ] Postmenopausal estrogen-progestin therapy Postmenopausal women younger than 80 with coronary heart disease ( n = 2763) No Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial ↑ Further investigation needed [ ] Perioperative hormone replacement therapy Orthopedic surgery patients ( n = 318) Yes Case–control study 0 – [ ] Testosterone treatment Men with VTE and controls ( n = 928,745) No Population-based case–control study ↑ Decreased fibrinolysis and interaction with previously undiagnosed thrombophilia-hypofibrinolysis and/or with higher underlying cardiovascular risk associated with erectile dysfunction [ ] Testosterone replacement therapy Men undergoing noncardiac surgery ( n = 5545) Yes Propensity score-matched, retrospective, single-center cohort trial 0 – [ ] VTE risk: ↑, significantly increased risk; 0, without significant changes Table 2 Overview of clinical studies evaluating other factors which may influence VTE occurrence Compound/procedure Type of patients ( n ) Type of study VTE risk Mechanism of action Ref. Anticoagulation - Warfarin - Rivaroxaban - Dabigatran - Apixaban Patients with atrial fibrillation ( n = 117,912) Retrospective study ↑ ↑ ↓ ↓ Further investigation needed [ ] Anticoagulation bridging Patients undergoing surgery or invasive diagnostic procedure ( n = 1178) Retrospective cohort study 0 – [ ] Perioperative blood product transfusion - Red blood cells and plasma transfusion Cardiac surgery patients ( n = 1219) Cohort study ↑ Promotion of hypercoagulable state [ ] Tranexamic acid Patients undergoing hip and knee arthroplasty ( n = 2046) Retrospective study 0 – [ ] CABG surgery patients ( n = 544) Systematic review and meta-analysis 0 – [ ] Desmopressin 71-year-old man with desmopressin therapy for diabetes insipidus ( n = 1) Case reports ↑ Stimulation of the release of von Willebrand factor, which facilitates platelet adhesion, followed by development of thrombus [ ] 22-year-old woman with desmopressin therapy for diabetes insipidus ( n = 1) [ ] Protease inhibitors Adult men with AIDS ( n = 28) – ↑ Inducement of endothelial or platelet dysfunction increasing a thrombophilic condition [ ] Indinavir and megestrol acetate Individuals older than 13 years with HIV infection ( n = 42,935) Longitudinal medical record view ↑ Further investigation needed [ ] Tamoxifen Women with stage I or II ER-positive breast cancer ( n = 16,289) Danish population-based cohort study ↑ Further investigation needed [ ] Tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors Women undergoing free-flap breast reconstruction ( n = 858) Retrospective study 0 – [ ] Neoadjuvant chemotherapy along with bevacizumab Patients undergoing hepatic cancer resection ( n = 300) Retrospective study 0 – [ ] VTE risk: ↑, significantly increased risk; ↓, significantly decreased risk 0, without significant changes
Other factors influencing the risk of VTE
Increased VTE risk is also related to other factors associated with perioperative or nonsurgical pharmacotherapy. Importantly, omitted or improperly administered thromboprophylaxis may lead to increased VTE events.
Anticoagulation and bridging anticoagulation
Patients with atrial fibrillation, mechanical heart valves, venous or arterial thromboembolism, or ventricular assist devices, to name a few, are treated with oral anticoagulants [ ]. Unfractionated heparin (UFH) and low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) are used for initial anticoagulation, with subsequent introduction of vitamin K antagonists (i.e. warfarin) or non-vitamin K oral anticoagulants (NOACs), which are associated with more favorable bleeding risk when compared with conventional anticoagulants [ , ]. Although these agents are effective in preventing the recurrence of VTE, new thrombotic events still occur. Patients presenting with PE during treatment with warfarin were found to have an increased risk of death from recurrent PE [ ]. Importantly, lower rates of VTE events in patients with atrial fibrillation were associated with the use of NOACs including dabigatran (HR 0.55; 95% CI: 0.47–0.66) and apixaban (HR 0.51; CI: 0.39–0.68) over warfarin and rivaroxaban [ ]. Moreover, it has been proposed that the risk of thromboembolic events during temporary interruption of anticoagulation is comparable to the baseline risk in patients with atrial fibrillation or VTE who are not administered anticoagulants [ ]. Bridging anticoagulation involves the administration of short-acting blood thinner during the interruption of oral anticoagulant (warfarin) treatment [ ]. LMWH and UFH are frequently used as bridging anticoagulants [ ]. Patients undergoing invasive surgery or other procedures that necessitate interruption of anticoagulation treatment are at increased risk of thromboembolism, hemorrhage, and death [ ]. However, according to analysis from the REGIMEN registry for patients on long-term oral anticoagulant therapy, LMWH bridging therapy was found to be as safe as UFH, and both were associated with a low risk of arterial thromboembolism [ ]. Clark et al. [ ] similarly investigated the risk of bleeding and VTE among patients receiving long-term warfarin sodium therapy for secondary VTE prevention who required anticoagulation bridging for surgery or invasive diagnostic procedures. Patients were found to be at low risk for VTE recurrence at the time of warfarin interruption; however, increased risk of bleeding was observed [ ]. Protamine is a polycationic peptide used to reverse the anticoagulant effects of heparin. Although it is a relatively safe drug, it has occasionally been associated with systemic hypotension, non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema, or severe pulmonary hypertension. Protamine-related adverse events may account for a proportion of mortality after cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) [ ].
In summary, patients who undergo surgery or other procedures that require temporary interruption of anticoagulation are considered to be at increased risk of thromboembolism and other adverse events. However, patients who received bridging anticoagulation were found to be at low risk for VTE events. Importantly, periprocedural anticoagulation management of patients on warfarin includes determining which patients can safely undergo the procedure without warfarin interruption and which are at high risk of thromboembolism and require UFH or LMWH [ ]. However, no significant data evaluating the association between protamine and VTE risk were found.
Perioperative use of blood products
Cardiac surgery carries a high risk of perioperative blood loss and the need for allogeneic blood transfusion [ ]. Perioperative coagulopathy observed in patients undergoing cardiovascular surgery is associated with massive bleeding, the need for blood transfusion, and surgical re-exploration [ ]. As an alternative, cell salvage (CS) is used during the perioperative period of cardiothoracic surgery in order to reduce the need for transfusion of allogeneic blood products [ , ]. CS is usually safe with respect to the coagulation function, and the effect of residual heparin from the cell saver is negligible [ ]. Patients undergoing cardiac surgery with CPB suffer from blood coagulation, which can be prevented with the use of cell salvage, due to the centrifugation and washing procedure, especially when high-concentration heparin saline is used [ , ]. Intra-operative CS can thus impede blood coagulation in CPB patients with high risk of bleeding. However, CS was shown to be a risk factor for heparin residues and excessive bleeding [ ]. Cell-salvaged blood does not contain platelets or coagulation factors; therefore, in the case of hemorrhage, the patient will require allogeneic blood components [ ].
The transfusion of one or two units of packed red blood cells (RBC) is associated with significantly increased morbidity, mortality, and cost in patients undergoing CABG [ ]. Even with the application of thromboprophylaxis, postoperative DVT is present in 10% of cardiac surgery patients and is associated with receipt of transfusions. Importantly, DVT was found to be associated with RBC transfusion in a dose-dependent manner and was exacerbated when accompanied by fresh frozen plasma (FFP) [ ]. The immunomodulatory and proinflammatory nature of blood transfusions was found to promote a hypercoagulable state, leading to an increase in VTE incidence, especially for patients with increased VTE risk such as cancer or bariatric surgery patients [ ]. These results point to the need for more stringent perioperative blood management and VTE prophylaxis in patients undergoing surgery [ ].
The most effective strategy for minimizing major bleeding and the need for transfusion is to improve surgical techniques and hemostatic management. Hemostatic agents include desmopressin (DDAVP) and the antifibrinolytic lysine analog tranexamic acid (TXA). However, the use of a drug that potentiates hemostasis inevitably carries a risk of thrombosis [ ]. Inhibition of the fibrinolytic pathway has been shown to reduce postoperative bleeding; however, there is evidence of complications associated with exaggerated thrombosis [ ]. One study analyzed whether the risk of TE events differed among patients undergoing hip and knee arthroplasty who were given TXA intraoperatively and three different postoperative prophylactic agents (aspirin, adjusted-dose warfarin, and LMWH). In the group of 2046 patients, low risk of TE events was found; the rates of symptomatic DVT (0.35%, 0.15%, and 0.52%, respectively) and nonfatal PE (0.17%, 0.43%, and 0.26%, respectively) were similar. Interestingly, the risk did not differ among the three groups of patients based on the prophylaxis type [ ]. TXA was also found to reduce blood transfusion after off-pump CABG surgery; however due to the small population sample, no associations with TE events were found [ ]. Similarly, the effects of TXA on DVT (RR 0.86; CI: 0.53–1.39; P = 0.54) and PE (RR 0.61; CI: 0.25–1.47; P = 0.27) were uncertain [ ]. Due to concerns regarding TE events, the use of TXA in patients without pre-existing coagulopathies is debated; however, TXA was not found to statistically increase TE events in the perioperative period [ ].
Desmopressin (DDAVP) is a synthetic derivative of vasopressin which is used as a blood-saving agent in patients undergoing surgery [ ]. Venous thrombosis is rare and has been observed only in patients who received desmopressin after transfusion of factor VII/von Willebrand factor concentrates [ ]. Studies have suggested the occurrence of venous thrombosis of the lower limbs complicated by PE in a 71-year-old man and VTE and transient thrombocytopenia in a 22-year-old woman, both treated with desmopressin for diabetes inspidus [ , ]. However, no recent studies evaluating the association between desmopressin and VTE events were found.
In conclusion, allogeneic blood transfusion is associated with several adverse events including VTE. Hemostatic management via the use of tranexamic acid was not associated with increased incidence of VTE, although rare occurrences of VTE influenced by desmopressin have been reported.
Pharmacotherapy for HIV or cancer
A large proportion of VTE events are associated with pharmacotherapy for HIV or various malignancies [ ]. Increased incidence of VTE in HIV-infected populations was observed after the introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy, particularly with the use of protease inhibitors (PI) [ ]. PIs are believed to downregulate anticoagulant effects or precipitate endothelial or platelet dysfunction, and may also interfere with hepatic metabolism and regulation of thrombotic proteins, leading to a pro-thrombotic state [ ]. As an example of the influence of PIs, one study showed a rate of thrombosis among AIDS patients of 1.52% over a 42-month study period (cumulative incidence 0.30%/year), while the rate of thrombosis before the era of PIs was 0.33% (cumulative incidence approximately 0.055%/year). Interestingly, aspirin was found to be effective in preventing relapse [ ]. Sullivan et al. [ ] similarly demonstrated that clinically detected thrombosis was more common among HIV-infected individuals for whom indinavir (aOR 2.4; CI: 1.4–4.3) or megestrol acetate (aOR 2.0; CI: 1.3–2.9) was prescribed. Other PIs were not found to influence thromboembolic risk [ ]. Megestrol acetate is an appetite stimulant used in patients with AIDS-related cachexia or anorexia [ ].
Patients with malignancy are at increased risk of VTE due to the induction of a hypercoagulable state caused by hormones released from the tumors and certain chemotherapeutic agents, the frequent presence of indwelling central venous catheters, reduced mobility, and possible venous obstruction from tumors [ ]. Moreover, there is an association between VTE and cancer-related nonsurgical pharmacotherapy. Tamoxifen, aromatase inhibitors, thalidomide, lenalidomide, and bevacizumab have been associated with increased VTE events [ ]. Tamoxifen is a selective estrogen receptor (ER) modulator which effectively reduces the risk of breast cancer recurrence among women with ER-positive tumors. However, there is strong evidence from clinical trials that tamoxifen use is a risk factor for DVT and PE. A study conducted on women diagnosed with stage I or II ER-positive breast cancer showed that women treated with tamoxifen were at higher risk of developing DVT/PE during the first 2 years after exposure (RR 3.5; 95% CI: 2.1–6.0), with greater risk for older versus younger women [ ]. The risk of VTE with the use of tamoxifen is also higher in patients undergoing surgical procedures [ ]. Despite the implication of higher VTE risk associated with selective ER modulators and aromatase inhibitors, Mirzabeigi et al. [ ] observed no statistically significant difference in thrombotic complications when comparing patients who did and did not receive tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors during the preoperative period of free flap breast reconstruction [ ]. A possible association has been demonstrated between antiangiogenic agents (thalidomide, lenalidomide, bevacizumab, sunitinib, sorafenib) and the development of thromboembolism. Although the mechanism of its pro-thrombotic effects remains ill-defined, antiangiogenic agents appear to be associated with increased risk of thrombosis and paradoxical bleeding. Thalidomide and lenalidomide are associated with an increase in VTE complications, whereas bevacizumab is linked with a higher risk of arterial thromboembolism [ ]. However, neoadjuvant therapy along with bevacizumab was not associated with perioperative thromboembolic complications in patients after hepatic resection for colorectal liver metastases [ ].
In summary, protease inhibitors and megestrol acetate administered to patients with HIV increased the risk of thrombotic events. Tamoxifen was found to increase the risk of VTE among breast cancer patients. However, there was no association between tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors and thrombotic complications among women undergoing free flap breast reconstruction. Similarly, no effects were observed in patients undergoing hepatic resection and receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy along with bevacizumab.
Thromboprophylaxis
VTE is a common and potentially lethal complication in surgical patients. The risk of VTE is dependent on patient characteristics and the type of surgery [ ]. The incidence of thromboembolism after cardiac surgery is similar to that after high-risk general surgery. PE and symptomatic VTE after cardiac surgery can be reduced with VTE prophylaxis [ ]. Trials on thromboprophylaxis in medical patients have proven the efficacy of both UFH and LMWH [ ]. Long-term acetylsalicylic acid should be used as thromboprophylaxis for patients undergoing vascular or cardiovascular surgery. LMWH or warfarin is the drug of choice for patients undergoing spinal cord operations and all patients with major trauma with no contraindications for anticoagulation [ ]. On the contrary, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia increases the risk of venous and arterial thrombosis. Importantly, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia occurs with UFH more commonly than with LMWH; in addition, the risk of HIT is higher for surgical patients, women, and those with a long exposure to heparin products [ ]. Despite evidence-based prophylaxis recommendations, its use is frequently suboptimal [ ]. Thus, risk assessment of prophylaxis should reduce the mortality and morbidity related to this condition [ ].
Conclusion
VTE risk factors in patients post-surgery include immobility, hospital admission, and surgery. It is also necessary to consider the choice of perioperative drugs. Increased monitoring and consideration are advisable in patients receiving antipsychotics, antidepressants, diuretics, and analgesics. Special caution is advised if a patient is using antipsychotics or COX-2 inhibitors in the postoperative stage.
This literature review brings together an overview of medicines that could increase the likelihood of developing PE or DVT postoperatively and is therefore of great interest, especially in surgical patients, since medical treatment in surgical patients in most cases can be adjusted preoperatively. This review is limited to the most commonly prescribed drugs in surgical departments, while rarely prescribed groups of medicines are not included.
Additional studies are warranted in order to further elucidate the adverse effects of NSAIDs and different antipsychotics and diuretics in relation to VTE, and to determine the possible predisposing factors and physiological mechanisms involved.