Introduction
Dizziness is a general term for a sense of disequilibrium. Vertigo is a subtype of dizziness, defined as an illusion of movement which results in an impression of rotation or false movement [ ]. It often occurs along with neurovegetative signs (nausea or vomiting), nystagmus and a tendency to fall without loss of consciousness during the attack [ , ].
In general medicine and emergency medicine, vertigo and dizziness have a lifetime prevalence of between 20 and 30% [ , , , ] with an annual incidence of about 11% [ ]. These symptoms are also the single most frequent complaint among patients older than 75 years [ , , ]. In primary care, up to 10% of all adults consult a physician because of vertigo [ , ].
Vertigo and dizziness have various aetiologies caused by physiological irritation (rotatory vertigo, motion sickness, visual height intolerance) or a pathological lesion (unilateral labyrinthine failure or vestibular nuclei lesion). Vertigo is either vestibular or neurological (transient ischaemic attack (TIA) or cerebellar stroke) and dizziness covers broader symptoms: vertiginous sensations, drunkenness or faintness attacks which are the result of cardiovascular (vasovagal, orthostatic hypotension), metabolic or psychological disorders [ ].
In out-patient cases seen by general practitioners, the most frequent four causes, accounting for about 90% of cases, are benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV), vestibular neuritis (sudden idiopathic or viral unilateral vestibular deficit), vestibular migraine and Ménière’s disease [ , , ]. Indeed, half of the cases of dizziness is associated to anxiety disorders [ ].
In France, acetylleucine (Tanganil®) is often prescribed to treat attacks of vertigo, whether in general practice clinics or in emergency wards. Its pharmacodynamics are not fully understood. The hypothesis is that it restores the membrane potential [ , , ], via an interaction with membrane phospholipids on the injured side of vestibular neurons mainly in the thalamus or parietal region of the cortex [ ].The reimbursement rate of this drug is decided by a committee of experts who in 2016 concluded that it had a moderate medical effect and decided on a 30% reimbursement rate [ , ]. Consequently, according to data from the social security’s financial branch (Caisse nationale de l’assurance maladie des travailleurs salaries; CNAMTS), acetylleucine costs about 6 million euros in 2016 (Table 1 ) [ ]. Table 1 Prescriptions and reimbursement of acetylleucine in France in 2017 Number of boxes reimbursed (30 pills) Reimbursed amount (€) Acetylleucine 4,926,023 5,713,701
Considering this cost, and to evaluate the efficacy of the acetylleucine to treat vertigo and dizziness (vertigo/dizziness), a systematic review was carried out in the hope that data could be meta-analysed to answer the question of its efficacy.
Materials and method
Main objective
The main objective was to evaluate the clinical efficacy of acetylleucine to reduce or stop attacks of vertigo/dizziness.
Research methodology
A systematic review, following the PRISMA statement [ ], was carried out by searching the main free-access databases up to the 15th of September 2018: Medline, Cochrane Central and the American database for recording clinical trials ( ClinicalTrials.gov ). Keywords used to find each of three drugs available were ‘Acetylleucine’ or ‘Tanganil®’ or ‘Acetyl-DL-Leucine’ or ‘Acetyl-leucine’.
Eligibility criteria
Randomised controlled clinical trials versus placebo with double blinding were included. Trials were included if the full text was available in English or in French. The trials had to evaluate the clinical efficacy of the drug acetylleucine.
All causes or types of vertigo and dizziness were included and trials were included regardless of their duration.
Assessment criteria
The primary endpoint was the significant improvement (or the disappearance) of vertigo/dizziness between baseline and the end of the trial.
Trial selection
Two reviewers collected data for primary endpoint and data to assess trial quality and recorded it on separate spreadsheets.
The qualitative analysis was based on the data collected. A quantitative analysis using Revman 5.3® was planned with calculation of the relative risk expressed with a confidence interval of 95% (significance p < 0.05%) according to the model of Mantel-Haenszel (because the hypothesis was that the trials would be very heterogeneous).
Results
The flow chart is presented in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 Flow chart
The systematic review did not find any articles that met the inclusion criteria chosen for this review.
No randomised clinical trial, comparative, even with active comparator was found. Other trials were preclinical or observational in patients with cerebellar ataxia (Fig. 1 ).
Discussion
The main finding of this systematic review of the literature is the total lack of evaluation of the efficacy of acetylleucine. The search equation used did not find any randomised controlled clinical trial evaluating the efficacy of acetylleucine for vertigo although intermediate outcomes were considered, all trial durations and all types of vertigo/dizziness. It is possible that this review missed trials from unpublished or unreferenced databases. No trial was excluded because it was not available in English or French. However, the search did find an observational study available only in Italian. It was published in 1960 and apparently found promising results in favour of acetylleucine in patients with vertigo/dizziness, but the methodology was not available for critical review [ ] (Fig. 1 ) .
Even though, clinical trials on animals showed an improvement in locomotor balance after forced rotation or unilateral vestibular neurotomy [ , , , , ]. This review confirms the findings, 16 years after its publication, of a review by Neuzil [ ] which also did not find any randomised clinical trial evaluating acetylleucine since its first launch on the market in the 1950s.
One clinical trial identified in the database search was a randomised controlled trial but was not included because of a particular study design. It included 52 patients who underwent vestibular neurotomy to treat either an evolved form of Ménière’s disease or a neurinoma of the acoustic nerve. This study found that there was no significant improvement of dizziness in the group who received acetylleucine in comparison with the control group who underwent the surgery without any other treatment [ ]. Another clinical trial which was carried out without randomisation but with blinding of participants found no improvement of vertiginous symptoms. In another clinical trial with double blinding but without randomisation, no improvement of symptoms was found after vestibular training of 20 healthy patients in comparison with the control group who only had vestibular training and placebo treatment [ ]. In two series of case studies, significant improvement in scale for the assessment and rating of ataxia (SARA) from baseline was observed in patients with cerebellar ataxia after 1 week [ ] and 5 weeks [ ] of acetylleucine treatment. A significant improvement of SARA score and quality of life was also noted on 12 patients with Niemann-Pick disease class C after 1 month of acetylleucine administration [ ]. A randomised and placebo-controlled clinical trial testing acetylleucine in cerebellar syndrome (ALCAT) is currently underway and could provide more evidence [ , ].
In parallel, a recent Cochrane meta-analysis [ ] on betahistine, another frequently prescribed anti-vertigo treatment, also concluded to insufficient clinical evidence. The included trials were heterogeneous and the level of evidence was poor (low number of participants, old trials) [ ]. Moreover, this review did not include a recent randomised trial evaluating betahistine in Ménière’s disease [ ]. In this trial, the primary endpoint (number of vertigo attacks) did not significantly decrease, whether with low or with high dosages ( p = 0.76). For vestibular neuritis, a 2011 meta-analysis showed a significant effect of corticosteroid at 1 month but not at the end of 12 month follow-up [ ].
At present, vestibular rehabilitation has clinically proven efficacy with a good level of evidence and is therefore the treatment of choice for patients with vestibular dysfunction [ ]. For BPPV, Espley manoeuvre allows significant improvement of vertigo symptoms [ ].
Despite the lack of clinical evaluation and the diverging results of available trials, the Transparency Committee in France continues to recommend the reimbursement of acetylleucine for the treatment of vertigo at a dose of 500 to 2000 mg per day in both 2011 and 2016 re-evaluations of this drug [ ]. Consequently, it is a frequently prescribed treatment as shown in a survey of 171 teaching supervisors and 305 interns in general medicine from 4 universities. Ninety-three percent of respondents had already prescribed acetylleucine for vertigo, but only half of them knew that there was insufficient evidence of its efficacy [ ].
As the benefit is questionable at best, the risks must be considered. Acetylleucine is known to cause only very rare adverse effects such as skin rash (with or without pruritus) and urticaria [ ]. The risk is low in case of over-prescription. Acetylleucine is an unassessed drug and until proven otherwise can be considered an impure placebo [ ]. Indeed, it has established pharmacological effects but clinical efficacy is not sufficiently assessed.
The question of drug efficacy is an important one. In 2010, an American study [ ] including 412 general practitioners showed that 56% of them reported using placebo treatments in their practice, impure in 89% of cases. Using such treatments may seem harmless, but this attitude encourages over-treatment, as a patient comes to expect a drug for each ailment. Moreover, the use of impure placebos raises an ethical dilemma because, unlike pure placebos, these pharmacologically active substances can cause adverse effects. How can the practitioner decide between the unknown benefits and the possible risks associated with this kind of prescription?
Conclusion
Acetylleucine has a marketing authorisation and is reimbursed in France in the symptomatic treatment of vertigo/dizziness although there is no evidence of its efficacy. Due to its frequent prescription and considering the cost supported by the national healthcare system, randomised trials of high quality specifically carried out to measure the efficacy of this drug seem indispensable. Until sufficient data is gathered, evidence-based minded clinicians should remember that it is at best an impure and a costly placebo.