Introduction
Upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) is a common infection in children and the leading cause of visits to a doctor in high-income countries [ , ]. URTI is generally caused by viral respiratory infection, and normally resolves spontaneously without treatment within 7–10 days, on average. Use of antibiotics is warranted in response to secondary bacterial infection, particularly acute otitis media, acute bacterial sinusitis, or lower respiratory tract infection [ ].
Vitamin C has been proposed as prophylaxis for URTI since 1940. l -Ascorbic acid is an organic antioxidant that protects host cells against infection-driven oxidative stress. The fact that l -ascorbic acid concentrations are high in phagocytes and lymphocytes compared with plasma suggests that vitamin C plays functional roles in immune system cells [ , , , , ].
Vitamin C was used heavily in the 1970s in the wake of Pauling’s clinical trials concluding that vitamin C prevents URTI and improves URTI symptoms [ , , ]. However, later trials failed to corroborate this preventive effect of vitamin C supplementation [ , , ].
Preschool- and school-age children up to 18 years old are a unique subpopulation, because they are exposed to URTI and are at risk of complications due to their community life, immature sinus development, and pediatric immune response. Few studies have addressed the preventive and curative efficacy of vitamin C in this age group. A meta-analysis from 2013 assessed the efficacy of vitamin C for prevention and treatment of the common cold [ ], but the review had limitations: (1) it did not specifically evaluate the effect of vitamin C on the incidence of URTI in children and adolescents; and (2) it included one trial that contained manifestly incorrect data. Given these limitations and the fact that vitamin C is still regularly prescribed or used in self-medication, it is necessary to re-assess the use of vitamin C for treating URTI in children.
The objective of this systematic review was to assess whether administration of vitamin C decreases the incidence and duration of URTI in children.
The primary endpoint was a decrease in the incidence of URTI in children treated with vitamin C, where incidence was defined as the percentage of children presenting with one or more episodes of URTI during the course of the study.
Methods
Search strategy
This study followed the PRISMA Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines [ ] (Electronic Supplementary Material Table 1 ) and Cochrane Handbook guidance standards [ ]. The search for studies focused on finding clinical trials assessing prophylactic use of vitamin C to decrease the incidence of URTI in children aged <18 years, as well as the intensity and duration of symptoms. Searches queried all the elements liable to be involved in viral or post-viral URTI, such as laryngitis or flu-like syndromes. The search also encompassed documents produced outside traditional commercial or academic publishing, indexing and abstracting channels (gray literature).
The search was conducted in October 2017 and January 2018. The search keywords were: common cold , upper respiratory tract infection , nasopharyngitis , rhinosinusitis , ascorbic acid , and children . The following electronic databases, digital publishers, and search engines were queried: Medline via PubMed and PubMed Central via the Cochrane Library, Embase, Google Scholar, Google, and international registries of clinical trials in progress. The sources of gray literature queried were: Open Gray, the Gray Literature Report, international congress and convention programs, and authoritative pediatric ear–nose–throat websites. The bibliographies of the papers retrieved were also analyzed.
The initial search method was set up on PubMed by one of the authors (BA), and independently by a documentarian from Clermont Auvergne University Campus Health Library, then pooled and re-aggregated in the event of divergent opinion [ ]. The syntax used for the search—as adapted to each database—is described in the Electronic Supplementary Material, Tables 2 and 3 .
Study selection
Two of the authors (BA and PV) separately read the title and abstract of all publications found by the search engines. Studies that both authors independently selected as eligible were ruled in, and studies that both authors independently selected as excluded were ruled out. Studies for which the two authors’ opinions diverged were discussed until consensus was reached.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
All trials qualifying as randomized clinical trials (RCTs) comparing the use of vitamin C against placebo were selected. The age of the in-trial children had to be between 3 months and 18 years, that is, generally corresponding to the age range spanning community life in day care and in schooling. The incidence of an URTI infection and the duration and severity of symptoms were recorded. RCTs on chronic respiratory tract infections with allergic causes, complicating factors or bronchiolitis, and RCTs demonstrating the therapeutic efficacy of vitamin C on already existing URTI were not included.
Outcomes
The primary endpoint was a decrease in the incidence of URTI in children treated with vitamin C, where incidence was defined as the percentage of children presenting with one or more episodes of URTI during the course of the study. Secondary endpoints were the duration of URTI, defined by the mean number of days per URTI episode, and severity of symptoms (nasal congestion, nasal discharge, pus, cough, sneezing and fever). Safety was also queried.
Quality assessment
Quality assessment of the studies included was performed independently by three authors (BA, BP and AC), following the classification categories set out in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions, version 5.1.0, as follows: random sequence generation and allocation concealment (selection bias); blinding of participants and personnel (performance bias); blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias); incomplete outcome data (attrition bias); selective outcome reporting (reporting bias); and other bias.
Data extraction
Data extraction was performed by one of the authors (BP). The RCT data extracted comprised the year, place/location, type and age of population, type of intervention, methodological quality, any adverse events, and outcomes.
Data analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using comprehensive meta-analysis software (version 2; Biostat Corp., Englewood, NJ). Type-I error was set at α = 0.05. Baseline characteristics were compiled and summarized for each study population and reported as mean and standard deviation for continuous variables or number (%) for categorical variables. Incidence, standardized mean differences (SMDs), and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using random-effects models (the DerSimonian & Laird method). Forest plots were constructed. Statistical heterogeneity between results was assessed by examining the forest plots and CIs and using formal homogeneity tests based on the I 2 inconsistency statistic (the most widely used measure of between-study heterogeneity for meta-analysis). I 2 values range from 0 to 100% and are conventionally considered low at <25%, modest at 25–50%, and high at >50%. Publication bias was assessed using funnel plots and Egger’s test. Sensitivity analysis was performed to assess the influence of inclusion and exclusion of studies.
Results
Research and trial selection
The following trials were identified: 214 articles in PubMed, 59 in Embase, and 15 found via manual searching using Google and Google Scholar, analysis of clinical trials registries and gray literature databases, and dialog with pharmaceutical laboratories (Fig. 1 .). The titles and abstracts of all 288 papers were considered while applying filters for inclusion criteria, namely children, URTI, and administration of vitamin C versus placebo. Duplicates were deleted. In total, a set of 188 studies were retrieved, from which the full text of 11 was read from start to finish. One study was a literature review. Two studies were excluded after evaluation (see Description and qualitative analysis of excluded trials, Electronic Supplementary Material, Tables 4 and 5 ). The main reasons for exclusion were the use of a complex system of classification of symptoms, making comparison with other RCTs difficult as in Wilson et al. [ ], and utilization of a low dose of vitamin C (50 mg/d vit C) associated with probiotics as in Garaiova et al. [ ]. Fig. 1 Flowchart of study selection
Trials included
Eight double-blind RCTs met the inclusion criteria: Constantini et al. [ ], Cohen et al. 2004 [ ], Bancalari et al. [ ], Ludvigsson et al. [ ], Coulehan et al. 1974 [ ], Coulehan et al 1976 [ ], Miller et al. [ , ], and Ritzel et al. [ ] . Quantitative analysis was used to survey eight RCTs for the primary endpoint and seven for the secondary endpoint. The trials were randomized, placebo-controlled, and double-blind. The dose of vitamin C varied from 0.5 to 2 g/day. In total, there were 1447 participants in the intervention group (IG) and 1417 participants in the control group (CG; See Table 1 ). Table 1 Main characteristics of the included studies Authors No. of patients Patient age Doses and duration of therapy Primary outcome Concomitant treatment Side effects Bancalari (1984) [ ] Chilean school children 32 vitamin C; 30 placebo 10–12 years 2 g/day of vitamin C during 12 weeks Incidence None None Cohen (2004) [ ] 10 Primary care pediatric community clinics in Israel 160 vitamin C; 168 placebo 1–5 years 10 mg/mL of vitamin C (twice daily, dosed at 5 mL for children aged 1–3 years and 7.5 mL for children aged 4–5 years) during 12 weeks Incidence 50 mg/mL echinacea and 50 mg/mL propolis Gastrointestinal symptoms Constantini (2010) [ ] 39 Israelian competitive adolescent swimmers 21 vitamin C; 18 placebo 13.9 ± 1.8 years 1 g/day of vitamin C during 12 weeks Incidence None Not reported Coulehan (1974) [ ] 641 Children in two Navajo Indian residential schools 321 vitamin C; 320 placebo 6–14 years Children aged 6–10 years received 1 g/day vitamin C and children aged 10–14 years received 2 g/day during 14 weeks Incidence None Gastrointestinal symptoms, with 2 g of intake Coulehan (1976) [ ] 868 Children in two Navajo boarding schools 428 vitamin C; 428 placebo 6–15 years 1 g/day of vitamin C in the intervention group during 18 weeks in Greasewood school and 15 weeks in Toyei school. Incidence None None Ludvigsson (1977) [ ] 615 Swedish school children 304 vitamin C; 311 placebo 8–9 years 1 g/day in the intervention group and 30 mg/day of vitamin C in the placebo group for the pilot study during 7 weeks 1 g/day in the intervention group and 10 mg/day of vitamin C in the placebo group for the main study during 12 weeks Incidence None Stomach pain Nausea Diarrhea Skin rash Headache Miller (1977) [ , ] US school children. 12 twin pairs with “high body weight”, 12 twin pairs with “medium body weight”, 20 twin pairs with “low body weight” 6–15 years The twin pairs were separated by body weight into three dosage groups to receive 500, 750 or 1000 mg/day of vitamin C. Control group co-twins received 50 mg/day for 20 weeks. Duration of 20 weeks Incidence None Not reported Ritzel (1961) [ ] 279 Same-age-group children attending ski camp courses 139 vitamin C; 140 placebo The age groups were not specified 1 g/day of vitamin C Duration of 2 weeks Incidence None Not reported
Risk of bias in the studies
The authors’ judgment for each element of risk of bias is illustrated in Table 2 . Most studies contained some degree of bias, in particular the mode of randomization was often unclear. For further details, see Electronic Supplementary Material, Table 6 showing risk of bias in the studies. Table 2 Summary of the methodological quality of each trial Open image in new window
Effects of interventions
Primary endpoint
We performed a meta-analysis of the seven trials that reported the incidence of URTI. We found no significant difference between vitamin C administration and placebo (OR = 0.75, 95% CI [0.54–1.03], p = 0.07, I 2 = 74%). The results are shown in Fig. 2 . Egger’s test gave p = 0.56. The results for the sensitivity analysis excluding the Ritzel et al. study were: OR = 0.87, 95% CI [0.72–1.06], p = 0.17), I 2 = 27% (see Electronic Supplementary Material, Figure 1 ). Fig. 2 Forest plot: incidence of upper respiratory tract infection
Secondary endpoint
The secondary endpoint was the duration of symptoms (nasal congestion, nasal discharge, pus, cough, sneezing and fever). This secondary endpoint was assessed in all seven trials selected (Fig. 3 ). We found one significant between-group difference: when compared with a 6-day mean duration of URTI episodes in the CG, the duration of URTI was decreased by 1.6 days (26%) in the vitamin C group (SMD = −0.30 [−0.53; −0.08], p = 0.009, I 2 = 70%). The results for the sensitivity analysis excluding low-quality studies did not change the results: RR SMD = −0.19 [−0.31; −0.07], p = 0.002, I 2 = 0%. Fig. 3 Forest plot: duration of upper respiratory tract infection
Description and qualitative analysis of the excluded trials are presented in Supplementary File, Tables 3 and 4 .
Adverse effects from vitamin C intake
Supplementation with vitamin C was generally well tolerated, including for children taking 2 g. Some benign adverse events were reported, however, such as mild gastrointestinal symptoms, nausea, skin rash.
Discussion
Main findings
Statistical analysis of seven RCTs, including 3135 children aged 3 months to 18 years, failed to demonstrate efficacy of vitamin C for preventing URTI episodes. Vitamin C administration decreased the duration of URTI by 1.6 days compared with the 6-day mean duration in the placebo group. Groups that did benefit from a reduction in the number of URTI comprised children under 6 years and children following directed exercise regimes during winter. None of the trials included in this systematic review reported any serious adverse events.
Comparison with the literature
Hemilä et al. [ ] led a review in 2013 that included RCTs on both children and adults. Our systematic review found an additional RCT, by Cohen et al. Our findings diverge somewhat from those of Hemilä et al.: their meta-analysis included the RCT by Coulehan et al. (1976) for duration [ ], and there were discordances in analysis of the RCT by Ritzel et al. (1961) [ ] . It was not possible to obtain individual-level data from Ritzel et al.; in their RCT, the results were reported in sickness days and it was not possible to extract or analyze the data. We therefore performed sensitivity analyses: first, by adding the results from the trial of Coulehan et al. [ ] (Table 4 , Supplementary Data); second, by replacing these data with the data reported in Ritzel’s paper but keeping Coulehan’s data (Table 5 , Supplementary Data); and third, performing a final analysis after removing the trials by Coulehan and Ritzel (Table 6 , Supplementary data). Each of these sensitivity analyses failed to find any differences.
It is noteworthy that Hemilä’s review and analysis did not distinguish between children and adults with regard to the primary endpoint, but only with regard to the secondary endpoints. If the data on the primary endpoint are stratified to separate children and adults, the preventive effect of vitamin C is no longer found in children ( p = 0.42). The results of our review are in agreement on the secondary endpoint, finding a 14% decrease in the duration of URTI episodes.
Regular vitamin C supplementation has been poorly studied in children under 6 years of age. However, in Cohen’s RCT [ ], a small dose of vitamin C shows an effectiveness at this age on both judgment criteria. Garaiova’s pilot study [ ] also supports this approach. In the first trial, vitamin C was associated with echinacea and propolis, and in the second, it was associated with probiotics. While echinacea has not been shown to be effective in reducing the incidence and duration of URTIs [ ], probiotics have been shown to be superior to placebo in preventing URTIs, with a low level of evidence [ , ]. It is therefore difficult to interpret these results.
Strengths and limitations
The vitamin C dosage delivered differed between RCTs (2 g/day in Bancalari et al. [ ] and 100 mg in Cohen et al. [ ]). Furthermore, the vitamin C dosage delivered differed even within trials, with some age-group-adjusted dosages being as much as doubled (Cohen et al. [ ] and Coulehan et al. 1974 [ ]). In the RCT by Ludvigsson et al. [ ], the placebo contained a small dose of vitamin C (10 mg in the main study and 30 mg in the pilot study). Ludvigsson justified supplementing placebo-group children with vitamin C by the need to cover the basic need for vitamin C and to avoid deficiency. These dosage variations cloud our interpretation of the results. In each of the studies included, these dosages were chosen empirically, without justification by the authors. Analysis of the RCTs does not indicate whether there is an optimal vitamin C dosage for preventing URTI.
The RCTs reported by Constantini et al. [ ] and Ritzel et al. [ ] included sports-training adolescents exposed to physical exercise stress. These two RCTs had contradictory results, with no effect demonstrated in Constantini’s RCT and a beneficial effect in Ritzel’s RCT. With small-sized RCTs including consciously selected sports-training adolescents, there is only thin evidence for a preventive effect of vitamin C in school children exposed to physical exercise stress. Hemilä’s meta-analysis [ ] did note a beneficial effect of vitamin C.
Although an appropriate statistical approach using random effects models was conducted to take into account between- and within-study variability, high heterogeneity was observed, possibly explained by the reasons described above (e.g., age of patients, duration of supplementation, vitamin C dosage, and time-point evaluation).
Subgroup analysis on pre-school-age children would have been informative to help assess the efficacy of vitamin C supplementation during this key period for maturation of the immune system. There was only one RCT [ ] involving children aged 1–5 years analyzing both duration and severity variables, including in placebo-group children, and the results were inconclusive.
Despite making every effort to find relevant studies, including searching the gray literature for documentary evidence, we cannot rule out publication bias, even if Egger’s test was not significant for URTI episodes. Publication bias was evaluated by a funnel plot (see Electronic Supplementary Material, Figure 2 ). We had few RCTs to work with, and most were under-powered and heterogeneous. The age of the children included in the trials ranged from 1 to 18 years, and follow-up varied from 1 week to more than 3 months.
Implications for practice and research
Given the potential viral etiologies associated with URTI, there is no specific treatment. Antibiotics are often prescribed, sometimes at the request of the parents, sometimes because of the mucopurulent rhinitis that often accompanies the common cold, and symptoms may be confused with bacterial etiologies. For an average duration of 6 days, a decrease of 1.6 days of URTI may represent a potential reduction in the inappropriate prescribing of ineffective or even potentially dangerous antibiotics [ ] and therapies such as antihistamines and decongestants. This is especially true for children under 5 years of age who have an average number of 6–8 URTI episodes per year [ ]. The benefits of regular vitamin C supplementation may be presented to parents who have difficulty accepting the high number of infections, as an adjuvant to reduce their incidence and duration. Clinical trials involving pre-school-age children would be equally informative for studying this key period of immune system development.
Conclusions
This systematic review, which included 3135 participants aged 1–18 years, failed to show any benefit of prescribing vitamin C for the prevention of URTI in children, although vitamin C administration was found to decrease the duration of URTI. Vitamin C supplementation appears to be more effective for children under 6 years of age and those who follow vigorous exercise regimes. No serious adverse events were reported.