Introduction
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a prevalent healthcare problem worldwide [ , ]. Chemotherapy or immunosuppressive therapy can reactivate HBV, with reported rates as high as 70% among HBV carriers (defined as individuals who are hepatitis B surface antigen [HBsAg] positive) [ , , ]. HBV reactivation not only delays the scheduling of cancer therapy but may also lead to death. According to the current therapeutic guideline, HBV carriers should receive prophylactic antiviral agents to prevent HBV reactivation prior to undergoing chemotherapy or immunosuppressive therapy [ , , ]. Despite these precautions, there is a high prevalence of HBV infection in Taiwan [ ]. Based upon these consensual indications, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) of Taiwan has been offering prophylactic antiviral agents to HBV carriers since October 2009. However, HBV reactivation can still occur among resolved HBV patients (defined as individuals who are HBsAg negative, hepatitis B core antibody [anti-HBc] positive, or HBV-DNA negative) who are receiving chemotherapy or immunosuppressive therapy; the reactivation rate under these circumstances ranges from 0.3 to 9% [ , , ].
Recent meta-analyses have reported the increased risk for HBV reactivation and effective antiviral prophylaxis in HBsAg-positive patients receiving chemotherapy, but none have examined HBV reactivation and the efficacy of antiviral prophylaxis during chemotherapy in patients with resolved hepatitis B. The role of antiviral prophylaxis in preventing HBV reactivation before chemotherapy or immunosuppressive therapy in patients with resolved hepatitis B is still unclear. The aim of our study was, therefore, to determine the reactivation of HBV during chemotherapy or immunosuppressive therapy by comparing the efficacy of antiviral prophylaxis versus that of placebo in a meta-analysis. In conducting this study, we also wanted to emphasize the need for further research to design optimal management strategies to be incorporated into cancer treatment guidelines.
Methods
This systematic review was conducted following guidance provided by the Cochrane Handbook [ ]. All aspects of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement were followed [ ].
Data sources and search strategy
A systematic search of PubMed, the Cochrane library, and the ClinicalTrials.gov website were performed using key words and MeSH terms without language restriction. All databases were searched from inception until December 2017. The search terms used were: “occult hepatitis B” or “resolved hepatitis B” or “hepatitis B surface antigen” or “hepatitis B core antigen” or “hepatitis B antibody” or “immunosuppressive therapy” or chemotherapy and “antiviral agents” lamivudine OR entecavir OR telbivudine OR tenofovir and reactivation. Study titles, abstracts, and article contents were screened to determine whether the inclusion/exclusion criteria were met.
Selection criteria
All randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or observational studies were included if they reported: (1) resolved HBV patient(s) who received chemotherapy or immunosuppressive therapy, (2) an antiviral prophylaxis group and a non-prophylaxis group, and (3) an evaluation of antiviral agents as prevention against HBV reactivation. We assessed the following outcome measures: the reported number of patients with HBV reactivation and the total number of patients in each comparative group for RCTs; the reported relative risks (RR) or sufficient data to calculate RR.
Quality assessment
The Cochrane Risk of Bias 2.0 tool was used to assess the included RCTs [ ]. The cohort studies included in the meta-analysis were assessed for methodological quality using the Newcastle–Ottawa scale [ ], as recommended by the Cochrane Collaboration. This scale assesses study selection (four items), comparability (two items), and ascertainment of exposure/outcome (three items). The ‘high’-quality items were scored with a ‘star.’ A study can be awarded a maximum of one star for each item within the selection and exposure/outcome categories, while a maximum of two stars can be given for the comparability category. The maximum score is nine. A final score of ≥ 7 is considered to indicate high quality. The quality assessment of the included studies was performed independently by two investigators (YCS and CCW). Discrepancies in inclusions were resolved by discussion among reviewers and the senior author (PCL) (Electronic Supplementary Material [ESM] Table S 1 ). The presence of publication bias was investigated by visual inspection of funnel plots and by using Egger’s test [ , ].
Data extraction
Two authors (YCS and CCW) independently evaluated each identified study and extracted relevant data from the study characteristics (author, year of publication), patient characteristics (mean age with standard deviation, proportion of patients who were male), characteristics of antiviral prophylaxis (drug, dosage, frequency, and study duration), adverse event, and outcomes with percentages of HBV reactivation, hepatitis, and liver failure. A third author (PCL) arbitrated when the two authors disagreed. The authors of the included studies were contacted for any unpublished data.
For each study, the estimations of risk, adjusted for the presence of anti-HBs antibody as confounding variables, were extracted for further analysis. The primary outcome of interest was the incidence of HBV reactivation, which was defined as a ≥ 10-fold increase in the level of HBV-DNA compared to the baseline level, the appearance of HBV-DNA in previously negative patients, or an absolute increase in HBV-DNA exceeding 10 5 copies/mL [ ]. The secondary outcome measures included HBV-related hepatitis and liver failure.
Statistical methods
In the observational studies, the RRs with corresponding 95% confidence interval (CIs) were extracted for the meta-analysis. In the RCTs, the total number of patients in each group (treated vs. not treated with antiviral prophylaxis) was extracted for analysis. HBV reactivation data from the RCTs were analyzed according to the randomized assignment of participants to the treatment groups, regardless of their subsequent status (i.e., intention-to-treat analysis). Quantitative meta-analyses of pooled-effect estimates were calculated and presented using Forest plots. The results of each study and the overall pooled effects are presented as RR with 95% CIs. The dichotomous method with the random effects model was used to calculate overall RR and 95% CI. Interstudy heterogeneity was measured using Cochran’s Q statistical test. Substantial statistical heterogeneity between studies was defined as a statistically significant χ 2 value ( p < 0.10). I 2 values of 0–24.9%, 25–49.9%, 50–74%, and 75–100% were considered to denote no, low, moderate, and high heterogeneity, respectively [ ].
Subgroup analyses were carried out according to the study characteristics to investigate the sources of heterogeneity, which included study design (cohort and RCT), different comparison groups (rituximab-based and non-rituximab-based therapies, different antiviral prophylaxes, and different underlying diseases), and study quality (high vs. low). These studies were subsequently stratified based on whether there was adjustment for certain confounders, including detectable anti-HB antibodies.
Statistical analyses were conducted using Review Manager 5.3 [ ]. P values (two-tailed) of < 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant, except for heterogeneity and publication bias tests.
Results
Search results
The study characteristics and measured effects were extracted from the included studies and are summarized in ESM Tables S 2 and S 3 . A total of 1625 “hits” were identified after searching PubMed, the Cochrane library, and the ClinicalTrials.gov website. The titles and abstracts were screened, and the complete texts of 33 articles were reviewed further. Fourteen studies met the criteria for this systematic review. The PRISMA study flow diagram is shown in Fig. 1 . Two publications were derived from the same clinical trial [ , , , , , ] and, hence, only the most recent comprehensive report with a validated outcome was included [ , ]. One ongoing randomized controlled study, with the aim to study entecavir as a biological agent associated with HBV reactivation in inflammatory arthritis patients, will report the final results in December 2018 [ ]. Fig. 1 Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow chart summarizing study identification and selection. HBV Hepatitis B virus
Study characteristics
After reading the full text of 33 articles, we selected 13 articles for inclusion in the systematic review. Two RCTs were conducted in Taiwan and Spain. Both studies analyzed rituximab-based regimens to treat hematologic malignancies [ , ]: one study compared the use of entecavir prophylaxis vs. placebo in lymphoma patients [ ]; the other reported tenofovir prophylaxis vs. placebo [ ].
Eleven observational studies, including cohort studies, conducted in Asia, North America, and Europe were included (ESM Table S 2 ). Six of the eligible observational trials enrolled patients with hematopoietic malignancies and the others included patients with organ transplantation, rheumatoid arthritis, or autoimmune diseases. These patients were treated with immunosuppressants, such as tacrolimus, methylprednisolone, mycophenolate mofetil, basiliximab, rituximab, abatacept, methotrexate, leflunomide, sulfasalazine, hydroxychloroquine, alemtuzumab, fludarabine, busulfan, anti-thymocyte globulin, and azathioprine, with concomitant use of telbivudine, entecavir, lamivudine, adefovir, or placebo for prophylaxis of HBV reactivation.
Study quality
The overall risk of bias of the two aforementioned RCTs was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias 2.0 tool. One study generated concern regarding its overall assessment because despite reporting baseline balancing there was no declaration of allocation concealment [ ]. The study reported by Huang et al. [ ] was deemed to be at a high risk of bias because the participants and personnel were not blinded and the distribution of positive anti-HB subjects was not balanced (ESM Figs. S 1 , S 2 ). As shown in ESM Tables S1 and S2 , all of the observational studies scored from 2 to 8 on the Newcastle–Ottawa Scale criteria and were included in the quantitative analysis. Three cohort studies were considered to be of high quality (Newcastle–Ottawa score ≥ 7).
Risk of HBV reactivation
The pooled estimated RR of the two included RCTs, comprising 141 patients (74 patients with antiviral prophylaxis and 67 patients with placebo), was 0.13 (95% CI 0.02–0.7), showing a significant difference in HBV reactivation risk between antiviral prophylaxis and placebo. In contrast, the pooled estimated RRs of the cohort studies were 0.62 (95% CI 0.14–2.83) across 11 cohort studies, comprising 1069 patients (251 patients with antiviral prophylaxis and 818 patients with placebo) [ , , , , , , , , , , ] (Fig. 2 ). Maekawa et al. [ ] and Padovan et al. [ ] reported no events of HBV reactivation in both groups. Papadopoulos et al. disclosed a significantly lower rate of HBV reactivation in HBsAg-negative and anti-HBc-positive patients with antiviral prophylaxis (RR 0.05, 95% CI 0.01–0.23) [ ]. Three cohort studies, comprising 229 patients (97 patients with antiviral prophylaxis and 132 patients with placebo), only showed a trend toward lowered risk of HBV reactivation with antiviral prophylaxis [ , , ]. Fig. 2 Forest plot of HBV reactivation results among users of antiviral prophylaxis vs. non-antiviral prophylaxis. CI Confidence interval, df degrees of freedom, M-H, Random Mantel–Haenszel random-effects model, RCT randomized controlled trial,
Based on the meta-analysis of all studies, comprising a total of 1210 patients (325 patients with antiviral prophylaxis and 885 patients with placebo), the use of antiviral prophylaxis was marginally associated with a decreased risk of HBV reactivation, with an RR of 0.47 (95% CI 0.13–1.69). However, considerable heterogeneity was observed across studies ( I 2 = 72%; P = 0.0001) (Fig. 2 ).
Subgroup analysis
The subgroup analysis of study quality showed no significant difference between pooled estimates of high-quality and low-quality studies (Table 1 , ESM Fig. S3 ). However, excluding the eight studies with quality scores of < 7 rendered the overall association significant (RR 0.28, 95% CI 0.08–0.98). The effects were not significant in terms of decreasing the risk of HBV reactivation with antiviral prophylaxis in the rituximab-based therapy subgroups (with rituximab: RR 0.34, 95% CI 0.08–1.47; without rituximab: RR 0.2, 95% CI 0.03–1.29). In one study, we could not accurately identify the number of patients with or without rituximab [ ]. However, the overall pooled analysis (after excluding the study with unclear rituximab data [ ]) showed a significantly lower risk of HBV reactivation in the antiviral prophylactic arm (RR 0.29, 95% CI 0.10–0.83) (Table 1 , ESM Fig. S4 ). We also noted no significant difference in HBV reactivation rate across the prespecified subgroups of patients with hematologic malignancy or other clinical diseases (hematologic malignancy: RR 0.58, 95% CI 0.10–3.33; other clinical diseases: RR 0.34, 95% CI 0.05–2.29) (Table 1 , ESM Fig. S5 ). The comparison subgroups of the studies included lamivudine and non-lamivudine groups (drugs included entecavir, telbivudine, and tenofovir). Compared with the use of drugs other than lamivudine and placebo, lamivudine use was significantly associated with a decreased risk of HBV reactivation (RR 0.09, 95% CI 0.03–0.34). However, the association between lamivudine and HBV reactivation was not significant when compared with placebo alone (RR 0.57, 95% CI 0.13–2.46) (Table 1 , Fig. S6 ). Subgroup analyses were also carried out to examine the impact of adjustment on confounders. Among subgroups that were adjusted or not adjusted for the presence of anti-HBs antibody, no significant association between antiviral prophylaxis use and HBV reactivation risk was observed (adjusted: RR 0.29, 95% CI 0.07–1.28; not adjusted: RR 0.72, 95% CI 0.09–5.62) (Table 1 , ESM Fig. S7 ). Table 1 Subgroup analyses of hepatitis B virus reactivation risk among antiviral prophylaxis vs. placebo Group variable Subgroups Number of studies Adjusted RR (95% CI) Heterogeneity in subgroup difference All studies 13 0.47 (0.13-1.69) Study quality a High 6 0.28 (0.08-0.98) P = 0.38 I 2 = 0% Low 7 0.93 (0.09-9.88) Different immunosuppressant regimens b R-base 8 0.34 (0.08-1.47) P = 0.67 I 2 = 0% Non R-base 6 0.2 (0.03-1.29) Therapy for different diseases Lymphoma 8 0.58 (0.10-3.33) P = 0.68 I 2 = 0% Non-lymphoma 5 0.34 (0.05-2.29) Antiviral agents c Lamivudine 7 0.57 (0.13–2.46) P = 0.07 I 2 = 69.7% Non-lamivudine 5 0.09 (0.03–0.34) Adjustment of confounder (anti-HBs antibody) d Yes 3 0.29 (0.07-1.28) P = 0.49 I 2 = 0% No 10 0.72 (0.09-5.62) CI, Confidence interval; RR, relative risk, anti-HBs hepatitis B surface a A total score of ≥ 7 in the Newcastle–Ottawa scale was considered to indicate high quality for observational studies; the two randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were considered to be of high quality b Immunosuppressive therapy with or without rituximab ®) c Cho et al. [ ] and Papadopoulos et al. [ ] reported stratified outcomes of lamivudine and non-lamivudine. Lu et al. [ ] and Liu et al. [ ] studies did not declare which antiviral agents were used for prophylaxis. We also could not identify which antiviral drug was used in the HBV reactivation cases in the analysis by Yoo et al. [ ] d The two RCTs were considered to have been adjusted for all mentioned confounders
Secondary outcomes
There were no significant differences in rates of hepatitis or liver failure with or without antiviral prophylaxis (hepatitis: RR 1.19, 95% CI 0.40- 3.57; liver failure: RR 2.74, 95% CI 0.26- 29.05) (ESM Table S3 , ESM Figs. S9 , S10 ).
Toxicity outcomes
Only one randomized study reported eight severe adverse events in the prophylactic group and seven in the observation group. There were no significant differences between the two groups (27.2% [9/33] vs. 25.0% [7/28]; P = 0.85). These events were disease- or immunosuppression-related complications and were not related to anti-viral therapy [ ].
Publication bias
The funnel plot shows symmetrical distribution of the 13 included studies, suggesting that there was no significant evidence for publication bias, as confirmed by Egger’s test ( P = 0.903) [ ] (ESM Fig. S8 ).
Discussion
Patients with resolved HBV infection (e.g., HBsAg-negative, anti-HBc-positive patients) are also at risk for reactivation during immunosuppressive therapy. Most reports of reactivation in HBsAg-negative patients have been for those patients receiving anti-CD20 antibody (e.g., rituximab) or bone marrow/hematopoietic stem cell transplants (HSCTs) [ , , , ]. Recent studies suggest that HBV reactivation is associated with the increased use of various medications, such as traditional chemotherapeutic agents, glucocorticoids, biologic agents (e.g., anti-CD 20 and anti-tumor necrosis factor agents), and new classes of drugs, such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors and mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors [ , , , ]. However, these studies are incomplete and unclear in terms of the benefits or efficacies of prophylaxis. To obtain a clear insight on all of the literature to date, we performed the meta-analysis reported here to compare the prophylactic efficacy of antiviral agents with that of placebo for the risk of HBV reactivation. The analysis showed that antiviral prophylaxis trended toward a lower rate of HBV reactivation, but the difference was not significant (RR 0.47, 95% CI 0.13-1.69).
Our meta-analysis revealed a significant heterogeneity between studies. Lu et al. [ ] reported a significant association between antiviral prophylaxis use and HBV reactivation risk, whereas the remaining studies showed no such association. The former authors also mentioned some missing data from the enrolled patients, such as HBV serology and HBV-DNA levels and lower rates of reactivation ( n = 4). The prophylactic group included only four patients, and one of them complicated the data by showing reactivation. However, this anti-HBs-negative patient had several comorbidities. Another retrospective study included a total of 47 resolved HBV patients, and only six patients treated with rituximab therapy received lamivudine for prophylaxis. The limitations of that study are the relatively small number of prophylactic groups and a fair study quality (a score of 2 on the Newcastle–Ottawa scale) [ ]. Hence, the outcomes and limitations of the studies included in our meta-analysis may affect the accuracy of our analysis. In our subgroup analysis to study quality, the prespecified ‘higher quality’ studies (defined as RCTs or nonrandomized studies with a score of ≥ 7 out of 9 on the Newcastle–Ottawa scale criteria) showed a significantly lower risk of HBV reactivation in the antiviral prophylactic group (RR 0.28, 95% CI 0.08-0.98). However, most notably, for these RCTs, they both enrolled patients treated with a rituximab-based regimen. Based on the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) and the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) study, different immunosuppressive agents cause various risks of HBV reactivation in resolved HBV patients; for example, rituximab is related to a high risk of HBV reactivation (> 10%) [ , , ]. Our prespecified subgroup analysis of rituximab and non-rituximab regimens revealed that the relative effects appeared to be similar, with no heterogeneity across studies between rituximab and non-rituximab groups, although there was only a trend toward a decreased risk of HBV reactivation (rituximab: RR 0.34, 95% CI 0.08-1.47; non-rituximab: RR 0.2, 95% CI 0.03-1.29). One study that analyzed patients with diffuse B-cell lymphoma receiving rituximab-based chemotherapy indicated a higher risk of viral reactivation in the group of patients with prophylaxis (RR 12.17, 95% CI 1.59-92.97) [ ]. If we do not include these data, antiviral prophylaxis will significantly decrease the risk of HBV reactivation in patients treated with the rituximab-based regimen (RR 0.17, 95% CI 0.07-0.39).
Lamivudine is a nucleoside analog with potent antiviral activity against HBV; it is safe, well-tolerated, and inexpensive. It is also the first-line antiviral agent for prophylaxis of HBV reactivation in patients receiving chemotherapy or immunosuppressive therapy, but drug resistance remains a frequent consequence of long-term use [ ]. Other antiviral drugs, such as entecavir or tenofovir, are frequently used alternatives to the first-line therapy for chronic hepatitis B because of the lower risk of resistance [ ]. Moreover, one head-to-head study compared the prophylactic effect between lamivuidine and entecavir in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma receiving R-CHOP (rituximab–cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) chemotherapy; this study showed a benefit in the entecavir group [ ]. Based on the results of their network meta-analysis, Zhang et al. [ ] reported that tenofovir and entecavir might be the most potent regimens in the prevention of HBV reactivation for patients with hematological malignancies undergoing chemotherapy or HSCTs. According to the indications from these reports, our subgroup analysis of lamivudine and non-lamivudine indicated that both groups have a lower rate of HBV reactivation, especially the non-lamivuidine group that showed statistical significance.
Although HBV reactivation may be observed in anti-HBs-positive individuals, some publications suggest that those with detectable anti-HBs antibodies show a relatively lower risk of HBV reactivation [ , , ]. A possible mechanism involves the role of anti-HBs antibodies in protection of HBsAg reverse seroconversion. In a prospective study evaluating the risk of HBV reactivation in 150 HBsAg-negative patients and anti-HBc-positive patients undergoing chemotherapy for lymphoma with a rituximab-containing regimen, HBV reactivation occurred in nine of the 116 patients (8%) who were positive for anti-HBs at baseline and in eight of the 35 (23%) patients who were negative for anti-HBs [ ]. A recent meta-analysis reported that, for those not receiving antiviral prophylaxis, the reactivation risk was 14% in non-anti-HBs patients versus 5.0% in anti-HBs patients. Anti-HBs antibodies reduced the reactivation risk with a pooled odds ratio of 0.21 versus patients with anti-HBc antibodies only [ ]. Taking this fact into account, our subgroup analysis of confounding factors using detectable anti-HBs adjustment revealed a trend toward a lower risk of HBV reactivation in the adjustment group.
Limitations
This study has several limitations. First, in this meta-analysis we compile results from available studies and then attempt to draw a conclusion from an analysis of these results. However, the included studies did not adjust for the same confounders; hence, no direct comparisons can be made. Second, our study contains only two RCTs, the remainder being retrospective studies, and the RCT studies had small sample sizes. In addition to this, the quality of most of the included observational studies was poor, and these studies enrolled individuals with various comorbidities and underlying conditions. We were not able to exclude and adjust the influence of these factors on the results in the meta-analysis. More studies are needed to explore the relationship between antiviral prophylaxis and HBV reactivation.
In conclusion, our meta-analyses did not find an association between antiviral prophylaxis use and risk of HBV reactivation in patients with resolved HBV who underwent immunosuppressive therapy. This outcome is questionable, as the use of only higher quality studies produced a significant association, and the effects of different regimens or adjusting for confounding factors could bring the association closer to statistical significance. Based on our subgroup analyses, clinicians can consider providing anti-viral prophylaxis to patients with resolved HBV infection while undergoing rituximab-based therapy . Therefore, more prospective, RCTs with larger sample sizes and of higher quality are recommended to compare the potential benefits of antiviral prophylaxis in reducing HBV reactivation and its cost-effectiveness.