Introduction
Pharmacovigilance (PV) is the science and activities relating to detecting, assessing, understanding, and preventing adverse effects of drugs or drug-related problems [ ]. It is developed and mostly conducted through spontaneous reporting systems (SRS) [ ]. SRS has become a vital component of contemporary medical practice. It provides basic information for drug-safety evaluation [ ]. However, some adverse drug events (ADEs) may intentionally or unintentionally be ignored due to the shortcomings of the SRS. Many factors related to differences in clinical settings may influence reporting patterns and rates [ ], severity of events and types of drugs [ ], and different perceptions and attitudes toward adverse drug reactions (ADRs) [ , ], for example. Thus, reported cases only represent a small proportion of ADEs that have actually occurred. Furthermore, the reporting rates vary greatly [ , ]. Together with the variable quality of the reported data and lack of information on drug exposure, SRS has many limitations for which other approaches would be helpful [ ].
Active pharmacovigilance is a broadly recognized supplement to SRS [ , , ]. However, little is known about the current work patterns and specific techniques used in today’s environment [ ]. China Food and Drug Administration (CFDA) has promoted the exploratory use of active pharmacovigilance, and the scientific community and medical institutions have responded by exploring or implementing a variety of ways to conduct active pharmacovigilance. The aim of this paper is to examine these efforts and provide a perspective for China and other nations for building active pharmacovigilance systems.
Methods
Active pharmacovigilance in China was studied by examining: (1) information collected from scientific articles and the websites of the CFDA and China National Center for Adverse Drug Reaction Monitoring (CNCAM), (2) information available on China’s SRS and active pharmacovigilance system, and (3) annual reports and internal reports on this subject. This information is used to consider current system maturity and future challenges.
Overview of China's SRS system
China has undertaken the development of an efficient pharmacovigilance system since a pilot project for ADR monitoring in 14 major hospitals was instituted in 1988. The CNCAM was established in 1989; 66 major civilian hospitals and 19 military hospitals were assigned as pilot hospitals for ADR monitoring that year. The year 1998 was also an important milestone year, because China officially became the 68th member of the World Health Organization (WHO) Program for International Drug Monitoring. The construction of a national network for ADR monitoring developed rapidly after the promulgation of the Proposed Regulation on Administrative Measures on Reporting and Monitoring of ADRs and amendment of the Drug Administration Law of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) in 2001. In 2002, the first phase of the National Information Network for ADR Monitoring was finished and an online SRS system was put into place [ ]. Guangdong Provincial Center for ADR Monitoring built the first web-based quantitative signal-detection system in 2007, which greatly enhanced the efficiency of ADR monitoring [ ]. CNCAM and all provincial centers for ADR monitoring have since been equipped with the web-based signal-detection system.
China has a relatively mature SRS system, with a four-level network that consists of one national center, 34 provincial centers, and >400 municipal centers [ ]. By 2016, the number of end users of the system had reached >310,000. The end users include hospitals, drug manufacturers, wholesalers, and retail drug stores. County ADR monitoring centers are at the base of the four-level network. To date, 97.7% of all counties have reported ADR reports to the network. The average number of reports per million people has reached 1,068 [ ].
In 2016, CNCAM received 1,430,000 suspected ADR reports through the four-level SRS network. Among those, 423,000 new (ADRs not listed in the labels or package inserts) or serious ADRs. From 1999 to 2016, the total number of suspected ADR reports received by CNCAM reached 10,750,000 [ ].
China’s SRS system has played an important role in ensuring the safety of medicinal products. However, because an SRS relies on voluntary reporting and is characterized by low and uneven reporting rates, it is frequently referred to as passive pharmacovigilance. It is suitable for detecting new, rare, or serious ADR signals [ ] but less suitable to verify a safety signal. Some kinds of safety risks, such as fractures or myocardial infarctions, can be difficult to recognize by an SRS system [ ]. Thus, it was considered essential to build an active pharmacovigilance system.
Moving from passive to active pharmacovigilance: exploration of the Quick Reporting and Intelligent Scanning System of ADRs
The conduct of active pharmacovigilance is greatly enhanced if existing databases can be integrated [ ]. With the widespread use of electronic hospital information systems (HIS), a huge amount of electronic health information can be gathered for the purpose of monitoring the safety of medicinal products [ ] and has therefore become an important information source for active pharmacovigilance [ ]. CFDA and its subsidiary ADR monitoring centers have turned their attention to HIS in recent years. The work of Guangdong provincial center and Shanghai municipal center for ADR monitoring are good examples of this trend. Guangdong province is one of the most densely populated areas in China, with a population of >100 million for drug monitoring [ ]. In recent years, Guangdong Provincial Center for ADR Monitoring has developed an ADR Quick Reporting and Intelligent Scanning System to promote active pharmacovigilance in the district [ , ]. Similarly, Shanghai is one of the largest cities in the world, with a population of >24 million. The Shanghai Municipal Center for ADR Monitoring has explored active drug monitoring since 2001. It has worked in partnership with ten major hospitals in Shanghai that permit direct access to patient information to aid the active search and assessment of ADRs [ ].
General framework of the ADR Quick Reporting and Intelligent Scanning System
In 2013, Guangdong Provincial Center for ADR Monitoring initiated a pilot project of quick reporting and intelligent scanning of ADRs based on hospital information systems. The system was constructed on a Java 2 Platform Enterprise Edition (J2EE), Enterprise JavaBean (EJB), and other JAVA-based technologies. It uses a Lucene full-text search segmentation algorithm based on the reverse maximal matching algorithm and connects the hospital information system with the government’s ADR monitoring system. ADR reports generated by automated scanning can be sent to the provincial ADR monitoring center conveniently. The system can also download ADR regulatory information from the government’s ADR monitoring center. The structure of the system is demonstrated in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 Framework of the adverse drug reaction (ADR) Quick Reporting and Intelligent Scanning System
This is a web-based system built and operated based on the hospital information system. It can automatically scan ADRs of interest and extract patient demographic information and other information necessary for drug safety evaluation from hospital health records and laboratory test results and conveniently generate a large number of ADR reports on a particular adverse effect. At the present stage, it still needs clinical pharmacists to make the final judgment on whether the results of an automated scanning are real ADRs or not. The basic rationale of the ADR automated scanning is illustrated in Fig. 2 . Fig. 2 Rationale of adverse drug reaction (ADR) intelligent scanning system
The information extracted from the hospital information system, including from lab test results, can be analyzed at the hospital level. It can also be analyzed at the provincial level by a provincial ADR monitoring center that collects data from all member hospitals. Patients’ information should be de-identified by the member hospital before the extracted information is sent to the provincial center for further analysis. These ADR reports will also be included in the SRS to strengthen its power. The ADR Quick Reporting and Intelligent Scanning System can benefit both active and passive pharmacovigilance.
Practical effect of the system
This ADR monitoring system has been integrated into many major hospitals in China and has improved work efficiency and the frequency of ADR reporting. It may partially solve the problem of underreporting, undue delays, and miscommunication. Better reporting systems also can have a positive effect on rational drug use in medical institutions [ , ]. Data in Table 1 illustrates the increase in the number of ADR reports after application of the system in a sample hospital. Table 1 Number of adverse drug reaction (ADR) reports before and after application of the monitoring system in a sample hospital Year Moderate ADR (known) Moderate ADR (new) Serious ADR (known) Serious ADR (new) Total reports 2015 a 86 43 4 15 131 2016 b 154 45 42 37 289 Ratio increased (%) 79.07 4.65 950.00 146.67 120.6 a Before application of the system b After application of the system
Other explorations of active pharmacovigilance
It is important to obtain additional information from hospital records or other resources to aid drug safety evaluation for active pharmacovigilance. Such information is needed so that the incidence rates of an ADR can possibly be calculated, and a full safety profile of a drug can be described. In recent years, many medical institutions and research groups have explored ways to obtain information to add to the range of drug safety information available directly from hospital records by designing a set of preprogrammed requests on HIS. Multiple-trigger models and text-recognition technologies are the main methods for collecting this information.
Guo et al. [ ] developed a system based on a multiple-trigger model for automated detection of ADRs. In the early stages, they used a singular triggering criterion—specifically, changes in patient’s body temperature [ ]. They could scan for cases that accorded with the triggering criterion of body temperature changes, but it required much human judgment to decide whether an ADR had actually occurred or not. This challenge spurred a change in design from using a singular triggering criterion to multiple triggering criteria to improve specificity. Their system is now available for use in several military hospitals. Equipped with this system, the developers investigated automatic monitoring of ADRs with changes in liver or kidney function, platelet count, hemoglobin level, and so on [ ]. They also studied the relationships of nephrotoxicity and vancomycin, anemia and gemcitabine, transaminase changes and atorvastatin, and thrombocytopenia and linezolid [ , , , , , , , ]. However, their system mainly uses quantitative changes in laboratory test results as triggering parameters, so the range of application is limited.
There are also other automated ADR detection systems using lab test results as triggering parameters. Pan et al. [ ] developed a system based on hematological changes caused by chemotherapeutics. Lu’s group [ ] and Wang’s group [ ] developed their automated ADR detection systems using changes in alanine aminotransferase as triggering parameters.
Geng et al. [ ] explored text mining of hospital records using common ADR terms, such as fever or bone marrow suppression as keywords, to scan electronic records of hospital inpatients for related ADRs. Because no follow-up reports have been published after their preliminary study, the effects of their methods are difficult to evaluate. Text mining is emerging as a potentially useful tool with which to process free texts in hospital records and can be very promising in active pharmacovigilance [ , ]. However, explorations in text mining of hospital records appear to be quite rare due to the unsolved problems and difficulties in Chinese free-text documents and the forbidding complexity of free texts present in medical records.
China Hospital Pharmacovigilance System and China Sentinel Hospital Alliance
China Hospital Pharmacovigilance System (CHPS)
The China Hospital Pharmacovigilance System (CHPS) was developed by CNCAM to collect and analyze information automatically extracted from sentinel hospitals. Its information platform was built on the information system of sentinel hospitals connected to the coordinating center of the program. The connection to HIS makes it possible to extract necessary structured information from the HIS system of sentinel hospitals and then is uploaded to CNCAM, the coordinating center, for further analysis. The login interface and logic structure of CHPS are shown in Figs. 3 and 4 . The structured information processed by CHPS can be used for active pharmacovigilance, and it will also be sent to databases of ADR monitoring centers of the government to enrich data resources of the SRS system. Fig. 3 Login interface of China Hospital Pharmacovigilance System Fig. 4 Logic structure of China Hospital Pharmacovigilance System
China Sentinel Hospital Alliance (CSHA)
In 2016, CFDA launched another program associated with CHPS—the China Sentinel Hospital Alliance (CSHA) program—and formulated the protocol for CSHA. CSHA is a program that connects CNCAM with provincial ADR monitoring centers and sentinel hospitals. The program is recruiting additional competent sentinel hospitals and has undertaken the training of employees for those hospitals. CNCAM acts as the organizer and coordinator of the program, and all member hospitals are assigned by CNCAM [ ].
Inspired by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Sentinel Initiative [ , , , ] and Common Data Model [ , , , ], China also has been working on building a Chinese version of a common data model to solve the problem of data format differences between different sentinel hospitals and to provide standardized data forms for active pharmacovigilance. The structure of CSHA is shown in Fig. 5 . Fig. 5 Structure of China Sentinel Hospital Alliance (CSHA)
Discussion and future perspectives
Different roles and integrations of passive and active pharmacovigilance
Traditional passive pharmacovigilance data sources, such as SRS, are more structured and easier to manage than active sources, but the limited information may prevent researchers from reaching a solid conclusion. The main function of passive pharmacovigilance is to generate safety signals, whereas the function of active pharmacovigilance is to strengthen or verify a safety signal. In order to strengthen or verify a safety signal, contemporary active pharmacovigilance must obtain sufficient information to evaluate a safety problem comprehensively. China has made continuous efforts to explore possibilities and work models to obtain necessary information from hospital records for active pharmacovigilance: CHPS and CSHA are the most significant programs for this purpose.
Although the initial purpose of the online SRS system was to provide a platform for passive pharmacovigilance, it has also become an important platform for various explorations of active pharmacovigilance. Various programs and projects of active pharmacovigilance, such as ADR Quick Reporting and Intelligent Scanning System, CHPS, and CSHA, are all organized and coordinated by ADR monitoring centers of the drug regulatory authority and closely connected with the online SRS system. And all these programs and projects are different ways to connect the online SRS system with the information systems of sentinel hospitals and provide a smoother and more interactive way to transmit additional information necessary for drug safety evaluation from hospitals to research centers for further analysis.
As the ADR Quick Reporting and Intelligent Scanning System is built and operated on the hospital information system, it can obtain all data from hospital information system, including drug-use data. However, the main concern is the automated scanning and convenient reporting of ADR reports for efficiency promoting the SRS system. Obtaining sufficient information from hospital records for more comprehensive analysis would be the major concern of CHPS and CSHA. CHPS could be seen as an update of the ADR Quick Reporting and Intelligent Scanning System.
Major directions of China’s active pharmacovigilance
By and large, active pharmacovigilance in China appears to be heading in three major directions in the near future: (1) expanding the sentinel hospital alliance, (2) exploring new partnership for data sources, and (3) constructing a more flexible and efficient coordinating center.
The number of competent sentinel hospitals is a key element of the alliance program. China has been working hard to expand the alliance. On 19 September 2016, nine major hospitals became the initial members of CSHA [ ]. As of December 2017, >50 major hospitals officially joined the sentinel hospital alliance [ ]. The number of sentinel hospitals is estimated to reach to 300 in 2 years’ time, according to a recent plan, thus creating a giant national sentinel hospital alliance network.
The basic idea of the sentinel hospital alliance program is to integrate existing data sources of value for active pharmacovigilance. At present, CFDA mainly focuses on integrating data sources of sentinel hospitals and expanding the sentinel hospital alliance. Soon, it intends to integrate other existing data sources. There have been some existing databases available in China, such as the national claim databases [ ], some regional electronic health databases [ ], the China Cancer Database [ ], and the database of the National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, etc. [ ].
CSHA is now coordinated by CNCAM, a subsidiary body of the CFDA. In early stages, there may be some advantages for the government agency to act as the organizer and coordinator of the CSHA program. In the future, CFDA should cooperate with competent universities and medical institutions to allow them to coordinate the program, so that the government can focus on administrative issues.
Major issues at the present stage of China’s active pharmacovigilance system
The range of ADRs being reported in a particular pharmacovigilance system (passive or active) can reflect the maturity of the system. China has already built a relatively mature SRS system. Almost all sorts of ADRs can be included, but only ADRs of interest can be gathered and studied in an active pharmacovigilance system. The construction of an efficient active pharmacovigilance system in China is still under way. At present, the main focus is on ADRs with quantitative changes in laboratory test results, such as changes in liver or kidney function, platelet count, and so on. These are among the most studied ADRs in China; however, range of ADRs available for study through active pharmacovigilance system will be extended in the future.
The main current driving force for China’s active pharmacovigilance system is from CFDA and CNCAM (a subsidiary body of CFDA). Some leading hospitals are the main protagonists. Physicians, pharmacists, nurses, and consumers are involved to different degrees. The motivation to conduct active pharmacovigilance for the pharmaceutical industry is relatively low, and building an effective active pharmacovigilance system is a huge challenge for China. Traditional Chinese herbal medicine is an important part of the healthcare system, and there have been increasing concerns about safety and potential toxicity of these products. Generally speaking, the general principle and rationale of active pharmacovigilance are applicable for both conventional and alternative medicines. However, the differences between them have made the active pharmacovigilance of traditional Chinese herbal medicine challenging. Thus far, there are very few studies taking the differences into account, which is an issue for future exploration.
In summary, to promote active pharmacovigilance, China has been making great efforts to construct a connection between information systems of hospitals and ADR research centers and has made some progress. The CHPS and CSHA projects signal a new era for China’s active pharmacovigilance, but it is too early to celebrate success, and much challenging work lies ahead. There is a long way to go before China can claim to have established a high-level active pharmacovigilance system to ensure drug safety in the country.