Introduction
Within the last decade, synthetic cathinones (designer phenethylamines or “bath salts”) have emerged as popular drugs of abuse. Structurally, many synthetic cathinones are similar to 3,4-methylenedioxymethamephetamine (MDMA, ecstasy, or Molly) and are purported to provide a similar effect as MDMA to the user (Banks et al. ). Synthetic cathinone users report increased energy, empathy, openness, and heightened libido. Originally marketed as a “legal high,” the first popular synthetic cathinones (mephedrone, MDPV, and methylone) were emergency scheduled as controlled substances in 2011 (US Drug Enforcement Administration ) and became permanently scheduled in 2013 (78 FR 21818). Under the Federal Analogue Act of 1986, other synthetic cathinones or “designer drugs” that are analogs of illegal drugs are also considered illegal for human consumption; however, the law does not address manufacturing or possession of the designer drugs (United States Congress ). In 2009, five synthetic cathinones were reported to the National Forensic Laboratory Information System (NFLIS); this increased to 35 different synthetic cathinones reported to NFLIS in 2015 (US Drug Enforcement Administration, Diversion Control Division ). Synthetic cathinones were responsible for a 12-fold increase in Poison Control Center reports and almost 23,000 emergency department visits in 2010 (Bronstein et al. ). The most common adverse effects of synthetic cathinones are chest pain, hypertension, tachycardia, delusions, hallucinations, paranoia, agitation, aggression, and hyperthermia (Laurent et al. ; Prosser and Nelson ). Synthetic cathinone intoxication has been fatal (Carbone et al. ; Pearson et al. ; de la Torre et al. ; Moore et al. ).
Synthetic cathinones are phenylalkylamine derivatives containing a ketone at the β position of the amino alkyl chain attached to the phenyl ring (Fig. 1 ). The addition of the ketone increases polarity of the cathinones, as compared to their phenylalkylamine analogues. The most common substitutions at the N-terminus are methyl or ethyl groups, or a pyrrolidine ring (Prosser and Nelson ). Common synthetic cathinones that contain an N-methyl substitution include methcathinone, methylone, buphedrone, butylone, pentedrone, and pentylone to name a few. Additionally, the length of the alkyl chain at the α position is commonly modified. Methylone has a single methyl substitution, butylone contains an ethyl group, and pentylone contains a propyl group (Fig. 2 ) (Zawilska and Wojcieszak ). Mephedrone and 3-methylmethcathinone (3-MMC) are similar to methylone, having a single methyl substitution at the α position, but differ in substitutions on the phenyl ring. Whereas methylone contains a dioxolane ring, mephedrone, and 3-MMC have a single methyl group at the 4′ and 3′ positions, respectively, of the phenyl ring (Fig. 2 ) (Green et al. ; Shimshoni et al. ). Examples of synthetic cathinones with a dioxolane ring-substitution on the phenyl ring and a pyrrolidine ring-substitution on the N-terminus are methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV) and 3′,4′-methylenedioxy–α- pyrrolidinopropiophenone (MDPPP). MDPV has a propyl substitution at the α position and MDPPP has a methyl group (Fig. 2 ) (Zawilska and Wojcieszak ). Fig. 1 The chemical structure of MDMA as compared with the core scaffold of the synthetic cathinones. The core scaffold of synthetic cathinones is shown in bold and contains the addition of a ketone on the β carbon, as indicated. Common substitutions to the core scaffold include an alkyl chain of varying lengths located at the α carbon (e.g., methylone), a substitution of a pyrrolidine ring on the N-terminus (e.g., MDPV), and methyl substitutions for the dioxolane ring (e.g., mephedrone) Fig. 2 The chemical structures for several common synthetic cathinones. Each synthetic cathinone is built on the core scaffold, with varying substitutions on the α carbon, the benzene ring, and the N-terminus
Synthetic cathinones increase the levels of catecholamines in the synapse via several mechanisms. Clandestine laboratories modified the chemical scaffold of the synthetic cathinones in an attempt to circumvent the law (Banks et al. ). Chemical modifications are known to alter the affinity of the synthetic cathinones for the various neurotransmitter reuptake proteins (e.g., dopamine transporter (DAT)). For example, mephedrone, methylone, and MDPV can function as dopamine releasing agents and/or (re)uptake inhibitors depending on the chemical modification to the synthetic cathinone scaffold (Baumann et al., ; ; Simmler et al. , ). Mephedrone is slightly more potent at dopamine releasing and uptake blocking than methylone. In contrast to mephedrone and methylone, MDPV functions only as uptake blocker and cannot induce the release of dopamine (Baumann et al., ; ; Simmler et al. , ). In general, the ring-substituted cathinones, such as mephedrone and methylone, function as transporter substrates and release neurotransmitters and the pyrrolidinophenones, such as MDPV, are transport blockers and inhibit neurotransmitter reuptake.
This review summarizes the pharmacokinetic properties of the synthetic cathinones. Specifically, the review focuses on changes in the pharmacokinetic profiles of the synthetic cathinones based on the structural modifications to the core scaffold. Through characterization of the pharmacokinetic profiles of the synthetic cathinones will enhance our understanding of the effects of synthetic cathinones in humans, and will provide the basis for predicting pharmacokinetic profiles of newly designed synthetic cathinones based on the structural modifications.
Comparison of pharmacokinetic parameters between synthetic cathinones
The pharmacokinetic profile, i.e., concentration versus time profile, of drugs is highly influenced by the route of drug administration. In humans, synthetic cathinones are administered in a multitude of fashions. Common routes of synthetic cathinone consumption include oral tablets, snorting (“keying”), ingesting the drug rolled in cigarette paper (“bombing”), and intravenous use (“slamming”). Less common routes of administration include rectal suppositories (“booty bumper”), intramuscular injections, gingival delivery, and insertion into the eye (“eyeballing”) (Karila et al. ). To date, most pharmacokinetic studies with the synthetic cathinones have utilized rodent models and only a few human studies have been completed. Three major synthetic cathinones have been characterized pharmacokinetically: mephedrone (4-methyl ring-substituent), methylone (3,4-methylenedioxy ring-substituent), and MDPV (3,4-methylenedioxy ring-substituent plus nitrogen-containing pyrrolidine). Using a rodent model, Martinez-Clemente et al. ( ) examined the blood pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics response of mephedrone. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were treated with either a 10 mg/kg intravenous (iv) or 30 or 60 mg/kg oral dose (po) of mephedrone. Mephedrone (iv) fits a two-compartment model. Mephedrone (po) reached a T max of 0.43–0.93 h and a t 1/2 of 0.37 h. The bioavailability (F) was found to be 7.3% (30 mg/kg) and 11.2% (60 mg/kg). Martinez-Clemente et al. ( ) further observed a dose-dependent increase in locomotor activity that lasted up to 120 min after mephedrone (iv) administration, 90 min after the 60 mg/kg po dose and was absent 60 min after the 30 mg/kg po dose. Further, the pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic modeling demonstrated a relationship between mephedrone plasma concentrations and its psychostimulant effects. Recently, Sichova et al. ( ) examined the serum pharmacokinetic, behavioral, and hyperthermic effects of subcutaneous (sc) mephedrone (5 mg/kg). Mephedrone (5 mg/kg, sc) T max was seen at 30 min, and Sichova et al. ( ) reported that the locomotor stimulant effects declined quickly in a fashion similar to serum mephedrone. However, there was a dissociation between the locomotor effects and hyperthermia which they suggested may be the result of the active mephedrone metabolite, nor-mephedrone.
In 12 male young adult human volunteers, mephedrone (200 mg/kg, po) had a T max of 1.25 h and the t 1/2 was 2.15 h (Papaseit et al. ). Papaseit et al. ( ) further examined the physiological, subjective, and psychomotor effects of mephedrone and concluded that the drug has a high abuse liability. Those authors further suggested that because of its early onset, short duration of action, and elimination half-life, mephedrone could cause a compulsive pattern of use. Olesti et al. ( ) also examined the pharmacokinetics of mephedrone in human young adult male subjects and found that mephedrone reached a T max in 1.2 h and had a t 1/2 of 2.2 h following a po dose of 150 mg. These findings in humans are in align with the T max (0.5 h) and t 1/2 (3.1 h) seen in male rats treated with a 60 mg/kg oral dose of mephedrone (Martinez-Clemente et al. ).
Using a rodent model, Lopez-Arnau et al. ( ) examined the blood pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics response of methylone. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were treated with either a 10 mg/kg (iv) or 15 or 30 mg/kg (po) of methylone. As was seen with mephedrone, the plasma concentration of methylone was described by a two-compartment model. Methylone (po) had a T max of 0.5 and 1 h, respective of dose. The bioavailability (F) for po methylone was found to be 89% (15 mg/kg) and 78.4% (30 mg/kg). The t 1/2β for the po doses was found to be 0.55 h. Further, the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic analysis showed a correlation between plasma concentration of methylone and locomotor activity (Lopez-Arnau et al. ). Stefkova et al. ( ) examined the serum pharmacokinetic, behavioral, and hyperthermic effects of subcutaneous (sc) doses of methylone (10 mg/kg). Methylone (10 mg/kg, sc) was found to reach a T max in 30 min. Stefkova et al. ( ) did report that the locomotor stimulant effects corresponded with peak brain concentrations and not serum concentrations. In a similar fashion, Elmore et al. ( ) examined the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile of methylone (3, 6, and 12 mg/kg, sc). Methylone was found to peak quickly with a T max of 15–45 min and a short t 1/2 of 60 to 90 min. The stimulation of locomotor activity induced by methylone correlated to plasma concentrations.
The first pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic analysis of MDPV was performed by Anizan et al. ( ). Those authors examined sc doses of MDPV (0.5, 1.0, 2.0 mg/kg) in male Sprague-Dawley rats. The T max was found to be 12.9–18.6 min, t 1/2 ranged from 77.8 to 97.9 min, and C last ranged from 0.9 to 2.6 μg/L. Anizan et al. ( ) further found that horizontal locomotor activity and stereotypy correlated with MDPV plasma concentration. The same doses of MDPV given intraperitoneally (ip) yielded pharmacokinetic findings similar to those of sc dosing (Baumann et al. ). Following ip administration, MDPV obtained a T max in 10 min and a t 1/2 of approximately 90 min. Additionally, the locomotor effects were correlated to the plasma concentrations of MDPV. More recently, Horsley et al. ( ) using MDPV (2 mg/kg, sc) found the T max to be 30 min in the sera, lung, and brain tissue. They further found that locomotion, spatial distribution, and hyperthermia correlated to the brain/serum ratio.
We have examined the effect of the length of the α-alkyl chain on plasma and central nervous system (CNS) pharmacokinetics in rats (Grecco et al. ). Male Sprague-Dawley rats were administered a 20 mg/kg, sc dose of methylone (-CH 3 ), butylone (-CH 2 CH 3 ), or pentylone (-CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 ). Pentylone, which has the greatest lipophilicity, displayed the highest maximum plasma concentration (C max ), area under the concentration versus time curve (AUC 0-∞ ), and longest t 1/2 . Decreasing the α-alkyl chain length as in butylone and methylone significantly decreased the C max , AUC 0-∞ , and t 1/2 (Grecco et al. ).
Synthetic cathinones readily cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) to exert their pharmacological effects on their drug targets, namely the monoamine transporters (DAT, NET, and SERT). A brain/plasma concentration ratio greater than 1 indicates that a compound freely crosses the BBB (Hitchcock and Pennington ). Mephedrone (10 mg/kg, iv) yielded a brain/plasma ratio of 1.85. Mephedrone (5 mg/kg, sc) was found to have a mean brain/serum ratio of 1:1.19 (Sichova et al. ). Furthermore, Sichova et al. ( ) found that the maximum serum and brain concentrations were at the 30-min time point, indicating the relative ease of mephedrone to cross the BBB. Lopez-Arnau et al. ( ) first demonstrated that methylone po had a brain/plasma ratio of 1.42, indicating that methylone also easily crosses the BBB. In this study, whole brain homogenates were analyzed 45 min after methylone (30 mg/kg, po). At this time point, whole brain methylone concentrations were found to be 349.2 ± 26.7 ng/g tissue. Stefkova et al. ( ) found that methylone (10 mg/kg, sc) yielded a brain/serum ration of 7.97 30-min after dosing. Novellas et al. ( ) examined striatal concentrations of MDPV following a 1 mg/kg, sc dose and found a brain/plasma ratio of 4.74 (Novellas et al. ). Peters et al. ( ) administered a cocktail of MDPV (1 mg/kg), mephedrone (3 mg/kg), and methylone (3 mg/kg) ip and examined whole brain pharmacokinetics. All three synthetic cathinones reached a T max at 15 min, and the rank order (longest to shortest) t 1/2 was methylone (561 min) > MDPV (361 min) > mephedrone (262 min) (Peters et al. ). However, potential drug-drug interactions were not taken into consideration in this study. Using microdialysis cannulae surgically implanted into the lateral ventricle, we pharmacokinetically characterized the CNS concentrations of methylone, butylone, and pentylone (20 mg/kg, sc) over time (Grecco et al. ). For methylone, butylone, and pentylone, CNS T max were achieved at 60 min as compared to 30 min in plasma, representing a time dependence for drug distribution into the CNS. We further found the brain/plasma ratio to be 39.5 for methylone, 7.1 for butylone, and 2.1 for pentylone (Grecco et al. ). There were no significant differences for the effects of α-alkyl chain lengthening on any other pharmacokinetic parameter values considering CNS concentration versus time data. These in vivo findings are consistent with in vitro BBB model studies which found methylone and other synthetic cathinones can cross the BBB with high efficiency (Simmler et al. ).
Sex-dependent differences in pharmacokinetic profiles have been suggested with MDMA (Fonsart et al. ; Hirt et al. ). Few studies to date have examined sex-dependent differences in the pharmacokinetic characterization of synthetic cathinones. Hambuchen et al. ( ) examined the pharmacokinetic profile of racemic MDPV (3 and 5.6 mg/kg, iv) and its R- and S-enantiomers (1.5 mg/kg, iv) in female and male Sprague-Dawley rats. Racemic-MDPV displayed sex-dependent differences in the volume of distribution at steady state (Vdss) for (R)- and (R,S)-MDPV at both (R,S)-MDPV doses. Hambuchen et al. ( ) suggested that these differences in Vdss may be due to differences in drug-blood and drug-tissue protein binding. Strange et al. ( ) treated pregnant mice with a cocktail of methylone (5 mg/kg), mephedrone (10 mg/kg), and MDPV (3 mg/kg) ip. All three synthetic cathinones were found in the placenta and fetal brain. MDPV had the highest C max in the fetal brain, while mephedrone’s highest C max was found in the placenta (Strange et al. ). Drug cocktail studies such as this are confounded by potential drug-drug interactions that could alter the pharmacokinetic findings. Further studies are warranted to examine the potential pharmacokinetic differences between male and female subjects with regard to synthetic cathinones and their potential teratogenic effects.
Review of the metabolism of the synthetic cathinones
The metabolism of the synthetic cathinones is important from a clinical and forensic perspective, as metabolites may have pharmacodynamic or toxicological activity in addition to being appropriate targets for drug screening in humans. Most synthetic cathinones follow similar pathways for metabolism, with cytochrome P450-mediated phase I metabolism and some degree of phase II metabolism prior to elimination in the urine, although unchanged parent molecules are also detected in human urine following exposure (Zaitsu ). The metabolites for many of the synthetic cathinones have been identified, but in several instances the responsible phase I enzymes have yet to be described.
The metabolism of methylone and butylone is well characterized (Fig. 3 ). Methylone can undergo N-demethylation to produce 3,4-methylenedioxycathinone or O-demethylenation to produce 3,4-dihydroxy-N-methylcathinone. The dihydroxy metabolite may also undergo O-methylation by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) to produce 4-hydroxy-3-methoxy-N-methylcathinone or 3-hydroxy-4-methoxy-N-methylcathinone (Kamata et al. ; Meyer et al. ; Mueller and Rentsch ). Each of the described metabolites, with the exception of 3,4-dihydroxy-N-methylcathinone, have been detected in human urine primarily conjugated to either glucuronic acid or sulfate. 3,4-dihydroxy-N-methylcathinone has been detected in vitro , using P450-expressing Supersomes and human liver microsomes (Pedersen et al. ). Additionally, very small amounts of the reduced keto metabolite (dihydro-methylone) has been detected in human urine (Mueller and Rentsch ). With regard to pharmacological activity, 3,4-methylenedioxycathinone and 3,4-dihydroxy-N-methylcathinone are substrates at monoamine transporters in vitro, however only 3,4-mtehylenedioxycathinone is capable of elevating dopamine and serotonin in the CNS of rats (Elmore et al. ). Butylone undergoes similar metabolism to methylone with the minor N-demethylation pathway, and the major O-demethylenation followed by methylation via COMT pathway for metabolism. As with methylone metabolites, each of the butylone metabolites have been detected in human urine (Meyer et al. ; Zaitsu et al. ). Pentylone metabolism is less understood, although it could be presumed that pentylone metabolism will resemble the metabolism of the other N-methyl-containing cathinones. The pharmacodynamic behaviors of the metabolites of butylone and pentylone have not been studied. With regard to specific cytochrome P450s of interest, in vitro experiments with pooled human liver microsomes confirmed that methylone is primarily metabolized by CYP2D6, with minor contributions from CYP1A2, CYP2B6, and CYP2C19 (Pedersen et al. ). The other N-methyl-containing cathinones have not been studied in this system, and although there may be similar P450 isoforms for metabolism, it remains to be determined. Fig. 3 Common routes of metabolism for methylone. 3-Hydroxy-4-methoxy-N-methylcathinone and 4-hydroxy-3-methoxy-N-methylcathinone are the most abundant metabolites detected in human urine, and the intermediate 3,4-dihydroxy-N-methylcathinone has only been detected in vitro. 3,4-Methylenedioxycathinone and dihydro-methylone have been detected in human urine in small amounts. Phase I metabolism is carried out by CYP2D6, CYP1A2, CYP2B6, and CYP2C19. Phase II metabolism is carried out by COMT
Mephedrone metabolism has been studied in vitro and in human urine (Meyer et al. ; Pedersen et al. ; Pozo et al. ). Up to ten metabolites have been described in human urine, and seven of those have been detected in multiple systems. Mephedrone undergoes N -demethylation to produce nor-mephedrone, or a reduction of the keto group to produce dihydromephedrone. Additionally, hydroxylations of the C4 and benzylic carbon can occur, producing 4-hydroxytolylmephedrone. Another possibility is the oxidation of the benzylic methyl to carboxylic acid as observed by Meyer et al. ( ). Nor-mephedrone and dihydromephedrone are substrates for DAT, NET, and SERT. 4-Hydroxytolylmephedrone can also behave as a DAT, NET, SERT substrate, although it is much weaker than the other metabolites (Mayer et al. ). Only nor-mephedrone is capable of increasing extracellular dopamine and serotonin in rat brain (Mayer et al. ). As was seen with methylone, CYP2D6 was the primary cytochrome P450 that contributed to the phase I metabolism of mephedrone (Pedersen et al. ). Commonly, mephedrone will undergo subsequent glucuronidation (Pozo et al. ). Additionally, a small amount of succinic acid-conjugated metabolite was also observed in human urine (Pozo et al. ). 3-MMC metabolism is less studied than mephedrone and has been postulated to undergo extensive first-pass metabolism. 3-Methylephedrine and 3-methylnorephedrine have been detected in human pubic hair following 3-MMC use; however, a detailed analysis of the metabolism of 3-MMC has not occurred to date (Shimshoni et al. ).
The metabolism of pyrrolidine ring-containing cathinones, MDPV and MDPPP, has been studied in human urine and other systems (Meyer et al. ; Springer et al. ). Similar to the methyl-containing cathinones, pyrrolidine ring-containing cathinones undergo O-demethylation to form 3,4-dihydroxypyrovalerone and subsequent O-methylation by COMT to yield 4-hydroxy-3-methoxypyrovalerone (Strano-Rossi et al. ). The major metabolite found in rat and human urine is 4-hydroxy-3-methoxypyrovalerone (Meyer et al. ). 3,4-Dihydroxypyrovalerone can inhibit DAT but does not demonstrate activity in vivo, whereas the major metabolite 4-hydroxy-3-methoxypyrovalerone is a weak substrate for DAT and NET (Meltzer et al. ; Baumann et al. ). A minor but unique route of metabolism for the pyrrolidine-ring containing cathinones is hydroxylation at position 2 of the pyrrolidine ring (Meyer et al. ). The cytochrome P450s that have been implicated in phase I metabolism of MDPV are CYP1A2, CYP2D6, and CYP2C19 (Meyer et al. ). MDPPP is metabolized by CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 (Springer et al. ). CYP1A2 was specifically investigated in the metabolism of MDPPP and not found to be involved (Springer et al. ). The specific cytochrome P450s that contribute to each of the metabolites for MDPV and MDPPP is undetermined. MDPV and MDPPP also undergo phase II metabolism, specifically glucuronidation (Meyer et al. ; Springer et al. ).
Many of the methylenedioxy-derived synthetic cathinones inhibit CYP2D6 with potency similar to the clinically relevant CYP2D6 inhibitors quinidine and fluoxetine (Dinger et al. ). Furthermore, the inhibition of CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2E1, and CYP3A has been demonstrated by several of the methylenedioxy-derived synthetic cathinones using the two-cocktail approach (Dinger et al. ). MDMA inhibits CYP2D6 via mechanism-based inactivation (MBI) with a K I ranging from 5.1–45.3 μM and k inact = 0.12–0.26 min −1 (de la Torre et al. ). Given that methylone inhibits CYP2D6 in a time-dependent manner, and that the rate of inactivation reaches a maximum at high methylone concentrations, it is highly likely that methylone inhibits CYP2D6 via MBI as well (Pedersen et al. ). However, further characterization of methylone is needed to confirm that it is a mechanism based inactivator (Pedersen et al. ). The inhibition kinetics of methylone for CYP2D6 are K I = 15.1 μM and k inact = 0.075 min −1 (Pedersen et al. ). MBI is irreversible, and in order to regain enzyme activity new P450 must be synthesized, a process which takes ~ 24–48 h (Hollenberg et al. ). One clinical outcome of MBI is that substrates easily accumulate in the body, potentially to toxic concentrations. MDMA has been shown to accumulate in both humans and rats in an unexpected nonlinear fashion (de la Torre et al. ; Concheriro et al. ). Similarly, methylone accumulation in rats is nonlinear (Elmore et al. ). Secondly, with MBI non-inhibited compensatory P450s may contribute to metabolism, leading to variable metabolite profiles and pharmacokinetics. Finally, with P450 inhibition there is increased risk for additional drug interactions and the potentiation of the toxicities of co-administered drugs. Given that concomitant drug use, both licit and illicit, is common among “bath salt” users, the risk for adverse drug-drug interactions is especially dangerous (Bracchi et al. ; Miller and Stogner ; Romanek et al. ). Additionally, in the clinical setting, the immediate treatment goal for synthetic cathinone poisonings is to calm the patient and alleviate the psychotic effects of the substances so that other treatments can continue (Diestelmann et al. ). Commonly, drugs such as opioids and benzodiazepines are used as first-line treatment for patients with synthetic cathinones poisonings, and with synthetic cathinone-mediated P450 inhibition, the pharmacokinetic profile of the co-administered drugs is unknown and likely to be altered. Opioids are commonly metabolized by CYP2D6 and subsequent glucuronidation, and therefore may compete with synthetic cathinones for metabolism and are likely to be affected by CYP2D6 inhibition. The interaction between benzodiazepines, which are commonly metabolized by CYP3A4 and subsequent glucuronidation, is less clear although one study determined that co-administered benzodiazepines did not completely prevent the psychotic effects of synthetic cathinone intoxication, which may be due to a pharmacokinetic interaction (Diestelmann et al. ). In light of the vast number of P450s that are inhibited by many synthetic cathinones and given that MDMA inhibits P450 activity via MBI, all of the synthetic cathinones should be investigated for MBI activity and with various P450s. Additionally, future work should investigate changes in the pharmacokinetics of co-administered drugs due to synthetic cathinone administration.
Pharmacogenomics and the synthetic cathinones
An individual’s exposure and response to a given synthetic cathinone is a consequence of their metabolism phenotype (Zanger and Klein ; Pharmacogene Variation Consortium ; Sachse et al. ). Pharmacogenomics (PGx) of the synthetic cathinones describe the relationship of synthetic cathinone exposure and response based on the individual’s genetics. As noted previously, the phase I metabolism of synthetic cathinones has been shown to be mediated by CYP2D6, CYP2C19, CYP1A2, and CYP2B6 (Meyer et al. ; Pedersen et al. ; Pedersen et al. ; Springer et al. ). The exposure to a synthetic cathinone can be anticipated by considering the potential phenotypes of the individual. Normal metabolizers (NM) would expect an average exposure to a given synthetic cathinone as expressed by the C max and the AUC 0-∞ (Pharmacogene Variation Consortium ). An intermediate metabolizer (IM) has reduced drug metabolism and would therefore be expected to have an increased exposure to a given synthetic cathinone, as compared to a NM. This would result in an increased exposure, i.e., a higher C max , AUC 0-∞ , and a longer t 1/2 . A poor metabolizer (PM) would have the lowest amount of drug metabolism, likely expressing two copies of non-functional CYPs. A PM is expected to have the most exposure to the synthetic cathinones as a result of their decreased capability for drug metabolism (Pharmacogene Variation Consortium ). IM and PM individuals are at increased risk of adverse effects of the parent synthetic cathinone, including neurologic, cardiovascular and psychiatric effects (Prosser and Nelson ). Alternatively, metabolism may be increased above that seen for a NM; this is termed rapid metabolism (RM) or an ultra-rapid metabolizer (UM) depending on the extent of increased enzyme activity (Pharmacogene Variation Consortium ).
CYP genes have adopted a star (*) nomenclature to describe common variations in the gene. In this nomenclature the *1 form of a gene is considered the reference form; it is the first recognized DNA coding sequence that produces a fully-function protein (Robarge et al. ). As new SNPs are identified, a new star designation is assigned, e.g., CYP2C19 *2, CYP2C19 *3, etc. It should be noted that the *1 form does not always represent the most frequent form of the gene in the population, which is called the wild type. When a characterized SNP commonly inherited with a non-causative one, the different combinations are defined as haplotypes and receive letters in addition to the number, e.g., CYP2C19 * 2A (Sim and Ingelman-Sundberg ).
CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 play a significant role in the metabolism of a number of synthetic cathinones (Meyer et al. ; Pedersen et al. ; Pedersen et al. ; Springer et al. ). CYP2C19 is known to have more than 30 allelic variants and CYP2D6 has over 110 allelic variants (Pharmacogene Variation Consortium ; Zhou et al. ). There are more than 30 variants of CYP1A2 and CYP1A2 * 1A is considered wild-type (Sachse et al. ). A number of variants are considered important including the haplotype CYP1A2 * 1F , which has enhanced function, CYP1A2 * 1C and CYP1A2 * 1K , which both have decreased function (Sachse et al. ). Finally, there are almost 40 known variants of CYP2B6 (Zhou et al. ). The specific influence of CYP2B6 variants on cathinone metabolism has not been established. Table 1 summarizes the common variants, allele frequencies and functional effect of the allele for CYP2D6 , CYP2C19 , CYPA12 , and CYP2B6 . Table 1 The enzymes responsible for synthetic cathinone metabolism and the common allelic variants. Where possible, the variant frequency is provided. Finally, the functional effect of the allelic variant is provided (Zhou et al. ) Variant frequency (%) Gene/wild type Variant Variant function, as compared to wild type African American Asian European East South CYP1A2/*1A *1F Increased 43.9 73.3 58.8 46.6 65.6 *1K Decreased 6.1 2.5 0.2 6.9 2.4 CYP2B6/*1 *9 Decreased 49.7 68.6 65.5 42.1 40.1 *5 Decreased 4.1 10.6 N.A. 14.8 32.9 *6 Substrate-dependent 9.4 7.2 11.2 28.8 8.9 CYP2C19/*1 *2 No 32.6 43.9 78.5 70.7 44.7 *17 Increased 42.3 52.1 3.8 28.3 54.8 *3 No 0.52 0.028 17.1 2.4 0.42 CYP2D6/*1 *2 Normal 29.5 56.3 16.2 49.3 51.3 *4 No 13.1 26.9 N.A. 15.8 23.1 *41 Decreased 3.3 6 3.5 18.4 4.5 Note that the wild-type, the most frequent form of a gene in a population, typically inferring normal function, may vary across populations. The wild types listed in Table 1 are noted as such in the Pharmacogene Variation Society database, which is the official cytochrome P450 allele database and can be found at https://www.pharmvar.org / N.A. not available
As noted earlier, some synthetic cathinones are inhibitors of drug metabolism (Dinger et al. ; de la Torre et al. ; Pedersen et al. ). It is interesting to consider the effect of CYP inhibition in a PM. For instance, a CYP2D6 PM and CYP2D6 NM may have a similar pharmacokinetic profiles, given that in the CYP2D6 NM the synthetic cathinones would be inhibiting the enzymatic activity. Much work remains to further identify the influence of genetics on the exposure and response to synthetic cathinones.
Conclusions
Synthetic cathinones are popular drugs of abuse that can be easily synthesized and structurally modified in clandestine laboratories. Modifications to the synthetic cathinone scaffold alter the pharmacokinetic profiles of the synthetic cathinones and may ultimately produce a synthetic cathinone with a long t 1/2 and a high brain/plasma concentration ratio. To date, many of the newly identified synthetic cathinones have not been thoroughly characterized for pharmacokinetic and toxicological differences. Additionally, the importance of polydrug use and/or pharmacogenetic implications to patient care has been largely overlooked. Continued research will lead to a better understanding of the pharmacokinetic changes associated with structural modifications to the cathinone scaffold, and potentially enhance overdose and addiction therapy long-term.