Introduction
There are currently many antipsychotics available for the clinician to choose from for first-line treatment of a patient with schizophrenia. Almost all these drugs have evidence for greater efficacy than placebo. Is there empirical evidence of differential efficacy and side effects among different antipsychotics for a treating psychiatrist to use in order to make the best decision of first-line choice of an antipsychotic for a patient with schizophrenia? Or, is the difference in efficacy among first-generation and/or second-generation antipsychotics not meaningful enough to guide differential choices? Some earlier studies, however, such as the CATIE study, published more than 12 years ago (Lieberman et al. ), have suggested or were interpreted as showing that there may be little or no difference in efficacy of different antipsychotics when used at an appropriate dose.
In this paper, we review evidence accumulated during the last 15 years, primarily from statistical analysis of controlled studies using meta-analysis techniques. From these studies, we summarize the differential efficacy and side effects of antipsychotics and how these differences might inform clinical decisions on preferential drugs for first-line treatment of schizophrenia. Our review will address evidence of efficacy, side effects, and tolerability of different antipsychotics, optimal doses of antipsychotics, whether very high doses are more effective, and whether response could be maximized further by adding an adjunctive medication or switching to another first-line antipsychotic. On the basis of the evidence in this review, we will present some recommendations and indicate areas which need additional studies before firm recommendations can be made. This review concentrates on results of studies of standard treatment for acute episodes of schizophrenia whether for first-episode or relapsing patients. It does not deal in depth with studies specifically examining patients with treatment-resistant schizophrenia, patients with only prodromal symptoms, or patients with maintenance treatment of schizophrenia after resolution of acute symptoms.
Review of the evidence
Methodological approaches
We believe that recent systematic reviews using meta-analytic techniques have provided convincing evidence for differences in efficacy among different antipsychotics, although the magnitude of differences in most of the comparisons is not large. These studies have used both pair-wise meta-analysis, which compares multiple studies in which two specific drugs or drug and placebo were evaluated in the same study, and network meta-analysis (see Table 1 ). Network meta-analysis is a new statistical technique which allows comparisons of drugs from different studies if some statistical characteristics (in particular, transitivity) of the data are met. The advantage of network meta-analysis is that it often allows comparison of the efficacy of two antipsychotics from a considerably larger number of studies, and, therefore, it sometimes produces new or more robust findings than can be obtained for pair-wise meta-analysis (Leucht et al. ). A more comprehensive discussion of the statistical approaches in network meta-analysis and potential problems in conducting these analyses is beyond the scope of this substantive review but can be found in several sources (Cipriani et al. ; Leucht et al. ; Salanti et al. ). If there are enough pair-wise studies for two drugs contained in a network meta-analysis, one can sometimes compare the consistency of the direction and the degree of effect sizes from the pair-wise and network meta-analysis results in the same systematic review using network meta-analysis. Meta-analysis provides more reliable estimates of comparative efficacy than reviews which are based on interpretations of the literature or “counting” of positive results because of the following reasons: (a) it is based on statistical estimates from multiple studies using standard statistical transformation of original data; (b) it allows assessing statistically significant effects in overall studies, although some of the individual studies may have had too small a sample or too large variation to produce a statistically significant difference between drugs for that specific study; (c) it allows statistical analysis of the ways in which many factors in the design of included studies can potentially effect summary outcome results; and (d) it provides standards for evaluating the extent of various bias factors in study designs of the sample of studies chosen for analysis which may have a potential influence on the validity of the conclusions and/or the confidence in the overall results (Borenstein et al. ; Higgins and Green ). Meta-analysis is useful because it provides a convenient quantitative summary of the data, relatively free of bias. Since the pharmaceutical industry develops and promotes the new drugs, authors directly or indirectly supported by the industry may emphasize the advantages of a given drug or sometimes the disadvantages of another of the drug from a different company. We examined the abstracts of a number of studies supported by pharmaceutical companies and found that the results they presented often did favor the drug of the pharmaceutical sponsor and the authors selectively emphasized the results in their own abstract (Heres et al. ). However, in an independent quantitative meta-analytic study we conducted, our results showed no industry bias (Leucht et al. ). We feel that bias is not restricted to pharmaceutical-sponsored studies and believe it is possible that some academic authors may also have their own agendas. For example, when the second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs) were introduced, they were extremely expensive, and some authors may have felt their benefits were not worth the extra costs, and these beliefs may have influenced how they presented some of their results. Table 1 Comparison of pair-wise and network meta-analyses Conventional, pair-wise meta-analysis Network (multiple treatments) meta-analysis Uses data where two treatments were investigated in the same trial— direct comparisons Uses data from direct comparisons , as in pair-wise meta-analysis, as well as data from indirect comparisons , if this can be validly estimated. For example, indirect comparison of efficacy of drug A vs. drug C, when there are only studies of drug A vs drug B and drug B vs drug C. Compares relative efficacy of two specific treatments and gives effect size of difference between the two treatments from multiple studies. It cannot provide a statistical metric for comparison between different pairs of drugs. Can rank multiple treatments in terms of efficacy or other criteria and can give effect size differences between multiple treatments. In network meta-analysis, it is important to assess the degree of transitivity in the network, i.e., the extent to which potential effect modifiers are similarly operative in all the compared trials.
Review of differential efficacy of antipsychotic drugs
Differences in overall efficacy
A recent comprehensive network meta-analysis study of fifteen different antipsychotic drugs (Leucht et al. ) found clozapine more efficacious, in measures of overall efficacy, than most other antipsychotic drugs, with differences in effect sizes ranging from small (standardized mean difference [SMD] 0.2–0.33) to moderate (0.40–0.55) in comparison with the other antipsychotics. Amisulpride, olanzapine, and risperidone showed relatively small increases in efficacy (SMD 0.11–0.33) compared to haloperidol and some other more recent SGAs (see Table 2 and Fig. 1 ). However, all the antipsychotics were more efficacious than placebo with effect size ranging from small (0.33) for iloperidone to large (0.88) for clozapine (Leucht et al. ). Since the overall effect sizes of efficacy between drug and placebo were generally not more than small to moderate in size, the relatively smaller differences in greater efficacy for amisulpride, olanzapine, and risperidone compared to some other first- and second-generation antipsychotics may be clinically meaningful. The higher effect size of clozapine in comparison with other antipsychotics in the network meta-analysis may be partially explained by the fact that clozapine comparisons to other drugs were based primarily on older clozapine studies with first-generation antipsychotics (FGAs), and these statistically significant differences were not replicated when direct comparisons were made between clozapine and SGAs tested in the same study, when we used pair-wise meta-analysis . Although the magnitude of drug vs. placebo differences in antipsychotic studies of efficacy has decreased over time, a recent analysis of all placebo-controlled studies (Leucht et al. ) shows that this is not due to the decreased response rate or improvement in the antipsychotic drugs but primarily due to the increased placebo response rate over the years. This increase in placebo response is a major concern. In their network meta-analysis, Leucht et al. ( ) evaluated the impact of this phenomenon in several ways, most importantly by excluding all placebo-controlled studies. The efficacy hierarchy remained essentially unchanged. Nevertheless, future network meta-analyses will need to address this issue again. A recent network meta-analysis of antipsychotic efficacy of studies done using Japanese subjects and studies (Kishi et al. ) showed a generally similar efficacy ranking of antipsychotic overall efficacy to that seen in Leucht and associates’ network meta-analysis report cited previously (Leucht et al. ). Table 2. Efficacy and all-cause discontinuation of all anti-psychotic agents according to MTM analysis. Drugs are reported in order according to the efficacy ranking. Comparisons between treatments should be read from left to right, and the estimate is in the cell in common between the column-defining treatment and the row-defining treatment. For efficacy, SMDs below 0 favor the column-defining treatment. For all-cause discontinuation, ORs more than 1 favor the column-defining treatment. To obtain SMDs for comparison in the opposite direction, negative values should be converted into positive values and vice versa. To obtain ORs for comparison in the opposite direction, reciprocals should be taken. Significant results are in bold and underscored. AMI, amisulpride; ARI, aripiprazole; ASE, asenapine; CLO, clozapine; CPZ, chlorpromazine; HAL, haloperidol; ILO, iloperidol; LUR, lurasidone; OLA, olanzapine; PAL, paliperidone; PBO, placebo; QUE, quetiapine; RIS, risperidone; SER, sertindole; ZIP, ziprasidone; ZOT, zotepine; MTM, multiple-treatment meta-analysis; CrI, credible interval. (Reprinted from Leucht et al., Lancet, 382: 951–62, .) Open image in new window Fig. 1 Differences in overall efficacy of antipsychotic drugs. Forest plot for efficacy of antipsychotics drugs compared with placebo, network meta-analysis. Treatments are ranked according to their surface under the cumulative ranking (SUCRA) values. SMD, standardized mean difference; CrI, credible interval. (Reprinted from Leucht et al., Lancet, 382: 951–62, )
The CATIE study, an 18-month maintenance study, published more than 12 years ago (Lieberman et al. ) showed little difference in overall efficacy between several second-generation antipsychotics and a first-generation antipsychotic (perphenazine). However, on some measures, such as time to discontinuation for any cause (in months’ median time: olanzapine 9.2, quetiapine 4.6, risperidone 4.8, perphenazine 5.6, ziprasidone 3.5), olanzapine appeared slightly superior to some of the other antipsychotics. The all-cause discontinuation differences are driven by dropouts due to lack of efficacy with considerably less patients leaving the study because of poor efficacy on olanzapine vs. the other drugs, with hazard ratios, compared to olanzapine, between 0.41 for quetiapine, 0.45 for risperidone, 0.47 for perphenazine, and 0.59 ziprasidone; the smaller the hazard ratio, the less likelihood of relapsing on olanzapine. The duration of successful treatment was about three times longer with olanzapine than the others. Considerably, less patients were re-hospitalized due to an exacerbation of schizophrenia on olanzapine. On the decrease in PANSS scores at 6 months, olanzapine appeared slightly superior to the other antipsychotics. The PANSS differences between the drugs were attenuated over longer time intervals. More patients were discontinued due to intolerability with olanzapine (especially for weight gain or metabolic side effects) than the other drugs, although these differences were small. Similarly, there is no significant difference between the number of patients who had any serious adverse events and the percent of patients who had specific reports of a moderate or severe adverse event (except for insomnia [ziprasidone highest] and urinary hesitancy-constipation [quetiapine highest]). Although, in essence, as a maintenance study, CATIE’s efficacy results were not that different from the meta-analysis of acute studies we reviewed.
It is important to note that although there were some important efficacy differences among the antipsychotics, the primary measure in most meta-analyses was the mean response difference for any validated response measure. This approach does not separate drugs which produced a good clinical response (e.g., 50% improvement in symptoms) from drugs that produced a modest response (e.g., 20% improvement more than placebo). Leucht et al. ( ) reported a difference of 51% for drug vs 30% for placebo (response ratio = 1.75) for a 20% improvement compared to 23% for drug vs 14% for placebo (response ratio = 1.96) for a 50% improvement. This degree of difference in response between drug and placebo contrasts with the large improvement seen in antipsychotic drug efficacy in the early NIMH studies (61% improvement in symptoms under drug compared to only 23% under placebo). However, these early studies were done largely in patients with relatively recent onset whereas most of the modern meta-analyses have relied on studies done with multi-episode schizophrenic patients. Whether there are differences among antipsychotic drugs in the proportion of patients who show a good clinical response (or greater than 50% reduction in symptoms) has not been explored as systematically in meta-analysis studies.
It is important to acknowledge that the general efficacy of psychiatric drugs is fairly similar to those used to treat many medical conditions as shown in a recent meta-analysis (Leucht et al. ) and commented on in other reviews (Howes and Kaar ). The estimated SMD for antipsychotic efficacy was 0.51 to 0.53 in Leucht and associates’ paper, and a recent comparison of antipsychotic drugs vs placebo showed an overall efficacy vs placebo SMD of 0.38 when adjusted for small trial/publication bias (Leucht et al. ). For comparison, the SMD of efficacy of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors for reducing cardiac events and morality due to hypertension is 0.16 and for statins used for reducing the risk of cardiac disease or stroke the SMD is 0.15.
Differential efficacy for types of symptoms or stage of illness
Are there differences in efficacy for types of symptoms or stage of illness among antipsychotic drugs?
Positive symptoms
Studies using pair-wise meta-analytic comparisons indicate that amisulpride, olanzapine, clozapine, and risperidone are more efficacious than FGAs in reducing positive symptoms (Leucht et al. ) (see Fig. 2 ). There were few differences among the SGAs except that olanzapine and risperidone were more efficacious than quetiapine or ziprasidone (Leucht et al. ). However, a network meta-analysis has not addressed this question and the increasing placebo response over time may have accounted for some of the differences in positive symptoms, as well. Fig. 2 Comparison of efficacy in various domains of specific second-generation antipsychotic vs. first-generation antipsychotics, pair-wise meta-analysis. Each point represents overall standardized mean difference (SMD) and 95% confidence interval from pair-wise meta-analysis comparison of the specified SGA antipsychotic vs. an FGA (double-blind studies). N, number of studies used for each comparison to calculate overall mean SMD and confidence intervals; P, significance of mean difference. For each efficacy measure, SMD above the line indicates that the SGA tended to be more efficacious than FGAs
Negative symptoms
Responses to negative symptoms often parallel effects on positive symptoms, and it is frequently unclear whether the effects of negative symptoms may also be confounded with effects on depression or reductions in extrapyramidal-type side effect symptoms (EPS). Most studies have been done in patients with some negative symptoms who may also have positive and depressive symptoms. Previous meta-analyses have shown amisulpride, clozapine, olanzapine, and risperidone to be more effective than FGAs in treating negative symptoms (Leucht et al. ) (see Fig. 2 ). A more recent meta-analysis on 21 double-blind studies which concentrated on studies where patients had prominent negative symptoms, or patients whose symptoms were characterized as predominantly negative symptoms (i.e., with low positive or depressive symptoms), concluded that, in patients with predominant negative symptoms, amisulpride was significantly better than placebo and olanzapine was superior to haloperidol (Krause et al. ). Although there were four studies on amisulpride, they, however, lacked the current requirement that negative symptoms should not only be predominant but also persistent. In one well-controlled study of patients with persistent, predominant negative symptoms, cariprazine was convincingly better than risperidone for reducing negative symptoms, without the confounding factors of its effects on positive or depressive symptoms (Nemeth et al. ). A recently published study with a compound in development, MIN-101 (Davidson et al. ), which has effects on sigma-2 and 5-HT 2A receptors, has also shown convincing effects in patients with predominant negative symptoms; this effect on negative symptoms was not mediated by changes in positive symptoms of depression. A network meta-analysis of Japanese studies (Kishi et al. ) suggested that perospirone, an antipsychotic only approved in Japan, improved PANSS negative symptoms the most, although it was not significantly different from other second-generation antipsychotics.
Quality of life
Although studies for most antipsychotics show trend level or significant effects in improving quality of life and social functioning, the number of studies is too small to make any clear judgements about relative efficacy of different antipsychotics.
Cognitive deficits
Cognitive deficits are believed to be core underlying deficits in schizophrenia, but there is little data to show whether antipsychotics are more efficacious than others for improving cognitive function. A review and meta-analysis by Guilera et al. ( ) of 18 blinded studies, 16 of which were described by their authors as double-blind, indicated small effect sizes (0.17–0.29) for SGAs in improving cognition when compared to FGAs, with significant effects on a global cognitive index, language and verbal comprehension, psychomotor function, and speed of processing. However, the data were insufficient to show whether specific SGAs were particularly more effective in improving cognitive function. Two more recent meta-analyses (Desamericq et al. ; Nielsen et al. ), which both used network meta-analysis, showed some differences between antipsychotics on overall cognitive score and specific cognitive domains, but results were not consistent. The report by Nielsen et al. ( ) found no differences in overall cognitive function among antipsychotics except that sertindole was superior to clozapine, quetiapine, and FGAs, and sertindole was also superior to some SGAs and FGAs on executive function; however, these results were driven by data in one randomized study comparing sertindole to haloperidol. Furthermore, in this study, on several specific cognitive domains, FGAs showed less cognitive improvement than some SGAs. In the study by Desamericq et al. ( ), which examined only studies with long-term treatment (minmum 26 weeks, mean 52 weeks), queitapine, olanzapine, and risperiodne had better effects on overall cogntive scores than amisulperide or haloperidol; queitapine, olanzpaine, ziaprasidone, and risperidone also showed superiority on some specific cognitive domains. One systematic review of placebo-controlled studies of the effects of second-generation antipsycotics on cognition, which reviewed 4 double-blind studies and did not use quantitative meta-analysis, reported very small or no effects of SGAs in improving cognition in comparison to placebo condition (Takeuchi et al. ). Although some of these meta-analyses show specific SGAs to be superior to haloperidol or FGAs in improving cognitive fucntion, there is not enough consistent evidence to cleary rank specific SGAs as generally more effective for cognitive efficacy.
First-episode schizophrenia
In an analysis of double-blind and open studies in first-episode schizophrenia patients, several second-generation antipsychotics (amisulpride, olanzapine, ziprasidone, and risperidone) were superior in overall efficacy to haloperidol, but there was little difference between the individual SGAs, although some analyses showed olanzapine to be superior to risperidone for treating negative symptoms (Zhu et al. , ). One open algorithm-based clinical trial also showed olanzapine to be superior in clinical efficacy to risperidone in first-episode schizophrenics, but in a naturalistic study, clozapine was the most effective for patients who showed a poor response over two stages to both olanzapine and risperidone (Agid et al. ).
Although the evidence for choice of the best antipsychotic for treatment of first-episode patients with schizophrenia is not that clear, earlier studies as well as more recent meta-analyses show that delay of antipsychotic treatment during their first episode can have substantial deleterious consequences for patients in both acute recovery and longer-term course of their illness. An earlier series of studies by May et al. ( ), which were started in the era when psychoanalytic psychiatry was the orientation in the United States, is highlighted in a review by Davis et al. ( ). In a large study, 228 first-episode hospitalized patients were randomized in the following five groups: (1) the control group with supportive treatment without either antipsychotic medication or psychotherapy; (2) the group with intensive psychologically oriented psychotherapy without medication; (3) the group with antipsychotic medication, without psychotherapy; (4) the group with both antipsychotic medication and psychotherapy combined; and (5) the group with ECT without psychotherapy or medication. The recovery rate was very low in the first two groups, and after six months, they received medication. The patients were followed for the next 3 to 5 years and received treatment as usual. Despite eventually receiving later treatment with antipsychotics, the groups originally assigned to control (supportive treatment only) or psychotherapy only had almost twice the number of days hospitalized as those initially treated with the physical treatment. It would seem that the long period of time in the psychotic state did worsen outcome, at least in the next 3 to 5 years. Two more recent meta-analyses (Marshall et al. ; Penttila et al. ) also showed modest but statistically significant correlations between duration of time until initial treatment of psychosis (DUP) with poorer long-term outcome and more severe positive and negative symptoms and social functioning over the short- (6 months) and long-term course of the illness. Specialized programs monitoring high-risk patients with prodromal symptoms, such as the OASIS program in London, significantly reduce the DUP before treatment and reduce the need for involuntary hospital admissions (Valmaggia et al. ).
Review of differential side effects of antipsychotic drugs
The antipsychotic drugs differ markedly in terms of side effects, and these differences between drugs are often greater than the efficacy differences.
Weight and diabetes
Weight gain, diabetes, and glucose and lipid abnormalities have been of particular concern with some second-generation antipsychotics. There are large differences in weight gain produced by the different antipsychotics with olanzapine, zotepine, clozapine, iloperidone, and chlorpromazine producing more weight gain than haloperidol, ziprasidone, lurasidone, aripiprazole, and asenapine (see Fig. 3 ) (Leucht et al. ). In a network meta-analysis of Japanese studies (Kishi et al. ), blonanserin, an antipsychotic used in Japan, China, and Korea, was associated with the lowest risk of weight gain, although there was only statistically significant difference from olanzapine. However, in some studies of clozapine and olanzapine, weight gain has been positively correlated with clinical response to these antipsychotics (Ascher-Svanum et al. ; Czobor et al. ; Sharma et al. ), but the reasons are not clear. There have been few prospective or randomized studies directly comparing diabetes risk among antipsychotics in schizophrenia with data appropriate for inclusion in meta-analysis. The American Diabetes Association issued a consensus statement in 2004 stating that olanzapine and clozapine had the highest diabetes risk and risperidone and quetiapine had somewhat lower risk (Asssociation and Association ). An early meta-analysis using mostly retrospective studies showed a slight increase in overall diabetes risk with SGAs compared to FGAs (relative risk 1.32), but differences among specific SGAs were small (Smith et al. ). Two epidemiologic-type retrospective studies in New York state hospitals (Citrome et al. ) and Veterans Administration hospitals tended to show that quetiapine had the highest risk of new-onset diabetes. In contrast, a single, very large epidemiological study by Yood et al. ( ) reported that olanzapine and clozapine were the two antipsychotics associated with increased diabetes risk. Furthermore, a recent meta-analysis, relying mostly on epidemiologic-type data (Vancampfort et al. ) in patients with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or major depressive disorder, reported that all antipsychotics except aripiprazole and amisulpride were associated with increased diabetes risk and found quetiapine and clozapine associated with higher risk than olanzapine. A cross-sectional study by Smith et al. ( ) which directly measured fasting multiple glucose-lipid levels in patients’ blood showed no significant statistical differences in any glucose- and lipid-related measures between chronic schizophrenic patients treated with clozapine, olanzapine, risperidone, or a FGA, except for an increase in triglycerides in the olanzapine- and clozapine-treated patients compared to those treated with risperidone. The original CATIE study (2005) reported higher blood levels of glycosylated hemoglobin, cholesterol, and triglycerides in patients treated with olanzapine than other antipsychotics in their study. However, a later report concentrating on those with fasting levels (Meyer et al. ) reported no difference in fasting levels of glucose, HDL, or triglycerides after 3 months of treatment with the different antipsychotics and only a difference between olanzapine and ziprasidone, in selected subgroups, at the end of first phase of the overall study, for HDL and triglycerides. Several studies reported improvements in glucose and/or lipids in patients switched to aripiprazole from olanzapine or to aripiprazole from a second-generation antipsychotic (Ganguli et al. ; Spurling et al. ; Wani et al. ). A prospective Chinese study in first-episode schizophrenics comparing olanzapine, quetiapine, and aripiprazole found that olanzapine increased glucose levels, and olanzapine and quetiapine increased triglyceride levels, but no significant changes were found with aripiprazole (Zhang and Lan ). Overall, there is strong evidence for certain SGAs having a greater effect on increasing weight, but definitive evidence from head-to-head comparisons concerning the relative risk of diabetes and glucose-lipid abnormalities from randomized or multiple prospective studies is lacking. Although evidence from some epidemiological and isolated prospective studies suggest that aripiprazole and amisulpride may have lower risk of diabetes than several other SGAs, the differential risk ranking of SGAs associated with a significantly greater increase in diabetes risk or glucose-lipid abnormalities cannot be clearly established on the basis of the current evidence. In the absence of these data, treatment choices may be guided by the established differences in weight gain. Fig. 3 Differences in side effects of antipsychotic drugs. Forest plots for effect sizes of antipsychotic drugs compared with placebo for side effects, network meta-analysis. Results are shown for weight gain, extrapyramidal side effects (EPS), prolactin increase, QTc prolongation, and sedation. Treatments are ranked according to their surface under the cumulative ranking (SUCRA) values. Extrapyramidal side effects are defined by at least one use of antiparkinsonian drugs. OR, odds ratio; SMD, standardized mean difference
Extrapyramidal side effects and tardive dyskinesia
Extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) and movement disorders were the major side effect concerns with FGAs. Results from meta-analyses show that most SGAs are slightly to moderately superior to the FGAs in reducing the frequency of EPS symptoms, and some of the largest differences were found for clozapine (see Fig. 3 ) (Leucht et al. , ). Clozapine is superior to most drugs in decreased occurrence of EPS (usually measured in meta-analyses by lack of co-joint prescription of anti-parkinsonian medications), and olanzapine is superior to zotepine, risperidone, chlorpromazine, lurasidone, ziprasidone, and haloperidol. The development of tardive dyskinesia (TD) was another major concern with FGAs. Two recent meta-analyses have shown substantially decreased rates of TD in patients treated with SGAs. A study by Carbon et al. ( ) showed a prevalence rate of TD of 30% for FGAs and 20% for SGAs, with a particularly low rate of 7.2% for patients who were treated with a SGA and had not been previously exposed to FGA treatment. Another study by O'Brien ( ) showed about a three times higher prevalence and incidence rate of TD in older patients taking FGAs rather than SGAs. TD incidence at one year in patients taking SGAs was 7%. However, these studies did not report results relevant to the differential effect of specific FGAs or SGAs on the development of TD, and, therefore, we cannot give any estimates of differential susceptibility to this side effect with specific antipsychotics. In an earlier study with patients receiving FGAs, Smith et al. ( ) reported that treatment with fluphenazine was the only antipsychotic with a strong positive association with TD scores.
Other side effects
Other side effects, such as prolactin elevation, QTc prolongation on the electrocardiogram, and sedation, may also be important and should be taken into account when evaluating the risk-benefit ratios for choice of a specific antipsychotic. In terms of prolactin elevation, network meta-analysis showed that paliperidone, risperidone, and haloperidol had the highest prolactin increase and aripiprazole, quetiapine, asenapine, chlorpromazine, and iloperidone did not cause more prolactin elevation than placebo (Leucht et al. ) (also, see Fig. 3 ). Although there were no placebo-controlled studies of prolactin levels with amisulpride, data from other studies show that this drug is associated with high levels of prolactin increase. Increased QTc interval can be followed in rare cases by a life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmia called torsade de pointes (dTDP); this can lead to toxicity and occasional sudden death especially in patients with much prolonged QTc at baseline or other complicating cardiac conditions. In a recent network meta-analysis (Leucht et al. ), sertindole, amisulpride, ziprasidone, and iloperidone were associated with the highest increase in QTc (Fig. 3 ). Previous studies have shown that thioridazine and pimozide are also associated with increased risk of increased QTc. Sertindole has been removed from the market in some countries because of this risk, and thioridazine, an FGA, is now rarely used. Although ziprasidone is associated with increased QTc, one large study, comparing ziprasidone- and olanzapine-treated patients over a 1-year time course (Strom et al. ), showed no increase in non-suicide mortality (risk ratio 1.02, 95% CI 0.76–1.39) or cardiac morality (risk ratio 0.38, 95% CI 0.10–1.41). Amisulpride treatment associated with increased risk of QTc and dTDP is especially important in amisulpride overdose cases; one series of 83 amisulpride overdose cases (Isbister et al. ) reported 7% developing dTDP and one cardiac-related death. Therefore, there may be increased cardiac risk for this drug in patients who are judged at higher risk for overdosing. Lurasidone, aripiprazole, paliperidone, and asenapine are not associated with prolonged QTc compared to placebo. In a network meta-analysis, clozapine, zotepine, and chlorpromazine caused the most sedation and amisulpride, paliperidone, sertindole, and iloperidone were not significantly more sedating than placebo (Leucht et al. ).
It is important for patients with schizophrenia to maintain treatment with antipsychotic medication to reduce risk of relapse, and a measure of all-cause discontinuation of a drug may give a partial indication of acceptability to patients and doctors, which may reduce the risk of relapse. In the CATIE study, olanzapine had the lowest all-cause discontinuation. In a recent network meta-analysis (Leucht et al. ), amisulpride, olanzapine, clozapine, paliperidone, and risperidone had significantly lower all-cause discontinuation than several other FGA or SGA drugs.
Switching to another first-line antipsychotic
If the patient has not shown an adequate response to the selected first-line antipsychotic because of lack of efficacy or side effects which might interfere with compliance, does a switch to another antipsychotic make sense for maximizing efficacy or would increasing the dose be a better alternative?
For efficacy, we have to first consider whether the patient has been treated with an adequate dose of the first-choice antipsychotic before considering the question of switching. The analysis by Davis and Chen ( ) provides evidence for the dose associated with 50% response (the ED 50 ) and the near maximal effective doses of many FGAs and SGAs (see Table 3 ). While it should be noted that tables in other articles have slightly different minimal effective doses (Leucht et al. , ), differences are not large. Thus, Table 3 can be used by the treating clinician as a guide to ensure that the dose of antipsychotic treatment is likely to be adequate. There is convincing evidence that high doses which significantly exceed the near maximal doses do not improve response in most patients (Davis and Chen ). Table 3 The ED 50 and near-maximal effective dose for first-generation antipsychotics (FGAs) and second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs) Drug ED 50 Near-maximal effective dose FGAs Chlorpromazine 150 mg/d 400–450 mg/d Haloperidol 0.5–2 mg/d 3.5–10 mg/d Haloperidol decanoate 25 mg/mo 100–200 mg/mo Trifluoperazine – 10–15 mg/d Thiothixene – < 10 mg/d Fluphenazine – < 6.9 mg/d Fluphenazine decanoate/enanthate – 25 mg/2 wk SGAs Olanzapine 9 mg/d > 16 mg/d Olanzapine IM > 6 mg/d > 10 mg/injection Risperidone 2 mg/d 4 mg/d Risperidone depot 15 mg/mo 50 mg/mo Amisulpride 50 mg/d 200 mg/d Aripiprazole < 1.5 mg/d 10 mg/d Quetiapine 80–215 mg/d 150–600 mg/d Remoxipride 60 mg/d 120–240 mg/d Sertindole 10 mg/d 12–20 mg/d Clozapine – > 400 mg/d Ziprasidone, acute 63 mg/d 120–160 mg/d Ziprasidone, maintenance 40 mg/d 80–160 mg/d The numbers in the table are derived from dose-response curves from analysis of data from published studies or other sources of available data, where a measure of clinical response is plotted on the Y-axis vs. the log-dose plotted on the X-axis. The ED 50 is the dose at which half the maximal clinical response is achieved. The near-maximal effective doses are the doses between ED 85 and ED 95 on the dose-response curve, which is usually at the upper plateau portion of the dose-response curve. (Reprinted from Davis and Chen, Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, Vol. 24:2, )
The evidence base for informing a rationale choice for switching to another antipsychotic is not extensive. The appropriate design to test this includes randomization to either the same antipsychotic or the alternative antipsychotic so that the effect of duration of treatment can be controlled for in the study phase; if there were additional important differences in length of prior treatment on the given antipsychotic before entering the study, this can be statistically investigated with a covariate analysis of length of prior treatment. However, most studies do not use this design and, consequently, they cannot conclude that it was the switch to the new drug, rather than increased time in treatment, that was the reason for improvement in response. There is preliminary evidence that with inadequate response to the first antipsychotic, switching to a drug with a different receptor profile may have some advantage. In a study by Kinon et al. ( ), patients treated with risperidone who did not have at least a 20% improvement on the PANSS scale by 2 weeks responded slightly but significantly better if they were switched to olanzapine, rather than if they stayed on risperidone. In the CATIE study, patients who discontinued perphenazine did better if they were switched to olanzapine or quetiapine, which have a somewhat different receptor-binding profile, than if they were switched to risperidone, which has a fairly similar dopamine antagonist receptor profile. However, most of these studies were done in multi-episode patients and it is unclear whether a switching strategy would be helpful in initial or early treatment of patients with first-episode schizophrenia. The results of the OPTIMISE trial (Kahn et al. ; Leucht et al. ) provide evidence for informing the utility of a switch strategy in this group of patients. This study tested the efficacy of amisulpride in first-episode schizophrenia, and if an adequate response was not shown by 4 weeks, it tested the efficacy of remaining on amisulpride vs. switching to olanzapine (which has a different receptor profile); non-responders by 10 weeks were also tested for the efficacy of switching to clozapine. There was no increased efficacy in reduction of PANSS scores, for non-responders to 4 weeks of amisulpride treatment, if they were switched to olanzapine or stayed on amisulpride for an additional 6 weeks. For the small group of 28 patients who showed no response at 10 weeks and were able to be switched to clozapine open label for an additional 12 weeks, 5 were classified as responders and most of the others showed further decreases in PANSS scores. These results suggest that for first-episode patients switching to another standard second generation antipsychotic would not improve response, but for consistent non-responders, after at least a 10-week trial, a direct switch to clozapine, without an intervening trial of another antipsychotic may lead to an improved response. For further data on whether switching to another antipsychotics is more useful in multi-episode patients, the results of the SWITCH study, the full report of which is pending, will be informative. In the SWITCH study, patients who had not improved after two weeks’ treatment with either amisulpride or olanzapine were either kept on the same compound or switched to the respective other drug (Heres et al. ). The rationale of this study was based on findings that patients who have not shown a clinically relevant improvement after 2 weeks are unlikely to respond if they stay on the same compound (Samara et al. ).
Depot vs. oral antipsychotics
Several of the first- and second-generation antipsychotics are available in long-acting injectable (depot) as well as oral forms. For a patient who shows poor adherence to taking oral medication or who has frequent relapses because of stopping oral antipsychotics, depot medication might be an option. An early review by Davis et al. ( ) provided evidence for the superiority of depot vs oral antipsychotic medication for FGAs. However, a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials with SGAs showed no advantage of depot over oral medications in preventing relapse or severe worsening of symptoms (Kishimoto et al. ). However, observational studies and a meta-analysis of mirror-image studies (where the same patients were switched from oral to depot antipsychotics) show a clear advantage of depot vs oral medication in preventing rehospitalization and less hospitalization days, as reviewed in an earlier study by Davis and Andriukaitis ( ), findings that have been replicated in more recent meta-analysis reports (Kirson et al. ; Kishimoto et al. ), suggesting depots have a benefit in more naturalistic settings.
Adjunctive medication in addition to antipsychotic treatment
Will the addition of a non-antipsychotic medication help maximize clinical response in patients who have residual symptoms or less than fully adequate response?
A meta-analysis (Helfer et al. ) provides good evidence that the addition of an antidepressant improves negative and depressive symptoms, with higher effect sizes seen in those patients who had either predominant or more severe negative or depressive symptoms. The only limitation was that the trials were all small, opening the possibility of small trial effects. Importantly, there was no increase in positive symptoms with the addition of the antidepressant. Most of the reviewed studies utilized second-generation antidepressants (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) or serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)) or monoamine oxidase-inhibitor drugs, and some drugs or drug classes showed stronger effects, although the number of studies for each individual drug was small. Correll et al. ( ) performed a meta-analysis of previous individual meta-analyses to compare antipsychotic monotherapy to adjunctive treatment and reported that a number of add-on medications improved positive systems, with lamotrigine and some SSRI and SNRI antidepressant-type drugs and estrogen showing the strongest effects. For negative symptoms some antidepressants (SNRI and serotonergic 3 antagonists) and lamotrigine showed the strongest effects. However, in reviewing the quality of the data of the original studies on which these meta-analyses are based, they found problems in overall quality of the original studies; there was also a negative correlation between ratings of quality of the underlying individual studies and the effect size of the difference between add-on therapy and placebo. Therefore, they concluded that many of the statistically significant positive effects of add-on treatments may have a relatively low or confounded evidence level. For example, another meta-analysis showed that the effect size of lamotrigine may have been exaggerated by an outlier study (Sommer et al. ).
Recommendations for maximizing first-line antipsychotic response
Choice of first-line antipsychotic
How might the comparative data on efficacy and side effects, reviewed previously, be used by clinicians and patients to choose the most appropriate antipsychotic for treatment of acute-symptom episodes in patients with first-episode or relapsing schizophrenia?
Many of the SGAs are now off patent, and others will be coming off patent in the next few years; so, differential cost is a less important consideration than it was in 1990s and early 2000s. Given that almost all the SGAs have reduced risk of EPS and tardive dyskinesia than FGAs, and not all lead to important weight gain, and many are now available both in oral and long-acting intramuscular forms, treatment with a SGA would be the first choice in most cases. The choice among SGAs should consider the patient’s personal history in response to antipsychotics in the past and the risk-benefit consideration of efficacy for overall or specific symptoms vs side effects. Although clozapine has shown strong efficacy and relatively low incidence of standard side effects, except for increased sedation, the low risk of agranulocytosis, and rare cases of myocarditis, it might be considered a good second-line (not, as currently, third-line) treatment that has been underutilized. However, most of the data for clozapine are based on older studies against first-generation antipsychotics, and most of the other data for clozapine are in treatment-resistant patients who are non-responders to traditional antipsychotic medications. Results of ongoing studies in Europe using clozapine as a second-line treatment in non-treatment-resistant patients with schizophrenia may provide information to better inform psychiatrists on the standard use of clozapine as a second-line or possibly first-line treatment. Outside of clozapine, olanzapine and amisulpride have high acceptability and relatively higher efficacy for both positive and negative symptoms. Risperidone would also join this group for efficacy for treatment of positive symptoms. In patients where weight gain or diabetes is not a stronger concern than efficacy, olanzapine would have a favorable benefit-risk ratio and might be given higher consideration. In cases where there are no serious cardiac risks, and increased prolactin is not considered of primary importance, amisulpride should be given stronger consideration, except in patients with a high risk of overdose. However, this drug is only available in certain countries and not in the United States. Where avoiding weight gain and glucose-lipid abnormalities are prime considerations, and the development of an akathisia anxiety-like side effect is not worrisome, aripiprazole should be given stronger consideration. Two newer partial dopamine agonists, brexpiprazole and cariprazine, which also have relatively low weight gain and no significant effects on glucose-lipid changes (Kane et al. ; Lao et al. ; Marder et al. ) may also be considered in the same group as aripiprazole for patients where weight gain and glucose-lipid abnormalities are a primary concern. However, there is not enough data on comparisons of overall efficacy and side effects of these two drugs compared to aripiprazole and most other second-generation antipsychotics, although a meta-analysis review of brexpiprazole studies by Correll et al. ( ) suggests that brexpiprazole had a similar decrease in PANSS scores as aripiprazole in some placebo-controlled studies. Since these drugs will be on patent for many years, and costs will, therefore, be considerably higher than for aripiprazole, more solid comparative data would be needed for a clinical choice based on cost vs. benefit analysis for these types of weight and metabolic considerations. Risperidone has a good efficacy profile but would likely cause more prolactin elevation, sedation, and EPS, than other SGAs, especially at higher doses. When the focus is on treating negative symptoms of schizophrenia, amisulpride and, based on less evidence, olanzapine might be given special consideration. Also, the more recently approved antipsychotic, cariprazine, has convincing evidence from one study showing that it had strong effects on negative symptoms. However, as noted previously, cariprazine is likely to be more expensive because it will be on patent protection for many years, and the positive results of this single study need to be replicated and compared with drugs other than risperidone. When confirmed by further studies and approved by oversight agencies in different countries, the new drug in development, MIN-101, might also be given higher consideration for treatment of negative symptoms, but it may be primarily used as an add-on treatment if control of positive symptoms is also important. The current literature does not provide strong evidence for choosing among the SGAs for treatment of first-episode schizophrenia specifically, although a few of the SGAs were more efficacious than haloperidol, and olanzapine may be superior to risperidone for treating negative symptoms. It has been recommended that choice of drug in first-episode patients should be based even more on side effects in chronic patients (Zhu et al. , ). Although then these recommendations for specific drugs based on meta-analysis may help by providing guidance for clinicians’ choices or recommendations, there are so many differences between available drugs that patients should also be empowered by providing them with the necessary information so that they can help make an informed choice or together with their psychiatrist in a shared decision-making setting, whenever this is feasible. Whatever the choice for initial antipsychotic, it is important to start antipsychotic treatment early after the onset of first-episode schizophrenic symptoms, since there is now clear evidence that longer DUP is associated with poorer long-term outcome over the course of the illness.
Switching to another antipsychotic
Before considering a switch to another antipsychotic, if there is inadequate response after 2 weeks of treatment, the clinician should evaluate whether the patient has been treated with an adequate dose of the chosen first-line antipsychotic for 2–4 weeks. Since occasional patients may not take their medication reliably, as McCutcheon et al. ( ) have shown, or be fast metabolizers and have very low blood levels even on adequate dosing, it may be prudent to check a drug blood level. For first-episode patients, the recent OPTIMISE study suggests that switching to another antipsychotic early may not improve response and that for confirmed non-responders, after longer term treatment, a switch to clozapine may be the most appropriate option. For multi-episode or chronic schizophrenia patients, although there is not an extensive evidence base for choosing a drug to switch to, a choice of another antipsychotic with a different receptor profile (such as a switch from amisulpride to olanzapine) may be the most reasonable. Although clinical lore suggests tapering over 1–2 weeks as the best strategy, recent meta-analyses show that there are no significant differences in response in psychopathology changes, rates of discontinuation, or most side effects between a strategy of immediate switching vs strategies of gradual discontinuation and cross-tapering (Takeuchi et al. , ). In switching to olanzapine, a gradual approach may help reduce a side effect of insomnia. Although the average patient who is switched to clozapine is switched after 4 years of treatment, sometimes after polypharmacy and high doses of other antipsychotics (Howes et al. ), we see no reason that relapsing patients who have shown a less than optimal response should not undergo a clozapine trial considerably earlier. If a patient shows poor compliance, especially with frequent relapses, switching from an oral to depot form of the same first-line antipsychotic which showed an adequate response would help maximize long-term response.
Adjunctive medication treatment
If depression or negative symptoms are prominent in the symptom picture, the addition of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) or serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor may be worth a trial. For depressive symptoms, there is an evidence base to support the use of duloxetine, trazadone, or sertraline, and for negative symptoms, duloxetine, mirtazapine, and several of the SSRIs would be evidence-based choices. However, there is not enough evidence to show consistent efficacy differences between the various antidepressants for this indication.
In making the choice for first-line antipsychotic treatment or switches and adjunctive treatment, it is clinically important for the treating psychiatrist to clearly report response and side effects in an easily understandable manner so that future psychiatrists can evaluate prior treatment responses and treatment side effects. The development of a template for standard reporting may be helpful.
Conclusions
Our review of recent studies using meta-analytic techniques has provided evidence that all antipsychotics are not equal in the severity of different side effects or in efficacy. Comparative analysis and rankings from network meta-analyses can provide guidance to clinicians in choosing the most appropriate antipsychotic for first-line treatment, if used in conjunction with available information on the patient’s history of previous clinical response or higher risks for specific side effects. More evidence is needed to assess the best alternative antipsychotic to switch to if there is not an adequate response to the first choice after 2–4 weeks of treatment. More evidence is also needed to establish how much clozapine should be supported as a second- or even first-line treatment for patients who are not classified as antipsychotic-resistant or chronic non-responders and also as a treatment choice in first-episode schizophrenia patients. Ongoing studies may begin to provide more evidence to inform better responses to these two issues in the next few years.