Introduction
Rationale for α4β2 nAChR agonists as smoking cessation aids
The use of α4β2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) agonists as smoking cessation aids is based on the rationale that their nicotine-like action can replace the effects of nicotine during a quit attempt, which will reduce craving and increase the chance to remain abstinent. However, given the strong reinforcing effects of inhaled nicotine, oral or transdermal nAChR agonists cannot fully substitute for the steep increase in nicotine concentrations from smoking. Therefore, many smokers relapse, as they can rapidly eliminate withdrawal symptoms by smoking a cigarette. To reduce the rewarding effects of inhaled nicotine, Rose and Levin ( ) proposed an “agonist-antagonist” approach by co-administering nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) with a nAChR antagonist, the channel blocker mecamylamine. This combination would not only reduce withdrawal symptoms during a quit attempt through NRT’s agonist effect, but also attenuate the reinforcing effects of nicotine through mecamylamine’s antagonist effect during a relapse. Small clinical trials found that the NRT-mecamylamine combination resulted in higher abstinence rates than NRT alone (Rose et al. ) and the notion that a dual agonist-antagonist action could improve the clinical efficacy prompted efforts to achieve such a dual effect with a single drug, a nAChR partial agonist. During a quit attempt, a partial agonist can have a “nicotine-replacing” agonist activity that will reduce craving, while during a relapse, it can have a “nicotine-blocking” antagonist activity by competition with inhaled nicotine for the nAChR binding sites and attenuate the reinforcing effect of smoking. This dual agonist-antagonist approach for smoking cessation was originally explored with α4β2 nAChR partial agonists (Lloyd and Wiliams ; Cohen et al. ; Coe et al. ; Rollema et al. ), since α4β2 nAChRs are the major neuronal high-affinity nAChR type (Cooper et al. ), while β2 and α4 containing nAChR subtypes play crucial roles in nicotine reinforcement (Corrigall et al. ; Picciotto et al. ; Tapper et al. ). Drug discovery efforts were mainly aimed at partial agonists, which are expected to have minimal abuse liability, although full α4β2 nAChR agonists can in principle also have a dual agonist-antagonist action, depending on their binding affinities, functional potencies, and brain exposures.
Agonist and antagonist activities
The two pharmacological effects that represent a dual mechanism of action are agonist activity in the absence of nicotine and antagonist activity in the presence of nicotine. The agonist activity is defined as the net receptor activation at steady-state drug levels, which is determined by both receptor activation and receptor desensitization. Desensitization and net receptor activation replicate the effects of nicotine from smoking and thereby reduce craving. Desensitization contributes therefore to agonist activity, and although extensive desensitization with minimal activation is functionally equivalent to “nAChR antagonism,” it should not be confused with “antagonist activity” as defined in this paper. Antagonist activity refers to competition with inhaled nicotine for the same nAChR binding site, which will decrease nicotine receptor occupancy and attenuates reward and reinforcement during a smoking relapse. It should be noted though that desensitization can also contribute to reducing the effect of nicotine during a relapse, since nAChRs that are in the desensitized state due to prior occupancy by the nAChR agonist are not readily activated by inhaled nicotine and smoking will be less reinforcing. Since nAChR desensitization is accounted for as a parameter of agonist activity, we use the competition between nAChR agonist and nicotine as the primary measure for antagonist activity in this study (see also “ Discussion ”).
Though the combination of agonist and antagonist activity is expected to increase smoking cessation efficacy of a nAChR agonist by reducing both craving during a quit attempt and nicotine reinforcement during a relapse, the contribution of each activity to clinical efficacy is not known. Moreover, while it is often assumed that any α4β2 nAChR agonist will provide both activities, a prerequisite for agonist and antagonist activity in vivo is a functional and binding profile that permits both effects to occur at unbound drug concentrations experienced in the human brain after clinical doses. The goals of this study are to assess to what extent clinical doses of several α4β2 nAChR agonists will exhibit agonist and antagonist activity in vivo, and to examine if these functional effects correlate with clinical efficacy.
Agonist and antagonist activities were calculated based on α4β2 nAChR binding and functional in vitro data and pharmacokinetic parameters from the literature, while smoking cessation efficacies were quantified as odds ratios for end of treatment. Since the clinically used α4β2 nAChR agonists have also high affinity for α6β2-containing nAChRs (denoted as α6β2* nAChRs, * indicating the presence of one or more additional subunits), we evaluated functional activities at this subtype based on the limited data that are available. Several studies have shown that α6β2* nAChRs, which are predominantly expressed in nucleus accumbens and ventral tegmental area, modulate mesolimbic dopamine release and have an important role in nicotine addiction (Grady et al. , Champtiaux et al. , Exley et al. , Pons et al. , Gotti et al. , Quik et al. , Liu et al. , Brunzell , Brunzell et al. ).
The in vivo agonist and antagonist activity of a nAChR agonist also underlie its neurochemical and behavioral effects in animal tests that are frequently used in drug discovery to predict smoking cessation efficacy in humans. However, these downstream in vivo profiles do not address the objective of this study, i.e., the prediction of functional activities of nAChR agonists at the receptor level in response to therapeutic concentrations in humans, and are therefore not discussed in this paper.
α4β2 nAChR agonists studied
Of the eight compounds profiled, three drugs are currently used in clinical practice, while five candidate drugs were discontinued, mostly because of insufficient clinical efficacy, and for which only limited clinical data are available (Fig. 1 ). Nicotine is an alkaloid from the tobacco plant and the main component in cigarettes leading to addiction. After introduction of NRT in formulations that gradually release nicotine, the gum (Nicorette®) and transdermal patch (Nicoderm®), other types (lozenge, nasal spray, sublingual tablet, inhaler) have become available (Stead et al. ). Cytisine (Tabex®, Desmoxan®) is a nicotinic alkaloid that has been used for smoking cessation in several central and eastern European countries since 1964 (Etter ; Tutka and Zatoñski ). More recently, it was recommended to improve worldwide access to cytisine as a more affordable cessation aid (Prochaska et al. ; Rigotti ; Walker ) and studies are in progress evaluating the safety and efficacy of cytisine required for approval (Courtney and Walker ; Shurtleff et al. ). Varenicline was designed as a selective α4β2 nAChR partial agonist and its structure was derived from a series of analgesic bicyclic benzazepines, one of which lacked analgesic activity and was found to be a potent α4β2 nAChR antagonist (Coe et al. , ). Varenicline is thus not a cytisine derivative or analog, as is often incorrectly stated in the literature. Varenicline was approved in 2006 by the FDA and EMA as a first-line smoking cessation aid (Chantix® in the USA, Champix® elsewhere). Dianicline (SSR591813) is an α4β2 nAChR partial agonist that was in development for smoking cessation (Cohen et al. ), but discontinued after a large randomized controlled trial (RCT) did not show efficacy (Tonstad et al. ). CP-601927 and CP-601932 are α4β2 nAChR partial agonists structurally related to varenicline (Coe et al. ), but development was halted after a small phase 2 trial found that both investigational drugs were less efficacious than bupropion. ABT-418 (A-81418) is an α4β2 nAChR full agonist that was in development as a cognitive enhancer, but was also examined for smoking cessation and found to be efficacious in a phase 2 trial (Grebb et al. ; Arneric et al. ). It was not further developed because of lack of efficacy for its primary indications, Alzheimer disease and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (Lloyd and Wiliams ; Arneric et al. ). ABT-089 , an α4β2 nAChR partial agonist with better oral bioavailability than ABT-418 (Sullivan et al. ; Decker et al. ), was also evaluated as a treatment of cognitive deficits, but RCTs were negative (Childress and Sallee ) and development was halted. Recently, ABT-089 was reported to lack efficacy in a small pilot smoking cessation study (Falcone et al. ). Bupropion and mecamylamine are briefly discussed below in the context of smoking cessation agents; however, neither compound is a nAChR agonist and therefore are not included in the subsequent analysis of this study. Bupropion is a dopamine-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor and non-selective nAChR antagonist, originally marketed as an antidepressant (Wellbutrin®) that was in 1997 approved as a first-line smoking cessation aid (Zyban®). Mecamylamine is a nAChR channel blocker originally marketed as an antihypertensive (Inversine®), later combined with NRT for smoking cessation (Rose et al. ), and more recently, the S-enantiomer (TC-5214) was studied as an augmentation therapy for treatment-resistant depression, but discontinued after several phase III trials failed to meet end points (Wang et al. ). Fig. 1 Structures of marketed and experimental smoking cessation agents acting at nAChRs
All preclinical, pharmacokinetic, and clinical data on these drugs were collected from the literature and, for some discontinued drugs, data were obtained via personal communications and information from the manufacturer.
Methods
Data search
Using generic and brand names, synonyms, or codes as key words, a literature search for preclinical data and pharmacokinetic parameters of the nAChR agonists was conducted in key resources until January 2018. Data from different sources generated by similar or equivalent methods were averaged and mean values are shown in “ Results ,” while individual preclinical data with corresponding references are summarized in tables in Appendix 1. Clinical data for NRT, varenicline, and cytisine data were taken from smoking cessation trials included in published meta-analyses and used in meta-analyses for the end of treatment odds ratios. Clinical data on discontinued nAChR agonists were obtained from single trials, pilot studies, or information from the manufacturer via personal communications.
Pharmacokinetic data
Unbound drug concentrations in human brain ( h C u,b ) were estimated with a standard method to predict human brain interstitial fluid concentrations, using a surrogate rodent-derived brain-to-plasma ratio, typically measured through brain homogenates or microdialysis (Liu et al. ). From reported human plasma concentrations ( h C p ), unbound fractions in human plasma ( f u,p ), and rodent-derived brain-to-plasma ratios of the unbound species, h C u,b was calculated according to ( h C p . f u,p ).( r C u,b / r C u,p ), where r C u,b and r C u,p are unbound concentrations in rodent brain and plasma, respectively. Steady-state average plasma concentrations following a therapeutic dose regimen were obtained from the literature or extrapolated from available data for other doses. Human plasma concentrations of dianicline and cytisine have previously been estimated by single species allometric scaling using rat PK (Rollema et al. ), but recently human cytisine plasma levels have been reported (Jeong et al. , ).
Preclinical in vitro data
In vitro functional potencies: agonist activities
Functional effects of nAChR agonists are characterized by their activation potency (EC 50 ), relative agonist efficacy ( E max ), and desensitization potency (IC 50 ), which were taken from the literature. The fractions of human nAChRs predicted to be desensitized, activated acutely, and activated at steady-state by therapeutic brain concentrations ( h C u,b ) of the nAChR agonists were calculated with the logistic function of concentration-dependent activation and desensitization, assuming a slope = 1, since slopes were not always reported.
For a quantitative comparison between the agonist activity of nAChR agonists and that of nicotine from smoking, the fractions desensitized and activated at steady state were also expressed as a percentage of desensitization and steady-state activation by inhaled nicotine.
In vitro binding affinities: antagonist activities
Antagonist activity reflects how effectively steady-state levels of the nAChR agonist can compete with nicotine from smoking for the same nAChR binding sites, which is quantified as a decrease in receptor occupancy (RO) of nicotine in the presence of the nAChR agonist. Mean binding affinities and average human unbound brain concentrations of nAChR agonists (K i AG , h C u,b AG ) and of nicotine from smoking (K i NIC , h C u,b NIC ) were taken from the literature to calculate the percentage decrease in nicotine RO with the Cheng-Prusoff equation for fractional inhibition: f i = C u,b AG /[C u,b AG + K i AG (1 + C u,b NIC /K i NIC )].
Clinical data
To examine the contribution of a specific pharmacological mechanism to smoking cessation efficacy, abstinence at the end of treatment (EOT) with the drug still onboard is an appropriate clinical outcome. Therefore, we selected RCTs from previous meta-analyses with NRT, varenicline, and cytisine, which also report abstinence rates at EOT or shortly after treatment and conducted meta-analyses for EOT. Via a Peto meta-analysis, Peto odds ratios [OR] and 95% confidence intervals [CIs] of outcomes, reported as continuous abstinence or 7-day point prevalence, were calculated according to the number of events of abstinence reported in the original studies. The pooled OR and its 95% CI were then computed using Peto weights. Clinical information about the discontinued nAChR agonists is available from single phase 3 and phase 2 RCTs, and a small pilot study.
Results
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetic parameters from which the unbound concentrations of nAChR agonists in human brain ( h C u,b ) are calculated are shown with literature references in Table 1 . Total plasma concentrations ( h C p ) of the clinically used nAChR agonists are means of reported plasma concentrations at steady-state after clinical doses. For a comparison with the functional effects of nicotine exposures in smokers, which fluctuate over the course of a day from about 80 to 400 nM (Benowitz et al. ), we used the peak h C p concentration for the calculations. Nicotine exposures from NRT vary between approximately 20–100 nM dependent on the type of NRT and we used an overall average steady-state h C p of 62 nM nicotine. Varenicline (1 mg BID) plasma concentrations fall in a narrow range with an average steady-state h C p of 35 nM. Cytisine (1.5 mg 6 to 2 times per day, i.e., an average of 6 mg/day) plasma levels range from 27 to 160 nM, with an average h C p of 94 nM, which is in good agreement with an h C p of 60 nM based on previous allometric scaling data. Dianicline (40 mg BID) plasma levels have not been reported and were estimated by allometric scaling to be 260 nM (Rollema et al. ). For the discontinued drugs, only limited PK data are available from different clinical trials that reported either average or peak plasma levels. Table 1 Pharmacokinetic properties and predicted unbound drug concentrations in human brain after recommended doses of nAChR agonists Drug Dose/day Human plasma rB/P ratio Human brain t½ (h) h C p avg (nM) f u,p h C u,p (nM) r C u,b / C u,p h C u,b (nM) Nicotine (smoking) 1) 2 390 b 0.97 388 0.97 367 Nicotine (NRT a ) 1) 2–21 mg 2 62 0.97 60 0.97 58 Varenicline 2) 2 mg 33 35 0.80 28 0.96 27 Cytisine 3) 6 mg 3.6 94 0.64 60 0.14 8 Dianicline 4) (discontinued) 80 mg 3.3 260 213 0.20 43 CP-601927 5) (discontinued) 4 mg 14 26 14 0.60 8 CP-601932 5) (discontinued) 4 mg 17 47 24 0.60 14 ABT-418 6) (discontinued) 23 mg 0.5 c 170 150 0.90 136 ABT-089 7) (discontinued) 40 mg 2 c 165 125 0.90 112 C p : concentration of total drug in plasma; C u,p , C u,b : concentration of unbound drug in plasma and brain, respectively; f u,p : fraction unbound drug in human plasma; rC u,b /C u,p : rodent-derived B/P ratio of unbound drug a Average of all forms of NRT for which exposure data are available (patch, gum, lozenge, nasal spray, sublingual tablet, inhaler) b C max c Monkey plasma half-life 1) Gourlay and Benowitz ( ), Hukkanen et al. ( ), Benowitz et al. ( ), Rollema et al. ( ) 2) Faessel et al. ( ), Rollema et al. ( ) 3) Rollema et al. ( ), Jeong et al. ( , ) 4) Cohen et al. ( ), Rollema et al. ( ) 5) Coe et al. ( ), Fava et al. ( ), Hurst et al. ( ) 6) Decker et al. ( ), Arneric et al. ( ), Potter et al. ( ), Pfizer data on file 7) Wilens et al. ( , ); Pfizer data on file
The predicted unbound concentrations in brain following clinical doses vary widely among the different nAChR agonists evaluated (Table 1 ). Brain exposures are driven by several factors including dose, bioavailability, brain penetration, and protein binding. All nAChR agonists have low plasma protein binding ( f u, p ≥ 0.50) and most agonists will readily enter the brain as the unbound species with brain-to-plasma (B/P) ratios ≥ 0.6, except cytisine and dianicline that have poor brain penetration with B/P ratios < 0.2. Since in addition both drugs have short half-lives of < 4 h, high doses and/or frequent dosing of cytisine and dianicline is required to achieve pharmacologically relevant brain concentrations.
Receptor binding affinities and functional potencies
The mean ± SEM ( n ) binding affinities and functional potencies for each compound are shown in Table 2 . For individual literature data with references see Tables 6 – 9 in Appendix 1 . Table 2 Binding affinities and functional parameters of nAChR agonists at nAChR subtypes Binding Activation Inactivation K i (nM) EC 50 (μM) E max (%) IC 50 (nM) α4β2 nAChRs Nicotine 5.96 ± 1.04 (51) 4.6 ± 1.6 (26) 87 ± 6 (20) 108 ± 45 (12) Varenicline 0.28 ± 0.10 (13) 1.8 ± 0.4 (23) 30 ± 5 (24) 11 ± 5 (12) Cytisine 1.65 ± 0.47 (36) 9.1 ± 3.1 (19) 23 ± 6 (19) 18 ± 10 (8) Dianicline (discontinued) 65 ± 24 (4) 7.2 ± 3.6 (5) 12 ± 5 (5) 1174 ± 928 (3) CP-601927 (discontinued) 1.2 ± 0.3 (3) 2.6 ± 0.8 (3) 13 ± 2 (3) 25 CP-601932 (discontinued) 19 (2) 15.8 (2) 1.3 (2) 114 ABT-418 (discontinued) 14 ± 5 (11) 9.9 ± 3.7 (9) 104 ± 18 (7) 1190 ABT-089 (discontinued) 76 ± 41 (4) 60 ± 42 (7) 20 ± 4 (6) 680 α6β2* nAChRs Nicotine 27 ± 13 (9) 0.34 ± 0.07 (14) 83 ± 8 (12) 41 ± 22 (3) Varenicline 0.7 ± 0.3 (4) 0.06 ± 0.02 (11) 26 ± 4 (12) 40 (2) Cytisine 5.6 ± 4 (3) 0.07 ± 0.02 (10) 40 ± 8 (10) 13 Data are mean ± SEM ( n ) K i : binding affinity (nM); EC 50 : half maximal activation concentration (μM); E max : agonist efficacy relative to the full agonist ACh (%); IC 50 : half maximal desensitization concentration (nM)
Binding affinities
The profiled nAChR agonists share high binding affinity for α4β2 nAChRs with mean K i values ranging from 0.3 nM (varenicline) to about 80 nM (ABT-089). Varenicline, cytisine, and CP-601927 ( K i < 1.7 nM) bind with higher affinity to α4β2 nAChRs than nicotine ( K i = 6 nM); the other agonists have lower affinity ( K i > 14 nM) than nicotine. The limited α6β2* nAChR data show that nicotine, varenicline, and cytisine bind also with high affinity at α6β2* nAChRs. Each of the nAChR agonists has low affinity for α3β4 and α7 nAChR subtypes (except CP-601932, with a K i of 19 nM for α4β2 and α3β4 nAChRs) and low affinity for other CNS receptors, transporters, and ion channels (data not shown).
Functional potencies
Nicotine and ABT-418 are full agonists at α4β2 nAChRs; all other drugs are low efficacy partial agonists with relative agonist efficacies ( E max ) ranging from 1 to 30% (Table 2 ). All EC 50 values are > 1.5 μM and the nAChR agonists can therefore only activate nAChRs at relatively high concentrations. In contrast, with IC 50 values in the nanomolar range, the agonists can desensitize α4β2 nAChRs at much lower concentrations. The limited data on the functional effects of nAChR agonists at α6β2* nAChRs suggest that varenicline and cytisine are partial agonists at α6β2* nAChRs with E max values from 30 to 40%, and that nicotine is a full agonist. Importantly, EC 50 values at α6β2* nAChRs range from 60 to 340 nM indicating that varenicline, cytisine, and nicotine can activate α6β2* subtypes at 10 to 100 times lower concentrations than needed for α4β2 nAChR activation.
Calculation of agonist and antagonist activities
The fractions of α4β2 and α6β2* nAChRs that are predicted to be desensitized, activated acutely, and activated at steady-state at concentrations achieved with clinical doses of each agonist reflect in vivo agonist activity (Table 3 ). Desensitization and steady-state activation are also expressed as percentages of desensitization and activation by nicotine from smoking, to indicate how effectively an agonist substitutes for nicotine smoking during a quit attempt (Table 3 ). The in vivo antagonist activity is expressed as the decrease in RO by nicotine from smoking in the presence of an agonist (Table 3 ). The degrees of receptor desensitization, receptor activation, and reduction of nicotine RO, all relative to inhaled nicotine, are also shown as bar graphs in Fig. 4 . Table 3 Predicted agonist and antagonist activities of α4β2 and α6β2* nAChR agonists after recommended clinical doses Agonist Antagonist Desensitization Activation NIC sm RO Steady-state Acute Steady-state fraction % of NIC sm fraction fraction % of NIC sm % decrease α4β2 nAChRs Nicotine smoking 0.79 100 0.0682 0.0145 100 – Nicotine NRT 0.35 44 0.0106 0.0071 49 – Varenicline 0.71 90 0.0044 0.0013 9 59 Cytisine 0.31 39 0.0002 0.0001 1 7 Dianicline (discontinued) 0.04 4 0.0007 0.0007 5 1.4 CP-601927 (discontinued) 0.24 31 0.0004 0.0003 2 9.4 CP-601932 (discontinued) 0.11 14 < 0.0001 < 0.0001 < 0.1 1.6 ABT-418 (discontinued) 0.10 13 0.0141 0.0127 87 13 ABT-089 (discontinued) 0.14 18 0.0004 0.0003 2 3 α6β2* nAChRs Nicotine smoking 0.91 100 0.447 0.042 100 – Nicotine NRT 0.59 65 0.120 0.050 120 – Varenicline 0.40 44 0.081 0.048 116 71 Cytisine 0.38 42 0.041 0.025 60 8.6 Agonist activity is expressed as the fraction of nAChRs that is desensitized and activated acutely and at steady-state. Desensitization and steady-state activation are also expressed as the percentage of the corresponding effects of nicotine from smoking (NIC sm ). Antagonist activity is expressed as the percentage decrease in receptor occupancy (RO) of nicotine from smoking (NIC sm ) in the presence of the agonist
Agonist activity
Differences in EC 50 , E max , IC 50 , and h C u,b values of each nAChR agonist account for the wide range of nAChR fractions that are desensitized and activated during a quit attempt. The functional profiles (Table 3 ) show that smoking and nAChR agonists desensitize much larger fractions (~ 0.1–0.8) of α4β2 nAChRs than are activated at steady-state (< 0.0001–0.07). Compared to inhaled nicotine, the full agonists, NRT and ABT-418, activate 50–90% of α4β2 nAChRs that are activated by smoking, while low efficacy partial agonists cause minimal activation, ranging from < 0.1 to 9% of the fractions activated by inhaled nicotine. The three nAChR agonists for which data are available cause also extensive α6β2* nAChR desensitization, ranging from 40 to 65% of the fraction of α6β2* nAChRs desensitized by nicotine from smoking. In contrast, inhaled nicotine and the agonists can activate a larger proportion of α6β2* than α4β2 nAChRs at steady-state. NRT and varenicline activate α6β2* nAChRs to at least the same extent as nicotine from smoking. Cytisine activates fewer α6β2* nAChRs than NRT or varenicline, but also activates α6β2* nAChRs more potently than α4β2 nAChRs.
Antagonist activity
Whether or not a nAChR agonist can effectively compete with inhaled nicotine for nAChR binding sites is determined by the binding affinities (K i ) and unbound brain concentrations (C u,b ) of the agonist and of nicotine. As a consequence of this competition, the receptor occupancy (RO) of nicotine from smoking is reduced in the presence of another agonist and the percentage decrease in nicotine RO by steady-state levels of the nAChR agonist is a straightforward measure of antagonist activity. Varenicline will decrease nicotine α4β2 RO by about 60%, suggesting that it can effectively antagonize α4β2 nAChR-mediated effects at peak concentrations of inhaled nicotine (Table 3 ). Clinical doses of cytisine, CP-601927, and ABT-418 are predicted to cause small reductions of about 10% in nicotine α4β2 RO during a relapse, while other agonists lack meaningful antagonist activity with nicotine RO reductions of 1% or less. Varenicline and cytisine reduce nicotine RO at α6β2* nAChRs to about the same extent as nicotine RO of α4β2 nAChRs (71 and 8.6%, respectively). The agonist and antagonist activity profiles of the nAChR agonists are shown as bar graphs with their odds ratios for smoking cessation at end of treatment in Fig. 4 .
Clinical data
NRT and varenicline have been studied in a large number of RCTs and we selected 104 trials (~ 46,000 subjects) and 34 trials (~ 15,000 subjects), respectively, from previously published meta-analyses of trials that also report ORs at EOT or shortly after treatment (Wu et al. ; Stead et al. ; Cahill et al. , ). From meta-analyses of cytisine (Etter ; Hajek et al. ; Tutka et al. ), 5 trials (~ 3100 subjects) were selected that report ORs at EOT. The pooled Peto ORs at EOT with 95% confidence intervals are in Table 4 , while Forest and bias plots from separate meta-analyses of NRT, varenicline, and cytisine are shown in Appendix 2 . Table 4 Smoking cessation efficacies of α4β2 nAChR agonists vs. placebo treatment (odds ratios for end of treatment with 95% confidence intervals) Treatment OR (95% CI) Cochran’s Q I 2 index NRT 1.97 (1.88–2.06) 1 P < 0.0001 185.13 P < 0.0001 44.36% Varenicline 3.52 (3.27–3.79) 1 P < 0.0001 79.79 P < 0.0001 58.64% Cytisine 2.25 (1.94–2.60) 1 P < 0.0001 6.42 P = 0.1698 37.71% Dianicline (discontinued) 1.22 (0.83–1.80) 2 P = 0.31 CP-601927 (discontinued) 2.8 (1.2–6.4) 3 P = 0.11 CP-601932 (discontinued) 2.0 (0.8–4.7) 3 P = 0.30 ABT-089 (discontinued) 1 4 NS ABT-418 (discontinued) ~ 2 (pos. phase 2 trial) 5 OR Peto odds ratio for end of treatment, NS not significant 1 Pooled Peto OR, this study 2 Tonstad et al. ( ) 3 PFE data on file 4 Falcone et al. ( ) 5 Arneric et al. ( ) (no P value reported)
Table 4 also includes ORs at EOT, with 95% confidence intervals if available, for the discontinued drugs, which were taken from a large ( N = 602) phase 3 RCT with dianicline (Tonstad et al. ) and a phase 2 RCT with CP-601927 ( N = 45) and CP-601932 ( N = 45) that included bupropion ( N = 44) as comparator (Pfizer data on file, personal communication Dr. J.W. Coe). The odds ratio for ABT-089 was calculated based on the number of days abstinent in a small ( N = 13) pilot study (Falcone et al. ). An odds ratio for ABT-418 has not been reported, but was assumed to be equivalent to that of NRT and significantly different from placebo, based on the positive outcome of a small ( N = 54) phase 2 trial with NRT as a comparator (Grebb et al. ; Arneric et al. ). With the exception of ABT-418, the ORs at EOT of the discontinued drugs were not significantly different from placebo.
Discussion
Attempts to improve the clinical efficacy of nicotinic smoking cessation aids have been focused on high-affinity α4β2 nAChR agonists that are more selective and have better pharmacokinetic properties than nicotine from NRT. Several α4β2 nAChR full and partial agonists have been synthesized since the early 1990s and advanced to clinical trials as potential treatments for nicotine dependence and other disorders thought to involve α4β2 nAChRs (Arneric et al. ; Hurst et al. ). The pharmacological rationale for a high-affinity α4β2 nAChR agonist is the likelihood it can have two pharmacological actions that are expected to improve abstinence rates. During a quit attempt, a nAChR agonist can to some extent replace inhaled nicotine and reduce craving by mimicking the activation and desensitization effects of nicotine (“agonist activity”). During a relapse, the nAChR agonist can compete with nicotine for the same binding site and attenuate the reinforcing effect of inhaled nicotine (“antagonist activity”). In this scenario, the agonist acts as a competitive nicotine antagonist during a relapse, not as a nAChR antagonist, which is an important difference, since although non-competitive or competitive nAChR antagonists and nAChR channel blockers will also antagonize the actions of nicotine from smoking, antagonists are devoid of any agonist activity (Fig. 2 ). In contrast, a nAChR agonist will prevent nicotine from binding to the nAChR, but maintains its agonist effect that includes low-level activation, both in the absence and in the presence of nicotine from smoking (see also “ nAChR antagonists vs. nAChR agonists ” below). Fig. 2 Schematic of agonist and antagonist activities of a nAChR partial agonist and a nAChR channel blocker at α4β2 nAChRs during a quit attempt and a relapse. nAChR binding sites: white diamonds, nicotine: red triangles, nAChR agonist: blue squares, nAChR antagonist: grey half-circles. Downstream effects are represented as dopamine release (light blue circles)
Agonist and antagonist activities are determined by binding affinities, functional potencies, and intrinsic efficacies, parameters that are measured in vitro and can be used to predict to what extent each activity occurs in vivo at a given drug exposure. These quantitative predictions allow an assessment of the contribution of each activity to clinical efficacy by a comparison with the odds ratios for smoking cessation of each drug. All drugs examined in this study were designed to target the α4β2 nAChR, the most prevalent nAChR subtype in the central nervous system that plays a key role in several central nervous system disorders and in the addictive effects of nicotine. More recently, additional nAChR subtypes have been implicated in nicotine addiction (Harmey et al. ; Picciotto and Kenny ; Brunzell et al. ), in particular α6β2* nAChRs that regulate dopamine release in the reward system (Grady et al. ; Exley et al. ; Gotti et al. ; Quik et al. ; Liu et al. ; Brunzell ). Therefore, we included in our analysis not only α4β2 nAChR data, but also α6β2* nAChR data available for nicotine, varenicline, and cytisine.
Functional effects at nAChRs
Agonist activity during a quit attempt
The therapeutic effect of a nAChR agonist during a quit attempt is dependent on how effectively its agonist activity substitutes for that of nicotine from smoking. This functional effect is the net result of two opposing activities that can be measured in vitro: brief exposure (seconds) to an agonist opens the ion channel and activates the nAChR, while prolonged exposure (minutes and longer) desensitizes and thereby inactivates the nAChR. In general, agonists more potently desensitize (potencies in the nM range) than activate (potencies in the μM range) nAChRs. The concentration-dependent activation and desensitization profile results in a relatively narrow “concentration window” (Steinbach ; Lester ), in which steady-state levels of nAChR agonists can activate nAChRs that are not desensitized (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Theoretical example of concentration-dependent desensitization (black solid line) and activation of α4β2 (grey solid line) and α6β2* (blue dotted line) nAChRs by an nAChR agonist. The concentration windows at which α4β2 (grey) and α6β2* (blue) nAChRs can be activated are shown for a nicotine-like drug that is a full agonist at both subtypes, 10-fold more potent (EC 50 ) at activating α6β2* than α4β2 nAChRs, with the same desensitization potency (IC 50 ) for both subtypes. The activation curves represent the response to short pulses with increasing concentrations of the agonist. The desensitization curve represents the decrease in the response to repeated short ACh pulses in the sustained presence of increasing concentrations of agonist
All profiled nAChR agonists desensitize a substantial fraction of α4β2 nAChRs. Varenicline causes approximately the same extent of desensitization as inhaled nicotine and is more potent in desensitizing α4β2 nAChRs than NRT, cytisine, ABT-418, and CP-601927, which in turn are more potent than the other discontinued drugs (Table 3 ). Given the extensive desensitization, only a small fraction of α4β2 nAChRs can be activated by inhaled nicotine and by steady-state levels of nAChR agonists. Though sustained low-level nAChR activation is likely pharmacologically relevant for a clinical effect (Picciotto et al. ; Campling et al. ), its specific contribution to smoking cessation efficacy is not known. However, we generated a quantitative measure for how effectively a nAChR agonist can replace receptor activation by nicotine during a quit attempt by expressing steady-state activation relative to the activation by nicotine from smoking. Based on this comparison (Table 3 , Fig. 4 ), the full agonists NRT and ABT-418 are predicted to cause α4β2 nAChR activation that “replaces” about 50–90% of the effect of inhaled nicotine, while the partial agonists varenicline, dianicline, CP-601927, and ABT-089 activate much smaller fractions of α4β2 nAChRs (< 10% of nicotine’s effect). Because of relatively low activation potencies, intrinsic efficacies, and brain exposures, cytisine and CP-601932 cause virtually no α4β2 nAChR activation (≤ 1% of nicotine).
We collected literature data on α6* nAChRs that contained the β2 subunit, as α6β2* nAChRs are thought to modulate mesolimbic dopamine release (Gotti et al. ; Grady et al. ; Brunzell et al. ). While nAChRs comprising α4α6β2* are reported to play a key role in nicotine addiction (Tapper et al. ; Liu et al. ), the data search of α6β2* nAChRs in the present analysis was not limited by the inclusion of the α4 subunit, because the complete receptor subunit composition is not always known or reported. The majority of reported α6β2* data were generated at native α6β2* nAChRs, other data at exogenously expressed chimeras (α6/α3β2β3 nAChRs) or concatamers (α6β2β3, α6α4β2β3 nAChRs). Given the limited α6β2* nAChR data that are currently available for nicotine, varenicline, and cytisine, the predictions of functional effects at α6β2* nAChRs are less reliable than those at α4β2 nAChRs. Keeping this caveat in mind, the results suggest that NRT, varenicline, and cytisine desensitize about 40–65% of the fraction of α6β2* nAChRs that are desensitized when smoking. Although α6β2* nAChR desensitization is thus comparable to the degree of α4β2 nAChR desensitization, α6β2* nAChRs are activated by lower concentrations than required for α4β2 nAChR activation, resulting in a wider “concentration window” and greater peak response where steady-state activation can take place (Fig. 3 ). Hence, at steady-state, the nAChR agonists cause substantially larger fractions of persistently activated α6β2* nAChRs than α4β2 nAChR (Table 3 ). More extensive α6β2* than α4β2 nAChR activation is in agreement with previous findings, but the present limited data are insufficient to conclude that this is only due to higher activation potency. For instance, α6β2* nAChRs are reported to be less prone to desensitization than α4β2 nAChRs, observed as incomplete desensitization (Grady et al. ) and a less stable desensitized state (Xiao et al. ), which would further increase the steady-state activation of α6β2* nAChRs.
NRT and varenicline activate α6β2* nAChRs to the same extent as nicotine from smoking, while cytisine is less potent, but still activates a larger fraction of α6β2* than α4β2 nAChRs. These functional agonist data suggest that nicotine and the nAChR agonists share substantial desensitization of α4β2 and α6β2* nAChRs, which is likely associated with smoking cessation efficacy. While some activation of α4β2 nAChRs may help deliver optimal efficacy, activation of α4β2 nAChRs alone does not seem to be a requirement for a clinical effect. For instance, NRT activates half of the α4β2 nAChRs that are activated by smoking, but while cytisine causes virtually no α4β2 nAChR activation, it is as effective as a smoking cessation aid as NRT (Table 4 ). Given that NRT and varenicline, and to a lesser extent cytisine, activate the same proportion of α6β2* nAChRs as nicotine from smoking, nicotine-like steady-state activation of α6β2* nAChRs may substantially contribute to clinical efficacy, consistent with the key role that α6β2* nAChRs play in regulating dopamine release and nicotine self-administration (Salminen et al. ; Pons et al. ; Gotti et al. ; Quik et al. ; Grady et al. ; Liu et al. ; Brunzell ; Marks et al. ).
Antagonist activity during a relapse
Two mechanisms contribute to the reduction of smoking-induced reinforcement during a relapse. First, the nAChR agonist can compete with nicotine from smoking for the same binding sites on α4β2 and α6β2* nAChRs. By blocking nicotine’s access to those sites, i.e., having antagonist activity, a nAChR agonist will reduce the functional effects of nicotine at those receptors and thereby attenuate reinforcement associated with smoking. Second, if nicotine displaces an agonist from α4β2 or α6β2* nAChRs, a proportion of those receptors will be in the desensitized state due to prior occupancy by the nAChR agonist, so that nicotine activates a smaller fraction of receptors and is therefore less reinforcing. Because competition and desensitization produced by the nAChR agonist result from the same receptor binding event, these two effects are not additive and cannot easily be disentangled. nAChR desensitization is already taken into account as one of the mechanisms underlying agonist activity and the analysis in this paper focuses on the competition between the nAChR agonist and nicotine for the target receptor as the primary mechanism by which nAChR agonists reduce the reinforcing effect of smoking.
Pharmacologically relevant antagonist activity can only occur if brain concentrations and binding affinities of the agonist are sufficient to “outcompete” nicotine. Varenicline appears to effectively compete with high nicotine concentrations for α4β2 and α6β2* nAChRs, reducing nicotine RO by 60–70%, while the other agonists are predicted not to cause a meaningful reduction of the nicotine RO of α4β2 nAChRs (≤ 10%, Table 3 ). It is conceivable that competition between an agonist and nicotine will have more impact on α4β2 than on α6β2* nAChR function, as substituting nicotine with a low efficacy partial agonist will cause less activation of α4β2 nAChRs than by nicotine from smoking. In contrast, such a substitution is not expected to result in meaningful differences in α6β2* nAChR activation, since steady-state varenicline and inhaled nicotine activate α6β2* nAChRs to approximately the same degree.
Finally, the nicotine RO calculations are based on peak nicotine concentrations that are responsible for the strong reward and reinforcement experienced when smoking (Benowitz ), with which nAChR agonists have to compete in order to have significant nicotine antagonist activity. Since nicotine exposures in smokers fluctuate over the course of the day, nAChR agonists will obviously have stronger antagonist effects at lower nicotine concentrations. For instance, at trough plasma concentrations of nicotine between cigarettes of < 100 nM, varenicline is estimated to decrease nicotine RO by about 90% and to nearly prevent any nicotine binding to α4β2 nAChRs. Under these conditions, varenicline will thus have the same effect in the presence as in the absence of nicotine, as schematically shown in Fig. 2 . Similarly, cytisine brain concentrations cannot effectively compete with nicotine peak concentrations, but at trough nicotine concentrations, cytisine can reduce RO by about 15% and will then have a small antagonist effect. By the same token, each of the agonists has a unique dosing schedule resulting in fluctuating exposures that will likewise affect reductions in nicotine RO. Nevertheless, since fluctuations in drug exposures are much less than in nicotine exposure from smoking, the predicted antagonist activities are, for simplicity, based on the calculated average nAChR agonist exposures at steady-state.
Clinical efficacies
Abstinence rates at ≥ 6 months after the quit date are the standard follow-up duration for reporting data from clinical trials (Fiore et al. ) and are used for recent meta-analyses of smoking cessation aids (Wu et al. ; Etter ; Stead et al. ; Cahill et al. , ; Hajek et al. ; Tutka et al. ). However, at these long-term follow-up times 3–5 months after stopping treatment, the nAChR agonists with half-lives ≤ 24 h will be completely eliminated from the body. For studies on the contribution of a pharmacological mechanism to the clinical efficacy of a drug, abstinence rates measured when the drug is still present are more appropriate. Therefore, we selected RCTs with NRT, varenicline, and cytisine, which also report abstinence rates at the end of treatment (EOT), or shortly after treatment, from previous meta-analyses and conducted a meta-analysis of odds ratios at EOT (Table 4 , Appendix 2 ). While recognizing limitations in direct comparisons of results across different meta-analyses, it is noted that, numerically, varenicline has a larger OR at EOT with respect to placebo than either cytisine, NRT, or ABT-418. A comparison with reported long-term abstinence rates of NRT, varenicline, and cytisine shows that the observed ORs at EOT are higher, but otherwise consistent with the rank order of ORs or relative risks (RR) at long term at ≥ 6 months (Table 5 ). Table 5 Comparison of end of treatment odds ratios with long-term odd ratios and long-term relative risks OR (EOT) OR (long term) RR (long term) NRT 1.97 1 1.84 2 1.60 3 Varenicline 3.52 1 2.88 2 2.24 4 Cytisine 2.25 1 1.83 5 1.65 6 OR odds ratio, RR risk ratio, EOT end of treatment, long term ≥ 6 months 1 This study (Table 4 ) 2 Cahill et al. ( ) 3 Stead et al. ( ) 4 Cahill et al. ( ) 5 Etter ( ) 6 Tutka et al. ( )
The ORs at EOT of the discontinued nAChR agonists (Table 4 ), based on data from single RCTs or pilot studies, are not significantly different from placebo, with the exception of ABT-418 that was reported to have a positive outcome in a small phase 2 nicotine withdrawal trial, but an odds ratio or abstinence rate was not reported (Arneric et al. ).
The main results of this study are summarized in Fig. 4 . The three functional activities that contribute to smoking cessation efficacy (receptor desensitization, receptor activation, and reduction of nicotine RO) are shown as bar graphs that represent the magnitude of each activity relative to that of nicotine from smoking. Smoking cessation odds ratios at end of treatment are also shown for each nAChR agonist. The figure illustrates the unique profile of each nAChR agonist with different degrees of in vivo functional activities at clinical doses. A comparison with odds ratios suggests that extensive desensitization of α4β2 and α6β2* nAChRs (at least about 40% relative to smoking) and activation of α6β2* nAChRs (at least about 60% relative to smoking) are required for an nAChR agonist to be an efficacious smoking cessation aid (e.g., NRT, varenicline, cytisine, ABT-418). The clinical efficacy is further improved when this agonist profile is combined with competitive nicotine antagonist activity that reduces nicotine binding at α4β2 and α6β2* nAChRs, i.e., when a dual agonist-antagonist mechanism is active (e.g., varenicline). Fig. 4 Predicted in vivo agonist activities (steady-state receptor activation and receptor desensitization) and antagonist activities (decrease in nicotine receptor occupancy from smoking) at α4β2 and α6β2* nAChRs relative to the effects of inhaled nicotine, achieved at clinical doses of nAChR agonists. White and light blue bars represent the percentage of nAChRs activated and desensitized, respectively, by the agonist, relative to the fractions activated and desensitized by peak nicotine concentrations from smoking (100%). Dark blue bars represent the agonist-induced decrease in nicotine receptor occupancy from smoking, expressed as percentages of the nicotine receptor occupancy from smoking in the absence of the agonist (100%). Note that for smoking and nicotine from NRT, which will not reduce nicotine receptor occupancy from smoking, the decrease is 0%. Odds ratios with 95% CI for smoking cessation at the end of treatment are shown for each nAChR agonist
nAChR antagonists vs. nAChR agonists
Low efficacy nAChR agonists that will extensively desensitize nAChRs, but cause minimal or no nAChR activation act functionally as nAChR antagonists. Given the continued interest in nAChR antagonists and channel blockers as smoking cessation aids per se or as adjunct therapy, it is of interest to compare the mechanisms of action of nAChR agonists and antagonists. While nAChR antagonists and channel blockers will have a nAChR antagonist effect that mimics nAChR desensitization, these agents will not cause low-level receptor activation and may therefore be less effective in attenuating craving during a quit attempt. In contrast, nAChR agonists that produce persistent low-level activation of α4β2, in particular of α6β2* nAChRs, also provide moderate relief from withdrawal symptoms in the absence of inhaled nicotine (see Fig. 2 ).
Currently, only limited clinical data exist for nAChR antagonists as treatments or adjunct therapy for nicotine dependence. The non-selective nAChR ion channel blocker mecamylamine has been examined for smoking cessation, either as such or in combination with NRT. Small trials showed that mecamylamine per se reduced smoking (Tennant Jr et al. ; Tennant Jr and Tarver ; Rose et al. ) and that the combination with NRT improves quit rates compared to NRT alone (Rose et al. ). Bupropion and its active metabolite hydroxybupropion are dopamine-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors that have weak, non-competitive nAChR antagonist properties, but it is not known if, or to what extent, nAChR antagonism contributes to bupropion’s clinical efficacy (Slemmer et al. ; Damaj et al. ; Rose and Behm ). Currently, the clinical data do not allow a reliable comparison of nAChR antagonism vs. nAChR partial agonism for smoking cessation, also because in some cases the level of in vivo nAChR antagonism after recommended doses of antagonists may be inadequate. For instance, the usual mecamylamine doses of 5–10 mg/day are associated with brain concentrations that are estimated to inhibit only 15–30% of α4β2 nAChRs (Weber et al. ). It is conceivable that this level of antagonism is suboptimal, given that varenicline desensitizes, i.e., “inhibits” 90% of α4β2 nAChRs, but higher doses of mecamylamine are impractical due to side effects (Tennant Jr et al. ; Rose et al. ). Novel competitive antagonists selective for α4β2 or α6β2* nAChRs are currently in the discovery or development stage (Dwoskin and Bardo ; Beckmann et al. ) and future clinical data may provide more insights in the efficacy of nAChR antagonists as smoking cessation agents.
Clinical pharmacokinetics and adverse events profile of NRT, varenicline, and cytisine
The preclinical and pharmacokinetic properties that underlie the smoking cessation efficacy of the clinically used nAChR agonists also determine dosing regimen and undesirable pharmacological effects, which are an essential part of a drug profile and therefore briefly discussed here.
Clinical pharmacokinetics
Nicotine is extensively metabolized, has a very short half-life, and is administered as NRT in the form of a patch, gum, lozenge, or inhaler. Both varenicline and cytisine are well absorbed after oral administration and undergo minimal metabolism. Varenicline has a long half-life, good brain penetration, and is dosed once or twice a day. Cytisine has a short half-life, poor brain penetration, and requires frequent oral dosing to achieve sufficient steady-state brain concentrations. There are no warnings about clinically meaningful pharmacokinetic drug interactions in the product labels of the drugs, except that the cytisine label states not to use during tuberculostatic therapy, but the reason for that is not known.
Adverse events
Since nicotine from NRT, varenicline, and cytisine are selective for α4β2 and α6β2* nAChRs and lack significant interactions with other biological targets, they share mild side effects mediated via nAChRs, although some are nicotine withdrawal symptoms.
Nausea can be mediated via central α4β2 nAChRs, but also via peripheral nAChR subtypes for which the agonists have low affinity. This is because shortly after dosing, high local drug concentrations in the GI tract are sufficient to activate α3, α5, α7, β2, or β4 containing nAChR subtypes expressed near the lumen wall (De Biasi ), causing nausea and GI disorders. Varenicline has weak 5-HT 3 receptor agonist properties (Lummis et al. ) and can also cause transient nausea via activation of peripheral 5-HT 3 receptors. By dosing 1 mg twice a day instead of 2 mg once a day, the incidence of peripherally mediated nausea is reduced, while lowering the dose to 0.5 mg twice daily further decreases the incidence of nausea. Data from the recent large safety RCT (Anthenelli et al. ) confirm that 2 mg BID varenicline causes a higher incidence of nausea than NRT. No data are available from RCTs comparing cytisine with varenicline or NRT, but the incidence of nausea seems to be comparable to that with NRT (Tutka and Zatoñski , West et al. , Walker et al. ).
Sleep disturbances like insomnia and abnormal dreams occur at a similar incidence with the three nAChR agonists, consistent with a mechanism via central α4β2 nAChRs thought to be involved in cognition, memory, and alertness. Anthenelli et al. ( ) reported incidences of insomnia and abnormal dreams of 8–11.5% for varenicline, 9–14% for NRT, and 4–7.5% for placebo. Sleep disturbances have been reported to occur in 1–26% of patients on cytisine (Tutka and Zatoñski ).
Neuropsychiatric adverse events (e.g., depression, suicidality, irritability) are not observed in clinical trials, but were spontaneously reported through post-marketing surveillance in patients on varenicline. These reports led the FDA in 2009 to add a boxed warning on the varenicline label. However, meta-analyses of varenicline RCTs and several observational cohort studies did not detect an increased risk of varenicline for neuropsychiatric adverse events compared to placebo or NRT. Recently, the “EAGLES” safety trial with varenicline, bupropion, NRT, and placebo found no significant differences between the risk for neuropsychiatric adverse events of drug treatments and placebo in smokers without and with a mental disorder (Anthenelli et al. ). Together, these results provide strong scientific evidence that neuropsychiatric adverse events can occur in smokers independent of medication use, which led the FDA to remove the boxed warning from the varenicline product label (FDA Drug Safety Communication ).
Limitations of the study
The analysis in this study is limited by the availability of data in the literature on the various nAChR agonists under consideration and the extent to which the data sets have been replicated. Generally, there are more data available for the approved drugs than the discontinued agents and more data on α4β2 than α6β2* nAChRs. In addition, estimates of agonist and antagonist activities are based on the means of binding affinities and functional potencies calculated from several literature data that were generated using methodologies and assay conditions that differ across studies. For instance, binding experiments have been conducted with various radioligands at different temperatures and incubation times, while agonist-induced receptor activation and desensitization are measured using electrophysiology, Ca 2+ -flux, Rb + flux, or 3 H-dopamine release at native nAChRs, concatamers, or chimeras expressed in oocytes or in human cells. The absolute values for binding and functional potencies of each compound reported in the literature over the past decades vary therefore widely ( Appendix 1 ). Still, to minimize bias, the analyses performed in this study utilized all available data without preference for any methodology. Moreover, because nicotine is often included in the assays, values for nicotine can be used as “internal standards” to compare the affinity and functional potency of an agonist relative to those of nicotine. Such nicotine-agonist ratios show much less variability between studies than the absolute values and support the use of mean values for expressing agonist and antagonist activities of nAChR agonists relative to those of nicotine from smoking. Finally, exposure profiles that are, for any reason, substantially different from average values can obviously affect the pharmacological response.
A second limitation is that functional activities of the agonists reflect short-term exposures to nAChRs, while it is well documented that repeated exposure of nicotine and other agonists can alter the number of cell-surface nAChRs. This receptor upregulation, which occurs with a much slower time course than receptor activation and desensitization, may involve parallel changes in several pathways (Govind et al. ; De Biasi and Dani ; Hurst et al. ). Agonist-induced nAChR upregulation is thought to play an important role in nicotine addiction and could be an undesirable effect as it may sustain or increase withdrawal symptoms (De Biasi and Dani ). Ideally, clinical efficacy comparisons between nicotinic smoking cessation aids should therefore consider effects after chronic dosing of the drugs on nicotinic receptor expression profiles. However, data on long-term effects of other agonists than nicotine on nAChR expression in vivo are not available, while recent in vitro data suggest that varenicline can actually reduce nicotine-induced nAChR upregulation, which could be an additional beneficial effect in smokers (Govind et al. ). Currently there are no data that allow a comparison of the acute effects on a “background” of potential long-term effects of the different nAChR agonists.
Conclusions
The in vivo pharmacological effects of nAChR agonists were derived from their in vitro receptor functional and binding profiles at predicted unbound brain concentrations after clinical doses. During a quit attempt, nicotine-like “agonist activity,” comprised of extensive desensitization and low-level steady-state activation of α4β2 and α6β2* nAChRs, can to some extent replace nicotine from smoking and is associated with smoking cessation activity. Activation of α6β2* nAChRs to a comparable level as activation by inhaled nicotine appears to be important for a clinical effect. Low-level activation of α4β2 nAChRs may provide some additional benefit although this activity does not appear to be required for clinical efficacy. Nicotine-blocking “antagonist activity” that reduces nicotine binding to nAChRs by competing with inhaled nicotine during a relapse attenuates the reinforcing effects of smoking. These three pharmacological effects appear to be key factors underlying smoking cessation efficacy. No single activity is dominant, and the extent of each of these activities varies among the different nAChR agonists driven by their unique pharmacology profiles and exposure. While adequate agonist activity alone seems sufficient for a clinical effect (NRT, cytisine), clinical efficacy is improved if competitive antagonism of α4β2 nAChRs also occurs with a drug that has a dual agonist-antagonist mechanism of action in vivo (varenicline). The results of this retrospective study, using preclinical data of nAChR agonists with known clinical efficacies, support a quantitative translational approach for predicting clinical efficacies of novel candidate smoking cessation agents that target various nAChR subtypes, including α6*, α5*, α3β4*, and α7 nAChRs as agonists, partial agonists, or antagonists.