Introduction
Alcohol use disorder is defined by the DSM-5 on a continuum with classifications ranging from mild to severe forms and based on the number of diagnostic criteria met (American Psychiatric Association ). Altogether, there are 11 criteria defined, for example, “in the past year have you had times when you ended up drinking more, or longer than you intended; wanted a drink so badly you couldn’t think of anything else; continued drinking even though it was causing trouble with your family and friends.” The presence of 2–3 criteria indicates mild alcohol use disorder (roughly equivalent to alcohol dependence in DSM-IV), 4–5 indicates moderate, and 6 or more indicates severe (previously alcohol abuse). In this review, we will focus on severe alcohol use disorder unless otherwise stated. Treatment for severe alcohol use disorder is a complex and prolonged process. Although the initial phase of withdrawal or detoxification can be challenging, the major goal of any rehabilitation program is to engage the client in a lifelong pattern of abstinence or control over their alcohol use. This is not a straightforward task. The lifetime relapse rates for substance use disorders are typically between 40 and 60%, commensurate with other chronic diseases such as asthma, hypertension, and diabetes (NIDA ). If half of the people who undergo treatment are likely to relapse at some point, then maintenance of care in some form needs to be considered. Furthermore, because alcohol use disorder is complex and multideterministic, treatment needs to consider the many different aspects that contribute to the client’s drinking patterns. For example, a treatment plan could include pharmacotherapy to control craving and motivation to remain abstinent, behavioral therapy and counseling to modify maladaptive behavioral and cognitive patterns, and peer support and support/advice/training for the families of the client to promote an environment that facilitates abstinence (Glasner-Edwards and Rawson ; NIDA ). In addition, the needs of the individual should also be addressed. For example, alcohol use disorder frequently has comorbidities such as anxiety, depression, and liver or renal dysfunction, which may affect treatment. Other factors such as the age, gender, culture, and religion of the client also have the potential to affect how they respond to different treatments and need to be considered in rehabilitation plans. In other words, treatment needs to be comprehensive, long term, and tailored to the individual.
In order to bring consistency and improve the efficacy of medical practices, new practice guidelines are regularly developed from published clinical trials, or “evidence-based practice.” These integrate both clinical expertise and research evidence and are a huge milestone for the treatment of alcohol use disorders. Over the last 10 years, health organizations across several countries have introduced these guidelines (for example—USA (American Psychiatric Association ; NIDA ), UK (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence ), Australia (Australian Government Department of Health and Ageing )). These guidelines have helped bring consistency to the sector and should aid in the advancement of current therapies. Despite the existence of such guidelines for best evidence-based practice in alcohol use disorder, not to mention a wealth of research into relapse prevention, relapse and poor treatment retention continue to be serious obstacles to the process of rehabilitation. Indeed, it would appear that there have been few major advances or changes to the list of recommended treatments for alcohol use disorder in the past decade. Practice guidelines show high consistency in the recommendations that are made within (American Psychiatric Association ; Australian Government Department of Health and Ageing ; National Institute for Health and Care Excellence ; NIDA ). Although consensus is desirable, the lack of change since the first handbook in 2006 is concerning because it suggests that there has been no progress. Global rates of alcohol use disorder and alcohol-associated harm continue to rise, and relapse is still an overwhelming problem for the treatment of alcohol—or any substance use disorder (NIDA ; WHO ). Furthermore, PubMed indicates that there has been a vast quantity of research into alcohol use—from basic experimentation to clinical trials. The difficulty in bringing new and effective treatment to policy and clinical practice can be found in the complexity of the disorder itself. It is also important to acknowledge the challenges of translating evidence-based treatment into routine clinical practice (Perry and Lawrence ). Indeed, the majority of individuals with alcohol use disorder do not access treatment, and of those that do, only a small percentage are prescribed medication (Mark et al. ). Additionally, while some evidence-based therapies may appear to have clinical benefit, in practice they might be ethically or economically unfeasible and unsustainable (McGovern and Carroll ).
What are the main evidence-based therapies in use today?
The recommended interventions described in the clinical guidelines have been in use for many years and have been reviewed extensively elsewhere (Carroll and Onken ; Kaskutas ; Lyon ; McGovern and Carroll ; Perry and Lawrence ). Here, we will provide a brief outline of current practice guidelines to enable subsequent discussion of how emerging technologies and advances in neuroscience and cognitive neuroscience might be incorporated into these practices.
Psychosocial interventions
Psychosocial interventions are the most common forms of treatment for alcohol use disorder (NIDA ). Of these, the evidence-based therapies consistently recommended include the following: cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), motivational interviewing or motivational enhancement therapy, 12-step support/self-help groups as well as 12-step facilitation, and contingency management. Both CBT and motivational interviewing involve intensive one-on-one sessions between the client with alcohol use disorder and the therapist. The client and therapist work on developing and teaching strategies to overcome the desire to seek out and consume alcohol, and to deal with situations which might trigger these desires (Carroll and Kiluk ; Miller and Rollnick , ; Miller and Rose ; Zilverstand et al. ), although both client and therapist may differ in their strategy employed to achieve this (Perry and Lawrence ). Self-help programs such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) also provide and teach strategies for coping with craving, and encourage activities to replace drinking habits, but do so in a group environment (Kaskutas ; Kaskutas et al. ; Majer et al. ; National Institute for Health and Care Excellence ). These group self-help strategies may be supplemented with programs such as 12-step facilitation that encourage participation, leading to better outcomes overall (Kelly et al. ). Contingency management employs a different strategy to the interventions listed above, in that rather than teaching strategies and coping skills, it promotes desirable or adaptive behavior by direct reinforcement (for example vouchers for clear urine samples) (Carroll and Onken ; McDonell et al. ). Contingency management has been shown to be effective in clients with mild alcohol use disorder, or in heavy drinkers who do not have a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder (Dougherty et al. ). It also improves compliance rates when used in conjunction with other treatments for alcohol and other drugs (Fitzsimons et al. ).
Evidence for the efficacy of these interventions has been replicated across many different clinical trials, as shown in numerous meta-analyses (Carey et al. , ; Fernandez et al. ; McQueen et al. ; Sayegh et al. ). However, there is great individual variability in the responsiveness to treatment. For example, short interventions such as motivational interviewing may be more appropriate for moderate alcohol use disorder, while more severe presentation of the disorder may require a more protracted intervention (Office of the Surgeon General ). Personality factors have also been shown to affect relative responsiveness to treatment (Project Match Research Group ), as has motivation. For example, “readiness for change” predicts attendance at AA meetings and alcohol use disorder severity (Krenek et al. ; Le Berre et al. ; Rice et al. ). Thus, the choice of treatment strategy must consider a variety of factors unique to the client. While guidelines do acknowledge and recommend individualized treatment, relapse is an ongoing problem for people emerging from psychosocial interventions for alcohol use disorder and it is often not treated as a chronic condition. Indeed, the effect size reported by most of the meta-analyses referenced above was only small (Foxcroft et al. ). It may be, therefore, that psychosocial intervention alone is not sufficient.
Pharmacological interventions
For clients with severe alcohol use disorder, the initial withdrawal stage can be challenging and even fatal (Long et al. ). Anxiolytic drugs, such as benzodiazepines, are recommended for treating acute withdrawal (Khan et al. ). However, despite significant comorbidity between alcohol use, anxiety, and depression (Conway et al. ), benzodiazepines do not improve abstinence rates with ongoing treatment (Liang and Olsen ). Other anxiolytics, such as buspirone, gabapentin, and pregabalin, have all been found to improve outcomes for alcohol use disorder where it presents with comorbid anxiety disorder (Gimeno et al. ), but the evidence for efficacy of anxiolytics for the treatment of alcohol use disorder is generally inconclusive (Ipser et al. ). For example, antidepressants such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are only found to be effective where there is a primary diagnosis of depression, and in some cases can actually increase drinking rates (Gimeno et al. ; Khan et al. ; Torrens et al. ).
For the treatment of alcohol use disorder following withdrawal, guidelines from the UK, USA, and Australia currently include three FDA approved drugs. These are naltrexone, acamprosate, and disulfiram which are recommended specifically for relapse prevention in clients with moderate to severe alcohol use disorder. Both acamprosate and naltrexone are used as anticraving medications. A meta-analysis of 64 clinical trials conducted between 1970 and 2009 showed that acamprosate was more effective at promoting abstinence, while naltrexone was more effective in reducing craving and the number of drinks per drinking day (Maisel et al. ). Disulfiram, on the other hand, acts as an active deterrent by triggering an accumulation of toxic acetaldehyde if alcohol is consumed (Krampe and Ehrenreich ). For clients presenting with mild to moderate alcohol use disorder, relapse prevention medications include nalmefene (recommended and licensed in the UK and Europe) (Soyka ) and sodium oxybate (used in Italy and Austria) (Caputo et al. ). All these medications are effective at reducing drinking and relapse measures (Caputo et al. ; Maisel et al. ; Rosner et al. ; Soyka ); however, effect sizes tend to be small or moderate at best (Rosner et al. ), while some larger multisite trials found no benefit over placebo (Gastpar et al. ; Krystal et al. ). Both acamprosate and naltrexone have been recommended as adjuncts to behavioral therapies such as CBT (Anton et al. ; Feeney et al. ), although compounded efficacy of the two treatments has not been confirmed (Anton et al. ). In addition, for all of these medications, individual differences in the client need to be considered. For example, disulfiram can have severe and even fatal effects, and therefore is only advocated for clients that are highly motivated to remain abstinent and have a strong support network (Krampe and Ehrenreich ). Compliance rates with disulfiram are also typically low, making supervised administration critical for its success (Skinner et al. ). To improve the efficacy of medications for the treatment of alcohol use disorder, perhaps tailoring treatment to the individual would be of benefit. This is discussed in the “ Precision medicine: understanding the individual and tailoring the treatment accordingly ” section below.
Seeking to improve outcomes by designing new therapies
Making the old new again—repositioning FDA approved drugs for other indications
There have been no new medications for alcohol use disorder approved in the USA since acamprosate came on the market in 2004 (Lyon ). Elsewhere, nalmefene was approved for treatment of mild alcohol use disorder (previously alcohol dependence) by the European Medicines Agency in 2013, and the National Health Services in the UK in 2014 (Soyka ). This low rate of licensing for medication is surprising, given the global scale of alcohol use and the number of drugs approved each year for other conditions such as cancer ( https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/DrugInnovation/ucm483775.htm ). Despite this, there is research into new pharmacological targets with numerous potential medications in trial for alcohol use disorders. Here, we have focused on those emerging from a strategy that is increasingly being adopted by researchers and pharmaceutical companies involved in drug development, namely drug repositioning.
Repurposing or repositioning drugs involves using drugs that have already been approved for treatment in other indications. This strategy bypasses the drug discovery phase, as well as decreasing (to a certain extent) the need for toxicology testing (Ashburn and Thor ), making it a fast and economically feasible approach for drug development. Naltrexone, in fact, was originally used for the treatment of opioid dependence before it was repurposed for the treatment of alcohol use disorder. The repurposing of drugs can in some cases be attributed to shared neurobiological aspects of alcohol use disorders with other substance use disorders. Today, there are a number of trials completed or in progress that seek to reposition other approved drugs to alcohol use disorder medications. Some of these are described below.
Numerous anticonvulsants and antiepileptics have been shown decrease alcohol consumption and are now in clinical trial for both alcohol withdrawal (Minozzi et al. ) and alcohol use more broadly (Pani et al. ). Topiramate modulates glutamate and GABA receptors, and has also been shown to reduce alcohol consumption in randomized controlled trials (Johnson et al. , ; Knapp et al. ). Importantly, topiramate treatment is started when the client is still consuming alcohol, rather than during abstinence as with other medications (Johnson et al. , , ). Topiramate has been shown to be more effective than naltrexone at reducing alcohol cravings and consumption in heavy-drinking clients of an outpatient addiction unit (Florez et al. ). It does, however, have a number of side-effects, not least cognitive impairments (Knapp et al. ), which is an important clinical consideration if the client is also undergoing CBT or other behavioral therapies (Perry ; Perry and Lawrence ). Another antiepileptic, zonisamide, acts by modulating voltage-dependent sodium channels (Biton ). The clinical pharmacology and mechanism of zonisamide was proposed as having fewer cognitive effects compared to topiramate, although some impairments in cognitive tasks measuring verbal fluency and working memory have been found (Knapp et al. ). It has also been shown in clinical trials to improve drinking outcomes (i.e., reduce the number of heavy-drinking days, drinks per week, drinks per drinking episode, and improve alcohol craving scores) (Arias et al. ; Knapp et al. , ; Rubio et al. ). Pregabalin (Martinotti et al. ) and levetiracetam (Knapp et al. ) have also shown some benefits. Finally, gabapentin was identified as a potential therapeutic target based on RNA-sequencing of human postmortem brain tissue from heavy-drinking individuals (Farris et al. ; Lyon ). It has been shown to decrease both anxiety and drinking outcomes in clients with alcohol use disorder (Farris et al. ; Furieri and Nakamura-Palacios ; Mason et al. ).
Other classes of medication are also being explored for their treatment potential for alcohol use disorder. As mentioned previously, anxiolytics and antidepressants are frequently trialed because of the high degree of comorbidity between these conditions (Torrens et al. ). Given the high levels of neuroinflammation observed in human and animals exposed to alcohol, it is unsurprising that anti-inflammatory agents such as ibulast (a phosphodiesterase inhibitor), are being explored for their therapeutic value (Warden et al. ). In regard to “off-label” treatments, baclofen, a GABA B agonist, has received temporary approval for alcohol use disorder in France (Soyka and Muller ). It was originally prescribed to treat spasticity associated with neurological conditions, but has also been found to reduce alcohol intake and craving in case studies (Addolorato et al. , ; Pastor et al. ) and preclinical models (e.g., Liang et al. ; Maccioni et al. ). However, there has been much controversy surrounding the appropriate dose of baclofen for clients with alcohol use disorder. Indeed, case studies and reports have examined doses ranging from 30 up to 270 mg/day (Addolorato et al. ; Ameisen ; Bucknam ). While low-dose baclofen (30 mg/day) appears to have some success with mild side effects including sedation, vertigo, and psychological disturbances (Minozzi et al. ; Soyka and Muller ), more recent clinical trials have used higher dose treatment (> 150 mg/day) with mixed results (Pignon et al. ; Reynaud et al. ). High doses of baclofen are generally effective if use is gradually reduced and discontinued; however, side effects can include seizures and hyperthermia (Agabio and Colombo ; Dario and Tomei ).
Finally, drugs that are used to treat other substance use disorders are also being trialed for alcohol use disorders. For example, varenicline acts at a number of nicotinic receptors and is effective for smoking cessation (Cahill et al. ). It has also been shown to decrease alcohol consumption in some animal models (but see Randall et al. ; Steensland et al. ). Clinical trials confirmed that varenicline reduces alcohol consumption in individuals with alcohol use disorder and other substance abuse disorders, suggesting that it could be adopted more widely for substance abuse treatment (Apollonio et al. ).
There are many drugs at various stages of the drug development process, and many of these have previously been prescribed for other indications (Lyon ; Soyka and Muller ). These novel drug targets offer new opportunities for treating people with alcohol use disorder and may provide alternatives for people who are not responding to medications that are currently available. However, there is little clinical evidence available for any superior benefits of these drugs over existing treatments. Indeed, with a disease as complex as alcohol use disorder, which is subject to individual variability, it is unlikely that a single medication or treatment type will permit full recovery, particularly if treatment is static.
Emergence of new technologies
Brain stimulation
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a relatively novel and non-invasive technique and is currently FDA approved for clients that are resistant to antidepressant medications. It uses electromagnetic induction to generate targeted electrical fields on the cortical surface. Traditional TMS methods targeting the prefrontal cortex of alcohol-dependent clients have had some success at reducing alcohol craving even after a 1-month follow-up period (Mishra et al. , ; Rossi et al. ). Recent technological advances have allowed for the stimulation of deeper brain regions using TMS targeting deeper regions of the prefrontal cortex to reduce alcohol craving and intake (Addolorato et al. ; Ceccanti et al. ). However, due to the currently limited penetration depth of TMS (~ 2 cm from the skull surface), many clinical trials and case studies stimulate cortical regions, assuming neuromodulation of downstream reward-associated brain regions such as the nucleus accumbens and ventral tegmental area. A functional link to the dopaminergic system is difficult to determine using this technique alone. Recently though, a reduction in striatal dopamine transporter availability compared to baseline has been shown following repeated dorsolateral prefrontal cortex stimulation (Addolorato et al. ). Future research and improvements in technology are required to uncover the neurobiological mechanisms through which TMS acts, at both a cellular and molecular level.
Another non-invasive brain stimulation technique is transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) where weak direct current is applied to the brain region of interest for several minutes, resulting in the modulation of brain activity (Boggio et al. ). tDCS of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has been shown to reduce general alcohol craving as well as craving in response to alcohol-associated cues and improve cognitive performance in alcohol use disorder clients compared to sham controls (Boggio et al. ; den Uyl et al. ; Nakamura-Palacios et al. ). However, these reductions in craving are not always straightforward. For example, repeated tDCS of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex also increased the number of alcohol use disorder clients that relapsed to alcohol use during treatment compared to sham controls (da Silva et al. ). Improving the anatomical specificity of stimulation may help improve the accuracy and efficacy of this technique.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) involves the implantation of electrodes on targeted brain regions (Alba-Ferrara et al. ). Due to the invasive nature of this technique, there have been a limited number of studies examining DBS in those with alcohol use disorder. However, DBS has been shown to deliver electrical pulses to regions as deep as the nucleus accumbens, reducing alcohol craving for up to 8 years (Kuhn et al. ; Muller et al. ). The success of DBS is still debatable with some clients still experiencing short periods of relapse due to external stressful events (Voges et al. ). Nevertheless, the long-term follow-up of DBS clients in these studies is commendable given that relapse can occur at any point following the withdrawal period. Other types of interventions for alcohol use disorders, both pharmacological and non-pharmacological, should consider long-term follow-up sessions of all clients to improve the efficacy of these interventions.
Technology-based interventions
The recent digital age has seen rise to the development of several computer-based and smartphone-based behavioral interventions to assist in the treatment of alcohol use disorders (Campbell et al. ). Despite alcohol use disorder being one of the most prevalent mental health disorders across the globe (WHO ), individuals suffering alcohol use disorders and those seeking treatment for their alcohol dependence are still severely stigmatized by society (Schomerus et al. ). In the USA, only 20% of individuals diagnosed with alcohol use disorder actually seek treatment (Grant et al. ). The introduction of technology-based interventions to the alcohol use disorder field attempts to rectify this situation by introducing a degree of anonymity with these treatment options. This should help curb the stigma-induced social burdens that individuals with alcohol use disorder typically suffer from. For example, individuals with mild alcohol use disorder who are not willing to seek treatment in a clinical setting will readily engage in an online interactive treatment program with a relatively high completion rate (Lieberman and Huang ). In addition to high levels of anonymity, these types of interventions are cost-effective, easily accessible, and can be tailored to suit the individual with immediate and 24/7 access available.
Even though there are evident practical and economic benefits of computer-based interventions, several meta-analyses and systematic reviews highlight only moderate effectiveness of these treatments for mild alcohol use disorder (Balhara and Verma ; Khadjesari et al. ; Riper et al. ; White et al. ). Only 20% of Internet-based studies examined were effective at reducing alcohol consumption compared to other face-to-face behavioral interventions (Balhara and Verma ). However, most studies examining the effect of these types of interventions on alcohol use disorder occur in the USA or Australia and in a student population where technology is highly appealing and available (Balhara and Verma ; Kay-Lambkin et al. ; Khadjesari et al. ; White et al. ). Despite this, there is some research showing that Internet-based interventions can be as effective as brief face-to-face counseling sessions (Tait and Christensen ). However, given the chronic, relapsing nature of alcohol use disorder and the relatively short follow-up timepoints for computer-based interventions to date, the real question is whether these interventions have the capability of reducing alcohol consumption and craving long term. Indeed, most computer-based interventions are self-directed and require a high level of motivation, perhaps limiting their long-term effectiveness. To cater for this, the literature highlights that technology-based interventions are most beneficial in conjunction with face-to-face therapy such as CBT (Sundstrom et al. ).
Similar to computer-based interventions, the use of smartphone applications (apps) and text messaging is relatively new for the treatment of alcohol use disorders. Pilot studies using smartphone apps with location-based monitoring and intervention strategies have been shown to decrease alcohol consumption, reduce alcohol cue-associated cravings, and increase the number of days spent abstinent in individuals with mild alcohol use disorder (Dulin and Gonzalez ; Gonzalez and Dulin ). However, many smartphone-based apps and text messages use self-report measures only, but recent improvements in these interventions have allowed these to be more interactive and personalized, improving their success rate (Hoeppner et al. ). For example, automated, tailored, and interactive text messages have been shown to reduce alcohol consumption compared to controls receiving no text message and those receiving self-assessment text messages only (Muench et al. ; Suffoletto et al. ). Despite the preliminary evidence of smartphone-based interventions for alcohol use disorders, there is promise for this technology in the future with a recent systematic review showing efficacy for these types of interventions, in particular text message-based interventions, on long-term alcohol-related behaviors (Fowler et al. ). It is important to note that the age groups participating in both computer-based and smartphone app interventions are < 45 years old and that perhaps the use of smartphones and computer-based interventions may be less accessible and less effective for individuals over this age bracket.
In summary, computer-based and app-based programs are cost-effective, provide consistent therapy, increase alcohol use disorder awareness, and promote positive behavioral change; however, their efficacy as interventions remains questionable (Cohn et al. ). Indeed, most apps and computer programs require a high level of motivation to prevent attrition with several apps relying solely on self-report measures. At present, it appears as though these technology-based interventions are most successful when supplemented with occasional therapist support. However, future advances in technology will make these interventions easily accessible, feasible, and successful.
Seeking to improve outcomes by adapting and refining current treatment protocols
Improving evidence-based therapy with digital media
In the previous section, we described how new digital technologies can extend the reach of therapists to people in remote locations, and people who may not feel comfortable in a clinical setting (Lieberman and Huang ; Walker et al. ). This can also be harnessed to improve the reach of traditional interventions. For example, both CBT and motivational interviewing have been adapted for delivery via Internet, telephone, or SMS (Blankers et al. ; Jiang et al. ; Suffoletto et al. ; Suffoletto et al. ). Not all interventions are equally amendable to this type of delivery. For example, Blankers et al. ( ) showed reduced alcohol consumption in clients with alcohol use disorders when treated using Internet-based CBT/motivational interviewing therapy compared to an Internet-based self-help program. However, Gustafson et al. ( ) showed that response to CBT, motivational interviewing, and psychoeducation were all improved when presented with a smartphone app. Apps like this may help people to extend what happens in the clinic to their everyday lives. Thus, with care and consideration in design, these new approaches may enhance and extend the support provided by psychosocial interventions.
Technology-based interventions can also be used to improve the efficacy of exposure-based therapies. These therapies involve presentation of drug- or alcohol-associated cues in a controlled environment and without drug delivery. This, in theory, should decrease the potential for these cues to elicit craving (Loeber et al. ) but exposure therapies are not usually recommended because overall, they provide no benefit over other interventions or contact control (Conklin and Tiffany ; Mellentin et al. ). However, this lack of efficacy may be due the fact that the treatment is generally administered in a clinical environment, so that the return to a more naturalistic setting restores the capacity of the cues to motivate drinking behaviors (Conklin and Tiffany ). More recently, virtual reality has been used to overcome this issue of context, and hence reduce cue-associated cravings in individuals with alcohol use disorders (Ferrer-Garcia et al. ; Lee et al. ).
Together, these studies suggest an interesting possibility of combining technology-based interventions with traditional behavioral treatments. To date, only a few studies have explored the effect of tech-based interventions combined with pharmacotherapies (Balhara and Verma ). One such example showed that mobile-based interventions, including daily text message medication reminders and Internet-based assessment, did not improve medication compliance rates (Stoner et al. ). On the other hand, smartphone-based interventions coupled with portable breathalyzers produced decreased alcohol consumption and frequency in alcohol-dependent clients (You et al. ). Thus, there are multiple avenues whereby new technology might be used to enhance and extend traditional evidence-based practice.
Precision medicine: understanding the individual and tailoring the treatment accordingly
Alcohol use disorders are complex, multifaceted disorders with both biological and behavioral complexity. Targeting the treatment of alcohol use disorder to the individual may be the most effective way of tackling this complexity. With proper assessment of prospective clients at the outset of rehabilitation, pharmacological and psychosocial or behavioral interventions could be combined in a treatment plan tailored to the individual. Such a personalized plan would be based not only on genetic and environmental factors, but also on which stage of the addiction cycle the client is experiencing, i.e., craving, negative emotional state, etc. This method has promised success for the treatment of cancer (Collins and Varmus ). For alcohol use disorder, the individual differences that need to be catered for include age, gender, cultural background and/or ethnicity, and of course other comorbidities. They might also simply be individual differences in the way the treatment-seeking client presents—for example, the extent of dangerous drinking patterns, the age of onset for problem drinking, drinking history (moderate daily consumption versus binge drinking, i.e., consumption of more than four (for females) or five (for males) drinks over a 2-hour period ( https://www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-health/overview-alcohol-consumption/moderate-binge-drinking )), the current level of cognitive function, the response to alcohol-associated cues, and the response to stressful situations. All of these factors have been shown to mediate client response to different interventions and/or combinations of interventions for both mild and severe alcohol use disorder (Bates et al. , ; Kushner et al. ; Lemke et al. ; Trim et al. ).
Precision medicine is not a new concept (Jain , ), and the idea of tailoring drug treatment is not revolutionary. In fact, one of the principles for effective drug treatment is that “effective treatment should attend to the multiple needs of the individual” (NIDA ). New behavioral therapies are being developed that facilitate this. For example, CBT4CBT is a modularized version of CBT, which is divided into seven separate parts which can be delivered and evaluated independently of each other (Carroll and Kiluk ). This format makes it reasonably straightforward to adapt the modules delivered based on initial client assessment, as well as update them based on ongoing and independent assessment for performance and responsiveness to each module (Carroll and Kiluk ). Pilot studies and phase two clinical trials indicate that CBT4CBT has better treatment retention than regular CBT for other substance use disorders (Carroll and Kiluk ), and further trials for alcohol use disorder are underway ( https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02742246?cond=Alcohol+Use+Disorder&draw=5&rank=11 ). However, truly effective delivery of therapy that is targeted to the individual requires a good understanding of the relevant biomarkers, including genetic and cognitive, that predict how an individual might respond to various treatments (Kranzler et al. ). Rapid advancement of assessment technologies, whether imaging, sequencing, or psychometric, now permits us to uncover such biomarkers.
Identifying biomarkers that will predict individual responsiveness to treatment
Genetics
Alcohol use disorder has a strong heritable component. Developments in sequencing technology and bioinformatics have allowed researchers to begin to characterize this genetic component. Better understanding of these genetic aspects may uncover potential targets for new pharmacotherapies as well as opening up avenues for identifying how people presenting with alcohol use disorder will respond to different treatments (Farris et al. ).
Several studies have examined genetic biomarkers in the context of individualized pharmacotherapies for the treatment of alcohol use disorder (Batki and Pennington ). This can be relevant for the process of drug development, as well as for determining the appropriate prescription on a case-by-case basis. For example, ondansetron is an antinausea drug that is used during chemotherapy. It is a serotonin receptor (5-HT3) antagonist and has been shown to reduce alcohol consumption particularly in early-onset alcohol use disorder, which is thought to have a particularly strong heritable component (Kranzler et al. ). Responsiveness to this medication in alcohol use disorder has been shown to be mediated by allelic differences of the serotonin transporter, so that individuals carrying a particular polymorphism to the 5′-regulatory regions of the gene encoding this transporter (the LL genotype) show a greater reduction in drinking outcomes than SS or heterozygous individuals (Johnson et al. ; Soyka and Muller ). There is currently a phase two clinical trial underway at the University of Maryland and University of Pennsylvania in the USA examining how the genotype at this allele mediates the treatment outcome for ondansetron ( https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/record/NCT02354703?cond=alcohol+use+disorder&draw=3&rank=13 ). When complete, this should offer not only information regarding the therapeutic potential of this drug, but also important information about how particular genetic biomarkers can be used to determine the most appropriate treatment at an individual level (Soyka and Muller ).
This is not the only drug where treatment outcome has been linked to specific genetic markers. The anticonvulsant topiramate is effective in reducing drinking (see previous section). Responsiveness to this drug has also been shown to be tied to a specific polymorphism of the GRIK1 gene (rs2832407) which encodes a subtype of the kainate receptor (Ray et al. ; Soyka and Muller ). Biomarkers also help identify individuals who will respond positively to currently approved pharmacotherapies. For example, particular polymorphisms of candidate genes (GRIN2B rs2058878) were associated with the length of abstinence in alcohol-dependent clients treated with acamprosate (Karpyak et al. ), while the DRD4-L genotype was linked with naltrexone-induced reductions in heavy alcohol consumption (Tidey et al. ). Additionally, particular polymorphisms of the mu-opioid receptor gene (rs179919 or AG118G) predict a favorable response to naltrexone, reducing alcohol craving in individuals with the G allele versus those without (Ray and Hutchison , ).
In addition to the above biomarkers, the appetitive hormone ghrelin has also been associated with alcohol use disorder. For example, intravenous administration of ghrelin increases alcohol craving in clients with severe alcohol use disorder (Leggio et al. ). Additionally, a Leu72Met missense polymorphism (rs696217) in the prepro-ghrelin gene has been linked with excessive alcohol consumption (Suchankova et al. ). This highlights that peripheral biomarkers such as gut-brain peptides may also help predict an individual’s response to treatment.
Cognitive function
Chronic alcohol is associated with a specific range of cognitive impairments (Bates et al. ), some of which are associated with treatment outcome for alcohol use disorder (Bates et al. ; Perry ). There have been several arguments put forward as to why cognitive impairment might be correlated with treatment outcomes—these deficits may inhibit an individual’s ability to learn new behaviors, as well as to retain information learned in treatment sessions (Bates et al. , ). Furthermore, impaired social cognition associated with alcohol use disorder (Rupp et al. ) may result in increased interpersonal issues and social isolation, both of which are associated with an increased likelihood of relapse (Maurage et al. ). Given this, performance on specific cognitive tests may be used as a tool to inform clinicians about the relapse risk of an individual (Rupp et al. ). For example, performance on a facial-emotion recognition task at the beginning of treatment predicted likelihood of relapse or premature drop out from an inpatient treatment for alcohol dependence. This means that performance on a social cognition task may be used as a clinical biomarker to predict client responsiveness to treatment, and that treatments that aim to improve this aspect of cognition might also improve prognosis for rehabilitation.
Although there have been a number of studies that examine whether cognitive ability in alcohol use disorder clients can be improved with psychosocial, behavioral, or pharmacological interventions (Bates et al. ; Perry ; Perry and Lawrence ), only a few have addressed whether improving measures of cognitive performance translate to improved prognosis. These studies do, however, show promising outcomes. For example, cognitive remediation therapy (which aims to enhance attention, executive function and memory), led to decreased craving immediately after the intervention when provided in conjunction with an inpatient treatment program (Rupp et al. ). Training with a working memory task not only improved working memory, but also decreased how much heavy-drinking participants drank in a 1-month follow-up period (Houben et al. ). Cognitive bias modification is a computerized task that trains people to overcome automatic processes associated with alcohol use, for example, approaching alcohol-associated cues (Gladwin et al. ). A meta-analysis of the use of cognitive bias modification for alcohol (and smoking) found small effects for reducing alcohol consumption and craving, but concluded that methodology and risk of bias were questionable in a lot of the studies (Cristea et al. ). Larger scaled studies will be required to properly assess the impact of cognitive enhancement on treatment outcome for alcohol use disorder and if the effects endure over time.
Nevertheless, there is an argument for developing treatments that include both cognitive assessment upon entry as a biomarker, and cognitive rehabilitation as a treatment facilitator. Furthermore, evidence for other mediating factors such as gender differences in how these deficits develop and present in alcohol use disorder (Caldwell et al. ; Medina et al. ) emphasizes the importance of a multifaceted analysis of individual differences when designing and tailoring treatment programs. With rapid improvements in cognitive testing, neuroimaging, and cognitive training interventions, there is huge potential for improvement to alcohol use disorder treatment within this area.
Stress response
Another avenue for tailoring the treatment of alcohol use disorder to the individual is through activation of the body’s stress response. Indeed, alcohol use has not only been associated with changes in the reward pathways of the brain but also changes to the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis (HPA) and cortisol regulation (Frias et al. ; Wright ). Understanding the individual response to alcohol and how the body can normalize its cortisol levels and associated negative feedback system will prove helpful for alcohol use disorder treatment (Blaine et al. ; Blaine and Sinha ). Further, understanding how successful treatment with currently approved pharmacotherapies for alcohol use disorder alter the HPA axis will assist in tailored treatment. Several studies have examined the effect of naltrexone and acamprosate on the neuroendocrine response following alcohol consumption or alcohol-associated cues. However, the current literature on this subject is mixed with some studies showing normalization of baseline HPA activity or a reduction in the alcohol-induced neuroendocrine response following naltrexone or acamprosate administration (Hammarberg et al. ; McCaul et al. ; O'Malley et al. ). Other studies have shown no change in cortisol levels in response to alcohol-associated cues following either naltrexone or acamprosate administration (Ooteman et al. ). A greater understanding of how these FDA-approved drugs impact HPA activity in response to alcohol will improve how we tailor our treatments to the individual for alcohol use disorder.
HPA axis response and affiliated physiological states may also help predict successful treatment options for alcohol use disorder clients, particularly when considered in context of the addiction cycle (Pang et al. ). For example, the emotional and physiological state of the alcohol-dependent client during the withdrawal phase is completely different when that same client is in the dependence phase and the relapse phase. Indeed, while acute alcohol exposure increases cortisol levels and heart rate, 1-year abstinence from alcohol has been associated with reduced cortisol levels compared to clients that relapsed to alcohol use (Frias et al. ; Stormark et al. ; Walter et al. ). Additionally, an increased neuroendocrine response is seen in acute withdrawal states, which are typically associated with negative emotional states (Breese et al. ; Kutscher et al. ). Predicting the emotional and physiological state and stress response of a person with alcohol use disorder at each stage of the addiction cycle will help with the successful tailoring of interventions.
Concluding remarks
Within developed nations across the world, the recommendations for treatment of alcohol use disorder are consistent, but do not reflect the progress that is being made in clinical research. Ongoing research and development in this field has led to a number of new avenues which may help improve treatment outcomes and help to overcome the intractable problem of relapse.
Repositioned drugs offer new treatment options for those who are not responding to traditional pharmacological interventions such as naltrexone, acamprosate, and disulfiram. Transcranial stimulation is a promising new therapy which may help treatment-resistant alcohol use, and the emergence of new technologies offers ways of extending current therapies, as well as delivering behavioral interventions to populations which may not otherwise be able to access treatment. In addition, there is emerging understanding that particular biomarkers may be used to predict responsiveness to treatment. With an exponential increase in the understanding of heritable factors involved in alcohol use, genetic biomarkers may help clinicians to identify and prescribe the most appropriate pharmaceutical interventions on a case-by-case basis. Furthermore, aspects of the client’s phenotype, such as cognitive performance and stress response, may be useful for identifying those at risk of relapse, as well as for tailoring the treatment delivered to best suit how the disorder presents in the individual.
In summary, an increasing understanding of the individual differences underlying the complex and heterogeneous nature of alcohol use disorder may be the key to prescribing and delivering effective and enduring programs of rehabilitation for alcohol use disorder.