Early-life stress
Sigmund Freud and Seymour Levine were of the first researchers to highlight the importance of ‘early experiences’ and current evidence provides support for these concepts including the link between stress in early-life and increases in incidents of depression, anxiety, and psychiatric illnesses as adults (Shetgiri ). Early-life stress in the form of bullying and violence is now recognised as a significant public health problem (National Institute of Child Health and Human Development ). Reports show that 10% of children are victims of serious bullying (Juvonen et al. ) whereas 50% of adolescents are involved in verbal or relational bullying (Wang et al. ). The brain is structurally developing during early-life (Paus ) and stress can significantly influence neural development and therefore impact later behavioural responses.
Types of clinical stress
Early-life stress is most often divided into stressful life events (SLE) and childhood maltreatment although there is considerable overlap (Enoch ). With regards to SLE, 53% of adults report having experienced some form of stressor with the most frequent stressful events being parental divorce, family violence, economic adversity, mental illness, and parental death (Green et al. ). Schalinski et al. ( ) describes other adverse childhood experiences which include parental non-verbal emotional abuse, sexual abuse, witnessing physical violence, peer emotional and physical violence, and emotional and physical neglect. Of course, these children are often exposed to multiple stressors (Dong et al. ) meaning that the same child can experience stress through multiple adverse experiences. An important question to consider is to what extent the nature of the stressor (bullying, sexual abuse, neglect, etc.), frequency of the stressors (acute or chronic), severity of the stressors (mild or severe), and timing of the stressors (childhood or adolescence) determine the outcome or consequences in later life? The timing of early-life stress exposure may affect different brain regions undergoing growth spurts at that time so that brain regions rich in glucocorticoid receptors and undergoing postnatal development (e.g. hippocampus, amygdala, prefrontal cortex (PFC)) are particularly vulnerable to the long-term effects of stress (Teicher et al. ; Rincon-Cortes and Sullivan ). Schalinski et al. ( ) showed that psychiatric inpatients that had adverse childhood experiences were more vulnerable to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), dissociation, and depression if the experiences occurred during the pre-school age (4–6 years) or the pre-adolescent age (8–9 years). The same study showed that PTSD symptoms in these patients vary with the frequency of adverse experiences—which supports the dose-dependent model—meaning that increased frequency of adverse experiences leads to a greater severity in symptoms. Enoch ( ) discussed an important point in that not all children exposed to early-life stress develop a psychiatric disorder or mental illness. Therefore, resilience and mediating factors may play a role such as environment, good parenting, and good peer relationships.
Preclinical adolescent stress
The last decade has seen a surge in the number of preclinical studies investigating the consequences of stress during adolescence on brain, physiology, and behaviour. Adolescence in both rodents and humans has been subdivided into early, mid, and late stages. The specific postnatal days (PND) which define adolescence in rodents can vary between studies but each stage is associated with specific hormonal, physical, and behavioural changes. In mice, rats, and humans, the early adolescent stage corresponds to PND 21–34 and 10–14 years, the mid-adolescent stage to PND 34–46 and 15–17 years, and the late adolescent stage to PND 46–59 and 18–21 years, respectively (Shriner et al. ; Daston et al. ; Burke and Miczek ). Puberty occurs at different times for males and females—namely between PND 45–48 (balanopreputial separation) and PND 32–34 (vaginal opening) (Lewis et al. ; McCormick and Mathews )—and puberty in mice appears at an age similar to rats (Fig. 1 ) (Safranski et al. ). Adulthood is considered PND 60 onwards and the time of sexual maturity, but maturation may extend further into life for example dopamine receptor concentrations in the prefrontal cortex (Andersen et al. ). Fig. 1 Timeline of adolescent period between weaning and adulthood
Types of preclinical stress models
The intensity between different types of stressors in rodent studies is quite variable, implying that not all stressors are equivalent. Habituation to a stressor can occur after repeated exposure and this is characterised by a reduction in the neuroendocrine response, protecting the animal from exposure to chronically high levels of glucocorticoids (Girotti et al. ). For example, repeated restraint stress (i.e. confining the animal in small spaces) undergoes habituation seen as reduced hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis responses in later exposures (Girotti et al. ). Whereas social stress (i.e. exposure to an intermittent, short-lasting social stressor) does not result in habituation, seen as increased functional activation in the central and medial amygdala (Covington 3rd and Miczek, ). Chronic variable stress (CVS) and chronic mild stress (CMS), a combination of stress procedures, also aim to overcome habituation and so multiple stressors are employed in a random and unpredictable fashion (Willner ). Popular and commonly employed stress procedures such as footshock or tailshock (electric pulses to the feet or tail), forced swim test, predator scent exposure, and elevated platform are all effective means of initiating a stress response; however, there is a lack of translatability of these stress models to the clinical scenario and the relevance of these models will be discussed below. Much like in the clinical scenario of stress, it is important to consider whether the nature of the stressor (social, variable, aversive, etc.), frequency of the stressors (acute or chronic), severity of the stressors (mild, moderate, or severe), and timing of the stressors (early, mid, or late adolescence) determine the outcome or consequences in later life. And again, like the clinical scenario, much evidence exists to support this hypothesis. Looking at the timing of stress (developmental age of the rodent)—which is most often the basis for experimental design—many studies have shown that in early adolescence it takes twice as long to regain pre-stress corticosterone (CORT) levels after acute restraint stress compared to adults (Romeo and McEwen ; Romeo et al. ). However, it is evident that there are several protocols in use for each stress procedure. Hence, the findings are not consistent and it becomes difficult to interpret if the effects found are due to the stress, the protocol employed, the laboratory environment, or a yet-to-be-determined variable. Therefore, comparing the various protocols employed in early-life stress studies may highlight discrepancies and inconsistencies between studies and laboratories.
Review methods
The search terms ‘Adolescent, Rodent, Stress’, ‘Adolescent, Rodent, Aggression’, or ‘Adolescent, Rodent, Resident-Intruder’ were entered into PubMed search engine. Between 1964 and 2016 (July), 990 articles were published in this area (Fig. 2 ). Among these articles, 156 were relevant in that they involved stress exposure during adolescence. Fig. 2 Adolescent stress papers published
Aims
The purpose of this review is to illustrate the variation in methods employed when studying the effects of early-life stress in animal models. Although early-life is considered to be the first weeks of development after birth, for the purpose this review, the adolescent period has also been included for comparison. It is not possible to review all ages, models, and outcomes and therefore, for this review, we have focused on stress during the early-life period (PND 1–20) and the adolescent period (PND 21–59, Fig. 1 ). Due to the clinical relationship between chronic stress addiction and in the motivation to abuse addictive substances (Tomkins ; Wills and Vaughan ), this review has focused on the consequences of this stress on drug use (Table 1 ) and general behavioural outcomes (Table 2 ) in later life. Table 1 Early-life stress studies and drug intake in adulthood. The range of parameters employed in early-life stress studies. n=38 papers. Species Strain Age on arrival Sex Model Age at stress No. stresses Endpoints measured Findings Reference Mice OF1 PND 21 M Social defeat PND 27 1 × 4 Ethanol self-ad ↑ EtOH Rodriguez-Arias et al. ( ) Mice WT PND 1 M+F Social isolation PND 21 6 weeks Ethanol 2-BC – Moriya et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 F Social isolation PND 21 2 weeks Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Van Waes et al. ( ) Rats F-H/ Wistar PND 21 M Social isolation PND 21 8 weeks Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Hall et al. ( ) Rats F-H PND 21 M Social isolation PND 21 9 weeks Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Lodge and Lawrence ( ) Rats L-E PND 21 M Social isolation PND 21 13 weeks Ethanol self-ad ↑ EtOH Deehan et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M Social isolation PND 25 10 days Ethanol 1 or 2-BC ↑ EtOH Juarez and Vazquez-Cortes ( ) Rats L-E PND 21 M Social isolation PND 28 6 weeks Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Skelly et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 21 M Social isolation PND 28 6 weeks Ethanol injection ↑ Response Karkhanis et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 21–25 M Social isolation PND 28–32 6 weeks Ethanol 2-BC/ethanol self-ad ↑ EtOH McCool and Chappell ( ) Rats L-E PND 24, 40 g F Social isolation PND 31 6 weeks Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Butler et al. ( ) Rats AA and ANA PND 43–50 M Social isolation PND 43–50 16 weeks Ethanol 1-BC ↑ EtOH Ehlers et al. ( ) Mice C57BL/6J PND 1 M+F Social isolation ± CVS PND 21 and 35 6 weeks and 2 × 14 Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Lopez et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M Early weaning ± social isolation PND 16 10 days Ethanol 2-BC ↓ EtOH Fahlke et al. ( ) Mice CFW PND 1 M Maternal separation PND 1 3 h × 14 Ethanol 3-BC/ethanol self-ad ↑ EtOH Cruz et al. ( ) Mice C57BL/6J PND 1 M+F Maternal separation ± social isolation PND 2 3 h × 12 Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Advani et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 1 15 min × 7 Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Lancaster ( ) Rats AA and ANA PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 1 6 h × 21 Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Roman et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 2 3 h × 12 Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Huot et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 9 24 h Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Penasco et al. ( ) Mice Kunming PND 1 M+F Footshock PND 28 1/10 Ethanol CPP ↑ EtOH-induced CPP Song et al. ( ) Mice Hs/Ibg PND 1 M+F Footshock PND 36/37 10 Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Chester et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M Footshock PND 26/27 1/8 Ethanol 2-BC ↓ EtOH Brunell and Spear ( ) Hamsters NS PND 22 M Footshock PND 31 1 × 11 Ethanol 2-BC ↑ EtOH Ferris and Brewer ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Restraint PND 24/38 1 × 5 Ethanol injection ↓ Response Varlinskaya et al. ( ) Mice OF1 PND 21 M Social defeat PND 29 1 × 4 Cocaine CPP ↑ Cocaine-induced CPP Montagud-Romero et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 20/21 M Social defeat PND 35 1 × 4 Cocaine self-ad ↑ Cocaine self-ad Burke and Miczek ( ) Rats L-H PND 14 M Social isolation PND 21 3 weeks Cocaine self-ad ↑ Cocaine self-ad Baarendse et al. ( ) Rats L-H PND 21, 45–55 g M Social isolation PND 21 8 weeks Cocaine self-ad ↑ Cocaine self-ad Howes et al. ( ) Rats S-D NS M Social isolation PND 22 5 weeks Cocaine self-ad ↑ Cocaine self-ad Ding et al. ( ) Rats NS PND 1 M Maternal separation PND 2 3 h × 11 Cocaine self-ad ↓ Cocaine self-ad O’Connor et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 23, 70–90 g M Yohimbine injection PND 54–55 1 Cocaine self-ad ↑ Cocaine self-ad Anker and Carroll ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M Aversive stimulation PND 1/30 1 × 10 Cocaine 2-BC ↑ Cocaine Marquardt et al. ( ) Mice OF1 PND 21/42 M Social defeat PND 29/47 1 × 4 MDMA CPP ↑ MDMA-induced CPP Garcia-Pardo et al. ( ) Mice OF1 PND 21 M Social defeat PND 29 1 × 4 MDMA CPP – Garcia-Pardo et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 9 24 h MDMA CPP – Llorente-Berzal et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 22 M+F Social isolation PND 30 16 AMP CPP ↓ AMP-induced CPP Mathews et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M Footshock PND 27 10 min Nicotine CPP ↑ Nicotine-induced CPP Brielmaier et al. ( ) Table 2 Early-life stress studies and behaviour in adulthood. The range of parameters employed in early-life stress studies. n = 133 papers Species Strain Age on arrival Sex Model Age at stress No. stresses Endpoints measured Reference Mice OF1 PND 21 M Social defeat PND 27 1 × 4 EPM, passive avoidance, SI, Hebb–Williams maze Rodriguez-Arias et al. ( ) Mice OF1 PND 21 M Social defeat PND 29 1 × 4 OFT, EPM Garcia-Pardo et al. ( ) Mice OF1 PND 21/42 M Social defeat PND 29/47 1 × 4 Passive avoidance, EPM, Hebb–Williams maze, SI Garcia-Pardo et al. ( ) Mice C57BL/6 NS M Social defeat PND 35 1 × 10 SI, FST, EPM, SP Iniguez et al. ( ) Mice C57BL/6J PND 28 M Social defeat PND 35 1 × 10 SI Warren et al. ( ) Mice C57BL/6J PND 35, 18–23 g M Social defeat PND 42 1 × 10 SI, LA, FST, LDB, NOR Huang et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 21–23 M Social defeat PND 28/35 1 × 3 or 1 × 10 Play behaviour, EPM, defensive Burying, SI Buwalda et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21/35 M Social defeat PND 28/42 1 × 7 OFT, defensive, burying, FST Bingham et al. ( ) Rats S-D NS F Social defeat PND 28/42 1 × 5 OSST Snyder et al. ( ) Rats S-D NS M Social defeat PND 28/42 1 × 5 OSST Snyder et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 29–31 F Social defeat PND 29–31 1 × 7 FST Ver Hoeve et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M Social defeat PND 35 1 × 5 AMP LA Burke et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M Social defeat PND 35 1 × 5 Win-shift task, T-Maze Novick et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M Social defeat PND 35 1 × 5 FC Novick et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M Social defeat PND 35 1 × 5 EPM Watt et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M Social defeat PND 35 1 × 5 AMP LA, stereotypy behaviour Burke et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M Social defeat PND 35 1 × 5 LA Burke et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 20/21 M Social defeat PND 35 1 × 4 OFT, cocaine LA Burke and Miczek ( ) Rats Wistar PND 24 M Social defeat PND 45 1 × 5 SI Vidal et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 37, 184 g M Social defeat PND 45 1 × 5 SI Vidal et al. ( ) Rats RHA & RLA NS M Social defeat PND 45 1 × 5 RI, operant conditioning Coppens et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 M+F Social defeat PND 45 1 × 10 EPM, T-Maze Furuta et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 34 M Social defeat PND 45 1 × 2 Water conflict test Vidal et al. ( ) Rats Groningen PND 1 M Social defeat PND 45 1 × 5 RI, operant behaviour Coppens et al. ( ) Mice C57BL/6J NS M Social defeat ± social instability PND 28 2 weeks OFT, partition test, EPM, SI, FST Kovalenko et al. ( ) Mice Kunming NS M+F Social isolation PND 21 4/8/12/16 weeks LA, EPM, LDB, FST, induced-sleep Guo et al. ( ) Mice C57/BL6 PND 20 NS Social isolation PND 21/22 8 weeks ASR, OFT Gan et al. ( ) Mice Swiss Albino PND 21–25, 10–14 g M Social isolation PND 21–25 6 weeks OFT, FST, splash test, hole-board test Amiri et al. ( ) Mice C57BL/6J PND 1 M+F Social isolation PND 30 4 weeks SI Kercmar et al. ( ) Rats Wistar NS M Social isolation PND 21 2 weeks EPM, CPRIDE Cuenya et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M Social isolation PND 21 4 weeks OFT, SI, hot plate Meng et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Social isolation PND 21 8 days SP Anderson et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 F Social isolation PND 21 2 weeks FST Van Waes et al. ( ) Rats F-H/Wistar PND 21 M Social isolation PND 21 8 weeks SP Hall et al. ( ) Rats F-H PND 21 M Social isolation PND 21 9 weeks EPM Lodge and Lawrence ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Social isolation PND 23 10 days NOR Douglas et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M Social isolation PND 28 1.5/3 h Ethanol LA Acevedo et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 21 M Social isolation PND 28 6 weeks EPM, OFT, FC Skelly et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 21–25 M Social isolation PND 28–32 6 weeks EPM, LDB, SP, PPI McCool and Chappell ( ) Rats L-E PND 22 M+F Social isolation PND 30 16 LA, AMP LA Mathews et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M+F Social isolation PND 30 3 weeks Restraint stress, EPM Weintraub et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 23 M+F Social isolation PND 30 3 weeks FST, SP Hong et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 22 M Social isolation PND 30 1/1 × 16 SI Hodges and McCormick ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Social isolation PND 30–32 1 × 5 EPM, SI Doremus-Fitzwater et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 24, 40 g F Social isolation PND 31 6 weeks EPM, LDB, LA, NOR Butler et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Social isolation PND 35 1 SI with ethanol Varlinskaya and Spear ( ) Mice CD-1 PND 26–28 M Social instability PND 31–33 7 weeks LA Schmidt et al. ( ) Mice CD-1 PND 26–28 M Social instability PND 31–33 7 weeks SI, Y-Maze, NOR, MWM Sterlemann et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 22 M+F Social instability PND 30 16 days FST Mathews et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 22 M+F Social instability ± isolation PND 30 1 × 16 Nicotine LA McCormick and Ibrahim ( ) Rats L-E PND 22 F Social instability and isolation PND 30 1 × 16 Spatial location test McCormick et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 21 M Social instability and isolation PND 30 1 × 16 Food competition test Cumming et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 22 M Social instability and isolation PND 30 1 × 16 FC Morrissey et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 22 M Social instability and isolation PND 30 1 × 16 NOR, spatial object location test McCormick et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 22 M Social instability and isolation PND 30 1 × 16 Spatial object location test, MWM, alternation task Green and McCormick ( ) Rats L-E PND 22 M+F Social instability and isolation PND 30/45 1 × 16/1 EPM, OFT McCormick et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 22 F Social instability and isolation PND 35 1 × 16 FC McCormick et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 25 M+F Social instability, isolation and white noise PND 33 1 × 16 LA, nicotine LA McCormick et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Social isolation ± early weaning PND 16 10 days LA Fahlke et al. ( ) Rats Wistar/ Fischer PND 22 F Play deprivation PND 22/30 1/4 weeks Hot plate, EPM, LA SI, ASR Schneider et al. ( ) Mice C57BL/6 PND 1 M Variable stress PND 25 1 × 5 EPM, OFT, FC, MWM, AMP LA, active avoidance learning Peleg-Raibstein and Feldon ( ) Rats L-E PND 21 M+F Variable stress PND 22/35 1 × 6 EPM, FST, shock probe burying test Wilkin et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 21 M Variable stress PND 26 2 × 10 FC Wright et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M Variable stress PND 27 1 × 3 FC Yee et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 22 M Variable stress PND 27/33 1 × 3 Shuttle avoidance and learning test, OF Tsoory and Richter-Levin ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Variable stress PND 27/44 1 × 3 OFT, FST, SP Zalsman et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21, 45–50 g M PCMS PND 28 4 weeks SP, LA, NSFT, EPM, FST Suo et al. ( ) Mice C57Bl/6J PND 1 M CMS PND 28 8–10 weeks EPM, SI Conrad and Winder ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 M+F CMS/CVS PND 23 4 weeks EPM, shock-probe burying, SP, food preference Pohl et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 33–40 M CMS PND 40–45 1–3 × 3 weeks FC Reich et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F CVS PND 25 2 × 10 Cocaine LA, LA Lepsch et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 22 M CVS PND 27 1 × 3 OFT, NOR Saul et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 21 M CVS PND 28 1 × 10 LA, restraint stress Cruz et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M CVS PND 28 1/2 × 28 MWM Isgor et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M CVS PND 28 4 weeks LA, AMP LA Kabbaj et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M CVS PND 30 6 weeks Radial arm maze Chaby et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F CVS PND 36 1 × 12 ASR, EPM, SP, FST Bourke and Neigh ( ) Rats Fischer 344 NS M+F CVS PND 37 1 × 8 EPM, FC Taylor et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F CVS PND 37 1 × 12 FST, OF, SP Harrell et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 F CVS F1 PND 42–49 1 × 7 OFT, EPM, FC in F2s Zaidan and Gaisler-Salomon ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 F CVS PND 45 2 weeks FST Wulsin et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 23 M CVS PND 45 1 × 7 LDB, food preference Handy et al. ( ) Mice Dtg PND 1 M Footshock PND 25 1 FC, EPM, OF, MWM Joseph et al. ( ) Mice Hs/Ibg PND 1 M+F Footshock PND 36/37 10 ASR Chester et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M Footshock NS 3 weeks OFT, FST Lyttle et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 21 M Footshock NS 2 × 6 OFT, EPM, Y-Maze Li et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 21 M Footshock NS 2 × 6 EPM, MWM Li et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M Footshock PND 35 1 × 5 LA Burke et al. ( ) Rats Wistar NS M+F Footshock PND 38 1 MWM Uysal et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 M Footshock ± scent exposure PND 8 1 × 5 LDB Sarro et al. ( ) Rats S-D NS M Tailshock PND 35 80 × 1 Social exploration Kubala et al. ( ) Mice C57BL/6 PND 1 M Maternal separation PND 2 4 h × 18 OFT, EPM, FST, Y-Maze, MWM, SI, RI, tube dominance Shin et al. ( ) Mice CD-1 PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 12 24 h OFT, EPM, tail suspension Martini and Valverde ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 1 1 × 10 EPM Koehnle and Rinaman ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 1 2 weeks FST, SP Zhang et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 1 3 × 14 LDB, SP Chocyk et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 1 2 weeks Paw pressure test, tail flick test, flinch test, FC Chocyk et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 1/2 1 h EPM, formalin test, FST, Morris labyrinth Butkevich et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 2 3 h × 12 EPM, airpuff startle, SP Huot et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M Maternal separation PND 2 2 weeks FC Callaghan and Richardson ( ) Rats Holtzman PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 2 1 × 10 OFT, LDB Spivey et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 2 1 × 5 LA, cocaine LA Marin and Planeta ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 2 1 × 7 NOR, LA, AMP LA, stereotypy behaviour Hensleigh et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 2 1 × 10 OFT, LDB Spivey et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 2 2 weeks AMP LA, stereotypy behaviour Pritchard et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 2/14 1 × 8 MWM Cao et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M Maternal separation PND 4/9/18 24 h Swim stress Gruss et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 9 24 h Y-Maze, NOR, EPM Marco et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 9 24 h ASR, AMP LA Choy and van den Buuse ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 9 24 h FST, EPM, hole-board test Llorente et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 9 24 h OFT Llorente-Berzal et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 9 24 h NOR, SI, FST Zamberletti et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 9 24 h NOR, PPI Llorente-Berzal et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Maternal separation PND 9 24 h PPI, EPM, hold-board test, maternal behaviour Llorente-Berzal et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 F Maternal separation, food deprivation and footshock PND 1 and 38 1 × 7 and 24 h Binge eating Hancock et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Maternal separation and saline injection PND 2/9 1 × 8 Learned helplessness Freund et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 F Maternal separation using T-maze and social isolation PND 10 and 30 4 and 9 FST Raftogianni et al. ( ) Mice CD-1 PND 21 M Restraint PND 28 1/1 × 2 weeks FC, LA, EPM, induced-sleep Ota et al. ( ) Rats S-D NS F Restraint PND 25 1 × 7 LDB, SP, FC Lee and Noh ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Restraint PND 24/38 1 × 5 SI, LA Varlinskaya et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Restraint PND 25 1 h × 10 Cocaine LA, LA Lepsch et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 21 M+F Restraint PND 26 1 × 7 EPM Ariza Traslavina et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M Restraint PND 28 1 × 7 Nicotine LA Cruz et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M Restraint PND 28 1 Ethanol LA Acevedo et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 21 M Restraint PND 28 1 × 10 LA, restraint stress Cruz et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Restraint PND 28 1 × 5 SP Anderson et al. ( ) Rats S-D NS M+F Restraint PND 28/35/28 1 × 4/1/1 × 10 SI Klein et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21/35 M Restraint PND 28/42 1 × 7 OFT, defensive, burying, FST Bingham et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 25, 60–70 g M Restraint PND 29 1 × 7 FC, EPM Zhang and Rosenkranz ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M Restraint PND 30 1 × 5 SI Willey and Spear ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Restraint PND 30–32 1 × 5 EPM, SI Doremus-Fitzwater et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Restraint PND 31 1 × 5 SI with ethanol, LA Varlinskaya et al. ( ) Rats Wistar NS M+F Restraint PND 31 1 × 7 MWM Dayi et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 1 M+F Restraint PND 35 1 SI with ethanol Varlinskaya and Spear ( ) Rats S-D PND 21, 80–100 g M Restraint PND 42 1 × 7 OFT, EPM, LDB, FC Negron-Oyarzo et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 22 M Restraint, EPM and footshock PND 27 1 × 4 SP, OFT, EPM, AST Luo et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 21 M Restraint and EtOH-withdrawal anxiety PND 26 3 weeks SI Wills et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 21 M Scent exposure PND 33 12 × 2 FC, SI, EPM, FST Kendig et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 M+F Scent exposure PND 37–39 1 × 5 OFT, observation test Wright et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 M+F Scent exposure PND 38 1 × 5 OFT, predator stress test Wright et al. ( ) Rats L-E PND 1 M+F Scent exposure PND 40 1 × 5 OFT, scent exposure Wright et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 22 M Scent exposure and footshock PND 23 1 × 5 and 1 EPM, plantar test Post et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 21 M+F Scent exposure and elevated platform PND 28 1 × 3 LA, NOR, EPM, FC Toledo-Rodriguez and Sandi ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 F Scent exposure and EPM PND 28 1 × 7 RI, SI, maternal behaviour Cordero et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 22–24 M Underwater trauma PND 37 1 Operant conditioning, FC, EPM, ASR Moore et al. ( ) Rats S-D PND 22–24 M Underwater trauma PND 37 1 EPM Moore et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 21 M+F Metabolic stress PND 26 1/1 × 7 EPM Ariza Traslavina et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 21 M+F Immune stress PND 26 1/1 × 7 EPM Ariza Traslavina et al. ( ) Mice DDY PND 1 M+F Sound noise stress ± FST PND 14/21 1 × 5 LA Tokumo et al. ( ) Mice DDY PND 1 M+F Sound noise stress ± FST PND 14/21 1 × 5 EPM Nishio et al. ( ) Rats Wistar PND 1 M+F Aversive stimulation PND 1/30 1 × 10 FST Marquardt et al. ( )
How does early-life stress exposure vary?
Consistency with experimental variables is imperative to ensure that results seen are the result of the stress experience and nothing else. The protocols used for exploring the effects of early-life stress can vary in several areas. By looking separately at experimental variables, we can categorise these accordingly: (i) Animals, (ii) model of stress, and (iii) endpoints assessed (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Experimental variables that exist in early-life stress studies
Animals
There are many subject characteristics to be taken into account when designing a rodent model of stress including species, strain, animal source, sex, and the number of animals to be used in the experiment as well as husbandry procedures such as housing and weaning.
Species and strain
In early-life stress studies, rat models are more frequently used, with 70 and 86% of these studies using laboratory rats as the test subject when investigating the consequences on drug use and behaviour, respectively (Table 3 ). Both rat and mice models provide reliable results that can be translated to humans and, although no comparison between these two rodent species has been made for early-life stress studies, it has been suggested that rats are less susceptible to stress effects (Collins et al. ). Hamsters and voles have also been used in a few studies investigating the consequences of early-life social isolation or footshock on ethanol intake (Ferris and Brewer ). Generally, the choice of species is based on the outcome to be measured in later life with rats known to be more suitable for intravenous self-administration studies (Burke and Miczek ; Baarendse et al. ; Ding et al. ), while mice are more frequently chosen for ethanol drinking studies (Lopez et al. ; Cruz et al. ; Song et al. ) (Table 1 ). Table 3 Most commonly used species and strains of animals for early-life stress studies. Data expressed as percentage employing each strain. The % for each strain is given as a % of the total studies for the species Drug use studies ( n = 39) Rats 70% Mice 25% Sprague-Dawley 17% CFW 10% Wistar 28% C57BL/6J 20% Long-Evans 31% OF1 40% Behavioural studies ( n = 133) Rats 86% Mice 14% Fischer 1% DDY 9% Long-Evans 22% OF1 14% Wistar 30% CD-1 19%
Another factor to consider is the strain of animal used. The principal rat strains previously used in early-life stress studies are Long-Evans and Wistar and the main mouse strains previously used are OF1, C57BL/6J, and CD-1 (Table 3 ). This is very important as there is much evidence to show different stress effects between strains. The use of different rat strains is known to lead to disparities in stress-induced effects (Becker et al. ). For example, after maternal separation (MS), Lewis rats are more sensitive to thermal nociception in the tail withdrawal test and are less sensitive in the formalin inflammatory nociception test than Fischer rats (Lariviere et al. ). The effects of isolation-rearing during adolescence on sucrose and saccharin preferences (SP) tests appear to be exacerbated in Fawn Hooded rats compared to Wistar rats (Hall et al. ). These findings add another complication when trying to interpret studies between laboratories and comparing the results found with different stress procedures. Since strain-dependent stress effects are common then direct comparisons between these studies are not possible.
Animal source
It is beneficial to have animals that are bred in-house to eradicate stress associated with transport but the main reason is so that one can control the rearing environment to which the animals are exposed. The environment for animals reared in-house and in a breeding facility may vary greatly and many studies have shown that the presence or absence of environmental enrichment (EE) alone can greatly affect the development of young animals. EE during the time of MS prevented cognitive dysfunction and elevated circulating pro-inflammatory cytokines that was evident in MS pups (do Prado et al. ). In early-life stress studies, there is an equal divide between the number of studies using animal suppliers and breeding animals in-house (Table 4 ). Table 4 Source of animals previously used for early-life stress studies. Data expressed as percentage employing each source Source Drug use ( n = 39) (%) Behaviour ( n = 133) (%) NS 2 8 Bred in-house 48 45 Supplier 50 47
Although differences may exist between animals sourced and animals bred in-house, literature exists to show that the supplier alone is a confounding factor to consider when choosing the animal model. A study looking at suppliers (i.e. Harlan Laboratories, Taconic Farms, and Charles River) revealed supplier-dependent differences among outbred Wistar rats with regard to alcohol intake in that the highest alcohol intake occurred in Harlan-sourced rats (Momeni et al. ). Many other comparative studies in the field of alcohol research have also exemplified supplier variances in their findings (Palm et al. ; Palm et al. ; Palm et al. ) and these reports support the fact that the animal supplier is unfortunately a factor that can cause differences in experimental outcome. Although these studies are in adult rats, to the best of our knowledge there have been no similar studies performed for younger rats. These studies would be beneficial in determining if indeed animal source is related to supplier-dependent differences but we can assume that this would hold true in even young animals. For these reasons, animals bred in-house or using the same supplier ensures consistency across studies in a single laboratory but this does not overcome the complexity of comparing findings across numerous laboratories.
Weaning
If animals are bred in-house then the precise time of weaning is an important factor to consider but in early-life stress studies there appear to be disparities on when this occurs (Table 5 ). This raises an important question on when is the appropriate time to wean rodents? In general, at PND 16, pups will begin to eat solid foods and then separation from the mother takes place at PND 21. Numerous studies in rodents have demonstrated that the time point of weaning shapes the behavioural profile of the young. Fahlke et al. ( ) showed that early weaning (PND 16) in rats leads to higher activity levels, lower ethanol intake and preference, and slightly reduced levels of plasma CORT in adulthood compared to the 21-day weaned animals. Early weaning (PND 18) in rats also leads to higher neuropeptide-Y and astrogliosis in the hypothalamus of the adult offspring (Younes-Rapozo et al. ). Interestingly, late weaning (PND 28) in C57BL/6J mice triggered less anxious and more explorative behaviour than normally weaned mice in the open field test (OFT) and novel cage tests (Richter et al. ). In early-life stress studies, PND 21 is both the youngest age of weaning seen in the literature as well as the most commonly employed (over 50% of studies, Table 5 ). Other studies have employed later weaning ages such as PND 23 (Chester et al. ; Pohl et al. ), PND 25 (Wulsin et al. ), and PND 30 (Zaidan and Gaisler-Salomon ). However, as the aforementioned studies highlight, late weaning can have long-lasting effects on offspring and produce a different behavioural characteristics in these offspring. Table 5 Age at weaning used in early-life stress studies. Data expressed as percentage employing each age PND Drug use ( n = 39) (%) Behaviour ( n = 133) (%) NS 10 22 21 50 55 22 30 13 21–22 – 1 21–23 5 2 23 – 2 25 5 3 30 – 2
Housing
Regardless of whether animals are sourced or bred in-house, the housing conditions for the young animals are a key determinant to consider when designing an early-life stress study. This accounts not only for EE, as discussed earlier, but the social conditions for the animals, i.e. single vs. group housing. Social play during adolescence, including play fighting, is crucial for the development of adult social competence (Green and McCormick ). Between the ages PND 28 and 35 in the rat, the adolescent animal demonstrates significant increases in social play and activity, exhibiting an inverted U-shaped ontogenetic pattern (Varlinskaya and Spear ; Himmler et al. ). By employing single housing during adolescence, which is quite common in early-life stress studies (Table 6 ), the animals are socially deprived, and it is thought that this deprivation may play an important role in the alteration of development of behaviour and brain relating to chronic social stress (Auger and Olesen ; Siviy et al. ). Social deprivation in adolescence is used in itself as a model of early-life stress called ‘social isolation’ and this will be discussed later. The use of single housing with other stress procedures stems from the fact that housing juvenile rats in an environmentally enriched or social environment following the stress protocol could attenuate many of the adult behavioural, physiological, and neurobiological stress responses. Single housing has been used with stress procedures such as social defeat (Iniguez et al. ; Warren et al. ; Vidal et al. ), variable stress (Wilkin et al. ; Wright et al. ; Conrad and Winder ), MS (Hancock et al. ; Lancaster ), and restraint (Bingham et al. ; Wills et al. ) to try and overcome this buffering effect of social housing. In these cases however, the control animals are also singly housed to control for the stress associated with this procedure. Some studies have used single housing for stressed animals and group housing for control animals and have included single housing as ‘part of the stress procedure’ (Coppens et al. ; Bourke and Neigh ; Harrell et al. ). When group housing is employed, pair-housing or three to five animals per cage are quite popular protocols (Table 6 ). Table 6 Housing of animals in early-life stress studies. Data expressed as percentage employing each condition PND Drug use ( n = 39) (%) Behaviour ( n = 133) (%) NS 4 12 Single 17 22 Paired 21 21 3–5/cage 13 20 4/cage 25 12 4–6/cage 21 8 6+/cage – 1
Sex
Most early-life stress studies include only male animals and so the possible sex differences in the outcome of stress has only been partially addressed. In humans, gender has shown to be an important determinant of the stress response with females showing higher peak levels than males (Romeo ). In rodents, there is also sex specificity seen in the effects of stress with male adolescents showing facilitation of the neuroendocrine response and facilitation of the feedback inhibition after stress cessation whereas females do not show this [reviewed by Romeo ( )]. The mechanism behind this difference is the result of the regulation of the HPA-axis function by gonadal hormones which emerges in adolescence (Romeo ; McCormick and Mathews ). When examining early-life stress studies and their consequences on drug intake, only 32% of studies used female animals. Among the studies including males and females, many sex differences in early-life stress effects were reported. Social isolation has been shown to increase ethanol intake in male mice and decrease ethanol intake in female mice (Moriya et al. ; Advani et al. ) and the same effects have been found after MS (Roman et al. ). Lopez et al. ( ) also studied social isolation during adolescence and the consequences on ethanol intake in adulthood and found no sex differences. Although the social isolation occurred for similar lengths of time in these studies, the protocol for measuring ethanol consumption was continuous and intermittent access, respectively, which may explain the discrepancy in results.
When examining early-life stress studies and their consequences on behavioural outcomes, only 36% of studies used female animals. Studies that used both sexes have shown that after social isolation, male mice have higher locomotor activity (LA) and anxiolytic-like behaviour compared to controls and this effect is not seen in females (Guo et al. ). Early-adolescent social defeat impairs strategy-shifting in adulthood in males (Snyder et al. ) but these deficits are not found in females (Snyder et al. ). Although it appears that males may be more sensitive to early-life stress, many other studies have reported stress effects only seen in females but not males. Females exposed to chronic mild variable stress (CMVS) show reduced burying, decreased SP, and exaggerated CORT levels in response to cold-water immersion stress (Pohl et al. ). On the other hand, it is worth mentioning that no sex differences have also been reported after early-life stress. Outcomes such as social habituation and recognition are diminished by adolescent social isolation in rats and similar effects are seen in both males and females (Kercmar et al. ). While the stress effect on pain outcomes are also similar for males and females in that rats of both sexes exposed to short-term MS both exhibit enhanced pain sensitivity in the formalin test (Butkevich et al. ). This section highlights the sex differences that occur in response to early-life stress and how this variation in response is also related to the type of stress procedure, the severity of the procedure, and the outcome measured. Males seem to be more susceptible to anxiety-like and cognitive deficits in later life in response to stress procedures such as sporadic, variable stress, social defeat, and social isolation whereas females seem to be more susceptible to depressive-like effects in later life in response to stress procedures such as social isolation and CMVS.
Stress model
Since different types of stress can elicit qualitatively different patterns of physiological stress responses and therefore, different patterns of behavioural responses, we reviewed each model of stress used in early-life studies with regard to protocols employed (timing, frequency, duration), severity of procedure, appropriate controls, and clinical relevance.
Model type
Many models of early-life stress exist and stressors include social defeat, social isolation, social instability, MS, restraint stress, yohimbine injection, aversive stimulation, underwater trauma, footshock/tailshock, and predatory scent exposure (Table 7 ). The most commonly employed model of stress when investigating drug intake is social isolation with 40% of studies using this procedure. When investigating behavioural outcomes, use of multiple stressors is most common with 16% of studies using this model, followed closely by MS and social defeat (15% each) (Table 7 ). Table 7 Models of stress used in early-life stress studies. Data expressed as percentage employing each model Drug use ( n = 39) Behaviour ( n = 133) Model % Papers Model % Papers Restraint 3 Metabolic/immune stress 1 Yohimbine injection 3 Underwater trauma 1 Aversive stimulation 3 Social instability 2 Multiple stressors 5 Scent exposure 3 Footshock 13 Footshock/tailshock 5 Social defeat 13 Restraint 12 Maternal separation 23 Social isolation 14 Social isolation 40 CVS/CMS 15 Maternal separation 15 Social defeat 15 Multiple stressors 16
Maternal separation
Maternal separation is a lack or loss of parental stimulation and is a potent stressor during early-life (Fig. 4 ). As a stressor it produces immediate effects which can result in wide-spread dysregulation of physiological and behavioural responses suggesting that the quality of these first relationships program the infant to adapt to later-life environments (Rincon-Cortes and Sullivan ). Maternal separation is the only stress procedure in early-life studies that is employed before adolescence, i.e. between PND 1 and 21 (Tables 1 and 2 ). A recent in-depth review by Nylander and Roman ( ) investigating MS protocols stated that there are several models and protocols and each generates different outcomes. In the various protocols, the separations are done repeatedly, either daily or occasionally. Maternal separation can be short separations (5–15 min/day) used to simulate naturalistic conditions or repeated separations for longer periods of time (180–360 min/day) used to disrupt the mother–pup interactions that are vital for normal development and it is this latter model that is commonly used as a model of early-life stress. Maternal deprivation on the other hand is not used consistently and can refer to occasional 24 h separation or 180–360 min separations from the mother. In the mid-1950s, psychologist Seymour Levine studied the effects of early trauma on animal behaviour and interestingly found that brief separation from the dam proved protective as pups were ‘less fearful’ and resistant to a stress challenge in adulthood (Levine ; Levine and Lewis ). Opposing results were later found with prolonged MS in that separation resulted in an exaggerated stress response in adulthood (Plotsky and Meaney ; Francis and Meaney ; Kaffman and Meaney ). Fig. 4 Maternal separation in rodents
Social defeat
Social defeat is an intermittent, short-lasting social stressor that can have long-lasting effects on brain and behaviour (Buwalda et al. ). In social defeat stress, the intruder animal (experimental animal) experiences a large and sustained rise in heart rate, core temperature, and blood pressure and these elevations take hours to return to resting level (Covington 3rd and Miczek, ; Tornatzky and Miczek ). In stress research, social defeat is simulated in the resident–intruder paradigm. Here, experimental animals are placed into the territory of an aggressive resident animal after which the intruder is attacked and defeated by the resident (Fig. 5 ). In rats, the defeat stress is most commonly performed intermittently for 4 exposures (Burke and Miczek ) or for 10 exposures in mice (Furuta et al. ; Buwalda et al. ). In rats, the defeat posture is characterised by a supine posture with limp extremities and emission of loud and frequent ultrasonic 22 kHz vocalisations, whereas in mice, the defeat posture is characterised by a upright posture with limp forearms, head angled upward, and audible vocal signals (Miczek et al. ). To ensure the required outcome of the social confrontation, residents will usually be larger and will be familiarised with fighting prior to the experimental defeat (Buwalda et al. ). Social defeat can be used in both adult and juvenile animals (Burke and Miczek ). A single experience of social defeat stress can have persistent neurobiological and behavioural consequences and repeated episodes amplify and prolong these consequences. Fig. 5 Social defeat stress in rodents. (Adapted from Wood ( ))
Social isolation
Social isolation in rodents may model social exclusion from peer groups or peer victimisation behaviour in adolescence. In rodents, deprivation of social contact can affect the development of normal social behaviour. These effects are attributed to not only the deprivation of social contact but the deprivation of play fighting which normally peak in adolescence. Social play during adolescence is crucial for the development of adult social competence (Bell et al. ; Bell et al. ). Social isolation is a simple procedure and involves single housing of the animals, usually after weaning and for long periods of time (1 to 13 weeks, Fig. 6 ). Although this procedure is referred to as a social stressor, it differs from other chronic stress procedures in that its consequences do not involve prolonged high elevations of glucocorticoids. Hence, there is an argument as to whether social isolation elevates HPA function (Lukkes et al. ; Weiss et al. ; Serra et al. ). Nevertheless, the effects of social deprivation are widely reported and result in long-lasting effects in these offspring. Fig. 6 Social isolation stress in rodents
Social instability
Social instability is most commonly employed with other stress procedures such as social defeat (Kovalenko et al. ) or social isolation (Morrissey et al. ; Green and McCormick ; McCormick ; Cumming et al. ) as it is thought that rodents can habituate to novel partners. The hypothesis is that social instability will delay the recovery of CORT levels after defeat or isolation stress and therefore, inhibit habituation (McCormick ). However, social instability has been used alone in studies as a stress procedure (Schmidt et al. ; Sterlemann et al. ; Mathews et al. ). The procedure involves daily 1 h isolation followed by pairing the experimental animal with an unfamiliar partner (exposed to the same protocol) and cage but it can also involve group compositions with the groups in each cage being changed twice per week for several weeks (Fig. 7 ) (Schmidt et al. ). Fig. 7 Social instability stress in rodents
Restraint stress
Restraint stress is carried out by confining the animal in small spaces such as small containers or restrainers (Fig. 8 ). This procedure activates the HPA response causing an increase in glucocorticoid release; however, habituation to the endocrine response with this procedure is common after repeated exposure (Romeo ; Buwalda et al. ). Restraint stress can be used in both juvenile and adult studies and studies have shown that employing restraint stress during early-life creates a prolonged rise in plasma CORT compared to the HPA response after restraint stress in adults (Buwalda et al. ). Fig. 8 Restraint stress in rodents. (Chattarji et al. )
Footshock/tailshock
Shock stress can be applied in the form of electric pulses to the feet or tail of the animal (Fig. 9 ). It can be delivered as a low intensity or high intensity shock and can be employed as an acute procedure occurring only once or it can be used chronically over an extended period of time. Although these studies were regularly employed as a stress procedure in early preclinical studies, they are less commonly employed today with only 13% of early-life studies using this procedure when examining consequences on drug consumption outcomes and only 5% when examining behavioural outcomes (Joseph et al. ; Chaby et al. ; Lyttle et al. ; Li et al. ; Burke et al. ; Uysal et al. ; Kubala et al. ). Nonetheless, among alcohol studies in the literature, footshock stress was shown to be a most prominent procedure at enhancing alcohol intake (Noori et al. ). Fig. 9 Footshock stress in rodents
Scent exposure
Scent exposure, as a model of stress, uses predator odour that results in the animal displaying behavioural responses associated with predation threat. 2,3,5-Trimethyl-3-thiazoline (TMT) is one such predator odour which is a derivative of fox-faeces or cat odour in the form of hair and dander can also be used. TMT (10%) is generally placed onto a cotton ball/cloth below the metal grid floor of the animal’s cage or within close proximity to an arena/cage (Fig. 10 ) (Post et al. ; Toledo-Rodriguez and Sandi ; Cordero et al. ). Cat odour is acquired by using cat hair or dander, by rubbing cat dander and hair onto strips of cloth, or by using a piece of the cat collar (Wright et al. ; Wright et al. ; Kendig et al. ). It is thought that natural cat odour is more effective at eliciting defensive behaviours and activating the neural defence circuits compared to synthetic derivatives (Wright et al. ). Fig. 10 Predator stress in rodents
Underwater trauma
Underwater trauma is used as a stress model (traumatic stress experience) in experimental animals but may be more relatable to PTSD (Moore et al. ) than early-life stress. The underwater trauma is performed in a 60-s procedure. Animals are allowed to swim for 30 or 40 s in a large tank of saline and then are gently submerged for 30 or 20 s, respectively (Fig. 11 ). Afterwards, animals are removed and dried. Since forced swim is also used as a stress model and the water exposure and swim experience may alone have an aversive effect, the control animals for such a procedure are allowed to swim for the 60 s. Saline is generally used to minimise the effects of the submersion on the animal’s mucous membranes (Moore et al. ). This is quite a new animal stress model and so has only been employed in two early-life stress studies to date (Moore et al. ; Moore et al. ). Fig. 11 Underwater trauma in rodents. (Adapted from Abelaira et al. ( ))
Yohimbine injection
Yohimbine is a pharmacological stressor used to initiate a stress response. Yohimbine, a norepinephrine α2 receptor antagonist, increases norepinephrine release in several brain areas implicated in stress, including the amygdala (Feltenstein and See ; Khoshbouei et al. ), and has been shown to produce anxiety-like behaviours in humans (Charney et al. ) and animals (Davis et al. ). It is usually given as an i.p. injection at a dose of approximately 2.5 mg/kg just before outcomes are to be measured. As a stress model, it is rarely used in early-life stress studies with only one study in the literature to investigate how yohimbine injections in late adolescence affects later cocaine consumption (Anker and Carroll ).
Multiple stressors
Multiple stressors models such as CVS and CMS use a combination of the above-mentioned stress procedures with additional procedures such as elevated platform, forced swim, wet or soiled bedding, cold exposure, food and water deprivation, vibration/shaker, tilted cages, overcrowding, light/dark cycle reversal, tail clamp, stroboscopic light, overnight illumination, white noise, novel environment, litter-shifting, ether exposure, loud noise, taxidermied bobcat, cat vocalisations, and hypoxia (Fig. 12 ). The hypothesis of this model is that the combination of procedures will reduce the risk of habituation as they are exposed in an unpredictable manner. Such stress models like CVS are the most extreme of all the models discussed with animals being exposed chronically (10 or more days) to 10 or more different stressors combining an array of different types of stressors. Although in the clinical scenario exposure to multiple stressors can be quite common in early-life (Dong et al. ), individually these stressors may not be clinically translatable but combined they create a severe and worst case scenario with regards to stress and the consequences are both intense and long-lasting. Fig. 12 Multiple stressors in rodents. (Adapted from Abelaira et al. ( ) and Chattarji et al. ( )
Timing of stress
In early-life, CORT release is more long-lasting than in adulthood and this appears to be attributable to immature development of the negative feedback systems rather than due to differences in CORT clearance rates (Goldman et al. ; Vazquez and Akil ). Explorations of adolescent stress in preclinical studies involves a wide age range (PND 25–59) which results in many different ages used at the onset of stress exposure. As highlighted previously it is to be expected that outcomes of stress are stress-specific, with different stressors resulting in different outcomes, but the same stress procedure at one age in early-life is likely to yield different outcomes when exposed at a slightly different age given the rapidity of change (Green and McCormick ). In early-life stress, the majority of studies investigating drug intake outcomes have focused on stress exposure during early-adolescence (PND 15–28) and studies investigating behavioural outcomes have focused on stress exposure during mid-adolescence (PND 29–42) (Table 8 ). Table 8 Age of animals used across early-life stress studies. Data expressed as percentage employing each age PND Drug use ( n = 39) (%) Behaviour ( n = 133) (%) PND 1–14 23 20 PND 15–28 43 35 PND 29–42 27 39 PND 43–56 7 6
Social isolation as a stressor in rats seems to consistently increase alcohol intake regardless of the age of animal at the start of isolation for example beginning in early adolescence between PND 21 and 31 (Deehan et al. ; Juarez and Vazquez-Cortes ; Butler et al. ) or beginning in mid-adolescence between PND 43 and 50 (Ehlers et al. ). On the other hand, MS in rats beginning in the first few days of life (PND 1–2) results in increased alcohol intake in adulthood (Roman et al. ; Huot et al. ) but remains unchanged in adulthood if MS begins later on at PND 9 (Penasco et al. ). Social defeat stress on PND 28 in mice show increased social avoidance and decreased social interaction (Warren et al. ), and when exposed to this same stressor on PND 21, mice show similar outcomes with increased avoidance and submissive behaviours (Garcia-Pardo et al. ; Rodriguez-Arias et al. ). Restraint stress does not alter depressive-like behaviour in rats after being exposed on PND 25 or 28 (Lee and Noh ; Anderson et al. ; Bingham et al. ), but when exposed on PND 42, depressive-like behaviour was increased in rats (Negron-Oyarzo et al. ). These results highlight the stress-specific outcomes and that the interaction between the stressor and the timing of the stressor ultimately determines the outcome. With most studies investigating the early adolescent period and the consequences of stress during this time, it appears that this developmental stage may be most vulnerable to stress compared to later adolescence.
Frequency of stress exposures
The frequency of stress exposures refers to the number of stressful experiences the offspring is exposed to and this can also influence behavioural outcomes in later life. Table 9 shows, for each stress procedure, the frequency of stress exposures most commonly used in early-life stress studies. Of course, as we can see the number of stress exposures varies between procedures and can vary between species but they can also vary between laboratories and studies, meaning that many protocols exist for a single procedure. In early-life stress studies using social defeat as the stressor, most studies expose the animal to aggressive residents four or five times in both mice and rats (Montagud-Romero et al. ; Garcia-Pardo et al. ; Novick et al. ; Coppens et al. ). Yet, some protocols involve only 2 exposures (Vidal et al. ), 7 exposures (Bingham et al. ; Ver Hoeve et al. ), or as many as 10 exposures (Iniguez et al. ; Huang et al. ; Furuta et al. ). Table 9 Number of stress exposures used across early-life stress studies. Data expressed as number of stress exposures employed for each model Drug use ( n = 39) Behaviour ( n = 133) Social defeat × 4 × 5 Social instability – × 16 Maternal separation × 12 × 14 Footshock × 10 × 5 Restraint × 5 × 7 Variable stress × 14 × 3 Scent exposure – × 5
MS is another stress procedure which can vary greatly in the number of experiences the offspring are exposed to. Generally between 12 and 14 separations are most commonly employed, however as many as 21 separations have previously been used with this stress model (Roman et al. ). Similar extreme protocols are seen when variable stress is used in that generally 3 or 14 exposures are used when investigating behavioural or drug use outcomes, respectively, but as many as 28 exposures have been employed previously (Isgor et al. ). Although this wide range of exposures in each of these stress procedures provides more information on the severity of the stress and how they translate to the severity of outcome, it makes it quite difficult to compare studies and to know which frequency of exposures translates to the clinical scenario. The question for future research should be what is occurring clinically and how can we translate this in our model, rather than how many exposures of this procedure do I need to use to find a significant effect?
Duration of stress exposure
In addition to altering the frequency of exposures, stress protocols can be administered in a chronic pattern or as acute stress. This is more appropriate when discussing stress models such as social isolation, social instability, and MS. The stress may be applied once daily, numerous times a day, or every second day but the duration of the stress can be anywhere from 24 h to 16 weeks (Table 10 ). For example, social isolation and social instability are continuous stressors so that the animal is housed in these stressful conditions but the length of time these conditions are maintained differs between studies. Whereas, with MS the offspring can be exposed to any amount of separations but the separation itself may last 15 min, 90 min, or 24 h. Regardless of the procedure applied, the most popular duration of exposure to stress is between 1 and 10 days regardless of the outcome being measured (drug use or behaviour). Table 10 Duration of stress exposure across early-life stress studies. Drug use ( n = 39) and behaviour ( n = 133) studies. Data expressed as percentage employing each period Duration of exposure 24 h (%) 1–10 days (%) 2–3 weeks (%) 4–5 weeks (%) 5–6 weeks (%) 6–7 weeks (%) 8–9 weeks (%) 13–16 weeks (%) 16 weeks (%) Drug use 7 47 19 – 14 – 9 5 – Behaviour 6 62 21 5 – 4 2 – 1
Guo et al. ( ) compared the behavioural difference of mice isolated for 4, 8, 12, or 16 weeks. Male mice showed higher LA after 4, 8, or 12 weeks of isolation but this effect was not apparent after 16 weeks of isolation. Male mice showed anxious-like behavior at all time points except after 4 weeks of isolation. Social instability also shows varying results depending on the duration of stress exposure. Female mice have more depressive-like behaviour immediately after 16 days of social instability compared to controls but this effect is not seen after 2 weeks (Mathews et al. ). However, if this social instability stress is applied for 7 weeks then the long-lasting effects can be seen up to 12 months after stress cessation as seen in cognitive impairments in the MWM (Sterlemann et al. ). MS is one of the most variable procedures which we previously mentioned and numerous protocols and durations of exposures are utilised. The duration of the separation replicates different environmental settings. For example, shorter separations from the dam (15 min) mimic naturalistic conditions. To replicate a risky environment and early-life stress, longer periods of separations are used (180–360 min) to disrupt the mother–pup interactions. Once more, the wide range of duration exposures in each of these procedures makes it difficult to compare studies and to know which exposure duration can be translated to the clinical scenario. For each stress procedure, it is important to know what is the most common length of time that these stressors are experienced clinically?
Appropriate controls
The choice of control group in a stress study is vital for the evaluation of results. Common experimental groups that are used as controls include undisturbed, animal facility reared, handled, socially reared, saline treated, or exploration groups. The most commonly used control groups in early-life stress studies are undisturbed animals with 31–34% of studies (Table 11 ). Unfortunately, control groups which are undisturbed or animal facility reared (Bingham et al. ; Ver Hoeve et al. ; Mathews et al. ) are left in under-stimulated surroundings that alone may generate effects in the offspring and so may not act as a suitable control. Therefore, control groups such as handled groups (Wilkin et al. ; Wright et al. ; Callaghan and Richardson ) may be better for early-life stress studies. With regard to HPA axis function, briefly handled animals have a low stress response compared to non-handled animals (Pryce and Feldon ; Meaney ). Although, if handled control groups are to be employed, it is of upmost importance that the handling by the experimenter and the general husbandry and housing conditions are kept consistent, especially in stress studies. Table 11 Controls previously used for early-life stress studies. Data expressed as percentage employing each control Drug use ( n = 39) Behaviour ( n = 133) Model % Papers Model % Papers EE 2 No control 1 Saline 2 Saline 1 Baseline 2 NS 6 Handled 5 Handled 15 No control 5 Socially reared 23 Exploration group 12 Exploration group 23 Undisturbed 34 Undisturbed 31 Socially reared 37
Exploration groups are generally used in protocols where the experimental animal is introduced into a novel environment. For example, in the social defeat stress test, the experimental animal is placed into a resident’s cage for the duration of the stress exposure (Burke et al. ; Watt et al. ). Control animals can therefore be placed into a clean, novel cage for the same period of time to control for both the environment and the handling. This ensures that the effects found are due solely to the defeat stress rather than due to environmental stress. This type of control is preferable as the animals are being treated the exact same, except for the stressful experience. Socially reared control groups are used more often in social isolation or instability protocols (Schmidt et al. ; Meng et al. ). The animals are handled in the same way but the social environment that they are reared in is either isolated or social. Of particular concern, however, is the use of controls which are unrelated to the experimental groups. This is most notable when the experimental animal undergoes a stressful experience and is then singly housed whereas the control groups are group housed (Bourke and Neigh ; Harrell et al. ). Here the authors justify this protocol by portraying single housing a part of the ‘stress experience’ but if one is not controlling for this then we cannot know if the effects found are due to the stress or the single housing. Again, it is very important that the handling, general husbandry, and conditions are kept consistent for both experimental and control groups, especially in stress studies.
Clinical relevance
As with all animal models in preclinical research, each of these stress models must be reviewed in terms of clinical relevance and in particular in terms of construct, face, and predictive validity. This longstanding framework of three validators allows researchers to systematically review animal models in terms of validity and their strengths and weaknesses (McKinney ; Kornetsky ). Current animal models of stress have limitations such as weak validation and so generating convincing and meaningful animal models of stress is a major challenge.
Construct validity can also be referred to as etiologic validity and it refers to the disease or disorder relevance of the methods by which a model is fashioned. This can be simplified further in that the methods causing the disease or disorder in humans should be the same methods employed in the preclinical setting. In the stress model, investigators would accomplish construct validity by exposing the animal to the etiologic processes that cause the stress in humans (Nestler and Hyman ). By doing this, one can then replicate the neural and behavioural features that are associated with stress in humans. Therefore, when comparing these above-mentioned models of stress used in early-life stress studies, it is clear that a lack of construct validity exists. We previously highlighted that the lead causes of early-life stress in humans are parental divorce, family violence, economic adversity, mental illness, parental death, parental emotional abuse, sexual abuse, witnessing physical violence, peer emotional, peer physical abuse, and emotional and physical neglect (Green et al. ; Schalinski et al. ). Although it is not possible to model all of these experiences in animals, many of these experiences can be. MS shows high constructive validity as it models parental neglect, both emotional and physical. Social defeat models physical and emotional abuse as well as peer victimisation and bullying. Social isolation also models neglect relating to peers rather than parental. Unfortunately, other stress models such as restraint stress, yohimbine injection, shock stress, and scent exposure lack constructive validity and so may not be clinically relevant for modelling early-life stress.
Face validity refers to the anatomical, biochemical, and behavioural features of the human condition that should be replicated in the animal model. Of course, the exact neurobiological processes that occur in humans for most diseases or disorders are unknown and so most preclinical studies rely on behavioural features to achieve face validity. Yet, Nestler and Hyman ( ) highlight that a given disease or disorder can be quite variable and therefore, judgments of face validity will often be challenged and researchers typically defend their choice of animal model and its validity. With regards to stress exposure, it results in activation of the HPA-axis which, in brief, involves increased hypothalamic CRF release and consequently increased glucocorticoid production (Rincon-Cortes and Sullivan ). Therefore, when comparing these above-mentioned models of stress used in early-life stress studies, it appears that endocrine face validity exists in most models as most have been shown to increase CORT release. Of course, the long-term consequences of stress in the brain are still under investigation both clinically and preclinically and so this makes the task of accomplishing face validity in animal stress models. The habituation to stress however, is not something that occurs clinically and so stress procedures such as restraint stress and shock stress, where habituation is common, may lack face validity.
Predictive validity often involves pharmacological validity and relates to the response to treatments. In an ideal animal model, the effects of a pharmacological treatment would predict the response or effect of that treatment in humans. Again, as with face validity, many preclinical models rely on behaviour as its readout and will compare to existing reference drugs that act in a similar manner (Nestler and Hyman ). Although the purpose of this review is to examine the stress models, rather than pharmacological treatments for stress, it is worth noting that if the future goal of a preclinical study is to access a compound for treating the consequences of stress, then it is vital that the model has not only construct and face validity, but that it also has predictive validity for how these compounds will respond in humans. All in all, each stress model has its own strengths and weaknesses yet it appears that social stressors such as social defeat, social isolation, and MS may be the most appropriate models to employ in early-life stress studies in terms of construct and face validity and that relates most closely to the clinical scenario in terms of stress experiences and being clinically relevant, something that is becoming more and more important in preclinical research.
Conclusions
The previous sections have focused on the range of experimental parameters that are important for an animal model of early-life stress. Overall, it is clear that there is a large diversity and little consistency among these studies and so the interpretation of these results and which ones are more clinically relevant are difficult. For animals being used, it is important to choose the most appropriate species and strain relevant for each study; however, the literature would benefit from having a species and strain comparison study to look at the difference in outcomes across strains. Breeding animals in-house and weaning them at PND 21-22 is desirable but if not feasible then the use of the same supplier ensures some consistency between studies. Regardless of animal source, all details regarding weight and age of the animals must be disclosed in order to allow comparison between studies and the use of both males and females is crucial for studies going forward. For early-life stress studies, the model of stress is pivotal to the study design should reflect salient features of the clinical situation. It is clear that regarding construct and face validity that the social stressors such as social defeat or MS are the most relevant to the clinical scenario. The early adolescent period seems to be the most vulnerable period for stress exposure and long-term consequences, but studies comparing different time points of stress exposure would be quite valuable in separating out this complex development period. Similarly to this, multiple frequencies and durations of stress exposure would help in mimicking each possible clinical pattern of exposure while also determining the developmental timeline and if the inverted U-shape exists with regard to outcomes based on severity of stressful experiences.
By keeping these parameters as clinically relevant as possible, it will also allow us to be more confident in the results obtained and confident that the human situation is being replicated as closely as possible. The standardisation of these simple stress procedures means that results will be more comparable between studies and that results generated will give us a more robust understanding of what can and may be happening in the human and veterinary clinic.