Introduction
Ensuring and documenting cardiovascular (CV) safety is an important part of the drug development process. Firstly, the attrition rate due to CV safety findings is high, but more importantly, it is crucial to ensure that healthy subjects and patients in first - in - human (FIH) studies, as well as patients in later trials, are not subject to unnecessary risks. A quantitative approach using modelling and simulation such as Model Informed Drug Development/Discovery and Development (MIDD/MID3) [ , , , , , ], can significantly enhance the understanding of potential drug-related effects on the CV system. MID3 is defined as a quantitative framework for prediction and extrapolation, centered on knowledge and inference generated from integrated models of compound, mechanism and disease level data and aimed at improving the quality, efficiency and cost effectiveness of decision making. The aim of this tutorial is to provide an overview of what to take into account when assessing and interpreting drug-related effects on the CV system. In the following sections, we will present background information on the CV system across species, which will be followed by CV electrophysiology. This section will include description of (1) which are the key ion channels, (2) how can drugs affect them, (3) what are the consequences of such effects and (4) how they can be detected in vivo (for example on the electrocardiogram). Next, the aspects of CV safety assessment will be covered. This will include descriptions of nonclinical and clinical studies where CV data are collected and can potentially be used in mathematical modelling. Practical aspects of modelling data collected during safety assessment will be presented in the “ Data and modelling: a quantitative approach ” section. And finally, regulatory expectations will be provided which will focus on the application of model informed and quantitative approaches. At the end of the tutorial, we present 3 case studies; examples that demonstrate how model-based approaches can aid decision making in practice during various stages of drug development.
Biological and medical aspects of the cardiovascular system
All animals depend on a CV system for survival; it supplies oxygen and nutrients to each cell and removes carbon dioxide and metabolic waste products. The basic structure in mammals consists of a four-chambered heart (two atria and two ventricles) and dedicated vessels for blood or circulatory fluid. Four-chamber hearts have improved performance as the deoxygenated venous blood and the oxygenated arterial blood are kept from mixing. This common structure across mammals allows for the evaluation of potential impact of a compound on CV function already in nonclinical species. However, the use of nonclinical species requires taking into account species differences, such as e.g. the resting heart rate, which varies greatly between commonly studied mammals (Table 1 ) [ , ]. Table 1 Range of resting heart rate (bpm) in mammalian species used in nonclinical and clinical trials Species Resting heart rate (bpm) Rat 250–400 Guinea pig 200–300 Rabbit 180–350 Dog 70–120 Rhesus monkey (anesthetized) 160–330 Human 60–100
Deoxygenated venous blood returns from the periphery, into the right atrium and the right ventricle. It’s pumped at low pressure through the pulmonary circulation for release of carbon dioxide and oxygenation in the alveoli, before entering the left atrium and ventricle, which empties at full systemic blood pressure into the aorta. Cardiac valves separate the atria from the ventricles, and the ventricles from the pulmonary and aortic arteries to prevent backflow through the cardiac cycle of contraction and relaxation. The left ventricle is cylindric and the wall is thicker, as the left heart is built to perform systemic pressure work, while the right ventricular wall is thinner, swept around the left heart, and built to perform low pressure volume work. The ventricular walls are built up by muscular fibers in a complex structure allowing for a highly coordinated concentric contraction and twisting shortening, while the atrias contract to top fill the ventricles immediately prior to each ventricular contraction. This complex pump function requires advanced coordination and timing of the sequential contraction and relaxation of every myocardial fiber, which is ensured by a combination of a specialized nerve like network of myocytes propagating the electrical depolarization trigger through the myocardium, and a range of conditioned, voltage gated ion channels and pumps in each cell membrane, strictly coordinating the contraction and relaxation of each myocyte.
Electrophysiology
Ion channels are membrane proteins permeable to a specific type or types of ions and that use a “gate” to control permeability. Ion movement through the ion channel is passive and depends on the prevailing electrochemical-gradient for a given ionic species. For each key ionic species, there is also an active transport process, a protein ion pump that maintains the chemical gradient. In myocytes, during the resting state (i.e. diastole), only K + channels are open and the transmembrane potential equals the equilibrium potential for potassium (around − 90 mV: inside relative to outside). There is no flux of Na + or Ca 2+ ions during the resting state as the cell is not permeable to these ions. Following excitation, Na + and Ca 2+ channels open and there is an influx of Na + and Ca 2+ down their electrochemical gradient with a resulting reduction of the negative membrane potential (depolarisation). Na + and Ca 2+ channels then close and a return to around − 90 mV is achieved via K + efflux down its electrochemical gradient (repolarisation). Excitation of the myocardium ultimately stems from the spontaneous activity of pacemaker cells in the sino-atrial node that initiate excitation by generating action potentials. Excitation spreads rapidly through the heart via low resistance “gap junctions” between myocytes. A specialized conduction system slows down the spread of excitation through the atrio-ventricular node, then speeds it up through the Bundle of His and the Purkinje fibres. Myocyte action potential morphology varies between different regions of the myocardium to accommodate optimal, sequential and rhythmic excitation and contraction. The wave of myocardial excitation can be detected on the body surface by the electrocardiogram (ECG). It is important to understand how different drugs can interact with the key ion channels and how this can affect the ECG, in order to prevent or minimize CV risks [ ]. How blocking key ion channels impact the action potential and the resulting ECG is schematically shown in Fig. 1 , and specific examples of drug-related effects can be found in Table 2 . Fig. 1 The effect of channel block on action potentials (middle) and ECG (bottom panel) Table 2 Pharmacology of channel blockers and associated examples of drugs that block them Channel blocker HCN block Ca V1.2 block Na V1.5 block K V11.1 or K V7.1 block Ca V1.2 block or K V11.1 activation Pharmacology HCN blockers slow pacemaker potential Membrane potential takes longer to reach excitation threshold Heart rate decreases (bradycardia) Ca V1.2 Blockers slow conduction through AV node In AV node cells, upstroke is driven by Ca V1.2 PR interval prolonged Can lead to complete AV block (i.e. atrial action potential not conducted to ventricles) Also, vasodilatation leading to hypotension Na V1.5 blockers slow action potential upstroke This decreases conduction velocity through the ventricles QRS complex prolonged Can lead to ventricular fibrillation K V11.1 (IK R /hERG) or K V7.1 (IK S ) blockers slow repolarisation rate of ventricular cells Ventricular action potentials get longer QT interval prolonged Note: “Thorough QT/QTc Study” (TQTS) in man Can lead to Torsades de Pointes (TdP) Ventricular action potential duration can also be decreased by: Ca V1.2 blockers (this can also decrease contractility) K V11.1 (IK R /hERG) activators Examples ZD7288 Ivabradine Verapamil Flecainide Sparfloxacin and indapamide Verapamil PD-307243
A 12-lead ECG can be said to represent 12 different viewpoints from which we can observe the progression of the electrical signals from the heart. Physically, there are only ten electrodes, one on each of the four limbs (on right arm RA, left arm LA, right foot RF and left foot LF) and six precordial electrodes placed across the chest (V1, V2, V3, V4, V5, V6) [ ]. Originally, only three leads were used to observe signals from heart, the so called Einthoven’s triangle (see Fig. 2 left panel), where Lead I is the bipolar electrical connection between LA and RA, Lead II connects the LF and the RA and Lead III connects the LF and the LA. Uni-polar leads from each limb add three additional leads, aVR aVL and aVF, and together with the six precordial leads observing the cross plane of the heart result in 12 leads in total. Each lead presents the signal as viewed from that specific angle. Any change in lead placement or body position will change the viewing angle, and thus the resulting waveform appearance in that lead recording. Figure 2 right panel illustrates a typical ECG complex: P wave (small deflection from baseline and denotes atrial depolarization), PR interval, Q wave (first negative deflection of QRS complex), QRS interval (denotes ventricular depolarization), T wave (denotes ventricular repolarization), and QT interval (time interval between Q wave onset and T wave offset and incorporating both depolarization and repolarisation). Fig. 2 Left panel: ECG leads and Einthoven’s triangle (RA—right arm, LA—left arm, LL—left leg); right panel: typical ECG complex
Regulatory considerations
One of the most common regulatory concerns related to drug impact on the CV electrophysiology is the risk of QT interval prolongation. Although it is not an adverse event per se, it has been clearly linked with an increased risk of developing Torsades de pointes (TdP), a ventricular arrhythmia, with complex genesis [ ] and that may be fatal unless normal rhythm is restored. Still, not all mechanisms that prolong the QT interval are equally prone to also increase the TdP risk. And not even all compounds that act on the h uman E ther- à-go-go- R elated G ene (hERG, see Table 2 ) channel, which is the mechanism most commonly associated with QT related increase in TdP risk, show a clinically increased incidence of TdP. TdP is very rare, even in the circumstances of a hERG-mediated QT interval prolongation, but the risk increases with increased QT-prolongation. Some additional risk factors to develop TdP include: female gender, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, bradycardia, high dose/plasma concentration of drug, chronic heart failure, cardiac hypertrophy, rapid intravenous infusion of a culprit compound and congenital long QT syndrome. This makes TdP an inherently difficult adverse event to predict. In the mid 2000s, in vitro and in vivo animal models were tested for their ability to predict the potential to induce QT prolongation, to subsequently identify compounds where also the possible risk for TdP needed to be further characterized. In the clinical setting, the Thorough QT/QTc study (TQT) became, in effect, the key arbiter to identify compounds with a possible potential TdP risk, and where terminated development, or more extensive CV monitoring in the clinical development program would be justified.
There is now consensus that the accumulated experience with concentration-QTc (C-QTc) modelling has matured sufficiently to warrant consideration of this approach as a reasonable (and in some situations a superior) approach to serve as an alternative to a TQT study and thereby satisfy the regulatory requirement for QT assessment (ICH E14(R3) Concept Paper [ ]). Recently, a white paper published by authors from FDA and industry representatives involved in this discussion, has provided recommendations on how to plan and conduct a definitive QTc assessment of a drug using C-QTc modelling in early phase clinical pharmacology and thorough QT studies [ ]. The discussion is still ongoing in the scientific and regulatory experts’ community to generate guidance on concentration–response modelling of QTc data from early clinical.
Owing to concerns about the de-selection of potentially valuable medicines, solely based on hERG block or QT prolongation, the Comprehensive in vitro Proarrhythmia Assay (CiPA) initiative has now been launched [ ]. The CiPA objective is to facilitate the adoption of a new paradigm for assessment of clinical potential of TdP risk, rather than of QT prolongation potential.
More than 100 drugs are known to prolong the QT interval and/or to induce TdP. Some of them were withdrawn from market due to torsadogenic potential (e.g. astemizole, cisapride, terfenadine—see Fig. 3 ), while others were approved with prescribing restrictions (e.g. pimozide). QT/TdP risk will in most cases lead to significant post-marketing and label implications with a resulting prescribing preference for alternative drugs, with similar therapeutic use but with lower perceived risk. The potential to affect the CV electrophysiology and the QT/QTc interval must be characterised for all systemically bioavailable compounds. If healthy volunteers cannot be used owing to safety concerns, other ways need to be developed (e.g. ECG collection in patients, at higher doses, at multiple time-points, and under tightly controlled conditions). This may significantly impact drug development costs, especially in Phase 2 and 3. Multiple guidance documents for sponsors have been developed to provide regulatory, technical and research recommendations, reflecting the complexity of the CV system and the challenges when evaluating CV safety in healthy volunteers and in patients, see Table 3 . Fig. 3 Example of compounds stopped due to their QT and TdP related concerns. Diagram adapted from Sallam et al. [ ] Table 3 Guidance and resources supporting the evaluation of cardiovascular safety of human medicines [ , ] Regulatory Technical and other community of research ICH S7A [ ]: Safety Pharmacology Studies for Human Pharmaceuticals (CV system: blood pressure, heart rate and ECG, including QT interval) ICH S7B [ ]: The non-clinical evaluation of the potential for delayed ventricular repolarization (QT interval prolongation) by human pharmaceuticals [blood pressure, heart rate and ECG (including QT interval)] ICH E14 [ ]: The clinical evaluation of QT/QTc Interval Prolongation and Proarrhythmic Potential for Non-Antiarrhythmic Drugs. (Outlines recommendations for sponsor on evaluation of the potential of a drug to delay cardiac repolarization by conducting most appropriate study design, conduct, analysis, and interpretation of clinical studies to assess the potential of a drug to delay cardiac repolarization) ICH E14 Q&As (R3) [ ]: The questions and answers developed by the E14 Implementation Working Group (IWG) are intended to facilitate the implementation of the E14 Guideline by clarifying key issues ICH E14/S7B [ ]: Discussion Group (DG) with participation of experts in clinical (E14) and non-clinical drug development (S7B) to discuss advances in science and methods related to the clinical assessment of QT prolongation and to continue the discussion of the CiPA initiative FDA QT Interdisciplinary Review Team (IRT): to review sponsor QT study design and C-QT analysis [ ] EMA Reflection paper [ ]: on assessment of cardiovascular safety profile of medicinal products Technical : HL7 ECG standard [ ], provide common annotated ECG standards FDA ECG warehouse [ ]—online database for uploading digital ECG Community of research : Specialized QT study vendors-(clinical sites and ECG Corelabs) Metrics Champion Consortium (MCC) with a working group on ECG metrics Cardiac Safety Research Consortium (CSRC)
Evaluation of cardiovascular risks
Nonclinical evaluation
During drug discovery, lead optimisation (LO) is the critical phase to fine tune available chemistry to mitigate safety issues prior to entering the clinical studies. Compounds with potential safety issues can be identified, and compounds without such issues can be taken forward.
In silico, in vitro and in vivo experiments are carried out to identify and deselect compounds with potentially unfavourable properties. In vitro assessment of effects on CV electrophysiology, such as screening of key ion channels, isolated canine myocyte or guinea-pig isolated heart are ideal means to prioritize and de-select compounds in early discovery [ , ]. The late discovery phase with in vivo work provides an opportunity to gather further information on safety and efficacy/risk and benefit risk balance before going into man. Many elements need to be considered during the evaluation: disease area, degree of unmet medical need, mechanism of action (MoA)/target, small/large molecules, nonclinical CV safety profile on ion channel effects, effects on vascular tone (e.g. affecting blood pressure or heart rate, or cardiac contractility), ECG changes, PR/QRS/QT/QTc intervals, T wave morphology.
Early screening is often possible because of known associations between CV risk, modulation of ion channels (as described in “ Electrophysiology ” section above) and hemodynamic system. The best established electrophysiological pseudo-marker for CV risk in drug discovery is the assessment of the effects on the hERG channel [ ]. The development of new technologies has enabled high throughput screening of ion channels in very short timeframes. It is now possible to screen new compounds and provide medicinal chemistry with an IC 50 value for channel inhibition within a timeframe that can influence chemical design [ ]. Ion channel potency (IC 50 values from ion channel screening) is often used to calculate a safety margin to predicted unbound therapeutic concentration (maximum blood levels). A preferred minimum of 30- to 100-fold margin between hERG IC 50 and the therapeutic unbound concentration has been established [ ] and similar margins are also suggested between hERG and the QT interval [ ] as well as between Na V1.5 and QRS prolongation [ ].
In-vivo studies to detect ECG and hemodynamic risks include: A small animal study (acute i.v. study, late LO)—for example the anesthetized guinea-pig animal model. Other animals that may be used include mouse or rat (it is important to note though, that rats lack functional hERG channel and their electrophysiology is significantly different from that of man) [ ]. Large animal, single-dose study (usually conscious telemetered dog; core regulatory study) Large animal, repeat-dose study (ideally non-invasive telemetry in dog toxicology study) [ ]
Data routinely collected from in vitro and in vivo animal studies can be used in pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (PKPD) modelling, an extensive reviews are found in Parkinson et al. [ ] and Collins et al. [ ]. More details are covered in “ Data and modelling: a quantitative approach ” section below as well as in the Case studies 1 and 2 (modelling of guinea-pig and dog CV data). There are also possibilities to utilize animal data using more advanced mathematical models—an example can be an application of geometric mesh modelling of the heart and surrounding tissue from MRI scans to produce ECG traces in Watson et al. [ ].
In addition to QT-interval prolongation and risk for TdP, identification and understanding of other CV toxicities is desired. There is a long history of the development of mechanistic mathematical models to mimic the CV system [ , , , , , ]. With advances in computational power, much work was done [ , , , ] to support complex system biology/pharmacology models to understand the CV system and adverse effects of drug in cellular networks and to support identification of biomarkers for side effect. Although these system models try to encapsulate the complex structure and relationship in CV system, it is often challenging to calibrate the models using typical nonclinical and clinical data sets. The level of complexity of the model required should therefore be driven by the key clinical questions. An example of such a model was published by Francheteau et al. [ ] and later reduced by Cheung et al. [ ] to ensure all parameters were identifiable. This model was applied to the nonclinical assessment of an oncology compound and extrapolation to elderly patients with life-threatening disease. The compound behaved like a peripheral vasodilator, with the potential to cause a significant drop in blood pressure in the efficacious dose range, this was observed in integrated nonclinical data package. The dog telemetry study data were used to estimate the model parameters and these parameters were then translated into a human PKPD model. In the human model, predicted variability in both human PK and PD were incorporated. Blood pressure and heart rate effects were modelled for doses spanning the proposed starting dose and expected efficacious dose, and the 95% confidence intervals calculated. Predicted changes were minimal at the starting dose, increasing to ~ 12 mm Hg (upper 95% confidence interval of mean) at the predicted efficacious dose and increasing further at higher doses. The construction of a credible model describing both effects in dogs and predicted effects in the patient population enabled the project team to fully assess the potential risks for Phase I trials, and to incorporate suitable monitoring and stopping criteria.
Clinical evaluation
The first stage of testing in human subjects is usually to assess the safety and tolerability of a drug in healthy volunteers, and typically dose-escalation studies comprise multiple cohorts. In Phase 1, standardized, well controlled and high resolution digital ECG (dECG) data along with vital signs such as systolic and diastolic pressure, and heart rate are usually collected to enable pooling, and early capture of signals of safety, regulatory or strategic concern. In FIH studies, ECG evaluation is guided by the nonclinical CV safety profile and the predicted PK profile. During these studies, multiple ECGs are collected and standard ECG intervals, including the heart rate and corrected QT interval (QTc), are calculated and assessed. This can be done by descriptive statistics or PK/PD analysis (concentration–response relationship). In Phase 1, single or multiple ascending dose (SAD or MAD) studies with crossover designs are not common, hence QTc prolongation assessment comparing changes from baseline between placebo and active treatment as stated in ICH E14 is usually not feasible.
Thorough QT/QTc (TQT) studies when conducted, are usually performed at the end of Phase 2 with the predicted efficacious dose, a supra-therapeutic dose, placebo and a positive control. Such studies are in the uncomplicated cases relatively small (40–60 healthy volunteers) but still expensive (~ $1 to $2.8 M). The implications of the TQT study result for a development program can be large: a negative TQT study: typically allows the collection of baseline and minimal periodic on-therapy ECGs as sufficient evaluation of CV safety during subsequent stages of drug development whereas a positive TQT study will have more serious implications, such as the need for expanded ECG safety evaluation during later stages of drug development, with labelling implications (and safety follow-up) and could be a reason for non-approval. A TQT study is regarded to be positive when the upper bound of the 95% one-sided confidence interval (CI) for the largest time-matched mean effect of the drug on the QTc interval exceeds 10 ms. For the study to be negative, the upper bound of the 95% one-sided confidence interval for the largest time-matched mean effect of the drug on the QTc interval excludes 10 ms [ ].
Recently, there has been an increase in the utilization of PKPD modeling (concentration-QTc response based on clinical data from one or more early phase clinical studies) to assess the potential for drug induced effects on the QT/QTc interval; i.e. to predict the outcome of a TQT study The studies may be pooled i.e. SAD and MAD studies or the analysis can be performed in a standalone study (the SAD or the MAD or another study), with a large range of concentrations. This approach is encouraged by the current ICH E14 Q&A (ICH E14 (R3)) [ , ] and has been previously used especially for compounds that cannot be dosed in HV and hence the TQT study was not feasible e.g. oncology compound with genotoxicity. The application of C-QTc analysis makes efficient use of data and would be valuable from ethical, time, resource and financial investment perspectives.
To provide quantitative assessment of a compound’s potential to prolong cardiac repolarization by predicting outcome of a TQT study, the result of the C-QTc analysis needs to demonstrate that (1) a small QT effect can be excluded in early phase studies at high plasma levels and (2), that these levels when possible, with sufficient margins exceed levels predicted to be observed in patients during studies performed later during the clinical development. When predicting the outcome of the TQT study, there are some important considerations that need to be taken into account: e.g. whether it is appropriate to pool data from multiple early clinical studies (especially if these were conducted in different patient populations). Another example is the need to also include MAD study data in case there is significant PK accumulation of parent/metabolite, or the need to include placebo control to eliminate bias introduced by study procedures and diurnal variations. There are also specific considerations regarding quality of the ECG data when used in modeling—for example pre-dose baseline ECG is usually calculated as the average of three predose time points over 1 h, but if the drug has effects on the heart rate, the pre-dose baseline ECGs may need to be collected over 24 h (ICH E14(R3)) [ ] and to ensure that the pre-dose heart rate range covers the predicted post dose heart rate range on treatment. The comparison of a “traditional” cross-over design TQT study, and the modelling approach to assess QT risk based on early clinical studies is summarized in Table 4 . An example of how C-QTc modelling can be done in practice is presented in Case study 3. Table 4 Comparison of the standard TQT study and alternative method that utilizes concentration-QTc modelling Standard method Alternative method Thorough QT study (ICH E14): Concentration-QTc modelling Negative control (placebo) and positive control (moxifloxacin) Two doses (approved dose of test product and supra-therapeutic dose) Multiple single point comparison (ΔΔQTc) Requires large sample size Subject to outlier (false positive) Expensive (2–3 millions USD/study) Conclusive if moxifloxacin effect mean change > 5 ms (upper one-sided 95% CI > 10 ms) Negative study if upper one-sided 95% CI < 10 ms Digital replicate ECG in early phase studies (i.e. SAD and/or MAD) Collect ECG with time-matched PK samples No formal requirement of positive control, but, but in its absence, exposures at least twice the highest clinically relevant exposure should be tested (the highest dose should give a mean C max that is twice the C max,ss obtained during metabolic inhibition or with renal, hepatic dysfunction) Should include placebo if possible Rich data covering wide range of doses Use all time points reducing sample size Less subject to outliers Detect risk early in development Accepted by health authorities (FDA, EMA, ICH regions)
Data and modelling: a quantitative approach
Ideally, a model informed approach should be initiated during the nonclinical stage of development to allow knowledge of the compound, mechanism and disease to propagate and translate to the clinical setting. Early planning also allows identification of key questions (custom-tailored to each programme due to different MoA and phase of development) and to assess the required data collection and modelling needed. Documentation and assessment of key assumptions [ ] should be considered. The first part of section describes the data that are collected during CV assessment and focuses on the methods of collecting and processing the data (for example QT correction). The second part covers practical issues that need to be taken into an account when using MID3 approaches to CV data.
Data
The electrocardiogram (ECG) is most often used in collecting data during all phases of drug development. It is a tool that was developed in 1920s by Einthoven and Lewis [ ] and has evolved into everyday clinical use. Its two main purposes are to ensure patient safety (bed-side monitoring) and to characterise the drug safety profile. Technological advancement has allowed the collection of ECG to be moved from large machinery to more portable devices and even mobile phone applications. These new devices enable flexible data collection, increased frequency of sampling and also remove the need to restrict patients to in-house monitoring. There are three levels of automation when reading ECG data: (1) automated, (2) semi-automated and (3) manual. The automated method has many advantages—it is standardized, validated [ ], and highly reproducible (since it is defined by algorithms) and independent on the user. The latter can be a potential issue in the manual method, where there is a risk of introducing inter-observer as well as intra-observer variability [ ]. When analysing and interpreting CV data, it is important to consider the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the analysed trial: e.g. Are the subjects healthy or are they patients with background CV problems? Also, it is important that digital ECGs are collected at pre-specified study protocol time points and preceding in close connection the PK sampling time points.
Once the data are collected, the ECGs are analysed and interpreted. The following parameters may also be clinically assessed: (1) heart rate (slow or rapid), (2) rhythm (what is driving the ventricular activity?), (3) width of QRS and electrical axis (are the conduction pathways intact?), (4) amplitudes and intervals (myocardial condition and function), (5) morphology (signs of ischemia, acute or old infarction, hemodynamic disturbance, repolarization disorders or electrolyte imbalances). Some of the ECG data, such as QT intervals, need additional processing before the results can be interpreted. The QT and the HR are strongly correlated—in general slow heart rate (long RR) results in a longer QT, while a rapid heart rate (short RR) comes with a shorter QT. To allow comparisons across different heart rates it is therefore crucial that the measured QT interval is corrected for heart rate. There are many methods of HR correction available such as Bazett’s formula (QTcB: QTc = QT/RR 1/2 ) [ ], Fridericia’s formula (QTcF: QTc = QT/RR 1/3 ) [ ], linear regression [ ], population specific correction (QTcX) [ ] and subject specific correction (QTcI) [ ]. Bazett’s method was developed based on a small study with limited range in HR. Fridericia therefore strived to develop a formula with improved correction for RR, and a number of comparisons of various methods can today be found in the literature [ , , ]. The first step when assessing the most appropriate method for correcting QT is to plot QT versus RR data (as shown in Fig. 4 a). The QT versus RR relationship is typically non-linear (approximately log-linear) and highly subject-specific. After applying a selected correction method, the QTc data should ideally be uncorrelated to the RR-data within each subject. This can be identified through graphical exploration of the QTc-RR relationship (see Fig. 4 b). A trendless scatter plot stratified by placebo and drug with median regression lines close to zero should be observed to indicate an adequate correction method. If trends indicate that the investigated drug has impact on the heart, additional graphical time series plots of heart rate in each dose levels will be required. If heart rate changes are large between treatment and placebo group (typically > ~10 beats/min), the appropriateness of the QT interval correction applied has to be considered [ , ]. Fig. 4 a QT versus RR plot of the uncorrected placebo data for six simulated individuals; b QTc versus RR plot of the same data after optimal individual QT correction; c examples of QT versus RR plots for multiple subjects with uncorrected, optimally corrected and mathematically overcorrected QT/QTc versus RR correlation slopes
The basis for choosing the most appropriate correction method [ ] relies on careful estimation of the QT-RR slopes. The correction methods based on a pre-specified slope (e.g. Bazett’s or Fridericia’s method) may result in systematic errors; for example, in Fridericia’s method it is presumed that all individuals have a similar QT-RR slope of 0.333, and if the true slope is more, or less than that value, this results in a systematic inaccurate correction of the individual data. However, such systematic effects have been found to be small over all with Fridericia’s method and a standardized approach using the QTcF is today the preferred method in regulatory practice, unless there is a significant drug related effect on HR (Section 1.5 ICH E14 Q&A (R3)).
Modelling
The PKPD modelling of ECG intervals is usually focused on the standard ECG intervals collected during monitoring: HR, RR, PR, QRS and QT intervals. Of these parameters, the QTc interval has received most attention in recent years [ , , , ]. Drug-induced QTc effects can be quantified using PKPD modelling, where the response is related to the plasma concentration of the drug (for a review see Parkinson et al. [ ] and Collins et al. [ ]). There are several factors that may affect QTc that should be taken into account during the modelling. These include: diurnal variability, gender, age, food intake, body position, electrode reposition inconsistencies, body temperature, physical activity, anxiety or changes in electrolyte balance [ , ]. Some of these factors can be included in the modelling—for example diurnal variability can be modelled using circadian rhythm [ , ]. Drug-induced QTc effect can be instantaneous (i.e. maximum QTc effect occurs when the maximum concentration in plasma is reached), however, in some cases there may be a delay between peak plasma concentration and peak QTc effect. This phenomenon, hysteresis, can occur also on other levels. If there e.g. are sudden changes in heart rate, it may take a few minutes for QT to physiologically adapt to the heart rate change (e.g., the time to achieve 90% stability in the QT interval following rapid changes in heart rate in dogs was 90 s [ ]). Another source for hysteresis may be the presence of active metabolites that affect QT and that take time to be produced. Additionally, a delay between plasma concentration and QT effect may occur if the drug is affecting hERG channel protein trafficking, rather than directly blocking the hERG channel [ , ].
Modelling is used at all stages of drug development. Often, data from various sources are combined, which allows for a more integrated assessment. An example of such data integration can be found in Fig. 5 , where data from in vitro (% inhibition of hERG) and in vivo (guinea pig MAPD, % QTcR increase in dog telemetry) experiments were combined into one plot for an assessment of drug-induced QT effects. Often, data from early clinical studies are integrated (for example SAD, MAD studies) which is valuable for describing drug-related QTc effects in humans. Modelling of such combined data can be used to predict the outcome of TQT study and potentially avoid conducting it by obtaining TQT waiver. An example of such approach is covered in Case study 3 below. Fig. 5 Left panel: integration of in vitro and in vivo data for QT assessment; right panel: probability of accurately predicting TQT study outcome from in vitro, in vivo and clinical data
One issue with combining data from multiple sources is that the same parameters are not always collected across different studies. For example, in vitro tests measure inhibition of ion channels (hERG, Nav1.5, Kv4.3, Cav1.2, Kv7.1), while in nonclinical species and in clinics other endpoints are collected (QT, QRS, PR). In such cases, it is possible to combine different endpoints with more mechanistic PKPD models such as operational model of pharmacologic agonism [ , ].
Case studies
The aim of the three case studies is to demonstrate how model-informed approaches can aid decision making during all phases of drug development. The first case study is set in lead optimization phase and it shows how data collected from nonclinical guinea pig studies can be modelled and used to predict safety margin to the predicted therapeutic concentration in man (see Fig. 6 ). The second case study is also from nonclinical development and demonstrates how QTc data collected during routine dog telemetry study can be used to predict QTc effect in man. These predictions may have potential implications for drug selection or design of FIH study (for example dose selection or inclusion of additional CV monitoring if there is a potential risk of QTc prolongation). The third case study comes from clinical development, where QTc data collected from early clinical studies can be used to predict the outcome of the TQT study. Fig. 6 Flow chart of the steps included in the case studies 1–3
Case study 1: Early pre-clinical modelling to assess cardiovascular safety risk to identify safety margin for project planning
The aim of the first case study is to evaluate the cardiovascular (CV) effect of a new compound at the lead optimization stage and support the project team by providing safety predictions for the tested leads. The modelling is based on data from the nonclinical guinea pig study, which is used to provide an integrated CV assessment. This reduces the risk of selecting compounds with safety issues for testing in large animal safety studies. During the guinea pig study, a range of CV measurements are taken, including hemodynamics (blood pressure and heart rate), ECG (PR, QRS, QT, QTc, RR intervals) and contractility (left ventricular pressure, contractility index dP/dt Max) [ ]. Using appropriate method of anaesthesia, this model allows simultaneous measurement of hemodynamics, ECG and contractility [ ] and has been validated using a set of reference compounds with clinically known CV effects [ ]. Also, the anaesthetized guinea pigs have been shown to translate well to non-rodent telemetry models and to humans for changes in QTc, PR and QRS prolongation elicited by effects in vitro on hERG, Cav1.2 and Nav1.5 [ ]. Although this model allows early testing in a complete CV system, caution should always be applied for translation and prediction of clinical effects. For the changes in hemodynamics parameters (such as centrally-driven effects on heart rate or blood pressure), the translation to the conscious animal model or human, may not always be straightforward.
In this example, animals received multiple infusions (2 × 15 min), followed by a 30 min wash-out period. The doses were selected with the aim to reach 2–10 and 30–100 times the predicted therapeutic plasma concentrations with the first and second infusions respectively. The PK and CV data were collected and the PKPD modelling was performed following steps outlined in Fig. 6 . Briefly, the collected data were visually explored to identify endpoints with potential drug-induced effects. In this example, the visual inspection of the data revealed that the compound has a potential effect on the mean arterial blood pressure, heart rate and QTc interval (potential drug-induced decrease in mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) and HR and increase in QTc interval). A PK model was fitted to the plasma concentration data (here, 2 compartmental iv infusion model) and then PKPD modelling was performed for each of the identified endpoints (MABP, HR and QTc). Here, the main purpose is to identify safety margins to potential liabilities, and not investigate variabilities, covariates etc. This is because much of the variability is minimised in this study setting: the animals are dosed per body weight, animal body weights are within a similar range and endpoints are monitored during a short period of time during which other potential covariates remain stable. Therefore, standard PKPD models developed in a routine manner are usually sufficient. Based on the developed PKPD model, the concentrations which result in a relevant change, such as 10% is calculated (C10, indicated by arrows) for each of the identified CV parameter and compared to the predicted therapeutic concentration (see Fig. 7 , left). The resulting ratios (C10/therapeutic concentration and C20/therapeutic concentration) represent the safety margin and are the final results that can be reported back to the project team. In the example presented here, the safety margin to 10% level (C10/therapeutic concentration, which in this example is 0.2 μM) is approximately eightfold for MABP, tenfold for HR and 40 for QTc. Fig. 7 Prediction results from each of the case studies. Left: exposure-CV response curve from guinea pig data and the predicted concentration of the drug resulting in 10% change (C10, indicated by arrows respectively) for each of the identified CV parameter: second arrow from the left for heart rate (HR), first arrow from the left for mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) and third arrow from the left for QT interval (QTc); middle: exposure-QTc response curve from dog data and the predicted concentration range resulting in 2.5–8 ms QTc increase (shaded area); right: exposure-∆∆QTcF response from the FIH study, predicted ∆∆QTcF effect at the supra-therapeutic exposure (solid horizontal line at 5 ms) and the actual observation from the TQT study
Case study 2: Translating nonclinical QTc data from dogs to predict phase I clinical outcome
The aim of this case study is to predict human QTc outcome in a FIH clinical study using information from nonclinical dog telemetry data. The dog telemetry study is an example of an nonclinical animal model used to assess the QT liability of the compound and it is the accepted “gold-standard” approach [ ]. Dogs have surgically instrumented telemetry transmitter that measure arterial blood pressure and ECG, or purpose-made non-invasive telemetry jackets in the study (e.g. 4 or 6). Usually all animals receive vehicle and a number of single doses of drug with a wash out period in between [ ]. This animal model can be used to assess both drug-induced QTc prolongation as well as QTc shortening. During the study, animals are conscious and free to move while the CV measurements are taken. Plasma samples are also collected for pharmacokinetic assessment, which gives an opportunity to perform PKPD modelling and link the exposure of the drug to the CV effect, such as QTc prolongation. The advantage of applying PKPD modelling in this setting is that it can account for a potential time delay between plasma concentrations and QTc effects (hysteresis [ ]) and it gives a possibility to predict the QTc response under alternative dosing schedules. In addition, PKPD modelling using dog telemetry data can also be used to predict clinical QTc effect of the drug. This can be done by using previously described translational link between dog and human [ ]. According to this model, a QTc change of 2.5–8 ms in dog would correspond to a 10 ms QTc change in human. The translational dog-to-human model has been developed using this approach. Here, PKPD modelling of dog and human data was performed for a set of compounds and the exposure-matched QTc effects in both species were plotted on one graph. If we assume that this translational relationship is consistent also for other drugs (for example compounds that are currently at the nonclinical stage), it is then possible to make predictions of human QTc outcome based on dog data alone. Dogs have also been shown to be less sensitive to QRS and PR prolongations compared to humans [ ], emphasizing the need for robust translational models for interpreting nonclinical results.
In order to predict QTc changed in FIH studies, PKPD modelling of dog telemetry data needs to be performed and all the steps of this evaluation have been schematically presented in Fig. 6 . Briefly, after initial graphical exploration of the data, the modeller should be able to assess whether there are potential trends for the drug-induced QTc changes. If so, the PKPD modelling is performed and once the relationship between drug exposure and QTc effect is described, it is then possible to make predictions for the clinical observations outcome. To do this, the free drug concentration range is calculated that corresponds to 2.5–8 ms QTc change in the dog—based on the final PKPD dog model (see middle plot in Fig. 7 and the predicted range indicated by the shaded area). This free drug concentration is the range that would correspond to approximately 10 ms QTc change in humans—a regulatory concern (ICH E14). As with any model, there are some assumptions that need to be taken into an account when interpreting the prediction of clinical QTc outcome. These assumptions are listed in Table 5 and the main one is that the previously developed translational relationship between dog and man is the same for the newly tested compound. If there is an indication that the new compound may behave differently in human than in a dog, then the human QTc prediction should be interpreted with caution. Table 5 Example of different types of assumptions made in modelling process of the 3 case studies: details on assumption testing are illustrated together with the potential impact of these example Model Types of assumption [ ] Assumption New/established Testable Evaluation Potential Impact Nonclinical guinea pig Pharmacological Guinea pig is appropriate nonclinical model for the tested compound New Not testable at the stage of prediction Test CV effects in clinics medium – the model provides general risk assessment and can flag potential CV liability Data PK data available to link concentration to PD response; high quality PD data is available to detect CV changes Established Yes Data exploration Translational dog–human Pharmacological QTc translational relationship assumed to be the same as that used to develop the model Established, but translational relationship based on a relatively small set of drugs (n = 4) NOT testable at the stage of prediction Test QTc effect in FIH at the relevant drug concentration medium – the model can provide valuable QTc prediction in humans, however, it should be complimented with other assessments; it may inform decisions about dosing in clinical studies or target population Disease Prediction is made for healthy volunteers, without underlying CV problems Established (prediction can be made for FIH study in healthy volunteers) Yes Test QTc effect in healthy subjects Data PK and QTc data is available from healthy and conscious dogs; high quality PD data is available to detect QTc changes Established Yes Data exploration Clinical C-QTc Pharmacological The drug does not affect heart rate Established Yes Evaluated in early clinical studies Potentially high—if further developed, the model may provide possibility to waive the TQT-study Data Rich digital ECG (and concentration) data available; wide range of doses, including placebo, covering therapeutic and supra therapeutic doses Established Mathematical/statistical PK model accurately predicts the concentrations (if need for model due to ECG data without time-matched concentrations) Established
Case study 3: Applying concentration-QT analysis with early clinical data to predict TQT study outcome
This case study provides an example of the predictability of a concentration-QTc analysis, based on early clinical data, for the outcome of a TQT study. The analysis of early clinical data should (optimally) be pre-planned (analysis plan with assumptions outlined, see Table 5 ). We aim to illustrate the key considerations (Fig. 6 ) for the concentration-QTc modelling approach below.
This example is based on a clinical project in which high quality digital ECG data were available from both the FIH study, and from a TQT study. The FIH study was a single ascending dose (SAD), parallel group study in 59 healthy male subjects. A wide range of doses (5, 15, 50, 150, 225, 400, 600 mg with n = 5–6 in each dose group) and placebo (n = 20) were evaluated. Frequent digital ECG data were recorded and analysed with a semi-automated method using the EClysis©software [ ]; as 20× means of 10-s digital ECG recordings pre-dose (baseline), and 10× means of 10 s digital ECG recordings per time-point at 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12 and 24 h after dose. The ECG parameters (RR, QT and QTcF intervals in units of millisecond, ms) were calculated automatically. PK samples were obtained after dosing and were partly matched with the ECG sampling time. A PK model was developed to provide predicted plasma concentrations for each QTcF measurement.
Graphical analysis of the data was first performed to evaluate the appropriateness of a direct effect linear mixed-effects (LME) modelling approach as suggested in [ ]. Based on this analysis it was concluded that there were no relevant effects on heart rate of the drug, no apparent correlation between QTcF and RR was seen, nor were there any indication of time-delay between the concentration and QTcF maximum. A nonlinear relationship was, however, apparent when plotting change from baseline QTcF (ΔQTcF) versus concentration, indicating the potential need for nonlinear models.
Given the nonlinearity indicated, it was decided to apply nonlinear mixed-effects modelling rather than LME. The placebo data were first analysed applying cosine functions to describe the diurnal change in baseline QTcF (for LME analysis a fixed-effect parameter is used for each time-point to account for diurnal changes). A direct effect relationship between predicted concentrations and QTcF was implemented, and both linear and E max functions were evaluated. The E max function, however, could not be estimated and the final model included a linear relationship. Graphical model diagnostics, including visual predictive checks, were used to assess the appropriateness of the model.
The final C-QTcF model was used to predict the change from baseline and placebo QTcF (∆∆QTcF) effect across the concentration range, including the supra-therapeutic dose (600 mg; C max 1500 nM). The predicted mean (90% CI) was 4.9 (2.7–7.0) ms, which is below the ICH E14 limits (mean change of 5 ms with the upper bound of the two sided 90% CI > 10 ms), and is in good agreement with the actual outcome from the TQT study (Fig. 7 , right). This illustrates the usefulness of C-QTc analysis applied to early trial data.
Discussion
The CV system is key to the ongoing function of the body; therefore understanding the potential for drug-induced perturbations are fundamental to decision-making in drug discover and development. In order to develop analysis techniques, it is important to understand CV endpoints used in drug discovery and development, how they result from CV physiology and how they relate to one another. Finally, one must understand what these endpoints may predict. For example, it is important to understand the function of heart ion channels in order to understand the consequences of a drug interacting with them and in this tutorial, we have outlined this.
In order to utilise available nonclinical and clinical data, an understanding of MID3 approaches is required. Through case studies we have aimed to provide insight into how model based approaches may be applied. We hope these case studies have demonstrated the impact that model based approaches on drug discover and development. We have also outlined the regulatory expectations in terms of study design, analysis and interpretation. These will be dependent upon the stage of development and the patient population. In some therapy areas, assessment is only possible in patients, and often as part of a larger clinical study. We have also demonstrated how in vitro, animal and clinical data can be integrated to allow translation of nonclinical findings from before compound nomination to the clinic. We have highlighted where the generation of good quality data can remove the need for a TQT, stand-a-alone, study.
In summary, model informed approaches can have a significant impact on CV safety assessment at all stages of drug discovery and development. This enables a detailed and thorough assessment of CV risk, supporting decision making at key points of a project’s lifecycle.