Introduction
Recent interventional radiology, oncology and surgical data have suggested that primary tumor location is an important prognostic factor in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients [ , , , , , , ]. This has added to the long-established data implicating various molecular characteristics of colorectal cancer (CRC) in treatment prognosis. The combined SIRFLOX, FOXFIRE, and FOXFIRE worldwide overall survival analysis for first-line treatment of patients with mCRC suggested a 4.9-month survival benefit in those patients treated with radioembolization who had right-sided colon cancer, whereas patients with left-sided colon cancer saw no survival benefit [ , ]. Given the relatively poor prognosis of right-sided colon cancer, this is an exciting finding. Furthermore, several different molecular markers in mCRC have been shown to affect treatment outcomes in various locoregional therapies [ , ]. Therefore, it is important for the treating interventional radiologist to understand the fundamentally different tumoral characteristics of mCRC patients whose primary tumor location is right-sided to best treat them. The goal of this paper is to review the molecular characteristics of colorectal cancer (CRC) with a focus on the differences between right-sided and left-sided primary tumor location.
Colorectal Cancer (CRC) Molecular Development Pathways and Important Mutations
There are three major pathways by which CRC develops: chromosomal instability (CIN), mismatch repair (MMR) or microsatellite instability (MSI), and CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) [ ]. Figure 1 outlines these three different developmental pathways. While an exhaustive review of these three pathways is beyond the scope of this review, it is important to understand the basic principles of the different pathways and how each may affect patient prognosis and treatment. Fig. 1 Molecular pathways leading to colorectal cancer. APC adenomatous polyposis coli, KRAS Kirsten rat sarcoma, RC right colon, DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
Chromosomal Instability (CIN)
The CIN pathway is the most common pathway of CRC development featuring in up to 85% of all CRCs and is well known in the adenoma-to-carcinoma sequence for CRC, first described in the early 90s [ , ]. It is commonly described as a progressive loss of tumor suppressor genes that eventually leads to cancer development. Typically, a mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene occurs followed by Kirsten rat sarcoma (KRAS) and P53 mutations [ ]. These mutations are caused by alterations in chromosome segregation, telomere dysfunction, and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) damage response eventually leading to characteristic imbalances in the number of chromosomes seen in tumor cells [ ]. Given the prevalence of various mutations in CRC as well as the prognostic implications of these mutations, a brief review of those genes is likely warranted.
Common Mutations in Colorectal Cancer
APC is the most common mutation in the CIN pathway, being found in 85% of sporadic CRC patients [ ]. The APC gene is part of the Wnt signaling pathway, which regulates cytoplasmic levels of B-catenin, an important factor in cytoskeletal integrity [ ]. While the APC gene has many functions, one of the most important to CRC is its role in cell migration from crypt base to gut lumen [ , ]. Cells with APC mutations tend to migrate towards the crypt base and develop into polyps [ , ].
Rat sarcoma (RAS) gene mutations are also critically important in CRC; while the term RAS mutations encompass a number of related proteins of various importance depending on tumor etiology, for CRC, RAS mutations typically refer to either KRAS or neuroblastoma RAS (NRAS) mutations. KRAS, a member of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, is more commonly mutated in CRC than NRAS and is the second most commonly mutated gene in the CIN pathway [ , ]. While the complexity of the MAPK pathway is beyond the scope of this review, it is important in cell proliferation, and mutations can lead to increase in cell survival and growth signals. KRAS mutations are also important for treatment choices, as adding anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) therapy to standard chemotherapy appears to be of benefit in KRAS wild-type but not KRAS mutant cancers [ , ]. NRAS is also a member of the MAPK pathway, and while NRAS is less common in colon cancer, it appears to confer similar treatment and outcome consequences as KRAS. Another member of the MAPK pathway, BRAF, a serine–threonine kinase, is present in 5–15% of CRCs [ , ]. BRAF is not part of the classic CIN mutation pathway but is important for prognosis, as it portends worse outcomes [ , ].
P53, which is encoded by the TP53 gene, is the final mutation in the classic CIN pathway. P53 is responsible for halting the cell cycle at the gap 1 (G1)/synthesis (S) phase and allowing for repair of mutations. If the mutations cannot be satisfactorily repaired, then p53 induces apoptosis, when functioning properly. Thus, loss of p53 function can lead to loss of DNA repair as well as continued viability of mutated cells. Mutations in p53 are found in 5% of adenomas, 50% of malignant polyps, and 75% of invasive CRC, indicating its importance as lesions progress from benign to malignant [ ].
The final mutation it is important to be familiar with is PIK3CA, which encodes phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3 K), a lipid kinase [ ]. PI3 K is downstream of the EGFR signaling pathway and thus it is thought that activation of PI3 K through mutation of PIK3CA, which occur in 10–20% of CRC patients, may confer resistance to anti-EGFR agents; however, data on this have been conflicting [ , ]. The prognostic impact of PI3 K mutations is also not fully understood; however, some studies suggest that PI3 K mutation is associated with worse prognosis when occurring concomitantly with KRAS mutations [ ].
Mismatch Repair (MMR)/Microsatellite Instability (MSI)
The second pathway of carcinogenesis in CRC is the MMR/MSI pathway which is responsible for approximately 15% of all CRCs, including 12% of sporadic CRC and > 95% of patients with Lynch syndrome [ , ]. MMR genes function in repair of DNA mutations; therefore, genetic (change in DNA sequence) and epigenetic (change in gene function without change in DNA sequence) inactivation lead to mutations and cancer development [ ]. MMR deficiency results in high-frequency MSI [ , ]. Microsatellites, which occur throughout the genome, are non-coding repetitive 1–4 nucleotide segments. MSI can be used to screen patients with Lynch syndrome, but is important in sporadic CRC patients as well. To determine MSI status, five microsatellite markers are tested in cancerous and non-cancerous tissues. Tumors are divided into three groups, no instability (microsatellite stable (MSS), less than 30% instability, or greater than 30% instability (MSI-high (MSI-H)) [ , , ]. BRAF is more common in patients who develop CRC through the MMR/MSI pathway [ , , ]. The effect of MSI pathway on prognosis appears to be divergent. In early-stage tumors, MSI has been shown to confer a favorable prognosis [ ]. However, if later stage or metastatic patients are considered, MSI may confer a worse prognosis, although it is unclear if this is primarily due to its association with BRAF mutations or innate to MSI CRC [ ]. Finally, MSI has been shown to be predictive of resistance to fluorouracil-based (5-FU) chemotherapy in later stages [ ].
CpG Island Methylator Phenotype (CIMP)
The third major established pathway of CRC development is CIMP, which was introduced in 1999 by Toyota et al. [ ]. This pathway involves the hypermethylation of promoter regions of tumor suppressor genes, which leads to mechanical obstruction of transcription factor binding, thus silencing of these genes [ , , ]. CIMP is an example of epigenetic changes leading to cancer as it does not require changes in the DNA sequence, but instead results in gene silencing through reduction in transcription. The silencing of these tumor suppressor genes in turn leads to development and progression of CRC [ , ]. To date, there is no global consensus on defining CIMP status with several competing methods of identification being proposed [ ]. The prognostic value of CIMP is in question as well with conflicting results as to whether CIMP provides a negative or positive influence on outcomes [ , ]. There is a great deal of overlap between the CIMP pathway and MSI. Patients with CIMP tumors demonstrate a high rate of KRAS and BRAF mutations and a low rate of p53 mutations [ ].
Differences in Left- and Right-Sided Cancers
Over the last several years, more emphasis has been placed on the importance of primary tumor location when evaluating patients with CRC. The right colon (RC) and left colon (LC) have different embryologic origins, with the RC arising from the mid-gut and the LC arising from the hind gut [ , ]. While embryologically the division occurs in the distal third of the transverse colon, it is difficult to reliably access clinically; therefore, the splenic flexure is used to demarcate the RC from the LC in clinical studies [ ]. However, right-sided and left-sided colon cancers differ in a number of ways, which may be important to treatment outcomes.
Location Effect on Patient Presentation and Histology
Right-sided colon cancer and left-sided colon cancer patients present in different fashions. RC cancer patients more commonly present with iron deficiency anemia secondary to occult blood loss, while LC cancer patients more commonly present with hematochezia and change in bowel habits [ , ]. Patients with RC cancer also are more likely to be female and are older at presentation [ , , ]. Finally, mucinous histology, which is an uncommon histologic type of adenocarcinoma seen in approximately 5% of CRC, is more common in RC cancer as compared to LC cancer [ ].
Location Effect on Molecular Profile
There are several molecular differences that have been noted between LC cancer and RC cancer. Patients with RC cancer are significantly more likely to develop cancer through the MMR/MSI or CIMP pathways [ , ]. One review of 524 patients with mCRC found that 68% of RC cancer demonstrated MSI as compared to 37% of LC cancer ( P < 0.001) [ ]. This is as compared to LC cancer, which more commonly occurs through the CIN pathway, with CIN being associated with approximately 75% of LC cancer and only 30% of RC cancer [ , , ]. RC cancer is also more likely to have BRAF mutations than is LC cancer, with one study showing 68% of BRAF mutants having a RC primary tumor location as compared to 35% of BRAF wild-type tumors [ , ]. There have been conflicting reports on RAS mutations, including KRAS and NRAS, with some authors demonstrating significantly more RAS mutations in RC cancer and others demonstrating no significant difference by primary tumor location [ , , , ]. However, PI3K mutations have been shown to occur more commonly in RC cancer as compared to LC cancer, while conversely TP53 mutations have been seen more frequently in LC cancer than RC cancer [ , ].
Location Influence on Clinical Outcomes
In a recent meta-analysis, which included 66 publications and 1,437,846 patients, Petrelli et al. found that LC primary tumor location was associated with a 19% absolute risk of death reduction [ ]. This reduction was found regardless of patient race or stage. Benedix et al. [ ] found similar results in their review of 17,641 patients with CRC. They noted that the overall 5-year survival rate was significantly less in those patients with RC as compared to LC primary tumor location, also showing shorter overall survival (OS) in RC cancer patients who presented with stage I or stage III disease. These results have been reproduced by several other authors as well [ , , , ], increasing the interest in understanding the factors which may influence the disparity in outcomes between RC cancer and LC cancer. As mentioned above, RC cancer is associated with BRAF mutations, which confers a worse prognosis as well as mucinous histology, which is controversial in regard to prognosis, but may portend worse outcomes [ , , ]. However, it is important to note that RC cancer seems to be associated with a worse prognosis even when these factors are taken into account [ ].
Location Influence on Microbiota and Mucosal Immunology
Given the recent evidence that RC cancer and LC cancer appear to have different outcomes, even when controlling for things such as molecular markers, histologic subtype, and presentation stage, other influencing factors have been investigated. Microbiota, which varies depending on colonic sight, is one area being reviewed as a possible contributing factor [ , ]. In a review of RC cancer and LC cancer tumors, Dejea et al. [ ] discovered that most (89%) RC cancers and very few (12%) LC cancers were associated with bacterial biofilms. Furthermore, all patients with tumors associated with bacterial biofilms also exhibited biofilms on nearby normal colonic mucosa, and these biofilms were associated with diminished epithelial cell E-cadherin and enhanced epithelial cell IL-6 and Stat3 [ ]. Bacterial biofilms were also associated with increased crypt epithelial cell proliferation. RC has also been shown to have a higher concentration of epithelial eosinophils and T-cell concentration as compare to the LC [ , ]. While the significance of these microbiota and immunologic differences between the RC and LC are still not understood, it is an area of active research, with the goal of further explaining the disparity in treatment outcomes between RC cancer and LC cancer.
Treatment Differences
Current first-line chemotherapeutic treatments for mCRC include Folic acid, 5-Flurouracil, and Oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) OR Folic acid, 5-Flurouracil, and Irinotecan (FOLFIRI); however, targeted therapies are frequently added in combination with these standard chemotherapies [ ]. Patients with RAS (KRAS or NRAS) mutations have been shown to not benefit from anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies (cetuximab and panitumumab) [ , ]. However, recent data have shown that patients with RC cancer and RAS wild-type genomics may benefit minimally or not at all from the addition of an anti-EGFR therapeutic as well [ , , ]. Addition of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-targeted agents (bevacizumab) has been more controversial with initial studies demonstrating a limited benefit in RC cancer, but more recent studies refuting this finding and suggesting RC cancer patients benefit as much or more than LC cancer from its addition [ , , ]. Some authors have also recommended triplet chemotherapy (FOLFOXIRI; Folic acid, 5-Flurouracil, Oxaliplatin, and Irinotecan) for RC cancer, given their aggressive nature and poor survival [ ]. However, while Loupakis et al. [ ] did show a modest survival benefit of treating mCRC patients with FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab using FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab as a control arm (12.1 vs 9.7 months) this was at the expense of significantly more side effects. Therefore, the use of FOLFOXIRI in this patient subset is not advocated by all and further data into its effectiveness in RC cancer patients specifically are needed.
Importance to Interventional Radiology
Recent data have suggested that molecular characteristics of mCRC affect the outcomes of locoregional therapies [ , ]. Furthermore, post hoc analysis of a large randomized controlled trial showed that first-line radioembolization of patients with mCRC in combination with chemotherapy failed to show a benefit in the setting of LC cancer, but did show a fairly profound benefit to RC cancer patients of 4.9 months [ , ]. These studies emphasize the importance of interventional radiologist understanding the molecular characteristics of CRC and the differences between RC cancer and LC cancer. Gaining this knowledge is important for several reasons. First, when attending tumor boards and interacting with medical oncology, radiation oncology, and surgical oncology it is important to have this basic understanding to appropriately choose patients for locoregional therapies. Second, it is important for interventional radiologist to understand those factors that predict a positive treatment effect for our procedures. More thorough understanding of why RC cancer patients demonstrated an OS benefit while LC cancer patients did not may help the identification of other tumoral characteristics to help us optimally assign patients to the various treatment methods available. This is an important area, which would benefit from further research from the interventional radiology community.
Conclusions
CRC patients’ treatment and outcomes are shaped by molecular characteristics; therefore, it is vitally important for treating interventional radiologists to have a basic understanding of this area. Furthermore, RC cancer is a fundamentally different disease process from LC cancer, which has a different embryologic origin, patient demographic, presentation, molecular profile, and outcome. Further investigation is needed to fully understand all of the clinically relevant ways in which RC cancer and LC cancer differ; however, recent data suggest that RC cancer with liver dominant metastases may benefit from first-line radioembolization in combination with chemotherapy.