Introduction
Tunneled, cuffed hemodialysis catheters (TDC) [ , ], which are intended for long-term hemodialysis use, [ , ] contain an externally attached cuff which consists of a band of fibrous material, usually polyester, whose purpose is twofold: (1) to serve as a site for the ingrowth of tissue to firmly anchor the catheter within the subcutaneous tunnel, and (2) to provide a barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external surface of the catheter thereby decreasing the incidence of catheter-related infections.
The attachment of the cuff to the surrounding tissue prevents easy removal or replacement of the attached catheter [ ]. Thus, the physician typically needs to use traction or blunt dissection to separate the cuff from the surrounding tissue during catheter removal or exchange [ ]. Catheter exchange is advantageous when treating hemodialysis patients with a catheter-related infection [ , , ]. Catheter exchange is also required to treat a non-functioning catheter, which often occurs due to thrombosis or movement of the TDC tip position within the patient.
The percutaneous vascular access system (PVAS; DermaPort™) was designed to incorporate a tissue-integrating slidable device into a long-term hemodialysis catheter to enable easy catheter reposition and exchange while providing fixation and infection-resisting properties. The primary hypothesis of the study was that the PVAS enabled the ability to perform TDC exchanges, repositioning, or removal without soft tissue dissection.
Materials and Methods
Health Canada approval was granted for this first in human study. This prospective, open-label, observational, non-randomized study was approved by the respective institutional ethics review boards. Funding for the study, including data storage and data analysis, was provided by DermaPort. All participants signed informed consent forms prior to enrollment in the study. The study enrollment target was maximum of 50 adult chronic hemodialysis patients undergoing dialysis with a TDC. Inclusion and exclusion criteria are presented in Table 1 . Table 1 DermaPort™ protocol summary Inclusion criteria 1. Hemodialysis catheter required for a minimum of 30 days 2. At least 18 years of age 3. Platelet count > 50,000; INR < 1.6 4. Patent internal jugular, subclavian, external jugular, or appropriate collateral vessel 5. Participant understands study requirements and agrees to participate in study 6. Participant agrees to undergo hemodialysis treatment at designated hemodialysis treatment center Exclusion criteria 1. Clinical or laboratory evidence of infection within 10 days prior to procedure 2. Known bleeding disorder 3. Receiving steroid therapy 4. Participant actively enrolled in another hemodialysis-related investigation Primary endpoint Ability of the PVAS to enable catheter exchange, reposition, and removal as required without dissection of tissue-integrating device typically associated with a tunneled catheter Secondary endpoints 1. Quality of exit-site healing associated with the PVAS port as graded by the clinician monthly 2. Blood flow rate through the PVAS catheter, recorded from the dialyzing machine at 30 days following PVAS insertion, and then monthly during the duration of catheter use 3. Physician assessment of PVAS port initial insertion, exchange, and removal procedures 4. Interventions performed to maintain catheter patency if necessary (a) Use of intraluminal thrombolytic agents (b) Reversal of hemodialysis blood lines (c) Other 5. Incidence of catheter-related infection or other complications 6. Catheter migration 7. Patient satisfaction with the PVAS 8. Primary and secondary patency of the PVAS Follow-up 1. Blood flow measurements, including arterial and venous pressures, recorded during hemodialysis at 30 days post-PVAS insertion and then at 30-day intervals for the duration of PVAS use (up to 6 months) 2. PVAS to remain in place at the discretion of the investigator during which time participants will be monitored for adverse events 3. Any instances of catheter migration to be noted and quantified 4. Patient satisfaction questionnaire to be completed monthly
Patient follow-up occurred biweekly for the first month and then at monthly intervals for the duration of PVAS use (minimum of 6 months). Clinical follow-up was conducted by clinical research coordinators. At each monthly follow-up visit, a photograph of the exit site was taken to monitor and document wound healing. Objective measures of catheter blood flow and device-related complications were recorded. Catheter reposition and exchange events occurred per facility protocols and at the discretion of the treating nephrologist. Indications for repositioning/exchange included tip position/migration, inadequate flows, TDC damage, and TDC infection. These TDC manipulations were recorded along with procedure times.
Device
The DermaPort, percutaneous vascular access system (PVAS) [Figs. 1 , 2 ) (FDA approved (510 K) but not CE marked] is designed to facilitate catheter placement, reposition, and exchange procedures while maintaining the catheter attachment, bacterial barrier, and fixation functions of a fibrous cuff. The main component of the PVAS is a metal port, which is implanted with sterile technique into the subcutaneous tunnel at the catheter exit site on the chest wall. Fig. 1 DermaPort™ percutaneous vascular access system (PVAS). A Key features and B physical appearance with a dialysis catheter through the PVAS Fig. 2 A Exit-site healing at 3 weeks and B 1 year post-implantation
To insert the PVAS into the patient, a custom blade is used to make an incision on the chest wall approximately 8–10 cm below the clavicle. A trocar is used to create and slide the catheter with PVAS port through a tunnel. The PVAS port is positioned within the incision with the mesh immediately subcutaneous to the incision. Standard Seldinger technique is then used to insert the catheter via a peel-away sheath at the venous entry site. The 14.5 Fr standard non-cuffed catheter (24, 28, 32, and 36 cm lengths; Martech Medical, Harleysville, PA) was secured to the port using a locking attachment (“brake”) mechanism. This attachment brake component consists of a moveable cylindrical silicone collar, which is attached to the anchor of the PVAS port by two lateral braces using one encircling suture in the proximal groove. After the final positioning of the catheter, the brake at the proximal end of the PVAS port is closed and secured with a suture. Catheter position with the tip at the atrial–caval junction/proximal right atrium is confirmed by fluoroscopy at the end of the insertion procedure.
The implanted portion of the PVAS is designed to encourage tissue bio-integration through the incorporation of an integral porous titanium mesh layer. In an animal model, an epidermal seal was fully established at 3 weeks, with fibrous connective tissue filling over 90% of the sealed mesh at 6 weeks [ , ]. The epithelium grows through the porous mesh layer and seals against the implanted titanium port with no localized skin inflammation (Fig. 2 ). This tissue integration forms an infection-resisting seal between the implanted port and the skin, which is not disturbed during catheter reposition or exchange (Figs. 3 , 4 ). The port (Fig. 1 A) also contains an internal obturating silicone seal, which prevents bacterial ingress along the catheter through the port. The catheter can be slid through this seal during subsequent catheter reposition and exchange procedures. Fig. 3 Tissue ingrowth into the porous mesh on the DermaPort™ showing full epidermal ingrowth 6 weeks post-implantation in a rabbit model Fig. 4 Higher resolution micrograph of the tissue ingrowth into the titanium mesh on the DermaPort™ showing cellular infiltration 6 weeks post-implantation in a rabbit model
Assessment and Definitions
Physician evaluations of PVAS insertion, exchange, reposition, and removal; primary and secondary PVAS patencies, measures of arterial and venous blood flow from the dialysis machines monthly, wound healing assessed with a physician VAS score (assessing erthyma, edema, exudate/wound drainage, and overall quality of wound healing), and infection rates, and patient satisfaction with the device (below) were assessed. Evaluations of patient satisfaction, healing, and clinician procedure expectations were assessed using standard visual analog scales (VAS) [ ]. For healing and clinical procedure expectations, a VAS score of 5 was considered equivalent to the expectations of a TDC with a score exceeding 5 interpreted as surpassing TDC expectations.
PVAS success or the primary endpoint was determined and defined as the ability to perform a TDC exchange, reposition, or removal without dissection with a success rate of at least 80% with a 95% confidence interval. Secondary endpoints were quality of wound healing up to 6 months, TDC blood flow rates, physician assessment of PVAS at insertion and during TDC manipulations, number of TDC interventions and TDC infections, patient satisfaction with the PVAS, and patency rates of the PVAS.
Catheter infection was defined as positive swab cultures at the exit site and/or presence of one or more positive blood cultures and a positive catheter tip culture, whereby the same organism is isolated and not related to another site of infection. Catheter infection rate was reported as infections per 1000 catheter days.
Technical success was defined as successful placement of the PVAS. Primary patency was time from insertion of PVAS device to the first of removal, exchange, or reposition of the TDC. Secondary patency was time from insertion of PVAS device to complete removal of PVAS device and may have included one or more successful interventions to restore TDC patency. Malposition/migration was defined as catheter tip not at the caval/atrial junction or proximal right atrium determined with fluoroscopy. Inadequate flow was defined as inability to achieve a flow rate greater than 300 mL/min at a catheter pressure of less than ± 250 mmHG, per KDOQI guidelines.
Statistical Analysis
Discrete data were presented as counts and percentages or rates. Continuous data were presented as mean ± SD. The primary endpoint was calculated with exact, lower one-sided 95% confidence bounds. A t test was performed to evaluate the success rate against the value of the endpoint goal.
The secondary endpoints of blood flow rates were expressed at mean ± SD; primary and secondary patency was expressed as medians. Interventions and complications were expressed as rates, analyzed for clinical significance, and compared to expected outcomes based on the clinical experience of the investigators. Statistical analyses were performed with StatXact (version 11.1.0, Cytel Studio Software, Cytel, Inc.).
Results
Enrollment terminated after 38 participants since the study objectives were met. Participants were 61% male, mean age 67 years old (range 29–95 years), 84% were Caucasian, 8% were Asian, and 8% listed as “other.” In terms of comorbidities, 36 (95%) had hypertension, 23 (61%) had diabetes, and 16 (42%) had peripheral vascular disease. Thirty-four patients had TDC inserted in the right internal jugular vein and four in the left internal jugular vein.
Technical success of device and TDC placement was 100%. A cumulative time of 12,100 catheter days (397 catheter months) was observed over a 26-month study interval. The mean insertion procedure time was 17.6 ± 7 min. PVAS insertion was graded as easy (mean 7.6 ± 3), as was catheter insertion (8.2 ± 2). The PVAS enabled 31 exchanges and 10 repositions of TDC thru the PVAS port without dissection in 18 patients. The exchanges were performed for inadequate blood flow ( n = 21), infection ( n = 1), catheter damage by patient or staff ( n = 4), and catheter migration ( n = 5). Mean exchange time was 19.3 min ± 11.5 min with catheter repositions performed with a mean time of 5.2 ± 5 min. The procedures were graded as easy (7.6 ± 2.6 and 9.5 ± 1, respectively). Nine of the repositions (90%) were performed at bedside confirmed by portable X-ray and no additional repositions. The device met the acceptance criteria/primary endpoint of at least a 95% confidence level that 80% of these procedures (exchange and reposition) occurred without the need for dissection. The exact, lower one-sided 95% confidence bound for this observed 100% (18/18), and patient-level success rate is 84.7% ( p = 0.02; on sided).
The mean VAS scores for exit-site healing at 6 months were: erythema 5.16 ± 1.48; edema 5.33 ± 1.16; exudate/drainage 5.46 ± 1.20; and quality of wound healing 5.64 ± 1.24 (mean ± SD) indicating no difference from those expected for standard TDC (VAS score of 5). Mean QB for the study was 357 ± 63 mL/min with arterial pressures at − 179 ± 37 mmHg and venous pressures at 131 ± 29 mmHg.
Primary patency of the PVAS was 172 ± 150 days. The longest PVAS implantation time was 770 days, while the longest patient without a TDC exchange was 647 days. Secondary patency of the PVAS was 430 ± 203 days for the nine active patients at the end of the study. The mean time for all patients enrolled in the study was 262 ± 201 days. Fourteen patients were removed from the study for the following reasons: one kidney transplant, seven deaths (non-device related), two matured hemodialysis arteriovenous fistulas, three withdrew from hemodialysis, and one bloodstream infection (non-device related). Thirteen explantations occurred in these patients with no noted difficulties in explantation of the PVAS. No patients were lost to follow-up.
Complications were primarily TDC related. There were 66 TDC used from both insertion and exchange procedures; exchange procedures were required for seven cracked luers. There were 16 total cases of PVAS mesh exposure at the exit site with no erosions. (Eleven of these cases were considered minimal, requiring no clinical correction over the study period.) Five patients received replacement of PVAS ports for mesh exposure that occurred early in the study, suturing material used to keep the PVAS port in place was clarified, and the issue of mesh exposure was resolved.
Two minor exit-site infections occurred at 175 and 433 days, respectively, treated with external antibiotic ointment. One bloodstream infection occurred in a home hemodialysis patient at 251 days, and one exit-site/TDC sepsis occurred at 326 days. The bloodstream infection was considered to be unrelated to the PVAS port device or TDC as there were no clinical signs of exit-site or tract infection, and TDC-derived blood cultures were negative. No PVAS devices were explanted for exit-site infection. The observed catheter infection rate was 0.33/1000 days.
There were five instances (7.6%) of catheter migration with clinical significance (> 1 cm migration). All events with clinical significance were related to participant abuse of the catheter: three due to participant abuse (25, 20, 13 cm, respectively); one due to mechanical force, caught TDC on chair, pulled (8 cm); and one unknown cause. The TDC with clinically significant migration were successfully exchanged thru the PVAS port without complications.
VAS scores at 6 months for patient satisfaction were: procedure 8.8 ± 1.16; recovery 9.13 ± 0.91; and comfort 8.97 ± 0.95.
Discussion
In 2010, within the USA, 80% of incident hemodialysis patients initiated dialysis with a catheter, and although rates drop below 20% for prevalent patients, TDC remain commonly used [ ]. Dialysis catheters are considered as an inferior form of access for dialysis patients due to higher complication rates and poorer patency rates compared to grafts and fistulas [ ]. Complications mainly consist of thrombosis, migration, fibrin sheath formation, and infectious complications, and in one study, median time to first episode of catheter dysfunction was 95 days [ , ].
Catheter tip migration occurs in most peripheral catheter placements (98%) and to a much less degree with central catheter migrations (2%) where the tip may move as much as 3–4 cm [ ] and occasionally needs to be addressed immediately [ ]. One advantage of the DermaPort™ is that it would enable the physician to adjust the TDC as needed without disturbing the healing process or by revision. In regard to “exposed” cuffs to TDC, there is a paucity of reported incidence making a comparison to exposure of the PVAS mesh difficult. However, in cases of mesh exposure requiring intervention, the exposure happened before incorporation could occur, and the problem was mitigated with a change in suturing material (from silk that can stretch to a mersilene polyester fiber) to allow for time for the device to become incorporated into the SQ tissues. Also when a TDC cuff is exposed, there is concern that a barrier to infection has been lost [ ]. Despite mesh exposure in 16 cases, no devices were considered clinically infected or explanted for infection.
A major cause of catheter removals/exchanges is infection [ , , ]. For catheters that are the source of bacteremia, catheter exchange is recommended [ ]. The DermaPort™ offers the opportunity to exchange the infected catheter and replace the new TDC into the same location. TDC-related infections have a reported incidence of 1.1–5.5 episodes per 1000 catheter days [ , , ]. Within this study, 0.33 episodes per 1000 catheter days were noted. Only one catheter was exchanged for non-device-related blood stream infection. The design of the PVAS device may have contributed to the low infection rate due to its barrier-like characteristics [ , , , ]. Given the observed lower infection rate within this study, there are possible economic and patient care benefits from use of the PVAS.
Primary patency of the PVAS was 172 days with loss of primary patency the result of dialysis catheter dysfunction, not the PVAS itself. In one study, for TDC median primary patency was 202 days and a review of the literature found a primary TDC median patency of 66–312 days [ ]. The study results fall in the mid-range suggesting acceptable catheter patency with the PVAS. In addition, observed blood flows for the catheters were above 300 mL/min indicating that the PVAS device did not compromise catheter flow rates. Also, by VAS scores, patients were very satisfied with the insertion procedure and comfort with the device in place.
Catheter thrombosis and central venous stenosis account for up to 40% of catheter failures and are often not recognized immediately [ ]. As noted in this study, 31 catheter exchanges were performed with 21 performed for inadequate blood flow. With TDC, blunt dissection would have been required for TDC exchange, whereas with the PVAS device, no dissection was required which also reduces procedure time and potential risk for infection. This was supported by the average time of exchange of 19 min. Physicians found these procedures to be easier compared to their subjective prior experience with cuffed TDC. In addition, patients were very satisfied with the PVAS compared to their perception of a regular TDC.
There are several important limitations to this study. Ninety percentage of patients received TDC via the right internal jugular vein, which may have positively influenced our patency and infection rates. A staggered tip TDC was used, and with newer catheter tip designs, an impact on patency and exchange rates may have been observed. Finally, despite the observed advantages of the PVAS in this prospective study, further assessment as to efficacy, patient satisfaction, and low infection rates needs to be validated with a randomized controlled trial.
Conclusions
Device-related infection rates were lower than historical outcomes with traditional TDC and required no explantations for infection. The PVAS system facilitates efficient catheter repositioning and exchanges, often directly at the patient bedside. These outcomes may offer clinical and cost benefits for patients that are dialysis catheter dependent.