Introduction
Sympathetic neuroimaging is rarely used as part of autonomic function testing in the USA, although this modality is used commonly in Europe and Japan and has been for decades. This discrepancy is due mainly to issues related to approvals by regulatory agencies and third-party payors. In this review we summarize evidence on the clinical utility of sympathetic neuroimaging, with emphasis on the evaluation of neurogenic orthostatic hypotension (nOH).
Historical perspective
Sympathetic neuroimaging developed as an offshoot of efforts to visualize and treat endocrine tumors using radioiodinated compounds by William H. Beierwaltes (1917–2005), one of the founders of nuclear medicine [ ], at the University of Michigan. He was a co-holder of a patent for radioiodinated Iobenguane, which is synonymous with metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) (Fig. 1 ). In the early 1980s, animal studies showed that following the intravenous injection of 131 I- or 123 I-MIBG the heart was visible on planar or tomographic images and reserpine, which blocks the vesicular uptake of monoamines, decreased the amount of cardiac radioactivity, indicating cardiac neuronal uptake of the tracer and retention of the radioactivity in storage vesicles in myocardial sympathetic nerves [ ]. Beierwaltes’s group began clinical studies involving cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging by 123 I-MIBG scanning in the 1980s [ ]. Notably, in 1987 they reported “Generalized autonomic neuropathies were associated with marked diminutions of [ 123 I]MIBG uptake into the heart.” Fig. 1 Chemical structures of some sympathetic neuroimaging agents. The agents can be classified in terms of catecholamines and non-catecholamines
The advent of clinical positron emission tomographic (PET) scanning at about the same time led to somewhat parallel efforts to visualize cardiac sympathetic innervation by using 18 F-labeled compounds. Groups at the Brookhaven National Laboratory [ , , ] and intramural National Institutes of Health (NIH) independently developed 18 F-dopamine [ ], and the first clinical 18 F-dopamine scanning studies were reported in the early 1990s [ ]. With a few exceptions [ ], since then clinical 18 F-dopamine PET scanning has been done solely at the NIH Clinical Center. PET scanning for cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging has continued to be refined at the University of Michigan, with the use in particular of 11 C-meta-hydroxyephedrine [ ]. A positron-emitting analog of MIBG is under development [ ].
Overview of sympathetic neuroimaging agents
One can classify sympathetic neuroimaging agents in terms of two types of compounds—catecholamines and sympathomimetic amines (Fig. 1 ). As noted in a recent publication in Clinical Autonomic Research [ ], catecholamines are catechols (note the “head of the cat”). In this review we will focus on 18 F-dopamine as the prototype of a catecholamine PET imaging agent. 18 F-Dopamine was the first catecholamine PET imaging agent to be used in clinical autonomic research [ ].
Inspection of the chemical structures in Fig. 1 shows that 123 I-MIBG is not a catecholamine, a catechol, or a chemical analog of the catecholamine norepinephrine, as sometimes is claimed [ ]. Instead, 123 I-MIBG is an analog of the sympatholytic agent guanethidine. Catecholamines and sympathomimetic amines are analogous pharmacologically in that they share the characteristic of being substrates for the Uptake-1 process [ ] mediated by the cell membrane norepinephrine transporter (NET). Catecholamines and sympathomimetic agents differ importantly, however, in their respective metabolic fates in neuronal and non-neuronal cells (Fig. 2 ). Catecholamines such as 18 F-dopamine and 11 C-epinephrine are substrates for monoamine oxidase (MAO) and catechol- O -methyltransferase (COMT). This offers the opportunity, by simultaneous measurement of the parent catecholamines and their metabolites, to obtain important insights into specific mechanisms underlying catecholamine depletion. In particular, concurrent measurement of myocardial 18 F-dopamine-derived radioactivity and arterial plasma levels of 18 F-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid ( 18 F-DOPAC) enabled the discovery of an intra-neuronal vesicular storage defect in Lewy body diseases [ ]. Combined neuroimaging/neurochemical approaches showed that under resting conditions most of the turnover of catecholamines in sympathetic nerves occurs via net leakage from vesicles—not release with escape from neuronal reuptake [ ]. The neuronal uptake of positron-emitting catecholamines occurs extremely rapidly, so that there is little confusion about distinguishing “uptake” and “washout” of the radioactivity and little concern of substantial radioactivity remaining in myocardial cells. Fig. 2 Concept diagrams for the different fates of sympathetic neuroimaging agents that are catecholamines versus those that are not catecholamines. Catecholaminergic sympathetic neuroimaging agents are substrates for monoamine oxidase ( MAO ) and catechol- O -methyltransferase ( COMT ); 123 I-metaiodobenzylguanidine 123 I-MIBG is not. 18 F-DA 18 F-Dopamine, 18 F-DOPAC 18 F-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid, OCT organic cation transporters, NET cell membrane norepinephrine transporter, SNS sympathetic noradrenergic system, VMAT vesicular monoamine transporter
123 I-MIBG, 11 C-meta-hydroxyephedrine, and other radiolabeled sympathomimetic amines are not substrates of MAO or COMT. They are better substrates than catecholamines for extra-neuronal uptake via the uptake-2 process mediated by organic cation transporters (OCT). This means that there is more non-neuronal radioactivity with these tracers than with catecholamines. 123 I-MIBG is also not as good a substrate for the NET or vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT) in sympathetic nerves as are catecholamines. Nevertheless, from the point of view of detecting sympathetic noradrenergic denervation, both types of agents work well because of the shared feature of being substrates for the NET.
11 C-Methylreboxetine ( 11 C-MRB) is a NET ligand, and 11 C-dihydrotetrabenazine and 18 F-tetrabenazine are ligands for the type 2 VMAT, the form of VMAT in sympathetic nerves. There is no published information on whether these ligands yield satisfactory cardiac sympathetic images. In our experience, 18 F- l -3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine ( 18 F- DOPA), which is used to visualize central dopaminergic innervation, is of no value as a sympathetic neuroimaging agent; this is because 18 F-DOPA is a neutral amino acid and as such is taken up by myocardial cells via the neutral amino acid transporter.
123I-Metaiodobenzylguanidine
Almost all 123 I-MIBG scanning studies involve calculation of the heart/mediastinum ( H / M ) ratio of 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity (Fig. 3 ). H / M ratios are measured during an “uptake” phase of about 15–30 min and a subsequent “washout” phase of a few hours. Fig. 3 123 I-MIBG SPECT/CT scans (scans combining single photon emission computed tomography and computed tomography, respectively) showing (left) normal left ventricular 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity, indicated by a high heart ( H )/mediastinum ( M ) ratio and (right) abnormal 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity with a low H / M ratio. Figure reproduced with permission of P. Borghammer
Quantification of radioactivity in regions of interest is difficult because of the limited spatial and temporal resolution and lack of attenuation correction. Quantitative methods addressing these limitations are being developed [ ].
The H / M ratio is a crude parameter that is influenced importantly by the camera–collimator combinations. One of the reasons for the successful use of 123 I-MIBG scanning in Japan is the standardized approach for quantification. Cross-calibration methods have been published for Japan [ ] and more recently in Europe [ ].
The relatively long scanning intervals in typical 123 I-MIBG SPECT scanning render the meaning of “uptake” at best complicated. Because of the extremely rapid exit of injected sympathomimetic amines from the bloodstream, neuronal uptake via the NET, and vesicular uptake via the VMAT, the “uptake” phase probably actually corresponds to a period when not only uptake but also loss of the radioactivity is occurring. The loss of radioactivity may reflect not only sympathetically mediated exocytosis but also vesicular leakage with possible backwards exit of the radioactivity via the NET because of the concentration gradient as 123 I-MIBG levels in the extracellular space fall.
123I-Metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy versus positron emission tomography imaging
No study has compared scanning using 123 I-MIBG scanning with scanning using a PET imaging agent. Each of these modalities has advantages and disadvantages.
There are practical limits on the temporal resolution of 123 I-MIBG scintigraphy because of the time required for sufficient radioactivity to accumulate to produce an interpretable image. Attenuation correction, which is needed for quantifying radioactivity within regions of interest, is not done currently, and virtually all literature on the subject is based on H / M ratios. 123 I-MIBG scanning is rarely performed together with myocardial perfusion imaging, meaning that separating a sympathetic lesion from a coronary arterial or microvascular lesion can be impossible. This is especially a consideration in the evaluation of diabetic autonomic neuropathy.
PET scanning for cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging requires a system for rapid delivery of the imaging agent from the site of production to the site of administration; personnel carrying out radiochemical syntheses by hand must be monitored carefully to stay within radiation safety guidelines; and there are substantial expenditures for space, equipment, maintenance, and software. Very few centers do cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging by PET scanning, and the procedure is not approved in the USA for any medical indication.
Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension
Cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging is very useful in the evaluation of patients with neurogenic orthostatic hypotension (nOH). A four-step algorithmic approach has been proposed based on whether the OH is persistent and consistent, has an identifiable cause, is neurogenic, and is associated with sympathetic noradrenergic denervation [ ] (Fig. 4 ). It is at the last step that cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging comes in. Fig. 4 Algorithm for the clinical and laboratory evaluation of orthostatic hypotension. Cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging is used to identify sympathetic noradrenergic denervation. AAD Autoimmunity-associated autonomic failure with sympathetic denervation, AAG autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy, BP blood pressure, CNS central nervous system, DLB dementia with Lewy bodies, MSA multiple system atrophy, MSA-C cerebellar MSA, MSA-D MSA with cardiac sympathetic denervation, MSA-P parkinsonian MSA, PAF pure autonomic failure, PD + OH Parkinson disease with orthostatic hypotension
If there were a suspected secondary cause of nOH, such as diabetic autonomic neuropathy, cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging would not be of value diagnostically. Similarly, in nOH associated with peripheral neuropathy (especially “small fiber neuropathy”), the value of cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging is unclear. In a patient with clinical central neurodegeneration and nOH, neuroimaging evidence of cardiac sympathetic denervation argues for Parkinson disease (PD) with OH (PD + OH) or dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) + OH (DLB + OH), whereas multiple system atrophy (MSA) is less likely. On the other hand, the finding of neuroimaging evidence of intact cardiac sympathetic innervation is strong evidence against PD + OH or DLB + OH. In a patient with nOH, no signs of central nervous system involvement, and neuroimaging evidence of intact cardiac sympathetic innervation, the diagnosis is not necessarily autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy (AAG), and MSA beginning with autonomic failure is a possibility.
Alternative means to identify sympathetic noradrenergic denervation include plasma levels of catechols during supine rest [ ], skin biopsies with a focus on small nerve fibers in arrector pili muscles that receive pure sympathetic noradrenergic innervation [ ], and neuropharmacologic probes such as tyramine infusion [ , ]. It is likely that none of the alternatives is as sensitive as cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging, because in nOH the cardiac noradrenergic lesion is more severe than in other organs or the body as a whole [ , ].
Lewy body diseases
A substantial and remarkably consistent body of literature has documented neuroimaging evidence of cardiac sympathetic denervation in Lewy body diseases, including PD, DLB, and pure autonomic failure (PAF) [ , ]. Probably the first report describing neuroimaging evidence of a cardiac sympathetic lesion in PD was that by Hakusui et al. [ ]. There has been post-mortem confirmation of this finding based on profoundly decreased immunoreactive tyrosine hydroxylase in epicardial nerves and myocardial tissue [ , ] and based on myocardial norepinephrine contents [ , ].
Since essentially all patients with PD + OH have neuroimaging evidence of cardiac sympathetic denervation [ , ], the finding of intact innervation in a patient with nOH and parkinsonism excludes PD + OH.
Recent studies have supported the value of combining cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging with central neural biomarkers of Lewy body diseases, such as 123 I-FP-CIT SPECT (also called 123 I-ioflupane SPECT [single photon emission computed tomography] and DaT scanning [ , , , ]) and calculation of apparent diffusion coefficients [ ]. Another potential approach is to combine cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging with analysis of skin biopsies to identify denervation [ ] or synucleinopathy [ ] in skin constituents that receive sympathetic noradrenergic innervation, such as arrector pili muscles.
Parkinson disease versus multiple system atrophy
Most patients with MSA, a non-Lewy body form of alpha-synucleinopathy, have neuroimaging evidence of intact cardiac sympathetic innervation [ , , ], although there are exceptions [ , , ].
The vast majority of studies on differentiating PD from MSA by cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging have begun with the movement disorder, not with nOH (Table 1 ). These studies almost always have not stratified PD in terms of the occurrence of nOH. In Europe, 123 I-MIBG scintigraphy is recommended by European Federation of Neurological Societies as a diagnostic tool in the evaluation of PD, without regard to OH [ ]. Table 1 Cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging to distinguish Parkinson disease from multiple system atrophy First author [citation reference] Year Parkinson disease ( N ) a Multiple system atrophy ( N ) a Significant difference? Braune [ ] 1999 15 5 Yes Goldstein [ ] 2000 29 24 Yes Reinhart [ ] 2000 21 7 Yes Druschky [ ] 2000 10 20 Yes Braune [ ] 2001 246 45 Yes (meta-analysis) Courbon [ ] 2003 18 10 Yes Saiki [ ] 2004 34 7 Yes Matsui [ ] 2005 17 9 Yes Oka [ ] 2006 39 17 Yes Kashihara [ ] 2006 130 11 Yes Raffel [ ] b 2006 9 10 Yes Rascol [ ] 2009 N/A N/A (Review) Treglia [ ] 2011 1226 129 Yes (meta-analysis) Orimo [ ] 2012 625 N/A Yes (meta-analysis) Umemura [ ] 2013 118 20 Yes Yang [ ] 2017 25 18 Yes a N refers to the number of patients b Denervation in multiple system atrophy also
In PD without OH, only about one-half of the patients have evidence of cardiac sympathetic denervation, a minority have partial denervation, typically in the inferolateral region, with sparing of the anterobasal region (Fig. 5 ), and a small minority have normal neuroimaging [ , , , , ]. Without stratification in terms of nOH there can be overlap between PD and MSA. Fig. 5 Partial and diffuse cardiac sympathetic noradrenergic lesions indicated by 18 F-dopamine positron emission tomography PET)/CT scanning. The cardiac sympathetic lesion can be more prominent in the inferolateral wall than the anteroseptal base of the heart and progress to become diffuse. All subjects gave written informed consent to participate in an Institutional Review Board (IRB)-approved protocol before undergoing any research procedures
There seem to be two historical trends that have led to different justifications for including cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging in autonomic medicine. The first is within the domain of the differential diagnosis of chronic autonomic failure and specifically of nOH. The relevant question is: in a patient with nOH and signs of central neurodegeneration, does cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging distinguish PD + OH from MSA? The second trend is within the domain of movement disorders and specifically of parkinsonism. The relevant question is: In a patient with parkinsonism, does cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging distinguish PD from MSA? Answering the first question requires studying patients with PD + OH specifically, whereas the second question can be answered by studying patients with PD regardless of the occurrence of OH. The authors of some studies have reported similarly severely decreased myocardial 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity in PD independently of OH [ , ]; others have noted that a sub-population of patients with PD and no OH (PD No OH) have normal myocardial 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity [ , , ].
Studies based on 18 F-dopamine PET scanning help resolve this inconsistency. We have found that at the time of initial evaluation, patients with PD + OH are on average about a decade older than patients with PD No OH [ ]. It is possible that patients with PD No OH who are relatively old at the time of motor onset are more likely to have cardiac sympathetic denervation. To take into account the difference in group mean age, from our large ongoing database we deleted data from older PD + OH and younger PD No OH patients to achieve groups matched for mean age (Fig. 6 ). When this was done the PD + OH group still had lower myocardial 18 F-dopamine-derived radioactivity than did the PD No OH group. It is possible that inconsistency in the literature on 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity in PD + OH versus PD No OH may reflect insufficient attention to the ages at which the groups were compared or inadequate numbers of subjects to avoid false–negative results. The issue is of some consequence because if a proportion of PD No OH patients had normal 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity, this would limit the specificity of the test for differential diagnosis from MSA. Fig. 6 Mean (± standard error of the mean) values for interventricular septal myocardial 18 F-derived radioactivity in patients with PD + OH ( PD+OH ) PAF, PD without OH ( PD No OH ), MSA, normal volunteers ( Normal ), and individuals at increased risk for PD ( PDRisk [ ]). Numbers in rectangles are numbers of subjects. Mean ages are shown below the group labels. The patients gave written informed consent to participate in an IRB-approved protocol before undergoing any research procedures. Numbers in italics are p values for factorial analyses of variance comparing the PD + OH, PD No OH, and Normal groups. Note lower 18 F-derived radioactivity in the PD + OH group than in the PD No OH group, even in groups of similar age
To summarize, 123 I-MIBG scanning is valuable for distinguishing PD from MSA, but it is even more valuable for distinguishing PD + OH from MSA, because a proportion of PD No OH patients have normal 123 I-MIBG data.
Combining cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging with plasma levels of catechols adds relatively little compared to cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging alone in terms of differentiating PD from MSA. In our experience, low plasma levels of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycol (the main neuronal metabolite of norepinephrine) occur in some patients with PD + OH, whereas plasma levels of this metabilite are normal in patients with PD No OH.
Amyloidosis
In most cases amyloidosis is acquired. Amyloidosis has been classified into several forms, including immunoglobulin light chain diseases, chronic inflammatory disorders, dialysis, old age, and hereditary. When presenting mainly as sensory, autonomic, and motor polyneuropathy, the term autonomic polyneuropathy has been used, and when presenting mainly as cardiomyopathy, amyloid cardiomyopathy has been used. A mixed form also can occur.
In contrast with alpha-synuclein, the neuronal accumulation of amyloid, which can explain autonomic neuropathy in Lewy body diseases, occurs extracellularly. Exactly how amyloidosis leads to sympathetic denervation is poorly understood. Decreased H / M ratios of 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity in amyloid autonomic neuropathy are associated with a poor prognosis [ ].
Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis is a rare but clinically and scientifically important disorder that is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait [ ]. The disease results from extracellular deposition of the mutated protein, transthyretin. In hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis, cardiac dysautonomia assessed by 123 I-MIBG scanning predicts long-term survival after liver transplantation [ ].
Dementia with Lewy bodies
Neuroimaging evidence of cardiac sympathetic denervation characterizes DLB [ , , ] and predicts DLB in individuals with amnestic mild cognitive impairment [ ], although it should be noted that to date cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging studies have not been done in groups of patients whose diagnoses were subsequently pathologically confirmed [ ].
This modality is useful for differentiating DLB from Alzheimer’s disease and other forms of dementia (Table 2 ) [ , , ]. The distinction is clinically relevant in allowing for early initiation of effective treatment with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and avoiding adverse effects from antipsychotic medications that are dopamine receptor blockers. Dopamine receptor blockade in DLB could precipitate overt parkinsonism or worsen OH. Table 2 Cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging to distinguish dementia with Lewy bodies from Alzheimer’s disease First author [citation reference] Year Dementia with Lewy bodies ( N ) a Alzheimer’s disease ( N ) a Significant difference? Yoshita [ ] 2001 14 14 Yes Taki [ ] 2004 N/A N/A Yes (review) Orimo [ ] 2005 7 10 Yes Hanyu [ ] 2006 32 40 Yes Hanyu [ ] 2006 19 39 Yes Yoshita [ ] 2006 37 42 Yes Nakajima [ ] 2008 N/A N/A N/A (review) Rascol [ ] 2009 N/A N/A N/A (review) Treglia [ ] 2010 N/A N/A N/A (review) Kim [ ] 2015 22 37 Yes Yoshita [ ] b 2015 61 46 Yes Manabe [ ] 2017 79 19 Yes Abbasi [ ] 2017 7 10 Yes McKeith [ ] c 2017 N/A N/A N/A Sonni ( ] 2017 N/A N/A N/A (review) Toru [ ] 2018 56 59 Yes Nuvoli [ ] 2018 N/A N/A N/A (review) N/A Not available a N refers to the number of patients b Multi-center study c Consensus statement
As in the diagnostic evaluation of parkinsonism, combining cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging with biomarkers of central dopaminergic deficiency may improve the accuracy of testing for DLB [ , ].
Heart failure
Patients with childhood dilated cardiomyopathy [ ], hypertrophic cardiomyopathy [ ], acute myocarditis [ ], and heart failure [ , ] have been reported to have abnormal 123 I-MIBG cardiac scanning. The severity of the scanning abnormality is associated with the functional classification of the heart failure [ ]. A low H / M ratio of 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity is associated with poor outcome in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy [ , , , ], ischemic cardiomyopathy [ ], and congestive heart failure [ ].
Treatment of heart failure is associated with improvement in the H / M ratio [ , , , , , , , , ].
In patients with chronic heart failure, low H / M ratios of 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity are associated with an increased risk of cardiac events [ ], including sudden death [ ]. In patients with an implanted cardiac defibrillator and well-compensated heart failure, 123 I-MIBG washout is positively related to fast ventricular arrhythmic episodes [ ] and other ventricular arrhythmias [ ].
In the USA, 123 I-MIBG, marketed as AdreView by GE Healthcare (Chicago, IL, USA), was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2013 for cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging in heart failure (New York Heart Association [NYHA] class 2–3 heart failure with a left ventricular ejection fraction of ≤ 35%). This approval was based on data from the ADMIRE-HF trial, an observational study in which 25% of 961 patients with systolic heart failure who underwent 123 I-MIBG scanning had a primary event (NYHA functional class progression, potentially life-threatening arrhythmia, or cardiac death). The 2-year event rate was 15% for those who had an H / M ratio of > 1.60 and 37% for those with an H / M ratio of < 1.60, for a hazard ratio of 0.40 [ ]. Whether 123 I-MIBG scanning helps identify patients likely to benefit from implantation of a cardiac defibrillator is still under investigation.
There are several potential explanations for low H / M ratios of 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity in heart failure. Cardiac sympathetic denervation cannot be a sufficient explanation because of the relatively rapid improvement by essentially all treatments that reduce the severity of the heart failure. Neuronal uptake of norepinephrine in the heart has been reported to be normal in congestive heart failure [ ]. It seems likely that the low H / M ratios of 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity reflect markedly increased exocytotic release of norepinephrine [ ]. Treatment of heart failure reduces the sympathetic hyperactivity [ ] and can explain the improvement in H / M ratios. Locally high norepinephrine concentrations at neuronal uptake sites could also compete with 123 I-MIBG for uptake into sympathetic nerves, giving the appearance of decreased NET activity.
Takotsubo cardiopathy
Takotsubo cardiopathy is an acute, reversible form of heart failure brought on by emotional distress or other factors that cause acute release of catecholamines [ , ]. A takotsubo is a Japanese ceramic pot for catching octopi, and patients with takotsubo cardiopathy have a lack of contraction or even a ballooning out of the left ventricular apex and normal basal contraction during systole, giving the heart the appearance of a takotsubo . Mid-ventricular and even reverse patterns of myocardial akinesia have also been described. The condition is especially common in post-menopausal women.
Many studies have agreed on low H / M ratios of 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity in takotsubo cardiopathy [ , , , ]. There are probably several determinants of the abnormality. First, plasma levels of norepinephrine and especially epinephrine are markedly increased in takotsubo cardiopathy [ , ], and high circulating catecholamine levels can compete with cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging agents at neuronal uptake sites [ ]. Second, all forms of heart failure are associated with increased sympathetic noradrenergic outflow to the heart [ , , ], and high local interstitial fluid concentrations of norepinephrine released from cardiac sympathetic nerves could compete with 123 I-MIBG for the NET. Third, because of the elevated rate of exocytotic release, 123 I-MIBG taken up into intra-neuronal vesicles can be released at an increased rate; this would be especially manifested by increased “washout” of 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity.
After takotsubo cardiopathy, decreased 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity can persist even after return of cardiac function to normal [ , ].
Pheochromocytoma
Pheochromocytomas are rare tumors of catecholamine-synthesizing cells, usually in the adrenal gland, although they can be located elsewhere; they are usually non-malignant. Pheochromocytomas are important clinically because they constitute a potentially surgically curable form of hypertension and because, if left undetected, they can produce sudden, unexpected hypertensive paroxysms. Since the tumors usually express the NET, 123 I-MIBG scanning can visualize them [ , ], and 123 I-MIBG scanning is approved in the USA for the diagnostic evaluation and localization of pheochromocytoma.
In this review, pheochromocytoma is mentioned because of the potential effects on cardiac sympathetic noradrenergic functions. High circulating catecholamine levels in patients with pheochromocytoma can result in dilated cardiomyopathy that is reversible upon removal of the tumor [ ]. This effect is reminiscent of the situation in takotsubo cardiopathy noted above, and indeed takotsubo cardiopathy can result from pheochromocytoma [ , ].
Probably because of competition between endogenous catecholamines and 123 I-MIBG for neuronal uptake sites in pheochromocytoma, patients with pheochromocytoma can have decreased H / M ratios of 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity, with reversal of the abnormality after tumor resection [ ].
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
The presence of cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in diabetes mellitus has been associated with about a doubled risk of silent myocardial ischemia and mortality [ ]. Diagnosis usually rests on a battery of tests, although approaches vary by center [ ]. Cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging studies have found decreased 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity in diabetic patients compared to controls, even in the absence of other signs and symptoms of autonomic neuropathy [ , , ]. Further studies are needed to determine the clinical utility of 123 I-MIBG scanning in the evaluation of diabetic autonomic neuropathy, especially since coronary microvascular lesions could decrease 123 I-MIBG-derived radioactivity.
Conclusions
Cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging by 123 I-MIBG scanning is approved in the USA to help assign prognosis in patients with heart failure. 123 I-MIBG scanning focusing on the adrenal glands is also approved in the diagnostic evaluation of pheochromocytoma. Based on extensive and long-standing experience with 123 I-MIBG scanning in Europe and the Far East and on compelling results reported in the literature, we propose that indications for cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging by 123 I-MIBG scanning should be expanded to the diagnostic evaluation of nOH in the setting of parkinsonism to diagnose PD + OH differentially from MSA, and of cognitive dysfunction to diagnose DLB differentially from other forms of dementia. 18 F-Dopamine PET scanning for cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging offers advantages over 123 I-MIBG SPECT scanning but is available only at the NIH Clinical Center.