Introduction
The trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias (TACs) are a group of primary headache disorders with core similarities. The primary feature common to all is attacks of severe or extreme, strictly unilateral headache of varying duration, accompanied by cranial autonomic symptoms (CAS). The group contains some of the most painful conditions known to man—cluster headache (CH), paroxysmal hemicrania (PH), short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT), short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache with cranial autonomic features (SUNA), and hemicrania continua (HC)—all classified according to the International Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD-3 beta) [ ]. These disorders are highly disabling, some with onset early in life and persisting for many years, resulting in considerable economic and social burden [ ]. Although occasionally described as rare, the prevalence of CH, the most prevalent of the TACs, is 0.1%, comparable to Parkinson’s disease [ ]. The TACs share many clinical features; nevertheless, there are also key differences, including treatment response, making clinical differentiation crucially important. With their stereotypical presentation, it may be surprising that a correct initial diagnosis is made in only 21% of CH patients, and the diagnostic delay is 6 years [ , ].
This review will give an overview of the clinical features of the TACs and then focus on the current understanding of the pathology and how this affects clinical presentation and treatment. The majority of our knowledge is centered on CH which is reflected in the following. Treatment will not be covered in detail and readers are referred to exhaustive reviews on this topic.
Search strategy
Relevant articles were identified by PubMed search using the following terms: “trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias”, “cluster headache”, “paroxysmal hemicrania”, “SUNCT”, “SUNA”, “hemicrania continua”, “pathophysiology”, “headache”. References of articles identified were also searched. The searches were performed in May and June 2017. Only English articles were included.
Clinical features
The primary differentiating features of the TACs are the duration and frequency of attacks (Table 1 ). However, both of these may overlap between disorders and clinically the best method for reaching the correct diagnosis relies on a detailed patient history as well as the use of a headache diary. In some cases, and despite an overlap here also, treatment response may aid the diagnostic process. There are no known specific biomarkers for the TACs but imaging focusing on pathology in the cavernous sinus and pituitary fossa may be used to exclude secondary headache. Table 1 Characteristics of the individual TACs Adapted from [ ] Cluster headache Paroxysmal hemicrania SUNCT Hemicrania continua Attacks/day 1–8 1–40 3–200 Continuous Attack duration 15–180 min 2–30 min 1–600 s Hours to days Pain intensity Very severe Very severe Severe Varying with exacerbations Typical pain location (Peri-)orbital, frontotemporal Frontotemporal, retro- and periorbital Orbital, supraorbital, temporal, trigeminal Temporal, periorbital Prevalence 0.1% 0.02–0.05% 0.05% Rare Typical age of onset 20–40 20–70 35–65 35–50 Male/female 2.5/1 1/1 2/1 1/2.8 Restlessness 90% 80% 65% During exacerbations Acute treatment response Oxygen 70% 0% 0% 0% Sumatriptan 90% 20% 0% Occasional Preventive medications Verapamil Lithium Indomethacin Lamotrigine Indomethacin Indomethacin-responsive ± + – + Rhythmic attack patterns + ± – – Patients with spontaneous remission periods (%) 80 20 Majority 15
Besides the frequent, short-lasting attacks, the CAS define these headaches and are part of the diagnostic criteria. They result from parasympathetic hyper- and sympathetic hypoactivity, and include conjunctival injection, lacrimation, nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, eyelid edema, forehead and facial sweating and/or flushing, a sensation of fullness in the ear, miosis and ptosis. They are present to different degrees, the most common being lacrimation, occurring in around 75% of patients. Headache, CAS and the occasional phono- and photophobia are completely lateralized [ ]. The attacks in CH, PH and SUNCT generally arise abruptly and end just as abruptly, although pre-attack symptoms are probably under-recognized.
Cluster headache
Named for the tendency for attacks to cluster together at specific times of the year, CH has the longest average attack duration among the TACs, lasting around 45 min. Occurring up to eight times a day, the pain is extreme, probably the worst of all headaches, and biorhythmic features are highly pronounced, with both circadian and circannual attack patterns [ , ]. Along with the CAS, most patients also experience restlessness or agitation during attacks. There are two sub-diagnoses: (1) episodic (eCH; 80% of patients), where attack periods lasting weeks or months are interspersed with remission periods lasting longer than 1 month, and (2) chronic (cCH; 20%), with no remission periods lasting more than a month. Especially in eCH, attacks often occur during sleep, and 80% of patients indicate that sleep or napping triggers attacks [ ].
CH treatment can be divided into three groups: abortive, preventive and transitional/bridge therapy. Typically, patients will use injectable or nasal triptans or oxygen delivered via a face mask at 8–15 L/min as abortive therapy to end the attack [ ]. While it has been suggested that oxygen may be useful in migraine with CAS [ ], it does seem to be uniquely effective in CH and may be used in the differential diagnosis.
First-choice preventive treatment is the calcium channel blocker verapamil, administered with the aim of reducing the duration, frequency and severity of attacks [ ]. The method of action of verapamil is unknown, but it is interesting that this drug—as well as lithium, the second-choice preventive therapy for CH—may show some efficacy in the treatment of the chronobiological bipolar disorder [ , ]. Topiramate, methysergide, gabapentin and melatonin can be used in CH, but are typically used only as third-choice preventives [ ].
Oral glucocorticoids can be used as a transitional therapy, administered for a rapid preventive effect, while verapamil or lithium is being titrated [ ]. If the side effects are tolerable, glucocorticoids work very well in CH and some of the other TACs [ ]. Another option for transitional therapy is the greater occipital nerve (GON) block using a local anesthetic either alone or combined with injectable glucocorticoids.
Surgery is not widely used, due to inconsistent results and adverse events. When it is used, the target is parasympathetic or sensory pathways (gangliolysis, neurectomy, resection) [ ]. A more promising approach, however, is the use of neurostimulation targeting the posterior hypothalamus, sphenopalatine ganglion, occipital and vagal nerves, which has demonstrated positive effects in a growing number of studies conducted over the past two decades [ ]. The effects of the available modes of neurostimulation are not directly comparable, since occipital nerve and deep brain stimulation seem to have solely a preventive effect, whereas sphenopalatine ganglion and vagal nerve stimulation have both acute and preventive effects.
Paroxysmal hemicrania
PH may in some presentations resemble CH, the main differences being shorter, more frequent attacks and less predilection for nocturnal occurrence [ ]. Oxygen is not effective, possibly due to the shorter attacks and the somewhat delayed onset of effect, but attacks can be completely prevented by the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug indomethacin [ ]. Using the same criteria as for CH, PH is classified as either episodic (20–35%) or chronic (65–80%). It is not known why most PH patients experience chronic symptoms while most CH patients experience episodic events, and why PH attacks do not show as marked a circadian rhythm. While most attacks in PH arise spontaneously, it does appear that 10% are triggered mechanically, the C2–C3 region of the neck being particularly sensitive. There appears to be no preponderance by sex [ ].
Given the high frequency of short attacks, therapeutic focus should be on prevention. The first choice for PH is indomethacin, typically in doses of 150–225 mg. [ ]. Although the response is described as absolute, very high doses of around 300 mg may be needed, and timing may also play a role, some patients requiring 10 days of maintenance therapy before any effect sets in, or needing to take the medication at a specific time of day [ ]. When the patient is attack-free, tapering can be attempted at regular intervals, and with the episodic subform, medication can be stopped between attack periods. Gastroprotective measures should always be considered, and not all patients can tolerate indomethacin in the doses required for efficacy; kidney function may also need to be monitored. Other treatment options include topiramate and GON blocks [ ].
SUNCT/SUNA
SUNCT is characterized by still shorter and more frequent attacks than PH. These are, per definition, accompanied by conjunctival injection and lacrimation and last 1–600 s, occurring with a very high frequency of up to 30 per hour [ ]. They can be triggered by mechanical stimuli to the skin and can also occur as repetitive stabs [ ]. In SUNA, there may be any number of the previously described CAS. The pain distribution is typically orbital or periorbital, and the character can be electric or shock-like, hence the name neuralgiform. Between attacks, most patients are completely pain-free, and only seldom do attacks occur at night.
The concept of abortive therapy in a headache disorder characterized by attacks whose duration is measured in seconds is not realistic, and there are no controlled trials investigating preventive treatment. Treatment is therefore a specialist task, with evidence based on one large and several small case series [ ]. Preventive first-choice medication is lamotrigine, with topiramate and gabapentin second. Extra efficacy may be gained by combination with corticosteroids. However, as with all TACs, some cases are medically refractory, and patients do not respond to or cannot tolerate effective dosages. Magnetic resonance imaging may show evidence of neurovascular compression in some patients, and some of these may respond to microvascular decompression of the trigeminal nerve [ ].
Although SUNCT and SUNA are classified as TACs, a case has been made that these are more neuralgia-like and should be classified as trigeminal neuralgia (TN) variants [ ]. This is supported by the finding of neurovascular compression and the response to decompression. The ambiguity is also underscored by the finding that in rare cases, TN may be associated with CAS [ ]. Unlike TN, however, in SUNCT the majority of sufferers do not experience a refractory phase following attacks.
Hemicrania continua
HC is likely very rare, with approximately 100 cases reported, although the disorder may be underdiagnosed. The pain is not as severe as with the other TACs—typically mild to moderate—but it never remits completely, waxing and waning throughout the day. There may be exacerbations in the same sensory distribution of varying durations where the pain is severe or very severe. As with the other TACs, the pain is unilateral, and in contrast to migraine, the patient may become restless and agitated during exacerbations where CAS are also more pronounced. HC is more commonly found in women, and exists in two forms—remitting and unremitting—with the latter being the most common. The similarities between HC and migraine are the basis of some discussion, and it was only in the most recent headache classification that HC was placed together with the TACs [ ]. Like PH, HC responds absolutely to indomethacin administered in a similar regime, with similar precautions. Other treatments may include melatonin, GON blocks, gabapentin and topiramate.
The natural course of HC is unpredictable. In the case of freedom from pain under indomethacin, treatment tapering can be tried after 2 weeks with absence of pain. If the tapering is successful and the patient remains pain-free, all scenarios can be encountered, including persisting remission or future episodes of HC of varying durations [ ].
Pathophysiology
While our understanding of the TACs remains imperfect, there is strong proof that similarities extend from clinical phenotype to pathophysiological mechanisms. In early years, research efforts were focused on peripheral mechanisms. This was motivated by observations such as the effectiveness of glucocorticoids leading to suspicion that inflammation, possibly in the cavernous sinus, could be involved, but evidence of this was never found [ ]. Vasodilation in intracranial arteries and increases in particular neuropeptides measured in jugular blood are well-documented, but are unspecific and are also seen in other circumstances, suggesting that these phenomena are secondary in nature [ ]. Lastly, the role of the trigeminal nerve in CH and PH may in fact be secondary, since the pain is not always located within the trigeminal distribution, and surgical resection of this nerve does not always end the headaches, and when it does, the effect may be temporary [ , , ]. The fact that provocation of cluster attacks using alcohol or nitroglycerine is possible during, but not outside, the cluster periods seems to suggest that the patient needs to be in a permissive state for attacks to arise. Overall, peripheral mechanisms alone cannot satisfactorily explain the complete symptomatology of the TACs.
Involvement of areas of the pain matrix is not surprising in a headache disorder, and was indeed found in neuroimaging studies, but the discovery of specific hypothalamic activation during CH attacks, which was later demonstrated in other TACs as well, cemented the concept of a strong central component in the pathophysiology [ , ]. Involvement of central components is confirmed by the prominent chronobiological features and derangements of centrally regulated hormones, as well as a close association with sleep in CH. In the following sections, three major elements of TAC pathophysiology will be covered: the trigeminal-autonomic reflex, hypothalamic involvement, and sleep and systemic autonomic changes.
The trigeminal-autonomic reflex
CAS are not specific to the TACs, and can be seen in both migraine and experimental pain in healthy volunteers [ , ]. However, what is specific is how pronounced this cranial autonomic activation is during attacks. The CAS result from activation of the trigeminal-autonomic reflex, leading to increased cranial parasympathetic outflow [ ]. The afferent loop is made up of the trigeminal nerve, mostly the first division, and activation of these fibers is likely responsible for the pain. Sensory neurons in the trigeminal ganglion innervate both extra- and intracranial structures and meningeal vessels. Nociceptive signaling from these reach the trigeminal nucleus caudalis (TNC; if the upper cervical spinal levels are included, it is referred to as the trigeminocervical complex). From here there are connections to brainstem, medullary, diencephalic, hypothalamic and thalamic areas. Amongst these is a reflex connection to the parasympathetic superior salivatory nucleus (SSN) in the pons from which parasympathetic nerves arise [ ]. These autonomic fibers pass through the geniculate ganglion, synapsing in the sphenopalatine ganglion, which gives rise to innervation of the cranial vasculature by vasomotor neurons and innervation of the lacrimal and nasal mucosa glands by secretomotor neurons. While these circuits may explain the increased parasympathetic tone during attacks, and can account for the parasympathetic CAS, the miosis and ptosis do not result from parasympathetic excess; rather, they result from a sympathetic deficit. It is believed that these two CAS may be caused by carotid wall swelling, compressing sympathetic fibers projecting to the orbit.
Biomarkers for activation of the reflex have been identified: During CH and PH attacks, increases in calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) can be measured in jugular blood on the attack side, an indication of trigeminovascular and cranial parasympathetic activation, respectively [ , ]. In humans, triptans and oxygen reduce the levels of both of these signaling molecules [ ], and the unique clinical usefulness of oxygen in CH can probably be explained by a specific inhibitory effect on the parasympathetic cranial outflow, in turn inhibiting evoked trigeminovascular activation [ ]. The triptans work on 5-HT(1B/1D) receptors, likely causing presynaptic inhibition of cranial sensory nerves, although central mechanisms have not been excluded [ , ].
Invasive manipulation of the trigeminal-autonomic reflex with interventions aimed at the sphenopalatine ganglion has been practiced for almost 100 years, recently also including local injection of onabotulinumtoxin A [ ]. Interventions also include neurostimulation targeting this ganglion. An implanted device with stimulation electrodes in the sphenopalatine fossa is activated and powered by remote control, delivering on-demand stimulation. It has been shown to be effective in around two-thirds of patients; initially investigated as an abortive therapy, it appears to have a preventive effect as well [ ]. The device may work by breaking the efferent loop of the trigeminal-autonomic reflex, leading to cessation of the ongoing attack, but elucidation of mechanisms remain speculative. Research into pharmacological manipulation of trigeminal signaling is also a strong field. Gepant-class CGRP receptor antagonists had shown promising results in treating migraine attacks without the vasoconstriction associated with the triptans [ ]. However, liver toxicity was an issue, and the drugs were discontinued. Ditans (5-HT1F-directed agents) may offer similar advantages and are being investigated [ ]. Monoclonal antibodies targeting CGRP and the CGRP receptors are currently being explored in both migraine and CH, and initial results are promising [ ]. Manipulation of pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide-38 (PACAP-38) signaling also represents a developing area in CH and headache therapy [ ].
The above-described efforts over the past three decades have shed light on these mechanisms, and we now have a good understanding of the neurobiological substrate for the pain and CAS. However, much remains unknown with regard to the central mechanisms. What may complicate matters is that CH and PH patients can experience attack pain without autonomic features, and vice versa [ , , , ]. Although this is a small minority, it still indicates that pain and CAS are not inseparable and may not necessarily be reflex-mediated. Further, while differential activation of the trigeminal-autonomic reflex could explain the different degrees of cranial autonomic activation seen in the TACs, the reflex cannot be the sole component of the pathophysiological mechanism. It does not explain the central effects seen in some of the treatments or the absolute effect of indomethacin in some TACs and complete ineffectiveness in others, nor does it explain the chronobiological attack patterns, hormonal changes, gender differences or efficacy of deep brain stimulation. These observations introduce the concept of hypothalamically modulated TAC reflex-based syndromes.
Hypothalamic involvement
With a focus on CH, the case for hypothalamic involvement rests on four lines of evidence: neuroimaging studies, efficacy of deep brain stimulation, endocrinological changes and chronobiological features (covered in the next sections).
Neuroimaging studies
Hypothalamic activation was first demonstrated in CH using positron emission tomography (PET) functional neuroimaging [ ]. These results were corroborated by findings of increased cellular density in the same area and findings of hypothalamic neuronal dysfunction as measured by magnetic resonance spectroscopy [ , , ]. Patients with CH also have decreased opioid receptor availability in the hypothalamus and anterior cingulate cortex that is dependent on disease duration [ ]. Functional imaging studies in the other TACs have also found activation of the posterior hypothalamus [ , , , ]. The pattern of hypothalamic activation seen in the different TACs is not wholly the same, however, with both ipsi- and contralateral as well as bilateral activation observed. Furthermore, the stereotactic coordinates are not completely identical between studies. Nevertheless, activation of part, or all, of the posterior hypothalamic area seems certain.
The posterior hypothalamus connects to brainstem nuclei including the SSN and TNC via direct, bidirectional connections referred to as the trigeminohypothalamic tract [ ]. The descending connections, some of which are orexinergic, are thought to regulate brainstem pain processing. Orexin (hypocretin) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide involved in the regulation of many homeostatic functions, including arousal and pain processing, and injection of orexin B into the posterior hypothalamus has been shown to increase spontaneous firing in the TNC, increasing the response to dural stimulation and noxious stimulation [ ]. The response to orexin A is the opposite—diminished trigeminal firing. Orexin A levels in cerebrospinal fluid have been found to be depressed in CH, but the immediate effect or cause of this remains speculative [ ]. Also, an association between CH and a polymorphism in an orexin receptor gene was found but was not confirmed in a recent meta-analysis [ ]. Orexins are most famously involved in the regulation of the sleep–wake cycle, as evidenced by the devastating result of complete deficiency in the sleep disorder narcolepsy [ ]. In CH, and perhaps the TACs in general, this signaling system represents a possible link between hypothalamic activation and descending nociceptive modulation, sleep disturbances and chronobiological features [ ]. A dual orexin receptor antagonist, filorexant, was recently investigated in migraine, where there was no significant difference compared to placebo; however, selective antagonists and other forms of administration should also be investigated [ ].
Deep brain stimulation
In CH, PH and SUNCT, deep brain stimulation (DBS) targeting the posterior hypothalamus has been used to treat patients with chronic, medically refractory TAC, achieving a response rate of around 60% [ ]. PET functional neuroimaging has revealed increased blood flow in the ipsilateral, posterior, hypothalamic gray matter and ipsilateral trigeminal system in CH patients treated with DBS [ ]. Several theories for the effect have been proposed, including blockade of a local “cluster generator”, a non-specific antinociceptive effect by activation of the periaqueductal gray and/or rostral ventromedial medulla pain modulatory systems, and finally, long-term modulation of neuronal pain-processing pathways. Further research is necessary to elucidate this effect.
Endocrinological changes
In CH, changes in several hormones have been observed, including growth hormone, thyrotropin, gonadotropins, testosterone, cortisol and melatonin [ ]. Some of these changes are present only during the cluster period, others also during remission. However, considering the chronobiological features, one of the most remarkable changes identified in CH patients is a lower level of melatonin and a blunting of nighttime increases [ ]. Melatonin does have some effect as a prophylactic or adjunctive therapy, especially in eCH, and an association between daylight and cluster occurrence has been identified [ ]. Other endocrinological changes include a lower level of testosterone, although this may be secondary to reduced amounts of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep [ , ]. Still, it represents an interesting finding, because, like the lower levels of opioid receptors, it may contribute to an overall lowered pain threshold. Lastly, and of particular clinical relevance, is the efficacy of glucocorticoids as a preventive and transitional therapy in several primary headaches, but especially in CH [ ]. Elucidation of the mechanism behind its effect remains speculative, but it has been suggested that it may work by normalizing noradrenaline levels in the hypothalamus through complex feedback mechanisms [ ].
Chronobiology, sleep and systemic autonomic changes
The last—and perhaps most easily observed—evidence for hypothalamic involvement in the TACs is the chronobiological features inherent in CH. In the classical understanding of headaches, focus was given to the pain, which of course is the most debilitating and prominent symptom. However, it is now apparent that this is only part of a larger complex of symptoms and findings which result from dysregulation of homeostasis.
The chronobiological patterns are most apparent in CH where they have been studied in some detail. Here, attacks commonly occur at night, typically arising 1–3 h after the patient falls asleep (Fig. 1 ). This may be more pronounced in eCH, and not so much in cCH. Concerning circannual rhythms, some studies have found two peaks—typically spring and autumn—although with some variation. A recent study of Danish eCH and cCH patients found that cluster occurrence was high from fall till spring and low during the summer [ ]. This is interesting in a setting of reduced melatonin levels. It is also noteworthy that when going from the episodic to the chronic phenotype of CH, and moving into the TACs with more frequent attacks, it seems the association with sleep is lost and attacks become more unpredictable. From a clinical standpoint, this naturally fluctuating disease activity becomes a challenge when evaluating treatment efficacy, as it will be difficult to assess whether a remission was due to a change in treatment or the cluster ending of its own accord. Fig. 1 Different patterns of pain. Yellow boxes indicate typical timing of attacks in the trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias. eCH has slightly fewer attacks than cCH, and these are more often associated with sleep. PH has more attacks which are less associated with sleep. SUNCT has still more frequent and shorter attacks. The exacerbations in HC can vary greatly in duration. Cultural influences may also affect attack timing. eCH episodic cluster headache, cCH chronic cluster headache, PH paroxysmal hemicrania, SUNCT short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing, HC hemicrania continua. Time is in 24-h format
This close temporal connection between attacks and sleep has prompted a number of studies (reviewed in [ ]). Early observations indicated that in eCH, attacks occurred during REM sleep whereas this was not apparent in cCH [ ]. More recent and larger studies have not identified such a pattern [ , ]. However, there are indications that the attacks may arise with the ending or start of sleep cycles, perhaps triggered by shifts in autonomic tone. Overall, patients’ sleep is fragmented, with a counterintuitive lower number of arousals compared to controls and lower REM density [ ]. The prevalence of sleep apnea may be higher in CH, although this is not a universal finding, and there does not seem to be any consistent improvement of the headache with successful treatment of the apnea [ , ].
In PH there are reports of single cases with completely “REM-locked attacks” (17/18 attacks), but this has never been confirmed in larger studies [ ]. As stated previously, SUNCT activity is reportedly not high at night, and nocturnal attacks should prompt suspicion of a symptomatic lesion. In HC there are sparse reports that irregular sleep may trigger exacerbations which may also occur during sleep, but no other association has been reported.
Involvement of systemic autonomic regulation
There are multiple studies in the TACs showing that the homeostasis of systemic autonomic regulation is affected. This represents derangement separate from the described CAS and is best characterized in CH [ ], but is likely also present in the other TACs. These are not necessarily subtle, and indications of altered systemic autonomic function were noted in the earliest accounts of the disorder [ ]. They have since been confirmed in a number of studies and include bradycardia and cardioinhibitory syncope during attacks [ , ]. This prompted the labeling of CH as a “parasympathetic paroxysm”.
Several studies have found indications of systemically increased parasympathetic tone including ECG changes and bradycardia during spontaneous and provoked attacks [ , , , , ]. CH patients were also found to have abnormal responses to standard autonomic tests such as deep breathing, active standing, Valsalva maneuver and sustained handgrip [ , , , ]. A number of tilt-table studies have all found altered autonomic and baroreflex function, with indications of dysfunction in the parasympathetic division or in the central relay from the baroreceptors, resulting in reduced reactivity of the autonomic nervous system [ , , , , , ].
Past studies have shown that lesioning of the posterior hypothalamus may result in a systemic sympathetic deficit, whereas stimulation of this structure in CH increases the sympathoexcitatory drive and improves sleep structure and quality [ , , ]. This observation again draws attention to orexinergic signaling which is involved in the control of the autonomic nervous system [ ]. As stated previously, orexin has been shown to be decreased in CH, and narcolepsy patients, completely deficient in orexin, have a reduced sympathetic drive in wakefulness [ ].
Other than the above-described instances of bradycardia and syncope, there are no reports that these changes in systemic autonomic regulation represent a frequent clinical problem. However, how these findings relate to the observation that CH attacks have a propensity for arising during times of increased parasympathetic tone may be relevant with regard to patient education. It could be speculated that the increased parasympathetic drive seen during attacks could result from activation of the trigeminal-cardiac reflex; however, this would not explain changes in sympathetic tone or changes observed in the attack-free state [ ]. The efficacy of vagal nerve stimulation in some CH patients is also an interesting finding in this regard. Possible mechanisms for headache relief have been described, and stimulation of this nerve has been noted to affect trigeminal nociception [ ].
Conclusion
Despite the bulk of evidence in favor of a central role of the hypothalamus, it remains unknown whether this brain region triggers attacks, serves to end attacks or has a permissive role in allowing self-perpetuation of the trigeminal-autonomic reflex. Further, whether the TACs really represent individual clinical entities or are a continuum of differential manifestation of symptoms and epiphenomena remains a debatable issue [ ]. It is possible that in the setting of reduced descending antinociceptive input to the brainstem, the threshold for activation of the trigeminal autonomic reflex is lowered and thus can activate and reactivate via positive feedback, leading to the CAS and the pain. Such a theory would explain the headache, the CAS and the accompanying features of the TACs; however, it does not explain the differences between the TACs.
In a clinical setting, the primary focus must be the alleviation of pain by established treatment regimes. However, an understanding of the seasonal and diurnal nature of the TACs is imperative in patient education and timing of therapeutic efforts. This has hitherto not been systematically applied or investigated in the TACs, but with better knowledge of how attack patterns manifest, this may change. In the coming years, advances in animal models, neuroimaging, neurostimulation and neuropharmacology are sure to deepen our understanding of these disabling headache syndromes.