Introduction
The increased prevalence of obesity in the US population and its associated comorbidities (e.g., cardiovascular disease, insulin resistance) has driven the need for preventative strategies and therapeutic options [ ]. A strong association between obesity and inflammation has led to a rise in studies to determine the link between obesity-induced inflammation and certain diseases [ , ]. Obesity-induced inflammation is a low-grade, chronic immune-mediated response that results in the secretion of a number of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and acute phase proteins (e.g., C-reactive protein) [ , ]. This low-grade inflammation increases the burden of obesity on health across multiple organ systems and diseases, with a large impact on cardiovascular function [ , ].
Activity of the sympathetic nervous system is increased in response to acute and/or chronic inflammation [ ]. The autonomic nervous system (through sympathetic and parasympathetic efferent nerves) regulates and integrates many functions in the human body—including cardiovascular activities—and the disruption in this regulation is associated with higher prevalence of adverse cardiovascular outcomes [ ]. Consistent with this idea, obese adults exhibit an increase in sympathetic and a decrease in vagal activities, which have been linked to abnormal cardiovascular parameters [ ].
The measurement of baroreflex sensitivity is a source of valuable information in the clinical management of cardiovascular disease. Baroreflex sensitivity measures the capability of the autonomic nervous system to respond to changes in blood pressure sensed at the level of the carotid sinus and aortic arch [ ]. Variations in baroreflex sensitivity may result from decreases of parasympathetic activity and/or increases of sympathetic activity, which may be altered with the advancement and progression of cardiovascular diseases.
The use of antiinflammatory agents in obese adults can improve metabolic abnormalities associated with obesity, such as insulin sensitivity [ ], and an antiinflammatory diet can decrease cardiovascular disease risk [ ]. However, the effect of antiinflammatory compounds on autonomic function is inconclusive [ , , ]. Thus, the purpose of the present investigation was to examine the effect of ibuprofen (a cyclooxygenase inhibitor and systemic antiinflammatory agent) on baroreflex sensitivity in lean and obese individuals. Based on the existing literature, we hypothesized: (1) baroreflex sensitivity would be lower in obese individuals when compared to lean individuals and (2) acute ibuprofen administration would increase baroreflex sensitivity in obese subjects, with no effect in the lean subjects.
Methods
A total of 13 healthy adults [7 lean (4 male/3 female), 6 obese (5 male/1 female)], aged 18–40 years (lean 25 ± 2 years, obese 30 ± 3 years, p = 0.22), participated in the present study after giving written informed consent confirming their participation. The Institutional Review Board at Mayo Clinic reviewed and approved all procedures. All procedures were conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Data from these subjects examining the effect of oral ibuprofen on resting muscle sympathetic nerve activity (MSNA) and endothelial function (intra-arterial acetylcholine) were published previously [ ].
Based on review of the medical history and a brief physical examination, all subjects were determined as healthy, non-smoking, normotensive, taking no cardiovascular medications, and with no history of cardiovascular disease or other chronic diseases. Lean subjects were identified as having a body mass index (BMI) less than 28 kg/m 2 (range 20–26 kg/m 2 ). Obese subjects were identified as having a BMI greater than or equal to 35 kg/m 2 (range 35–40 kg/m 2 ). Young women were non-pregnant (confirmed by a negative pregnancy test within 48 h of the study day) and were studied in the early follicular phase of the menstrual cycle or during the low hormone phase of oral contraceptive use.
Subjects completed two visits randomized to control (CON) or oral ibuprofen (IBU) and separated by at least 1 month. Studies were performed in the Mayo Clinic Clinical Research Unit (CRU) after an overnight fast and at least 24 h without caffeine or vigorous exercise. On the ibuprofen visit, subjects received 800 mg oral ibuprofen in pill form approximately 90 min prior to the start of data collection. All procedures were conducted in the supine position. Instrumentation consisted of a three-lead ECG for continuous recordings of heart rate, an intravenous catheter in the dominant arm for administration of study drugs (sodium nitroprusside, phenylephrine HCl), and a brachial arterial catheter (5 cm, 20 gauge) in the non-dominant arm (following local anesthesia, using ultrasound guidance and aseptic technique) for blood pressure monitoring and blood sampling [C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6), fasting glucose, fasting insulin]. High sensitivity C-reactive protein was measured using a Roche chemistry analyzer (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN; lowest detection 0.03 mg/dl). Interleukin-6 was measured using an immunoassay (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN; lowest detection 0.31 pg/ml). Glucose was measured using the glucose oxidase method (Analox Instruments Inc., Lunenburg, MA). Insulin was assessed using a two-site immunoenzymatic assay performed on the DxI automated immunoassay system (Beckman Instruments, Chaska, MN).
Multiunit muscle sympathetic nerve activity (MSNA) was measured from the right peroneal nerve at the fibular head using an insulated tungsten microelectrode. A muscle sympathetic fascicle was identified when taps on the muscle belly or passive muscle stretch evoked mechano-receptive impulses, and no afferent neural response was evoked by skin stimuli [ , ]. The recorded signal was amplified (80,000-fold), band-pass filtered (700–2000 Hz), rectified, and integrated (resistance-capacitance integrator circuit, time constant 0.1 s) by a nerve traffic analyzer (662C-4 Nerve Traffic Analysis System, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA). Baseline MSNA data (burst frequency and burst incidence) were published previously [ ].
ECG, arterial pressure, and MSNA data were simultaneously recorded at 250 Hz (WinDaq, DATAQ Instruments, Akron, OH). Following instrumentation and a minimum of 10 min of quiet rest, subjects completed two modified Oxford tests separated by 25 min for assessment of baroreflex responsiveness [in 3 subjects (obese, n = 1; lean, n = 2) only one modified Oxford test was completed because of time constraints]. Each modified Oxford test began with a 5-min resting period, followed by a 100-µg intravenous bolus of sodium nitroprusside (to transiently lower arterial pressure). One minute later, subjects were administered a 150-µg intravenous bolus of phenylephrine HCl (to transiently increase arterial pressure), and data were collected for an additional 2 min.
Baroreflex sensitivity was determined by examining the relationship between systolic blood pressure and heart rate (cardiac baroreflex sensitivity) or diastolic blood pressure and MSNA (sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity) measured during a modified Oxford test. Results are reported as the mean of the two modified Oxford tests. The sensitivities of baroreflex control of the heart were assessed using the relationship between the R – R interval and systolic blood pressure during the vasoactive drug boluses. The slope of the linear portion of this relation was used as an index of baroreflex sensitivity (ms/mmHg) [ ]. A minimum r value of 0.50 was used as the criteria for accepting slopes. Values for the R – R interval were pooled over 2-mmHg ranges to minimize variability due to non-baroreflex influences [ ]. To take into consideration the mathematical constraint of the hyperbolic relationship between the R – R interval and heart rate, responses were also evaluated by plotting the changes in systolic pressures with heart rate (beat/min/mmHg).
Sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity was determined by examining the relationship between diastolic blood pressure and MSNA during the modified Oxford-mediated changes in arterial pressure. Bursts of MSNA were automatically detected on the basis of amplitude using a signal-to-noise ratio of 3:1 within a 0.5-s search window centered on an expected 1.3-s burst peak latency from the previous R-wave (WinCPRS, version 1.163, Absolute Aliens Oy, Turku, Finland). Potential bursts were displayed and edited by one trained investigator (A.A.A.). Diastolic blood pressure for each cardiac cycle was grouped into 3-mmHg intervals (bins). Burst incidence and total MSNA for each diastolic blood pressure bin were calculated and plotted against the corresponding diastolic blood pressure. The slopes of these relationships were evaluated with linear-regression analysis. All linear-regression analyses were weighted for the number of cardiac cycles within each diastolic blood pressure bin, and a minimum r value of 0.50 was used as the criterion for accepting slopes. In cases where only one of the two modified Oxford tests resulted in an r ≥ 0.50, a single trial was used. In cases where both tests resulted in an r ≥ 0.50, measures were averaged.
Statistical analysis was completed using SigmaStat 12.0 software (Systat Software Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). Resting variables were compared between groups (lean/obese) using a one-way analysis of variance. To examine the differential effect of ibuprofen on main outcome variables, a two-way repeated measures analysis of variance was used to examine the effect of group (lean, obese), drug (control, ibuprofen), and group-by-drug interactions. Further comparisons using Pearson correlations were conducted post hoc to explore the potential contribution of secondary outcome variables (e.g., IL-6, CRP, insulin) on baroreflex sensitivity. Post hoc analyses were also conducted on the effect of sex (male, female) on observed responses. An alpha of 0.05 was considered statistically significant, and data are expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean.
Sample size was determined a priori by power test equations with α = 0.05 and power = 0.80, using differences reported from previously published data. Specifically, data from Weisser et al. [ ] suggested that six subjects per group would be necessary to detect a 0.78 ± 0.49 beat/min/mmHg difference in baroreflex sensitivity with ibuprofen.
Results
Demographic data were published previously [ ]. Briefly, when compared to lean controls, obese adults had higher weight (74 ± 4 vs. 116 ± 6 kg, p < 0.01), BMI (23 ± 1 vs. 36 ± 1 kg/m 2 , p < 0.01), IL-6 (1.0 ± 0.1 vs. 4.1 ± 1.5 pg/ml, p = 0.03), and a trend for higher CRP (0.07 ± 0.3 vs. 1.7 ± 0.4 mg/l, p = 0.07). Ibuprofen resulted in a non-significant decrease in CRP ( p = 0.14) and a significant reduction in IL-6 in obese adults only (Table 1 , [ ]). Glucose was not different between groups (93 ± 1 vs. 99 ± 5 mg/dl, p = 0.37), whereas insulin was higher in obese subjects (7 ± 1 vs. 37 ± 14 µU/l, p = 0.04). No differences in systolic or diastolic blood pressure were observed between groups, and there was no detectable effect of ibuprofen ( p > 0.05, data not shown). Heart rate was higher in obese adults when compared to lean adults (67 ± 2 vs. 57 ± 2 beat/min, p < 0.05), with no significant changes with ibuprofen (68 ± 3 vs. 59 ± 2, p > 0.05). Table 1 Markers of inflammation Control Ibuprofen IL-6 Lean 1.0 ± 0.1 1.3 ± 0.3 Obese 4.1 ± 1.5 1.8 ± 0.4 CRP Lean 0.7 ± 0.3 0.5 ± 0.1 Obese 1.7 ± 0.4 † 1.3 ± 0.2 † These data have been published previously [ ]. IL-6 (lean, n = 4; obese, n = 4); CRP (lean, n = 6). Data are reported as mean ± standard error of the mean † p < 0.05 vs. lean
Cardiac baroreflex sensitivity
Cardiac baroreflex sensitivity, as assessed by the relationship between the R – R interval and systolic blood pressure, was lower in obese adults when compared to lean (main effect of group, p = 0.02; Fig. 1 a). When assessed by the relationship between heart rate and systolic blood pressure, no group differences in cardiac baroreflex sensitivity were observed (main effect of group, p = 0.22; Fig. 1 b). There was no effect of ibuprofen on cardiac baroreflex sensitivity in either group (main effect of IBU: ms/mmHg, p = 0.20; beat/min/mmHg, p = 0.28; interaction of group and IBU: ms/mmHg, p = 0.42; beat/min/mmHg, p = 0.98; Fig. 1 a, b). Fig. 1 Baroreflex sensitivity in lean and obese individuals before and after oral ibuprofen. † Data are reported as mean ± standard error of the mean from n = 7 (lean) and n = 6 (obese). † p < 0.05 lean versus obese. a Cardiac baroreflex sensitivity ( R – R interval and systolic blood pressure) was lower in obese adults compared to lean ( p = 0.02). b Cardiac baroreflex sensitivity (heart rate and systolic blood pressure) was not different between groups ( p = 0.22). c , d Sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity was higher in obese adults compared to lean [burst incidence, p = 0.03 ( c ); Total activity, p = 0.01 ( d )]. There was no effect of ibuprofen on cardiac or sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity ( p value range 0.20–0.71)
Sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity
Sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity was greater in obese adults when compared to lean adults (main effect of group: burst incidence, p = 0.03; total activity, p = 0.01; Fig. 1 c, d). There was no effect of ibuprofen on measures of sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity (main effect of ibuprofen: burst incidence, p = 0.23; total activity, p = 0.71; interaction of group and ibuprofen: burst incidence, p = 0.85; total activity, p = 0.86, Fig. 1 c, d).
Post-hoc analyses
There was a significant relationship between cardiac baroreflex sensitivity at baseline and IL-6 ( R – R interval: R = −0.83, p = 0.01; heart rate: R = 0.70, p = 0.05) and CRP ( R – R interval: R = −0.65, p = 0.02; heart rate: R = 0.68, p = 0.01), indicating individuals with high levels of inflammation exhibit low cardiac baroreflex sensitivity. Insulin was strongly correlated with sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity (burst incidence: R = 0.73, p = 0.01); however, no relationship between insulin and cardiac baroreflex sensitivity was observed ( R – R interval: R = 0.27, p = 0.40). Post hoc analyses also showed that ibuprofen reduced the sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity in men [ n = 9 (4 lean, 5 obese), p < 0.01], whereas baroreflex sensitivity increased following ibuprofen in women [ n = 4 (3 lean, 1 obese), p = 0.04, Fig. 2 ]. Fig. 2 Sex differences in the effect of ibuprofen on sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity. Data are reported as mean ± standard error of the mean from n = 9 (men, 4 lean/5 obese) and n = 4 (women, 3 lean/1 obese). * p < 0.05 versus control. Ibuprofen resulted in a reduction in sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity in the men studied ( p < 0.01), whereas sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity appeared to increase following ibuprofen in the women ( p = 0.04)
Discussion
In human cardiovascular research, baroreflex control of autonomic outflow is often evaluated in two main categories of responses: (1) cardiovagal (the beat-to-beat responsiveness of the R – R interval, which is thought to be primarily reflective of vagal control); (2) vascular sympathetic (evaluated as responses of directly measured vascular sympathetic nerve activity in the present study) [ ]. Values for sensitivity, or responsiveness, of these two segments of the baroreflex have been shown to be poorly correlated to each other [ ]. Consistent with this, our present results suggest obesity and inflammation/cyclooxygenase may influence each aspect differently.
Previous work has consistently shown cardiovagal baroreflex sensitivity to be lower in obese adults when compared to lean, healthy controls [ , ], and our data support this concept (Fig. 1 a). In contrast, sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity was higher in obese adults when compared to lean controls (Fig. 1 c, d). These results were surprising, given a previous work supporting impairments in baroreflex control of peripheral resistance in human obesity [ ]. We propose two possible explanations for the discrepancies between findings.
First, in the present study, obese adults exhibited higher circulating insulin when compared to lean adults. In addition, the observed insulin levels were higher than in other published studies in obese individuals (e.g., ~35 vs. ~15 μU/ml) [ , ]. Recently, insulin (in the form of a hyperinsulinemic, euglycemic clamp) has been shown to increase sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity while having little effect on cardiac baroreflex sensitivity [ ]. Consistent with this, we observed a strong correlation between insulin and sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity (burst incidence: R = 0.73, p = 0.01), whereas no relationship was observed between insulin and cardiac baroreflex sensitivity ( R – R interval: R = 0.27, p = 0.40). Second, despite the presence of obesity, the individuals studied were relatively healthy. For example, we have shown previously that baseline MSNA was not higher in our obese subjects when compared to lean [ ]. Additionally, blood pressure and fasting glucose were relatively normal in the obese subjects studied. Furthermore, the obese adults were relatively young (30 ± 3 years) and free of overt cardiovascular disease (including normal endothelial function [ ]). Perhaps with further development of metabolic syndrome, insulin resistance, and/or progression toward cardiovascular disease, impairments in sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity may appear. In this way, future work should consider more closely examining the direct effect of insulin and/or insulin resistance on baroreflex sensitivity in obesity.
Interestingly, our data support a possible role for systemic inflammation in contributing to the lower cardiac baroreflex sensitivity we observed in obese adults. We observed significant relationships between cardiac baroreflex sensitivity at baseline and IL-6 ( R – R interval: R = −0.83, p = 0.01; heart rate: R = 0.70, p = 0.05) and CRP ( R – R interval: R = −0.65, p = 0.02; heart rate: R = 0.68, p = 0.01). In this context, we hypothesized that acute ibuprofen may increase cardiac baroreflex sensitivity in obese adults. Despite reductions in markers of inflammation (IL-6, CRP) following ibuprofen (Table 1 ), we saw no effect of ibuprofen on cardiac or sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity in obese adults (Fig. 1 a–d). Consistent with this, Monahan and Ray observed no change in cardiovagal and sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity following administration of an antiinflammatory compound (ketorolac) in lean individuals [ ]. However, data supporting an effect of antiinflammatory and/or cyclooxygenase compounds on acute sympathoexcitation (MSNA) are inconsistent [ ]. It is possible some of this discrepancy could be the result of unexpected sex differences in observed responses.
There are known sex differences in blood pressure regulation [ ], including obesity-induced sympathoexcitation and hypertension [ ]; however, the majority of our understanding has come from data collected in men. For example, a reduction in baroreflex sensitivity has been shown following acetaminophen (a COX-2 inhibitor) in a cohort of subjects comprised by 85% men [ ] and following acute indomethacin (non-selective COX inhibitor) in a cohort of all men [ ]. When we examined the effect of ibuprofen on baroreflex sensitivity more closely within groups, we found, surprisingly, that baseline sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity and the change in sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity with ibuprofen appeared to be different between men and women. Specifically, ibuprofen resulted in significant reductions in the sympathetic baroreflex in men [ n = 9 (4 lean, 5 obese), p < 0.01], whereas baroreflex sensitivity appeared to increase following ibuprofen in women [ n = 4 (3 lean, 1 obese), p = 0.04] (see Fig. 2 ). Although not a main focus of the study, we speculate this effect may be the result of sex differences in: (1) the effect of inflammation on blood pressure regulation [ ] and (2) the contribution of cyclooxygenase in resting vascular tone. Consistent with this idea, previous work has shown an important role for prostanoids and the cyclooxygenase pathway in normal baroreflex function [ , , , ].
Experimental considerations
It is important to acknowledge ibuprofen is a non-selective COX inhibitor (both COX-1 and COX-2), whereas previous studies using ketorolac (COX-1 [ ]), dexamethasone (COX-2 [ ]), acetaminophen (COX-2 [ ]), or indomethacin (non-selective [ ]) may have come to different conclusions based on the specificity of the inhibitor and/or dosage used. In addition, we are unable to comment on the potential effect of a more prolonged administration of ibuprofen on observed responses. It is possible that it is difficult to reduce a chronic sympathoexcitatory state by acute interventions. For example, prolonged dexamethasone (a COX-2 inhibitor) administration has marked sympathoinhibitory effects that are not observed following acute use [ ]. Lastly, we studied a total of 13 individuals (7 lean, 6 obese) based on power test equations completed a priori. Due to the small sample size, it is possible the lack of a statistically significant effect of ibuprofen on baroreflex sensitivity could be secondary to a type 2 error. However, when we examined the 95% confidence interval, the upper and lower bounds were close to zero (−0.11 and 0.35 beat/min/mmHg); we therefore conclude that if a difference does exist, it is relatively small and unlikely to be physiologically meaningful.
Conclusions
In our present group of relatively healthy individuals with obesity, we found lower cardiovagal baroreflex sensitivity, whereas sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity was higher in the obese group compared to lean controls. When data were evaluated by group (obese versus lean), we found no effect of an acute dose of 800 mg ibuprofen on cardiac or sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity, suggesting that chronic effects of obesity-related inflammation may not be reversed by a single acute pharmacological antiinflammatory intervention. However, when we compared responses in men and women (obese and lean combined), we found preliminary data supporting a potential sex-specific influence of ibuprofen treatment on sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity. This preliminary finding highlights an important area of follow-up for future work.