Introduction
Inherently radiopaque microspheres for image-guided therapy have recently entered the commercial market [ , ]. Radiopaque microspheres have been demonstrated to enhance conspicuity of target and non-target tissue embolization [ ], whereas standard non-radiopaque microspheres provide no information on their precise vascular distribution after transarterial embolization. Treatment response to standard microspheres can only be visualized by the retention of, or lack of, iodinated or gadolinium based contrast material in computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; [ , , ]), and visibility of standard microspheres during embolization is transient, as the contrast material washes out [ ].
To improve real-time treatment control as well as precision and individuality of therapy, inherently radiopaque microspheres have been developed [ ]. Tacher et al. [ ] demonstrated that these microspheres cannot only be detected by experimental imaging techniques such as micro-CT but also by human-scale imaging modalities such as cone-beam CT to increase the conspicuity of tumor regions and feeding arteries. Follow-up imaging of inherently radiopaque microspheres could contribute to the improved assessment of treatment response, as demonstrated by Takayasu et al. for transarterial chemoembolization performed with iodized oil [ ].
For accurate targeting of the vessels to be occluded, the size of microspheres seems to be crucial, and different sizes have been assessed in different organs, models, and therapeutic settings such as porcine liver and kidney (100 µm, 700 µm; [ , ]) as well as prostate artery embolization (250 µm; [ , ]). In addition, Gadaleta et al. [ ] described the treatment of unresectable lung malignancy by pulmonary artery embolization in combination with radiofrequency ablation. The authors discussed the relevance of microsphere size for both therapeutic effects and complications and concluded that the size class of 250 µm is promising to prevent microspheres from passing through arteriovenous pulmonary shunts and through shunts between the pulmonary artery and the bronchial artery.
In the study described herein, we characterized radiopacity, embolization properties, and vascular distribution of a new type of inherently radiopaque microspheres with a size of 250 µm (hereafter referred to as ‘Visible’). Narrow-size-calibrated microspheres (Embozene™; Boston Scientific Corporation, Marlborough, MA, USA) and non-narrow-size-calibrated microspheres (DCBead™; BTG, London, UK) of the same size class were used as control.
Materials and Methods
Animal Procedures
The responsible ethics committee approved the study. Experiments were performed in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and Good Clinical Practice. The study was designed as a hypothesis-driven controlled preclinical trial. Twelve animals (34–38 kg) were anesthetized as described previously [ ]. Following embolization and in vivo cone-beam CT, animals were euthanized 60 min after the last examination with 20 mL intravenously injected potassium chloride (7.5%).
Microspheres
We compared three different types of microspheres: DCBead™ (100–300 µm), hydrogel–polyzene F microspheres Embozene™ (250 µm), and the prototype Visible (250 µm). Visible derives from the same production line as Embozene™, with the exception that a radiopaque material was additionally loaded.
Experiments
In Vitro Micro-CT
Eppendorf tubes containing approximately 1 ml microsphere suspension underwent micro-CT (Siemens Medical Solutions, Knoxville, TN, USA) with the following acquisition parameters: X-ray voltage of 80 kV, anode current of 500 µA, and exposure time of 550 ms for each of the 360 rotation steps (360°). The field of view was 51.3 × 20.1 mm and the binning factor was 2. With medium–high magnification, the effective pixel size was 28.6 μm. Image reconstruction was performed using the Feldkamp algorithm. A Shepp–Logan reconstruction filter was employed with a down-sample factor of 2. Images were evaluated by volume-rendering technique (VRT). Based on visual appearance, radiopacity was qualitatively assessed and compared between types of microspheres.
Laser Diffraction
Size and size calibration of microspheres were assessed by laser diffraction. For this assessment, microspheres (approximately 1 ml) were suspended in 5 ml saline solution. Focused laser light was directed through a measurement cell and diffracted by microspheres. Special Fraunhofer lenses sorted diffracted light and deposited it on a printed circuit board with a ring pattern around a center. Photosensitive cells measured light intensity of different rings to obtain the size calibration curve (average of three runs). The software of the laser diffractometer combined data of serial measurements. All size calculations were based on Mie theory [ ].
Embolization
Porcine pulmonary arteries were embolized under angiographic control (Axiom Artis; Siemens Healthineers, Forchheim, Germany). After dissection of the right internal jugular vein, a 6-F vascular sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was introduced, and the left pulmonary artery was subsequently catheterized with a soft glidewire (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) and a 4-F Sidewinder catheter (Cordis, Miami, FL, USA). A selective digital subtraction angiography (DSA) of the left pulmonary artery (frame rate 2 images/s) was performed with 20-ml iodinated contrast material (flow rate 5 ml/s). After definition of the target volume (subsegmental artery, lower lobe), a 2.8-F microcatheter (Progreat; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was coaxially introduced via the 4-F sidewinder catheter, and the subsegmental artery feeding the target volume was catheterized. After verification of the correct embolization position by superselective DSA (frame rate 2 images/s; 3 ml iodinated contrast material [flow rate 1.5 ml/s]), the target volume was embolized with pure microspheres (0.5 ml in 2.5 ml normal saline without contrast material). After microsphere injection, the microcatheter was flushed with 5 ml normal saline to deliver remaining microspheres into the blood. Then, superselective DSA was repeated with identical parameters. For each type of microspheres, two positions of the left lower lobe were embolized in four animals (0.5 ml microspheres per embolization position).
In Vivo Cone-Beam CT
After embolization, a cone-beam CT of the lung without iodinated contrast material was performed. Acquisition parameters were set as recommended by the manufacturer (8-s digital radiography preset). Images were obtained as multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) images with a slice thickness of 1 mm (coronal and transverse plane, soft tissue window), and VRT images (coronal view).
Ex Vivo Micro-CT
After killing, lungs were preserved in formalin 4%. For each animal, two paraffin blocks were obtained from the two embolization positions in the left lower lobe and from one control position (right lower lobe). For ex vivo micro-CT, the paraffin block containing the maximum load of microspheres (as demonstrated by microscopy) and one control block were selected from each animal. Acquisition parameters were identical to those of in vitro micro-CT. VRT and MPR images were obtained.
Microscopy
Multiple 5-µm slices were obtained from all six paraffin blocks of each animal, and histochemical staining (hematoxylin and eosin, alcian blue) was performed according to standard protocols. The number of microspheres in subsegmental arteries, bronchiolus-associated arteries, and capillary arteries was counted in all available slices.
Statistical Analysis
Microscopic vascular distribution of microspheres was expressed for three different arterial levels (subsegmental, bronchiolus-associated, and capillary arteries) as relative frequency (%), with the total number of microspheres set as 100%.
Results
Characterization of Microspheres
In Vitro Micro-CT
In in vitro micro-CT, radiopacity was observed with Visible. VRT images revealed densely packed single microspheres, detectable as hyperdense microspheres with sharp margins. Radiopacity of Embozene™ was markedly less than that of Visible, and no single microspheres but a homogeneous hyperdense sediment consisting of multiple densely packed microspheres was observed. No radiopacity was featured by DCBead™ (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 In vitro micro-CT before embolization. Volume-rendering technique (VRT) images of Visible ( A ), Embozene™ ( B ), and DCBead™ ( C )
Laser Diffraction
Actual sizes of different microspheres were assessed by laser diffraction measurements (Table 1 ). The proportion of microspheres < 223.5 μm was markedly smaller for Visible and Embozene™ (7.0 and 6.5%, respectively) compared with DCBead™ (22.5%). Table 1 Analysis of the percentage size distribution of microspheres determined by laser diffraction Size range (µm) < 223.5 223.5–272.3 272.3–331.8 331.8–404.2 > 404.2 Visible (%) 7.0 3.1 34.8 46.6 8.5 Embozene™ (%) 6.5 3.2 29.1 50.1 11.1 DCBead™ (%) 22.5 15.5 23.9 24.0 14.1 Measurement ranges are determined by technical factors. The threshold of 223.5 µm was chosen since it is nearest to the size of 200 µm that seems to be critical for embolization-induced hemorrhagic lung infarction [ ]
Embolization and In Vivo Cone-beam CT
Digital Subtraction Angiography
Before embolization, DSA showed homogeneous enhancement of feeding arteries, lung parenchyma, and draining veins of the target volume indicating normal antegrade blood flow (Fig. 2 A). Embolization by all microspheres equally reduced and delayed the enhancement of lung parenchyma and abolished the enhancement of draining veins of the target volume, indicating embolization-induced occlusion of subsegmental arteries leading to markedly reduced antegrade blood flow and even reflux (Fig. 2 B exemplarily shows embolization by Visible). There was no evidence of any technical failures, complications, toxicities, and other adverse effects during and after embolization. Fig. 2 Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) aspects before ( A ) and after ( B ) embolization with Visible. After embolization, significantly reduced and delayed enhancement of the lung parenchyma as well as significant reflux was noted
In Vivo Cone-Beam CT
Embozene™ and DCBead™ showed no radiopacity in cone-beam CT. In contrast, Visible provided radiopacity, and MPR and VRT images demonstrated homogeneous linear hyperdensity in multiple subsegmental arteries, which corresponds to hundreds of densely packed microspheres in the target volume. Figure 3 illustrates the inherent radiopacity of Visible in cone-beam CT after embolization. Atelectasis of the basal lung segments on both sides was noted in all animals, which is no specific sign of embolization and commonly observed during lung CT. Fig. 3 In vivo cone-beam CT after embolization with Visible. A Multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) image (coronal reconstruction, soft tissue window), B MPR image (transverse reconstruction, soft tissue window), and C volume-rendering technique image (VRT; coronal view); each figure contains the magnification of the target volume (insert in the left lower quadrant of each image)
Morphological Results
Ex Vivo Micro-CT
Even though the lung microarchitecture is not assessable by micro-CT imaging of paraffin-embedded tissue, Visible showed clear radiopacity with sharply defined hyperdense microspheres of comparable size. MPR and VRT images demonstrated multiple microspheres arranged beside or behind each other, which was interpreted as microspheres within intact bronchiolus-associated arteries (Fig. 4 A, B). The same was observed for Embozene™, but radiopacity was less pronounced, and the margins of the microspheres were less sharp than that of Visible microspheres in MPR images (Fig. 4 C). In contrast, no hyperdense microspheres could be detected for DCBead™ (Fig. 4 D). Fig. 4 Ex vivo micro-CT after killing. Multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) and volume-rendering technique (VRT) images of Visible ( A , B ); MPR image of Embozene™ ( C ); MPR image of DCBead™ ( D )
Microscopy
The three types of microspheres showed different histopathological characteristics (Table 2 , Fig. 5 ). Compared with Embozene™, Visible revealed a more dotted aspect of the hydrogel core, most likely as a result of the additional radiopaque material. For Embozene™ and Visible, intact microspheres with homogeneous size were frequently identified in bronchiolus-associated arteries, but rarely in subsegmental arteries and capillary arteries (Table 2 ). Both types of microspheres showed a round or slightly oval shape and a smooth surface (Fig. 5 A–C). For DCBead™, non-spherical microspheres with inhomogeneous size were very often observed in bronchiolus-associated arteries, frequently in capillary arteries, and rarely in subsegmental arteries (Table 2 ). The microspheres featured an edgy shape and a rugged surface. In the embolized basal lung segments, rupture of smaller microspheres into the alveolar space and hemorrhagic lung infarction was observed and interpreted as a specific effect of embolization by DCBead™ (Fig. 5 D–F). Microscopy confirmed atelectasis in embolized and non-embolized basal lung segments, as demonstrated by cone-beam CT. Histological staining of microspheres is presented in Table 3 . Table 2 Microscopic vascular distribution after killing of the different types of microspheres (relative frequency in %) Arterial segment Subsegmental arteries Bronchiolus-associated arteries Capillary arteries Visible 1.5 97.2 1.3 Embozene™ 1.8 98.2 0 DCBead™ 0.1 88.9 11.0 Fig. 5 Microscopy after killing. Photomicrographs of Visible ( A , B ), Embozene™ ( C ), and DCBead™ ( D – F ) Table 3 Histological staining of microspheres Hematoxylin and eosin Alcian blue Surface Core Surface Core Visible Dark red Light red Dark blue Light blue Embozene™ Light red Dark yellow Dark blue Light yellow DCBead™ Dark violet Dark violet Light blue Light blue
Discussion
Here, we describe the in vivo radiopacity, embolization properties, and vascular distribution of Visible, a new type of inherently radiopaque narrow-size-calibrated microspheres. In in vitro as well as ex vivo micro-CT experiments, inherent radiopacity of Visible was higher than that of Embozene™, whereas DCBead™ showed no radiopacity. In a pig pulmonary artery embolization model, Visible but not Embozene™ or DCBead™ provided in vivo radiopacity in cone-beam CT. In contrast to non-narrow-size-calibrated DCBead™ (100–300 µm), pulmonary artery embolization by narrow-size-calibrated Visible and Embozene™ (both 250 µm) resulted in a predictable vascular distribution of microspheres without embolization-related hemorrhagic lung infarction, confirming the rationale for using microspheres larger than 200 μm in this setting as suggested by Gadaleta et al. [ ].
To our knowledge, there are currently no preclinical data available on the use of inherently radiopaque microspheres in pulmonary artery embolization. For liver and kidney embolization, Embozene™-based prototypes with multimodal visibility (radiography, CT, MRI) had been tested [ , ]. In the present study, however, we decided to limit the visibility of Visible to CT, because of the drawback of susceptibility artifacts resulting from MRI-visible material [ , ]. The aim of this project was to design microspheres that allow their detection by human-scale cone-beam CT, and enable the acquisition of artifact-free MRI.
In our study, we compared radiopacity and embolization properties of Visible with those of Embozene™ and DCBead™. Both comparators were used for bland embolization, whereby DCBead™ is also available as a drug-eluting microsphere. Another drug-eluting microsphere, BeadBlock ® (100–300 µm) could have been used as an alternative, but BeadBlock ® showed an unexpected vascular distribution in preclinical trials, with occlusion of arteries much smaller than the nominal size of these microspheres [ , , ]. Incidentally, Visible might theoretically provide the potential for drug loading and release, comparable to, for example, Tandem™ microspheres (Boston Scientific Corporation, Marlborough, MA, USA [ , ]).
The relevance of size and size calibration for the vascular distribution of microspheres was demonstrated by Derdeyn et al. [ ]. In their work, microspheres with a size of 100 to 300 µm were found throughout the rete mirabilis and beyond after embolization of the porcine rete mirabilis, whereas microspheres with a size of 200 to 300 µm successfully occluded the proximal rete. Embozene™, Embosphere™, BeadBlock ® , and Contour SE™ microspheres of different size classes (40 and 900 µm) showed considerable variations in vascular distribution, whereas narrow-size-calibrated microspheres generated a homogeneous and predictable distribution in arteries of the same size [ ]. This phenomenon was confirmed in our study for Visible and Embozene™. For non-narrow-size-calibrated DCBead™, however, distal penetration of microspheres even resulted in capillary rupture, with small microspheres detectable in the alveolar space. In addition, DCBead™ led to an uncontrolled distal arterial occlusion—potentially due to the non-narrow-size calibration. Collateral perfusion via the bronchial artery was inhibited, and hemorrhagic lung infarction occurred in healthy animals. Laser diffraction measurements revealed a considerable high proportion of DCBead™ microspheres < 223.5 μm, surprisingly and inexplicably contrasting with previous studies [ , , ]. Pulmonary artery embolization with small and very small microspheres should be avoided, and narrow-size-calibrated microspheres occluding arteries with a diameter that corresponds to the nominal size of microspheres should be preferred [ ].
This study has limitations. First, we did not assess tissue reactions in the long term. Second, we intentionally abstained from applying angiography and fluoroscopy imaging during microsphere injection. Microspheres were administered in normal saline without iodinated contrast material to avoid artefacts. This procedure corresponds to good preclinical practice, as described in other animal studies of this field [ , ]. In future studies, however, we will assess the long-term effects of different types of both bland and drug-eluting inherently radiopaque microspheres, administered in combination with iodinated contrast material.
Conclusion
In conclusion, Visible but not Embozene™ and DCBead™ provide inherent in vivo radiopacity in cone-beam CT after pulmonary artery embolization. A predictable vascular distribution and the absence of embolization-related hemorrhagic lung infarction is an advantage of narrow-size-calibrated microspheres such as Visible and Embozene™.