Introduction
Brain volume has been increasingly studied with the advent of modern MRI methods. The determinants of brain volume continue to be a matter of active research given its potential utility as a measure of neuroprotection and neural repair. Cerebral blood volume (CBV) represents 4.25 % of brain volume at rest and is highly dynamic, fluctuating with physiological and pathological changes [ ]. The better understanding of anatomical and physiological features of the autonomic innervation of brain vessels raise new questions of its effect on CBV changes in patients with autonomic disturbances. The autonomic regulation of CBV may be a significant determinant of brain volume changes. We describe the autonomic innervation of brain vessels and changes in brain volume in different clinical populations with autonomic disturbances. Finally, we suggest the potential implications in MS.
Autonomic regulation of brain vessels and brain volume
Changes in CBV and perfusion are aimed to match neuronal requirements. Changes directly determined by neuronal activity integrate autoregulatory mechanisms. Autoregulatory mechanisms dilate upstream vessels, increasing cerebral blood flow (CBF) into areas of the brain that demand it, ensuring a blood perfusion of 50 milliliters per 100 grams of brain tissue per minute, and a cerebral pressure perfusion in the range of 60–160 mmHg [ ]. Brain vessel autoregulation also allows keeping a relatively constant CBF with changes on mean arterial (MAP) blood pressure (BP). With increases on MAP, a negative feedback loop produces narrowing of brain vessels, increasing their resistance to flow and bringing CBF to the original level. This mechanism determines a curve with relatively constant CBF for values of MAP between 60 and 170 mmHg. Autoregulatory mechanisms are closely integrated with extrinsic and intrinsic autonomic innervation. The main action of the sympathetic nerves is vasoconstriction that protects the brain by shifting the autoregulation curve to the right, namely keeping steady CBF with higher MAP levels by means of additional vasoconstriction. This complex regulation is capable of inducing significant changes in CBV. Thus, the autonomic regulation of brain vessels is of special interest, likely representing an important determinant of brain volume [ ].
Extrinsic autonomic innervation is composed of sympathetic, parasympathetic and sensory systems, innervating the internal carotid and vertebral arteries, the arterial circle of Willis and pial arteries [ , ]. Sympathetic fibers originating from the superior cervical ganglion produce vasoconstriction by releasing mainly norepinephrine and neuropeptide Y. The main role of the extrinsic sympathetic innervation is to protect the brain against changes of blood BP beyond the limits of cerebral autoregulation, when the myogenic constriction of vascular smooth muscle is overcome [ ]. Experiments inducing hypotension on individuals with and without alpha 1 receptor blockers showed that alpha 1 adrenergic receptors are likely the main mediators of vasoconstriction [ ] (Fig. 1 ). Therefore, the extrinsic sympathetic innervation has an important role in the regulation of the CBF, especially during unsteady states. Fig. 1 Possible interaction between peripheral and extrinsic sympathetic regulation and intrinsic autonomic innervation of brain vessels in normal conditions
The extrinsic parasympathetic nerves originate in the sphenopalatine and otic ganglia and produce cerebral vasodilation by means of vasoactive intestinal peptide, acetylcholine and nitric oxide [ , ]. Despite having a weaker effect on vascular tone and autoregulation, the parasympathetic effect on brain vessels has been a subject of interest, given their crucial role in specific pathological situations. Decreased parasympathetic nerve density was reported with aging and more prominently in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. This decreased nerve density may impair cortical perfusion during states of increased metabolic demands caused by neuronal activation, potentially contributing to cognitive impairment found in patients with Alzheimer’s disease [ ]. Also, increased blood flow within the dura mater may be related to the activation of parasympathetic and sensory trigemino-vascular afferents in patients suffering from cortical depression spreading during migrainous aura [ ].
As the arteries penetrate the brain to become intraparenchymal arteries and capillaries, their intrinsic autonomic innervation becomes more prominent. In contrast to extrinsic innervation, the delineation between sympathetic and parasympathetic structures is less clear: nerve terminals originating in the nucleus basalis, locus coeruleus and raphe nucleus project to cortical microvessels where acetylcholine, norepinephrine or 5-hydroxytryptamine is released [ ]. These terminals promote changes on smaller vessels by direct contact, but also activate beta-adrenergic receptors found on astrocytes, which are key intermediaries in neurovascular coupling [ , ]. The influence of the intrinsic autonomic innervation on brain vessels is continuous, likely mediating changes even during normotensive states. When decreased sympathetic output is induced by means of ganglionic blockade, the jugular noradrenaline spillover decreases, and the noradrenaline metabolites spillover increases suggesting that inhibition of extrinsic sympathetic firing results in activation of the intrinsic innervation [ ]. The existence of functional sympathetic nerves in the walls of the cerebral blood vessels in the brain is also suggested by the reduced trans-cerebral noradrenaline removal with the use of noradrenaline uptake inhibitors. Therefore, the intrinsic innervation is likely activated by reductions in BP, correlating to the decrease in the extrinsic and peripheral sympathetic activity [ ].
The activation of the intrinsic autonomic innervation is likely a highly sensitive mechanism. Subtle changes on the peripheral sympathetic activity produce no changes in the middle cerebral artery diameters with significant increase in the cerebral vascular resistance (due to vasoconstriction), suggesting that the cerebro-vascular control occurs in downstream vessels [ ]. The activity of the intrinsic innervation attenuates the CO 2 -induced increase in cerebral blood flow (CBF) showing an effect on the modulation of autoregulatory mechanisms [ ]. These changes in brain volume prompted by the activity of the intrinsic autonomic innervation involving small vessels with a large vascular bed may be significant and likely have a greater effect on CBV as compared to those induced by the modulation of extrinsic autonomic innervation on larger vessels (Fig. 1 ).
The brain’s autonomic innervation may also modify brain volume by other mechanisms different from the regulation of CBV. The activation of beta-2 adrenergic receptors modulate neuronal and non-neuronal metabolism in the brain. Changes in sympathetic output activate the synthesis of proteins and metabolic processes, likely leading to changes in cellular volume. This modulation is supported by the increase of the synthesis of protein as the CBF increases. With declining CBF rates, protein synthesis is inhibited first (at a threshold of 0.55 ml/g/min in rats), followed by a stimulation of anaerobic glycolysis (at 0.35 ml/g/min in gerbils) [ ]. Similar modulation is plausible in humans since the activity of beta-2 adrenergic receptors may mediate memory consolidation by their influence on protein synthesis [ ]. Other mechanisms, such as neuronal growth promoted by the release of nerve growth factors following adrenergic transmission, are also subjects of interest and active investigation and may play a role in inducing changes of brain volume [ ].
Autonomic function and brain volume in different clinical populations
Significant fluctuations in brain volume in different clinical populations have become evident with the advent of MRI methods allowing to detect changes in the order of 0.2–0.5 % [ , ]. Studies on patients with isolated cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction suggest a role of the autonomic regulation of brain vessels as a determinant of CBV. Smaller insular volumes were found in young patients with neurocardiogenic syncope as compared with age-matched healthy controls. Insular volumes were correlated with larger drop in systolic and diastolic blood pressure during head-up tilt. The authors attributed smaller insular volumes to right insular atrophy. Thus, it was speculated that insular atrophy was associated with a decrease in sympathetic activity and a reciprocal increase in parasympathetic activity, resulting in a drop in BP and syncope. However, considering the mean age (20.8 ± 7.1 years) and the lack of comorbidities of the participants of this study, the existence of atrophy leading to structural changes is unlikely [ ]. Conversely, chronic sympathetic overactivity at rest and insufficient sympathetic activation during orthostatic stress [ ] may lead to CBV changes with a reduction in regional CBV in this population. Increased sympathetic activity has been previously correlated with decreased mean flow velocity in the middle cerebral artery, resulting from a possible downward shift of the autoregulatory set point [ ]. Pediatric patients with neurally mediated syncope have lower perfusion in the right peri-insular area that correlated to larger drops in BP [ ], and similar results were found in adult patients with neurally mediated syncope when compared with healthy participants [ ]. Thus, chronic small vessel vasoconstriction driven by a compensatory increase in the sympathetic autonomic tone may lead to decreased CBV with a subsequent decrease in brain volume [ ]. Nevertheless, measures of brain volume in patients with disorders of orthostasis may also be related to changes in hydration and a tendency to lie down for longer periods of time as compared to healthy individuals.
Smaller brain volume has been correlated with higher BP levels. A recent meta-analysis including 28 studies found that in 92.9 % of patients, higher BP was significantly associated with smaller total and regional brain volume [ ]. The authors concluded that higher BP levels may result in ischemic brain lesions related to atherosclerosis, leading to brain volume reduction. However, if only studies involving healthy, normotensive individuals were considered, higher BP was, in all cases, significantly associated with lower total and regional brain volume [ , , , ]. Abnormal overactivation of the peripheral sympathetic nervous system is linked to the origin and progression of essential hypertension and may influence the brain volume in this population [ ]. Chronic cardiovascular sympathetic overactivation with increases in BP is a response aimed at maintaining end organ perfusion. However, a right shift on the autoregulatory curve generated by the sympathetic overactivation may lead to further chronic vasoconstriction and decreased CBV [ ]. Thus, chronic peripheral sympathetic overactivation may explain smaller brain volumes in those subpopulations of hypertensive patients without ischemic lesions.
Evidence from studies involving exercise may also suggest an autonomic role in the modulation of brain volume through changes in CBV. Routines of aerobic exercise modulate the cardiovascular ANS toward a decreased sympathovagal balance in healthy individuals and hypertensive patients [ , ]. Higher levels of fitness and engaging in a routine of aerobic exercise have been correlated with larger volume of gray and white matter structures in healthy and patient populations [ ]. In turn, the effects of aerobic exercise in brain volume are correlated with changes in blood volume of selective cerebral regions. Thus, a left shift on the autoregulatory curve generated by a decreased sympathetic tone with aerobic conditioning may explain a proportion of the changes on the brain volume found. Considered together, these findings suggest a possible role of changes in the ANS activity in the modulation of brain volume.
Implications and future perspectives in multiple sclerosis
Brain volume determinants have received increasing attention in multiple sclerosis (MS). The advances on the understanding of inflammatory pathways in MS and the development of highly effective anti-inflammatory therapies have been accompanied by increased focus on new outcomes, such as neuroprotection and neural repair. The most common radiological methods used to assess neuroprotection in MS are brain parenchymal fraction (BPF) and structural image evaluation of normalized atrophy (SIENA). Despite having good reproducibility and sensitivity, these methods have low specificity, not allowing discerning between underlying structural components [ ]. Neuro-glial components have demonstrated to be significant determinants of cortical volume when postmortem MRIs were compared with histopathological samples [ ]. However, the components determining whole-brain volume in vivo, especially CBF and CBV, are likely highly dynamic.
Decreased CBF to gray and white matter have been demonstrated in MS [ , , ]. However, the actual effect of autonomic dysfunction on CBF in MS and it potential translation into CBV changes are not known. First, cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction is common in MS, as 42.1 % of MS patients have been reported to have at least one abnormal autonomic testing [ ]. Sympathetic dysfunction in MS is not only related to brain structural damage, but also there is a reciprocal association with chronic CNS inflammation [ , ]. The selective sympathetic impairment in the initial stages of MS was correlated with clinical and radiological markers of inflammatory activity. Also, reduced expression of beta-2 receptors in astrocytes has been demonstrated in MS [ ]. The impact of these autonomic changes on CBF are yet to be investigated in MS. Similarly, the effect of CBV changes on total brain volume is unknown. Significant fluctuations of brain volume across the day were recently demonstrated by BPF measures in patients with MS. BPF changes showed larger brain volume during the morning, with fluctuations of 0.44 % of total brain volume per day [ ]. The hydration status and fluid redistribution may be related to these findings with prolonged periods of horizontal positioning during the night [ , ], explaining larger brain volumes found in the morning. Whether circadian sympathetic and parasympathetic rhythms may affect fluid redistribution through changes in the intravascular volume deserves further investigation [ , ].
Understanding the influence of the autonomic regulation on CBV and brain volume is relevant in MS (Fig. 2 ). The autonomic effect of anti-inflammatory therapies may contribute to understand their effects on brain volume. The reduced loss of brain volume with the use of these therapies has been attributed to reduced loss of myelin, oligodendrocytes and axons associated with inflammation [ ]. However, a paradoxical and transient loss of brain volume has been described with the onset of long-term anti-inflammatory therapies. This effect, referred to as ‘pseudo-atrophy’, has been attributed to decreased edema and decreased volume of glial cells over the resolution of inflammatory changes [ ]. Anti-inflammatory therapies may play a role given their significant effect on the cardiovascular autonomic function (Fig. 3 ) [ , , ]. Longer clinical trials have been suggested to detect the therapeutic effects on brain volume [ ], since volumetric changes due to acute inflammation are only evident after 6 months [ ]. The autonomic influence on brain volume likely represents an important factor to account for clinical trials prior to ascribing such changes in brain volume to a neurodegenerative etiology [ ] (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 2 Components underlying measures of brain volume Fig. 3 Comparative representation of daily fluctuations of brain volume and long-term decrease of brain volume in different populations. Daily fluctuation on brain volume in MS patients ( a ) has been reported to be 0.44 % per day, within the same range to changes related to hydration (0.36–0.75 % per day). Long-term reduction of brain volume ( b ) in healthy individuals (≈0.30 % per year) is smaller than the reduction of brain volume reported in MS patients using fingolimod (0.40–0.56 % per year) and MS patients naive to DMTs (0.5–1.35 % per year) Fig. 4 Likely effects of sustained inflammation in brain volume. Decreased CBF of gray and white matter was demonstrated during continuous inflammatory states along with lack of beta-adrenergic receptors. Imbalance of vasoconstrictive and vasodilatory mechanisms may lead to decreased brain volume secondary to reduction of CBV
Conclusions
Autonomic innervation of brain vessels may have a significant role in regulating brain volume. Contrary to previous speculation [ ], brain volume is dynamic and highly variable in nature. Overall, it is proposed that the influence of the ANS should be considered in future studies addressing changes in brain volume.