Introduction
Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy affect approximately 10 % of all pregnancies in the United States and are one of the leading causes of maternal and foetal morbidity and mortality worldwide [ ]. Importantly, these pregnancy complications are not only acutely dangerous, but their presence may also identify women at increased risk for the future development of cardiovascular disease [ , ], including chronic hypertension, premature heart attacks, strokes, and renal complications [ , ].
The underlying mechanisms for the greater future cardiovascular risk in women with a history of hypertensive pregnancy are unclear; however, alterations in autonomic circulatory control may be one contributing factor. Women with preeclampsia and gestational hypertension exhibit high levels of sympathetic activation when diagnosed [ , , , ], indicating that an excessive increase in sympathetic activity during pregnancy (above and beyond the normal increase that occurs with healthy pregnancy) [ , , , , ] is likely a key contributor to hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Thus, it is possible that these alterations in sympathetic neural control may continue or progress in the years following pregnancy.
Certainly, the cardiovascular diseases that women with a history of hypertensive pregnancy are at greatest risk of developing are characterized by impaired autonomic circulatory control. For example, patients with essential hypertension have elevated resting muscle sympathetic nerve activity (MSNA), which parallels increases in resting blood pressure (BP) across various stages of the disease [ , ]. Hypertensive individuals also exhibit increased total peripheral resistance and enhanced vasomotor responsiveness to adrenergic stimuli compared to normotensives, presumably as a result of central adrenergic activation in combination with dysregulation of peripheral adrenergic receptors, reductions in norepinephrine reuptake, and changes in humoral, metabolic and endothelium-derived factors at the vascular wall [ ]. Furthermore, research indicates that normotensive individuals who later develop hypertension and/or cardiovascular events display an exaggerated exercise pressor reflex [ , , , , ], indicative of underlying impaired neural control before any signs or symptoms of disease appear. The exercise pressor reflex is one mechanism responsible for the increases in heart rate (HR), BP, and MSNA during exercise. This feedback loop arises from mechano- (group III) and metabo- (group IV) sensitive afferent nerve endings in skeletal muscle and causes an increase in BP via elevations in MSNA-mediated vasoconstriction in non-active skeletal muscle [ ].
It is unknown whether normotensive women with a history of hypertensive pregnancy, in a manner similar to individuals who later develop cardiovascular disease, exhibit an augmented exercise pressor reflex. Thus, the purpose of this study was to investigate whether or not women with prior hypertensive pregnancy have augmented sympathetic neural (e.g., MSNA) and cardiovascular (e.g., BP, HR) responses during exercise compared to women with a healthy pregnancy history.
Methods
Subjects
Women with a history of healthy pregnancy (CON; n = 9) and with a history of hypertensive pregnancy (HP+; n = 12) were studied during the mid-luteal phase of the menstrual cycle (approximately 19–22 days after the onset of menstruation, when both oestrogen and progesterone are high). Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy included gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, and/or HELLP syndrome (a life-threatening pregnancy complication characterized by hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet count; often considered a variant of preeclampsia), and diagnoses were confirmed via medical records [ ]. Exclusion criteria included smoking, recreational drug use, hormonal contraceptive use within the previous 6 months, current breastfeeding, and current pregnancy. Endurance-trained women were also excluded form participation. All participants had self-reported normal menstrual cycles and were at least 1-year postpartum. All subjects were informed of the study purpose and protocols, and they gave written informed consent to a protocol approved by the institutional review boards of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center and Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas. The study was performed in accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later amendments.
Protocol
The first visit (screening) consisted of a 12-lead resting ECG and resting BP measurements. For the experimental visit, menstrual cycle phase was determined by [ ] the onset of menstruation and [ ] by the detection of the luteinizing hormone surge by an ovulation prediction kit (OvuQuick, Quidel Corp., San Diego, CA, USA). All women were on an isocaloric diet consisting of 200 mEq of sodium, 100 mEq of potassium, and 1000 mg of calcium, with ad libitum fluid intake, for 2–3 days prior to testing. Women were also instructed to not exercise for at least 24 h before testing. A urine pregnancy test was taken on the study day to verify the women were not pregnant.
The experiment was performed in the morning ≥2 h after a light meal and ≥72 h after the last caffeinated or alcoholic beverage. The study laboratory was quiet and environmentally controlled with an ambient temperature of ~25 °C. The subject was placed in the supine position, and an intravenous catheter was inserted into an antecubital vein of the left arm for blood samples. Estradiol and progesterone concentrations were measured by radioimmunoassay techniques. Prior to microneurography, the subject performed three brief (~3 s) maximal contractions with her dominant hand to determine her maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) using a handgrip dynamometer. At least 20 min after an acceptable nerve recording site had been found, 6 min of baseline data were collected. HR, BP, respiratory waveforms, and MSNA were recorded continuously throughout all tests.
CPT
A cold pressor test (CPT) was used to assess the central integration of vasomotor sympathetic processes and their efferent pathways [ , ] in the two groups of women. Following a period of rest, the dominant hand was immersed up to the wrist in an ice water bath (~4 °C) for 2 min, after which the subject’s hand was immediately dried and warmed during a 3-min period of recovery. Subjects were instructed to avoid breath holding (confirmed by nasal cannula) and to stay as relaxed as possible during the CPT.
SHG
After a sufficient recovery from the CPT, static handgrip (SHG) exercise was performed at 40 % of MVC until volitional fatigue, defined as a decline to <80 % of the desired force for ≥2 s. Immediately following fatigue and before the subject relaxed her forearm, an upper arm occlusion cuff was inflated to 250 mmHg for 2 min (post-exercise circulatory arrest, PECA). During the SHG and PECA, subjects were again instructed to avoid breath holding. Data were recorded for 3 min of recovery after deflation of the occlusion cuff.
Measurements
MSNA
MSNA signals were obtained with the microneurographic technique [ ]. Briefly, a recording electrode was placed in the peroneal nerve at the popliteal fossa, and a reference electrode was placed subcutaneously 2–3 cm from the recording electrode. The nerve signals were amplified (gain 70,000–160,000), band-pass filtered (700–2000 Hz), full-wave rectified, and integrated with a resistance–capacitance circuit (time constant 0.1 s). Adequate MSNA recording was assessed by [ ] pulse synchrony, [ ] facilitation during the hypotensive phase of the Valsalva manoeuvre, [ ] increases in response to breath holding, and [ ] insensitivity to a gentle skin touch or a loud shout [ ].
Hemodynamics
HR was determined via electrocardiogram, and beat-to-beat arterial BP was measured non-invasively from the middle finger using photoplethysmography (Nexfin, BMEYE B.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Arm-cuff BP was measured by electrosphygmomanometry (model 4240, SunTech Medical Instruments Inc., Raleigh, NC, USA) with a microphone placed over the brachial artery to detect Korotkoff sounds. Beat-by-beat arterial pressures were corrected to arm-cuff BP. Mean arterial pressure (MAP) was calculated as [(systolic pressure − diastolic pressure)/3] + diastolic pressure. Respiratory excursions were identified by a nasal cannula (model 1265, Respironics California Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA).
Data analysis
MSNA
Data were sampled at 625 Hz with a commercial data acquisition system (Biopac Systems, Santa Barbara, CA, USA). Sympathetic bursts were identified by a computer program (LabView Software, National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) using a 3:1 signal-to-noise ratio threshold within a 0.5-s search window and an expected burst reflex latency of 1.3 s from the preceding R-wave [ , ]. All bursts were confirmed by an experienced microneurographer. Within the integrated neurogram, the burst with the largest amplitude during baseline was assigned a value of 100, and all bursts in that trial were normalized to that burst before calculating total burst area [ ]. Burst areas of the integrated neurogram, systolic and diastolic pressures, and R–R interval were measured simultaneously on a beat-to-beat basis. Total activity of the burst was defined as the burst area of the rectified and integrated neurogram. The numbers of bursts per minute (burst frequency) and per 100 heartbeats (burst incidence), and total burst area per minute (total activity) were used as quantitative indices.
Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Baseline MSNA, BP, and HR for both the CPT and SHG were averaged for 1 min. These 1-min baseline values were not different from the initial 6 min of resting data. MSNA, BP, and HR were averaged in 30-s epochs throughout (CPT-0.5, CPT-1, CPT-1.5, CPT-2) and during recovery from (REC-0.5, REC-1, REC-1.5, REC-2, REC-2.5, REC-3) CPT. During SHG, data were averaged for the first 1 min (SHG-1) and the last 30 s before fatigue (SHG-F) [ ]. The data in-between these two time points were divided in half and averaged (SHG-A and SHG-B). Stages during handgrip were divided in this manner to allow comparisons at both absolute time points and relative (to normalize for intersubject variability) stages of fatigue. PECA-1, PECA-2, and recovery (REC-1, REC-2, REC-3) from handgrip were averaged each minute.
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS Statistical Software Package (Version 20.0, IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). Baseline characteristics between groups were compared using unpaired t tests. A two-way repeated measures ANOVA (group × stage) was used to examine HR, BP, and MSNA responses to the SHG and CPT, with a Bonferroni adjustment for multiple comparisons. For all tests, statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.
Results
Subject characteristics
Descriptive characteristics of the subjects are displayed in Table 1 . HP+ women were younger and fewer years postpartum than CON women. The women were similar in terms of race, anthropometrics, parity, and resting MSNA, HR, and SBP. Resting DBP was lower in HP+ compared to CON women (62.6 ± 4.3 vs. 68.6 ± 6.0 mmHg, p < 0.05). Circulating estradiol was similar between groups (HP+ 133 ± 75 vs. CON 136 ± 81 pg/mL, p = 0.92), but progesterone concentrations were lower in HP+ women (HP+ 6.8 ± 4.7 vs. CON 13.3 ± 4.7 ng/mL, p < 0.01). Within the HP+ women, 6 had a history of gestational hypertension, 5 had a history of preeclampsia, and 1 had a history of HELLP syndrome. Table 1 Subject characteristics CON ( n = 9) HP+ ( n = 12) p value Age (years) 37.7 ± 7.8 30.7 ± 5.2 0.023* Height (cm) 165.6 ± 7.0 162.2 ± 4.5 0.19 Weight (kg) 64.0 ± 9.3 67.4 ± 11.3 0.48 BMI (kg/m 2 ) 23.4 ± 3.3 25.6 ± 4.3 0.20 Circulating estradiol (pg/mL) 136 ± 81 133 ± 75 0.92 Circulating progesterone (ng/mL) 13.3 ± 4.7 6.8 ± 4.7 0.006* Resting MSNA (6-min baseline) (bursts/min) 14.8 ± 10.6 20.4 ± 7.9 0.20 # of previous pregnancies 1.8 ± 0.8 1.5 ± 0.8 0.48 Years postpartum 7.6 ± 7.8 2.7 ± 1.4 0.047* Race ( n ) Caucasian 6 9 n/a African–American 0 1 Asian 2 1 Hispanic 1 1 CON healthy pregnancy history, HP + hypertensive pregnancy history, BMI body mass index * p < 0.05
CPT
The BP, HR, and MSNA responses to the CPT were similar between groups (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Hemodynamic and sympathetic neural responses to CPT in CON ( open circle ) and HP+ ( filled circle ) women. BP, HR, MSNA burst frequency, and MSNA burst incidence are displayed at baseline, every 30 s during a 2-min CPT, and every 30 s during a 3-min recovery. Data are displayed as mean ± SD. BP blood pressure, HR heart rate, MSNA muscle sympathetic nerve activity, CPT cold pressor test, BL baseline, REC recovery
SHG
MVC (HP+ 26.1 ± 3.3 vs. CON 28.4 ± 4.3 kg, p = 0.18) and time to fatigue during SHG (HP+ 166 ± 52 vs. CON 210 ± 73 s, p = 0.12) were not different between groups. However, a measure of total work during the test, as assessed by resistance (kg) × time (s), indicates a significant difference between groups (HP+ 1740 ± 556 vs. CON 2233 ± 694 kg s, p = 0.04). A representative tracing illustrates the differential cardiovascular and neural responses seen in an HP+ and CON subject (Fig. 2 ). Arterial pressures, HR, and MSNA rose during SHG, reached a peak at fatigue, and remained elevated above baseline levels during PECA (Figs. 3 , 4 ). There were no significant group × time interactions in the measured physiological variables during SHG. SBP was similar between groups, but HP+ women had significantly higher measures of DBP and HR during the SHG protocol compared to CON women ( p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively). MSNA burst frequency tended to be elevated in HP+ women during the test but was not significantly different ( p = 0.06); furthermore, when quantified relative to HR, MSNA (bursts/100 heartbeats) was not different between groups ( p = 0.23). Similarly, MSNA total activity was not different between groups ( p = 0.34). Fig. 2 Representative tracings of HR, MSNA, ETCO 2 and beat-by-beat BP in one HP+ ( a ) woman and one CON ( b ) woman during the SHG test (including resting baseline, handgrip, PECA, and recovery). CON healthy pregnancy history, HP + hypertensive pregnancy history, HR heart rate, MSNA muscle sympathetic nerve activity, ETCO 2 end tidal CO 2 , BP blood pressure Fig. 3 BP and HR responses to SHG to fatigue and 2-min PECA in CON ( open circle ) and HP+ ( filled circle ) women. Data are displayed as mean ± SD. SBP systolic blood pressure, DBP diastolic blood pressure, HR heart rate, SHG static hand grip, BL baseline, PECA post-exercise circulatory arrest, REC recovery Fig. 4 MSNA responses to SHG to fatigue and 2-min PECA in CON ( open circle ) and HP+ ( filled circle ) women. Data are displayed as mean ± SD. MSNA muscle sympathetic nerve activity, SHG static hand grip, BL baseline, PECA post-exercise circulatory arrest, REC recovery
Discussion
This study is the first to comprehensively examine the exercise pressor reflex in women with a history of hypertensive pregnancy. Our primary findings are that (1) women with a history of hypertensive pregnancy exhibit augmented DBP and HR during an SHG to fatigue protocol compared to women with a healthy pregnancy history, (2) HP+ women also tend to have higher MSNA during SHG compared to CON; however, this is primarily driven by differences in HR response, and (3) women with healthy and hypertensive pregnancy histories display similar BP, HR, and MSNA responses to a CPT stimulus (indicating that central processing and the efferent arm of the sympathetic nervous system are functionally similar between the two groups of women). Our findings support the hypothesis that women with prior hypertensive pregnancy may have augmented HR responses during isometric exercise. However, there are no differences in sympathetic neural responses to this exercise stimulus.
Contributions of mechano- and metaboreflexes and central command
Despite completing greater total work (kg × time) during the SHG, CON women displayed similar increases in sympathetic outflow during the static exercise stimulus compared to HP+ women. The SHG test elicits increases in signals from both mechano- and metabosensitive nerve endings in active skeletal muscle, and thus differentiating the separate contributions of the two is difficult. However, during PECA elevations in BP and MSNA are driven by metaboreceptors (group IV), as the deformation of group III afferents is reduced coincident with the end of muscle contraction. In this study, HP+ and CON women showed relatively similar sympathetic neural and cardiovascular responses to PECA, suggesting that the metaboreflex may not contribute to the possible differences in SHG response between HP+ and CON.
The differential HR and BP responses between HP+ and CON may have been due, in part, to differences in central motor command. Central command, like the peripheral feedback from group III and IV afferents, plays a prominent role in the increased sympathetic and, perhaps more importantly, decreased parasympathetic activation of the heart during exercise [ , ]. Centrally mediated vagal withdrawal at the beginning of exercise increases HR and cardiac output, thereby elevating blood pressure. In fact, under conditions of regional paralysis, the cardiovascular response to attempted muscle contraction is similar to the normal (no paralysis) response during moderate isometric contraction (33 % of maximal voluntary strength) [ ]. However, the cardiovascular response to central command alone cannot match the responses seen during higher intensities of isometric contraction (50 % maximal voluntary strength), indicating that both motor command and peripheral feedback contribute to the cardiovascular responses during high intensity static exercise [ ]. In this study, women performed SHG to fatigue at 40 % of maximal voluntary strength. Given the intensive nature of fatiguing exercise, it is likely that central command was not the sole contributor to the differential elevations in HR and BP between groups during the exercise.
Sympathetic and cardiovagal baroreflex
The baroreflex is important for effectively maintaining arterial BP under a variety of resting and stress conditions [ ]. During exercise the baroreflex undergoes an upward and rightward resetting, allowing a continued ability to detect and respond to the changes in BP that are characteristic of physical work [ ]. While the similarity in MSNA burst incidence throughout the SHG protocol in this study may be indicative of comparable baroreflex control of sympathetic activity between the two groups, we did not assess the interactions of central command or the exercise pressor reflex with sympathetic baroreflex sensitivity. On the other hand, cardiovagal baroreflex sensitivity (i.e., ΔR–R interval/ΔSBP) does appear to be different in the HP+ compared to CON women during SHG, as HP+ women exhibited much larger HR responses despite similar SBP responses between the two groups.
Similar responses to cold pressor test
Our data indicate women with and without a history of hypertensive pregnancy display similar responses to a cold pressor stimulus. These findings are consistent with previous research; sympathetic and hemodynamic responses to CPT have been found to be similar between healthy individuals and those at risk for cardiovascular disease (including patients with heart failure, obesity, and obstructive sleep apnea) [ , , , ], though a few studies have shown that hyperreactivity of the BP response to CPT may be predictive of future hypertension [ , ]. The present results indicate that the differences in HR and DBP during SHG between CON and HP+ women are not due to generalized autonomic dysfunction in cardiovascular control or altered efferent pathways but specific to central and/or afferent portions of the reflex arch.
Limitations
Racial differences
Racial comparisons have established that there are differences in sympathetic neural and cardiovascular parameters between races. For example, young Caucasian women appear to have a greater sympathetic support of BP than African–American women, who may rely more on humoral (renal-adrenal) mechanisms to regulate BP during orthostasis [ ]. On the other hand, Asian women, who have lower prevalence of hypertensive pregnancy, have less sympathetic activation than Caucasians [ ]. In this study, the racial composition of groups was similar, with approximately two-thirds of each group being Caucasian and one to two Hispanic and Asian women in each group. While there were no African–American women in the healthy pregnancy history group, it is unlikely that the one African-American woman in the HP+ group accounted for differences in the exercise pressor response.
Age differences
In this analysis, women in the CON group were included from three separate studies (including [ , ]), and thus, dependent upon the nature of the investigation, their ages and years postpartum varied widely. Like race, aging also affects sympathetic neural control of blood pressure. In women, the change in sympathetic activity and cardiovascular measures with aging is due in part to changes in circulating hormones. Specifically, it has been suggested that estradiol has sympathoinhibitory effects, while progesterone is sympathoexcitatory, and thus lower relative concentrations of E 2 / P are associated with augmented levels of MSNA [ ]. While the CON women in this study were slightly older than the HP+ women, they were all premenopausal with similar levels of circulating estradiol (Table 1 ; HP+ 133 ± 75 vs. CON 136 ± 81 pg/mL); and, in fact, CON women had higher levels of progesterone (HP+ 6.8 ± 4.7 vs. CON 13.3 ± 4.7 ng/mL), which would presumably increase sympathoexcitation. The progesterone concentrations seen in some HP+ women are suggestive of anovulatory menstrual cycles; however, ovulation was confirmed by the detection of the luteinizing hormone surge. Women with occasional anovulatory cycles appear to have lower reproductive hormone concentrations during subsequent ovulatory cycles [ ]. It is possible that the HP+ women in this study (perhaps as a result of their younger age and/or fewer years postpartum) had more frequent and recent anovulatory cycles than the CON women, but this was not assessed in this study.
Nevertheless, aging differences may be present even in the absence of hormonal differences. Matsukawa and colleagues nicely illustrated the typical increase in sympathetic activity for a given increase in age [ ]. Utilizing this regression for women, the 7 year difference between CON and HP+ in this study could account for an approximately 6 bursts/min increase in MSNA. As such, controlling for age within the present investigation would likely have resulted in even more substantial differences in the sympathetic exercise pressor response between HP+ and CON women (i.e., since the CON women were older). Conversely, given the damping effect of aging on resting and exercise HR [ , ], it is possible that the age difference between our HP+ and CON subjects amplified the difference in HR response to SHG and PECA.
To more confidently assess the impact of previous hypertensive pregnancy on cardiovascular responses to SHG, the age and years post-partum of subjects should be carefully controlled in future investigations. Furthermore, time-series analysis of continuous beat-by-beat parameters may allow a clearer interpretation of the potential differences in cardiovascular response to SHG between HP+ and CON women.
Clinical implications
An exaggerated exercise pressor reflex is certainly clinically relevant—abnormal elevations in circulatory hemodynamics could reduce exercise capacity and increase the risk for adverse cardiac events during physical activity. An exaggerated exercise pressor reflex is seen in heart failure patients, specifically as a result of mechanoreceptor overactivity [ ]. Similarly, patients with hypertension exhibit overactivity of both mechano- and metaboreflex in BP control and overactivity of the mechanoreflex in the control of HR [ , ].
In previous investigations, an exaggerated BP response has been defined as a specific pressure (e.g., SBP >190 mmHg for whole-body dynamic exercise [ ]). The arterial pressures of the women in this study did not exceed the cut-off points used in earlier investigations (e.g., HP+ peak BP during small muscle group SHG was 150/92); however, using precise limits is likely inappropriate, given the lack of standardized exercise protocol and the complex interaction of gender, age, resting BP, and fitness level on exercise BP. Accordingly, we are confident in the detected BP difference between groups for the given exercise stimulus in this study; however, whether or not an elevated exercise pressor response of this magnitude in HP+ is clinically relevant needs to be investigated in future studies.
It is important to acknowledge that augmented sympathetic and cardiovascular reactivity to an exercise stressor is only one possible mechanism for the increased future cardiovascular risk in women with a history of hypertensive pregnancy. The reduced placental perfusion characteristic of preeclampsia is suggested to initiate systemic endothelial dysfunction and inflammation [ ], which can persist years after delivery [ , ]. Underlying endothelial dysfunction, vascular injury, and/or endothelial adhesion molecule (e.g., VCAM-1, ICAM-1) upregulation, which have been implicated in cardiovascular disease and early atherosclerosis, may thus contribute to the observed cardiovascular risk in women with a history of hypertensive pregnancy. Furthermore, it is certainly possible that risk factors characteristic of both hypertensive pregnancy and other cardiovascular diseases, including obesity and familial history, independently contribute to the manifestation of both events.
Conclusions
This study demonstrates that, like individuals at risk for future cardiovascular disease in previous investigations [ , , , , ], women with a history of hypertensive pregnancy may exhibit exaggerated cardiovascular reactivity to an exercise stressor. While these findings do not elucidate whether women with a history of hypertensive pregnancy are at greater risk because of the complicated pregnancy, per se (e.g., due to the subsequent vascular injury, elevated coagulation factors, etc.), or because of the presence of overlapping risk factors for both hypertensive pregnancy and cardiovascular disease, the results may indicate differences in cardiovascular control between HP+ and CON women. These differences in cardiovascular reactivity may contribute to the increased risk for future cardiovascular disease in women with a history of hypertensive pregnancy.