Introduction
Over the last years, fentanyl, a potent synthetic μ receptor–stimulating opioid, has become one of the most used drugs for both procedural analgesia and sedation in patients undergoing coronary angiography (CA) and/or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) [ , ]. However, few studies have been performed to evaluate the efficacy and the impact of this drug in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) treated with PCI. Indeed, most of the previous investigations have mainly focused their attention on the hemodynamic effects of fentanyl and drug-to-drug interactions [ , ]. An increasing use of conscious sedation among PCI patients has been highlighted by a recent survey analysis which reported that among North American interventional cardiologists, benzodiazepines were the drugs most frequently used. Specifically, a conscious sedation was administered in about 66% of patients receiving CA and/or PCI. Conversely, it has been reported that European interventionalists adopted the sedation in about half of the cases [ ]. As standard of care, in US, fentanyl alone, and more frequently the co-administration of fentanyl with midazolam is generally used as analgesia in more than 90% of coronary artery interventions. Conversely, the administration of any type of sedation is adopted only in 38% of patients by European cardiologists. The reason of this “transatlantic” difference is probably multifactorial. Firstly, there is a different perception and treatment of pain between the two sides of the Atlantic Ocean. Moreover, as reported by Shah et al., when the pain became the fifth vital sign in the latest 1980s, opioids became more frequently used to treat both acute and chronic pain and, indirectly, also as premedication before invasive procedures. Another potential reason of the routine administration of fentanyl before cardiovascular procedure is represented by the fear of intraprocedural pain commonly shared by patients and their physicians [ ]. As well-known, antiplatelet inhibition plays a pivotal role in the short- and long-term success of PCI and recent studies have demonstrated a dangerous interaction between morphine and oral P2Y 12 inhibitors, resulting in both delayed effects and reduced blood concentrations of these antiplatelet agents [ , , ]. Our review is aimed to analyze the available data on effects, safety, and potential drawbacks of fentanyl used as a sedation agent before CA and/or PCI.
Pharmacologic Characteristics of Fentanyl
Fentanyl is a potent synthetic opiate agonist, available for intravenous (i.v), transmucosal, and transdermal use. Compared to morphine, it has a higher lipophilicity which implies a rapid onset and shorter half-life and action but a longer half-time of elimination [ ]. Specifically, following an intravenous administration, the onset of effect occurs within 60 s while the half-time distribution is about 13 min. From a pharmacodynamic point of view, fentanyl has no negative inotropic effects, ensuring a quite neutral hemodynamic response. Nevertheless, it could cause a mild hypotension mediated by bradycardia and decreased central sympathetic tone. However, the magnitude of the bradycardia is believed to be related to both the total dose administered as well as the rate of infusion. Moreover, patients with absolute or relative hypovolemia are more prone to hypotension after receiving the drug [ ].
Effects and Drawbacks of Fentanyl in Cardiovascular Interventions
Fentanyl has been evaluated in different fields of cardiovascular interventions. Most of the previous investigations have mainly focused their attention on the use of fentanyl during cardiac surgery [ , , ] while only few and sporadic studies have analyzed different aspects and use of this drug in respect to PCI (Table 1 ). The different use of fentanyl investigated in medical literature is presented and discussed herein. Table 1 Studies assessing different uses of fentanyl during coronary angiography or percutaneous coronary intervention Author Year Type of study No. of pts Type of procedure Fentanyl administration Fentanyl (dose) vs [drug] Aim Main findings Fulton et al. [ ] 2000 Controlled-randomized trial 130 PCI IV Fentanyl (NR) vs morphine (NR) vs local lidocaine • Compare three different analgesic regimens in terms of efficacy and safety during femoral arterial sheath removal after PCI • No differences in pain perception among patients using different analgesic regimens, as fentanyl, morphine, or local lidocaine, during femoral arterial sheath removal Baris et al. [ ] 2001 Prospective; double blind; randomized 90 CA IV NR vs [midazolam and placebo] • Compare hemodynamic and sedative effects of midazolam—with or without fentanyl combination—with placebo during CA • The use of fentanyl with midazolam and midazolam alone allow a better hemodynamic stability and patient cooperation Kiat et al. [ ] 2007 Controlled-randomized trial 611 PCI IV Fentanyl (25 μg) + midazolam (1 mg) vs local anesthesia (lidocaine 1%) vs fentanyl (25 μg) + midazolam (1 mg) local anesthesia vs none • Patients-reported procedure-related pain during femoral arterial sheath removal after PCI • Incidence of vasovagal reactions • Patients receiving any IV sedation had a lower mean pain score (2.92 ± 3.6 vs 3.83 ± 3.4, p = 0.001) • Significant pain score differences across patients receiving sedation, local anesthesia, both or neither (2.5 ± 3.3 vs 4.1 ± 3.4 vs 3.3 ± 3.9 vs 3.6 ± 3.5, respectively) • No significant differences in the incidence of vasovagal reaction among the four study groups. Abdel-Wahab et al. (PROFIT trial) [ ] 2008 Prospective; single-blind; randomized; 276 PCI IV first group: (0.05 mg) vs second group: (0.1 mg) vs [diazepam (5 mg sublingually)] • Compare fentanyl and diazepam in terms of post-procedural elevation of cardiac troponin T • Occurrence of post-procedural myocardial infarction or MACE within 30 days from the interventional procedure • No significant variation in hemodynamic response; • No significant differences in the rates of post-procedural troponin T elevation ( p = 0.26); • No significant differences in the rates of post-procedural MI or MACE ( p = 0.84); Deftereos et al. [ ] 2013 Prospective; open-label; randomized 2013 PCI IV Fentanyl (0.5 μg/kg) + midazolam (1 mg) (treatment group) vs placebo (control group) • Incidence of arterial spasm during the procedure • Major bleeding related to the procedure • Patients-reported procedure-related discomfort • 30-day all-cause mortality and/or repeat hospital stay for any causes • Spasm occurred less frequently in treated patients (2.6% vs 8.3%, p < 0.0001) • No differences for major in-hospital bleeding (1.1% vs 1.0%, p = 0.81 for treated and untreated patients, respectively) • Self-reported patients discomfort was lower in the treatment group (18.8 ± 12.5 vs 27.4 ± 17.4, p < 0.0001) • No differences in 30-day mortality or repeat hospital stay for any causes (4.6% vs 4.5%, for treated and untreated patients, respectively) Conway et al. [ ] 2015 Prospective-observational 399 [125 CA and 104 PCI] CA and PCI [enrolled also electrophysiological procedures] IV Either fentanyl (NR) or midazolam (NR) or both • Identify the prevalence of and risk factors for inadvertent hypothermia after procedures performed with procedural sedation (propofol, fentanyl, midazolam) and analgesia in a cardiac catheterization laboratory • Highest prevalence of hypothermia after combined use of fentanyl and midazolam (20.3%); • Post-procedural hypothermia only in 5.4% of cases after administering only fentanyl McEvoy J et al. [ ] PACIFY trial 2018 Single center; randomized 70 PCI IV Fentanyl (27.4 ± 7.9 μg)* (67.6 ± 0.4 μg)** + midazolam (1.8 ± 1.3 μg) vs no fentanyl* • Ticagrelor plasma concentration during the 24 h after the loading dose; • Platelet inhibition • Self-reported maximum pain experienced during the procedure • Fentanyl group had a lower ticagrelor 24-h plasma concentration than the no fentanyl group (2107 vs 3301 ng.h -1Ml , p = 0.05) • ADP response by aggregometry was greater with fentanyl versus no fentanyl patients (39.3 ± 8.7% vs 27.5 ± 14.4%, p = 0.04) • Mean self-reported maximal intraprocedural pain was lower with fentanyl versus no fentanyl (1.5 vs 2.3, p = 0.14). *Initial dose **total dose
Sedative Effects and Pain Control
Over the years, fentanyl has become the opiate of choice to obtain a moderate procedural sedation and analgesia during CA and/or PCI [ ]. A combined approach with both i.v. benzodiazepines (e.g., midazolam or diazepam) is widely applied in some countries, despite no specific recommendations have been proposed in this regard by international guidelines on percutaneous coronary artery revascularization. Very few randomized studies have been performed over the years on the use and potential side effects of fentanyl during CA and/or PCI. Available evidence demonstrates a lower self-reported patient discomfort/pain after the administration of fentanyl i.v., with or without the co-administration of benzodiazepines, in the absence of any significant variation in the hemodynamic response. Baris et al. enrolled 90 patients treated with midazolam + placebo, midazolam + fentanyl, and only placebo [ ]. They demonstrated that a better hemodynamic stability was achieved in patients treated with midazolam with or without fentanyl and also no difference in sedation scores, anxiety, or patient/cardiologist satisfaction [ ]. Similar results were presented by Kiat et al. [ ], demonstrating that fentanyl had a greater effect in reducing the mean pain score compared to only local anesthesia with lidocaine at 1% (2.5 ± 3.3 vs 4.1 ± 3.4), as well as the combined use of both sedation and local anesthesia (2.5 ± 3.3 vs 3.3 ± 3.9) or none of these (2.5 ± 3.3 vs 3.6 ± 3.5) during the femoral arterial sheath removal. Moreover, patients treated with sedation required less frequently the administration of an additional analgesic during the procedure (7.8%) when compared to those patients treated only with local lidocaine at the site of the puncture (11.8%) and those receiving both local anesthesia and sedation (9.8%). Unfortunately, these studies evaluated the mean pain value by a visual analogue scale (VAS) independently from the total duration of PCI. Conversely, Fulton et al. [ ] found no significant differences in pain perception among 130 patients, treated with different analgesic regimens, such as i.v. morphine, fentanyl, or local lidocaine, administered before removing the femoral arterial sheath after PCI.
Over the last years, the radial approach has been preferred in clinical practice due to the very low complication rates, reduced procedural discomfort, and early mobilization [ , ]. The prophylactic use of fentanyl during the radial arterial sheath removal has never been assessed. Deftereos et al. randomized 2013 patients (29.1% female, mean age 64.5 ± 8.4 years old) to either administration of sedation and analgesia (fentanyl 0.5 μg/kg + midazolam 1 mg) or no intraprocedural sedative/analgesic treatment before transradial PCI. Pain was graded according to a VAS ranging from 0 (no discomfort) to 100 (extreme pain and discomfort). Again, the results confirmed a significant lower self-reported discomfort in patients receiving sedation and analgesia (18.8 ± 12.5 vs 27.4 ± 17.4, p < 0.001) [ ]. In contrast were the findings of McEvoy who reported no significant differences in the mean self-reported intraprocedural pain, graded on a 10-point numerical scale, between patients treated with and without fentanyl before PCI (1.5 vs 2.3, p = 0.14) [ ]. It should be noticed that patients enrolled received both subcutaneous lidocaine and intravenous midazolam at the beginning of the catheterization and as needed for the rest of the procedure, with doses adjusted at the discretion of the physicians. Probably, the absence of fixed dose of fentanyl could be considered as a potential bias of the study which has led to a non-significant difference in the mean self-reported intraprocedural pain.
However, none of these studies evidenced hemodynamic instability or deterioration after fentanyl administration. As demonstrated, fentanyl gained certain popularity in cath labs, thanks to its minimal cardiovascular effects, good level of pain relief, and efficacy in providing conscious sedation.
Protection from Vasovagal Reactions
Only one study evaluated the role of local anesthesia and i.v sedation on vasovagal reactions during arterial sheath removal. Kiat et al. analyzed a cohort of 611 patients treated with PCI via the transfemoral route. They observed a vasovagal reactions rate of 5.1% ( n = 35). More precisely, the highest percentages of vasovagal events were observed in patients treated only with local anesthesia (9.8%) when compared to those treated with conscious sedation (9.8% vs 3.5%) [ ].
Myocardial Protection
Previous investigations have demonstrated that δ-opioid receptors are able to confer myocardial protection, playing a pivotal role in cardiac preconditioning during PCI both in animals and human studies [ , , , ]. Despite fentanyl being generally considered selective for μ-receptors, it can also interact with δ- and κ-receptors [ ]. Intriguingly, from a pharmacologic point of view, fentanyl has been related to a reduction of the infarct size as well as a faster recovery of cardiac contractile function after MI, via the PKC and by δ-receptors [ ]. Fentanyl seems to protect the heart against myocardial ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injury via δ-receptor cross-talk with adenosine A1-receptors and through PKC- and mKATP-linked mechanisms.
In real clinical practice, the PROFIT trial, after enrolling 276 patients, investigated whether fentanyl, compared to diazepam, was able to provide myocardial protection, beyond the well-known analgesic and sedative effect, during elective PCI [ ]. Specifically, no significant differences were observed in post-procedural troponin T elevation in patients preoperatively treated with fentanyl (0.05 mg or 0.1 mg) or diazepam (5 mg sublingually). Moreover, rates of post-procedural MI were similar among patients treated with different dosages of fentanyl or with benzodiazepines.
Protection from Arterial Spasm
Nowadays, the transradial access (TRA) remains the first option for coronary interventions [ ]. However, one of the most common complications encountered during the procedure is represented by radial artery spasm which is responsible for the majority of access site crossover. Indeed, in daily clinical practice, the cannulation of the radial artery could be complicated by different factors such as radial artery spasm, radial and brachial loops, or tortuosity of the innominate trunk. In such situations, successful access can be obtained switching to an alternative access route, such as the ulnar or the femoral artery. Access site crossovers can be potentially problematic as it increases procedure duration, radiation exposure, and risk of vascular complications related to multiple sites of access in patients on antiplatelet and antithrombotic therapy [ , ]. To reduce this complication, several preventive strategies have been investigated, ranging from the administration of a “vasodilator cocktail” after the insertions of the arterial sheath [ ], to the use topical anesthesia [ , ] and the co-administration of fentanyl and benzodiazepines. In this regard, Gursoy et al. [ ] analyzed the vasodilatory effect of different opioids, such as fentanyl, demonstrating concentration-dependent and endothelium-independent effects in human radial arteries. This finding was clinically tested by Deftereos et al. [ ] in a prospective-randomized study based on 2013 patients (mean age 64.5 ± 8.4 years old) which were randomized into two groups: the former receiving a preoperative sedation and analgesia (1 mg of midazolam and 0.5 μg/kg of fentanyl) while the latter did not receive any sedative/analgesic treatment. Arterial spasm occurred less frequently in the treatment group than in control one (2.6% vs 8.3%, p < 0.001, odds ratio (OR 0.29, 95% confidence of interval [CI] 0-18-0-47). Moreover, the access site crossover rate resulted significantly lower in treated patients (9.9% vs 15.0%, OR 0.62, 95% CI 0.48–0.82, p = 0.0001). Furthermore, the reduction of the arterial spasm appeared independently associated with the administration of combined opioid analgesia and benzodiazepine sedation (multivariate hazard ratio [HR] 0.140, 95% CI 0.073–0.271, p < 0.0001). Despite that these results should be confirmed in further studies, the absence of peri- and post-procedural complications represents the starting point of future research about preventive use of fentanyl and benzodiazepines not only for sedation purposes but also to prevent arterial spasm.
Risk of Hypothermia
Pharmacologic agents used in cath labs for intraoperative sedation and analgesia, as benzodiazepines, opioids, and propofol, are known for impairing the patients’ thermoregulation [ ]. This intriguing issue was investigated only by Conway et al., in 399 patients undergoing elective coronary or electrophysiological procedures. Specifically, CA and PCI were performed in 125 (31.3%) and 104 (26.1%) patients, respectively [ ]. Sedation was administered either by an anesthesiologist or a nurse and could be based on oral benzodiazepines, propofol (generally during cardiac arrhythmia ablation procedures, permanent pacemaker, or cardioverter-defibrillator implantation), or either midazolam or fentanyl or a combination of these in bolus. The sedative regimens with the highest prevalence of hypothermia were those based on fentanyl combined with midazolam ( n = 23; 20.3%; 95% CI 12.9–27.7%) and those including propofol ( n = 35; 40.2%; 95% CI 29.9–50.5%). However, a significant lower incidence of hypothermia was observed when only fentanyl was administered (5.4%). This study underlined that thermal discomfort was not a predictor of pre- or post-procedural hypothermia as well as physical signs of hypothermia (i.e., shivering), and thermal discomfort were not reliable predictors of hypothermia in sedated patients. For these reasons, temperature monitoring was necessary to early detect hypothermia in these subjects. As evidenced by animal studies, temperature strongly influences the hepatic microsomal cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) which is implied in the metabolism of fentanyl [ ]. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that mild hypothermia is able to induce a distribution and/or elimination-dependent increase in plasma fentanyl concentration which could continue to increase for several hours after rewarming [ ]. It is important to bear in mind this potential side effect and predispose a temperature monitoring for patients treated with fentanyl during long interventional procedure.
Delayed Platelet Inhibition
Recent investigations have demonstrated that i.v. morphine significantly delays the absorption of oral P2Y 12 platelet inhibitors both in healthy subjects and in patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) [ , ]. Intriguingly, fentanyl is classified, from a pharmacological point of view, in the same class of morphine. For this reason, a growing interest in assessing a possible interaction between fentanyl and P2Y12 has emerged recently. The single-center PACIFY trial recently enrolled 212 patients undergoing CA who were randomized to receive fentanyl (105 patients—fentanyl harm) or no fentanyl (107 patients—no fentanyl harm) [ , ]. Moreover, 35 patients in each arm were also loaded with 180 mg of ticagrelor after being considered candidates for PCI. Ticagrelor plasma concentrations were measured at baseline and 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 24 h after the administration while platelet inhibition was evaluated after 2 h. Surprisingly, the fentanyl arm demonstrated a lower ticagrelor 24-h area under the concentration-time curve when compared to the no fentanyl arm (2107 vs 3301 ng·h -1Ml , p = 0.05).Moreover, ADP response, evaluated by aggregometry, resulted greater in fentanyl vs no fentanyl patients (39.3 ± 8.7% vs 27.5 ± 14.4,%, p = 0.04. The assessment of platelet function demonstrated that more than 20% of patients in the fentanyl group had high reactivity after 2 h, a percentage that rose to more than 35% when platelet aggregometry was used. Mean high-sensitivity troponin I (hs-TnI) was higher with fentanyl at 2-h post-PCI (11.9 vs. 7.0 ng/L, p = 0.04) with an enzynatic level reflecting myocardial infarction in 11% of patients for fentanyl and 0% for no-fentanyl patients ( p = 0.08). However, no data regarding the presence of ECG changes were reported in the study [ ]. The trial demonstrates that fentanyl and morphine share common properties in delaying the absorption of P2Y12 inhibitors and, as consequence, deferring the platelet inhibition. The underling mechanism is still unknown but, considering the similarity between morphine and fentanyl, it is likely that like morphine, fentanyl impeded gastrointestinal absorption of several oral drugs, including P2Y12 platelet receptor inhibitors. Doubtlessly, this finding has important clinical implications and the preoperative administration of fentanyl in patients undergoing PCI would require a reconsideration of at least how much time has passed since the administration of the ticagrelor load.
Discussion
Available data demonstrates that fentanyl is widely used, especially in North America, during CA and/or PCI [ ]. However, very few trials and randomized studies have been performed regarding the use of this drug in cath lab during the last years. Several potential applications have emerged using fentanyl, as well as many questions left to be resolved (Table 2 ). However, as demonstrated by the results, fentanyl has both advantages and disadvantages when administered before or during coronary artery interventions (Fig. 1 ). Thanks to the quite neutral hemodynamic effect, fentanyl has obtained a prominent role among the other sedative/analgesic drugs [ ]. Currently, no specific recommendations about the procedural sedation have been provided. More precisely, only the American guidelines on PCI have inserted a paragraph regarding this issue, without any class of recommendations [ ]. However, the consensus paper has indicated that the term “conscious sedation” should be replaced with the more appropriate “procedural sedation levels” because different grades of consciousness could be maintained during the PCI. Indeed, patient’s sedations could be applied to obtaining only an anxiolytic effect or, in some cases a more depressed consciousness maintaining the ability to respond to verbal commands [ ]. However, physicians must be aware of the potential risks related to the use of fentanyl since even short lasting exposure, in some cases, may lead to dependence [ ]. Moreover, in daily clinical practice, preprocedure screening for priory history of opiate use and/or abuse is generally not performed by interventional cardiologists. These two aspects could have important clinical consequences [ , ]. The most important novel aspect is doubtless represented by the potential interaction between ticagrelor and fentanyl. Indeed, as demonstrated by the PACIFY trial, fentanyl delays the absorption of ticagrelor and results in less inhibited platelets at 30 min and 1 and 2 h after coronary stenting. Moreover, the 2- and 4-h troponin levels were higher with fentanyl, suggesting a clinically important drug interaction with potential clinical implications [ , ]. Interventional cardiologists should be aware that a new drug–drug interaction must be considered before preloading the patient with P2Y12 inhibitors, even because fentanyl may delay the absorption of P2Y12 inhibitors and, as a consequence, the inhibition of platelets. Waiting for further larger studies, in the meantime fentanyl must be considered the drug of choice for procedural analgesia during both CA and PCI. When fentanyl is administrated preoperatively before long duration procedures (e.g., Mitral clip, CTOs), it is important to evaluate the body temperature to avoid a potential hypothermia after the procedure. Moreover, as recommended by the results of the PACIFY trial [ ], during the PCI, the use of fentanyl must be discouraged in the absence of pain, especially when P2Y12 inhibitors are loaded near the time of fentanyl administration. Since the reduction of catecholamine release during acute coronary syndromes is achieved by pain reduction, generally using morphine or other opioids, like fentanyl, it will be fundamental to re-evaluate the ACS prehospital management since in these patients, an adequate P2Y12 load, without delays in the absorption and subsequent platelet inhibition, remains fundamental before performing a successful primary PCI. Table 2 Open questions regarding the use of fentanyl during coronary artery interventions Open questions Fentanyl-induced hypothermia [ ] Delay the absorption of P2Y12 inhibitors [ , ] Assess if fentanyl is truly needed for analgesia during angiography or PCI on the modern radial-access era [ ] Routine screen of prior history of opiate abuse before the administration [ ] Other potential non-analgesic benefits of fentanyl during cardiac procedures [ ] Potential risks of routine opiate use as dependence [ ] Potential role of cangrelor in patients treat with fentanyl [ ] Fig. 1 Advantages and disadvantages of fentanyl use in cath lab