Introduction
Perivascular adipose tissue (PVAT) is a specialized adipose depot surrounding blood vessels that functions to regulate vascular tone through paracrine signaling. In metabolically healthy individuals, PVAT promotes vasodilation and inhibits inflammation through release of adipose-derived relaxing factors and anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., NO and IL-10). Indeed, PVAT-deficient mice generated by PPARƔ-specific deletion in SM22α-positive cells display enhanced atherogenesis [ ]. Vasoprotective properties of PVAT are lost during obesity, likely due to adipocyte hypertrophy, hypoxia, and inflammation [ ]. Increased aortic PVAT volume during obesity correlates with visceral fat mass in humans and is linked to coronary artery disease and arterial calcification. Additionally, PVAT around coronary arteries from patients with a myocardial infarction is twice as thick as coronary PVAT from healthy individuals [ ]. The heterogeneity and anatomical location of PVAT impacts the local microenvironment and vascular function. PVAT surrounding the coronary artery exhibits significantly increased production of inflammatory cytokines IL-1b, IL-6, and leptin compared to PVAT surrounding the athero-resistant internal thoracic artery [ ]. Likewise, retention of PVAT on blood vessels during bypass surgeries, the so called “no-touch” procedure, increases graft patency [ ] and reduces the risk of post-procedural cerebrovascular events [ ]. These studies emphasize the regulatory effect of PVAT on vascular tone and highlight the need to understand mechanisms regulating its expansion.
Adipose tissue is rich in mesenchymal-like, multipotent stem/progenitor cells harboring broad regenerative capacity and therapeutic potential [ ]. Recent breakthroughs in regenerative medicine show promising ability for adipose progenitor cells (APC) to regenerate damaged cardiomyocytes, endothelium, and vascular smooth muscle [ ] via paracrine signaling from APC or by direct differentiation of APC. APCs are also potent regulators of angiogenesis and contribute to adipose tissue homeostasis, expansion, and inflammation, thus mediating central physiological functions related to cardiometabolic health. APC proliferation gives rise to identical daughter cells that maintain pluripotency, and progeny can continue dividing indefinitely to maintain the progenitor cell pool or terminally differentiate to committed adipocytes in response to environmental and biological inputs [ ]. There is no consensus on a defined set of markers for identifying APC [ ]. However, human APC have been shown to express CD34 [ ], CD73 [ ], CD90 [ ], CD105 [ , ], CD140A [ ], and CD271 [ ].
Mechanisms regulating APC differentiation to adipocytes have been extensively studied [ ], but surprisingly, little is known about APC proliferation during obesity [ ]. Autocrine secretion of Pref-1 from APC regulates their self-renewal [ ], and Pref-1 null mice develop obesity because of enhanced differentiation and maturation of APC [ ]. Likewise, obesity increases proliferation of human-derived APC [ ], suggesting an important role for APC in obesity and cardiometabolic health. Given that PVAT expands during obesity, regulates vascular function, and exacerbates cardiovascular disease, it is critical to identify mechanisms regulating PVAT-APC differentiation. We are not aware of any published studies characterizing human PVAT-derived APC; thus, our study is unique.
Rab27a is a member of the small GTPase family of Rab proteins that coordinate intracellular sorting and trafficking of cargo proteins [ ]. Widely expressed, Rab27a regulates immune, metabolic, and blood vessel function [ , , ] and is linked to several human cancers. Unlike most Rab proteins, which share complementary and/or overlapping functions, loss of Rab27a is linked to disease. Humans born with a null mutation in Rab27a will develop Griscelli syndrome [ ], a fatal condition early in childhood characterized by hyperactivation of the immune system, demyelination of nerves, clotting defects, and hypopigmentation of skin and hair. Mice harboring a null mutation in Rab27a ( ashen ) are viable but phenocopy several attributes of Griscelli Syndrome [ ]. Mechanistically, Rab27a regulates Golgi-to-plasma membrane vesicle trafficking, and exosome secretion [ ], although non-secretory functions have been reported [ , ].
Descriptive and mechanistic studies on human PVAT are extremely limited, in part, due to the highly invasive nature of procurement. Furthermore, the progenitor cell population has not been characterized, and mechanisms that regulate human PVAT-APC cell function are unknown. Additionally, there have been no reports of Rab27a expression or function in any adipose depots. In this work, we obtain human PVAT from the ascending aorta of patients with coronary artery disease undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). From this tissue, we sought to identify APC by cell surface progenitor marker expression and test the ability of APC to undergo adipogenesis. Further, we made the novel discovery that Rab27a is expressed in human PVAT and PVAT-APC from CABG patients and is required for their adipogenic differentiation in vitro, thus identifying a new function for Rab27a in regulating adipogenesis. This work provides new mechanistic insight into the regulation of PVAT expansion.
Materials and Methods
Donor Samples
PVAT is discarded tissue during bypass surgery and has been approved as non-human subjects research by the Maine Medical Center Institutional Review Board. PVAT was collected from the ascending aorta of patients with coronary artery disease undergoing CABG (Table 1 ). Once removed from the donor, PVAT was placed into a tube with ice cold-DMEM and immediately transferred to the Maine Medical Center Biobank for documenting and de-identification. Tissue was picked up from the Biobank within 2 h of resection and transferred to the lab on wet ice. PVAT was divided for fixation and paraffin embedding, whole tissue lysis, or digest for progenitor cell explant. Subcutaneous adipose tissue was collected from the abdominal region of obese donors undergoing liposuction. Table 1 Characteristics of PVAT from donors used for this report Donor ID Age Sex BMI Medical history (all have coronary artery disease) Diabetic R17–0609 71 F 36.4 Aortic valve stenosis, congestive heart failure, hypertension N R17–0809 33 F 33.3 Mitral valve prolapse/regurgitation, atrial fibrillation, N R17–1066 73 F 38.7 Hypertension, hyperlipidemia, Y R17–1092 59 F 32.5 Hyperlipidemia, heart murmur, hypertension Y R17–1240 71 M 25.4 Hyperlipidemia, hypertension, aortic stenosis N R17–1440 71 M 28.0 Hyperlipidemia, myocardial infarction, peripheral vascular disease, mitral regurgitation Y R17–1787 58 F 25.3 Aortic stenosis, hypercholesterolemia, valvular disease N R17–1865 65 F 33.0 Hypertension, congestive heart failure, mitral regurgitation Y R18–0500 66 M 28.7 Hyperlipidemia, hypertension Y
Tissue Digest and Cell Explant
Preparation of Collagenase Solution
Collagenase I solution was prepared by dissolving 10 mg collagenase I (Worthington Biochemical Corporation, cat no. LS004196, lot no. 46 K16856) into 5 ml of buffer (123 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1.3 mM CaCl 2 , 5 mM glucose, 100 mM HEPES, 4% BSA, pH = 7.4) and incubating for 45 min. Collagenase solution was sterile filtered (0.22 μm pore size) and pre-warmed to 37 °C while the tissue was prepared.
Tissue Digest
An approximately 400 mg piece of human PVAT was rinsed in HBSS containing 2× pen/strep (40 U/ml penicillin G, 40 μg/ml streptomycin, and 100 ng/ml Amphotericin B-HyClone cat no. SV30079.01) on ice for 10 min. PVAT was transferred to a 60-mm petri dish and minced in 1 ml of collagenase solution using surgical scissors until no chunks remained. Minced tissue slurry was transferred to a 5-ml tube containing 4 ml of pre-warmed collagenase and incubated on its side at 37 °C for 30 min with moderate rotation. After incubation, the 5 ml cell solution was transferred to a 50-ml conical tube and diluted with 45 ml of ice-cold HBSS containing 2× pen/strep and centrifuged at 300× g for 10 min.
Cell Explant
After centrifugation, the supernatant was removed and cell pellet (PVAT stromal cells) re-suspended in 25 ml HBSS to wash. Cells were centrifuged again at 300× g for 10 min and supernatant removed. Pellet was re-suspended in 2 ml of DMEM F12 containing 10% FBS and 100 μg/ml primocin (Invivogen cat no. ant-pm-1) and 50 ng/ml bFGF (Peprotech, cat no. 100-18C) and plated to one well of a 12-well culture dish coated with 0.02% gelatin. Confluency was established after 3–4 days and cells passaged for experimentation. All experiments were performed with cells between passages 3 and 5.
Adipogenic Induction
PVAT-APCs were grown to confluency and incubated in adipocyte induction medium (7.5 ml growth media, 40.8 ml high glucose DMEM, 0.5 mM IBMX, 1 μM dexamethasone, 5 μM rosiglitazone, 33 μM biotin, 100 nM insulin, 20 μM pantothenic acid, and 20 U/ml penicillin G, 20 μg/ml streptomycin, and 50 ng/ml Amphotericin B (1× pen/strep)), for 72 h at 37 °C. After 72 h, the cells were washed 2× in PBS and incubated in adipogenic maintenance media (induction media minus IBMX and rosiglitazone) for the duration of the experiment, with media changes every other day.
Protein Isolation
Whole adipose tissue was ground in 200 μl radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer supplemented with 1% w / v SDS and 1× protease/phosphatase inhibitors (Cell Signaling Technology cat no. 5872S) using a microcentrifuge tube pestle. Lysates were then sonicated using output power 3 and duty cycle at 30 for 10 pulses on ice and proteins precipitated with 4 volumes of ice-cold 100% acetone and incubation at − 20 °C for 1 h. Samples were centrifuged at 4 °C for 20 min at 12,000× g , supernatant poured off, pellets re-suspended in 70% acetone to wash, and centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000× g . Supernatant was removed and pellets allowed to dry at room temperature for 30 min before resuspending in RIPA buffer. Pellets were sonicated as indicated above to solubilize. Cultured cells were lysed in RIPA supplemented with 1× protease/phosphatase inhibitors without acetone precipitation. Protein was quantified using the DC protein assay (BioRad cat no. 5000111) and denatured by heating at 95 °C for 15 min in Laemmli sample buffer supplemented with 100 mM DTT.
Flow Cytometry
Passage 4 human PVAT-derived APCs were detached using Accutase solution (VWR cat no. 10210-214) for 2 min at 37 °C, added to 10 ml of PBS and centrifuged for 5 min at 300× g . Cell pellets were re-suspended in FACS buffer (2 mM EDTA, 0.5% BSA in PBS) and divided into FACS tubes (~ 75 K cells/ml). FcƔ receptors were blocked by addition of 1 μg of Human Fc Block™ (BD Biosciences cat no. 564219) to each tube for 10 min at room temperature. For labeling cells, 1 μg of each fluorochrome-conjugated antibody was added to each tube (1 μg/ml) and incubated at 4 °C for 40 min with occasional mixing. Antibodies used were all from Biolegend (CD105-PeCy7 cat no. 323218 clone 43A3, CD73-FITC cat no. 344016 clone AD2, and CD90-FITC, cat no. 328107, clone 5E10). Fluorescence-minus one (FMO) controls were included by excluding one fluorochrome from each condition. Unstained cells were labeled with DAPI for live/dead staining. Cells were washed 2× in FACS buffer and analyzed using a Miltenyi Biotec MACSQuant equipped with three lasers (405, 488, and 638 nm). Data were analyzed and histograms generated using Flowjo_V10.
RT-PCR
Total RNA was isolated from whole tissue using the miRCURY RNA Isolation Kit (Exiqon cat no. 588705, product now discontinued). RNA was normalized to 25 ng/μl in RNase free water and 10 μl (250 ng) used for generating cDNA. DNA was removed and cDNA synthesized simultaneously using iScript gDNA Clear cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad cat no. 1725034) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. PCR amplification was carried out using 0.5 μg template DNA with Promega 2× PCR master mix (cat no. M7502) with cycling conditions: 95 °C for 2 min followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 58 °C for 20 s, and 72 °C for 20 s. PCR products were separated on a 1.5% TAE-agarose gel containing a few drops of ethidium bromide. Positive control was pooled cDNA from human MEC1, MCF7, and THP1 cells; negative control was water loaded in place of template (Table 2 ). Table 2 Primers used for RT-PCR Target Forward 5′- 3′ Reverse 5′-3′ Tm (°C) CD45 AGTACAGACGCCTCACCTTC TGGCTGTACTCCTCTCTCCT 58 CD73 GAAGGCCTTTGAGCATAGCG TAACTGGGCACTCGACACTT 58 CD90 AGTACGAGTTCAGCCTGACC CCCTCGTCCTTGCTAGTGAA 58 CD105 CCATTGTGACCTTCAGCCTG CTTGGATGCCTGGAGAGTCA 58 CD140A ATGGATTAAGCCGGTCCCAA TAAATGGGGCCTGACTTGGT 58 C/EBPA CAAGGCCAAGAAGTCGGTG GGTCATTGTCACTGGTCAGC 58 PPIA CTCGAATAAGTTTGACTTGTGTTT CTAGGCATGGGAGGGAACA 58 PPARG GACCACTCCCACTCCTTTGA GAGATGCAGGCTCCACTTTG 58 UCP1 TTAGCAGATGACGTCCCCTG CACTAACGAAGGACCAACGG 58 ZFP423 CAAGAACATTCCACTGGCCC TGGAGAACTTGAGGTCGCAT 58
Immunoblot
For immunoblotting, 25–50 μg of protein was loaded onto a 10% TGX gel (Bio-Rad) and separated at 200 V for ~ 30 to 40 min. Protein was transferred to a PVDF membrane using Bio-Rad Trans-blot Turbo (1.5 amps, 15 V for 30 min). Membranes were blocked using 5% w / v non-milk dissolved in PBS with 0.1% Tween-20 (PBS-T) for 30 min and incubated with primary antibody overnight at 4 °C. Primary antibodies and dilutions used were as follows: from Cell Signaling Technologies—ACTB 1:5000 (no. 4970S), C/EBPα 1:750 (no. 8178S), FASN 1:1000 (no. 3180S), PLIN1 1:4000 (no. 9349S), PPARG 1:500 (no. 2443S), TUBA1B 1:2500 (no. 2125S); from Santa Cruz Biotechnology—CD73 1:1000 (no. sc-398260), CD140A 1:1000 (no. sc-398206), Rab5 1:750 (no. sc130010), Rab27a 1:1000 (no. sc136996); from R&D Systems—UCP1 1:750 (no. MAB6158-SP); and from Abcam—FABP4 1:2500 (no. ab92501), PGC1A 1:2000 (no. ab54481). The next day, the membranes were washed 3× for 15 min each in PBS-T and incubated in HRP-conjugated secondary antibody from Cell Signaling Technology (no. 7074S and no. 7076S) diluted 1:4000 in PBS-T supplemented with 5% w / v milk for 1 h. Membranes were washed 3× for 15 min each and developed using Immobilon forte chemiluminescent reagent (Millipore cat no. WBLUF0100). Signal was detected using HyBlotCL ® autoradiography films (Denville no. E3212-1001371) in a dark room and developed on a Konica developer (SRX-101A).
Immunohistochemistry and Immunofluorescence
Immunohistochemistry
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded PVAT samples were sectioned at 5 μm and rehydrated in AmeriClear™ followed by decreasing ethanol concentrations. Antigen retrieval was performed using 0.01 M sodium citrate and heat, followed by quenching of endogenous peroxidases with 3% H 2 O 2 . Sections were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 and blocked for 2 h at room temperature (blocking solution was 2% BSA and 2% goat serum in TBS). Sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C in primary antibody diluted in blocking solution, washed 3× in TBS-T, and detected using SignalStain ® Boost IHC Detection Reagent and SignalStain ® diaminobenzidine substrate (Cell Signaling Technologies). IHC primary antibody dilutions were as follows: CD105 1:200 (SCBT, sc-18838), CD140A 1:200 (SCBT, sc-398206), Rab27a 1:50 (SCBT, sc-81914), and concentration-matched IgG1 Isotype Control (CST, 5415). Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin to visualize nuclei.
Confocal Immunofluorescence
For tissue, sections were processed and labeled with primary antibody as described above. Primary antibody dilutions were as follows: Rab27a 1:50 (SCBT, sc-74586), PLIN1 1:4000 (CST, 9349), and concentration-matched IgG (CST, 3900) and IgG1 (CST, 5415) isotype controls. After washing 3× in TBS, sections were incubated with Highly Cross Adsorbed IgG (H + L) alexa-fluor conjugated goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit secondary antibody (ThermoFisher Scientific A-11037 and A32723) in TBS-T for 1 h at room temperature, followed by two additional washes in TBS-T. To quench auto fluorescence, sections were incubated with True View Autofluorescence Quenching Kit (Vector Labs SP-8400) for 2 min according to the manufacturer’s protocol and counter stained with 1 μg/ml DAPI for 20 min. Vectashield Hard Set Anti-fade mounting medium was used for cover slipping and to preserve fluorescence. Images were captured using a Leica TCS SP8 laser scanning confocal with a 20×/0.75 air objective.
Oil Red O Staining
Oil red O (ORO) stock solution was prepared by mixing 0.35 g ORO (Sigma-Aldrich no. O-0625) into 100 ml of 100% isopropanol. To prepare ORO working solution, stock solution was diluted three parts ORO to two parts nanopure H 2 O and filtered through a 0.2-μm filter. Ten percent formalin-fixed cells were dehydrated in 60% isopropanol with two 5-min washes and cells incubated in ORO working solution for 10 min at room temperature. Wells were washed with nanopure H 2 O and cells imaged. To elute ORO from the cells, 100% isopropanol was added to the wells for 5 min and collected to measure absorbance at 490 nm. Total protein was collected by lysing the cells in RIPA after elution of ORO.
Results
Identification of Progenitor Cells from Human Aortic PVAT
Adipose tissue is a rich source of multipotent progenitor cells [ ]. The progenitor population from human PVAT has not been defined, and it is unclear if cells with adipogenic potential can be harvested from human PVAT. Histologically, human aortic PVAT from CABG patients has large adipocytes with collagen-rich, interstitial regions between lipid-laden adipocytes (Fig. 1 a, left, arrows). CD105 and CD140A are markers of adipocyte progenitor cells [ , ], and we tested for their localization in human PVAT. We detected strong CD105 and CD140A protein in the interstitial regions of human aortic PVAT (Fig. 1 a, columns 2 and 3, arrows) while tissue stained with isotype-matched IgG control were negative (Fig. 1 a, right). Next, we tested if CD105+/CD140A+ progenitor cells could be explanted from human PVAT and cultured in vitro. Aortic PVAT (~ 450 mg) was digested in collagenase I and plated on 0.02% gelatin-coated plates in DMEM F12 with 10% FBS and 50 ng/μl bFGF. By day 3, explanted cells were spread on the substrate, and by day 7, were proliferating rapidly (Fig. 1 b). To determine their identity, we performed RT-PCR on explanted cells from two different female donors. Consistent with in vivo staining (Fig. 1 a), explanted cells expressed CD140A and CD105 , albeit levels of expression were variable between donors (Fig. 1 c). Strong expression of progenitor markers CD90 and CD73 was also detected, while explanted cells were negative for the leukocyte marker CD45 . Intriguingly, we detected expression of preadipocyte commitment marker ZFP423 , early-phase adipogenic differentiation marker PPARG , and thermogenic marker UCP1 , while late-phase differentiation marker C/EBPA was absent (Fig. 1 c). Consistent with transcript expression, we detected CD140A by immunoblot (Fig. 1 d) and cell surface expression of CD73, CD105, and CD90 by live cell flow cytometry (Fig. 1 e–g, green peak, stained cells; blue peak, unstained; gray peak, FMO control). These data are consistent with the identification of these cells derived from the stromal fraction of human PVAT as APC, due to their expression of markers of adipocyte progenitors and committed preadipocytes [ , , , ]. Fig. 1 Identification of adipocyte progenitor cells from human aortic PVAT. a Immunohistochemical analysis of human aortic PVAT. Trichrome: blue = connective tissue, purple = nuclei. b Phase contrast microscopy of progenitor cells explanted from the stromal vascular fraction of PVAT from a CABG patient at days 3 and 7 in culture. c RT-PCR for the indicated transcripts from passage 1 PVAT-APC. d Immunoblot for the indicated proteins from passage 2 PVAT-APC. e – g Histograms of PVAT-APC analyzed by flow cytometry for CD73 ( e ), CD105 ( f ), and CD90 ( g ) from donor R17-1092. Blue, DAPI stained; gray, FMO negative control; green, labeled cells. Results are representative of data from 5 separate donors Fig. 2 Human PVAT-APC differentiate to adipocytes in vitro. a Oil red O (ORO) staining of lipids in non-induced (top) and induced (bottom) PVAT-APC at day 7. b Immunoblot for the indicated proteins of non-induced and induced PVAT-APC for 7 and 14 days. c Confocal immunofluorescent analysis for the indicated proteins in non-induced and induced human PVAT-APC. Arrows, PLIN1 surrounding lipid droplets
Human PVAT-APC Exhibit Adipogenic Potential
Given the expression of pre-adipocyte commitment markers from explanted APC, we wondered if they have the potential to generate adipocytes in vitro. Human PVAT-APC were induced to differentiate towards an adipogenic lineage for 7 days using previously established methods [ ] and neutral lipid accumulation visualized by oil red O (ORO) staining [ ]. Compared to non-induced PVAT-APC, induced cells showed accumulation of multilocular lipid droplets (Fig. 2 a). The multilocular phenotype persisted through 28 days of differentiation (data not shown). Immunoblot of non-induced and induced cells at 7 and 14 days showed robust activation of PPARƔ (early), C/EBPα (late), and FABP4 (terminal) adipogenic differentiation markers and lipid-droplet-associated protein PLIN1 (Fig. 2 b) demonstrating strong adipogenic induction. Interestingly, despite the white fat-like appearance of human PVAT (Fig. 1 a), UCP1-positive adipocytes are present in human thoracic aortic PVAT [ ]. Consistent with this, we detected UCP1 protein in induced human aortic PVAT-APC at 7 and 14 days of differentiation (Fig. 2 b), suggesting the potential for PVAT-APC to form thermogenic brown-like adipocytes in vitro. Although PLIN1 is mainly associated with lipid droplets, endoplasmic localization has been reported [ ]. We labeled cells using PLIN1 antibody and visualized PLIN1 localized predominantly to lipid droplets (Fig. 2 c) indicating association with developing droplets. Collectively, our data demonstrate that explanted PVAT-APCs differentiate into multilocular, UCP1-producing adipocytes.
Rab27a Is Expressed in Human PVAT and Suppressed During Adipogenesis
PVAT modulates vascular and metabolic function by paracrine secretion of growth factors and adipokines in the local environment [ , , ]. We searched for candidate secretory proteins enriched in PVAT compared to subcutaneous white adipose tissue (WAT) by MS/MS of whole tissue lysates. Using this approach, we identified numerous secretion-associated proteins that appeared to be enriched in human PVAT compared to human subcutaneous white adipose tissue, including synaptotagmin-1, myosin-9, Rab11, and Rab27 (data not shown). Importantly, Rab27a is a well-established regulator of protein secretion and degradation [ , , ] and regulates the function of multiple systems [ ], including pancreatic beta cell release of insulin [ ], VEGFR1 degradation during angiogenesis [ ], cancer stem cell self-renewal [ ], initiation of clotting cascades [ ], and lytic granule exocytosis from cytotoxic T-cells [ ]. Rab27a expression and function has not been studied in adipose tissue, and given its prominent role in regulating secretion, we validated expression in human PVAT. Rab27a protein was detected in human PVAT in the interstitial cells using immunohistochemistry (Fig. 3 a, top) and confocal immunofluorescence (Fig. 3 a, bottom, arrows), suggesting Rab27a is expressed in some interstitial progenitor cells of human PVAT. Further, immunoblot of tissue lysates from PVAT and WAT revealed detectable, albeit variable, Rab27a expression in PVAT but not WAT (Fig. 3 b). UCP1 protein was also detected in PVAT but not WAT, confirming previous reports [ ]. We also verified expression of Rab27a in explanted human PVAT-APC and found that it colocalized along F-actin tracks (Fig. 3 c, arrows), which is consistent with an active secretory function for Rab27a [ ] in these cells. Negative controls were stained with fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibody only. Next, we tested Rab27a levels during adipogenic differentiation of human PVAT-APC for 7 and 14 days. Immunoblot of PVAT-APC whole cell lysates revealed high levels of Rab27a in non-induced PVAT-APC that was completely suppressed by adipogenic differentiation (Fig. 3 d). The related secretory Rab protein Rab5 was detectable throughout differentiation, indicating a regulated and specific suppression of Rab27a. Thus, Rab27a is produced in human PVAT and PVAT-APC and is selectively suppressed during adipogenic differentiation. Fig. 3 RAB27A is expressed in human PVAT and suppressed during adipogenic differentiation. a Immunohistochemistry (top, brown Rab27a staining) and confocal immunofluorescence (bottom, green Rab27a staining) for the indicated proteins from sections of human PVAT. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Negative controls were stained using isotype-matched IgG control antibodies. b Immunoblot of human PVAT and subcutaneous WAT whole tissue for the indicated proteins. c Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy of cultured PVAT-APC. RAB27a is labeled green, actin filaments are detected by phalloidin (red), and nuclei are stained with DAPI. Negative control is stained using fluorophore conjugated secondary antibody. d Immunoblot for the indicated proteins from PVAT-APC as indicated
Rab27a Is a Novel Regulator of Adipogenesis in Human PVAT-APC
Since Rab27a is expressed in PVAT-APC, but suppressed during differentiation, we hypothesized that it functions to regulate the phenotype and identity of APC prior to differentiation. To test this, PVAT-APC were transfected with a scrambled non-targeting (ntRNA) or siRNA specific for Rab27a (siRab27a) for 48 h prior to adipogenic induction. After 48 h, cells were induced to an adipogenic lineage for 3 days and maintained in adipogenic maintenance medium for 5 days (total 8 days) before visualizing lipid mobilization. Intriguingly, ORO staining revealed a reduction in lipid accumulation in siRab27a APC as compared to ntRNA (Fig. 4 a). Non-induced cells from both conditions were negative for lipid accumulation (Fig. 4 a, right column). The amount of ORO in the cells (Fig. 4 b) and the number of ORO-positive cells (Fig. 4 c) were significantly reduced in siRab27a cells, suggesting impaired lipid accumulation and adipogenic differentiation respectively. Given these observations, we hypothesized that knockdown of Rab27a in PVAT-APC prior to adipogenic induction may impair their differentiation. To test this, we analyzed protein expression by immunoblot from non-induced and induced cells transfected with ntRNA or siRab27a. Rab27a knockdown was confirmed in non-induced and induced cells, and as expected, substantial loss of progenitor markers CD140A and CD73 upon adipogenic induction (Fig. 4 d, bottom). In line with reduced ORO staining in siRab27a cells (Fig. 4 a–c), we noted increased levels of the mitochondrial biosynthesis protein PGC1A, and marked reductions in fatty acid synthase (FASN), perilipin1 (PLIN1), C/EBPA, and FABP4 in induced cells with Rab27a knockdown (Fig. 4 d, e–j). These data suggest that Rab27a expression in human PVAT-APC is required to prime the cells for adipogenesis. Fig. 4 RAB27A regulates adipogenic differentiation of human PVAT-APC. a – c ORO staining ( a ), quantification of ORO incorporation ( b ), and % of ORO positive cells ( c ) from control (ntRNA) or RAB27A knockdown (siRAB27A) PVAT-APC induced to differentiate for 8 days. Negative control, non-induced cells from each condition stained with ORO. Statistics: Shown are means + SD. Students t test with Tukey’s post hoc analysis, n = 8 CABG patients. d – j Representative immunoblot ( d ) and quantification of protein levels ( e – j ) of non-induced and induced human PVAT-APC with and without RAB27A knockdown
Discussion
PVAT is a critical regulator of vascular tone and function. Pathological conversion of PVAT contributes to vasoconstriction, vascular inflammation, and metabolic dysfunction. Studies on human PVAT are extremely limited, likely due to the invasiveness of procurement from major vessels. The adipogenic potential and mechanisms involved with regulating differentiation of PVAT-APC remain undefined and a thorough investigation of PVAT-APC will advance our understanding of the development of cardiometabolic dysfunction.
There has been increased attention to anatomical and molecular features of PVAT that may potentially assist in the understanding of cardiovascular disease. Coronary computed tomography angiography identified a significant increase in PVAT volume surrounding the coronary artery in patients with localized vasospasm [ ]. In addition, patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms had local necrotic and highly inflamed PVAT compared to PVAT surrounding aortae from patients without vascular disease [ ]. One study compared PVAT surrounding the heart (atherosusceptible) and PVAT surrounding the internal mammary artery (atheroresistant) in males undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) surgery for advanced atherosclerotic disease [ ]. That study showed that leptin levels were lower in PVAT from the internal mammary artery compared to PVAT surrounding the aortic root and coronary arteries. Conversely, PVAT around the heart was more vascularized with more macrophages. A recent study compared gene expression of PVAT around human internal mammary arteries versus coronary arteries in patients with or without cardiovascular disease [ ] and found that differentially expressed genes high in cardiovascular disease patients included those involved in inflammation and lipid metabolism. Other adipokines with enrichment in PVAT/epicardial adipose tissue in coronary artery disease include IL-1β, TNFα, leptin, visfatin, resistin, and IL-6, whereas adiponectin and migration inhibitory factor were decreased [ ]. These studies provide strong impetus for the continued molecular characterization of mature and progenitor cells within PVAT.
In this report, we obtain human PVAT from the ascending aorta of patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting to assess progenitor marker expression and test the hypothesis that Rab27a is a novel regulator of APC differentiation. Through a combination of flow cytometry, immunoblot, PCR, and immunohistochemistry, we establish a baseline characterization of PVAT-APC as CD45-/CD31-/CD73+/CD90+/CD105+/CD140A+ with robust adipogenic potential. Expression of CD73, CD90, CD105, and CD140A-positive progenitors within a CD45-/CD31- population from adipose tissue has been reported in numerous adipose depots [ , , , ] and indicates that human PVAT, like classical adipose depots, is a rich source of progenitor cells, likely harboring broad regenerative capacity [ , ]. Furthermore, we identified Rab27a as highly expressed in human PVAT compared to SWAT. Since there are no reports of Rab27a in adipose, the impact of this finding is unclear. Interestingly, PVAT-APC expression of Rab27a regulates their ability to undergo adipogenesis, and siRNA-mediated knockdown of Rab27a caused impaired adipogenesis and lipid mobilization. Rab27a has been shown to regulate progenitor cell self-renewal of breast and colon cancers via effects on secretion [ , ]. Given these findings, it is feasible to speculate that Rab27a may regulate PVAT expansion during obesity.
The Rab-family of small GTPases are trafficking and secretory mediators that play vital roles in metabolic function [ , ]. In 3T3-L1 cells, Rab18 controls the balance between insulin-induced lipogenesis and β-adrenergic-induced lipolysis [ ]. Likewise, Rab4 regulates the subcellular localization [ ] and Rab11 the endocytic trafficking [ ] of the glucose transporter protein GLUT4 in 3T3-L1 adipocytes; however, further studies are needed to test these theories in primary human APC lines and in adipose tissue. A recent study comparing gene expression profiles of human PVAT to subcutaneous WAT using genome-wide expression analysis identified genes involved in vascular regulation and inflammation as upregulated in human PVAT compared to SWAT [ ]. Intriguingly, Rab27a was detected in the analysis as upregulated in human PVAT but was not the focus of the research. Our data in Fig. 3 b confirm higher expression of Rab27a in human PVAT compared to SWAT at the protein level. Given that Rab27a controls secretory vesicle trafficking in numerous cell types, and that PVAT regulates vascular tone via paracrine secretion, it is tempting to speculate that Rab27a in PVAT influences the local vascular environment through effects on cytokine secretion.
We demonstrated impaired adipogenesis of PVAT-APC with Rab27a knockdown (Fig. 4 ). This effect on adipogenesis was observed in all donor cells tested (Table 1 ), regardless of gender, BMI, age, and cardiometabolic disease status, suggesting it may represent a generalizable mechanism controlling PVAT-APC differentiation in patients with cardiovascular disease. A limitation to our study is the small sample size ( n = 9 CABG patients). Despite obtaining consistent findings on both progenitor marker expression and the effects of Rab27a knockdown, it is imperative to extend this work out to larger sample sets and include PVAT-APC from healthier donors absent coronary artery disease and determine the potential impact of confounding variables like diabetes and medications at the time of procurement. It is also critical to determine if Rab27a is a marker of metabolically impaired PVAT or is constitutively expressed regardless of its metabolic state. In addition, how does Rab27a exert it effects on PVAT and the adjacent vessel, and does it have different functions in healthy and diseased PVAT?
In summary, this work provides seminal research on the progenitor cell population residing in human PVAT and identifies Rab27a as a critical mediator of PVAT-APC differentiation. These findings provide a significant advancement of our understanding of human PVAT and the mechanisms potentially regulating cardiovascular disease progression.