Background of the Trial
In an aging society, the number of the patients suffering from heart failure (HF) has been rapidly increasing worldwide as well as in Japan. HF is a staggering clinical and public health problem, linked to significantly high mortality, morbidity, and expenditures for healthcare, particularly among older patients. HF with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) accounts for approximately one third to one half of the HF cases in epidemiological studies [ , ], including those conducted in Japan [ ]. Given the diversity of HF pathophysiology, the activation of neurohumoral systems, such as the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), leads to ventricular remodeling in association with adverse clinical outcomes. Theoretically, the inhibition of the RAAS should be one of the treatment options for HF; however, several of the most recent multicenter clinical trials for HFpEF failed to demonstrate the effects of the tested drugs, including angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs). For example, while candesartan, one of the ARBs, improved the clinical outcomes in HF patients with systolic dysfunction in the CHARM study [ ], therapeutic efficacy of ARBs in patients with HFpEF was not demonstrated [ ]. Similarly, the I-PRESERVE [ ] study found that another ARB, irbesartan, had no effect on cardiovascular mortality and hospitalization in patients with HF. However, details regarding the results of I-PRESERVE study are still open to discussion. For example, the patients who received irbesartan reduced their systolic blood pressure by less than 4 mmHg from the baseline [ ], suggesting insufficient blood pressure-lowering effects of irbesartan on hypertension. Interestingly, a subanalysis of the I-PRESERVE trial demonstrated beneficial effects of irbesartan in HFpEF patients with levels of baseline plasma N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NTproBNP) below the median, but not in patients with baseline levels above the median [ ]. These findings raise the possibility that strong ARBs may exert preventative effects on HFpEF progression, and the administration of an ARB in the early phases of HF might have beneficial effects in patients with hypertensive HFpEF.
Importantly, left ventricular (LV) diastolic dysfunction is an essential component of the pathophysiology of HFpEF in previous studies. Combined ventricular-vascular stiffness in patients with HFpEF may lead to an elevation in blood pressure along with an afterload increase [ ]. Conversely, this finding raises a possibility that decreases in vascular load, the increase in capacitance or decreases in resistance of the systemic vasculatures, are related to an improvement of ventricular diastolic function.
Recently, azilsartan, a strong ARB, has been approved and is available worldwide. It has been shown that the antihypertensive effect of azilsartan is stronger than that of conventional ARBs [ ]. Azilsartan is characterized by a high affinity to arteries (3.1 times more than candesartan) because of a high tissue affinity even after drug washout [ ]. Based on these findings, we hypothesized that azilsartan may improve the LV diastolic function in HFpEF patients with hypertension by decreasing the vascular load. If this is demonstrated, we can make a potential proposal that these effects are associated with the improvements of clinical outcomes in patients with HFpEF. Indeed, we have shown that azilsartan improves LV diastolic dysfunction more than candesartan in patients with HF in our retrospective study [ ], hinting at and inspiring us to prospectively evaluate the effects of azilsartan on LV diastolic dysfunction in comparison with candesartan.
Methods
Japan Working Group on the Effects of Angiotensin Receptor Blockers Selection (azilsartan vs. candesartan) on Diastolic Function in the Patients Suffering from Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction: J-TASTE trial (UMIN Clinical Trials Registry; UMIN000022556) is a multicenter, randomized, open-labeled (candesartan vs azilsartan), and assessor(s)-blinded, active controlled using candesartan, parallel-group clinical trial, to test the hypothesis that azilsartan improves diastolic dysfunction in HFpEF patients with hypertension for 48 weeks. Before enrollment of the patients, the study protocol will be approved by the institutional review board of all participating centers. This study is conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent is obtained from each patient before enrollment. Personal information about potential and enrolled participants remain confidential, and data are de-identified using participant numbers.
Key Objective
To determine the effect of azilsartan on LV diastolic function in patients with HFpEF and hypertension by a multicenter, randomized, open-label, assessor(s)-blinded, active controlled using candesartan, parallel-group clinical trial.
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Specific inclusion criteria are listed in Table 1 . Enrollment in this clinical trial requires that patients meet all of the following inclusion criteria. Evidence of elevation in LV filling pressure at rest is required for this study (plasma BNP levels ≥ 40 pg/mL or NTproBNP levels ≥ 125 pg/mL). Exclusion criteria are detailed in the online-only Data Supplement. Table 1 Inclusion criteria of the J-TASTE trial 1 Age, ≥ 20 and < 85 years old 2 Previous clinical diagnosis of hypertension within 3 months before consent Patients who fall under any of the following (2-1., 2-2., and 2-3.) are defined as hypertension 2-1. Patients with newly diagnosed hypertension 2-2. No treatment hypertension patient 2-3. Patients receiving an antihypertensive drug for hypertension 3 Patients presenting with BNP levels not lower than 40 pg/mL or NTproBNP levels not lower than 125 pg/mL within latest 4 months before obtaining consent 4 Patients with heart failure Patients who fall under any of the following (4-1., 4-2., and 4-3.) are defined as hypertension 4-1. Patients being hospitalized for heart failure 4-2. Patients with history of hospitalization for heart failure 4-3. Patients presenting with NYHA function classification not lower than II 5 Patients whose left ventricular ejection fraction assessed by echocardiography within 4 months prior to the consent is not lower than 45% 6 Patients whose left ventricular diastolic function assessed by echocardiography is not lower than E/e’ = 8 7 Patients who are able to provide written consent
Study Protocol
The J-TASTE trial is a randomized (1:1), open-labeled (candesartan vs azilsartan), and assessor(s)-blinded study to test the hypothesis that azilsartan improves diastolic dysfunction in HFpEF patients with hypertension for 48 weeks (Fig. 1 ). Study procedures include echocardiography, which is independently evaluated by the Core Laboratory of Echocardiography (Core Laboratory, Osaka, Japan), and the collection of blood for biomarkers. The information of the tested drugs is blinded to the Core Laboratory of Echocardiography.
After confirmation of the enrollment to this study, allocation of patients to each treatment group is conducted by a covariate-adaptive randomization method (Pocock-Simon method) including the following as considered factors: (1) age (≥ 75 or < 75 years), (2) early diastolic wave height in mitral blood flow wave (E)/early diastolic mitral annulus velocity (e’) (≥ 8 or < 8), (3) eGFR (≥ 30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 or < 30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ), (4) history of hospitalization for HF (yes or no).
Details of the administration of study drugs are described in the online supplemental data. Briefly, the administration of doses of the tested drugs is 20 mg azilsartan once daily or 8 mg candesartan once daily. The physicians can change the doses of the tested drugs based on the patient conditions, including blood pressure, at each visit, and can add antihypertensive drugs, excluding other ARBs, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and direct renin inhibitors, according to the Guideline for the Management of Hypertension published by Japanese Society of Hypertension in 2014 [ ].
Endpoints
The primary endpoint is the change in LV early diastolic wave height/early diastolic mitral annulus velocity (E/e’) assessed by echocardiography from baseline to the end of the study (48 weeks). The secondary endpoints include the change in e’ (48 weeks), the change in E/atrial contraction wave height (A) (48 weeks), the change in deceleration time of early diastolic wave height in mitral blood flow wave form (48 weeks), the changes in NYHA cardiac functional classification (48 weeks), the changes in circulating NTproBNP level from baseline (48 weeks), the changes in serum aldosterone levels (48 weeks), and the incidence of the composite endpoint (death from cardiovascular disease or hospitalization for cardiovascular disease) at the end of the study as shown in Table 2 . Regarding the echocardiographic analysis, all assessments are performed by independent sonographers who are blinded to the patient’s treatment group. Fig. 1 Study protocol of the present study Table 2 Summary of the study endpoints Primary endpoint The change in E/e’, early diastolic wave height in mitral blood flow wave form (E) divided by early diastolic mitral annulus velocity (e’) (from baseline to the end of the study) Secondary endpoints As evaluation for left ventricular diastolic function improvement assessed by echocardiography except for E/e’ change 1. The change in e’ from baseline (at the end of the study) 2. The change in E/atrial contraction wave height (A) from base line (at the end of the study) 3. The change in deceleration time of early diastolic wave height in mitral blood flow wave form (Dct) from baseline (at the end of the study) 4. The change in left atrial diameter from baseline (at the end of the study) As evaluation for cardiac structure and systolic and diastolic functions assessed by echocardiography 5. The changes in left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVDd), left ventricular end-systolic diameter (LVDs), left atrial volume index, and left atrial diameter 6. The changes in left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) from baseline (at the end of the study) 7. The changes in left ventricular mass index from baseline (at the end of the study) 8. The changes in end-systolic elastance and end-diastolic elastance of left ventricular from baseline (at the end of the study) As evaluation for heart failure severity 9. The changes in NYHA cardiac functional classification from baseline (24-week post drug administration and the end of the study) 10. The changes in NTproBNP level from baseline (4-week post drug administration and the end of the study) 11. The changes in serum aldosterone levels from baseline (at the end of the study) As evaluation for antihypertensive effect 12. The changes in systolic and diastolic blood pressure from baseline (4-, 12-, 24-, 36-week post drug administration and at the end of the study) As evaluation for cardiovascular events 13. The incidence of composite endpoint (death from cardiovascular disease or hospitalization for cardiovascular disease) at the end of the study 14. The incidence of composite endpoint (death from cardiovascular disease or hospitalization for heart failure) at the end of the study 15. The incidence of death from cardiovascular disease (at the end of the study) 16. The incidence of hospitalization for cardiovascular disease (at the end of the study) 17. The incidence of hospitalization for heart failure (at the end of the study) 18. The incidence of death from any cause (at the end of the study) 19. The incidence of hospitalization from any cause (at the end of the study) 20. The incidence of additional therapy or dose escalation for heart failure caused by worsening of heart failure (24-week post drug administration and the end of the study) 21. The incidence of onset of new atrial fibrillation/flutter (at the end of the study)
Echocardiography
The same echocardiographic machine is used at the baseline and at the end of the study for each patient. All echocardiographic data are sent to the Core Laboratory. At the Core Laboratory, all of the echocardiography analyses are performed by the independent sonographers in a blinded manner. Ventricular dimensions are measured from 2-D or M-mode images according to American Society of Echocardiography conventions [ ]. LV volume is determined using the Teichholz method [ ]. LVEF is determined by the biplane modified Simpson method or by M-mode or 2-D echocardiography using the Quinones formula from the parasternal views as previously described and validated [ ]. Transmitral inflow is measured by pulsed-wave Doppler using standard methods as previously described [ , ].
Sample Size
The sample size was calculated on the basis of the primary hypothesis, using the precision-based method for continuous variables. A sample size of 87 patients per group (equally sized groups) produces a two-sided 95% confidence interval for the standardized mean difference in change from baseline, for LV early diastolic, with a distance to the limits that is equal to 0.286. To allow for approximately 10% dropout, 95 patients will be recruited per group, i.e., 190 in total.
Risk-Based Monitoring and the Data and Safety Monitoring Committee
Risk-based monitoring of study sites will be implemented to ensure that this study is properly conducted. A monitoring protocol has been separately created for the detailed monitoring-related plan. Auditing by a third party which is not participating in this study will also be performed to ensure the reliability of study results. Auditing will be performed according to the separately specified, documented procedure. Records and medical information identifying the patient will be kept confidential in monitoring and auditing. Also, when new safety information-related issues arise, the Protocol Steering Committee or the Independent Data Monitoring Committee should discuss the issue, including study discontinuation or continuation, and the ethical review committee at each study site will also confirm each patient’s intention to continue to participate in the study.
Statistical Analysis
Analyses will be performed on the basis of the intention-to-treat principle. The azilsartan group will be compared against the candesartan group for all analyses. For the primary endpoint, i.e., change from baseline in E/e’, the analysis of covariance will be used to calculate an adjusted mean difference and its 95% confidence interval, where baseline E/e’ will be included as a covariate. For subgroup analyses, we will use regression methods with appropriate interaction terms (respective subgroup × treatment group). Secondary endpoints will be analyzed descriptively; categorical variables will be assessed using a chi-squared test or Fisher’s exact test, whereas continuous variables will be assessed with Student’s t test or Wilcoxon rank-sum test, as appropriate. For time-to-event variables, the Kaplan-Meier method will be used to estimate the survival curves and log-rank test will be used to compare the curves between the treatment groups. The analyses of the primary endpoint may be affected by the number of the withdrawals from the trial. We will report the reasons for withdrawal for each randomization group and compare the reasons qualitatively. The effect that any missing data might have on results will be assessed via the sensitivity analysis of the augmented data sets. Dropouts will be included in the analysis by modern imputation methods for missing data, if necessary. All tests are two-sided, and a P value of < 0.05 is considered indicative of a statistically significant between-group difference. All analyses are performed using statistical analysis software SAS, version 9.3 for Windows (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). The statistical analysis plan, which will include more technical and detailed elaboration of the principal features stated in the protocol, will be prepared separately and finalized before the database lock.
Current Status
The first patient was enrolled in August 16, 2016. We have recruited 20 hospitals, which specialize in ADHF diagnosis and treatment. We have already enrolled 81 patients and will recruit the remaining 109 patients with ADHF.
Discussion
Previous studies suggest that the pathophysiology of HFpEF is characterized by high ventricular and vascular stiffness [ , , ]. It is well established that changes of the LV myocardial property alter the end-diastolic pressure volume regression (EDPVR), and we hypothesize that the improvement of ventricular and vascular stiffness by ARB therapy may also improve the LV diastolic function. Although the theory that an elevation in vascular load influences ventricular diastolic function is still controversial, some clinical studies suggest a robust relationship between the elevation in vascular load and worsening diastolic function. Elzinga and Westerhof showed that both aortic peak flow and mean flow decrease when aortic resistance increases or capacitance decreases along with the early onset of aortic valve opening [ ] and the early opening of the aortic valve and early timing of LV ejection slow LV relaxation [ ]. This indicates that the changes in vascular compliance may alter the LV relaxation property via the changes in the LV ejection mode. Indeed, Borlaug et al. demonstrated that the annular tissue Doppler e’ wave, indicating LV relaxation, was strongly associated with the vascular load, especially with the late-systolic load [ ]. The fact that LV diastolic function is sensitive to acute changes in systemic blood pressure through administration of angiotensin [ ] and nitroprusside [ ] has already been reported. A more recent study suggests that transient hypertension caused by handgrip is strongly associated with late-diastolic pressure [ ]. Accumulating lines of evidence inspired us to test the hypothesis that both ventricular and vascular stiffness are possible therapeutic targets for improvements of diastolic function in patients with HFpEF. Meanwhile, one recent study demonstrated that increases in stroke volume by acute vasodilation using intravenous sodium nitroprusside are smaller in patients with HFpEF compared to those with HF and reduced EF [ ]. However, little is known about the effects of slow reduction in the vascular load via an inhibition of RAAS on LV diastolic stiffness in patients with HFpEF. In particular, it remains uncertain whether the reduction in vascular loads through the treatment is associated with a downward-shift in EDPVR or decreases in end-diastolic pressure in patients with HFpEF. The present study was therefore designed to precisely quantify changes in the diastolic function in patients with HFpEF and is accompanied with vascular load reduction through treatment with a strong ARB. Concerning vascular capacitance, azilsartan exerts a higher vascular affinity than candesartan because of the small changes in residue in the same chemical structure. If azilsartan improves E/e’ more than candesartan, the relief of vascular stiffness due to high vascular affinity of azilsartan would be one of the potential causes of the improvement of the LV diastolic dysfunction since both azilsartan and candesartan are believed to improve the LV myocardiac properties and the diastolic LV pressure-volume relationship in patients with HFpEF.
Importantly, the I-PRESERVE [ ] study (irbesartan) failed to demonstrate the beneficial effects of ARB on clinical outcomes in patients with HFpEF. However, the details of the results in the I-PRESERVE study are still open to discussion. For example, the reduction of systolic blood pressure in the patients who received irbesartan was only 3.8 mmHg (mean) from the baseline [ ]. A subanalysis of the I-PRESERVE study clearly demonstrated the beneficial effects of irbesartan in HFpEF patients with baseline NTproBNP below the median, but not in patients with levels above the median [ ], suggesting that early intervention with ARBs may be associated with improvements of clinical outcomes. Notably, around 30% patients in both groups already received ACE inhibitors in the I-PRESERVE study. It is widely known that the mortality in HF patients with reduced EF who were treated with both ACE inhibitors and ARBs in addition to beta-blockers was increased in the Valsartan Heart Failure Trial (Val-HeFT) [ ]. For this reason, we exclude patients who have already used ACE inhibitors at screening in the present study.
Furthermore, in the present study, the cardiologists mainly treat the patients with hypertension and LV diastolic dysfunction in accordance with the Guideline for the Management of Hypertension published by Japanese Society of Hypertension in 2014 [ ]. Thus, the degrees of lowering blood pressure will not be different between the physicians in the present study.
Assessment of LV Diastolic Function in Patients with HFpEF
The primary endpoint in this study is to compare changes in tissue Doppler E/e’ between the two groups. Several clinical studies [ , , ] have identified tissue Doppler index E/e’ as an independent predictor of future cardiovascular events in patients with HFpEF. The E/e’ ratio has been widely accepted clinically to estimate LV filling pressure [ ] and diastolic dysfunction. However, more recent studies suggest the limitation of E/e’ as a sensitive indicator of diastolic function in patients with HFpEF, and there is still controversy over its use in patients with reduced ejection fraction in recent studies [ ] or in various clinical situations [ ]. Nonetheless, E/e’ is still indicated as the routine parameter to assess diastolic function in patients with HFpEF in recent European Society Cardiology guidelines [ ], with other multistep echocardiographic assessments. In accordance with the recent guidelines, we added several parameters for the assessment of diastolic function in this study, such as E/A, left atrial volume, and tricuspid regurgitation velocity.
Novel Biomarkers for Vascular Remodeling and Cardiorenal Syndromes
In the present study, we will measure several biomarkers to uncover the important cardiovascular effects of azilsartan. Pentraxin 3 (PTX3) has been described as an early-detection marker for primary local activation of innate immunity and inflammatory response in the vascular wall [ ]. Notably, previous studies demonstrated that plasma levels of PTX3 are associated with mortality in patients with cardiovascular disease such as myocardial infarction, even after adjustment for major risk factors and other acute-phase prognostic markers [ ]. Interestingly, one previous study demonstrated an elevated PTX3 level in the heart of HFpEF patients by collecting blood samples from the coronary sinus and artery [ ]. These findings suggest that PTX3 has a potential for revealing vascular remodeling, inflammation, and loads; therefore, we will investigate serum levels of PTX3 in the present study.
In addition, several biomarkers have been determined to be representative of both renal and cardiac states. Recent studies suggest that circulating levels of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), a phosphate-regulating hormone secreted from osteoblasts, are associated with renal function [ , ]. Of note from our previous study, circulating FGF23 levels are strongly associated with risk of adverse clinical events not only in patients with CKD but also in patients with HF [ , ]. Therefore, we will add the assessments of this novel biomarker to demonstrate cardiorenal status in the present study.
Summary
The J-TASTE trial design has many strengths, including the multicenter design, central assessment system for echocardiography, suitable guidelines for control of blood pressure by physicians, and assessments for novel biomarkers. The study will provide us with useful information about the therapeutic efficacy of ARBs and provide insight into the pathophysiological mechanisms for HFpEF.
Sources of Funding
This study will be conducted using funding provided by Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited.