Background
Atrial fibrillation (AF) and bradyarrhythmia are both prevalent in the elderly. So, the incidence of bradyarrhythmia concomitant with AF is high. Epidemiologic studies showed that the cumulative incidence of AF after pacemaker implantation is up to 30–40%. This is much higher than that of the general population [ ]. Multiple clinical studies revealed silent paroxysmal AF in approximately 10–50% of patients with a pacemaker but without clinical evidence for AF [ , , , , , , ].
Although silent AF was found in a large number of pacemaker patients, many of these patients were delayed for medical treatment due to lack of AF symptoms. It is not certain about the stroke risk in subclinical AF patients, and whether there is a similar risk/benefit ratio for oral anticoagulation in patients with subclinical AF compared to patients with similar risk profiles and clinically diagnosed AF. Several studies suggested that the stroke risk appears to be lower compared with that in patients with similar risk profiles and clinical AF [ , ]. Given the weakness of clinical evidence for oral anticoagulation for stroke prevention in patients with device-detected subclinical AF, specific recommendations in most guidelines for this population are scarce and rarely similar.
Various clinical studies have proved that the two stroke-risk classification schemes (CHADS 2 and CHA2DS 2 -VASc score) could aid in increasing the detection rate of high-risk patients recommended for antithrombotic therapy in AF population. But it does not consider the value of continuous AF burden (including daily AF burden and cumulative time spent in AF over a specific time window) for predicting stroke [ , ]. Reliance on clinical symptoms and intermittent electrocardiographic assessments could only help to diagnose AF. It lacks the ability to make precise quantification of AF burden. Today, comprehensive detection of AF is facilitated by pacemakers, implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs), and other implantable monitors. These devices aid to the acquisition of continuous AF burden and would enhance the accuracy of AF diagnosis.
Results from previous studies all indicate a critical value of daily AF burden in predicting the rate of thromboembolic events (TE). Most research support that increased AF burden would be independently associated with increased stroke risk after adjusting for anticoagulation treatment and risk factors. But the AF duration related to increased risk of TE varied from 5 min to 24 h in different studies [ , , , , , , , , ].
The burden of AF varies in patients with subclinical AF after pacemaker implantation. Whether we should include AF burden in stroke risk stratification schemes is unknown. There is a lack of clinical evidence in how to guide anticoagulation in device-detected silent AF with CHA2DS2-VASc score combined with additional risk factors such as AF burden to reduce the risk of TE.
As the AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for the Management of Patients With AF mentioned [ ], additional studies are needed to further clarify the relationship between stroke risk and atrial high rate events (AHREs) detected by implanted devices and to define key characteristics of AHREs in patients who warrant further investigation or potential therapy. Currently, further clinical studies will be required to determine the clinical significance of anticoagulation guided by device-detected subclinical AF to lower the risk of TE. Two large-scale interventional prospective randomized multi-center studies exploring the strategy of anticoagulation in device-detected subclinical AF are ongoing in Europe. It may provide the strongest evidence for the role of anticoagulation for this population [ , ]. But there is no similar research in China.
Taken together, existing related research showed increased risk of TE in device-detected subclinical AF (especially asyptomatic) patients. But most of the studies were performed in a foreign population. We do not have the related data in Chinese population. Moreover, previous studies did not define a level of AF burden and CHA2DS2-VASc score at which anticoagulation is required in subclinical AF. How to screen out the high-risk patients recommended for anticoagulation by device-detected AF burden combined with CHA2DS2-VASc score in Chinese patients after pacemaker implantation is of important clinical significance.
Methods
Objectives
The Evaluation of Oral Anticoagulation for Reduction of Thrombo-Embolism in Chinese Patients with Device-Detected Subclinical Atrial Fibrillation (ART-CAF) trial was primarily designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of selecting high-risk patients with device-detected subclinical AF who could benefit from oral anticoagulant agent (OAC) use at the approved dosage to prevent stroke and systemic arterial embolism. The study also assesses the occurrence of clinically overt major bleeding as the primary safety outcome. In addition, this study will evaluate the patients’ satisfaction of anticoagulation.
Study Overview
Based on previous research and literature reports the ART-CAF trial is an open-label, registry-based, prospective, multicenter, cohort study. It will recruit patients with subclinical AF first detected by a pacemaker, ICD, or insertable cardiac monitor after device implantation for more than 3 months. Patients recruited should be identified with at least one episode of device-detected daily AF ≥ 5 min in duration [ ]. AF requires at least one episode of electrogram confirmation (unless ≥ 6 h in duration). AF detection will be programmed to the nominal settings (atrial rate > 180 bpm) by general AF diagnose algorithm to ensure consistent device programming at all centers. Key inclusion and exclusion criteria are shown in Table 1 . Enrolled patients will be treated with or without anticoagulants according to center clinical practice. Routinely, after discussion of the patients’ medical status between doctor and patient, the advice of the doctor as well as the patient’s own choice will finally contribute to the decision of whether or not to start anticoagulation. Patients assigned either to OAC or to usual care without OAC will finally be maintained in a 1:1 ratio. The study design and schedule of investigations are summarized in Fig. 1 . ART-CAF is registered at www.chictr.org.cn (ChiCTR1800016221). Table 1 Key inclusion and exclusion criteria Inclusion criteria 1. Patient must be more than 18 years old. 2. Permanent pacemaker or defibrillator with atrial lead (with or without resynchronization) or a single-chamber device with an AF detection algorithm similar to those used in implantable loop recorders, or insertable cardiac monitor capable of detecting AF. 3. At least one episode of device-detected daily AF ≥ 5 min in duration (atrial rate > 180 bpm if an atrial lead is present), implanted at least 3 months prior to randomization before enrollment. AF requires at least one episode of electrogram confirmation (unless ≥ 6 h in duration). 4. CHA2DS2-VASc score ≥ 1 (males) or 2 (females). 5. Patient is informed and has signed informed consent. Patient is willing to attend an outpatient follow-up. Exclusion criteria 1. Clinical AF or atrial flutter history documented by surface ECG (12-lead ECG, telemetry, Holter) lasting ≥ 5 min, with or without clinical symptoms. 2. Mechanical valve prosthesis, recent (within past 6 months) deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism or valvular AF or other condition requiring treatment with an anticoagulant. 3. Indication for long-term combination therapy with two antiplatelet drugs (aspirin and clopidogrel, or other combination of two platelet inhibitors). 4. Contraindication for oral anticoagulation in general. 5. Serious bleeding in the last 6 months (this includes, but is not limited to, prior intracranial hemorrhage, active peptic ulcer disease, active internal bleeding, bleeding at a noncompressible site). 6. Bleeding diathesis within 30 days before randomization. 7. Patients at high risk of bleeding (this includes, but is not limited to, clinically significant thrombocytopenia or anemia, platelet count < 90,000/μL at screening or pre-randomization, anemia of unknown cause with a hemoglobin level < 10 g/dL at screening or pre-randomization, coagulation disorders, recent stroke within past 30 days, documented hemorrhagic tendencies, or blood dyscrasias). 8. Ucontrolled hypertension (> 180/110 mmHg) 9. Acute coronary syndrome, coronary revascularization (PCI or bypass surgery) within 30 days prior to randomization. 10. Significant liver disease (e.g., acute hepatitis, chronic active hepatitis, cirrhosis) or liver function test abnormalities at screening (alanine transaminase (ALT) > 5 times the upper limit of normal or ALT > 3 times the upper limit of normal plus total bilirubin > 2 times the upper limit of normal). 11. Severe renal insufficiency (a calculated creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min). 12. Previous anticoagulation therapies such as: VKAs, heparin, low molecular weight heparin, dabigatran, and FXa inhibitors before randomization. 13. Drug abuse or clinically manifest alcohol abuse. 14. Systemic treatment with drugs that are combined P-gp and strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, lopinavir, ritonavir, indinavir, and conivaptan) or systemic treatment with drugs that are combined P-gp and strong CYP3A4 inducers (e.g., carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampin, St. Johns wort). 15. Any active malignancy. 16. Any disease that limits life expectancy to less than 1 year. 17. Participation in another controlled clinical trial, either within the past 2 months or still ongoing. 18. Allergy to anticoagulant drugs including VKAs, dabigatran, and rivaroxaban. 19. Women who are pregnant, breast-feeding, or of child-bearing potential. 20. Patient who is mentally ill. Fig. 1 Study design. OAC, oral anticoagulant. Warfarin dosage will be titrated to maintain the international normalized ratio between 2 and 3. Dabigatran dosage will be 110 mg twice daily. Rivaroxaban dosage will be 20 mg once daily with a reduction of dose to 15 mg once daily in patients with the following characteristics: age > 75 years, weight ≤ 50 kg, or estimated glomerular filtration rate < 50 mL/min. Patients assigned to usual care will receive either placebo or aspirin (100 mg once daily) or clopidogrel (25, 50, or 75 mg once daily) or cilostazol (50 or 100 mg twice daily) depending on established indications for aspirin and clopidogrel therapy
The study is conducted at three sites in China. The trial started recruitment in June 2018 and aimed to recruit 750 patients over a 30-month period. After baseline investigations, follow-up will occur at 4 weeks, 12 weeks, 24 weeks, and 1 year after enrollment and every year after 1-year visit until the end of the study. At the baseline visit, informed consent is taken, and additional baseline variables including CHA2DS2-VASc score, AF burden, gender, age, height, weight, complete medical history, vital signs, NYHA classification, laboratory test, echocardiographic data, type of atrial and ventricular leads, concommitant drug used up to 3 months before enrollment, and the name of OACs prescribed are recorded. Follow-up questionnaires at follow-up visits will also selectively collect patient-reported measures by trained medical practitioners. These measures will assist in our understanding of long-term medication influence and other safety data. Because this is an event-driven study, the precise termination of follow-up will occur once 66 adjudicated primary efficacy outcome events have occurred, with an anticipated follow-up of approximately 70 months from the beginning of recruitment.
Patients assigned to the OAC group will receive warfarin, dabigatran, or rivaroxaban in the therapeutic dose approved for stroke prevention in AF. During the course of the trial, warfarin dosage will be titrated to maintain the international normalized ratio between 2 and 3. Dabigatran dosage will be 110 mg twice daily. Rivaroxaban dosage will be 20 mg once daily with a reduction of dose to 15 mg once daily in patients with the following characteristics: age > 75 years, weight ≤ 50 kg, or estimated glomerular filtration rate < 50 mL/min. Patients assigned to usual care will receive either placebo or aspirin (100 mg once daily) or clopidogrel (25, 50, or 75 mg once daily) or cilostazol (50 or 100 mg twice daily) depending on established indications for antiplatelet therapy.
During follow-up, patients who develop symptomatic clinical AF documented by surface ECG and meets the clinical criteria for anticoagulation should all receive anticoagulant therapy as recommended by current guidelines. If a clinical indication for anticoagulation and/or dual antiplatelet therapy arises, anticoagulation and/or antiplatelet therapy should be applied according to the current guidelines. Participants will continue with follow-up and may restart study medications if the clinical situations resolve.
Blinding is not possible because of different OACs and antiplatelets used in study groups; a researcher who is unaware of the treatment arm the patient has been assigned to will be appointed to adjudicate all endpoint events and another researcher who is also blinded to the patient allocation is assigned for the statistics task.
No funding was used to support this work. The authors are solely responsible for the design and conduct of this study, all study analyses, the drafting and editing of the article, and its final contents.
Ethics
The study was approved by the medical ethics committees of Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, affiliated to Medical School of Zhejiang University, in February 2018 (Keyan20180206-10). This trial will be conducted in compliance with the study protocol, good clinical practices, principles laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki, and applicable local regulations.
All patients will provide individual informed consent for study participation and authorization for the use and disclosure of their personal health information. De-identified data will be used for data analysis, and the confidential nature of patient information will be maintained.
Study Outcomes
The primary efficacy outcome parameter of ART-CAF is a composite of ischemic stroke and systemic arterial embolism. Stroke is defined as the rapidly developing of new clinical signs of focal (or global) neurological dysfunction, lasting more than 24 h supported with concomitant brain imaging studies, including computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or leading to death, with no apparent cause other than that of vascular origin.
A systemic arterial embolism is defined as an abrupt episode of systemic arterial insufficiency associated with either clinical or radiographic evidence of embolic arterial occlusion that occurred in the absence of other likely mechanisms. Arterial embolic events to the central nervous system and coronary were classified as stroke/transient ischemic attack (TIA) and myocardial infarction, respectively, rather than systemic arterial embolism. Pulmonary embolism will not be included. Also, there should be at least one of the following objective evidence of arterial embolism: surgical report indicating evidence of arterial embolism, pathological specimens related to embolism removal, imaging evidence consistent with arterial embolism, or autopsy reports.
The primary safety outcome is the occurrence of clinically overt major bleeding defined according to the International Society of Thrombosis and Hemostasis (ISTH) criteria. It includes fatal bleeding, bleeding in a critical site (intracranial, intraocular, intraspinal, intraarticular, intramuscular with compartment syndrome, pericardial, retroperitoneal), or bleeding causing an acute decrease in hemoglobin level of ≥ 2 g/dL or leading to transfusion of ≥ 2 units of whole blood or red cells.
Secondary outcome parameters include: TIA, myocardial infarction, cardiovascular death, all-cause death, components of the primary outcome, TIA, myocardial infarction, cardiovascular death and all-cause death, components of the primary outcome, TIA, myocardial infarction, cardiovascular death, all-cause death, and major bleeding. TIA is defined as a transient episode of neurological dysfunction caused by focal brain or retinal ischemia without acute infarction, lasting no longer than 24 h. They leave no persistent neurological deficit. Myocardial infarction is defined according to the third universal definition of myocardial infarction [ ]. Death will be considered cardiac according to the 2014 ACC/AHA key data elements and definitions for cardiovascular endpoint events in clinical trials [ ].
Modified Rankin Scale is used for the overall assessment of the neurologic function of the patient. Patient’s satisfaction of anticoagulation is assessed by the Anti-Clot Treatment Scale (ACTS).
We will collect the data of continuous AF burden (including daily AF burden and total cumulative time spent in AHREs over each follow-up period). Daily AF burden is defined as the maximum number of hours of AHRE S on any day from the last time of program-control and may have included more than one episode of AHRE S on that day.
Sample Size Calculation and Statistical Analysis
According to MOST and other recent study results, the rate of stroke is about 1 to 3% in subclinical AF. Our study inclusion criteria are AF lasting more than 5 min and CHA2DS2-VASc score ≥ 1 (males) or 2 (females). Conservative assumption would be that the annual incidence of primary endpoint is about 3% in non-anticoagulation treatment group. We select a HR of 0.5, so the annual incidence of the primary endpoint in the anticoagulation treatment group would be about 1.5%. With the two-sided test, alpha as 0.05 and power of 80%, assuming that enrolment will continue for approximately 30 months at a uniform rate, and about 10% of the patients will be lost during follow-up, approximately 750 patients will be needed to be enrolled to the two treatment groups in a 1:1 ratio until 66 primary efficacy outcomes are observed with an anticipated follow-up of approximately 70 months from the enrollment of the first patient in this study.
We will estimate AF burden and CHA2DS 2 -VASc scores at screening and during follow-up, the incidence rate of ischemic stroke and systemic arterial embolism during follow-up, and the probability of TE per AF risk exposure. We will compare estimates for patients who take anticoagulant therapy with those for patients who do not receive any anticoagulant treatment. Concomitant medication and other baseline characteristics will be included in subgroup analysis.
Continuous variables will be summarized using descriptive statistics, i.e., number of patients ( n ), mean, median, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum. Qualitative variables will be summarized by counts and percentages.
Baseline characteristics will be compared. t test or sign rank test will be used after testing for normality. Chi-square or Fisher’s exact test will be performed for categorical variables.
The primary efficacy endpoint (ischemic stroke or systemic embolism) will be analyzed by Kaplan-Meier method, and comparisons between the groups will be performed using a log-rank test. Hazard ratio with 95% CI will be derived by the Cox proportional hazards model. Subgroup analyses of the efficacy endpoint are pre-specified to compare: (1) The ability to predict the difference in risk of TE by different level of AF burden combined with CHA2DS2-VASc scores as well as NYHA classification, left ventricular ejection fraction, chamber diameter, concomitant disease, and medication; (2) The ability of different anticoagulant in reducing the TE risk of subclinical AF; (3) The influence of different atrial and ventricular leads on the incidence of TE risk of subclinical AF and the AF burden; (4) The influence of different baseline cardiac function (including NYHA classification and left ventricular ejection fraction) on the incidence of TE risk of subclinical AF and the AF burden; (5) The influence of different baseline chamber diameter on the incidence of TE risk of subclinical AF and the AF burden; (6) The influence of different baseline concomitant disease on the incidence of TE risk of subclinical AF and the AF burden; (7) The influence of different concomitant medication on the incidence of TE risk of subclinical AF and the AF burden;
Subgroup analysis of primary efficacy endpoint will be estimated using a stratified Cox model. The subgroup analysis of AF burden will be tested by Chi-square or Fisher’s exact tests.
The primary safety endpoints and secondary endpoints will be presented by summary statistics, as number of patients, event counts, and percentage.
Discussion
In the ART-CAF study, we investigate whether OAC use guided by combination of AF burden and CHA2DS2-VASc score in patients with device-detected subclinical AF could help to prevent stroke and systemic arterial embolism.
It is unclear about the cut-off points of AF duration required to combine with CHA2DS 2 -VASc score for stroke risk stratification. The MOST study was the first to demonstrate that AHREs lasting at least 5 min detected by pacemaker diagnostics was an independent predictor of total mortality or nonfatal stroke (hazard ratio 2.8) [ ]. The ASSERT trial revealed that subclinical AHREs detected by implanted devices for more than 6 min by 3 months were associated with a significantly increased risk of ischemic stroke or systemic embolism (hazard ratio 2.49) [ , ]. The TRENDS study found that a relatively high atrial tachycardia (AT)/AF burden (≥ 5.5 h) on any of 30 prior days appeared to double TE risk [ ]. Research from Shanmugam et al. elucidated that a cut-off point of 3.8 h AHRE burden over 24 h was associated with significant increase in the TE rate [ ]. But results from Capucci et al. implicated that only AF episodes longer than 1 day were independently associated to increased embolic events (3.1 times increased as compared to patients without or with shorter AF episodes) [ ]. The SOS AF project [ ] recruited a total of 10,016 patients. During a median follow-up of 24 months, 43% patients experienced at least 1 day with at least 5 min of AF burden. A range of cut-off points of AF burden were defined a priori as 5 min, 1, 6, 12, and 23 h based on previously reported thresholds [ , , ]. A Cox regression analysis adjusted for the CHADS 2 score and anticoagulants at baseline demonstrated that AF burden was an independent predictor of ischemic stroke. Among the thresholds of AF burden that were evaluated, 1 h was associated with the highest hazard ratio for ischemic stroke (hazard ratio 2.11). In accordance with the ASSERT study [ ], the SOS AF project proved a wider clinical prospect of device detected AF for predicting stroke risk. Also, it focused not only on the risk associated with AF detected in the first 3 months of observation, but also considered AF occurring at any time during the follow-up. Considering the impact of AF burden on stroke risk, some researchers recommended combining AF burden with CHADS 2 and CHA2DS 2 -VASc score to evaluate the stroke risk. Boriani et al. [ ] continuously monitored 568 patients implanted with a DDDR-P pacemaker (AT-500; Medtronic) and a history of AF for 1 year and found 14 patients (2.5%) had a TE event. Patients were divided into three groups: AF burden > 5 min per day, AF burden < 5 min but > 24 h per day, and AF burden > 24 h. The discrimination ability of each risk score (including AF burden, CHADS 2 , and CHA2DS 2 -VASc score) was evaluated. Compared with CHADS 2 score alone, its combination with AF parameters gave the best compromise between sensitivity (79%) and specificity (63%). The CHA2DS 2 -VASc score alone had 100% sensitivity. However, its specificity was low: 7 and 24%, respectively, for CHA2DS 2 -VASc ≥ 1 and 2. When combined with AF data, it increased specificity up to 42% without relevant changes in sensitivity. A retrospective analysis from Botto et al. assessed the incidence of TE events by combining AF duration with the CHADS 2 score. They found that the combining data can discriminate between low- and high-risk patients. Patients with AF duration < 5 min on 1 day with CHADS 2 ≤ 2, or AF ≤ 24 h with CHADS 2 ≤ 1, or AF > 24 h with CHADS 2 = 0 had low risk of TE (0.8%). But patients with AF < 5 min with CHADS 2 > 2, or AF ≤ 24 h with CHADS 2 > 1, or AF > 24 h with CHADS 2 ≥ 1 had markedly higher risk than the previous population (5%, p = 0.035) [ ]. So, researchers of this study pointed out that the risk stratification for TE events can be improved by combining CHADS 2 score with data on AF duration derived from continuous monitoring of arrhythmic episodes by the implanted device. Due to the small number of observed events, a much larger sample size and a longer observational period in order to collect a larger number of embolic events are required. In summary, subclinical AF lasting at least 5 min was associated with an increased risk of stroke, and the diagnostic accuracy of AF episodes ≥ 5 min is highly reliable because with this cutoff, the appropriateness in AF detection is 95% [ , ]. So, we will enroll patients with AF duration ≥ 5 min.
Currently, anticoagulation should be prescribed for all clinical AF patients with a CHA2DS 2 -VASc score ≥ 2 according to most guideline recommendation. It is still controversial regarding OAC use in patients with a CHA2DS 2 -VASc score of 1 (males) or 2 (females). A retrospective study in the National Health Insurance Research Database in Taiwan demonstrated that ischemic stroke risk was already significantly elevated in this population, which implicated a higher ischemic stroke risk in Asian patients [ ]. So, our study will enroll device-detected subclinical AF with a CHA2DS 2 -VASc score ≥ 1 (males) or 2 (females).
Additionally, we hope to establish a scoring system of TE risk based on a Chinese population with device-detected subclinical AF and guide the anticoagulation treatment of this population to reduce the risk of TE. The main concern is CHA2DS 2 -VASc score combined with AF burden as we previously mentioned. Also, we will record age, sex, medical history, vital signs, weight, NYHA classification, laboratory test, left ventricular ejection fraction, camber diameter of heart, name of concomitant drug, and disease. By subgroup analysis, we expect to find the additional risk factors associated with the risk of TE that can be utilized to guide anticoagulation in subclinical AF.
Importantly, there are no protocol pre-specified limitations regarding the category of OACs and antiplatelets chosen for the enrolled patients. Patients will be treated with anticoagulation therapy according to the current standard guidelines and patients’ true situation. OACs available in three study centers are warfarin, dabigatran, and rivaroxaban. All of these three drugs are widely used depending on the patients’ clinical and economic condition. So, the anticoagulation strategy chosen is a real-world anticoagulant management issue. The safety and clinical effectiveness data of OACs obtained from this study will be used to better understand optimal anticoagulation strategies to care for these complex but increasingly common emergent real-world clinical situations and help with clinical practice.
There is debate regarding the efficiency of warfarin compared with non-vitamin K OACs (NOACs) in reducing the risk of TE. Because warfarin can take 5 to 7 days to become therapeutic, some researchers consider a median delay of 3 days that exists between AF onset and warfarin effect initiation. So, patients treated with warfarin may not have been effectively anticoagulated during a critical window immediately after the device detection of AF. Target-specific NOACs provide more rapid onset and offset of anticoagulation than vitamin K antagonists and would probably be superior to warfarin for improving outcome. But other scholars comment that the idea that stroke risk increases during a defined period after subclinical AF detection may be incorrect. Previous data have suggested that in most cases of subclinical AF-associated stroke, no AF occurred within 1 to 3 months before the stroke occurrence [ , ]. ART-CAF will provide data comparing safety and efficacy of three OACs including warfarin, dabigatran, and rivaroxaban in patients with subclinical AF. To our knowledge, this is the first trial comparing the effects of these three OACs within this specific population.
The present study is mainly limited by its open-label design and patient selection bias cannot be excluded, which makes the interpretation of the results somewhat limited.
Conclusions
This study evaluates the feasibility of selecting high-risk patients suitable for anticoagulation by AF burden combined with CHA2DS 2 -VASc score after pacemaker implantation and aims to select these high-risk patients who could benefit from anticoagulation. Our research will provide clinical evidence for anticoagulation in Chinese patients with device-detected subclinical AF and may contribute to improve compliance with anticoagulation therapy in this population. It also can help to prevent delay by clinicians to implement anticoagulation in the current domestic clinical practice of low anticoagulation rate.