Introduction
Recent studies have shown that medications used to treat type 2 diabetes (T2DM) may confer direct renal protection which may be independent of improvements in glucose control. Specifically, glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) agonists, dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP4) inhibitors, and sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors may help prevent and treat diabetic kidney disease by possibly exerting beneficial direct effects on the kidney. Two recently published clinical trials, the EMPA-REG [ ] and CANVAS trials [ ], have shown that SGLT2 inhibition not only has cardiovascular benefits but also favorably alters the progression of diabetic nephropathy in patients with T2DM. In addition, a similar benefit was seen in the LEADER [ , ] and SUSTAIN-6 [ ] studies which examined the effects of liraglutide and semaglutide, respectively, both GLP-1 receptor agonists, on cardiovascular and renal outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, the DPP4 inhibitor saxagliptin (Saxa) reduced the albumin/creatinine ratio in patients with T2DM in the SAVOR-TIMI 53 study although there were no effects on the estimated glomerular filtration rate [ ]. These findings are significant, given the global burden of T2DM and its associated renal complications. However, the precise physiological and molecular mechanisms by which GLP-1 receptor agonists, DPP4 inhibitors, and SGLT2 inhibitors confer renal protection independent of improvements in glycemic control are unclear.
We have previously shown that saxagliptin (Saxa), a DPP4 inhibitor, attenuated diabetes-induced activation of the NOD-like receptor 3 (Nlrp3) inflammasome and progression of diabetic nephropathy in animal models [ ]. We have recently shown that SGLT2 inhibition with dapagliflozin (Dapa) reduces inflammation and attenuates the progression of diabetic cardiomyopathy [ ]. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that these cardio-protective effects were independent of glucose lowering [ ]. The effects of Dapa on the activation of the Nlrp3 inflammasome and the combined effects of SGLT2 and DPP4 inhibitors on T2DM-induced inflammasome activation and progression of diabetic nephropathy (DN) have not been described in a diabetic animal model with nephropathy phenotype. In the present manuscript, we assessed whether Dapa attenuates the inflammasome activation and progression of DN in a T2DM mouse model and whether these effects can be augmented by coadministration of Saxa using the same animals used to assess the cardiac effects of the drugs [ ].
Method
Animal Model and Treatment
The experimental protocol was previously described [ ]. Male BTBR ob/ob mice start developing DN at the age of 8 weeks, and there is high mortality at the age of 22–24 weeks [ ]. Male BTBR ob/ob mice [BTBR.V(B6)- Lep ob /WiscJ] (Jackson Laboratory) and wild-type control (WT: C57BL/6J) at an age of 8 weeks were assigned to one of three groups: (1) vehicle, (2) Dapa, and (3) Dapa+Saxa [ ]. Medications were mixed with food. Saxa was given at a dose of 10 mg/kg/day, and Dapa was given at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day. The duration of therapy was 8 weeks. Fasting glucose was monitored and measured weekly using a Glucose OneTouch meter. After completion of treatment, animals were sacrificed, and tissue samples were harvested for conducting further experiments. All procedures were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and conformed to The Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH Publication No. 85-23, revised 1996).
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
After completion of treatment, the animals were sacrificed. Kidney samples were homogenized and prepared in RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics). After centrifugation, the supernatant of tissue lysate was collected. Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method. Interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) levels in tissue were determined using ELISA kits (R&D Systems, USA). The absorbance was recorded at 450 nm with a plate reader.
Kidney Function
The weights of kidneys and the kidney weight/body weight ratio were determined in all the mice under study in order to be used as renal trophy indexes. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine were determined. Plasma cystatin C measurements were performed using an ELISA kit (R&D Systems, USA).
Renal Morphology Assessment
Samples were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin wax. Five-micrometer-thick sections were stained for routine histopathological diagnosis with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Periodic acid of Schiff (PAS) staining was performed to evaluate and confirm the levels of mesangial expansion. The degree of injury was examined under microscopy and was scored in a double-blinded fashion. The surface area (μm 2 ) of a minimum of 10 sections from 6 individual mice was determined, and PAS-positive material in each glomerulus was quantified. And then the mesangial matrix index (%) was expressed as a percentage of the glomerular tuft area.
Western Blot Analysis
Renal cortex levels of TNF-α, NLRP3, and total and P-5′-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and caspase-1 were evaluated by western blot. Samples were homogenized in lysis buffer (in mM): 25 Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 0.5 EDTA, 0.5 EGTA, 1 phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 dithiothreitol, 25 NaF, 1 Na 3 VO 4 , 1% Triton X-100, 2% SDS, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail. The lysate was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C, and supernatants were collected. The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method. Protein (50 μg) was fractionated by SDS-PAGE (4–20% polyacrylamide gels) and transferred to PVDF membranes (Millipore, Bedford, MA).
After blocking, membranes were incubated with primary antibodies anti-TNF-α, anti-caspase-1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA), anti-NLRP3 (Cell Signaling, USA), anti-total-AMPK (Cell Signaling, USA), anti-P-AMPK (Cell Signaling, USA), and anti-β-actin (as a gel loading control) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) overnight at 4 °C. The membranes were then washed and incubated with secondary HRP-conjugated antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Bound antibodies were detected using the chemiluminescent substrate (NEN Life Science Products, Boston, MA, USA). The protein signals were quantified with an image-scanning densitometer, and the strength of each protein signal was normalized to the corresponding β-actin signal. Data are expressed as percent relative the expression in the control group.
RT-PCR
Total RNA from isolated mouse renal and adipose tissues was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the protocol per manufacturer’s instruction. Two micrograms of total RNA from each sample was reverse-transcribed into cDNA, and equal amounts of the reverse transcriptional products were subjected to PCR amplification. The evaluation of mRNA expressions of TNF-α, NLRP3, apoptosis-associated speck-like protein (ASC), caspase-1, interleukin (IL)-1β, IL6, DPP4, collagen-1 and collagen-3, and SGLT1 and SGLT2 by RT-PCR were performed by using the primers reported in Table 1 . The Ct (threshold cycle) is defined as the number of cycles required for the fluorescence signal to exceed the detection threshold. Expression of the gene relative to GAPDH was calculated as the difference between the threshold values of these two genes (2 −Δct ). Melting curve analysis was performed during real-time PCR to analyze and verify the specificity of the reaction. The values are given as the means ± S.E. of four independent experiments. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate and normalized by GAPDH. Table 1 Primer sequences for real-time RT-PCR Target mRNA Forward primer Reverse primer IL-1β CCCTGCAGCTGGAGAGTGTGG TGTGCTCTGCTTGAGAGGTGCT IL-6 TAGTCCTTCCTACCCCAATTTCC TTGGTCCTTAGCCACTCCTTC NALRP3 CATGTTGCCTGTTCTTCCAGAC CGGTTGGTGCTTAGACTTGAGA ASC CTCTGTATGGCAATGTGCTGAC GAACAAGTTCTTGCAGGTCAG SGLT1 CCACAAAGTGACCACTTCCA GTGGTACCGTTGGAGGCTT SGLT2 TCAGATTCTTTCCAGCCAGG GCCTGACTCCTATCACCTGC Caspase-1 AGTCCTGGAAATGTGCCATC TCAGCTCCATCAGCTGAAAC TNF-α ATCTACCTGGGAGGCGTCTT GAGTGGCACAAGGAACTGGT DPP4 TTGTGGATAGCAAGCGAGTTG CACAGCTATTCCGCACTTGAA Collagen-1 AAGAAGACATCCCTGAAGTCA TTGTGGCAGATACAGATCAAG Collagen-3 TTGGGATGCAGCCACCTTG CGCAAAGGACAGATCCTGAG GAPDH ATGATTCTACCCACGGCAAG CTGGAAGATGGTGATGGGTT
Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as means ± standard error (SE). Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Sidak correction for multiple comparisons was applied to compare the different groups. Values of p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. In each figure, the p value of the ANOVA is shown along with symbols for the individual comparisons between specific groups.
Results
The body weight of the BTBR mice was significantly higher than in the WT mice (Fig. 1 a). Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa equally decreased the body weight in BTBR mice, but had no effect in the WT mice. Absolute kidney weight (Fig. 1 b) and kidney weight/body weight ratio (Fig. 1 c) were significantly higher in the BTBR mice than in the WT mice. Treatment with Dapa attenuated the increase in kidney weight in the BTBR mice. The effect of Dapa+Saxa was significantly greater than that of Dapa alone. In contrast, Dapa and Dapa+Saxa had no effect on kidney weight in the WT mice. Fig. 1 a Body weight. b Kidney weight. c Kidney/body weight ratio. There were six animals per group. * p < 0.001 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ p < 0.002 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa. d Serum BUN. e Serum creatinine. f Serum cystatin C. There were six animals per group. * p < 0.02 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ p < 0.05 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa
Serum BUN (Fig. 1 d), serum creatinine (Fig. 1 e), and serum cystatin C (Fig. 1 f) were significantly higher in the BTBR mice than in the WT mice. Dapa, and to a greater extent, Dapa+Saxa significantly attenuated these increases in the BTBR mice, without any effect in the WT mice.
As previously published, fasting glucose levels were significantly higher in the BTBR mice than in the WT mice (Fig. 2 a) [ ]. Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa had no effect on fasting glucose levels in the WT mice. In contrast, Dapa and Dapa+Saxa significantly reduced fasting serum glucose levels in the BTBR mice. The effect of Dapa+Saxa was significantly greater than that of Dapa alone [ ]. Fasting blood insulin levels were not changed by Dapa or Dapa+Saxa in the WT mice. As expected, fasting insulin levels were significantly higher in the BTBR mice than in the WT mice. Dapa, and to a greater extent Dapa+Saxa, reduced fasting insulin levels (Fig. 2 b). Glucose (Fig. 2 c) and insulin (Fig. 3 d) levels during glucose tolerance tests were comparable between the WT-control, WT-Dapa, and WT-Dapa+Saxa groups. Glucose levels during the test were significantly higher in the BTBR-control group than in the WT-control group. Dapa reduced the glucose levels during the tolerance test in the BTBR mice. The effect of Dapa+Saxa was significantly greater than that of Dapa alone in the BTBR mice (Fig. 2 c). Insulin levels at the beginning of the glucose tolerance test were higher in the BTBR-control mice than in the WT-control mice. Yet, during the test (30, 60, and 120 min), insulin levels were lower in the BTBR-control mice than in the WT-control mice. Dapa, and to a greater extent Dapa+Saxa, increased blood insulin levels at 30, 60, and 120 min (Fig. 2 d), suggesting improvement in glucose tolerance and increased insulin secretion [ ]. Fig. 2 a Fasting blood glucose. b Fasting serum insulin levels. c Blood glucose levels during glucose tolerance test. p < 0.001 for the time effect. p < 0.001 for the group × time interaction. d Plasma insulin levels during glucose tolerance test. p < 0.001 for the group effect. p < 0.001 for the time effect. p < 0.001 for the group × time interaction. e Fasting serum triglyceride levels. f Fasting serum CRP levels. There were six animals per group. * p < 0.002 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ p < 0.003 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa. Reproduced with permission from [ ] Fig. 3 a Representative pictures of H&E and PAS reagent staining of the kidney (original magnification ×400). PAS, periodic acid of Schiff. b Mesangial matrix index (% area). There were six animals in each group. In each animals, we measured 10 glomeruli. * p < 0.001 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa
As we previously published, fasting serum triglyceride levels were unaltered by Dapa or Dapa+Saxa in the WT mice. Levels were significantly increased in the BTBR mice (Fig. 2 e) [ ]. Both Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa reduced triglyceride levels in the BTBR mice, without a difference between the Dapa and the Dapa+Saxa groups. Serum CRP levels were higher in the BTBR-control than in the WT groups (Fig. 2 f) [ ]. Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa had no effect on serum CRP levels in the WT mice. CRP levels were lower in the BTBR-Dapa and the BTBR-Dapa+Saxa groups than in the BTBR-control group. The difference between the BTBR-Dapa and BTBR-Dapa+Saxa was not significant ( p = 0.057).
H&E and PAS reagent staining of the kidneys shows an increase in the glomerular area and mesangial expansion in the BTBR mice compared to the WT mice (Fig. 3 ). Dapa alone, and to a greater extent Dapa+Saxa, significantly attenuated the increase in both glomerular area and mesangial matrix index.
Kidney mRNA levels of collagen-1 (Fig. 4 a) and collagen-3 (Fig. 4 b) were significantly higher in the BTBR mice than in the WT mice. Both Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa equally attenuated the increase in collagen-1 and collagen-3 levels. Fig. 4 Renal mRNA levels of collagen-1 ( a ) and collagen-3 ( b ). Data are expressed as the ratio with the WT-control group. There were four animals in each group. * p < 0.003 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-control
Kidney mRNA levels of both SGLT1 (Fig. 5 a) and SGLT2 (Fig. 5 b) were significantly higher in the BTBR mice than in the WT mice. Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa equally attenuated the increase in the BTBR mice, without detectable effect in the WT mice. In contrast, kidney mRNA levels of DPP4 were comparable between the BTBR and WT mice and neither Dapa nor Dapa+Saxa had an effect on the levels (Fig. 5 c). Kidney mRNA levels of the components of the inflammasome (ASC, NALP3, IL-1β, IL-6, caspase-1, and TNF-α) were significantly higher in the BTBR mice than in the WT mice (Fig. 5 d–i). Dapa and Dapa+Saxa significantly decreased these levels in the BTBR mice. The effects of Dapa+Saxa were significantly greater than those of Dapa alone. In contrast, Dapa and Dapa+Saxa had no effect on the levels in the WT mice. Fig. 5 Renal mRNA levels of SGLT1 ( a ), SGLT2 ( b ), DPP4 ( c ), ASC ( d ), NALP3 ( e ), IL-1β ( f ), IL-6 ( g ), caspase-1 ( h ), and TNF-α ( i ). Data are expressed as the ratio with the WT-control group. There were four animals in each group. * p < 0.023 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.004 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ p < 0.015 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa
Kidney levels of IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α significantly increased in the BTBR mice compared to the WT mice (Fig. 6 a–c). Dapa alone, and to a greater extent Dapa+Saxa, significantly attenuated these levels in the BTBR mice without an effect in the WT mice. Fig. 6 ELISA of IL-1β ( a ), IL-6 ( b ), and TNF-α ( c ) (pg/mg of kidney tissue). There were six samples in each group. * p < 0.001 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ p < 0.046 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa
Immunoblotting shows that the protein levels of NLRP3, TNF-α, and caspase-1 were significantly higher in the BTBR mice than in the WT mice, whereas the P-AMPK/total-AMPK ratio was decreased in the BTBR mice (Fig. 7 ). Dapa significantly reduced NLRP3, TNF-α, and caspase-1 levels in the BTBR mice, without an effect in the WT mice. Dapa significantly increased the P-AMPK/total-AMPK ratio. Levels of NLRP3, TNF-α, and caspase-1 were significantly lower in the Dapa+Saxa combination group compared to the Dapa-alone group. In contrast, the difference in the P-AMPK/total-AMPK ratio between the Dapa and Dapa+Saxa groups did not reach statistical significance. Fig. 7 Samples of immunoblots ( a ) and densitometric analyses of NLRP3 ( b ), TNF-α ( c ), caspase-1 ( d ), and P-AMPK/total-AMPK ratio ( e ) in the kidneys. There were four animals in each group. * p < 0.018 vs. WT-control. † p < 0.002 vs. BTBR-control. ‡ p < 0.001 vs. BTBR-Dapa+Saxa
Discussion
We found that an 8-week exposure to Dapa significantly attenuated the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and the progression of DN in BTBR mice with T2DM. Specifically, Dapa attenuated the increase in kidney weight; the increase in serum BUN, creatinine, and cystatin C; the expansion of the glomerular area; and the increase in the mesangial matrix area. Moreover, Dapa attenuated the T2DM-induced increase in renal mRNA levels of collagen-1 and collagen-3 and the expression of the components of the inflammasome. Adding Saxa to Dapa significantly augmented the attenuation of the inflammasome, kidney dysfunction, and increase in kidney weight, glomerular area, and mesangial matrix index, but not the increase in collagen-1 and collagen-3 mRNA levels and the increase in the P-AMPK/total-AMPK ratio as compared to Dapa alone. In the current study, the magnitude of the protective effects on the kidneys paralleled the effects on lowering glucose levels, suggesting that attenuation of hyperglycemia could be the mechanism. However, using the same model, we have previously shown that Saxa alone (10 mg/kg/day) delayed the development of DN and the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in mice with type 1 diabetes (Akita), as well as mice with T2DM (BTBR mice) [ ]. The fact that Saxa attenuated inflammation and the progression of DN in mice with type 1 diabetes without affecting glucose levels suggests a glucose lowering-independent effect for Saxa. Nevertheless, adding Saxa to Dapa could have additive effects on the attenuation of the inflammasome activation and the progression of DN in mice with T2DM.
Although clinical outcome trials have shown that SGLT2 inhibitors delay the progression of DN and improve major CV outcomes in patients with T2DM [ , , ], the detailed mechanisms are still unclear. In the EMPA-REG study [ ], empagliflozin was associated with slower progression of kidney disease and lower rates of clinically relevant renal events than was placebo in patients with type 2 diabetes at high cardiovascular risk despite a modest HbA1c difference of 0.4% between the two treatment arms. Similarly, in the CANVAS study, the difference in HbA1c between the canagliflozin and placebo groups was only 0.58%. Yet, canagliflozin significantly reduced albuminuria and clinical renal events [ ]. These results suggest that SGLT2 inhibitors likely improve renal outcomes independent of glucose lowering. Inflammation and oxidative stress play critical roles in the innate immune responses to defend the body under physiological/pathophysiological insults. Several preclinical studies have demonstrated that SGLT2 inhibitors reduce oxidative stress biomarkers and attenuate inflammasome activation in mice with T2DM [ , ] and type 1 diabetes [ ]. Furthermore, we have previously reported that Dapa attenuated the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome and reduced cardiomyopathy in a BTBR ob/ob mouse model of T2DM [ ]. We hypothesized that the NLRP3 inflammasome activation may play important roles in overall metabolic stress caused by T2DM. Consequently, we examined the effect of Dapa on diabetic nephropathy in the same mouse model of T2DM. Some [ , , ] but not all [ ] studies found that despite having a significant effect on blood glucose levels, SGLT2 inhibitors do not have a significant effect on the progression of DN in mice with type 1 diabetes. A consistent effect has been reported in mice and rats with T2DM [ , , , , , ]. Using the same animals used for the current study, we have shown that Dapa attenuated the activation of the inflammasome, fibrosis, and the development of diabetic cardiomyopathy [ ]. However, using an in vitro model, we found that the protective effect of Dapa seems to be independent of SGLT2 inhibition, as cardiofibroblasts do not express SGLT2 at all [ ]. Moreover, the effect was glucose lowering independent. Recently, Tahara et al. found that only ipragliflozin and Dapa, but not tofogliflozin, canagliflozin, empagliflozin, and luseogliflozin, administered once a day by oral gavage, attenuated the development of DN in KK/A y mice with T2DM, suggesting that there might be a difference among the six SGLT2 inhibitors [ ]. However, only ipragliflozin and Dapa are long-acting drugs and the authors suggested that the differences in efficacy might be related to pharmacokinetics rather than to specific effects of the compounds [ ].
Shi et al. suggested that in streptozotocin-induced type 1 diabetic mice, the protein levels of endothelial DPP4 were higher than in non-diabetic mice [ ]. Here we found that in mice with T2DM, renal mRNA levels of DPP4 are comparable to that of WT mice. There might be differences between type 1 diabetes and T2DM or the upregulation of DPP4 is related to decreased degradation rather to increase synthesis. They reported that linagliptin, a DPP4 inhibitor, decreased the endothelial protein levels of DPP4 [ ]. In contrast, here we did not find that Saxa altered the renal mRNA levels of DPP4. In contrast, kidney mRNA levels of both SGLT1 and SGLT2 were significantly higher in the BTBR mice than in the WT mice. Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa equally attenuated the increase in the BTBR mice, without detectable effects in the WT mice. In the same animal model, we have found that mRNA levels of SGLT1 were increased in the BTBR hearts compared to the hearts of WT mice and Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa equally attenuated the increase. Yet, SGLT2 mRNA was undetectable in the hearts of the BTBR, as well as WT mice [ ].
The NLRP3 inflammasome is an interleukin-1β family cytokine-activating protein complex that plays an important role in the inflammation associated with T2DM [ , , ]. NLRP3 interacts with ASC leading to activation of caspase-1, and a subsequent increase in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [ , , ]. The NLRP3 inflammasome is involved in DN [ , ]. We have previously shown that Saxa suppresses the activation of the inflammasome in the kidneys of mice with type 1 diabetes (Akita) and T2DM (BTBR ob/ob) [ ]. Previous studies have shown that SGLT2 inhibition attenuates the NLRP3 inflammasome activation in mice with T2DM [ , , , ]. However, the combined effect of SGLT2 and DPPI4 inhibitors on the NLRP3 inflammasome activation in these mouse models of T2DM has not been studied in the kidney. We are the first to show that the combination of SGLT2 and DPP4 inhibitors, Dapa and Saxa, respectively, provided additional renal protective effects and attenuation of inflammasome activations in the diabetic kidney of BTBR ob/ob mice, than that of the SGLT2 inhibitor alone. Our results provide the direct evidence on the renal and cardiac [ ] protection through the combination of Dapa and Saxa in diabetic cardiomyopathy and nephropathy.
It was reported that AMPK activation attenuates the inflammasome upregulation [ , ]. Reduced AMPK phosphorylation mediates the development of DN and diabetes-induced renal hypertrophy [ , ]. Hawley et al. reported that canagliflozin activates AMPK by inhibiting mitochondrial function and increasing cellular AMP in the mouse liver, whereas Dapa and empagliflozin had a significant effect on AMPK phosphorylation at a very high concentration of 100 μM, but only a small effect at a concentration of 30 μM [ ]. On the other hand, in the same animals, we found that in an in vitro experiment, the P-AMPK/total-AMPK ratio decreased in cardiofibroblasts exposed to lipopolysaccharides and Dapa increased the ratio in these cells [ ]. Moreover, the effects of Dapa on the attenuation of lipopolysaccharide-induced upregulation of NLRP3, TNF-α, and caspase-1 upregulation were completely blocked by compound C (an AMPK inhibitor), suggesting that AMPK mediates the protective effects [ ]. DPP4 inhibitors also augment AMPK phosphorylation [ ]. Yet, despite the fact that Dapa+Saxa had significantly greater inhibitory effects on the inflammasome activation and progression of DN than Dapa alone, there was no difference in the effects of Dapa alone and Dapa+Saxa on the P-AMPK/total-AMPK ratio, suggesting that other mediators are involved.
Limitations
The doses of Dapa and Saxa used in this study have similar plasma concentrations of these two compounds in mice as those in humans at clinical doses. Our results suggest that clinical relevant doses of Dapa with and without Saxa protect diabetic mouse kidney from inflammatory insults and oxidative stress through the inflammasome activation mechanism. Although kidneys express SGLT2, our findings with cardiofibroblasts in vitro suggest that glucose lowering- and SGLT2-independent effects could be present. This issue can only be addressed by constructing an SGLT2 mutant that cannot be inactivated by the standard SGLT2 inhibitors.
In conclusion, Dapa attenuated the development of DN in BTBR mice with T2DM. The protective effect was associated with increased AMPK phosphorylation and subsequent attenuation of NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Adding Saxa to Dapa resulted in significant augmentation of the protective effects against glomerular hypertrophy, mesangial matrix expansion, and attenuation of the inflammasome activation, but not on the mRNA levels of collagen-1 and collagen-3 and the activation of AMPK. This may suggest that other signaling pathways are involved in addition to AMPK in mediating the anti-inflammatory and anti-hypertrophy effects of Dapa+Saxa. Together, our results are the first to demonstrate that the combination of Dapa and Saxa provides renoprotection in the mouse model of diabetic nephropathy through NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Future clinical trials are necessary to study the effect of the combined SGLT2 inhibitor and incretin therapy on renal outcomes in patients with T2DM.