Introduction
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a major risk factor for cardiovascular (CV) disease and at the same time, CV disease is the leading cause of death in patients with T2DM. The interplay between glycemic control and CV risk is a complex one. Much research has been dedicated to ensure that therapeutic agents have adequate cardiovascular safety profiles or ideally, to lower long-term risk. Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists are a class of antihyperglycemic agents that have shown reduction in adverse cardiovascular outcomes associated with T2DM. Indeed, in-vitro and animal studies have demonstrated favorable outcomes of GLP-1 receptor activation towards reducing inflammation [ , , ], atherosclerosis [ , , ], reperfusion injury [ , ], high glucose-induced apoptosis [ ], and cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis [ , ], as well as the progression of heart failure (HF) [ , ]. Moreover, clinical studies have suggested that GLP-1 analogues, in addition to achieving glycemic control, may also improve body weight, lipid profile, and blood pressure [ , , ].
Only until recently information on effects of these agents on cardiovascular outcomes could only be gleaned from studies with non-cardiovascular endpoints [ ]. However, four recently published randomized trials on cardiovascular outcomes have provided direct data on the effect of GLP-1 receptor agonist on cardiovascular disease (CVD) [ , , , ]. Major outcomes, though, differed among the studies. Two of the trials, the Lixisenatide in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes and Acute Coronary Syndrome (ELIXA) trial and the Exenatide Study of Cardiovascular Event Lowering (EXSCEL) trial, showed non-inferiority of GLP-1R agonists compared to placebo. On the other hand, the Liraglutide Effect and Action in Diabetes: Evaluation of Cardiovascular Outcome Results (LEADER) and the Trial to Evaluate Cardiovascular and Other Long-term Outcomes with Semaglutide in Subjects with Type 2 Diabetes (SUSTAIN-6) both showed significant reduction of primary composite cardiovascular endpoints in the GLP-1R agonist groups compared with placebo. Thus, the aim of the present meta-analysis is to pool and evaluate data from the currently available CV outcome trials in order to better clarify the effect of GLP-1R agonists on cardiovascular outcomes.
Methods
Study Selection
Our primary aim is to pool and analyze data from the available cardiac outcomes trials. Our rationale for this approach was to ensure a high quality of data from large, multi-centered clinical trials with long-term follow up. Therefore, only randomized control trials designed to formally assess cardiac outcomes and had follow-up periods of greater than 2 years were included. Studies with non-CV primary endpoints and with shorter follow-up periods were excluded. The currently available studies that met our inclusion criteria were the ELIXA, LEADER, SUSTAIN-6, and EXSCEL trials.
Data Extraction
XJ and MA independently extracted data on baseline characteristics, cardiac outcomes, and major adverse events. Cardiac outcomes that were extracted include major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), overall mortality, cardiac death, non-fatal MI, non-fatal stroke, coronary revascularization including percutaneous coronary intervention and coronary artery bypass grafting, and hospitalization for heart failure. Adverse events data extracted include serious adverse events, retinopathy, nephropathy, acute pancreatitis, any malignant neoplasm, pancreatic carcinoma, medullary thyroid carcinoma, acute gallstone disease, and severe hypoglycemia. We collected data on glycemic control, changes in body weight, blood pressure, and heart rate from each study. The definitions of outcome measures were based on the descriptions outlined in the individual studies.
Data Analysis and Synthesis
We performed meta-analysis comparing GLP-1R agonist to placebo based on data from the available studies. A random-effects model computing risk ratio (RR) with 95% confidence interval was used to pool and compare the cardiac outcomes and adverse events. Small study effect was appraised by graphical inspection of funnel plots. RevMan 5.3 software was used to perform the meta-analysis.
Results
A total of 33,457 patients were included in the meta-analysis. Baseline characteristics of patient were mostly similar between studies. A summary of study design and major outcomes is presented in Table 1 . Notably, the follow-up period was longest in the LEADER trial followed by the EXSCEL trial. The LEADER trial also had a longer exposure period to study medication compared to the other trials. The discontinuation rate of the study medication was markedly higher in the EXSCEL study compared to the other trials. Finally, the ELIXA trial examined a patient population with recent acute coronary syndrome (ACS) while the other trials included mostly patients with coronary artery disease but not necessarily those with recent ischemic events. Table 1 Summary of design and outcomes of the ELIXA, LEADER, SUSTAIN-6, and EXSCEL trials Study Agents N Duration (years) Exposure period (years) Discontinuation rate (%) Primary outcome All-cause mortality CV mortality Non-fatal MI Non-fatal stroke ELIXA Lixisenatide vs placebo 6068 2.1 1.9 27.5 No difference No difference No difference No difference No difference LEADER Liraglutide vs placebo 9340 3.8 3.5 9.5* Liraglutide superior Liraglutide superior Liraglutide superior No difference No difference SUSTAIN-6 Semaglutide vs placebo 3297 2.1 2 19.9 for 0.5 mg, 22.6 for 1.0 mg Semaglutide superior No difference No difference No difference Semaglutide superior EXSCEL Exenatide LAR vs placebo 14,752 3.2 2.4 43.0 No difference No difference No difference No difference No difference Primary outcome = composite of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, stroke, or hospitalization for unstable angina in ELIXA d composite of first occurrence of death from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke in the other trials *Discontinuation due to adverse events. Overall discontinuation rate not reported
Cardiac Outcomes
Meta-analysis showed a significant difference in all-cause mortality (RR 0.89; 95% CI 0.82 to 0.96) and cardiovascular mortality (RR 0.88; 95% CI 0.80 to 0.97) favoring GLP-1R agonists over placebo. There were no significant differences in MACE, non-fatal MI, non-fatal stroke, hospitalization for heart failure, and coronary revascularization ( supplemental material ) between GLP-1R agonist versus placebo (Fig. 1 ). However, in subgroup analysis of only long-acting GLP-1R agonists, namely liraglutide, semaglutide, and exenatide long acting release (LAR), there were significant differences between GLP-1R agonist versus placebo with respect to MACE (RR 0.88; 95% CI 0.81 to 0.97) as well as non-fatal strokes (RR 0.87; 95% CI 0.76 to 0.99) – see supplemental material . There also appeared to be less effect on primary outcome in the North American patients compared to the rest of the world, which was driven primarily by the results of the LEADER and SUSTAIN-6 trials ( supplemental material ). Fig. 1 Forest plots of cardiovascular outcomes including major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), all-cause mortality, cardiovascular (CV) deaths, non-fatal myocardial infarction (MI), non-fatal strokes, and hospitalization for heart failure (HF)
Safety Endpoints
Pooled analysis showed a significant difference in nephropathy favoring GLP-1R agonists versus placebo (RR 0.73, 95% CI 0.58 to 0.92), though only the LEADER and SUSTAIN-6 trials had available data on renal injury. However, GLP-1R agonists showed a significant increase in acute gallstone disease compared to placebo (RR 1.27; 95% CI 1.03 to 1.57). There was no significant difference in overall serious adverse events, retinopathy, acute pancreatitis, any malignant neoplasms, pancreatic carcinoma, medullary thyroid carcinoma, and severe hypoglycemia between GLP-1R agonists and placebo (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Forest plots of serious adverse events including overall events, retinopathy, nephropathy, acute pancreatitis, malignant neoplasms, pancreatic carcinoma, acute gall stone disease, and severe hypoglycemia
Cardiac Risk Factors
Effects of GLP-1R agonist versus placebo on glycemic control, weight loss, changes in systolic and diastolic blood pressure as well as change in heart rate were collected and tabulated (Table 2 ). Values are expressed as the difference between GLP-1R agonist versus placebo (GLP-1R agonist – placebo) with either respective 95% CI or p value as presented in the original studies. Overall, all GLP-1R agonists showed statistically significant improvement in glycemic control, weight loss, and systolic blood pressure compared to placebo. Table 2 Metabolic effect of GLP-1R agonists Study Δ Glycated hemoglobin (%) Δ Body weight (kg) Δ Systolic blood pressure (mmHg) Δ Diastolic blood pressure (mmHg) Δ Heart rate (bpm) ELIXA − 0.27; 95% CI, − 0.31 to − 0.22 − 0.7; 95% CI, − 0.9 to − 0.5 − 0.8; 95% CI, − 1.3 to − 0.3 – + 0.4; 95% CI, 0.1 to 0.6 LEADER − 0.40; 95% CI, − 0.45 to − 0.34 − 2.3; 95% CI, − 2.5 to − 2.0 − 1.2; 95% CI, − 1.9 to − 0.5 + 0.6; 95% CI, 0.2 to 1.0 + 3.0; 95% CI, 2.5 to 3.4 SUSTAIN-6 − 0.7; p < 0.001 for 0.5 mg group − 1.0; p < 0.001 for 1.0 mg group − 2.9; p < 0.001 for 0.5 mg group − 4.3; p < 0.001 for 1.0 mg group − 1.3; p = 10 for 0.5 mg group − 2.6; p < 0.001 for 1.0 mg group – + 2.0; p < 0.001 for 0.5 mg group + 2.5; p < 0.001 for 1.0 mg group EXSCEL − 0.53; 95% CI, − 0.57 to − 0.50 − 1.27; 95% CI, − 1.30 to − 1.31 − 1.57; 95% CI, − 1.92 to − 1.21 + 0.25; 95% CI, 0.04 to 0.47 + 2.51; 95% CI, 2.28 to 2.74 Δ = Difference between GLP-1R agonist versus placebo
Discussion
The results of our meta-analysis suggest that GLP-1R agonists, particularly long acting agents, have CV protective properties. One important finding is the significant reduction of CV related mortality, which may be explained by the ability of GPL-1R agonist to impact important CV risk factors by improving glycemic control, blood pressure, and promoting weight loss. Interestingly, despite an improvement in CV mortality as well as MACE and non-fatal strokes in the case of the long-acting agents, reduction of non-fatal MI and heart failure were not observed. The reason for this discrepancy is unclear, though it is possible that the current trials are simply underpowered to formally assess for differences in this secondary endpoint. The lack of significant effect on non-fatal MI may also be due to a short exposure to GLP-1R agonists in particular in the ELIXA, EXSCEL, and SUSTAIN 6 studies. Furthermore, it is possible that GLP-1R agonists promote protective effects on the myocardium after an ischemic event, thus turning potentially fatal MIs into non-fatal events. This speculation is supported by previous clinical and animal studies that demonstrated properties of GLP-1R agonists in limiting infarct size [ , , ]. Likewise, GLP-1R agonists have been reported to slow the progression of heart failure in animal models [ , , , ], and previous meta-analysis showed that GLP-1R agonist improved ejection fraction of patients by 4.4% [ ]. However, a recent phase-2, double blind multicenter trial, the Functional Impact of GLP-1 for Heart Failure Treatment (FIGHT), confirmed a lack of efficacy of liraglutide in patients with heart failure and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction with respect to the primary endpoint, number of deaths, and re-hospitalization for heart failure, suggesting that GLP-1R agonists may not have a beneficial effect on heart failure as previously thought [ ].
The GLP-1R agonists studied further showed renal protection, which may contribute to the observed reduction in overall mortality as compared to placebo. The ELIXA trial showed a significant improvement in the urine albumin/creatinine ratio over time favoring lixisenatide group starting as early as after 6 months of treatment. The LEADER and SUSTAIN-6 trials further showed lower rates of nephropathy events associated with the GLP-1R agonist groups over placebo. These findings support the results of several animal studies showing that GLP-1 receptor activation ameliorates diabetic nephropathy in rodents [ , , , , , ]. The mechanism of protection has been proposed to relate to the anti-inflammatory properties of GLP-1R agonists [ , ]. It has been suggested that GLP-1 receptor activation increases intracellular cAMP with subsequent activation of protein kinase A (PKA) and downstream inactivation of phospho-c-Raf/ phosphor-Erk 1/2, which are activated by angiotensin II. This process leads to attenuation of angiotensin II induced upregulation of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, CD68, and CXCL2 levels [ ].
The metabolic effects of GLP-1R agonists have been well-described. Both short-acting- and long-acting agents are known to play a significant role in glycemic control, promote modest weight loss, and reduce systolic blood pressure [ ]. As mentioned above, all four trials included appear to validate this trend. However, the degree of improvement on clinical and metabolic parameters seems to be greater in the long-acting agents (semaglutide, liraglutide, and exenatide LAR) as compared to the short-acting molecule (lixisenatide). This trend in metabolic effect intimates potential differences in therapeutic potency between the agents. It may also help to explain why subgroup analysis of only long acting agents showed a more statistically significant improvement in MACE and non-fatal stroke compared to placebo.
Indeed, the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of the GLP-1R agonists being discussed are different. Lixisenatide is a short-acting GLP-1R agonist with a half-life of approximately 3 h [ ]. Meanwhile, liraglutide, semaglutide, and exenatide LAR are long-acting GLP-1R agonists with half-lives of approximately 13 h [ ], approximately 1 week [ ] and approximately 2 weeks [ ], respectively. Studies on mechanism have shown that short-acting GLP-1R agonists primarily lower postprandial blood glucose levels via slowing of gastric emptying. On the other hand, long-acting compounds exert robust effect on fasting glucose levels through stimulation of insulin secretion and reduction of glucagon secretion [ ]. In the Diabetes Therapy Utilization: Researching Changes in HBA1C, Weight, and Other Factors Through Intervention with Exenatide Once Weekly (DURATION)-5 trial, exenatide once weekly was found to achieve better glycemic control compared to twice-daily dosing of short-acting exenatide. Moreover, though not statistically significant, the study demonstrated that 77% of the patients treated with long-acting exenatide achieved weight loss, with a mean reduction of − 2.3 kg compared to baseline compared to 63% of patients in the short-acting exenatide group, which had a mean weight reduction of − 1.4 kg [ ]. Results from DURATION-5 as well as subsequent studies comparing long-acting to short-acting agents suggest that achieving a steady state level of GLP-1R agonist is important in producing a more pronounced metabolic as well as biological effect in CVD protection [ ].
At the same time, the failure of exenatide LAR to achieve significant cardioprotective outcomes raises important questions on differences in pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of these agents beyond just the elimination half-life. In the DURATION-6 trial comparing liraglutide to exenatide LAR, liraglutide was shown to achieve both greater glycemic control and weight-loss compared to exenatide, perhaps foreshadowing findings seen in the large randomized CV outcomes trials [ ]. Some may argue that weekly dosing of exenatide LAR can lead to lower plasma concentration of the medication towards the end of the week, resulting to an attenuation of drug effect, unlike liraglutide. Yet, semaglutide, also dosed weekly, was able to achieve significant reduction primary CV outcome.
One explanation is the differences in chemical structure of exenatide and lixisenatide compared with liraglutide and semaglutide. The structures of exenatide and lixisenatide are derived from exendin-4, a molecule isolated from the saliva of the gila monster, and shares ~ 50% homology with human GLP-1 [ ]. Liraglutide and semaglutide, meanwhile, are analogs of the human GLP-1, with a high degree of homology. Interestingly, both exenatide and lixisenatide are high-affinity agonists and have greater GLP-1 receptor-binding affinity compared with liraglutide and semaglutide [ ]. Therefore, receptor-binding affinity likely plays a role but is not the primary determinant of drug potency. A variety of pleiotropic effects have been shown with GLP-1R agonists in different experimental models [ , , ]. It is plausible that the close homology of liraglutide and semaglutide to the natural GLP-1 structure bestows more GLP-1 receptor activation-dependent and -independent actions compared with the exendin-based molecules, which then translates to differences in clinical outcomes.
The potentially important consequence that arises from difference in structure is that exenatide and lixisenatide are much more immunogenic. In studies measuring antibodies against GLP-1R agonists, up to 73% of patients on exenatide LAR were positive for treatment-emergent antibodies after 24 weeks [ ], while 43–71% of patients on lixisenatide were positive for antibodies after 13 weeks [ ]. In contrast, only around 8% of patients treated with liraglutide showed treatment-emergent antibodies in 26 weeks [ ]. Though exenatide and lixisenatide in these studies still produced improvement in metabolic effect despite the apparent immunogenicity of these agents, it is unclear if a longer exposure to the medications, as was the case in the EXSCEL and ELIXA trials, would have generated a significant antibody response that attenuated effects on CV outcome.
Several additional factors in study design may have also contributed to the differences in CV outcomes seen in the four trials. For example, the ELIXA trial included T2DM patients all with recent acute coronary events within 180 days before screening, which represents a non-modifiable CV risk. Comparatively, the LEADER and SUSTAIN-6 trials included patients with a history of CV disease or significant risk factors but not necessarily with recent ACS. In fact, the LEADER trial excluded patients with ACS within 14 days of screening and randomization while the SUSTAIN-6 trial excluded patients with ACS within 90 days of randomization. As such, the patient population in the LEADER trial comprised of 81.3% who had established cardiovascular disease, with only 31% having prior myocardial infarction and 39% having prior revascularization. Likewise, while a majority (83.0%) of the patients in the SUSTAIN-6 trial had established cardiovascular disease, only 32–33% had a history of previous myocardial infarction. The EXSCEL trial was designed to include a majority of patients with previous significant cardiovascular events such as myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke, and symptomatic atherosclerotic peripheral artery disease, as oppose to only risk factors. However, the study does not specify the percentage of patients included who had ACS or the timing of events in relation to screening and randomization.
There were notable differences in the duration of the study period as well as time of therapeutic exposure among the trials. The LEADER trial in particular had both a long follow-up (3.8 years) and exposure (3.5 years) periods. On the other hand, the median follow-up for the ELIXA and SUSTAIN-6 trials were both approximately 2.1 years, with exposure periods of 1.9 and 2.1 years, respectively. For the SUSTAIN-6 in particular, a combination of low event rates and short treatment period may account for the lack of effect on mortality in an intention to treat analysis. Meanwhile, the EXSCEL trial had relatively long study duration of 3.2 years but a therapeutic exposure period of only 2.4 years. Furthermore, the mean percentage of time that participants were receiving the trial regimen was lower, and the discontinuation rate was drastically higher (43%) compared to the other studies. By comparison, the LEADER trial reported only a 9.5% discontinuation rate. The relatively short time of exposure to therapy, coupled with a high discontinuation rate, may help to explain why exenatide LAR did not show superiority with regards to CV outcomes compared to placebo.
Finally, in our meta-analysis, there appeared to be a geographical difference with respect to effect on primary outcome between North America versus the rest of the world, which was driven by the lack of effect in the North American population observed in the LEADER and SUSTAIN-6 trials. The opposite pattern was true in the EXSCEL trial, where GLP-1R agonist was found to be more effective in the North American population but not as much in the rest of the world. The reason for this phenomenon is unclear. However, differences in pharmacological exposure, potential drug interactions, differences in study population, design, or conduct may have all contributed to this observation.
Conclusion
Previous in vitro, animal models, and early clinical studies have all provided evidence towards the ability of GLP-1 receptor agonists to reduce adverse cardiovascular outcomes associated with T2DM. Two recently published cardiovascular outcomes trials, LEADER and SUSTAIN-6, demonstrated significant improvement in primary CV outcomes with GLP-1R agonists while two others, ELIXA and EXCEL, did not. Overall, our meta-analysis of the four trials showed statistically significant reduction in all-cause and cardiovascular mortality by GLP-1R agonist versus placebo. Long-acting agents also showed a statistically significant reduction in MACE and non-fatal stroke. Part of the discrepancy in outcomes may be attributed to distinctive pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of the compounds as well as disparities in study design. Clinical trials that directly compare CV effects of the different GLP-1R agonists are warranted.