Introduction
Ischemic heart disease is the major cause of mortality worldwide. Patients over 75 account for more than one third of those presenting with myocardial infarction and more than 50% of in-hospital mortality [ ]. Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) becomes more frequent with age and its management more challenging in the elderly patients not only because of the greater ischemic risk but also because of more treatment-related complications.
Scientific evidence concerning elderly patients in ACS is scarce. Most randomized trials excluded such patients while the rate of elderly patients among the ACS population is growing. There are no specific guidelines concerning the elderly; hence, the treatment should not be less effective in this population. However real-life epidemiologic studies show that elderly patients are less well treated while their ischemic risk is known to be greater. The fear of complications—hemorrhagic mostly—leads to less aggressive treatment [ ]. Nevertheless, even in the very elderly, adherence to recommended therapies within 24 h of admission for non-ST-elevation ACS (NSTE-ACS) reduces in-hospital mortality [ ]. The benefit has been observed in the elderly despite an increased risk of side effects from pharmacological treatment and, specifically, an increased risk of bleeding events associated with antithrombotic therapy [ , , ]. Specific precautions and treatment adaptation according to bodyweight and renal function are mandatory in this population, but treatment should not be limited only because of age but only after a global risk assessment of all patients. Indeed, over the last decade, an almost linear decrease in rates of mortality after ACS has been reported in all age classes, including the very elderly in association with both the increased use of early percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and recommended medications [ , , , ]. The widespread use of radial access, which has been shown to be feasible and particularly beneficial in the elderly, participates to the reduced bleeding risk [ ] and the subsequent improved outcome.
In this paper, we review the current treatment strategies in ACS while focusing on data concerning the elderly.
Antiplatelet Therapy
Aspirin
Aspirin remains the established first-line antiplatelet therapy in patients with ACS, reducing major vascular events [ ]. Aspirin should be given as soon as possible, preferably orally (150–300 mg in Europe [ , ], 162–325 mg in the USA [ , ]) because of its better absorption, to ensure complete inhibition of TXA2-dependent platelet aggregation. It may be given intravenously (80–150 mg i.v.) in patients who are unable to swallow. The maintenance dose is 75–100 mg daily (81 mg in the USA). The CURRENT-OASIS 7 trial [ ], which enrolled 25,086 ACS patients undergoing invasive strategy, found neither efficacy nor safety differences between higher (300–325 mg/day) and lower daily doses (75–100 mg/day) of aspirin. Thus, in the absence of improved outcomes and increased bleeding risk, especially in the elderly (≥ 75 years), high maintenance doses of aspirin should be avoided especially in association with P2Y12 inhibitors where higher aspirin doses are directly associated with higher risks of bleeding [ ]. No dose adjustment is required in the elderly. The relative benefit of aspirin does not appear to be affected by age, and its absolute benefit is greatest in populations at highest risk, such as the elderly [ ]. However, special attention should be given to the risk of bleeding with aspirin among the elderly especially if associated with a history of ulcer, previous bleeding, or interfering drugs [ ]. Use of low-dose aspirin, gastric protection and detection of early signs of bleeding are of major importance in such populations.
Clopidogrel
In the CURE trial [ ], clopidogrel, a thienopyridine prodrug (300 mg immediately, followed by 75 mg once daily) when used in addition to aspirin, was associated with an additional 20% relative reduction in the risk of the composite of cardiovascular death, non-fatal MI, or stroke at 1 year. Whereas, there was no larger benefit with clopidogrel in older patients; overall, those undergoing PCI with higher thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) risk scores or prior revascularization had greater benefit [ ]. However, there was also an increased risk in major bleeding with dual therapy compared to aspirin alone (3.7 vs. 2.7%; p = 0.001), with a small but non-significant increase in the risk of life-threatening bleeding or hemorrhagic stroke.
Slow onset of action, irreversibility of platelet inhibition, and variability of platelet response [ ] partially due to genetic polymorphisms of the hepatic cytochrome CYP2C19 triggered the development of new antiplatelet options. A biological study has shown a higher platelet reactivity in elderly patients on clopidogrel [ ]. The increase in clopidogrel dosage (600 mg loading dose) tested in the large clinical trial CURRENT-OASIS 7 [ ] showed a significant reduction in the primary outcome (CV death, MI, and stroke) and in definite stent thrombosis only among the 17,263 patients who underwent PCI [ ]. Major bleeding was more frequent with double dose but the rate of severe and fatal bleeding did not significantly differ between both groups [ ]. There was no significant interaction between clopidogrel dose and patient’s age (≤ 65 or > 65 years old). The guidelines [ , , , ] recommend a 600 mg loading dose followed by 75 mg daily dose clopidogrel without any adjustment in the elderly patients referred for an invasive strategy.
Prasugrel
Prasugrel, another thienopyridine prodrug that irreversibly blocks the P2Y12 platelet receptor with a faster onset and a more potent platelet inhibition, has been tested in the TRITON-TIMI-38 [ ] trial against the 300 mg loading dose of clopidogrel in 13,608 thienopyridine-naïve patients with moderate to high-risk ACS and scheduled PCI. Key exclusion criteria included an increased risk of bleeding, fibrinolytic therapy within 24 h before, and oral anticoagulation. Prasugrel therapy was associated with reduced rates of ischemic events compared to clopidogrel (9.9 vs 12.1%, p < 0.001) but with an increased risk of TIMI major bleeding (2.4 vs 1.8%, p = 0.03) including fatal bleeding. Subgroup analyses showed a significant harm associated with prasugrel in patients with previous stroke and no net benefit in patients ≥ 75 years (13% of the patients) and in those weighing less than 60 kg. The absence of net benefit in the elderly was due to an increased risk of intracranial and fatal bleeding.
The TRILOGY ACS trial [ ] was designed to investigate the effects of prasugrel versus clopidogrel in medically managed patients with unstable angina or NSTE-ACS randomized to prasugrel (10 mg/day; 5 mg/day for those ≥ 75 or < 75 years of age and <60 kg in weight) or clopidogrel plus aspirin. Prasugrel was associated with no significant reduction of the risk of the primary end point and no increase in the risk of major bleeding. Consistently, there was no difference in ischemic and bleeding outcomes between reduced-dose prasugrel and clopidogrel in the elderly cohort.
The ANTARTIC trial [ ] randomized elderly patients ≥ 75 years with STE- or NSTE-ACS treated with PCI to receive oral prasugrel 5 mg daily with dose or drug (clopidogrel) adjustment in case of inadequate response (monitoring group) or prasugrel 5 mg daily without monitoring. Platelet function monitoring led to a change of treatment in 45% of the patients in the monitoring group. The study did not show any difference in ischemic or bleeding outcomes.
Given these considerations, prasugrel should be avoided in the elderly > 75 years except in high-risk ischemic situations such as stent thrombosis if other antiplatelet therapy cannot be used (with a reduced maintenance dose of 5 mg/day).
Ticagrelor
Ticagrelor is an oral, reversibly binding, non-thienopyridine P2Y12 inhibitor with a relatively short plasma half-life (12 h) with a more rapid and potent platelet inhibition compared to clopidogrel. The PLATO study [ ] randomly assigned 18,624 ACS patients—with or without prior loading with clopidogrel and irrespective of strategy (invasive vs. non-invasive)—to treatment with ticagrelor or clopidogrel. Major exclusion criteria were oral anticoagulation, concomitant therapy with strong CYP3A inhibitors, dialysis, and fibrinolytic therapy within 24 h before and increased risk of bradycardia. Ticagrelor significantly reduced the rate of the composite of death from vascular causes, MI or stroke (9.8 vs 11.7%; p < 0.001) and the rate of death from vascular cause (4 vs 5.1%; p = 0.001) without increasing the risk of specific study-defined overall major bleeding but with an increase in non-coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) major bleeding (4.5 vs 3.8%; p = 0.03).
The clinical benefit of ticagrelor over clopidogrel was similar between patients aged ≥ 75 years (15.5% of the study population) and those < 75 years [ ]. However, a significant interaction with age (< 65 and ≥ 65 years) was reported in the elderly NSTE-ACS patients undergoing PCI who may not benefit from ticagrelor [ ]. The relative increase in the risk of study-defined overall major bleeding and non-CABG-related major bleeding with ticagrelor compared to clopidogrel was similar between age categories, although the absolute rate of non-CABG-related major bleeding with ticagrelor was numerically greater in elderly patients. The increased non-CABG-related major bleedings, first of all intracranial, with ticagrelor enhances the need of a careful bleeding-risk evaluation in the elderly before treatment [ ].
Hence, ticagrelor may be preferred over clopidogrel in elderly patients with STE-ACS, regardless of initial treatment strategy including those pre-treated with clopidogrel, in the absence of contraindication and after a careful evaluation of their bleeding risk. This option may not be recommended systematically in elderly patients with NSTE-ACS without an even more precautious assessment of bleeding risk. In patients at very high risk of bleeding—e.g., those on anticoagulation therapy or with past history of major bleeding—clopidogrel or a switch to clopidogrel should be considered.
Cangrelor
Cangrelor is an i.v. P2Y12 inhibitor that produces a highly effective inhibition of ADP-induced platelet aggregation almost immediately after bolus administration and allows normalization of platelet function within 60 min after discontinuation. Cangrelor has been studied in three clinical trials [ , , ]. A meta-analysis [ ] of these studies, in which 69% of patients underwent PCI for ACS, showed a 19% reduction in the risk of the primary efficacy composite outcome of death, MI, ischemia-driven revascularization, or stent thrombosis at 48 h. The combination of TIMI major and minor bleeding was increased by such strategies, but there was no increase in the rate of transfusions. The benefit of cangrelor on the primary efficacy and safety outcomes were consistent in patients ≥ 75 years.
Pre-treatment by P2Y12 Inhibitors
A meta-analysis [ ] evaluated the benefit of clopidogrel pre-treatment among patients undergoing PCI. Pre-treatment had no effect on death or major bleeding but the risk of major cardiac events was significantly reduced. The benefit of pre-treatment was greater with increasing severity of clinical presentation (especially in STE-ACS). In another meta-analysis [ ] focusing on NSTE-ACS patients, pre-treatment with clopidogrel was associated with a reduction in rates of recurrent MI, no significant reduction of the risk of mortality, and a significant excess of major bleeding.
In the PLATO trial [ ], all patients received pre-treatment with clopidogrel or ticagrelor, irrespective of treatment strategy. The recent ATLANTIC trial [ ] evaluated whether in-ambulance vs in-hospital administration of ticagrelor could safely improve coronary reperfusion in patients with STE-ACS of less than 6 h. Pre-hospital administration of ticagrelor did not improve pre-PCI ECG or angiography coronary reperfusion but was safe with similar rates of major bleeding and was associated with reduced rates of definite stent thrombosis. However, stent thrombosis did not lead to a reduction of mortality, and paradoxically, there was a non-significant numerical excess of death from any cause in the pre-hospital group. The recent European position paper recommends pre-treatment in the pre-hospital setting in patients with STE-ACS irrespective of age [ ]. In elderly patients with STE-ACS, pre-treatment should be considered after a clear diagnosis and assessment of bleeding risk by trained emergency medical services staff.
The optimal timing of ticagrelor or clopidogrel administration in NSTE-ACS patients has not been adequately investigated, especially in the elderly and the topic of pre-treatment remains controversial. Atypical symptoms are not rare in the elderly and the diagnosis of ACS should be confirmed before pre-treatment in such high bleeding-risk population. Finally, in patients with oral anticoagulants, the recent ESC guidelines in NSTE-ACS patients [ ] suggest restricting pre-treatment to aspirin and avoiding P2Y12 inhibitors until diagnosis is confirmed in order to reduce the bleeding risk.
GP IIb/IIIa Inhibitor
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors (GPI) are i.v. drugs that block the final pathway of platelet aggregation. A meta-analysis of six randomized controlled trials involving 29,570 NSTE-ACS patients showed a significant reduction in rates of death or non-fatal MI with GPI when added to unfractionated heparin (UFH). The benefit was greater in patients who underwent PCI [ ]. On the other hand, the use of GPI was associated with an increase in major bleeding complications [ ]. In the setting of STE-ACS, several trials have documented clinical benefits of GPI in addition to primary PCI performed with UFH [ ]. They showed a significant relationship between the benefit of GPI and patient’s risk profile and presentation indicating that GPI should be considered among high-risk patients presenting early after symptom onset. However, most of these studies predated the routine use of P2Y12 inhibitors. GPI were used in 55 and 27% of the patients in PLATO and TRITON, respectively [ , ]. The relative efficacy of prasugrel and ticagrelor appears consistent between patients receiving or not GPI. A recent meta-analysis outlined that the risk of bleeding using a combination of GPI and oral antiplatelet regimens is mainly related to the use of GPI and not to the oral antiplatelet regimen [ ]. The correct timing of administration of GPI has also been debated. The deferred strategy significantly reduced bleeding complications with no significant difference in death, MI, or unplanned revascularization [ , ].
Relative cardiovascular benefits of the GPI vary in the elderly subgroups of patients [ ]. Greater benefits have been observed in older subgroups when given at the time of intervention and when those with renal dysfunction were excluded. The majority of elderly who receive GPI are given excessive doses, while doses should be adapted to estimated creatinine clearance and weight [ ].
Overall, the ESC guidelines do not support the routine use of GPI but outline that GPI should be considered during PCI for bailout situations or thrombotic complications. According to ACC/AHA guidelines, GPI may be considered in selected patients at the time of PCI (NSTE-ACS patients with high-risk features not adequately pre-treated with clopidogrel or ticagrelor; or selected STE-ACS patients who are receiving UFH) and prior to catheterization in patients with STE-ACS for whom primary PCI is intended [ ] .
There are no specific recommendations for antiplatelet therapy in the elderly patients with ACS. Based on the analysis of the literature, we propose an adapted summary of the guidelines for the elderly in Table 1 . Table 1 Summary of the ESC and ACC/AHA recommendations for antiplatelet therapy, adapted in the elderly (please note that the class of recommendations correspond to the general population, not to the elderly) Recommendations ESC ACC/AHA STEMI (2012) NSTEMI (2015) STEMI (2013) NSTEMI (2014) Oral antiplatelet therapy Non-enteric-coated aspirin (LD 150–300 mg ESC; 162–325 mg AHA/ACC; or 80–150 i.v. in patients who are unable to swallow) should be administrated to all patients without contraindications, as soon as possible IB IA IB IA Aspirin should be administrated long-term regardless of treatment strategy, with a maintenance dose of: IA IA IA IA - 75-100 mg daily (ESC) or preferably 81 mg (AHA/ACC) IA IA IIaB IIaB A P2Y12 inhibitor (either clopidogrel or ticagrelor) in addition to aspirin should be administrated for up to 12 months, regardless of initial treatment strategy, if no contraindications: IA IB IB IB - Ticagrelor 180 mg LD, then 90 mg twice daily IB IB IB IB - Clopidogrel 300 to 600 mg LD (600 mg LD in patients undergoing PCI), then 75 mg daily IC IB IB IB Prasugrel should be avoided in the elderly > 75 years IB IB except in high-risk ischemic situations if others antiplatelet therapy cannot be used (with a reduced maintenance dose of 5 mg/day) Intravenous antiplatelet therapy Cangrelor may be considered in P2Y12 inhibitor–naive patients undergoing PCI IIbA Routine use of GPI is not recommended (ESC) or may be considered in selected patients (ACC/AHA) in the precatheterization laboratory setting (IIbB) IIIA IIbB IIbB GPI should be used after careful evaluation of the ischemic and bleeding risks in the elderly. Doses should be adapted in function of weight and renal function GPI should be considered during PCI for bailout situations, thrombotic complications IIaC IIaC GPI can be administrated at the time of primary PCI in selected patients with STEMI who are receiving UFH IIaA* or for inadequate P2Y12 inhibitors loading in high-risk NSTEMI IA ACS acute coronary syndrome, GPI GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors, LD loading dose, PCI percutaneous coronary intervention *IIaA for abciximab and IIaB for tirofiban or eptifibatide
Anticoagulation
All guidelines recommend parenteral anticoagulation treatment in ACS, with different regimens depending on the clinical presentation and the reperfusion strategy. The management of parenteral anticoagulation therapy is particularly challenging in the elderly, because of the frailty and the comorbidities—mostly renal insufficiency—and the high bleeding risk. Bleeding, especially intracranial hemorrhage, is the most threatening complication of anticoagulation therapy, and age is an independent risk factor for bleeding on anticoagulation within the therapeutic range [ , , ]. Anticoagulation therapy should be the shortest possible in order to reduce accumulation of the drugs and should be discontinued after revascularization of the culprit lesion, in the absence of other indications [ ]. In elderly ACS patients, anticoagulation options include the following: enoxaparin, bivalirudin, fondaparinux, and UFH. Current guidelines are summarized in Table 2 . Table 2 Summary of the ESC and ACC/AHA recommendations for anticoagulation therapy, adapted in the elderly Recommendations ESC ACC/AHA STEMI (2012) NSTEMI (2015) STEMI (2013) NSTEMI (2014) General considerations Pharmacotherapy in older patients should be individualized and dose adjusted by weight and/or CrCl to reduce adverse events caused by age-related changes in pharmacokinetics/dynamics, volume of distribution, comorbidities, drug interactions, and increased drug sensitivity IC IA Enoxaparin Enoxaparin (1 mg/kg s.c. every 12 hours, reduce dose to 1 mg/kg s.c. once daily in patients with creatinine clearance [CrCl] < 30 mL/min), continued for the duration of hospitalization or until PCI is performed. IIbB IB IA Fondaparinux Fondaparinux (2.5 mg s.c. daily) is recommended as having the most favorable efficacy–safety profile regardless of the management strategy, continued for the duration of hospitalization or until PCI is performed. IIIB IB IIIB IB UFH UFH IV (70–100 IU/kg with no GPI planned, 50–70 IU/kg if GPI planned) is recommended in patients undergoing PCI who did not receive any anticoagulant. IC IB IC IB Bivalirudin Bivalirudin i.v. bolus followed by continuous infusion IB IA IC IB Bivalirudin preferred over UFH with GPI in older patients IIaB IIaB s.c. subcutaneous, i.v. intravenous, UFH unfractionated heparin, GPI GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors, ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme, ARB angiotensin receptor blocker
Enoxaparin
Overall, low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWH), and more specifically enoxaparin, have replaced UFH in ACS because of their predictable pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and safety. LMWHs are readily absorbed after subcutaneous administration and their anticoagulant activity does not require routine monitoring except in patients with an eGFR of 15–30 mL/min/1.73 m2 or a weight > 100 kg [ ]. In case of NSTE-ACS, enoxaparin is recommended as the first-line therapy in the 2014 AHA/ACC guidelines [ ]; whereas, in the 2015 ESC guidelines, enoxaparin is recommended when fondaparinux is not available [ ]. The dose of enoxaparin is 1 mg/kg s.c. every 12 h [ , ]. In the presence of impaired renal function (eGFR 15–30 mL/min/1.73 m2), which is common in older patients, the dose should be reduced to 1 mg/kg s.c. once daily [ ]. In the case of severe renal impairment (eGFR < 15 mL per minute), UFH represents an alternative [ ]. It should be acknowledged that no specific dose-finding study has been performed for enoxaparin use in the elderly. In clinical practice, the dose of enoxaparin should be the lowest possible and the duration of its use reduced to the minimum. In the case of a specific indication for efficient prolonged anticoagulation, plasma antiXa should be monitored to avoid excessive anticoagulation. In other cases, after the short initial anticoagulation, enoxaparin may essentially be used at deep venous thrombosis doses prevention in non-mobile patients.
In the setting of STE-ACS with primary PCI, enoxaparin represents the first-line anticoagulant in the ESC guidelines [ ]. Enoxaparin was compared with UFH in only one randomized trial, the ATOLL trial, which included only 165 (18%) patients over 75 years [ ]. The primary composite endpoint of 30-day mortality, complications of myocardial infarction (MI), procedural failure, and major bleeding was not significantly reduced in these patients. For this reason, enoxaparin is considered as a second-line therapy (after UFH) in the AHA/ACC guidelines due only to the absence of superiority of enoxaparin over UFH in the ATOLL trial [ ].
UFH
Because of a large inter-individual variability and a narrow therapeutic window, UFH doses must be weight-adjusted. In the case of NSTE-ACS, UFH is considered as a second-line anticoagulant therapy in patients without renal failure regarding both the 2015 ESC and the 2014 AHA/ACC guidelines [ , ]. In STE-ACS, although there has been no placebo-controlled trials evaluating UFH in primary PCI, its use benefits from a large experience and therefore represents the first-line anticoagulant in the AHA/ACC 2013 guidelines [ ].
Bivalirudin
Bivalirudin is a direct thrombin inhibitor administered intravenously, evaluated in the ACUITY trial which included NSTE-ACS patients [ ]. Of 13,819 patients in the ACUITY trial, 2441 (17.7%) were ≥ 75 years of age. Patients ≥ 75 years treated with bivalirudin alone had similar ischemic outcomes but significantly lower rates of bleeding (5.8 vs 10.1%, p < 0.001) compared with those treated with UFH and GPI overall and in the PCI subgroup [ ]. In the setting of STEMI, bivalirudin may be preferred over UFH associated to GPI [ ]. One large open-label trial demonstrated the superiority of bivalirudin over the combination of UFH and GPI [ ], a benefit driven by a marked reduction in bleeding, associated with an initial significant increase in rates of stent thrombosis [ ]. However, more recently, the HEAT-PCI and the MATRIX trials, two randomized studies enrolling patients addressed for primary PCI and comparing bivalirudin with UFH have reported different results [ , ]. Both studies, which included, respectively, 403 and 1810 patients ≥ 75 years old, showed that UFH was not inferior to bivalidurin in terms of bleeding events. Moreover, UFH was associated with a reduction in the incidence of major adverse ischemic events compared to bivalidurin. On the basis of these results, the AHA/ACC guidelines consider bivalirudin as only a reasonable alternative to UFH for patients at higher risk of bleeding and when avoidance of GPI is preferred [ ].
Fondaparinux
Fondaparinux is a synthetic polysaccharide molecule which selectively inhibits activated factor X. It is contraindicated if eGFR is < 30 or < 20 mL/min [ , ]. OASIS-5 randomized 20,078 patients with NSTE-ACS to 2.5 mg s.c. fondaparinux once daily or enoxaparin 1 mg/kg s.c. b.i.d. for 8 days maximum [ , ]. In patients ≥ 65 years, bleeding rates fell from 8% with enoxaparin to 4.1% with fondaparinux (HR 0.49, 95% CI 0.37–0.66; p < 0.00001) and in those < 65 years from 2.5 to 1.5% (HR 0.58, 95% CI 0.34–0.99; p = 0.047). The reduced bleeding rate was associated with lower mortality at 6 months ( p = 0.05) [ ]. However, OASIS-5 suffered from major drawbacks: first, it compares a preventive dose of fondaparinux to a therapeutic dose of enoxaparin, second, there was no dose adjustment for enoxaparin based on eGFR, third there was no monitoring for enoxaparin in patients with a relatively long treatment duration, and last, the contemporary treatment of ACS does not require more than a bolus or 24 h treatment by anticoagulants as it was assessed in the trial. Interestingly, fondaparinux is recommended as first-line, regardless of PCI or conservative management, in the 2015 ESC guidelines but not in the 2014 AHA/ACC guidelines [ , ]. To avoid catheter thrombosis when fondaparinux is used alone in patients undergoing PCI, anticoagulant therapy with anti-IIa activity is also administered [ , , ]. Such attitude adding UFH over another molecule is not recommended by the 2015 ESC guidelines, because of an increase in the risk of bleeding (Grade IC). Such contradictions explain that most physicians prefer using LMWH instead of fondaparinux, to avoid combining different anticoagulants, especially in elderly patients with a higher risk of major bleeding. In the setting of STE-ACS with primary PCI, fondaparinux was associated with potential increase of stent thrombosis in the OASIS 6 trial and should therefore be avoided [ , , ].
Fibrinolysis
European and American guidelines agree that fibrinolytic therapy should be given to STE-ACS patients with symptoms < 12 h when it is anticipated that primary PCI cannot be performed within 120 min of first medical contact (IA), without specific age restrictions. Randomized trials comparing primary PCI and fibrinolytic therapy in the elderly are rare but suggest a special benefit in favor of primary PCI in patients > 75 years, driven by a decrease in recurrent ischemia rates (0.8 in the PCI group vs. 9.7% in the fibrinolysis group, p < 0.001) [ ] when in-hospital fibrinolysis is compared to primary PCI. No difference has, however, been shown between pre-hospital lytic therapy and primary PCI [ ]. The risk of intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) and non-hemorrhagic stroke, devastating complications of fibrinolysis, increases with age [ ]. In the Fibrinolytic Therapy Trialists’ overview of randomized trials, the early excess of death related to bleeding complications, associated with fibrinolytic therapy, increased with age but so did the risk of death from acute MI. Hence, the risk of fibrinolytic treatment is greater in the elderly, but also is its benefits [ , ]. The recent STREAM trial [ ] confirmed that pre-hospital fibrinolysis with timely coronary angiography resulted in similar rates of the primary composite end point than primary PCI. There was an initial increased risk of ICH in the fibrinolysis group among patients ≥ 75 years old leading to a reduction in the dose of tenecteplase (TNK) in such patients with a subsequent improvement of the safety profile and comparable outcomes versus primary PCI.
With respect to the adjunctive therapy (Table 3 ), lower doses of enoxaparin (0.75 mg/kg) without any intravenous bolus, associated with better outcomes than UFH, should be used [ ]. Clopidogrel loading dose should be reduced to 75 mg only in patients > 75 years old. Ticagrelor and prasugrel have not still been studied as adjuncts to fibrinolysis and should not be given. Doses of aspirin are the same as in the general population. Fibrin-specific agents and especially TNK are preferred in the elderly, because they are associated with a significantly lower rate of non-cerebral bleeding and less need for blood transfusion. Given the results of the STREAM trial published after the guidelines, doses of fibrinolytic therapy should be reduced by 50% after 75 years. Table 3 Doses of antiplatelet and antithrombin co-therapies with fibrinolysis Antiplatelet therapy ESC ACC Aspirin Loading dose 150–500 mg orally i.v. dose of 250 mg if oral ingestion is not possible. (IB) 162–325 mg loading dose (IA) 81–325 mg maintenance dose (indefinite), 81 mg (IA) 81 mg is the preferred maintenance dose (IIaB) P2Y12 inhibitor Clopidogrel (IA) Age ≤ 75 years • 300 mg loading dose • 75 mg/day maintenance dose Age > 75 years • No loading dose, give 75 mg • 75 mg/day maintenance dose Prasugrel Ticagrelor Contraindicated in association with fibrinolytic therapy Anticoagulant therapy Enoxaparine (IA) Preferred over UFH • In patients < 75 years of age: 30 mg i.v. bolus followed 15 min later by 1 mg/kg s.c. every 12 h until hospital discharge for a maximum of 8 days The first two doses should not exceed 100 mg. • In patients > 75 years of age: No i.v. bolus; start with first s.c. dose of 0.75 mg/kg with a maximum of 75 mg for the first two s.c. doses. • In patients with eGFR < 30 mL/min, regardless of age, 1 mg/kg s.c. once every 24 h. UFH (IC) 60 U/kg i.v. bolus with a maximum of 4000 U Followed by an i.v. infusion of 12 U/kg with a maximum of 1000 U/h for 24–48 h. Target aPTT: 1.5 to 2.0 times that of control Fondaparinux (IB) In patients treated with streptokinase 2.5 mg i.v. bolus Followed by a s.c. dose of 2.5 mg once daily up to 8 days or hospital discharge.
Conclusion
Careful considerations should be made regarding the risk/benefit ratio in older patients and individual decisions on how to manage an elderly patient should not only be based on ischemic and bleeding risk assessment but also on estimated life expectancy, comorbidities, patient values and preferences, and after evaluating risks and benefits of revascularization. No specific studies of antithrombotic therapy efficacy and safety have been performed in elderly patients with ACS and subgroup analyses of pivotal trials remain the main source of information. Importantly, specific precautions and treatment adaptation are necessary in this population.