Introduction
By the year 2030, as cardiac risk factors such as type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and obesity continue to become more prevalent, it is projected that approximately 40% of the US population will have some form of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease [ ]. A recent report on prevalence of diabetes in the USA projects a 30% increase from 29 million subjects in 2012 to 40 million by 2030 [ ]. Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a major clinical consequence of T2DM and is the leading cause of death in diabetic patients.
The optimal treatment approach to managing patients with CAD, including those with T2DM, has been extensively evaluated. Several trials of stable ischemic heart disease (SIHD) including patients with T2DM have demonstrated that medical management is comparable to revascularization in terms of mortality and rates of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) [ , ]. Since the Clinical Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization and Aggressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE) trial, which evaluated outcomes in patients with and without DM randomly assigned to optimal medical therapy (OMT) alone or OMT plus PCI [ ], guideline recommendations place OMT as an equivalent to PCI for SIHD. Furthermore, the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI-2D) [ ] and Fractional Flow Reserve versus Angiography for Multivessel Evaluation 2 (FAME-2) [ ] trials also addressed the role of revascularization versus an initial conservative approach of OMT in SIHD patients with and without DM, showing no incremental benefit in long-term major cardiovascular event rates with the revascularization arm. On the other hand, studies evaluating patients with acute coronary syndromes (ACS) have demonstrated clinical benefit associated with an early invasive strategy as compared to a conservative strategy of OMT [ , , ]. While ongoing trials, such as the International Study of Comparative Health Effectiveness with Medical and Invasive Approaches (ISCHEMIA) trial [ ], attempt to compare early revascularization alone versus revascularization with OMT in SIHD, there has been a growing appreciation for OMT’s role in improving clinical outcomes [ ].
Diabetic patients have higher rates of cardiovascular death than non-diabetics regardless of treatment strategy (OMT, PCI, and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)) [ ]. Therefore, it is vital to target patients with T2DM to prevent or delay MACE events through advanced OMT, which may avoid a need for revascularization, particularly on an urgent basis. OMT includes lifestyle interventions (i.e., regular exercise, smoking cessation, weight loss, and a healthier diet), glycemic control, improving insulin sensitivity, reducing low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), and inhibiting platelet aggregation. There has been significant evolution in the pharmacologic management of T2DM patients. Promising therapies that have been shown to improve cardiovascular outcomes include liraglutide in the Liraglutide Effect and Action in Diabetes: Evaluation of Cardiovascular Outcome Results (LEADER) trial [ ], and semaglutide in the Trial to Evaluate Cardiovascular and Other Long-term Outcomes with Semaglutide in Subjects with Type 2 Diabetes (SUSTAIN-6) [ ]. Sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors are also new pharmacologic agents with tremendous potential to alter clinical practice and influence practice guidelines.
This review will discuss the impact of SGLT2-inhibitors and their potential role in diabetic patients with CAD. Furthermore, we will discuss the role of SGLT2-inhibitors in heart failure (HF) and the use of HF as an outcome to compare treatment strategies.
Mechanism of Action of SGLT2 Inhibitors
With the advent of new pharmacologic therapies, the role of OMT for patients with T2DM continues to be an increasingly important complement to percutaneous or surgical revascularization. SGLT2-inhibitors are a recent class of oral anti-hyperglycemic agents with a distinct mechanism of action. In the renal glomeruli, glucose is filtered freely and subsequently reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule via both passive facilitated glucose transporters (GLUTs) and active cotransporters (SGLTs). There are six identified SGLTs, two of which (SGLT1 and SGLT2) have been considered the most promising targets for pharmacologic therapy [ ]. SGLT2-inhibitors work by inhibiting SGLT2 in the proximal convoluted tubule. This in turn prevents the reabsorption of glucose, facilitating its urinary excretion. Ultimately, excretion of glucose decreases plasma glucose levels, leading to an improvement in all glycemic parameters [ ].
SGLT2-inhibitors have several potential effects. Their use can lead to a reduction in body weight, ranging from about 1 to 5 kg, especially in patients with long-standing diabetes and higher baseline weight [ , ]. It has been demonstrated that two-thirds of the weight loss is due to a decrease in fat mass as compared to lean mass [ ], while the remainder is from reduced plasma volume. SGLT2-inhibitors are also associated with significant reductions in systolic and diastolic blood pressure (BP) independent of glycemic or body weight reduction, and the reductions in BP are greater in patients with high baseline systolic BP [ ]. The mean systolic BP reduction by empagliflozin is approximately 3–5 mmHg [ , ]. The mechanism of BP reduction in SGLT2-inhibitors happens primarily through osmotic diuresis and reduction in plasma volume [ ]. Also, some SGLT2-inhbitors such as canagliflozin increase high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and reduce triglyceride levels [ , ]. Conversely, a study showed that empagliflozin moderately increases LDL-C levels by switching metabolism from carbohydrate to lipid utilization [ ]. This raises concerns for potential adverse cardiovascular consequences of SGLT2 inhibition, although the collective advantages of empagliflozin have overshadowed this potential disadvantage based on the current evidence. Therefore, the unique mechanism of SGLT2 inhibitors along with their pleiotropic effects on weight, BP, and HDL-C makes them attractive options for add-on therapy in patients with cardiovascular risk factors not well controlled on other medications, especially those with higher baseline weight and BP.
Review of SGLT2 Inhibitors in Cardiovascular Outcome Trials
SGLT2-inhibitors, particularly empagliflozin, have been shown to have a significant impact on clinical cardiovascular outcomes, particularly hospitalization for HF [ ]. Theories regarding the mechanisms of benefits in regard to development of HF include osmotic diuresis secondary to increased urinary glucose excretion which may counter insulin-related fluid retention. This thereby leads to volume contraction, reduced blood pressure, less arterial stiffness, reduced myocardial wall stress, and improvement in subendocardial blood flow [ ]. Furthermore, the benefit of SGLT2 inhibitors on HF may in part be through a natriuretic effect by promoting urinary sodium excretion and thereby counteracting sodium retention. However, there is still a need to further elucidate the potential physiologic mechanisms of SGLT2 inhibitors on HF, including the impact on effective circulating volume, myocardial perfusion, and coronary flow reserve.
In addition to diuresis, animal models in diabetic and obese mice suggest that SGLT2 inhibitors may potentially decrease cardiac fibrosis, decrease cardiac macrophage infiltration, and cause attenuation of oxidative stress on the myocardium [ ]. Furthermore, SGLT2-inhibition may result in upregulation of cardiac SGLT1 [ ] and possibly enhance glucose and decrease fatty acid metabolism that could favorably affect myocardial function. In combination, these may reduce the potential pro-arrhythmia effects of free fatty acid metabolites [ ] (Fig. 1 [ ]). Fig. 1 Potential mechanisms involved in the reduction of cardiovascular events (cardiovascular death, all-cause mortality, and heart failure hospitalization) observed in the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial for empagliflozin-treated patients with T2DM. Figure adapted from Marx et al. [ ]
The reduced need for insulin, in combination with the pleiotropic effects on hypertension and weight, can play a role in decreasing MACE and all-cause mortality in diabetic patients. The EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial [ ] studied the effects of empagliflozin, an SGLT2-inhibtor, compared to standard of care, on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in patients with T2DM at high cardiovascular risk. Patients randomized to the empagliflozin arm had significantly lower rates of death from cardiovascular causes (3.7 vs 5.9% in the placebo group; 38% relative risk reduction, p value = <0.001), hospitalization for HF (2.7 and 4.1%, respectively; 35% relative risk reduction, p value = 0.02), and death from any cause (5.7 and 8.3%, respectively; 32% relative risk reduction, p value = <0.001). These data also demonstrated improved CV outcomes regardless of HF status at baseline. The US Food and Drug Administration recently approved a new indication for empagliflozin to reduce the risk of CV death in patients with T2DM and CV disease [ ].
The possibility that other SGLT2-inhibitors will have similar effects remains to be seen. A recent comprehensive meta-analysis of available data from randomized controlled trials (RCT) suggests that the beneficial action observed with empagliflozin on all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in the EMPA-REG OUTCOME study is a class effect [ ]. There are a number of ongoing clinical trials that will study the effect of other SGLT2-inhibitors on cardiovascular events including CV death, MI, hospitalization for HF, hospitalization for unstable angina pectoris, or hospitalization for any revascularization. These include the Multicenter Trial to evaluate the Effect of Dapagliflozin on the Incidence of Cardiovascular Events (DECLARE –TIMI 58), the CANagliflozin cardioVascular Assessment Study (CANVAS trial), and the Safety and Effectiveness of SGLT-2 Inhibitors in Patients With Heart Failure and Diabetes (REFORM) trial. These trials could prove the effectiveness of SGLT-2 inhibitors in reducing mortality in patients with HF.
SGLT2-Inhibitors Close the Gap Between Optimal Medical Therapy Versus Revascularization
Trials comparing revascularization strategies in diabetic patients with multi-vessel disease (MVD) included patients who were treated with contemporary medical therapy. However, in most of these studies, target goals for risk factor reduction were not achieved. For example, in the FREEDOM trial [ ], the average HbA1c was 7.8% for both the PCI and CABG groups. Similar baseline findings were also seen in a pooled analysis [ ] which evaluated the proportion of patients achieving guideline-based, protocol-driven treatment targets for systolic blood pressure, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, smoking cessation, and HbA1c in the COURAGE, BARI2D, and FREEDOM trials. In this study, it was found that the proportion of diabetic CAD patients achieving all pre-specified targets at 1 year after enrollment was limited (only 18% of the COURAGE diabetes subgroup patients, 23% of BARI2D patients, and 8% of FREEDOM patients). Bittner et al. measured the relationship between the degree of risk factor goal attainment and clinical outcomes from the results of the BARI 2D trial [ ]. The successful control of risk factors at 1 year was significantly related to cardiovascular outcomes and survival after adjustment for the number of risk factors at baseline. Patients with up to two uncontrolled risk factors had double the risk of death (hazard ratio 2.0 [1.3 to 3.3], p = 0.0031) and 1.7 times the risk of the composite outcome of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke (hazard ratio: 1.7 [1.2 to 2.5], p = 0.0043) in comparison with patients with all risk factors controlled (smoking, HbA1c <7%, hypertriglyceridemia, non-HDL-C < 130 mg/dL, systolic blood pressure < 130 mmHg, and diastolic blood pressure < 80 mmHg) [ , ].
Underutilization of OMT in T2DM patients regardless of revascularization also increases cardiac risk. For example, in the SYNTAX post hoc study [ ], a randomized comparison of PCI vs CABG in 1800 patients with and without diabetes, revealed that OMT was underutilized in patients undergoing revascularization. This important study also demonstrated that the use of OMT itself may close the gap between OMT and revascularization. Among patients who received OMT in combination with revascularization, there was a markedly reduced event rate as compared with patients who received revascularization without concomitant OMT during a 5-year follow-up [ ]. These findings highlight that the role OMT plays in reducing the risk of subsequent cardiac events, even among those patients treated with revascularization.
Overall, with the advent of new accompanying medical therapy such as SGLT2-inhibitors and their additive advantageous effects on risk-factor modification, treatment targets may become more easily achievable (Table 1 ). In a recent meta-analysis of RCTs involving anti-diabetes treatments added to metformin, dapagliflozin offered similar glycemic control compared with the currently recommended add-on treatment of sulfonylureas, with a reduced risk of hypoglycemia and an added benefit of weight loss [ ]. A study by Haring et al., examining empagliflozin added to metformin plus sulfonylurea regimens (EMPA-REG METSU trial), showed that empagliflozin 10 mg ( n = 226) and 25 mg ( n = 225) was associated with significant reductions in HbA1c levels (−0.64 and −0.59%, respectively, p value = <0.001) after 24 weeks. Furthermore, a greater proportion of participants receiving empagliflozin achieved a HbA1c < 7.0% (26.3% on 10 mg, 32.2% on 25 mg vs 9.3% on placebo) [ ]. Therefore, SGLT2 inhibitors present a potential second- or third-line agent to further strengthen OMT therapy aimed at achieving therapeutic targets in patients with CAD. In fact, a 2015 position statement of the American Diabetes Association and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes recommends using SGLT2-inhibitors as an additive therapy to improve glycemic control [ ]. They are used predominantly in combination with metformin and/or other agents, though with less additive efficacy when combined with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors [ ]. However, there is little evidence that strict glycemic control affects the risk of cardiovascular events [ , , ]. Several trials studying the effect of intensive glucose-lowering strategies compared to standard therapy on cardiovascular outcomes failed to show a significant reduction in macrovascular events using intensive glucose-lowering strategies [ , , ]. Whether such therapies can reduce the burden of cardiovascular events in patients with other forms of hyperglycemia (such as impaired glucose tolerance) remains to be evaluated as the rate of non-cardiovascular death remains high in this population [ ]. Table 1 Cardiovascular risk factors in patients with diabetes which need to be optimized as part of OMT, with their goals and the potential additive role of empagliflozin in reaching them Cardiovascular risk factors in patients with diabetes Risk factor goal Empagliflozin’s potential additive role in goal attainment c Hypertension Systolic blood pressure of <140 mmHg. Level A a 2.8 to 5.5 mmHg reduction in systolic blood pressure [ ] Diastolic blood pressure of <90 mmHg. Level A a 0.9 to 2.5 mmHg reduction in diastolic blood pressure [ ]. Obesity Modest weight loss achievable by the combination of lifestyle modification and the reduction of caloric intake benefits overweight or obese adults with T2DM. Although benefits may be seen with as little as 5% weight loss, sustained weight loss of >7% is optimal. a 1.1 to 2.3 kg weight loss [ ]. Dyslipidemia No specific goal. Treatment of all patients with statin unless contraindicated with moderate to high intensity based on ASCVD risk factors. a Increases LDL-C levels [ ]. Increased LDL-C Increases HDL-C levels by 0.05 mmol/L (1.9 mg/dl) [ ]. Decreased HDL-C Increased triglycerides No change in triglycerides [ ]. Hyperglycemia HbA1c <7.0% for most. b Level A a HbA1c reduction of 0.3–0.4% compared to placebo. A greater proportion of participants receiving empagliflozin achieved HbA1c < 7.0% compared to placebo (32.2% vs 9.3%) [ ]. Microalbuminuria No specific goal. Delaying and limiting levels of albuminuria. Renal hyperfiltration has been found to be closely associated with the development of diabetic nephropathy [ , ]. SGLT2 is one of the main determinants of glomerular hyperfiltration and blockade of SGLT2 has potential nephroprotective action [ ]. ?Hyperinsulinemia [ , ] Iatrogenic hyperinsulinemia may promote pro-inflammatory macrophage responses and stimulate hormonal over-activation of signal transduction pathways, which affects progression of atherogenesis and disturbs hemodynamic control and cardiovascular function [ , , ]. Level C Empagliflozin may act as an insulin-sparing agent [ ]. >100 mg/dL (2.6 mmol/L), high blood pressure, smoking, obesity, and family history of premature ASCVD). Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes-2016 [ ]. Not every patient will clearly fall into a particular category. ASCVD atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (risk factors include LDL-C a This represents a framework for considering treatment goals for glycemia, blood pressure, and dyslipidemia in older adults (>40 years old) with diabetes based on the American Diabetes Association b Lower A1C goal may be set for an individual if achievable without recurrent or severe hypoglycemia or undue treatment burden. Looser A1C targets of <8.0% for patients with multiple coexisting chronic illnesses c Based on trials where patient cohort was optimally treated at baseline for the corresponding risk factor
SGLT2 Inhibitors as Potential Insulin Sparing Agents
SGLT2-inhibitors also have the potential for use as insulin-sparing agents in patients with T2DM already receiving insulin and as an alternative to increasing the insulin dose or frequency. This was illustrated in a recent study which showed that when empagliflozin is used as an add-on to basal insulin, insulin dose decreased by approximately 6 U from baseline, along with improved glycemic control and reduced body weight compared with placebo, without the risk of hypoglycemia [ ]. It has been shown that patients treated with insulin have worse outcomes than non-insulin-treated diabetics. A secondary analysis of the FREEDOM trial investigated the long-term CV outcome of PCI versus CABG in insulin-treated and non-insulin-treated diabetic patients [ ]. This study documented that insulin-treated patients have worse clinical outcome regardless of the treatment arm. These outcomes may be due to more aggressive disease in these patients (as patients on insulin were significantly more likely to be female, have a higher BMI, a longer history of diabetes, a higher HbA 1c level, higher glucose level on the day of the procedure, HF, and ACS), or an adverse effect of insulin.
Iatrogenic hyperinsulinemia in diabetic patients may promote pro-inflammatory macrophage responses and stimulate hormonal over activation of signal transduction pathways, which affects progression of atherogenesis and disturbs hemodynamic control and cardiovascular function [ , ]. This may ultimately lead to a higher risk for essential hypertension [ ], pathological cardiac hypertrophy [ ], myocardial hypoxia [ ], HF [ , ], and weight gain [ ]. In an observational study of patients with severe HF, 1-year survival was significantly lower in patients with diabetes receiving insulin, compared to those with diabetes not receiving insulin [ ]. Multivariate analysis illustrated that insulin use was an independent risk factor for 1-year mortality (HR 4.3, 95% CI 1.69–10.94), whereas diabetes without insulin treatment was not a risk factor (HR 0.95, 95% CI 0.31–2.93). On the contrary, other studies have demonstrated no difference in cardiovascular outcomes between insulin-treated patients versus non-insulin-treated patients with diabetes [ , ].
Regardless of whether worse clinical outcomes in insulin-treated diabetic patients are due to a direct adverse effect of insulin or rather a more aggressive disease state, a novel hypoglycemic agent such as SGLT2-inhibitors that significantly reduces the need for insulin and its possible adverse cardiovascular effects may improve clinical outcomes.
SGLT2-Inhibitors’ Impact on Heart Failure as an Outcome in Clinical Trials
Besides its effect on mortality, an important benefit seen with empagliflozin is the significantly lower rate of hospitalization for HF (2.7 and 4.1%, respectively; 35% relative risk reduction). Since one of the main principles in the management of these patients has been revascularization directed at flow-limiting coronary stenosis will more effectively treat myocardial ischemia and thereby preserve ventricular systolic function, studying HF as an outcome in DM patients managed with OMT alone vs OMT plus revascularization is an important outcome to evaluate. HF is associated with increased morbidity and mortality with worse outcomes [ ], and preventing progression of HF could potentially improve outcomes and mortality in diabetic and non-diabetic patients.
Relief of symptoms and avoiding development of other complications such as HF is an important patient centered outcome [ ]. HF hospitalizations have only recently been prespecified in clinical trials of medical therapy among patients with DM; however, this is predominantly in the form of an adverse event, and not as a component of a composite or primary outcome [ ]. Evaluating hospitalization due to HF as a component of the primary outcome in trials of revascularization in patients with DM is warranted.
Role of Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction as an Outcome in Clinical Trials
An objective in the management of patients with DM and CAD should be to prevent a decline in left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). A reduced LVEF is one of the strongest predictors of adverse cardiovascular outcomes and mortality among patients with and without CAD [ , , , ]. Revascularization among patients with DM and CAD has been shown to potentially prevent a decline in LVEF. In the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation (BARI) trial, 5 years after randomization to balloon PCI or CABG for the treatment of MVD, among survivors, there were no significant changes in LVEF initially. However, when an LVEF of 0 was imputed for patients who were dead and missing LVEF data, the CABG group had a higher LVEF only among patients with diabetes [ ]. Preventing a decline in LVEF remains an important yet understudied objective among patients with DM. Furthermore, given the prognostic importance of LVEF, a decline in LVEF should be considered as an endpoint in clinical trials of patients with DM and CAD. Whether SGLT2 inhibitors can improve or prevent a decline in LVEF remains to be determined; however, initial smaller studies have demonstrated striking improvements in diastolic function in patients initiated on empagliflozin [ ]. Furthermore, clinical trials are underway to determine whether dapagliflozin can improve left ventricular systolic function among patients with T2DM [ ].
Conclusion
SGLT2-inhibitors may have tremendous potential in reducing adverse CV outcomes and improving HF outcomes in patients with T2DM and CAD. Empagliflozin should be considered as a part of OMT among patients with T2DM and pre-existing cardiovascular disease. If results similar to the EMPA-REG OUTCOMES trial are seen with other SGLT-2 inhibitor trials, the use of these pharmacologic agents as a part of OMT may narrow the gap between revascularization and OMT alone in patients with T2DM and MVD. Future studies on the role of SLGT-2 inhibitors with regard to HF outcomes are needed to elucidate the mechanisms and clinical effects in this vulnerable population.