Introduction
Infantile-onset inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) refers to a rare group of inflammatory gastrointestinal disorders with onset before the age of 2 years [ , ]. To date, nearly 100 different monogenic conditions have been described that include gastrointestinal manifestations with an IBD-like phenotype among other systemic features [ ]. Considering the intestines are a major lymphoid organ, primary immunodeficiency and immune dysregulation syndromes contribute to more than half of monogenic IBD syndromes. Suspicion for immune-based hereditary IBD disorder is raised by a clinical history of recurrent infections, young age at presentation, severe manifestations, consanguinity, and immunological workup impairments [ , ].
Recently, several patients with primary immunodeficiency have been described with pathogenic variants in the capping protein regulator and myosin 1 linker 2 ( CARMIL2 ), also known as RGD, leucine-rich repeat, tropomodulin, and proline-rich-containing protein ( RLTPR ) [ , , , ]. CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency syndrome is characterized by a combined immune defect in T and B cells, as shown by various studies in humans and mice [ ]. The limited number of patients reported presented with recurrent infections, mostly of the respiratory system, and cutaneous features, including psoriatic rash, eczema, and skin warts. Chronic diarrhea was observed in some of the patients, though there is limited related phenotypic data [ , , , ]. We report on a patient with a novel homozygous CARMIL2 variant, manifesting primarily as infantile-onset colitis and eosinophilic disease.
Materials and Methods
Study Participants
The study was approved by the institutional Helsinki committee, and written informed consent was obtained as customary. The studied family included an affected child, both his parents, and a healthy brother.
Genetic Analysis
“Trio” whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed in collaboration with the Regeneron Genetics Center (RGC). Protein-coding regions were captured using the IDT xGen capture platform (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, USA) and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq2500 platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). We utilized the Genoox data analysis platform Ltd. (Tel Aviv, Israel) and the RGC bioinformatics pipeline for mapping and alignment of the obtained sequence reads to the human genome reference assembly, variant calling and annotation, and subsequent data analysis.
We filtered WES data for rare (defined as variants with a minor allele frequency [MAF] < 0.01 in unaffected controls from population databases, such as gnomAD [ ], dbSNP [ ], 1000Genomes [ ], Greater Middle-East Variome [ ], the Rambam Genetics Institute in-house database of 1000 Israeli exomes, and the internal RGC database) coding, protein-altering variants (missense, nonsense, frameshift, and splice site). We investigated all possible disease-causing variants identified by WES, including de novo mutations, X-linked, and compound heterozygous and homozygous variants under a recessive mode of inheritance due to consanguinity between the parents. Pathogenicity of the mutations was assessed by various in silico programs, including SIFT, MutationTaster, and PolyPhen-2 [ , , ]. The ConSurf server and SWISS-MODEL were used for protein modeling and variant assessment [ , ].
The candidate variant in CARMIL2 was validated and tested for segregation with disease in the healthy brother by Sanger sequencing on an ABI Prism 3500 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA), using 5′-AGACCACACATTGGGAGAGG-3′ forward and 5′-ACCGGACGTTGAAGTTCCTT-3′ reverse primers.
RNA Analysis
RNA was extracted from peripheral blood of the patient and a healthy control, using the PureLink RNA Mini kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and reverse transcribed with the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems), following the manufacturer’s protocols. Patient and control cDNA samples and a wild-type gDNA control were analyzed by standard PCR using primers designed to flank over exons 14–21 (forward 5′-CTGAGCCGTCCTAACGTACT-3′, reverse 5′-ACCCAAAGCAGATGTGTGGT-3′) of CARMIL2 . The expected cDNA and gDNA sizes were 765 and 1779 bp, respectively. PCR products were subjected to 4% agarose gel electrophoresis with HyperLadder 100 bp (Bioline, London, UK) and Sanger-sequenced to observe the candidate variant effect on splicing.
Western Blotting
Total protein was extracted from patient and healthy control lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) using RIPA buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE using standard protocols. The EM-53 anti-CARMIL2 antibody (#11–718, ExBio, Vestec, Czech Republic; 1:500 dilution) was used for protein-of-interest detection, and anti-α-Tubulin (#T9026, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA; 1:5000 dilution) was used as a loading control. Results were visualized on ImageQuant LAS 4010 (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA) and analyzed using NIH ImageJ software.
Immunohistochemistry
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded 4-μm sections from patient and age- and gender-matched control colonic and esophageal samples were deparaffinized and stained using the EM-53 anti-CARMIL2 antibody (ExBio) diluted at 1:100. Staining was performed on the Ventana Benchmark ULTRA system (Roche Diagnostics, Risch-Rotkreuz, Switzerland). Normal tonsil biopsy was used as a positive control.
Isolation of Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells
Blood was collected in EDTA tubes. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by Ficoll-Paque PLUS (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) gradient, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
In vitro T cell Proliferation
CD4 + CD45RA + CD25 − naïve T cells were isolated by magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) beads (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany). Isolation purity was more than 95%. To assess proliferation, we cultured 5 × 10 5 mM carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE)–labeled naïve T cells with soluble αCD3/αCD28-coated beads (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and IL-2 (100 ng/mL, Peprotech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA). Proliferation was assessed after 4 days based on CFSE dilution and determined by flow cytometry.
In vitro Treg Generation
MACS-sorted CD4 + naïve T cells were stimulated with αCD3/αCD28 beads, TGFβ 2 ng/mL (Peprotech), and IL-2 (100 ng/mL) for 4 days. Cells were then fixed, permeabilized, and stained for CD25 and FOXP3.
Flow Cytometry
Cells were acquired using Navios flow cytometer (Beckman-Coulter, Brea, CA, USA) and analyzed using FlowJo. For FOXP3 staining, fixation/permeabilization kit by eBioscience was used. The following antibodies were used: CD4 clone RPA-T4 (BD Bioscience), CD25 clone 2A3 (BD Bioscience), and FOXP3 clone PCH101 (eBioscience). All flow cytometry experiments were performed in duplicate and a representative image was chosen.
CyTOF Studies
PBMCs from the CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency patient, six healthy controls (ages 5–18) and two patients with active ulcerative colitis (UC, ages 18–22), were either stained directly as subsequently described or stimulated for 4 h with 50 ng/mL phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and 500 ng/mL ionomycin and then stained with a panel of metal-tagged antibodies targeting markers of major immune cell lineages and various cytokines. The samples were run on Helios2 mass cytometer (Fluidigm, San Francisco, CA, USA). FCS files obtained were analyzed with premium Cytobank software and pre-gated on CD45 + /viable/single/DNA + events before initiating the analysis. Normalization beads were used and gated out of the analysis. The data was automatically clustered with Rphenograph and cluster identity was manually labeled based on marker expressed in the individual clusters. The data were also independently reduced on ViSNE plots via Cytobank, once again with manual labeling of cellular populations based on marker expression. Cluster percentage (% of CD45 + viable single events) was computed and plotted for comparison between patient groups using Prism7 software. Cytokine levels were analyzed either by median intensity of the marker within particular clusters or by percent-positive events within that cluster.
Results
Case Description
A boy was referred for genetic evaluation at the age of 10 years due to infantile-onset colitis. He was born to healthy parents of Christian Arab descent, who are second-degree cousins (Fig. 1a ). The patient presented at age 6 months with chronic bloody diarrhea, accompanied by recurrent fever, aphthous stomatitis, psoriatic rash, severe failure to thrive (FTT), malnutrition, and subsequent physical and motor developmental delays. He did not have recurrent or severe infections that would suggest a primary immunodeficiency. Colonoscopy at the age of 4 years revealed severe active chronic colitis with skip lesions, and hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrated massive eosinophilic infiltration of the lamina propria of healthy and inflamed colonic mucosa (Fig. 1b ). Skin biopsy was consistent with a diagnosis of psoriasis. He was treated with systemic and topical steroids with partial response, and due to FTT and ongoing symptoms, total parenteral nutrition was given for several months; no other medications were used in view of parental objection. His psoriatic rash resolved at 5 years and has not recurred since. Fig. 1 A missense variant in CARMIL2 causes infantile colitis . a Pedigree and genotypes of studied family. The c.1590C>A variant segregates as expected for an autosomal recessive disease. b Histopathological section of patient’s colon tissue, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, revealed skip lesions of healthy and inflamed tissue. Left panel depicts × 40 magnification of inflamed colonic mucosa showing marked increase in eosinophils (in red) in the lamina propria (up to 100 eosinophils per high-power field). Right panel depicts × 40 magnification of healthy colonic mucosa showing granulation tissue with multiple eosinophils (in red). Zoom-in insets are provided for each section to highlight the eosinophilia. c Schematic representation of the CARMIL2 gene (top) and protein (bottom), highlighting the missense variant described in this report (c.1590C>A; p.Asn530Lys) and previously described variations in the gene. The c.1590C>A variant affects the second to the last nucleotide of exon 17, causing an asparagine-to-lysine substitution at position 530 of the protein. PH, pleckstrin homology; LRR, leucine-rich repeat; HD, helical dimerization; CBR, capping protein-binding; PRD, proline-rich domain. d 3D homology model of the CARMIL2 LRR region, composed of 16 leucine-rich repeats (modeled by SWISS-MODEL). Asn530 is located within a highly conserved region in LRR 11. It is predicted to be exposed and functional (source: ConSurf server). b, buried; e, exposed; f, functional, s, structural
At 5 years of age, he underwent a sub-total colectomy due to perforation that occurred during routine colonoscopy, leaving him with a protective ileostomy and a rectal pouch. Since then, he suffers from continuous rectal discharge, with repeated rectal biopsies showing eosinophilic proctitis. Over the years, he also developed eosinophilic esophagitis. Amino acid–based formula nutrition combined with topical steroid treatment (oral gel and rectal suppository) was initiated with relatively good results, both clinically and in follow-up esophageal histology. Currently, the boy is thriving properly in terms of height (6th percentile), weight (27th percentile), and cognition. He does not suffer from recurrent infections or exhibits cutaneous findings. His main medical issues revolve around his stoma, rectal discharge, and the fact that he is dependent on a hypoallergenic formula. Eosinophilic infiltration and inflammation are still observed on repeat biopsies.
Identification of a Novel CARMIL2 Candidate Variant
No pathogenic variants were observed in IBD-related genes, such as XIAP , FOXP3 , and IL10RA/B [ ]. “Trio” WES analysis identified nine homozygous, three compound heterozygous, four X-linked, and no de novo rare protein-altering variants that passed the filtering criteria described above (Supplementary Table S1 ). Of these, we prioritized one candidate homozygous novel missense variant, which we considered likely related to the patient’s phenotype. The variant occurs in exon 17 of CARMIL2 (NM_001013838.1): c.1590C>A; p.Asn530Lys (Fig. 1a,c ); the amino acid substitution affects the 11th leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domain of the protein (Fig. 1d ). The variant has not been reported in general population variant databases or in our internal databases, and it is predicted deleterious by all pathogenicity bioinformatic algorithms used. The variant is located 2-bp upstream of exon’s 17 donor splice site and hence we considered possible that it could also affect mRNA splicing (Fig. 1c ). However, PCR analysis and Sanger sequencing of the proband’s cDNA flanking CARMIL2 exons 14–21 revealed the expected missense variant of c.1590C>A, without any effect on mRNA splicing (results not shown).
CARMIL2 Protein Expression
Western blot analysis revealed a marked reduction of 73% in CARMIL2 protein in patient LCLs compared with a healthy control (Fig. 2a ). Fig. 2 CARMIL2 protein expression analyses. a Western blot analysis of CARMIL2 reveals 27% protein expression in patient LCLs compared with control LCLs. The figure shows a representative blot from n = 2 independent experiments, each performed in duplicate. b Normal tonsillar tissue was used as positive control for CARMIL2 immunohistochemical staining, showing a rage of staining intensities in different cell types: intense staining in endothelial cells, moderate staining in parafollicular lymphocytes, and weak staining in germinal centers. c Colonic sample from age- and gender-matched control shows positive cytoplasmic staining in lymphocytes (*), lamina propria plasma cells (¥), and crypt epithelium (¤). d Patient’s colonic sample shows lack of staining in lymphocytes (*) and weak focally positive staining in colonic epithelium (¤) and plasma cells (¥). All immunohistochemical images are depicted at × 20 magnification
Immunohistochemical staining for CARMIL2 expression in normal tonsillar tissue (used as positive control) revealed intense staining in endothelial cells, moderate staining in parafollicular lymphocytes, and weak staining in germinal centers (Fig. 2b ). The colonic control sample showed positive cytoplasmic staining in lymphocytes, lamina propria plasma cells, crypt epithelium, and endothelium (Fig. 2c ), whereas patient samples revealed a lack of staining in lymphocytes and weak, focally positive staining in colonic epithelium and plasma cells (Fig. 2d ). No staining was detected in control esophageal squamous epithelium, while intense staining was observed in esophageal immune infiltrates (Supplementary Fig. S1 ). The patient esophageal sample showed weak staining only in endothelial cells in granulation tissue (Supplementary Fig. S1 ), compared with intense staining observed in control endothelial cells (Fig. 2b ).
Immunological Analyses
Blood tests at the age of 12 years demonstrated normal immunoglobulin levels. The lymphocyte sub-population assay was overall normal with slightly elevated B cells and decreased CD4 + T cells (Table 1 ). The level of T cell receptor excision circles, a marker of T cell maturation, was normal, as was T cell receptor Vβ repertoire. Previous studies suggested abnormal T cell proliferation among patients with CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency. T cell proliferation in response to phytohemagglutinin (PHA) was comparable between patient and control, but response to anti-CD3 was reduced in the patient (Table 1 ), in contrast to previous reports [ , ]. In more detailed analyses, naïve CD4 + T cells of the patient exhibited diminished proliferation in response to anti-CD3/CD28 and IL-2 stimulation (Fig. 3a ). Moreover, in vitro regulatory CD25 high FOXP3 + T cell (T regs ) generation was impaired in the patient cells compared with control (Fig. 3b ). A marked decrease in T reg frequency was also observed in peripheral blood of the CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency patient (Fig. 3c ). Overall, our studies are in line with previous findings and suggest a marked impairment in T cell activation in the presence of a mutated CARMIL2. Table 1 Immunological workup of the CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency patient Laboratory Patient’s value Normal range Immunoglobulins IgG 806 mg/dL 720–1670 mg/dL IgA 292 mg/dL 63–304 mg/dL IgM 180 mg/dL 49–183 mg/dL Lymphocyte subsets WBC 10,330 cells/m 3 Lymphocytes 35.8% CD3 + T cells 64% 60–85% CD4 + T cells 26% 36–63% CD8 + T cells 35% 15–40% CD20 + B cells 31% 5–25% CD56 + NK cells 13% 6–30% T cell studies TRECs 1306 copies/0.5 mg DNA > 400 copies/0.5 mg DNA TCR v-beta Polyclonal (normal) Proliferation No mitogen 249 CPM 910 CPM PHA 6 mcg/mL 72,673 CPM 40,269 CPM PHA 25 mcg/mL 93,563 CPM 50,833 CPM CD3 mitogen 2059 CPM 25,200 CPM TREC , T cell receptor excision circle; CPM , counts per minute; PHA , phytohemagglutinin Italicized values reflect abnormal results Fig. 3 Impaired T cell proliferation and Treg generation in CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency. a FACS plot ( n = 1) showing decreased T cell proliferation of naïve CD4 + T cells of the CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency patient (red) compared with healthy control (gray). In these studies, each peak going from the right to left corresponds to division of the cells, leading to dilution of the CFSE. b In vitro T reg generation assay ( n = 1) demonstrating diminished production of FOXP3 + T cells from naïve T cells of the patient, under polarizing conditions. c T reg frequency in peripheral blood in the patient is reduced, compared with control, as measured by FACS ( n = 1)
CyTOF Analysis of PBMCs
To obtain a more comprehensive overview of the effect of aberrant CARMIL2 on different immune populations in the blood, we performed CyTOF analysis of PBMCs obtained from the patient and compared the profiles to healthy controls and patients with UC (Fig. 4 , Supplementary Fig. S2 ). There were significant shifts in both innate and adaptive immune cells in the patient compared with controls and UC patients. Our analyses demonstrate that the patient has increased the abundance of effector memory and naïve CD8 + T cells, an increase in naïve CD4 + T cells and transitional B cells (CD38 + /CD24 + ) compared with controls and patients with UC. In contrast, a significant reduction of T regs , memory B cells (CD27 + ), NK cells, and monocytes was observed in the patient’s blood (Fig. 4 , Supplementary Fig. S2 ) . We next evaluated cytokine production in response to stimulation with PMA and ionomycin. Overall, cytokine levels were comparable between the groups, including IL-21, IL-22, IL-17, TNF-α, and IL1β (data not shown). However, interferon-γ (IFN-γ) production in the CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency patient was increased compared with controls in several immune subsets, particularly activated CD8 + T cells (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 4 Peripheral blood immune alterations in CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency patient. CyTOF ( n = 1) was completed on PBMCs from controls ( n = 6), patients with UC ( n = 2), and the patient with CARMIL2 mutation. a Representative viSNE plots of PBMCs obtained from the studied patients, followed by cumulative data ( b ) (NK-natural killer cells, T regs -regulator T cells, MP-macrophages, nTh-naïve CD4 T cells, nB-naïve B cells, tB-transitional B cells, nTC-naïve CD8 T cells, E.M.Tc -effector memory CD8 T cells, EM-effector memory, DC-dendritic cells, DN-double negative, ILC-innate lymphoid cells) Fig. 5 IFN-γ production in CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency. a Representative 2D CyTOF plot ( n = 1) of IFN-γ production by effector memory T cells (CCR7 − /CD45RA − ). b Heat map of IFN-γ production in the clusters generated through automatic clustering of controls ( n = 3), patients with UC ( n = 2), and patients with CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency ( n = 1)
Discussion
We describe a patient with infantile-onset colitis, who was found to harbor a homozygous missense variant in CARMIL2 (p.Asn530Lys). The previously described immunodeficiency syndrome caused by CARMIL2 mutations in 11 unrelated families consists predominantly of recurrent infections and cutaneous features; only six of the 21 published patients were reported to have chronic diarrhea, among the other symptoms, and only one patient was described with eosinophilic esophagitis [ , , , ]. A susceptibility to EBV-related smooth muscle tumors and leiomyosarcoma was observed in some CARMIL2 patients [ , ] and required comprehensive follow-up.
Although the patient we describe here presented with a psoriatic rash at an early age as consistent with the other reports, it resolved and did not recur. In addition, he did not suffer from significant respiratory illnesses and chronic viral infections, as often observed in patients with immunodeficiency disorders. Since colitis was the predominant feature of the boy’s ailment, he was regarded as an IBD patient and managed accordingly.
Tissue eosinophilia in colonic biopsies is commonly seen in UC, and some studies have shown a negative correlation between the degree of eosinophilia and clinical outcomes [ , ]. However, significant tissue eosinophilia is also a characteristic of several primary immunodeficiencies that are also associated with monogenic IBDs, such as IPEX syndrome (resulting from FOXP3 mutations) [ ] and occasionally chronic granulomatous disease (resulting from CYBB , CYBA , NCF1 , NCF2 , and NCF4 mutations) [ ]. Our patient, as well as those reported in the literature, exhibited severely diminished T regs , similar to IPEX patients. Thus, CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency should be added to the growing list of IPEX-like diseases, which, beside FOXP3 , [ ] also include mutations in IL2RA [ ], MALT1 [ ], STAT1 [ ], CTLA4 [ ], DOCK8 [ ], and LRBA [ ]. Interestingly, despite a lack of T regs in our patient, no additional autoimmune features were noted.
T cell activation and subsequent signal transduction require co-stimulation of CD28. CARMIL2 was found essential for this co-stimulation process by linking CD28 with CARD11 (CARMA1) and activation of the NF-kB pathway [ , ]. The human CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency syndrome recapitulates the findings in mouse models, as demonstrated by the immunological workup in the patient described here and in previous studies. Studies in other patients showed global T cell immunity impairment, with poor Th1 and Th17 differentiation and cytokine production, as well as abnormal activation of the NF-kB pathway [ , , ]. While in mice the immune defects could be attributed to T cell dysfunction alone, in humans, the cellular defect appears to overlap both the T and B cells, leading to a combined immunodeficiency (CID) syndrome [ , ]. Moreover, our CyTOF analysis provides a comprehensive overview of immune cell architecture, showing alterations in the frequency of various other populations, including monocytes and NK cells. The IFN-γ expression was upregulated by different effector cells and might have an important role in mediating the inflammatory response.
CARMIL2 contains five major domains (N- to C-terminal): pleckstrin homology (PH), LRR, helical dimerization (HD), capping protein-binding (CBR), and proline-rich domain (PRD) (Fig. 1c ). The PH, LRR, and PRD have been previously demonstrated to play part in CD28 co-stimulation; therefore, impeding these regions leads to defects in T cell activation, as observed in patients with CARMIL2 pathogenic variants, including the patient described here [ , , , ]. The LRR domain of CARMIL2 comprises 16 repeats of the canonical highly conserved LxxLxLxxN/CxL sequence, in which “L” corresponds with leucine, isoleucine, valine, or phenylalanine and “N/C” with asparagine, threonine, serine, or cysteine [ ]. The amino acid substitution p.Asn530Lys affects the highly conserved asparagine (N) in position 9 of the 11th LRR sequence (Fig. 1d ); the alteration between the polar uncharged asparagine to a positively charged lysine, which also has a larger side-chain, at this position may possibly affect the α/β horseshoe/loop structure of this domain, thus changing its affinity and interaction with other proteins, such as CARMA1 [ , ]. The outcome from this amino acid substitution is decreased by 73% in protein expression in patient cells compared with a healthy control, highlighting its pathogenicity (Fig. 2a ). These findings are similar to a different variant in the same LRR repeat (p.Leu525Gln), which was previously described in a patient of Turkish descent, without reported diarrhea, and shown to cause 65% decrease in protein expression [ ]. Interestingly, immunohistochemical analysis of control colonic and esophageal tissues shows expected high CARMIL2 expression in immune cells (lymphocytes and plasma cells), as well as high expression in endothelial cells and moderate expression in colonic epithelial tissue (Fig. 2c , Supplementary Fig. S1 ). These appear markedly reduced in the patient with mutated CARMIL2, i.e., no expression in colonic and esophageal immune cells and very mild expression in colonic epithelium and in endothelial cells in both tissues (Fig. 2d , Supplementary Fig. S1 ). These findings may explain the immunological gastrointestinal dysregulation and the clinical phenotype observed in this patient’s colon and esophagus. The observation of CARMIL2 expression in colonic epithelial and endothelial cells warrants further study of the role of CARMIL2 in the gut.
Overall, the phenotypical differences between the CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency patients reported to date emphasize the heterogeneity of clinical symptoms within the same genetic disease and occasionally even in patients with the same genetic variant. One of the X-linked variants observed in the patient’s WES, CYSLTR1 (NM_001282186.1): c.68A>G; p.Asn23Ser may have a modulating effect on his pronounced eosinophilic gastrointestinal disease. CYSLTR1 encodes a G protein–coupled receptor for cysteinyl leukotrienes and has been previously associated with asthma and eosinophil migration [ ]. However, the predicted effects of this variant are not strong (Table S1 ), and further evaluation is required to assess a possible effect on receptor activity. While the patient did have occasional eosinophilia on blood counts, his blood eosinophil levels are mostly normal and he does not have symptoms consistent with asthma.
In summary, we describe a patient with infantile-onset colitis that harbors a novel homozygous missense CARMIL2 variant, highlighting the importance of a wide differential diagnosis in patients that present with presumably isolated colitis. The T reg signaling defects observed in this patient support this diagnosis. Diagnosing CARMIL2 -immunodeficiency in this patient has important clinical implications, requiring a multidisciplinary overview of gastroenterology and immunology experts in patient management.