Introduction
Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is a rare disorder characterized by recurrent bacterial infection due to severe neutropenia and maturation arrest in the bone marrow (BM) at the promyelocyte or myelocyte stage. In SCN patients, the absolute neutrophil counts (ANCs) are consistently lower than 200/μL at birth. [ , , ] Heterozygous mutations in the ELANE gene encoding the human neutrophil elastase have been identified in 35–69% of SCN [ , , ] cases with autosomal dominant inheritance. [ , ] These mutations also underlie most cases of cyclic neutropenia, which is characterized by regular oscillations of ANC, generally with a 21-day periodicity. [ ] In previous analyses, ELANE mutations have been shown to cause the misfolding of the encoded protein and subsequent activation of unfolded protein responses, leading to premature apoptosis in myeloid cells. [ , ]
Here, we present the clinical outcomes of a Japanese girl with SCN due to a heterozygous missense mutation, c.607G>C, in ELANE (p.G203R, formerly G174R). The mutated allele was also detected in her asymptomatic mother, who had a normal ANC. We examined the mutant variant ratio by sequence signals in various isolated cell populations. We generated ELANE -mutated and non-mutated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from the mother’s T cells and then examined the occurrence of granulopoiesis.
Methods
Detection of Genetic Mutations
Genomic DNA was extracted using the QIAamp DNA blood mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) from blood samples and using ISOHAIR (Nippon Gene Co., Ltd. Toyama, Japan) from hair and nail samples. PCR amplification of the affected sequence in the ELANE gene was performed with primer sets (forward 5′-GGACTTCCCAACCCTGAC; reverse 5′-AGCCAAGGAGCATCAAACAC). The PCR products were subjected to direct sequencing from both directions using the BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing kit and ABI 3130xl Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA). Maximum peak intensities were extracted manually from raw sequencing traces using Sequence Scanner Software 2 (Allied Biosystems). The fraction of mutant (C) versus wild-type (G) allele representation was calculated using the formula C/(C + G) × 100% for the forward and G/(G + C) × 100% for the reverse. The values from forward and reverse traces showed semiquantitative data [ ].
Cell Purification and TA Cloning
Mononuclear cells and granulated leukocytes were isolated from PB by Ficoll centrifugation and dextran sedimentation, respectively. CD14 + monocytes, CD3 + T cells, CD19 + B cells, CD56 + NK cells, and CD34 + hematopoietic stem cells/progenitor cells from mononuclear cells were then purified using MicroBeads assays (Miltenyi Biotec, Tokyo, Japan). [ ] PCR products from isolated cells were cloned into the pMD20T-vector using the Mighty TA cloning kit (Takara, Kusatsu, Japan), and individual colonies were analyzed by sequence analysis.
Generation of Human iPSCs from PB T Cells
PB T cells were reprogrammed using the CytoTune-iPS 2.0 Sendai Reprogramming kit (MBL Life science, Nagoya, Japan) according to the procedure described previously. [ ] All human iPSCs were maintained on mitomycin C-treated mouse embryonic fibroblast feeder cells (ReproCELL, Yokohama, Japan) in human ES/iPS cell maintenance medium [Primate ES Cell Medium (ReproCELL) and 5 ng/mL human basic fibroblast growth factor (ReproCELL)]. iPSCs were passaged every 5 days.
Murine Stromal Cells
AGM-S3 cells (kindly provided by Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) within 10 passages were used throughout the experiments, as previously described. [ ] AGM-S3 cells (1–2 × 10 5 ) were cultured in each gelatin-coated six-well dish (FALCON, Corning, NY, USA) overnight to generate a confluent feeder layer. On the next day, they were exposed to 25 Gy of radiation.
Hematopoietic Differentiation from iPSCs
Hematopoietic differentiation was conducted as described previously. [ , ] Briefly, undifferentiated iPSCs were transferred into medium containing irradiated AGM-S3 cells. The culture medium was then replaced with hematopoietic differentiation medium [Iscove’s modified Dulbecco’s medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 3 mM L-glutamine, 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, and 0.1 mM non-essential amino acids] supplemented with 10 ng/mL vascular endothelial growth factor (Human VEGF165 aa, Miltenyi Biotec) and changed every day. Twelve days later, the co-cultured cells were harvested, and CD34 + cells were separated using positive immunomagnetic selection with CD34 MicroBeads kit (Miltenyi Biotec). [ ]
Colony-Forming Cell Assay
Clonal cell cultures were performed in 35-mm Lux suspension culture dishes (#153066; Nunc), as reported previously. [ ] Cultured CD34 + cells (2500) were plated in dishes containing methylcellulose medium (Methocult H4034 Optimum, Stemcell Technologies Inc.). On day 14, the colonies of hematopoietic cells were scored in situ using an inverted microscope.
Myeloid Cell Differentiation from iPSC-Derived CD34 Cells
To carry out the differentiation of iPSC-derived CD34 cells into neutrophils, a co-culture system with AGM-S3 and combinations of cytokines was used according to a procedure described previously. [ ] Briefly, CD34 + cells (0.5 × 10 4 cells) were co-cultured with irradiated AGM-S3 cells in hematopoietic differentiation medium supplemented with stem cell factor (Human SCF, Miltenyi Biotec), thrombopoietin (Human TPO, Miltenyi Biotec), interleukin (IL)-3 (Human IL-3, Miltenyi Biotec), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (Human G-CSF, Miltenyi Biotec), and fusion protein of IL-6 and IL-6 receptor (FP6, kindly provided by Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) . The concentration of each cytokine was as follows: 100 ng/mL SCF, 10 ng/mL TPO, 10 ng/mL IL-3, 10 ng/mL G-CSF, and 100 ng/mL FP6, as described previously. [ ] Thereafter, the medium was changed every 4 days. On day 14, non-adherent cells were cytospun and then stained with May-Grünwald-Giemsa. Samples were examined using the NDP.view2 viewer software.
Apoptosis Assay
The annexin V assay (MBL Life Science) was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions on day 7 of myeloid cell differentiation culture. Cell surface markers were analyzed with a FACScan flow cytometer using the BD FACStation™-Data management System software (BD Biosciences, Tokyo, Japan). Fractions of annexin V-positive cells were estimated.
Statistical Analysis
All data are presented as individual data and mean ± SD. A P value of < 0.05 was considered significant. All statistical analyses were performed using EZR (Saitama Medical Center, Jichi Medical University, Saitama, Japan), which is a graphical user interface for R (The R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). [ ]
Study Approval
This study was performed following approval from the independent ethics committee of Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan; written informed consent was obtained from participants.
Results
Proband and Her Asymptomatic Mother
The proband was a 5-year-old Japanese girl with a history of recurrent bacterial infections since infancy. She had been diagnosed with SCN at the age of 1 year based on consistently severe neutropenia (ANC < 200/μL) and maturation arrest in BM. Repeated cytogenetic analysis results were normal. She exhibited no increase in ANC despite daily treatment with G-CSF (10 μg/kg subcutaneously). Sequencing analysis of the ELANE gene revealed a heterozygous missense mutation in exon 5 of c.607G>C (p.G203R, formerly G174R). This mutation had been previously reported for SCN [ , ] and was present in the mother. The mother had no obvious recurrent infections, and repeated PB examinations showed normal white blood cell counts (4170, 4160, and 4130/μL) and near-normal ANCs (1271, 1385, and 1581/μL).
Proof of Maternal Mosaicism
To confirm whether there was a difference in mutant variant ratio among cell lineages, we separated PB and confirmed mutant variant ratios by sequence signals. In the sequence analysis of isolated PB, nail and hair, the mutant variant was observed at approximately 40–60% frequency in CD14 + , CD3 + , CD19 + , CD56 + , CD34 + cells, and hair and at low frequency in nail. Conversely, the mutant variant was not detected in neutrophils (Fig. 1 , Table 1 ). Fig. 1 Direct sequencing of the affected ELANE gene in purified maternal cells expressing the CD14, CD3, CD19, CD56, and CD34 antigens, isolated neutrophils, and nail tissue. Sequencing chromatograms showed that maternal lymphocytes, monocytes, and hematopoietic progenitor cells carried approximately half mutant alleles, whereas nail tissue carried only a few (arrow, c.607G>C). However, the mutant allele was not detected in neutrophil cells Table 1 Mutant allele frequencies Semiquantitative data from sequencing traces Cell type Forward (%) Reverse (%) Average (%) Neutrophil 0 0 0 CD14 50 34.7 42.35 CD3 53.5 35.9 44.7 CD19 55.2 38.8 47 CD56 54.4 35.2 44.8 CD34 50 33.6 41.8 Nail 37.5 19.8 28.65 Hair 63.8 43 53.4 Subcloning analysis from genomic DNA Cell type No. % CD3 8 of 21 38.1 CD34 6 of 16 37.5
Next, we attempted to establish iPSCs from the maternal PB to assess whether both ELANE -mutated and non-mutated clones were present and then determined the occurrence of granulopoiesis in these iPSCs. Although iPSCs derived from CD34 + cells are ideal for estimating hematopoietic capacity into neutrophils, we could neither generate iPSCs from few PB CD34 + cells nor ethically obtain BM from the mother, who had no symptom or low ANCs. Therefore, we attempted to generate iPSCs from maternal T cells. Before that, we evaluated the mutant variant ratio between CD3 + and CD34 + cells with another method. PCR products amplified from selected CD3 + and CD34 + cells were subcloned, and the frequency of the mutant allele was analyzed by sequencing. The mutant allele was detected in 8 of 21 clones (38.1%) from CD3 + cells and 6 of 16 clones (37.5%) from CD34 + cells, indicating that mutant variant ratios were similar to the sequence results. Overall, 12 iPSC clones were established from the asymptomatic mother who carried the ELANE mutation by infecting PB CD3 + T cells with Sendai virus encoding the reprogramming factors OCT3/4 , SOX2 , KLF4 , and c-MYC ; 10 of the clones were found to contain heterozygous ELANE mutation, two of which contained the wild-type. ELANE -mutated iPSCs (Mt-1, Mt-2) and non-mutated iPSCs (Wt-1, Wt-2) were established after > 20 passages. We also generated iPSCs derived from her daughter (SCN) and a healthy individual (Cont). These iPSCs had no mutations in the mutation-sensitive region of the G-CSF receptor gene. [ ]
Comparison of Granulopoiesis Between CD34+ Cells Derived from ELANE-Mutated and Non-mutated iPSCs
For the functional analyses of CD34 + cells derived from ELANE -mutated and non-mutated iPSCs, we performed colony-forming cell assays using methylcellulose medium containing cytokine mixtures for myeloid cells. The colonies were picked up, stained with May-Grünwald-Giemsa, and analyzed for the presence of myeloid differentiated cells. Histologic analysis of CFU-G, CFU-GM, and CFU-M confirmed that the colonies contained neutrophils, neutrophils and macrophages, and macrophages, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2 , CD34 + cells derived from Mt-1, Mt-2, and SCN generated approximately 75% and 35% reduction in CFU-G and CFU-GM colonies, respectively, compared with CD34 + cells derived from Wt-1, Wt-2, and Cont. However, CD34 + cells derived from Mt-1, Mt-2, and SCN increased the generation of CFU-M by comparison. For the precise quantitation of neutrophil development, CD34 + cells derived from these iPSCs were co-cultured in suspension with AGM-S3 in the presence of neutrophil differentiation medium. The number of cultured cells was not different (data not shown), but a variety of differentiation stages was identified by morphological analysis. As shown in Fig. 3 b, Wt-1, Wt-2, and Cont-derived myeloid cells differentiated into increasing frequencies of differentiated neutrophils. Meanwhile, the granulocytic population from ELANE -mutated iPSCs (Mt-1, Mt-2, and SCN) was shifted to the left with immature myeloid cells and a largely reduced neutrophil. Scoring for myeloid cell types, the ratio of neutrophils was significantly lower in Mt-1, Mt-2, and SCN than in Wt-1, Wt-2, and Cont (Fig. 3 a). The maturation arrest of neutrophil development in SCN is associated with the induction of apoptosis in myeloid cells. [ , ] Hence, we compared these iPSC-derived myeloid cells by flow cytometric analysis using annexin V. Mt-1-, Mt-2-, and SCN-derived myeloid cells contained a significantly higher proportion of annexin V-positive cells than Wt-1-, Wt-2-, and Cont-derived myeloid cells on day 7 of culture (Fig. 4 ), suggesting enhanced apoptosis of ELANE -mutated iPSCs derived myeloid cells. Fig. 2 Colony-forming cell assay of CD34 + cells derived from ELANE -mutated iPSCs (Mt-1, Mt-2) and non-mutated iPSCs (Wt-1, Wt-2) and SCN-iPSCs (SCN) and healthy control-iPSCs (Cont). A hematopoietic colony assay was performed using 2500 iPSC-derived CD34 + cells in the presence of a cytokine mixture, and the myeloid (CFU-G, CFU-GM, CFU-M) and mixed colonies were scored on day 14. The data represent mean ± SD ( n = 3) Fig. 3 Granulopoietic differentiation of CD34 + cells derived from Mt-1, Mt-2, Wt-1, Wt-2, SCN, and Cont. iPSCs-derived CD34 + cells differentiated into a variety of granulocyte differentiation, including pro-myelocyte (ProM), myelocyte (My), meta-myelocyte (MM), n-banded neutrophil (Band), segmented neutrophil (Seg), and monosyte (Mono). (i) The proportion of myeloid cells from iPSC-derived CD34 + cells on day 14. The data represent mean ± SD ( n = 4). (ii) Photographs of May-Grünwald-Giemsa stained cytospins Fig. 4 Quantitation of the annexin V binding % on cultured myeloid cells derived from Mt-1, Mt-2, Wt-1, Wt-2, SCN, and Cont. Annexin V apoptosis assay was performed on day 7. The data represent mean ± SD ( n = 4). One-way ANOVA was performed, followed by pair-wise comparisons using the Bonferroni criterion. * P < 0.05
Discussion
We present the case of a family of a girl affected with SCN, whose healthy mother was found to carry her daughter’s p.G203R ELANE mutation. Sequencing chromatograms showed that lymphocytes, monocytes, and hematopoietic progenitor cells carried approximately half of the mutant alleles, whereas in the nail tissue, only a few were present. However, the mutant allele could not be detected in neutrophils (Fig. 1 ). ELANE mutations are known to produce autosomal dominant phenotypes [ , ] and have extremely high penetrance in SCN. Therefore, we hypothesized that the mother possessed wild- and mutant-type clones; the wild-type clones could generate neutrophils, whereas the mutant clones failed to generate neutrophils.
Somatic and germline mosaicisms have been reported in several genetic disorders, including SCN. Similarly to our case, three reports on SCN and one on cyclic neutropenia have been published previously. [ , , , ] According to these reports, the same ELANE mutation was identified in affected children and in their asymptomatic parent. In three cases, somatic mosaicisms were demonstrated by various molecular methods. Furthermore, Ancliff et al. [ ] revealed the presence of homozygous wild-type and heterozygous colonies cultured in vitro from PB. In the current study, another proof of mosaicism was obtained from generated iPSCs from the mother’s PB; we could establish both iPSCs with wild-type and heterozygous ELANE mutations.
iPSCs have proven to be excellent tools for studying the disease mechanisms. Recently, some groups have demonstrated that ELANE -mutation-associated SCN-derived iPSCs could be induced by the arrest of granulopoietic differentiation and apoptosis of myeloid cells. [ , ] Therefore, we compared the neutrophil differentiation potential between established ELANE -mutated and non-mutated iPSCs. The number of granulocytic colonies and the ratio of neutrophils were significantly lower for mutated iPSCs than for non-mutated iPSCs (Figs. 2 and 3 ). The granulocytic differentiation potential of non-mutated iPSCs was similar to that observed in iPSCs obtained from a healthy individual. Also, similar to previous reports [ , ], higher number of apoptotic cells were detected in ELANE -mutated iPSCs and SCN than in non-mutated iPSCs and Cont.
Our results demonstrate that the mother’s PB harbored somatic mosaicism for the ELANE mutation and that her normal hematological phenotype could be explained by the perseverance of normal, non-mutated granulopoiesis. In addition, we conclude that mutant-carrying neutrophils did not appear in her PB because mutated clones could not differentiate into neutrophils due to ELANE -mutation-induced apoptosis during myelopoiesis.