Introduction
Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease syndrome (MSMD, OMIM 209950) is a rare primary immunodeficiency (PID) caused by inborn monogenic errors of interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) mediated immunity, with at least ten causal genes known to date [ , ]. MSMD was classically defined as conferring susceptibility to poorly pathogenic mycobacteria, including attenuated Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine and environmental mycobacteria. IL-12Rβ1 deficiency is the most common genetic etiology. Recently, it has been shown that patients with MSMD can also develop severe disease from Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( M.tb ) [ ]. Differentiating BCG from M.tb infection, both included in M.tb complex (MTC), is difficult [ ] but important since these conditions are treated slightly differently. Furthermore, the diagnosis of a BCG-disseminated infection (BCG-osis) should prompt a more extensive immune evaluation [ ]. We report and discuss here the first Peruvian patient diagnosed with IL-12Rβ1 deficiency, suffering from a severe recurrent BCG-osis initially misdiagnosed as multidrug-resistant M.tb (MDR-TB) infection.
Methods
Cytometric determination of IL-12Rβ1 presence and STAT4 phosphorylation in response to hrIL-12p70 (STAT4p) was performed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells as described elsewhere [ ]. IL12RB1 exons and flanking regions were amplified by PCR in genomic DNA and sequenced with 3730xl DNA Analyzer apparatus (Applied Biosystems). IFN-γ production was evaluated in heparinized venous blood after stimulation with live BCG (Pasteur substrain) at a multiplicity of infection of 20 BCG/leukocyte and BCG plus human recombinant IL-12p70 (hrIL-12p70, 20 ng/ml, Milteny Biotec, Germany) for 48 h as previously described [ , ]. IFN-γ detection in the culture supernatant was performed with ELISA (eBiosciences, San Diego, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Mycobacterial identification within MTC was performed directly on DNA extracted from an acid-fast bacillus smear-positive stool sample with a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay targeting the mycobacterial secA1 gene [ ]. For species identification, a second PCR was performed [ ]: Touchdown PCR amplification with a first step of 98 °C (30s), 20 cycles of 98 °C (10s), annealing starting at 65 °C (20 s, decreasing 0.6 °C/cycle), and extension at 72 °C (30 s) was followed by a second step of 20 cycles of 98 °C (10 s), 53 °C (20 s), and 72 °C (30 s). PCR products were sequenced on an ABI3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA) and their identity was confirmed by comparison with NCBI GenBank database, using BLAST.
This study was carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the Spanish Ley General de Sanidad (25/4/1986), and parental written informed consent was obtained. The protocol was approved by the local ethics committee (PIC-50-12).
Results
The patient was a 6-year-old Peruvian (Cuzco region) girl from non-consanguineous parents, with no relevant family history. She had received routine Peruvian vaccinations, including BCG at birth. At 10 months of age, she was diagnosed with axillary M.tb lymphadenitis, ipsilateral to the site of BCG vaccination (fine needle aspiration with positive bacilloscopy and positive culture to MTC), with negative tuberculin skin test. Anti-tuberculosis treatment was started (see Fig. 1 for a detailed chronogram of clinical evolution and treatment). Three months later, an enlargement of the lymphadenitis was observed requiring surgical excision. At that time, culture-based phenotypic drug susceptibility testing (DST) from the initial sample yelded resistance to pyrazinamide. The patient was switched to a directly observed treatment with an empiric regimen [ ], and clinical signs of infection resolved. Four months after finishing the treatment, she presented an early relapse, with an ipsilateral pectoral abscess (positive bacilloscopy and MTC culture). The strain was tested for drug resistance with Genotype® MTBDR PLUS (isoniazid,rifampicin) and resistance to rifampicin was identified. After 10 months on a new regimen, the patient was admitted to hospital with fever and weight loss because of a disseminated mycobacterial infection, including a massive thoracic wall abscess that was debrided, with positive bacilloscopies in urine and feces. Simultaneously, mucocutaneous candidiasis (vaginal, oral, and esophageal) was observed. She had an initial good response to a new empiric treatment for multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, but was then readmitted with intestinal semi-occlusion due to mesenteric adenopathy growth, persistent cough, weight loss, a psoas abscess, and Pott’s disease (T12 and L1 vertebrae), with acid-fast bacilli present in feces and gastric aspirates. Abdominal CT showed signs of ileitis and portal hypertension. The patient had developed a severe protein-losing enteropathy with lymphopenia and hypogammaglobulinemia. Extended resistance to ethionamide was confirmed by DST, prompting a switch to empiric therapy for extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis. A PID was then suspected, and she was transferred to a reference center in Peru, for an immunologic diagnostic workup. Fig. 1 Chronogram of clinical evolution and treatment. Isoniazid (H); rifampicin (R); pyrazinamide (Z); ethambutol (E); amikacin (Am); levofloxacin (Lfx); ethionamide (Eto); moxifloxacin (Mfx); capreomycin (Cm); cycloserine (Cs); paraamino salicylic acid (PAS); ciprofloxacin (Cfx); linezolid (Lnz); Imipenem/Cilastatin (Ipm/Cln); amoxicillin/clavulanate (Amx/Clv); thioridazine (Tio); multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB); extensively multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB). hrIFN-γ: exogenous recombinant IFN-γ
Lymphocyte populations, lymphocyte proliferation to mitogen stimulation, and phagocyte oxidative response were within the normal limits for the patient’s age, thereby ruling out T cell deficiencies and chronic granulomatous disease (data not shown). Both IL-12Rβ1 expression and STAT4 phosphorylation in response to hrIL-12p70 were absent (Fig. 2 a ). After 48-h culture with BCG, IFN-γ levels were low (30.46 pg/ml) without recovering after the addition of hrIL-12p70 (43 pg/ml); these results were consistent with IL-12Rβ1 deficiency (Fig. 2 b). A homozygous mutation p.(Arg211*; c.631C > T) was found in IL12RB1 g ene, creating a premature stop codon in exon 7 (Fig. 2 c ) . This mutation was found in heterozygosis in the patient’s parents. Her 5-year-old brother was found to have the same homozygous mutation but no symptoms despite BCG vaccination. The patient was transferred to the NIH Clinical Center for exogenous recombinant IFN-γ (hrIFN-γ) treatment and further evaluation. Fig. 2 Immunological and genetic studies. a IFN-γ production after no stimulation, BCG stimulation, BCG + hrIL-12p70 stimulation, ratio between BCG + hrIL-12p70/BCG stimulations. b Cytometric determination of IL-12Rβ1 and STAT4 phosphorylation after hrIL-12p70 stimulation in PHA-stimulated lymphocytes. Solid line represents stimulated condition and dashed line represents baseline condition. c Electropherograms for the mutation site in a healthy control (WT/WT) and in the father, mother, and patient
Microbiological studies performed from stool samples identified MTC [ ], speciated as M. bovis [ ] and assumed to be from the vaccine strain due to its initial location next to the BCG administration site, the timing of the initial disease in infancy, and the early demonstration of pyrazinamide resistance. Identification of M. bovis BCG was later confirmed on an isolate grown by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. hrIFN-γ was initiated at a dose of 25 mcg/m 2 subcutaneously three times weekly, and titrated up to approximately 150 mcg/m 2 subcutaneously three times weekly over several months, without complete clinical improvement. Antimicrobial regimen was switched, and in 5 months, stool cultures cleared, lymphocyte count normalized, and albumin improved, consistent with the improvement of protein-losing enteropathy. The patient was discharged on antimycobacterial therapy but hrIFN-γ was interrupted. She was maintained on clotrimazole troches for oral candidiasis.
Discussion
We describe a patient with a homozygous mutation in IL12RB1 gene causing MSMD whose disseminated BCG infection was initially misdiagnosed as tuberculosis. This mutation has already been reported in a Turkish patient with salmonellosis, and mycobacterial (not BCG-related) and fungal infections [ ]. Warning signs for IL-12Rβ1 deficiency include adverse events after BCG vaccination, invasive BCG infection, invasive or recurrent salmonellosis, and a combination of severe mycobacterial infection and candidiasis, although other intramacrophagic infections can occur [ ]. There is an unexplained variation in infection susceptibility [ ], since not all mutation carriers develop infections despite abnormal functional studies, as with the sibling of our index case. This unexplained variation in infectious susceptibility in IL-12Rβ1 deficiency is currently a new line of research for the identification of modifying factors.
PID suspicion in the context of a mycobacterial infection is of the utmost importance. Disseminated M. bovis BCG infection (BCG-osis) is very uncommon (estimated at 1∶10,000–1∶1,000,000) [ ] and hardly occurs in patients other than those with AIDS, severe combined immunodeficiency, chronic granulomatous disease, or MSMD. The confirmation of an MSMD-causing mutation has therapeutic implications: exogenous hrIFN-γ can improve the outcome of patients with deficient production of, or partial response to, IFN-γ; it is useless in complete IFN-γ response defects [ ]. In IL-12Rβ1 deficiency, the aim is extensive, prolonged antimycobacterial treatment followed by secondary prophylaxis, and exogenous hrIFN-γ is typically recommended [ , , ], with doses ranging from 50 up to 200 mcg/m 2 subcutaneously three times weekly over several months [ , , ].
Inborn errors of IFN-γ should be considered in patients with severe mycobacterial infections worldwide. As MDR-TB is an emerging problem in Peru [ ], the patient’s lack of clinical response was first ascribed to drug-resistant M.tb , thus delaying the suspicion of other less virulent mycobacteria in the context of an underlying immunodeficiency. A similar case of disseminated tuberculosis in Colombia, finally diagnosed with IL-12Rβ1 deficiency, has recently been published [ ]. Both cases developed severe gut inflammation, causing protein-losing enteropathy, hypoalbuminemia, and antimicrobial malabsorption, and requiring intravenous administration. Both M. bovis BCG and M.tb must be considered in the differential, as different therapeutic approaches will be needed.
M. bovis is closely related to M.tb within the MTC [ ], and the BCG vaccine is derived from a virulent strain of M. bovis [ ]. BCG is difficult to differentiate from other strains of M. bovis and other members of the MTC family by conventional methods, such as mycobacterial culture. All BCG vaccine strains are intrinsically resistant to pyrazinamide, which is uncommon in naïve patients with M.tb [ ], and the study of specific regions with PCR is needed [ ]; unfortunately, these studies are not widely available. Furthermore, IFN-γ release diagnostic assays, which are specific for virulent MTC species such as M.tb and M. bovis , and which avoid cross-reactivity with M. bovis BCG [ ], are less reliable in patients with inborn errors of IFN-γ mediated immunity, such as MSMD.
Conclusions
We report the first Peruvian patient with IL-12Rβ1deficiency. This case highlights, first, the need to consider PID (especially defects in the IFN-γ circuit) in patients with severe mycobacterial infection, and/or major adverse events after BCG vaccination [ ], and, second, how BCG-osis can mimick disseminated tuberculosis, especially in areas of drug resistance to M.tb , thus delaying appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic management. Species-specific mycobacterial infection diagnosis is still challenging, mainly in countries with limited access to PCR-based microbiological diagnostic techniques. Awareness of the warning signs of MSMD and accurate microbiological and immunological diagnosis of severe mycobacterial infections are of the utmost importance for optimal diagnosis and management of affected patients, highlighting the need for international collaboration to ensure this goal.