Introduction
The Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) was started in 1988 to eliminate poliomyelitis worldwide. Through the global use of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV), the annual incidence of wild-type poliomyelitis has decreased by > 99.9% worldwide [ , ] Despite the efficiency of OPV administration to eradicate wild polioviruses, adverse consequences related to OPV use has brought up concerns regarding the accomplishment of eradication program [ , ].
Normally, attenuated OPV strains replicate in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and are excreted in stool until the immune system generates humoral and cellular responses to clear the infection. Given the unstable structure of poliovirus RNA, spontaneous nucleotide substitutions and genomic recombination occur very frequently due to guanidine-resistant revertants and low poliovirus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase fidelity [ , , , ]. When replication is prolonged enough, these genomic changes can turn attenuated OPV strains into neurovirulent strains that may cause vaccine-associated paralytic poliomyelitis (VAPP) [ , ]. By definition, vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPVs) serotypes 1 and 3 show > 1%, and poliovirus serotype 2 shows > 0.6% nucleotide divergence in viral protein 1 (VP1) coding region, as compared with their parental (original) OPV strains [ ].
Patients with primary immunodeficiency (PID) are at ~ 3000-fold higher risks of developing VAPP and VDPV infection [ , ]. These patients may excrete immunodeficiency-associated VDPVs (iVDPVs) for a long time (reported up to > 28 years), even in the absence of any clinical symptom [ , ]. Prolonged shedding of neurovirulent iVDPVs can potentially cause poliomyelitis outbreaks when the level of population immunity is reduced [ , ].
To the current knowledge, humoral immunity and neutralizing anti-polioviral antibodies are the main arms of protection against poliomyelitis [ , ]. However, more recent evidence suggested a possible contribution of cell-mediated immunity in both the pathogenesis of VAPP and clearing long-term poliovirus infections [ , ].
In this study, we present a severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) patient with asymptomatic and prolonged iVDPV infection who stopped poliovirus shedding only after a successful hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). We also reviewed the literature for all reports of iVDPV infection in combined immunodeficiency (CID) patients to emphasize on the role of HSCT in clearing the infection.
Case Presentation
The patient is a 4-year-old boy born to first-degree consanguineous parents following an uneventful pregnancy and delivery. He was the third child of the family, with healthy siblings and parents. There was no history of PID or unexplained infant death in relatives. According to the routine national vaccination program, he received the first dose of trivalent-OPV at birth, in addition to Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG) and Hepatitis-B vaccine. He took the sequential OPV doses and diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (DTP) vaccine at ages 2, 4, and 6 months. He experienced recurrent upper respiratory infections and an episode of pneumonia until 8 months of age, when he was admitted to Children’s Medical Center with severe respiratory distress. On examination, he was febrile, irritable, and tachypneic. Height and weight were < 5th percentile. Oral thrush was evident and tonsils were atrophic. Generalized wheezing and bilateral coarse lung crackles were detected. There were two small non-discharging ulcers on the right arm at the site of BCG incubation and in the right axillary area. There was no other skin lesion, lymphadenopathy, and/or organomegaly. Other examinations were normal.
Primary laboratory workup showed diminished absolute lymphocyte count (ALC). Blood, stool, and urine cultures were negative for bacterial infections. His chest X-ray demonstrated diffuse bilateral infiltrates extending from the perihilar regions, suggesting interstitial pneumonia. The shadow of the thymus was not seen. Histologic findings in the smear of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid suggested the diagnosis of Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia. Empiric therapy with ceftazidime, vancomycin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was initiated and the patient’s condition improved gradually. Two-drug antimicrobial treatment with isoniazid and rifampin was initiated for BCGitis thereafter.
Due to a combination of failure to thrive, recurrent infections, absent tonsils, and severe lymphopenia, SCID was suspected. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was negative. Sweat chloride and nitroblue-tetrazolium tests were normal. Purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test was negative. All serum immunoglobulin levels were low and specific antibodies against tetanus and diphtheria were absent. Flow cytometry revealed low percentages of B and T lymphocytic markers and an increased population of natural killer (NK) cells (Table 1 ). A diagnosis of SCID with T-B-NK+ immunophenotype was made based on European Society for Immunodeficiencies criteria [ ] and the International Union of Immunological Societies (IUIS) phenotypic classification [ ]. Data on clinical and immunological profile of the patient was recorded according to the national registry of PID patients [ , ]. The patient was placed on antibiotic prophylaxis and periodic intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) replacement therapy (500 mg/kg every 4 weeks). Table 1 Laboratory results of the index patient at the time of diagnosis before HSCT Test Patient’s result Reference range WBC (cells/μl) 4300↓ 6000–11,000 RBC (cells/μl) 5470 × 10 3 3800–6000 (× 10 3 ) Hemoglobin (g/dl) 12.9 10–14 Hematocrit % 39.8 36–51 Platelets (cells/μl) 376 × 10 3 150–450 (× 10 3 ) ALC (cells/μl) 1161 3400–9000 CD3+ cells (cells/μl) 237↓ 1900–5900 CD4+ cells (cells/μl) 119↓ 1400–4300 CD8+ cells (cells/μl) 105↓ 500–1700 CD19+ cells (cells/μl) < 20↓ 610–2600 CD16/56+ cells (cells/μl) 818 160–950 IgA (mg/dl) 37↓ 86–320 IgG (mg/dl) 198↓ 410–1081 IgM (mg/dl) 24↓ 35–250 Anti-diphtheria Ab (mg/dl) 0.0↓ > 0.1 Anti-tetanus Ab (mg/dl) 0.0↓ > 0.1 NBT % 99% > 90% LTT (SI): PHA 1.61↓ > 3.0 BCG ND > 2.5 Candida 1.03↓ > 2.5 Ab , antibody; ALC , absolute lymphocyte count; BCG , Bacillus Calmette–Guérin; CD , cluster of differentiation; HSCT , hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; Ig , immunoglobulin; LTT , lymphocyte transformation test; NBT , nitroblue-tetrazolium tests; ND , not done; PHA , phytohemagglutinin; RBC , red blood cell; ST , stimulation index; WBC , white blood cell
Following PID diagnosis, stool specimens were sent to the Iran National Polio Laboratory (NPL) to be screened for poliovirus shedding using cell culture and real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction technique, according to the protocol certified by the World Health Organization (WHO) [ ]. Genome sequencing of the isolated viruses was performed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, Atlanta) as described previously [ ]. Consecutive stool samples were positive for iVDPV serotype 1. Isolates showed 2.3% VP1 divergence (21 nucleotides [nt]) in the first specimen and gradually evolved to have 3.3% VP1 divergence (30 nt) during > 4 months of continuous virus shedding under IVIG treatment. However, the patient never developed paralysis associated with poliovirus infection.
At 12-month age, he received single locus (human leukocyte antigen B [HLA-B]) mismatched umbilical cord blood (UCB) source HSCT from an unrelated donor. He received a reduced intensity condition (RIC) regimen consisting of fludarabine, 30 mg/m 2 , administered intravenously on 5 consecutive days (days − 8 to − 4), melphalan, 70 mg/m 2 , intravenously on 2 consecutive days (days − 3 and − 2), and rabbit anti-thymocyte globulin (Thymoglobulin, Sanofi-Aventis, Inc., Quebec, Canada), 2.5 mg/kg for 4 consecutive days (days − 4 to − 1). Graft versus host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis consisted of cyclosporine and methylprednisolone. Cyclosporine (1.5 mg/kg/day IV) was administered from day 1 followed by double dose (3 mg/kg IV) from day + 7 and then was switched to an equivalent oral dose (9 mg/kg) after discharge from the hospital. Given the use of UCB-originated stem cells and the absence of any GVHD sign, cyclosporine was tapered off after 6 weeks to minimize the risk of graft failure. Methylprednisolone was discontinued on day + 15. Acyclovir, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and amphotericin B were given as infection prophylaxis. He received granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) during days + 8 to + 14. IVIG (500 mg/kg) was started on day + 9 and administered every 3 weeks for 1 year. Neutrophil and platelet engraftments were observed on days + 15 and + 19, respectively. Analysis of short tandem repeat markers was performed on whole blood and lymphoid fractions on days + 15, + 30, + 60, + 90, + 180, and + 365 post-HSCT and annually afterwards, which indicated a stable engraftment with > 95% donor chimerism in all instances (Table 2 ). Reimmunization was started after 1 year. He received DTP, hepatitis-B, pneumococcal conjugate, and Haemophilus influenzae type-B vaccines and also inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) at 12, 14, and 24 months post-HSCT. Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine was given at 24 months post-HSCT. The patient has remained in good health until 5 years old at the time of this report and never developed adverse consequences related to HSCT. Stool specimens collected ~2, 3, and 4 months after HSCT were negative for iVDPV infection. Search for poliovirus shedding among family members at the time of iVDPV isolation from patient’s stool yielded negative results. Table 2 Post-HSCT immune reconstitution profile of the index patient Results in time points post-HSCT Reference range + 1 month + 2 months* + 3 months + 6 months + 12 months CD3+ % (cells/μl) 42 (430) 49 (586) 45 (781) 54 (2206) 50 (1980) 53–75 (2100–6200) CD4+ % (cells/μl) 9 (91) 10 (125) 10 (177) 13 (540) 19 (759) 32–51 (1300–3400) CD8+ % (cells/μl) 30 (307) 35 (422) 27 (470) 20 (815) 29 (1155) 14–30 (620–2000) CD19+ % (cells/μl) 0.5 (< 10) 6 (72) 6.9 (119) 23 (945) 28 (1102) 16–35 (720–2600) CD20+ % (cells/μl) 0.5 (< 10) 7 (86) 8 (141) 40 (1630) 28 (1090) 16–41 (500–3300) IgA (mg/dl) NA NA < 10 NA < 10 86–320 IgG (mg/dl) NA NA 1000 NA 810 410–1081 IgM (mg/dl) NA NA 25 NA 34 35–250 CD , cluster of differentiation; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; NA, not available *First clearance report from iVDPV
Discussion
Properties of iVDPV Infection
We presented a case with SCID who was found to excrete iVDPV at time of PID diagnosis. He had received OPV at birth and early months of life when his immunodeficiency condition was unknown. Consistent with the most recent evidence [ , ] and given the absence of VDPV infection in family members, the first OPV exposure was considered as the presumptive infective OPV dose. Thereby, the patient likely carried the asymptomatic infection for almost 1 year. He also developed BCGitis as a consequence of BCG incubation.
The patient never had paralysis and his iVDPV infection was detected only by screening. Patients with CIDs are at increased risk of asymptomatic and prolonged iVDPV infection [ , , ]. Although the majority of iVDPV patients identified to date had PID from the category of predominantly antibody deficiencies (PADs) [ ], the implementation of poliovirus screening programs in recent years has resulted in detection of several asymptomatic iVDPV excretors that mainly had CIDs [ , ]. Given the risk of asymptomatic iVDPV excretion, patients with CID (especially SCID) should come to attention for poliovirus screening programs in the endgame eradication strategy.
The patient in our study shed iVDPV serotype 1. Among all HSCT-receiving iVDPV-infected patients reported to date, iVDPV2 has been the most frequent serotype followed by serotype 1 and 3 (Table 3 ). This observation is consistent with the prevalence of different iVDPV serotypes among total iVDPV-infected patients identified. Recent studies have not reported any predisposition of different PIDs to any specific iVDPV serotypes [ , ]. Table 3 Data of patients with iVDPV infection who received HSCT Patient no. Detection year/country Age at iVDPV detection, months/sex PID type Immunophenotyping VAPP occurrence iVDPV serotype Max VP1 divergence, % Shedding duration under observation (months) HSCT-clearance interval (weeks) HSCT outcome Latest survival status No. tOPV doses Age at HSCT (months) Reference 1 2005/USA 7/F SCID NA No 1 2.3 4 4 Stable (2nd engraftment) Survived 0 10 [ ] 2 2013/Saudi Arabia 31/F MHC class 2 deficiency NA No 2 4.4 5 4 Stable Survived 2 32 [ ] 3 2014/Libya 7/F SCID NA No 2 1 5 5 Stable Survived 3 9 [ ] 4* 2014/Iran 8/M SCID T-B-NK+ No 1 3.3 4 7 Stable Survived 4 12 –* 5 2017/Turkey 7/F SCID T-B-NK+ (RAG1 deficiency) No 3 1.7 5 3 Stable Survived 1 11 [ ] 6 2015/Gaza 5/F SCID NA No 2 1.9 6 –† NA NA NA NA [ ] HSCT , hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; iVDPV , immunodeficiency-associated vaccine-derived poliovirus; MHC2 , major histocompatibility class II deficiency; NA , not available; PID , primary immunodeficiency; SCID , severe combined immunodeficiency; tOPV , trivalent-OPV; VAPP , vaccine-associated paralytic poliomyelitis; VP1 , viral protein 1 region of poliovirus genome *Patient 4 is the index patient presented in this study †Our data is limited regarding the follow-up of this patient and the outcome of her HSCT. She did not clear the infection based on available evidence
We observed a strikingly high VP1 divergence rate (3.3%/year) in viruses isolated. Mechanisms including random nucleotide substitutions and genomic recombinations, along with selected and unselected hitchhiker mutations, may contribute to this high-rate genomic evolution [ , ]. Further studies reviewing available data on phylogenetic analysis of poliovirus evolution is needed to reveal any other probable mechanisms involved in this observation.
Immune Reconstitution Following HSCT
There are several reports of iVDPV-infected CID patients who underwent HSCT (Table 3 ). Five of six patients with available data cleared the infection in few weeks (range 4–7 weeks) following HSCT. The index patient in our study stopped poliovirus shedding when his GVHD prophylaxis was being tapered off. Although a complete immune reconstitution may take several months to accomplish, the initial recovery of immune cells during few weeks post-HSCT may contribute to infection clearance. The use of RIC regimen and UCB source stem cells was shown to be associated with a faster immune reconstitution after transplantation [ , , , ]. Cyclosporine and corticosteroid treatment was discontinued shortly after HSCT in our study. Of note, GVHD prophylaxis may not completely attenuate all the immunologic interactions between transplanted cells and poliovirus-infected cells. In our case study, all these factors together may have provided the opportunity for a faster immune recovery and mounting adequate immunologic responses to interrupt iVDPV replication.
Innate Immunity and iVDPV Clearance
Innate lymphocyte cells (ILCs) particularly ILC1s and natural killer cells play a role in the early response to viral infections through cytotoxic and antiviral activities by producing interferon-γ (IFN-γ), tumor necrotic factors (TNF), perforin, and granzymes [ , , ]. Spontaneous clearance of iVDPV infection in CID patients [ , , ] with defects in humoral and cell-mediated adaptive immunity could be, in part, attributed to the function of these innate immune cells. Despite a normal or even an increased number of NK cells, two patients with T-B-NK+ SCID presented in this report and a previously published study [ ] had persistent poliovirus infections for almost 1 year prior to HSCT. NK cells are the first group of lymphocytes which recover after HSCT [ , ]. Depending on the genetic basis of PID, defects in the pathway of essential cytokines such as interleukin-15 (IL-15) and IL-2 could affect the proliferation, activation, and maintenance of these effector cells [ , ]. Thereby, the recovery of cytokine pathways and cell-mediated cytotoxicity after HSCT may have improved iVDPV clearance by innate immunity in these patients. Future studies could better address the associations between NK cells function and clearance of enteroviral infections.
Adaptive Immunity and iVDPV Clearance
Lacking humoral immunity is a constant observation in the majority of CID patients carrying iVDPV infection as we observed in our study. In line with this notion, poliovirus excretors with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II deficiencies presenting low serum immunoglobulin are at a higher risk of iVDPV development comparing to MHC class I deficiency patients with low CD8+ cytotoxic T cell function/counts [ , ]. The patient in our study received regular IVIG replacement therapy during 4 months before and early after HSCT. However, replenishment in serum immunoglobulin level, as the main part of humoral immunity function, did not result in infection clearance before HSCT. Other studies have not provided any evidence indicating the efficacy of immunoglobulin replacement on iVDPV clearance either [ , ]. Several attempts to stop iVDPV excretion (including administration of oral and intravenous immunoglobulin products) by a chronic shedder were not successful [ ]. In that study, oral intake of immunoglobulin A (IgA)-rich breast milk and immunoglobulin preparation resulted in a temporary drop in iVDPV shedding. However, the virus excretion load reached its initial levels immediately after intervention discontinuation [ ].
Secretion of neutralizing antibodies by infiltrated B lymphocytes into the systemic circulation, the GI lumen, and also the interstitium of GI mucosa could be considered more efficient than the effect of substitutive immunoglobulin administration. IVIG is not secreted into the GI lumen and oral immunoglobulin may not penetrate into the subepithelial interstitium of GI mucosa, which is the main site of poliovirus replication (e.g., tonsils and Peyer’s patches) [ ]. Following HSCT, interstitial and secretory neutralizing antibodies form engrafted humoral cells could decrease the load of viral particles and thereby limit the extension of infection to unaffected cells. However, a delayed reconstitution of humoral immunity after HSCT remains in contrary to the major contribution of humoral mechanisms to early iVDPV clearance. The patient in our study was receiving IVIG during the first year post-HSCT. Immunoglobulin levels gradually reached normal values in the second year after transplantation.
Beside innate and humoral adaptive immunities, the interactions between T lymphocytes and poliovirus-infected cells (e.g., enterocytes and M cells) could play a crucial role in limiting further intracellular replication of poliovirus. Recovery of T cells could be achieved by 1.5 months after UCB-source HSCT, and virus-specific T cells could be detected as early as 2 months post-HSCT [ , ]. As observed in this report and previous studies, CD8+ T cells recover faster than CD4+ T cells [ , ]. Cytotoxic effects of CD8+ T cells on poliovirus-infected cells pull down the reservoir available for viral replication and could play a significant role in infection clearance. This explanation accurately addresses the difference in iVDPV clearance rate observed between subgroups of patients with humoral and combined PIDs [ , ]. In 1974, Lopez et al. described the effect of bone marrow transplantation on poliovirus shedding in four CID patients (data not included in Table 3 ). Interestingly, poliovirus excretion stopped in all four patients after their engraftment became stable to generate immune responses, as represented by developing the signs of GVHD or a rise in anti-polio antibody levels and phytohemagglutinin results [ ].
Other Possible Mechanisms
Clearance of iVDPV infection after acute diarrheal illnesses has been reported in previous studies [ , ]. Destruction of GI epithelial lining and infected enterocytes, as a reservoir for poliovirus replication, either by the effect of inflammatory diarrheal illness [ ] or cytotoxicity of engrafted lymphocytes could contribute to VDPV clearance in PID patients. Other T cell subsets such as mucosal-associated invariant T cells and NK T cells could be activated through cytokine-mediated antigen-independent pathways [ ]. These cells recover early after HSCT and may promote the lysis of virally infected cells. Further studies are required to unravel the role of different lymphocyte subsets on immune response recovery after HSCT. Besides these explanations, pre-transplantation regimen used to abolish the native hematologic cells of HSCT recipients may also facilitate the destruction of poliovirus-infected mononuclear cells in GI mucosa that resulted in the accomplishment of iVDPV clearance. However, our evidence to support the latter hypothesis is limited.
There were limitations to our study. The patient received HSCT based on a phenotypic diagnosis of T-B-NK+ SCID and genetic materials were not stored prior transplantation to determine the molecular diagnosis. Due to technical limitations, the kinetics of NK cell recovery and polio-specific immunity were not assessed after HSCT in this patient. In addition, our study would have benefited from serial testing of poliovirus load in stool prior to and after HSCT. Addressing these limitations in future studies on HSCT-receiving iVDPV-infected patients would shed further light on the immune mechanisms involved in poliovirus clearance.
Administration of live vaccines at birth carries the risk of adverse events in PID patients. It also endangers the polio eradication program through VDPVs emergence [ ]. Accordingly, the GPEI strategy changed to use a combination of bivalent-OPV (serotypes 1 and 3) and IPV immunization in April 2016 [ ]. Although this strategy can prevent the emergence of iVDPV serotype 2, which has been the most prevalent serotype to date [ ], it still has the risk of developing virulent strains from other 2 serotypes. On the other hand, using IPV-only immunization may not induce sufficient mucosal response and population herd immunity to prevent poliovirus transmission in communities with a high risk of virus circulation [ , ]. Introducing newborn screening for PIDs can help identify patients before they receive live vaccines and develop numerous consequences of PID. This is important especially in countries with high PID incidence rate [ , ] (e.g., Middle-Eastern and North-African countries due to high rates of parental consanguinity) that use OPV as the mainstay of population immunization. Of note, T cell receptor excision circles (TREC)-based newborn screening for SCID cannot detect the functional cellular/humoral immune defects; therefore, a different strategy for newborn screening in families with a positive history of leaky combined immunodeficiency should be considered.
Conclusion
In this study, we presented an SCID patient who cleared iVDPV infection following HSCT and explained the possible immune mechanisms responsible for this observation. Future studies would benefit from a more detailed assessment of innate and adaptive immune responses against iVDPV infection in patients receiving HSCT.