Introduction
Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial diseases (MSMD, MIM 209950) is a rare inherited condition characterized by a selective predisposition to poorly virulent mycobacteria, such as the Mycobacterium bovis BCG strain and nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM). Patients affected by this primary immunodeficiency disease (PID) are also vulnerable to the more virulent species of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex [ ]. Ten MSMD-causing genes, including eight autosomal ( IFNGR1 , IFNGR2 , STAT1 , IL12B , IL12RB1 , ISG15 , TYK2 , and IRF8 ) and two X-linked ( NEMO , and CYBB ) genes have been discovered so far. The high level of allelic heterogeneity has already led to the definition of 20 different disorders, all involved in IFN-γ-mediated immunity [ ]. The most common genetic etiology of MSMD results from autosomal recessive (AR) mutations in IL12RB1 encoding the IL-12Rβ1 chain of the IL-12 and IL-23 receptors [ ]. All mutant alleles are loss-of-function, and patients’ lymphocytes do not respond to IL-12 and IL-23 and produce low levels of IFN-γ [ , , ]. The clinical phenotype is heterogeneous and characterized mainly by mycobacterial infections followed by salmonellosis, candidiasis, and tuberculosis and less frequently, infections due to Klebsiella pneumoniae , Paracocci-dioides brasiliensis , Coccidioides spp., and Histoplasma spp. [ ]. Here, we report a child with IL-12Rβ1 deficiency who presented with M. bovis BCG disseminated disease following BCG vaccination (BCG-osis) including chronic enteritis and enteropathy as well as transient hypogammaglobulinemia. Subsequently, he also developed Gram-negative bacterial infections (salmonellosis, klebsiellosis, citrobacteriosis) and mucocutaneous candidiasis.
Case Report
The patient is a male born in 2009 in the city of Pereira (Colombia, South America) from apparently non-consanguineous parents at 39 weeks of gestational age. He had an older brother who died at 5 years of age due to BCG-osis. The patient weighed 3.350 g at birth and received the BCG vaccine according to the guidelines of the national immunization program of Colombia, along with the other scheduled vaccines until the age of 6 months when vaccination was suspended for unknown reasons. His first symptoms began at the age of 4 months when he developed an asymptomatic nodule in the left axilla. The mother took him to the pediatrician who made the clinical diagnosis regional suppurative lymphadenitis following BCG vaccination (“BCG-itis”) but decided to monitor his progress without treatment, and discharged him home and ordered follow-up tests. A month later, he was seen again, but this time the nodule developed into an abscess and the chest radiography did not reveal abnormalities, and the results of a complete blood count (CBC) and blood chemistry panel were within normal limits. Oral dicloxacillin was prescribed with no therapeutic response, and the child was subsequently hospitalized and started on intravenous (IV) oxacillin. The diagnosis of lymphadenitis secondary to M. bovis BCG was considered but the child remained afebrile and was feeding well; therefore, he was discharged with follow-up in 1 month. At the age of 11 months old, the child was hospitalized again as he developed persistent fevers, irritability, and failure to thrive, and the lymphadenitis remained suppurative for which reason IV oxacillin was administrated again. Cervical lymphadenopathies and hepatosplenomegaly were noted during the physical exam, and the differential diagnosis included lymphoma and disseminated tuberculosis (TB). A thoraco-abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) revealed multiple lymphadenopathies in the neck, both axillae, and upper mediastinum that were consistent with diffuse lymph node disease, as well as ascites in the abdomen; the liver and spleen were normal. Serial smear microscopies of the discharge from the axilla and of gastric aspirates were positive for acid-fast bacilli (AFB). In the meantime, on the basis of presumptive disseminated disease due to M. tuberculosis , antimycobacterial treatment was initiated with oral isoniazid (H), rifampicin (R), and pyrazinamide (Z), 6 days per week for 6 months, and the child was discharged, pending results of mycobacterial cultures. A month later, cultures of pus from the axilla and of gastric aspirates became positive for mycobacteria and a niacin test was reported positive, and isolates were sent to the National Institute of Health of Colombia for drug susceptibility testing, (Bactec MGIT 960, Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) demonstrating susceptibility to H, R, Z, streptomycin (S), and ethambutol (E).
At 15 months of age, the child was hospitalized due to a left axillary lymphadenopathy for which he underwent resection, and the histopathology revealed granulomatous inflammation with necrosis, abundant giant cells, and histiocytes, but AFB were not detected. However, new smears of gastric aspirates were AFB-positive. A new thoraco-abdominal CECT revealed again ascites and diffuse lymph node disease, and although there were no signs or symptoms suggestive of CNS infection, a lumbar puncture was performed and the cell count and chemistry of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were within normal limits and smear microscopy was negative for AFB. Due to concern for relapse of previously treated TB disease, multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) was considered and intramuscular (IM) S was added (initially prescribed for 60 days, but then discontinued after 22 days), and then the treatment de-escalated to H plus R 3 times per week for reasons not clear from the medical records. Mycobacterial cultures of gastric aspirate and of CSF were negative after 2 and 3 months, respectively.
Between the ages of 16 to 19 months, the child presented two episodes of non-bloody diarrhea, vomiting, decreased appetite, progressive abdominal distension, and persistent fevers, presumed to be due to gastrointestinal (GI) viral infections. These were treated with fluid repletion for dehydration and probiotics, with resolution of the symptoms. At 20 months of age, the child was hospitalized for a follow-up and gastric aspirates were obtained for smear microscopy and mycobacterial culture and were all negative. However, by 21 months of age, the diarrhea became persistent and severe, leading to dehydration with dysuria and oliguria along with facial edema. Intestinal and renal TB were a concern, and he was once again hospitalized. Hypoalbuminemia was documented (2.96 g/dL; ref .8–5.4 g/dL) and in addition, serum creatinine was normal and urine samples revealed pyuria but not proteinuria, and AFB smears and mycobacterial cultures were negative. A high-resolution renal ultrasound revealed normal kidneys and ascites, an excretory urography only showed inflammation of collecting calyces, and a dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) renal scan did not document active infection. By then, the antimycobacterial treatment consisted only of H plus R 3 times per week. However, the patient continued to deteriorate, leading to the suspicion of an underlying PID, and the child was referred with the diagnosis of refractory TB disseminated disease to a pediatric TB specialist at a tertiary center in Medellin for further evaluation at the age of 22 months.
Upon admission to this center, the physical exam revealed a severely dehydrated and malnourished child (weight-for-height (W/H) −0.65, height-for-age (H/A) −2.06) with cervical, axillary, submandibular, and inguinal lymphadenopathies; severe abdominal distension; and edema of the lower limbs. CBC showed mild leukopenia and lymphopenia with normal monocytes and platelets (Supplemental Table 1 ). Hypoproteinemia and hypoalbuminemia were also noted (3.84 g/dL; ref .6–7.5 and 1.47 g/dL; ref .8–5.4, respectively, Supplemental Table 2 ). In addition, serum AST and ALT and bilirubins were within normal limits, and serology and viral load for HIV and PPD-tuberculin skin test were negative. This time, the thoraco-abdominal CECT showed no abnormalities in the chest, but in the abdomen it revealed multiple retroperitoneal lymphadenopathies and ascites but no organomegalies. The antimycobacterial treatment was held for 2 weeks to improve the bacteriological yield of a new collection of specimens (blood, stool, gastric aspirate series, axillary lymph node biopsy, and ascitic fluid). The lymph node biopsy revealed abundant necrotizing granulomatous chronic inflammation that was positive for AFB. However, AFB smear microscopy, mycobacterial cultures and M. tuberculosis complex (MTC) PCR (Xpert MTB/RIF®, Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA) of all other specimens were negative. A few days later, oral thrush was noticed and candidiasis was diagnosed and treated with complete resolution. Finally, antimycobacterial treatment for presumptive drug-resistant TB was started again with H, R, Z, E plus ethionamide (Eto) and levofloxacin (L), along with aggressive enteral nutrition and albumin infusions, leading to resolution of the ascites and the edema of the lower limbs, but not the chronic diarrhea. The child was discussed with PID experts and with strong suspicion of MSMD, the patient was transferred at 24 months of age to a PID referral center in Medellin.
At the referral center, an upper and lower gastrointestinal tract (GIT) endoscopy was performed, showing chronic nonspecific inflammation but no atrophy; staining of all biopsied sites were negative for AFB (Fig. 1a ); in addition, cultures of all biopsies did not isolate mycobacteria. A first PCR for MTC and NTM (Genotype Mycobacteria Direct®, Hain LifeScience GmbH, Germany) from a biopsied lymphadenopathy was positive for MTC; however, a second PCR for MTC (Xpert MTB/RIF®) performed a few weeks later in one gastric aspirate sample was negative. CBC remained mostly within normal limits but with mild-to-moderate lymphopenia throughout the hospital stay (Supplemental Table 1 ); serum proteins measured several times during this hospitalization revealed low to normal total proteins and albumin (Supplemental Table 2 ) and severe hypogammaglobulinemia (0.17 g/dL; ref 0.6–1.6 g/dL). Fig. 1 a Endoscopy and H&E staining of a biopsy of the duodenum showing mild chronic inflammation with mononuclear infiltrates and no atrophy (×40). b Flow cytometry staining of EBV-B cells with anti-CD212 or an isotype in a healthy control, the patient, and a negative control (EBV-B cells from a patient with IL-12Rβ1 deficiency). c T cell PHA blasts from a healthy control, the patient, and his mother were either non-stimulated (NS) or stimulated for 16 h with 20 ng/mL of rhIL-12p70. Intracellular IFN- γ production was evaluated by flow cytometry by staining live cells (Aqua negative population) and excluding aggregates by FSC-H and FSC-A and gating on CD3 + T lymphocytes. d Electropherogram showing the mutation C291Y in the patient and parents. e Pedigree showing the index case, the deceased brother, and both parents; each generation has a roman numeral (I–II), the arrow indicates the proband. No DNA was available from the brother for mutational testing (“E?”)
Thereafter, serum Ig levels were measured revealing low IgG (246 mg/dL; ref 749–2682 mg/dL), normal IgM and IgA, and mildly elevated IgE (178.3 IU/mL; ref 0.1–15.8 IU/mL, respectively) (Supplemental Fig. 1 ). Phenotyping of T, B, and NK cells by flow cytometry could not be performed at this time. To further investigate the genetic cause of his disease, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) transformed B cells were stained with fluorescently-labeled anti-IL-12Rβ1 mAb, revealing complete absence of protein expression by flow cytometry (Fig. 1b ); similar results were obtained from peripheral blood (PB) T cells (not shown). Furthermore, rhIL-12p70-stimulated PB lymphocytes showed no intracellular production of IFN-γ in CD3+ T lymphocytes from the patient, when compared with a healthy control and the heterozygous mother by flow cytometry (Fig. 1c ). Genomic DNA sequence analysis of all coding exons of IL12RB1 revealed a homozygous missense mutation in exon 9 (c.872G > A) that replaced cysteine in position 291 with tyrosine (p.C291Y) (3), confirming the diagnosis of IL-12Rβ1 deficiency (Fig. 1d ); both parents were heterozygous for the same mutation but no biological material was available to test the deceased brother (Fig. 1e ). In silico evaluation of the p.C291Y mutation with Polyphen-2, SIFT, and CADD score (25.3 high) indicated that the variant was damaging.
Given the uncertainty of whether the detected MTC species represented M. tuberculosis or M. bovis BCG, pyrazinamide (which would not treat M. bovis BCG) was replaced with levofloxacin (which would treat both species), and H, R, and E were continued. Recombinant human (rh)IFN-γ was added at the age of 28 months at the dose of 200 μg/m 2 , 3 times per week. Serum IgG levels were measured serially for 2 months and remained low; therefore, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was started at 27 months of age at the dose of 600 mg/kg initially every 15 days for 15 months, and then continued on a monthly basis for 10 more months, followed by 11 months of subcutaneous immunoglobulin (SCIG). In addition, enteral nutrition supplementation with tube feeding was continued until the age of 60 months. All treatment led to considerable improvement of his general condition, with resolution of the diarrhea and complete recovery of serum IgG levels (Supplemental Fig. 1 ); nonetheless, serum albumin levels remained low until 72 months of age when they became normal (Supplemental Table 2 ). The disseminated TB was treated for 12 months, followed by 24 months of secondary prophylaxis, and SCIG was continued for 36 months. CBC normalized, but the mild-to-moderate lymphopenia persisted after 24 months (Supplemental Table 1 ); CBC fluctuated over time and lymphopenia persisted, along with mild neutropenia. A recent phenotyping of PBL still showed mild leukopenia with normal T lymphocytes but slightly low total CD3+ T cells and CD3 + CD8+ T cells; however, lymphoproliferation to phytohemaglutinin (PHA) was normal (Supplemental Tables 3 and 4 ).
The patient has had other severe infections: Salmonella spp. gastroenteritis at the age of 3 years, febrile neutropenia with Proteus mirabilis bacteremia at 42 months of age, and at 46 months a bacteremic Citrobacter freundii deep neck abscess in the submandibular space. For these infections, he received IV antibiotics with good response. At 59 months, he developed severe diarrhea associated with ascites, cervical lymphadeno-pathies, and leukopenia with lymphopenia and hypoalbuminemia (1.2 g/dL); however, since he was still receiving SCIG, his serum IgG was normal (Supplemental Table 3 ). This time, an esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed esophagitis with white plaques consistent with candidiasis that was treated successfully with fluconazole. Biopsies of the GIT revealed nonspecific inflammation. Mycobacterial cultures from blood and GIT biopsies were negative as well as a MTC PCR (Xpert MTB/RIF®) of the GIT biopsy. However, blood cultures were positive for an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing K. pneumoniae strain that was treated with IV antibiotics with resolution of the infection. He also received albumin, zinc sulfate, and a low FODMAP (Fermentable, Oligo-, Di-, Mono-saccharides, and Polyols) diet and attained full recovery. Currently, he continues to be on rhIFN-γ and prophylactic trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) three times per week.
Discussion
We describe the first Colombian child with MSMD due to a homozygous mutation in IL12Rβ1 , and affected with various invasive infectious diseases associated with IL-12Rβ1 deficiency including mycobacterial (MTC), bacterial (non-typhoidal Salmonella , K. pneumoniae , C. freundii ), and fungal ( Candida spp.). We could not firmly establish the species of MTC, as the isolate at the time of initial microbiological diagnosis was not submitted for further speciation, and mycobacterial testing of various specimens collected at the time of recurrences of the MTC disseminated disease were negative by culture despite being positive by smear microscopy and MTC PCR, suggesting that the bacilli were non-viable possibly due to recent antimycobacterial therapy or sample processing. Initially, we hypothesized that the species was M. bovis BCG given the recurrence of the left axillary lymphadenitis at an early age in a BCG-vaccinated child, associated with involvement of a distant organ (i.e., GIT), and the absence of pulmonary involvement in the setting of a PID well-recognized to predispose to M. bovis BCG disseminated disease. However, the fact that the initial MTC isolate was both niacin-positive as well as pyrazinamide-susceptible makes it unlikely to have been M. bovis BCG, since the vast majority of isolates are niacin-negative and pyrazinamide-resistant [ , ]. On the other hand, it is well-recognized that IL-12Rβ1 deficiency-related M. tuberculosis disease is not very rare, and that the clinical syndrome of disseminated disease can occur in children who are otherwise immune to weakly virulent mycobacteria such as M. bovis BCG and to nontuberculous mycobacteria [ , ]. Nevertheless, the most common infection found in patients with IL-12Rβ1 deficiency continues to be M. bovis BCG disseminated disease several months after vaccination [ ]. Such events supposedly attributable to vaccination or immunization, including complications related to BCG vaccination (such as BCG-itis and BCG-osis) must be considered severe, and quickly reported through effective epidemiological surveillance systems, to allow timely diagnosis of patients affected with MSMD and other PID that lead to susceptibility to these microorganisms [ , ].
A significant finding in this patient was the development of severe hypoproteinemia and hypogammaglobulinemia most probably in the context of chronic diarrhea and severe malnutrition, as liver and renal dysfunction were never demonstrated. In addition, we believe that the inflammation of the GIT (as shown in Fig. 1a ) might have contributed to the loss of proteins, suggesting protein-losing enteropathy (PLE); however, no specific biomarker tests were available to confirm this. To our knowledge, there have been only two cases reporting the association of IL-12Rβ1 deficiency with protein-wasting enteropathy or severe gastroenteropathy. The first was a 4-year-old Mexican boy affected with mucocutaneous candidiasis and M. bovis BCG disseminated disease, who died in spite of multiple antimycobacterial treatments. However, in this patient, there was no report of a GIT biopsy, and PLE was not documented; furthermore, serum Ig levels were normal [ ]. The second patient was a 49-year-old Caucasian male from the Faroe Islands (Denmark) who suffered from severe gastroenteropathy and weight loss during a 2-year period [ ]. Interestingly, the gastroduodenoscopy revealed duodenitis but, again, PLE was not demonstrated. Microscopy of GIT biopsies revealed AFB, but mycobacterial cultures were all negative; nonetheless, the amplification and sequencing of a segment of the 16S rRNA-DNA hypervariable region revealed high homology to mycobacterial RNA DNA sequences, suggesting Mycobacterium branderi . He also had hypoalbuminemia, but serum IgG and IgM were normal while IgA was undetectable.
IL-12Rβ1-deficient patients usually have relatively mild clinical disease and good prognosis [ , ]. In most cases, they can be treated with prolonged antimycobacterial therapy (2–3 years), rhIFN-γ, and antimicrobial therapy as needed for concomitant infections, as well as prophylaxis if infections are recurrent. rhIFN-γ is effective with conventional therapy for cases of refractory mycobacterial disseminated disease such as our patient [ , , ]. He had a positive response to rhIFN-γ although he has shown mild leukopenia (neutropenia and lymphopenia) that could be partly attributable to this therapy [ ] as well as to the prophylactic TMP-SMX; for this reason, we are regularly monitoring the patient to prevent potential complications. Surgical removal of mesenteric lymph nodes is often indicated for localized infections with poor response to antimy-cobacterial therapy [ ].
We emphasize that all patients who develop complications from MTC (regardless of whether M. tuberculosis , M. bovis BCG, or other MTC) should be evaluated for PID, and managed accordingly with the assistance of experts in pediatric TB and PID. Finally, it is likely that both parents share some degree of consanguinity based on their common origin from a small and closed community [ , ], indicating the need to consider a genetic disease in such closed communities and to expand testing for relatives.
This case highlights the fact that MTC species other than M. bovis BCG can mimic the clinical presentation of axillary lymphadenitis ipsilateral to the vaccination site. MTC species other than M. bovis BCG should be suspected when the axillary lymphadenitis is pronounced bilaterally and when the MTC species is niacin-positive and pyrazinamide-susceptible. Immune-based tests for tuberculosis infection such as the IFN-γ release assays (QuantiFERON-TB® (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) or T.SPOT-TB® (Immunotec, Oxford, UK)) are helpful—when positive—in that they are specific for virulent MTC species such as M. tuberculosis and M. bovis , and do not have cross-reactivity with M. bovis BCG. However, their sensitivity is significantly compromised in patients with defects in their IFN-γ pathways, including those with MSMD [ ]. In the global context, this case is relevant because the clinical scenario of the patient with TB disease who is refractory to appropriate antimycobacterial treatment—or who has a satisfactory therapeutic response but subsequently has a recurrence of TB disease—is not uncommon. When drug susceptibility testing is not possible (which is the case in the vast majority of children with TB who are paucibacillary), primary drug-resistant TB must be considered—especially in countries where MDR-TB is endemic. However, when adequate treatment for drug-susceptible disseminated TB is completed and reinfection is considered improbable, the differential diagnosis of a recurrent TB disease that is disseminated should include MSMD, but is under-recognized in the TB literature [ ].
Conclusion
We report a child in whom a homozygous mutation in IL-12Rβ1 associated with protracted refractory MTC disseminated disease (not speciated, but probably not M. bovis BCG) was complicated with enteropathy and hypogammaglobu-linemia. Therefore, in HIV-uninfected infants with an infectious disease due to weakly virulent mycobacteria (e.g., Mycobacterium bovis BCG, other MTC species , or NTM), intramacrophagic bacteria (e.g., Salmonella ) and/or fungi (e.g., Candida ), related that is severe (disseminated or invasive), recurrent, or refractory to treatment, an inborn error of IFN-γ immunity, such as IL-12Rβ1 should be considered, and related complications such as enteropathy and hypogamma-globulinemia should be prompty recognized if present and managed appropriately. These results demonstrate the importance of developing low-cost molecular diagnostic tools, effective educational programs, accessible treatment centers, and genetic counseling for affected families, and encourage further research into the molecular basis of MSMD in patients [ , ].