Introduction
Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) is one of the major environmental non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM). Its virulence is not high, and it usually forms indolent mode of infection in the lung [ ]. But in compromised hosts, it causes severe diseases like disseminated MAC infection (dMAC) [ , ]. Compared with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-associated dMAC, non-AIDS dMAC requires longer duration of treatment and discontinuation leads to recurrence [ ]. It is probably because non-AIDS cases still need establishment of efficient way to recover immunity, while the immune status of AIDS patients can be dramatically restored by anti-retroviral therapy within a few months.
Anti-interferon (IFN)-γ autoantibody has been reported to cause various opportunistic infections, and it can be a cause of non-AIDS dMAC, too [ , , , , ]. The pathogenicity of this autoantibody has been rigorously investigated, and recent reports show that rituximab treatment improves the prognosis of dMAC disease [ , ].
We report a case of non-AIDS dMAC with anti-IFN-γ autoantibody. The disease was refractory to medication and extensive bone lesions developed, but we proved the efficacy of rituximab.
Case Report
A 67-year-old Japanese female had been admitted to our hospital. She had severe back pain of recent onset and detailed medical investigation was scheduled. As past history, she had mild diabetes mellitus diagnosed 4 years earlier. She claimed no family history of immunodeficiency.
At presentation, she had fever (38.2 °C), hepatosplenomegaly was remarkable, and bilateral leg edema was seen. She was 158 cm height, and had lost weight from 55 to 48 kg within 3 months. She complained severe pain in back, rib, and neck area. There was no neurological deficit at this time. No particular respiratory symptoms were complained. Blood examination results were as follows (Supplementary Table 1 ): white blood cell (WBC) 14,100/μL, C-reactive protein (CRP) 13.02 mg/dL, normocytic anemia, and hypoalbuminemia, suggesting that strong inflammation and wasting were the major findings. Serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) elevation up to 1136 IU/L and slight hypercalcemia were detected. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed multiple osteolytic mass lesions, lung consolidation, and marked hepatosplenomegaly (Fig. 1 a–c). Fig. 1 CT and MRI findings. a – c CT findings at diagnosis. Multiple osteolytic lesions with adjacent soft tissue mass ( a ), marked hepatosplenomegaly ( b ), and lung consolidation at left lower lung ( c ) were detected. d–f CT findings of cervical vertebra at day 250, showing dislocation of atlas ( d , e ) and osteolytic lesions ( f ). g , h MRI findings of cervical vertebra at day 29 ( g ) and day 239 ( h ) of dMAC treatment. On day 239, spine was compressed by deformed vertebra
Metastatic cancer was suspected, and we performed biopsy from the rib. The histologic diagnosis was non-caseous granuloma instead of malignancy, and acid fast stain detected mycobacterium. Additional results were (1) T-SPOT TB® (Oxford Immunotec Inc., Marlborough, MA) negative, (2) anti-glycopeptidolipid (aGPL)-core IgA positive, and (3) remarkable elevation of serum soluble interleukin receptor-2 (sIL-2R) level. QuantiFERON-TB gold® (QIAGEN Inc., Germantown, MD) was indeterminate as mitogen induced no increase in interferon-γ level (Supplementary Table 1 ). M. avium was isolated from venous blood, bone marrow, and rib tissue (after 17, 17, and 28 days of incubation, respectively). The strains were sensitive to clarithromycin (CAM), rifampicin (RFP), and levofloxacin (LVFX), while it was resistant to ethanbutol (EB) and streptomycin (SM). Those susceptibility tests were evaluated by broth MIC-NTM® (Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Industrial).
The definitive diagnosis was dMAC involving bone, bone marrow, lymph node, liver, and spleen. She was in severe wasting syndrome. To rule out immunodeficiency, we evaluated the immune status of this patient. Human immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV) antibody test was negative, CD4 lymphocyte count was 421/μL, and CD8 lymphocyte count was 172/μL. We screened for genetic abnormalities in the following nine gene mutations: IFNGR1 (encoding the ligand-binding chain of the IFN-γ receptor), IFNGR2 (encoding the accessory chain of IFN-γR), NEMO (encoding NF-kappa-B essential modulator), IL12B (encoding the p40 subunit common to IL-12 and IL-23), IL12RB1 (encoding the β1 chain common to the receptors for IL-12 and IL-23), STAT1 (encoding signal transducer and activator of transcription 1), CYBB (encoding the major component of the phagocyte nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase complex), IRF8 (encoding a transcription factor inducible by IFN-γ, from the IRF family), and ISG15 (encoding an IFN-γ-inducing molecule that acts in synergy with IL-12) [ , ]. The PCR products of these genes were treated with an Exo-SAP-IT Kit (GE Healthcare, Amersham, UK) and then were analyzed by direct sequencing with an ABI 3130 DNA sequencer (Perkin-Elmer, Foster City, CA, USA). No mutations have been detected. The false negativity in QFT® mitogen assay could be secondary to interfering anti-IFN-γ autoantibody. So, we investigated anti-IFN-γ autoantibody assay and found that the autoantibody was positive, though the titer was not high (Fig. 2 ). The neutralizing capacity of this autoantibody against IFN-γ was confirmed by STAT1 phosphorylation index (STAT1-PI 10 ) assay (Supplementary Fig. 1 ) [ ]. Fig. 2 Clinical course. a Time course with event, medications, and CRP and ALP values. b Trends of anti-IFN-γ titer, STAT1 phosphorylation index (STAT1-PI 10 ), aGPL-core IgA, sIL-2R, IgG values, and CT findings. As anti-mycobacterials failed to stop wasting osteolysis, rituximab was started at day 224. Gradually, serum ALP level was normalized, and sIL-2R and IgG showed further decrease. Six weeks after the first dose of rituximab, anti-IFN-γ antibody titer decreased (72 E.U.), and STAT1-PI 10 was recovered. *Anti-IFN-γ Ab was measured by ELISA. (Healthy control; 48.6 E.U.) ** STATI-PI10 was measured in 10% serum after IFN-γ(10ng/mL) stimulation. 14) (Healthy control; 167). Abbreviations: aGPL, anti-glycopeptidolipid; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; AMK, amikacin; AZM, azithromycin; CAM, clarithromycin; CRP, C-reactive protien; EB, ethanbutol; EN, enteral nutrition; E.U., ELISA unit; LVFX, levofloxacin; LZD, linezolid; RFP, rifampicin; STATI-PI 10 , STATI phosphorylation index*; sIL2-R, soluble interleukin-2 receptor; STFX, sitafloxacin; TPN, total, total parenteral nutrition
Figure 2 shows the clinical course. Anti-mycobacterial regimen was started with RFP 450 mg daily, CAM 800 mg daily, and EB 500 mg daily. On day 49 (of anti-mycobacterial chemotherapy), fever and wasting still persisted. We added sitafloxacin (STFX) 100 mg, and amikacin (AMK) 400 mg i.m. q48h for intensification. By day 88, she got unable to eat, so i.v. regimen was tried for 1 month, linezolid (LZD) 600 mg daily (i.v.), azithromycin (AZM) 500 mg daily (i.v.), LVFX 250 mg daily (i.v.), and AMK 400 mg q48h (i.m.). On day 114, the regimen was changed again to RFP, CAM, EB, and STFX via nasogastric tube. However, the destruction of vertebrae has progressed. Dislocation of atlas and axis caused paralysis of lower limbs.
As conventional anti-mycobacterial chemotherapy failed to stop wasting and osteolytic lesions, rituximab 375 mg/m 2 was started on day 224. It was administered every 7 day for four doses. Several days after the second dose of rituximab, fever subsided. Inflammatory markers (CRP, immunoglubulin G (IgG), soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R), and β 2 -microglobulin (β 2 MG)) decreased within a few weeks. Six weeks after the first dose of rituximab, the anti-IFN antibody titer has decreased (72 E.U.) and STAT1-PI 10 was recovered (421). Those data showed further improvement in the later course. On day 238, IgG was normalized and sIL-2R showed further decrease. The osteolytic markers, serum ALP and calcium levels, were not normalized till rituximab administration. But after rituximab, both levels stay within the normal range (Supplementary Table 2 ). Bone lesions still remain, but destruction has stopped to progress. Gradually, she is recovering from bedridden state, with better nutritional state and activities of daily living. As an adverse effect, mild leukocytopenia was seen from day 266 (43 days after administration of rituximab), for almost 3 weeks. The lowest count of WBC and neutrophils were 2000 and 430/μL, respectively, and no infectious event was observed.
Discussion
NTM are ubiquitous bacteria found in soil, water, plant, or animals. Most of the NTM patients present with lung infection, but bone involvement is rare both in immunocompetent and compromised hosts. In the literature review from 1956 to 2011, there have been only 38 cases of bone involvement by NTM in non-HIV cases [ ]. Shimizu et al. reported that MAC is the most common pathogen of vertebral osteomyelitis (22 cases, 58%), followed by M. fortuitum (6 cases, 16%), M. abscessus (3 cases, 8%), M. kansasii (3 cases, 8%), and M. xenopi (3 cases, 8%). Nearly one third of the patients were in immunosuppressive state, most of whom taking prednisolone. It seems that bone is one of the organs involved in dMAC of immunocompromised hosts, though it can also be seen in immunocompetent cases.
dMAC is originally a common form of MAC infection in AIDS patients, whose prognosis has been improved by anti-retroviral regimen. The treatment of AIDS-dMAC can be stopped if the patients remain asymptomatic after completion of the MAC regimen of ≥12 months, and if recovery of CD4 count is sustained for >6 months after ART [ ]. However, treatment regimen and duration for non-AIDS-dMAC are not clearly defined, and many of those cases experience recurrences [ ]. Probably, unlike in AIDS, there is no way to recover immunity in non-AIDS immunodeficiency cases. So, those cases require infinite treatment to control the disease.
“Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial diseases (MSMD)” denotes hereditary immunodeficiency causing infection by weakly pathogenic NTM. Recent findings have identified different types of mutation in nine genes, IFNGR1 , IFNGR2 , STAT1 , IL12B , IL12RB1 , ISG15 , IRF8 , NEMO , and CYBB [ ]. Our case showed no abnormalities in those genes. Instead, anti-IFN-γ autoantibody was positive.
Anti-IFN-γ autoantibody has been reported to cause various opportunistic infections in the Asian adults without HIV infection [ , , , , ]. Because IFN-γ is a key effector molecule enhancing the phagocytosis and lysosomal digestion, neutralization of IFN-γ by this autoantibody can cause dMAC. We aimed to restore anti-mycobacterial immunity by selective inhibition of anti-IFN-γ autoantibody. Some other approaches might have been tried, but corticosteroid or other immuosuppressants could also impair T cells, neutrophils, or other necessary immune function.
Rituximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody against the B cell protein CD20. It acts as a depleting agent of naïve and memory B cells, and originally used to treat CD20-positive malignant B cell lymphoma.
Its efficacy has also been shown in other autoantibody-mediated diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus [ ], autoimmune hemolytic anemia [ ], or myasthenia gravis [ ]. There are a few cases of rituximab administration for dMAC. Browne et al. administered rituximab in four cases of disseminated NTM cases (two M. abscessus , one M. avium , and one M. intracellulare ). After 8 to 12 doses of 375 mg/m 2 , anti-IFN-γ autoantibody titers significantly decreased and all of them showed clinical improvement, lasting for months to years. However, unlike other parameters like symptoms, blood cultures, or hypergammaglobulinemia, radiographic change was not completely resolved in all cases [ ]. Our case did not achieve complete remission, but at least we could say that four doses of rituximab stopped progression of osteolysis and chronic inflammation. Those symptoms are critical because further osteolysis leads to severe pathologic fractures, and in fact, chronic inflammation once led her into cachexia.
To solve the question whether the identified anti-IFN-γ antibody was functionally inhibiting the cytokine, neutralizing capacity against IFN-γ was evaluated with STAT1-PI 10 in leukocyte after IFN-γ stimulation (Supplementary Fig. 1 ) [ ]. As a result, STAT1 phosphorylation was inhibited in the sample before rituximab administration. The effect was in a dose-dependent manner and it was restored in the samples on week 4 and week 12 after the last dose of rituximab. We could confirm that not only the titers but also the neutralizing capacity against IFN-γ was decreased by rituximab. We also confirmed that the effect was specific to the IFN-γ-STAT1 system, as the addition of patient’s sera did not affect STAT1-PI 10 in response to IFN-α.
Another important issue is how to evaluate the disease status. In the previous reports, outcome was evaluated with clinical symptoms, autoantibody titer, or STAT1 function [ , , ]. Biomarkers were not described except in one series with IgG or CRP [ ]. The unique feature of our case report is the detailed analysis of those biomarkers by serial measurement. Because complete remission of dMAC may not be achieved, we set the primary goal to stop critical organ damage and wasting. And we followed several biomarkers as surrogate goals, anti-IFN-γ autoantibody titer (for evaluating appropriate immune response to MAC), CRP (for evaluating severity of acute inflammation and wasting), ALP (for evaluating osteolysis), IgG (for evaluating the degree of chronic inflammation and abnormal humoral immunity), and sIL-2R (for evaluating T cell activity and excessive inflammatory response). Those markers showed fair correlation to clinical status. First, CRP decreased with defervescence, indicating resolution of acute phase inflammation. ALP decrease preceded improvement of osteolysis. IgG decreased right after rituximab, and after resolution of dMAC infection, sIL-2 finally decreased, suggesting that excessive T cell response driven by infection has been improved. Those changes were not observed during the months without rituximab, and the markers were almost normalized after rituximab. If those markers rise again, we plan to restart rituximab therapy.
In conclusion, we experienced a case of dMAC with multiple bone involvement and severe wasting. The disease was unresponsive to conventional multidrug anti-mycobacterial regimen, but rituximab ameliorated the symptoms caused by anti-interferon-γ autoantibody. The clinical course of the dMAC infection is mainly dependent on host immunity rather than drug sensitivity in this case. Rituximab is the treatment of choice due to its safety and specificity by targeting the anti-IFN-γ autoantibody.