Introduction
There are many types of DNA damage that can happen within mammalian cells that occur either naturally or due to exposure to ionizing radiation or toxic chemicals [ ]. The natural processes that give rise to double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) are products of cellular metabolism such as oxygen reactions or during DNA rearrangement. DSBs are quite dangerous as they predispose the individual to develop genomic instability that leads to malignancy. There are two types of repair mechanisms for DSBs: homologous and non-homologous end joining. Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) is the predominant pathway in mammalian cells to repair such DSBs
The components of NHEJ pathways consist of multiple factors. First is the Ku complex (Ku70 and Ku80 heterodimer) which recognizes and binds to DNA ends. Second, the DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is recruited by the Ku complex to the site of damage and activates by phosphorylation other repair proteins to bridge the broken DNA ends. Third, Artemis phosphorylated by DNA-PKcs is an enzyme responsible for DNA-end processing. Fourth is the XRCC4-ligase IV complex responsible for the re-ligation of the broken DNA ends. Fifth, NHEJ1 is a DNA repair factor which promotes the ligation of mismatched and non-cohesive DNA ends and as such it is essential for the NHEJ pathway which interacts with XRCC4 [ , , ]. The first 128 amino acid residues of NHEJ1 are essential for this interaction [ ]. NHEJ1 simply pieces together the broken DNA ends and can function in all phases of the cell cycle [ ]. Recent studies have highlighted a new factor, PAXX, which promotes the binding of NHEJ1 to the Ku complex and stimulates non-cohesive end ligation in its presence [ ].
Mutations in the NHEJ1 gene were recently identified as being responsible for autosomal recessive immunodeficiency with microcephaly [ , ]. Patients present with T and B cell lymphopenia, recurrent infections, growth retardation, and developmental delays as well as microcephaly [ ]. Treatment includes antibiotics as well as immunoglobulin replacement therapy. Some patients also receive hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) [ ].
Here, we describe a consanguineous Saudi family with three children affected with CID, microcephaly, and growth retardation who were assessed at the DNA, RNA, and protein levels to determine the molecular cause of pathogenesis.
Methods
Clinical Data
Data were collected by a retrospective chart review. Three patient siblings who were managed at the King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre in Riyadh (KFSH&RC), Saudi Arabia, between 2007 and 2017 were studied. Informed consent was obtained from the patients or their parents, and the study was approved by the hospital’s research advisory committee (RAC no. 2080 025).
Sanger Sequencing
Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood samples. Library preparation and targeted NGS protocols have been described elsewhere [ ]. Primers were designed from within the intron regions to span the splice site and the exon/intron boundaries with 5′ tagged M13 sequences. DNA was sequenced with the BigDye R Terminator. To rule out the possibility that the mutation was an unreported normal variation within the Saudi population, 250 DNA samples from normal individuals from the KFSH&RC blood bank were sequenced, in addition to interrogating 816 ethnically matched exomes.
Reverse Transcription PCR ( RT-PCR ): blood was collected from patients (and healthy controls) into PAXgene tubes (PreAnalytix, a Qiagen/BD Company, Valencia, CA., USA), and RNA was extracted using the PAXgene Blood RNA Kit (Qiagen for PreAnalytix, Valencia, CA, USA). Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized as describe previously [ ]. The NHEJ1 cDNA was amplified with primers designed to sequence from within exon 2 to within exon 4. Primer sequences are available upon request. The resultant patient RT-PCR products were TA cloned (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and individual colonies were picked and submitted for Sanger sequencing as above.
Immunoblotting
Patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from whole blood using a standard Ficoll-Paque gradient protocol. Cell lysates were prepared using RIPA buffer (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). Samples were normalized by measuring on a Smart-Spec Plus spectrophotometer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) using the Protein Assay Dye Reagent (Bio-Rad). Electrophoresis, transfer, and immunoblot detection were performed according to standard protocols. The anti-NHEJ1 and anti-Vinculin primary antibodies were purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, UK).
Patients
We describe here three siblings who presented to the immunodeficiency clinic at our hospital with typical features of microcephaly and growth retardation in addition to recurrent infections. They are products of a consanguineous marriage (Fig. 1 a). Both parents are healthy and living. Two other siblings died at ages 11 and 13 due to unknown causes. Salient clinical and laboratory features are summarized in Tables 1 and 2 , respectively. Fig. 1 A splice site mutation in NHEJ1 affects RNA and protein expression. a Pedigree of the family studied in this report, with individuals that we had access to denoted by a red asterisk . Two siblings had previously passed away due to unknown causes. b DNA chromatogram of the splice site mutation, with a control sequence provided for comparison. c RT-PCR spanning NHEJ1 exon 2 to exon 4 shows the expected wildtype product from control blood and two smaller products (Δ 69 bp and Δ Ex3) from patient blood. d , e Cloning and Sanger sequencing of these two products reveals that the mutation causes in-frame skipping of the resultant mRNA. f Schematic of NHEJ1 indicates the expected truncation of the globular head domain. The red spikes correspond to S245 and S251, which are the major phosphorylation sites for the protein [ ]. g Following immunoblotting, no NHEJ1 protein was observed in patient PBMCs (even taking into account the expected molecular weight after truncation). Vinculin was used as a loading control Table 1 Clinical features Patient 1 Patient 2 Patient 3 Onset of illness at age 5–10 years 2 months 1 year Current age 30 years 20 years (deceased) 14 years Height (cm) 138 (at age 15 years) 0.1 percentile 94.8 cm (at age 5 years) 0.2 percentile 73.5 (at age 2 years) 0.1 percentile Weight (kg) 27 (at age 15 years) <0.1 percentile 10 (at age 5 years) <0.1 percentile 7 (at age 2 years) 0.1 percentile Head circumference (inches) 18.5 (at age 15 years) <0.1 percentile 16.4 (at age 5 years) <0.1 percentile 16.5 (at age 2 years) <0.1 percentile Chest infections Yes Yes No Chronic diarrhea No No No Failure to thrive Yes Yes Yes Autoimmunity No No No Pancytopenia Yes Yes Yes Other infections Yes Yes Yes Neurological manifestations Yes Yes Yes Microcephaly with dysmorphic features Yes Yes Yes Developmental delay Yes Yes Yes Table 2 Laboratory data Patients Patient 1 Patient 2 Patient 3 Age at diagnosis 15 years 2 months 1 year Absolute lymphocyte counts 1.58 (1.5–4.0) 0.79 (1.5–4.30) 1.29 (1.9–4.9) CD3 + lymphocytes 1301 (782–2834) 466 (782–2834) 1084 (1700–1900) CD4 + 349 (322–1750) 271 (322–1750) 367 (800–1700) CD8 + 827 (338–1086) 190 (338–1086) 616 (700–1000) Total CD3 CD 45 RA (cells/μl) 822 159 323 Total CD4 CD 45 RA (cells/μl) 63 135 52 Total CD3 CD 45 RO (cells/μl) 648 476 594 Total CD4 CD 45 RO (cells/μl) 332 326 310 B lymphocytes 0 (67–555) 0 (67–555) 11 (400–800) NK cells 175 (60–360) 166 (60–360) 131 (60–360) T cell proliferation (PHA) 48,773 (control 201,326) 11,589 (control 66,756) 56,868 (control 201,326) Ig values before substitution IgG 5.5(7.0–16.0) 1.1 (6.1–15.7) 1.5 (6.1–15.7) IgA <0.25 (0.72–4.0) <0.23 (0.5–2.0) <0.25 (0.5–2.0) IgM 0.17 (0.4–2.3) <0.17 (0.52–2.4) <0.18 (0.43–2.1)
Patient 1
This is a 30-year-old male patient who has been followed at our hospital since 2002. The patient was full term, normal spontaneous vaginal delivery (NSVD), birth weight of 2.3 kg. He was initially referred from a local hospital with a history of recurrent chest infections. There was also a history of weight loss and failure to thrive, and the patient was noticed to have a smaller stature compared to his other siblings. Upon admission to the local hospital, he was found to have bronchiectasis. He was also told that he has “immunodeficiency.” He was started on antibiotics and was referred to our hospital for further evaluation.
His initial IgG level was 5.5. The patient was found to have poor response to pneumococcal vaccine as well as tetanus vaccines. He has been on IVIG since 2003 and has been regularly followed in our Allergy and Immunology Clinic. Other medical issues include chronic hepatitis B as well as pancytopenia.
On exam, the patient has bird facies, high-arched palate, radial deviation of little fingers, sloping forehead, large nose, and ears. The patient also has small stature, microcephaly as well as mild micrognathia. CNS exam revealed hyperreflexia, no clonus, and no focal lesion.
The patient is on monthly IVIG in addition to antibiotic prophylaxis as well as Tenofovir for hepatitis B.
Patient 2
Patient was a 20-year-old female who had been followed at our hospital in the immunology clinic. The patient was full term, NSVD, birth weight of 2.1 kg. She was initially referred from a local hospital because of failure to thrive, IgG of 1.1. There was also a history of weight loss, and the patient was noticed to have a smaller stature compared to her other siblings. Upon admission to the local hospital, she was found to have bronchiectasis. She was started on antibiotics and was referred to our hospital for further evaluation.
The patient had panhypogammaglobulinemia. She was found to have poor response to pneumococcal vaccine as well as tetanus vaccines. She was started on IVIG and had been regularly followed in our Allergy and Immunology Clinic. Other medical issues included chronic hepatitis B as well as low platelet count and low WBC count. Patient also started complaining of muscle spasms, mouth pulling to one side, progressive ataxia, worsening proximal muscle weakness, and inability to walk without assistance. She had microcephaly, micrognathia, bird facies, high arched palate, and large nose and ears, in addition to small stature. Despite aggressive management, she died of sepsis at the age of 20 years.
Patient 3
Patient is 14 years old. He is preterm, born at 32 weeks. His weight was 2 kg. He has a history of recurrent otitis media and upper respiratory infections, since the age of 1 month. He has failure to thrive and microcephaly. He also has bird facies. IgG levels are low with poor response to both tetanus and pneumococcal vaccines. The patient is also hepatitis B positive and has pancytopenia. The patient developed anaphylaxis to different formulations of IVIG, and therefore, he is not currently receiving IVIG.
Molecular Diagnosis
Subsequent to informed consent, DNA extraction and targeted NGS [ ], we filtered our data based on population allele frequencies, focusing on genic and splice site regions. The only variant that survived on our filtering was a splice site mutation in NHEJ1 . Since no other genic or splice site variant survived the filtering algorithm, this increased our confidence in this mutation as the genetic cause of pathogenesis in this family. Sanger sequencing confirmed that all affected children were homozygous for the mutation (NM_024782.2:c.390+1G>C), which lies immediately downstream of exon 3, and that it fully segregated with the disease state in all the individuals we had access to (Fig. 1 a, b).
To assess the effect of this mutation at the RNA level, we carried out RT-PCR with primers spanning a region from exon 2 to exon 4. RNA extracted from healthy control blood showed a single-band corresponding to the expected mRNA sequence of exon 2-3-4 (Fig. 1 c), which was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The patients however exhibited two discrete bands, both of which were smaller than the wildtype product. By TA cloning and sequencing, the identity of each band was further characterized. The upper band was the result of a skipping of 69 bp at the 3′ end of exon 3, which we call Δ 69 bp (Fig. 1 d). The lower band, which we refer to as Δ Ex3, was due to exon 2 being followed by exon 4 with complete splicing out of exon 3 (Fig. 1 e).
Both of these changes are in-frame deletions. Δ 69 bp is predicted to remove 23 amino acids from the end of the NHEJ1 globular head domain, while Δ Ex3 predicts the loss of over half of that domain (Fig. 1 f). As expected, immunoblotting did not reveal the full-sized NHEJ1 protein in patient PBMCs (Fig. 1 g) but surprisingly, there were no smaller truncated NHEJ1 products either corresponding to the expected molecular weights of the Δ 69 bp and Δ Ex3 isoforms.
Discussion
We describe T and B cell combined immune deficiency, associated with pancytopenia, developmental defects including microcephaly as well as growth retardation, and recurrent infections. All patients were siblings from a consanguineous marriage. Human SCID can arise due to a faulty NHEJ pathway, the predominant pathway of DNA double-stranded break repair in mammalian cells. Defects in this pathway cause radiosensitivity at the cellular level, as well as abnormal V(D)J recombination and/or class switching in patients [ ]. V(D)J recombination, a somatic rearrangement of Ig and T cell receptor genes which creates diversity, produces double-stranded breaks during this process and relies on subsequent repair by NHEJ proteins [ ]. A defective repair mechanism makes V(D)J recombination ineffective and leads to immune deficiency in these patients.
Cases reported in the literature have recently been summarized [ ], while details of our own patients are presented in Tables 1 and 2 . Respiratory infections seem to be the commonest finding although other bacterial and opportunistic infections have also been described. Immunologically, all cases reported so far had low T cell and absent or very low B cell numbers along with normal NK counts. They also exhibited low IgG and IgA levels and normal IgM, which is suggestive of a possible class switch recombination defect.
Microcephaly, severe growth retardation, and bird-like facies are reported in most of the patients [ , , , ]. Diarrhea has been found in a minority. Autoimmunity has been reported in five patients so far out of a total of 24 patients in the literature. Some cases seem to take a more protracted course than others and may die in early childhood despite being on intravenous immunoglobulins [ ]. A couple of patients have also been documented with bone marrow aplasia [ , ]. Despite increased radiosensitivity in NHEJ1 deficient patients, the presence of lymphoid tumors or other malignancies has been the exception and not the rule. Brain MRI on a 2-year-old boy revealed an intracranial mass which, following biopsy, proved to be consistent with diffuse large B cell lymphoma [ ]. Aside from its role in the immune system, NHEJ1 RNA is also found in the telencephalic ventricular and subventricular zones and may play a role in the development of the human central nervous system, as evidenced by a fetal case of polymicrogyria with a balanced chromosomal translocation which specifically truncated NHEJ1 [ ]. A very recent report has also highlighted the role of NHEJ1 in maintaining telomere length. Several NHEJ1 patients were shown to have shortened telomeres, and this was reproduced in vitro through downregulation of the gene, resulting in reduced activity of telomerase and other associated proteins [ ]. This finding may provide a mechanism for the premature aging observed in hematopoietic stem cells from NHEJ1-deficient mice, which leads to progressive lymphocytopenia [ ].
Most patients are the children of consanguineous parents although there are exceptions [ , ], and in fact, sometimes an unreported trait (such as polydactyly) may appear but it may be difficult to conclude whether it is due to a NHEJ1 defect or to homozygosity for more than one mutation [ ].
The first successful treatment of a NHEJ1 patient using HSCT was reported in Italy. Following a reduced-intensity conditioning regimen, the patient was treated with unrelated allogeneic HSCT. Post op the patient did well, maintaining full donor engraftment and normal hematopoiesis [ ]. In another HSCT report, two Turkish patients with NHEJ1 deficiency received hematopoietic stem cells from HLA-identical related donors without any conditioning regimen and recovered without any complication, although both experienced severe diarrhea post transplantation which later on resolved itself [ ]. Recently, HSCT has been described for a large cohort of patients with four double-strand break repair disorders including NHEJ1, with the majority (95%) receiving conditioning and an overall transplant-related survival rate of 71% [ ].
The mutation that we describe here results in two isoforms that harbor in-frame deletions and yet fails to form detectable protein from either isoform. Previously [ ], it has been shown that the globular N-terminal domain corresponding to the first 128 amino acids are essential for NHEJ1 interaction with XRCC4. The globular head domains of both proteins represent the minimal interacting regions required for heterodimer formation, and NHEJ1 deletion at the N-terminus resulted in complete loss of yeast two-hybrid interaction with XRCC4. In addition, introduction of point mutations in several residues that lie towards the end of the head domain (including F117, W119, and C123) lead to reduced NHEJ1 stability [ ]. Our RT-PCR data predict truncation of the head domain in both Δ 69 bp and Δ Ex3 isoforms. Even though the patient mRNA will escape detection by the nonsense-mediated decay machinery, our observations suggest that the proteins translated from the mRNA are unstable and hence that this splice site mutation leads to what is effectively a null phenotype.
To date, no clear-cut genotype/phenotype correlations can be drawn. Two patients with the homozygous nonsense mutation p.R178* died at the age of 1.5 and 4 years with septic shock, for example, while another with homozygosity for the same mutation was alive at twice that age without transplantation [ , , ]. Beyond the age of 8 years, however, patients who have survived without HSCT have harbored either missense alterations or splice site mutations which produced a variety of aberrant products, a small portion of which may have been viable [ , ]. Prior to this study, the oldest reported patient was found to have compound heterozygosity for two missense mutations and had died at 18 years due to septic shock [ ]. In that regard, it is intriguing that one of our patients has completed a full three decades of life without recourse to HSCT. While our laboratory data suggest a total loss of protein, we do not discount the possibility that a small percentage of in-frame deleted but semi-functional NHEJ1 may in fact exist, at levels below the threshold for immunoblot detection yet just high enough to make a difference in this patient’s clinical prognosis.
Conclusion
Although still rare a number of cases of NHEJ1, gene mutation have now been reported around the world, in both consanguineous and non-consanguineous families. Early recognition of this disease is critical for appropriate management. Patients require a lot of supportive care including antibiotics as well as IV immunoglobulins. One of our patients is alive at the age of 30 years even without HSCT, so the disease may follow different courses in different individuals. Another of our affected, who was unable to receive IV immunoglobulins because of repeated anaphylaxis to different formulations, highlights that allergic reactions can occur in NHEJ1 patients. HSCT remains an option in these patients for definitive treatment.