Introduction
Positron emission tomography (PET) with time-of-flight (TOF) has been commercially available for a decade. , The primary advantage associated with TOF is an increase of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the reconstructed images. This increase in SNR, which is manifested as a reduction in image noise, has been used in fluoro-deoxyglucose (FDG) oncology images to increase lesion detection and also permit reductions in administered activity or scan time. ,
There are few studies that have attempted to specifically assess the impact of TOF in cardiac PET. Two studies have evaluated TOF from the perspective of quantification. The first was in rubidium-82 cardiac PET imaging, which showed that TOF increased the rate of reconstruction convergence in very obese patients, with BMI ranging from 36 to 76 kg/m 2 . The study observed greater uniformity of myocardial uptake after several reconstruction iterations with TOF due to the improved convergence. Conversely, the second study from the same institution compared myocardial segmental uptake of FDG in oncology patients in non-TOF and TOF images and reported no significant differences in uptake as a result of the two reconstructions. However, this latter study had a study population with considerably lower BMI (ranging from 18.8 to 34.0 kg/m 2 ), which may explain the difference in findings.
The theory describing the SNR gains associated with TOF PET was established over 30 years ago. It states that SNR increases with an increasing object size and therefore suggests that TOF will be most beneficial in high-body mass index (BMI) patients. The theoretical model was developed with filtered back-projection reconstruction algorithms for a uniform cylindrical object and an ideal top-hat function for the timing resolution. In reality, reconstruction is almost exclusively iterative reconstruction, activity distribution is not uniform in patients, particularly in cardiac studies, and the timing resolution is Gaussian. As a result, the SNR gains observed in FDG oncology images are more modest and may vary depending on the area of the body. ,
In FDG oncology PET images, SNR measured within the liver is a common metric that has been used to quantify image quality. This measurement of SNR is obtained from defining a large region of interest within the liver and calculating the mean voxel value divided by the standard deviation of the voxel values within a region of interest. It requires the area of tracer distribution to be homogeneous, which is relatively common in FDG oncology images. This measurement has been used to evaluate SNR gains from TOF in oncology. Conversely, assessing SNR in heterogeneous distributions such as FDG cardiac PET presents more of a challenge compared with this method. One cannot simply measure the voxel standard deviation within the myocardium as the dominant component of the standard deviation will be the inherent heterogeneity of the tracer distribution itself.
To date, we believe that there are no studies that have attempted to quantify the gain in SNR within the myocardium as a result of TOF to mirror the many studies in oncology imaging. The development of the fluorine-18-based myocardial perfusion agent Flurpiridaz , combined with the need to reduce nuclear cardiology patient radiation doses as outlined by the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology Position Statement and elsewhere has made this more pertinent. Therefore, there is a need to assess and make use of the potential SNR gains from TOF in cardiac PET to allow further reductions in administered activity for TOF-capable PET systems.
The aim of this work is to develop and evaluate a means of quantifying the gains in SNR due to TOF within the myocardium. This would be used to aid the optimization of dose protocols for TOF systems with fluorine-18 cardiac tracers.
Materials and Method
PET/CT Scanner
All image acquisitions in this study were performed on a Siemens Biograph mCT (Siemens Healthcare, Knoxville, TN) with 64-slice CT and an extended PET axial field of view of 21.6 cm (TrueV option). The TOF timing resolution for the system is quoted as 530 ps. Images were reconstructed without TOF using three iterations and 24 subsets and with TOF using 2 iterations and 21 subsets. It is noted that the number of image updates is different in the TOF and non-TOF reconstructions, with the number for TOF subsets being fixed at 21. Evidence suggests that TOF requires fewer image updates to achieve comparable activity concentration recovery. , , Local validation work from oncology studies has determined that this choice of TOF and non-TOF reconstruction parameters yields equivalent quantification. These same TOF and non-TOF parameters were used in the study by Oldan et al. where myocardial uptake was seen to be comparable. Hence, we believe that there should be no impact on interpretation and merely a reduction in image noise in the TOF images. Two sets of voxel dimensions were chosen to correspond to local protocols for oncology and cardiac imaging. These were 4.0 mm in both the transaxial and axial directions for the oncology protocol and 3.2 mm in the transaxial and 2.0 mm in the axial direction for the cardiac protocol. All images were corrected for attenuation and scatter.
Reference SNR Gain
SNR gains from TOF will be related to the timing resolution of the scanner, the implementation of the algorithm by the manufacturer, and the iterative reconstruction parameters that are used locally. Other centers may already have an appreciation for SNR gains based on oncology images. Therefore, we feel that it is useful to include a reference measurement of TOF SNR gain at our institution to demonstrate locally observed SNR gains and whether any gains observed in cardiac images are comparable. For this, we retrospectively reviewed 88 routine FDG oncology patients. The median [inter-quartile range (IQR)] for patient weight was 72 [62 to 82] kg and the median [IQR] BMI was 26.1 [22.6 to 29.2] kg/m 2 . SNR was measured using a 3.0-cm spherical region placed in the right lobe of the liver ensuring that FDG distribution was homogeneous. SNR was calculated as the mean voxel value divided by the voxel standard deviation within the region and will be referred to as SNR liver . The gain in SNR was defined as $$ SNRgain = \frac{{\left( {SNR_{TOF} - SNR_{non - TOF} } \right)}}{{SNR_{non - TOF} }}. $$
Cardiac Phantom Assessment
A phantom investigation was used to translate the results of the reference SNR gains from oncology images to cardiac images. An anthropomorphic torso phantom with cardiac insert (Data Spectrum, Hillsborough, NC) was used in this study. The phantom was filled with FDG with a nominal cardiac:background activity concentration ratio of 5:1. A 10-minute listmode scan was acquired with dynamic images of various frame lengths and numbers being produced with details to follow. TOF and non-TOF images were reconstructed using the same numbers of iterations as for the oncology data.
Background SNR
To mirror the measurements in the oncology data, the SNR was measured in the uniform background region of the torso phantom on images using the oncology voxel dimensions. Twelve circular regions of 37 mm diameter were drawn on three transaxial slices. SNR was defined as the mean voxel value divided by the voxel standard deviation within each region, which was averaged across the 36 regions and will be referred to as SNR BG .
Measuring SNR in the Myocardium
The method of assessing SNR within the cardiac insert was based on the technique of generating parametric images from multiple replicate images demonstrated by Schmidtlein et al. This technique was used to assess noise in areas of heterogeneous uptake such as malignant lesions. In our study, mean and standard deviation parametric images were generated from the replicate images such that a voxel value represented the mean and standard deviation, respectively, of that particular voxel over the replicate images. From here, a SNR parametric image was produced by dividing the voxel values of the mean image by the voxel values of the standard deviation image on a voxel-by-voxel basis. A mask region was generated by a threshold of the mean image to a percentage of the maximum voxel value within the cardiac insert. The percentage threshold was set manually following visual inspection of the mask on each transaxial slice through the cardiac insert. This mask was transposed onto the SNR image and the mean value of voxels within the mask on the SNR image was calculated and will be referred to as SNR myo . Analysis was performed only on the image volume that contained the cardiac insert. This was to avoid inclusion of high levels of extra-cardiac activity that were expected to be observed in the clinical images. Figure 1 shows a schematic of how the parametric images were produced. The replicate images used here were those with the cardiac protocol voxel dimensions. Figure 1 A schematic to show the parametric mean image A , standard deviation image B , SNR image C , and masked SNR image D that were created from multiple replicate images. The SNR myo was calculated from the mean of voxels within the masked region as shown in D . Data shown are single transaxial slices but analysis was performed over the entire volume of the cardiac insert
The method by Schmidtlein et al. used an external ECG trigger to create the replicate images via a gated reconstruction. This would not be possible in the clinical part of this study due to the necessity to acquire and produce myocardial gated images using an ECG signal from the patient. Therefore, replicate images were generated by a dynamic reconstruction. To assess the robustness of the technique, mean, standard deviation, and SNR parametric images were generated from a variety of total replicate images and frame lengths; these were 5, 10, 15, and 20 images with frame times of 20 and 30 seconds giving a total of eight measurements of the gain in SNR myo due to TOF.
Gain of SNR in Myocardial Viability Patients
Dynamic images consisting of ten 30-second frames were reconstructed retrospectively from 13 patients that were referred for assessment of myocardial viability with FDG. All patient data were fully anonymized prior to inclusion in this work. According to our institution’s research board protocol, this evaluation did not require ethical approval or consent. The group included four female patients, the median [IQR] weight was 80 [58 to 95] kg, and the median [IQR] BMI was 27.2 [22.7 to 31.0] kg/m 2 . All patients fasted for six hours prior to the administration of 280 MBq (7.6 mCi) of FDG after ensuring that the patient blood glucose level was between 5.5 and 7.7 mmol/ml. A single bed position image was acquired in listmode sixty minutes after the FDG injection. Images were reconstructed with and without TOF as with the phantom study using the cardiac protocol voxel dimensions. SNR parametric images were generated using the technique described in the previous section and the SNR myo was calculated for each patient in the TOF and non-TOF images. As with the phantom data, image analysis was performed only on the image volume that contained the left ventricle. The masked region applied to the SNR image was visually inspected on all transaxial slices through the left ventricle for every patient and was adjusted if necessary to include only the myocardial area.
Statistical Analysis
Continuous data were assessed for normality using a Shapiro-Wilk test. Normally distributed data are expressed as mean and standard deviation. An unpaired t test was performed to compare gains in SNR due to TOF in the oncology study group and the cardiac study group. Statistical analysis was performed in StatsDirect v2.7.8 (StatsDirect Statistical Analysis Software, Altrincham, UK).
Results
Reference SNR Gains
Figure 2 shows the reference gain in SNR liver in the oncology patients plotted against patient weight and BMI. The mean and standard deviation of the gain in SNR liver due to TOF were +23% and 8.5%, respectively, and it can be seen that there is no correlation with patient size. Figure 2 Gain in SNR liver from TOF measured in 88 patients used as a reference for assessing gains in cardiac SNR myo
Cardiac Phantom Assessment
The mean and standard deviation of the gain in SNR BG due to TOF were +21% and 1.6%, respectively, with these values calculated across the 36 regions. This is in good agreement with the measurements of SNR liver gain from the oncology patients. Table 1 shows the gain in SNR myo measured in the phantom cardiac insert derived from the parametric images for the various combinations of number of replicate images and frame length. The mean and standard deviation of the gain in SNR myo due to TOF, across the combinations of replicate images and frame time, were +21% and 0.9%, respectively. Table 1 Gain in SNR myo due to TOF measured in the phantom cardiac insert derived from the parametric images for the various combinations of number of replicate images and frame length Number of images Frame time (s) 20 (%) 30 (%) 5 +21 +23 10 +21 +22 15 +21 +21 20 +20 +21
Gain of SNR in Myocardial Viability Patients
Figure 3 shows example parametric masked SNR images from three patients for images reconstructed with and without TOF. Table 2 shows the SNR myo for the non-TOF and TOF images and resultant gain due to TOF for each patient. The mean and standard deviation of the gain in SNR myo due to TOF were +21% and 2.8%, respectively. No statistically significant difference was observed between the measurements of SNR gain compared with those measured in the oncology patients. Figure 4 shows the gain in SNR myo plotted against patient weight and BMI. Figure 3 Single transaxial slices from masked SNR parametric images for A a female patient with weight 82 kg and BMI 34.6 kg/m 2 , B a female patient with weight 58 kg and BMI 22.7 kg/m 2 , and C a male patient with weight 67 kg and BMI 25.5 kg/m 2 . Note that the color scale is fixed for pairs of TOF and non-TOF images from the same corresponding patient Table 2 SNR myo in the myocardium for non-TOF and TOF images and resultant gain in SNR calculated from the parametric images for the 13 patients referred for cardiac viability imaging Gender BMI (kg/m 2 ) non-TOF SNR myo TOF SNR myo Gain in SNR myo (%) F 21.5 5.0 6.1 +22 F 34.6 4.8 5.8 +22 F 22.7 4.0 4.9 +23 M 34.0 2.7 3.3 +25 M 25.5 4.9 6.0 +22 M 28.9 3.5 4.0 +15 M 17.0 4.5 5.5 +20 M 37.7 1.6 1.8 +17 M 27.2 3.1 3.7 +20 M 26.1 2.8 3.4 +21 M 28.0 3.1 3.8 +21 M 31.0 2.5 3.1 +24 F 22.4 3.9 4.8 +22 Figure 4 Gain in SNR myo from TOF measured in the myocardium of 13 patients plotted against weight and BMI
Discussion
This study has developed a technique to quantify SNR within the myocardium uptake for FDG. This has allowed the gains in SNR due to TOF to be quantified. Results have been compared with SNR gains measured in clinical FDG oncology images that were acquired according to our local protocol. Phantom data were used to translate the reference SNR gains to the proposed measurement technique within the myocardium. We believe that this is the first study that has attempted to quantify SNR gains within the myocardium arising from TOF in FDG cardiac PET. These findings can be used to guide optimization for imaging protocols and in particular potential reductions in administered activity. The SNR gain can be considered equivalent to a gain in acquired counts comparable to the squared value of SNR gain. Consequently, the findings here suggest that there is an effective gain in acquired counts of close to 50%, which should allow for an approximate reduction of 25% in the administered activity.
The phantom investigation was used to validate the method of assessing the SNR gain within the myocardium. Excellent agreement was observed between the SNR BG gains in the phantom and SNR myo in the phantom cardiac insert derived from parametric images. The range of replicate images and frame time also suggested that the technique was robust across a range of image noise.
Scanner technology continues to advance with PET/MR and now PET/CT systems available with solid-state silicone photomultipliers that offer substantial gains in TOF performance compared with the current generation of TOF systems with photomultipliers. These systems are already demonstrating potential for substantial reductions in radiation dose in oncology imaging. The methods proposed will be useful in assessing the benefits in cardiac PET.
Study Limitations
The primary limitation of this study is the relatively small number of clinical cardiac cases that have been included. However, we believe that when combined with the validation data from the phantom investigation, there are sufficient data to illustrate the benefits of TOF. The second limitation is that the parametric image technique that has been evaluated is applicable only to cardiac PET studies where the tracer distribution over the timescale of image acquisition is fixed. This inhibits the use of the technique in rubidium-82 cardiac PET due to the very short half-life of the tracer. However, we believe that it is a fair assumption that similar SNR gains would be observed with TOF for static and gated rubidium-82 cardiac images. With the future prospect of fluorine-18-based perfusion tracers, the method can be further utilized. Finally, this work demonstrates the SNR gains only for a static image, but we believe that the SNR gains should translate into ECG-gated images as well.
New Knowledge Gained
A technique of assessing SNR gains due to TOF within the myocardium has been developed and the results compared against gains observed in oncology studies using a translational phantom experiment. The magnitude of gains in SNR within the myocardium is comparable to those measured in oncology patients that have been measured using established techniques. While we have used the technique to assess gains with TOF, the method could be equally applicable to other forms of optimization in cardiac PET such as evaluating a weight-based dosing protocol.
Conclusion
A technique of assessing SNR gains due to TOF within the myocardium has been developed for cardiac PET using fluorine-18 tracers. TOF offers gains in SNR for tracer distribution within the myocardium comparable to those observed in oncology imaging on a like-for-like PET/CT system. Based on the TOF performance of the system used, this should facilitate an approximate 25% reduction in the administered activity.