Introduction
Heart failure is a common and serious disease, with a high mortality rate, accounting for more than 4 million deaths of people each year in Europe. Although the incidence of heart failure continues to increase, there is a constant shortage of donor organs, overcome by the improvement and expanding use of left-ventricular-assist device (LVAD), implanted as bridge-to-transplant or destination therapy (i.e., alternative to transplantation). Despite technical improvements of LVAD (particularly the advent of newer generation continuous-flow-assist devices), infections represent a major limitation to the successful use of VAD, leading to a high mortality rate. Between 2012 and 2014, the seventh Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support (INTERMACS) report recorded an infection rate of 7.3 events/100 patients months in the first 12 months post implant for continuous-flow LVAD and biventricular-assist device (N = 12,030).
Identifying LVAD infections is a challenge, as echocardiography shows low diagnostic value in infectious endocarditis on cardiac-implantable electronic devices (CIEDs), even with transoesophageal echocardiography, and magnetic resonance (MR) is largely precluded. On the other hand, computed tomography (CT)-scan is particularly useful, especially in assessing cannulas, thrombi, vegetations, or sternal wound infections. Nuclear imaging has potential value in the diagnostic strategy of LVAD and CIED infections, but only few studies have evaluated the diagnostic efficacy of 18 F-fludeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT ( 18 F-FDG PET/CT) imaging - and leucocyte-labeled scintigraphy, , and there is still no consensus criteria for interpretation of these two techniques. Very little is known about the diversity of LVADs (different types and trends, new generation of continuous-flow devices) and their different material compositions (areas of Dacron, GoreTex) by physicians. Keidar et al showed that increased 18 F-FDG activity may occur in the absence of an acute infectious process, and that grafts often induce a foreign-body chronic low-grade inflammatory reaction, which can also exhibit increased 18 F-FDG activity, and induce erroneous interpretation of 18 F-FDG PET/CT. This chronic inflammatory phenomenon occurs frequently around the Dacron area and should therefore be known as a source of interpretation pitfalls.
The main objective of this study was to compare the respective performances of 18 F-FDG PET/CT and leucocyte scintigraphy in the diagnosis LVAD infections. Our secondary objective was to evaluate the respective performances of visual and quantitative 18 F-FDG PET/CT interpretation scales.
Materials and Methods
Patient Population
This monocentric retrospective study included patients who had undergone both radiolabeled leucocyte scintigraphy single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and 18 F-FDG PET/CT for a suspected infection of LVAD between April 2013 and July 2017. The patients underwent routinely both examinations systematically and independently, regardless the results of each imaging. The median time between both examinations was 3 days. Suspicion of a VAD-related infection could be based on the patient’s clinical history, clinical symptoms, biology, or imaging. Antibiotherapy was introduced when deemed necessary. Clinical signs, demographic, biological, and imaging data were recorded for each patient (Table 1 ). Table 1 Main baseline characteristics of 24 patients with suspected infection of LVAD Characteristics Patients (N = 24) Sex [N] female/male 3/21 Age [median (IQR2)] 57 (28-78) LVAD Heartmate II 14 Heartware 7 Jarvik 2000 3 Indication of LVAD Bridge to transplant 15 Destination therapy 9 Pathology LVAD Ischemic cardiopathy 13 Non ischemic dilated cardiopathy 10 Other (congenital anomaly) 1 Comorbidities [N (%)] Diabetes mellitus 6 Neoplasm (treatment < 2 years) 2 Delay between installation of LVAD and nuclear imaging in days [median (IQR)] 165 [3-1095] Antibiotic treatment before nuclear imaging [N (%)] 12 (50) Antibiotic treatment duration before nuclear imaging in days [median (IQR)] 34.5 [3-210] Clinical symptoms 21 (87.5) Fever 8 Purulent issue driveline 11 Abdominal pain 2 Tumefaction on operatory site 1 None 3 Laboratory findings [N/total tested (%)] Positive blood cultures 11 (45.8) Positive pus cutaneous driveline 13 (54.2) Serum C-reactive protein > 10 mg·L −1 15 (62.5) C-reactive protein [median (IQR2)] 50 [4-253] Blood granulocyte count > 7.5 G/L 14 (58.3) Blood granulocyte count (G/L) [median (IQR2)] 7.9 [3.5-13.5] Heart transplant 9 Periprosthetic purulence found during LVAD explantation 1 Culture positive of LVAD after explantation 5 Deceased patients 5 From septic shock 1 Other cause 4 Final diagnosis Non-VAD infection 3 Digestive origin 2 Pulmonary origin 1 VAD-related infection 6 VAD-specific infection 15 Driveline 10 Pump and/or canula infection and/or pocket 5
Case Definition of LVAD-Related Infection
LVAD-related infection was diagnosed according to the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) criteria for infection in patients using VADs. The patients were therefore divided into three categories defined as follows: VAD-specific infections pump and/or cannula infections, pocket infections, percutaneous driveline (DL) infections (both superficial and deep infections); VAD-related infections infective endocarditis, bloodstream infections (BSIs) [including central venous catheter (CVC) and/or BSIs], Mediastinitis VAD-related or non-VAD-related (other causes of mediastinitis, perforation of the esophagus); and Non-VAD infections lower respiratory tract infection, cholecystitis, Clostridium difficile infection, urinary tract infection.
As there are different types of LVAD (Heartmate II, Heartware, Jarvik 2000), the cardiac-LVAD category included pump, canula, and pocket infections. The material was considered infected or not according to ISHLT criteria applied at the end of the follow-up, and based on clinical symptoms, biology, and, if positive, imaging data (echocardiography, CT). In case of missing data to conclude on the infectious status, the final diagnosis was specified by the multidisciplinary consensus meetings.
Radiolabeled Leucocyte Scintigraphy SPECT Protocol
Autologous radiolabeled white blood cells (WBCs) were prepared and separated according to European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM) guidelines and according to the characteristics of Ceretec ® for the labeling of neutrophils with technetium-99m hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime ( 99m Tc-HMPAO). Radiolabeling efficiency was always in the range of 70%-85%. Whole-body and spot planar images were obtained after 30 minutes, then 2 or 4-6 hours (delayed images) and 20-24 hours (late images) after reinfusion of 148-555 MBq (megabecquerel) of 99m Tc-HMPAO WBC. SPECT of the region of interest was performed in all patients at the end of 4 hours and repeated at 24 hours. Images were acquired using a dual-head, variable-angle SPECT γ camera (Hawkeye and Discovery ST; GE Healthcare). A low-dose CT transmission scan was acquired for 16 seconds over 220° for each transaxial slice. The full field of view consisting of 40 slices was completed in 10 minutes. CT scans were reconstructed into a 256 × 256 matrix. SPECT component of the same field of view was acquired using a 128 × 128 matrix, 360° rotation, and acquisition times of 40 and 60 seconds per frame at 2-4 and at 24 hours, respectively. Both CT attenuation-corrected and noncorrected SPECT images were evaluated in the coronal, transaxial, and sagittal planes, as well as in tridimensional maximum intensity projection cine mode. Matching pairs of x-ray transmission and radionuclide emission images were fused using Xeleris™ software (GE Healthcare), and hybrid images of overlying transmission and emission data were generated.
18F-FDG PET/CT Protocol
Patients received a low-carbohydrate, high-fat meal the day before 18 F-FDG PET imaging and were then asked to fast for at least 12 hours to limit physiologic myocardial 18 F-FDG uptake. Blood glucose levels were measured prior to the injection of FDG. Patients with blood glucose levels < 9 mmol·L −1 were accepted for imaging. Approximatively 3.5 MBq·kg −1 of body weight of 18 F-FDG was injected intravenously 60 minutes before PET data acquisition (mean activity 310 ± 51 MBq). All scans were performed on an integrated PET/CT system (Discovery VCT or Discovery 690; GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA). The CT (5-mm slices, 100-130 kV, and 100-150 mA; median DLP 800 mGy·cm) was carried out without administration of intravenous contrast agent. Images were analyzed on an AW Workstation Version 4.4 (GE Healthcare Biosciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA).
Image Analysis and Interpretation
Separate readings of 18 F-FDG PET/CT and leucocyte scintigraphy were performed by two experienced nuclear medicine physicians, aware of the patient’s clinical history, in consensus. For each examination, we divided our analysis into two parts: the analysis of the DL (divided into three portions—proximal, median, and distal), and the analysis of the cardiac-LVAD (regrouping cannulas, pocket, and pump).
Interpretation criteria of 18FDG PET-CT
A visual analysis was performed (Figure 1 ), defined by three points, applicable to the DL and to the cardiac part of the LVAD. As a diffuse homogeneous 18 F-FDG uptake is currently found in noninfected prosthetic vascular grafts because of local inflammatory process, only focal FDG uptake was retained as a positive septic focus for the cardiac part of LVAD. Figure 1 Scale grading scores for the driveline (line 1) and the cardiac-LVAD (line 2). Row 1 grading score for the driveline: ( A ) no uptake, median abdominal portion of the driveline; ( B ) focal or segmentary uptake without extension to soft tissues, proximal portion of the driveline; and ( C ) uptake with extension to soft tissues, median portion of the driveline. Row 2 grading score for the cardiac-LVAD-device: ( 1 ) no uptake, outflow canula of Heartmate II LVAD (arrow), ( 2 ) segmentary uptake without extension to soft tissues, axial view of outflow canula of a Jarvik 2000 device, and ( 3 ) uptake extended to soft tissues, coronal view of pomp, pocket and canulas of a Heartmate II device
The scale was graduated as follows.
For the DL material: (A) no FDG uptake, (B) focal or segmental FDG uptake without extension to soft tissues, (C) focal or segmental FDG uptake with extension to soft tissues.
Every result > grade A was considered pathologic.
For the cardiac part of the LVAD, (1) no uptake or circumferential FDG uptake corresponding to Dacron or GoreTex areas only, (2) focal FDG uptake without extension to soft tissues, and (3) focal or segmental FDG uptake with extension to soft tissues or extending to a mediastinal collection (Figure 2 ). Figure 2 Example of a specific infection of the cardiac-LVAD-device. ( A ) 18 F-FDG PET/CT scan showing an intense segmentary uptake on the two canulas of a Heartmate II, with an extension to soft tissues around inflow and outflow canulas (white arrows, axial and coronal views). The uptake on the sternotomy site was considered aspecific. Segmentary uptake classified as grade B is visible along the driveline (3D view, red curved arrow). ( B ) Leucocyte-labeled scintigraphy showing a segmentary uptake on outflow canula (white arrows, axial and coronal views). These findings were visible on both corrected and uncorrected for attenuation acquisitions. Note that there was no fixation visible along the driveline on the leucocyte scintigraphy. The patient presented fever and purulent drainage at the exit site of the driveline, without germ found at pus analysis or hemoculture. The patient had a heart transplant 2 months after the beginning of symptoms. The culture of the Heartmate II device was positive to Propionibacterium acnes (patient #2)
Every result > grade 1 was considered pathologic.
Every FDG uptake had to be present on both attenuation-corrected and uncorrected acquisitions, in order to avoid overcorrection artifacts.
Every pathologic 18 F-FDG uptake was measured semiquantitatively as maximum standard uptake value (SUV max ). SUV max values of pathologic foci, liver, and mediastinal blood pool (MBP; region of interest drawn in superior vena cava) were also collected for each patient.
Interpretation criteria of leucocyte-labeled scintigraphy
Scintigraphy results were classified as positive when foci of labeled leucocyte uptake greater than background activity were detected in the cardiac area or along the DL and/or when contrast between these foci and background signal increased over time. Foci of nonphysiologic abnormal uptake that decreased after 24 hours were considered negative.
Statistical Analysis
Sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive value (NPV), positive predictive value (PPV), and accuracy were calculated for SPECT and for different 18 F-FDG PET/CT reading scales. For the quantitative scale, a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed for determination of threshold values and for calculation of the diagnostic performance. Sensitivity, specificity, were compared using McNemar χ 2 test. Predictive positive and negative values were compared using the generalized score statistic proposed by Leisenring et al . P values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Statistical analyses were performed using R software.
Results
Clinical Characteristics
Twenty-two patients with LVAD had 24 18 F-FDG PET/CT scan and leucocyte scintigraphy for a suspected infection. Two patients underwent 18 F-FDG PET/CT scan and leucocyte scintigraphy twice, with independent clinical presentation and bacteriological results between their two stays in the Nuclear Medicine Department. They were therefore considered as independent cases. Median time between 18 F-FDG PET/CT and SPECT was 3 days, with no change in antimicrobial therapy and no surgery during this period. Both examinations were routinely performed as soon as possible, without order of priority, independently of their respective results.
Broad antibiotic treatment was initiated in all patients after the onset of infection and diagnostic measurements, and was adjusted by clinical presentation and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Baseline characteristics are reported in Table 1 .
Infectious Status Groups
VAD-specific infections
15 patients were classified as having VAD-specific infections: Five as pump and/or canula infections, with positive microbiology culture at explantation. Among these patients, four (80%) had also positive blood culture before LVAD explantation. Ten as superficial VAD-specific percutaneous DL infections, with positive culture of purulent issue around the exit site of the DL. One patient presented only cutaneous ulcer at DL exit site. No surgical debridement was performed.
VAD-related infections
6 patients were classified as having VAD-related infections: One patient presented repeat blood cultures positive for Staphylococcus aureus , with fever and local pain. Ultrasound imaging and CT found a purulent collection at the surgical site, corresponding to a VAD-related mediastinitis (patient #10). The repeat blood cultures of five patients were found to be positive to Pasteurella multicoda , Klebsiella pneumoniae (two patients), Streptococcus oralis , and Enterococcus faecalis (two patients). They all had fever > 38 °C. No patient presented symptoms of respiratory or digestive infections.
Non-VAD infections
3 patients were classified as having non-VAD-related infections: 1 patient (patient #23) presented a severe respiratory sepsis before the implantation of the Heartmate II, with blood culture, tracheal suction and arterial line culture positive for S. aureus. The LVAD was implanted under cover of antibiotics. Despite three different lines of antibiotherapy, and pleural effusion draining, the patient presented a recurrent fever 2 months later. The CT showed an aspect of bilateral infectious pneumonitis. There was no purulent issue at the exit site of the DL and no BSI detectable after the implantation of the LVAD. 1 patient presented a cholecystitis asserted by US imaging, with blood culture positive for Escherichia coli (patient #24). 1 patient had a surgery for colorectal cancer, 1 year after the implantation of his Heartware, with positive blood culture to E. faecalis few days after the surgery (patient #22).
Performance of 18F-FDG PET/CT
Visual analysis
Based on visual analysis, 18 F-FDG PET/CT accuracy was 91.6%, with sensitivity, specificity, predictive positive value, and predictive negative value of 95.2%, 66.7%, 95.2%, and 66.7%, respectively. PET/CT and leucocyte scintigraphy results are presented in Table 2 . Table 2 Diagnostic performance of PET/CT and leucocyte scintigraphy Sensitivity Specificity PPV NPV Accuracy 18 F-FDG PET/CT visual analysis 95.2 (20/21) 66.7 (2/3) 95.2 (20/21) 66.7 (2/3) 91.6 (22/24) 18 F-FDG PET/CT quantitative analysis 90 (19/21) 66.7 (2/3) 95 (19/20) 50 (2/4) 87.5 (21/24) SPECT 71.4 (15/21) 100 (3/3) 100 (15/15) 33.3 (3/9) 75 (18/24)
PET/CT examination results were positive in 20 patients out of the 21 patients with VAD-specific or VAD-related infection.
One patient had false-negative PET/CT examination results, with clinical evidence of infection (patient #16; Table 3 ). This patient had a septic shock a few days after the implantation of a Heartware in bridge-to-transplant. Blood cultures as well as CVC culture were positive to E. faecalis . The patient was considered as having a VAD-related infection. 18 F-FDG PET/CT and leucocyte scintigraphy were performed 30 days after the initiation of antibiotics and 33 days after the implantation of the LVAD. Both examinations were negative. Table 3 Results of 18 F-FDG PET/CT and leucocyte scintigraphy in patients with suspected LVAD infection Patients Sex (man/woman), age, type of LVAD Clinical presentation Culture results Antibiotherapy (days) PET results (visual analysis) LS results Infection status #1 M/48/HM II PI Positive blood culture: Enterobacter cloacae Purulence issue at DL exit site: Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Enterobacter cloacae , Staphylococcus haemolyticus Positive culture of LVAD after explantation: negative gram Bacillus ( subculture negative ) − + (DL + C) − VAD-specific (pump) #2 M/58/HM II Fever, PI Positive culture of LVAD after explantation: Propionibacteirum acnes − + (DL + C) + (C) VAD-specific (pump) #3 W/59/HM II PI Purulence issue at DL exit site: Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Corynebacterium Positive culture of LVAD after explantation: Staphylococcus epidermidis , negative - coagulase Staphylococcus 9 + (DL + C) + (DL + C) VAD-specific (pump) #4 M/43/HM II Tumefaction around outflow cannula (CT, US) Negative − + (DL + C) + (DL + C) VAD-specific (pump) #5 M/43/HM II PI Purulence issue at DL exit site: Staphylococcus aureus Positive blood culture: Staphylococcus aureus Purulent collection around the HM II (cannulas, pocket and pump) seen at explantation of the LVAD, positive culture: Staphylococcus aureus 10 + (DL + C) + (DL + C) VAD-specific (pump) #6 M/66/HM II PI Purulence issue at DL exit site: Escherichia coli , Citrobacter koseri , Enterobacter cloacae , Klebsiella oxytoca Positive culture of LVAD after explantation: Citrobacter koseri − + (DL) + (DL) VAD-specific (DL) #7 M/66/HM II PI Purulence issue at DL exit site: Enterobacter cloacae 3 + (DL) + (DL) VAD-specific (DL) #8 M/54/HW PI Purulence issue at DL exit site: Bacillus cereus , Corynebacterium , Staphylococcus epidermidis , Corynebacterium tuberculostearicum − + (DL) + (DL) VAD-specific (DL) #9 M/56/HM II PI Purulence issue at DL exit site: Staphylococcus aureus − + (DL) + (DL) VAD-specific (DL) #10 M/71/HM II Fever, PI Purulence issue at DL exit site: Staphylococcus haemolyticus 210 + (DL + C) − VAD-specific (DL) #11 M/59/HM II PI Purulence issue at DL exit site: Staphylococcus aureus − + (DL) + (DL) VAD-specific (DL) #12 M/58/HW PI Purulence issue at DL exit site: Staphylococcus epidermidis , Staphylococcus lugdunensis − + (DL) + (DL) VAD-specific (DL) #13 M/72/J Cutaneous ulcer of driveline exit site Negative − + (DL) − VAD-specific (DL) #14 M/28/HM II PI Purulence issue at DL exit site: Staphylococcus aureus − + (DL) + (DL) VAD-specific (DL) #15 W/41/HW PI, abdominal pain Purulence issue at DL exit site: Staphylococcus aureus 60 + (DL) − VAD-specific (DL) #16 M/53/HW Septic shock Positive blood culture: Enterococcus faecalis 39 − − VAD-related #17 M/60/HW Fever, PI – Positive blood culture: Streptococcus oralis – Purulence issue at DL exit site: Corynebacterium 30 + (DL) − VAD-related #18 M/78/HM II Biological inflammatory syndrome of unknown origin, CRP 274 mg·L −1 ) Positive blood culture: Pasteurella multicoda 11 + (DL + C) + (DL + C) VAD-related #19 W/56/J Fever Positive blood culture: Klebsiella pneumoniae , Staphylococcus haemolyticus 15 + (DL) − VAD-related #20 M/50/HW Fever Positive blood culture: Staphylococcus aureus 45 + (DL + retrosternal collection) + (DL + retrosternal collection) VAD-related #21 M/72/J Fever Positive blood culture: Klebsiella pneumoniae 120 + (C) + (C) VAD-related #22 M/52/HW Sepsis after surgery for colorectal cancer Positive blood culture: Enterococcus faecalis − − − Non-VAD-related #23 M/56/HM II Fever, respiratory symptoms Positive blood culture: Staphylococcus aureus Cytobacteriological sputum: Staphylococcus aureus 60 + (DL) − Non-VAD-related (pneumonia) #24 M/68/HM II Fever, abdominal pain Positive blood culture: Escherichia coli Cholecystitis documented on CT and echography − − − Non-VAD-related (cholecystitis) Type of LVAD: HW , Heartware; HM II , Heartmate II; J , Jarvik 2000; clinical symptoms: PI , purulence issue at driveline exit site; DL , driveline; infection status: +, positive; −, negative; C , cardiac part of LVAD (pump, cannula, pocket); DL , driveline
One patient presented a lower respiratory tract infection (non-VAD-related, Figure 3 , patient #23; Table 3 ). 18 F-FDG PET/CT and leucocyte scintigraphy were performed 60 days after the initiation of antibiotics and 61 days after the implantation of the LVAD. An uptake was found along the DL, from the exit of the pump to the abdominal exit site (with a SUV max of 4.2). Leucocyte scintigraphy did not find any uptake on the DL or the cardiac part of the LVAD. Figure 3 Example of discordance between 18 F-FDG PET/CT uptake and leucocyte-labeled scintigraphy for the driveline. ( A ) 18 F-FDG PET/CT scan showing a linear uptake along the entire driveline, grade B, without extension to soft tissues (3D view, red curved arrow, axial views, white arrows). No uptake was remarkable along the cardiac-LVAD (Heartmate II). ( B ) Leucocyte-labeled scintigraphy found no uptake on the driveline (white arrows) or cardiac-LVAD-device. It was interpreted as negative. This patient (patient #23) presented a serious respiratory infection at the moment of the implantation of the Heartmate II. Bacteriological examination of sputum and hemoculture were positive to Staphylococcus aureus . The 18 F-FDG PET/CT scan and the leucocyte-labeled scintigraphy were both completed 2 months after the beginning of the antibiotherapy. The patient was classified as non-VAD-related infection, and the 18 F-FDG PET/CT scan was considered as false positive
Quantitative analysis
The SUV max of 4.5 was determined from the ROC curve as a cutoff point differentiating positive and negative infection statuses. Using this cutoff, 18 F-FDG PET/CT accuracy was 87.5%, with sensitivity, specificity, predictive positive value, and predictive negative values of 90%, 66.7%, 95%, and 50%, respectively.
Comparison of visual and quantitative 18F-FDG PET/CT reading scales
There was no significant difference between visual and quantitative analyses of 18 F-FDG PET/CT. Sensitivity, PPV, and NPV were slightly better with visual analysis (95.2%, 95.2%, and 66.7%, respectively) than with quantitative scale (90%, 95%, and 50%, respectively) but did not reach significance ( P = 0.32, 0.47, and 0.29, respectively). The specificity was the same for both visual and quantitative analyses (66.7%).
Performance of Leucocyte Scintigraphy
Radiolabeled leucocyte scintigraphy SPECT accuracy was 75%, with a sensitivity, specificity, predictive positive value, and predictive negative values, respectively, of 71.4%, 100%, 100%, and 33.3%.
Leucocyte scintigraphy examination results were positive in 14 patients out of the 21 patients with VAD-specific or VAD-related infection.
Seven patients had false-negative leucocyte scintigraphy results with clinical or bacteriological evidence of infection. A bacteriological proof of infection (positive purulence at the exit site of the DL/positive blood culture/positive culture of LVAD) was found in six patients. One patient presented only a rapidly evolving cutaneous ulcer at the DL exit site with a scab, without any positive bacteriological analysis (patient #13; Table 3 ). However, he was considered as infected at the DL exit site of the LVAD and received antibiotics after undergoing PET/CT and leucocyte scintigraphy. For the seven false-negative cases, an antibiotherapy was initiated in five patients (patients #10, 15, 16, 17 and 19; Table 3 ) before nuclear tests.
There were no false-positive cases (leucocyte scintigraphy negative in all three cases of non-VAD-related infection), leading to a specificity of 100%.
Comparison of 18F-FDG PET/CT and Radiolabeled Leucocyte Scintigraphy SPECT Results
The sensitivity of 18 F-FDG PET/CT (visual analysis) was significantly higher than leucocyte scintigraphy ( P = 0.01). Leucocyte scintigraphy had better specificity (100%) than 18 F-FDG PET/CT (66.7%) but the difference did not reach significance ( P = 0.32). There was no significant difference between 18 F-FDG PET/CT and leucocyte scintigraphy for the PPV ( P = 0.31) and NPV ( P = 0.14).
Discussion
Diagnosis of LVAD infections is sometimes difficult to make, and it is considerably improved by multimodality imaging. Given that LVAD infections are associated to an important morbidity and mortality, it is helpful to rapidly target the good examination in order to avoid noncontributory results. Currently, there is no consensus on the nuclear examination technique to prioritise, or the criteria for interpretation. The main finding of the present study is that 18 F-FDG PET/CT shows better sensitivity than leucocyte scintigraphy for detecting LVAD infections. Both visual and quantitative analyses of 18 F-FDG PET/CT allow high diagnostic performance without statistical significant difference and should be combined for optimal image interpretation.
18F-FDG PET/CT
PET/CT has several advantages: its availability, easier protocol and good spatial resolution. It enables imaging all possible sites of infection (pocket/generators, leads) and extracardiac complications at the same time (metastatic infection and septic emboli). Salomäki et al reported that diagnostic performances of 18 F-FDG PET/CT are better for the detection of paravalvular infection associated with prosthetic valve endocarditis than with native valve endocarditis. Prosthetic valve endocarditis could cause more abscesses than native valve endocarditis and therefore be more detectable on imaging because of a large amount of inflammatory cells.
No consensus exists concerning the criteria of interpretation for 18 F-FDG PET/CT in LVAD infections. Jimenez-Ballvé et al compared different interpretation criteria in prosthetic infective and CIED infections, and the best method appeared to be a visual analysis of PET images both with and without attenuation correction. This method was particularly useful when evaluating the presence of artifacts due to the presence of metal components. They also found a good accuracy of quantitative analysis, with an optimal SUV max threshold of 5.5 (vs 4.5 in our study). However, it is difficult to establish a fixed threshold to discriminate between physiological and pathological uptakes, as there are many factors influencing the uptake. This lack of reliability is increased with the use of different PET cameras.
In another study, Avramovic et al found that the use of the metabolic volume yields very high accuracy in the detection of LVAD DL infections, but this criterion was not explored in our study.
However, 18 F-FDG PET/CT also presents some limitations. The most important one is certainly its lack of specificity since increased glucose utilization can be seen in numerous neoplastic, postoperative, inflammatory, and infectious processes. An optimal preparation is also required with a high-fat low-carbon diet, in order to avoid physiological myocardial uptake and potential sources of misinterpretation.
Finally, the timing of 18 F-FDG PET/CT remains controversial shortly after surgery, because of FDG uptake in postoperative inflammation. In that context, leucocyte scintigraphy could be more specific than PET/CT and could be considered a better option.
In a meta-analysis, Juneau et al reported high sensitivity (87%) and specificity (94%) of 18 F-FDG PET/CT in the diagnosis of CIED infection. We found specificity of 66.7%, but this result was due to the low proportion of non-VAD-related, infected patients (3/24) with one false-positive result, leading to a weak specificity, probably not reflecting reality. In this study, the sensitivity of 18 F-FDG PET/CT was 95.2%. It is better than that in Juneau’s meta-analysis, but this difference could be due to the fact that they analyzed a different cardiac device (10 studies about CIED infections, one study about LVAD infections exclusively). Dell’Aquila et al performed 18 F-FDG PET/CT in 31 patients with LVAD for a suspicion of infection, and found sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 80%, closer to our findings.
Leucocyte Scintigraphy
By targeting the main cells involved in infectious processes, leucocyte scintigraphy is an interesting imaging technique for suspicion of LVAD infections. However, there are some limitations that need to be mentioned. First, radiolabeling of leukocytes involves direct handling of blood products. Second, patients have to come for 2 days straight, and the signal detected with leucocyte scintigraphy is weak on 24 hours post-injection images. Leucocyte scintigraphy is also lengthier than 18 F-FDG PET/CT: the examination requires the acquisition of images 30 minutes, and 4-6 and 20-24 hours after injection of the radiotracer. Finally, the spatial resolution and sensitivity are intrinsically lower in single-photon γ cameras than those in PET systems. There are few studies evaluating the diagnostic performance of leucocyte scintigraphy in LVAD infections. Erba et al reported sensitivity of 94% and specificity of 100% in 63 patients for a suspected device-related infection, whereas a small study that enrolled 13 LVAD patients reported sensitivity and specificity of 100%. In this study, we reported sensitivity of 71.4% due to an important number of false negatives of leucocyte scintigraphy (N = 7). This could be explained by the initiation of antibiotherapy in five patients in our study, whereas no antibiotherapy was initiated before leucocyte scintigraphy in Erba’s study.
Discordant Cases
There were seven discordant cases between PET and leucocyte scintigraphy results. Six patients presented an infection (4 VAD-specific infection and 2 VAD-related infection), with true positive PET results and false-negative SPECT. The proportion of false negatives with leucocyte scintigraphy was more important for the interpretation of the DL site (N = 3) than the cardiac device (N = 1).
In total, 18 F-FDG PET/CT found more uptake foci on the DL (N = 20) than leucocyte scintigraphy (N = 12). In most cases of both positive PET/CT and leucocyte scintigraphy for the DL, the FDG uptake was extended to soft tissues nearby (grade C). On the contrary, focal or segmentary uptake on 18 F-FDG PET/CT without extension to soft tissue (grade B) was rather associated to negative leucocyte scintigraphy results for the DL. This difference could partly be explained by the lower spatial resolution of leucocyte scintigraphy (< 10-15 mm), since septic foci extended along the DL without extension to soft tissue are thin, and therefore harder to visualize. Given the better spatial resolution of 18 F-FDG PET/CT relative to scintigraphy, 18 F-FDG PET/CT could be more performant to see tiny amount of septic material.
In five patients of the seven discordant cases, nuclear tests were performed days to weeks after treatment initiation, where the acute accumulation of leucocytes is replaced by chronic inflammatory such as lymphocytes and plasma cells. This could have increased the proportion of false negatives of leucocyte scintigraphy. In contrast, 18 F-FDG PET/CT showed higher sensitivity but lower specificity since FDG uptake was seen in both inflammatory and infectious process.
One patient had false-positive 18 F-FDG PET/CT with true negative leucocyte scintigraphy findings (#patient 23, description in “ Results ” section). He presented a severe respiratory sepsis to S. aureus , with no clinical or biological evidence of LVAD infection. Nuclear tests were realized 63 days after the implantation of a Heartmate II, under antibiotherapy. FDG uptake was seen along the DL, without extension to soft tissues. Given the short delay between surgery and the timing of PET/CT, the uptake could have reflected nonspecific local inflammation.
Limitations
This study has some limitations: its retrospective design, the small number of patients, and the population selection, given that all patients had a clinical suspicion of infection (specific LVAD infection, VAD-related infection, or non-VAD-related infection). This population, however, reflects clinical routine. Half of the patients received antibiotics before nuclear medicine examinations which could have affected the sensitivity of both methods. Finally, the cohort was heterogenous since patients had different types of LVAD (Heartware, Heartmate, Jarvik), with different characteristics which could influence the evolution of the infectious process.
New Knowledge Gained
18 F-FDG PET/CT appears to be more sensitive than leucocyte scintigraphy for the detection of LVAD infections. However, leucocyte scintigraphy presents high specificity. 18 F-FDG PET/CT could be proposed as first-line nuclear medicine procedure and completed with leucocyte scintigraphy in equivocal cases.
Conclusion
Nuclear imaging appears to be helpful for diagnosing and localizing LVAD infections, and should be part of the diagnostic criteria, to adapt patient management. 18 F-FDG PET/CT and radiolabeled leucocyte scintigraphy have high accuracy in the diagnosis of infections in patients carrying ventricular devices, with significantly higher sensitivity for 18 F-FDG PET/CT. Given its high sensitivity, and its easier protocol, 18 F-FDG PET/CT could be proposed as first-line nuclear medicine procedure. Both visual and quantitative analyses of 18 F-FDG PET/CT allow high diagnostic performance and should be combined for optimal image interpretation. The validity of this imaging strategy in patients with suspected infection of VADs will need to be confirmed in a prospective clinical study with a larger number of patients.