Introduction
Primary percutaneous coronary artery intervention (PPCI) is the standard of care for ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). , Restoring normal coronary blood flow and normal myocardial perfusion are primary goals for the interventional cardiologist performing the procedure. In STEMI, approximately 40 to 70% of patients undergoing PPCI have multivessel coronary artery disease (CAD). ,
PCI options for patients with STEMI and multivessel disease include the following: (1) culprit artery—only primary PCI (PPCI), with PCI of non-culprit arteries only for spontaneous ischemia or intermediate- or high-risk findings on pre-discharge non-invasive testing, including stress testing and (2) culprit artery—only PPCI followed by staged routine PCI of non-culprit vessels. The decision on which approach to use has been a subject of debate. Over the last several years, observational studies, randomized controlled trials (RCTs), and meta-analyses comparing PCI strategies in STEMI patients have been reported, , , , , , , , , , but with differing inclusion criteria, study protocols, timing of multivessel PCI, statistical heterogeneity, and variable endpoints. Nevertheless, four RCTs performed to date (PRAMI, CvLPRIT, DANAMI 3 PRIMULTI and PRAGUE-13) suggest that a follow-up staged strategy of routine multivessel PCI to the non-culprit may be beneficial and safe in STEMI patients. , , However, cost-effectiveness discussions would have to include the incremental costs associated with routine revascularization of non-culprit vessels. In addition, revascularization of non-culprit vessels could result in revascularization of functionally insignificant stenosis. In a recent Cochrane Database systematic review of complete vs. infarct-only revascularization in the setting of STEMI, the conclusion was that complete revascularization may be superior due to lower non-fatal myocardial infarction, revascularization, and mortality though the evidence quality as it currently stands is low.
Guidelines for Revascularization Post-STEMI
The 2013 American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions guidelines (ACC/AHA) recommended complete revascularization (CR) strategy as Class III (with potential harm) during PCI of STEMI, with evidence derived largely from observational studies. In a recent 2015 focused update on PPCI in STEMI patients, taking into account this new evidence, the recommendation for non-culprit PCI in hemodynamically stable patients was upgraded to a class-IIb recommendation.
However, within the interventional cardiology community, agreement with this recommendation is not uniform. The writing committee of the ACC/AHA 2015 focused update emphasized that this change should not be interpreted as endorsing the routine performance of multivessel PCI in all patients with STEMI and multivessel disease. They advised that when considering the indications for and timing of post-PPCI, non-culprit intervention, physicians should integrate clinical data, lesion severity/complexity, and risk of contrast nephropathy to determine an optimal strategy. In addition, functional significance of lesions in the form of fractional flow reserve has become a key point in studies rather than anatomy alone. In the recently published Compare-Acute study, fractional flow reserve (FFR) was performed on patients with multivessel disease post-STEMI to determine subsequent revascularization of the non-infarct-related arteries. The primary outcome of reduced MACCE (which included all-cause mortality, non-fatal myocardial infarction, any revascularization, and cerebrovascular events) in the FFR-guided revascularization arm was met but the statistical significance was reached based on a reduction in subsequent revascularization compared to the infarct-artery-only guided arm.
What Have We Learned From Ischemia-Guided Therapy in Stable Ischemic Heart Disease Trials That Might Help Guide This Decision?
Within patients eligible for elective PCI, lesion-based ischemia using invasive fractional flow reserve (FFR) as compared to an anatomic approach has been investigated. In the Fractional Flow Reserve vs. Angiography for Multivessel Evaluation (FAME) Trial, 1,005 patients with known multivessel CAD were randomized to an approach of complete revascularization with PCI vs. FFR-guided PCI with a cut-off FFR of < 0.80. The results of this trial showed a reduction in the primary endpoint of death, myocardial infarction, or repeat revascularization in the patients undergoing FFR-guided PCI vs. the complete revascularization arm (13.2% vs 18.3%, P = .02).
Additionally, in the Clinical Outcomes Using Revascularization and Aggressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE) trial, patients with obstructive coronary artery disease were randomized to optimal medical therapy (OMT) vs. revascularization in addition to the OMT. For patients with > 70% proximal epicardial stenosis, evidence of electrographic abnormalities in the form of ST segment depressions or T wave inversions at rest or inducible ischemia non-invasive testing was required. For those patients with > 80% proximal epicardial stenosis and angina symptoms, confirmation of ischemia was not required. The primary endpoint of all-cause death or MI was not statistically different between the two arms (18.5% OMT vs. 19.0% OMT plus revascularization, P = .62). Two important factors, though, contribute to the discussion of ischemia-guided revascularization. The first is in subsequent core lab analysis of those patients using nuclear imaging as the inclusion criteria for the ischemia component of the criteria; approximately 60% of the patients had no or mild ischemia. The second is that enrollment was based on a binary site assessment of ischemia presence. It did not determine anatomic location of ischemia as related to the epicardial lesions identified and subsequently revascularized.
The currently enrolling NIH-NHLBI sponsored International Study of Comparative Health Effectiveness with Medical and Invasive Approaches (ISCHEMIA) Trial is looking at the decision to revascularize patients in addition to optimal medical therapy alone in patients with stable ischemic heart disease who demonstrate moderate or greater ischemia on one of the several non-invasive stress tests (SPECT, PET, echocardiography, MR, or exercise tolerance testing alone). For patients undergoing SPECT for determination of ischemia, a cut-off of 10% is used to define moderate ischemia. Similar thresholds were determined for the other modalities based on annualized mortality rates.
Future Directions
The question remains if non-culprit artery stenosis in the setting of STEMI can be compared to the coronary artery stenosis evaluated in the SIHD studies above? In addition to FFR to evaluate functional significance of these lesions, can non-invasive evaluation with myocardial perfusion imaging guide the decision process on revascularization of these lesions? The nuclear cardiology community is in need of a study to address this question of ischemia-guided revascularization of non-culprit obstructive coronary artery disease in the setting of STEMI. As previously discussed, a large proportion of patients with STEMI have multivessel disease at the time of STEMI, with rates ranging from approximately 40 to 70%. We propose another option, based on the FAME trials and supported by published SPECT trial as well, that employs non-invasive assessment of ischemia to guide staged intervention of all non-culprit lesions. Gated-SPECT MPI with stress (either exercise or pharmacological) would allow evaluation of the extent and severity of myocardial ischemia, regional wall motion, and left ventricular function, including localization of ischemia, as well as measurement of the infarct extent. Prior studies have shown safety in performing pharmacologic nuclear stress testing post myocardial infarction.
The study design would include 100 STEMI patients with multivessel CAD over 18 years old, stable hemodynamically, who received a primary PCI (target vessel revascularization only) during the first 12 hours after the initial pain episode. The multivessel disease would be defined as stenosis in an epicardial vessel in addition to the culprit artery, greater than 70% according to the opinion of two experienced observers and quantitative analysis, in vessels with ≥ 2.5 mm diameter.
Patients would be eligible to participate if they have multivessel disease and have undergone a primary PCI for the culprit-vessel in the index hospitalization. Patients would be randomized to a strategy of routine elective PCI of non-culprit vessels during the index hospitalization or would undergo pharmacological stress-rest MPI followed if necessary by PCI of non-culprit vessels. Non-culprit vessel PCI would be recommended for patients with at least mild ischemia (5% or more of ischemic myocardium). For non-culprit vessel PCI, the plan would be for complete revascularization.
Timing of SPECT MPI Following the Culprit Lesion PCI
For those patients who are randomized to the MPI arm, the pharmacologic stress-rest MPI would be performed during the index hospitalization. In the INSPIRE (Adenosine Sestamibi Post-Infarction Evaluation) trial, patients underwent pharmacologic MPI within 10 days of an acute myocardial infarction as well as repeat diagnostic testing at 1-year follow-up (Figure 1 ). Higher event rates of cardiac events/death and re-infarction were noted in those patients with higher risk nuclear stress tests using criteria including perfusion defect size, extent of ischemia, and ejection fraction. Figure 1 Proposed study for utilization of SPECT diagnosed ischemia prior to multivessel revascularization post-STEMI
Semi-quantitative visual interpretation of images will employ short-axis, vertical long-axis, and horizontal long-axis tomograms divided into 17 segments. Each segment will be scored by the consensus of two expert independent observers unaware of the clinical and angiographic data, using a five-point scoring system (from 0 = normal to 4 = absence of myocardial uptake). Summed stress, summed rest, and summed difference scores (SSS, SRS, and SDS) will be obtained. If the summed difference score is 4 or greater it will be considered to represent the presence of stress-induced ischemia. Calculation of percentage ischemia using this semi-quantitative visual interpretation will be the SDS/64. Quantitative software, when available, would be utilized as well for determination of percentage ischemia.
All patients would receive standard guideline-directed medical therapy including anti-ischemic and secondary prevention care. Patients would be followed up at intervals of 1, 6, and 12 months after the index event. Information on clinical outcomes and MACE would be collected at the follow-up visits. At 1 year, all patients would undergo a gated-SPECT MPI using pharmacological stress (while on anti-ischemic medication) for assessment of ischemia. The primary endpoint of this proposed trial would be the percent ischemic myocardium at 1 year of follow-up in the revascularization arm vs. the optimal medical therapy alone arm. The MPI scans would be interpreted by nuclear physicians who are unaware of treatment allocation.
This study would allow assessment of whether a strategy of ischemia-guided non-culprit vessel PCI is non-inferior to routine non-culprit vessel PCI post-PPCI.
Conclusions
The benefits of routine revascularization of non-culprit obstructive coronary artery disease in the setting of STEMI remain unclear. The power of ischemic evaluation with nuclear stress testing may be beneficial in identifying lesions for revascularization that have functional significance vs. an approach of complete revascularization independent of proven functional significance. Further studies are needed to identify the optimal patient centric approach to this dilemma.