“A quick glance at selected topics in this issue” aims to highlight contents of the Journal and provides a quick review to the readers. We realize that many of you do not have time to read all journals or attend all national meetings. For that reason, every issue of the JNC includes two types of literature reviews. One summarizing recent key nuclear cardiology articles that have been published in journals other than ours, while the second outlines select publications in the general cardiovascular disease literature that have relevance to our field. Also included is a review of key imaging abstracts presented at the 2017 American Heart Association Scientific Sessions which was held in Chicago, Illinois, November 10–14, 2017 ( ).
Other entries include manuscripts on technical issues (Acquiring and measuring myocardial blood flow: Method, technique, and QA; ) and what goes on internationally (Left ventricular functional parameters by gated SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging in a Latin American country; ). These contributions compliment a great selection of original articles with accompanying editorials, brief reports, a CME review paper, ‘What is this image’ and ‘Images that Teach.’ Many of the original articles also have power point slides. The abstract of the lead original article on ‘Comparison of left ventricular shape by gated SPECT imaging in diabetic and nondiabetic patients with normal myocardial perfusion: A propensity score analysis’ by Nappi et al. has also been translated into Spanish, Chinese, and French in response to requests from the international readership. PowerPoint slides from this paper can be found by searching doi; . Guidelines in review: Comparison of ESC and ACC/AHA guidelines for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable coronary artery disease ( ) is accompanied by the American ( ) and European ( ) perspectives. The review article discusses the absolute quantification of myocardial blood flow ( ), while the debate article with editorial is on whether the assessment of dyssynchrony by gated myocardial perfusion imaging does or does not improve patient management ( ; ; ). The relatively new ‘Case Presentation Corner’ this time focuses on the longitudinal care of a patient with cardiac sarcoidosis.
Our comments on a few selected papers noted below are therefore only the tip of the iceberg. These papers were selected at random and we sincerely believe all original articles serve a purpose, provide great value, and have undergone an intense peer review.
Diabetes mellitus is an independent risk factor for the development of LV remodeling and heart failure. The alterations in LV structure and function decrease cardiac performance leading to heart failure and may occur independently from CAD. The early identification of diabetics that are prone to develop LV remodeling might be of considerable importance to improve outcome. Nappi et al. ( ) compare LV shape characteristics by measuring LV shape index derived from gated SPECT in diabetic and nondiabetic patients without overt CAD and normal LVEF after matching for demographic characteristics, coronary risk factors, and stress type to identify early LV remodeling changes. After matching clinical characteristics by propensity score analysis, diabetic patients showed a higher prevalence of abnormal LV shape indices compared to nondiabetic patients. Thus, gated SPECT-derived LV shape indices appear useful for identifying early LV remodeling in diabetic patients.
In patients who cannot exercise, both dobutamine stress echocardiography (DSE) and stress myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) are widely used for the evaluation of stress-induced myocardial ischemia, and provide significant prognostic information. Boiten et al. from Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands ( ) study the long-term prognostic value of DSE compared to dobutamine MPI in 301 patients unable to perform exercise testing. All patients underwent simultaneous dobutamine stress echocardiography and dobutamine stress 99m-Tc Sestamibi SPECT MPI for the evaluation of suspected or known CAD. Abnormal DSE was detected in 182 (60%) patients, whereas 198 (66%) patients had an abnormal MPI. The agreement between DSE and MPI was 82%. Multivariable analysis demonstrated that an abnormal DSE or an abnormal MPI was comparable in predicting cardiac mortality and hard cardiac events in patients unable to perform exercise testing. In a clinical setting, both techniques can be used interchangeably to classify patients as low or high risk for cardiac events.
Sympathetic system abnormalities have been reported in sepsis-related cardiac dysfunction. Clerc et al. from France ( ) evaluate the potential of 123 I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine ( 123 I-MIBG) SPECT imaging for the noninvasive assessment of changes in cardiac sympathetic activity occurring in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced experimental acute sepsis in a rat model. Sepsis was induced in male Wistar rats by intraperitoneal injection of lipopolysaccharide ( n = 16), whereas control animals ( n = 7) were injected with NaCl 0.9%. Global and 17-segment SPECT image analysis indicated that early 123 I-MIBG activity was not affected by LPS treatment, whereas late cardiac tracer activity was significantly decreased in LPS-treated animals. Thus, the cardiac washout of 123 I-MIBG was significantly higher in LPS-treated than that in control animals. This study describes for the first time the potential of 123 I-MIBG nuclear imaging for the noninvasive in vivo monitoring of abnormalities in sympathetic cardiac activity occurring in an experimental model of LPS-induced acute sepsis.
Nudi et al. from Italy ( ) study the fate of fixed perfusion defects from prior myocardial infarction in 3691 patients on serial MPI. They note that a vast majority of patients (86%) had persistent fixed perfusion defects. The consistency was even higher in the patients with moderate or severe necrosis/defects (99%). Neither type nor site of interval coronary revascularization significantly impacted the presence and extent of myocardial defects/necrosis, confirming that once established, necrosis cannot be meaningfully reversed.
Jameria et al. ( ) study stress-only imaging, comparing upright and supine CZT camera acquisition to conventional gamma camera images with and without attenuation correction, with coronary angiography as a reference. The authors find that upright and supine stress-only imaging on a CZT camera to be statistically noninferior for detection of angiographic coronary artery disease compared to stress-only attenuation-corrected imaging with a conventional Anger camera. For some readers, stress-only CZT images may result in lower overall diagnostic sensitivity with an offsetting improvement in specificity. Addition of rest CZT images may increase sensitivity, but at a loss of specificity.
Using phase analysis of gated SPECT MPI, Malhotra et al. ( ) study the relationship between LV dyssynchrony (LVD) and incident VT (ventricular tachyarrhythmia) in 183 patients with LV systolic dysfunction. They also explore the interaction between LVD, LV scar burden, and parameters of systolic dysfunction severity as a mechanistic explanation for the genesis of VT. Ninety-eight percent of the patients with VT had evidence of LVD, and indices of LVD were more severe among those who had VT compared to those who did not. Among patients with HF and reduced LV ejection fraction, lack of LV dyssynchrony predicts almost a complete absence of ventricular tachyarrhythmia over long-term follow-up. Also a scar burden of > 6% further identified patients with LVD at the greatest risk of VT. Based on a small subgroup analysis, the authors also substantiate observations from clinical trials that effective resolution of LVD with cardiac resynchronization therapy may confer protection against incident VT.
Transient ischemic dilation (TID) is a potential nonperfusion marker of severe coronary artery disease. Gultekin et al from Ankara, Turkey ( ) demonstrate the incremental value of TID (≥ 1.20) in a cohort of patients with significant CAD who had recurrent symptoms post revascularization. 104 patients (62 patients had PCI (75 arteries) and 42 patients had CABG (104 arteries) were evaluated with follow-up stress SPECT MPI and repeat coronary angiography. The sensitivity for detecting obstructive CAD (reversible myocardial perfusion defects) was 61% for SPECT MPI alone, but increased significantly to 93% by the addition of TID as a diagnostic criterion ( P < 0.0001).
The diagnosis of myocarditis remains challenging as clinical presentation is variable and no single test can reliably confirm the diagnosis. Noninvasive assessment with the reference standard cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) has become an integral part in the diagnostic workup of patients with suspected myocarditis. Nensa et al. ( ) demonstrate the feasibility of FDG-PET in suspected myocarditis and compare with CMR using integrated PET/MRI. Using CMR (late gadolinium enhancement and/or T2 hyperintensity) as the standard of reference, sensitivity of PET was 74%, specificity was 97%, and diagnostic accuracy was 87%. The authors also note good agreement between FDG-PET and CMR findings on a per-patient basis and with the spatial distribution of imaging findings.
Common practice is to acquire separate CT scans during rest and stress for attenuation correction of SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging. Wells et al. ( ) demonstrate the feasibility of one CT acquired at stress to correct both rest and stress scans (1CT) and compare it with correction of each scan with its own CT (2CT). The authors found that differences between 1CT and 2CT resulted in small changes in summed scores (an increase in the summed rest score and an increase in the variability of the summed difference score) that are unlikely to be clinically significant. Thus, a single CT acquired at stress is feasible for attenuation correction of both rest and stress SPECT MPI.
Assessment and follow-up of left and right ventricular volumes and function are critical in the management of patients with left ventricular assist devices (LVADs). The primary imaging modality to monitor patients with continuous-flow LVADs is echocardiography, but its acoustic window is limited by overlap of the device with the heart, especially the right ventricle. Planar equilibrium radionuclide ventriculography (ERV) is feasible for the assessment of LV ejection fraction but is also limited by the overlap of the pump with the RV. Lairez et al. from Toulouse, France ( ) show the feasibility of tomographic-ERV for the accurate assessment of left and right ventricular volumes and function in 24 patients with LVADs and good correlation with functional status. Thus, tomographic-ERV offers a good alternative to transthoracic echocardiography to monitor and manage symptomatic patients.
The prognostic value of improved risk stratification with regadenoson-induced heart rate response (HRR) independent of MPI findings which is secondary to stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system is well known. Uzendu et al. from the University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama ( ) for the first time evaluate the heart rate response to regadenoson in 43 patients with atrial fibrillation and compare with 86 control patients that were in sinus rhythm at the time of MPI and did not have a history of atrial fibrillation. They show that the HRR was not different between the 2 groups. However, the association of a blunted HRR (marker of autonomic dysfunction) with mortality was limited to patients in sinus rhythm and was not demonstrated in those with atrial fibrillation. They hypothesize that the lack of association of HRR with outcomes in atrial fibrillation may be a reflection of the differential innervation of the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes by autonomic fibers and/or the opposing effects from activation of Adenosine A1 and A2A receptors.
We encourage the readers to read the several other articles in the Journal with accompanying scholarly and informative editorials that not only put the findings in perspectives but also outline future directions. We would like to hear your comments as we strive to gain knowledge and, in the process, improve patient care.