Anatomy and Function of the Cardiac Autonomic Nervous System
Cardiac activity is regulated through a combination of receptors, afferent (sensory) and efferent (effector) nerves, and effector systems. Receptors within the cardiovascular system, including chemoreceptors and baroreceptors, transmit signals through afferent cardiac nerves, reflecting cardiac activity or tissue injury. Afferent somatic nerve fibers travel within sympathetic and parasympathetic (vagal) nerves (Fig. 1 ). Most of the cardiac afferent nerves are parasympathetic or vagal afferents, traveling in the vagus nerve. A minority of them have their cell bodies located in the thoracic dorsal root ganglion, and are called ‘spinal afferents’ or sympathetic afferents as they use the sympathetic nerve trunks for passage. Sympathetic afferent neurons housed in the dorsal root ganglion project onto the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, particularly the lamina I and the intermediate gray matter. Nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) is the primary relay point for many important cardiopulmonary and cardiovascular reflexes by serving as a reception center for most cardiac afferent input as well as some visceral afferent input, whereas most of spinal afferent information is relayed onto the thalamus, parabrachial gray, and other brainstem and hypothalamic centers. Primary cardiac afferent neurons synapse to secondary afferent neurons producing reflexive parasympathetic and sympathetic responses via interactions among the NTS and several brainstem nuclei that initiate autonomic motor output. Cortical control centers are recognized to exert a modulatory effect on the autonomic nervous system, with input related to emotion, pain perception, and overall conscious state. Figure 1 Afferent autonomic pathways. NTS , nucleus tractus solitarius; RVLM , rostral ventrolateral medulla; CVLM , caudal ventrolateral medulla; DMV , dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus; NA , nucleus ambiguous; SSN , spinal sympathetic afferents
The efferent portion of the cardiac sympathetic division includes pre-ganglionic neuronal cells in the intermediolateral nucleus (IML) at the first 4–5 thoracic levels of the lateral gray column of the spinal cord (Figure 2 ). The pre-ganglionic sympathetic neurons leave the spinal cord through anterior roots reaching the cervicothoracic sympathetic nerve chain including the stellate ganglia, which are located anterior and lateral to the spine. From cell bodies in the cervicothoracic sympathetic chain, post-ganglionic fibers, the superior, middle, and inferior cardiac nerves, extend to the base of the heart. Post-ganglionic sympathetic fibers from the right stellate ganglion provide predominant innervation to the sinus node, right atrium, and anterior left ventricle. Fibers from the left stellate ganglion supply the A-V node, left atrium, and posterior aspect of the left ventricle. At the brainstem level, sympathetic motor nuclei are the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM) which is sympathoexcitatory and the caudal ventrolateral medulla (CVLM) which is sympathoinhibitory. Figure 2 Cardiac efferent autonomic innervation. NA , nucleus ambiguus; DMV , dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus; CVLM , caudal ventrolateral medulla; RVLM , rostral ventrolateral medulla; IML , intermediolateral nucleus
The parasympathetic division of the cardiac autonomic nervous system originates in the medulla oblongata, primarily from the nucleus ambiguous (NA), with contribution from the dorsal motor nucleus of vagus (DMV), and reaches the heart predominantly by the vagus nerve with some innervation from the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Cardiac parasympathetic neurons in the vagus are largely pre-ganglionic with intracardiac ganglia as their first relay center. Post-ganglionic sympathetic nerves and parasympathetic (branches of vagus and recurrent laryngeal) nerves converge at the cardiac surface forming the superficial and deep cardiac plexuses.
Autonomic neural structures physically located within cardiovascular tissue comprise the intrinsic cardiac nervous system. These intrinsic neural structures are believed to also have independent neuronal activity, separate from the central or peripheral nervous system components (e.g., following cardiac transplantation). The intrinsic cardiac nervous system is largely composed of ganglionated cardiac plexuses. These intricate networks of ganglia are mainly embedded within the epicardial fat on the posterior surfaces of the atria and the base of the great vessels. They provide myriad neuronal connections, descending into the myocardium and along the electrical conduction system of the heart. Three relatively large sympathetic cardiac nerves follow the three coronary vessels and are named the right and left coronary cardiac nerves and the left lateral cardiac nerve.
Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter for post-ganglionic parasympathetic and pre-ganglionic sympathetic nerves, whereas post-ganglionic sympathetic nerve transmission is mediated by norepinephrine. Activation of a post-ganglionic sympathetic nerve results in release of norepinephrine from the presynaptic nerve terminal located across the synaptic cleft from the cardiomyocyte (Figure 3 ). In addition to post-synaptic adrenergic receptor targets, beta-1 and beta-2, norepinephrine released into the synaptic cleft can also bind to presynaptic beta-2 adrenergic receptors that provide feedback which increases the rate of norepinephrine release from presynaptic sympathetic nerves, or alpha-2 receptors that decrease the rate of norepinephrine release. Figure 3 Cardiac adrenergic receptors and norepinephrine transport. NET , norepinephrine uptake transporter
Across the synaptic cleft, norepinephrine binds to post-synaptic adrenergic alpha (α) and beta (β) receptors producing a wide range of cardiac effects summarized in Table 1 . Post-synaptic α1 receptors are coupled to stimulatory G q proteins that activate phospholipase C, increasing inositol triphosphate and intracellular calcium. Through protein kinase C, this leads to phosphorylation of enzymes and alteration of ion channels leading to electrolyte transfer in and out of cells. Activation of α1 receptors results in smooth muscle contraction and peripheral arterial (and venous) vasoconstriction. Within the heart, norepinephrine increases contractile force of the left ventricle and mediates coronary artery vasoconstriction. Post-synaptic α2 receptors are also G-protein-coupled receptors, but are coupled to inhibitory G i protein. The G i protein inactivates adenylyl cyclase, decreasing cyclic adenosine monophosphate production from adenosine triphosphate. This prevents phosphokinase A activation by cyclic AMP (cAMP) so that proteins including phosphorylase kinase are not activated. Activation of post-synaptic α2 receptors results in constriction of vascular smooth muscle. This includes limited coronary artery vasoconstriction that may be over-ridden by the coronary vasodilatory effects of β2 activation. , Table 1 Types and actions of adrenergic receptors Adrenergic receptor LV inotropy Chronotropy LV diastolic filling rate Automaticity Conduction velocity Refractory period Large coronary tone Small coronary tone Alpha-1 ↑ — – – – – ↑ ↑ Alpha-2 ↓ — – – – – ↑ ↑ Beta-1 ↑↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↓ ↓ – Beta-2 ↑ ↑ ** ↓ ↑ – ↑ ⇊ – ** With stress
β1 and β2 adrenergic receptors bind to adenylyl cyclase and increase intracellular levels of cyclic AMP. β1 receptors predominate in the heart and are primarily responsible for ventricular contractility. Under resting conditions, sympathetic stimulation increases ventricular contractility by approximately 30%, and can double contractility during exercise or stress. Activation of post-synaptic β1 and β2 receptors increases heart rate by increasing the rate of phase 4 depolarization in the sinus node. β receptor stimulation has several electrophysiologic effects, including speeding electrical conduction of impulses in the heart and facilitating conduction through the atrioventricular (A-V) node. It shortens cellular effective refractory periods, thereby facilitating early and late afterdepolarizations, predisposing to premature depolarizations, particularly in “vulnerable” myocardial regions. Sympathetic nerve stimulation lowers the threshold for ventricular fibrillation. , In addition, a major role of β2 receptors is dilation of coronary arteries in response to stress. Beyond the role of β1 and β2 receptors, β3 and β4 adrenergic receptors have been identified as minor contributors to observed cardiac effects, with β3 receptors exhibiting a negative inotropic effect and β4 receptors exhibiting a positive inotropic effect on left ventricular contraction. , Sympathetic nerve stimulation also produces norepinephrine release by the adrenal glands, resulting in further cardiac effects.
Receptor polymorphisms that alter the effects of sympathetic nerve activation affect cardiac responses. For example, β2 adrenergic receptor polymorphisms containing isoleucine at locus 164 (Ile164), glycine at locus 16 (Gly16), and the combination of Gly16 and glutamine at locus 27 (Gln27) are associated with abnormal receptor-effector coupling or patterns of desensitization resulting in impaired exercise performance in heart failure patients. Nevertheless, attempts to document an association between single adrenergic receptor polymorphisms and rate of progression of heart failure have met with mixed results. , Other investigations have suggested that a combination of adrenergic polymorphisms may be associated with progression of heart failure and may also alter the clinical response of heart failure patients to beta-adrenergic blocker (β-blocker) therapy. In human subjects, the hereditary absence of loci 322–325 on the presynaptic α2 receptor (α2CDel322–325) impairs the ability of that receptor to block the release of norepinephrine into the sympathetic nerve cleft. Chronic increased release of norepinephrine is associated with onset and progression of heart failure, and the homozygous α2CDel322–325 deletion by itself was found to be associated with an adjusted odds ratio of 5.65 for progressive clinical heart failure. A variant of the β1 adrenergic receptor (β1Arg389) is associated with increased function of norepinephrine at the post-synaptic β1 receptor, but polymorphism alone was not observed to predict onset or progression of heart failure. With the combination of impaired inhibition of norepinephrine release at the presynaptic location by the reduced function α2c receptor and increased norepinephrine impact by the homozygous altered post-synaptic β1 receptor (β1Arg389), there was an adjusted odds ratio of 10.11 for increased onset or progression of heart failure. The authors suggest that genotyping at these two loci may be a useful approach for identification of persons at risk for heart failure or its progression, and those who may be candidates for early preventive measures. These findings are supported by a recent multicenter study in a pediatric heart failure population in which subjects with multiple adverse adrenergic receptor polymorphisms had more rapid progression of systolic and diastolic left ventricular dysfunction, but a more favorable response to β-adrenergic-blocking drugs compared to subjects without multiple adverse polymorphisms.
Autonomic cardiac effects result from a balance of sympathetic and parasympathetic tone, which may be determined by the relative extent and distribution of innervation in the heart. Atrial stretch, sensed by myelinated vagal afferents, results in a cardiac sympathetic reflex that increases heart rate as well as inhibits sympathetic renal tone, decreasing anti-diuretic hormone and vasopressin levels, and thus promoting sodium and water elimination. In the setting of cardiac ischemia, sympathetic activation is proarrhythmic, whereas parasympathetic activation is antiarrhythmic. Vagal tone is the predominant cardiac autonomic tone during sleep, suppressing SA node activity, especially in non-REM sleep. In REM sleep, however, there are phasic breakthrough surges of sympathetic domination producing increases in heart rate. The net autonomic tone on the sinus node under most resting conditions is vagal; however, the interval from one beat to the next is changing instantaneously reflecting the dual influence of both sympathetic and parasympathetic arms on the sinus node, and producing heart rate variability (HRV). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia is also a product of interplay between baseline vagal tone on the SA node, its suppression with inspiration, producing increased heart rate, and its stimulation with expiration, with decrease in heart rate.
Within the cardiac autonomic system, there are several reflex loops producing key regulatory functions. These reflex pathways take sensory feedback information and respond with immediate autonomic motor actions, thereby maintaining a homeostasis mechanism within the cardiovascular system. A representative example is the baroreceptor reflex that helps regulate blood pressure. The afferent arm is activated when mechanoreceptors of the carotid sinus and aortic arch sense stretch from increased intravascular pressure. This is carried via parasympathetic cardiac afferents in the ninth and tenth cranial nerves, to the NTS, which is the primary receiving and processing center for most cardiac autonomic afferent information. The NTS in turn sends out regulatory or reflex motor response via two channels: cardioinhibitory and sympathoinhibitory. The cardioinhibitory channel slows down the heart rate via activation of cardiovagal efferents of the nucleus ambiguus to the SA node. The sympathoinhibitory channel decreases total peripheral vascular resistance by connections to the CVLM that it activates, which in turn inhibits the RVLM. A second example is the Bezold-Jarisch reflex, a parasympathetic reflex initiated primarily by products of myocardial injury and inflammation where a chemical or mechanical stimulus is detected by vagal afferents innervating the ventricles that in turn may cause suppression of heart rate and blood pressure. While the efferent parasympathetic arm may respond in a cardioinhibitory fashion (i.e., decrease in HR, but no decrease in contractility?) to products of ischemia, the spinal or sympathetic afferents innervating the ventricles sense inflammation and injury, and are believed to play a role in realization of cardiac pain via their spinothalamic projections from lamina I neurons. They may also project from lamina I of the dorsal horn of spinal cord, to the IML in the lateral horn, which houses pre-ganglionic sympathetic motor neurons, creating a cardioexcitatory reflex, i.e., increase in HR and contractility. Additional autonomic reflexes are triggered by activation of receptors in the pulmonary arteries in response to increased intra-luminal pressure. During physiologically demanding conditions like exercise or hypoxia, reflex vasoconstriction and respiratory stimulation may result. Similar stressful conditions also trigger a sharp decline of the cardiovagal tone on the SA node, allowing physiologic or reflex tachycardia. Among indices used to assess increased overall cardiovascular risk, particularly propensity toward ventricular arrhythmias, HRV and baroreflex sensitivity (BRS) have been recognized.
Diagnosis of Altered Autonomic Innervation
Sympathetic Imaging Agents and Techniques
Detailed reviews of neural imaging agents have been published previously and are beyond the scope of this present manuscript.
123I-MIBG and Single-Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)
Briefly, 123 I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) is a radio-labeled norepinephrine analog that is taken up via the norepinephrine uptake-1 transporter into storage vesicles in cardiac presynaptic sympathetic nerve terminals. Cardiac sympathetic nerve activity can be characterized by a ratio of 123 I-MIBG myocardial to background mediastinal activity (H/M ratio) at 4 h following injection. The rate of 123 I-MIBG washout between 15 min and 4 h has been used to characterize sympathetic nerve tone. 123 I-MIBG was approved by the US Food & Drug Administration for use in patients with New York Heart Association class II or III heart failure and left ventricular ejection fraction ≤35% to help identify patients at lower one- and two-year mortality risks, as indicated by H/M ratio ≥1.6.
In addition to heart failure, the role of 123 I-MIBG has also been studied in ischemic heart disease. Sympathetic neurons have been shown to be more sensitive to ischemic injury compared to myocardial tissue. It has been postulated that denervated myocardial regions with preserved blood flow and viability may predispose to fatal ventricular arrhythmias.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Imaging
PET imaging provides several advantages compared to SPECT including superior image resolution allowing more specific regional analysis of cardiac neuronal function. PET facilitates the combined assessment of myocardial viability and perfusion along with innervation. It also provides potential for imaging autonomic receptors as well as quantitation of overall cardiac sympathetic and parasympathetic activity. 11 C-hydroxyephedrine, the most extensively studied neuronal PET tracer in human studies, is analogous to norepinephrine and 123 I-MIBG, and is transported by the uptake-1 mechanism. Major limitations in the use of PET tracers include higher costs compared to SPECT and their short half-lives, requiring an on-site cyclotron for most current PET innervation radiotracers.
Direct Adrenergic Receptor Imaging
A few agents have been investigated for their role in direct visualization of adrenergic receptors and are mostly based on receptor antagonism. Examples include 11 C-CGP12177 and 11 C-CGP12388 which are both β-receptor antagonists. Both these analogs have been studied for their role in assessing β-adrenoreceptor density in normal and diseased hearts via PET imaging and have shown promise to predict outcome and guide treatment in ischemic heart disease and heart failure. , The study by Naya et al. showed strong correlation between change in adrenoreceptor density measured with 11 C-CGP12177 and change in left ventricular ejection fraction with pharmacologic therapy, making it a potentially useful tool to guide therapy in heart failure. Recently, a new PET tracer, 18 F-LMI1195, was reported which has a much longer half-life compared to previously studied PET receptor tracers and offers promise in making PET evaluation of cardiac adrenoreceptors more feasible. PET tracers that image specific adrenergic receptor subtypes have been synthesized for investigational use.
Parasympathetic Imaging Agents and Techniques
PET imaging of parasympathetic innervation has been accomplished with radiotracers that label muscarinic and nicotinic receptors in the heart. Muscarinic receptors were initially characterized biochemically by their ability to bind the atropine-related chemical 3-quinuclidinyl benzilate (QNB). This led to the synthesis of the methylated 11 carbon-labeled PET parasympathetic nerve imaging radiotracer 3-QNB ( 11 C-MQNB). Quantitation of receptor density with 11 C-MQNB requires kinetic modeling including co-injection of cold ligand. PET imaging with 11 C-MQNB has been validated for measurement of muscarinic receptor density and affinity constants in patients with heart failure. Its use has been restricted to research centers by the requirement for cyclotron preparation of the short-lived 11 C positron emitter and by the complex mathematical modeling of muscarinic receptor density. Additionally, development and availability of tracers to image the parasympathetic system have been limited because of specificity of cholinergic receptors and uptake mechanisms to acetylcholine as well as low density of cholinergic neurons in the myocardium compared to adrenergic neurons. A potential future direction would be the development and testing of tracers based on acetylcholine esterase inhibition. One such tracer, 11 C-donepezil, based on acetylcholine esterase inhibition, was tested recently and showed good results in terms of quantifying cardiac parasympathetic innervation.
Non-imaging Modalities
Altered levels of norepinephrine in blood and urine are found in patients with impaired autonomic function (e.g., heart failure) and carry significant prognostic implications. , Norepinephrine blood levels, however, are altered by acute and relatively minor changes in autonomic activity reducing their reproducibility and specificity for chronic overall autonomic state. Tests of heart rate variability provide an indirect approach to assess autonomic dysfunction, focusing on the impact of sympathetic and parasympathetic influences on the sinoatrial node but also have demonstrated limited specificity and reproducibility. Heart rate turbulence (HRT), which assesses R–R intervals following ectopic ventricular contractions, compared to preceding sinus R–R intervals, appears to reflect intact parasympathetic activation through the baroreceptor reflex, and carries prognostic value in patients with heart failure. Baroreceptor sensitivity to blood pressure changes can also be tested non-invasively and carries prognostic value. The above techniques lack randomized controlled trials demonstrating effectiveness in improving outcomes and, hence, their precise role, usefulness, and prognostic value are unclear.
Clinical Effects of Autonomic Dysfunction (and Role of Autonomic Modulation)
Heart Failure
Autonomic dysfunction has been well studied in patients with cardiomyopathy, including both dilated and hypertrophic types. Autonomic disturbances at the synaptic level involve reduced presynaptic norepinephrine reuptake as well as downregulation of post-synaptic β-adrenoreceptors. , These changes are preceded by and, to some degree, thought to be a result of increased sympathetic activity in patients with heart failure.
Pharmacologic agents that block β-adrenergic receptors, the most common adrenergic receptor found in cardiac tissue, have been extensively studied in large trials and proven to be beneficial in heart failure treatment, reducing morbidity and mortality. One of the key mechanisms by which β-blockers improve heart failure outcome is by reducing sympathetic and augmenting parasympathetic function in the heart. Another critically important class of heart failure drugs, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE inhibitors), also has sympatholytic activity. Sympatholysis at the level of the central nervous system presynaptic α-receptors has also been studied using drugs like clonidine and moxonidine, – but most studies were small and results were conflicting.
Devices that denervate renal sympathetic nerves have been studied in heart failure patients and have been shown to provide benefit in terms of reduced hospitalization, improved heart failure symptoms, and improved LV function via reduction in renin release, increase in blood flow to the kidneys, and increased sodium excretion. – These studies have been limited by sample size and lack of sample blinding. The first double-blinded study on this subject is underway.
A recent large randomized multicenter trial assessed the role of vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) in heart failure and found that vagal nerve stimulation did not significantly change cardiovascular mortality, cardiac function, or reduce adverse cardiovascular events, but did improve exercise capacity of heart failure patients. Similarly, another randomized trial in 2015 published similar results with no difference in mortality, heart failure-related hospitalizations, or cardiac function as assessed by left ventricular dimensions and volumes with VNS but did show significant improvement in quality of life. These trials did not evaluate incidence of arrhythmias among the 2 groups.
Spinal cord stimulation (SCS) is an established safe and effective therapy for several conditions. Its role in heart failure is currently being investigated. Animal studies have shown improvement in myocardial function as assessed by improvement in left ventricular ejection fraction in subjects receiving SCS. The underlying mechanism is thought to be the augmentation of parasympathetic drive, and human studies are currently underway.
Stress-Induced Cardiomyopathies
Several stress-induced cardiomyopathies including takotsubo cardiomyopathy, cardiomyopathy of acute critical illness, cardiomyopathy associated with pheochromocytoma, and neurogenic-stunned myocardium have been reported. Each results from a clinical condition known to involve a catecholamine surge, and emerging data in these conditions suggest a beneficial role of pharmacologic blockade of adrenergic activity. It has been proposed that most of these cardiomyopathies are representative of the same syndrome with similar pathogenesis but with variable clinical manifestations. ,
Atrial Arrhythmias
Atrial fibrillation may be sympathetically or parasympathetically mediated. – The role of the parasympathetic nervous system is supported by the observation that atrial fibrillation frequently arises during the heightened parasympathetic tone during sleep. Atrial fibrillation may be more closely related to parasympathetic influences in the case of lone atrial fibrillation, whereas a sympathetically dominated mechanism may be more likely in a context of organic heart disease or the post-operative state.
Pulmonary vein ablation has emerged as a standard interventional treatment for atrial fibrillation. This technique disrupts nerve circuits around the pulmonary veins, but may also isolate the innervation connection from the triggered activity within ganglionated plexuses of the mid and dorsal right atrium. This has led to approaches to atrial fibrillation ablation that include ablation of the atrial ganglionated plexuses. These various observations have raised questions whether ganglionated plexuses and ectopic origin sites of atrial fibrillation can be identified by neural radiotracer imaging with PET or SPECT, potentially facilitating ablation procedures.
A role for autonomic modulation for prevention of atrial fibrillation, using techniques like renal sympathetic denervation, has been suggested. Animal studies have suggested that atrial fibrillation may be more successfully suppressed by renal artery denervation than by β-blockade or by the antiarrhythmic drugs, sotalol and amiodarone. Corresponding data in humans are very limited, with one study demonstrating no suppression of atrial fibrillation by renal denervation, although renal denervation did decrease the ventricular conduction rate. In another small human study, efficacy of renal sympathetic denervation combined with pulmonary vein isolation was found to be superior to pulmonary vein isolation alone for prevention of recurrent atrial fibrillation.
In the area of neural stimulation, acupuncture for inhibition of sympathetic nerve activity, , low cervical vagal nerve stimulation to decrease stellate ganglion activity, reduction in stellate cell density, – SCS to augment parasympathetic nerve activity, and prolong atrial refractory period have been studied in small human and animal studies with favorable preliminary results.
Ventricular Arrhythmias
Ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, and sudden cardiac death often occur in a context of a vulnerable cardiac substrate with a triggering event, and may be induced by increased sympathetic tone. , In acute myocardial infarction, the zone of injury to sympathetic nerves demonstrated by neural imaging extends beyond the region of reduced myocardial blood flow demonstrated by myocardial perfusion tracers. Non-infarcted border zones distal to a myocardial infarction show heterogeneous effective refractory periods in response to sympathetic nerve stimulation. Compared to normal myocardium, these non-infarcted border zones show denervation hypersensitivity consisting of an exaggerated shortening of the effective refractory period in response to norepinephrine , and are prone to ventricular arrhythmias. Other potential contributors to ventricular arrhythmias in acute or chronic myocardial infarction include a heterogeneous response to left or right sympathetic nerve stimulation and loss of protective vagal innervation.
Ventricular arrhythmias also commonly arise in a context of chronic heart failure. In both ischemic and non-ischemic cardiomyopathies, ventricular nerve distribution is more heterogeneous than in normal ventricles. Regional hyperinnervation has been observed in perivascular regions and in the periphery of injured myocardium, whereas regional denervation has been noted in areas of myocardial necrosis or dense fibrosis. Chronic heart failure is accompanied by high circulating catecholamine levels and depletion of norepinephrine stores from sympathetic nerve vesicles at the synaptic terminal. Current methods of identifying patients at risk of fatal arrhythmias are neither sensitive nor specific, and current practices for patient selection for implanted defibrillator implantation are costly. 123 I-MIBG has been studied as a potentially useful tool in predicting fatal ventricular arrhythmias and has shown promise in selecting heart failure patients for defibrillator placement. –
Ventricular arrhythmias also arise through the interactions of cardiac autonomic innervation and genetic mutations in cardiac cellular channels. In the prolonged QT syndrome, genetic abnormalities in potassium and sodium channels result in risk for polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and sudden cardiac death. In the long QT type 1 variant, the KCNQ1 gene encodes the slow component of the delayed rectifier potassium channel, reducing the outward K + current, IKs. Abnormality in IKs in patients with the long QT type 1 variant results in QT interval prolongation in response to fast heart rates and catecholamines. In a study of 670 patients that included 57 patients with long QT type 1 who developed cardiac arrest or sudden cardiac death, the lethal event occurred during exercise in 68%, but during sleep or rest in only 9%. In long QT type 2, IKs channel function is normal, and activation by catecholamines shortens ventricular repolarization, potentially protecting against exertional or catecholamine-induced QT prolongation. Among the 670 study subjects, 49 patients with long QT type 2 had a cardiac arrest or sudden cardiac death, with no lethal events occurring during exercise, but 49% occurring during sleep or rest. An apparent autonomic role in the origin of lethal ventricular arrhythmias is also seen in the genetic sodium channel disorder of Brugada syndrome. In Brugada syndrome, β-adrenergic blockade and parasympathomimetic drugs have been used to unmask electrocardiographic manifestations of the syndrome, and it has been observed that lethal arrhythmias in Brugada syndrome are particularly likely to occur during sleep. Imaging studies with 123 I-MIBG SPECT and 11C-hydroxyephedrine have reported heterogeneity of the distribution of sympathetic neurons in the left ventricle in patients with long QT and Brugada syndromes. These observations from neuronal imaging in patients with channelopathies may provide further clues concerning the mechanisms of lethal arrhythmic events and a potential prognostic clinical role.
In addition to anatomic and electrical sympathetic nerve heterogeneity, other postulated autonomically related mechanisms of fatal ventricular arrhythmias include heightened stellate nerve ganglion activity, upregulated nerve growth factor activity, and augmented sympathetic nerve regeneration (nerve sprouting). Withdrawal of vagal tone as, for example, is observed with diabetes mellitus has also been implicated in the genesis of ventricular arrhythmias.
Pharmacologic and Device-based Approaches to Autonomic Nervous System Modulation for Treatment of Ventricular Arrhythmias
Pharmacologic therapy with β-adrenoreceptor blockers is known to reduce the incidence of ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death following acute myocardial infarction and in the catecholamine-sensitive long QT type 1 syndrome. , Additionally, α- and β-blockades achieved by way of sympathetic denervation have also been tested. The role of sympathetic denervation in inherited ventricular arrhythmias is well established, , and has also been tested to treat acquired ventricular arrhythmias with favorable results. ,
Renal sympathetic nerves, through afferent and efferent components, play a significant role in modulation of central sympathetic activity. Electrical stimulation of renal sympathetic nerves has been shown to increase systemic blood pressure, serum catecholamine levels, and sympathetic nerve indices of heart rate variability, suggesting an increase in systemic sympathetic nervous activity. Huang et al. demonstrated a measurable increase in activity of the left stellate ganglion in response to renal artery sympathetic nerve stimulation. This increase in systemic sympathetic activity in response to renal artery electrical stimulation was associated with ventricular arrhythmias in the presence of myocardial ischemia. Ablation of the left stellate ganglion then attenuated the induction of ventricular arrhythmias during renal artery nerve stimulation, providing confirmation of the connection of renal artery stimulation and cardiac arrhythmic events. Studies of renal artery denervation in patients with resistant hypertension have shown that this minimally invasive device-based therapy significantly reduces renal artery sympathetic nerve activity, while also reducing left stellate ganglion nerve activity, skeletal muscle sympathetic activity, and decreasing whole-body norepinephrine spillover. Tsioufis and associates reported reduced heart rate, reduced ventricular ectopic complexes, and improvement in both time and frequency indices of heart rate variability following renal artery denervation, thereby suggesting a potential effect of renal denervation in preventing ventricular arrhythmic events. Numerous case reports confirm that renal artery denervation may control intractable ventricular arrhythmias. A randomized clinical trial is needed to confirm the efficacy of this approach.
VNS has been shown to reduce the risk of ventricular fibrillation and ventricular tachycardia in ischemic myocardium. – Theorized mechanisms include blockade of sympathetic input by activating muscarinic receptors, , reduction in baseline heart rate, , and reducing mitochondrial damage in the ischemic myocardium. Large human trials are needed to establish the utility and safety of VNS in treatment and prevention of ventricular arrhythmias.
More recently, similar to atrial arrhythmias, the role of SCS has been under investigation for treatment of ventricular arrhythmias. Issa and colleagues reported a significant reduction in the incidence of ventricular arrhythmias in canines treated with SCS following myocardial ischemia. Another study by Lopshire and colleagues demonstrated significantly better long-term control and prevention of ischemia-induced ventricular arrhythmias in canine models of ischemia treated with SCS compared with pharmacologic β-receptor blockade. A recent prospective multicenter human trial evaluating the role of thoracic SCS as restorative treatment for heart failure showed a trend toward lower incidence of ventricular arrhythmias in patients treated with SCS.
New Knowledge Gained
Cardiac autonomic innervation is a complex system and although anatomical locations of various cardiac nerves and ganglia have been well understood for decades, their precise role in various cardiovascular disorders was not. In recent years, more and more data have been collected that suggest that cardiac autonomic nerves play an important role in heart failure, arrhythmias and other hemodynamic abnormalities. More recently, several studies have tested the potential role of pharmacologic and device-based therapies that modulate cardiac autonomic nerves. This review covers a broad range of literature on the subject and discusses therapies, which are well known to be beneficial, and others that need to be investigated further.
Conclusions
The autonomic nervous system plays a central role in cardiac function and disease. Modulation of cardiac autonomic activity by pharmacologic and device-based approaches has a major role to play in a wide range of cardiac disorders.