Introduction
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune syndrome caused by abnormal immune response. It is characterized by generation of autoantibodies against nuclear self-antigens, formation of immune complex deposition, activation of B and T cells, and excessive release of proinflammatory cytokines. It could affect many body systems, including skin, muscles, heart, nervous system, and kidney. Involvement of kidney, named as lupus nephritis (LN), is the most severe complication of SLE that significantly increases the mortality [ ]. Most LN patients show proteinuria, hematuria, and various degrees of renal impairment. If not controlled, LN might finally lead to kidney failure and result in death.
Inflammation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of LN [ ]. Autoantibodies and immune complexes could activate intrarenal inflammation, resulting in production of large amounts of proinflammatory cytokines and IFNs which contribute to renal damage in LN [ ]. Interactions between local renal cells and infiltrating inflammatory cells contribute to renal injury. Several studies have observed renal infiltration of T cells and macrophages in LN [ ]. The proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines released by resident cells as well as by infiltrating inflammatory cells could lead to further influx of inflammatory cells and excessive release of proinflammatory cytokines, ultimately causing excessive renal inflammation and tissue injury [ ]. Anti-inflammatory drugs such as corticosteroids have been employed in the treatment of LN [ ].
Sophocarpine is a type of quinolizidine alkaloid that is widely used in traditional Chinese medicine. Previous studies have shown that sophocarpine possesses immune-regulatory, anti-virus, and anti-tumor properties [ , , ]. Sophocarpine was found to suppress LPS-induced nitric oxide production and proinflammatory cytokines release in vitro [ ]. Thus, we speculated that sophocarpine might play a beneficial role in LN due to its anti-inflammatory property.
This study aimed to investigate the potential effect of sophocarpine in MRL/ lpr mice, an experimental model of LN. We further investigated the possible mechanism underlying the effect of sophocarpine in LN.
Materials and methods
Animals and treatment
Animals were maintained under the standard conditions in the animal center of Liaocheng People’s Hospital. Female MRL/ lpr mice aged at 12 weeks were divided into two groups: Veh group (treated with normal saline) and SP group (treated with sophocarpine). Sophocarpine (Winherb Medical Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) was dissolved in normal saline. Mice received intragastrically administration of normal saline (Vel group) or 100 mg/kg sophocarpine (SP group) once a week for 18 weeks. C57BL/6J mice were used as control (Nor group).
Evaluation of renal function
The levels of urine protein were measured once per 2 weeks. Animals were singly housed in a metabolic cage for 24 h. The urine was collected and measured using Multistix 10SG reagent strips (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany). The urine protein levels were graded on a scale of 0–4, where 0 indicated none, 1 indicated 30–100 mg/dl, 2 indicated 100–300 mg/dl, 3 indicated 300–2000 mg/dl, and 4 indicated > 2000 mg/dl. At 20 weeks of age, mice were sacrificed. The blood samples were collected and the levels of blood urea nitrogen (BUN) were measured using the BUN Analyzer (Beckman Coulter Inc., Brea, CA, USA).
Histopathology
Paraffinized kidney sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) reagent. Based on the histopathology results, the glomerular and vascular lesions were scored on a scale of 0 to 3 by an experimenter blinded to the grouping, following previous study [ ], where 0 indicated normal and 3 indicated severe damage.
Assessment of immune complex deposition
The mouse immunoglobulins in frozen kidney sections were stained with FITC-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Dallas, TX, USA) or FITC-conjugated goat IgG fraction to mouse complement C3 (Cedarlane Laboratories, Burlington, Canada). Fluorescence intensity was scored from 0 to 3. For each mouse, the score for 25 glomeruli were averaged to get the mean fluorescent intensity.
ELISA
Following the manufacturer’s instructions, ELISA assays were carried out to measure the anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) in serum (commercial kit from Laibio, Shanghai, China) and levels of IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α in the kidney and serum (commercial kits from R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA).
Western blotting
Cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins were extracted from kidney tissues using a commercial kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Protein extracts (30 μg) were separated on SDS-polyacrylamide gel and transferred onto a PVDF membrane. After blocking, membranes were incubated with one of the primary antibodies: anti-NLRP3 (1:500), anti-ASC (1:500) (Abcam, Cambridge, MA), anti-caspase-1p20 (1:1000), anti-IKKα (1:1000), anti-phosphorylated IKKα/β (1:500), anti-IκBα (1:1000), anti-phosphorylated IκBα (1:1000), anti-p65 (1:500) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), and anti-IL-1β (1:1000, Abcam), at 4 °C overnight. Then, membranes were washed and incubated with secondary antibodies conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) (1:2000) (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) for 1 h at room temperature. Primary antibodies anti-GAPDH (1:1000) and anti-lamin B (1:1000) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., USA) were employed as internal control. The bands were developed by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) reagent (Cell Signaling Technology) and analyzed using the ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD).
Survival rate
Two additional groups of MRL/ lpr mice ( n = 15) were treated with vehicle or sophocarpine for 8 weeks, and survival state was assessed up to 28 weeks of age.
Luciferase assay
HEK293 cells were seeded at 2 × 10 5 per well on 24-well plates. After adhesion, cells were co-transfected with IL-2 promoter firefly luciferase reporter plasmid and p65 or IKKβ expression plasmid, by standard calcium phosphate precipitation. pRL-TK Renilla luciferase reporter plasmid was added to normalize transfection efficiency. Cells were incubated with sophocarpine at a dose of 0, 100, 200, 400, or 800 μg/ml, respectively, for 2 h before harvest. Cells were harvested at 36 h after transfection and luciferase reactivity was measured with a dual luciferase assay kit (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA).
Statistical analysis
Data were presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Difference between groups was analyzed by the Student’s t test or one- or two-way ANOVA. Kaplan-Meier and log-rank analyses were used to evaluate the survival rates. Significant level was set as P < 0.05.
Results
Sophocarpine reduced renal injury in MRL/lpr mice
Sophocarpine treatment significantly decreased the urine protein (Fig. 1 a) and BUN level (Fig. 1 b), compared with vehicle. The HE staining results showed that sophocarpine treatment ameliorated the glomerular and renal vascular lesions (Fig. 1 c, d). These data indicated that sophocarpine reduced renal injury in MRL/ lpr mice. Fig. 1 Sophocarpine reduces renal lesions in MRL/ lpr mice. a The 24-h urinary protein excretion levels. b Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) levels were obtained from 20-week-old MRL/ lpr mice. c Renal tissue was obtained from 20-week-old MRL/ lpr mice. Glomerular and perivascular areas of the renal sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Original magnification ×400. d The severity of renal damage was semiquantitatively scored in each group. Nor normal controls (age-matched female C57BL/6 mice), Veh vehicle-treated MRL/ lpr mice, SP sophocarpine-treated MRL/ lpr mice. Values are presented as the mean ± SD. N = 8 mice per group, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, versus the Veh group
Sophocarpine reduced anti-dsDNA antibody and immune complex deposition in kidney.
Circulating anti-dsDNA antibody is a characteristic marker of LN. ELISA results showed that the serum anti-dsDNA antibody level in MRL/ lpr mice treated with sophocarpine was significantly lower than that in mice treated with vehicle (Fig. 2 a). Sophocarpine treatment also significantly decreased the glomerular deposition of C3 and IgG (Fig. 2 b). These results suggested that sophocarpine could reduce the anti-dsDNA antibody and immune complex deposition in kidney of MRL/ lpr mice. Fig. 2 Sophocarpine reduces serum anti-dsDNA antibody and renal deposition of immune complex in MRL/ lpr mice. a Serum anti-dsDNA antibody was assessed by ELISA. b Deposition of immune complex in the kidney was detected and scored based on fluorescence intensity using FITC-conjugated anti-C3 and anti-IgG antibodies. Nor normal controls (age-matched female C57BL/6 mice), Veh vehicle-treated MRL/ lpr mice, SP sophocarpine-treated MRL/ lpr mice. Values are presented as the mean ± SD. N = 8 mice per group, ** p < 0.01, versus the Veh group
Sophocarpine increased the survival rate of MRL/lpr mice
The survival rate of sophocarpine-treated MRL/ lpr mice was significantly higher than that of mice treated with vehicle (Fig. 3 ), which indicated that sophocarpine could increase the survival rate of MRL/ lpr mice. Fig. 3 Sophocarpine increased the survival rate of MRL/ lpr mice. Treatment began at 12 weeks of age, and the mice were observed for 18 weeks. Veh vehicle-treated MRL/ lpr mice, SP sophocarpine-treated MRL/ lpr mice. Values are presented as the mean ± SD. N = 15 mice per group, * p < 0.05, versus the Veh group
Sophocarpine suppressed NLRP3 inflammasome in the kidney
Results from western blotting showed that treatment with sophocarpine significantly decreased the protein levels of NLRP3, ASC, caspase-1, and IL-1β in the kidneys of MRL/ lpr mice (Fig. 4 a, b). Sophocarpine also significantly reduced the levels of IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α in both kidney (Fig. 4 c) and serum (Fig. 4 d). These data indicated that sophocarpine could suppress NLRP3 inflammasome formation in MRL/ lpr mice. Fig. 4 Sophocarpine suppressed NLRP3 inflammasome activation in the kidney of MRL/ lpr mice. a Western blot was performed to analyze the expression of NLRP3, ASC, caspase-1p20, and IL-1β. GAPDH was used as the endogenous control. b Quantitative expression of NLRP3, ASC, caspase-1p20, and IL-1β was normalized against GAPDH. c , d Renal and serum IL-1β, TNF-α, and IL-6 levels were measured by ELISA. Nor normal controls (age-matched female C57BL/6 mice), Veh vehicle-treated MRL/ lpr mice, SP sophocarpine-treated MRL/ lpr mice. Values are presented as the mean ± SD. N = 8 mice per group, ** p < 0.01, versus the Veh group
Sophocarpine suppressed NF-κB activation
Results from western blotting showed that phosphorylation of IKKα/β and IκBα and nuclear translocation of NF-κB-p65 were significantly suppressed in sophocarpine-treated MRL/ lpr mice, compared to that treated with vehicle (Fig. 5 a). Results from luciferase assay showed that the luciferase reactivity was significantly suppressed by sophocarpine when cells were co-transfected with plasmids expressing IKKβ, while the luciferase reactivity was not influenced when cells were co-transfected with plasmids expressing p65 (Fig. 5 b). These results suggested that sophocarpine could suppress NF-κB activation, possibly by inhibiting IKKs. Fig. 5 Sophocarpine suppressed NF-κB activation in the kidney of MRL/ lpr mice. a Western blot was performed to analyze the expression of P-IKKα/β, P-IκBα, and p65. GAPDH and lanin B were used as the endogenous control, respectively. Nor normal controls (age-matched female C57BL/6 mice), Veh vehicle-treated MRL/ lpr mice, SP sophocarpine-treated MRL/ lpr mice. Values are presented as the mean ± SD. N = 8 mice per group, ** p < 0.01, versus the Veh group. b IKKα was inhibited by sophocarpine with NF-κB luciferase assay. HEK293 cells (2 × 10 5 ) were transfected with the IL-2 promoter luciferase plasmid and cotransfected with expression plasmid as indicated. Cells were incubated with sophocarpine respectively as 100, 200, 400, 800 μg/ml for 2 h before harvest. Luciferase assays were performed 36 h after transfection. Data are representative of five independent experiments, and values are presented as the mean ± SD. * P < 0.05
Discussion
Our study investigated the effect of sophocarpine in MRL/ lpr mice. This strain is a classic mouse model of spontaneous lupus, which displays a series of symptoms similar to those observed in human SLE, including production of autoantibodies, lymphoid activation, and lupus nephritis [ ]; thus, it is also commonly used as an experimental model of LN. Consistent with previous reports [ , , ], we found that MRL/ lpr mice showed characteristic features of LN, including increased urine protein, blood urea nitrogen, and renal tissue damage. Treatment with sophocarpine attenuated these symptoms, decreased the circulating anti-dsDNA antibody, suppressed immune complex deposition in the kidney, reduced the levels of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α), and ultimately increased the survival rate of MRL/ lpr mice. These results suggested that sophocarpine could play a beneficial role in this experimental model of LN.
We further investigated the mechanism underlying the beneficial effect of sophocarpine in MRL/ lpr mice. In recent years, the NLRP3 inflammasome has gained attention as a contributor to LN. The NLRP3 inflammasome complex is formed by NLRP3, the adaptor molecule ASC, and caspase-1 [ ]. Activation of this inflammasome could result in the activation of caspase-1, which promotes the production of proinflammatory cytokines including IL-1β [ ]. It was suggested that in human monocyte, self-dsDNA and its autoantibodies could induce IL-1β release by activating the NLRP3 inflammasome [ ]. In lupus nephritis biopsies, the expression of NLRP3 and caspase-1 was found to be increased [ ]. Lupus macrophages showed increased NLRP3 inflammasome activation, which led to release of inflammatory cytokines and resulted in a self-promoting inflammatory loop that ultimately led to organ damage [ ]. Previous studies found that drugs that could inhibit NLRP3 inflammasome, such as Bay11–7082 and brilliant blue, showed beneficial effect in experimental LN [ , ]. In our study, we found that treatment with sophocarpine reduced the protein level of NLRP3, ASC, and caspase-1 in the kidneys of MRL/ lpr mice. These results indicated that the beneficial effect of sophocarpine in MRL/lpr mice might be via inhibiting NLRP3 inflammasome.
We further investigated the effect of sophocarpine on NF-κB pathway. NF-κB is a transcription factor that could regulate immunity and inflammatory response. NF-κB was found to be essential for activation of NLRP3 inflammasome by regulating NLRP3 expression [ ]. Moreover, NF-κB could directly bind to specific motifs in the promoter region of several cytokines, including TNF-α and IL-1β, and regulate their expression [ ]. In mammalian cells, the NF-κB family contains five members: p50, p52, p65, c-Rel, and RelB. These members form homo- or hetero-dimers which could bind to promoters or enhancer regions of downstream genes. The most well-studied form of NF-κB is the p65/p50 heterodimer [ ]. Under inactive state, NF-κB is mainly located in the cytoplasma, complexed with members of the inhibitory IκB protein family. The key process in NF-κB pathway is phosphorylation of IκB by the IκB kinase (IKK). The IKK complex contains heterodimers of the subunit IKKα and IKKβ. When stimulated by proinflammatory stimuli, the IKK complex is activated through serine phosphorylation of IKKβ. Once activated, the IKK complex could phosphorylate the IκB protein and lead to its degradation by proteasome. Degradation of the IκB protein releases the NF-κB, resulting in activation of the NF-κB. The activated NF-κB translocates into the nucleus where it modulates the expression of target genes through binding to the promoters or enhancer regions of these genes [ ]. Previous study observed upregulation of IKKα expression and enhanced NF-κB activation in LN patients [ ]. In our study, we found that compared with control animals, the MRL/ lpr mice showed significantly higher phosphorylation of IKKα/β and IκBα, and enhanced nuclear translocation of NF-κB-p65, along with elevated levels of IL-1β. These features were significantly suppressed by sophocarpine treatment. These data indicated that the inhibitory effect of sophocarpine on NLRP3 inflammasome and inflammatory response might be via inhibiting NF-κB pathway. In our study, we further carried out a luciferase assay to investigate the mechanism underlying the effect of sophocarpine on NF-κB pathway. Results showed that the luciferase reactivity was significantly suppressed by sophocarpine when cells were co-transfected with plasmids expressing IKKβ, but not p65. These results suggested that sophocarpine could suppress NF-κB activation by inhibiting IKKs.
Conclusion
In conclusion, our study found that sophocarpine could ameliorate LN in MRL/ lpr mice by reducing inflammatory response and inhibiting NLRP3 inflammasome activation. These effects might be via suppressing the NF-κB pathway by inhibiting the IKKs.