Introduction
Scavenger receptors are structurally heterogeneous membrane-bound receptors that were initially thought to bind and internalize modified low-density lipoprotein (including oxidized and acetylated low-density lipoproteins) and direct them for lysosomal degradation, though they are currently known to bind to a variety of ligands including endogenous proteins and pathogens [ ]. This large “superfamily” has been classified into ten subclasses (A to J). CD68 (also known as SR-D1) is an important member of class D scavenger receptor family which is characterized for their ability to uptake apoptotic cells. CD68 expressed on cells associated with immune system such as monocyte/macrophages [ ]. Since monocyte/macrophages play a pivotal role in liver inflammation, regeneration, remodeling of extracellular matrix, and fibrogenesis, and related works in other organs have reported that macrophage CD68 plays a central role in many pathogenic processes [ , , ], here in this study, we explored the potential role of CD68 in macrophages in liver inflammation and liver fibrosis in mice.
Liver fibrosis and its end stage, cirrhosis, represent a major worldwide health problem. During liver fibrosis, macrophages are recruited from the bone marrow (BM) to engraft the damaged liver, and BM is regarded as one of the most important origins of monocyte/macrophages [ , ]. Macrophages are strategically located throughout the body tissues, where they ingest and process foreign materials, dead cells, and debris and recruit additional macrophages in response to inflammatory signals [ ]. They are highly heterogeneous cells that can rapidly change their phenotype and function in response to local microenvironmental signals [ , ]. Macrophages have distinct activation states and functions, which in vitro can be broadly classified as M1 (classical) or M2 (alternative) type [ ]. However, it is increasingly clear that this binary classification does not address the more complex heterogeneity in vivo, where macrophages adopt distinct phenotypes and even switch between phenotypes in response to the myriad of stimuli to which they are exposed [ , ]. Therefore, it is essential for us to better understand this diversity of macrophages since they are central to many pathological processes and have emerged as important therapeutic targets in many diseases [ , ]. Our previous studies showed that a significant number of BM-derived monocyte/macrophages (BMMs) were recruited to the damaged liver after liver injury and displayed pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic effects [ , ]. However, which subset of BMM is responsible for this process remains incompletely defined.
In the present study, we investigated the expression pattern of multiple scavenger receptors in two liver injury mouse models and chose the class D member CD68 for further study. In the carbon tetrachloride (CCl 4 )-treated mice, abundant CD68 + BMMs were recruited to the injured liver, aligning along the developing fibrotic septa. CD68 function was validated by a selective macrophage toxicant gadolinium chloride (GdCl 3 ) in primary cultured BMM and in injured liver. Notably, reduction of CD68 expression by GdCl 3 resulted in the attenuation of liver inflammation and fibrosis in CCl 4 -treated mice, which may represent a novel therapeutic target in liver fibrosis.
Materials and methods
BM isolation and BMM preparation
ICR mice (6 weeks old) were sacrificed by cervical dislocation at the time of BM harvest. BM cells were extracted from the tibias and femurs by flushing with culture medium using a 25G needle. The cells were then passed through a 70-mm nylon mesh and were washed three times with PBS containing 2% FBS. BM cells were grown in culture dishes for 7 days in the presence of L929-conditioned medium. The identification of BMM was assessed using immunocytochemistry analysis of F4/80 expression. The purity of BMM was > 95%.
Mouse models
Liver injury model was induced by methionine-choline-deficient and high-fat (MCDHF) diet or CCl 4 administration. In detail, ICR mice at 6 weeks of age were fed either control diet or MCDHF diet (A06071309, Research Diet Inc.) containing 46 kcal% fat, 18 kcal% protein, and 36 kcal% carbohydrate. Another group of mice received intraperitoneal injections of 1 μL per gram body weight of a CCl 4 /olive oil (OO) mixture (1:9 v / v ) twice per week. Mice were sacrificed at always the day after the last injection. Mice were sacrificed at days 7, 14, 28, and 56. All animal work was conformed to the Ethics Committee of Capital Medical University and in accordance with the approved guidelines (approval number: AEEI-2014-131).
To determine the contribution of BM cells to the development of liver fibrosis, ICR mice aged 6 weeks received irradiation (8 Gy in a divided dose 4 h apart) and immediately received transplantation by a tail vein injection of BM cells which obtained from 3-week-old EGFP transgenic mice; this was 1.5 × 10 7 whole BM cells. Four weeks later, the BM was reconstructed and the chimera mice with EGFP-labeled BM cells were treated with CCl 4 to build liver injury model.
Immunofluorescence staining
BMMs were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 min and permeabilized in 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS for 15 min. Liver samples were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in Tissue Tek OCT compound (Electron Microscopy Sciences). Six micrometers of frozen section was used for immunofluorescence. BMM or the liver sections were blocked with 2% BSA and then incubated with anti-CD68 rat monoclonal antibody (1:100, Serotec, Raleigh, NC) or anti-cleaved caspase3 rabbit antibody (1:50, Cell Signaling Technology, Boston, MA), Cy3-AffiniPure goat anti-rat IgG (1:100, Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA), or FITC-AffiniPure goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:100, Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA) as secondary antibodies. The samples were covered with Vectashield mounting medium containing DAPI and observed under confocal microscope (LSM510, Carl Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH, Germany). The proportion of CD68 + BMM (number of CD68 + EGFP + cells/number of CD68 + cells) was measured by the software Image-Pro Plus.
Flow cytometric analysis (FACS)
Nonparenchymal cells (NPCs) of mouse liver were isolated as described by Baeck et al. with modification [ ]. Briefly, livers were perfused with 20 mL of PBS, minced with scissors, and digested for 30 min with collagenase type IV at 37 °C with gentle shaking. Digested extracts were pressed through 70-mm cell strainers to achieve single cell suspensions. The cell suspension was subjected to density gradient (Histopaque-1077) centrifugation at 2000 rpm for 20 min. The cells were collected from the interface after centrifugation, washed twice with PBS, and resuspended in PBS at 1.5 × 10 6 cells/100 μL. Subsequently, the cells were incubated with antibodies [CD68 (Serotec, Raleigh, NC), Annexin V (Abcam, Cambridge, MA), Cy5 (BioLegend, San Diego, CA)] in the dark. After 15 min of incubation, the cells were washed with PBS and subjected to FACS. FACS was performed on a FACS Aria-II (BD Biosciences). Conjugated isotype control antibodies were used in all experiments. Similar methods were applied on cultured BMM. Data were analyzed with FlowJo software (TreeStar, Ashland, OR).
Phagocytic activity of BMM
Phagocytic activity of BMM was analyzed as follows. BMMs were serum-starved for 4 h, and then, the latex beads were added (10%, 3 μm size) and incubated for an additional 4 h. The cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, and noninternalized beads were removed by copious washes with PBS. The cells were then examined under a Leica TCS SP5 Confocal Microscope (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany).
qRT-PCR
Extraction of total RNA from mouse liver frozen specimen and qRT-PCR were performed as described [ ]. Primers were as follows: CD68 : sense, 5′-TGT CTG ATC TTG CTA GGA CCG-3′; antisense, 5′-GAG AGT AAC GGC CTT TTT GTG A-3′; CD36 : sense, 5′-CCT CAT ATG ATT CCT GTC AGT TGA TAC T-3′; antisense, 5′-TGT GCA TGC ATA CCT GAG TGT ATA A-3′; CD204 ( Msr1 ): sense, 5′-GAG GAT GCT GAC TGC AGT TCA G-3′; antisense, 5′-GGG CCA TTT TTA GTG CTG TGA-3′; Marco : sense, 5′-AAA GGG TCA AAA AGG CGA ATC-3′; antisense, 5′-CAG CTC GGC CTC TGT TGG T-3′; LOX1 ( Olr1 ): sense, 5′-AAG ACT GGC TCT GGC ATA AAG AA-3′; antisense, 5′-GCA GGT CTG CCG GTT TTT T-3′; SREC ( Scarf1 ): sense, 5′-CCA GGC TGG AAC GGT ACT CA-3′; antisense, 5′-CCA GTG CAC CTC TCA CCA AA-3′; CD163 : sense, 5′-CAG GTG TTA TCT GCT CCG AGT TC-3′; antisense, 5′-CCA TGT ACC ATT GTA AAA CAC TTC AA-3′; 18S rRNA: sense, 5′-GTA ACC CGT TGA ACC CCA TT-3′; antisense, 5′-CCA TCC AAT CGG TAG TAG CG-3; Mouse α-smooth muscle actin ( α-SMA ): sense, 5′-ATG CTC CCA GGG CTG TTT T-3′; antisense, 5′-TTC CAA CCA TTA CTC CCT GAT GT-3′; Mouse procollagen α1(I) [ Col α1(I) ]: sense, 5′-AGG GCG AGT GCT GTG CTT T-3′; antisense, 5′-CCC TCG ACT CCT ACA TCT TCT GA-3′; Mouse procollagen α1(III) [ Col α1(III) ]: sense, 5′-TGA AAC CCC AGC AAA ACA AAA-3′; antisense, 5′-TCA CTT GCA CTG GTT GAT AAG ATT AA-3′.
Quantitative analysis of liver fibrosis and inflammation
The fibrotic or inflammatory areas were assessed as described [ ]. Liver tissues were fixed in PBS containing 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 h and embedded in paraffin. Sections (5 μm) were stained with Sirius red for collagen visualization and hematein-eosin (H&E) for analysis of inflammatory area. The fibrotic area and inflammatory area were assessed by computer-assisted image analysis with MetaMorph software (Universal Imaging Corporation, Downingtown, PA). The mean value of 15 randomly selected areas per sample was used as the expressed percentage of fibrosis or necrosis area.
Hydroxyproline content assay
Hydroxyproline content of the liver was measured as described [ ]. In brief, three small fragments of each liver were pooled, homogenized in distilled water, and lyophilized, and 20 mg of the freeze-dried sample was hydrolyzed at 95 °C for 20 min. After hydrolysis, the samples were neutralized at pH 6.0 to 6.8. The hydrolysates were then treated with activated charcoal. After centrifugation at 1000× g for 10 min, aliquots of the hydrolysates were used to measure hydroxyproline content spectrophotometrically by reaction with Ehrlich’s reagent. Absorbance was measured at 560 nm. The hydroxyproline content of the liver was expressed as micrograms per gram of dry weight.
ALT and AST quantification
ALT and AST levels were detected by BS-200 Chemistry Analyzer (Mindray, China).
Statistical analysis
The results are expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Statistical significance was assessed by Student’s t test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for analysis of variance when appropriate. Correlation coefficients were calculated by Pearson test. P < 0.05 was considered to be significant. All results were verified in at least three independent experiments.
Results
Scavenger receptor CD68 was highly up-regulated in injured liver
We first investigated the expression patterns of multiple scavenger receptors in mouse injured liver by qRT-PCR. There were three scavenger receptors (CD68, CD36, and CD204) which were markedly up-regulated during chronic liver injury induced by MCDHF diet or CCl 4 (Fig. 1 a–c); one (MARCO) increased only in acute liver injury (7 days) (Fig. 1 d); two (LOX1 and SREC) almost unchanged (Fig. 1 e, f); and one (CD163) decreased in injured liver (Fig. 1 g). Among the three up-regulated scavenger receptors, CD68, which belongs to the class D scavenger receptor family, first got uppermost and continuously increased throughout the entire stage of chronic liver injury (from 7 to 56 days) (Fig. 1 a). Therefore, we focused on the role of CD68 in mouse liver injury in the following studies. Fig. 1 The expression pattern of scavenger receptors in injured liver was examined by qRT-PCR. The mRNA expression of different scavenger receptors, including CD68 ( a ), CD36 ( b ), CD204 ( c ), MARCO ( d ), LOX1 ( e ), SREC ( f ), and CD163 ( g ) was examined by qRT-PCR in chronic liver injury mice induced by methionine-choline-deficient and high-fat (MCDHF) diet or carbon tetrachloride (CCl 4 ). All results were confirmed in three independent experiments at least. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM
Abundant CD68+ BMMs were recruited to the injured liver
Intrahepatic NPCs were isolated for FACS to examine the recruitment of CD68 + macrophages to the injured liver in CCl 4 -induced liver injury model. As shown in Fig. 2 a, c, the proportion of CD68 + macrophages significantly increased in CCl 4 -treated mice compared with that in OO-treated mice. Liver macrophages consist of liver-resident KC and BMM; we then made chimera mice with EGFP-labeled BM cells to trace the recruitment of CD68 + BMM and CD68 + KC to the injured liver, respectively. The frequency of CD68 + BMM (CD68 + EGFP + ) in injured liver elevated markedly compared with that in healthy mice (from 6.7 to 37.1%) (Fig. 2 b, d), whereas CD68 + KC (CD68 + EGFP − ) remained unchanged in the liver (Fig. 2 e), indicating that abundant CD68 + macrophages, which were recruited to the mouse damaged liver during chronic liver injury, were of BM origin (CD68 + BMM). Fig. 2 Abundant CD68 + BMMs were recruited to injured liver induced by CCl 4 . a Representative FACS histograms for proportion of CD68 + cells in NPCs in the liver treated with OO or CCl 4 . Isotype controls are shown as gray shadow ones. b Representative FACS plots for proportion of CD68 + /EGFP + monocyte/macrophages in NPCs in the liver. c – e Quantification of FACS for proportion of total CD68 + , CD68 + /EGFP + , and CD68 + /EGFP − cells in intrahepatic NPCs from OO- or CCl 4 -treated mice. f Representative images of immunofluorescence analysis by confocal microscopy to track the CD68 + monocyte/macrophages (red) of BM origin (EGFP + , green) in the CCl 4 -treated livers. Scale bars, 100 and 10 μm (inset). All results were confirmed in three independent experiments at least. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM
To further demonstrate the above results, we performed immunofluorescence staining for CD68 in the injured liver. As shown in Fig. 2 f, there was a strong immunoreactivity for CD68 aligning along the developing fibrotic septa in livers of CCl 4 -treated mice, with distribution similar to that of EGFP-positive cells. Altogether, these phenomena suggested that CD68 played a critical role in liver injury and a mass of CD68 + BMM infiltrated into the injured liver induced by CCl 4 in mice.
Scavenger receptor CD68 expression was reduced by GdCl3
Next, to validate the function of scavenger receptor CD68 in vitro, we cultured primary BMM and analyzed their phenotype by FACS and qPCR. The FACS results revealed that 43.7% BMMs were positive for CD68 (Fig. 3 a). We also analyzed the amplified products of RT-PCR and observed the abundant expression of CD68 in BMM (Fig. 3 b). Moreover, immunofluorescence staining was performed to determine the protein expression of CD68, showing that CD68 was clearly detected and specifically expressed in a number of BMMs (Fig. 3 c), with the proportion of CD68 + BMM in accordance with FACS analysis. Fig. 3 CD68 was expressed in primary cultured BMM. a Representative FACS histograms for CD68 expression in BMM. Isotype controls are shown as gray shadow ones. b Expression of CD68 mRNA in cultured BMM was measured by qRT-PCR; the products were then size fractionated in a 2% agarose gel. c Representative pictures of CD68 immunofluorescence of cultured BMM. All results were confirmed in three independent experiments at least. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM
It is known that CD68 is one kind of scavenger receptor D, which is characterized for its ability to assist macrophages in eliminating particulates or microbes by phagocytosis [ , ]. Therefore, we examined CD68 function by measuring the ability of cultured BMM to phagocytose particles. As shown in Fig. 4 a, CD68 + BMM showed a marked phagocytic activity which was in line with previous studies [ ]. GdCl 3 is a selective macrophage toxicant [ ] and can be endocytosed by macrophages, thus causing their apoptosis. It is amazing to observe that GdCl 3 selectively triggered apoptosis of CD68 + BMM, as cleaved-caspase-3 signals were exclusively detected in CD68 + BMMs (arrows), with no signal in CD68 − BMMs (arrowheads) (Fig. 4 b). In addition, FACS results confirmed that the percentage of apoptotic BMM increased once exposed to GdCl 3 (Fig. 4 c). Furthermore, treatment of GdCl 3 induced a significant increase in apoptosis of CD68 + BMM (Fig. 4 d), indicating that the apoptotic process selectively targeted CD68 + monocyte/macrophages. Fig. 4 CD68 reduction was triggered by macrophage phagocytosis and apoptosis in the presence of GdCl 3 in vitro. a Representative images of phagocytosis activity of CD68 + BMM. Monocyte/macrophages isolated from BM were incubated with FITC-labeled latex beads for 4 h, and their uptakes by monocyte/macrophages were analyzed by co-staining with CD68 antibodies. b Representative images of double immunostaining of cleaved-caspase 3 with CD68 show the apoptotic cells treated with GdCl 3 (200 μmol/L, 6 h). The arrow indicates apoptotic cells and the arrowhead indicates normal cells. c Representative FACS histograms for Annexin V in BMM treated with GdCl 3 (200 μmol/L, 6 h) compared with that in control. d Representative FACS plots were shown with the percentage of CD68 + /Annexin V + in BMM treated with or without GdCl 3 . All results were confirmed in three independent experiments at least. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM
To verify the effects of scavenger receptor CD68 in vivo, a mouse model of CCl 4 -mediated liver injury was used with/without the administration of GdCl 3 . The liver tissues were harvested after 4 weeks and assessed for CD68 by FACS and qRT-PCR. FACS analysis showed that the percentage of CD68 + cells in injured liver elevated markedly after CCl 4 treatment while it was down-regulated with the administration of GdCl 3 (Fig. 5 a–c). Importantly, CD68 + BMMs (CD68 + EGFP + ) were reduced by GdCl 3 markedly in mouse injured liver (Fig. 5 a, b, d). In keeping with FACS results, the mRNA expression of CD68 increased significantly in injured liver while it was down-regulated with GdCl 3 administration (Fig. 5 e). These results confirmed the inhibition of scavenger receptor CD68 by GdCl 3 in primary BMM and in the fibrotic liver. Fig. 5 The expression of scavenger receptor CD68 was reducted by GdCl 3 in chronic injured liver. ICR mice were irradiated and received whole BM transplants from EGFP transgenic mice. Four weeks later, the BM was reconstructed and the chimera mice with EGFP-labeled BM cells received 4 weeks of CCl 4 with/without GdCl 3 administration (7.5 mg/kg body weight, twice per week, intraperitoneally, n = 6 per group). Then, liver tissues or intrahepatic NPC cells were analyzed. a , b Representative FACS histograms and plots for CD68 expression. c , d Quantification of FACS for proportion of total CD68 + , CD68 + /EGFP + , and CD68 + /EGFP − cells in intrahepatic NPCs from OO- or CCl 4 -treated mice with/without GdCl 3 administration. e Expression of CD68 mRNA of liver tissues from OO- or CCl 4 -treated mice with/without GdCl 3 administration. All results were confirmed in three independent experiments at least. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. * P < 0.05 compared with the OO group. # P < 0.05 compared with the CCl 4 group without GdCl 3 administration
Reduction of CD68 expression attenuated chronic liver inflammation and fibrosis in mice
In the end, the potential effects of CD68 on hepatic inflammation and fibrosis were assessed. H&E staining showed a significant decrease in liver injury after depleting CD68 + BMM by GdCl 3 administration in CCl 4 -treated mice (Fig. 6 a). Concurrently, area of inflammation quantified by digital image analysis was dramatically reduced after CD68 depletion by GdCl 3 administration (Fig. 6 b). Biochemical parameters represented by serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) were proved to be decreased by GdCl 3 (Fig. 6 c). Furthermore, decreased accumulation of intrahepatic CD68 + BMM was associated with a diminished development of liver fibrosis, as evidenced by reduced hepatic hydroxyproline content (Fig. 6 d), collagen deposition (Fig. 6 e), fibrotic area (Fig. 6 f), and fibrotic marker ( α-SMA , Col α1(I) , Col α1(III) ) expressions (Fig. 6 g). Altogether, these data indicated a critical role for scavenger receptor D CD68 upon chronic liver injury, showing that reduction of CD68 attenuated liver inflammation and fibrosis in CCl 4 mouse models. Fig. 6 Reduction of CD68 expression attenuated hepatic inflammation and fibrosis in mice. a Representative H&E-staining liver sections after depleting CD68 by GdCl 3 administration. Scale bars, 50 μm. Inset: H&E staining for OO-treated livers. b Quantification of inflammatory areas. c Serum ALT and AST activity of mice. d Hydroxyproline content in the liver. e Representative images of Sirius Red staining in the OO or CCl 4 livers. Scale bars, 50 μm. Inset: Sirius Red staining for OO livers. f Quantitative analysis of liver fibrosis. Ten randomly selected fields were quantitated for each mouse using the Leica QWin V3 software. g Expression of Col α1(I) , Col α1(III) , and α-SMA mRNA levels in liver, measured by qRT-PCR. Data were presented as the mean ± SEM. * P < 0.05 compared with the OO group. # P < 0.05 compared with the CCl 4 group without GdCl 3 administration
Discussion
In the present study, we explored the critical role of scavenger receptor D CD68 in chronic liver injury. There are several important observations in this study. (1) Among the diverse scavenger receptors we examined, CD68 first got uppermost and continuously increased throughout the entire stage of liver injury; (2) Accumulation of CD68 + BMM was found aligning along the fibrotic septa in damaged liver; (3) In vitro CD68 was highly expressed in cultured BMM, and CD68 reduction was triggered by macrophage phagocytosis and apoptosis in the presence of GdCl 3 ; (4) In CCl 4 -treated mouse liver, the recruitment of CD68 + BMM and CD68 mRNA expression were reduced by administration of GdCl 3 ; (5) The most exciting and therapeutically relevant finding is that reduction of CD68 expression attenuated mouse liver inflammation and fibrosis. Taken together, these findings provide strong evidence that scavenger receptor CD68 plays a critical role in chronic liver injury in murine models.
CD68, which is one of the most important class D scavenger receptors, locates on human chromosome 17 and expressed on cells related to immune system and bone marrow [ ]. CD68 can bind oxidized low-density lipoprotein (OxLDL), lectins, and selectins and also mediate phagocytosis and bone resorption [ , , ]. CD68 promotes OxLDL binding and uptake when it is expressed on monocytes and is considered to be a major receptor for OxLDL [ ]. Given that LDL is the cholesterol rich of the lipoproteins, OxLDL and its receptors may also be involved in the uptake of dietary cholesterol via the portal circulation. In addition, OxLDL, phorbol esters, or GM-CSF can up-regulate CD68, whereas bacterial LPS or TNF-α inhibits its level [ , ], showing a link between inflammation and CD68 function. Here in this study, we likewise explored the potential effect of CD68 in macrophages on hepatic inflammation, showing that reduction of CD68 expression in CCl 4 -treated mice attenuated the extent of inflammation and necrosis, as demonstrated by H&E staining and digital analysis of inflammatory and necrotic area.
Macrophages contribute to the systemic response to local inflammation, clearance of pathogen-derived soluble molecules and toxins from the circulation, and engulfment of apoptotic bodies [ ]. These cells are also professional phagocytes and have been widely implicated in various liver injuries [ ]. The functional plasticity of macrophages is driven by their immunological environment that can shape their properties through a wide spectrum of phenotypes, among which classical (M1) or alternative (M2) macrophages represent the extreme stages [ , , ]. But these phenotypes have been defined predominantly in cell culture models and might not reflect the complexity of macrophage function in vivo . GdCl 3 and clodronate liposome (cytotoxin for macrophages) have been used for either depleting KC or inhibiting their function [ , ]. The current study has explored CD68 as a useful marker for discriminating a subset of monocyte/macrophages depleted by GdCl 3 . Although previous studies, using other methods to modify or deplete monocyte/macrophages, had pointed out the role of monocyte/macrophages in mediating fibrotic responses [ ], these data mostly reflected nonspecific depletion or the existence of distinct functional populations of macrophages in different models of inflammation. Our conditional ablation system in this study is cell type specific and effective in mouse fibrotic liver. We showed that GdCl 3 selectively and effectively depleted CD68 + BMM with a phagocytic activity in murine liver injury model.
It is important to note that macrophages are known to play a dual role in liver fibrosis. Depletion of the macrophage population during either injury or repair and resolution had dramatically different effects on the overall injury response. Specifically, macrophage depletion results in amelioration of fibrosis in progressive inflammatory injury while a failure of resolution with persistence of the fibrotic response during recovery [ ]. Our study indicated that reduction of CD68 + BMM relieved the extent of inflammation and necrosis and attenuated chronic liver fibrosis induced by CCl 4 , which is in support of the former one. However, macrophages also contribute to fibrosis resolution through MMP13 and matrix remodeling [ ]. Recently, the CD11b high F4/80 int Ly-6C low macrophage subset was shown to orchestrate regression of murine liver fibrosis [ ]. Therefore, it was thought that the yin and yang of the classically activated macrophage were inadequate to reflect the complex roles of these cells in vivo during liver injury. Here, we observed an anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic effect of CD68 + BMM depletion by GdCl 3 . Clinical pharmacology studies would be needed to evaluate the potential toxicity of CD68 + BMM depletion strategies in human cirrhosis.
Taken together, our findings present evidence that the class D scavenger receptor CD68 plays a pivotal role in chronic liver injury in mice. The reduction of CD68 expression by GdCl 3 alleviated the extent of liver inflammation and fibrosis in mice, which sets the stage for further evaluation of CD68 as a potential therapeutic target in liver fibrosis.