Introduction
Immunotherapy has been shown to be effective in treating several cancers including breast cancer [ ]. As well, further insights from clinical trials show that the host immune response is important in limiting disease progression in cancer patients [ , ]. With respect to breast cancer, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), found within the tumor or in the surrounding stroma, have been associated with improved patient outcome [ , , , , , ]. It has also been observed that breast cancers with greater influx of TILs tend to respond better to neo-adjuvant chemotherapy compared to less immunogenic tumors [ , , , ].
The prolactin-inducible protein (PIP) was identified by us several years ago as an abundantly secreted protein in some human breast cancer cell lines [ , , ]. PIP is expressed to varying degrees in > 90% of breast cancers [ ]. It is highly specific for mammary differentiation and is associated with both benign and malignant pathological conditions of the mammary gland [ ]. As a consequence of such specificity, PIP is frequently used in the clinic in determining whether metastatic carcinoma originating from an unknown primary site is of mammary origin [ , , ], making it a highly valuable biomarker for breast cancer.
Recent studies show that PIP is enriched in breast tumor subtypes that exhibit more favorable prognosis, i.e., the luminal-like breast cancer subtype which is hormone receptor (ER, PR, HER2) positive [ , ]. This is the same molecular subtype of breast cancers that usually is associated with TILs. Our recent data confirmed the presence of high numbers of TILs in PIP-expressing breast cancer tissues (unpublished). As well, PIP is found to be highly expressed in ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), a non-invasive breast cancer histotype [ ]. Interestingly, most triple negative tumors, which are more aggressive, do not express PIP [ , , ].
The function of PIP in breast tumorigenesis still remains unknown. However, there are numerous indications from our laboratory and others to suggest PIP plays a role in innate and adaptive immunity. PIP has been shown to inhibit T cell apoptosis [ ] and is a ligand for CD4, a molecule which plays a key role in the adaptive immune function of T cells [ ]. PIP has also been shown to bind several bacterial strains from the oral cavity, GI tract, skin, and ear canal [ , ], suggesting a role in innate immunity.
To further address PIP function, we generated PIP loss/gain of function mouse models [ , ]. Loss of PIP does not affect the percentage of macrophages, dendritic cells, NK cells, and granulocytes, with the exception of CD4 + T cells which were significantly affected [ ]. Furthermore, deficiency of PIP decreased Th1 cell functions, resulting in dramatically reduced production of IFN-γ by CD4 + Th1 cells [ ]. Interestingly, we found that the production of nitric oxide and pro-inflammatory cytokines by IFN-γ-activated macrophages from PIP-deficient (PIP −/− ) mice was also diminished, suggesting that the signaling pathway within the macrophage may be impaired [ ]. Overall, these results clearly indicate that PIP −/− mice are unable to respond to IFN-γ stimulation. The reason for this is currently unknown; however, it has been reported that the expression of IFN-γ receptor (IFN-γR) and TLR4 on macrophages is important for responsiveness to IFN-γ [ , ]. In addition, the classical activation of macrophages by IFN-γ results in nitric oxide (NO) production by processes that are regulated by intracellular signaling events including phosphorylation of MAPK and STAT proteins [ , ].
In the present study, we further investigated the role of PIP in adaptive immunity by comparing IFN-γ receptor (IFN-γR) and TLR4 expression, and intracellular signaling events in macrophages from WT and PIP −/− mice following IFN-γ and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation. In this study, LPS was used because the LPS-initiated signaling pathway is the most studied signaling pathway in macrophages and it provides good information on the pathway leading to intracellular signaling protein (MAPKs, STATs, and NF-κB) activation resulting in pro-inflammatory cytokine production. We showed that deficiency of PIP significantly affects intracellular signaling events leading to impaired pro-inflammatory cytokine production in macrophages, and further confirms a role for PIP as an important immunoregulatory protein, and moreover, may play an immunoprotective role in breast cancer.
Materials and methods
Mice
The generation of PIP-deficient (PIP −/− ) mice has been previously described [ ]. Eight to 12-week-old female homozygous PIP −/− mice (backcrossed > 9 generations into CD1 background) and female wild-type (WT) CD1 mice were obtained from our in-house breeding colony managed by the Central Animal Care Services, University of Manitoba. The animals were housed and maintained in the specific pathogen-free environment at the University of Manitoba Animal Care facility, and all animals were used in accordance with the Canadian Council for Animal Care guidelines.
Generation of bone marrow-derived macrophages and dendritic cells
Bone marrow cells were isolated from the femurs of WT and PIP −/− mice and differentiated to bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDDCs) in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, 2 mM l -glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin (all purchased from Hyclone Laboratories Inc., Logan, UT, USA.), and 5 × 10 −5 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich Canada Co., Oakville, ON, Canada) using recombinant mouse GM-CSF (20 ng/mL; Peprotech, Indianapolis, USA) as previously described [ ]. Immature dendritic cells (DCs) were assessed by flow cytometry and the expression of CD11c was greater than 90%. To obtain bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs), bone marrow cells were cultured in complete RPMI medium supplemented with 30% L929 cell culture supernatant (conditioned medium) for 7 days. Adherent cells were > 95% F4/80+ by flow cytometry.
Flow cytometry analysis
BMDMs were directly surface stained with fluorochrome-labeled antibodies against the following molecules: CD11b, CD11c, IFN-γR, and TLR4 (all purchased from BioLegend, San Diego, CA). After 25–30 min incubation on ice, the cells were washed, resuspended in 300 μL FACS wash buffer, and acquired using BD FACS Canto II.
Flow cytometry analyses were carried out according to standard procedures. Briefly, stained cells were acquired using FACS Canto II (at least 100,000 events). The splenic cells were first gated on live cells and then on CD11b + cells (a marker of macrophages). Thereafter, the expressions of IFN-γR and TLR4 by CD11b + cells were then analyzed and plotted as a histogram over isotype control antibody. To analyze the expression of these receptors on splenic dendritic cells, live cells were gated on CD11c + cells (a marker of dendritic cells) and their expression of IFN-γR, TLR4, and TLR2 was then analyzed. Similarly, the BMDMs and BMDDCs were acquired and live events were further gated for CD11b+ and CD11c + cells, respectively, and assessed for expression of IFN-γR and TLR4. The analyses were performed using Flowjo software (Treestar, Ashland, OR).
In vitro cell cultures
BMDMs and BMDDCs from WT and PIP −/− mice were incubated in serum free RPMI-1640 medium for 24 h. The medium was then replaced with complete medium with or without LPS (1 μg/mL, Sigma, Mississauga, ON, Canada), IFN-γ (40 ng/mL, BioLegend), or a combination of both LPS and IFN-γ. At 0, 15, 30, 60, and 120 min, the media was removed and the cells were lysed with a combination of NP-40 cell lysis buffer (Invitrogen ™ , Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Burlington, ON, Canada) and protease inhibitors (sodium orthovanadate, and PMSF, Sigma-Aldrich Canada Co.).
Western blotting
Protein concentration in the cell lysate was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA; Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Ten micrograms of protein in 20-μL sample was loaded in each lane, and the samples were electrophoresed in a sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Following electrophoresis, the proteins were transferred onto a polyvinylidenediflouride (PVDF) membrane (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA, USA). The blotted PVDF membranes were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA; Sigma-Aldrich Canada Co.) in Tris-buffered saline with Tween ® 20 (TBST) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Thereafter, the membranes were incubated overnight with primary antibodies (phospho-STAT1, phospho-ERK, phospho-NF-κB, SOCS1, or SOCS3; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) at a dilution of 1:1000 in blocking solution. After washing with TBST, the membranes were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with secondary antibody (horse radish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG, Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc.) at a dilution of 1:3000 in blocking solution. Using the Clarity ™ ECL Western substrate (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc.), signals were acquired using the ChemiDoc ™ system (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc.). Following the detection of the phospho-proteins, the membranes were stripped using stripping buffer (1 M glycine, 10% SDS, Tween 20, dH 2 0), probed with antibody against total STAT1, ERK, or NF-κB, and processed as described above. Following the detection of SOCS1 and SOCS3, the membranes were also stripped using stripping buffer and probed with antibody against β-actin (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), which was used as loading control. The total cell lysates were assessed for β-actin phosphorylation by Western blot using appropriate primary and secondary antibodies. Densitometry was performed using the band analysis tools of the Image Lab software version (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc.).
Statistical analysis
Two-tailed Student’s t test analysis was used to compare mean and standard error of mean (SEM) between the groups (WT and PIP−/− mice). Differences were considered significant when p < 0.05.
Results
Decreased production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by BMDMs from PIP−/− mice following IFN-γ and LPS stimulation
Pro-inflammatory cytokines are produced by innate immune and non-immune cells following their interaction with pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) expressed on the surfaces of invading pathogens and play important roles in the initiation and promotion of local and/or systemic inflammatory responses. Interleukin-12 (IL-12) and IL-6 are key pro-inflammatory cytokines that are associated with the induction of Th1 cell-mediated immune responses against many pathogens in mice including Leishmania. Our preliminary data show that BMDDCs from PIP-deficient mice produce significantly less pro-inflammatory cytokine than their WT counterparts following IFN-γ priming [ ]. However, this study did not show if BMDMs from PIP-deficient mice also showed impaired production of pro-inflammatory cytokines compared to their WT counterpart mice. Therefore, we determined whether deficiency of PIP reduced the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-12 and IL-6). Consistent with the observations in BMDDCs [ ], we found that the production of IL-12 and IL-6 by the BMDMs from PIP −/− mice was significantly decreased compared to their WT counterparts following stimulation with IFN-γ, LPS or both (Fig. 1 a, b). The finding that BMDMs and BMDDCs from PIP −/− mice significantly produce less IL-12 and IL-6 suggests that PIP might serve as a positive regulator of pro-inflammatory cytokine production in BMDMs and BMDDCs in WT mice. These results indicate that although PIP −/− and WT mice showed similar levels of IFN-γR and TLR4 expression, there exist intrinsic differences in their overall responsiveness to these stimuli. Fig. 1 Decreased production of IL-12 and IL-6 by BMDMs from PIP −/− mice. Bone marrow derived macrophages ( a , b ) from WT and PIP KO mice were stimulated in vitro with various concentrations of LPS, IFN- γ , and LPS + IFN- γ for 48 h, and the productions of IL-12 and IL-6 were determined by ELISA. In all experiments, medium from unstimulated cells served as negative control. Results are presented as mean ± SEM of four replicate wells and are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. *** p < 0.001
Deficiency of PIP does not affect the expression of IFN-γR and TLR4 on BMDMs and splenic macrophages
We previously showed that the productions of pro-inflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide (NO) by bone marrow-derived dendritic cells from PIP −/− mice were decreased following IFN-γ or LPS stimulation [ ]. We further confirmed and extended this observation by showing that the productions of IL-6 and IL-12 by IFN-γ or LPS-stimulated BMDMs and splenic macrophages from PIP −/− mice were significantly decreased compared to those from wild-type (WT) mice [ ].
To assess whether this impairment in pro-inflammatory cytokine and NO production was related to altered recognition of the stimulants, we used flow cytometry to investigate the impact of PIP deficiency on the expression of IFN-γR and TLR4 on BMDMs and splenic macrophages of PIP −/− mice. Data showed that BMDMs (Fig. 2 a) and splenic macrophages (Fig. 2 b) from WT and PIP −/− mice express similar levels of IFN-γR and TLR4. These results suggest that the decreased production of NO and pro-inflammatory cytokines by PIP −/− macrophages following IFN-γ or LPS stimulation was not related to decreased expression of these key receptors, but rather could be as a result of reduced signaling activities in the infected cells. Fig. 2 BMDMs and splenic macrophages from WT and PIP −/− mice express similar levels of IFN-γR and TLR4. Bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs, a ) or splenic macrophages (isolated by magnetic beads, b ) from WT and PIP −/− mice were stained with specific antibodies (“ Materials and methods ”) and assessed for the expression of IFN-γR (left panel) or TLR4 (right panel) by flow cytometry. Shown are histogram plots showing the expression of IFN-γR and TLR4 by CD11b + cells over isotype antibody controls. Results are representative of four independent experiments with similar results
Decreased phosphorylation of STAT and MAPK proteins in PIP−/− BMDMs following IFN-γ and LPS stimulation
The production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide (NO) by macrophages and dendritic cells following IFN-γ and LPS stimulation is mediated by signals transmitted through a cascade of intracytoplasmic proteins known as STATs and MAPKs [ , , ]. Therefore, we examined the phosphorylation of different MAPK and STAT proteins from BMDMs from PIP −/− and WT mice following stimulation with LPS and IFN-γ. There was a dramatic inhibition of phosphorylation of STAT3 and ERK, in PIP −/− macrophages stimulated with IFN-γ and LPS (Fig. 3 a–d) and (Fig. 4 a–d). Also, we observed that phosphorylation of p38 was decreased while phosphorylation of STAT1 was not dramatically affected (data not shown), suggesting that there was no global downregulation of phosphorylation events in cells from PIP −/− mice. Since signaling via MAPKs and STATs is critical for production of NO and pro-inflammatory cytokines by macrophages, these results suggest that the inability of PIP −/− mice to make NO and pro-inflammatory cytokine may be related in part to decreased phosphorylation of these molecules in PIP-deficient macrophages. Fig. 3 Decreased phosphorylation of STAT3 and ERK protein in BMDMs from PIP −/− mice following stimulation with IFN-γ. BMDMs from WT and PIP −/− mice were stimulated in vitro with IFN-γ (100 U/mL) and at different indicated times. Total cell lysates were assessed for phosphorylation of STAT-3 ( a , c ) and ERK ( b , d ) proteins by Western blot using appropriate primary and secondary antibodies. The same blots were stripped and re-probed with antibodies against total STAT3 and ERK, then used as loading controls. The ratios of phosphorylated STAT3, ERK, and p38 to their respective total proteins were calculated by densitometry and plotted as bar graphs. The data presented are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. (* p < 0.05; *** p < 0.001) Fig. 4 Decreased phosphorylation of STAT3 and ERK proteins in BMDMs from PIP −/− mice following stimulation with LPS. BMDMs from WT and PIP −/− mice were stimulated in vitro with of LPS and at different durations of time (0–120 min); lysed and total cell lysates were assessed for phosphorylation of STAT3 ( a ) and ERK ( b ) by Western blot using appropriate primary and secondary antibodies. The same blots were stripped and re-probed with antibodies against total STAT3 and ERK used as loading controls. The ratios of phosphorylated STAT3 and ERK to their respective total proteins were calculated by densitometry and plotted as bar graphs ( c , d ). The data presented are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. (* p < 0.05; *** p < 0.001)
Decreased phosphorylation of nuclear factor-kappa B protein in BMDMs from PIP−/− mice
The observation that deficiency of PIP decreases phosphorylation of MAPK and STAT proteins strongly suggest that PIP could also regulate nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB), a master transcription factor whose phosphorylation and subsequent translocation into the nucleus regulate pro-inflammatory cytokine gene expression in macrophages [ ]. Therefore, we investigated whether PIP deficiency decreased phosphorylation of the NF-κB protein in BMDMs from wild-type and PIP −/− mice. We found significantly lower phosphorylation of the NF-κB (p65 subunit) in BMDMs from PIP −/− mice stimulated with LPS compared to their WT counterparts (Fig. 5 ). This observation suggests that the decreased production of pro-inflammatory cytokine and NO in PIP −/− mice is associated with decreased NF-κB phosphorylation. Fig. 5 Decreased phosphorylation of NF-κB protein in LPS-stimulated BMDMs from PIP −/− mice. BMDMs from WT and PIP −/− mice were stimulated in vitro with LPS and at different durations of time (0–120 min); lysed and total cell lysates were assessed for NF-κB phosphorylation by Western blot using appropriate primary and secondary antibodies ( a ). The same blots were stripped and re-probed with antibodies against total NF-κB and used as loading controls. The ratios of phosphorylated NF-κB to its total protein were calculated by densitometry and plotted as bar graphs ( b ). The data presented are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. (*** p < 0.001)
The expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 and 3 (SOCS 1 and 3) protein is significantly upregulated in BMDMs from PIP−/− mice
It has been previously reported that SOCS1 and SOCS3 are induced following stimulation of macrophages with IFN-γ or LPS and these proteins function to inhibit IFN-γ- or LPS-induced signaling events directly by inhibiting the activities of MAPK and JAK kinases to negatively regulate excessive production of inflammatory cytokines [ , ]. Given that LPS- and IFN-γ-induced activation of MAPKs and subsequent production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by macrophages from PIP −/− mice were decreased, we investigated whether deficiency of PIP enhanced the expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 in macrophages. We stimulated BMDMs from WT and PIP −/− mice in vitro with LPS and IFN-γ and at different durations of time (0–120 min), and assessed the expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 by Western blot. Our data showed that the expressions of SOCS1 (Fig. 6 a, c) and SOCS3 (Fig. 6 b, d) proteins in BMDMs from PIP −/− mice were significantly higher than those in WT macrophages. Taken together, these results suggest that PIP might act as a negative regulator of SOCS 1 and SOCS3 proteins, thereby enhancing MAPK/STAT signaling. Fig. 6 Increased expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 protein in BMDMs from PIP −/− mice stimulated with IFN-γ. BMDMs from WT and PIP −/− mice were stimulated in vitro with IFN-γ and at different durations of time (0–120 min); lysed and total cell lysates were assessed for SOCS1 ( a ) and SOCS3 (b ) protein expression by Western blot using appropriate primary and secondary antibodies. The same blots were stripped and re-probed with antibodies against B-actin and used as loading controls. The ratios of SOCS1 and SOCS3 expressed to its total protein were calculated by densitometry and plotted as bar graphs ( c , d ). The data presented are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. (*** p < 0.001; **** p < 0.0001)
Discussion
Recently, we reported that PIP −/− mice had significantly lower numbers of CD4 + T cells, decreased ability of their CD4 + T cells to differentiate into Th1 cells in vitro, decreased IFN-γ and NO production, and thus failed to control Leishmania major infection [ ] . Furthermore, the ability of macrophages from PIP −/− mice to restrict growth of L . major following IFN-γ stimulation was decreased, suggesting that deficiency of PIP leads to decreased responsiveness of macrophages to IFN-γ. Here, we confirmed and extended these findings by showing that the ability of macrophages from PIP −/− mice to produce pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-6 and IL-12) following IFN-γ and LPS stimulation was decreased. Since the expression of IFN-γ receptor and TLR4 is critical for responsiveness to IFN-γ and LPS, respectively, we assessed whether deficiency of PIP affects the expression of IFN-γR and TLR4 in macrophages and the downstream intracellular signaling pathway involved in NO and pro-inflammatory cytokine production in macrophages. Collectively, the data presented in this study show that deficiency of PIP did not affect the expression of these receptors on macrophages.
The production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by macrophages and dendritic cells following IFN-γ and LPS stimulation is initiated by signals generated through a cascade of intracytoplasmic proteins including STATs and MAPKs [ ]. Similarly, the production of NO and pro-inflammatory cytokines by classically activated macrophages is regulated by intracellular signaling events including phosphorylation of MAPK and STAT protein. Our previous data showed that LPS- and IFN-γ-stimulated BMDMs from PIP −/− mice produce significantly less NO than those from WT mice [ ]. However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate this impairment were not investigated. In this study, we assessed the phosphorylation of different MAPK and STAT proteins from BMDMs of PIP −/− and WT mice following stimulation with LPS and IFN-γ. Our results showed dramatic inhibition of phosphorylation of STAT3 and ERK, in PIP −/− macrophages stimulated with IFN-γ and LPS. Interestingly, the decreased phosphorylation of STAT3 and MAPKs in PIP −/− macrophages was associated with a concomitant suppression of NF-κB phosphorylation, which is a critical transcription factor that controls the induction of several immune genes including those involved in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in macrophages [ ]. Whether the decreased phosphorylation of MAPKs is directly responsible for the decreased phosphorylation of NF-κB was not investigated in this study. However, it is conceivable that decreased activation of STATs and MAPKs could directly or indirectly affect NF-κB phosphorylation as has been shown in other studies [ ]. Alternatively, it is plausible that PIP might regulate NF-κB phosphorylation by enhancing the ability of the inhibitor of kappa B kinase (IKK) complex to degrade the inhibitor of kappa B (IkB) proteins, thus promoting the phosphorylation and translocation of NF-κB to the nucleus. Further studies are required to accurately determine the mechanistic pathway through which deficiency of PIP regulates NF-κB phosphorylation in macrophages.
The induction of SOCS1 and SOCS3 proteins in macrophages following LPS or IFN-γ stimulation is critical for feedback inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokine responses via the downregulation of JAK kinase activity [ , ]. We found that the impaired phosphorylation of MAPK and STAT proteins in PIP −/− BMDMs following LPS and IFN-γ stimulation was associated with increased expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 proteins compared to those from their WT counterpart mice. Though, at 120 min of stimulation, it appears that the level of SOCS3 is similar in PIP −/− and WT cells which could be due a delay in SOCS3 expression in WT, which suggests that PIP inhibition of SOCS3 in WT occurs at earlier time points. Given that SOCS proteins act to dampen excessive inflammatory response activation, it is understandable that their induction be delayed in WT cells following LPS stimulation to allow for the initiation of an inflammatory response. In contrast, its early induction in PIP −/− mice acts to inhibit LPS-induced activation leading to inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokine responses as observed in Fig. 1 .
These observations suggest that PIP might act as a negative regulator of SOCS1 and SOCS3 proteins in macrophages. Thus, it appears that in the absence of PIP, unregulated SOCS expression acts to inhibit MAPK and STAT activation/phosphorylation, thereby limiting the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by macrophages. Although PIP is a secreted protein, it is possible that it could interact with SOCS proteins (or other proteins) intracellularly prior to being secreted. It is also conceivable that the simultaneous binding of putative SOCS3-PIP complex to JAK and gp130 cytokine receptors (which are the binding sites of SOCS3, [ ]) could occur inside the cells leading to repression of JAK-STAT signaling pathway.
In a previous study, we have identified PIP as a promoter of Th1 differentiation [ ]. Moreover, it has been shown that patients with breast tumors that elicit a stronger Th1 response have a better prognosis than those whose tumors skew toward a T helper 2 (Th2) response [ ]. In line with such studies, we have also observed that thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), which is important in the initiation of Th2 immune response [ , , ], is significantly upregulated in the absence of PIP (as observed in the PIP −/− mice, unpublished data). Intriguingly, TSLP has recently been shown to block early stages of breast cancer [ ], leading us to suggest that it is plausible that when PIP is expressed by the tumor, it suppresses TSLP and consequently the Th2 response, thereby shifting the immune response to a more Th1 response. Also, it has been reported that depressed Th1 cytokine (IL-12 and IFN-γ) response is associated with breast cancer patients with large tumors [ ], suggesting that during the early stages of breast cancer progression, PIP might be providing host protection by boosting the immune system and promoting a strong anti-tumor response to destroy the cancer cells. This immunoprotective role may diminish as the cancer progresses. Based on these collective studies, we suggest PIP is a novel immunomodulatory molecule that elicits protective, anti-tumor immunity during the early stages of breast cancer development. Immunotherapy, the activation of the immune system for therapeutic benefits, is effective in treating several cancers including breast cancer [ ]. Though immunotherapy for breast cancer holds much promise, it still remains under-explored. This study contributes to understanding the role of PIP as a novel regulatory molecule of the immune response during breast cancer progression.
In conclusion, our studies clearly pave a way to a better understanding of the pathway involved in suppression of pro-inflammatory cytokine production from macrophages of PIP-deficient mice, and this further confirms PIP as an important immunoregulatory protein involved in host defense. This observation stresses the need to evaluate the mechanism through which SOCS proteins suppress IFN-γ signaling and deserves further studies.