Introduction
There is growing interest worldwide in medical treatments to prevent or reduce skin ageing, both on medical grounds and for aesthetic and cosmetic purposes [ , ]. In 2009, the American Society of Aesthetic and Plastic Surgery confirmed that more than 10 million patients in the USA alone had had biomaterial filler injections [ ]. The increasing number of dermal fillers now available is evidence of this growing market. Initially, no side effects were reported [ , ]; however, severe late-onset inflammatory responses are now starting to be seen in 2–5% of cases [ , , , , , ]. Most of these adverse reactions are local, but systemic reactions are also being reported. To trigger these immune reactions, fillers may act as a T cell-directed antigen, as a superantigen or as an adjuvant. An immunological adjuvant is a substance that enhances the antigen-specific immune response, preferably without triggering one on its own [ ]. In 1964, Miyoshi et al. [ , ] described for the first time the possible complications of filler treatment—silicone and paraffin—referred to as “human adjuvant disease” (HAD). In 2008 and in 2012, Alijotas-Reig et al. [ , ] reported a series of cases that they termed human adjuvant-like disease, referring to those induced or triggered by synthetic bioimplants other than silicone and paraffin. More recently, Shoenfeld and Agmon-Levin [ ] coined the term “ASIA”—autoimmune/inflammatory syndrome induced by adjuvants—for an umbrella entity that included several clinical and laboratory features first described by Miyoshi et al. [ ] together with other new clinical and laboratory parameters related to exposure to diverse external stimuli such as bacteria, viruses, vaccines or silicone.
The ability of adjuvants to chronically stimulate the immune system reflects their effect on the innate immune pathway. They also protect antigens from being degraded, thus giving them prolonged exposure to the antigen-presenting cells [ ]. Given their ability to induce an immune response, we demonstrated in previous reports that silicone medical grade (SMG) and hyaluronic acid (HA) compounds act as adjuvants rather than antigen-triggering T cell responses [ , ]. Other filler substances, mainly acrylamides, may act in the same manner (Alijotas-Reig et al., unpublished results). With respect to bioimplants, only silicone, mineral oil [ ] and, more recently, a short series of other fillers [ ] have been associated with ASIA to date. Disorders such as siliconosis, Gulf War syndrome, macrophagic myofasciitis syndrome and post-vaccination syndrome could also be included in ASIA [ ]. Moreover, Colafrancesco et al. [ ] raised an interesting theory based on the epidemiological, pathogenic, serological and clinical manifestation similarities between Sjögren’s syndrome (SS) and ASIA, and suggested that SS and ASIA could constitute another facet of the same problem. Thus, in genetically predisposed hosts, the effects of diverse molecules acting as a trigger may evolve into more generalised inflammatory disorders that may eventually present as ASIA or a related syndrome. In recent years, two different sets of diagnostic criteria have been launched: the first and at present accepted were proposed by Shoenfeld et al. [ ] (Table 1 ). However, many of these criteria are too subjective, leading to some patients being diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome or other “central sensitisation syndromes” or even to a false-positive diagnosis [ ]. The second set was suggested in 2015 by Alijotas-Reig [ ] (Table 2 ), in an attempt to avoid these subjective items, and is still awaiting validation. Table 1 ASIA diagnostic criteria according to Shoenfeld’s proposal Major criteria Variable latency time ranging from months to years External stimulus exposure (infection, vaccine, silicone) before clinical signs. Injected paraffin or silicone act as an adjuvant Appearance of typical clinical manifestations Foreign body-type granuloma present in the injected or implanted area Myalgia, myositis or muscle weakness Foreign body-type granuloma may be seen in drainage lymph nodes Arthralgia and/or arthritis Presence of any autoantibody Chronic fatigue, unrefreshing sleep or sleep disturbances Symptoms may disappear after the implant material removal Neurological manifestations Infection and cancer have to be ruled out in the analysed tissue Cognitive impairment, memory loss Pyrexia, dry mouth Removal of inciting agent induces improvement Typical biopsy of involved organs Minor criteria The appearance of autoantibodies or antibodies directed at adjuvant. Other clinical symptoms (e.g. irritable bowel syndrome). Specific HLA (i.e. HLA DRB1, HLA DQB1). Evolvement into an autoimmune disease (i.e. MS, SSc). HLA human leukocyte antigen, MS multiple sclerosis, SSc systemic sclerosis Table 2 New proposed criteria for ASIA Major criteria 1. Exposure to external stimuli: biomaterials, vaccines, anilines or other organic/inorganic materials prior to clinical manifestations 2. Minimum latency time of days when referring to vaccines and 1 month when the suspected trigger is other than vaccines, i.e. biomaterials ab 3. Clinical involvement Local/regional: inflammatory nodules; skin oedema or angioedema, skin indurations; pseudo-abscesses; lymphadenopathy, panniculitis, morphea, sarcoid-like lesions, or Systemic: distant inflammatory nodules; arthritis; sicca or Sjögren’s syndrome c ; myositis d or muscle weakness e , extended panniculitis, demyelinating neurological involvement, or Evolvement into organ or non-organ autoimmune diseases 4. Foreign body-type biopsy of involved area or lymph nodes f or histological findings consistent with autoimmune/granulomatous disorders 5. Removal of inciting materials induces improvement 6. Compatible HLA (i.e. HLA B8, HLA DRB1, HLA DR3, HLA DQB1, or haplotype combination) Minor criteria 1. Recent history of triggering factors preceding the onset of clinical manifestations g . 2. Large, de novo livedo reticularis and/or hand erythema appearing at the onset of clinical manifestations h . 3. Presence of any autoantibody and/or hypergammaglobulinaemia and/or ACE and/or LDH and/or low complement levels Alijotas-Reig [ ]. Specific histopathological patterns of biomaterials and vaccine adjuvants should be considered and depicted when possible (according to recommendations [ , ] ASIA autoimmune/inflammatory syndrome induced by adjuvants, HLA human leukocyte antigen, ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme, LDH lactic dehydrogenase, SLE systemic lupus erythematosus, MRC medical research council muscle strength grading system a Paraffin, silicone, silicone medical grade, methacrylate, poly- l -lactic acid, polyacrylamide, poly-alkyl-imide, collagen, hydroxyl-apatite, hyaluronic acid, non-animal stabilised hyaluronic acid, alginate b When adverse reactions occur after a second stimulus, short period of time can be accepted c Demonstrated through objective test: salivary flow or salivary scintigraphy; Schirmer and Rose Bengala tests d Documented by elevated muscle enzymes and/or electromyography and/or muscle biopsy e Muscle strength should be evaluated by means of MRC scale or similar f Specify what type of histopathological pattern was identified (i.e. sarcoidal, palisading, necrobiotic, paraffinoma, siliconoma) g Infectious process; trauma or manipulation of filled/implanted/vaccination areas h Appearance of de novo painless, symmetric, bilateral reddish, purplish, or bluish erythematous coloration of palms and sometimes palmar surface of the fingers, similar to those observed in SLE, hyperoestrogenism or vasculitis
Forty-five cases of late-onset inflammatory, immune-mediated adverse reactions related to fillers/implants that could be considered as ASIA are reported. An updated review focused on biomaterials and ASIA is also provided.
Patients and methods
Setting
The Autoimmune Diseases Unit of our hospital (Vall d’Hebron University Hospital) has initiated a prospective protocol to manage patients who present with late-onset adverse reactions related to dermal fillers or implants. By January 2008, 350 patients with these kinds of adverse reaction related to filler injections had sought medical attention at our unit. All but 10 of these patients had been treated by aesthetic and plastic surgery physicians in various clinics around Spain. All cases were treated at our outpatient clinic. In accordance with the protocol for bioimplant injections, strict sterile conditions were maintained throughout.
Study protocol
The recommended clinical study protocol included a detailed clinical history; standard blood test; C-reactive protein (CRP); fibrinogen; calcium; lactic dehydrogenase (LDH); angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE); serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP); antinuclear antibodies (ANAs); C4; CH50 and CD4/CD8 ratio; anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-Scl-70, anticentromere, antimitochondrial (AMA), anti-dsDNA and antiphospholipid antibodies (aFL); antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) and Waaler-Rose. Ultrasound and/or magnetic resonance images of the primarily filled areas were taken in all cases. Chest X-ray and computed tomography of other areas were performed when necessary. Biopsy of lesions was not mandatory but recommended. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes were analysed in some patients.
Inclusion criteria
To be eligible for inclusion, patients had to have had late-onset inflammatory, non-infectious adverse reactions related to filler injection. Late-onset adverse reactions were defined as onset 3 months or longer after bioimplant injection and of at least one of the following clinical signs: oedema, angioedema, skin induration, plaques, panniculitis, swelling/tender nodules with or without fistulisation or discharge of sterile pus or filler material and at least one or more of the following systemic complaints: fever, arthralgia, arthritis, myalgia, muscle weakness, chronic fatigue, generalised aches, distant skin lesions, dry eyes and mouth and any other sign or clinical complaint, depending on the different organ involved.
Disease definition
Sjögren’s syndrome, leukocytoclastic and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) vasculitis, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, undifferentiated connective tissue disease (UCTD), scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, Guillain-Barré syndrome, inflammatory bowel syndrome, Hashimoto’s disease, sarcoidosis and mesenteric panniculitis were diagnosed according to their respective currently accepted classification or diagnostic criteria. HAD was defined using modified Miyoshi-recommended criteria [ ] i.e. a latency period ranging from months to years; history of silicone or other foreign material injection; granuloma seen in filled areas; presence of autoantibodies and/or hypergammaglobulinaemia (SPEP); no evidence of cancer or infection and/or the presence of more than one of the following: arthralgia, arthritis, fever, myalgia, skin lesions, lymphadenopathy, sicca complex or skin rash. To be included as ASIA, patients had to fulfil Shoenfeld’s suggested diagnostic criteria (Table 1 ).
Search strategy and selection criteria
Data for this review refer only to ASIA related to biomaterials, and were obtained through a comprehensive literature search using the following keywords: “silicone”, “silicone medical grade”, “hyaluronic acid”, “NASHA” “methacrylate”, “methylmethacrylate”, “poly-alkyl-imide”, “poly-acrylamide”, “almagate”, “collagen”, “poly- l -lactic acid”, “hydroxylapatite”, “dermal fillers”, “breast prosthesis”, “tooth amalgam”. This list was crossed with “human adjuvant diseases”, “autoimmune/inflammatory syndrome induced by adjuvants”, “ASIA” “delayed adverse/side effects”, “autoimmune”, “Sjögren’s syndrome”, “systemic sclerosis”, “scleroderma”, “undifferentiated connective tissue disease”, “mixed connective tissue disease”, “sarcoidosis”, “granulomatous disorders”, “panniculitis”, “vasculitis” and “arthritis”, and the search was restricted to “human” and “late-onset adverse effects” to identify articles published in English from PubMed (MEDLINE), Google Scholar and The Cochrane Library from 2011 (after initial description of ASIA) to August 2016. Some interesting papers from before 2011 were also reviewed and included according to their importance. The review included case reports, case series, cohort studies and reviews. The review was made by JAR, EEV and NGA.
Results of this case series
General results
Most cases were female 40/45 (88.88%) and Caucasian 38/45 (84.44%). Biomaterials included skin fillers 23/45 (51.11%), silicon breast implant 19/45 (42.22%), other silicone implants 11/45 (24.44%) and tooth amalgam 5/45 (11.11%). Main locations were face 20/45 (44.44%) and breast 17/45 (37.77%); other locations had a lower prevalence: teeth 5/45 (11.11%), buttocks 4/45 (8.8%), lower legs 2/45 (4.44%) and pectoral 1/45 (2.22%). Average time elapsed from first exposure to biomaterial to clinical onset was 70.66 months (6–317), and the diagnosis lapse (time from clinical onset to clinical diagnosis) was 19.82 months ( 1–120).
Clinical complaints
Autoimmune disorders yielded were autoimmune thyroiditis (13/45), panniculitis 11/45, early UCTD (8/45), type 1 diabetes mellitus (5/45), Sjögren’s syndrome (3/45), systemic sclerosis (3/45), seropositive polyarthritis (3/45), leukocytoclastic vasculitis (3/45), sarcoidosis (3/45), localised scleroderma (2/45), overlap syndrome (2/45), mesenteric panniculitis (2/45), Guillain-Barré (2/45), Crohn’s disease (2/45), multiple sclerosis (1/45), ulcerative colitis (1/45) and SLE (1/45). The most common symptoms presented by patients were arthralgia 38/45 (84.44%), general weakness 30/45 (66.66%), myalgia 27/45(50%), palmar-digital erythema 25/45 (55.55%) and arthritis 20/45 (44.44%) (more details shown in Table 3 ). Table 3 Clinical complaints according to ASIA criteria and outcome Case Adjuvant a Myalgia Arthralgia arthritis Fatigue Neurologic complaints Cognitive features Fever Sicca synd. Removal Biopsy ANAs Evolvement AD/GD Skin LN 1 PAI X – X – – – – – – X – X – 2 SMG X X X – – – – X X X – X – 3 SMG – X X – – X – – X X X X X 4 PAI – X – – – – – – – X – X X 5 PAI – – – X X – – – X X – X – 6 SMG X X – – X X – – X – X X – 7 SMG – X X – – – – – X X – X X 8 SMG X X – – X – X – X X X X X 9 PLA – X X – – X – X – X X X – 10 A-FAT – – – – X – – – X – X X – 11 U – X X – – – – – – X – X X 12 SMG X X X X X X – X X – X – X 13 U X – – – – X X – – – X X – 14 HA X X X X X – – – – X X X X 15 PAI – X – – – X – – X X – X – 16 SMG – X X – – X – – X X X X – 17 PLA X X X – – – – – X X X X X 18 HA-MT – X X – – – X – X X X X – 19 SMG X X X – – – X X X X X X – 20 SMG – X X – – – X – X X X X X 21 HA X X X X X – – – X X – X – 22 HA X X X – – – X – X – – X – 23 SMG X – X X – – – – X X – X – 24 PLA X X X – X – – – X X – X – 25 PAI X X – – – X X – – X – – X 26 SMG – X X – X X – – – X X X X 27 SMG – X X – – – – X X X X X – 28 SMG X X X – – – X – – X – X X 29 SMG X X X – X X – X X – X X X 30 SMG X X X X X – – – – X X – – 31 SMG X X X X – – X – – – X – – 32 PAI X X X X X X – X X X – X X 33 SMG X X X X – – – – X – X X – 34 HA X X X – – X – – X X X X X 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 SMG PAI PLA PLA SMG HA HA–MT HA HA U SMG X X X X X – – – – X – X X X X X X – X – X X – – – X X X – X – – – – – – – X – – – – – – – – – – X – – – – – – X X X X X – – – – X – – – – – – – – – – – – - – – X X – – X – – – X X X X X X X X X - X X X X X X X - X X X X X X X X - X X - - X - X X X X X X X X X X X - X - X - X X - - - - Skin and lymph node (LN) involvement do not fall into preliminary diagnostic criteria for ASIA syndrome PAI polyalkylimide, PLA poly- l -lactic acid, HA-MT hyaluronic acid plus methacrylate, HA hyaluronic acid, U unknown filler, ASIA autoimmune/inflammatory syndrome induced by adjuvants, ANAs antinuclear antibodies, y evolvement into autoimmune or granulomatous disease, z skin manifestations include livedo reticularis, rash, hand’s erythema, liquen induration, large panniculitis a Last implanted adjuvant
Laboratory data
Blood results
ANA were positive in 36/45 (80%), hypergammaglobulinaemia in 23/45 (51.11%), ACE in 16/45 (35.55%), raised LDH in 16/45 (35.55%), anti-/Ro antibodies in 10/45 (22.22%) and anti-TPO antibodies in 13/45 (28.88%). Other positive autoantibodies can be seen in Table 4 . Table 4 Clinical findings and main laboratory results of these ASIA patients No. Biomaterial Main clinical/autoimmune disease ANA TPO LDH ACE HYPERγ SS-a/Ro LowC RF Other results 1 SF Angioedema, panniculitis, AT, AD X X X X 2 SB Raynaud, SSCL, myositis, arthritis X X X Scl70, CK 3 SF, SB RA, angioedema, facial granulomatosis, AD X X aCCP 4 SB,OS Leg panniculitis, ankle arthritis, AD X X X X 5 SF,OS Angioedema, SI X X X 6 SF,SB Cutaneous sarcoidosis X X 7 SF,OS SS, sarcoidosis X X X X X 8 OS,OS Panniculitis X X X 9 TA, SB Raynaud, arthritis X X aPL 10 SB,A-FAT Panniculitis X X 11 TA Livedo reticular, red eye, AT, UDCTD X X X X X aPL 12 OS Arthritis small joints, Ulcerative colitis X X 13 TA Digital ischemia, Raynaud X X X 14 SF Livedo reticular, SLE X X X X DNAds 15 OS,SF Angioedema, facial nodules, AT X X 16 SB Facial nodules, AT, CD X X ASCA 17 SF,SF RFA, facial nodules, AT X X 18 SB,OS SS X X X 19 SB SSCL X X Scl70 20 SB SS, AT X X X X 21 SF Panniculitis, UDCTD, multiple sclerosis-like X X X 22 SF Panniculitis, angioedema, AT X X 23 SF Arthritis, angioedema, panniculitis X X X 24 TA, SF Angioedema, panniculitis, UDCTD X X X 25 SF Angioedema, UDCTD X X 26 SB Overlap SD X X Anticentromere 27 SB Local scleroderma (morphea) X X 28 SF,SB Angioedema, myositis, Raynaud, UDCTD X X X 29 SB Panniculitis, morphea, Anticentromere 30 SB AT, angioedema, overlap SD X X 31 OS Guillain-Barré SD X AntiGQ1b 32 OS Cutaneous vasculitis, AT X X X X pANCA 33 SB Facial nodules, Guillain-Barré SD, AT X 34 SF Cutaneous vasculitis, AT X X X pANCA 35 OS UDCTD, angioedema, AD X X X 36 SB,SF Facial nodules, arthritis, UDCTD X X X RNP, aPL 37 SF Facial nodules, arthritis, UDCTD, SI X X X X 38 SF Angioedema, facial nod., arthritis, sarcoidosis X X X X 39 JJ Vasculitis, arthritis, AT, MP X X X X X X X 40 SF Angioedema, panniculitis, facial nodules, CD X X X ASCA 41 SF Angioedema, facial nodules, MP, SI X 42 SF,SF Angioedema, facial nodules, myositis, SI X X X X X 43 SF Angioedema, facial nodules, skin induration X X X X 44 TA Livedo reticular, arthritis, SSCL, SI X X X aPL 45 SF Angioedema, facial nodules, AT X X SF skin filler, SB silicon breast, OS other silicone implant, AJ articular joints, TA tooth amalgam, AI autoimmune, SD syndrome, AD autoimmune diabetes, AT autoimmune thyroiditis, SS Sjögren’s syndrome, SSCL systemic sclerosis, RA rheumatoid arthritis, RFA recurrent facial angioedema, SLE systemic lupus erythematosus, UDCTD undifferentiated connective tissue disease, CD Chron’s disease, SI skin induration, ANA antinuclear antibodies, LDH lactate dehydrogenase, TPO thyroid peroxidase antibodies, Hyperγ hypergammaglobulinaemia, RF rheumatoid factor, ACCP cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies, ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme, LowC hypocomplementemia C3/C4, DNAds double-strain DNA, ASCA anti-saccharomyces cerevisiae, ANTIGQ1b anti-ganglioside, p-ANCA perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
HLA haplotypes
Twenty-five out of 45 cases were tested for HLA class I and class II molecules. Interestingly, 10 of these 25 (40%) tested positive for the HLA-B*8 and HLA-DRB1*03 haplotype.
Histopathological studies
Biopsies were performed in 32 of 45 cases (71.11%): skin nodules/panniculitis in 24 (75%), muscle in 2 (6.25%), minor salivary glands in 3 (9.37%) and bowel in 3 (9.37%). More detailed histopathological data are shown in Table 5 . Table 5 Type of biomaterial, place of biopsy and major histopathological results Case N° Adjuvant Has the material been removed? Did the removal induce clinical improvement? Biopsy location Skin involvement Biopsy results 2 SMG X X Muscle Skin induration Myositis 3 SMG – – Skin Panniculitis Granulomatous reaction 5 PAI – – Skin Skin induration Typical findings of scleroderma 6 SMG – – Skin Granulomatous nodules Sarcoid-like granuloma 7 SMG – – Minor salivary gland – Chronic inflammation 8 SMG – – Skin Panniculitis Chronic inflammation 10 A-FAT – – Skin Panniculitis Chronic inflammation 12 SMG X X Colon – Chronic inflammation + granulomatous reaction 15 PAI – – Skin Granulomatous nodules Chronic inflammation + granulomatous reaction 16 SMG – – Colon – Chronic inflammation + granulomatous reaction 17 PLA – – Skin Granulomatous nodules Chronic inflammation + granulomatous reaction 18 HA-MT – – Minor salivary gland – Chronic inflammation 19 SMG X X Skin Skin induration Typical findings of scleroderma 20 SMG – – Minor salivary gland – Chronic inflammation 21 HA – – Skin Panniculitis Chronic inflammation 22 HA – – Skin Panniculitis Chronic inflammation 23 SMG – – Skin Panniculitis Chronic inflammation 24 PLA – – Skin Panniculitis Chronic inflammation 27 SMG X X Skin Skin induration Typical findings of scleroderma 29 SMG X – Skin Skin induration Chronic inflammation + granulomatous reaction 32 PAI X – Skin Vasculitis Cutaneous vasculitis 33 SMG – – Skin Granulomatous nodules Chronic inflammation + granulomatous reaction 34 HA – – Skin Vasculitis Cutaneous vasculitis 35 SMG – – Skin Inflammatory nodules and panniculitis Granulomatous reaction and chronicinflammation 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 45 PAI PLA PLA SMG HA HA-MT HA HA SMG – – X X – – X – – – – X – – – X – – Skin Skin Skin Skin Colon Skin Muscle Skin Skin Granulomatous nodules Granulomatous nodules Granulomatous nodules Vasculitis – Granulomatous nodules Granulomatous nodules Cutaneous granuloma Granulomatous nodules Chronic inflammation + granulomatous reaction Granulomatous reaction Sarcoid-like granuloma Cutaneous vasculitis Granulomatous reaction Granulomatous reaction Myositis Granulomatous reaction Granulomatous reaction PAI polyalkylimide, PLA poly- l -lactic acid, HA-MT hyaluronic acid plus methacrylate, HA hyaluronic acid, U unknown filler, ASIA autoimmune/inflammatory syndrome induced by adjuvants, SMG Silicone medical grade
Therapeutic schedules
Pharmacological approach
Forty-three of the 45 patients were treated with prednisone at an average dose of 12.5 mg/day (5 mg to 80 mg) in combination with hydroxychloroquine in 33 (73.33%), non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in 19 (42.22%), antihistamines in 12 (26.26%), allopurinol 12 (26.66%) and tacrolimus in 10 (22.22%). Prednisone alone was administered in the two remaining cases.
Surgical procedures
Briefly, biomaterials were removed completely in 10 patients, producing a clinical improvement in six (60%).
Discussion
Herein, we report the possible relationship between the uses of bioimplants of medical use and delayed, inflammatory, immune-mediated disorders observed in 45 consecutive cases fulfilling ASIA criteria. In this series, only cases with at least a 3-month symptom-free span between the filler implant and clinical onset were included, although in the majority, this interval exceeded 12 months. This time span was empirically chosen by us since our first published paper to ensure that these complications are not related to acute events—type I hypersensitivity reactions, infections or vaccination—and thus, probably to late-onset immune-mediated reactions.
As expected, the majority were women, since most of these biomaterials were used for cosmetic reasons, and although the number of men seeking aesthetic counselling is rising, women prevail. The main biomaterials used were skin fillers and for breast augmentation. Interestingly, the average time elapsed before clinical manifestation onset was 70 months after which, worryingly, time lost until diagnosis was a mean of 20 months. The former finding renders it difficult to understand how non- or semi-permanent dermal fillers, with an average effect lasting 6–12 months, can be responsible for clinical symptoms manifesting much later. This fact might be due to a second triggering effect of other adjuvants, particularly other fillers, clinical or subclinical infections, local trauma or vaccines [ , , , ]. In theory, in a predisposed host, two or more different stimuli may increase the risk of abnormal immune responses [ , ]. Therefore, adverse reactions against external stimuli could have three different immune activators—infectious agents, bioimplants or vaccines that act as adjuvants. This topic will be discussed later. The particular work of certain memory “homing” innate cells, mainly macrophages or CD123 + plasmacytoid dendritic cells [ ], could also explain this delay in the onset of these abnormal immune responses when a second non-specific trigger appears. In our cases, no patients had been injected with vaccines or reported clinical infections after the injections or prostheses. Some underwent local surgical attempts to remove the foreign material, and in others, the second filler material could have acted as a trigger or second adjuvant.
Dental amalgam is a liquid mercury metal alloy mixture used to fill cavities by tooth decay. Low-copper amalgam commonly consists of mercury (50%), silver (22–32%), tin (14%), copper (8%) and other trace metals such as zinc and nickel [ , ]. Five of our 45 patients had a history of tooth amalgams with a close temporal relationship with the onset of clinical immune disorders. As will be commented on in the “ Review on biomaterials and ASIA ” section, diverse metals may act as adjuvants and be able to induce pathological immune reactions. Thus, in our cases, amalgams may act as a first or second “hit” and induce these kinds of disorder.
In our series, some autoimmune diseases were observed, with non-organ specific being the most frequent. Laboratory data showed non-specific immune activation such as positivity for ANA and hypergammaglobulinaemia. Interestingly, the increased LDH and ACE levels in more than a third of patients signified continuous macrophage activation probably related to the adjuvant stimulus [ , ]. We previously reported data demonstrating continuous macrophage activation when levels of different macrophage-specific molecules such as chitotriosidase, YKL-40 and myeloperoxidase were analysed in filled patients, both those who were asymptomatic and those with clinical manifestations [ ]. Histopathological patterns can aid the specific diagnosis i.e. sarcoidosis or vasculitis; others are non-specific or may eventually yield specific patterns of granuloma-related fillers, thereby permitting experienced pathologists to uncover the foreign material [ , , , ].
Regarding therapeutic schedules, prednisone was used in all cases, usually combined with other drugs, principally hydroxychloroquine, allopurinol, cetirizine or tacrolimus. With this treatment, almost 100% of patients were symptom-free within a few months and 70% remained asymptomatic 2 years later when treatment withdrawal was attempted. The rationale for using hydroxychloroquine, allopurinol and high cetirizine doses was their anti-inflammatory and immunomodulating effects, and good results have been reported in this setting [ , ]. No assessable adverse effects appeared when these drugs were used, either alone or combined. Tacrolimus is an drug used after allogeneic organ transplantation [ ] and also for treating autoimmune diseases [ , ]. It inhibits the production of interleukin-2 (IL-2) and blocks T cell proliferation [ ]. Practically all cases refractory to the other drugs were sensitive to tacrolimus, usually at a low dose. High doses were used only in 20% of treated patients. No major clinical or biological adverse effects related to tacrolimus were observed.
Conclusion remarks
Our series showed that foreign materials, particularly biomaterials used in aesthetic, cosmetic and plastic surgery and dentistry, are able to induce foreign body immune-mediated reactions and, on occasions, yield or trigger the onset of systemic granulomatous or autoimmune disorders, some of which fulfil ASIA criteria. Several cases started with local or regional complaints, with later extension. A minority presented autoimmune systemic diseases from the beginning. Laboratory data demonstrated chronic macrophage activation, hypergammaglobulinaemia and autoantibody positivity, with diverse specificities. Biopsies identified the triggering adjuvant and/or yielded data of a particular disorder e.g. sarcoidosis, vasculitis or myositis. Chronic outcome was the rule, with good clinical response being achieved in more than 70% of cases treated for 2 years. To this end, strong combinations of anti-inflammatory and/or immunomodulating drugs are required. No cases refractory to tacrolimus were observed. The question of what will occur in cases remaining asymptomatic but showing continuous blood markers of macrophage activation remains to be answered.
Review on biomaterials and ASIA
Biomaterials as adjuvants in inflammatory immune-mediated disorders
An immunological adjuvant is a substance that enhances the antigen-specific immune response, preferably without triggering one on its own [ , ]. Different substances or molecules including silicone, microbial proteins, hyaluronic acid, acrylamides, methacrylate and other fillers, vaccines and heavy metals may exert adjuvant effects [ , , , , , ]. Regarding the capability of biomaterials to elicit an immune response, we previously demonstrated that silicone medical grade and hyaluronic acid compounds act more as adjuvants than as direct antigen-triggering T cell responses [ , ]. It has been demonstrated that peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from individuals who suffered late-onset adverse inflammatory reactions due to silicone medical grade (SMG) injections presented higher basal levels of IL (interleukin)-6 than PBMC from healthy individuals. In vitro stimulation by MGS induced production of IL-6 and TNF-α. However, those individuals showed no presence of memory CD4 + T cells against silicone since CD69 expression and IFN-γ or IL-2 production were absent. Hence, these in vitro results demonstrated that SMG is able to induce inflammatory responses and PBMC from individuals with silicone injection-related adverse reactions presented an immunological disorder because of silicone which acted as an adjuvant rather than an antigen [ ]. In patients suffering from inflammatory adverse reactions related to HA compounds, we showed that HA also provoked a low-grade inflammatory response. Thus, when PBMC of these patients were re-stimulated with PHA, laboratory tests for T cell activation in vivo indicated that these patients had activated T cells in terms of IFN-γ and IL-2 production and CD25, CD69 or CD71 expression. Thus, this T cell activation did not appear to be HA antigen-dependent. HA could affect the immune system via an adjuvant affect rather than by eliciting an immune response as an antigen per se [ ]. Other fillers, mainly acrylamides, may act in the same manner (Alijotas-Reig et al., unpublished results).
The clinical adverse effects of fillers/biomaterials are usually related to type IV hypersensitivity reactions, according to the Gell and Coombs classification [ ]. However, we [ , , , ] and others [ ] reported late-onset bioimplant-related inflammatory features also related to type I and type III hypersensitivity reactions. Local trauma, infections, filler injections or vaccines may act as triggering factors [ , , , ]. Women occasionally related their bouts, sometimes severe, to their menstrual cycle. In these cases, it is possible to speculate on the possible relationship between oestrogens and TNF-α [ ] (Alijotas-Reig, personal observation) directly or through their influence on vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) [ ]. If this hypothesis were true, there would be a rationale for using biological drugs such as anti-TNF or vascular growth factor modifiers. However, although cases have been reported on the usefulness of etanercept in the treatment of silicone-related granulomas [ , , ], the exact opposite has also been communicated [ ]. On the other hand, the induction of autoimmunity by these biological drugs, sarcoidosis included, has been reported [ , ].
Clinical correlations may, on occasions, highlight the possible role of infectious agents as triggering factors—adjuvants—for the development of these pathological immune-mediated reactions [ ]. In a predisposed host, two or more different stimuli may increase the risk of abnormal immune responses [ , ]. It is known that the activation of autoimmune mechanisms by infectious agents is not uncommon, but not always agent-specific. The adjuvant effect of microbial molecules, viz. non-antigenic activation of innate and regulatory immunity as well as the expression of various regulatory cytokines, may determine whether an autoimmune response remains limited or will evolve to full-blown disease.
Adjuvants: mechanisms of immune activation
The adjuvant effect is achieved via several mechanisms involving both the innate and adaptive immune pathways. Briefly, adjuvants heighten innate immune responses by mimicking evolutionary conserved molecules, e.g. bacterial walls or unmethylated CpG-DNA residues and by binding to Toll-like receptors (TLR), and reinforce the activities of antigen-presenting cells. Thus, adjuvants raise local reactions to antigens, with further release of inflammatory cytokines from T-helper and mast cells [ , ]. In addition, microbial agents, together with other adjuvants, can induce immune-mediated diseases through a variety of mechanisms [ , ]. The contribution of TLR in this context has recently been identified. Different bacterial molecules may activate several TLR mainly 1, 4, 5, 7 and 9 [ ]. Bacteria also produce high amounts of DNA molecules with unmethylated CpG residues that activate inflammation through TLR7 and TLR9. Furthermore, acylated microbial proteins may activate innate immunity by TLR1 and TLR6 recognition. TLR expression in different cells and the active cross talk that antigen-presenting cells and B cells display with T cells may explain why these receptors are now accepted as a link between adaptive and innate immunity [ ]. In this line, Cavalcante et al. [ ] suggested that TLR7/9 signalling may be involved in antiviral type I IFN production and long-term inflammation in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-infected myasthenia gravis (MG) thymuses. Recently, Farina et al. [ ] showed infectious EBV in monocytes from patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc) and links EBV to the activation of TLR8 and IFN innate immune response in freshly isolated SSc monocytes. However, a TLR-independent mechanism via activation of NOD-like receptors, ultimately responsible for the activation of a molecular platform, called “inflammasome”, should also be considered [ ]. The interaction between biomaterials or other adjuvants and nucleotide oligomerisation domain-like receptors including the NALP3 inflammasome has also been reported. [ ]. Other proposed immunological mechanisms related to adjuvant effects are (i) induction of progressive antigen release, thereby enhancing antibody production and leading to longer exposure in APC; (ii) conversion from soluble antigens to a particulate form, thereby facilitating their phagocytosis by APC, and (iii) increasing local inflammatory reactions with further induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines [ ].
Inorganic dental materials and adjuvancy
Although true data on inorganic dental materials and granulomatous or systemic autoimmune diseases are lacking, relationships among silica, beryllium, cobalt, gold, nickel, aluminium and titanium and chronic granulomatous reactions such as sarcoidosis, pneumonitis and pulmonary fibrosis have been reported [ , ]. Yeter et al. [ ] described the relationship between blood mercury and cadmium levels and the appearance of Kawasaki’s disease (KD) in children under the age of 5. These metal levels in blood would only produce KD in young children with a specific genetic background. Mercury and cadmium could act per se as adjuvants since they can provoke vasculitis-like diseases such as KD. Interestingly, allergy to orthopaedic metal implants presenting with local inflammatory signs or implant rejection has also been reported, could some cases fulfil ASIA criteria [ ]. Those authors concluded that metal orthopaedic implants may be the primary cause of allergies, possibly leading to implant failure. The prevalence of this kind of metal sensitisation ranges from 3 to 30% [ , ]. Thus, the possibility of these cases evolving clinically into a more disseminated immune-mediated disorder should be considered. Furthermore, Dietrich et al. [ ] reported effusions, arthritis and dermatitis in four patients who had received knee implants. In addition, other non-specific conditions such as chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia have also been related to these metals [ ]. Some of the reported cases were related to dental amalgams, with clinical improvement after they were removed [ , ]. Owing to the scarcity of data in this field, reporting new cases is mandatory for a clear relationship between metals and ASIA to be accepted.
A new adjuvant-related disorder: autoimmune/inflammatory syndrome induced by adjuvants
Shoenfeld et al. [ , ] proposed a new clinical entity, named ASIA, to include cases with diverse clinical signs and symptoms, some non-specific, together with certain laboratory markers related to inflammation or autoimmunity (Table 1 ). We previously coined the term “human adjuvant-like diseases” [ , ] for cases of late-onset inflammatory or autoimmune disorders related to newly launched biomaterials for human use to differentiate them from those induced by silicone or paraffin, reported earlier by Miyoshi et al. [ , ]. ASIA criteria have several symptoms in common with HAD described by Miyoshi et al. It is noteworthy that, although several patients appear to fulfil the latter criteria, a task force of the American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery concluded that HAD is an imprecise concept and should not be used in the future [ ]. So, how should these implanted patients with different signs and symptoms be classified? The rationale would be to establish a classification or better diagnostic criteria, as Shoenfeld et al. [ , ] attempted to do. Other defined syndromes suffered a similar fate and have already been included in the ASIA or HAD groups [ , ]. In addition, macrophagic myofasciitis [ ], Gulf War syndrome [ ], Spanish toxic oil syndrome [ ] and Ardystil syndrome [ ] could also be included since they all seem to be related to different adjuvants, possibly to vaccination or multiple vaccines in the two former and aniline-denatured rapeseed oil and amines or hydrogenated aliphatic hydrocarbures, respectively, in the latter. Finally, sick building syndrome (SBS), defined according to the American Society for Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineering criteria, has also been included in ASIA [ , ]. Pollutants and poor indoor air quality often caused by air conditioning have been proposed as possible triggers of SBS. Interestingly, macrophagic myofasciitis, Spanish toxic oil syndrome, Ardystil syndrome and inflammatory granulomatous disorders related to biomaterials usually have severe clinical manifestations. By contrast, the clinical features of Gulf War syndrome and sick building syndrome are, in the main, similar to those observed in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). Overall, the majority of patients with these syndromes can be considered as ASIA.
Biomaterials, ASIA, undifferentiated connective tissue disease and Sjögren’s syndrome
One clinical syndrome, undifferentiated connective tissue disease (UCTD), is also of interest since it may have features similar to those of both the new syndrome proposed by Shoenfeld [ ] and Miyoshi’s syndrome [ , ] if patients have a positive ANA test [ , ]. Another, Sjögren’s syndrome (SS), is characterised primarily by inflammatory exocrine gland involvement accompanied by systemic manifestations. Interestingly, genetic and environmental factors, specifically infectious agents, seem to be responsible for the onset of SS [ ]. The pathogenesis of SS shares similar mechanisms with ASIA, since viruses, bacteria and vaccines may activate the TLR pathway and, thus, the subsequent upregulation of innate and adaptive immune responses [ ]. Colafrancesco et al. [ ] raised an interesting theory, and proposed that SS and ASIA could constitute a further facet of the same problem. In fact, SS and ASIA may appear after vaccines, silicone or other exogenous biomaterials are delivered, even after infection. Autoantibodies may also be present in a similar manner, and some predisposing human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes are shared by the two disorders. Sicca syndrome and SS are probably two of the commonest adjuvant-related disorders associated with these “adverse reactions” in a predisposed host. Furthermore, the relationship between other autoimmune disorders, e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), scleroderma, MCTD or sarcoidosis with the same environmental triggers, has also been described [ , , ].
Biomaterials, fillers, prostheses, metals and ASIA silicone breast implants and other silicone fillers
Reports on biomaterials or heavy metals as a cause of ASIA have been scarce; in the majority, silicone was the material involved, either as an injected filler or as prostheses, usually breast implants. Silicone injections have been associated with diverse autoimmune systemic diseases (ASD), mainly systemic sclerosis (SS), rheumatoid arthritis, adult Still disease, mixed connective tissue disease (Sharp’s disease), eosinophilic fasciitis, overlap SS/SLE, inflammatory myopathy and fibromyalgia, or with non-specific or undifferentiated connective tissue diseases before ASIA was defined [ , , , , , , , , , , ]. Recently, Vera-Lastra et al. [ ] reported 50 cases of women with ASIA related to the injection of foreign materials, mainly mineral oil or silicone. Interestingly, 30 patients presented non-specific autoimmune manifestations, whereas 20 fulfilled the criteria for definite autoimmune diseases. Agmon-Levin and Shoenfeld [ ] reported chronic fatigue syndrome and other clinical features consistent with human adjuvant disease or incomplete ASIA, showing the additive adjuvant effect of hepatitis B vaccine and silicone implants. Cohen Tervaert et al. [ ] reported 32 cases of breast implants and systemic complaints falling into the ASIA box, with 15 patients having data of definitive autoimmune disease. Time elapsed between implantation and symptom onset ranged from 2 to 20 years, and mean time from breast augmentation to ASIA diagnosis was 16 years (2–40 years). In a review article, Goren et al. [ ] discussed the significance of silicone as an adjuvant and its capability to provoke autoimmune dysregulation and/or autoimmune disorders in certain subjects. They also discussed the correlation between prosthesis explantation and subsequent clinical remission, achieved in less than 30% of cases. Jara et al. [ ] reviewed the literature from 2011 to 2016 and identified 4479 cases fulfilling ASIA criteria related to diverse adjuvants, mainly silicone, mineral oil and vaccines. Of these 4479, 305 fulfilled arbitrary criteria of severe ASIA. Interestingly, some of these severe cases evolved into a systemic defined autoimmune disease, particularly SLE, vasculitis, thyroiditis, systemic sclerosis and autoimmune hepatitis. Maijers et al. [ ] described a series of 80 women with non-specific clinical complaints, 52 of whom met ASIA criteria. Interestingly, after explantation, 69% of those women experienced a reduction in their symptoms. Contant et al. [ ] presented a series of 26 women with multiple sclerosis-like syndrome after receiving silicone breast implants; some also had other musculoskeletal symptoms, Raynaud’s phenomenon and lymphadenopathy. Shoaib et al. [ ] published a series of 100 breast silicone prosthesis recipients who presented diverse clinical rheumatological complaints; blood tests were abnormal in more than 50%, and ANA was positive in 70%. The same researchers reported 26 cases of systemic disease with disseminated central nervous system (CNS) involvement after silicone breast implantation ( n = 25) or silicone fluid injections into breasts ( n = 1), and 20 also had peripheral neuropathy. Additional problems included myalgia, arthritis, sicca complex, skin involvement and lymphadenopathy. The authors stated that patients had a new syndrome triggered by the foreign material [ ].
Cuellar et al. [ ] reported 300 cases of women with silicone breast augmentation who had different multiple systemic complaints consistent with human adjuvant disease or ASIA. Gaubitz et al. [ ] presented 90 women with similar systemic complaints to those communicated by Shoab et al. [ ] and Cuellar et al. [ ] who underwent MRI to detect capsular rupture. Interestingly, clinical manifestations in women with implant rupture did not differ from those with intact prostheses. Giltay et al. [ ] compared a large series of patients with breast implants and controls, observing significant differences when pain/swollen joints, skin alterations and sicca were evaluated The majority of those cases could be considered ASIA. Vasey et al. [ ] described a set of symptoms, particularly fatigue, pain and lymphadenopathy, in a cohort of 319 women with silicone breast implants. Freundlinch et al. [ ] reported a series of 50 women with silicone breast implants and a raft of complaints, mainly sicca syndrome, fatigue, muscle pain, Raynaud’s phenomenon, alopecia and lymphadenopathy; however, none fulfilled full-blown criteria for a single autoimmune disorder and thus could ASIA. Solomon et al. [ ] also described the clinical and laboratory profile of a large series of 176 symptomatic women with silicone breast augmentation and similar clinical characteristics to those reported by Freundlinch et al. [ ]; however, more cases had thyroid and parotid involvement, simulating sarcoidosis, Sjögren’s syndrome or lymphoproliferative disorders. All those cases could now be accepted as ASIA. De Jong et al. [ ] studied the positivity of antipolymer antibodies in a short series of silicone-implanted women and their relationship with systemic clinical complaints which overall could also be included as ASIA. Vermeulen et al. [ ] studied a cohort of 500 Dutch women with silicone breast implants. Significantly more women with ruptured implants than those with intact implants had debilitating chronic fatigue (75 vs. 51%), and multi-joint pain (77 vs. 60%). Interestingly, implant rupture is associated with an increase in symptoms of pain and chronic fatigue. Bridges et al. [ ] evaluated 156 women with silicone breast augmentation and rheumatic symptoms who had similar articular, ocular, cutaneous and general complaints as mentioned previously. Wells et al. [ ] presented data on 52 women requesting removal of their silicone breast implants owing to their possible connection with muscle and joint pain, fever, fatigue, skin rashes and cognitive/psychological manifestations which, overall, could fulfil ASIA criteria. Finally, Peters et al. [ ] reported 100 women who underwent breast silicone explantation after experiencing local and non-specific systemic complaints similar to those previously described.
In addition, some cases of diverse adjuvant-related systemic complaints such as myositis [ ], pulmonary fibrosis [ ], Sjögren’s syndrome [ ], Churg-Strauss syndrome [ ] and sarcoidosis [ ] have also been reported. Esposito et al. [ ] also discussed the role played by adjuvants, particularly vaccines in children, although they also focused on environmental factors such as silicone, although siliconosis occurring in children has not been reported; despite the fact that not all patients fulfilled ASIA criteria, all did have clinical and/or laboratory markers of autoimmune or granulomatous dysregulation. Jara et al. [ ] reviewed the bibliography regarding severe ASIA cases related to diverse adjuvants, mainly silicone prostheses or injections, and found that many had alveolar proteinosis, pulmonary fibrosis or myocardiopathy. Colaris et al. [ ] compared a cohort of 100 cases with ASIA due to silicone implants with 100 historical patients diagnosed of adjuvant breast disease 30 years ago; no differences were observed in the clinical spectra of the cohorts even when novel silicone breast prostheses were considered. Finally, Cohen Tervaert et al. [ ] concluded that silicone breast implants are associated in a proportion of patients with complaints such as fatigue, cognitive impairment, arthralgia, myalgia, pyrexia, dry eyes and dry mouth, and that silicone can migrate from the implant through the body and induce chronic inflammatory processes.
Curiously, studies published in the 1990s—Sanchez-Guerrero et al. [ ], Gabriel et al. [ ], Hochberg et al. [ ], Hennekens et al. [ ] and Nyrén et al. [ ]—and in 2000 by Janoswky et al. [ ] found no relationship between connective tissue diseases particularly, systemic sclerosis and silicone breast prostheses. Although methodological concerns can be found in the majority of those papers, (usually case-control studies or self-reported data), controversy is served. Obviously, the relationship between ASIA and silicone implants was not analysed, since earlier works only attempted to correlate systemic sclerosis and autoimmune diseases with silicone implants. However, if those studies were read in detail, some cases could probably be diagnosed as ASIA (Table 6 ). Table 6 Systemic reported complaints and/or diseases related to the most common injectable fillers, implants or prosthesis Complication Silicone PAI PA MTC HA PLA Collagen HAP Flu-like symptoms + – – – – – + – Lymphadenitis a + – + – – – + – Pneumonitis + – – – – – – – NTPE ф + – – – + – – – Serositis + – + – + – – – Hepatitis + – – – – – – – Panniculitis + + – + – – + – Angioedema + + + + + + + – Bone erosion + – – – – – – – Amiloidosis + – – – – – – – Siliconosis + – – – – – – – AHS – – – + + – + – Distant nodules + + – + – + + + Renal failure + – – – – – – – HAD + + – + – – – – UCTD + – – – – – – – Sarcoidosis + + – + – – + – Sclerodermia + – – – – – – – Inflammatory myopathy + – – – – – + – Sjögren’s syndrome + + – + + – – – Vasculitis – – – – + – – – Bouts of UC – – + – – – – – Fibromyalgia + – – – – – – – Hand’s erythema b + + + + + + – – ASIA + + + + + + – – AHS acute hypersensitivity syndrome type I, Collagen non-human-based collagen, ASIA autoimmune/autoinflammatory syndrome induced by adjuvants, HA animal and non animal-derived hyaluronic acid compounds, HAD human adjuvant disease, HAP hydroxylapatite, MTC methacrylate compounds polymethylmethacrylate and ethylmethacrylate, NTPE non-thrombotic pulmonary embolism, PA polyacrylamide, PAI poly-alkyl-imide, PLA poly- l -lactic acid, sarcoidosis sarcoidosis and sarcoid-like granulomatous diseases as well, UC ulcerative colitis, UCTD undifferentiated connective tissue disease a Non-infectious origin b Vasculitis-like type
ASIA related to non-silicone implant fillers
Here, we will refer to ASIA supposedly related to synthetic fillers or materials, particularly hyaluronic acid (HA), methacrylate, poly- l -lactic acid (PLLA), acrylamide compounds or a combination thereof (see Table 5 ).
Hyaluronic acid, the most used filler, is able to induce or provoke late-onset immune-mediated adverse reactions, some of which fulfil ASIA criteria. Alijotas-Reig et al. [ ] reported a series of 25 patients who developed delayed immune reactions following injections of fillers containing hyaluronic acid, either alone or combined with acrylic hydrogels. The average latency period up to the onset of symptoms was 14 months. Five of the 25 patients had clinical symptoms consistent with ASIA. In that work, the authors [ ] also reviewed the literature in this field—25 papers, yielding 230 cases with delayed, immune-mediated adverse reactions; only 1 case had panniculitis and scleromyxedema [ ] to be included as ASIA. One interesting case of recurrent bouts of HA-related cutaneous hypersensitivity vasculitis has already been reported [ ]. Alijotas-Reig et al. [ ] published a prospective case series of 25 patients injected with poly-alkyl-imide implants who developed delayed (mean latency period 13 months) adverse immune reactions with inflammatory nodules in 24 cases and systemic or distant manifestations consistent with ASIA in 5, including leg panniculitis, arthritis, extended livedo reticularis, sicca syndrome, primary biliary cirrhosis, pneumonitis and vasculitis-like reaction.
Interestingly, to the best of our knowledge, only polyacrylamide implants have been related to the onset and bouts of inflammatory bowel diseases in patients already diagnosed of either ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease [36, 42]. Alijotas-Reig et al. [ ] also reported a prospective, case series study of 10 patients with delayed immune-mediated adverse effects related to PLLA injections. Mean latency period to symptom onset was 19.2 months (6–60 months). Local inflammatory nodules/granuloma apart, one case presented a systemic granulomatous disorder that fulfilled ASIA criteria. In some cases, the local inflammatory manifestations related to different non-silicone materials may evolve into systemic or distant and multiple complaints e.g. sarcoidosis, Sjögren’s syndrome or inflammatory polyradiculopathy, which could fall into the ASIA category [ ].
ASIA related to metals
This topic has already been discussed in discussion on the 45 analyzed cases.
Adverse reactions caused by subsequent injections of different implants/prostheses
The possible increased risk of immune-mediated adverse reactions related to consecutive injections of different fillers has been suspected on clinical grounds [ , ]. Bachmann et al. [ ] found no evidence of consecutive injections increasing the risk of inflammatory, immune-mediated adverse reactions, particularly in cases of biodegradable fillers. When we analysed our own early series of 100 patients with late-onset immune-mediated adverse reactions related to dermal fillers, we suspected that consecutive injections of different fillers did raise the risk of these adverse reactions (Alijotas-Reig et al., unpublished results). In a subsequent review of 260 cases with filler-related immune disorders, we found that repeated injections of different fillers in the same region or in different sites did not raise the risk of adverse reactions either local or systemic; nevertheless, when they appeared they were more likely to become chronic, sometimes systemic and more severe [ ].
Genetic background and adjuvant-related disorders, including ASIA
HLA genes predispose to autoimmune diseases. It has been hypothesised that three haplotypes i.e. HLADR2DQ6, DR4DQ8 and DR3DQ2 account for HLA association with most autoimmune diseases [ ]. The low prevalence of idiopathic or autoimmune/granulomatous diseases induced by diverse adjuvants such as silicone and other biomaterials may point to a predisposing genetic background. The risk of suffering autoimmune or granulomatous disorders has been related to different HLA haplotypes, mainly classes I and II but rarely class III [ ]. A combination of certain alleles, together with functional variations among the DR and DQ alleles, may generate the complex patterns of DR–DQ haplotype associations with autoimmunity [ ]. The most analysed autoimmune diseases in relation to the HLA system have been type 1 diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, SLE, multiple sclerosis, Graves’s disease and sarcoidosis. In this setting, Hoffmann et al. [ ] recently identified annexin-A11 (ANXA11) as a new susceptibility locus for sarcoidosis. Shoenfeld et al. [ ] included HLA DRB1 and HLA DQB1 as a minor criterion of those suggested for the diagnosis of ASIA. We also analysed the relationship between diverse HLA class I and class II haplotypes and the susceptibility to inflammatory, immune-mediated, late-onset adverse reactions or ASIA related to different biomaterials. In fact, the HLA-B*8 and HLA-DRB1*03 haplotype combinations have been found to be a specific risk marker for these disorders (Alijotas-Reig J, unpublished results). If these results are confirmed, a possible new predictive risk test may be offered to physicians to minimise patient risk related to fillers or implants. Thus, the idea that this kind of immune reaction may develop in a genetically predisposed host, in whom the adjuvant would act as trigger to full T and B immune activation, has a rationale.
Therapeutic approaches
Drugs: autoimmune disorders
The well-defined autoimmune or granulomatous diseases most frequently associated with ASIA such as SLE, Sjögren’s syndrome, vasculitis, inflammatory bowel diseases or sarcoidosis should be treated with the current recommended schedules [ , ].
Localised inflammatory granulomatous disorders or panniculitis related to ASIA
The major concern are how to treat both local–regional inflammatory manifestations and when to recommended explantation or filler or prosthesis retrieval. Although well-designed studies to prove the positive effects of certain drugs in inflammatory granulomatous local/regional/panniculitis disorders related to bioimplants are lacking, their effectiveness has only been communicated in case reports and case series of filler injection-related granuloma. Systemic corticosteroids, usually administered by mouth, are the most commonly used systemic treatment for filler-induced immune-mediated acute and delayed adverse reactions [ , , , , , ]. To the best of our knowledge, no refractory cases have been reported when medium-high doses of prednisone (0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day) were used. Given the chronic nature of these pathological reactions, physicians are often forced to maintain corticosteroid therapy over time.
Thus, the potential for systemic adverse effects related to corticosteroid treatment should not be underestimated. In these cases, combination treatment with a second or even a third drug is recommended to be able to taper or minimise the corticosteroid dose. Different drugs tried to this end include antimalarials, antibiotics, allopurinol, antihistamines, retinoic acid, cyclosporine, tacrolimus and, anecdotally, azathioprine, methotrexate and mycophenolate mofetil [ , , , , , , , , ]. In fact, drugs such as hydroxychloroquine [ , , , , , , , , ], allopurinol [ , , , , , , , , , , , , ], antihistamines [ , , , , , ], dapsone [ ] and antibiotics [ , , , , , , , , , ], mainly minocycline [ ], have been tried in these cases. In an attempt to reinforce the empirical use of these drugs, Alijotas-Reig et al. (unpublished results) [ , ] in an in vitro model using peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with granulomatous and autoimmune lesions related to SMG, hyaluronic acid and acrylamides showed that all the previously mentioned drugs were able to inhibit, in different degrees, diverse pro-inflammatory cytokines, mainly TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL1-β, IL-2 and IL-6.
Drug combinations
Although no well-designed clinical trials supporting this practice have been published to date, several combinations of systemic drugs other than corticosteroids have been proposed for the treatment of the most severe, recurrent or extensive cases. Practically all previously mentioned drugs have been combined in an attempt to avoid corticosteroid use [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. In certain cases, a combination of these drugs has been used given the severity of the patients’ lesions and the need to taper corticosteroid doses, usually with good results. Prescribers must be aware of the risk of the patient developing benign intracranial hypertension that contraindicates the use of tetracycline and retinoic acid derivatives in combination.
Explantation/biomaterial removal: surgical options: dermal fillers or bioimplants
In selected cases, surgical procedures are necessary to eliminate granulomatous or inflammatory reactions related to implant fillers [ , , , , , , , , ]. We agree with Sperling et al. [ ] and Lemperle et al. [ ] that few patients suffering from inflammatory adverse effects related to fillers should undergo surgical procedures. Similarly, only 10% of cases in the Therapy of Adverse Reactions of Injectable Fillers (TARIF) Study [ ] underwent surgery. During active inflammatory processes or when patients have large and/or multiple lesions, surgical procedures should be avoided owing to the risk of filler migration, infection, fistula formation, persistent granulation tissue, marked deformities, scars and new inflammation bouts or disseminated complaints related to injury [ , , ]. It is actually difficult to remove all the material filled; thus, as inflammatory reactions are not only related to the amount of exogenous material injected, success of the extraction cannot be guaranteed. Data on the effectiveness of material removal in cases complicated by systemic autoimmune diseases are lacking. Thus, only a few cases should undergo surgical procedures. Based only on our clinical experience and not on evidence-based medicine, we can only recommend surgical procedures in cases refractory to all known medical treatments, immunosuppressive therapy included.
Surgical options: silicone breast implants
Controversy exists regarding prosthesis explantation in women with systemic autoimmune diseases. Maijers et al. [ ] studied 80 women with non-specific clinical complaints, 52 of whom met ASIA criteria. Interestingly, after explantation, only 36 of the 52 (69%) experienced a reduction in their symptoms. In Colaris’ series, half of the 54 patients who underwent removal of their silicone breast implant experienced an improvement in their symptoms after explantation [ ]. Wells et al. [ ] presented data on 52 women requesting removal of their silicone breast implants owing to their possible relationship with muscle and joint pain, fever, fatigue, skin rashes and cognitive/psychological manifestations, which overall could fulfil ASIA criteria. Those authors described the psychological and rheumatic symptoms of 52 women requesting breast implant removal. The main outcomes were measured by psychological evaluation with the Brief Symptom Inventory and the Beck Depression Inventory. Clinical evaluation was made using a rheumatic symptom survey. Results revealed a rise in all Brief Symptom Inventory subscales and the Beck Depression Inventory showed mild depression. The authors noted psychological distress and mild depression in this group, who may also present rheumatic symptoms of connective tissue disease. Peters et al. [ ] described 100 women who underwent breast silicone explantation and who had experienced similar local and non-specific systemic complaints to those listed above. Melmed et al. [ ] reported 240 women who had undergone explantation, 196 of whom had a combination of signs and symptoms consistent with chronic fatigue syndrome and ASIA. Goren et al. [ ], as previously commented, observed that clinical remission after prosthesis explantation was achieved in less than 30% of cases. Recently, de Boer et al. [ ] stated that explantation was useful for improving silicone-related complaints in 75% of their patients, whereas in those who developed autoimmune diseases, improvements were only observed when explantation was combined with immunosuppressive therapy. Eighteen patients were referred by rheumatologists with a diagnosis of autoimmune or rheumatic disease. Six had autoimmune disease (systemic lupus in two, rheumatoid arthritis in two, multiple sclerosis in one and Raynaud’s disease in one). Twelve had rheumatic disease (fibromyalgia in 10 and inflammatory arthritis in 2). The main reasons for explantation were suspected silicone-related health problems in 76% and musculoskeletal pain in 23%. At a mean of 2.7 years (range, 1–5 years) post explantation, 45% of the 75 questionnaire responders felt that their implants had caused permanent health problems. Alijotas-Reig et al. [ ] reported three cases of diffuse or localised scleroderma, and clinical benefits of explantation were obtained in only one case. The authors subsequently followed other cases of breast prosthesis explantation owing to severe diffuse scleroderma in which less than 50% showed clinical improvement (Alijotas-Reig, unpublished data).
Laser therapy
Based on the experience of treating facial granuloma with laser therapy [ , ], some authors have used this therapeutic modality in clinical practice on patients suffering from granuloma related to filler injections, particularly cases complicated with systemic manifestations. Nevertheless, we are aware of publications on this subject by Cassuto et al. [ ] who reported a series of 20 patients with granuloma related to synthetic gel fillers treated using a lithium triborate at 532 nm diode laser using an intralesional technique. A possible role of bacteria as triggers of filler-related granuloma was assumed by those authors, who reported good responses after repeated treatments [ ]. A similar approach was used by Paradisi et al. [ ]. However, the evidence available remains insufficient to recommend this kind of therapy since adverse effects, mainly laser therapy-related cutaneous and subcutaneous necrosis with no improvement in systemic complaints, have also been observed (Alijotas-Reig, unpublished data).
Conclusion of the review
In light of this review, it may be concluded that foreign materials, particularly biomaterials and several heavy metals used in aesthetic, cosmetic, plastic surgery and dentistry, are able to act as adjuvants and induce delayed foreign body immune-mediated reactions and, on occasions, systemic granulomatous or autoimmune disorders, some of which fulfil full-blown ASIA criteria—Shoenfeld’s syndrome. Some cases may debut with local or regional complaints with further systemic extension while others present autoimmune systemic diseases from the outset. Laboratory data demonstrated chronic macrophage and immune activation and diverse antibody specificities according to the underlying autoimmune diseases. Histopathological studies can identify the triggering adjuvant and/or yield data for the diagnosis of a particular systemic disease e.g. SLE, sarcoidosis, systemic sclerosis, vasculitis or myositis. Two different diagnostic criteria sets have been suggested, with that proposed by Shoenfeld being the most used. The second set, proposed by Alijotas-Reig, is similar to the former except that the subjective items have been replaced by objective items in an attempt to avoid false-positive diagnoses. Chronic outcome was the norm in ASIA cases with no well-defined autoimmune diseases, with good clinical response being achieved in more than 70% of cases treated for 2 years. To this end, strong combinations of anti-inflammatory and/or immunomodulating drugs are required. To date, no cases refractory to tacrolimus have been communicated. Full-blown autoimmune diseases i.e. sarcoidosis, SLE, Sjögren’s syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, myositis, inflammatory bowel diseases, etc., should be treated as usual.
The role of explantation or foreign material extraction is a matter of debate; however, these maneouvres should be recommended in systemic, severe or refractory cases. In ASIA patients, adjuvated vaccines should probably not be recommended. The question as to what will occur in cases remaining asymptomatic but showing blood markers of ongoing macrophage activation remains to be answered. Finally, we wish to conclude that, in predisposed genetic hosts, biomaterials may trigger immune-mediated responses that can eventually lead to granulomatous or autoimmune disorders. In certain cases, patients suffering from these complications fall into a new diagnostic complex named autoimmune/inflammatory syndrome induced by adjuvants (ASIA), formerly known as human adjuvant disease or human-like adjuvant disease.