Introduction
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae (APP) is the causative agent of porcine contagious pleuropneumonia, a highly contagious and fatal respiratory disease that affects swine of all ages and causes great economic losses worldwide [ ]. APP has been divided into 16 serotypes [ ], and a lack of cross-protection among the primary serotypes has resulted in slow progress in vaccine development [ , ]. Propionibacterium acnes (PA), a gram-positive Corynebacterium grown under anaerobic condition, induces an adjuvant effect [ ] and can stimulate peripheral blood mononuclear cells to release cytokines, such as IFN-γ and IL-17, that are active against infection by other bacteria, fungi, and viruses [ ].
Although a large distance exists between APP and PA in terms of family and genus, fortunately, we discovered that PA could heterologously prevent APP infection during an analysis of genomic differences between APP serotypes 1 and 5 [ ]. Furthermore, a higher the level of anti-PA antibody was associated with, a better the protective effect in mice. Once the B cells in the mice were depleted, the antibody level induced by PA and the ability to resist an APP infection were significantly reduced, which indicated that the humoral immunity response played a primary role in disease prevention [ ]. Once the macrophages were depleted, the protective effect after passive immunization with anti-PA antibody was significantly reduced, which indicated that anti-PA antibody could resist APP infection by mediating phagocytosis of macrophages [ ].
Neutrophils are the most abundant immune cell type; they are essential effector cells of the innate immune response and they form the first line of defense against bacterial and fungal pathogens. Neutrophils exhibit powerful phagocytosis similar to macrophages. Therefore, we speculated that the Fc receptor on the neutrophil surface could stimulate a neutrophil to kill bacteria by mediating phagocytosis against an APP infection, in a similar manner to that of a macrophage. Whether neutrophils are necessary for resistance to an APP infection must be identified, and it would help us gain a deeper understanding of the mechanism underlying how PA prevents APP infection.
Cyclophosphamide (CP) is a drug that is commonly used to create an immunosuppression model in animals, and we used it to deplete neutrophils in mice to determine whether neutrophils were necessary for APP infection resistance. Then, the mice were challenged with APP serotype 1 after passive immunization with an anti-PA antibody. We determined whether the neutrophils were necessary for the activity of the anti-PA antibody against an APP infection by measuring the survival rate, the colonization of APP in the lungs, and pathological changes. All of these factors could form a basis to explain the mechanism of anti-PA antibody activity against an APP infection.
Materials and methods
Bacterial strains, media, and growth conditions
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae reference strain Shope 4074 serovar 1 (APP1) was donated by the Shanghai Entry–Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau (Shanghai, China) and was used for the challenge studies. It was cultured in brain heart infusion medium (BHI; Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI, USA) supplemented with 10 μg/ml NAD (Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at 37 °C for 6 h, with shaking at 150 rpm. The PA strain, which was isolated and identified in our laboratory, was cultured as previously described [ ].
Animals
Eight-week-old female BALB/c mice were purchased from the Animal Experiment Center of Jilin University. All animal research was conducted according to the experimental practices and standards approved by the Animal Welfare and Research Committee at Jilin University (Approval ID: 20100926-1). Rabbit anti-PA serum was stored in our laboratory.
Depletion of neutrophil in mice
Mice were randomly divided into four groups and each group contained ten mice (shown in Table 1 ). CP dissolved in saline was used to deplete neutrophils in mice [ ]. The mice in the first and second groups were injected intraperitoneally (i.p.) with CP at 150 mg/kg on the first and fourth days. The mice in the third and fourth groups were injected with saline instead of CP. Then, five mice in each group were randomly selected each day, whose blood was drawn from the tail vein and the number of neutrophils was counted after Giemsa staining. Table 1 The groups of mice and treatments Group Treatment Passive immunization Challenge 1 CP PA hyperimmune rabbit serum 0.2-ml APP1 2 CP Negative rabbit serum 3 Saline PA hyperimmune rabbit serum 4 Saline Negative rabbit serum The mice were randomly divided into four groups and each group contained ten mice. The first and second groups were treated with CP, whereas the third and fourth groups were treated with saline. The first and third groups were passively immunized with PA hyperimmune rabbit serum, whereas the second and fourth groups were immunized with negative rabbit serum. Then, all the mice were challenged with 0.2-ml APP1. CP: cyclophosphamide and APP1: Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype 1.
Passive immunization and detection of antibody titer
The mice in the first and third groups were passively immunized intravenously with 0.2-ml PA hyperimmune rabbit serum on the fifth day after the first CP injection. The mice in the second and fourth groups were immunized with negative rabbit serum instead (shown in Table 1 ).
Blood was collected from the caudal vein of the mice and used to produce serum. The anti-PA antibody titer in the mouse serum was determined with an indirect ELISA [ ] 3 h after the passive immunization.
APP challenge
APP1 was cultured in BHI medium supplemented with 10 μg/ml NAD at 37 °C for 6 h and washed three times with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Three hours after passive immunization, APP1 (4.0 × 10 7 CFU) suspended in 0.2-ml PBS was injected intraperitoneally into the mice. The mice were monitored for 120 h.
Detection of bacterial colonization, lung damage, and IL-8 level
To quantify the bacterial colonization of the lungs at 24 h after challenge with APP1, the mice were euthanized and the lung tissue was excised under sterile conditions and ground into a slurry dissolved in 1-ml saline. The tissue homogenate was serially diluted in sterile saline before plating on BHI agar. Colonies were counted after incubation for 24 h at 37 °C [ ].
The lung tissue was fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin for 24 h, embedded in paraffin, and cut into 5-μm sections, which were stained with hematoxylin and eosin to assess histological changes. Lung injury was scored according to a previous study [ ]. In brief, a score of 0 represented no damage, l represented mild damage, 2 represented moderate damage, 3 represented severe damage, and 4 represented extremely severe damage, as determined by histology.
The IL-8 level was determined by ELISA as operating manual (Shanghai, China).
Statistical analyses
The Gehan–Breslow–Wilcoxon test was used for the statistical analyses of the survival curves. One-Way ANOVA and Student’s t test were used to compare the differences among different groups. The data was expressed as the mean ± SEM; P < 0.05 indicated a statistically significant difference.
Results
Mouse neutrophils were effectively depleted by cyclophosphamide
To verify the function of neutrophils in the prevention of an APP infection by anti-PA serum, the mice were treated with CP to deplete the neutrophils. The result showed that the number of neutrophils was significantly decreased on the fifth day after CP treatment ( P < 0.05), and the depletion lasted until the seventh day and gradually recovered on the eighth day (Fig. 1 ), which indicated that a mouse model of neutrophil depletion had been successfully established. Fig. 1 The number of neutrophils in mice after CP or saline treatment. The mice in the first and second groups were injected intraperitoneally (i.p.) with CP at 150 mg/kg on the first and fourth days. The mice in the third and fourth groups were injected with saline instead of CP. Five mice in each group were randomly selected each day and blood was drawn from the tail vein and the number of neutrophils was counted after Giemsa staining. The asterisk means statistical difference between CP-treated group and saline-treated group in each day. CP cyclophosphamide. * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01
The antibody titer increased in mice after passive immunization
Next, the mice were passively immunized with anti-PA serum or negative serum on the fifth day. The serum antibody titers of mice were determined with an indirect ELISA 3 h after passive immunization. The result showed that the antibody titer of mice immunized with PA hyperimmune rabbit serum was 1:5867, which was significantly higher than the negative serum-immunized group ( P < 0.05) and sufficient to provide protection against APP infection in mice (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 The serum anti-PA antibody titers of mice were determined by ELISA. The mice in the first and third groups were passively immunized intravenously with 0.2-ml PA hyperimmune rabbit serum on the fifth day after the first CP injection. The mice in the second and fourth groups were immunized with negative rabbit serum instead. After 3 h, the mouse serum was collected and subjected to an ELISA. * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01
Anti-PA antibody effectively protected mice against APP infection independently of neutrophils
To verify the relationship between neutrophils and the high antibody level in mice, all of the mice were challenged with APP1. The survival rate showed that passive immunization with anti-PA antibody increased the survival rate compared with the negative serum-immunized group ( P < 0.05). Furthermore, the survival rate was not different between the two anti-PA antibody-immunized groups, and no differences were found between the two negative serum-immunized groups (Fig. 3 a). Obviously, the presence of neutrophils did not affect the preventive effect of anti-PA antibody. Fig. 3 Survival rate, bacterial colonization, and lung damage. a The survival rate of mice challenged with APP1. BALB/c mice were randomly assigned to four groups ( n = 10 per group). b The number of APP colonies in the lung homogenates. c Histological analysis of lung tissues (×400) after challenge with APP1. d Lung injury scores. 0 represented no injury, 1 represented mild injury, 2 represented moderate injury, 3 represented severe injury, and 4 represented extremely severe injury. CP cyclophosphamide; serum PA hyperimmune rabbit serum; neg-serum negative rabbit serum; APP1 Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype 1; * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; # no significant difference
The number of bacteria in the lung was counted at 24 h after the challenge. The bacterial recovered was significantly decreased in the anti-PA antibody-immunized group compared with the negative serum-immunized group after the neutrophils had been depleted ( P < 0.01), which was similar to the two groups in which the neutrophils had not been depleted. Furthermore, there was no difference after passive immunization with anti-PA antibody whether neutrophils were depleted or not ( P > 0.05) (Fig. 3 b), which indicated that bacterial clearance was independent of the neutrophils and was associated with the presence of anti-PA antibody.
The lung tissue was stained by hematoxylin and eosin, and the pathological changes were evaluated. The lung damage was scored according to the degree of injury (Fig. 3 c, d)—a score of 0 represented no injury, 1 represented mild injury, 2 represented moderate injury, 3 represented severe injury, and 4 represented extremely severe injury. The lung tissue displayed both slight alveolar rupture and serous effusion after treatment with the anti-PA antibody and challenge with APP1, whether the neutrophils were depleted or not (Fig. 3 c), and no differences were seen among the groups in which neutrophils had been depleted or not ( P > 0.05) (Fig. 3 d).
Taken together, the results indicated that anti-PA antibody protection against APP infection was independent of neutrophils.
The presence of neutrophils increased the damage to the mice after challenge
Interestingly and surprisingly, once neutrophils were depleted, the survival rate was unexpectedly increased in the two anti-PA antibody-immunized groups, and the same phenomenon was noted in the two negative serum-immunized groups (Fig. 3 a). We thought that this effect might have been caused by a reduced number of cytokines, which could result in less lung damage and a high survival rate after neutrophil depletion. To identify our thought, the IL-8 level of lung homogenates was determined by ELISA, which was a cytokine associated with neutrophils and inflammation. The IL-8 level was significantly decreased in the CP-treated group than that in the saline-treated group ( P < 0.01), which was both immunized with anti-PA antibody, and the same phenomenon was noted in the two groups immunized with negative serum. Furthermore, there were no differences between the two CP-treated groups ( P > 0.05) (Fig. 4 ). The result indicated that the IL-8 level was positive correlation with the number of neutrophils. Fig. 4 The IL-8 level in the lung homogenates was determined by ELISA. CP cyclophosphamide; serum PA hyperimmune rabbit serum; APP1 Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype 1; * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; # no significant difference
Similarly, the number of bacteria was decreased after neutrophil depletion in the two negative serum-immunized groups ( P < 0.01) (Fig. 3 b). Furthermore, after treatment with negative serum, the lung tissue score in the group of mice with neutrophil depletion was lower than that in the group in which neutrophils had not been depleted ( P < 0.05) (Fig. 3 d).
Taken together, these results indicated that neutrophils were not only unable to contribute to the protective effect produced by the anti-PA antibody against APP infection but also the presence of neutrophils abnormally injured the mice after challenge with APP1 .
Discussion
The humoral immune response played a principal role in PA protection against APP infection, and macrophages could clear bacteria by phagocytosis mediated by anti-PA antibody. The role of neutrophils in this process was unknown. In this study, neutrophils were depleted by CP and the mice were passively immunized with an anti-PA antibody and challenged with APP1. We found that the mice in the anti-PA antibody-immunized group had less lung damage, less bacterial colonization, and a high survival rate, all of which were not associated with the presence of neutrophils. Therefore, anti-PA antibody protection against an APP infection was independent of the neutrophils. Worse still, the presence of neutrophils increased the damage to the mice after challenge.
Neutrophils produced a substantial amount of cytokines when animals were infected with bacteria or a virus, which caused a strong cytokine storm and the rapid death of the animal. If the cytokine storm is suppressed, the survival rate of animals will be significantly increased [ ]. Interestingly, the number of bacteria was decreased after neutrophil depletion (Fig. 3 b), which may be caused by the decrease in neutrophils or by the activation of other immune cells that killed the bacteria. Once neutrophils were depleted, the proinflammatory cytokine IL-8 level was decreased (Fig. 4 ), which increased the survival rate of mice after challenge (Fig. 3 a). Other researchers have reported similar results [ ].
Neutrophil elastase could promote the expression of proinflammatory cytokine, such as TNF-α, MIP-2, and IL-6 in the lungs [ ]. The neutrophil elastase inhibitor (NEI) could decrease the IL-6 and TNF-α levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced acute lung injury (ALI) mice, which could significantly improve the survival rate of ALI mice [ ]. In addition, soluble epoxide hydrolase inhibitor-trifluoromethoxyphenyl propionylpiperidin urea (TPPU) decreased the neutrophil infiltration to the lung, pro-inflammatory cytokine levels (IL-1β and TNF-α) in serum and BALF, and improved the survival rate of LPS-induced ALI [ ]. In our study, the decrease of IL-8 and neutrophils increased the survival rate of mice, which was coincident with previous reports.
Heterologous immunity is relatively common in many species, such as parasites, bacteria, and viruses [ , , , ]. However, the mechanism of heterologous immunity is not well characterized. Our findings contribute significantly to the theory and mechanism of heterologous humoral immunity. We hope that these results will also contribute to the prevention and treatment of porcine contagious pleuropneumonia caused by APP infection.