Introduction
B cell differentiation and development are initiated in complex bone marrow microenvironments. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) differentiate into committed lymphoid progenitors (CLPs) that further differentiate into either T cell or B cell lineages. B cell differentiation occurs under the influence of largely bone marrow stromal cell-derived cytokines and chemokines including CXCL12 (SDF-1), FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (FLT3L), interleukin-7 (IL-7), and stem cell factor (SCF) that each exert their greatest effects at specific stages of B cell development [ , ]. For example, CXCL12 and FLT3L have their greatest effects on the CLP to pre-pro-B cell stages of B cell development, whereas IL-7 and SCF exert their greatest influence once B cell commitment and pro-B cell differentiation has occurred. These factors activate signaling pathways to drive gene expression programs that regulate B cell lineage differentiation. Once B cell maturation progresses to the immature B cell stage, immature B cells leave the bone marrow and enter the periphery to become antibody-producing, antigen-presenting, and cytokine-secreting members of adaptive immune responses [ ].
Platelet factor 4 (PF4 or CXCL4) is typically described as a megakaryocyte- and platelet-derived chemokine. PF4 is a highly abundant platelet alpha granule constituent and found in the plasma at nanogram-per-milliliter concentrations, but mice lacking PF4 do not have an overt bleeding defect [ ]. Consistent with its chemokine structure, the greatest influences of PF4 are on vascular inflammation, immune responses, and immune development. PF4 exacerbates vessel wall injury [ ] and is essential for maintaining normal T-helper cell differentiation [ ]. PF4 has also been implicated in maintaining HSC quiescence in a proposed megakaryocyte-HSC niche [ ]. Receptors for PF4 include CXCR3 on trafficking leukocytes, αv integrins on endothelial cells, and PF4 binds and signals through low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) to megakaryocytes, endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, and multiple myeloma cells [ , , , ]. There are indications that PF4 may interact with B cell lineage cells as PF4 has been noted to be genetically silenced in multiple myeloma cells [ ] and PF4 inhibited growth and induced apoptosis in myeloma cells by negatively regulating STAT3 [ ].
We have now discovered that mice lacking PF4 (PF4 −/− mice) have fewer maturing B cells furthering our understanding of the central role for PF4 in acquired immune response homeostasis.
Materials and methods
Mice and cell isolations
All mice were on a C57Bl/6J background as described in our prior studies [ , ]. Complete blood counts were performed using an Abaxis Vetscan HM5. Bone marrow was isolated by flushing the mouse femurs with a PBS, 2% FBS, and 1 mM EDTA solution. All bone marrow cell counts represent the number of cells from the two femurs of an individual mouse.
All antibodies for flow cytometry and the B cell depleting anti-CD20 clone AISB12 were purchased from eBioscience. Anti-IL-17 antibody and control IgG were purchased from BioXcell. For LPS treatment, mice were given 0.1 μg/g LPS via intraperitoneal injection and the bone marrow harvested the next day.
Immunoblot
Mouse pre-B cell HB-34 cells were purchased from ATCC and grown with RPMI media and 20% FBS. Immunoblots for P-STAT5 (Santa Cruz Biotech, Dallas, TX) and total STAT5 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) were performed using standard conditions with a primary antibody titer of 1:1000 in 3% BSA/TBS-T with gentle agitation. Secondary antibody (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK) was used in a 1:2000 titer in 5% milk/TBS-T for 1 h at room temperature. Final autoradiographic films (Bioblot BXR, Laboratory Product Sales, Rochester NY) were quantified by densitometry using ImageJ software (NIH).
Statistical analysis
For experiments involving repeated measurements, Friedman’s chi-square test, a non-parametric test, was computed. Additionally, pairwise comparisons between the baseline and various concentrations or time point values were made using the paired t test. When independent samples were compared, standard Student’s t test was used as noted. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Our prior studies demonstrated that PF4 limited Th17 type of T-helper cell differentiation [ ]. To determine whether a lack of PF4 alters the development of immune cells in the bone marrow, we isolated the femurs of WT and PF4 −/− mice and the total number of marrow leukocytes in both femurs of each mouse was determined. PF4 −/− mice had a trend towards more total marrow cells compared to WT mice (Fig. 1 a). The number of specific cell types was also determined. PF4 −/− mice had more bone marrow neutrophils, but similar numbers of monocytes as WT mice (Fig. 1 b). In contrast, both the percent and total number of bone marrow B cells were significantly reduced in PF4 −/− mice (Fig. 1 c). Circulating PF4 −/− B cells were also significantly reduced, but not to the same extent as marrow B cells (Fig. 1 d). These data indicate that PF4 is needed for normal B cell differentiation and development in the bone marrow environment. Fig. 1 PF4 −/− mice have fewer bone marrow B cells. a WT and PF4 −/− mice have similar numbers of total bone marrow cells. Each data point is representative of the combined number of cells from both femurs of an individual mouse. b PF4 −/− mice have more bone marrow neutrophils and similar numbers of monocytes as WT mice (* P < 0.05 vs WT). c PF4 −/− mice have fewer cells of B cell lineage cells in bone marrow compared to WT mice (* P < 0.01 vs WT). d PF4 −/− mice have fewer B cells in the peripheral circulation compared to WT mice (* P < 0.01 vs WT)
To define what step in B cell differentiation PF4 exerts its positive effects, we first determined the percent and number of cKit + (hematopoietic progenitor) marrow cells and found no significant difference in the percent between WT and PF4 −/− mice, but there was a strong trend to increased total cKit + cells in PF4 −/− mice (Fig. 2 a). CLP cells are the stage of development just before B cell commitment that is followed by the pre-pro-B cell stage. The number of CLPs and pre-pro-B cells were very similar between WT and PF4 −/− mice (Fig. 2 b, c). However, a number of pro- (Fig. 2 d), pre- (Fig. 2 e), and immature (Fig. 2 f) B cells in the bone marrow were all significantly reduced in PF4 −/− compared to WT mice. Fig. 2 PF4 −/− mice have a decline in B cell lineage cells at the pro-B cell stage of development. a PF4 −/− and WT mice have similar hematopoietic progenitor cells. b The number of bone marrow CLP cells are similar in WT and PF4 −/− mice. c The number of bone marrow pre-pro-B cells are similar in WT and PF4 −/− mice. d – f PF4 −/− mice have fewer pro-B cells, pre-B cells, and immature B cells compared to WT mice (* P < 0.01 vs WT)
PF4 −/− mice have increased numbers of neutrophils likely due to their elevated IL-17. Increased neutrophil counts can reduce bone marrow B cell production [ ]. To determine whether reduced marrow B cells in PF4 −/− mice is secondary to increased IL-17 and increased neutrophils, we treated PF4 −/− mice with either control IgG or anti-IL-17 antibody every 4 days over 3 weeks. Anti-IL-17 antibody reduced the neutrophil count in PF4 −/− mice to WT levels demonstrating a direct IL-17 effect on neutrophils (Fig. 3 a). However, PF4 −/− mice with normal neutrophil numbers still had significantly fewer bone marrow B cells compared to WT mice (Fig. 3 a), indicating that increased neutrophils does not account for the suppression of B cell production in PF4 −/− mice. Fig. 3 PF4 mediates B cell production with increased bone marrow demands. a Reduced bone marrow B cells in PF4 −/− mice are not neutrophil dependent. Mice were treated with IL-17 blocking antibody or control IgG (300 μg first dose then 100 μg every 4 days for 3 weeks). CBC were performed and bone marrow CD19 + cells were quantified. IL-17 blocking returned PF4 −/− neutrophil numbers. b PF4 −/− mice have delayed B cell recovery post-depletion. WT and PF4 −/− mice were treated with anti-CD20 antibody (50 μg) and circulating B cell numbers determined by flow cytometry and reported as a change from baseline ( N = 5, * P < 0.05 vs WT). c PF4 −/− mice have reduced stimulus-induced B cell differentiation responses. WT and PF4 −/− mice were given a sub-lethal dose of LPS (0.1 μg/g), and 20 h later, bone marrow B cells were quantified and expressed as % change from the average of three control mice of each genotype (* P < 0.03 vs WT)
To determine whether PF4 has a role in B cell differentiation not only in basal conditions but also in response to increased B cell production demands, we treated WT and PF4 −/− mice with a low dose anti-CD20 antibody (50 μg/mouse) to reduce the number of B cells. CD19 + cells in the circulation as a percent of CD45 + cells were then serially determined and normalized for fewer beginning B cells in PF4 −/− mice (expressed as change from baseline). Twenty-four hours after anti-CD20 antibody treatment, WT and PF4 −/− mice had a similar reduction in the number of circulating B cells (Fig. 3 b). On days 3–4 post-depletion, WT mice had a return of circulating B cell numbers that greatly exceeded that of PF4 −/− mice (Fig. 3 b). To further demonstrate a role for PF4 in response to increased B cell production demands, WT and PF4 −/− mice were treated with a sub-lethal dose of LPS (0.1 μg/g) or control buffer and, 20 h later, bone marrow was harvested to evaluate the number of B cells as compared to mice of the same genotype not LPS treated. WT mice had an about 50% increase in post-LPS total bone marrow B cells, pro-B cells, and immature B cells compared to buffer treated WT mice (Fig. 3 c). However, PF4 −/− responses varied from no change to a decrease in the number of marrow B cells as compared to control PF4 −/− mice (Fig. 3 c). These data indicate that in addition to maintaining basal B cell production, PF4 increases B cell differentiation in response to an acute increase in production demands.
To demonstrate a direct effect of PF4 on B cell differentiation, we isolated hematopoietic progenitor cells from WT mice and cultured the progenitors on OP9 stromal cells with control media or B cell differentiation induced by the addition of IL-7 and Flt3L (2 ng/mL each). Recombinant PF4 (100 ng/mL) was added either at the same time as IL-7/Flt3L (D0) or 24 h later (D1). Four days after the induction of B cell differentiation, a number of CD19 + cells were determined. The addition of PF4 both at D0 and D1 increased the number of CD19 + cells (Fig. 4 a), although the PF4 effect was the greatest when added on D0. These data demonstrate that PF4 has a direct effect on increasing the differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors to B cells. Fig. 4 PF4 increases B cell progenitor STAT5 activation. a PF4 increases B cell differentiation in vitro. WT mouse hematopoietic progenitor cells were isolated and differentiated to B cells in vitro (cultured with OP9 cells and 2 ng/mL IL-7, 2 ng/mL Flt3L, ± 100 ng/mL PF4 added at day 0 or day 1). PF4 increased the number of CD19 + cells (* P < 0.05 vs No PF4). b PF4 −/− mice have normal plasma cell numbers and plasma IgG. c PF4-induced P-STAT5. Cells were treated with PF4 overnight and P-STAT5 determined by immunoblot. d P-STAT5/STAT5 quantification ( N = 4, * P < 0.05 vs 0). e P-STAT5 is reduced in PF4 −/− bone marrow B cells. Intracellular flow cytometry (* P < 0.04 vs WT)
B cells leave the marrow compartment at the immature stage of development and mature into antibody-producing plasma cells in the periphery. In contrast to developing bone marrow B cells, WT and PF4 −/− mice had similar plasma cell numbers both in the bone marrow and the spleen, and similar plasma IgG concentrations (Fig. 4 b). STAT5 is necessary for B cell development in the bone marrow, but STAT5 is not needed once B cells leave the marrow compartment [ , ]. Because PF4 −/− mice had fewer developing B cells, but similar numbers of plasma cells, we determined whether PF4 increased the phosphorylation of STAT5 (P-STAT5). HB-34 cells, a pre-B cell line, were incubated with increasing concentrations of PF4 overnight and total STAT5 and P-STAT5 determined by immunoblot. PF4 increased P-STAT5 in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 4 c, d). To determine whether PF4 has a similar effect in vivo, P-STAT5 was measured in bone marrow-derived B cells by intracellular flow cytometry. Compared to PF4 −/− mice, WT mice had increased total CD19 + and pro-B cell P-STAT5 (Fig. 4 e). These data demonstrate that PF4 may drive B cell differentiation by increasing STAT5 phosphorylation.
Discussion
These data demonstrate that PF4 has an important role in B cell differentiation in the bone marrow environment and helps to further the concept that megakaryocytes and platelets have a central role in the regulation of immune responses and immune development both in the periphery, and in the bone marrow microenvironment. Others have demonstrated that megakaryocytes contribute to maintaining a quiescent HSC niche, in part through PF4 and/or TGF-β-mediated mechanisms [ , ]. We have now found that in the bone marrow environment, PF4 also supports B cell differentiation, perhaps indicating a more general role for megakaryocytes in hematopoietic development.
Megakaryocytes constitutively release PF4 in the bone marrow [ ]. Inflammatory stimuli, such as non-lethal doses of LPS, induce B cell production in the bone marrow and non-lethal doses of LPS also induce megakaryocytopoiesis and platelet production [ ]. This perhaps indicates a link between megakaryocytes and B cell development in the bone marrow environment, particularly in inflammatory states. We have implicated megakaryocytes as a PF4 source to support B cell differentiation, but our results do not rule out other non-megakaryocyte sources. PF4 basally is largely megakaryocyte/platelet restricted, but we have found that activated T cells are a source of PF4 [ ]. We have isolated mesenchymal stromal cells from the bone marrow, and by qRT-PCR, they do not express Pf4 (data not shown), but this does not rule out other unknown PF4 sources.
We demonstrate that PF4 has a major role in driving B cell differentiation, in part by increasing P-STAT5. This has a direct impact on our understanding of B cell differentiation and immune responses with the potential to impact the development of means to modulate B cell responses. More importantly, it also indicates that in addition to being the source of circulating platelets, megakaryocytes impact the development of potentially many cell types in the bone marrow.