Introduction
Over 30 years ago, we published that the cytokine IL-1 family plays an important role in the pathogenesis of many diseases and functions with a wide range of biological activities, furthermore it is clearly an important mediator of host response to various infectious, inflammatory, neoplastic, and immunologic challenges [ ].
In recent years, data has accumulated to support the idea that pro-inflammatory cytokines contribute to the development and progression of many immunological and inflammatory diseases [ , ]. Cytokines are pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory proteins that elicit their effects in an autocrine and paracrine manner [ , ]. A number of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory mediators have been detected in allergic and inflammatory disorders, and the balance between these opposing cytokine activities regulates disease severity [ , , , , ]. Therefore, cytokines are active in inflammatory diseases, and inhibiting these protein mediators with antagonists (such as monoclonal antibodies, soluble receptors, certain cytokines, and receptor antagonists) results in a therapeutic action [ , ].
Many laboratory and clinical data indicate the efficacy of the various anti-cytokine treatments in the therapy of inflammation and allergic diseases [ , ].
The existence of anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as (TGF)-β, IL-10, IL-4, and IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA), opens up new therapeutic pathways against immune diseases, autoimmunity, and inflammation. The modulation of cytokines plays an important role in regulating inflammatory diseases and may be implicated in therapeutic processes [ , ].
Anti-inflammatory cytokines are involved in diverse signaling pathways and inflammatory diseases including neuroinflammation, allergic diseases, and asthma. It is well known that anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13, play an important role in the pathogenesis of allergic asthma, even if the full mechanism remains unclear [ ].
In the present article, the most relevant biological effects of IL-37, a new immunological protein, are reviewed, focusing on its anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic actions, which are promising therapeutical compounds.
In this review, the anti-inflammatory effect of IL-37 in the light of new findings was studied.
IL-37 (formerly IL-1 family member 7) which originates from hematopoietic cells is a new cytokine naturally expressed in several cells and described as a negative regulator of immunity and inflammation [ ]. IL-37 (molecular weight circa 45 kDa) includes different variants, namely, IL-1F7a, b, c, d, which bind IL-18 receptor α-chain but do not act as a receptor antagonist [ ]. Among these proteins, IL-37b is the largest which is cleaved by caspase-1 from IL-37 precursor into mature IL-37 (Fig. 1 ). Caspase-1 is a cysteine protease, which transmits the signals via G protein-coupled receptors. Caspase activation also leads to cleave IL-1 precursor into active mature IL-1 (“alarmin”). After activation, several cell types, such as peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), monocytes, plasma cells, dendritic cells, epithelial cells, carcinoma cells, and organs (testis, thymus and uterus) generate IL-37 mRNA and/or IL-37 protein [ ] (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Macrophage activation by LPS leading to caspase-1 activation and therefore production of secretion of IL-1 pro-inflammatory family members, including IL-37 which binds IL-18Rα and provokes inhibition of immune response and allergic inflammation
Through an intracellular mechanism translocating to the nucleus, this cytokine exerts several biological functions [ , ]. Endogenous IL-37 is mainly produced by macrophages which increase upon stimulation with LPS and/or different toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands and is expressed in inflamed and allergic tissues and in a minor quantity in healthy and physiological states [ ].
IL-37 abrogates pro-inflammatory cytokines in activated immune cells, such as macrophages and mast cells, inhibiting intracellular and extracellular immune responses, inflammation, and allergy [ ].
Activated antigen-presenting cells (APC) are almost totally inhibited by IL-37 in their generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, while anti-inflammatory cytokines are uninhibited. Therefore, IL-37 is a negative regulator of innate and adaptive immunity [ ] (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Mast cell generation from hematopoietic stem cells activated by antigen leads to cytokine transcription and translation, inducing inflammation which is inhibited by IL-37 generated by activated macrophages and Th1 cells. In addition, inflammation can be amplified by arachidonic acid cascade products. Abbreviations: IL interleukin, LPS lipopolysaccharide, TLR toll-like receptor, PLA phospholypase A, PLC phospholypase C, Src proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase Src, Syk spleen tyrosine kinase, Tec tyrosine kinase expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma, SLP-76 Src homology 2 domain-containing leukocyte phosphoprotein of 76 kDa, NTAL non-T cell activation linker, PKC protein kinase C, IP3 inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate, DAG diacylglycerol, MAPK mitogen-activated protein kinase, ERK extracellular signal-regulated kinase, JNK c-jun N-terminal kinase, p38 protein 38
Moreover, IL-37 strongly inhibits the expression of IL-1α, IL-1β, TNF, IL-23, IL-17, IL-18, and IFN-γ, and in human monocytes, reduces IL-1β-induced expression of IL-1α, IL-6, TNF [ ], and certain chemokines including MIP-2/CXCL2, MCP-5/CCL12, BCA-1/CXCL13, and IL-8 in many different cell types [ ].
Recent research has highlighted that IL-37, binding IL-18Rα, plays an important role in allergic reactions, including asthma [ ] (Fig. 3 ). After antigen stimulation, administration of IL-37 leads to an inhibitory effect of hyper-responsiveness, reduction of mucus production, and pro-inflammatory cytokine generation, suggesting that IL-37 is a critical and potential target in allergic reactions [ ]. Allergic diseases involve multiple cell types of innate and adaptive immunity, including macrophages, neutrophils, Th2 cells, basophils, eosinophils, airway epithelial cells, natural killer T cells, Tregs, Th17, dendritic cells, bronchial epithelial cells, and mast cells [ , , ]. Fig. 3 IL-37 binding IL-18Rα inhibits several inflammatory pathways including allergy, acute phase protein, and other pathological inflammatory diseases
IL-1, mainly generated by APC, serves a role in host defense to pathogens and triggers inflammatory responses by multiple mechanisms but also serves as local amplifier of innate and adaptive immunity. Dysregulation of IL-1 expression may lead to the development of several autoimmune disorders and has a potential pathogenic role in IL-1R signaling. IL-1R-blocking agents are certainly useful for treating inflammatory diseases [ ].
Mast cells (MCs) are ubiquitous in the body and are immune effector cells involved in allergic immune responses and inflammation [ , , ]. As is well known, MCs respond to allergens, inducing inflammation and leading to the production of several cytokines [ , ]. MCs are found within tissues surrounded by immune cells producing inflammatory cytokines and are present in the pathogenesis of patients with allergy [ , ]. Cytokines are necessary for mast cell maturation, since human cord blood CD34+ cells differentiate and grow into MCs in the presence of stem cell factor (SCF) and interleukin (IL-6) [ ]. IL-6 secreted by Th2 cells or mast cells binds to its receptor IL-6R alpha (gp 80). IL-6 is a pleiotropic cytokine (26 kDa) produced in many diseases, which upregulates MC histamine production and is an important inducing factor for the expression of FcεRI receptor. MCs participate in human innate and adaptive immune responses and express on their surface c-kit receptor, SCF, and the high-affinity receptor ( K d = 10 −10 M) FcεRI for immunoglobulin E (IgE) [ ]. Cross-linking of bound IgE by antigen activates protein tyrosine kinases, such as Syk and Lyn , in turn triggering activation of a mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade and a phophatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLCγ) [ ]. MAP kinase acts on the MC nucleus and activates cytokine gene expression with generation of inflammatory cytokines. Activation, migration, and maturation of MCs are regulated by cytokines, such as TNF, IL-1 family members (e.g., IL-1β, IL-18, and IL-33), TGF-β, nerve growth factor, IL-3, IL-9, and CXCL12, also involved in allergic inflammation. IL-37 may be an intracellular regulator which modulates the signaling events initiated by FcεRI or other activating receptors such as TLR-9 and TLR-3 and c-kit. IL-37 reduces cJun and p38 MAPK phosphorylation, pro-inflammatory signals STAT transcription factors, and p53, affecting cellular proliferation and differentiation [ ] (Fig. 2 ).
Indeed, IL-37 treatment of allergic reaction has been reported to inhibit a number of pro-inflammatory mediators including M-CSF, GM-CSF produced by activated dentritic cells and TNF, IL-1, IL-18, and IL-33, which display an important function in host defense, immune regulation, inflammation, and allergy [ ]. IL-37 may also inhibit TNF and IL-1 released by LPS mast cell activation, in vitro [ ].
In allergic inflammation, Th2 cytokines are released, and eosinophils and MCs along with smooth muscle cells and epithelial cells secrete VEGF which is influenced by many other inflammatory pathways, and may be also inhibited by IL-37 [ ].
Therefore, IL-37 is a key cytokine in regulating the allergic and immunological responses, mainly by inhibiting the expression, production, and function of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, and IL-33 generated by MCs [ ]. However, in some cases, it has been reported that even the anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-13, IL-10, and I-309 are inhibited by IL-37 [ ].
IL-37 may downregulate the transcription and translation of several cytokines including IL-33 which plays a role in allergic reactions through mast cell activation and is elevated in atopic patients during anaphylactic shock [ ]. IL-37-blocking IL-33 leads to an inhibitory effect of innate immunity-mediated splenomegaly, blood eosinophilia, pulmonary inflammation, epithelial hyperplasia, and massive mucus production in the lungs and stomach [ ]. IL-37 helps to reduce the severity of disease, demonstrating the important role of inflammatory cytokines in allergic disorders [ ].
By suppressing the immune responses, IL-37 has a potential role in autoimmunity, transplantation, and allergy; however, its suppression on inflammatory cytokines is undesirable under physiological conditions since it modifies the innate immune responses [ ].
The study of the mechanisms of allergic reactions is poorly understood and the inhibitory effect of IL-37 in allergy, mediated by MCs and cytokine generation, is an emerging field and still in the early stages of development.
Cytokines generated from MCs regulate the inflammatory response, but the exact mechanism by which they regulate distinct features of the allergic reactions is still unknown. The effect of IL-37 makes this cytokine an attractive target for the inhibition of mast cell-mediated allergy and may contribute to the beneficial effects of immunotherapy. The fact that IL-37 inhibits mast cell mediating allergy and inflammation greatly expands our understanding of the development of allergy.
In conclusion, MCs contribute to allergic reactions inhibited by IL-37 and this phenomenon may have a therapeutic potential; however, these studies clearly require additional research, since the current data in the field are insufficient and the full mechanism(s) by which this cytokine elicits the anti-inflammatory responses is not totally understood [ ]. However, more studies are required to precisely define the specific role of IL-37 on MCs mediating allergy. For this reason, experiments using anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-37 are in progress in our laboratories.