Introduction
Primary immunodeficiency can arise from monogenic isolated defects of the immune system or as part of genetic syndromes [ ]. In some of these syndromes such as Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome or DiGeorge syndrome, the immune phenotype is well characterized [ ]. However, the immune defect in many genetic syndromes remains unknown. Complete monosomy 21 is reported as incompatible with life [ ]. Mosaic monosomy 21, partial deletions or ring chromosome 21 resulting in live births, though quite rare, have been reported [ , ]. Clinical findings may include intra-uterine growth restriction, cognitive and motor delay, facial dysmorphism, somatic birth defects and Fanconi syndrome-like presentation with thrombocytopenia [ , , , ]. A life-threatening aspect described in some of the reported patients is recurrent infections, secondary to immune deficiency. Several patients with partial monosomy 21 presented with humoral-mediated infections such as recurrent sinopulmonary infections, tracheitis and otitis media [ , , , ]. These patients had hypogammaglobulinemia with low IgA and IgG and either low or normal IgM, suggestive of a B cell maturation or class switch abnormality [ , , ]. Due to the rarity of lived monosomy and the immunological deficit in particular, little scrutinizing of monosomy 21 immunodeficiency has been carried out to date. Here we describe a 3-year-old boy with mosaic monosomy 21 who presented clinically with both humoral- and cell-mediated immunodeficiency. We attempted to characterize the immune deficiency in this patient, using advanced immunological assays, enabling us higher resolution in describing the immunological defect. A better understanding of the immunodeficiency in this syndrome will allow targeted treatment and prevention of infections in order to prevent morbidity and mortality in these patients.
Methods
Clinical data
Patient record was obtained from the e-record registry of our hospital. The patient was interviewed and examined by the authors.
Genetic diagnosis—fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
Blood samples were either cultured or directly fixed by standard FISH procedures.
Three microliters of FISH Probes (13q14 Vysis LSI 13 SpectrumGreen, 21q22.13-q22.2 Vysis LSI 21 SpectrumOrange) was added to each slide and covered with a coverslip sealed with rubber cement. Co-denaturation (5 min at 75 °C) and hybridization (24 h at 37 °C) were performed on the Hybrite system (Vysis). Stringent washings to remove unbound probe were performed in 0.4 × standard saline citrate solution (SSC) for 1 min at 75 °C and 1 min in 2 × SSC/0.1 % NP40 at room temperature. Slides were counterstained with DAPI/Vectashield (160 ng/ml) (Vector Labs) and visualized using Zeiss Axioscop fluorescent microscope, equipped with cooled CCD camera controlled by Cytovision software by Applied Imaging. Signal scoring was performed following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Immunological investigations
Lymphocyte subset determination
Cell surface markers of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were determined by immunofluorescent staining and flow cytometry (Epics V; Coulter Electronics, Hialeah, FL) using anti-CD3, anti-CD19, anti-CD16, anti-CD56, anti-CD27, anti-IgM and anti-IgD from BD Biosciences; and anti-CD4 (13B8.4) and anti-CD8 (B9.11) from Beckman Coulter Immunotech.
Proliferation assay
T cell function was tested by standard H3-thymidine uptake assays (1 μCi/well) by culturing 10 5 PBMCs with phytohemagglutinin (1 μg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) or plastic-bound anti-CD3 (10 μg/ml UCHT-1 from BD) for 72 h.
Quantification of sjTRECs, sjKRECs and iRSS-Kde rearrangements
Signal joint T cell receptor excision circle (sjTRECs) copy numbers were determined using quantitative real-time PCR (qRQ-PCR). PCRs were performed as previously described [ ] using as template 0.5 µg genomic DNA (gDNA) extracted from the patients’ PBMCs. RQ-PCR was carried out using an ABI PRISM 7900 Sequence Detector System (Applied Biosystems). A standard curve was constructed by using serial dilutions containing 10 3 –10 6 copies of a known sjTREC plasmid. Patient and control samples were tested in triplicate, and the number of sjTRECs in a given sample was calculated by comparing the obtained cycle threshold (Ct) value of the sample to the standard curve using an absolute quantification algorithm. The amount of sjKRECs and iRSS-Kde rearrangements was determined by qRQ-PCR as previously described [ ]. Results were measured as described above, in reference to serial dilutions of sjTREC. The threshold for Ct determination was positioned at the same level each time. Amplification of RNAseP (TaqMan assay, Applied Biosystems) served as a quality control of DNA amplification for both the sjTREC and the sjKREC/iRSS-Kde assays.
Cell surface analysis of TCR-Vβ families expression
Surface expression of individual TCR-Vβ families was analyzed using flow cytometry and a set of Vβ-specific fluorochrome-labeled monoclonal antibodies (Becton–Dickinson, Calibur) as described [ ]. Normal control values were obtained from the IOTest Beta Mark-Quick Reference Card (Beckman Coulter).
B cell receptor repertoire
FR2 IGH BCR gene rearrangement was assessed in order to determine BCR repertoire clonality by means of PCR amplification according to the standardized BIOMED-2 protocol [ ]. Fluorescence-labeled PCR products (1 µL) were added to a mixture of 8.5 µL of deionized formamide and 0.5 µL of GeneScan 500 Rox internal lane standard (Applied Biosystems) and separated with the 3100 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). Results were analyzed with Gene Mapper software (Applied Biosystems).
Results
Clinical presentation
The proband, a three-and-a-half-year-old boy, was born at 37-week gestation by emergency caesarian delivery due to fetal heart rate decelerations, to healthy parents. There was no family history of any genetic disease or malformations. Apgar scores were 9 and 9 at one and 5 min, respectively. Prenatal ultrasound examination revealed a single umbilical artery, a ventricular septal defect and intra-uterine growth restriction. Amniocentesis was not performed. At birth, he weighed 1.9 kg and suffered from transient hypoglycemia (31 mg/dl) attributed to low birth weight. On physical examination, he presented with facial dysmorphic features including small, low set ears, wide nose, microretrognathia, widely spaced nipples and triphalangeal thumb—Fanconi syndrome-like. Complete blood count at birth revealed thrombocytopenia of 30,000 platelets/microliter which persists to date. White blood cell counts and hemoglobin levels were normal. TORCH workup was performed due to thrombocytopenia and low birth weight and was negative, including congenital cytomegalovirus (CMV). Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia was ruled out. Bone marrow examination revealed decreased megakaryocytes.
During the first few months of life, he presented with multiple infections including recurrent otitis media, recurrent stridor and gastroenteritis. At 4 months of age, he was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit due to respiratory distress and cyanosis accompanied by restlessness. During his hospitalization, he was diagnosed with CMV pneumonitis, further complicated by Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PJP), ascertained by isolation of PJP from bronchoalveolar lavage. Lymphopenia of 880 cells/ml was noted. Due to agammaglobulinemia, he was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin infusion (IVIG). He was mechanically ventilated, treated with ganciclovir and discharged at the age of 5 months. After discharge, developmental delay (gross motor and speech) and failure to thrive (below the third percentile weight-to-height ratio) were noted. In the following years, he exhibited marked clinical improvement without additional infections requiring hospitalization. At present time, the patient is asymptomatic on prophylactic IVIG (0.6 gr/kg, once monthly) and trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole prophylactic treatment, per protocol following PCP infection. His development is improving and he has gained weight but remains below the third percentile.
Genetics
Karyotype analysis of peripheral blood metaphase cells revealed chromosome 21 monosomy. FISH analysis revealed mosaic (66 %) monosomy 21 (Fig. 1 ). Because of the Fanconi-like clinical picture, blood lymphocytes were tested for increased chromosomal breakage after exposure to DEB, and the test was negative; karyotypes of both parents revealed no deletions nor rearrangements of chromosome 21q, indicating a de novo event in the patient. Chromosomal microarray (CMA) to refine the breakpoints and confirm the deletion interval was later performed on archived DNA, using the Illumina chip containing 135,000 oligonucleotide probes, and revealed a 32.9 Mb deletion on one homolog of chromosome 21q, arr 21q11.2q22.3(15, 207, 860–48, 129, 895)X1. Fig. 1 FISH analysis of peripheral blood cells revealing mosaic monosomy 21. a Monosomic cell during metaphase. b Disomic cell during metaphase. c Monosomic and disomic cells during interphase
Immunological assessment
T cells exhibit normal counts, proliferation and de novo production
The patient’s total, CD4 + and CD8 + T cell counts were comparable with age-matched controls and within the expected normal range (Table 1 ). Mitogen-induced proliferation was normal and even slightly elevated compared with control (Table 2 ). Lymphopoiesis, as measured by signal joint T cell receptor excision circle (sjTREC) copy numbers, was normal in both peripheral blood and Guthrie card retrieved from the newborn screening laboratory (Table 3 ). sjTREC is a by-products of V(D)J recombination at the TCR α/β locus. The presence of sjTREC indicates de novo lymphopoiesis, and its enumeration allows quantification of naïve T cell production. Table 1 Patient and control lymphocyte subset counts Lymphocyte subsets (cells/µL) Patient (3 years old) Reference values a Lymphocytes 4164 2300–5400 T (CD3 + ) 3581 1400–3700 T helper (CD4 + ) 1790 700–2200 T cytotoxic (CD8 + ) 1624 490–1300 NK (CD3 − CD16 + /CD56 + ) 208 130–720 B (CD19 + ) 250 390–1400 a Cell subset counts from healthy, 2- to 6-year-old children [ ] Table 2 T cell proliferation Proliferation stimulant Patient (3 years old) (cpm a ) Control (cpm) Medium 615 601 PHA 6 µg/ml 97870 61955 PHA 25 µg/ml 85064 71417 Anti-CD3 44518 24073 a H3-thymidine uptake in response to mitogens CPM counts per minute Table 3 T and B cell receptor excision circles Excision circles a Patient (3.5 years old) Control sjTREC 1391 1270 sjKREC 388 652 iRSS-Kde 686 2400 sjKREC/iRSS-Kde 0.56 0.27 a Copies per 500 µL of gDNA
Reduced B cell function
The patient’s total B cell counts were mildly diminished compared with age-matched control (Table 1 ). Flow cytometry was performed to determine sub populations of B cells, which displayed a decreased subset of class switched B cells (IgM − IgD − CD27 + in CD19 + ) compared to healthy, age-matched controls (Fig. 2 ) [ ]. Over 90 % of B cells were IgD + , again, indicating decreased class switch. Before IVIG treatment was initiated, IgA and IgG levels were consistently near absent, while IgM level was normal (Table 4 ). Specific antibody responses to previous vaccination could not be assessed prior to initiation of IVIG because of his early age. As previously described in the case of T cells, B cell lymphopoiesis can be assessed by quantifying signal joint kappa receptor excision circles (sjKRECs). sjKREC levels were within normal range, indicating normal B cell production (Table 3 ). sjKREC is only present in developing cells undergoing V(D)J recombination, while an intronic rearrangement termed intron recombination signal sequence-K-deleting element (iRSS-Kde) is present in all mature B cells. Thus, B cell replication history can be deduced by dividing sjKREC (new B cells) by iRSS-Kde (all B cells). sjKREC/iRSS-Kde in the patient reported here suggests a normal replication history. Fig. 2 Flow cytometry analysis of surface membrane expression of B cell markers. a Measurement of IgD and CD27 expression in CD19 + cells. Note the right lower quadrant, IgD − CD27 + (class switched B cells) measured only 3.8 % of B cells. b IgM and CD27 expression in CD19 + cells. Note the right lower quadrant, IgM − CD27 + (class switched B cells) measured only 1.5 % of B cells Table 4 Serum immunoglobulin levels Isotype (mg/dl) Patient (6 months old) Reference values IgM 86 45–169 IgA Undetected 30–188 IgG 11 540–1340
T cell receptor repertoire very mildly skewed
In order to assess diversity of the T cell receptor repertoire, surface membrane expression of 24 different TCR-Vβ (TRBV) families was analyzed by flow cytometry compared to healthy controls. All 24 Vβ families were expressed on patient’s T cells (Fig. 3 ). Compared with healthy controls, three Vβ families were under-expressed and two were over-expressed. Overall, the patient exhibited a normal T cell receptor repertoire. Fig. 3 Variable segment usage for T cell receptor β. Flow cytometry analysis of surface membrane expression of 24 T cell receptor β variable segments in our monosomy 21 patient compared to average expression on healthy controls. Error bars indicate SD across controls
B cell receptor repertoire
B cell receptor repertoire was characterized by spectratyping amplification done by PCR using fluorescence-labeled V immunoglobulin heavy chain primers and exhibited a Gaussian-like distribution, indicating a normal B cell receptor repertoire (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 CDR3 length distribution. Polyclonal (gaussian) distribution of CDR3 length at the immunoglobulin heavy chain ( IGH ) locus across both patient and control B cell populations
Discussion
Monosomy 21 is a very rare genetic condition with multisystem involvement and distinct facial dysmorphism [ ]. Among other manifestations, some of the reported patients suffer from increased susceptibility to infection, raising the possibility of an underlying immune deficiency [ , ]. Here we present a patient born with mosaic monosomy 21 with recurrent infections typical of both humoral- and cell-mediated immunodeficiency. We attempted to characterize this combined immunodeficiency using a diverse panel of immunological assays. In infancy, the patient presented with severe CMV infection and Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia, infections typically seen in T cell immune defects. These infections were indeed accompanied by lymphopenia, which later resolved. We found normal sjTREC copy numbers, indicating normal naive T cell production. T cells displayed adequate receptor diversity and proliferative capacity. Having ruled out defective generation of new T cells, or their ability to proliferate, a functional defect, namely decreased killing capacity, remains the most likely cause. It appears that this defect in cell-mediated immunity has improved over time, manifested by the absence of severe infections associated with T cell immunity in recent years. In light of this improvement, we hypothesized that normal, disomic lymphocytes, a minority at birth, outgrow the monosomic cells over time owing to a survival or replication advantage, normalizing the clinical phenotype (a mechanism similar to, for example, that seen in Pearson marrow-pancreas syndrome [ ]). We were, however, unable to prove this hypothesis, as repeat FISH examination showed a similar 2:1 monosomic to disomic cell ratio as was first observed at diagnosis. It is possible that while still a minority, disomic cells function is sufficient to ward off opportunistic infections. The patient’s humoral defect was manifested as recurrent upper respiratory tract infections such as stridor and acute otitis media. The immunological workup revealed average sjKREC levels, indicating normal de novo B cell production. The ratio between de novo B cells (containing sjKREC) and total B cells (represented by iRSS-Kde containing cells) was normal, signifying appropriate peripheral proliferation. B cells displayed a diverse receptor repertoire. B cell subsets demonstrated mainly naïve and marginal zone B cells that have not undergone class switch. Subsequently, IgG, IgA and IgE levels were near absent, whereas IgM level was normal. These data indicate a defect in class switch, which may arise from an intrinsic B cell defect or lack of T helper stimuli. This immunological phenotype has been reported in several patients and appears to be one of the hallmarks of partial monosomy 21 [ , , ]. The gene responsible for this class switch defect remains unknown. When reviewing the literature, we found that a common chromosomal segment, 21q22.11-q22.12, is deleted in all patients displaying this phenotype and is likely to harbor the culprit gene [ , ]. One candidate, runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1), has been linked by Thevenon et al. [ ] to the thrombocytopenia seen in monosomy 21 patients. As a regulator of hematopoietic stem cells differentiation, RUNX1 could theoretically disrupt lymphopoiesis as it does platelet development. A mouse model for a partial chromosome 21 deletion that includes RUNX1, however, displays near normal lymphocyte counts with no mention of an immunological deficit [ ].
To conclude, we described here a combined immunodeficiency in a mosaic monosomy 21 patient. As noted, our patient displayed both clinical and laboratory cellular and humoral immune dysfunction. These findings highlight the importance of assessing the immune system in patients with monosomy 21 and genetic syndromes in general, a key to the clinical decision of initiating early preventive treatment such as IVIG and prophylactic antibiotic treatment. Despite an ominous initial presentation, our patient exhibited marked clinical improvement over time. This report may serve to caution against extreme therapeutic decisions such as bone marrow transplantation in favor of more conservative options in the management of partial monosomy 21 patients with immunodeficiency.