Infiltrative Cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) often have microvascular coronary artery disease (CAD) and anginal symptoms. On stress perfusion imaging, apparent LV cavity dilatation has been commonly described; however, the underlying pathophysiologic mechanism remains poorly understood. Bravo et al evaluated 61 patients with HCM undergoing N-13 ammonia PET imaging. Visual LV cavity dilatation occurred in half of the patients and correlated very well with its more objective surrogate of transient ischemic dilatation-cut-off value 1.13 ( K 0.91). There was no difference in baseline characteristics, resting perfusion, and ejection fraction (EF) between those with and without LV cavity dilatation. On multivariate analysis, abnormal regional myocardial perfusion, abnormal global myocardial blood flow, and increased LV wall thickness were independent predictors of LV cavity dilatation. The study provides additional insight into the role of impaired microvascular circulation that results into perfusion abnormality during vasodilator stress testing. However, macrovascular impairment and obstructive lesions were not excluded in all patients since only 57% underwent invasive coronary angiography. Furthermore, the cut-off value of TID 1.13 is derived from Rb-82 PET studies and has not been validated with N-13 ammonia PET. Finally, there was no difference in history of syncope or sudden death among those with and without TID. Whether stress induced LV cavity dilatation carries future prognostic value in patients with HCM needs to be evaluated in prospective large studies.
Cardiac Sarcoidosis
F18-PET imaging plays an important role in the diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis, monitoring response to therapy, and guiding additional therapy. Diffuse FDG uptake in the LV myocardial often results from suboptimal patient preparation and non-compliance to strict low-carbohydrate diet; hence, the study interpretation becomes challenging particularly when trying to distinguish pathologic and physiologic tracer uptake. Manabe et al compared 6 hours fasting preparation without low-carbohydrate diet (protocol A, n = 58) to 18 hours fasting with prior low-carbohydrate diet (protocol B, n = 24) in patients with suspected cardiac sarcoidosis. More than quarter of patients on protocol A had diffuse tracer uptake, while none of the patients on protocol B had any uptake ( P = .04) (Figure 1 ). The adoption of F18-FDG PET imaging in cardiac sarcoidosis underscores the need to standardize patient preparation, imaging, and interpretation protocols. Prior to Manabe et al study, there had been no protocol resulting in complete physiologic FDG suppression, hence, providing promising and breakthrough findings. Nevertheless, the study did not provide data whether such adequate physiologic FDG suppression resulted in adequate and accurate interpretation of images. Also, the exact fasting times were not reported and patient non-compliance has always been a barrier to adequate patient preparation. In addition, it is unclear whether the successful protocol B was driven by the longer fasting state or the low-carbohydrate diet or both; a prolonged fasting state may result in hypoglycemia and may be problematic in diabetic patients. A high-fat diet has been adopted in other protocols in conjunction with low-carbohydrate diet but was not evaluated in this study. Finally, the variation of the imaging techniques, hardware and software that spanned the duration of the study must be taken into account. Figure 1 ( A - D ) Show a patient with cardiac sarcoidosis with diffuse FDG uptake in the myocardium after a 6 hours fasting protocol (protocol B); ( E - H ) show adequate focal uptake using low-carbohydrate diet followed by 18 hours fasting (protocol A). Reproduced with permission from Manabe et al (Figure 2, p. 248)
Cardiac Amyloidosis
Significant progress has been achieved in imaging of cardiac amyloidosis, particularly transthyretin amyloidosis using Tc99m-PYP or Tc99m-DPD SPECT imaging. In a recent study of patient with transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis undergoing serial imaging, Castano et al showed that despite significant clinical progression of disease after a mean follow-up of 1.5 years, there was no difference in amyloid burden using quantitative 99mTc-PYP imaging. Patients however had significant tracer uptake (grade 3) on the first scan; therefore, it is plausible to assume that any additional increase in tracer uptake due to further disease progression may not be easily detected as pointed out in the editorial by Wechalekal et al.
PET imaging provides metabolic data and might detect early disease state, hence, overcoming some of the limitation with SPECT imaging. Significant advancement in the field of PET imaging of cardiac amyloidosis has occurred. A recent but non-selective tracer with PET imaging, C11-PIB (Pittsburg compound B), has emerged with promising results in the diagnosis of cardiac amyloidosis (AL and transthyretin) using non-invasive imaging. Indeed, Kero et al evaluated the utility of a simple and fast semi-automated software tool analysis for the identification of C11-PIB left ventricular retention index in 10 patients with systemic and cardiac amyloidosis compared to 5 healthy volunteers (Figure 2 ). There was no difference in retention index values obtained manually versus semi-quantitatively; the correlation between techniques was high ( r = 0.98) and results were reproducible (intra-class correlation coefficient > 0.98). The introduction of novel tracer for amyloidosis using PET technology is promising. In an accompanying editorial, Dorbala et al stated that “robust molecular imaging tools that signal early molecular changes may guide early drug modification or dose titration and prove vital to saving the lives of individuals afflicted with cardiac amyloidosis”. Indeed, such progress has been achieved in the field of oncology. While cardiac amyloidosis is easily diagnosed by visual scan interpretation using different tracers and techniques, semi-quantitative standardized methods using static and dynamic imaging are much needed for detecting early disease state (particularly when using compartmental modeling), disease severity, and response to therapy. “Such advancement in imaging must match the current pace in the development of drug therapy”. Figure 2 Analysis results of 11C-PIB with semiautomatic software at 10-20 min; images are modified from Carimas showing polarplots and histograms for five different subjects: ( A ) Healthy volunteer, ( B ) TTR amyloidosis, ( C ) AL kappa amyloidosis, ( D ) AL lambda amyloidosis, ( E ) AL lambda amyloidosis. The histogram y -axis shows frequency (relative number of pixels) and the x -axis shows RI value. The software enabled accurate detection of amyloid proteins as compared to healthy control, ability to quantify, and detect regional differences. Reproduced with permission from Kero et al (Figure 6, p. 746)
Molecular and Hybrid Imaging
Molecular cardiovascular imaging is an emerging “multidisciplinary field with applications in research and a diagnostic precision medicine tool to address clinical gaps in diagnosis, prognostication, and tracking the effect of therapeutic interventions”.
In an interesting debate, Sadeghi summarized some of the achievements in molecular cardiovascular imaging such as F18-FDG viability assessment to guide revascularization; F18-FDG imaging of cardiac sarcoidosis inflammation and predicting response to therapy; Tc-PYP imaging and quantification of transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis; MIBG assessment of autonomic dysfunction in heart failure to risk stratify for sudden death, and guide ICD implantation.
However, significant challenges lie ahead of molecular imaging, notably: (1) tight regulation that inadvertently delay and sometimes prevent adoption of new tracers; (2) lack of standardization of new hybrid technologies and tracers; (3) restricted availability to large tertiary referral centers; (4) high cost and low profit margin to industries limiting interest and investment. While molecular imaging has made it into clinical practice in the field of oncology, it is not yet ready for “prime use in the field of cardiology until joint efforts from societies, academia and industry are put together to overcome the above limitations”. ,
There has been an increase in concomitant CMR and PET imaging, such as in patients with infiltrative disease (amyloidosis and sarcoidosis), RV dysfunction, vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques, and inflammation. Also, CMR provides data on myocardial scar and fibrosis, which compliments perfusion and metabolic data obtained by PET. Hence, the hybrid PET-MR imaging has emerged as an alternative diagnostic tool to PET-CT. Some of the technical aspects of this emerging technology, particularly attenuation correction, remain to be validated. In a recent prospective study, Oldan et al compared myocardial FDG uptake in 27 patients undergoing PET-CT followed by PET-MR. Relative intensity values in myocardial segments were not significantly different between the two techniques ( P = .83), irrespective of gender and body mass index. In an accompanying editorial, Seals et al suggested additional statistical methods and analysis to further compare the two techniques and reinforce the validity of the findings. Unlike x-ray attenuation in CT imaging that can be directly converted into attenuation values for the 511 keV photons, the MR attenuation is far more complex and challenging; hence, a comparison of SUV and activity values between the two techniques seems too simplistic. The study also lacked validation in patients with myocardial infarction, and did not provide absolute FDG uptake values which are needed in serial follow-up imaging.
Non-ischemic Cardiomyopathy
Patients with non-ischemic cardiomyopathy (NICM) often have right ventricular (RV) systolic dysfunction, which can be prevalent in up to two-third of patients. CMR is the gold standard in quantifying RVEF, detecting myocardial scar and fibrosis. Indeed, an RVEF < 45% is associated with almost fourfold increase in all-cause death or heart transplantation. The extent of ventricular dysfunction is not only secondary to of loss of myocardial contractility, but also dependent on alteration of myocardial substrate and metabolism. In a recent paper, Wang et al evaluated RV glucose metabolism in 63 patients with NICM using 18F-FDG PET/CT imaging and obtained RV SUV values. There was an inverse correlation between RVSUV and RVEF (obtained by CMR) ( r = −0.57, P .001). Corrected RV/LV SUV ratio >0.79 was an independent predictor of all-cause death or transplantation (hazard ratio 5.0, P = .004). Hence, in patients with NICM, the increased RV FDG uptake is a common feature, correlates with progressive RV dysfunction, and may risk stratify patients (Figure 3 ). The study however was limited by the low number of events (restricting the number of covariates that could be fitted in the model), and by the lack of data on RV loading conditions, particularly systolic pressure that is associated with worse prognosis. Figure 3 Representative midventricular transaxial 18F-FDG PET images of 2 patients demonstrate FDG uptake in the RV free wall. Patient 1 ( A ) had a low LVEF (11.4%) and RVEF (13.3%), with a corrected R/L SUV was 0.80. He subsequently underwent heart transplantation. Patient 2 ( B ) is event-free during follow-up with a LVEF of 46.8% and a RVEF of 34.0%. The corrected RV/LV SUV was 0.42. ( C ) is a Kaplan-Meier survival plot showing worse event rate for patients with corrected R/L SUV > 0.795. Reproduced with permission from Wang et al (Figures 2, 4, pp. 762-765)
Ischemic Cardiomyopathy
Ejection Fraction
Quantification of left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF) is important for the diagnosis of cardiomyopathy, guiding pharmacological and device-based therapies. Coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) is used to assess CAD; retrospective gating, however, allows the additional assessment of LVEF but with low temporal resolution and additional radiation cost. Yang et al developed an accurate, fast, and low radiation dose protocol to quantify LVEF with CCTA. Among 77 patients undergoing CCTA and radionuclide angiography (RNA), both techniques showed no difference in mean LVEF values ( P = .15) and mean difference of 2.4% using Bland-Altman plots which was not clinically significant. Furthermore, there was high correlation between techniques ( r = 0.86) as well as significant agreement with categorization of EF (<30 and >50) using Kappa statistics. However, CCTA resulted in almost half the radiation dose as compared to RNA (4.7 vs 9.5 mSV) and half the mean acquisition time. While simultaneous acquisition of coronary data and EF was not feasible with the current low radiation protocol, it will become with future advancement in hardware and software.
Coronary Artery Disease
The evaluation of chest pain in the emergency room is often challenging. Several non-invasive modalities for risk stratification and evaluation of CAD exist such as stress echocardiogram, cardiac CTA, stress CMR, and stress SPECT. While SPECT is one of the most commonly used non-invasive stress tests in the United States, stress CMR has emerged as a robust competitor, particularly in Europe, given its high diagnostic accuracy without the tissue attenuation often seen with the former. In a prospective study, Ahmad et al enrolled 87 patients within 12 hours of presentation to the ER with chest pain to undergo stress SPECT and stress CMR. Both tests had high and similar diagnostic accuracy 88%-89%. The high diagnostic accuracy is likely a reflection of patient selection and pretest likelihood of CAD. However, the study was limited by verification bias since not all patients had invasive coronary angiogram, and needs further replication in large multicenter randomized setting.
Significant progress with PET imaging has been achieved with the introduction of new scintillation material and hardware allowing 3D acquisition with time-of-flight, resulting in increased sensitivity, improvement of image quality, and reduction of noise and radiation dose. Suda et al evaluated the role of time-of-flight dynamic 13-N-ammonia stress/rest PET imaging as compared to conventional PET. While both methods had high agreement in quantitative measures, time-of-flight provided better visual image quality, recovery coefficients, and improved variation of segmental values. Additional studies are warranted, particularly for patients undergoing 82-Rb PET imaging which is more frequently used than 13-N-ammonia.
The introduction of quantitative myocardial blood flow with PET imaging has provided significant advancement in the field of cardiovascular imaging, particularly in the setting of balanced ischemia. The reproducibility of such measures using different software is crucial, especially for serial testing. Dunet et al measured quantitative myocardial blood flow and flow reserve with dynamic Rb-82 PET imaging (n = 51) using two software packages and showed high concordance between them and ability to use them interchangeably. In an accompanying editorial, Morgan et al highlighted the need for further statistical tests that are more suited for evaluating the agreement between diagnostic tests, before prime use in clinical practice.
Myocardial Infarction
Post-myocardial infarction, there is upregulation of chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) on inflammatory cells. Identification of such active inflammation which is associated with LV remodeling, is of high clinical interest. Ga-68 pentixafor, a ligand with high affinity and selectivity to hCXCR4-receptor, has been used as new PET tracer to detect residual inflammation in the post-ischemic myocardium. Indeed, Rischpler et al published a case of a patient post-acute myocardial infarction with significant late Gd enhancement on CMR, perfusion defect with 99m-Tc-SPECT, and significant Ga-68 uptake in the infarcted/inflamed area (Figure 4 ). Figure 4 Late Gadolinium enhancement with transmural scar in the left anterior descending coronary artery territory and left ventricular apical thrombus on cardiac MR ( left column ); Tc-99m SPECT imaging showed a perfusion defect in the corresponding infarcted area ( middle column ); Ga-68 pentixafor PET images showed a significant expression of the CXCR4 in infarcted area corresponding to active inflammation ( right column ). Reproduced with permission from Rischpler et al (Figure 1, p. 132)
Myocardial healing post-infarction is not uniform, and often the scar left behind is heterogeneous. This heterogeneity plays an important role in ventricular arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death. On the other hand, mismatch between myocardial innervation and perfusion, which represents a viable myocardial area with ischemic nerve injury, is also a risk factor for ventricular arrhythmia. In an elegant study, de Haan et al showed that the denerved but viable myocardium with [ 11 C]-hydroxyephedrine and [ 15 O]-water PET imaging correlated well with the heterogeneous zone on CMR. As such, there appears to be a correlation between PET pathophysiology and CMR anatomy. Whether such results are good enough to guide implantation of an ICD, or even further recommend lack of need of an ICD in low-risk patients, needs further validation.
Diabetes Mellitus
Patients with type I diabetes mellitus often have alteration in myocardial innervation, metabolism, blood flow, and efficiency. In a cross sectional study (n = 45, 60% female) with matched controls, Duvemoy et al showed that oxidative metabolism, sympathetic tone, and myocardial flow were preserved in young patients with controlled diabetes; however, women had significantly higher oxidative metabolism. While these findings can be in part driven by hormonal differences between gender, other mechanisms are in play and need to be discovered. The identification of myocardial differences between genders in patients with type I diabetes and control is important; whether it translates into outcome differences and may tailor therapeutic interventions need further elucidation.
Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus are at increased risk of cardiovascular disease and often are asymptomatic. While the guidelines do not recommend routine screening for CAD in asymptomatic patients, van den Hoogen et al evaluated the prognostic value of coronary artery calcium score with CT coronary angiogram in 525 asymptomatic diabetic patients. Despite the lack of symptoms, coronary CT angiography identified CAD in 85% of patients (51% of which were non-obstructive). In addition, obstructive CAD was associated with increased mortality and incremental value beyond traditional risk factors. The risk also increased with high calcium score. On the other hand, normal coronary CT angiogram was association with very low event rate 3% at 5 years. In an accompanying editorial, Berman et al highlighted that one-third of diabetic patients had calcium score 0 and a quarter had no plaques; hence, diabetes is no longer a CAD equivalent. Furthermore, such subgroup of patients is at very low risk of events and “downscaling of treatment” particularly in the statin-intolerant patients, is reasonable. On the other hand, by identifying asymptomatic patients but with established plaques and disease, coronary CT angiography provides the mean for early and aggressive therapy that can lead to plaque regression and improvement in outcomes. The appropriate selection of high-risk asymptomatic diabetic patients is the key. Also, cost-effective analysis is warranted.
Incidental Findings
CT attenuation correction is often performed with single-photon emission tomography. However, CT imaging often yields incidental findings; while many are benign, some are either suspicious or inconclusive, and often lead to additional testing with increased cost and complication rates. The prognostic significance of these incidental findings was evaluated in 1139 patients undergoing CT attenuation correction. There were 135 (12%) patients with a clinically significant incidental finding, with two-third being a pulmonary nodule. Patient required follow-up imaging (87%), hospitalization (14%), and invasive procedure (32%). Less than 20% of the incidental findings were malignant and around 15% remained undiagnosed. After a median follow-up of 1.3 years, multivariate adjustment showed that incidental findings were not significantly associated with increased risk of all-cause mortality, but were significantly associated with cancer-specific mortality (HR 3.21; 95% CI 1.26-8.14, P = .01). Incidental findings on CT attenuation are a two edges sword; on one hand, most of them are benign finding that are not associated with an increase in all-cause mortality after adjustment; on the other hand, they are prevalent (12% in this study and 41% in other studies depending on the protocol used, image quality, and patient selection), often result in downstream intervention with high cost (6699$ per incidental finding), patient morbidity, anxiety, and potential diagnosis of malignancy (20% of cases) which is associated with a threefold adjusted increase in cancer-related death.