Introduction
Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is a major health problem all over the world as it is the third most common cancer in men and the second most common cancer in women worldwide [ ]. CRC is a heterogeneous disease in terms of morphology, invasive behavior, metastatic capacity, and clinical outcome [ ]. To be distinguished from colorectal non-mucinous adenocarcinoma (NMA), mucinous adenocarcinoma (MA) is a morphologic subtype of CRC that has more than 50 % of the tumor composed of mucin, either extracellular with mucin lakes (colloid carcinoma) or intracellular (signet ring cell adenocarcinoma). If the extracellular mucin is less than 50 % of the tumor, the tumor is called “Ordinary adenocarcinoma with mucinous component” (OAMC) [ ]. The importance of these distinct histological types lies in the reported differences between them with regard to clinicopathological characteristics, distinct genetic profiles, and pathogenic pathways [ ].
Recently, many so-called mesothelial markers, including calretinin, D2–40, mesothelin, WT1, thrombomodulin, and others have been certified [ , ]. Calretinin is a calcium-binding protein that has multiple functional roles including intracellular calcium buffering, message targeting [ ] and neoplastic proliferation of the cells expressing it [ ]. However it has been shown to be of good diagnostic value in the distinction between epithelioid malignant mesothelioma and adenocarcinoma, calretinin expression has been described in a wide variety of normal cells, including steroid-producing cells of the testis and ovary, adipocytes, eccrine-glands, keratinizing thymic epithelial cells [ ] and numerous tumors involving ovary, testis, adrenal cortex, colon, breast, sinonasal tract, thymus, skin and even soft tissue [ , , , ].
In addition to calretinin, D2–40 has been recommended as a marker for malignant mesothelioma [ ]. D2–40 was previously described to have selective immunoreactivity for germ cells and lymphatic endothelium and has been shown to react with Kaposi’s sarcoma, lymphangioma and Dabska tumor [ ].
Mesothelin is a 40 kD cell surface protein that may be involved in cell–cell adhesion. Its expression in normal tissue is limited mainly to mesothelia of peritoneal, pleural, and pericardial cavities [ ]. However, overexpression of mesothelin protein was found in several human malignancies, with the highest expression in ovarian, pancreatic, bronchial, gastroesophageal, cervical, endometrial, and biliary carcinomas [ ].
It is well known that some genes and proteins are aberrantly expressed in CRC as IGF2 [ ], CD133 [ ], E-cadherin, and S100 A4 [ ] among others, with relations to prognosis. We hypothesized that some mesothelial proteins can be aberrantly expressed in a considerable proportion of CRC cases. To the best of our knowledge, few studies tried to investigate the expression of these mesothelial markers in CRC, but these studies included only small number of cases and focused just on medullary and poorly differentiated cases [ ]. Till now, it is not clear whether mesothelial markers are aberrantly expressed in CRC subtypes or not, whether they have a role in adenoma-carcinoma sequence or not, and whether their expressions have true prognostic values or not. So, the aim of this study was to assess the immunohistochemical expression of mesothelial markers (calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin) in large number of colorectal MA and NMA cases and relation to clinicopathological features and prognosis using manual tissue microarray technique.
Material and Methods
Samples
Samples were collected from the surgical pathology laboratory at Gastroenterology Center, Mansoura, Egypt. Files of all resected CRC cases were revised during the period from 2007 to 2011. Mucinous CRC were selected and revised. Cases with incomplete clinical data and those that were composed completely of pools of mucin with very few epithelial cells were excluded. Seventy five cases with mucinous adenocarcinoma (MA) were fulfilling selection criteria. Another 75 cases of non-mucinous adenocarcinoma (NMA) were chosen randomly for comparison from the same period. The patients did not receive any neoadjuvant therapy. Fourteen normal colorectal tissues and 14 colorectal adenomas were also included in the study.
Clinical Parameters and Histopathological Evaluation
All clinicopathological data of these 150 cases were revised with re-examination of all their slides. This includes: age, gender, location, size, shape, multiplicity, histological type, grade, depth of invasion (T), tumor edges (either pushing or infiltrating microscopically), lymphovascular invasion, perineural invasion, peri- and intra-tumoral lymphocytic infiltration, extent of neutrophilic infiltrate, nearby and distant mucosa, whether the tumor is on top of adenoma or not, number of lymph node metastases (N), distant metastasis (M), TNM staging, state of surgical cut margins (either infiltrated by the tumor or not), associated schistosomiasis and any other findings.
Tissue Microarray (TMA) Construction
Three manual TMA blocks were constructed using modified mechanical pencil tip method as previously described by Foda [ ]. Three representative cores of 0.8 mm diameter were punched out from each case of CRC. Cores of normal and adenomatous tissues were included as well as cores of various normal tissues as controls. Sections from TMA blocks were prepared (4 μm thickness) for routine H&E. Other sections were prepared on charged slides for IHC.
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical staining was performed in the Pathology laboratory at Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial College, London, UK. The slides were deparaffinized in 3 changes of xylene, rehydrated through graded alcohol and brought to water. Endogenous peroxidase was blocked with peroxide block for 15 min. The slides were brought to tap water then subjected to antigen retrieval as required (for 30 min using Epitope retrieval 1 “Leica”). The slides were stained with antibodies to Calretinin (1/200, Leica NCL-L), D2–40 (1/100, Dako) and Mesothelin (1/40, Leica NCL-Meso), using standard procedures on BOND-MAX automated immunohistochemistry system (Leica Microsystems, New Castle, UK). For every run of immunostaining, a case of mesothelioma was used as a positive control. As a negative control, phosphate buffered saline was used to replace the monoclonal antibody whereas normal goat serum was used to replace polyclonal antibody. The detection system of choice was the Super Sensitive™ IHC polymer Detection (Biogenex, California, USA).
Evaluation of IHC
Calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin expressions were semi-quantitatively assessed for each case. Cytoplasmic/nuclear calretinin expression was considered positive [ ], while cytoplasmic/membranous D2–40 and mesothelin expressions were considered positive [ , ]. Any aberrant expression was also reported. Intensity of staining of each marker was graded as: 0 (negative), 1 (weak), 2 (moderate), and 3 (strong), and the percentage of positive-stained cells was graded as: 0 (<5 %), 1 (5–50 %), 2 (>50 %). For each marker, the final score was determined by the combining intensity and percent scores (0–5). Because expression of these markers is aberrant in CRC and for the purpose of data analysis, expression of each marker was classified as negative (scores 0,1,2) and aberrant positive (scores 3,4,5).
Statistical Analysis
Data were analyzed, applying SPSS, version 16.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc., IBM, Chicago, Illinois). χ2 (Chi-square) test was used to test significant differences in categorical variables between various groups. Survival data were analyzed using Kaplan-Meier test. A comparison of survival curves was carried out using the log-rank test. For multivariate analysis, Cox proportional hazard models were performed. A 2-tailed P ≤ 0.05 was considered significant in all tests.
Results
Clinicopathological and Histological Features of CRC Cases
The clinicopathological and histological features cases were previously reported (Foda et al., 2013). In summary, mucinous carcinomas were significantly associated with young age, more depth of invasion, more frequency of lymph node metastasis, less peri- and intra-tumoural neutrophils and more peri-tumoral lymphocytic response (Crohn-like response) than non-mucinous carcinomas.
Calretinin, D2–40 and Mesothelin Expressions in Colorectal Normal, Adenoma and Carcinoma Tissues
Calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin were totally negative in all colorectal normal and adenomatous tissues. Calretinin was positive in 8 cases (5.3 %) of CRC; 7 cases of NMA and one MA case. All cases showed diffuse weak cytoplasmic calretinin expression with luminal accentuation at two cases. NMA showed significantly more calretinin expression than MA ( P = 0.029). D2–40 showed aberrant nuclear staining in 14 cases (9.3 %) of CRC; all of NMA group with totally negative MA cases ( P < 0.001). Diffuse weak cytoplasmic D2–40 was also interpreted in 3 other cases; one of NMA and 2 of MA. Mesothelin was positive in 6 cases (4 %) of CRC; 5 cases of NMA and one MA case. All cases showed luminal cytoplasmic expression, with only one case of NMA that showed aberrant nuclear expression. In contrast to calretinin and D2–40, no statistically significant difference between NMA and MA was detected in mesothelin expression ( P = 0.096) (Table 1 ) (Fig. 1 ). Table 1 Calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin expressions in NMA and MA NMA MA Chi-square (χ2) P value No. (%) No. (%) Calretinin weak cytoplasmic expression -Negative 68 (90.7 %) 74 (98.7 %) -Positive 7 (9.3 %) 1 (1.3 %) 4.754 0.029* D2–40 nuclear expression -Negative 61 (81.3 %) 75 100.0 %) -Positive 14 (18.7 %) 0 (0.0 %) 15.441 <0.001* Mesothelin cytoplasmic luminal expression -Negative 70 (93.3 %) 74 (98.7 %) -Positive 5 (6.7 %) 1 (1.3 %) 2.778 0.096 * P ≤ 0.05 is significant NMA Non-mucinous adenocarcinoma, MA Mucinous adenocarcinoma Fig. 1 a, b, c Negative calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin expression in colorectal adenomas respectively. (d): Weak cytoplasmic staining of calretinin in a case of ordinary adenocarcinoma. e Aberrant nuclear staining of D2–40 in a case of ordinary adenocarcinoma (arrows). f Luminal cytoplasmic staining of mesothelin in a case of ordinary adenocarcinoma (×200).
Calretinin, D2–40 and Mesothelin Expressions in Subtypes of NMA
Calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin expressions in subtypes of NMA were summarized in Table 2 . The 7 cases of NMA that showed calretinin positive staining were distributed as follows: 3 cases of ordinary adenocarcinoma (OA) and 4 cases of ordinary adenocarcinoma with mucinous component (OAMC) with no statistically significant difference ( P = 0.255). The 14 cases of NMA that showed aberrant D2–40 nuclear staining were distributed as follows: 10 cases of OA and 4 cases of OAMC with no statistically significant difference ( P = 0.334). The 5 cases of NMA that showed mesothelin luminal staining were distributed as follows: 2 cases of OA and 3 cases of OAMC also with no statistically significant difference ( P = 0.356). Table 2 Calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin expressions in NMA subtypes OA OAMC Chi-square (χ2) P value No. (%) No. (%) Calretinin cytoplasmic expression -Negative 44 (93.6 %) 24 (85.7 %) -Positive 3 (6.4 %) 4 (14.3 %) 1.295 0.255 D2–40 nuclear expression -Negative 37 (78.7 %) 24 (85.7 %) -Positive 10 (21.3 %) 4 (14.3 %) 0.565 0.334 Mesothelin luminal expression -Negative 45 (95.7 %) 25 (89.3 %) -Positive 2 (4.3 %) 3 (10.7 %) 1.176 0.356 OA Ordinary adenocarcinoma, OAMC Ordinary adenocarcinoma with mucinous component
Interrelation between Calretinin, D2–40 and Mesothelin Expressions in CRC Cases
Of the 14 CRC cases that showed aberrant nuclear D2–40 expression, only 2 cases (14.3 %) showed concomitant cytoplasmic calretinin expression. There were no significant interrelation between nuclear D2–40 and cytoplasmic calretinin expressions in CRC ( P = 0.117). On the other hand, of the 6 cases that showed luminal mesothelin expression, 2 cases (33.3 %) showed concomitant cytoplasmic calretinin expression and 3 cases (50 %) showed concomitant nuclear D2–40 expression. Luminal mesothelin expression was significantly associated with cytoplasmic calretinin ( P = 0.002) and nuclear D2–40 ( P < 0.001) expressions in CRC (Table 3 ). Table 3 Interrelation between calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin expressions in CRC D2–40 nuclear expression Mesothelin luminal expression Negative Positive Negative Positive Calretinin cytoplasmic expression -Negative 130 (95.6 %) 12 (85.7 %) 138 (95.8 %) 4 (66.7 %) -Positive 6 (4.4 %) 2 (14.3 %) 6 (4.2 %) 2 (33.3 %) χ2 = 2.451, P = 0.117 χ2 = 9.705, P = 0.002* D2–40 nuclear expression -Negative 133 (92.4 %) 3 (50.0 %) -Positive 11 (7.6 %) 3 (50.0 %) χ2 = 12.214, P < 0.001* * P ≤ 0.05 is significant
Relation of Calretinin, D2–40 and Mesothelin Expressions with Clinicopathological and Histological Parameters in CRC Cases
The relation between Calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin expressions and clinicopathological and histological parameters was tested in CRC. There were no statistically significant relations between any of these parameters and any of the three markers (data not shown).
Survival of Patients with CRC and Relation of Calretinin, D2–40 and Mesothelin Expressions to Survival
To clarify the prognostic impact of calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin expressions on survival of NMA cases, univariate and multivariate analyses were carried out. In a univariate analysis, neither calretinin nor D2–40 expressions showed any significant relations to DFS or OS. However, mesothelin luminal expression was significantly associated with worse DFS ( P = 0.010) (Table 4 ). Multivariate Cox regression analysis was applied to test the prognostic yield of this finding, and proved that luminal mesothelin expression was an independent negative prognostic factor in NMA (HR: 0.307, 95 % CI 0.118–0.799, P = 0.016) (Fig. 2 ). Table 4 Univariate analysis of the relation of calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin expressions to survival of NMA cases Median DFS (months) P value Median OS (months) P value Calretinin cytoplasmic expression Negative 61 0.162 61 0.175 Positive 32 41 D2–40 nuclear expression Negative 53 0.553 53 0.388 Positive 61 63 Mesothelin luminal expression Negative 61 0.010* 61 0.317 Positive 33 41 * P ≤ 0.05 is significant Fig. 2 Relation of luminal D2–40 expression to DFS in NMA
Discussion
Calretinin is a widely used immunohistochemical maker for mesothelial cells and malignant mesothelioma. Normal human colon epithelial cells do not express calretinin, but several colon carcinoma cell lines express this protein to various amounts [ ]. In harmonay with this, we found that calretinin, and also D2–40 and mesothelin, were totally negative in all colorectal normal and adenomatous tissues while they were positive in small percentage of tumor tissues. These data may suggest that increased expression of mesothelial markers could be a late event in the colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence in a minority of cases and might be a molecular marker for adenomas progression to carcinomas.
While relatively sensitive and specific for mesothelioma, calretinin expression has been found in a wide variety of poorly differentiated carcinomas and tumors of mesenchymal origin [ ]. In our study, we demonstrated that calretinin was expressed in about 5 % of CRC cases. To the best of our knowldge, only few studies have addressed the expression of calretinin in colon carcinoma. In the study of Lugli et al. [ ], they found expression of calretinin in about 9 % of CRC cases which is slightly higher than our study. However, Gotzos et al. [ ] found calretinin expression in about 22.5 % of cases and reported that increased calretinin expression coincides with lesser degree of tumor differention and with increased regional lymph nodes and distant metastases. In our study, calretinin expression was not associated with any of these, or other, parameters. This discrepancy may be attributed to the relatively low number of cases in such studies; the largest study that investigated calretinin expression in CRC included 82 cases [ ]. Moreover, it is evident that many important histological subtypes were not sufficiently represented in these studies. In addition, different staining protocols/antibodies can reveal relatively low expression level in many cases in some studies that is not detected by others.
To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first to explore the immunohistochemical expression of calretinin in colorectal MA. We found significantly more positive calretinin expression in NMA than MA. Gotzos et al. [ ] found that calretinin is expressed by most undifferentiated colorectal adenocarcinomas, but only by a limited number of cells in well-differentiated tumors. Also, Cargnello et al. [ ] reported that most of positive calretinin CRC cases were grade III. In contrast, Winn et al. [ ] found significantly higher expression of calretinin in medullary carcinoma as opposed to poorly differentiated carcinoma. It is not clear in our study why MA, which is considered poorly differentiated (grade III) [ ], showed decreased calretinin expression than NMA. This can be explained by the different genetic profiles of our cases of MA and poorly differentiated NMA than other studied poorly differentiated CRC cases. However previous experiments on colon carcinoma cell lines have shown that down-regulation of calretinin leads to the inhibition of the cell cycle with impending apoptotic events [ ] and downregulation of calretinin significantly decreased the viability and proliferation of mesothelioma cells in vitro, the condition is so different with mucinous tumors. It is well known that cell lines and tumors that synthesize and secrete large amounts of mucin are characterized by increased proliferation, invasiveness, and tendency for metastasis [ ]. Consistent with this fact, our results suggest that mucinous carcinoma cells do not depend on calretinin expression for their aggressiveness, which may be true in NMA, especially in grade III tumors.
D2–40 has selective immunoreactivity for lymphatic endothelium and its clinical uses include the demonstration of lymphatic invasion by primary tumors [ ] and in evaluation of lymphovascular microvascular density [ ]. In addition, D2–40 is also a marker of cells with a mesothelial phenotype and may be useful to discriminate between mesothelioma and lung adenocarcinoma [ ]. D2–40 is expressed in tumor cells of various types of human cancers such as vascular tumors, malignant mesothelioma, tumors of the central nervous system (CNS), germ cell tumors and squamous cell carcinomas [ ]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first to study the expression of D2–40 in large number of CRC cases. D2–40 showed aberrant nuclear staining in about 9 % of CRC; all of NMA group with totally negative MA cases. Aberrant nuclear staining of D2–40 was reported only one study that showed strong membranous and focal moderate nuclear staining of D2–40 in malignant mesothelioma [ ]. We have no explanation for this nuclear expression, but it is not foreign for mesothelial markers, like calretinin, to show nuclear expression which is considered more specific to mesothelial differentiation [ ]. A role for D2–40 in invasion and metastasis has been suggested and its expression seems to be associated with bad prognosis and high risk for lymph node metastases [ ]. On the other hand, D2–40 expression was not associated with any clinicopathological parameters or with the prognosis in our study.
Like calretinin and D2–40, the overexpression of mesothelin has been found in several cancer types, including malignant mesothelioma, ovarian cancer, and pancreatic cancer [ ]. In our study, mesothelin was luminally expressed in 4 % of CRC. Furthermore, this luminal mesothelin expression was significantly associated with cytoplasmic calretinin and nuclear D2–40 expressions. Kawamata et al. [ ] reported that overexpressed membrane bound-mesothelin could enhance the endogenous gene. Expression and could have a biological role in malignancy. These findings may suggest possible interplay between mesothelium-related proteins and/or genes with possible involvement in tumorigenesis. In contrast, Liebig et al. [ ], the first who studied mesothelin expression in CRC, reported mesothelin expression in 58 % of CRC cases with restriction of mesothelin-positive tumor cells to the invasive front. In contrast, mesothelin-positive cells in our study were found throughout the tumor. Also, Kawamata et al. [ ] found luminal membrane positivity of mesothelin in about 37 % of CRC cases with a relation to lymphatic permeation and they recommended further studies to better define the association between mesothelin and integrin in lymphatic adhesion and invasion in CRC. Again, these discrepancies between our results and other studies regarding percentage of positive cases and relations to clinicopathological factors may be attributed to their relatively low number of cases, limitations of histological subtypes of their cases and different staining protocols/antibodies. To be added here, no statistically significant difference between NMA and MA was detected in mesothelin expression.
In addition to our interesting results regarding mesothelial markers expression in MA, for the first time these markers were studied in OAMC subtype of NMA. Till now, OAMC remains a vague entity that resembles OA in some clinicopathological and molecular respects as well as MA [ ]. In our previous study, OAMC showed significantly negative/lower expression of matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP-13) and EGFR than OA and significantly higher expression of MMP-13 than MA. On the other hand, there were no significant differences in E-cadherin expressions between AWMC, OA and MA [ ]. The same was detected here regarding mesothelial markers expression in OAMC; there were no statistical differences between OA and OAMC in calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin expressions. Consistent with the rest of our results, it seems that decreased or increased mesothelial markers expressions have not any role in mucinous activity or aggressiveness of CRC.
The current study was the first to investigate the prognostic impact of mesothelial markers expression in large number and various histological subtypes of CRC. Mesothelin luminal expression was significantly associated with worse DFS in NMA cases. This result was in concordance with Kawamata et al. [ ] who reported that luminal membrane expression of mesothelin elucidated the unfavorable prognosis of CRC patients with lymph node metastasis. Conversely, calretinin and D2–40 expressions did not have any significant relations to DFS or OS. In basal-like breast carcinomas, Taliano et al. [ ] found a significant association between strong calretinin expression and poor overall survival. Furthermore, a role for calretinin in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) may exist in basal-like breast carcinomas [ ]. On the other hand, EMT appears to be closely involved in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer, and analysis referred to it can yield novel targets for therapy [ ], although low frequency of calretinin expression in our study does not support a similar relation between both in CRC.
In conclusion, Calretinin, D2–40 and mesothelin are aberrantly expressed in a proportion of CRC cases with more expression in NMA than MA. Aberrant expression of these mesothelial markers was not associated with clinicopathological or histological features of CRCs. Only mesothelin expression appears to be a strong predictor of adverse prognosis.