Introduction
Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) have been shown to reduce mortality in patients at risk of sudden cardiac death. , However, a substantial proportion of patients do not receive an appropriate ICD therapy, yet are at risk of device-related complications. Therefore, numerous suggestions have been made to optimize selection criteria for implantation. – Studies have been focusing on myocardial scar characteristics assessed with late gadolinium-enhanced (LGE) cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) as potential risk stratifiers of sudden cardiac death. – One of these characteristics is the heterogenic scar zone, which is hypothesized to consist of an admixture of vital myocytes and fibrosis. Ventricular tachycardias may originate in this zone due to the presence of electrical micro re-entry circuits. Indeed, several studies have linked the size of the heterogenic scar zone to the occurrence of ventricular tachycardias and sudden cardiac death. –
Alternatively, myocardial denervation may also contribute to electrical instability and propagate ventricular tachycardias after myocardial ischemia. Cardiac nerves have been shown to be more vulnerable to ischemia and, therefore, the area of denervation is frequently of greater magnitude as compared to the infarct size. – This penumbra therefore consists of viable myocardium with impaired innervation. Positron emission tomography (PET) can accurately assess both myocardial scar as well as innervation. As such, the viable denervated peri-infarct zone can be visualized and has been linked to altered conduction and occurrence of ventricular tachycardias in animal experiments. ,
From a pathophysiological point of view, both imaging techniques with LGE CMR and PET may actually discern the identical phenomenon. Studies that have compared these imaging parameters in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy are, however, lacking. The current pilot study was conducted to evaluate the penumbra adjacent to the infarct area with LGE CMR and PET and attempt to link the magnitude of this area to the inducibility of ventricular arrhythmias.
Methods
Study Population
Twenty-eight patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy and a left ventricular ejection fraction below 35%, who were eligible for ICD implantation for primary prevention, were included in the current study. In all patients, myocardial ischemia and viability were ruled out or coronary anatomy was not amendable for further revascularization. All patients were in a stable clinical condition. Patients with contraindications for PET or CMR (e.g., pacemaker, claustrophobia, and irregular heart rhythm) were excluded. The study was approved by the institutional Medical Ethics Review Committee and all participants gave written informed consent prior to inclusion.
PET/CT Acquisition
All studies were performed on a Gemini TF-64 PET/CT scanner (Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands). For perfusion imaging, a 5 mL bolus injection (0.8 mL·s −1 ) of 370 MBq [ 15 O]-water followed by a 35 mL saline flush (2 mL·s −1 ) was administered simultaneously with the start of a list-mode emission scan of 6 minutes. Immediately after the emission scan, a respiration-averaged CT scan was acquired (30 mAs, rotation time 1.5 seconds, pitch 0.825, collimation 16 × 0.625, covering 20 cm in 37 seconds during normal breathing) to correct for attenuation. The emission scan was reconstructed into 22 frames (1 × 10, 8 × 5, 4 × 10, 2 × 15, 3 × 20, 2 × 30, and 2 × 60 seconds) using the 3D row action maximum likelihood algorithm (3D RAMLA) and applying all appropriate corrections for scanner normalization, dead time, decay, scatter, randoms, and attenuation. Subsequently, innervation imaging was conducted with [ 11 C]-hydroxyephedrine (HED), which was synthesized as described previously. 370 MBq [ 11 C]-HED was injected as a 5 mL bolus (0.8 mL·s −1 ) followed by a 35 mL saline flush (2 mL·s −1 ), simultaneously starting a 60 minutes list-mode emission scan. Again, emission acquisition was followed by a CT scan to correct for attenuation. All patients received a radial artery catheter for arterial blood sampling during the dynamic scan. 7 mL arterial samples were collected manually at 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, and 60 minutes after administration of [ 11 C]-HED. Activity concentrations in plasma and whole blood were determined in each sample as described previously. Emission images were reconstructed into 36 frames (1 × 10, 8 × 5, 4 × 10, 3 × 20, 5 × 30, 5 × 60, 4 × 150, 4 × 300, and 2 × 600 seconds).
PET/CT Image Analysis
In-house developed software was used to obtain input functions. One centimeter diameter regions of interest (ROIs) were placed over the ascending aorta in at least five transaxial image planes in the frame showing the first pass of the injected bolus. These ROIs were combined in one volume of interest (VOI) for the ascending aorta. A second set of ROIs was placed over the right ventricular (RV) cavity in five transaxial planes, with ROI boundaries at least 1 cm from the RV wall to avoid spill-over of myocardial activity. Again these ROIs were combined in a VOI for the RV-cavity. Both VOIs were then transferred to the full dynamic images to obtain arterial whole blood and RV time-activity curves (TACs). For [ 11 C]-HED, metabolite correction was performed using the arterial samples. Subsequently, seventeen myocardial segment VOIs were drawn manually on the final frame of the dynamic scan for [ 11 C]-HED and on parametric perfusable tissue fraction images for [ 15 O]-water according to the 17-segment model of the American Heart Association. This VOI template was projected onto the entire emission scan to extract segmental TACs. Segment TACs were fitted to a single-tissue compartment model for both [ 15 O]-water and [ 11 C]-HED as described previously. Myocardial blood flow (MBF) was multiplied by the perfusable tissue index to obtain transmural perfusion values. To minimize the effect of global reduction of innervation of the myocardium due to heart failure on the innervation defect, defect sizes were normalized to a reference area of remote myocardium. In all patients, four myocardial segments remote of scar were designated as the reference area. Subsequently, perfusion and innervation defect sizes were calculated at different cut-off percentages of the mean of the reference segments. Optimum cut-off was defined as the cut-off percentage at which innervation and perfusion mismatch was largest. Innervation and perfusion mismatch was defined as the difference between HED defect size and MBF defect size.
CMR Image Acquisition
CMR studies were performed on a 1.5 T whole body scanner (Magnetom Sonata or Avanto, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany), using a six-channel phased-array body coil. After survey scans, a retro-triggered, balanced steady-state free precession gradient-echo sequence was used for cine imaging. Image parameters included slice thickness of 5 mm, slice gap 5 mm, temporal resolution <50 ms, repetition time 3.2 ms, echo time 1.54 ms, flip angle 60°, and a typical image resolution of 1.3 × 1.6 × 5.0 mm. The cardiac cycle consisted of 20 phases. After obtaining 4-, 3-, and 2-chamber view cines, stacks of 10 to 12 short axis slices were acquired to fully cover the LV. Cine images were acquired during breath-hold at mild expiration. Subsequently, 10 to 15 minutes after administration of 0.2 mmol·kg −1 , gadolinium-DTPA contrast images were acquired in the same views as in the cine images, using a two-dimensional segmented inversion-recovery prepared gradient-echo sequence (TE 4.4 ms, TR 9.8 ms, inversion time 250 to 300 ms, typical voxel size 1.3 × 1.6 × 5.0 mm 3 ).
CMR Image Analysis
Images were analyzed offline using the software package MASS (MR Analytical Software System, Medis, Leiden, The Netherlands). To analyze left ventricular volumes, endocardial and epicardial borders of the left ventricle were outlined manually in both end-diastolic and end-systolic phases of all short axis images. Papillary muscles were included in the left ventricular volume. End-diastolic volume (EDV), end-systolic volume (ESV), and ejection fraction (EF) were computed using these analyses. Subsequently, endocardial and epicardial contours of the LGE images were traced manually. Total scar size, scar core size, and heterogenic scar zone size were calculated using the full width halve max (FWHM) method, which defines scar core as myocardium with signal intensity ≥50% of the maximum signal intensity of the hyperenhanced area. The heterogenic scar zone is defined as myocardium with signal intensity between 35% and 50% of maximum signal intensity. Total scar size is defined as the total of scar core size and heterogenic scar zone size. All areas of enhancement were quantified by computer assisted planimetry on each of the short axis images and expressed as percentage of myocardium.
Electrophysiological Testing
All patients were implanted with an ICD and during implantation electrophysiological testing was performed. The stimulation protocol was carried out through the ICD and consisted of two basic 8-beat drive trains with cycle lengths of 600 and 400 ms, followed by up to three extrastimuli at different cycle lengths delivered from the right ventricular lead. Positive electrophysiological testing was defined as the induction of a sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia that lasted ≥30 seconds or required cardioversion for hemodynamic compromise.
Statistical Analysis
Continuous variables are presented as mean ± SD, and categorical data are summarized as frequencies and percentages. For comparison of two data sets, paired and unpaired Student’s t test was used when appropriately. Levene’s Test for Equality of Variances was used to verify if the application of the unpaired Student’s t test was appropriate. Correlation between two data sets was calculated using the Pearson correlation test. A value of P < .05 was considered statistically significant. The statistical analysis was performed by means of SPSS for Windows (version 16.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA).
Results
Twenty-eight patients were included in current study. Baseline characteristics of these patients are listed in Table 1 . Figure 1 shows a typical example of a patient with an anterior myocardial infarction. These polar maps show similar infarct regions, and similar perfusion-innervation mismatch and heterogenic scar zone areas. Table 1 Characteristics of study population (n = 28) Patient characteristics (n = 28) Mean ± SD or N (%) Age (year) 66.8 ± 8.1 Male gender, n (%) 26 (93%) Coronary risk profile, n (%) Diabetes mellitus type II 5 (18%) Hypertension 11 (39%) Hypercholesterolemia 9 (32%) Smoking history 14 (50%) Medication, n (%) Antiplatelet therapy 28 (100%) β-blockers 27 (96%) ACE-I or ARB 26 (93%) Ca channel blocker 3 (11%) Amiodarone 1 (4%) Statin 25 (89%) Diuretics 14 (50%) Medical history, n (%) PCI/CABG 16/14 (57%/50%) NYHA class I/II/III 8/17/3 (28/61/11%) Serologic markers NT-pro-BNP (ng/L) 1685 ± 2942 Creatinine (µmol/L) 92 ± 29 ACE-I , ACE inhibitor; ARB , angiotensin receptor blocker; NYHA , New York Heart Association Figure 1 Example of a patient with an anterior myocardial infarction. A Polar map of LGE CMR signal intensity; B HED polar map; C MBF polar map. D LGE CMR polar map with scar core indicated in black and heterogenic scar zone indicated in white ; E HED defect size indicated in red ; F MBF defect size indicated in black ; G innervation and perfusion mismatch area indicated in red (HED defect size minus MBF defect size)
CMR and PET Parameters
CMR and PET imaging are shown in Table 2 . Left ventricular ejection fraction was 29 ± 7%. Total scar size was 21.2 ± 8.6% with a scar core size of 14.7 ± 6.6%, which resulted in a heterogenic scar zone size of 6.5 ± 2.9%. Results of PET imaging are presented in Table 2 . Global MBF at rest was 0.67 ± 0.14 mL·min −1 ·g −1 and global innervation was 26.4 ± 18.8 mL·g −1 . Defect sizes of both MBF and HED were calculated at different cut-offs and the innervation and perfusion mismatch was derived for different cut-offs as described (Figure 2 ). A cut-off of 50% of the mean of the remote area yielded the largest mismatch between innervation and perfusion. Therefore, the 50% cut-off was used to define defect sizes. These cut-offs resulted in a perfusion defect size of 16.6 ± 9.9% and an innervation defect size of 33.7 ± 10.8%. Consequently, the innervation-perfusion mismatch was 17.6 ± 8.9%. Table 2 Imaging parameters (n = 28) Imaging parameters (n = 28) Mean ± SD CMR parameters EDV (mL) 263 ± 62 ESV (mL) 188 ± 53 EF (%) 29 ± 7 Scar core size (%) 14.7 ± 6.6 Total scar size (%) 21.2 ± 8.6 Heterogenic scar zone (%) 6.5 ± 2.9 PET/CT parameters Perfusion (MBF) (mL·min −1 ·g −1 ) 0.68 ± 0.14 Innervation (HED) (mL·g −1 ) 26.4 ± 18.8 Perfusion in healthy segments (MBF) (mL·min −1 ·g −1 ) 0.78 ± 0.13 Innervation in healthy segments (HED) (mL·g −1 ) 29.3 ± 17.2 Perfusion (MBF) defect (%) 16.6 ± 9.9 Innervation (HED) defect (%) 33.7 ± 10.8 Innervation-perfusion mismatch (%) 17.6 ± 8.9 CMR , cardiac magnetic resonance imaging; HED , hydroxyepinephrine; MBF , myocardial blood flow × perfusable tissue index Figure 2 Defect sizes according to different cut-offs. A MBF defect sizes; B HED defect sizes; C HED- MBF defect sizes; boxes mean defect size with 2SD indicated
CMR vs PET
Scar core size measured by LGE CMR was comparable to MBF defect size ( P = .50). However, no apparent correlation was seen between both parameters ( r = 0.18, P = .36) (Figure 3 ). Innervation defect size was significantly larger than the mean total scar size ( P < .001) and correlated moderately ( r = 0.52, P = .004) (Figure 3 ). Compared to the innervation-perfusion mismatch, the heterogenic scar zone size was significantly smaller 6.5 ± 2.9% ( P < .001). Nevertheless, an evident correlation was found between heterogenic scar zone size and innervation-perfusion mismatch ( r = 0.67, P < .001) (Figure 4 ). Figure 3 A Correlation of myocardial scar core size (%), assessed with LGE CMR, and MBF defect size (%), assessed with [ 15 O]-water PET; r = 0.179; P = .363. B Correlation of total myocardial scar size (%), assessed with LGE CMR, and innervation defect size (%), assessed with [ 11 C]-HED PET; r = 0.523; P = .004 Figure 4 Correlation of innervation and perfusion mismatch, assessed with [ 11 C]-HED and [ 15 O]-water PET, and heterogenic scar zone, assessed with LGE CMR; r = 0.669; P < .001
Electrophysiological Testing
Of the 28 included patients, 22 underwent electrophysiological testing. One patient withdrew consent for the electrophysiological testing procedure, 1 patient did not underwent electrophysiological testing due to technical problems, and in four patients the procedure was canceled due to the presence of microthrombi in the left ventricle on LGE CMR. A monomorphic sustained ventricular tachycardia was induced in eight patients. The innervation-perfusion mismatch in patients in whom monomorphic ventricular tachycardias were inducible was 20.1 ± 7.2%, whereas patients who were not inducible displayed a mismatch of 15.2 ± 9.3%. However, this difference was not significant ( P = .21) (Figure 5 ). Inducible and non-inducible patients were compared for all remaining CMR and PET parameters and none of these parameters significantly differed between both groups (Table 3 ). Figure 5 Distribution of innervation and perfusion mismatch, assessed with [ 11 C]-HED and [ 15 O]-water, according to inducibility of monomorphic ventricular tachycardia on electrophysiological testing ( positive monomorphic VT inducible; negative monomorphic VT not inducible), P = .208 Table 3 Differences in imaging parameters between patients who are inducible and non-inducible at electrophysiological study (n = 22) Imaging parameters (n = 22) Inducible patients (n = 8) Mean ± SD Non-inducible patients (n = 14) Mean ± SD P value CMR parameters EDV (mL) 249 ± 46 275 ± 68 0.372 ESV (mL) 173 ± 26 202 ± 62 0.233 EF (%) 30 ± 7 28 ± 7 0.432 Scar core size (%) 13.9 ± 5.0 14.4 ± 7.9 0.889 Total scar size (%) 20.1 ± 7.0 20.4 ± 10.1 0.956 Heterogenic scar zone (%) 6.2 ± 3.1 6.0 ± 2.9 0.871 PET/CT parameters Perfusion (MBF) (mL·min −1 ·g −1 ) 0.70 ± 0.21 0.67 ± 0.11 0.657 Innervation (HED) (mL·g −1 ) 26.9 ± 19.1 22.5 ± 12.8 0.628 Perfusion (MBF) defect (%) 17.2 ± 10.1 15.6 ± 10.0 0.740 Innervation (HED) defect (%) 37.4 ± 7.2 30.8 ± 11.0 0.166 Innervation-perfusion mismatch (%) 20.1 ± 7.2 15.2 ± 9.3 0.208 CMR , cardiac magnetic resonance imaging; HED , hydroxyepinephrine; MBF , myocardial blood flow × perfusable tissue index
Discussion
The current study was conducted to evaluate whether the heterogenic scar characteristics adjacent to an infarct zone as observed with LGE CMR coincided with denervated, yet viable, myocardium as visualized with PET. Indeed, the magnitude of the innervation-perfusion mismatch zone was correlated with the size of the heterogenic scar zone as measured with LGE CMR. These imaging characteristics did not appear to be related to the inducibility of ventricular arrhythmias.
Several studies have shown an association of ventricular arrhythmias with their substrates, such as scar size, perfusion, and innervation. – , However, none of them looked at the correlation between the different substrates. This study was the first to compare scar characteristics with myocardial innervation and perfusion. Current results of the LGE CMR assessment are in line with previous studies. Mean size of scar core, total scar, and heterogenic scar zone are comparable to earlier studies, – albeit those studies demonstrated a relationship between scar parameters and ventricular arrhythmias. The inability of the current study to demonstrate a relation between scar parameters and the inducibility of ventricular arrhythmias might be due to the small sample size. Furthermore, studies utilized varying methods and cut-off values for the assessment of scar characteristics. These differences will influence the results, but a previous study showed that the predictive values of the different methods for ventricular arrhythmias are comparable.
Sasano et al showed the feasibility of assessment of cardiac innervation and perfusion with PET in a pig model. The presence of the mismatch between innervation and perfusion has been confirmed in humans with SPECT and, recently, the mismatch was assessed with PET in the PAREPET-study. , The current data also display the feasibility of both innervation and perfusion imaging with PET in humans. However, perfusion was assessed with [ 15 O]-water in current study, whereas the PAREPET-study used [ 13 N]-ammonium. Perfusion data are similar as seen in prior studies and also innervation defect results are similar to previous studies. , Although different analysis methods and, consequently, different cut-offs for determination of perfusion and innervation defect sizes were used, current study did not show a correlation between scar size measured with LGE CMR and perfusion defect assessed with PET. An important factor which influences this correlation is the presence of hibernating myocardium. All patients underwent revascularization when possible, which not means that patients are completely revascularized. Some patients will have hibernating myocardium with a reduced perfusion. Previous studies have shown a relation between presence of scar and measured flow, but no correlation between scar size measured by LGE CMR and perfusion defect has been described. ,
The demonstrated correlation between innervation and perfusion mismatch and heterogenic scar size might be the result of a common origin, i.e., limited ischemia. Previous studies have shown that the innervation of the myocardium is more vulnerable to ischemia than myocytes. – As a result, denervation is present in areas of limited ischemia, but myocytes remain intact in the same areas of limited ischemia. This results in areas of mismatch between innervation and perfusion, which are predominantly found in the border zone of a myocardial infarction, where limited ischemia is most likely. Heterogenic scar also arises in these areas of limited ischemia, which results in areas composed of both fibrosis and preserved myocytes. Due to this mixed composition, the peri-infarct zone displays an intermediate signal intensity on LGE images that is higher than normal myocardium, but lower than the infarct core. The current study showed a clear correlation between innervation and perfusion mismatch and the heterogenic scar zone size. However, both entities are not interchangeable, since the innervation and perfusion mismatch area is consistently larger compared to the heterogenic scar size. An important explanation for the larger innervation and perfusion mismatch is the higher vulnerability of innervation for ischemia.
Several studies have been conducted that focused on cardiac innervation. All studies showed a larger innervation defect as a result of ischemia compared to the perfusion defect, – which was confirmed in the current study. This mismatch between innervation and perfusion has been associated with conduction abnormalities and ventricular tachycardias. Calkins et al demonstrated that the refractory period of the myocardium was larger in denervated areas, which makes them possibly more arrhythmogenic. Furthermore, Simoes et al showed a correlation between innervation and perfusion mismatch size and prolonged repolarization. Subsequently, in a pig model, it was affirmed that larger areas of mismatch between innervation and perfusion are correlated to ventricular tachycardias induced at electrophysiological testing and the induced ventricular tachycardias originated from the mismatch areas. This correlation could not be confirmed in humans in a SPECT study using [ 123 I]mIBG and [ 99m Tc]tetrofosmin, in which a crude parameter for innervation and perfusion mismatch was used, which might have hampered the assessment of the association. Nonetheless the study did show a predictive value of a diminished global innervation. The ADMIRE-HF study also showed in a large population a clear predictive value of global diminished myocardial innervation for ventricular tachycardias and sudden cardiac death. However, there was no assessment of myocardial perfusion in the ADMIRE-HF study reported and, consequently, there was no assessment of innervation and perfusion mismatch. Fallavollita et al showed that the innervation defect size is an independent predictor of sudden cardiac death in ischemic cardiomyopathy patients. They also assessed myocardial perfusion, though innervation-perfusion mismatch did not appear to be an independent predictor of sudden cardiac death. This study could not demonstrate a relation between innervation and perfusion mismatch and inducibility of ventricular tachycardias. Furthermore, no relation was observed between global innervation defect size and inducibility of ventricular tachycardias. This dissimilarity might be due to methodological discrepancies between studies and a sample size too small to reveal significant differences. Additionally, there is not a standard cut-off value to determine innervation and perfusion defect sizes. All previous studies used varying cut-off values, which might have an important impact on the defect size and predictive values for ventricular arrhythmias. , In contrast to these studies, the optimal cut-off value to provide the largest innervation—perfusion defect size was explored. The optimal cut-off was at 50% of normal remote myocardium. Furthermore, innervation was assessed quantitatively, which may give a more accurate estimation of innervation and, therefore, of the innervation defect size.
Some limitations of the current study have to be addressed. First, image resolution of CMR is superior to PET. Such differences might influence the results. Additionally, partial volume effects play a role in both imaging modalities and will affect the assessment of innervation, perfusion, and scar characteristics. Secondly, electrophysiological testing is used as a substitute of sudden cardiac death. Although there is an association between inducibility of monomorphic ventricular tachycardias during electrophysiological testing and sudden cardiac death, the positive predictive value of inducibility of monomorphic ventricular tachycardias for sudden cardiac death is low. , Finally, as already alluded to, the sample size was too small to draw definite conclusions. The small sample size was partly caused by the fact that some patients included in the study were not able to undergo electrophysiological testing.
In conclusion, current study shows the feasibility of assessment of both cardiac innervation and perfusion by PET with [ 11 C]-HED and [ 15 O]-water, respectively, in humans. Furthermore, mismatch between cardiac innervation and perfusion was shown to correlate with heterogenic scar size assessed with LGE CMR. However, both heterogenic scar size as well as innervation and perfusion mismatch did not relate to inducibility of monomorphic ventricular tachycardias. Future studies should focus on the potential of innervation and perfusion mismatch as risk marker of ventricular tachycardias and sudden cardiac death in larger study populations.
New Knowledge Gained
The size of the innervation-perfusion mismatch zone correlates with the size of the heterogenic scar zone as measured with LGE CMR. As both entities have been correlated to the occurrence of ventricular arrhythmias, these results might have implications for risk stratification.