Traumatic or wound myiases are infestations of vertebrates caused by dipterous larvae, which develop on dermal and sub-dermal tissues of different animal species, including humans (Zumpt ). The main agents of traumatic myiases belong to the genera Lucilia and Calliphora (family Calliphoridae) and Sarcophaga and Wohlfahrtia (Sarcophagidae) also known as blowflies and flesh flies, respectively. The flesh fly Wohlfahrtia magnifica is one of the most important obligate traumatic myiasis-causing species, parasitizing several domestic mammals (Farkas et al. ; Sotiraki et al. ). This species is attributed to be responsible for serious myiasis wounds in many countries throughout the Mediterranean Basin, in the steppe regions of Europe, with an eastward spread to China (Hall and Farkas ). After mating, larviparous females lay first instar larvae on the mucus membranes, body orifices (e.g., female and male genitalia), and on the wounds of hosts, where they deeply penetrate and rapidly develop in the flesh, causing severe tissue damage which eventually worsen the wound, if not properly treated (Giangaspero et al. ). Differently from Lucilia sericata (Diptera, Calliphoridae) causing facultative myiasis, gravid females of W. magnifica may deposit larvae on healthy hosts without any predisposing conditions. If untreated, this myiasis can cause severe consequences to the animals and economic losses to farmers due to poor animal conditions, lethargy, depression, weight loss, reproduction problems, lameness, and even death (Hall and Farkas ).
In several countries, larvae of the flesh fly W. magnifica affect up to 90% of sheep flocks and up to 38.9% of other animal species (Gaglio et al. ; Giangaspero et al. ; Hall ). Wohlfahrtiosis has also been described in goats, horses, dogs, pigs, camels, and in a leopard (Farkas et al. ; Gaglio et al. ; Farkas and Kepes ; Moshaverinia and Kazemi Mehrjerdi ; Hadani et al. ; Valentin et al. ; Pirali Kheirabadi et al. ; Raele et al. ; Rosen et al. ). Additionally, in many Mediterranean countries, including Italy (Iori et al. ), larvae of W. magnifica have been reported as an agent of myiasis in humans (Hall and Smith ; McGraw and Turiansky ; Villaescusa et al. ).
For healing wounds myiasis, farmers manually remove larvae and apply disinfectant such as creolin (2-benzyl-4-chloro-phenol, 2-phenylphenol, NaOH) and an antibiotic formulation and/or sprays containing pyrethroid, avermectin-derived compounds. Insect growth regulators (IGR) such as dicyclanil are also used (Sotiraki et al. ; Giangaspero et al. ). However, creolin is highly toxic to the patients, cytotoxic to the living tissue, and inadequate with respect to the repellent effect. Though effective, insecticidal products for topical use often do not prevent the infestation/re-infestation of animals and may delay the healing of treated wounds (Hall and Farkas ). In addition, in most cases, the use of chemical treatments is either not permitted in animals producing milk for human consumption or strictly regulated (EMEA ). In humans, turpentine or ether and hydrogen peroxide is used locally, together with systemic administration of avermectin derivates (McGraw and Turiansky ). No natural products with a safe profile for living tissue, as well as toxin residue-free against larvae-producing myiasis, are available on the market.
In this case series, a novel wound-healing remedy (1 Primary Wound Dressing©—1PWD© (CE 0344)—Phytoceuticals, Zurich), which has already proven to be a good wound-healing product both in animal and in human, has been tested. This product has been registered as a medical device for topical application (class 2b); thus, it has undergone all the usual tests necessary for EC registration. A variety of clinical data, obtained using this patented combination, strengthened and confirmed an antimicrobial activity and healing properties of the oily formulation for managing second intention wound-healing in humans (Lauchli et al. ) and in animals (Carnevali et al. ) including a severe head injury with brain exposure in three loggerhead sea turtles Caretta caretta (Franchini et al. ). 1PWD© consists of a mixture of St. John’s wort ( Hypericum perforatum L.) oil extract in olive oil and cold pressed extracted neem ( Azadirachta indica , A.Juss.) oil. The lead compounds of these oils are tetranortriterpenoids from both the C-seco group (Azadirachtin A and B) and the D-seco group (Nimbin, Salannin, and Gedunin) for neem and a mixture of saturated and unsaturated free fatty acids (palmitic, oleic, linoleic, linolenic acids) and tocopherol. Neem seed extracts and oils are known to be active against a wide range of pests of veterinary and medical significance (Hableutzel et al. ; Schmahl et al. ), with an anti-feeding, repellent, and anti-IGR effect against more than 400 species of harmful insects. Azadirachtin extracts (100 and 10 ppm) showed toxic effects on parasitic larvae causing myiasis with low toxicity against mammalians (Paul et al. ; Di Ilio et al. ). Hypericum oil revealed biological activity on the wound-healing process with anti-inflammatory, regeneration (Wölfe et al. ), and antimicrobial properties, thanks to saturated, mono, and poly-unsaturated free fatty acids (FFAs) (Desbois and Smith ; Chao-Hsuan et al. ).
In this study, the efficacy of “off label” use of the patented plant-derived formulation 1PWD© has been investigated for (i) repellent effect towards maggot deposition on open wounds by adult flies during the healing process and (ii) in promoting healing during the treatment.
Animal care was applied within institutional guidelines in order to evaluate “off label” formulation of Primary Wound Dressing©—1PWD© for treatment of the wound myiasis in naturally infested domestic animals.
All procedures were performed in accordance with protocols approved by the CESA (Comitato Etico per la Sperimentazione Animale—Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Bari). Since animals affected by myiasis (by Wohlfahrtia spp), if untreated, can have fatal injuries, ethical authorization was granted under the condition that they were considered as infected.
From 2005 to 2014, 44 animals of different species (i.e., sheep, bovine, equine, canine, swine, rabbits, and goats) from the province of Rome, Rieti, and Viterbo, Lazio region (Center Italy), suffering from spontaneous wound myiasis in different body areas (Fig. 1 ), were enrolled in the study (Table 1 ). Fig. 1 Severe traumatic myiasis at the hoof ( a ) and head ( b ) in sheep Table 1 List of the recruited cases of animal species, wound localization, time of wound persistence before 1PWD treatment, time to heal, and related figures Number of cases Animal species Wound localization Wounds persistence before 1PWD treatment (days) Time to heal (days) 1–21 Sheep Hoof 10 24–32 22 Sheep Flank 14 31 23 Sheep Head 15 32 24 Sheep Tail 10 23 25 Sheep Prepuce 18 21 26 Sheep Prepuce 25 18 27 Sheep Prepuce 10 22 28–31 Bovine Base of the udder 25 18–27 32 Bovine Vulva 10 15 33 Equine Prepuce 15 23 34 Goat Vulva 10 15 35, 36 Swine Vulva 15 15 37 Canine Head and neck 10 23 38 Canine Ear 15 21 39 Canine Head 10 20 40 Canine Head and neck 13 27 41 Rabbit Vulva 10 15 42, 43 Sheep Ear 21 15 44 Sheep Vulva 15 10 Total: 44 cases Days 14 ± 4 Average 23 ± 5 days
Spontaneous wounds presenting with maggot infestation at different instars, since at least 10 to 25 days (average 14 ± 4, see Table 1 ), on several animals, were recruited. Peri-wound skin was sheared and cleaned using sterile water or saline (NaCl 0.9%). Necrotic tissue, if present, was removed by surgical debridement. All visible maggots were manually removed using forceps. Cleaned wounds were then sprayed with the topical dressing 1PWD©, once a day, until complete wound closure (corresponding to complete re-epithelialization). Throughout the trial, wounds were not bandaged and no systemic or local antibiotic treatment or disinfectants or insecticides were administered to the recruited animals. The presence/absence of different instars larvae or adult flies around the wounds and the healing progression phases (inflammation, proliferation, and epithelialization) were documented weekly using a digital camera and the healing time was recorded.
Before starting the 1PWD© protocol, all the recruited wounds were infested by different stages of maggots (see Figs. 1a and 3b ) from a minimum of 10 days to a maximum of 25 days (see Table 1 ). The repellent effect of the 1PWD© towards flies was evaluated mainly by comparing the aspect of the wounds before and during the 1PWD© treatment of all the recruited wounds.
In a grazing horse, the 1PWD© treatment of the wound located at the shoulder was interrupted for 24 h in order to consent the landing of new wild flies on the wound bed during the following day. In this case, a line at half height of the wound was traced horizontally in order to mark the border of the 1PWD©-treated (bottom half) and untreated area (top half). The wound was photographed every hour from early in the morning to sunset of the day (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Repellent effect of 1PWD© on horse wound: aspect of the wound 24 h after 1PWD© stopping treatment ( a ). Wound without treatment (top half above the black line) and treated with 1PWD© (bottom half below the black line) ( b )
During the first clinical evaluation of the wounds, from 10 to 15 larvae at different instars were gently removed with forceps and were identified. After a brief immersion in hot water (≥ 80 °C) for 15–30 s, they were preserved in vials with 80% ethanol for identification. A batch of mature larvae collected from wounds (n. 15–20) was reared in Petri dishes with some coarse sand and a small piece of fresh pig liver. After 3 days, the liver and sand were removed, and each Petri dish was filled with clean sand and inserted in a tulle sack (organza bags) and firmly closed with a string.
Dishes were left in the dark at room temperature until adult emergence (Soler Cruz et al. ). Larvae and adults were identified by using morphological keys (Zumpt ; Szpila et al. , ).
Collected larvae from the wounds, as well as emerging adults from larvae reared in Petri dishes, were identified as W. magnifica .
The time to heal of each wound is reported in Table 1 . At the second day, no maggots or sporadic residual maggots were found on the wound bed. No first-stage larvae, which would indicate deposition and development of new generations, were found. Five days after the beginning of the treatment with 1PWD©, lesions were not leaking and granulation tissue was evident on the whole wound bed (see Figs. 3 and 5 at day 5). All the treated wounds healed without further maggot infestation and no bacterial complications were evident. An overall reduction of the wound area surface occurred till complete wound re-epithelialization (see Figs. 3b, c, and d ; 4c, d ; and 5c, d ). Fig. 3 Case n. 22 Different instars maggots in open wound at sheep flank ( a ). At day 5 ( b ) and day 15 ( c ), granulation tissue is clearly visible; no maggots neither adult flies were present on the wound surface till complete wound re-epithelialisation ( d ) Fig. 4 Case n. 33. Maggot infesting prepuce of horse: the massive infestation suppressed in a few days; wound healed in 21 days Fig. 5 Case n. 37: Bite wound infested by maggots in dog. At day 2, no new maggots were present. At day 5, granulation tissue formation is evident, complete time course in 23 days
In animals with severe foot rot and lameness, the granulation tissue formation of infected hooves occurred within 5 days after the treatment, pending removal of the necrotic tissues. The reconstruction of the hard wall of the hooves took more than 1 month and was generally partial but enough for permitting the standing position.
At first evaluation, different stages of maggots and flies were present on the recruited wounds (Figs. 1a, b , 3a , 4a , and 5a ). After starting the daily treatment with 1PWD©, all treated wounds remained maggot-free during the whole healing process until complete wound re-epithelialization (average time to healing 23 ± 5 days, Table 1 ) (Figs. 3b, c, and d ; 4c, d ; and 5b, c, and d ).
The shoulder wound of the grazing horse (Fig. 2 ) was under 1PWD© treatment for 3 months. When 1PWD© treatment was interrupted, only a few landing flies were observed more than 8 h after treatment interruption, and only after 24 h, the whole surface of the wound was covered by a mixed population of unidentified wild flies (Fig. 2a ). After having re-treated the lower part of the wound with 1PWD© spray, leaving the upper part untreated, the treated area remained free of fly landings for the subsequent 12 h while the upper untreated part of the wound was regularly covered by the wild mixed fly population (Fig. 2b ).
Data herein presented indicate that the plant-derived wound dressing 1PWD© has, on the one hand, repellent effect against the larvae deposition responsible for wound myiasis by W. magnifica , while on the other hand being effective in promoting the healing of cutaneous wounds, free of re-infestation, during the whole healing period. The absence of new maggot generations in treated wounds has been observed within 24 h from the start of the treatment with 1PWD©. Data also confirm the wound-healing capacities of 1PWD© (Lauchli et al. ; Carnevali et al. ) on open wounds. The sole daily use of the plant-derived wound dressing 1PWD© resulted in complete healing of the lesions, with effective granulation tissue formation followed by an overall reduction of the wound area and re-epithelialization in 3 or 4 weeks after trauma (Table 1 ), without the appearance of bacterial secondary infections or re-infestation (Figs. 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 ). The healing effect was also observed in those wounds presenting with living tissue damaged by a previous application of creoline (Fig. 4a ) or in the hooves presenting with severe lameness and necrotic degenerations of the hoof wall.
The morphological identification of W. magnifica indicates that this sarcophagid species plays a role in the occurrence of wound myiasis in the Mediterranean area (Giangaspero et al. ) often representing a complication of the most common hoof disease of the sheep (i.e., foot rot) caused by two anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria, Fusiformis nodosus and Sphaerophorus necrophorus (König et al. ). For obtaining the complete resolution of the foot lesion, the removal of the necrotic tissue around the hoof was mandatory. After this radical operation, the healing process of the infested hooves was similar to that observed for cutaneous wounds, even if the final shape of the hoof wall was not as the original.
Wohlfahrtiosis in livestock is even now difficult to manage (Hall and Farkas ; Giangaspero et al. ; McGraw and Turiansky ) and the prevention, the safe treatment, and an environmental friendly control of myiasis in livestock have still to be advocated mostly because the treatments based on chemical products are toxic or cannot be used in productive and/or organic livestock (Sotiraki et al. ; Sotiraki and Hall ; Giangaspero et al. ; EMEA ). In addition, some of the above chemicals do not prevent the infestation/re-infestation of animals and do not promote the healing process (Hall and Farkas ).
This uncontrolled study demonstrated that the 1PWD© is able to manage the maggot infestation and the healing process of traumatic infested wounds in several animal species, without any side effect on the living tissue and without the need to use local or systemic chemical or other products.
Since 1PWD© is registered as a medical device for topical application without systemic effects for human use (CE 0344-medical device 2b), this would allow to extend the use of this natural remedy also to livestock without risk of toxic residuals inside the animal products intended for human consumption (milk, meat) and without the need to respect the withholding period, both for conventional and organic farming. The use of the tested natural plant-derived product 1PWD© on all type of open wounds could easily reduce the risk of maggot infestation in lambs subjected to docking (the cutting of the tail) or ear tagging or during the seasonal shearing of the flock or after other surgical interventions (castration or surgical reconstruction of traumatic wounds), all of which are always at risk of maggot infestation.
The 1PWD© has also potentialities for use in small animals and humans, who can also be subject to atrocious and not rare or infrequent maggot infestations.