Introduction
Trypanosoma (Megatrypanum) theileri is a non-pathogenic or weakly pathogenic parasite of domestic cattle, which was discovered in South Africa by Theiler in 1902 (Cross et al. ; Hoare ). This trypanosome has a global distribution, including in Japan (Sasaki ; Woo et al. ; Greco et al. ; Rodrigues et al. ; Lee et al. ). T. theileri belongs to the subgenus Megatrypanum of the section Stercoraria along with other non-pathogenic trypanosome species of ruminants such as Trypanosoma melophagium (sheep), Trypanosoma theodori (goats), Trypanosoma cervi (deer), and other trypanosomes of wild ruminants (Rodrigues et al. , ; Hatama et al. ; Garcia et al. ; Martinkovic et al. ; Fisher et al. ).
T. theileri is cyclically transmitted by blood-sucking insects, mainly tabanid flies (Hoare ). Bose et al. ( ) suggested that T. theileri is transmitted to cattle by contamination of the oral mucosa with metacyclic trypomastigotes from gut contents or feces of infected tabanids. The hard tick Hyalomma anatolicum has also been reported as a potential vector of T. theileri (Morzaria et al. ).
The low pathogenicity of T. theileri in healthy ruminants has generally been attributed to low parasitemia. However, in animals that are immunocompromised, pregnant, or infected with bovine leukemia virus, T. theileri propagates in the blood, and high parasitemia may cause clinical disease (Matumoto et al. ; Sood et al. ).
T. theileri and T. theileri -like trypanosomes from the blood of cattle, buffalo, sheep, and deer have been cultivated in vitro (Rodrigues et al. ; Hatama et al. ; Nalbantoğlu and Karaer ). The co-cultivation of T. theileri with either blood cells or feeder cells is necessary for long-term cultivation (Verloo et al. ; Rodrigues et al. ; Van Hellemond et al. ; Lee et al. ). For example, T. theileri isolated from a Holstein cow in Taiwan (TWTth1 strain) was cultured with kidney cells of infant hamsters as feeder cells (Lee et al. ), and T. theileri isolated from cattle and buffalo in Brazil (Tthc1-3 and -4 and Tthb1-11 strains) were co-cultured with SF9 insect cells in Grace’s medium or LLCMK2 mammalian cells in DMEM medium (Rodrigues et al. ).
T. theileri have been isolated from buffy coat and adapted to in vitro cultures during an epidemiological survey of Japanese cattle (Ishida et al. ). Moreover, a T. theileri -like trypanosome isolated from a Japanese sika deer ( Cervus nippon yesoensis ) was cultivated using deer renal cells as feeder cells (Hatama et al. ). To date, however, experimental cross-infections of cattle with T. theileri- like trypanosome from deer (Kingston and Morton ) and infections of deer with T. theileri from cattle (Bose et al. ) have been unsuccessful.
Cattle ( Bos taurus ) and water buffalo ( Bubalus bubalis ) have been found to be infected with genotypes of different lineages of T. theileri in Brazil (Rodrigues et al. , ). However, the T. theileri isolates from water buffalo and cattle in Sri Lanka and Vietnam have been found to belong to the same lineage (Yokoyama et al. ; Weerasooriya et al. ), suggesting that inter-host species cross-transmission of T. theileri and T. theileri -like trypanosomes should not be ruled out. In this regard, Böhm et al. ( ) found that wild deer constitute a source of numerous parasitic infections of livestock. Therefore, transmission of T. theileri -like trypanosomes from wild deer to cattle might represent a potential risk for dairy cattle infection in Japan and possibly for the dairy industry.
In the present study, a new T. theileri strain from a dairy cattle blood sample was co-cultivated with Madin–Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) cells. To determine the lineage and genotype of the new isolate, we used three genetic markers to compare it with previously described T. theileri of cattle and T. theileri -like trypanosomes of deer from Japan and other countries.
Materials and methods
Isolation and in vitro culture of T. theileri
In 2012, active mobile T. theileri were detected in a blood sample collected from a female Holstein on the research farm of Obihiro University of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine in Hokkaido Prefecture. After propagation of T. theileri by culturing of the blood sample, the specimens were transferred and co-cultured with MDBK cells (NBL-1 strain provided by the Japanese Cancer Research Resources Bank) as feeder cells using GIT medium (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd., Osaka, Japan) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). The T. theileri strain co-cultivated with the MDBK cell was maintained via continuous sub-culturing twice per week with MDBK cells at 37 °C in a 5% CO 2 atmosphere. The T. theileri strain was also axenically cultivated without MDBK cell using GIT medium supplemented with 10% FBS or HMI-9 medium supplemented with 10% FBS (Hirumi and Hirumi ). The strain was then cryopreserved in FBS supplemented with 10% dimethyl sulfoxide at − 80 °C, by using liquid nitrogen.
Morphological analysis of isolated T. theileri
T. theileri was co-cultured with MDBK cells in chamber glass slides (Matsunami Glass Ind., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). After 3 days, the culture supernatant was discarded, and the MDBK cells and T. theileri were washed with PBS, air-dried, and fixed with 100% methanol for 10 min at room temperature (~ 25 °C). For indirect fluorescence antibody tests (IFAT), the specimens were blocked with 5% skim milk in PBS for 1 h at room temperature and then incubated with a primary antibody (anti-recombinant Trypanosoma congolense α-tubulin serum) (Suganuma et al. ). The slides were then incubated with a secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit IgG [H + L]; Thermo Fisher Scientific K.K.) with Hoechst 33342 (Dojindo, Co. Ltd., Kumamoto, Japan). Specimens were observed using confocal laser scanning microscopy (Leica TCS SP5; Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany).
The specimens were then stained with 10% Giemsa solution for 10 min. The morphology of T. theileri was observed using a light microscope (Nikon TCS5; Nikon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan), and we determined the total length (TL) and width at the widest point of the cell body (MW), width at the widest point of the undulating membrane (UM), distance between the posterior end and central kinetoplast (PK), distance between the kinetoplast and center of the nucleus (KN), distance between the center of the nucleus and anterior end (NA), and length of the free flagellum (FF) from these observations. Nuclear (NI) and kinetoplast (KI) indices were also calculated as follows: NI = (PK + KN)/NA and KI = (PK + KN)/KN (Hoare ).
Molecular characterization of T. theileri
The total DNA of the Obihiro strain was extracted and purified using TE-saturated phenol (Sigma-Aldrich Japan) and phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol solution (Sigma-Aldrich Japan) (Sambrook et al. ). Purified total genomic DNA samples were stored at − 30 °C until use.
The Tth625 fragment (Rodrigues et al. ), partial cathepsin L-like protein ( CATL ) gene (Rodrigues et al. ), V7-V8 region of 18S ribosomal RNA ( 18S rRNA ) gene (Da Silva et al. ), and internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1) (Njiru et al. ) and whole ITS (ITS1 + 5.8S rRNA + ITS2) regions (Da Silva et al. ) of the T. theileri genome were amplified using the respective primer pairs (Supplementary Table S1 ). The amplicons were cloned into a pCR 2.1 cloning vector (Thermo Fisher Scientific K.K., Tokyo, Japan) and were sequenced using an ABI3100 genomic analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific K.K.). Contigs were constructed from each sequenced fragment by using the GeneStudio program ( http://genestudio.com ).
To clarify the taxonomical position of the new isolate among trypanosome species, the V7-V8 region of 18S rRNA sequences of the T. theileri Obihiro strain that was determined in the present study (Accession No.: LC385952) was subjected to dendrogram construction by the neighbor-joining (NJ) method along with the following reference sequences retrieved from the NCBI database: T. theileri Esashi 12 (AB569250), Esashi 9 (AB569249), KM (AB007814); Trypanosoma sp. TDS1 (AB569248); Trypanosoma cruzi Esmerald (AY785564 and AF362827); Trypanosoma rangeli Macias (AJ012415); T. rangeli B450 (AY230240); Trypanosoma brucei gambiense DAL972 (FN554966); Trypanosoma evansi Tansui (D89527); Trypanosoma equiperdum Botat1.1 (LC386039); T. brucei TREU927 (AC012647); and T. congolense TS07210 (JN673389).
To clarify the intra-species relationship among T. theileri and T. theileri -like trypanosome strains/isolates, whole ITS region (LC385951) and partial CATL (LC385983) sequences of the Obihiro strain were determined. A dendrogram based on whole ITS sequences was constructed by the NJ method using whole ITS sequence of the Obihiro strain and reference sequences retrieved from the NCBI database ( T. theileri/T. theileri- like trypanosome from Japan [AB569248, AB569249, AB569250, and AB007814], Austria [KY412803], Brazil [AY773698 and AY773699], Zambia [JN673395-JN673397], and the USA [AY773700, JX178172, JX178173, JX178164–JX178189, and JX853182–JX853185]). The partial CATL sequence determined in this study and reference sequences from the NCBI database ( T. theileri from Brazil [GU299352, GU299354, GU299367, GU299371, GU299375, GU299378, GU299401, GU299404–GU299407, GU299413, and HQ664735], Sri Lanka [AB930146–AB930168], the Philippines [JX860298 and JX860299], Vietnam [AB742558–AB742662], Thailand [HQ543057, HQ543060–HQ543062, HQ543066, HQ543068, and HQ543071–HQ543074], Cameroon [HQ664748 and HQ664750], USA [GU299391 and GU299392], Germany [GU299415 and GU299416]; and Trypanosoma vivax [EU753811 and EU753807]) were also included in the dendrogram construction by the NJ method. These dendrogram analyses were conducted using primer region-trimmed nucleotide sequences and the neighbor-joining method implemented in the MEGA 7 software program.
Results
Culture of T. theileri with MDBK cells
The T. theileri Obihiro strain was co-cultivated with MDBK cells as feeder cells using GIT medium supplemented with 10% FBS. The strain was unable to propagate without the feeder cells or using HMI-9 (Hirumi and Hirumi ), which is a medium used to cultivate African trypanosomes (data not shown).
Morphological analysis of cultivated T. theileri
In addition to the typical epimastigote forms, trypomastigote and intermediate forms, in which the kinetoplast is located adjacent to the nucleus, were also observed in the in vitro culture (Fig. 1a, b ). The body of the trypomastigotes of the Obihiro strain in culture ( n = 150) had a polymorphic length of 37.7–84.1 μm (mean ± standard deviation 60.0 ± 7.8 μm), a relatively narrow cell body width of 0.7–2.9 μm (1.7 ± 0.4 μm), and a long free flagellum of 3.8–33.4 (17.6 ± 5.6 μm). The nucleus was observed relatively near the anterior end and the kinetoplast was observed relatively near the nucleus. The mean values of the nuclear and kinetoplast indices were calculated as 1.62 and 5.3, respectively. Trypanosomes adhered to MDBK cells via the posterior end (Supplementary movie S1 ); however, no intracellular forms (amastigotes) were observed in Giemsa-stained smears, IFAT, or transmission electron microscopic observations (data not shown). Fig. 1 Morphological analysis of Trypanosoma theileri. a Images of Giemsa-stained T. theileri . The trypomastigote form (upper panel) and epimastigote and intermediate forms (lower panel) were observed under a microscope. The scale bar represents 10 μm. The arrow and arrowhead indicate the nucleus and kinetoplast, respectively. b Images of the indirect fluorescence antibody test of T. theileri trypomastigote and epimastigote forms. T . theileri was subjected to indirect immunofluorescence staining by using an anti-Tc α-tubulin antibody (green signal) and was observed under a confocal laser scanning microscopy. The nucleus and kinetoplast DNA were stained with Hoechst 33342, and the structures are shown in red. DIC differential interference contrast image; arrow indicates nucleus; arrowhead indicates kinetoplast
Molecular characterization of cultivated T. theileri
The amplicons obtained from each PCR reaction were observed at the expected sizes using agarose gel electrophoresis (Supplementary Fig. S1 ). The homologies of partial CATL , V7-V8 region of 18S rRNA, whole ITS, and Tth625 fragment sequences with those of T. theileri isolates available in GenBank were 100, 100, 99, and 86%, respectively (Supplementary Table S2 ).
A dendrogram analysis based on the V7-V8 region of 18S rRNA clearly indicated that the Obihiro strain belonged to the subgenus Megatrypanum in section Stercoraria (Fig. 2a ). A dendrogram analysis by using whole ITS sequence revealed that the Obihiro strain was nested in the lineage TthII together with Esashi 9 and 12, which are T. theileri strains isolated from a cow in another city in the same prefecture (Hokkaido) in Japan, and isolates from puku antelope in Zambia and white-tailed deer in USA (Fig. 2b ). Another Japanese isolate of T. theileri (KM strain) clustered in the lineage TthI together with isolates from Austria, Brazil, and the USA (Fig. 2a, b ). In a dendrogram analysis based on partial CATL sequence, the Obihiro strain clustered with isolates from the TthIIF genotype, which includes T. theileri from Vietnam, Sri Lanka, and Brazil (Fig. 2c ). Fig. 2 Dendrograms of Trypanosoma species using the V7-V8 region of 18S rRNA ( a ), whole internal transcribed spacer (ITS) ( b ), and partial CATL ( c ) sequences. Bootstrap values (> 60) are shown on the tree nodes. The Japanese isolates are highlighted in blue in b . The major lineages TthII and TthI are denoted in both b and c
Discussion
T. theileri has been considered a non-pathogenic trypanosome in cattle; however, some clinical cases caused by T. theileri infection were reported (Matumoto et al. ; Sood et al. ). The prevalence of T. theileri in cattle in Hokkaido Prefecture in Japan was reported to be 2.57% in 1958 based on microscopic observations of blood smears (Sasaki ). Some T. theileri and T. theileri -like isolates were identified in cattle and deer (Urakawa and Majiwa ; Hatama et al. ); however, the phylogenic lineage and genotype of T. theileri in Japan remained unclear. Therefore, we performed molecular analyses to reveal the genotype of a new T. theileri strain isolated from a Holstein cow in Hokkaido.
The isolated T. theileri Obihiro strain was co-cultivated with MDBK cells as feeder cells using GIT medium supplemented with 10% FBS, following previous studies (Verloo et al. ; Rodrigues et al. ; Hatama et al. ; Lee et al. ). Van Hellemond et al. ( ) suggested that the metabolic pathways of T. theileri are completely different from those of salivarian trypanosomes. Our findings are in line with the above result as we confirmed that the Obihiro strain could not be maintained at 37 °C in vitro without feeder cells.
Lee et al. ( ) performed microscopic examination of Giemsa-stained specimens, IFAT, and transmission electron microscopy and reported that, similar to T. cruzi, T. theileri could invade host cells and propagate in the amastigote form in the cytosol. Moreover, Lee et al. ( ) showed that the number of trypanosomes invading host cells differed from that invading feeder cells; for example, the numbers of T. theileri -parasitized SVEC cells were significantly fewer than the numbers that parasitized H9c2 and RAW 264.7 cells. In the present study, although several T. theileri adhered to the MDBK cells via their posterior end (Supplementary movie S1 ), intracellular trypanosomes were not observed in the culture (data not shown). These results indicate that the co-culture with MDBK cells as feeder cells might be suitable for maintaining the extracellular stage of T. theileri but not the intracellular stages.
The dendrogram analysis based on the V7-V8 region of 18S rRNA sequences clearly showed that the Obihiro strain belonged to the subgenus Megatrypanum . Nucleotide sequence similarity analyses of partial CATL , 18S rRNA , and whole ITS region sequences based on BLASTn searches revealed that the Obihiro strain has high sequence similarity (99–100%) with previously reported T. theileri . In contrast, the nucleotide sequence similarity of the Tth625 fragment of the Obihiro strain with that of other T. theileri strains was relatively low (86%). Rodrigues et al. ( ) developed a Tth625-PCR protocol as a species-specific PCR for T. theileri . Nucleotide polymorphism among Tth625 fragments has also been detected in T. theileri in Taiwan (TWTth1) and Brazil (accession nos. AF537201 and AF537202) (Lee et al. ; Rodrigues et al. ), thus, indicating that Tth625 fragments can potentially be used as taxonomic markers and for genotyping of T. theileri .
The population of sika deer on Hokkaido Island has increased markedly over the past 30 years, and the economic damage to agriculture and forestry caused by these deer is estimated at more than 1.5 billion Japanese Yen per year (Kaji ; Uno et al. ). The high number of wild sika deer in Hokkaido increases the possibility of their encroaching into areas where domestic animals are reared. Wild deer have been reported to be a source of several infectious cattle diseases (Böhm et al. ; Jilintai et al. , ; Yokoi et al. ; Masuzawa et al. ). T. theileri -like trypanosomes were isolated from wild sika deer in Japan (Hatama et al. ), and inter-species transmission of trypanosomes among cattle and wild deer was hypothesized. However, this was not supported by genetic analyses, because T. theileri strains isolated in Hokkaido prefecture ( T. theileri Obihiro and T. theileri Esashi strains; TthII lineage) were clustered in different lineages of the Trypanosoma TSD strain (TthI lineage), also isolated from wild sika deer in the same area. Although the present study and previous analyses showed distinct clusters of isolates from cattle within the lineage TthII (but not from deer and buffalo), some studies in Asian countries have shown, based on dendrograms of partial CATL sequence, that cross-transmission of T. theileri and T. theileri -like trypanosomes may occur between different host species such as water buffalo and cattle. To date, only a low number of T. theileri and T. theileri -like isolates from East Asian countries have been genetically analyzed (Yokoyama et al. ; Weerasooriya et al. ). Further researches must isolate and molecularly characterize these parasites to evaluate the possibility of inter-species transmissions of T. theileri and T. theileri -like trypanosomes in Japan and other East Asian countries.
Although partial CATL sequence has recently been widely applied for analysis of genetic diversity and host specificity of T . theileri strains, to the best of our knowledge, the diversity of T. theileri isolates in Japan is yet to be analyzed based on the CATL gene. Therefore, further studies should investigate the genetic diversity of T. theileri in different host species based on Tth625 fragment, ITS, or CATL sequences. Such analyses might shed light on the host specificity of T. theileri in Japan, thus indicating the likelihood of transmission between cattle and deer.
In conclusion, the trypanosome species successfully isolated in this study from cow blood in Obihiro City, Hokkaido, and cryopreserved has been morphologically and genetically identified as T. theileri . The findings suggest that the Obihiro strain is a new T. theileri strain belonging to the TthII clade. The genetic information obtained for the T. theileri Obihiro strain will provide a valuable resource that can be used to reveal the genetic relationship of the subgenus Megatrypanum trypanosome species in Japan and in other countries.