Introduction
The parasitic nematode genus Sulcascaris Hartwich, 1957 belongs to the superfamily Ascaridoidea and tribe Anisakinea which include also Anisakis Dujardin 1845, Phocanema Myers 1959, and Terranova Leiper and Atkinson 1914 (see Hartwich ). At present, Sulcascaris sulcata Rudolphi, 1819 is the only species in the genus. It shows a wide distribution in warm marine waters including Mediterranean and Caribbean Seas, and the South Atlantic, Western Atlantic, and Western Pacific Oceans where it naturally matures in the loggerhead sea turtle ( Caretta caretta ), green sea turtle ( Chelonia mydas ), and Kemp’s ridley sea turtle ( Lepidochelys kempii ) (Sey ; Lichtenfels et al. ; Berry and Cannon ; Vicente et al. ; Werneck et al. ; Santoro et al. ; Greiner ).
The life history of S . sulcata was elucidated experimentally. It has been demonstrated that hatchling loggerhead sea turtles become infected by ingesting scallops infected with fourth-stage larvae S . sulcata (Berry and Cannon ). Larvae attach at the base of the esophagus where four molts occur about 3 weeks after infection and mature to adults in at least 5 months. Adult parasites living in the stomach of the host and eggs are shed in the marine environment with feces. Two molts occur in the egg to the third-stage larva which spontaneously hatches and develops in bivalve mollusks and gastropods to fourth-stage larva after 3–4 months. It was hypothesized that the duration of the natural cycle could be of 2 years (Berry and Cannon ).
In the Mediterranean loggerhead sea turtle, the prevalence of infection by S . sulcata ranges from 20 to 25% (Sey ; Santoro et al. ; Gračan et al. ). Despite this, no report focused on the pathological changes that this nematode may inflict to its definitive host. Here, we report on the occurrence and describe for the first time the pathological changes caused by S . sulcata in the Mediterranean loggerhead sea turtles stranded along the Tyrrhenian and the northern Adriatic coasts of Italy.
Materials and methods
A total of 218 loggerhead sea turtles stranded from January 2013 to October 2018 along the Tyrrhenian coast ( n = 85) of Campania region and northern Adriatic coast ( n = 133) of Veneto region in Italy (Fig. 1 ) were studied for S . sulcata occurrence and associated pathologies. For each turtle, the curved carapace length (CCL) was measured to the nearest centimeter. Turtles were categorized into the following age classes (Bolten ): early juveniles (CCL ≤ 40 cm), large juveniles (CCL between 41 and 69 cm), and adults (CCL ≥ 70 cm). Fig. 1 Stranding areas of loggerhead sea turtles studied for Sulcascaris sulcata infection in the Adriatic and Tyrrhenian Seas
During postmortem examination, the whole digestive tract including the esophagus, stomach, and intestine of each turtle was examined separately for S . sulcata specimens and associated lesions. Sections of the digestive tract were opened and surfaces were examined visually, then washed through a 100-μm mesh screen. The remaining washed material from each tract was examined carefully under a dissecting microscope, and any nematodes were collected, counted, and rinsed in saline solution and preserved in ethanol 70% (Santoro et al. ). Nematodes were cleared in lactophenol and were classified following the identification key proposed by Sprent ( ).
In loggerhead sea turtles with the presence of S . sulcata specimens, a digital photography of gastrointestinal tract was taken at each postmortem examination, for tissue injuries related to this nematode. A gross subjective severity scoring system was established in which a stomach completely free of visible lesions was scored as 0; a stomach with hyperemia and few sub-mucosal petechia with no other visible lesions in the mucosa was scored as 1; a stomach with extensive areas of erosions or a single raised ulcer was scored as 2; and a stomach with multiple ulcers was scored as 3 (Fig. 2 ). Selected samples for histological examination of the esophagus, stomach, and intestine were fixed in 10% neutral phosphate-buffered formalin and processed by routine methods into paraffin blocks which were cut into 3 μm thick sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Fig. 2 Gross pathological changes by Sulcascaris sulcata in the stomach of loggerhead sea turtles. Stomach with hyperemia and few sub-mucosal petechia (arrowhead) is scored as 1 ( a ); stomach with extensive areas of erosions or a single raised ulcer (arrowhead) is scored as 2 ( b , c ); and a stomach with multiple ulcers is scored as 3 ( d , e , f , g , h ). Arrowheads in b and g indicate the lesions showed enlarged in c and h , respectively. Bar = 5 cm
Prevalence of infection and abundance (mean number of S . sulcata individuals among studied loggerhead sea turtles) were displayed using a simple descriptive statistics. Differences in prevalence values among sampling areas (Tyrrhenian vs. Adriatic) and host age classes were investigated by means of Pearson’s chi-squared test. Differences in abundance values among geographical sites and host age classes were assessed through a nonparametric approach, using the Mann–Whitney U test or the Kruskal–Wallis test. Similarly, loggerhead sea turtles with different gross severity scores (0–3) were assessed to unveil differences in number of harbored S . sulcata individuals. The overall level of statistical significance was set to p < 0.05. Statistical analyses were performed using the software IBM SPSS Statistics 25.
Results
In general, the digestive tracts from a total of 218 loggerhead sea turtles were examined, and 54 (24.8%) of those were positive for individuals of S . sulcata , with an abundance of 7.1 specimens (range, 0–287).
Out of a total of 85 carcasses of loggerhead sea turtles from the Tyrrhenian Sea (CCL mean, 63 ± 12.7 SD (standard deviation); ranging from 11.7 to 90.8 cm), 14 (16.5%) were infected by S . sulcata individuals. Infected individuals from the Tyrrhenian Sea had a CCL ranging from 57 to 81.8 (mean, 64.4 ± 4.6 SD) cm. Of the 14 loggerhead sea turtles with S . sulcata infection, we found gross pathological change in 10 (71.4%) of those.
Out of a total of 133 carcasses of loggerhead sea turtles (CCL mean, 52.6 ± 14.9 SD; ranging from 20 to 87 cm) from the Adriatic Sea, 40 (30.1%) were infected by S . sulcata. Infected individuals from the Adriatic Sea had a CCL ranging from 33 to 85 (mean, 59.4 ± 14.3 SD) cm. Of the 40 loggerhead sea turtles with individuals of S . sulcata from the stomach, 10 were too badly preserved for the evaluation of the severity grade of gastritis, while we found gross pathological changes in 29 out of the remnant 30 loggerhead sea turtles (96.7%).
Prevalence of infection for S . sulcata and abundance values from the Tyrrhenian and Adriatic Seas according to the host age classes are shown in Table 1 , with associated significant differences. Prevalence of infection was significantly higher in loggerhead sea turtles from the Adriatic Sea ( p < 0.05), whereas abundance was similar between the two areas. Both prevalence and abundance showed an increasing trend along with host age classes ( p < 0.01 and p < 0.05, respectively). Abundance according to the assigned gross severity score is displayed in Table 2 . Only animals assigned with grade 3 showed higher abundance ( p < 0.05), compared with other groups. Table 1 Prevalence (%) and abundance values (mean) of Sulcascaris sulcata infection in loggerhead sea turtles from the Adriatic and Tyrrhenian Seas, according to the different host age class. EJ , early juveniles; LJ , large juveniles; A , adults; SD , standard deviation Gut examination Examined Positive (individuals) Prevalence p value* Abundance** SD Range Geographical site Tyrrhenian 85 14 16.5 0.02 10.4 49.5 0–287 Adriatic 133 40 30.1 4.9 23.0 0–244 Age class EJ 34 5 14.7 < 0.01 0.4 a 1.2 0–6 LJ 146 32 21.9 5.2 a 30.5 0–282 A 38 17 44.7 21.3 b 62.4 0–287 *The p value refers to differences among groups (both for sampling areas and age classes), according to Pearson chi-squared test **Different letters refer to values with significant differences ( p < 0.05) at the Kruskal–Wallis test Table 2 General data of grades of gross severity score of gastritis by Sulcascaris sulcata and their abundance (mean) in loggerhead sea turtles from the Adriatic and Tyrrhenian Seas. Out of a total of 54 loggerhead sea turtles with S . sulcata individuals, only 44 were evaluated for gross severity score Postmortem Examined Abundance* SD Range Grade 0 5 2.0 a 2.2 1–6 1 8 12.1 ab 14.0 1–43 2 20 9.5 a 12.6 1–54 3 11 104.6 b 124.2 6–287 *Different letters refer to values with significant differences ( p < 0.05) at the Kruskal–Wallis test; SD , standard deviation
The most common gross pathological change was a mucous gastritis with sharply demarcated focal to multifocal raised ulcerous lesions (Fig. 2 ). Intralesional S . sulcata specimens were common (Fig. 2 f). Ulcerous lesions were roundish to irregular in shape ranging from 1 to over 20 cm in length, and cream-yellowish (in recent infection) (Fig. 2 b, c, and e) to greenish in color (in older infection) (Fig. 2 d, f, g, and h). In most cases, S . sulcata specimens were strongly attached by the buccal capsule to the gastric surface penetrating the mucosa and the sub-mucosa, and causing hyperemia, multifocal hyperplastic reactive inflammation, thickening, and petechial hemorrhages. Most of S . sulcata individuals were aggregated around and inside the ulcerated and eroded areas. Microscopic pathological changes ranged from the presence of heterophilic inflammatory infiltrates in the lamina propria to atrophic gastritis with destruction of the mucosal and sub-mucosal surfaces and necrosis (Fig. 3 b, c). Cross sections of adult specimens of S . sulcata and their eggs were common findings inside the lesions (Fig. 3 b, c). Eggs of S . sulcata were also observed histologically from the surface of esophageal papillae with no associated pathological changes (Fig. 3 a). Fig. 3 Microscopic findings. Several eggs of Sulcascaris sulcata on the surface of esophageal papillae in a loggerhead sea turtle ( a ). Atrophic gastritis with heterophilic infiltration in the lamina propria and destruction of the mucosal and sub-mucosal surfaces and necrosis ( b , c ). Cross sections of an adult specimen (arrowhead) of S . sulcata ( b ) and its eggs ( b , c ) were observed inside the lesions. Bar = 500 μm
Discussion
Results here obtained demonstrate that S . sulcata may cause ulcerous gastritis in loggerhead sea turtles from the Tyrrhenian and Adriatic Seas. There are no previous published reports of S . sulcata causing pathological changes in the Mediterranean basin. We were able to find in published literature just two records both from Australian loggerhead sea turtles. Lester et al. ( ) described the lesions by S . sulcata in five loggerhead sea turtles as ulcers penetrating into the sub-mucosa of the stomach wall. Berry and Cannon ( ) described the life cycle of S . sulcata experimentally and included a microscopic figure (in their Fig. 15) of a stomach of a free-ranging loggerhead sea turtle from the Western Australia showing the complete destruction of its upper mucosa.
Pathological changes of the digestive tract associated with helminth parasites are uncommon in loggerhead sea turtles except for the infection with cardiovascular flukes of Spirorchiidae where their eggs cause a range of granulomatous reactions in various organs and tissues (Marchiori et al. ; Santoro et al. ). The only other nematode able to cause gastritis in sea turtles is Anisakis sp., which matures as adult forms only in marine mammals (Santoro et al. ; Mattiucci et al. ). Anisakis infection occurs when sea turtles feed on fish or cephalopods infected with larva L3 of Anisakis sp., which are unable to mature to adults in sea turtles, since they represent a dead-end for the parasite (Santoro et al. ). Larvae of the genus Anisakis were responsible for a parasitic gastritis observed in 16 and 13 loggerhead sea turtles from the Canary Islands (Spain) (Orós et al. ) and southern Italian coast (Santoro et al. ), respectively. In the last case, the Anisakis larvae were identified molecularly as belonging to Anisakis pegreffii (Santoro et al. ). The migration of Anisakis larvae from the lumen of the stomach to the coelomic cavity resulted in ulceration of the gastric mucosa and granulomatous inflammatory reaction in the lamina propria, sub-mucosa, muscular layer, and serosa of the stomach (Orós et al. ; Santoro et al. ). Similar lesions were described in two Kemp’s ridley turtles from Cape Cod (MA, USA) by Innis et al. ( ).
Differences among the pathological changes by S . sulcata and Anisakis sp. in sea turtles are obvious as such the parasite stages and sizes (adult and larval forms of S . sulcata found in sea turtles are much more longer and larger than Anisakis spp.), and its definitive location in the host (Orós et al. ; Innis et al. ; Santoro et al. ). In marine mammal definitive hosts, gastric ulcers of variable size, number, and depth have been observed in association with adults and larvae of Anisakis spp. and other anisakids (Liu and Edward ; Brattey and Ni ; Abollo et al. ; Motta et al. ). Parasite-induced ulcers are usually shallow and have their anterior end embedded in the ulcer bed, similar to those observed for S. sulcata in loggerhead sea turtles . The mechanisms leading to ulceration of the gastric mucosa by Anisakis spp. seem to be linked primarily to the migration of the larval forms through the stomach wall (Moeller ). The accumulation of parasitic excretory debris and invasion of the mucosa by bacteria could act as secondary, perpetuating causes of ulcerous gastritis, as well as the direct attachment of the adult nematodes to the mucosa. No migrations through the gastric walls have been described for S . sulcata in sea turtles. Nevertheless, the head of the fourth-stage larva of S . sulcata (i.e., the infective stage), as well as that of the adult worms, can be found firmly embedded in gastric mucosa (Berry and Cannon ; this study), thus explaining the formation of such ulcerative lesions.
In the Mediterranean Sea, the occurrence of S . sulcata in loggerhead sea turtles seems to be limited to its eastern basin and the Tyrrhenian Sea (Sey ; Santoro et al. ; Gračan et al. ), and no data exists on its intermediate hosts. In Australian and American waters, most of the intermediate hosts of S . sulcata are important commercial species of fossorian bivalves living in sandy or muddy bottoms in which the prevalence of infection ranges from 25 to up 64% (Lester et al. ; Lichtenfels et al. , ; Amato and Amato ; Barber et al. ; Deardorff ).
From the Tyrrhenian Sea, we found infection by S . sulcata in loggerhead sea turtles with a CCL ≥ 57 cm (larger juveniles and adults), which are known to forage in shallower and coastal waters (Mansfield and Putman ) where potential mollusk intermediate hosts should be abundant. All Sulcascaris -positive loggerhead sea turtles from the Tyrrhenian came from the coastal sites located from Castel Volturno to the Naples Gulf where all mussel ( Mytilus galloprovincialis ) farms and wild bivalve beds registered on the Campania coast are concentrated, which in turn could be the intermediate hosts for S . sulcata .
Prevalence of infection with S . sulcata was significantly higher from the Adriatic Sea (see Table 1 ). Many small loggerhead sea turtles, both early and large juveniles (CCL ≥ 33 cm), were found infected in this area, whereas only bigger individuals (CCL ≥ 57 cm) were positive in the Tyrrhenian Sea. The northern area of the Adriatic Sea occupies the flooded seaward extension of the Po Plain and reaches an average bottom depth of about 35 m with sandy or muddy bottoms. It is the most extensive continental shelf of the entire Mediterranean Sea with high macrofaunal density dominated by sedentary invertebrates including a high diversity of fossorian mollusks. This basin hosts one of the largest neritic foraging habitats for loggerhead sea turtles in the Mediterranean (Margaritoulis et al. ; Lazar et al. ). Demersal stage loggerhead sea turtles are regularly present all over the year in the region, residing for a period of time in the area (Lazar et al. ). Small juveniles from Ionian rookeries are also facilitated to reach the northern Adriatic grounds by surface currents passing along the eastern Adriatic coast directing to the north, thus explaining the presence of young individuals with CCL < 30 cm (Lazar et al. ). Early use of benthic trophic resources has been already demonstrated in small loggerhead sea turtles (CCL > 25 cm), supporting the existence of a transitional ontogenic stage in which pelagic preys are targeted by the early juvenile turtles together with benthic organisms (Casale et al. ).
Lazar et al. ( ) identified 91 taxa of benthic mollusks, including 87 species (37 gastropods, 34 bivalves, and one scaphopod) from the digestive tract of loggerhead sea turtles found in the northern Adriatic Sea. It suggests that mollusks represent one of the major prey items for loggerhead sea turtles from that basin. On the other hand, Casale et al. ( ) reported that Bivalvia may have a limited importance in the diet of loggerhead sea turtles from the central Mediterranean, with Malacostraca, Gastropoda, and Echinoidea being the most important prey items. Such a high degree of biodiversity could reasonably support a greater abundance of one or more intermediate hosts for S . sulcata among the Adriatic benthic communities. The peculiar features of northern Adriatic ecosystem reasonably support a higher probability for the loggerhead sea turtles to get infected by the larvae of S . sulcata at an early stage of their life. However, loggerhead sea turtles from both sampling areas were found with high burden of parasites. The increasing trend of S . sulcata infection prevalence and abundance along with age (Table 1 ) suggest that this parasite tends to accumulate in its definitive hosts and this can lead to the development of serious gastric ascaridiosis in individuals with higher burden (Table 2 ). Studies are currently under way to identify, according to the cycle known experimentally (Berry and Cannon ), which mollusk species is acting as an intermediate host for this pathogenic nematode from the Mediterranean basin.