Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the leading cause of death in women. An overwhelming body of evidence has documented under-diagnosis and under-treatment of women for suspected or known ischemic heart disease (IHD), leading to a worse prognosis compared with men. Other data indicate overuse of elective invasive coronary angiography in women with suspected IHD. Non-obstructive CAD is highly prevalent in women, especially those under 59 years of age, and associated cardiovascular event rates are low. To further confound this already complex clinical situation, there is considerable evidence that women with stable ischemic symptoms, despite having a higher prevalence of non-obstructive CAD, have higher coronary event rates compared with the general population. , These distinct aspects of IHD epidemiology in women have motivated a paradigm shift from a coronary stenosis and anatomy-driven strategy to diagnosis, treatment, and risk stratification based on myocardial ischemia and ventricular function. Pretest probability of disease in any patient plays a fundamental role in selecting the most appropriate diagnostic test, and baseline electrocardiography (ECG) further guides the need for imaging when selecting an appropriate stress test. Thus, women with intermediate to high pretest probability of CAD with an abnormal ECG at rest or who are unable to exercise and require an ischemia test should be referred for stress imaging.
Stress CMR: Why
Several aspects of stress cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) make it an appealing and useful stress imaging modality for women requiring a test for myocardial ischemia. , CMR is free from ionizing radiation. Given concerns regarding malignancy risk with exposure to diagnostic radiation, CMR could be considered the preferred stress imaging modality particularly for women with genetic susceptibility to breast cancer. Pijpe and colleagues showed that in women with genetic predisposition to breast cancer (BRCA1/2 carrier), any exposure to diagnostic radiation before the age of 30 was associated with an increased risk of breast cancer with a dose-response pattern. CMR image quality is not compromised by obesity, and even the morbidly obese woman can undergo high-quality stress CMR with the increasing availability of large bore (e.g., 70 cm) MR scanners for cardiac imaging. The current obesity epidemic hampers the diagnostic yield of stress echocardiography and nuclear perfusion imaging. Poor echocardiographic image quality can result in non-diagnostic images in up to 30% of real-world patients, improved in some but not all with ultrasound contrast. Attenuation artifacts and limited spatial resolution lower the accuracy of single-photon emission computer tomography (SPECT) imaging; this is only partially overcome with attenuation correction algorithms in obese patients and comes with high-ionizing radiation exposures. While positron emission tomography (PET) may overcome some of these limitations, its use is limited by high cost and availability that requires an on-site cyclotron to supply the necessary short half-life radiotracers. On the other hand, stress CMR has demonstrated feasibility and high accuracy in obese patients. Shah and colleagues showed that in a cohort of 285 subjects with a body mass index ≥30 kg/m 2 , perfusion CMR was feasible in more than 95% of patients and yielded consistent prognostic value, with a very low negative event rate in patients without ischemia or infarction. Another unique aspect of stress CMR is its integrated delivery of high spatial and temporal resolution images of myocardial perfusion, cardiac function, and infarct scar. This unique combination offers the ability to reliably identify subendocardial ischemia, non-transmural infarction, and viability in the setting precisely estimated contractile dysfunction.
Stress CMR: How
In general, two main classes of pharmacologic agents are used for stress CMR: vasodilators and inotropes. Vasodilator stress myocardial perfusion imaging with CMR employs rapid dynamic imaging during the first pass of a gadolinium-based contrast agent; adenosine is administered with contrast-enhanced perfusion imaging performed at the end of the infusion, or regadenoson can be given as a bolus followed by contrast-enhanced perfusion imaging—both deliver comparable quantitative results. Late gadolinium enhancement imaging (LGE) is an integral part of stress CMR protocols, providing a detailed map of infarct scar to better delineate peri-infarct ischemia and at-risk but viable myocardium. Stress perfusion CMR performs well in detecting ischemia in patients with known or suspected IHD due to epicardial coronary artery stenosis. In a recent meta-analysis, Hamon et al. assessed the diagnostic accuracy of perfusion CMR to detect significant CAD defined as ≥50% of stenosis; adenosine stress perfusion CMR was found to provide an overall patient-level sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 81%. In the multicenter Magnetic Resonance Imaging for Myocardial Perfusion Assessment in Coronary artery disease (MR-IMPACT) trial, stress perfusion CMR demonstrated superior diagnostic performance over SPECT (area under the curve [AUC]: 0.86 ± 0.06 vs 0.67 ± 0.5, P = 0.013). Similar results were confirmed in the largest prospective multicenter study to date, in which diagnostic accuracy for detection of significant CAD was evaluated in both with perfusion CMR and SPECT. The cardiovascular magnetic resonance and single-photon emission computed tomography for diagnosis of coronary heart disease or CE-MARC trial showed significantly higher sensitivity and negative predictive value of CMR vs. SPECT. In a subsequent CE-MARC analysis by sex, CMR was shown to offer women referred for stress perfusion imaging both higher sensitivity (88.7% vs. 50.9%, P < 0.0001) and diagnostic accuracy compared to SPECT (AUC, 0.90 vs. 0.67; P < 0.0001). Finally, in a recent single-center study of 424 postmenopausal women followed prospectively, Becker and colleagues demonstrated a sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of 84%, 81%, and 82%, respectively, for the diagnosis of CAD using adenosine stress perfusion CMR. After an average follow-up of 4 ± 1 years, cumulative event-free survival was 91% for women with negative stress perfusion CMR endorsing the prognostic value of a negative stress perfusion CMR result.
Adenosine CMR can be performed without gadolinium-based contrast agent using the blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) imaging technique that takes advantage of changes in the intrinsic MR signal in the presence of paramagnetic deoxyhemoglobin in hypoperfused segments. Accuracy compared to invasive fractional flow reserve measurement has been shown to be excellent, but more data are needed in women.
Beyond epicardial CAD, perfusion CMR has established value in diagnosing microvascular disease that is all too common in women (Figure 1 ). Since the original report over 14 years ago of impaired myocardial perfusion reserve in a small number of women with chest pain but angiographically normal epicardial coronary arteries, there has been debate as to the robustness of subendocardial perfusion abnormality by perfusion CMR given the potential for artifact. However, its validity has been borne out by several larger studies using improved perfusion image acquisition techniques both with and without contrast, , and in genetic cohorts with established mechanisms for excess microvascular disease risk. Figure 1 High in-plane spatial resolution (approximately 1.5 mm) affords the ability to visualize subendocardial abnormalities with perfusion CMR, which aids in the diagnosis of coronary microvascular dysfunction. The images shown were obtained in a middle-aged obese female with chest pain; diffuse subendocardial hypoperfusion is seen during adenosine that reproduced chest pain (arrowheads)
As an alternative to vasodilator perfusion imaging, dobutamine can be administered to assess regional contractile response with cine imaging acquired at rest and during graded infusion. In the presence of hemodynamically significant CAD, the increase in oxygen demand cannot be met by an adequate increase in blood flow thus creating a demand supply mismatch. As ischemia develops, regional wall motion abnormalities (WMA) ensue that can be detected by cine CMR. An appeal of dobutamine stress CMR is that it can be performed without contrast, though typically contrast is included to help understand inotropic response in the context of any myocardial abnormalities by LGE. Additionally, perfusion image acquisition at peak dobutamine stress provides complementary information to regional wall motion assessment. Dobutamine stress CMR (DCMR) is used in high dose to detect stress-induced ischemic wall motion abnormalities and in low dose in patients with resting WMA to identify patients with contractile reserve, with consistent diagnostic performance in women supported by over 2 decades of data. One meta-analysis demonstrated a collective sensitivity of 83% (95% confidence interval [CI] 79%-88%) and specificity of 86% (95% CI 81%-91%) for DCMR. Women with false-positive stress nuclear imaging results may be better evaluated DCMR given greater accuracy.
Besides high diagnostic accuracy, stress CMR offers women high prognostic value that has been consistently demonstrated in single-center and multicenter studies. In a recent meta-analysis involving more than 11,000 patients with known or suspected IHD (mean follow-up 32 months), Lipinski and colleagues demonstrated that a positive stress CMR test was strongly associated with a composite outcome that included cardiovascular death and non-fatal myocardial infarction (Odds Ratios: 6.47; 95% CI 4.42-9.46 and 6.20; 95% CI 2.61-14.73, for stress perfusion CMR and DCMR, respectively). In Jahnke’s study of gender-related long-term prognostic value of either adenosine perfusion CMR or DCMR with a median follow-up of 5.3 years, multivariate analysis revealed the presence of inducible perfusion defects or WMA as independent predictors of hard cardiac events, for both men and women, with an incremental value over conventional cardiovascular risk factors: in women, a negative stress CMR demonstrated a event-free survival of 100%. In another DCMR-focused study, the prognostic value of stress CMR over an average follow-up period of 6.2 years found that inducible left ventricular WMA strongly predicted cardiac death and myocardial infarction in women (hazard ratio: 2.7; 95% CI 1.8-4.3, p < 0.0001).
Stress CMR: Future Directions
Advances in CMR techniques allow for rapid image acquisition without the need for breathholding or ECG gating, facilitating the development of exercise stress CMR. Physiologic stress is always preferred when feasible over pharmacologic stress as it offers data on functional capacity and hemodynamic response to exercise. Using free-breathing, non-ECG-gated imaging techniques and an in-room MR-compatible treadmill in patients with suspected ischemic heart disease, Raman et al. showed moderate agreement between SPECT and CMR (kappa = 0.58), while the accuracy in eight patients who underwent coronary angiography was 7/8 for CMR and 5/8 for SPECT. Forthcoming data from a multicenter head-to-head trial (NCT01592565) should better illuminate the relative utility of treadmill CMR vs. SPECT in women.
Finally, stress CMR is a cost-effective modality for women who require a stress imaging test. This is born out by data from Petrov and colleagues who studied 1,158 consecutive patients, 42% women, undergoing stress CMR; costs were significantly lower when using CMR as a gatekeeper to invasive coronary angiography. And in an intermediate risk group of acute chest pain patients with women comprising 50% of the study population, Miller et al. demonstrated lower index as well as follow-up costs of care using stress CMR for initial evaluation.
In summary, stress CMR has several decades of evidence supporting its diagnostic accuracy, prognostic value, safety and utility, and considerable growth over just the past few years is helping to ensure more widespready availability. Given superior test characteristics and lack of exposure to ionizing radiation, plus the unique ability to characterize both epicardial CAD as well as microvascular disease, stress CMR should be considered as the modality of choice for the detection of ischemia in women.