Introduction
Calcium has an important role as a second messenger on signaling for different cellular processes. After serving this function, calcium ions must be expelled from the cell or stored in some cellular organelles, such as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi apparatus (GA).
Proteins involved in the calcium flux include calcium-ATPases (Ca 2+ -ATPases), which belong to the P-ATPase family. They are characterized by a temporary conservation of ATP energy in the form of an intermediate phosphorylated enzyme (thereby denominated P-type). These calcium pumps are classified as: (i) plasma membrane Ca 2+ -ATPases (PMCA), which participate in the expulsion of Ca 2+ from cells; (ii) sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ -ATPases (SERCA) that transport Ca 2+ from the cytosol to the ER and are the main system for the control of cytoplasmic Ca 2+ in muscle cells; and (iii) secretory pathway calcium-ATPases (SPCA or PRM1 in yeast), implicated in the homeostasis of Ca 2+ and Mn 2+ in the GA (Brini and Carafoli ).
The GA serves as an intracellular Ca 2+ reservoir (Polishchuk and Lutsenko ; Shull et al. ), able to store up to 5% of the total Ca 2+ of the cell (Chandra et al. ). It has been demonstrated that Ca 2+ is essential for protein modifications and sorting from GA to vacuolar or lysosomal compartments (Durr et al. ). The reduction of Ca 2+ and/or Mn 2+ in the GA could lead to alterations in the trafficking of proteins involved in cellular adhesion (e.g., desmosomes) (Hu et al. ). On the other hand, Mn 2+ is essential for the oxidative stress response, being a cofactor for various antioxidant enzymes (Cho et al. ). Hence, the regulation of the homeostasis of Ca 2+ and Mn 2+ in the GA is vital for every type of cell (He and Hu ).
SPCA resides in GA compartments and post-Golgi vesicles (Van Baelen et al. ; Xiang et al. ), and it is the main system of Ca 2+ recovery in this organelle after cellular activation (Brini and Carafoli ). Furthermore, this pump plays an important role in the correct regulation of protein traffic and secretion (Mitchell et al. , ). Unlike to PMCA and SERCA, SPCA also transports manganese ions with high affinity (Brini et al. ) and contrasting with SERCA, it does not exchange H + in the process of transport (Vangheluwe et al. ). SPCA has a single-binding site for Ca 2+ and another for Mn 2+ , and the presence of these two binding sites possibly owes itself to the greater stability of the E1 over the E2 conformation (Dode et al. ).
The protozoa Entamoeba histolytica is the etiologic agent of human amoebiasis, a disease responsible up to 100,000 deaths annually worldwide (WHO ). The examination by transmission electron microscopy of the trophozoites showed that they do not have well-structured ER and GA, but they contain a large number of vacuoles, and some of them perform the typical activities of these organelles (Bredeston et al. ; Ghosh et al. ; Martinez-Higuera et al. ; Mazzuco et al. ; Teixeira and Huston ). Moreover, it has been described that ER and GA activities occur in different compartments (Bredeston et al. ). In this microorganism, calcium regulates growth, development, virulence, and transcription, among other cellular processes (Carbajal et al. ; Jain et al. ; Leon-Avila et al. ; Makioka et al. ; Munoz Mde et al. ; Ravdin et al. ). In addition, genomic studies on E. histolytica revealed a large number of genes coding for calcium binding proteins (Bhattacharya et al. ). However, few are known about the proteins involved in regulate the intracellular concentration of calcium.
Previously, we shown that the E. histolytica genome contains at least five genes encoding for putative Ca 2+ -ATPases (Martinez-Higuera et al. ). A phylogenetic analysis suggested that three of these pumps belong to the PMCA family, whereas the other two are related to organellar Ca 2+ -ATPases (Martinez-Higuera et al. ). Indeed, one of these organellar Ca 2+ -ATPase contains most of the canonical amino acid residues of the SERCA-type pumps and specific antibodies detected this protein in calreticulin-containing vesicles, supporting the idea that it corresponds to the E. histolytica SERCA (Martinez-Higuera et al. ). The other organellar Ca 2+ -ATPase was grouped in a clade comprising SPCA members, suggesting that it could correspond to the pump that regulates the calcium and manganese levels in GA (Martinez-Higuera et al. ). However, this assumption was not experimentally substantiated.
In this work, we confirmed that one of the organellar calcium-ATPases of E. histolytica has a close phylogenetic relationship with the Ca 2+ pumps located in the GA of different organisms. In addition, we showed that this protein has several of the characteristic amino acid residues of the SPCA members. Immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy assays using specific antibodies detected this pump in the membrane of cytoplasmic vacuoles. Moreover, this putative Ca 2+ -ATPase was localized in vacuoles stained with NBD C6-ceramide, a fluorescent dye that binds to the GA. All these results support the hypothesis that this protein corresponds to the SPCA of E. histolytica .
Materials and methods
E. histolytica cultures
Trophozoites of E. histolytica clone A (strain HM1:IMSS) (Orozco et al. ) were axenically cultured in TYI-S-33 medium and harvested as described (Diamond et al. ).
In silico characterization of the putative organellar Ca2+-ATPase
The predicted protein encoded for the EHI_065670 sequence that was previously suggested to be an organellar Ca 2+ -ATPase (Martinez-Higuera et al. ) was in silico characterized using the software deposited in the Expasy Bioinformatics Resource Portal ( http://expasy.org ) and the NCBI Home Page ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov ). Phylogenetic analysis was performed using the MEGA 5.05 software package (Tamura et al. ). Bootstrapping was performed for 1000 replicates.
Production of specific antibodies against the putative Ca2+-ATPase and Western blot assays
For production of an antibody against the polypeptide encoded by the EHI_065670 sequence (EhSPCA), the peptide located in position 845–862 (ERSEFLKNELRKAFEGLP) was synthesized linked to the KLH (Keyhole limpet Hemocyanin) tag to increase its immunogenicity. Then, 8-week-old New Zeland rabbits were intradermally immunized twice, in an interval of 7 days, with 100 μg of the peptide suspended in 0.15 ml of PBS and emulsified in the same volume of the TiterMax Classic Adjuvant (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) (Hancock and Evan ). The experimental protocol was approved by the institutional committee for animal care and provided all technical specifications for the production, care, and use of laboratory animals (NOM-062-ZOO-1999).
For Western blot assays, total E. histolytica proteins were separated in 10% SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose, and probed with the antibody against EhSPCA (1:1000). Then, membranes were incubated with a peroxidase-coupled secondary antibody (1:5000) (ZYMED, San Francisco, CA, USA). Finally, reaction was developed by chemiluminescence (ECL Plus, Amersham, Piscataway, NJ, USA).
Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy
Trophozoites grown on coverslides were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min at 37 °C and permeabilized with 0.5%-Triton X-100 for 30 min at room temperature. Then, cells were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C with the rabbit antibody against EhSPCA (1:50 dilution) and with a mouse antibody against the E. histolytica SERCA (EhSERCA) (Martinez-Higuera et al. ) (1:50 dilution). Subsequently, samples were incubated with anti-rabbit IgGs conjugated to Alexa 488 and with anti-mouse IgGs conjugated to Alexa 594 (ZYMED, San Francisco, CA, USA) (1:200 dilution). In other assays, samples were incubated with anti-EhSPCA and anti-rabbit IgGs conjugated to Alexa 594, and then with NBD C6-ceramide (6-(( N -(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazol-yl)amino)hexanoyl)sphingosine) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), used as a Golgi marker. Finally, samples were observed through a confocal microscope (Leica TCS SP2, Leica Microsystems Inc. Bannockburn, IL, USA). Observations were performed in 25 planes from the top to the bottom of each sample; the distance between scanning planes was 0.5 μm. To evaluate the co-localization between molecules, Pearson coefficients were obtained from at least 15 confocal independent images (laser sections 0.5 μm) using the ImageJ 1.45v software and the JACoP plugin.
Immunoelectron microscopy
The immunoelectron microscopy assays were performed as described (Segovia-Gamboa et al. ). Briefly, E. histolytica trophozoites were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and 0.1% glutaraldehyde in serum-free DMEM for 1 h at room temperature. Samples were embedded in LR White and polymerized under UV at 4 °C overnight. Sections were obtained and mounted on formvar-covered nickel grids. Later they were incubated with rabbit antibodies against EhSPCA and mouse antibodies against EhSERCA (1:40 dilution). Goat anti-rabbit IgGs conjugated to 35-nm gold particles and goat anti-mouse IgGs conjugated to 20-nm gold particles (Ted Pella Inc., Redding, CA, USA) were used as secondary antibodies (1:100 dilution). Finally, thin sections were observed with a Morgani 268 D Philips transmission electron microscope (FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR, USA).
Results and discussion
It has been revealed that Ca 2+ flux is involved in signaling pathways leading to growth and development of Entamoeba sp. (Makioka et al. ; Makioka et al. ; Martinez-Higuera et al. ). In addition, calcium is crucial in the modulation of virulence (Carbajal et al. ; Jain et al. ; Leon-Avila et al. ; Munoz Mde et al. ; Ravdin et al. ) and gene expression (Gilchrist et al. ). The genomic analysis on this parasite established the presence of 27 genes encoding for multiple proteins capable to bind calcium (Bhattacharya et al. ), and most of them may have an important participation in several cellular processes, including pathogenesis and development. For example, it has been shown that the calcium binding protein-5 (EhCaBP5) is involved in the initiation of the erythrophagocytosis (Kumar et al. ). However, a few are known about the proteins involved in the calcium flux.
Until now, the existence of calcium channels in E. histolytica has not been demonstrated by molecular or biophysical methods. Indeed, the only ionic channel characterized in E. histolytica is the chloride channel A (EhClC-A) (Salas-Casas et al. ). Genes coding for canonical plasma membrane- or organellar-calcium channels had not been identified in this parasite, suggesting that they are phylogenetically distant of known channels or that other type of proteins could be responsible for the calcium flux. On the contrary, some studies demonstrated an intense activity of Ca 2+ -ATPases in internal vesicles and in the plasma membrane of E. histolytica trophozoites (Bakker-Grunwald and Parduhn ; Kobayashi et al. ). In addition, we described that this parasite contains at least five Ca 2+ -ATPases (Martinez-Higuera et al. ), but so far it is still unknown the role of most of these pumps in the calcium homeostasis of E. histolytica .
In silico characterization of the putative SPCA of E. histolytica (EhSPCA)
To start the study of the putative calcium-ATPase encoded by the EHI_065670 sequence, we analyzed in silico this polypeptide. It consists of 1118 amino acid residues containing ten predicted transmembrane sequences (positions 254–273, 279–297, 446–468, 488–510, 906–931, 937–959, 980–1004, 1024–1042, 1063–1083, and 1095–1119) (Fig. 1 ). Similar to other Ca 2+ -ATPases, it also includes: (i) an E1–E2 domain (position 313–515) involved in form an aspartyl phosphate intermediate for the ATP hydrolysis (Brini and Carafoli ); (ii) an hydrolase motif (667–861); (iii) a cation ATPase N domain (position 205–273); (iv) a cation ATPase C motif (position 930–1118); (v) the transduction domain (position 285–2889); (vi) a phosphorylation motif (position 454–460); (vii) the sequences that participate in the binding of ATP (positions 576–581, 643–646 and 665–669); and (viii) the hinge domain (position 780–790) (Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1 ). Interestingly, the sequence of the N-terminus before the E1–E2 domain was found to be very long (202 amino acid residues) (Supplementary Fig. 1 ), which may have significant implications in regard to its location and/or in the regulation of its function. Fig. 1 Topological representation of the EHI_065670 polypeptide. A simplified model of the putative EhSPCA derived from SERCA was built. The cylinders with numbers 1–10 represent the 10 transmembrane α-helices (M1–M10) of varying inclination and length. White cylinders (M4 and M6) contain the residues that form the Ca 2+ -binding site. The pentagon represents the actuator domain; the bar above of the protein scheme indicates the region that spans the phosphorylation domain, which contains the nucleotide-binding domain (circle) and the amino acid that becomes transiently phosphorylated during the catalytic cycle (rhombus). N- and C- means the N- or C-terminus ends, respectively Table 1 Comparison of the structural domains between human SPCA1 and putative EhSPCA Protein Dephosphorylation site Phosphorylation site Nucleotide binding Hinge Motif Transmembrane domain (TM) SPCA1 EhSPCA TGET TGEM DKTGTLT DKTGTLT KGA KGA GDGVND GDGTND 1–10 1–10
The predicted topology of this polypeptide (EhSPCA) showed the same structural regions of typical Ca 2+ ATPases: an actuator, a nucleotide-binding domain, a phosphorylation domain, and ten hydrophobic helices (M1–M10) (Fig. 1 ). The links between these domains are flexibles during different states in the catalytic cycle, suitable for transporting ions.
There are nine recognized well-conserved motifs in P-type ATPases, numbered 1–9 (Moller et al. ), and some of them showed distinctive sequences in the different families (Thever and Saier ). Our analysis revealed that the nine motifs of EhSPCA are more related to Ca 2+ -ATPases than to other P-type ATPases. Besides, motifs 1, involved in the E1 to E2 transition, and 7, which participates in the phosphoryl transfer from ATP to the enzyme, showed 100% identity with SERCA and SPCA pumps (Table 2 ), supporting the hypothesis that the EHI_065670 polypeptide corresponds to an organellar Ca 2+ -ATPase. Interestingly, motifs 3, 6, 8, and 9 of EhSPCA contain amino acid residues that are not present in the consensus sequences of typical PMCA, SERCA, or SPCA (Table 2 ). Motif 3 (TGES) is one of the best-conserved motifs in P-type ATPases, but the S residue, could be conservatively substituted by T, A, or N (Thever and Saier ); however, in EhSPCA, it was substituted by M (Table 2 ). The residue 4 of the motif 6 (KGAxE) is variable in the three different families, S in PMCA, P in SERCA, and L in SPCA, whereas EhSPCA contains a C (Table 2 ). In the motif 8, which functions in the catalysis of enzyme phosphorylation (Thever and Saier ), the first residue of the M(V/I)TGD sequence changed to I in EhSPCA (IITGD) (Table 2 ). Finally, the carboy portion of the motif 9, the hinge domain, the consensus sequence PALKKA(D/E)(V/I)G(F/I)AM is replaced by the PAIKSSNIGIAM sequence in EhSPCA (Table 2 ). All these changes are likely to be determinants of substrate specificity or mechanistic function of EhSPCA. Table 2 Comparison of conserved motifs of typical Ca 2+ -ATPases and EhSPCA Open image in new window a Residues of EhSPCA identical to other Ca 2+ -ATPase are shadowed b Specific residues of EhSPCA are in bold
This Ca 2+ -ATPase of E. histolytica also contains the amino acid residues that conform one Ca 2+ -binding site, corresponding to the site II of SERCA, but the residues corresponding to the site I are absent, suggesting that, like canonical SPCAs, this amoebic Ca 2+ -ATPase has a single Ca 2+ -binding site. Moreover, the EHI_065670 polypeptide shows a great similarity to the mammalian SPCA1 (46%) (data not shown), and a phylogenetic analysis, which includes PMCAs, SERCAs, and SPCAs of different organisms, showed that the EHI_065670 protein has a closest relationship with yeast Ca 2+ -ATPases (Fig. 2 ), which are located in the ER and GA and participate in the Ca 2+ and Mn 2+ transport (Cohen et al. ; Furune et al. ; Lustoza et al. ; Suzuki ). All these results suggested that the EHI_065670 polypeptide corresponds to the Ca 2+ -ATPase that regulate the homeostasis of Ca 2+ and Mn 2+ in the GA of E. histolytica . Fig. 2 Phylogenetic analysis of the putative EhSPCA. The amino acids sequence of the putative Ca 2+ -ATPases of E. histolytica (EHI_065670) was aligned with the sequences of Ca 2 + -ATPases of other organisms. The data were submitted to a phylogenetic analysis by the method of minimum evolution using MEGA version 5.05. The other Ca 2 + -ATPases utilized for this analysis were: SPCA1 of Bos taurus (NP_786979.1), SPCA1a of Canis lupus familiaris (XP_536762.3), SPCA8 of Pan troglodytes (XP_016785777.1), SPCA1d of Homo sapiens (NP_001001486.1), SPCA of Rattus norvegicus (ABF55512.1), SPCA of Mus musculus (NP_081198.1.), SPCA of Gallus gallus (NP_990222.1), SPCA of Danio rerio (NP_957429.1), SPCA of Drosophila melanogaster (NM_001104196.3), CTA4 of Schizosaccharomyces pombe (CAA20137.1), SPF of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (EWH18959.1), PMR of Caenorhabditis elegans (AJ303082.1), PMR1 of Schizosaccharomyces pombe (CAB39136.1), PMR of Neurospora crassa (PMR1 KHE81076.1), SERCA1 of Homo sapiens (NP_775293.1), SERCA of Trypanosoma cruzi (EAN96035.1), SERCA of Leishmania donovani (AY791850.1), SERCA of Entamoeba histolytica (EHI_027710), SERCA of Trichomona vaginalis (EAY14503.1), PMCA of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (KZV11222.1), PMCA of Macaca mulatta (XP_014983996.1), PMCA of Homo sapiens (DQ201776.1), PMCAs of Entamoeba histolytica (EHI_030830, EHI_016480, and EHI_054830), PMCA of Trichomona vaginalis (EAY14503.1). Numbers at the branch nodes indicate the confidence percentages of the tree topology from bootstrap analysis of 1000 replicates. The putative EhSPCA is in a rectangle
Localization of EhSPCA in E. histolytica trophozoites
To locate the putative EhSPCA in E. histolytica trophozoites, a specific antibody was generated against a sequence of 18 amino acids (Fig. 3 a) situated in position 845–862, which is in the intracellular side between transmembrane domains 4 and 5. A BLAST search on the database of the E. histolytica genome, using the peptide as a probe, indicated that this sequence just matches with the EHI_065670 polypeptide, indicating that this protein could be the only target for the antibody. In Western blot assays on total extracts of trophozoites, the antibody recognized a single band of approximately 125 kDa, the expected molecular weight for EhSPCA, while the pre-immune serum did not recognize any band (Fig. 3 b). Fig. 3 Identification and cellular localization of the putative EhSPCA. a The peptide of the putative EhSPCA, located in position 845–862, used to obtain specific antibodies against this protein. b Western blot. The rabbit anti-EhSPCA antibody was used in Western blot assays on total extracts of E. histolytica trophozoites. Lane 1, Molecular weight markers. Lane 2, assay using anti-EhSPCA antibody. Lane 3, assay using pre-immune serum. c Cellular localization of EhSPCA by confocal microscopy. The E. histolytica trophozoites were fixed, permeabilized and incubated with rabbit anti-EhSPCA and mouse anti-EhSERCA. Then, samples were incubated with the secondary antibodies: anti-rabbit IgGs labeled with Alexa 488 and anti-mouse IgGs labeled with Alexa 594. Afterwards, nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue) and cells were observed through confocal microscopy. ( A – D ) Trophozites incubated with anti-EhSPCA and anti EhSERCA. E , F Trophozoites incubated with preimmune serum. A , E Phase contrast. B Green channel showing the localization of EhSPCA. C Red channel showing the localization of EhSPCA. D , F Merge. Arrows indicate sites of co-localization around the nucleus. G Pearson coefficient of co-localization between EhSPCA and EhSERCA
Subsequently, the anti-EhSPCA antibody was employed for immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy. In these experiments, EhSPCA showed a punctuate pattern around the nucleus and forming circled structures in the cytoplasm (Fig. 3 cB), suggesting that it is situated in the membrane of cytoplasmic vacuoles. Even though in this parasite the ER and GA do not show the structural characteristics found in typical eukaryotic cells, diverse studies have evidenced a continuous network of vacuoles that could carry out the functions of the RE or GA (Bredeston et al. ; Ghosh et al. ; Martinez-Higuera et al. ; Mazzuco et al. ; Teixeira and Huston ). EhSERCA was also detected in a continuous dotted profile in the cytoplasm of the trophozoites (Fig. 3 cC), which corresponds to the RE (Martinez-Higuera et al. ). Immunofluorescence assays using both antibodies showed some co-localization around de nucleus, but a scanty co-localization of both Ca 2+ -ATPases in other positions of the cytoplasm (Fig. 3 cD).
By immunoelectron microscopy, EhSPCA was observed in the membrane of some cytoplasmic vacuoles (Fig. 4 b). In general, EhSPCA-containing vesicles did not showed the presence of EhSERCA, although in some vesicles we observed both proteins (Fig. 4 c). The presence of vacuoles containing both Ca 2+ -ATPases is probably due to that EhSERCA may also participate in the homeostasis of calcium in the GA, as it has been described for rat hepatocytes (Taylor et al. ). To investigate if the EhSPCA-containing vesicles could be related to the GA, we performed immunofluorescence assays in trophozoites labeled with NBD C6-ceramide, a fluorescent compound that binds to the GA. In these assays, we observed a high co-localization of both molecules (Fig. 5 ), indicating that EhSPCA is located in the GA of trophozoites. Interestingly, EhSPCA was also detected in vacuoles situated in the periphery of the trophozoites that were not labeled by NBD 6C-ceramide (Fig. 5 ), suggesting that this Ca 2+ -ATPase could be also localized in secretory vesicles, as occurs in higher eukaryotes (Van Baelen et al. ). Fig. 4 Immunoelectron microscopy. Sections of trophozoites were incubated with antibodies against EhSPCA and against EhSERCA and then, with anti-rabbit IgGs conjugated to 30-nm gold particles and anti-mouse IgGs conjugated to 15-nm gold particles. Then, samples were analyzed by transmission electron microscopy. a Control omitting the primary antibodies. b Immunoelectron detection of EhSPCA. c Immunelectron detection of EhSPCA and EhSERCA. Arrows showed the detection of EhSPCA. Arrowheads indicate the detection of EhSERCA Fig. 5 Co-localization of EhSPCA and NBD C6-ceramide. The E. histolytica trophozoites were fixed, permeabilized and incubated with rabbit anti-EhSPCA and subsequently with a secondary antibody labeled with Alexa 594. Next, samples were incubated with NBD 6C-ceramide, which was used as a Golgi marker Afterwards, the cells were observed through confocal microscopy. (a) Phase contrast. (b) Red channel showing the location of EhSPCA. (c) Green channel showing the location of NBD C6-ceramide. (d) Merge. (e) Negative control using pre-immune serum. (f) Pearson coefficient of co-localization between EhSPCA and NBD C6-ceramide
In conclusion, we identify a putative SPCA in E. histolytica . This assumption is based on that it contains all characteristics motifs of the SPCA family and is located in the membrane of vacuoles stained with NBD C6-ceramide. However, it is necessary to conduct further pharmacological and electrophysiological experiments to confirm this hypothesis. In addition, the knockdown strategy will be useful to explore the role of this Ca 2+ -ATPase in calcium/manganese homeostasis and in signaling pathways triggered by Ca 2+ in E. histolytica .