Introduction
Toxoplasma gondii , an obligate intracellular parasite belonging to the phylum Apicomplexa, is one of the most successful parasitic organisms in the world, which can infect many warm-blooded vertebrates including humans (Dubey and Jones ). It is estimated that up to one third of the human population is infected with T. gondii , which is acquired mainly by ingesting tissue cysts from undercooked meat or ingestion of food or water contaminated with oocysts shed from cats (as the definitive hosts). However, other routes of transmission include vertical transmission from mother to child, organ transplantation, blood transfusion, and inhalation of oocyst-contaminated dust. This ubiquitous parasitic protozoan is the etiologic agent of toxoplasmosis, which causes the greatest disease burden of foodborne pathogens in the developed countries. T. gondii , if not treated, is the second leading cause of death due to foodborne diseases in these countries (Havelaar et al. ; Scallan et al. ).
Tachyzoites, bradyzoites (tissue cyst form), and sporozoites are three infectious forms of the T. gondii parasite (Dubey et al. ). Tissue cysts, intracellular structures formed by bradyzoites, divide by endodyogeny (Ferguson et al. ). The size of a tissue cyst is variable, but on average, a mature cyst can range from less than 10 to 70 μm in diameter and consist of several to hundreds or even thousands of bradyzoites (Dubey ). The development of tissue cysts is more common in the brain, eyes, and muscles (e.g., skeletal and cardiac tissues); however, they can also develop in visceral organs (e.g., lungs, liver, and kidneys). Tissue cysts are especially prevalent in the central nervous system (CNS). They have been detected in neurons, astrocytes, and microglia (Dubey ). Stage conversion from tachyzoites to bradyzoites allows the life-long persistence of the T. gondii parasite in the host (Weiss and Kim ).
When chronically infected patients become immunocompromised with conditions such as AIDS or due to the medication process after organ transplantation, bradyzoites get released from tissue cysts, multiply, and spread to other organs, predominantly the brain and muscles, resulting in severe morbidity and mortality (Luft and Remington ). Unfortunately, cyst walls are resistant to both the immune system and drugs (Gormley et al. ). While several drugs are available that can control acute toxoplasmosis (Montazeri et al. ), there is no approved therapy that eliminates the tissue cysts responsible for chronic infections (Montazeri et al. ). Accordingly, the current systematic review was aimed at retrieving published studies related to in vitro and in vivo evaluation of antimicrobial agents for the treatment of chronic toxoplasmosis in humans or animals against tissue cysts in order to prepare comprehensive data for designing more accurate investigations in the future.
Methods
This review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews (PRISMA) guidelines (Moher et al. ). A protocol of this systematic review is available in PROSPERO International prospective register of systematic reviews (2013), CRD42017072655 ( https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/ ).
Search strategy
English databases, including PubMed, Science Direct, Scopus, Google Scholar, and Web of Science, were systematically searched for articles related to in vitro or in vivo evaluation of anti- Toxoplasma activities of drugs and compounds published up to December 2017. The used keywords consisted of “ Toxoplasma gondii ,” “ T. gondii ,” “toxoplasmosis,” “drugs,” “compounds,” “tissue cysts,” “bradyzoites,” and “chronic infection.”
Study selection and data extraction
According to the inclusion criteria, papers written in English were selected and carefully reviewed for eligibility. Gray literature and abstracts of articles that were published in congresses were not explored. In addition, to avoid missing any articles, entire references of the papers were meticulously hand-searched. Among English articles that were found using the mentioned strategies, full-text papers that used laboratory methods both in vitro and in vivo for the detection of chronic infections were included. The included papers were precisely investigated, and the main information was extracted.
Results
Analysis of the included literature
A total of 55 papers (13 in vitro studies, 49 in vivo, and 7 both in vitro and in vivo) published in three decades from 1987 to 2017 were included in the systematic review. Figure 1 briefly shows this article’s search process. Fig. 1 The PRISMA flowchart describing the study design process
In vitro and in vivo results
The efficacy of 50 drugs and several new compounds against T. gondii in vitro and in vivo was evaluated (Tables 1 and 2 ). Also, drugs or compounds with more than 20 pathways or mechanisms of action are shown in Table 3 . Notably, several targets were identified against T. gondii including mitochondrial electron transport chain, calcium-dependent protein kinase 1, type II fatty acid synthesis, DNA synthesis, and protein synthesis. Our collected data indicated that many of the drugs or compounds evaluated against T. gondii cysts act on the mitochondria and apicoplast. Therefore, these organelles represent a potential drug target for new chemotherapy. Table 1 Summary of in vitro studies that evaluated the anti- Toxoplasma activity of drugs/compounds against tissue cysts No. Drug Strain Cell/medium Culture Evaluation Main results Effectivity Ref 1 Compound 566C80 ME49 RPMI 24 and 72 h Inoculation “”””into mice (IP) None of the mice were infected with cysts Effective (Araujo et al. ) 2 Arprinocid-N-oxide, azithromycin and the hydroxynaphthoquinone 566C80 ME49 RPMI 24 and 72 h Inoculation into mice (IP) The most active compounds against the cyst form were arprinocid-N-oxide, azithromycin, and hydroxynaphthoquinone 566C80 Effective (Huskinson-Mark et al. ) 3 Hydroxynaphthoquinone 566C80 ME49 RPMI 3 or 6 days Inoculation into mice (IP) Loss of viability of the cysts Effective (Huskinson-Mark et al. ) 4 CAMP ME49 Peritoneal macrophages 1, 3, 5, and 10 days [3H]-Uracil uptake assay and Giemsa stain CAMP and PYR: the number of pseudocysts were decreased but the size was not changed. MTX: no effect was noted Effective (Choi et al. ) PYR Effective MTX Ineffective 5 Monensin PLK, 76 K Vero 6 or 48 h Immunofluorescence assay, electron microscopy, and inoculation into mice Significant cytological alterations of the monensin-treated bradyzoites were seen. Mice inoculated with cysts were treated 6 or 48 h; no antibodies and no cysts were recovered from their brains Effective (Couzinet et al. ) 6 PHNQ6 alone and combined with sulfadiazin EGS DMEM 24 or 48 h Inoculation into mice (IP) Infectivity of bradyzoites treated with PHNQ6 alone or combined with sulfadiazine was inhibited after in vitro incubation Effective (Ferreira et al. ) 7 Tetrapeptide FR235222 PRU HFF 24, 48, and 72 h Immunofluorescence assay (IFA) 100% altered cysts 24 h after treatment with the lowest concentration (30 nM) of FR235222 Effective (Maubon et al. ) 8 New naphthoquinones (QUI-11, QUI-6, and QUI-5) and liriodenine EGS DMEM 24 and 48 h Inoculation into mice (IP) In vitro incubation with QUI-6, QUI-11, and liriodenine inhibited the infectivity of the bradyzoites. None of the surviving animals had detectable cysts in the brain Effective (Ferreira et al. ) 9 Spiramycin coadministered with metronidazole ME49 Vero E6 cells 1 week Counting the number of cysts Spiramycin reduced the numbers of cysts 44 and 42%. Coadministration of drugs reduced the numbers of cysts (68 and 58% reductions) Effective (Chew et al. ) 10 Atovaquone and 3-bromopyruvate RH LLC-MK2 24 or 48 h, or 6 days Indirect immunofluorescent assays Atovaquone and 3-bromopyruvate in combination led to fewer parasite-infected cells with no evidence of cystogenesis Atovaquone, effective (de Lima et al. ) 11 Guanabenz PRU HFF 32 h Stained with Diff-Quick and evaluated by light microscopy 4 and 15% of cysts were abnormal in the guanabenz and salubrinal Effective (Benmerzouga et al. ) 12 Tanshinone IIA and hydroxyzine PLK/DLUC1C9 HFF 3 days Dual-Glo luciferase assay Both compounds reduced the bradyzoite number Effective (Murata et al. ) 13 Aureobasidin A and compound 20 PRU HFF 3 days ED 50 determination Aureobasidin A demonstrated slightly higher efficacy (ED 50 2·51, μg/ml) than compound 20 (ED 50 3·74, μg/ml) Effective (Alqaisi et al. ) IP intraperitoneal, PYR pyrimethamine, MTX methotrexate, PHNQ6 2-hydroxy-3-(1′-propen-3-phenyl)-1,4-naphthoquinone Table 2 Summary of in vivo studies that evaluated the anti- Toxoplasma activity of drugs/compounds against tissue cysts No. Drug Animal Strain Type of infection Inoculum Treatment Assessment of efficacy Main results Effectivity Ref 1 CLI Swiss Webster female mice C56 Chronic 10 4 tachyzoites (IP) 150 mg of CLI phosphate per kg twice daily for 14 days (IP) Number of cysts was counted The average number of cysts in the brains of the CLI-treated mice were 9 Effective (Hofflin and Remington ) 2 TMP and SMX Murine PRU Chronic 10 cysts (IP) The combination from day 5 for 15 days or from day 28 for 288 days (60/300 mg/kg per day) Survival rates and histopathology The combination gave protection and even apparent toxoplasmal eradication at the highest dosing (60/300 mg/kg per day) Effective (Dumas et al. ) 3 Minocycline Swiss Webster mice ME49 Chronic 20 cysts (IP) 50 mg/kg per day of minocycline for 3 weeks Number of cysts was counted A significant reduction in the number of brain cysts was seen Effective (Chang et al. ) 4 Compound 566C80 Female CBA/Ca ME49 Chronic 20 cysts (IP) 100 mg/kg per day for 8 weeks by gavage Number of cysts was counted Fewer cysts in their brains were seen. Mortality as well as clinical signs of brain infection was absent from treated mice Effective (Araujo et al. ) 5 Clarithromycin alone or in combination with minocycline CBA/Ca ME49 Chronic 10 cysts (orally) 300 mg/kg/day, orally Counting the number of brains cysts and histopathology The combination that resulted was significantly greater than the activity of drugs alone Effective (Araujo et al. ) 6 Hydroxynaphthoquinone 566C80 Outbred female Swiss Webster and inbred female CBA/Ca ME49 Chronic 10 cysts (CBA/Ca) and 20 cysts (Swiss Webster) (IP) 200 mg/kg per day by gavage Counting the number of brain cysts and histopathology The reduction in the number of cysts in the brain was rarely seen in the histopathology sections of treated mice Effective (Araujo et al. ) 7 Rifabutin alone and combined with sulfadiazine, PYR, CLI, or ATO Inbred CBA/Ca females ME49 Chronic 20 cysts, orally 200 mg/kg per day by gavage Counting the number of cysts and histological examination The inflammatory responses were significantly reduced Effective (Araujo et al. ) 8 Epiroprim (Ro 11-8958), alone and in combination with dapsone Female Swiss Webster ME49 Chronic 10 cysts 50 mg/kg/day 3 weeks by gavage Counting the number of cysts and evaluation of inflammation Dapsone and epiroprim alone reduced the number of brain cysts and the inflammation in the brains Effective (Chang et al. ) 9 Azithromycin Mice PRU Chronic 9 cysts (IP) 100 mg/kg/day, 100 days Counting the number of cysts and survival rates Enhanced survival and a reduction in brain inflammation Effective (Dumas et al. ) 10 ATO Inbred female CBA/Ca mice ME49 Chronic 10 tissue cysts (IP) 200 mg/kg/day, 4 weeks by gavage Counting the number of cysts This significant reduction in tissue cyst numbers and the average size of the tissue cysts Effective (Ferguson et al. ) 11 Rifapentine Swiss Webster female mice C56 Chronic 10 tissue cysts (orally) 50 or 100 mg/kg/day for 10 days, beginning 3 days after infection Survival rates Resulted in 100% survival Effective (Araujo et al. ) 12 Copolymers CRL 8131 and CRL 8142 plus ATO Inbred female CBA/Ca ME49 Chronic 30 tissue cysts 2 mg of ATO and 100 mg of CRL 8131 per kg/day by gavage Counting the number of cysts and histological studies Reduction in the number of cysts and in the inflammation in the brains of mice Effective (Araujo and Slifer ) 13 Corticoids, azathioprine, and cyclosporine Swiss Webster mice C strain Chronic High-level inoculum of cysts, infected per orally Brain parasite load estimation Did not significantly affect parasite loads in the brain Ineffective (Sumyuen et al. ) 14 DDI OF1 mice DUR Chronic 10 cysts by gavage 2 mg of DDI/ml, 30-day treatment Microscopical and histological studies The number of cyst in the brains of mice treated with DDI was lower than that in the controls Effective (Sarciron et al. ) 15 Ketolide antibiotics HMR 3647 and HMR 3004 Female Swiss Webster mice C56 Chronic 10 cysts by gavage 5 to 200 mg/kg/day for 10 days, beginning 3 days after infection Survival rates Lower doses of each ketolide protected the mice Effective (Araujo et al. ) 16 Phenylalanine derivatives Female OF1 mice DUR Chronic 10 cysts/0.2 ml by gavage 150 mg/kg/day under 0.2 ml volume per animal for 5 days Cysts counted and histological studies Phe-Phe-OMe: 67, Boc-L-Phe: 77, L-Phe-OMe: 62, Boc-L-Phe-L-Phe-OMe: 62, and PYR 77% decrease the number of cysts Effective (Sarciron et al. ) 17 ATO, PYR, sulfadiazine sodium, CLI, vancomycin, spiramycin, and Rhodiafarma Female outbred Syrian golden hamsters ME49 Chronic 0.2 ml mouse brain (IP) PYR 50, CLI 1200 mg, sulfadiazine 4, spiramycin, and ATO 3 g for 4 weeks in the drinking water Counting the number of cerebral and retina cysts The ATO-treated group had a significantly lower mean number of cysts than the control group Effective (Gormley et al. ) 18 ATO and ATO-loaded nanocapsules Female Swiss Webster mice COUL and ME49 Chronic 10 cysts by gavage 15 mg/kg/day during 6 weeks, 5 days a week Counting the number of brain cysts and parasitic burdens A decrease of brain parasitic burden, which was significantly more pronounced in ME49-infected mice Effective (Sordet et al. ) 19 CLI and recombinant IL-12 (rIL-12) Mouse – Chronic – CLI (5 mg/kg orally), rIL-12 (0.25 microg IP), or the combination of both, once weekly for 3 months Counting the number of brain cysts and survival rate Simultaneous administration of CLI and rIL-12 resulted in prevention of reactivation in 73.3% Effective (Tawfeek et al. ) 20 Garlicin and minocycline Mice Fukaya Chronic (IP) – Counting the number of brain cysts Either garlicin or minocycline had no effect on elimination of tissue cysts Ineffective (Shu and Jiang ) 21 ATO combined with CLI Female Swiss Webster mice ME49 Chronic 10 or 20 cysts ATO 100, CLI 400, and ATO + CLI 100 + 400 mg/kg/day for 14 consecutive days Microscopically counted The cyst burdens in ATO and CLI alone and in combination were decreased to 75.9, 76.4, and 43% Effective (Djurković-Djaković et al. ) 22 PHNQ4, PHNQ5, and PHNQ6 Outbred female Swiss mice EGS Chronic 10 cysts (orally) 10, 50, and 100 mg/kg/day, for 10 days, beginning 2 days after infection orally Survival rate A prolongation of the time to death or up to 30 days after treatment was seen Effective (Ferreira et al. ) 23 PHNQ6 alone and combined with sulfadiazine Outbred female Swiss mice P strain Chronic 10 cysts (IP) Sulfadiazine (40 mg/L), PHNQ6 (50 mg/kg/day), and sulfadiazine plus PHNQ6, for 4 weeks Counting the number of brain cysts and liver histological studies The number of brain cysts was lower in mice treated with PHNQ6 alone or combined with sulfadiazine. Liver histology being normal after treatment Effective (Ferreira et al. ) 24 Valproic acid Mice ME49 Chronic 1 × 10 3 tachyzoites 800 mg/kg for 4 weeks in the drinking water Counted the number of tissue cysts No significant differences were present in tissue cyst numbers in valproic-acid-treated mice Ineffective (Goodwin et al. ) 25 FR235222 and the five FR235222 derivative compounds Outbred female Swiss mice PRU Chronic 25 to 50 cysts FR235222 (200 nM), and PYR (1 μM) Dolichos lectin, acridine orange, and ethidium bromide staining No cysts were detected in mice inoculated with FR235222-treated cysts Effective (Maubon et al. ) 26 ITZ and FLZ Outbred female Swiss mice ME49 Chronic 20 cysts (IP) 10 and 20 mg/kg/day alone and in combination for 10 consecutive days, (orally) Counting the number of brain cysts and survival rate ITZ significantly reduced brain cyst numbers. FLZ significantly enhanced protection in mice Effective (Martins-Duarte et al. ) 27 Endochin-like quinolone (ELQ-271 and ELQ-316) CBA/J mice ME49 Chronic 18 cysts (IP) Atovaquone, ELQ-271 5, and ELQ-316 25 mg/kg (IP) Counting the number of brain cysts ELQ-271 and ELQ-316 reduced the brain cysts by 87–84 and 76–88%, respectively Effective (Doggett et al. ) 28 Spiramycin coadministered with metronidazole Male BALB/c mice ME49 Chronic 1000 tachyzoites (orally) 400 and 500 mg/kg alone and in combination for 7 days Counting the number of brain cysts Spiramycin reduced the brain cysts (58 and 36%). The combined administration showed a large and significant reduction of brain cysts Effective (Chew et al. ) 29 Toltrazuril Akkaraman lambs ME49 Chronic 1 × 10 5 oocysts (IP) 20 and 40 mg/kg twice, once every week (orally) Counting the number of cysts The toltrazuril treatment efficacy on the cyst presence was determined as 44.4% Effective (Kul et al. ) 30 4 new derivatives of 3-methyl-benzyl-PP (3-MB-PP, or 1) Female BALB/c mice Pru-LUC Chronic 10 4 PRU-Luc-GFP tachyzoites (IP) 1–5 mg/kg containing 5% DMSO for 10 days (IP) Counting the number of cysts Compound 24 showed a large and significant reduction of brain cysts Effective (Lourido et al. ) 31 Rolipram Female Swiss albino mice KSU strain Chronic 20 cysts (IP) 10 mg/kg daily for 3 weeks Life expectancy, Alt, histopathology of liver and brain Rolipram exerts a significant lowering effect on ALT levels Partially effective (Afifi et al. ) 32 Guanabenz Female BALB/c mice PRU Chronic 10 6 tachyzoites (IP) 5 mg/kg/day (IP) Count the number of tissue cysts and qPCR Guanabenz representing a 69% reduction in the number of cysts Effective (Benmerzouga et al. ) 33 Corticosteroids (hydrocortisone sodium succinate) Swiss Webster ME-49 Chronic 10 3 bradyzoites (IP) 2.5 mg/kg/day (orally) Brain parasite load estimation and histopathological examination Toxoplasmic encephalitis in corticosteroid-treated animals was seen Ineffective (Elfadaly et al. ) 34 Triclosan and TS liposomal nanoparticles Swiss albino mice ME49 Chronic 10 cysts (orally) 200 and 120 mg/kg for 30 days (orally) Measurement of the parasite burden, ultrastructural and biochemical study Reduction in mice mortality, brain parasite burden, and infectivity of cysts obtained from the brains of treated mice Effective (El-Zawawy et al. ) 35 Miltefosine Swiss albino mice ME49 Chronic 10 cysts by gavage Milteforan 20 and sulfadiazine 200 mg/kg for 15 days (orally) Counting the number of cysts and measured and survival rate Reduction of brain cysts 77.7% Effective (Eissa et al. ) 36 Aripiprazole Male BALB/c mice Tehran Chronic 50 cysts (IP) 10 and 20 mg/kg (IP) Counting the number of cysts The cysts were observed in brains of all mice Ineffective (Saraei et al. ) 37 Rolipram Female Swiss albino mice KSU strain Chronic 20 cysts (IP) 10 mg/kg daily for 3 weeks Tissue injury scoring, brain cyst count, specific IgG titers, TNF-α, IFN-γ, and IL-12 assays Significant reduction of TNF-α (84.6%), IFN-γ (76.7%), and IL-12 (71%) Partially effective (Afifi and Al-Rabia ) 38 T. gondii biotherapies (BIOT-TG 200) Swiss male mice ME49 Chronic 20 cysts (orally) The medicines were diluted in water (1 ml/100 ml of water) for 24 h Counting the number of brain cysts The number of brain cysts was reduced in the BIOT-TG200-pretreated group Effective (Braga-Silva et al. ) 39 Resveratrol and ST Swiss male mice VEG Chronic 50 cysts (orally) Resveratrol 100 and ST 0.5 mg/kg (orally) Counting the number of brain cysts The drug combination showed a significant reduction in the number of brain cysts Effective (Bottari et al. ) 40 TgCDPK1 inhibitor 32 CBA/J mice ME49 Chronic 30 mg/kg once daily for 14 days (orally) 14 days via oral gavage with either 30 mg/kg of 32 Counting the number of brain cysts Reducing of brain cysts by 88.7% Effective (Vidadala et al. ) 41 Fluphenazine and thioridazine Male BALB/c mice Tehran Chronic 20 cysts (IP) Thioridazine 10, 20, and fluphenazine 0.06 and 0.6 mg/kg Counting the number of cysts The number of brain cysts was less at higher dose compared to lower doses for both drugs Ineffective (Saraei et al. ) 42 Etanercept (TNF-α antagonist) Swiss albino mice ME49 Chronic 10 cysts (IP) A dose of 1 mg/kg/week for 4 weeks alone or combined with sulfadiazine and PYR (subcutaneously) Counting the number and size of brain cysts, and TNF-α assays A significant increase in the mean number and sizes of tissue cysts was seen. Also, TNF-α significantly decreased Ineffective (El-Sayed et al. ) 43 Diphenyl diselenide Swiss albino mice ME49 Chronic 50 cysts (orally) 5 μmol/kg Creatine kinase, MB, troponin, myoglobin, lactate dehydrogenase, and adenylate kinase assays Treatment had a protective effect on the heart Effective (Machado et al. ) 44 Artesunate Female Swiss albino mice ME49 Chronic 20 cysts/0.2 ml/mouse by nasogastric feeding tube 10 mg/kg/day for 8 days (IP) Counting the number of brain cysts and survival rate Lowering brain cyst count (41%) was seen in the artesunate-treated group Effective (Mahmoud et al. ) 45 DLE Female NIH mice ME49 Chronic 25 cysts (orally) 35 ng extract per 24–25 g mouse (IP) Histopathology and counting the number of brain cysts Less tissue damage, lowering brain cyst count (31%), and the survival rate of 93% was seen in the DLE-treated group Effective (Fuentes-Castro et al. ) 46 Diphenyl diselenide Swiss albino mice ME49 Chronic 50 cysts (orally) 5 μmol/kg NTPDase, 5′nucleotidase, ADA activities, and ATP/ADO ratio in the liver Diphenyl diselenide treatment reduced the hepatic inflammation Effective (Doleski et al. ) 47 Diphenyl diselenide Swiss albino mice ME49 Chronic 50 cysts (orally) 5 μmol/kg NTPDase, 5′nucleotidase, ADA activities, and ROS levels in the spleen Diphenyl diselenide reduced histological inflammatory markers, ROS levels, and ADA activity in the spleen Effective (Doleski et al. ) 48 Pyrazolopyrimidine analog, compound 24 Mice lacking the IFN-γ receptor (Ifngr1−/−) ME49Δhx::FLUC line Chronic 5 cysts (orally) 25 or 40 mg/kg by oral gavage for a total of 8 days Weight loss, bioluminescence imaging, and survival for 30 days. Presence of cysts in the brain and by bioassay Mice treated with 40 mg/kg showed no sign of activation. Treated mice survived significantly longer than controls Effective (Rutaganira et al. ) 49 DXM Female BALB/c A local isolate of chicken brain Chronic 15 cysts (IP) DXM: 2.66 and 5.32 mg/kg (daily) at 42 days after infection and monitored for 42 days Histopathology, counting the number of brain cysts, and IgM and IgG assays The cysts increased in the brains of all mice, and IgM levels declined but IgG levels continued rising Ineffective (Mokua Mose et al. ) CLI clindamycin, IP intraperitoneal, TMP trimethoprim, SMX sulfamethoxazole, ATO atovaquone, DDI 2′,3′ dideoxyinosine, ITZ itraconazole, FLZ fluconazole, ELQ endochin-like quinolone, ALT alanine aminotransferase, TS triclosan, ST sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim, TgCDPK1 T. gondii calcium-dependent protein kinase 1, DLE dialyzable leukocyte extracts, ADA adenosine deaminase, ATP adenosine triphosphate, ADO adenosine, ROS reactive oxygen species, DXM dexamethasone Table 3 Pathway/mechanism of action of drugs/compounds used against tissue cysts T. gondii Pathway/mechanism of action Location Drugs/compounds Ref Protein synthesis inhibitor Apicoplast Clindamycin* Spiramycin* (Chew et al. ; Hofflin and Remington ) Type II fatty acid synthesis Triclosan and triclosan liposomal* (El-Zawawy et al. ) Electron transport pathway Mitochondria Atovaquone* Hydroxynaphthoquinone 566C80* PHNQ6 New naphthoquinones* (QUI-11, QUI-6, and QUI-5) Endochin-like quinolones* (ELQ-271 and ELQ-316) 3-Bromopyruvate (Doggett et al. ; Ferguson et al. ; Ferreira et al. , , ; Gormley et al. ) Dihydrofolate reductase inhibitor Cytosol Epiroprim (Ro 11-8958) Methotrexate Sulfadiazin (Chang et al. ) (Choi et al. ) (Ferreira et al. ) DNA synthesis Histone deacetylase enzyme Core Metronidazole* Tetrapeptide FR235222 Novel FR235222 derivative compounds* (Chew et al. ) (Maubon et al. ) Inhibitors of calcium-dependent protein kinase 1 (CDPK1) Apical end New derivatives of 3-methyl-benzyl-PP (3-MB-PP, or 1) Pyrazolopyrimidine analog, compound 24 (Lourido et al. ) (Rutaganira et al. ) Phospholipid metabolism Cell membrane Miltefosine (Eissa et al. ) Activation of protein kinases, transcription of specific genes, and changes in the cytoskeleton structure Cytoskeleton CAMP (Choi et al. ) Different metabolic pathways – Monensin (Couzinet et al. ) Cyclic AMP signaling pathways – Rolipram* (Afifi and Al-Rabia ; Afifi et al. ) Calcium signaling pathways – Aripiprazole (Saraei et al. ) Translational control through phosphorylation of parasite eukaryotic initiation factor 2 α a (eIF2α) – Guanabenz* (Benmerzouga et al. ) *Drugs/compounds with known pathway/mechanisms of action against T. gondii
Most of the in vitro and in vivo investigations on the activity of drugs against the T. gondii cyst were based on their infectivity by subinoculation to mice (5 studies) and counting the number of brain cysts (40 studies). Most of the surveys used the ME49 strain of T. gondii (4 in vitro studies and 28 in vivo) while in some studies, Prugniaud, EGS, and VEG strains were also used. The animal model used in the reviewed papers was mostly Swiss Webster mice (22 studies).
Discussion
The aim of this systematic review was to investigate the in vitro and in vivo effects of anti- Toxoplasma drugs and synthetic compounds against tissue cysts. The previous studies in 1992, 1994, and 1998 suggested that atovaquone had activity on cyst tissue in vivo (Araujo et al. ; Ferguson et al. ; Gormley et al. ); however, clinical cases of resistance to this drug have been reported (Baatz et al. ; Megged et al. ). Unfortunately, Toxoplasma has a strong ability to spontaneously develop drug resistance by mutation of the atovaquone binding site on cytochrome b, and thus, this drug has never become a first-line treatment for chronic toxoplasmosis (Chirgwin et al. ).
In a new study, Vidadala et al. ( ) optimized compound 32 ( T. gondii calcium-dependent protein kinase 1 inhibitor [CDPK1]), a promising lead for the development of a new antitoxoplasmosis therapy in the acute and latent stages of infection. Interestingly, this compound does not have human Ether-à-go-go-Related Gene (hERG) inhibitory activity. Moreover, compound 32 is a CNS-penetrant and can significantly reduce brain cysts by 88.7%.
In a recent study by Rutaganira et al. ( ), the effect of small molecule inhibitors of CDPK1 for the treatment of CNS toxoplasmosis was examined. In this study, compound 24 was effective in treating acute and chronic infection, reducing propagation to the CNS, and decreasing reactivation of chronic toxoplasmosis in immunocompromised mice. CDPK1, an essential enzyme in T. gondii , controls multiple processes that are critical for the intracellular replicative cycle of the parasite, including secretion of adhesins, motility, invasion, and egression. Based on these studies, CDPK1 inhibitors can be represented as the potential drugs for new chemotherapy methods.
In another study by Doggett et al. ( ), researchers showed the remarkable efficacy of endochin-like quinolone (ELQ-271 and ELQ-316) in decreasing T. gondii brain cysts by up to 88% at low doses, suggesting that they have the potential to eradicate latent infection at clinically applicable doses. ELQ-271 and ELQ-316 are inhibitors of the Qi site of the T. gondii cytochrome bc1 complex, and their mechanism of action differs from that of current clinically used anti- Toxoplasma therapies.
Recently, investigators have focused on miltefosine, an anticancer agent, which was demonstrated to result in significant reduction in brain cyst load in the chronic stage of toxoplasmosis. Also, the survived cysts were noticeably smaller upon microscopic examination, suggesting that this drug can effectively penetrate the blood–brain barrier and that the prolongation of treatment time may result in greater effects (Eissa et al. ). Additionally, future studies should focus on the mechanism of action of miltefosine against the T. gondii cyst form in chronic toxoplasmosis.
In two studies performed by Afifi et al., on the Toxoplasma brain cyst load, 74% reduction in cystic forms in the chronic phase of toxoplasmosis after treatment with rolipram, a phosphodiesterase-4 (PDE4) inhibitor, has been shown. Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases are critical modulators of cellular levels of cAMP, which catalyzes cyclic nucleotide hydrolysis, since rolipram causing high cAMP levels can inhibit Toxoplasma ’s conversion to the bradyzoite form. Additionally, rolipram could interfere with tachyzoite–bradyzoite interconversion due to suppression of cytokines TNF-α, IFN-γ, and IL-12. However, rolipram was also partially able to prevent progression to chronic toxoplasmosis. Clinical studies have reported adverse effects of this drug, mostly severe nausea and vomiting (Afifi and Al-Rabia ; Afifi et al. ; Eissa et al. ). It is suggested that investigators should focus on finding safe anti- Toxoplasma drugs in the future.
Guanabenz, a Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drug, has excellent solubility and penetration into the CNS (Bougdour et al. ; Meacham et al. ). In a study by Benmerzougas et al. ( ) in chronically infected mice, guanabenz crossed the blood–brain barrier and reduced the number of brain cysts. Also, guanabenz inhibited the phosphorylation of T. gondii eukaryotic initiation factor 2α (eIF2 α), a novel antiparasitic drug target, and its ability to kill the Toxoplasma parasite did not involve the host’s eIF2α. T. gondii IF2α phosphorylation occurs in response to stresses, which induces conversion of tachyzoites to bradyzoites during the lytic cycle in tachyzoites (Konrad et al. ; Meacham et al. ).
The ability of compound 32, endochin-like quinolones, miltefosine, and guanabenz to penetrate the blood-brain barrier is the important criteria for therapeutic intervention as tissye cysts have a propensity to form in the brain (Benmerzouga et al. ; Doggett et al. ; Eissa et al. ; Vidadala et al. ).
The cyclopeptide FR235222 appears to be a bradyzoite to tachyzoite conversion inhibitor, and preventing the parasite differentiation process could be an effective way to prevent the parasite from spreading. FR235222 is able to access the bradyzoites within the cyst. The ability of FR235222 to permeate the membrane wall is a major advantage for crossing the blood–brain barrier and the CNS tissues where Toxoplasma cysts are located. It is shown that histone acetylation levels are controlled by histone acetylase (HAT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes, and the specific inhibition of T. gondii histone deacetylase (TgHDAC3) by FR235222 disrupts the steady-state level of histone 4 (H4) acetylation across the genome, inducing derepression of stage-specific genes. Thus, acetylation of histones plays a substantial role in the control of gene expression during parasite interconversion (Bougdour et al. ; Maubon et al. ).
In a study by Ferreira et al. ( ), anti- Toxoplasma properties of new naphthoquinones (QUI-11, QUI-6, and QUI-5) were evaluated. In vitro incubation with QUI-11 resulted in the inhibition of infectivity of the bradyzoites; none of the surviving animals had detectable cysts in their brains. This suggests that this drug may be useful in treating chronic toxoplasmosis.
Recently, Murata et al. ( ) identified that tanshinone IIA and hydroxyzine represent novel lead compounds in preventing the reactivation of latent infection. These novel anti- Toxoplasma compounds can inhibit the growth of intermediately differentiated bradyzoites.
However, FR235222, QUI-11, tanshinone IIA, and hydroxyzine showed anti- Toxoplasma cyst effects in vitro (Ferreira et al. ; Maubon et al. ; Murata et al. ); their effectiveness in vivo against chronically infected mice remains to be directly demonstrated. Additionally, future studies should focus on the mechanism of action of QUI-11, tanshinone IIA, and hydroxyzine against the T. gondii cyst stage in chronic toxoplasmosis.
In a new study by El-Zawawy et al. ( ), it was shown that triclosan (TS) significantly reduced mice mortality, parasite load, as well as viability and infectivity of tachyzoites and the cysts that were harvested from infected mice and their brains in the treatment group. Accordingly, TS was proven as an effective, promising, and safe prophylactic drug against chronic murine toxoplasmosis. Liposomal formulation of TS enhanced its efficacy and allowed its use at a lower dose (El-Zawawy et al. ; Surolia and Surolia ). In T. gondii , FAS-II enzymes are present in the apicoplast and are essential for its survival. The key enzyme in this process is the ENR enzyme, which cannot be found in mammals. This enzyme catalyzes the last reductive step of the type II FAS pathway. Significantly, TS inhibits type II FAS, suggesting that apicoplast represents a potential target for new chemotherapy drugs as it is essential for the parasite and it is absent in host cells (El-Zawawy et al. ; Surolia and Surolia ).
Interestingly, investigators in a study showed the effectiveness of toltrazuril treatment in lambs. The results of this study showed that muscle tissues of lambs receiving toltrazuril were free of tissue cysts (44.4%). The outcomes are promising as one of the paths of getting infected with this parasite is through consumption of undercooked or raw meat containing tissue cysts, and this could be used as a strategy to reduce the cyst exposure of humans (Kul et al. ). Given that Toxoplasma human infections depend on the prevalence of the parasite in animals and eating habits, production of T. gondii -free sheep, lambs, and goats for human consumption is important for public health.
Many studies described anti- Toxoplasma effects of different drugs in combination with novel compounds. The compound 2-hydroxy-3-(1′-propen-3-phenyl)-1, 4-naphthoquinone (PHNQ6), combined with sulfadiazine, showed reduction of the brain cysts in vivo (Ferreira et al. ).
In another study by Chew et al. ( ), administration of spiramycin and metronidazole, due to the presence of the efflux transporters multidrug-resistant protein 2 and P-glycoprotein spiramycin, did not result in an effective concentration in the brain. Importantly, metronidazole increased brain penetration of spiramycin causing a significant reduction of T. gondii brain cysts. According to the information, combination therapy leads to faster recovery, using lower doses of drugs, less relapse, and fewer side effects of the disease. Furthermore, such combinations are highly promising for the development of a drug that can eliminate the cyst form of the parasite and, thus, efficiently impair relapse of the disease in immunocompromised patients (Chew et al. ; Ferreira et al. ).
The particular resistance of cysts to drugs could be explained by two characteristics: the presence of the cyst walls and the low metabolism of bradyzoites compared to tachyzoites. Despite the importance of the tissue cyst in the life cycle of the parasite, only a few components of the T. gondii cyst wall and their functions have been identified. However, bradyzoite pseudokinase 1 (BPK1) is a component of the cyst wall. The expression of BPK1, specifically in the bradyzoite stage, suggests that it may have an important function in the bradyzoite biology and structure or the function of the tissue cyst in the life cycle of T. gondii (Buchholz et al. ).
Treatment of the T. gondii -infected cell cultures with atovaquone in combination with 3-bromopyruvate (3-BrPA), an inhibitor of cellular energy metabolism, led to fewer parasite-infected cells with no evidence of cystogenesis. However, the infection was not completely eliminated, and the apicoplast is possibly another energy source for T. gondii . This organelle is important in the parasite metabolism as it is the site of biosynthesis of fatty acid type II, isoprenoids, and some enzymes of carbohydrate metabolism. Based on these results, 3-BrPA can be used as a good tool for the study of cystogenesis in vitro and for gaining more knowledge regarding T. gondii parasite metabolism (de Lima et al. ).
Conclusions
In conclusion, as bradyzoites located inside the T. gondii cysts are resistant to all drugs, development of well-tolerated and safe specific immunoprophylaxis is a highly valuable goal for global disease control. Importantly, with the increasing number of high-risk individuals, and absence of a proper vaccine, persistent efforts are necessary for the development of novel treatments in patients with T. gondii cysts. Future studies should focus on the mechanisms of action of drugs or compounds that have sterilizing activity against the T. gondii cyst form in chronic toxoplasmosis in patients with cysts who are at risk for reactivating acute toxoplasmosis.