Introduction
Echinococcosis is a zoonosis, caused by the small cestodes of the genus Echinococcus . Echinococcus granulosus is the specie most widespread and of major public health importance especially in the Mediterranean area (reviewed in Deplazes et al. ). Its lifecycle involves carnivorous (mainly dogs) as definitive hosts and a broad spectrum of mammalians, including humans, as intermediate hosts (McManus et al. ). Dogs become infected feeding the offal of intermediate hosts (especially sheep) with hydatid cysts and expel out the eggs with faeces. When the intermediate hosts eat the eggs, the oncospheres inside penetrate the mucosae of the intestine and through the blood and lymphatic system reach the target organs (e.g., liver and lungs) where the larval stage (metacestode) develops and causes cystic echinococcosis (CE) (Craig et al. ).
In Europe, dogs and sheep play a key role in the transmission of CE. Therefore, monitoring and surveillance of echinococcosis in dogs is useful for epidemiological studies and control programs. It can also indicate the potential risk to humans of being infected with hydatid disease (Huang et al. ; Craig et al. ). However, ante-mortem diagnosis of infection with E. granulosus in definitive hosts is difficult, because the eggs of all genera of Taeniidae cannot be differentiated morphologically by light microscopy (Carmena and Cardona ) and the characteristic small segments of E. granulosus may be absent from the faeces or can be easily overlooked (Eckert et al. ). Moreover, even with a high parasite burden, echinococcosis in definitive hosts is asymptomatic (Carmena and Cardona ).
Conventionally, the evaluation of echinococcosis prevalence in dogs was based on purging them with arecoline hydrobromide (WHO/OIE ). This procedure was inconvenient due to environmental contamination, time-consuming, low sensitivity and reproducibility (Eckert et al. ).
However, some of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) were developed and applied for epidemiological studies on echinococcosis, e.g., in Spain (Benito et al. ), India (Prathiush et al. ), Zambia (Nonaka et al. ), China (Moss et al. ), South America (Morel et al. ) and Chile (Acosta-Jamett et al. ), but they do not work properly and so more specific ELISAs, using monoclonal antibodies, are developing (Craig et al. ).
Different faecal flotation methods have been described to detect Taeniidae eggs (Thienpont et al. ; Mathis et al. ; Szell et al. ; Oge et al. ), but their sensitivities are low and need further characterization of Echinococcus species/genotyping by molecular studies. The copro-PCR-based assays developed to detect echinococcosis are very useful, because they allow the identification of Echinococcus species and strains (Eckert and Thompson ), but they are relatively expensive methods and so epidemiological studies based only on copro-PCR are unsuitable (Carmena and Cardona ; Craig et al. ).
The aim of this study was to develop and validate a combination of flotation (to detect samples positive for Taeniidae) and PCR-based protocol for the identification of E.granulosus and other Taeniidae in faeces from naturally infected dogs. For this purpose, (i) the FLOTAC technique (Cringoli et al. ) was calibrated with five flotation solutions, (ii) FLOTAC was compared with four of the most used copromicroscopic techniques for the diagnosis of Taeniidae eggs (Thienpont et al. ; Mathis et al. ; Szell et al. ) and (iii) four different protocols of DNA extraction were compared.
Materials and methods
Experiment 1—evaluation of flotation solutions for the diagnosis of Taeniidae eggs using FLOTAC
Fifty faecal samples positive to Taeniidae (at the start, each sample was analysed five times using the flotation protocol described by Mathis et al. ( ) to determine the presence/absence of Taeniidae eggs) were collected from sheep farm dogs, living in Campania region (Southern Italy) and naturally infected. The faecal samples were preserved at − 80 °C for three consecutive days (WHO/OIE ) and used to compare five different flotation solutions by the FLOTAC technique (Cringoli et al. ): (i) saturated sodium chloride (specific gravity, s.g. = 1.20), (ii) zinc sulphate (s.g. = 1.35) (Cringoli et al. ), (iii) zinc chloride (s.g. = 1.45) (Mathis et al. ), (iv) Breza (three parts of saturated MgSO 4 solution, three parts of saturated Na 2 S 2 O 3 solution and one part of water; s.g. = 1.30) and (v) modified Breza (one part of saturated MgSO 4 solution and one part of saturated Na 2 S 2 O 3 solution; s.g. = 1.40) (Szell et al. ). After a thorough homogenization, each sample was suspended in tap water at a dilution ratio of 1:10. The suspension was thoroughly homogenized and filtered through a wire mesh (aperture = 250 μm) and the debris discarded. The filtered suspension was divided into five aliquots of 11 ml each and placed in 15-ml tubes. After the centrifugation of the tubes for 3 min at 1500 rpm, the supernatant was discarded, leaving only a pellet in the bottom of the tube.
Subsequently, tubes were randomly filled with one of the five flotation solutions to the previous 11-ml level and slowly agitated. The resulting suspension was taken up by pipette to load the two chambers of the FLOTAC (analytic sensitivity = 1 egg per gram (EPG) of faeces; Cringoli et al. ). The apparatus was centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min and cut transversally. Taeniidae eggs were counted for all the protocols, using a light microscope at ×10 magnification.
Experiment 2—comparison between five concentration methods for the diagnosis of Taeniidae eggs
Forty faecal samples, 20 positive (different from experiment 1) and 20 negative to Taeniidae, were collected from sheep farm dogs (living in Campania region) and preserved at − 80 °C for three consecutive days (WHO/OIE, ). Each sample was analysed five times by the FLOTAC basic technique (Cringoli et al. ) with an analytic sensitivity of 1 EPG to determine the presence/absence of Taeniidae eggs.
Taeniidae eggs were extracted from the positive samples using the mass extraction method, i.e., a method that employs four sieves of different dimension (1 mm, 250 μm, 212 μm and 38 μm) to separate the eggs from the faeces. Then, ten aliquots of 0.1 ml each were taken and the number of eggs counted (Godber et al. ). The extracted Taeniidae eggs were used to contaminate negative dog faeces and, after a thorough homogenization, to give faecal egg counts (FECs) of 4, 15, 150 and 350 EPGs. For each level of experimental infection, 12 replicates of the following five different techniques were performed: (a) FLOTAC basic technique with zinc sulphate (s.g. = 1.35) (Cringoli et al. ), (b) flotation in centrifuge with zinc sulphate (s.g. = 1.20) (Thienpont et al. ), (c) flotation in centrifuge with Breza solution (s.g. = 1.30) (Szell et al. ), (d) flotation in centrifuge with modified Breza solution (s.g. = 1.40) (Szell et al. ) and (e) flotation in centrifuge with zinc chloride (s.g. = 1.45) (Mathis et al. ).
Experiment 3—comparison of molecular methods for the diagnosis of E. granulosus
Four different protocols of DNA extraction were compared and standardized for the diagnosis of E. granulosus , starting from two different matrices: eggs by (i) QIAamp Tissue Kit (Qiagen) and (ii) QIAamp Stool (Qiagen); faeces by (iii) QIAamp Stool (Qiagen) from faeces and (iv) Wizard Magnetic Purification System for Food (Promega).
For this purpose, the 50 faecal samples that resulted positive for Taeniidae using FLOTAC by experiment 1 were used. To start from eggs, after copromicroscopic diagnosis, each chamber of FLOTAC was cleaned with 1.5 ml of distilled water and the recovered suspension was transferred in a 15-ml tube. This step was repeated three times. Then, distilled water was added in the tube up to 14 ml and centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 15 min. The supernatant was discarded and sediment was resuspended in 1 ml of distilled water and transferred to a 2-ml microtube, then 200 μl of suspension were used for DNA extraction and PCR.
Each protocol of DNA extraction was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
To evaluate the best method of DNA extraction, a multiplex PCR was performed to amplify the small subunit of ribosomal RNA (rrnS) using a mix of primers: Cest1, Cest2, Cest3, Cest4 (2 μM), and Cest5 (16 μM), as reported in Trachsel et al. ( ), in a final volume of 50 μl containing 2 μl of template DNA, 0.2 mM of each dNTP (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), 2.5 mM of MgCl 2 , and 2 U of FastStart Taq DNA Polymerase (Life Technologies, USA).
The PCR products were detected on a 2% ethidium bromide-stained low melting agarose gel (BIO-RAD, Spain). Bands were cut from the gel under UV exposure, and the amplified DNAs were purified by QIAquick Gel Extraction KIT (Qiagen, Germany). The purified PCR products were sequenced, and the obtained sequences, in both forward and reverse directions, were analysed using the Chromas version 2.1 software and compared with rrnS sequences present in GenBank, using BLASTn system and ClustalW.
Statistical analysis
The arithmetic mean EPG was calculated for each FS/method. Differences between FS/method were analysed using one-way ANOVA with post hoc Fisher’s least significant difference (LSD). Statistical analysis was carried out using STATA version 10.0 (Stata Corp.; Texas, USA).
Results
Experiment 1—evaluation of flotation solutions for the diagnosis of Taeniidae eggs using FLOTAC
Zinc sulphate (s.g. 1.35) resulted the most efficient solution for the flotation of Taeniidae eggs using the FLOTAC technique (Table 1 ), although the mean EPG for the 50 positive samples analysed with zinc sulphate was not statistically different from the mean EPG obtained with modified Breza; however, the reading resulted clearer with zinc sulphate. Table 1 Results of the comparison of different flotation solutions, using FLOTAC technique for the diagnosis of Taeniidae eggs No. Flotation solution Specific gravity Mean EPG Readability (i) Sodium chloride 1.20 1950 c Clear (ii) Zinc sulphate 1.35 4038 a Clear (iii) Zinc chloride 1.45 2356 b Many debris (iv) Breza 1.30 2390 b Clear (v) Breza modified 1.40 3920 a Many debris Values with different symbols (a, b, c) are significantly different ( P < 0.05) EPG eggs per gram of faeces
Experiment 2—comparison of five flotation-based methods for the diagnosis of Taeniidae eggs
The FLOTAC technique using zinc sulphate (s.g. = 1.35) was the most efficient method for the detection of Taeniidae eggs (Table 2 ), producing a higher recovery of Taeniidae eggs ( P < 0.05) and a higher prevalence of positive replicates than the other techniques, i.e., 100% for all the infection levels. Table 2 Results of the comparison of the five flotation-based techniques for the diagnosis of Taeniidae eggs Level of infection (FEC) Parameters Flotation-based techniques FLOTAC ZnSO 4 1.35 (a) Flotation in centrifuge ZnSO 4 1.20 (b) Flotation in centrifuge ZnCl 1.45 (c) Flotation in centrifuge Breza 1.30 (d) Flotation in centrifuge modified Breza 1.40 (e) 4 EPG Mean 3.8 a 0.6 b 0 b 0.4 b 0.1 b Prevalence% 100 22 0 55 33 15 EPG Mean 15 a 5 b 0.8 c 0.8 c 0.4 c Prevalence% 100 67 78 100 100 150 EPG Mean 144 a 43.1 b 13.6 c 1.2 d 1.3 d Prevalence% 100 100 100 100 100 350 EPG Mean 344 a 72 b 61.8 b 3.8 c 7.6 c Prevalence% 100 100 100 100 100 Values with different symbols (a, b, c) are significantly different ( P < 0.05) EPG eggs per gram of faeces
Experiment 3—comparison of molecular methods for the diagnosis of E. granulosus
As reported in Table 3 , a very low number of positive samples was obtained with the combination of faeces and Wizard Magnetic Purification System for Food (9/50 = 18%; 95%CI = 9.1–31.9). Table 3 Results of the comparison of different DNA extraction methods for the diagnosis of Taeniidae eggs Method no. Matrix for extraction of DNA Kit Prevalence 95% CI (i) Eggs QIAamp Tissue Kit 28/50 (56.0%) 41.4–69.7 (ii) Eggs QIAmp Stool 47/50 (94.0%) 82.5–98.4 (iii) Faeces QIAmp Stool 22/50 (44.0%) 30.3–58.7 (iv) Faeces Wizard Magnetic Purification System for Food 9/50 (18.0%) 9.1–31.9
The QIAamp Stool, using eggs concentrated by FLOTAC with zinc sulphate, was the best method for DNA extraction. Indeed, the combination of these methods provided the highest number of positive samples with PCR, i.e. 47/50 (94.0%; 95% CI = 82.5–98.4). The three negative samples with this protocol showed very low FECs (2 EPG) below its detection limit. Of the other 47 faecal samples positive for Taeniidae, the analysis with FLOTAC concentration revealed that 32 samples had a count ≤ 50 EPG (mean 13.4; min = 2, max = 50), 9 samples had a count < 500 EPG (mean = 250.9; min = 120, max = 420) and 6 samples > 500 EPG (mean = 953.3; min = 640, max = 1600). Therefore, the limit of detection of this PCR was 4 EPG, because for samples with 2 EPG, the results were variable (of the 6 samples with 2 EPG infection, 3 were positive and three negative).
From sequencing of the 47 positive samples with method, (ii) 6 samples were identified as E. granulosus sensu stricto (s.s.), 28 as Taenia hydatigena and 6 as T. pisiformis . A co-infection between different genera of Taeniidae was found in 7 samples: E. granulosus s.s. + T. hydatigena in 3 samples and E. granulosus s.s. + T. pisiformis in 4 samples.
Discussion
CE has a significant socio-economic impact, related to both human and livestock infections. CE is reported among the five most frequently diagnosed zoonoses in the Mediterranean area (along with brucellosis, rabies, leishmaniosis and bacterial food-borne zoonotic infections), and it is included in the list of the main neglected tropical diseases by the World Health Organization (WHO ). The global burden of human CE is 188,000 new cases per annum resulting in 184,000 Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs), i.e. 0.98 DALYs per case, and it is mainly related to the duration of hospitalization and convalescence (Torgerson et al. ). In livestock, the economic and animal health repercussions linked to CE are mainly reduced yield and quality of meat (2.5–20%), milk (2.5–12%) and wool (10–40%), reduced birth rate (3–12%) and delayed performance and growth (Battelli ; Cardona and Carmena ). Annual estimated losses due to CE on the global livestock industry have been preliminary estimated to be up to $2 billion (Cardona and Carmena ).
Therefore, considering that dogs are the main definitive hosts, implicated in the transmission of E. granulosus to humans and other intermediate hosts (Carmena and Cardona ; Kachani and Heath ), determining echinococcosis in dogs is very important not only for epidemiology studies but also especially for surveillance of control programs (Abbasi et al. ).
In the Mediterranean area, echinococcosis is predominant in countries with large number of grazing sheep (up to 76%) (Varcasia et al. ) and a prevalence up to 60% is reported in dogs (Deplazes et al. ), with a higher presence of E. granulosus s.s. that is the main specie responsible of human infection (Varcasia et al. ).
In the last 20 years, many advances in diagnostic approaches have been made to detect CE in sheep, like development of rapid immunochromatographic tests (Zhuo et al. ), recombinant vaccines and ultrasound diagnosis (Dore et al. ; Varcasia et al. ); however, diagnosis of echinococcosis in definitive hosts has not progressed equally (Craig et al. ).
In the past, many control programs of echinococcosis were based on purgation (firstly with arecoline hydrobromide and then with magnesium sulphate, and praziquantel), but even if this technique was high specific, the main limits were the environmental contamination, undesirable side effect on threated dogs, its time-consuming and required trained personnel (Varcasia et al. ; Naidich et al. ; Lahmar et al. ). The developed ELISA assays to detect copro-antigens for E. granulosus showed highly variable sensitivities due to parasite burdens and cross-reactivity with other Taeniidae, but these methods were very useful to detect the echinococcosis in pre-patent period (Naidich et al. ).
Recently, different authors showed that copro-PCR (DNA extraction from faeces or from isolated Taeniidae eggs) is very useful for E. granulosus detection, due to its high sensitivity and its capacity to reveal also pre-patent period (Stefanic et al. ; Naidich et al. ; Lahmar et al. ; Deplazes et al. ).
Both coproantigen-ELISA and copro-PCR are higher sensitive, more simple, safe and less-time consuming than purgation with arecoline hydrobromide (Lahmar et al. ).
However, there is not a gold standard method in literature suggested for the diagnosis of echinococcosis in definitive hosts (Barnes et al. ). Therefore, it is very important to develop and standardize an accurate method for the diagnosis of this Cestoda of zoonotic importance (Zhang et al. ).
Irie et al. ( ) compared two commercial kits (QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit, Qiagen and PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit, Mobio Laboratories) and a modified alkaline-sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) protocol for the DNA extraction from faeces of dogs experimentally infected with Echinococcus multilocularis . The modified alkaline-SDS resulted as the most sensitive technique for diagnosis of E. multilocularis during patent and pre-patent periods, because of permission to analyse over 1 g of faeces compared with the two commercial kits that can test a total of 0.2 g of faeces. These results are in line with those obtained in our study; in fact, the most efficient DNA extraction was obtained starting directly from concentrated eggs by FLOTAC that permits to analyse 2 g of faeces (with an analytic sensitivity of 1 EPG) and to recover all the eggs in the chambers of the apparatus. The two DNA extraction techniques that started from faeces (methods iii and iv) using 0.2 g of sample showed lower sensitivity.
Oge et al. ( ) compared centrifugal flotation with zinc sulphate and sedimentation-formalin-ethyl acetate for the diagnosis of Taeniidae. They showed that sedimentation was better than flotation, although they used the improved flotation method by Szell et al. ( ) to concentrate the eggs, for the identification of E. granulosus by PCR.
Also an innovative loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) was performed to improve the diagnosis of Taeniidae infections in dogs (Feng et al. ), but this technique resulted less sensitive of the multiplex PCR by Trachsel et al. ( ).
The results of our study showed that the FLOTAC is more sensitive and accurate than other ‘classical’ techniques for the detection of Taeniidae eggs. Moreover, the FLOTAC resulted faster (12 min for FLOTAC vs 20 min for flotation with zinc sulphate, 60 min for flotation with zinc chloride, 18 min for Breza and modified Breza flotation) and easy-to-use than the other techniques, considering also that this device was the only method that permitted to recover directly the Taeniidae eggs to be used for DNA extraction.
The combination of FLOTAC (with zinc sulphate) and QIAamp Stool Kit for the extraction of DNA directly from eggs could be a very useful protocol for E. granulosus diagnosis in dogs in endemic areas as southern Italy, considering also that the limit of detection of this protocol was 4 EPG and so it could be very useful for the diagnosis of low infections. Moreover, this protocol could be very useful and cost saving also for large-scale survey, because it permits to identify the samples positive for Taeniidae with an economic copromicroscopic technique and only on them will be performed the PCR plus sequencing with a high sensitivity. This is important because the management of dog populations, based mainly on regular examination and treatment (ESCCAP, ), is essential for the control programs for animals and humans.