Introduction
Snails of the genus Biomphalaria inhabit environments with lentic or lotic freshwater (Medeiros et al. ; Pordeus et al. ) and survive in anthropized regions (Medeiros et al. ) such as residential areas. Some of the species have epidemiological significance and the interaction of these snails with the urban environment is related to a major public health problem, i.e., schistosomiasis (Barbosa et al. ; Cantanhede ). The presence and maintenance of susceptible strains of these vectors favor the continuity of schistosomiasis in endemic regions, as well as its introduction to non-endemic areas (Telles ).
Thirty-four species of Biomphalaria have been described worldwide, inhabiting the tropics and subtropics. Twenty-two of these species occur in the Americas, and the other 12 species are found in Africa and the Middle East (Chitsulo et al. ; Dejon et al. ; Gryseels et al. ; Steinmann et al. ). Ten species and one subspecies have been identified in Brazil (Paraense , , , ; Carvalho et al., ; Thiengo and Fernandez ).
Among the three Biomphalaria species found naturally infected by Schistosoma mansoni Sambon, 1907, Biomphalaria glabrata (Say, 1818) is the most important intermediate host in the Americas, owing to its great compatibility with the parasite (Souza et al. ) and its (1999), which describes the distribution of biological diversity in the Brazilian territory (Carvalho et al. ), the development of different types of climates, and a variety of permanent breeding sites (Paraense ). Biomphalaria tenagophila (D'Orbigny, 1835) has a more restricted distribution to the southern and southeastern states, and has epidemiological importance in the transmission of S. mansoni in the states of these regions (Carvalho et al., ).
Schistosomiasis is endemic to tropical areas, has a wide geographical distribution, and is reported in more than 76 countries (Santos and Melo ). In Brazil, it is one of the most relevant parasitic endemic diseases (Enk et al. ); its occurrence is maintained owing to deficiencies in basic sanitation and environmental education among the population. It is among the most prevalent waterborne diseases (Gubler ; Vitorino et al. ).
The transmission and manifestation of schistosomiasis are more frequent in the northeastern regions of Brazil (Resendes et al. ; Araújo et al. ), but its occurrence is considerably widespread in the southeastern states as well (Lara et al. ). In Maranhão, schistosomiasis has been recorded since 1920 (Coura and Amaral ), with high prevalence in the north coast and northwestern region (Resendes et al. ). Biomphalaria species found in Maranhão include B. glabrata , B. straminea , and Biomphalaria schrammi (Crosse, 1864) (Carvalho et al. ; Cantanhede ).
In São Luís (capital of Maranhão), a city located in the coastal region of the state, there are occurrences of S. mansoni vectors in peripheral neighborhoods, and the precarious sanitary conditions of these neighborhoods make the city an interesting subject of study for the epidemiology of schistosomiasis.
Knowing the potential factors behind the establishment of schistosomiasis as a major public health problem is extremely important in order to create strategies for epidemiological surveillance. Precise identification of Biomphalaria spp. in the areas of possible transmission and knowledge of the distribution patterns of planorbids are crucial aspects for planning the control of vector snail populations. Therefore, this study sought to compile information from malacological surveys carried out in São Luís (Maranhão, Brazil) to identify the spatial and seasonal distribution patterns of vector snails and assist in the planning of control strategies for schistosomiasis.
Materials and methods
We used the breeding site data for Biomphalaria from an 8-year period (2006–2013), which were provided by the Municipal Health Department of São Luis (Maranhão, Brazil). These data are the information on the location of the snails (neighborhood), date, presence/absence of the snail in the breeding sites, and the number of snails collected and were manually recorded in tables by health agents during the capture of snails.
According the health department, sites with natural water bodies in each neighborhood were inspected and designated as collection points and were treated as breeding sites when the presence of mollusks was verified. Based on this categorization, the frequency of the breeding sites (frequency of water bodies with snails) was calculated by the ratio the number of freshwater collections with Biomphalaria and the total number of freshwater collections surveyed, multiplied by 100.
Snails were captured annually using the “aleatory scoops” technique (Olivier and Schneiderman ) (ten aleatory scoops per collection point) and identified genus level by external morphology (shell characteristics). The studied neighborhoods are indicated in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 Map of São Luís, Maranhão (Brazil), emphasizing the regions (geometric symbols) and the 23 districts investigated (letters) for the presence of Biomphalaria spp. breeding sites, from 2006 to 2013. The dotted lines delimit the area of study in northern and southern regions. The arrows indicate the four collection sites (breeding sites) sampled in the 2-year survey (2012–2014). A . Vila Luizão, B . Rio Grande, C . Coquilho, D . Residencial Primavera, E . Barreto, F . Areinha, G . Monte Castelo, H . Salina do Sacavém, I . Coroado, J . Coroadinho, K . Parque Nice Lobão, L . Sá Viana, M . Gapara, N . Vila Jambeiro, O . Vila Embratel, P . Vila Conceição, Q . Vila Esperança, R . São Cristovão, S . Maracanã, T . Vila Nova República, U . Pedrinhas, V . Bacabal, and W . Itapera. The neighborhoods are grouped into geographic regions: northern region ( = average and recent human occupation), mid-northeastern region ( = intense occupation, old and disorderly), northwestern region ( = intense occupation, old and disorderly), mid-southern region ( = little occupation), and southern region ( = little occupation)
Considering the characteristics of population occupation, the 23 neighborhoods investigated were grouped in geographic areas: northern region ( = average and recent human occupation northern region), mid-northeastern region ( = intense occupation, old and disorderly), northwestern region ( = intense occupation, old and disorderly), mid-southern region ( = little occupation), and southern region ( = little occupation).
The collection points of snails were plotted on satellite images obtained from Google Earth to create a map using the program, ArcGIS 10.3.
The relationship between the mean annual precipitation (mm) and the total number of Biomphalaria snails obtained in each year was tested. For this purpose, the Pearson correlation coefficient was used, and p values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. The values of precipitation are coming from the meteorological station of São Luís—A203 (2.526771° S, 44.213577° W) and were provided by the Center for Meteorological Research at Universidade Estadual do Maranhão.
Another survey carried out over 2 years (2012–2014), for neighborhoods of São Luis, was investigated: Barreto (E), Coroadinho (J), Sá Viana (L), and Vila Jambeiro (N) (Fig. 1 ). The breeding sites of snails were selected for each neighborhood. The selection criterion was based on the report of actions of the control program of schistosomiasis of the Municipal Health Department of São Luis which classified several neighborhoods as areas of risk in São Luís, due to the concentration of the cases of schistosomiasis during 2006–2013.
Snail collection was carried out every 2 months, in a delimited area of 4 m 2 . A standardized methodology of ten shells followed by 10 min of active search for snails was used. All the captured snails were identified using shell characteristics, and a sample of 10% specimens from each breeding place was identified using internal anatomical characteristics: presence/absence of the renal crest and vaginal wrinkling (Deslandes ; Rey ; Paraense , ). The same snails were also submitted for molecular identification using restriction fragment length polymorphism–polymerase chain reaction (PCR–RFLP) for the intragenic spacer ITS, as described by Vidigal et al. ( ).
The Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated with a significance level of p < 0.05 in order to investigate the relationship between the average monthly rainfall (mm) and the number of snails of each species ( B. glabrata and B. straminea ) captured each month. All statistical analyses were performed using the R statistical software (R Core Team 2016).
Results
During the 8-year period (2006–2013), the Municipal Health Department investigated 250 neighborhoods, and 153 of them were found to be breeding sites of Biomphalaria . In total, there were 550 breeding sites and 15,990 snails collected. In the 23 neighborhoods (Fig. 1 ) that were visited every year, 212 breeding sites were registered.
Considering the frequency of breeding sites categorized by geographic area, the mid-northeastern and northwestern areas showed a higher occurrence of Biomphalaria breeding sites (51.0 and 44.2%, respectively), whereas in the mid-southern, southern, and northern regions, breeding sites were less frequent (1.3, 0.0, and 3.3%, respectively).
Figure 2 shows the relationship between annual mean precipitation and number of Biomphalaria snails. A strong significant positive association was found between the number of Biomphalaria snails and the annual mean precipitation ( r = 0.9224; p = 0.0413) (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 2 Number of Biomphalaria snails and the average annual precipitation (mm) between 2006 and 2013, São Luís, Maranhão, Brazil Fig. 3 The Pearson correlation for Biomphalaria snails and the average annual precipitation (mm) between 2006 and 2013, São Luís, Maranhão, Brazil
During the survey of the four neighborhoods (2012–2014), 2487 snails were collected. According to the morphological identification (shells and anatomy), we obtained 1046 specimens of B. glabrata and 1426 specimens of B. straminea . Molecular analyses confirmed the specific identification. B. straminea was verified in the four monitored breeding sites. In Sá Viana, B. glabrata and B. straminea were verified as inhabiting the same breeding sites (stream with sewage).
From the correlation analysis between average monthly precipitation and the number of snails by species ( B. glabrata and B. straminea ), we obtained the following results: (A) Sá Viana B. straminea ( r = − 0.4520; p = 0.001), B. glabrata ( r = − 0.2456; p = 0.2856), (B) Vila Jambeiro B. straminea ( r = 0.7119; p = 0.004), (C) Coroadinho B. straminea ( r = 0.7556; p = 0.0010), and (D) Barreto B. straminea ( r = 0.8018; p = 0.0008). Figure 4 shows the average monthly precipitation and the number of specimens of B. glabrata and B. straminea collected in each of the four neighborhoods between 2012 and 2014. Fig. 4 Number of B. glabrata and B. straminea (collected in: A. Sá Viana, B. Vila Jambeiro, C. Coroadinho, and D. Barreto) and the mean monthly precipitation (mm) between 2012 and 2014, São Luís, Maranhão, Brazil
The mean monthly precipitation shows a strong and significant positive association with the number of B. straminea obtained in B, C, and D. For the specimens of B. straminea obtained in A, the statistical analysis was significant, but it showed a negative correlation and low explanatory value with respect to precipitation. There was no statistically significant association for B. glabrata.
Discussion
Our results indicate that areas near Bacanga River Basin (mid-northeastern and northwestern region) presented a high frequency of breeding sites for Biomphalaria . The establishment and territorial expansion of Biomphalaria spp. populations is historically related to river basin regions (Carvalho et al. ; Telles ; Fernandez et al. ; Telles ; Lofty ; El-Wakeil et al. ; Abou-el-Naga ; Leite et al. ).
However, the results suggest that presence of a hydrographic basin is not the primary determinant of breeding site frequency, since the southern and mid-southern regions present low frequency of breeding sites despite having considerable hydrographic basins. The occupation by snails is more strongly related to the characteristics of human occupation in the area. There is a high concentration of snail breeding sites in urbanized territories, where the neighborhoods have a high population density, with intense occupation, and are old and disorderly. In these areas, the construction of irregular houses advanced on the mangrove vegetation, resulting in environmental degradation (Nascimento ; Ribeiro et al. ). The process of urbanization and its characteristics as the form of territorial occupation and environmental degradation are also indicated as factors determining the occurrence of snail breeding sites and, consequently, as a risk for the transmission of schistosomiasis (Patz et al. ; Gomes et al. ; Moraes et al. ; Abou-el-Naga et al. ; Barbosa et al. ; Loyo and Barbosa ).
Although this parasitic disease is predominantly reported in individuals living in rural areas (Githeko et al. ; Dejong et al. ; Abou-el-Naga et al. ), since 1990, cases of schistosomiasis have been recorded in urban and coastal areas of Brazil as well (Gonçalves et al. ; Barbosa ; Araujo et al. ).
The spread of schistosomiasis as an urban endemic disease has also been observed in South America, North Africa (Egypt), and Asia (Honk Kong and Vietnam), where more than 70% of the population already resides in urban areas. These regions are undergoing disordered growth of the cities, owing to the population seeking work in urban regions (Githeko et al. ).
Regarding the association between precipitation and population density of Biomphalaria spp., some studies have reported a negative correlation between these variables for torrential rains. The increase of rainfall causes water to flow out of the breeding sites, causing a drag effect and reduction in snail numbers. Thus, the snails are dispersed and the new foci of these vectors are formed in other localities (Giovanelli et al. ; Araujo et al. ; Souza et al. ; Barbosa et al. ).
In our study, a positive association was observed between the mean values of precipitation and number of mollusks of Biomphalaria genus, specifically for B. straminea . It is possible that weak rains would have contributed to the proliferation of breeding sites, but did not cause dispersal of snails to other localities, since there were irregularities in the rainfall pattern in São Luís (Maranhão) in recent years (Miranda et al. ).
Some studies found that during rains, there is a demographic explosion of snails in estivation in temporary breeding sites, along with a higher peak of reproduction of these animals (Rumi and Hamann ; Barbosa and Barbosa ; Brooker et al. ; Souza et al. ; Oliveira and Assis ).
Our result showing a directly proportional relationship between increased precipitation and increased occurrence of Biomphalaria spp. has already been verified for B. straminea (Buchmman ) and B. glabrata (Souza et al. ; Oliveira et al. ; Cantanhede 2015; Miranda et al. ).
In addition to influencing the distribution and density of snails, the rainy season might also facilitate the transmission of schistosomiasis. In a malacological survey carried out in Pernambuco (Brazil), all snails positive for S. mansoni were found during the rainy season (Oliveira et al. ). Similar results were found in Senegal (Africa) for Biomphalaria pfeifferi (Krauss, 1848) (Ernould and Sellin ).
During our 2-year survey (2012–2014), we collected more specimens of B. straminea than of B. glabrata . In addition, B. straminea was verified in all four of the monitored breeding sites. Although B. glabrata is considered the most efficient intermediate host for S. mansoni (Paraense ; Guimarães and Tavares-Neto ), B. straminea presents great abundance and wide geographical distribution, occurring in permanent and temporary breeding sites from the north to the south of Brazil (Paraense ), owing to its greater ability of adaptation to all varieties of climate and ecological conditions (Paraense ).
The record of B. glabrata and B. straminea inhabiting the same sewage stream shows the need for efficient analyses for taxonomic identification. Juvenile specimens are often obtained from breeding sites, but their differentiation is difficult. The simultaneous occurrence of these two species of Biomphalaria has been recorded in nearby breeding sites, indicating a syntopic relationship (Telles ; Oliveira et al. ; Loyo and Barbosa, ). However, in our study, the two species were found inhabiting the same breeding sites in neighborhood A, suggesting sympatry. This was has also been reported in São Luís in the neighborhood of Vila Embratel (Oliveira et al. ).
In the Republic of Kenya (Africa), simultaneous occurrences of Biomphalaria choanomphala (Martens, 1879) and Biomphalaria sudanica (Martens, 1870) on the coast of Lake Victoria and of Biomphalaria pfeifferi and B. sudanica in the Chebwonyo Dam reservoir have been registered (Bandoni et al. ). Plam et al. ( ) also reported simultaneous occurrence for four species in Lake Albert (Uganda): B. choanomphala , B. pfeifferi , B. sudanica , and Biomphalaria stanleyi (Smith, 1888).
Only in neighborhood A, the relation between precipitation and expansion of B. straminea was not significant. This fact may be related to interspecific competition and emphasizes the importance of detailed studies investigating the ecological factors underlying simultaneous occurrences of B. glabrata and B. straminea in natural environment, as well as other vector species.
In summary, our results suggest that high density of human occupation and high precipitation are both factors that influence the expansion and density of the populations of Biomphalaria , especially of B. straminea . We believe that the results presented here reflect the specific situation of not only Biomphalaria spp. breeding sites in São Luís (Maranhão) but also of other urban areas that underwent disordered space occupation and environmental degradation. These factors should be considered when planning control strategies for schistosomiasis.
This information is relevant for understanding the transmission dynamics of schistosomiasis in other endemic and non-endemic localities and for the monitoring of snail breeding sites. Monitoring the breeding sites, along with other interventions (improvements in sanitation, water supply, and health education), should continue to be implemented as a strategy to reduce the transmission of schistosomiasis.