Introduction
Sarcocystis species have worldwide distribution. Some species of Sarcocystis are pathogenic to humans and animals, and some are zoonotic. Most Sarcocystis species are host-specific but some have a wide host range. Rodents, especially immunosuppressed, have been used to study biology of Sarcocystis . The Brown rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) is an intermediate host for seven or more Sarcocystis species; S. cymruensis , S. murinotechis , S. singaporensis , S. villivillosi , S. zuoi , S. zamani , and S. dispersa -like (Dubey et al. ). Of these, S. cymruensis and S. singaporensis are of biologic interest. With respect to S. cymruensis , its life cycle can be easily completed in the laboratory because domestic cat ( Felis catus ) is its definitive host and it has been reported that rats can act as both the intermediate and definitive host (Hu et al. ). For S. singaporensis , python ( Python reticulatus ) is the definitive host and it is highly pathogenic for the rat but host-specific. Thus, feed intentionally contaminated with S. singaporensis sporocysts has been proposed as a biological control for rats (Jäkel et al. ).
Sarcocystis cymruensis was named and described from the Brown rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) from the UK and sarcocysts were found in 36 (17.5%) of 205 rats (Ashford ). Domestic cats fed naturally infected rat muscle excreted sporocysts; dogs and ferrets fed tissue did not excrete sporocysts. Rattus norvegicus became infected when fed sporocysts from experimentally infected cats, sarcocysts, sarcocysts became grossly visible 6-month post inoculation (p.i.). The parasite was not transmissible to laboratory-raised house mice ( Mus musculus ) (Ashford ). Jäkel et al. ( ) reported S. cymruensis sarcocysts in six of nine R. norvegicus in Thailand. Jäkel et al. ( ) mentioned that one Brown rat and two Roof rats ( Rattus rattus frugivorous) were naturally infected with S. cymruensis ; these rats were caught in Egypt and were used for experimental infection with S. singaporensis in Germany.
Hu et al. ( ) discovered S. cymruensis sarcocysts in 22 (11.6%) of 198 wild rats ( Rattus sp.) from China. Domestic cats fed naturally infected rat tissues excreted sporocysts. Sporocysts from cats were infective to R. norvegicus but not the outbred M. musculus . Additionally, sporocysts were detected in the lamina propria of small intestines of R. norvegicus fed sarcocysts from experimentally infected rats.
A new species of Sarcocystis , Sarcocystis rodentifelis , was described from Russia with a broad host range and unusual life cycle (Grikieniené et al. ). The Norway rat was the type intermediate host; bank vole ( Clethrionomys glareolus ), and the laboratory-raised house mouse ( Mus musculus ) acted as additional intermediate hosts. The laboratory rat acted both as the intermediate and definitive host (Grikieniené et al. ; Grikieniené and Kutkiené ). Rats fed sarcocysts excreted numerous sporocysts in feces (Grikieniené and Kutkiené ). Additionally, the domestic cat also acted as definitive host and S. rodentifelis could be transmitted transplacentally in rats (Grikieniené et al. ). Morphologically, S. rodentifelis was indistinguishable from S. muris and S. cymruensis (Grikieniené et al. ). Based on unusual characteristics, the authors proposed a subgenus Levitia for S. rodentifelis (Grikieniené et al. ).
The objective of the present paper is to document natural infection of S. cymruensis in Brown rats from Grenada, describe morphological and molecular characteristics, and experimental transmission.
Material and methods
Sample collection
As part of an epidemiological study of rodent pathogens, from February to July 2017, 167 rats (78 females, 89 males) were caught using live traps (45 cm L × 15 cm w × 15 cm h) with cheese and/or various local fruits as bait. Rats were trapped in various locations in two parishes (St. George and St. David) which were densely populated compared to four remaining parishes. Attempts were made to trap the rats near residential buildings. Traps were placed in the evening and visited next morning. Traps with rats were covered with black cloth and transported to the necropsy laboratory of the St. George’s University School of Veterinary Medicine and euthanized using isoflurane, and necropsied.
Samples from heart and limb muscle from 167 rats were shipped on ice by overnight delivery to the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Animal Parasitic Diseases Laboratory (APDL) in Beltsville, MD, USA, for protozoal testing, including Toxoplasma gondii (to be reported separately). The rats were received at APDL in 17 batches of 6, 3, 2, 4, 10, 5, 11, 13, 7, 14, 24, 8, 13, 11, 13, 16, and 7 samples storage in individual bags. Two to 4 days elapsed between euthanasia and receipt at APDL.
Testing of rat muscle for Sarcocystis
Samples were examined by muscle squash, pepsin digestion, histology, bioassay, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and DNA sequencing. For muscle squashes, 1–3 mm of muscle from leg of 156 rats and myocardium of 167 rats were pressed between a slide and coverslip, and examined microscopically at 100–400 x magnification. For pepsin digestion, tissues (165 hearts, 154 muscles) were pooled in batches of two to ten rats (total pools 29, homogenized in saline (aqueous 0.9% NaCl), incubated in acid pepsin solution for 1 h at 37 °C in a water bath, and examined for bradyzoites of cyst forming coccidian as described previously for T. gondii (Dubey ). In this process, protozoan bradyzoites are released as soon as the cyst wall is in contact with pepsin and bradyzoites can survive in the digest for several hours. The pepsin product was filtered, centrifuged, and suspended in saline, and a drop (0.1 ml) of the digest was spread on a slide, covered with a coverslip, and examined microscopically for bradyzoites.
For TEM, six sarcocysts were teased out of muscle at APDL, fixed in 2.5% buffered glutaraldehyde and processed as described previously (Trupkiewicz et al. ).
Bioassay of Sarcocystis in cats
For bioassay in cats, five parasite-free (14–34 weeks old) cats from the USDA cat colony were used to obtain sporocysts; management of the cat colony has been described previously (Dubey ). Feces were collected daily and examined for Sarcocystis sporocysts as described (Verma et al. ). Cats were euthanized between day seven to 13 p.i. The entire small intestine from each animal was removed, slit open, mucosa scraped, homogenized in water, and examined microscopically for sporocysts as described (Dubey et al. ).
Bioassay of Sarcocystis in mice
For murine bioassay, outbred albino Swiss Webster (SW) and interferon gamma gene knockout (KO) mice were used. Two SW and four KO mice were orally inoculated with sporocysts from a cat that had been fed muscle from two naturally infected rats. The number of sporocysts given to mice was unknown (< 1000) because the cat had excreted only a few sporocysts. Two SW and two KO mice were euthanized day 70 p.i., one KO mouse was euthanized day 116 p.i., and one KO mouse was euthanized day 189 p.i.; multiple samples of muscle were squeezed between the slide and coverslip and examined for the presence of Sarcocystis sarcocysts. Samples of muscle, heart, tongue, lung, liver, eye, spleen, kidney, brain, and intestine of all mice were fixed in 10% buffered formalin, and processed for histology. Sections were cut 5-μm thick and examined microscopically after staining with hematoxylin and eosin (HE). Additionally, carcasses of mice were homogenized and digested in pepsin. The product of digestion was smeared on a slide, fixed in methanol and stained with Giemsa, and examined microscopically for bradyzoites.
Bradyzoites released from sarcocysts deriving from the KO mouse euthanized day 116 p.i. were fed to two KO mice. For this, a piece of muscle from the KO mouse was smashed and digested in pepsin for 5 min to release bradyzoites from sarcocysts. The pepsin digest was neutralized with 3% NaOH, centrifuged, and orally inoculated into two KO mice; more than 100,000 bradyzoites were ascertained in the inocula. These two KO mice were euthanized day 6 p.i. and sections of small intestine were fixed in 10% buffered formalin. The remaining small intestine was homogenized in 50 ml of distilled water, shaken for 1 h to lyse the intestinal epithelial cells, centrifuged, and suspended in distilled water, and a drop (0.1 ml) was spread on a slide, covered with a coverslip and examined microscopically for sporocysts.
The KO mouse euthanized day 189 p.i. was heavily infected with sarcocysts. After fixing samples of internal organs, pieces of gastrocnemius muscle with hundreds of sarcocysts were chopped with scissors and saved for feeding to KO mice. After removing viscera and skin, the carcass was homogenized in blender with saline, incubated in acid pepsin at 37 °C for 15 min, neutralized with 3% NaOH and Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS), centrifuged, and suspended in 3 ml of HBSS. After counting bradyzoites, the suspension of bradyzoites (15 million per mouse) was orally inoculated into four KO mice. Additionally, the same four KO mice were fed on heavily infected mouse muscle. For this, the finely chopped muscle was left in Petri dish in the mouse cage; the mice ate all infected muscle. These four KO mice were euthanized on days 1–6; one on day 1 p.i., one on day 4 p.i., and two on day 6 p.i. For the mice euthanized day 1 and 4 p.i., the entire small intestine was cut in to small pieces and fixed in formalin, and paraffin-embedded sections were examined after staining with HE. From the two KO mice euthanized day 6 p.i., after removing 1-cm piece for histology, the remaining small intestines from both mice were pooled, homogenized in 50 ml of distilled water in a blender, shaken for 1 h at 37 °C, centrifuged, and suspended in 5 ml water, and a drop of it was spread on a slide for microscopic examination. Because we did not find Sarcocystis sporocysts, the homogenate was further digested in a bleach solution (6.0% sodium hypochlorite) for 10 min to dissolve most of the host tissue, centrifuged with water, and a drop (0.1 ml) of the final 1 ml suspension of the pellet was examined microscopically for sporocysts.
Molecular characterization
Sarcocysts excised from two naturally infected rats were individually placed in 20 μl of saline (0.85%) and frozen at − 20 °C until DNA was isolated.
Genomic DNA was extracted using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Nuclear ribosomal DNA ( 18S rDNA , 28S rDNA , and ITS-1 ) and mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 ( cox1 ) were amplified by PCR using previously published primers as described (Gjerde ; Gjerde ; Gjerde and Josefsen ). Each locus was amplified independently using 3-μl template, 1 μl of forward and reverse primers (20 mM final concentration), 12.5 μl of Taq PCR Master Mix (Qiagen, USA), and 8.5 μl of distilled water. Following an initial denaturation step of 5 min at 95 °C, 40 cycles of PCR were conducted for all reactions with the following cycling conditions (95 °C for 45 s, 56.5 °C for 45 s, and 72 °C for 1 min), ending with 10 min at 72 °C for final extension. Excess primers and nucleotides were removed using ExoSap-It (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions, then PCR fragments were sequenced using original amplification primers and BigDye Terminator v3.1 cycle sequencing chemistry (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Sequencing products were analyzed on an ABI 3730 Sequencer.
Sequencing chromatograms were examined in Geneious R10.2.3 (Biomatters Limited, New Zealand), and consensus sequences for each sample were generated only from areas where both forward and reverse sequencing were present. Consensus sequences were then compared to other Sarcocystis sequences deposited in GenBank ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank ).
In order to establish phylogenetic relationships between Sarcocystis species, sequences were aligned using the Geneious v.10.2.3 MUSCLE plug-in and neighbor-joining trees were built with the HKY substitution model in the Geneious v.10.2.3 Tree Builder. Consensus trees were constructed from alignments of 1118 sites from 23 taxa at the 18S rDNA locus and 760 sites from 14 taxa at the 28S rDNA locus. Alignments were constrained by the length of the S. cymruensis sequence at the 18S rDNA locus and the S. rodentifelis sequence at the 28S rDNA locus. Insertions or deletions (indels) accounted for the difference between the length of alignment and the length of the shortest sequence. These indels were ignored for the purposes of tree building. Support for the resultant trees was assessed using 1000 bootstrap replicates.
Ethics
Research at the Beltsville laboratory was performed in accordance with Animal Protocols #15-018 Toxoplasmosis in cats, approval date May 19, 2015, and #15-017 Toxoplasmosis in mice, approval date May 19, 2015, Chair for both protocols Dr. Ransom Baldwin, Beltsville Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (BAACUC). These protocols are good for 3 years and can be amended.
The project (Detection of zoonotic pathogens in brown rats ( Rattus norvegicus ) in Grenada) was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC #16009-R, approval date May 23, 2016, Chair Dr. Karin Guerrero) of the St. George’s University, Grenada.
Results
Sarcocysts were found in fresh muscle squashes of skeletal muscle of 11 (7.0%) of 156 rats but not in any heart; infected rats were captured in St. Georges (6 rats) and St. David (5 rats). In fresh squashes, sarcocysts were slender, up to 5028-μm long and 255-μm wide, and had a thin wall (Fig. 1 a). Bradyzoites (Fig. 1 b) were detected microscopically in pepsin digests in six pools of muscles derived from 123 rats. Histologically, sarcocysts were thin walled in sections of muscle stained with HE (Fig. 1 e). Fig. 1 Sarcocystis cymruensis stages. a Part of sarcocyst from leg muscle of a naturally infected rat #7. The sarcocyst wall is thin (arrows) and encloses bradyzoites. Unstained. b Bradyzoite in pepsin digest of muscle. Giemsa stain. c Sporulated oocyst with a thin oocyst wall (ow), enclosing two sporocysts with prominent walls (sw). Unstained. d Sporocyst containing sporozoites (sz). Unstained. e . Longitudinal section of a sarcocyst in skeletal muscle of KO mouse, 70 days p.i. Note thin sarcocyst wall (arrows). Hematoxylin and eosin stain. f TEM of a part of sarcocyst wall. Note thin parasitophorous vacuolar membrane (pvm), smooth ground substance layer (gs), thick septa (se), metrocytes (me), and bradyzoites (br). Cyst #1
The cat fed naturally infected rat tissues excreted few sporulated oocysts and sporocysts 6 days p.i. (Fig. 1 c, d). The mice inoculated with sporocysts from cat remained asymptomatic. Sarcocysts were detected microscopically in muscle squashes of two KO mice but not in two SW mice euthanized day 70 p.i. Sarcocystis bradyzoites were detected in pepsin digests and HE-stained sections of muscles from the two KO mice. Neither bradyzoites in carcass digests nor sarcocysts in HE-stained sections were found in muscles of SW mice. Bradyzoites in stained smears averaged 16.3 × 3.3 μm with a range of 12.5–19.5 × 1.9–4.8 μm ( n = 35). No Sarcocystis sporocysts were found in feces or small intestine of the two cats fed muscle of two KO and two SW mice euthanized day 70 p.i.
Numerous mature slender sarcocysts were detected in the KO mouse euthanized day 116 p.i. Live bradyzoites were 12.1 × 3.4 μm (10.5–13.5 × 2.7–4.5, n = 30). Sarcocystis sporocysts were found in the small intestine of the cat fed mouse carcass euthanized on day 116 p.i. No Sarcocystis sporocysts were found in the small intestine of six KO mice fed bradyzoites.
Numerous sarcocysts were found in muscles of the KO euthanized day 189 p.i. This KO mouse remained asymptomatic. Sarcocysts were mature, confined to skeletal muscle, and were not grossly visible. The muscle mass seems to be increased although there was no inflammation (Fig. 2 ). Numerous sarcocysts were present in histologic sections and millions of mature bradyzoites were present in the carcass digest. Fig. 2 Sarcocystis cymruensis sarcocysts in gastrocnemius muscle of a KO mouse 189 days post inoculation. Hematoxylin and eosin stain. ( a ) Note numerous mature sarcocysts. b Higher magnification of a sarcocyst. Note thin cyst wall (arrow) enclosing mature bradyzoites
Six sarcocysts were studied ultrastructurally. TEM examination confirmed that the sarcocyst wall was thin (Figs. 1 f, 3 a–d). The parasitophorous vacuolar membrane (pvm) was lined by a 40–60-nm thick layer with variable density (edl). The pvm had 100-nm blebs (evaginations) with a stalk. Depending on the plane of section, some blebs appeared hyphenated (Fig. 3 c, d). The pvm was invaginated at irregular distances (Fig. 3 c) that appeared like pits on the wall; the edl had thinned out in pits. Beneath the pvm was the smooth ground substance layer (gs). The gs was usually 400–500-nm thick, lacked microtubules, but had few granules (gr). The character of the cyst wall at 116 and 189 days p.i. was identical. Sarcocysts studied were mature and contained numerous bradyzoites and few metrocytes, juxtaposed with gs. The metrocytes (me) were irregular in shape, divided by endodyogeny, and had few organelles (Fig. 4 ). Longitudinally cut bradyzoites were 9.9 × 3.0 (7.7–11.2–2.7–3.5) μm, and contained a conoid, micronemes (mn), rhoptries (rh), dense granules (dg), amylopectin granules (am), nucleus (nu), and a mitochondrion (mc) (Fig. 5 ). The pellicle of bradyzoite was thickened at the conoidal end (Fig. 5 b). The micronemes were about 320 × 60 nm and distributed both haphazardly and in rows (Fig. 3 d, 5 b). Only one rhoptry was seen in any bradyzoite. There were several dense granules (dg), often concentrated at the conoidal half of the bradyzoite. Several amylopectin granules (am) were concentrated in the distal half the bradyzoite. The nucleus was subterminal. Fig. 3 TEM of S. cymruensis sarcocysts. Note cyst wall (cw), parasitophorous vacuolar membrane (pvm), electron dense layer (edl), villar protrusion (vp) ground substance layer (gs), bradyzoite pellicle (brp), bradyzoite (br), nucleus (nu), microneme (mn), amylopectin (am), dense granules (dg), rhoptry (rh), conoid (co), and mitochondrion (mc). a A longitudinally cut and parts of several other bradyzoites. Cyst #2. b Note bleb-like vp, gs with few granules (gr). c , d Note pits (arrowheads) the pvm. Cyst #2 Fig. 4 TEM of S. cymruensis showing a metrocyte (me) and parts of 4 bradyzoites (br). Note the metrocyte (me) has no rhoptry, only 1 microneme (mn), 6 dense granules (dg), smooth endoplasmic reticulum (er), few amylopectin granules (am), and a large nucleus (nu). Cyst #3 Fig. 5 TEM of S. cymruensis bradyzoites . a A longitudinally cut and parts of other bradyzoites. Note nucleus (nu), microneme (mn), amylopectin (am), dense granules (dg), rhoptry (rh), conoid (co), and mitochondrion (mc). b Conoidal end of a bradyzoite showing details of conoid and micronemes. Note thickening of the bradyzoite pellicle (arrowheads). Cyst #3
Molecular analyses
Partial DNA sequences were successfully acquired from 18S rDNA , 28S rDNA , ITS-1 , and cox1 . At all loci, DNA sequences were identical from sarcocysts isolated from two different mice. These sequences were submitted to NCBI GenBank with accession numbers MG564723 ( 18S rDNA ), MG564724 ( 28S rDNA ), MG582596 ( ITS-1 ), and MG571085 ( cox1 ) and designated as S. cymruensis from naturally infected R. norvegicus from Grenada. BLAST searches revealed that sequences from the 18S rDNA (987 bp in length) and 28S rDNA (1511 bp in length) ribosomal DNA were most similar to published sequences from S. muris (KC877996 and AF012883, respectively) and S. rodentifelis (AY015111 and AF513496). Sarcocystis cymruensis 18S rDNA and 28S rDNA sequences were 100 and 96.8% identical to S. muris sequences, respectively, while S. rodentifelis sequences shared 99.5% and 99.3% identity with them; S. rodentifelis sequences were considerably shorter at the 28S rDNA locus. BLAST searches determined that cox1 (998 bp) shared 95.5% identity with S. speeri (KT207461) or S. lutrae (KM657808); there were no published cox1 sequences for S. muris or S. rodentifelis in GenBank. While ITS-1 flanking sequences corresponding to the last 71 bases of 18S rDNA and first 62 bases of 5.8S rDNA were similar to those from S. lutrae (93% identity), the ITS-1 sequences (743 bp) generated from S. cymruensis did not return any significant BLAST hits, despite searching various subsections of the molecule.
Phylogenetic trees for both 18S rDNA and 28S rDNA showed 100% bootstrap support for S. cymruensis , S. muris , and S. rodentifelis belonging to an independent clade in the Sarcocystis tree (Fig. 6 a, b). There are no cox1 or ITS-1 sequences for S. muris or S. rodentifelis in GenBank, negating complete phylogenetic analysis across all loci sequenced. Fig. 6 Phylogenetic relationships among Sarcocystis species based on a 28S rDNA ribosomal DNA sequences and b 18S rDNA ribosomal DNA sequences. Neighbor-joining trees for each locus were constructed from HKY genetic distances with 1000 bootstrap replicates. In both trees, an independent clade is formed with 100% bootstrap support which contains S. cymruensis , S. muris , and S. rodentifelis
Discussion
This is the first report of S. cymruensis in the Americas. The 7.0% prevalence in the present study is lower than 11.6% prevalence in China (Hu et al. ) and 17.5% prevalence in the UK (Ashford ). The distribution of definitive host may be important concerning prevalence. The natural definitive host for S. cymruensis remains unknown; cat is the experimental definitive host.
The present study confirmed the separate identity of S. cymruensis although its sarcocyst is morphologically similar to S. muris of mice. Sarcocystis cymruensis was not transmissible to immunocompetent house mouse (Ashford ); here, we have confirmed this. Additionally, we demonstrated that S. cymruensis is transmissible to immunodeficient KO mice, as in S. muris (Al-Kappany et al. ). The KO mice have proved very useful in studying the biology of Sarcocystis neurona , a parasite that causes fatal neurological disease in horses and many other mammals (Dubey et al. ). Recently, some species of Sarcocystis from snakes and red-tailed hawks (Verma et al. ; Verma et al. , ) induced schizont-associated neurological disease in KO mice. In the present study, the KO mice fed S. cymruensis sporocysts remained asymptomatic but developed sarcocysts. The sarcocysts in KO mice euthanized 70 days p.i. contained bradyzoites but were apparently not infectious to cat. To maximize chances of detection of few sporocysts, the intestinal mucosa was treated with undiluted bleach (5.25% sodium hypochlorite) to dissolve host tissue (Dubey et al. ). The period prior to becoming infectious for S. cymruensis is unknown; in previous studies (Ashford ; Hu et al. ), cats were fed tissues with grossly visible sarcocysts from naturally infected rats whose infection duration was unknown. We chose to euthanize KO mice at 70, 116, and 189 days p.i. because in most sarcocyst species, sarcocysts become mature at 70 days p.i. (Dubey et al. ), but some species take longer. Sarcocystis muris sarcocysts became infectious for cats beginning at 76 days p.i., while sarcocysts at 65 days p.i. were not infectious (Ruiz and Frenkel ). Thus, the morphologic appearance of bradyzoites may not equate with infectivity. In the present study of KO mice euthanized day 70 p.i., intact, motile bradyzoites were seen in pepsin digest, confirmed by TEM, but were not infectious for cats. Infectivity in cats was only seen after day 116 p.i. in KO mice. Therefore, the range of the development of infectivity is between 70 and 116 days.
In the present study, KO mice acted as intermediate hosts but not as definitive hosts for S. cymruensis from Grenada. These findings are different than those obtained with S. rodentifelis in rats (Grikieniené et al. ) and S. cymruensis in rats (Hu et al. ). In the present study, four KO mice had ingested millions of free bradyzoites and hundreds of intact sarcocysts from a very heavily infected KO mouse euthanized 189 days p.i. The KO mice were euthanized on days 1, 4, and 6; the prepatent period for S. cymruensis is < 8 days. We could not find gamonts, oocysts, or sporocysts in KO mice euthanized 1–6 days p.i. In addition to examination of histological sections, the entire small intestines were digested in bleach to dissolve the host tissue. Whether these findings are related to different intermediate hosts (rats versus KO mice) or to different parasites is uncertain and requires further studies.
The results of the present study supplement the preliminary description of sarcocyst and bradyzoites by Ashford ( ) and Hu et al. ( ). The ultrastructure of cyst wall is a useful criterion in taxonomy of Sarcocystis for species within a given host (Dubey et al. ). Based on structure, the sarcocyst wall was grouped into 42 types with subdivisions within a type. The simplest of all wall types, “type 1,” occurs in S. muris and several other species; it was further subdivided in “type 1a–h.’ In type 1a, the wall has bleb-like protrusions that have a stalk as described in detail for S. muris (Sheffield et al. ). Dubey et al. ( ), in their review considered S. cymruensis as “type 1c” because in the paper by Ashford ( ), the blebs were hyphenated. Results of the present study showed that the hyphae appearance is because of angle of sectioning. Therefore, S. cymruensis wall should be regarded as belonging to type 1a, the same as in S. muris . We have also supplemented the morphologic description of S. cymruensis bradyzoites.
We also provide the first molecular data from S. cymruensis , revealing it to be a close relative to S. muris and S. rodentifelis. While S. cymruensis 18S rDNA sequences were identical to that of S. muris , 28S rDNA sequences were more similar to S. rodentifelis sequence. The cox1 sequence most closely resembled sequences from S. lutrae and S. speeri , but was limited in its phylogenetic utility with absence of published cox1 sequences for S. muris or S. rodentifelis . At the 18S rDNA and 28S rDNA loci, S. cymruensis had 97.3% and 93.0% identity with S. lutrae , respectively, placing S. cymruensis , S.muris , and S. rodentifelis in a separate clade of the Sarcocystis tree. Additional sequencing would be required to determine which two species in the S. cymruensis , S. muris , and S. rodentifelis clade are most closely related and divergence times among them. The combined divergence at the 18S and 28S loci and the lack of infectivity in immunocompetent house mice supports S. cymruensis as probably being distinct from S. muris .
Based on the molecular data from the present paper and review of literature, there is uncertainty concerning taxonomic status of S. cymruensis/S. rodentifelis and additional studies are required to resolve this issue.