Text
I am very honored to have this opportunity to present at the prestigious Nimura lecture. I thank Prof. Nobuyuki Ohte, president of the sponsoring organization, and the other affiliated physicians concerned.
The three EBMs in the title refer to the following concepts: evidence-based medicine, experience-based medicine, and echo-based medicine.
Evidence-based medicine
I have conducted clinical studies primarily using the pulsed-wave Doppler method, the continuous-wave Doppler method, and the color Doppler method. In these studies, I have examined the following pathological conditions: atrial septal defect (ASD), tricuspid regurgitation (TR), abnormal left ventricular inflow during right ventricular loading, obstruction at the junction of the inferior vena cava and the right atrium (IVC orifice) due to a giant left atrium (LA) in mitral valve stenosis (MS), and stenotic blood flow in the transmural penetrating coronary arteries in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM).
Atrial septal defect
Almost 40 years ago, in 1980 or thereabouts, a new noninvasive diagnostic method called two-dimensional echocardiography (2DE) emerged and cardiovascular diagnostics, which prior to that time was dependent on invasive diagnostic methods, underwent drastic changes. Directly detecting and identifying the specific defect in an ASD in a noninvasive manner was a clinically compelling and important issue. In general, examination methods such as approaches used to obtain parasternal four-chamber views and short-axis views were initially employed, although they allowed oblique entrance of the ultrasound beam into the atrial septum and dropout of the atrial septum, which resulted in higher false-positive rates. In the pediatric field, the subcostal approach was taken because the ultrasound beam hit the atrial septum at almost a right angle and the detection rate was satisfactory [ ]. However, when the subcostal approach is used to visualize lesions associated with ASDs in adult patients, the distance between the probe and the atrial septum is increased by the intervening abdominal wall and liver, and therefore, the ASD cannot always be visualized clearly. In 1979, Weyman et al. recommended a new method of identifying ASDs through concomitant use of peripheral contrast echocardiography detecting the negative contrast echo in the right atrium due to left-to-right shunting of blood across the atrial septum [ ]. Identification of the negative contrast echo, however, required intensive observation, and continuous drip infusion was indispensable during the preparation.
On the other hand, the era of the pulsed-wave Doppler method arrived, and this technique was ideally suited for just this situation. At that time, Dr. Chuwa Tei, one of my colleagues, published on the application of the right parasternal approach and atrial septal dynamics [ , ]. Before the pulsed-wave Doppler method came into clinical use, Dr. Tei went to the USA to study cardiovascular internal medicine. His research work was left to me, and I attempted to detect the waveform of shunt blood flow at the site of the ASD.
We reasoned that the right parasternal approach, in which the transducer is placed on the right side of the chest wall, might provide better evaluation of the structure and function of the atrial septum, because in that approach, the ultrasound beam passes in a plane perpendicular to the atrial septum (Fig. 1 , panel A). I was able to visualize the defective opening of the atrial septum on the two-dimensional echocardiogram. However, despite adjustment of the sample volume, particularly in the sinus rhythm, the position of the ASD showed remarkable leftward and rightward movement due to pulsation during the cardiac cycle. Moreover, in view of the influence of blood flow associated with the superior vena cava (SVC), IVC, and TR in the right atrium, I was not quite sure, for some days, whether the Doppler signal suggestive of shunt blood flow obtained from the defect actually indicated shunt blood flow. During that period, I encountered a middle-aged female patient with an ASD that was clearly imaged on 2DE and recorded a blood flow signal indicating left-to-right flow along with a clear Doppler sound (Fig. 1 , panel B). In this patient, the ASD was not substantially affected by the cardiac cycle, and the movement of the defective opening was limited and stabilized, likely due to LA enlargement caused by atrial fibrillation and mitral regurgitation. Furthermore, as a result of severe mitral regurgitation, the blood flow velocity in the left-to-right shunt was relatively high. These two factors appeared to have allowed us to record a clear left-to-right shunt flow signal. In this case, the contrast echocardiogram also showed left-to-right blood flow (negative contrast echo) across the shunt throughout the cardiac cycle. This experience convinced me that shunt blood flow through the ASD was indeed recorded by pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography. Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the transthoracic right parasternal approach by pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography (panel A), and left-to-right shunt flow patterns and the pressure gradient across the ASD in a patient with secundum ASD complicated with atrial fibrillation and mitral regurgitation (panel B). IAS interatrial septum, RA right atrium, LA left atrium, RV right ventricle, ASD atrial septal defect, St sternum, Th thoracic spine, P posterior, SV sample volume, LV left ventricle, T transducer, A anterior. From Minagoe et al. [ ] with permission
To confirm the validity of this flow signal, we recorded pressure tracings between both atria, because comparing that pressure gradient and the Doppler waveform of the shunt blood flow likely provided the rationale for the further identification of shunt blood flow [ , ]. Simultaneous recordings of right and left atrial pressure were then conducted in this patient. Despite the inconsistent waveform of the blood flow rate due to atrial fibrillation, we compared the pressure gradient with the Doppler waveform of the blood flow rate (vermilion part in Fig. 1 , panel B) and found that the left-to-right flow of blood across the ASD was consistent in terms of the time phase. The gradient corresponded to the waveform of the blood flow rate. Moreover, I compared the Doppler waveform with the time phase of the negative and positive contrast echoes in a different patient with two signals that indicated left-to-right and right-to-left shunt blood flows, and found that they matched precisely (Fig. 2 ). On a Doppler echo showing the right-to-left shunt blood flow alone obtained from two other patients, right-to-left shunt blood flow was also observed mainly in the systolic phase, while a positive contrast echo in the left atrium alone was observed on a contrast echo (Table 1 ). These two patients suffered from pulmonary hypertension and severe TR. For the analysis of flow, the Doppler technique has a definite advantage over contrast two-dimensional echocardiography. In the presence of a large right-to-left shunt flow, the contrast tends to occupy all four chambers within the first few beats after injection, making further observation impossible, whereas Doppler measurements can be made continuously. Therefore, this technique was considered to be useful not only in the diagnosis of ASD but also in the hemodynamic analysis of shunt flow in patients with secundum ASD. As a result of these efforts, I obtained a clear indication that the right parasternal approach enabled noninvasive detection of shunt blood flow across an ASD together with its direction, and this finding was published in an English-language scientific journal [ ]. My article was accepted, probably because it clearly reported how to detect ASD shunt blood flow noninvasively in an era in which transesophageal echocardiography was not available. Fig. 2 Demonstration of the direction of ASD shunt flow by the pulsed-wave Doppler method (panel A) and peripheral contrast echo (panel B) from the right parasternum. From Minagoe et al. [ ] with permission Table 1 Direction of Doppler signals obtained by sampling within the defect in patients with secundum ASD No. of patients Definite R-L shunt in systole Complication of TR Predominant L-R shunt 28 3 5 Predominant R-L shunt 2 2 2 A definite right-to-left (R-L) pattern of shunt flow in systole was observed in five patients who had complicating tricuspid regurgitation, despite the fact that, in three of these patients, the flow was predominantly L-R. A definite right-to-left (R-L) pattern of shunt flow would appear to be associated with tricuspid regurgitation (TR), although the influence of regurgitation on the shunt flow requires further study
In that study, the Doppler method was shown to have the same value as the addition of the contrast method to 2DE for confirming the presence of a defect (Fig. 2 , panel A). These findings suggested that the pulsed Doppler method can directly detect the direction of both left-to-right and right-to-left shunt flow (Fig. 2 , panel B).
At that time, Hatle et al. applied continuous-wave Doppler echocardiography to record the waveforms of valve regurgitation and valve stenosis. They converted the flow rate to a pressure gradient using a simplified Bernoulli equation and thus determined the severity of the valve stenosis and right ventricular systolic pressure [ ]. We therefore entered an era in which the severity of valve stenosis or the value of the right ventricular systolic pressure could be measured noninvasively.
Tricuspid regurgitation
After I completed my research paper on ASD, I traveled to the USA to study at the LAC/USC Medical Center, Los Angeles. This medical center, which is a 3000-bed hospital attached to the University of Southern California (USC), functions as the municipal hospital for the City of Los Angeles. In later years, this medical center, which is a microcosm of US society, was used as the backdrop for the popular TV drama ER . Prof. Pan Chandraratna, my academic supervisor, and Prof. SHB Rahimtoola, my senior professor, worked at the LAC (Los Angeles County)/USC Medical Center. Prisoners were often brought to the special ward in this hospital for treatment. A police officer with a pistol holstered at his or her waist brought a prisoner with hands cuffed behind his or her back and ankles bound with chains to the ultrasound laboratory. The police officer would then unlock the cuffs and use them to attach the prisoner to the bed. After the cuffs had been relocked, the echocardiographic examination began. I often examined these prisoners, and 1 day found one without a tricuspid valve. At that time, at the medical center, the tricuspid valve was often surgically resected to treat infective endocarditis of the valve due to drug abuse. Because of the absence of the tricuspid valve, there should have been severe regurgitation; however I was impressed to find a slow flow rate of only 1 m/s (Fig. 3 , panels A–C). It was then that I first noticed that, compared with flow rate, the regurgitant valve orifice area had a more important influence over regurgitant flow volume. Fortunately, I was able to record five patients with tricuspid valvectomy over the next 2 years. Although I could not actually visualize the range of the TR in the absence of the color Doppler method at that time, I used a mapping method that was based on the pulsed-wave Doppler method, which Dr. Kunio Miyatake et al. [ ] had reported in their article, examining the extension of TR Doppler signals in the RA, in which they identified TR grading. Fig. 3 Two-dimensional echocardiographic demonstration and continuous-wave Doppler echocardiographic flow velocity in patient with systolic tricuspid cusp separation or tricuspid valvectomy (panel A). Panel B shows the relationship between the systolic tricuspid cusp distance and the flow velocity of TR. TR tricuspid regurgitation, PFV peak flow velocity. From Minagoe et al. [ ] with permission
After understanding these conditions, I reexamined the 2DE views obtained from patients with TR but with no tricuspid valvectomy and found approximately 14 consecutive patients who showed TR as a systolic tricuspid cusp separation [ ]. This condition is currently called “tricuspid valve tethering,” but we called it “systolic tricuspid cusp separation” at that time. From 2DE views, I measured the distance between the tricuspid valve leaflets and found that it ranged from a minimum of 2 mm to a maximum of 15 mm. I examined the relationship between the distance between the separated cusps and the TR flow rate and observed that the TR flow rate decreased with an increase in the separation of the valve leaflets (Fig. 3 , panel B). All pulsed-wave Doppler views obtained from patients with separated valve leaflets showed laminar flow, and almost all of these patients had severe TR [ ]. In later years, I was able to record the TR color Doppler signal in one patient with tricuspid valvectomy. He showed a wide range of regurgitant away flow signals without a mosaic signal pattern in the RA.
When I view these findings with the benefit of hindsight, now that color Doppler views and the TR flow pattern by continuous Doppler views can be obtained easily, I can assume the following conditions without difficulty (Fig. 4 ). In TR with systolic tricuspid cusp separation, the right atrial pressure increases as a result of increased regurgitant flow, the high v-wave rapidly reduces the systolic right atrium-to-right ventricle pressure gradient, and the Doppler waveform reflects it as the cut-off sign. However, at that time, since the color Doppler method had just been developed in Japan and was not yet widely used even in the USA, I could not advance this research more deeply. Fig. 4 Speculated hemodynamic difference between TR with (panel A) and without systolic tricuspid cusp separation (panel B) demonstrated by 2DE, color Doppler echo, continuous-wave (CWD) and pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography (PWD), spontaneous RV and RA pressure tracing, and schematic representation of the TR flow
Mitral inflow abnormality in right ventricular overload
During my stay in the USA, I conducted another study. These days, abnormal left ventricular inflow due to right ventricular overload is a well-known fact. However, this feature was only a hypothesis at that time. One day, I read a scientific paper and found that the degree of curvature of the interventricular septum (IVS) could be measured easily (Fig. 5 , panel A). Back then, the E-wave and A-wave of mitral valve filling velocities with pulsed Doppler measurement were used to evaluate diastolic function, a method that was first reported by Kitabatake et al. [ ] in 1982. Using this technique, we examined the LV filling dynamics under condition of RV volume or pressure overload, the mitral inflow velocity using pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography (Fig. 5 , panel B), the radius of curvature of the ventricular septum (R) in end-systole (RS) and end-diastole (RD) from the 2DE, and the ratio of RV to LV end-diastolic dimension in 17 patients with RV overload and 10 normal controls. The group of patients consisted of 11 with ASD, 4 with cor pulmonale, and one with pulmonary valve stenosis. The peak mitral valve inflow velocity (MVF) in early diastole (E) and atrial systole (A) and the A/E ratio were determined. The patients were divided into two groups; group A consisted of 8 patients with A/E > 1, and group B consisted of 9 patients with A/E < 1. There was a good correlation between A/E and 1/RS ( r = −0.81, p < 0.001) and 1/RD ( r = −0.70, p < 0.001) (Fig. 5 , panel C). Consequently, I recognized that an increased degree of IVS curvature caused left ventricular diastolic dysfunction (a condition that is today called mild diastolic dysfunction), while the concepts of pseudonormalization and restrictive pattern had not yet been established at that time. This study was presented at the 58th Scientific Session of the American Heart Association (AHA) held in November 1985 in Washington, DC [ ]. At the same session, Louei et al. of Chicago University presented a Doppler echocardiography assessment of impaired left ventricular filling in patients with RV pressure overload due to primary pulmonary hypertension, and soon published this work in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology [ ]. Then I lost my enthusiasm to write the paper, which has been a thread over the course of my life. Fig. 5 Measurement of the curvature of the ventricular septum on the 2DE (panel A) and mitral valve inflow by pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography (panel B) in patients with right ventricular overload and comparison of the radius of IVS curvature in RVO patients with or without LV filling abnormalities due to right ventricular overload (panel C). Abnormal LV filling in RVO is considered to be due to geometric changes in LV caused by displacement of the IVS in RVO, and abnormal MVF in RVO does not necessarily imply LV pathology. RVO right ventricular volume or pressure overload. IVS interventricular septum. Other abbreviations the same as in Fig. 1
I remained in Los Angeles for 2 years. At about the same time, Dr. Katsu Takenaka was studying at the University of California Irvine (UCI) under the direction of Professor Walter Henry. Dr. Takenaka always helped me by giving valuable advice when I encountered difficulties in my research. It is still a good memory for me to have listened, together with Dr. Takenaka, to the first presentation of the newly developed color Doppler instruments from Japan by the two companies Aloka and Toshiba at the fireside session of the AHA meeting in Anaheim.
Usefulness of the longitudinal right parasternal approach using color Doppler echocardiography
In 1986, I returned to Japan. Noninvasive diagnostic imaging methods including 2DE, M-mode echocardiography, the color Doppler method, the continuous-wave Doppler method, the pulsed-wave Doppler method, and transesophageal echocardiography had created a golden age of new techniques in echocardiography. Using the color Doppler method, we could precisely detect shunt blood flow in the ASD including left-to-right and right-to-left shunting. In making a diagnosis of ASD through the right parasternum, we formerly used the short-axis sectional image of the atrial septum. After the introduction of the color Doppler method, we were able to easily visualize longitudinal slices of the atrial septum and not only identify ASDs of the central type (secundum ASD) but also superior and inferior types of ASD located in the lower and upper part of the atrial septum (sinus venosus ASD), even when complicated by partial anomalous pulmonary venous drainage (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Transthoracic color Doppler echocardiographic demonstration of the ASD position from the right parasternal longitudinal plane (panel A) and its schematic representation from frontal (panel B) and sagittal (panel C) views. PA pulmonary artery, PAPVD partial anomalous pulmonary venous drainage, SVC superior vena cava, IVC inferior vena cava. Other abbreviations the same as in Fig. 1
Additionally, the transthoracic right parasternal approach is useful in diagnosing heart diseases other than ASD (pulmonary artery thrombus, superior vena caval thrombus, tumor in the anterior mediastinum, thrombus or tumor in the right atrium, maximum peak velocity of the aortic stenosis, ascending aortic dissection, etc.). These methods are worth attempting combined with initially using computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or angiography.
Inferior vena caval orifice obstruction in patients with mitral stenosis and giant left atrium from the right parasternal approach
After returning to Japan, I employed the right parasternal approach and established the following hypothesis: If mitral valve disease is complicated by giant LA, then the atrial septum protrudes anteriorly and to the right, the blood flow in the IVC orifice increases, and abnormal venous return occurs (Fig. 7 ). For various reasons, I conducted this study under the supervision of Dr. Junichi Yoshikawa of Kobe Municipal Central Hospital. This condition is associated with significantly increased flow velocity at the IVC orifice, which is narrowed by the extreme rightward displacement of the atrial septum due to the gross LA enlargement. The simultaneous pressure curve of the IVC and the right atrium obtained from a patient with typical IVC orifice narrowing showed a pressure gradient of 13 mmHg, and the IVC orifice was occluded by the giant LA. On the other hand, I recognized the widening of the IVC orifice in severe TR in patients with mitral stenosis. Then, according to the presence or absence of giant LA and severe TR, I divided the patients I had examined into four groups for further evaluation (Fig. 8 , panel A). As a result of this evaluation, irrespective of the presence or absence of severe TR, the IVC orifice was narrowed with enlargement of the LA, and the blood flow rate at this site increased due to this narrowing. Moreover, the frequency of hepatomegaly in the group of patients with giant LA (71 %) was similar to that in the group of patients with severe TR (71 %). In the group of patients with giant LA and severe TR, the frequency was significantly higher (approximately 89 %) (Fig. 8 , panel B). These findings suggest that the giant LA seen in patients with mitral stenosis may contribute to obstruction of the venous return from the IVC and result in venous congestion in the absence of severe TR or significant right atrial hypertension. Fig. 7 Transthoracic color Doppler echocardiographic demonstration of the inferior vena cava (IVC) orifice flow (panel A) and its schematic representation (panel B) in a patient with mitral stenosis with giant left atrium. Other abbreviations the same as in Fig. 1 . Panel A from Minagoe et al. [ ] with permission Fig. 8 Representative views of the inferior vena caval (IVC) orifice demonstrated by two-dimensional (upper panels) and color Doppler echocardiography (lower panels) in mitral stenosis patients (panel A) and incidence of hepatomegaly in each group (panel B). Abbreviations the same as in Fig. 6 . * p < 0.001 versus group A without severe TR by Kay square analysis. From Minagoe et al. [ ] with permission
I reported this study in an article that was appreciated by the editorial board [ ]. However, little attention was directed to this article, probably because of low frequency of giant LA in developed countries. The feature I described may be useful when right heart failure in mitral stenosis occurs without severe TR, right ventricular dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, constrictive pericarditis, or no high right atrial pressure, among other factors.
During the 2 years in which I worked on this study in the laboratory of Dr. Junichi Yoshikawa, I noted that only a single door separated the busy clinics and the laboratory. The raw clinical data delivered to the laboratory each day were immediately analyzed by Dr. Kiyoshi Yoshida and Dr. Takashi Akasaka. When sufficient data had accumulated, the researchers used the data to produce scientific articles. I recall that, at what was probably an American College of Cardiology (ACC) meeting, the laboratory staff members sat at the front of the room to listen to my presentation. I was impressed by their earnest attention toward presentations at academic conferences. During my stay in Kobe, I also recognized the importance of support by sonographers. Medical technologists working at the hospital, including Toshikazu Yagi, were pioneers in the field of sonography. Having observed many other technologists at work, I thought that I would like to develop a program for education of such sonographers in Kagoshima. I then returned there.
Transmural penetrating coronary artery flow using Doppler echocardiography
After returning to Kagoshima from Kobe, I worked for Nanpuh Hospital, a hospital with 300 beds managed by an incorporated association. Naoko Mizukami worked at the hospital as a sonographer. 2 years later, at our request, the hospital purchased an ATL Ultramark 9, a new echocardiography device manufactured in the USA. I was attracted by the linear probe that could be used to visualize the flow of blood in digital vessels. Because at that time the microcirculatory system was regarded as a kind of “black box,” I wondered whether I could visualize intramyocardial blood flow by applying the probe over the myocardium. In cooperation with Mizukami, I conducted an animal experiment using a dog kept at the Faculty of Agriculture of Kagoshima University, and could able visualize the linear blood flow signals passing externally to internally within the heart muscle. We could define that this linear blood flow signal on the color Doppler echocardiogram corresponded to the transmural penetrating coronary arteries in animal and clinical studies. Through some of the process, we were finally able to visualize the transmural penetrating coronary artery blood flow in adults by transthoracic Doppler echocardiography using a high-frequency sector-type transducer in 1997 [ , ].
One day we noticed local acceleration of the flow signal in the transmural penetrating coronary artery around the middle portion of the thickened left ventricular myocardium in a patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), even when the color Doppler method was used at an increased velocity range of more than 45 cm/s, which corresponds to flow velocity of more than 90 cm/s by pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography (Fig. 9 ). We used the pulsed-wave Doppler method to determine the acceleration flow signal and measured the flow velocities proximal and distal to the acceleration signal. We found an average local increase of 1.5 m/s in the flow rate at the acceleration flow signal along the penetrating coronary artery. This localized acceleration flow signal was observed in almost 50 % of patients with HCM and was not observed in normal healthy subjects. Since this acceleration flow signal was repeatedly observed at the same site in the same vessel in each patient, the abnormal signal is thought not to have resulted from spasm of the penetrating coronary artery. Fig. 9 Schematic representation of the transthoracic Doppler echocardiographic (TTDE) approach to a transmural penetrating coronary artery (panel A) and color Doppler echocardiographic acceleration flow signal in the transmural penetrating coronary artery obtained from a patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) (panel B). Abbreviations the same as in Fig. 1
The transmural penetrating arteries located upstream of the microvasculature system are a unique component that courses from the epicardium to the subendocardial plexus. The localized high flow velocity observed as an accelerated flow signal in the transmural penetrating coronary artery in our study could produce an increase in the pressure gradient via a curvilinear pressure–flow relationship (Bernoulli equation) and selectively restrict blood flow to the subendocardium leading to markedly lower perfusion pressures in the distal penetrating coronary artery (Fig. 10 ) [ ]. Fig. 10 Suspected fluid mechanics in the transmural penetrating artery
It has been reported that the coronary arterial system includes 3 different functional components (large epicardial coronary arteries, prearterioles, and arterioles) and that proximal prearterioles are most reactive to changes in flow, whereas the distal prearterioles are most responsive to pressure changes which are mainly responsible for autoregulation of coronary blood flow [ , ]. Several histological studies using horizontal sections of vessels obtained at autopsy from patients with HCM have revealed the presence of a narrowed lumen caused by thickening of the endothelium or the media of prearterioles or arterioles [ , ]. However, these studies do not mention the transmural penetrating coronary artery and do not indicate whether such a stenosis is a diffuse-type narrowing (cylinder-like) or the discrete type. Our Doppler method used longitudinal imaging to visualize the blood flow and defined the presence of narrowing of the vessel or the discrete type of stenosis along the transmural penetrating coronary artery in real time. Since this lesion exists in the upstream of the microvasculature, greater extent of damage to the downstream microcirculation system due to the low pressure perfusion would occur under such a longitudinally distributed network (Fig. 11 ). However, further study, including histological evidence, is needed to examine whether the transmural penetrating artery stenosis revealed by our method can cause improper regulation of coronary resistance vessels to such an extent that ischemia would result. Fig. 11 Schematic representations of the anatomy of the coronary arterial system. The localized high flow velocity at the segmentally narrowed lumen in the penetrating coronary artery could produce an increase in the longitudinal pressure gradient and low perfusion pressure downstream of prearterioles and arterioles especially in the subendocardium
The Doppler method might allow us to evaluate the flow characteristics in the transmural penetrating coronary artery hydrodynamically. (Since I have not yet submitted an article on this theme, I would appreciate it if you understand that I cannot display sufficient images in this presentation.)
In this manner, I have conducted my modest research activities, gleaning hints from routine day-to-day work and conducting experimental clinical investigations using the Doppler method. However, it has been said that research is completed only when it is organized in an article. Considering this remark, I have to admit with humility that I am not, in this case, a researcher.
Experience-based medicine
Physicians of all ages frequently encounter diseases that they have never witnessed before. I still encounter such diseases although I graduated from medical school 40 years ago. There are an unlimited number of diseases. Even a single disease can have different pathophysiological presentations depending on the patient’s situation or state. Moreover, constant advances in technology enable us to observe things that were previously invisible to us. For these reasons, encountering new diseases even within one’s medical specialty seems to be the fate of a physician. In the field of cardiovascular medicine, diastolic heart failure can be regarded as a current example of this.
Diastolic heart failure or cardiac tamponade due to external compression to the left ventricle
Over the past 10 years, I have encountered patients with symptoms that were probably caused by disorders of left ventricular inflow due to local displacement of the left ventricular wall. Such disorders may arise from localized displacement of the left ventricular wall caused by a giant coronary aneurysm, localized pericardial effusion and/or hemopericardium, a diaphragmatic hernia, or an aneurysm of a coronary sinus (Fig. 12 ). In all of the diseases noted above, the left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) is normal, but E/e’ is increased, and the patient shows symptoms of heart failure, cardiac tamponade or even features of constrictive pericarditis (dip and plateau by ventricular pressure tracing). Since the symptoms were improved after elimination of the cause of displacement except in one case of dilatation of coronary sinus, pathological conditions that result from displacement of the left ventricular free wall from both inside or outside of the pericardium might be present. Since all of these pathological conditions were first identified when an increase in LA pressure was recognized during noninvasive use of the Doppler method, the role of echocardiography must be important to identify such diastolic heart failure due to extrinsic factors in clinical work. At the same time, the tissue Doppler method and evaluation based on pressure data may be indispensable in clarifying this pathological mechanism. Besides that, there must be many other pathophysiological conditions and diseases which we have yet to identify or notice in terms of experience-based medicine. Fig. 12 Two-dimensional echocardiographic demonstration of various types of heart diseases that cause diastolic heart failure or cardiac tamponade due to external compression of the left ventricle
Standing between evidence-based medicine and experience-based medicine
Although my research work might proceed in twists and turns, the Japanese Society of Echocardiography (JSE) has always been beside me. I have learned the following from the JSE: a physician should stand between evidence-based medicine and experience-based medicine by utilizing echocardiograms, electrocardiograms, auscultatory findings, etc. (Fig. 13 ). Dr. Eugene Braunwald says, “The best book of cardiology is the patient itself” [ ]. I am sure that we can understand the meaning of Dr. Braunwald’s words only by standing between these two EBMs. Today’s Nimura lecture was organized in commemoration of Dr. Yasuharu Nimura, who used the Doppler signal and reported extension of the isovolumetric relaxation time in hypertensive heart disease in 1968. His finding served as the innovative scientific rationale leading to the heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) and to the Tei index. In a conversation during a medical interview with Dr. Shintaro Beppu, Dr. Nimura emphasized the importance of the physician’s skill and said, “Unlike machines, humans have the abilities for differentiation, judgment and recognition” [ ]. Thus, it can be said that we must refine sensibility and hypothesis development by standing between two EBMs to learn more from the patients. Fig. 13 Standing between evidence-based medicine and experience-based medicine: “The best book of cardiology is the patient itself.” (E. Braunwald)
Echo-based medicine
I would like to personally create a third term, “echo-based medicine,” that can also be abbreviated as “EBM.” This term also expresses my personal determination. Currently, in the field of cardiovascular medicine, physicians do not conduct detailed echocardiographic examinations but instead rely on costly examinations including CT, MRI, and cardiac catheterization. Of course, we should actively promote use of integrated cardiac imaging such as CT or MRI in combination with echocardiography. However, I am certain that we can reduce unnecessary healthcare costs if we use the information obtained through echocardiography and electrocardiography to appropriately select reasonable examinations and to evaluate the appropriateness of these examinations. I believe that, by utilizing many other researchers’ experiences, we can create a more fruitful field of echocardiography. I would like to devote the time left in my career to the study of cardiovascular medicine, believing in the power of echocardiography and the Doppler method to provide a link between evidence-based medicine and experience-based medicine.
Summary
I can clearly remember the 22nd Annual Scientific Meeting of the Japanese Society of Echocardiography held in Kagoshima in 2011, immediately after the Great East Japan Earthquake. Because the great earthquake had occurred just 1 month prior to the meeting, the damage was still fresh in our minds, and everyone in Japan was seriously concerned about the dangers of radioactivity. In this situation, many people, including Japanese investigators and foreign researchers from various countries such as the USA and Korea, attended the scientific meeting. Even researchers living in the Tohoku Region, who were inconvenienced by interruptions to transportation services, came all the way to Kagoshima and explained the actual damage situation to the meeting attendees. Two members of the secretariat of the American Society of Echocardiography also attended this scientific meeting for the first time (both of them were mothers), traveling all the way from Chicago to Kagoshima. Many other academic organizations which had scheduled meetings in Japan discussed whether they should be held as scheduled in this situation. Even the Japanese Circulation Society, a large academic society, had cancelled its annual scientific meeting in Yokohama. However, the JSE was the first society that decided to hold its scientific meeting according to schedule. Why were we, including the invited guest speakers from foreign countries, able to decide to hold our meeting immediately after such a great disaster? Because of the strong motivation among the members, which I wish to recognize, and their concerted efforts to deepen understanding of echocardiography. The JSE was organized based on the concept of “beyond the university.” At our scientific meetings, members develop science-based arguments and repeatedly engage in active discussions. It is true that there have been passionate discussions among the members as part of this process. However, the repetition of such discussions over a long period of time has produced mutual respect, feelings of affection, and interactions between senior and junior researchers that extend beyond the borders of their universities. It is my hope that such relationships will be established among a wide variety of members, not only beyond the universities but beyond the borders of hospitals, genders, ages, and nations from now on.
Thank you for your attention.