Introduction
Exertional dyspnea is a common symptom among elderly patients in daily practice. In elderly patients, various diseases and conditions that can cause this symptom include anemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, valvular heart disease, myocardial ischemia, dynamic mitral valve regurgitation (MR), and dynamic left ventricular (LV) outflow tract obstruction. Elderly patients with LV diastolic dysfunction can develop elevated LV filling pressure during exercise, and can complain of exertional dyspnea. Echocardiography is a useful tool for making a definitive diagnosis of heart diseases. However, echocardiography at rest is insufficient to diagnose myocardial ischemia, dynamic MR, or dynamic LV outflow tract obstruction. Exercise stress echocardiography has become a main functional test to detect myocardial ischemia and dynamic cardiac abnormalities. However, although echocardiographic evaluation of LV diastolic function at rest is a useful tool to diagnose patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), echocardiography at rest is insufficient to detect elevated LV filling pressure during exercise in patients with exertional dyspnea. For the past decade, exercise stress echocardiography to evaluate diastolic function, namely ‘diastolic stress echocardiography’ has been utilized.
Pathophysiological backgrounds
The invasive exercise stress test has demonstrated that healthy subjects can increase cardiac output without increasing LV filling pressure during exercise, due to the high diastolic reserve (the ability to augment myocardial relaxation under stress). LV diastolic dysfunction is characterized by delayed myocardial relaxation and increased ventricular stiffness. Patients with diastolic dysfunction can have normal LV filling pressure at rest. Kitzman et al. demonstrated that LV filling pressure was normal at rest and rose only with exertion in patients with HFpEF [ ]. Recent studies in patients with early HFpEF demonstrated that LV filling pressure increased significantly during exercise, and caused a rise of pulmonary capillary pressure (PCWP) and the development of exertional dyspnea (Fig. 1 ) [ ]. Moreover, Dorfs et al. demonstrated the prognostic importance of the invasive exercise test in patients with suspected HFpEF [ ]. An excessive rise of PCWP during exercise despite normal PCWP at rest is associated with increased long-term mortality and may be considered as early HFpEF. Hence, if exercise stress echocardiography can reproduce important pathophysiological information regarding LV diastolic function during exercise non-invasively, it could provide great clinical benefits in diagnosis and clinical management of patients with early HFpEF. Fig. 1 Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) increased to a greater extent in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) compared with non-cardiac disease (NCD) during exercise ( a ). Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) ( b ) and mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) ( c ) also rose more dramatically with exercise in the HFpEF group ( p for exercise change between groups). Reused from Borlaug et al. [ ]
Echocardiographic assessment of LV diastolic function has been an established tool in routine clinical practice, and is constantly updated [ ]. Major contributions from Japanese investigators in this field have been previously described [ ]. Contemporary and fundamental techniques for the evaluation of LV diastolic dysfunction have previously been reviewed and well summarized [ ]. The ratio of early transmitral velocity to early tissue Doppler annular velocity, the E / e ′ ratio, is the most commonly used index to estimate LV filling pressure non-invasively. E / e ′ >15 at rest, when septal e ′ is used, indicates elevated LV filling pressure or PCWP, whereas E / e ′ <8 indicates normal filling pressure [ ]. Furthermore, Burgess et al. demonstrated that the E / e ′ ratio correlated with invasively measured LV diastolic pressure during exercise (Fig. 2 , left) [ ]. In agreement, Talreja et al. demonstrated that E / e ′ provided a reliable estimation of PCWP not only at baseline, but also with exercise. E / e ′ >15 during exercise was associated with a significantly elevated PCWP >20 mmHg (Fig. 2 , right) [ ]. However, there are several limitations to the use of this index to evaluate PCWP during stress echocardiography. Maeder et al. demonstrated that E / e ′ did not reflect PCWP at peak exercise [ ]. More recently, its accuracy to track changes in PCWP has been questioned. Behlla et al. reported that although E / e ′ correlated significantly with PCWP in general, E / e ′ did not reliably track changes in PCWP within individuals [ ]. Fig. 2 Correlation between mean left ventricular diastolic pressure (LVDP) and E / e ′ (expressed as E / E ′ in figure) both at rest and during exercise ( left ). Solid circles resting data; open circles exercise data. Adapted from Burgess et al. [ ]. Plot of pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) versus E / e ′ with baseline and peak exercise values for each patient ( right ). Adapted from Talreja et al. [ ]
Indications
Diastolic stress echocardiography is indicated when resting echocardiographic findings do not explain the exertional dyspnea. In general, when patients have abnormal echocardiographic findings at rest consistent with elevated LV filling pressure, indicated by diastolic dysfunction grade II or more, and cardiac etiology of their exertional dyspnea are well established, they do not need to undergo diastolic stress echocardiography [ ]. The most appropriate subjects for diastolic stress echocardiography are patients with grade I diastolic dysfunction, which indicates delayed myocardial relaxation and normal LV filling pressure at rest. Increasing heart rate with exercise decreases diastolic filling period and LV compliance, which may cause elevation of LV filling pressure and exertional dyspnea.
Exertional dyspnea is assumed to be an angina equivalent, and much more common in patients referred for stress echocardiography. The major target of stress echocardiography has been stress-induced wall motion abnormality to detect myocardial ischemia. However, only 10% of 311 consecutive patients with exertional dyspnea developed stress-induced wall motion abnormality [ ]. To evaluate the etiology of exertional dyspnea, a combination of diastolic functional assessment with traditional wall motion analysis will provide further information (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Treadmill stress echocardiography in a75-year-old male with current exertional dyspnea and a history of percutaneous coronary interventional therapy. Wall motion analysis revealed no exercise-induced wall motion abnormality ( left top and bottom ). Mitral flow pattern at baseline is consistent with pattern of delayed relaxation ( right ). Mitral flow pattern changed during exercise. E / e ′ increased from 14 at rest to 16 with exercise
Stress protocols
Key points for performing diastolic stress echocardiography are described in the current guidelines for assessment of diastolic function [ ]. Diastolic stress echocardiography is best performed with exercise stress and not with pharmacological stress. Dobutamine stress echocardiography is an established tool to detect myocardial ischemia; however, administration of dobutamine improves LV diastolic function, and does not simulate physiological stress. Supine bicycle stress or treadmill stress is usually performed as shown in Table 1 . As shown in this table, except in a few studies, patients with a mean age of <70 years were studied. Comorbidities in elderly patients, such as musculoskeletal problems can make it difficult to perform substantial exercise. Six minute walk or six minute stepping can be an alternative in isolated diastolic stress echocardiography. Table 1 Diastolic stress echocardiography Authors Studied patients Stress protocol Max workload Measurements Findings Ha et al.[ ] 31 healthy subjects 59 ± 14 years Treadmill Bruce protocol Symptom-limited maximal E / e ′ There was a significant increase in LV filling indexes (E and A) and mitral annular velocity ( e ′ and a ′). Because of proportional increases in these values, the E/A and E / e ′ ratios were unchanged after exercise Ha et al. [ ] 45 patients with exertional dyspnea and w/o evidence of myocardial ischemia 59 ± 16 years Supine bicycle start at 25 W, increment of 25 W every 3 min Submaximal max workload = 75 W E / e ′ Diastolic stress echocardiography using a supine bicycle is technically feasible for demonstrating changes in E / e ′ (filling pressure) with exercise Burgess et al. [ ] 37 patients mean age 61 years (invasive) 166 patients 59 ± 11 years (non-invasive) Supine bicycle (invasive) treadmill (non-invasive) Submaximal (invasive) Symptom-limited maximal (non-invasive) E / e ′ and invasive LVDP post-exercise E / e ′ (non-invasive) E / e ′ correlated with invasively measured LVDP during exercise. Post-exercise E / e ′ >13 was highly specific (90%) for reduced exercise capacity <8 METs Talreja et al. [ ] 12 patients 58 ± 9 years Supine bicycle start at 25 W, increment of 25 W every 3 min Symptom-limited maximal E / e ′ and invasive PCWP E / e ′ provides a reliable estimation of PCWP not only at baseline, but also with exercise. E / e ′ >15 during exercise is associated with a significantly elevated PCWP >20 mmHg Grewal et al. [ ] 2867 patients w/o echocardiographic evidence of exercise-induced myocardial ischemia 53 ± 11 years (normal) 67 ± 9 years (mild dysfunction) 66 ± 11 years (moderate–severe dysfunction) Treadmill Bruce protocol Symptom-limited maximal E / e ′ Measurement of post-exercise E / e ′ was feasible in 2366 patients (82%). Post-exercise E / e ′ of ≥15 was associated with a reduction in exercise capacity Ha et al. [ ] 141 patients with impaired LV relaxation at rest (E/A <0.75 and/or DT >240 ms) 62 ± 9 years Supine bicycle start at 25 W, increment of 25 W every 3 min Symptom limited maximal LV diastolic function reserve index = Δ e ’ × e’ base, peak V O 2 Δ e’ is the change of e’ from baseline to exercise (25 W or 50 W) The ratio of E / e’ to stroke volume was used as an index of ventricular elastance. Lower LV diastolic functional reserve was associated with higher ventricular elastance during exercise, and reduced exercise capacity (lower peak V O 2 ) Sekiguchi et al. [ ] 26 subjects including 10 normal subjects, 11 hypertensive patients and 5 patients with cardiomyopathy 47 ± 21 years Bicycle constant workload at 50, 100 and 120% of AT every 3 min 120% AT Δ e’ (difference in e’ between base and 120% AT), peak V O 2 Δ e’ was correlated independently with AT and peak V O 2 Tan et al. [ ] 56 HFpEF patients and 27 age-matched control subjects 72 ± 7 years Treadmill modified Bruce Maximal (respiratory exchange ratio >1) Longitudinal and radial strain, mitral annular velocities, and apical rotation, peak V O 2 Mitral annular systolic and diastolic velocities, systolic LV rotation, and early diastolic untwist on exercise correlated with peak V O 2 Holland et al. [ ] 436 patients with fatigue or dyspnea 57 ± 12 years Treadmill Symptom-limited maximal E / e’ E / e’ was elevated at rest and/or post exercise in less than half of 148 patients with clinical suspected HFpEF using current classification for HFpEF. Reduced exercise capacity, increase of E/e’ with exercise and ischemia are three objective aspects of the HFpEF syndrome that might be considered for incorporation in the definition Holland et al. [ ] 522 patients 58 ± 11 years Treadmill Symptom-limited maximal E / e’ Exercise capacity (HR 0.893; p = 0.008), exercise wall motion score index (HR 1.507; p = 0.001), and exercise E / e >14.5 (HR 2.988; p = 0.002) were independent predictors of outcome including cardiovascular death and hospitalization Maeder et al. [ ] 14 HFpEF patients 69 ± 10 years 8 control subjects 61 ± 12 years Supine bicycle Symptom-limited maximal for 8 HFpEF patients submaximal for 6 HFpEF patients and 8 control subjects E / e’ and invasive PCWP The HFpEF patients achieved a similar peak exercise PCWP to that of controls, at a much lower workload. Kim et al. [ ] 197 patients with DM 58 ± 10 years Supine bicycle Submaximal max workload = 50 W Δ e’ (difference in e’ between base and exercise) Δ e’ was independent predictor (HR 0.58; p = 0.005) of outcome including death and hospitalization for HF. In an incremental model, the addition of stress echo data significantly increased the χ 2 of the clinical and resting LV function model, from 40.5−46.6 ( p < 0.005) Takagi et al. [ ] 310 elderly patients 73 ± 6 years (elevated E / e ′) 71 ± 6 years (control group) Treadmill Bruce protocol or modified Bruce Symptom-limited maximal E / e’ 33% of patients had elevated post exercise E / e’ ≥15. Patients with post exercise E / e’ ≥15 were older ( p = 0.0052), had a greater BMI ( p = 0.0459), were more likely to have an abnormal glucose tolerance ( p = 0.0059), had a greater LV mass index ( p = 0.0383), a greater LA volume index ( p = 0.0042), and a higher E / e’ value at rest ( p < 0.0001) Holland et al. [ ] 15 HFpEF patients 63 ± 9 years 15 control subjects 61 ± 9 years Supine bicycle Submaximal E / e’ CAP and AIx There was a large increase in E / e’ with exercise in patients ( p = 0.012). Change in E / e ′ from rest to submaximal exercise was significantly and independently associated with ΔCAP ( r = 0.559; p = 0.030) and ΔAIx ( r = 0.654; p = 0.008) in patients with HFpEF. In contrast, E / e’ , CAP and AIx decreased with exercise, and there were no associations between exercise E / e’ and central pressure in control Tartière-Kesri et al.[ ] 23 HFpEF patients 66 ± 10 years 15 control subjects 67 ± 7 years Supine bicycle Submaximal max workload = 30 W LV volumes, Ees, peripheral resistance, Ea, arterial compliance, aortic pulse wave velocity, and carotid Ep During exercise, HFpEF was associated with a major increase in Ep, pulse wave velocity and Ea, and a lower decrease in peripheral resistance ( p < 0.05 for all). In addition, HFpEF patients showed a lower increase in stroke volume despite a greater increase in Ees ( p < 0.05 for all). Also during exercise, adaptation of proximal VAC was impaired in HFpEF patients (Ees/Ep: 26 ± 47 vs 20 ± 47% for controls) ( p < 0.01), with no difference in Ees/Ea Takagi et al. [ ] 147 elderly patients w/o evidence of myocardial ischemia by exercise echocardiography 73 ± 5 years Treadmill Bruce protocol or modified Bruce Symptom-limited maximal E / e’ Male gender (HR 3.294; p = 0.0117), LA enlargement (HR 3.576; p = 0.0017), and exercise E / e ≥15.0 (HR 3.147; p = 0.0068) were independent predictors of new onset AF Takagi et al. [ ] 58 elderly patients w/o evidence of myocardial ischemia by exercise echocardiography 74 ± 6 years Treadmill Bruce protocol or modified Bruce Symptom-limited maximal DWS and E / e’ Patients with low DWS had greater post-exercise E / e’ (17.9 ± 3.2 vs12.8 ± 3.3, p < 0.0001). DWS was inversely and strongly correlated with post-exercise E / e’ ( r 2 = 0.534, p < 0.0001) Studer Bruengger et al.[ ] 40 young NAs 30 ± 6 years 20 young ETs 29 ± 5 years Supine bicycle Symptom-limited maximal E / e’ There was a slight increase in E / e’ septal (overall, from 6.8 ± 1.3−7.2 ± 1.2; p = 0.02) and E / e’ lateral (overall, from 5.0 ± 0.8−6.2 ± 0.9; p < 0.0001) with exercise. Changes in diastolic parameters with exercise were similar in ETs and NAs Kosmala et al. [ ] 207 stage C HFpEF patients 64 ± 9 years 60 stage B HFpEF patients 63 ± 8 years Treadmill Bruce protocol Symptom-limited maximal E / e’ GLS VAC peak V O 2 Normal E / e’ response to exertion in stage C HFpEF is associated with less profound impairment of exercise capacity and is accompanied by derangements of contractile state and VAC. The transition from stage B to stage C HFpEF is linked to diastolic, systolic, and chronotropic deficits and an increasing degree of hemodynamic disturbances in stage C HF a′ late diastolic mitral annulus velocity, A late diastolic transmitral flow velocity, AF atrial fibrillation, AI x augmentation index, AT anaerobic threshold, BMI body mass index, CAP central augmented pressure, DM diabetes mellitus, DT deceleration time, E early diastolic transmitral flow velocity, e′ mitral annulus early diastolic velocity, E/A the ratio of the early (E) to late (A) ventricular filling velocities, Ea arterial elastance, E / e ′ ratio of early transmitral velocity to early tissue Doppler annular velocity, Ees end-systolic elastance, Ep Peterson’s modulus, ETs endurance-trained athletes, GLS global longitudinal strain, HFpEF heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, HR hazard ratio, LA left atrial, LV left ventricular, LVDP left ventricular diastolic pressure, METs metabolic equivalents, NAs non-athletes, PASP pulmonary artery systolic pressure, PCWP pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, peak VO 2 peak oxygen consumption, VAC ventriculo-arterial coupling, w/o without
It is easier to perform diastolic stress echocardiography using the supine bicycle protocol, which allows sufficient time to obtain two-dimensional (2D) and Doppler data. Patients undergo baseline echocardiography to obtain 2D images, Doppler transmitral flow velocities, LV tissue Doppler velocities and estimated pulmonary artery pressures using peak tricuspid regurgitation (TR) velocity. Subsequently, with continuous electrocardiographic monitoring and interval blood pressure monitoring, patients exercise on the supine bicycle to achieve target heart rate (85% of maximum predicted for age). During the supine bicycle stress, 2D images and Doppler diastolic parameters are acquired at each stage including peak exercise and in recovery. In treadmill stress, 2D images and Doppler diastolic parameters are acquired at baseline and immediately after peak exercise and in early recovery. There are some pitfalls in acquiring data. If echocardiographic contrast agent is used for LV cavity opacification, tissue Doppler signals are not useful; however, TR velocity can be used in this case. Doppler transmitral and tissue Doppler annular early and late diastolic velocities are frequently merged at peak exercise. It is possible to acquire Doppler data later during recovery when the heart rate falls and merging is relieved. When merging continues, it is reasonable to proceed with TR velocity recording first, and retry recording transmitral flow velocities and annular tissue Doppler velocities when the heart rate has decreased further.
Myocardial ischemia can also cause elevated LV filling pressure and exertional dyspnea. When study subjects are patients with known or suspected coronary artery disease, myocardial ischemia must be excluded with comprehensive stress echocardiography; these patients should exercise to target heart rate or symptom-limited heart rate. It is important to prioritize the acquisition of 2D images for wall motion analysis. Images should be acquired immediately after treadmill exercise is terminated, and within 60 s for assessment of myocardial ischemia. Subsequently, Doppler velocities should be acquired (Fig. 3 ).
Recently, the MEDIA study group proposed an optimal protocol for diastolic stress echocardiography. A ramped exercise protocol on a semi-supine bicycle, starting at 15 W, with increments of 5 W/min to a submaximal target (heart rate of 100–110 bpm or symptom) is recommended [ ]. When the initial target is reached, the workload at that time is then maintained constant for 3 min while echocardiographic images are acquired. If the patient is asymptomatic, the workload can be increased by the same increments until symptoms develop or the maximal target heart rate is reached, in order to assess if the patient has myocardial ischemia. Data acquisition at submaximal exercise may have several advantages. Submaximal exercise is more feasible for elderly patients and more equivalent to their daily activities. Less breathlessness during exercise permits better quality image acquisition. Slower heart rate will avoid merging of Doppler velocities. From such advantages, the latest recommendations for the clinical use of stress echocardiography in non-ischemic heart disease recommend supine bicycle stress, and recording E and e ′ velocities at submaximal exercise (heart rate of 100–110 bpm) is recommended for diastolic stress echocardiography [ ].
Lessons from current studies
Clinical implication of exercise E/e′
In 2003, Ha et al. first reported the effect of treadmill exercise on mitral inflow and annular velocities in healthy middle-aged subjects [ ]. They found a significant increase in both mitral inflow and mitral annular velocities. However, the E / e ′ ratio was unchanged after exercise, because of proportional increases in these values. This observation has been taken as a normal response for exercise. Eleven years later, Bruengger et al. reported that the E / e ′ ratio remained in normal range with exercise in healthy young subjects and confirmed a previous observation [ ]. Ha et al. also reported the feasibility of diastolic stress echocardiography in clinical practice. They studied 45 patients with normal LV ejection fraction referred for evaluation of exertional dyspnea. Patients were divided into 3 groups regarding change in E / e ′—group 1A, with normal E / e ′ at rest and no increase at peak stress, group 1B, with normal E / e ′ at rest and increase at peak stress, and group 2, with elevated E / e ′ at rest and continued elevated at peak stress. Although the percentage of dyspnea as a primary reason for stopping exercise was similar in all groups, exercise capacity was significantly reduced in patients in groups 1B and group 2 than in group 1A [ ]. They also demonstrated that recovery of E / e ′ prolonged after cessation of exercise. Burgess et al. found a good correlation between E / e ′ and invasively measured LV diastolic pressure at rest and during exercise, and proposed a cut-off value of 13 for exercise E / e ′ to identify patients with elevated LV diastolic pressure during exercise [ ]. They also demonstrated that one-quarter of the patients had elevated LV filling pressure only during exercise. Furthermore, in 166 patients undergoing treadmill stress echocardiography, post-exercise E / e ′ >13 was highly specific (90%) for reduced exercise capacity. Even after classification of resting LV filling pressure, post-exercise E / e ′ >10 permitted identification of patients with exercise capacity <8 metabolic equivalents (METs). Grewal et al. studied 2867 patients undergoing treadmill stress echocardiography and not limited by ischemia. In this large cross-sectional study, post-exercise E / e ′ ≥15 was associated with a reduction in exercise capacity [ ]. Holland et al. demonstrated the importance of exercise stress echocardiography in identifying exercise intolerance, raised LV filling pressure and detecting ischemia in patients undergoing investigation of HFpEF [ ]. Furthermore, they demonstrated the prognostic importance of exercise E / e ′. Exercise E / e ′ >14.5 was associated with cardiovascular hospitalization, independent of and incremental to inducible ischemia (Fig. 4 a) [ ]. In our experience, one-third of 310 elderly patients referred for stress echocardiography presented post-exercise E / e ′ ≥15. Patients with post-exercise E / e ′ ≥15 were older ( p = 0.0052), had a greater body mass index ( p = 0.0459), were more likely to have an abnormal glucose tolerance ( p = 0.0059), had greater LV mass index ( p = 0.0383), a greater left atrial (LA) volume index ( p = 0.0042), and a higher E / e ′ value at rest ( p < 0.0001) [ ]. In 58 elderly patients, those with diastolic wall strain (DWS) ≤0.33 (which indicated patients with increased LV stiffness) were likely to develop post-exercise E / e ′ ≥15 than patients with normal DWS (Fig. 5 ) [ ]. Furthermore, patients with post-exercise E / e ′ ≥15 were associated with development of atrial fibrillation in elderly patients without obvious inducible ischemia (Fig. 4 b). This prognostic value of raised post-exercise E / e ′ was independent of, and incremental to, LA enlargement [ ]. Fig. 4 Prognostic importance of diastolic stress echocardiography. In 522 patients referred for exercise echocardiography, those with isolated ischemia or ischemia and raised E / e ′ had a worse outcome than those with neither ( a ). Adapted from Holland et al. [ ]. In 147 patients without obvious myocardial ischemia by exercise stress echocardiography, those with both LA enlargement and raised post-exercise E / e ′ (expressed as E / E ′ in figure) ≥15 developed new-onset atrial fibrillation (AF) most frequently ( b ). Adapted from Takagi et al. [ ]. In 197 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, those with lower diastolic function reserve (Δ e ′) at 25 W exercise ( c top ) or at 50 W exercise ( c bottom ) had significantly worse outcomes than those with higher Δ e ′ (expressed asΔ E ′ in figure). Adapted from Kim et al. [ ] Fig. 5 Correlation between diastolic wall strain (DWS) and post-exercise E / e ′ (expressed as E / E ′ in figure). In 58 elderly patients, those with low DWS (which indicated patients with increased LV stiffness) were more likely to develop post-exercise E / e ′ ≥15 than patients with normal DWS. DWS was inversely correlated with post-exercise E / e ′. Adapted from Takagi et al. [ ]
Clinical implication of diastolic functional reserve
Diastolic functional reserve is another index designed to express the change of e ′ with exercise relative to e ′ at baseline. Ha et al. studied 141 patients with grade I diastolic dysfunction at rest. Patients with lower diastolic functional reserve had shorter exercise duration and lower peak oxygen consumption (peak V O 2 ) [ ]. In agreement, Sekiguchi et al. demonstrated that difference in e ′ (Δ e ′) between at rest and 120% anaerobic threshold (AT) was correlated independently with AT and peak V O 2 [ ]. These studies suggest the ability to augment LV relaxation during exercise is an important factor in determining exercise capacity. Furthermore, Kim et al. demonstrated that, in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, those with a lower Δ e ′ between at rest and 25 W or 50 W exercise had a significantly worse outcome than those with higher Δ e ′ (Fig. 4 c) [ ].
Further applications of diastolic stress echocardiography
Tan et al. demonstrated that HFpEF was not an isolated disorder of diastole by using Doppler and 25 speckle-tracking methods. Systolic longitudinal and radial strain, systolic annular velocities and apical rotation were lower in HFpEF patients at rest, and all failed to increase normally on exercise. Systolic longitudinal reserve was significantly lower in HFpEF patients. HFpEF patients had reduced and delayed untwisting, and reduced LV suction at rest which was more apparent on exercise. The mitral flow propagation velocity ( V p ) increased less during exercise in HFpEF patients. Mitral annular systolic and diastolic velocities, systolic LV rotation, and early diastolic untwist on exercise correlated with peak V O 2 [ ].
Holland et al. reported that patients with HFpEF had increased E / e ′ with exercise compared with age- and sex-matched controls. Importantly, the change in E / e ′ from rest to submaximal exercise was significantly and independently associated with change of indices of central blood pressure in patients with HFpEF [ ]. Tartière-Kesri et al. demonstrated an increase in the E / e ′/end-diastolic volume ratio during exercise in HFpEF patients. At the same time, they demonstrated a steeper increase in the carotid pulse pressure/end-diastolic carotid diameter ratio in HFpEF patients. This steep increase in proximal afterload during moderate exercise was associated with impaired ventriculo-arterial coupling (VAC) and exercise intolerance in HFpEF patients [ ]. In a recent study, Kosmala et al. studied patients with stage C HFpEF, and divided them into 3 subgroups, representing the 3 levels of increasing severity of physiological disturbances. Stage C1 was defined by E / e ′ <13 both at rest and at exercise, stage C2 by E / e ′ >13 only at exercise, and stage C3 by E / e ′ >13 both at rest and at exercise. They demonstrated that normal E / e ′ response to exertion in stage C1 patients was associated with less profound impairment of exercise capacity and was accompanied by derangements of contractile state and VAC [ ]. These studies suggest that arterial function and central hemodynamics may be important targets for treating symptoms in HFpEF patients, especially in modest stage.
Conclusions
Diastolic stress echocardiography provides important information in the assessment of patients with unexplained exertional dyspnea, and in identification of patients with HFpEF, especially with early HFpEF. It also provides prognostic information. Diastolic stress echocardiography has expanded its field beyond diastole. Tissue Doppler and speckle-tracking analysis combined with diastolic stress echocardiography allow evaluation of both systolic and diastolic components of HFpEF, which are more apparent during exercise. Assessment of VAC and/or peripheral consumption combined with diastolic stress echocardiography will help to give us a better understanding regarding the development of symptoms in early HFpEF patients. Prospective large-scale studies are required to evaluate the value of diastolic stress echocardiography in the diagnosis and clinical management of patients with early HFpEF.