Introduction
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive loss of motor neurons in the brain and spinal cord [ , ]. The expansions of hexanucleotide (GGGGCC) repeats in the gene chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 ( C9ORF72 ) is the most common cause of ALS and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) [ , ]. The expanded hexanucleotide repeats can be transcribed to sense and antisense RNA foci and further translated into dipeptide repeat (DPR) proteins through an unconventional form of non-ATG (RAN) translation [ , , , ]. Previous studies in flies and cultured cells have suggested that the production of DPRs is one of the important drivers of neurodegeneration in C9ORF72 -related ALS/FTD [ , , ]. The arginine-rich DPRs, glycine-arginine (GR) and proline-arginine (PR), are highly toxic to cultured cells through nucleolar stress, oxidative stress, compromising nucleocytoplasmic transport, and dysregulating the dynamics of membrane-less organelles [ , , , , , , , ].
Previous studies have reported that the cell-to-cell spread of DPRs via exosome-dependent and -independent pathways may be relevant to the disease [ ]. In addition, synthetic poly-PR and poly-GR peptides added to the culture medium can be taken up by cells, inducing cell toxicity in a dose-dependent manner by disrupting RNA biogenesis or inhibiting translation [ , , ].
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress signaling is tightly associated with various neurodegenerative diseases, especially ALS [ , , ]. In response to ER stress, a complex signaling network known as the unfolded protein response (UPR) is induced to alleviate the stress. Three factors, protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase (PERK), inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), and activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6), differentially initiate the UPR to three distinct pathways [ , , ]. The UPR signaling network is crucial for the control of protein folding, autophagy, oxidant regulation, and amino-acid metabolism upon ER stress [ ]. However, sustained or chronic ER stress activates the JNK-mediated pathway or upregulates the transcription factor CHOP (C/EBP-homologous protein) that is encoded by Ddit3 and downstream of PERK, which induces cell death [ , ]. In the superoxide dismutase (SOD1)-ALS model, the activation of PERK and IRE1α has been identified in spinal motor neurons, suggesting that ER stress is associated with motor neuron death. Moreover, ER stress can lead to activation of the JNK pathway, which is crucial for promoting cell death in ALS models [ , , , ]. Activation of ER stress has also been detected in induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived human motor neurons and in a cellular model exposed to poly-GA (glycine-alanine) [ , ].
Endocytosis is a cellular process involving the internalization of extracellular material, ligands and membrane proteins, and lipids [ ]. The functions of endocytosis are not only the absorption of extracellular materials, but also the regulation of various processes initiated at the cell surface. Endocytosis processes can be subdivided into four categories: macropinocytosis, clathrin-mediated endocytosis, caveola-dependent endocytosis, and clathrin- and caveola-independent endocytosis. Although these pathways are different, specific endocytic components can participate in other pathways [ , ]. Neurons, like other cell types, absorb extracellular materials though these pathways, but it is still unclear whether endocytic pathways are involved in poly-PR uptake. Here we showed that the clathrin-dependent endocytic pathway is involved in poly-PR-mediated neurotoxicity. Poly-PR is transferred into cells in a clathrin-dependent manner and induces cell death via ER stress and the JNK-mediated pathway.
Materials and Methods
Cell Culture
SH-SY5Y cells, a kind gift from Dr. Jin Xu (Institute of Neuroscience, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China), were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) including penicillin (100 μg/mL) and streptomycin (100 μg/mL). Primary mouse cortical neurons were prepared as described elsewhere [ ]. In brief, the dissociated neurons were cultured in DMEM/F12 (Gibco) with 10% FBS for 6 h. Subsequently, the culture medium was changed to Neurobasal medium with 1 × B27 (B-27™ Plus Neuronal Culture System, Gibco). Half of the medium was changed every 3 days. The neurons were subjected to experiments at 5 days in vitro (DIV5). Cells were maintained in a humidified incubator at 37°C under 5% CO 2 .
Peptide Synthesis and Drug Treatment
Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled PR 20 peptides were synthesized by ChinaPeptides Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China) and dissolved in sterile water. Chlorpromazine, genistein, nystatin, and ethyl-isopropyl amiloride (EIPA) were from MedChemExpress (Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA) and dissolved with dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO). SP600125 was from Selleck (Houston, TX, USA) and dissolved with DMSO.
Flow Cytometry
To analyze the internalization of the FITC-PR 20 peptides, SH-SY5Y cells were pretreated with or without 10 μmol/L chlorpromazine, and then treated with 5 μmol/L FITC-PR 20 for 2 h. Then, the cells were treated with 0.05% trypsin and collected. The cells were centrifuged at 2500 rpm for 5 min and the supernatant was removed. They were then washed with PBS and centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min. After the washing cycle was repeated, the cells were suspended in PBS (600 μL) and subjected to fluorescence analysis on a flow cytometer (Beckman FC-500, Miami, FL, USA).
Small Interfering RNA (siRNA)
RNA oligonucleotides were transfected into cells as described previously [ ]. Briefly, the cells were incubated in a mixture of Opti-MEM, RNAiMAX (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and RNA oligonucleotides for 20 min at room temperature before transfection. Twenty-four hours after transfection, the medium was replaced with fresh complete medium. The cells were collected 72 h after transfection for further analysis. Oligonucleotides that targeted human CLTC were from GenePharma (Shanghai, China). The sequences were as follows: si- CLTC #1 sense 5′-UGCUCUAUUUAUAUAGAAAUAAUTT-3′, antisense 5′-AUUAUUUCUAUAUAAAUAGAGCATT-3′; si- CLTC #2 sense 5′-UAGAACAUUUCACUGAUUUAUAUTT-3′, antisense 5′-AUAUAAAUCAGUGAAAUGUUCUATT-3′.
Propidium Iodide (PI) Staining Assays
SH-SY5Y cells were treated with different concentrations of PR 20 , incubated with Hoechst 33342 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) or PI (Beyotime, Shanghai, China) for 8 min, and washed with PBS. The cells were then imaged using an inverted IX71 microscope system (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
Immunofluorescence
Immunofluorescence was analyzed as described previously [ ]. Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature and permeabilized with 0.25% Triton X-100 for 10 min, blocked with 1% bovine serum albumin for 1 h, and incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C. The following primary antibodies were used: anti-cleaved caspase-3 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA, Cat# 9661), Anti-p53 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA, Cat# sc-126), and anti-MAP2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA, Cat# sc-20172). After incubation with the primary antibodies, cells were washed three times with PBS and then incubated with rhodamine (red)-conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) for 1 h at room temperature. After incubation, the cells were stained with DAPI for 5 min and imaged using the inverted IX71 microscope system (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
Western Blot
Cells were lysed in 1 × SDS lysis buffer (50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1% Nonidet P40, and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). About 20 μg of cell lysate was isolated by SDS-PAGE and transferred onto a PVDF membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Western blots were analyzed for the following primary antibodies: anti-CHOP (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA, Cat# ab179823), anti-p-JNK (Thr183/Tyr185), anti-JNK (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA, Cat# 4668, Cat#9252), anti-p53 and anti-Bax (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA, Cat# sc-126 and Cat# sc-493), and anti-β-actin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA, A3854). The secondary antibodies, sheep anti-rabbit, or anti-mouse IgG-HRP, were from Thermo Fisher (Waltham, MA, USA). The proteins were visualized using an ECL detection kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA).
Cytotoxicity Assays
Cytotoxicity was measured using lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release assays (Promega, Madison, WI, USA, CytoTox 96 Non-Radioactive Cytotoxicity Assay). Briefly, 50 μL of CellTiter-Glo reagent was added to wells containing 50 μL of growth medium. After vigorous shaking at room temperature for 20 min, luminescence was measured to determine cell viability. Cell viability determination was performed in triplicate.
RNA Isolation and Quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA was isolated as previously described [ ]. Total RNA from cells was extracted with TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), then the RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA using a TransScript First-Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Takara, Otsu, Shiga, Japan). Real-time PCR analysis was performed using SYBR Green Real-Time PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) on a 7500 Real-Time System (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) and the following primers: human ATF4 sense 5’-CTCCGGGACAGATTGGATGTT-3’, antisense 5’-GGCTGCTTATTAGTCTCCTGGAC-3’; human CHOP sense 5’-GGAAACAGAGTGGTCATTCCC-3’, antisense 5’-CTGCTTGAGCCGTTCATTCTC-3’; mouse ATF4 sense 5’-CTCTTGACCACGTTGGATGAC-3’, antisense 5’-CAACTTCACTGCCTAGCTCTAAA-3’; mouse CHOP sense 5’-TTATCTTGAGCCTAACACGTCG-3’, antisense 5’-TCAGGTGTGGTGGTGTATGAA-3’; mouse p53 sense 5’-GCGTAAACGCTTCGAGATGTT-3’, antisense 5’-TTTTTATGGCGGGAAGTAGACTG-3’; mouse Bax sense 5’-AGACAGGGGCCTTTTTGCTAC-3’, antisense 5’-AATTCGCCGGAGACACTCG-3’; mouse Hrk sense 5’-GGCACGCACACAGTTCATTT-3’, antisense 5’-ACACCATGGCAGAGACAGTG-3’. The mRNA expression was measured using the ΔΔCt method relative to that of an endogenous control gene ( β-actin ).
Lentiviral Transduction
To generate expression vectors for EGFP-(PR) 28 , the CCAAGA with 28 repeats was synthesized by Invitrogen and ligated to the EcoRI and BamHI restriction sites of a pEGFP-C1 vector (Clontech Laboratories, Mountain View, CA, USA). The transduction experiments were carried out with lentivirus Ubi-EGFP-MCS (Shanghai Genechem Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China) expressing EGFP-(PR) 28 and EGFP.
Statistical Analysis
The results were quantified using Photoshop 7.0 (Adobe, San Jose, CA, USA) and the data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 7.00 (GraphPad Software, Version X; La Jolla, CA, USA). Significant differences were calculated using a two-tailed unpaired t test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett’s multiple-comparisons test or two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple-comparisons test. The criterion of significance was set at P < 0.05. The values are shown as the mean ±SEM.
Results
Synthetic PR20 Peptides are Transferred into Cells by Clathrin-Dependent Endocytosis
To determine which endocytic pathway is involved in poly-PR uptake, we used pharmacological inhibitors of endocytosis to block specific endocytic pathways in SH-SY5Y cells. Interestingly, chlorpromazine, an inhibitor of clathrin-mediated endocytosis [ , ], blocked poly-PR transfer into cells at 10 μmol/L (Fig. 1 A–C). However, genistein and nystatin, inhibitors of caveola-dependent endocytosis [ , ], and EIPA, an inhibitor for macropinocytosis [ ], did not prevent the internalization of poly-PR (Fig. 1 A). In cells treated with PR 20 for 2 h, PR 20 was transferred into the cells and accumulated in nuclei (Fig. 1 B). However, in cells treated with chlorpromazine, the abundance of PR 20 in cells was greatly decreased compared to cells without chlorpromazine treatment (Fig. 1 B–D). Moreover, PR 20 only formed a few cytosolic puncta but did not accumulate in nuclei (Fig. 1 B). To further confirm that clathrin-mediated endocytosis contributes to the transfer of poly-PR into cells, we knocked down clathrin heavy-chain (CLTC) to assess the effects of clathrin on poly-PR transfer. The uptake of PR 20 peptides was markedly lower in SH-SY5Y cells transfected with siRNA against CLTC than with control siRNA (Fig. 1 E) after treatment with synthetic PR 20 peptides (Fig. 1 F). Fig. 1 Synthetic PR 20 peptides are transferred into cells by clathrin-dependent endocytosis . A SH-SY5Y cells incubated with chlorpromazine (CMZ), genistein, nystatin, and EIPA (each at 10 μmol/L) for 30 min, and then further incubated with 5 μmol/L FITC-PR 20 for 2 h (blue, Hoechst; green, FITC; scale bar, 50 μm). B SH-SY5Y cells incubated with CMZ (10 μmol/L) for 30 min and then further incubated with 5 μmol/L FITC-PR 20 for 2 h (blue, Hoechst; green, FITC; scale bar, 20 μm). C Flow cytometric analysis of SH-SY5Y cells treated as in B (X-mean value, average fluorescence intensity of FITC). D Quantification of the intensity of flow cytometric fluorescence as in (C). Values are the mean ± SEM from 6 independent experiments (** P < 0.01, t -tests). E Western blots using clathrin heavy chain antibody in SH-SY5Y cells transiently transfected with siRNA for clathrin heavy chain for 72 h and then further incubated with 5 μmol/L FITC-PR 20 for 2 h. F SH-SY5Y cells treated as in (E) (blue, Hoechst; green, FITC; scale bar, 20 μm).
Synthetic PR20 Peptides Cause SH-SY5Y Cell Death
It has been reported that poly-PR tends to accumulate in the nucleoli and causes cell death [ ]. We found that the synthetic PR 20 was remarkably cytotoxic to SH-SY5Y cells, as evidenced by PI staining (Fig. 2 A, B). In SH-SY5Y cells, synthetic PR 20 peptides induced significant cell death at 10 μmol/L (Fig. 2 B, C). Treatment of cells with synthetic PR 20 (10 μmol/L) activated caspase-3; the percentage of cells positive for cleaved caspase-3 was ~8-fold higher than that in control cells (Fig. 2 D, E). Fig. 2 Synthetic PR 20 peptides cause cell death in SH-SY5Y cells. A SH-SY5Y cells treated with PR 20 (0, 5, or 10 μmol/L) for 24 h. then stained with PI for cell death assays (blue, Hoechst; red, PI; scale bar, 100 μm). B Relative integrated optical density of PI-positive cells as in (A). Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (** P < 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test). C Cytotoxicity measured using lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release assays in SH-SY5Y cells treated with PR 20 (0, 5, or 10 μmol/L) for 48 h. Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (* P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test). D Immunofluorescence of cleaved-caspase 3 in SH-SY5Y cells treated as in A (blue, DAPI; green, FITC; red, cleaved-caspase 3; scale bar, 50 μm). E Quantification of the density of cleaved-caspase 3-positive cells as in (D). Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (** P < 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test).
Synthetic PR20 Peptides Induce Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and JNK Activation in SH-SY5Y Cells
Since poly-PR caused significant cell death (Fig. 2 ), and ER stress is an important factor in cell death in neurodegenerative diseases [ ], we assessed the expression of CHOP, a marker of ER stress. In SH-SY5Y cells treated with 0, 5, or 10 μmol/L synthetic PR 20 , the mRNAs of the ER stress markers Atf4 and Ddit3 were significantly upregulated 10 μmol/L synthetic PR 20 (Fig. 3 A). Consistently, the CHOP protein level was increased in cells treated with 10 μmol/L synthetic PR 20 (Fig. 3 B, D). It has been reported that ER stress induces cell death through activation of the JNK-mediated pathway [ ]. We therefore examined the activation of JNK by evaluating its phosphorylation. In SH-SY5Y cells treated with PR 20 at 10 μmol/L, the phosphorylation of JNK was significantly increased (Fig. 3 B, D). Moreover, the protein levels of p53 and the pro-apoptotic factor Bax were increased in SH-SY5Y cells that with 10 μmol/L PR 20 (Fig. 3 B, D). Immunofluorescent staining further showed an increase of p53 levels after treatment with 10 μmol/L PR 20 (Fig. 3 C). Fig. 3 Synthetic PR 20 peptides induce endoplasmic reticulum stress and JNK activation in SH-SY5Y cells. A qRT-PCR analysis of SH-SY5Y cells treated with PR 20 (0, 5, or 10 μmol/L) for 24 h. The levels of Atf4 and Ddit3 mRNA were quantified and normalized to β-actin . Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (** P < 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test). B Western blots of CHOP, p-JNK, p53, and Bax protein levels in SH-SY5Y cells treated as in (A). C Immunofluorescent staining of p53 in SH-SY5Y cells treated as in (A) (blue, DAPI; green, FITC; red, p53; scale bar, 50 μm). D Quantitative analysis of the relative density of CHOP, p53, and Bax normalized to the loading control (β-actin) and quantitative analysis of the relative density of p-JNK normalized to the loading control (JNK). Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (* P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test).
Poly-PR Induces ER Stress and JNK Activation in Primary Cortical Neurons of Mouse
As poly-PR is toxic to cultured cell lines, we evaluated whether poly-PR is harmful to mouse primary cortical neurons. The primary cortical neurons were treated with different concentrations of synthetic PR 20 , and the cell death was evaluated using LDH release assays. Similar to the data from cultured cell lines, synthetic PR 20 peptides also induced neuronal death, but at a concentration as low as 0.5 μmol/L (Fig. 4 A), showing that primary cultured neurons are sensitive to poly-PR. In primary neurons treated with 0.5 μmol/L PR 20 , the expression of CHOP and Bax, and the phosphorylation of JNK were increased (Fig. 4 B and 4 C). To evaluate the effects of ploy-PR in a more disease-relevant context, we generated lentivirus vectors expressing PR with 28 repeats. The expression of Chop , Atf4 , p53 , Bax , and Hrk was significantly upregulated in primary neurons that expressed GFP-PR 28 but not in those that expressed GFP alone (Fig. 4 D). Meanwhile, the phosphorylation of JNK and the expression of Bax were upregulated in neurons expressing the poly-PR lentivirus (Fig. 4 E, F). Fig. 4 Poly-PR induces the ER stress and JNK activation in primary cortical neurons of mouse . A Cytotoxicity measured using LDH release from primary mouse cortical neurons treated with PR 20 (0, 0.25, or 0.5 μmol/L) for 24 h. PR 20 resulted in cell death at 0.5 μmol/L. Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (* P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test; scale bar, 50 μm). B Western blots of protein levels of CHOP, p-JNK, and Bax in primary mouse cortical neurons treated as in (A). C Quantitative analysis of the relative density of CHOP and Bax normalized to the loading control (β-actin), and quantitative analysis of the relative density of p-JNK normalized to the loading control (JNK). Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (* P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test). D qRT–PCR analysis of mRNA levels of Atf4 , Ddit3 , p53 , Bax and Hrk normalized to β-actin in primary mouse cortical neurons infected with lentivirus expressing GFP or GFP-PR 28 for 4 days. Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (** P < 0.01, t -tests). E Western blots of p-JNK and Bax protein levels in primary mouse cortical neurons treated as in (D). F Quantitative analysis of the relative density of p-JNK normalized to the loading control (JNK), and quantitative analysis of the relative density of Bax normalized to the loading control (β-actin). Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (* P < 0.05, t -tests).
JNK Inhibitor SP600125 Suppresses the Cell Death Caused by PR20
To further determine whether the activation of the JNK pathway plays a crucial role in the cell death induced by PR 20 , we used the JNK inhibitor SP600125 to block JNK activation in primary neurons. After pretreatment with SP600125 for 12 h, the activation of phosphorylated JNK and the upregulation of p53 and Bax were suppressed in neurons treated with PR 20 (Fig. 5 A–C). Moreover, SP600125 suppressed cell death in primary neurons treated with poly-PR, as evidenced by LDH release assays (Fig. 5 D). These results revealed that the expression of pro-apoptotic factors can be downregulated by inhibiting the activation of JNK, thereby preventing cell death (Fig. 5 E). In order to exclude the possibility that SP600125 affects the level of PR 20 in cells, we pretreated the cells with SP600125 for 12 h followed by treatment with synthetic PR 20 peptides. SP600125 did not change the fluorescence intensity of FITC in these cells (Supplementary Fig. S1). Fig. 5 JNK inhibitor SP600125 suppresses the cell death caused by PR 20 . A Western blots of the protein levels of p-JNK, p53, and Bax in primary mouse cortical neurons pretreated with 10 μmol/L SP600125 for 12 h and then treated with 0.5 μmol/L PR 20 for 24 h. B Quantitative analysis of the relative density of p-JNK normalized to the loading control (JNK). Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (* P < 0.05, two-way ANOVA and Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). C Quantitative analysis of the relative density of p53 and Bax normalized to the loading control (β-actin). Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (* P < 0.05, two-way ANOVA and Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). D Cytotoxicity measured by LDH release assay in primary mouse cortical neurons pretreated with 10 μmol/L SP600125 for 12 h and then treated with 0.5 μmol/L PR 20 for 48 h. Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (* P < 0.05, two-way ANOVA and Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). E Immunostaining for anti-MAP2 antibody in primary mouse cortical neurons treated as in (A) (blue, DAPI; green, FITC; red, MAP2; scale bar, 50 μm).
Inhibition of Clathrin-Mediated Endocytosis Suppresses the Cell Death Caused by PR20
Since we had shown that chlorpromazine blocked poly-PR uptake by inhibiting clathrin-mediated endocytosis, we wondered whether chlorpromazine can suppress the cell death induced by synthetic PR 20 . We found that pretreatment with chlorpromazine markedly attenuated the poly-PR-induced cell death, as evidenced by PI staining and LDH release assays (Fig. 6 A–C). The chlorpromazine pretreatment attenuated ER stress and suppressed the activation of phosphorylated JNK and the upregulation of p53 caused by poly-PR treatment (Fig. 6 D, E). Fig. 6 Inhibition of clathrin-mediated endocytosis suppresses the cell death caused by PR 20 . A PI staining to assess cell death in SH-SY5Y cells pretreated with 10 μmol/L CMZ for 30 min and then with 10 μmol/L PR 20 for 12 h, after which the culture medium replaced with fresh medium and the cells further culture for 36 h (scale bar, 100 μm). B Relative integrated optical densities of PI-positive cells as in (A). Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (** P < 0.01, two-way ANOVA and Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). C Cytotoxicity assessed by lactose dehydrogenase (LDH) release from SH-SY5Y cells treated as in (A). Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (* P < 0.05, two-way ANOVA and Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). D Western blots of the protein levels of CHOP, p-JNK, p53, and Bax in SH-SY5Y treated as in (A). E Quantitative analysis of the relative density of CHOP, p53, and Bax normalized to the loading control (β-actin), and quantitative analysis of the relative density of p-JNK normalized to the loading control (JNK). Values are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments (* P < 0.05, ** P < .01, two-way ANOVA and Tukey’s multiple comparisons test)
Discussion
Lines of evidence indicate that the transmission of pathogenic proteins associated with neurodegenerative diseases is responsible for the induction of neurodegeneration. These disease-related proteins or peptides, such as β-amyloid, α-synuclein, SOD1, TAR DNA-binding protein 43, and poly-glutamine, have the ability to cross cellular membranes and transfer to adjacent cells, a process known as prion-like propagation [ , , , , , , , , ]. This transfer of pathogenic proteins leads to the neuropathological spread of a lesion. Previous work has confirmed that five DPRs can spread between neurons or from neurons to glia [ ]. The mechanism underlying the release and uptake of DPRs is largely unknown. In the present study, we found that the uptake of poly-PR is mediated by endocytosis. Chlorpromazine, an inhibitor of clathrin-dependent endocytosis, largely blocked poly-PR uptake, and this attenuated the cell death induced by poly-PR.
Clathrin-dependent endocytosis, which uses clathrin-coated vesicles in the cell surface, is the most common endocytic mechanism by which a cell takes up extracellular material [ ]. Clathrin is a trimer of heterodimers, each unit consisting of one heavy and one light chain, making a lattice-like coat around vesicles. Adaptor proteins link a specific cargo with the clathrin-coated vesicle [ , ]. Clathrin-dependent endocytosis is involved in the uptake of β-amyloid peptides by astrocytes [ ]. Inhibition of clathrin-dependent endocytosis significantly decreases the internalization of β-amyloid peptides by astrocytes, and improves their viability [ ]. Also, pathological α-synuclein can enter neurons through a clathrin-dependent endocytic process. Blocking clathrin-dependent endocytosis inhibits the transmission of α-synuclein [ ].
It has been reported that poly-GR or -PR induces cell toxicity both in vivo and in vitro [ , , , , ]. Poly-GA induces ER stress though proteasome inhibition [ ]. Poly-PR and poly-GR induce cell death by impairing pre-mRNA splicing and the maturation of ribosomal RNA in U2OS cells and human astrocytes [ ] or by ER stress [ ] and JNK activation [ ].
Emerging evidence indicates that ER stress plays an important role in equilibrating protein homeostasis in cells and controlling cell fate. However, chronic ER stress damages the normal function of cells, thus initiating the apoptotic pathway [ ]. Many studies have demonstrated that ER stress is associated with neurodegenerative diseases. In Alzheimer’s disease, β-amyloid peptides induce ER stress in cortical neurons and cause caspase-12-dependent cell death [ ]. In Parkinson’s disease, α-synuclein interacts with the UPR activator glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78/Bip) and induces cell death by the PERK pathway [ ]. α-Synuclein also inhibits the processing of ATF6 by interacting with ATF6 to activate pro-apoptotic signaling [ ]. In ALS, mutant SOD1 interacts with the ER membrane protein Derlin-1, a key regulator of ER-associated protein degradation; this induces ER stress and activates the cell death pathway that is dependent on apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 [ ]. Recent studies have shown that ER stress contributes to neuronal death in C9-ALS [ , , ]. iPSC-derived motor neurons with GGGGCC repeat expansions in C9orf72 show activation of ER stress and dysfunction of Ca 2+ homeostasis [ ].
Chronic ER stress and JNK activation contribute to cell death by activating p53 transcription activity [ ] and stimulating the transcription of Bax [ ]. The JNK pathway plays an important role in signal transduction in various neurodegenerative diseases including ALS and Parkinson’s disease [ , , , ]. JNK activation is involved in several forms of motor neuronal loss induced by genetic factors [ ]. Accordingly, it has been reported that JNK is activated in samples from C9-ALS patients [ ]. In our experiments, poly-PR induced the phosphorylation of JNK and upregulated the expression of p53 and Bax. Inhibition of JNK by SP600125 significantly protected neurons from poly-PR-induced cell death and decreased the levels of p53 and Bax that were upregulated by poly-PR. We concluded that the JNK-mediated pathway plays an important role in poly-PR-induced neurotoxicity. As ER stress plays an important role in neurodegeneration, an inhibition of ER stress-induced JNK activation provides protective effects on neurons in our poly-PR cellular model.
Interestingly, it has been reported that Rab7 may participate in the intracellular transport of PR 20 peptides after their endocytosis [ ]. In primary cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons, knockout of Rab7 alleviates the axon degeneration induced by synthetic PR 20 peptides and delays neuronal death [ ], suggesting that a blockade of the intracellular transport of PR 20 peptides reduces their toxicity. Most interestingly, similar effects as Rab7 knockout have been reported in TMX2 -knockout cells [ ]. That TMX2 is a response to ER stress and TMX2 deficiency reduces it [ ] suggests that ER stress is involved the axon degeneration induced by PR 20 peptides. In our experiments, PR 20 peptide-induced ER stress and neuronal death were largely blocked by chlorpromazine, suggesting that PR 20 peptides undergo clathrin-mediated endocytosis to enter cells and cause ER stress and toxicity.
In summary, we demonstrated that poly-PR is transferred into neurons via the clathrin-dependent endocytic pathway to induce ER stress and JNK activation, leading to neuronal death. Blockade of the endocytosis of PR 20 peptides by chlorpromazine protects neurons from PR 20 peptide toxicity (Fig. 7 ). Fig. 7 Poly-PR peptides are transferred into cells by endocytosis in a clathrin-dependent manner, leading to cell death by ER stress and JNK activation.