Introduction
The heart is a muscular organ that works continuously throughout life. In response to the question “Does the heart get old with increasing age?”, the answer is, “Yes, it does”. Although left ventricular (LV) systolic function assessed by ejection fraction is usually preserved with advancing age, sclerosis gradually progresses in the heart muscle concomitant with a significant decrease in LV diastolic function. Additionally, LV mass increases slightly with age. The progression of atherosclerosis that occurs during aging also increases the LV afterload. Together, these factors result in a deterioration of LV filling ability. This decreases particularly when there is physical stress to the heart, and the consequent increase in LV filling pressure gives rise to dyspnea. Cardiac aging is a slow process that is associated with changes of cardiac structure and function that include LV hypertrophy, fibrosis, sclerosis, and diastolic dysfunction. These combine to increase the risk of developing cardiac disease in the elderly. At the molecular level, the accumulation of mitochondrial protein oxidation (Krebs tricarboxylic acid cycle) triggers mitochondrial DNA mutations, eliciting increased biogenesis of mitochondria, while increased oxidation impairs the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca ATP-ase (SERCA2) protein [ ]. The decrease in the concentration of calcium in the endoplasmic reticulum limits the diastolic relaxation of the LV myocardium with a normal or only slightly decreased systolic function. Oxidants act as specific signal molecules on physiological and pathological processes such as the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system, adrenergic signaling activation, and low serum levels of insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1, leading to obesity, hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, and other consequences, in turn creating a vicious cycle that accelerates the cardiac aging process [ ]. Echocardiography provides us with a noninvasive and simple procedure for assessing cardiac aging in the clinical setting.
Etiology of cardiac aging
Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of death in the elderly population. Among patients with cardiovascular disease over 60 years of age, 80 % have ischemic heart disease, 75 % congestive heart failure, and 70 % atrial fibrillation [ ]. Cardiac aging is a major risk factor for all of the above conditions. According to the US National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), the mortality rate from the above cardiovascular diseases increases exponentially with age (exponential curve R 2 = 0.9895) [ ]. In Japan, diastolic heart failure comprises about 40 % of all cases of heart failure [ ]. Intrinsic cardiac aging is defined as slowly progressive age-associated degeneration and decline in function, during which the heart characteristically becomes compensatory under the status of stress, contributing to increased cardiovascular mortality and morbidity. In subjects suffering from diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity, iron deficiency anemia, and some other conditions, cardiac aging is accelerated [ ]. Therefore, patients with these conditions are at increased risk of diseases related to cardiac aging, even when younger than 60 years old.
Pathophysiology and pathoanatomy of cardiac aging
Throughout life, the LV ejection fraction at rest is relatively preserved within the normal range, whereas the value at maximal exercise capacity progressively decreases due primarily to a reduction in contractive reserve [ , , ]. Oxidative stress, systemic inflammatory diseases, and endocrine dysfunction all make significant contributions to cardiac aging [ , ] (Fig. 1 ). A longitudinal study found that the LV wall thickens progressively during aging in both genders. However, a major characteristic of cardiac aging is a decrease in LV diastolic function as a consequence of myocardial fibrosis and a high intracellular calcium concentration resulting from insufficiency of reuptake of cytosolic calcium into the reticular endoplasmic sac. LV diastolic dysfunction with reduced exercise tolerance is a risk factor for the development of diastolic heart failure. Fig. 1 Aging-associated cardiovascular systemic pathological changes. Aging-associated cardiovascular systemic pathological changes are the consequence of complex factors. ANG II angiotensin II, NO nitric oxide, TGF-β transforming growth factor-β, ROS reactive oxygen species
After 50 years of age, the ventricular surface of the aortic valve is changed by fibrosis, and after 70 years of age, this is also true of the mitral valve [ ]. It is assumed that these degenerative changes of the valves with increasing age might be partly attributed to shear stress with the high pressure on the ventricular side. Lipid sedimentation, the collapses, and hypertrophy combine to produce small pseudo-nodules in the valves. In addition, mitral ring calcification is present in 10 % of patients aged more than 50 years (more in women), initially from the posterior tip of the central or commissural part, increasing the length of the cusp to more than 30 mm, and significantly reducing the movement of the leaflets [ ]. Lambl’s excrescence, which looks like a vegetation of the mitral valve, can also be observed in the aortic valve together with calcification. In the myocardium, myeloma-associated amyloidosis and senile systemic amyloidosis derived from normal transthyretin can be observed in 37 % of subjects aged 70 years old [ ]. Consequently, cardiac aging also elicits morphological changes in the aortic valve, mitral valve, and myocardium.
Mitochondrial oxidative stress plays a central role in cardiac aging. In 1956, Denham Harman, who first proposed the free radical theory of aging, suggested that intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) are the major determinant of the lifespan of cells [ , ]. ROS are generated by several intracellular processes: the action of NADPH oxidase [ROS derived from a family of superoxide-generating enzymes, termed NADPH oxidases (NOXs)] at the plasma membrane, lipid oxidation within peroxisomes, oxidative phosphorylation within mitochondria, and the actions of cyclooxygenases and xanthine oxidase in the cytoplasm. Most of the ROS are produced in mitochondria by the Krebs tricarboxylic acid cycle that generates ATP. Mitochondrial ROS, including superoxide (O 2− ) and hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), are the main causes of age-related damage and degeneration by mutating mitochondrial DNA, and the oxidase respiratory enzymes elicited increase, thereby producing more ROS and further mitochondrial dysfunction; this, in turn, increases the elasticity of the myocardium during the diastolic period by shortening cardiac titin. Nitric oxide bioavailability is also reduced by ROS, causing highly specific acute and chronic changes in the cell phenotype, and contributing to cardiac aging by inducing dysfunction of the coronary artery endothelium and remodulating the myocardium into LV diastolic dysfunction [ ]. Beta-adrenergic signaling activates the secondary messenger cAMP, which is produced by a key enzyme, adenylated cyclase type 5 [ ]. This results in increases in heart rate, contractility pressure afterload, and wall stress. Also, together with increased angiotensin II causing cardiac metabolic demand [ ], the aging process decreases the plasma concentration of IGF1, which activates a mitochondrial protection mechanism and results in increased production of mitochondrial ROS, as well as activating NF-E2 related factor 2 (Nrf2) driven antioxidant defense mechanism can release the antioxidant response element (ARE) [ ], which attenuates the oxidative stress in cardiomyocytes, producing an age-dependent weakness in autophagy in lysosomes. The accumulation of damaged nonfunctional mitochondria and lysosomes in cardiomyocytes creates a shortage of ATP production, and occupies a large proportion of cytostome volume, in turn producing hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes and limiting their ability to relax. Simultaneously, this causes a decreased level of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ and its coactivator-1α, accelerating cardiac aging and reducing NO bioavailability and soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) activity until heart failure develops [ ]. Subsequently, decreases in the concentration of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and the activity of protein kinase G (PKG) increase the turgidity of cardiomyocytes, resulting in limitation of their contractive ability. Furthermore, at the level of the arterial endothelium, expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM), E-selectin, and transforming tumor growth-β causes myocardial fibrosis by stimulating fibroblasts [ ]. Mostly, these morphological and functional changes can be observed as age-related physiological changes in the healthy elderly. However, if they are accelerated by comorbidities, such as hypertension, diabetes, and obesity, they can lead to acceleration of cardiovascular diseases related to the aging process.
Assessment of diastolic function by echocardiography
Echocardiography is of value for the noninvasive assessment of cardiac aging. Currently, echocardiographic parameters that are widely used for assessing LV diastolic function in the clinical setting are pulsed-wave (PW) mitral inflow, tissue Doppler imaging (DTI) of the mitral annulus, left atrial (LA) volume, and PW pulmonary venous flow, following the guidelines of the American Society of Echocardiography (ASE) [ ]. Among them, mitral inflow and DTI of the mitral annulus play central roles in the assessment of LV diastolic function in routine practice. In subjects with normal sinus rhythm, mitral inflow shows a biphasic pattern of peak early filling (E-wave) and late diastolic filling (A-wave). The mitral E-wave velocity primarily reflects the left atrial to left ventricular (LA–LV) pressure gradient during early diastole, and is affected by preload and alterations in LV relaxation [ ]. The mitral A-wave velocity reflects the LA–LV pressure gradient during late diastole, which is affected by LV compliance and LA contractile function. Physiologically, in the early diastolic period, LV pressure decreases rapidly, enhances a high LA–LV pressure gradient, keeps a maximum volume of blood flowing into the LV, and leaves only a minimum volume of blood flowing into the LV by the A-wave. This is characterized by an E/A value greater than 1.0 in a subject with normal diastolic function.
At grade I LV diastolic dysfunction (abnormal LV relaxation), as the LV compliance is mildly decreased, disturbing mitral inflow in early diastole, the mitral E-wave is attenuated and the deceleration time of the E-wave (DT) is prolonged (Fig. 2 ). Instead, the mitral A-wave increases in order to force the rest of the blood after the E-wave into the left ventricle. These hemodynamic changes of mitral inflow at this stage bring E/A to less than 0.8. The stage reached when LV diastolic dysfunction has progressed further, and elevated the filling pressure by decreasing LV compliance, is classified as grade II diastolic dysfunction. At this stage, the elevated LV filling pressure causes increased LV filling in early diastole, resulting in a higher mitral E-wave than A-wave. This produces a pseudo-normal E/A of 0.8–1.5. For differential diagnosis between normal and pseudo-normal LV diastolic dysfunction, the early wave of the mitral annulus by DTI (e′-wave), a surrogate marker of LV relaxation, is useful, as the e′-wave linearly decreases as diastolic dysfunction progresses, and appears as pseudo-normal [ ]. The E/e′ increases, reflecting an elevated LV filing pressure. The LA volume also serves as an indicator of elevated LV filling pressure at this stage. At the stage of severe diastolic dysfunction, classified as stage III, restrictive LV filling occurs, with an E/A ratio ≥2. LV filling may revert to impaired relaxation with successful therapy in some patients (grade IIIa), whereas in others, LV filling remains restrictive (grade IIIb) [ ]. Fig. 2 The relationship between left ventricular (LV) diastolic function grade and chamber pressures, mitral inflow, and tissue Doppler imaging of the mitral annulus. In grade I diastolic dysfunction, tau ( τ ), the rate of LV relaxation, is significantly prolonged. Decreased left atria to left ventricular pressure gradient at an early stage causes a diminished E-wave. The E-wave deceleration time (DT) is also prolonged. At the stage of grade II or grade III diastolic dysfunction, in addition to abnormal LV relaxation, a reduction of LV compliance increases the LV filling pressure, resulting in an increased E-wave. In contrast to the E-wave, the early diastolic wave of the mitral annulus (e′-wave) shows a linear decrease as diastolic dysfunction progresses, and is helpful for the differential diagnosis between normal and pseudo-normal mitral inflow. P LV left ventricular pressure, P LA left atrial pressure, MA DTI mitral annulus pulsed-wave tissue Doppler imaging
Cardiac aging assessed by echocardiography
The simplest way to estimate cardiac age is to assess LV diastolic function by echocardiography, although LV mass shows a small increase with age. Even in a healthy population, LV diastolic function decreases gradually with increasing age, and most subjects over 60 years old show grade I diastolic dysfunction (Fig. 3 ) [ , ]. Similarly, the e′-wave shows a linear decline with aging, reflecting decreased LV relaxation. Diabetes mellitus, hypertension, obesity, iron deficiency anemia, and other conditions that are risk factors for diastolic heart failure can accelerate these reductions of diastolic parameters by echocardiography, and may be referred to as risk factors for accelerated cardiac aging (Fig. 4 ). E/e′ also increases with advancing age in addition to other diastolic parameters (Fig. 5 ). Interestingly, women show a sharp decrease of diastolic parameters after 50–60 years of age compared to men [ ]. Although this phenomenon is postulated to underlie the high prevalence of diastolic heart failure in elderly women, the etiology of this gender difference is still unknown. The loss of the cardioprotective effect of estrogens after menopause has been suggested to play an important role in the deterioration of LV diastolic dysfunction in elderly women [ ]. However, early menopause did not influence LV dysfunction in elderly women in our study [ ]. On the other hand, both healthy men and women have increased body weight and blood pressure with advancing age [ ]. In a previous study of older patients with mild hypertension, women were found to have greater impairment of LV diastolic function and higher estimated LV filling pressure than men [ ]. Gender differences in the age-related increases in body weight and blood pressure may contribute to the sharp decrease in LV diastolic function in elderly women. The pathophysiological mechanism that underlies the sharp progression of LV diastolic dysfunction in elderly women is probably multifactorial, and not due only to the loss of the cardioprotective effects of estrogens. Fig. 3 Relationship between age and E/A and e′ in a healthy population. Left ventricular diastolic dysfunction progresses with aging even in a healthy population, and mostly appears after 60 years of age (from Daimon et al. [ ], with permission). E/A is the ratio of mitral inflow velocities of early filling and mitral inflow peak of late diastolic filling, e′ is the early wave of the mitral annulus by tissue Doppler imaging Fig. 4 Comparison of mitral inflow in a healthy subject aged 40 years old ( left ) and a patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension ( right ). For cardiac aging, grade I diastolic dysfunction normally appears after the age of 60 years. Patients with diabetes mellitus, obesity, etc. without effective treatment have accelerated cardiac aging, and can develop grade I diastolic dysfunction at a younger age. DM2 diabetes mellitus type 2, HT hypertension, E peak early filling velocity of mitral inflow, A peak late diastolic velocity of mitral inflow, DT deceleration time of early filling velocity Fig. 5 Relationship between age and E/e′ in a healthy population. E/e′ , a surrogate of left ventricular (LV) filling pressure, shows a significant increase with aging even in a healthy population (from Daimon et al. [ ], with permission). E/e′ is the ratio of mitral inflow velocity of early filling to early wave of the mitral annulus by tissue Doppler imaging
Despite the progression of LV diastolic dysfunction with increasing age, it rarely proceeds to grade II or grade III by the physiological process of aging in healthy subjects. Thus, subjects with diastolic dysfunction more than grade II should be suspected of having pathological changes, and in need of a careful checkup. LA size remains almost the same throughout life [ ]; and might not increase as a consequence of physiological advancing age, despite the progression of diastolic dysfunction. In a patient with a dilated LA, any latent pathology that causes high cardiac output or increased LV filling pressure, such as anemia, hypertension, thyroid dysfunction, or obesity, should be considered.
The LV mass also increases slowly with advancing age. The LV wall thickness in healthy subjects aged 20–29 years is 7 or 8 mm and gradually increases to 9 or 10 mm, accompanied by an increase in LV mass, by the age of 70 years. However, increasing LV mass by physiological aging does not reach pathological LV hypertrophy, defined as >95 g/m 2 in women and >115 g/m 2 in men [ , ].
In contrast to LV diastolic dysfunction, the LV ejection fraction does not show significant change with advancing age. However, impaired longitudinal systolic function despite preserved global LV ejection fraction has been reported to be accompanied by LV diastolic dysfunction [ ], suggesting that longitudinal systolic function may deteriorate with advancing age. In a previous study [ ], it was shown that longitudinal strain assessed by 2D speckle tracking imaging declined linearly with advancing age in a healthy population. Therefore, we may conclude that reduced longitudinal systolic function is a type of cardiac aging that can be associated with the development of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction as well as diastolic dysfunction [ ]. Furthermore, the technological advancement of 3D speckle tracking echocardiography has provided additional insight into the effect of age on LV longitudinal systolic function and torsion. Zhang et al. reported that peak LV twist was higher in older volunteers, and peak untwisting velocity and isovolumic untwisting percentage were lower in the young and old, with a peak in mid-age ranges [ ]. Kaku et al. reported that a significant age dependency was observed for global longitudinal and 3D strain [ ]. They found that aging also affected LV torsion: the lowest values were found in children and adolescents, and values subsequently increased with age, while further aging was associated with a gradual reduction in basal rotation, accompanied by an increase in apical rotation.
As for the effect of age on the right ventricle, some investigations have been reported. In a previous study [ ], right ventricular (RV) fractional area change, a one of the RV systolic functional parameters, remained unchanged irrespective of age. On the other hand, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion, RV S′ (systolic velocity of the tricuspid annulus by tissue Doppler imaging) and global systolic stain were reported to decrease with age, suggesting that RV longitudinal systolic function may be impaired with age [ ]. They also suggested that RV diastolic function might be impaired with age, showing that the peak E velocity of tricuspid inflow, RV free wall e′ velocity, and early diastolic strain rate decreased with age [ ].
Cardiac aging and cardiovascular event risk
As discussed above, functional or anatomical changes in the heart with advancing age, which can be accelerated by various clinical factors, are associated with increased risk of a future cardiovascular event. In a population-based cohort undergoing 4 years of follow-up, Kane et al. [ ] reported the prevalence of diastolic dysfunction and its association with the risk of future heart failure. They reported that heart failure occurred in 2.6, 7.8, and 12.2 % of subjects whose diastolic function normalized or remained normal, remained or progressed to mild dysfunction, or remained or progressed to moderate or severe dysfunction, respectively, during 6.3 years of further follow-up [ ]. These results suggest that prevention of cardiac aging may reduce the risk of future cardiovascular events. On the other hand, previous investigations regarding the relationship between echocardiographic parameters and cardiac aging in healthy subjects were based upon the cross-sectional observational studies. Thus, serial changes of echocardiographic parameters with age in healthy subjects are still unknown. To address this issue, a longitudinal study that follows up echocardiography in healthy subjects will be needed. Although effective prophylactic measures against cardiac aging remain to be identified, assessment of cardiac aging may be useful for predicting future cardiovascular events, and a prophylactic strategy to prevent or reduce cardiac aging may be important in the prevention of cardiovascular events in societies that have an increasing elderly population.