Introduction
Two-dimensional echocardiography and Doppler echocardiography can be used for noninvasive assessment of left atrial (LA) function [ ]. Indices of LA function determined by these methods have been shown to predict adverse cardiovascular events [ ]. However, such indices of LA function depend on hemodynamic loading conditions and on geometric assumptions. These problems have been overcome by strain imaging using tissue Doppler echocardiography (TDE) and two-dimensional speckle tracking echocardiography (2D-STE) [ , , ]. These imaging techniques enable assessment of LA function with better reproducibility than that with conventional methods. 2D-STE is an automated tracking system and a basically angle-independent technique. Analysis of longitudinal LA function by 2D-STE (i.e., LA strain and LA strain rate) has been increasingly used for various purposes including detection of subclinical LA dysfunction in patients with hypertension and/or diabetes, assessment of the effect of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF), assessment of severity of dyspnea in patients with heart failure (HF), prediction of AF recurrence after catheter ablation (CA), estimation of left ventricular (LV) filling pressure, and prediction of cardiovascular events in patients with valvular heart diseases [ , ]. Here, we review recent studies on clinical implications of LA function assessed by 2D-STE and summarize the remaining problems to be solved to improve the clinical utility of this method.
Assessment of LA strain by 2D-STE
LA mechanics
The left atrium acts as a (1) reservoir, receiving pulmonary venous return during LV systole; (2) conduit, passively transferring blood to the left ventricle during early diastole; (3) booster pump, actively contracting during late diastole. These three LA functions contribute to LV filling. Strain and strain rate imaging by TDE and 2D-STE enables assessment of all three LA functions. Strain rate imaging by TDE was initially used for assessment of passive and active deformation of the LA myocardium [ ]. However, LA strain determined by TDE is highly dependent on the angle of ultrasounds and signal-to-noise ratios. 2D-STE was subsequently applied to assess LA function and overcome the problems of TDE. Application of 2D-STE to assess LA function by deformation imaging has been studied by several groups of investigators [ –– ], and 2D-STE has become a widely used and established modality for noninvasive evaluation of LA function.
Strain is a fractional change in the length of a myocardial segment and represents myocardial deformation, whereas strain rate represents the speed at which myocardial deformation occurs. LA strain curves (Fig. 1 a, b) represent the physiology of atrial function and are closely related to LV mechanics during the cardiac cycle. During the reservoir phase, the left atrium is stretched as it is filled with blood from the pulmonary veins. In this phase, longitudinal LA strain increases, reaching a positive peak at the end of LA filling. This phase is also influenced by the downward movement of the mitral annulus toward the LV apex, as a result of LV contraction. Hence, LA strain during the reservoir phase reflects not only LA compliance but also LV longitudinal contraction. During the conduit phase, the left atrium empties and shortens quickly after mitral valve opening and LA strain decreases to a plateau, corresponding to LA diastasis. LA conduit function is dependent on aging and LV diastolic function [ ]. The LA wall subsequently shortens in a longitudinal direction during the LA contraction phase. This movement leads to a further decrease in LA strain and reflects the LA booster pump function. LA strain indices are calculated by averaging regional LA strains observed in all LA segments (i.e., global LA strain) of a 15-segment model (six regions in four-chamber view, three in three-chamber view, and six in two-chamber view) [ , ] or a 12-segment model (six regions in four-chamber view and six in two-chamber view) [ , , , , , , , , , ] or a six-segment model (six regions in four-chamber view) [ ]. LA strains during the reservoir phase and booster pump phase were focused on as indices of LA function in a number of clinical trials [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. However, LA strain rate has been less studied because noises in LA strain rate curves make it difficult to obtain consistent data [ , , , , , , , , , ]. Fig. 1 Representative measurements of left atrial (LA) strain by two-dimensional (2D) speckle tracking echocardiography. LA strain curves are set at the onset of the QRS complex ( a ) and set at the P wave ( b ). 2D-Sa LA strain during late diastole, 2D-Ss LA strain during left ventricular systole
Normal values of LA strain determined by 2D-STE
Reference values of global LA strain and LA strain rate determined by 2D-STE have been summarized in a review by Vieira et al. [ ]. Morris et al. [ ] recently reported global LA strain during LV systole (i.e., reservoir function) and global LA strain rate during late diastole (i.e., booster pump function) in 329 healthy subjects in a multicenter study. The normal ranges of global LA strain during LV systole and global LA strain rate during late diastole are 45.5 ± 11.4 % and −2.11 ± 0.61 s −1 , respectively. They also reported that the lowest expected values, which are calculated as −1.96 SD from the mean of values, were 23.1 % for global LA strain during LV systole and −0.91 s −1 for global LA strain rate during late diastole, respectively. These values are useful for detection of LA dysfunction in patients with cardiovascular diseases. As shown in a previous study on LA function determined by TDE [ ], the parameter of LA reservoir function determined by 2D-STE, but not the parameter of LA booster pump function, was found to be dependent on aging in a study by Morris et al. [ ]. Gender difference has not been observed for LA strain during LV systole and LA strain rate during late diastole. These findings suggest that difference in age, but not gender, should be taken into consideration when comparing the LA reservoir function determined by 2D-STE among multiple study groups.
What does LA strain determined by 2D-STE predict?
Reduced LA strain during LV systole is associated with impaired exercise capacity and elevated LV filling pressure [ ], which are significant determinants of outcome in patients with cardiovascular diseases. LA strain during late diastole is also correlated with LV filling pressure [ ]. Thus, assessment of LA functions, especially reservoir and booster functions, might be helpful for prediction of mortality in patients with cardiovascular diseases.
Recently, reduced LA strain determined by 2D-STE has been shown to correlate with histopathological alterations of LA myocardium [ , ]. Kuppahally et al. [ ] demonstrated that regional LA strain and strain rate during LV systole were inversely correlated with the degree of LA fibrosis estimated by delayed-enhancement magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in patients with AF. Furthermore, Cameli et al. [ ] reported that impairment of global LA strain during LV systole was strongly correlated with the extent of LA fibrosis and LA endocardial thickness in patients undergoing mitral valve surgery for severe mitral regurgitation (MR). Collectively, these findings indicate that reduced LA strain in the reservoir phase reflects LA histological remodeling, especially in patients with AF and severe MR. LA strain during LV systole might be used as a non-invasive marker of the degree of LA fibrosis.
Pitfalls of assessment of LA strain determined by 2D-STE
First, we should recognize that there are two different approaches to quantify LA strain with 2D-STE [ , ]: one is setting the reference points at the onset of the QRS complex [ , , , , , , , , ] and the other is setting the reference points at the P wave [ , , , , , ]. Different LA strain curves are provided depending on the time points of the reference. If the onset of the QRS complex is selected as the reference, peak positive LA strain represents reservoir function, and LA strains during early diastole and late diastole correspond to conduit and booster pump functions, respectively (Fig. 1 a). On the other hand, if the onset of the P wave is selected as the reference, the first negative peak LA strain represents the booster pump function, positive peak LA strain corresponds to conduit function, and their sum represents reservoir function (Fig. 1 b). Hayashi et al. [ ] recently showed that correlations between LA strains and parameters of LA function determined by three-dimensional echocardiography were stronger when the onset of P wave was used as the reference than when the QRS complex onset was used as the reference. However, the timing at which the reference is selected has not been uniform in studies to date, and a standard method for LA strain analysis has not been recommended.
Second, there is an inter-software discordance of LA strain and strain rate assessed by 2D-STE. Motoki et al. [ ] compared the LA strains and strain rates derived from two different speckle tracking analysis software programs (EchoPAC, GE Medical Systems vs. Velocity Vector Imaging, Siemens Medical Solutions). LA strains and strain rates during late diastole determined by using the two different systems were comparable. However, there were significant differences in LA strain and strain rate during LV systole and early diastole. Hence, differences in software should be taken into consideration when we quote and discuss published values of LA strain and strain rate in reservoir and conduit phases.
Third, LA strain and LA strain rate during LV systole determined by TDE were significantly decreased after preload reduction by hemodialysis [ ]. Hence, the preload dependence should be considered when we assess LA strain and strain rate during LV systole in the longitudinal follow-up studies. In contrast to the results of LA strain and LA strain rate during LV systole, LA strain rate during late diastole was not affected by the preload reduction by hemodialysis [ ]. Why LA strain rate during booster pump phase by TDE-based strain imaging shows less preload dependence than the LA strain and LA strain rate during LV systole has not been clarified. Assessment of LA volume change rate during preload alteration using 2D-STE could detect impairment of LA booster function [ ] and may be helpful for understanding the mechanism of less preload dependence of LA strain rate during late diastole.
Finally, LA strain analyses by 2D-STE have been performed by use of programs that were developed for LV analysis, and it is not actually clear whether the software programs are suitable for LA function. There is currently no software specifically for LA strain analyses.
Clinical applications of LA strain determined by 2D-STE
Atrial fibrillation
LA strain determined by 2D-STE has been most widely used to characterize alterations in LA mechanics by AF. 2D-STE enabled detection of reduced LA reservoir and booster pump functions in patients with paroxysmal AF even before LA dilatation [ ]. Yoon et al. [ ] demonstrated that impaired LA reservoir function independently predicted progression of paroxysmal AF to persistent AF, even in patients without LA dilatation. Pagola et al. [ ] reported that measurement of LA strain during LV systole is useful for detection of paroxysmal AF in patients with cryptogenic stroke and normal LA size. Furthermore, LA strain and strain rate determined by TDE or 2D-STE could predict AF recurrence and LA reverse remodeling after cardioversion or CA for paroxysmal and persistent AF [ , ]. Motoki et al. [ ] recently confirmed in a large-scale study (204 cases of paroxysmal AF, 52 cases of persistent AF) that LA reservoir function assessed by 2D-STE was independently related to AF recurrence after CA. Consistent with their findings, we could detect improvement of LA function by use of 2D-STE in AF patients in whom sinus rhythm was maintained after CA (Fig. 2 ). Taken together, these findings suggest that assessment of LA reservoir function by 2D-STE provides important information for risk stratification of stroke and can improve candidate selection of patients with AF for CA. Fig. 2 Comparison of left atrial (LA) strains during left ventricular (LV) systole and late diastole assessed by two-dimensional (2D) speckle tracking echocardiography in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation ( n = 26) before ( Pre CA ) and 3 months after catheter ablation (CA) ( Post CA 3M ). LA strain during LV systole ( a ), but not that during late diastole ( b ), was significantly improved after CA. Sinus rhythm was maintained after CA (unpublished data by Yamamoto-Masuda H., Yuda S). NS not significant
Stroke
Stratification of patients with AF, especially those with low CHADS 2 or CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc scores, for risk of stroke is important for decision-making in therapy. Decreased LA strain during LV systole has been shown to be an independent predictor of stroke in patients with AF, even in patients with low CHADS 2 scores [ , ]. Obokata et al. [ ] recently demonstrated that decreased LA strain during LV systole provided incremental value for embolism risk stratification over that by the CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc score in patients with AF.
All-cause mortality and hospitalization for cardiac events are also predicted by decreased LA strain during LV systole determined by 2D-STE, which had an incremental value over CHADS 2 score and LA volume [ , ]. Furthermore, decreased LA strain during LV systole, in addition to age and Glasgow Coma Scale score, independently predicts all-cause mortality after cerebral embolism [ ]. Collectively, these findings indicate that LA reservoir function determined by 2D-STE is important for stratification of AF patients for risk of stroke and mortality and may be useful for decision-making in anticoagulation therapy, especially in AF patients with low CHADS 2 or CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc scores.
Heart failure
LA reservoir and booster pump functions have been shown to be impaired in both patients with HF with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) and patients with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) [ ]. Kurt et al. [ ] demonstrated that LA strain during LV systole determined by TDE-based strain imaging was significantly lower in patients with HFpEF than in patients who had LV diastolic dysfunction without HF (DD). In patients with HFrEF, LA reservoir and booster pump functions were significantly lower than those in patients with HFpEF. They also demonstrated that LA stiffness index, which was calculated as the ratio of estimated LV filling pressure to LA strain during LV systole, was the most accurate index to distinguish patients with HFpEF from patients with DD.
Kusunose et al. [ ] demonstrated that LA strain during LV systole was an independent predictor of estimated metabolic equivalents (METs) in patients with HFpEF. A similar relationship between LA strain and exercise capacity was also reported for patients with HFrEF [ ]. However, a significant relationship between LA dysfunction determined by 2D-STE and mortality in patients with HF has not been demonstrated. One possible explanation for the lack of a relationship is the contribution of other major predictors (e.g., LV ejection fraction and E / e ′), exceeding the impact of LA dysfunction determined by 2D-STE on mortality in patients with HF.
Valvular heart diseases
Decreased LA strain assessed by 2D-STE was shown not only in patients with mitral valve diseases but also in patients with aortic valve diseases [ , ]. LA strain during LV systole was decreased with increase in the severity of MR [ ]. For similar degrees of severity of MR, LA strain during LV systole in patients with paroxysmal AF was significantly lower than that in patients without paroxysmal AF. Reduction in LA strain during LV systole is associated with adverse events in patients with MR. Not only increased LA volume but also increased LA strain during LV systole before mitral valve replacement is independently associated with postoperative AF in patients with severe MR [ , ]. Furthermore, death and need for mitral valve surgery due to HF were found to be predicted by LA strain during LV systole in a cohort of 104 patients with asymptomatic severe primary MR [ ].
LA strain and strain rate during LV systole are impaired in patients with mitral stenosis (MS) even at asymptomatic stages. Reduced LA strain rate during LV systole determined by 2D-STE could predict worse prognosis during 3-year follow-up in patients with moderate MS, irrespective of LA volume, age, and mitral valve area [ ]. In addition, LA strain during LV systole was the most powerful predictor of new-onset AF at 4-year follow-up in asymptomatic patients with isolated rheumatic MS [ ]. These findings indicate that impaired LA reservoir function determined by 2D-STE can predict the development of AF and cardiovascular events independent of mitral valve area in asymptomatic patients with MS.
In patients with aortic stenosis (AS), impaired LA strains during LV systole and late diastole and their recovery after aortic valve replacement were demonstrated [ , ]. As reported for MR and MS, reduction in LA strain during LV systole in AS is associated with increase in all-cause mortality, worsened HF, and need for cardiac-related hospitalization [ ]. The impact of reduced LA strain during LV systole was independent of the presence of coronary artery disease and New York Heart Association functional class. On the other hand, LA function in patients with aortic regurgitation has not been characterized by 2D-STE. As discussed above, results of studies to date indicate development of LA dysfunction at the early phase of MR, MS, and AS and significant impact of LA dysfunction on prognosis, including all-cause mortality and outcome after surgery. Hence, assessment of LA reservoir function by 2D-STE in patients with valvular diseases is likely to provide a guide for therapy, particularly for timely surgery in patients with asymptomatic severe valvular diseases.
Ischemic heart diseases
Although 2D-STE-assessed change in LA strain caused by ischemic heart disease (IHD) has not been characterized fully, several studies have shown that assessment of LA strains provides useful information for management of patients with IHD. First, reduced LA strain during LV systole predicts increased risk of new-onset AF after coronary artery bypass graft surgery [ , ]. Second, LA strain during LV systole may be useful for prediction of prognosis in patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) [ ]. LA reservoir and booster pump functions determined by 2D echocardiography or cardiac MRI are known to be independent predictors of all-cause mortality in patients with AMI [ ]. Antoni et al. [ ] showed that LA strain during LV systole and LA volume could independently predict all-cause mortality, reinfarction, and hospitalization for HF in a cohort of 320 patients with AMI treated with percutaneous coronary intervention. Ersbøll et al. [ ] also demonstrated that LA strain during LV systole was associated with all-cause mortality and hospitalization for HF in a cohort of 843 patients with AMI. However, they indicated that LA strain during LV systole was not an independent predictor of outcome when adjusting for age, LV longitudinal strain, and LA volume. It is unclear whether the discrepancy between the results of the two studies can be totally explained by use of LV longitudinal strain and LA volume as variables for adjustment in multivariate analyses. Nevertheless, further studies, in which LV longitudinal strain and LA volume are adjusted in multivariate analysis, will be necessary for clarifying the impact of alteration in LA strain on prognosis of patients with IHD.
Hypertension and diabetes mellitus
Hypertension and diabetes are very common diseases particularly in the elderly, and both of the diseases are major risk factors of HF, including HFpEF. As in patients with paroxysmal AF, reduced LA reservoir and booster pump functions were demonstrated in hypertensive and diabetic patients with normal LA size (LA volume index <28 mL/m 2 ) compared with those in controls [ ]. Further reductions of LA function determined by 2D-STE were shown in patients with both hypertension and diabetes mellitus [ ]. Oki et al. [ ] demonstrated that 2D-STE could detect not only LA dysfunction but also LV and arterial dysfunctions in asymptomatic patients with hypertension. Furthermore, they showed that abnormal LA–LV–arterial interaction worsens as asymptomatic hypertensives develop HFpEF. Taken together, the findings suggest that 2D-STE is useful for early diagnosis of LA and LV dysfunction and stage of cardiac remodeling caused by hypertension and/or by diabetes.
2D-STE is useful for evaluation of the effects of medications on LA function in patients with hypertension (Fig. 3 ). By using 2D-STE, Degirmenci et al. [ ] showed that LA reservoir, conduit, and booster pump functions were improved after 12 months of treatment with renin angiotensin receptor blockers (irbesartan) and beta blockers (nebivolol) in patients with mild–moderate hypertension. The improvement of LA strain during LV systole occurred together with controlled blood pressures and decrease in LA volume. Interestingly, no significant difference in the beneficial effect on LA function was found between the irbesartan treatment group and the nebivolol treatment group. These findings indicate that improvement of LA function after antihypertensive therapy primarily depends on the blood pressure control level, not on the class of antihypertensive agents. Since LA dysfunction is closely associated with new-onset AF, the impact of subclinical LA dysfunction on the development of AF and prognosis in patients with hypertension and diabetes mellitus is an interesting issue. However, since LA dysfunction in most patients with hypertension and diabetes mellitus is mild, a large-scale study with a long follow-up period will be needed to address this issue. Fig. 3 Comparison of left atrial (LA) strains during left ventricular (LV) systole assessed by two-dimensional (2D) speckle tracking echocardiography in patients with hypertension ( n = 15) before ( Pre Irb ) and after 13 months of treatment with irbesartan (Irb) ( Post Irb 13M ). LA strain during LV systole was significantly improved after treatment with Irb (unpublished data by Yuda, Nakata)
Collectively, these findings indicate that 2D-STE is a sensitive tool to detect LA involvement in various non-cardiac diseases. Whether assessment of LA dysfunction associated with those non-cardiac diseases is useful for stratifying AF risk or risk of cardiovascular death remains to be investigated.
Prediction of prognosis using LA strain determined by 2D-STE
As shown in Table 1 , there is accumulating evidence indicating that LA strain determined by 2D-STE, which can be easily measured with good reproducibility, has an impact on prognosis in patients with cardiovascular diseases. However, in contrast to LA volume, LA strain has been shown to be a predictor of outcome in only several types of cardiovascular diseases [ ]. Furthermore, the clinical utility as a predictor of outcome is limited to LA strain during LV systole, which reflects LA reservoir function. Table 1 Previous studies regarding to the impact of LA strain by 2D speckle tracking echocardiography on the outcomes References Publication date Etiology Number of patients Mean or median follow-up period Predictors of outcome Cutoff value of LA strain Antoni et al. [ ] 2011 AMI 320 27 ± 14 months LA-Ss, LAV LA-Ss < 19 % Cameli et al. [ ] 2012 CVD 312 3.1 ± 1.4 years LA-Ss, LAV LA-Ss < 18.8 % Ersbøll et al. [ ] 2013 AMI 843 23 months Age, LAV, LV systolic strain Not selected Obokata et al. [ ] 2014 AF with embolism 82 425 days LA-Ss, age, GCSS LA-Ss ≤ 12 % Galli et al. [ ] 2015 AS 128 14 months LA-Ss, CAD, NYHA class LA-Ss < 21 % Yang et al. [ ] 2015 MR 104 13.2 ± 9.5 months LA-Ss LA-Ss < 26% AF atrial fibrillation, AMI acute myocardial infarction, AS aortic stenosis, CAD coronary artery disease, CVD cardiovascular disease, 2D two-dimensional, GCSS Glasgow Coma Scale score, LA left atrial, LA-Ss LA strain during LV systole (i.e., LA reservoir function), LAV LA volume index, LV left ventricular, MR mitral regurgitation, NYHA New York Heart Association functional class
Assessment of LA strain by 3D-STE
2D-STE is a promising and useful modality for assessment of LA function; however, it has several limitations. Measurement of LA strain by 2D-STE is dependent on image quality and suffers from errors due to the loss of some speckles that move out of the image plane (i.e., through-plane motion). LA myocardial fibers are arranged in both longitudinal and circumferential directions, and cardiac MRI has demonstrated that LA fibrosis occurred heterogeneously in patients with AF [ ]. Thus, it is likely that the assessment of longitudinal LA function by 2D-STE overlooks some LA dysfunction. Three-dimensional (3D) STE has been developed and its advantages for the determination of LV strain and LV synchrony have been shown [ ]. Our recent study [ ] demonstrated that 3D-STE enabled measurement of both LA strain (Fig. 4 ) and synchrony with excellent reproducibility. In addition, impairment of LA function and synchrony were found in patients with paroxysmal AF even in the absence of LA dilatation, and the assessment of LA function by 3D-STE was more accurate than that by 2D-STE in differentiation of patients with paroxysmal AF from controls [ ]. Moreover, 3D-STE enabled detection of the improvement of both impaired LA strain and LA dyssynchrony after CA for paroxysmal AF [ ]. These findings indicate that 3D-STE is also an option for assessment of LA dysfunction in patients with AF undergoing CA, as is 2D-STE [ , , ]. Fig. 4 Representative measurements of left atrial area strain during left ventricular systole (3D-ASs) and late diastole (3D-ASa) by three-dimensional (3D) speckle tracking echocardiography in patients who had paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF) with ( b ) and without ( a ) AF recurrence after catheter ablation
Superiority of 3D-STE over 2D-STE for assessment of LA function has been shown only in our study [ ]. More studies will be required to clarify whether the diagnostic and prognostic values of 3D-STE are superior to those of 2D-STE. Moreover, LA synchrony, which could be accurately determined by 3D-STE [ , ], is a novel parameter of LA mechanics. Watanabe et al. [ ] recently demonstrated that LA dyssynchrony determined by 3D-STE in patients with paroxysmal AF was correlated with abnormality of LA substrate assessed by an electroanatomic mapping system. However, evaluation of the clinical utility of this parameter remains insufficient and further studies are needed.
Future perspectives
Clinical relevance of LA function determined by 2D-STE has emerged, and this modality is considered to be a promising technique for diagnosis, therapeutic decision-making, and assessment of prognosis. However, most previous findings were derived from single-center studies with relatively small sample sizes. Hence, nonbiased large-scale multicenter studies will be required to test and strengthen the clinical utility of LA function determined by 2D-STE. In addition, there are several problems to be solved. Lack of standardization in data analysis and software applications is a major problem, as described in the section “Pitfalls of assessment of LA strain determined by 2D-STE”, and should be solved, for example, in accordance with a consensus report by the EACVI/ASE/Industry Task Force [ ]. The remaining problems to be solved to improve the clinical utility of this modality are summarized in Table 2 . Table 2 Remaining problems to be solved to improve the clinical utility of STE Prognosis Impacts of LA dysfunction in patients with DM/HT on the development of AF and prognosis Impacts of LA dysfunction in patients with HF, IHD, and AR on mortality Clinical utility of LA booster pump function in prediction of outcomes Confirmation of relationship between prognosis and LA dysfunction in a large multicenter study Standardization in LA strain measurements Data analysis (QRS complex onset or P wave onset, analysis of 12 segments or 15 segments) Development of ultrasonic machines with less intervendor variability of LA strain Development of specific software programs for LA strain analysis 3D-STE Diagnostic and prognostic values of 3D-STE in patients with AF, HF, IHD, and VHD Superiority of LA strain by 3D-STE compared to that by 2D-STE Clinical utility of LA synchrony by 3D-STE AF atrial fibrillation, AR aortic regurgitation, DM diabetes mellitus, 2D two-dimensional, 3D three-dimensional, HF heart failure, HT hypertension, IHD ischemic heart diseases, LA left atrial, STE speckle tracking echocardiography, VHD valvular heart diseases
Conclusions
Assessment of LA function is important for prediction of prognosis in patients with cardiovascular diseases. 2D-STE is advancing toward being a clinically feasible tool for quantitative analysis of LA function. LA function determined by 2D-STE enables detection of early LA dysfunction before anatomical changes and provides additional prognostic information to conventional echocardiographic parameters of LA. It is possible that early and quantitative detection of LA dysfunction will contribute to improvement of cardiac therapy.