Introduction
Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) has proven to be highly effective for improving symptoms and survival of patients with advanced heart failure (HF) and wide QRS [ , , ]. However, many randomized clinical trials have demonstrated that a significant minority of patients do not favorably respond to CRT on the basis of standard clinical selection criteria, including left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF) and electrocardiographic QRS width. Although various factors can influence response to CRT, LV dyssynchrony has gained prominence as a potentially important means for predicting patient response. Interest in the quantification of LV dyssynchrony as a potential means for better management of patients referred for CRT has therefore remained high. Echocardiographic assessment of LV dyssynchrony has been widely believed to be useful for CRT, but the Predictors of Responders to Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (PROSPECT) study suggested that the predictive value of various forms of echocardiographic dyssynchrony, such as conventional M-mode, pulsed Doppler, and tissue Doppler-derived parameters, are not sufficiently robust to replace routine selection criteria for CRT [ ]. A more recent approach is the application of speckle-tracking echocardiography, which is used for routine grayscale echocardiographic images and is not limited by the Doppler angle of incidence. Speckle-tracking strain analysis therefore allows for an accurate quantification of regional wall thickening. Speckle-tracking approaches have therefore generated a great deal of excitement about their clinical applications for CRT. Here, we review especially the strengths of speckle-tracking methods, and their current and future potential for clinical use in CRT.
Assessment of LV dyssynchrony by means of speckle-tracking strain
Until the PROSPECT study was published, most reports on echocardiographic LV dyssynchrony analysis focused on the use of LV longitudinal velocities by means of tissue Doppler imaging from the apical views. Typical left bundle branch block (LBBB) activation can be clearly visualized by speckle-tracking radial strain imaging, and patients with typical LBBB contraction have early peaks in the septum with early pre-stretching in the posterior and lateral wall and late posterior and lateral peaks after aortic valve closure (Fig. 1 a). Suffoletto et al. first reported the utility of speckle-tracking radial strain echocardiography for quantifying LV dyssynchrony, defined as a time difference of ≥130 ms in the timing of peak strain between the anteroseptum and the posterior wall from the mid-LV short-axis views, and which is associated with the EF response to CRT (Fig. 1 b) [ ]. Since then, several investigators have demonstrated the usefulness of speckle-tracking radial strain imaging for quantification of LV dyssynchrony and its ability to predict midterm LV reverse remodeling as well as long-term outcomes after CRT [ , , , , ]. The Speckle Tracking and Resynchronization (STAR) study was the first prospective multicenter study to investigate the relationship between speckle-tracking strain dyssynchrony and EF response and long-term survival after CRT [ ]. Speckle-tracking radial strain imaging from short-axis views and transverse strain imaging from apical views were found to be associated with response to CRT in 132 patients, and the absence of dyssynchrony before CRT by radial or transverse strain (or both) to be significantly associated with death, heart transplantation, or LV assist device implantation. In addition, Risum et al. reported that, during a 4-year follow-up, favorable outcomes were associated with HF patients with LBBB who showed typical LBBB contraction patterns detected by speckle-tracking strain [ ]. The utility for CRT of speckle-tracking strain to quantitatively assess LV dyssynchrony has also been recently demonstrated by a multicenter prospective study [ ]. Fig. 1 The activation of typical LBBB can be clearly visualized by two-dimensional speckle-tracking radial strain from mid-LV short-axis view. Typical LBBB contraction has early peak in the septal wall ( red arrow ) with early pre-stretch in the posterior and lateral wall ( blue arrow ) and late posterior and lateral peak after aortic valve closure ( black arrow ). LV dyssynchrony was usually quantified as the time difference between the peak anteroseptum to posterior wall from mid-LV short-axis views, and ≥130 ms was defined as significant. AVC aortic valve closure
Application for CRT of LV dyssynchrony detected by speckle-tracking strain
Patients with borderline QRS duration or non-LBBB
Of the HF patients who met the inclusion criteria for CRT, those with a smaller QRS width of 120–150 ms or without LBBB have expressed misgivings about the benefits of CRT. As a result, current guidelines specify a class I indication for CRT for patients with a QRS width of ≥150 ms and LBBB and even with mild HF such as New York Heart Association (NYHA) class II [ , ]. With regard to the association of LV dyssynchrony detected by speckle-tracking radial strain imaging with long-term survival after CRT, Gorcsan et al. designed a prospective and longitudinal study of 229 consecutive NYHA class III–IV HF patients with LVEF ≤35 % and QRS duration ≥120 ms. They reported that patients with a QRS width of 120–150 ms and significant LV dyssynchrony, determined as a time difference of ≥130 ms in the timing of peak strain between the anteroseptum and the posterior wall from the mid-LV short-axis views, showed favorable outcomes similar to those for patients with a QRS width of ≥150 ms; however, those with a QRS width of 120–150 ms and who lacked significant LV dyssynchrony had a particularly poor prognosis (Fig. 2 a) [ ]. The same group also reported that LBBB patients showed significantly more favorable long-term outcomes compared with non-LBBB patients including intraventricular conduction delay and right bundle branch block (Fig. 2 b) [ ]. In addition, non-LBBB patients with significant LV dyssynchrony showed significantly more favorable long-term outcomes, a finding similar to that for patients with LBBB when compared with non-LBBB patients who lacked significant LV dyssynchrony. Specifically, the association between LV dyssynchrony and survival for non-LBBB patients showed that the hazard ratio for LV dyssynchrony was 2.58, with a 95 % confidence interval of 1.47–4.53. Although the potential influence of CRT on outcome for patients without LV dyssynchrony remains unknown, the absence of LV dyssynchrony determined by speckle-tracking radial strain echocardiography may be a marker for a less favorable prognosis for patients who undergo CRT for routine indications, especially those with borderline QRS duration or non-LBBB. Fig. 2 The times-to-peak speckle-tracking radial strain of 16 segments from mid- and basal-LV views (6 from each view) were determined. The site of latest activation was determined as the segment with the latest peak strain (mid-posterior, red arrow )
Patients with a narrow QRS
Although current guidelines do not recommend CRT for HF patients with a narrow QRS (<120 ms), single-center studies have suggested that LV dyssynchrony criteria that are based on echocardiographic measurements can identify patients with narrow QRS who can benefit from CRT [ , , , ]. Echocardiography Guided Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (EchoCRT) was a randomized trial evaluating the effect of CRT on patients with a QRS width of <130 ms and echocardiographic evidence of LV dyssynchrony including speckle-tracking radial strain imaging [ ]. Although the trial was terminated early due to futility, a significant relative increase in all-cause mortality of 81 % was observed in the CRT-ON compared with the CRT-OFF group. Although a small minority of patients with a QRS width of ≤120 ms responded favorably to CRT in a clinical setting, current guidelines still recommend not using CRT for such patients as a result of EchoCRT findings.
Another application of speckle-tracking strain echocardiography for CRT
Combined assessment of LV dyssynchrony and myocardial function
Although LV dyssynchrony has been most closely associated with the response to CRT, other factors, such as LV myocardial viability or scar burden, LV lead position, and inadequate atrioventricular and ventricular–ventricular optimization, can influence the response to CRT. The especially important parameters for the lack of response to CRT are absence of LV dyssynchrony and impaired myocardial function such as that caused by scar tissue. Lim et al. reported the strain delay index determined by longitudinal speckle-tracking strain imaging from standard apical views was a marker of both LV dyssynchrony and myocardial contractility [ ]. They demonstrated that a strain delay index ≥25 % constituted a strong predictor of response to CRT with 95 % sensitivity and 83 % specificity and correlated with reverse remodeling in both ischemic and non-ischemic patients. This means that current identification of responders using time delay indices alone is inherently limited, and that combined assessment of LV mechanical dyssynchrony and myocardial function, including myocardial viability or cardiac sympathetic activity, is likely to lead to more accurate prediction than the use of individual parameters. In addition, Mochizuki et al. reported on a more simple and intelligible speckle-tracking approach to the assessment of LV dyssynchrony and myocardial function in 132 CRT patients [ ]. They assessed both LV radial dyssynchrony and global circumferential strain (GCS), the latter being considered a parameter of LV intrinsic myocardial function, from the same mid-LV short-axis view. Combining assessment of LV radial dyssynchrony and GCS was even more effective for predicting cardiovascular events during long-term follow-up, and a time of only 2 ± 1 min per patient was needed to analyze both parameters from the same routine mid-LV short-axis view.
Other investigators have reported that LV myocardial viability or scar tissue, especially the posterolateral systolic function where the LV pacing lead was positioned, is an important marker for the response to CRT [ , , ]. Norisada et al. observed that combining speckle-tracking radial dyssynchrony with posterolateral myocardial systolic function assessed by automated function imaging, based on longitudinal strain detected by speckle-tracking echocardiography, was more useful for predicting response to CRT than speckle-tracking radial dyssynchrony parameters alone [ ].
Determination of appropriate LV lead position
Although the LV lead is routinely positioned in a posterior or lateral epicardial vein through the coronary sinus, the importance of the site of LV lead placement during CRT has been previously demonstrated, with consistent results supporting the benefit of placing the LV at the site of latest mechanical activation [ , , , , ]. The determination of the site of LV lead position can usually be determined by means of speckle-tracking radial strain imaging in 12 segments obtained from the mid- and basal-LV short-axis view (Fig. 3 ). Two recent major prospective, double-blinded, randomized trials demonstrated the utility of LV lead positioning using speckle-tracking echocardiographic guidance. Both the Targeted Left Ventricular Lead Placement to Guide Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (TARGET) and The Speckle Tracking Assisted Resynchronization Therapy for Electrode Region (STARTER) trials compared outcomes for patients with LV lead placement at or close to the site of the latest mechanical activation determined by means of speckle-tracking strain echocardiography and those with LV lead placement determined with a routine fluoroscopic approach [ , ]. Both trials showed that patients who had LV lead replacement determined by speckle-tracking guidance had more favorable outcomes than those who had not. Fig. 3 a Patients with a QRS width of 120–150 ms who had LV dyssynchrony (≥130 ms) had a similarly favorable outcome to those with a QRS width of ≥150 ms; however, those with a QRS width of 120–150 ms who lacked LV dyssynchrony had a particularly poor prognosis. b Patients with non-LBBB who had LV dyssynchrony showed a favorable outcome similar to that for patients with LBBB, while those with non-LBBB who lacked LV dyssynchrony had a particularly poor prognosis. Adapted from References [ ] and [ ]
Potential of application of 3D speckle-tracking strain echocardiography for CRT
Although two-dimensional (2D) speckle-tracking approaches for CRT are clinically useful, they are restricted to the assessment of LV function in a single plane. Moreover, each segment must be evaluated sequentially so that assessment is subject to beat-to-beat variability. The newer and theoretically superior approach is the three-dimensional (3D) speckle-tracking echocardiography system because 2D speckle-tracking is limited to the measurement of dyssynchrony in a single plane, which may therefore possess insufficient sensitivity to determine the precise patterns of dyssynchrony (Fig. 4 ). Since LV dyssynchrony in reality is a 3D phenomenon, 3D speckle-tracking strain imaging provides a unique and powerful tool for the evaluation of LV dyssynchrony [ , , ]. Tanaka et al. were the first to report that radial dyssynchrony identified by 3D speckle-tracking was successfully quantified in 64 subjects from all 16 LV sites as maximal opposing wall delay in time-to-peak strain and standard deviation of time-to-peak strain [ ]. Fig. 4 a Color-coded 3D LV display and bull’s-eye plot image and corresponding time-to-radial-strain curves from 16 LV segments from a normal control subject, demonstrating synchronous time-to-peak-strain curves represented by homogenous coloring at end-systole (see Animations 1 and 2). b Color-coded 3D LV display and bull’s-eye plot image and corresponding time-to-radial-strain curves from 16 LV segments from a heart failure patient with LBBB, demonstrating dyssynchronous time-to-peak-strain curves represented by heterogenous coloring at end-systole (see Animations 3 and 4)
An exciting potential application of 3D speckle-tracking strain system is mapping LV mechanical activation and guiding LV lead positioning. Although the site of the latest activation for CRT was first determined with a 2D speckle-tracking method, the novel 3D speckle-tracing echocardiography system has the potential to improve dyssynchrony analysis by providing a more complete 3D mechanical activation map. The pattern of the site of the latest mechanical activation in HF patients with LBBB varies according to the individual and the timing of regional mechanical contraction cannot be determined using a surface electrocardiogram.
This novel 3D speckle-tracking system has been found to be able to quantify the endocardial area change ratio (area change ratio) when coupled with the factors of both longitudinal and circumferential strain from all 16 standard LV segments [ ], and to predict LV reverse remodeling following CRT [ , ]. In addition, this system also provides visualization of mechanical activation, known as activation imaging [ ]. The concept of activation imaging is to visualize the onset of regional mechanical activation modeled after that of electrical mapping systems. This imaging allows for identification at a glance of the earliest and latest segments on the images, which is helpful for determining the optimal LV lead position as well as quantifying the LV dyssynchrony. In addition, Seo et al. more recently reported that a U-shaped propagation pattern as identified by activation imaging was significantly associated with a favorable response for patients with LBBB treated with CRT [ ].
However, the 3D speckle-tracking system currently presents several matters of concern for its future use for CRT including low temporal and spatial resolution, reproducibility and others. Further technical advances in computer technology can thus be expected in the near future.
Conclusions
In terms of current guidelines, speckle-tracking imaging may not be used to recommend whether a patient should undergo CRT. However, we believe that speckle-tracking plays an important ‘additive’ role for CRT, and this should be a clinical decision on a case-by-case basis for the borderline or challenging cases.