Introduction
Since the introduction of transcatheter structural heart intervention, the term “structural heart disease” has been widely used in the field of cardiology. Structural heart disease refers to congenital heart disease, valvular heart disease, and cardiomyopathy, and valvular heart disease is frequently identified in the elderly [ ]. Transcatheter intervention, which is less invasive than surgical intervention, is one of the revolutionary techniques for treating structural heart disease in the aging society; transcatheter aortic valve replacement for aortic stenosis (AS) and percutaneous mitral valve repair for mitral regurgitation (MR) are most frequently performed. Here, we focus on structural heart disease and its assessment using exercise echocardiography, particularly in AS and MR.
Aortic stenosis
Senile degenerative AS is the most common form of valvular heart disease in developed countries, and its prevalence is rapidly increasing along with the aging population and is present in 3–7 % of patients over 65 years old [ ]. Echocardiography is a gold-standard modality for diagnosing AS. Symptom occurrence in patients with severe AS represents a clear indication for aortic valve replacement (AVR) [ , ]. However, the management of asymptomatic patients with severe AS remains challenging. In a recent study including asymptomatic patients with at least moderate AS and following up for 16–18 months, the mean rates of cardiovascular death and sudden death were 3.7 and 1.6 %, respectively [ ]. In this regard, early surgery before symptom onset is debated in asymptomatic patients. The optimal timing for AVR remains controversial due to the lack of prospective data on the determinants of AS progression, multicenter studies on risk stratification, and randomized studies. Exercise stress test with or without imaging is strictly contraindicated in symptomatic patients with severe AS. The current guidelines recommend exercise stress test in asymptomatic patients because it may provide incremental prognostic value [ , ]. Moreover, symptomatic status is often subtle, insidious, and difficult to identify purely on clinical practice, particularly in elderly patients. Thus, exercise stress test is also useful to confirm symptom status. One recent meta-analysis confirmed that symptom-limited stress test is safe and has an important prognostic value [ ]. Of note, none of the approximately 500 patients undergoing the normal exercise stress tests in the seven studies had sudden cardiac death. Indeed, symptom occurrence during exercise and abnormal blood pressure response are associated with poor outcome and should be considered as an indication for AVR [ , ]. Exercise echocardiography may also improve risk stratification and identify asymptomatic patients at higher risk of a cardiac event. Semi-supine exercise echocardiography provides the advantages of its wide availability, such as Doppler information and the assessment of regional wall motion not only at peak exercise but also throughout the exercises test. In this review, we evaluate the usefulness of exercise echocardiography with semi-supine bicycle in AS and MR.
Exercise protocol
A symptom-limited graded exercise test is recommended, and at least 80 % of the age-predicted heart rate should be reached in the absence of symptoms. Classically, the initial workload of 25 W is maintained for 2–3 min and the workload is gradually increased every 2–3 min by 25 W. An increase in workload by 10 W seems to be appropriate in elderly patients and patients with low levels of physical activities. Blood pressure and electrocardiography are recorded at rest and at each step of the test. The exercise test should be stopped promptly in case of typical chest pain, breathlessness, dizziness, muscular exhaustion, hypotension (drop in systolic blood pressure ≥20 mmHg), and/or significant ventricular arrhythmias. Isolated abnormalities in the ST-segment (>2 mm ST-segment depression) are rare causes to stop the stress examination in patients with AS. The treadmill exercise test is most commonly used test in the United States, whereas the semi-supine bicycle test is considered desirable in Europe. The semi-supine bicycle test has the following two major advantages compared to the treadmill exercise test: (1) it can be performed with echo imaging for monitoring real-time cardiac function and hemodynamics during exercise, and (2) risk reduction of fall down. In our laboratory, exercise echocardiography using semi-spine bicycle is generally employed (Fig. 1 ) [ , , , , , ]. Fig. 1 Exercise echocardiography laboratory. Example of the exercise echocardiography using semi-spine bicycle table including electrocardiography
Exercise echocardiography
Image acquisitions focus on parameters related to the valve, the left ventricle (LV), and systolic pulmonary artery pressure (SPAP). The dynamic changes in aortic mean pressure gradient and SPAP should be assessed throughout the test, from low to peak levels of exercise. The assessment of exercise-induced changes in LV systolic function is also useful. Newly developed wall motion abnormalities indicate an ischemic insult. The use of wall motion score may help to quantify such abnormalities. The absence of LV contractile reserve is generally characterized by the absence or a slight increase in LV ejection fraction or long-axis function derived from tissue Doppler imaging or two-dimensional speckle tracking imaging. Changes in the LV filling pressure estimation (i.e., E / e ′ ratio) should be obtained at low levels of exercise (approximately 100 beats/min) in order to avoid E and A wave fusion.
Value of exercise stress test
Changes in clinical and electrocardiographic parameters during exercise test, which influences prognosis in patients with asymptomatic severe AS, have been recently reported. Approximately one-third of asymptomatic patients may develop symptoms on exercise [ , , , , , ]. These results suggest that stress test should be used for risk stratification and determination of the most appropriate timing for AVR in asymptomatic patients with severe AS.
Exercise-induced changes in mean pressure gradient
In asymptomatic patients with moderate to severe AS, two studies have reported the prognostic value of exercise-induced changes in mean pressure gradient. Whatever the results of the exercise test, an increase in mean aortic pressure gradient by ≥18 to 20 mmHg during exercise is associated with an increased risk of cardiac-related events (Fig. 2 ). In 2010, a multicenter study including 186 asymptomatic patients reported that the cut-off value of an exercise-induced increase in mean aortic pressure gradient >20 mmHg was identified as a powerful predictor of poor outcome, even after adjusting for age, exercise LVEF, and resting mean pressure gradient [ ]. This study reported that the rate of increase in mean pressure gradient during exercise was 21 %. An increase in pressure gradient reflects the presence of either more severe AS or the noncompliant and rigid aortic valve. However, these parameters were not considered about exercise-increased LV stroke volume. Indeed, a marked increase in LV stroke volume in response to exercise may directly affect the aortic mean pressure gradient, even in the presence of pseudo AS. Therefore, an increase in aortic mean pressure gradient corrected by LV stroke volume reserve may be a more useful predictor for prognosis in asymptomatic patients with AS. Fig. 2 Example of an asymptomatic patient with aortic stenosis who underwent exercise echocardiography. This patient had exercise-increased mean pressure gradient, the presence of left ventricular contractile reserve, and exercise-induced pulmonary hypertension. TRPG tricuspid regurgitant pressure gradient
Exercise-induced changes in LV function
Assessment of LV function during exercise can also provide incremental prognostic information. Patients with a decrease or a small increase in LV ejection fraction during exercise are more likely to show an abnormal response to exercise, which is associated with cardiac events [ , ].
In this study by Marechaux et al., LV contractile reserve was defined as an exercise-induced increase in LV ejection fraction, and its absence was associated with cardiac events and development of symptom. Using tissue Doppler imaging, van Pelt et al. suggested that an exercise-induced increase in S′-wave velocity ≥5 cm/s is a good cut-off value to determine the presence of LV contractile reserve [ ]. Donal et al. reported that a cut-off value of −1.4 % in exercise-induced changes obtained using 2D speckle tracking imaging in LV global longitudinal strain was also useful for predicting prognosis [ ]. Using 2D speckle tracking echocardiography, the assessment of myocardial longitudinal function with the quantification of global longitudinal strain may identify subtle, latent, and early LV dysfunction in asymptomatic patients with preserved LV ejection fraction (Fig. 2 ).
Exercise-induced changes in SPAP
Elevated SPAP and the presence of pulmonary hypertension (PHT) are associated with poor prognosis [ ] and a higher mortality rate after valve replacement [ , ]. However, PHT is often closely associated with symptoms, which limits its usefulness for clinical decision-making. In contrast, exercise PHT is generally considered as a predictor of occurrence of resting PHT during the follow-up, the development of symptoms, and/or outcome in patients with valvular heart disease. Lanellotti et al. reported that exercise PHT was independently associated with a two-fold increase in risk of cardiac event at 3-year follow-up in “truly” asymptomatic patients with AS [ ]. In their study, only 6 % of the population exhibited resting PHT (SPAP > 50 mmHg), whereas 55 % of the population developed exercise PHT (SPAP > 60 mmHg). Interestingly, all of the fatal events, such as cardiovascular death including sudden death, occurred in the group of exercise PHT in their study. They also investigated that exercise-induced PHT is essentially determined by impaired LV relaxation (i.e., e ′ velocity), reduced LV compliance, and increased metabolic demands [ ]. Therefore, the measurements of SPAP during exercise could provide additional information in asymptomatic patients with AS (Fig. 2 ).
Impact of exercise echocardiography on clinical management
Because of its incremental prognostic value, exercise echocardiography may be useful to risk stratification and identifying patients who may benefit from early surgery. In the most recent ACC/AHA and ESC guidelines, AVR is now indicated in asymptomatic-severe AS patients when the exercise test is abnormal (class IIa and I, respectively) [ , ]. Nevertheless, in patients without exercise abnormalities, exercise echocardiography may be very useful for a “watchful-waiting” strategy. Exercise-induced changes in mean aortic pressure gradient, LV ejection fraction, LV longitudinal strain, and SPAP may identify a subset of patients with early, subtle, sometimes latent, and harmful consequences of increased LV afterload. Therefore, early surgery may be beneficial in asymptomatic-severe AS patients with these findings. At least, a close follow-up (3–6 months) should be indicated. On the other hand, patients with appropriate exercise echocardiographic adaptation should be safely followed up every year.
Mitral regurgitation
Mitral regurgitation is the second most common form of valvular heart disease. Despite a substantial reduction in the incidence of rheumatic heart disease, MR is a growing public-health problem. MR is progressive and difficult to manage. The main causes of MR are classified as organic (primary) and functional (secondary). On both organic and functional MR, the dynamic changes of MR can be reliably examined during exercise echocardiography. In assessing MR, it is critical to distinguish between these two mechanisms because of the different therapeutic strategies. This article provides an overview of the incremental value of exercise echocardiography in patients with organic and functional MR, respectively.
Organic (primary) MR
Asymptomatic patients with severe organic MR (effective regurgitant orifice area ≥40 mm 2 ) are at increased risk of cardiac events [ , ]. Recent studies have reported an improved outcome in asymptomatic patients with severe MR referred for early mitral valve repair despite the risk of operative mortality or mitral valve replacement [ ]. In the ACC/AHA guideline, mitral valve repair is a class IIa recommendation in asymptomatic organic MR patients in whom the likelihood of a successful and durable repair without residual MR is >95 %, with an expected mortality rate of <1 % [ ]. However, only half of the patients with class I or IIa indicated for surgical intervention underwent mitral valve surgery [ ]. Recent studies have shown that decreased exercise capacity identified by reduced peak oxygen consumption during a cardiopulmonary exercise test was predictive of cardiac events and mortality in asymptomatic patients with primary MR [ , ]. These exercise tests probably unmask “asymptomatic” patients who manage to reduce their daily activities to avoid symptoms. Exercise echocardiography is reasonable for assessing exercise tolerance (“truly” asymptomatic?), contractile reserve, and effect of exercise on MR severity and SPAP in asymptomatic patients with severe MR.
Exercise-induced changes in MR and SPAP
Organic MR can be dynamic with marked exercise-induced changes as functional MR. Magne et al. reported that one-third of patients with organic MR had a marked increase in MR severity quantified by the PISA method during exercise [ ]. In degenerative MR, a decrease in LV end-systolic volume during exercise could be associated with MR exacerbation by increasing the extent of the leaflet prolapse. Stoddard et al. also found that an increase in MR during exercise might lead to mitral annular dilation and, in turn, worsen MR, as in a vicious cycle [ ]. An exercise-induced increase in MR (defined as effective regurgitant orifice area ≥0.10 cm 2 or regurgitant volume ≥15 ml) is associated with lower symptom-free survival (Fig. 3 ) [ , ]. Physicians should follow up these patients more closely and provide a more aggressive strategy. Conversely, it seems that a watchful strategy is more appropriate in asymptomatic patients with a remarkable decrease or no change in MR during exercise. Patients with mitral valve prolapse or flail often have eccentric MR, where it is sometimes difficult to quantify MR severity because flow convergence might be hemispheric and remains optimal for radius measurements. Accordingly, the use of offline analysis to quantify MR, allowing the selection of the optimal aliasing velocity, improves the accuracy of the measurements. Fig. 3 Example of an asymptomatic patient with organic mitral regurgitation (anterior leaflet prolapse) who underwent exercise echocardiography. This patient had exercise-increased mitral regurgitation, the absence of left ventricular contractile reserve, and exercise-induced pulmonary hypertension. R radius, ERO effective regurgitant orifice area, TRPG tricuspid regurgitant pressure gradient
The ACC/AHA and ESC guidelines recommend mitral valve surgery in asymptomatic patients with severe MR, preserved LVEF, and PHT (defined as a SPAP > 50 mmHg) [ ]. However, exercise PHT may occur even if SPAP is in the normal range at rest. Magne et al. reported that exercise PHT was present in 46 % patients with asymptomatic degenerative MR whereas resting PHT was observed in 15 % of the patients. Exercise PHT is more accurate than resting PHT for predicting symptoms [ ]. Their study showed that exercise PHT, relating to exercise MR severity and elevated filling pressure estimated by E / e ′ ratio, was associated with a 3.4-fold increase in the risk of the development of symptoms. Prompt surgery could potentially be recommended in these patients. On the other hand, a watchful-waiting strategy seems to be more appropriate in patients without exercise PHT.
Exercise-induced changes in LV function
The ACC/AHA and ESC guidelines recommended mitral valve surgery when LV function is impaired (LVEF < 60 %) or in case of LV dilatation (LV end-systolic diameter >40 mm in ACC/AHA and >45 mm in ESC guidelines) [ , ]. However, symptoms commonly occur before LV dysfunction or dilatation; LVEF augmented by increased preload frequently remains normal or super-normal despite the presence of latent dysfunction. LV dysfunction is often developed after mitral valve surgery. It may also be useful in unmasking latent ventricular dysfunction preoperatively and in predicting LV function after mitral valve repair. LV volume appears to be reliable for predicting post-operative LV dysfunction [ ]. However, the detection of early LV subclinical dysfunction in organic MR still remains challenging. Exercise-induced changes in LVEF well predict postoperative LV dysfunction than LVEF at rest. In addition, the presence of LV contractile reserve is associated with improved exercise capacity [ ] and better outcome [ ]. However, longitudinal function is more sensitive than load dependency of LVEF in detecting subclinical LV dysfunction. A recently developed two-dimensional speckle tracking technique allows the assessment of angle-independent determination of myocardial deformation. The current studies using 2D speckle tracking echocardiography reported that LV longitudinal contractile reserve (rather than LVEF) might be useful in predicting postoperative LV dysfunction and cardiac events [ , , , ]. The quantification of global longitudinal strain obtained using 2D speckle tracking echocardiography allows identifying subtle and early LV dysfunction (Fig. 3 ) because the first consequences of LV myocardial damage primarily occur in longitudinal function before the impairment of circumferential or radial function. This novel application of stress echocardiography is the subject of ongoing investigation.
Functional (secondary) MR
Functional MR develops in approximately one-fifth of patients with myocardial infarction and half of patients with heart failure [ , , , , ]. Functional MR arises from global and regional LV remodeling (apical and posterior displacement of papillary muscles) leading to papillary muscle displacement, tethering of the mitral valve leaflets, and loss of systolic annular contraction. It is well known by physicians that functional MR is dynamic, and depends on the loading conditions. Exercise is an important cause for variability of functional MR, irrespective of the baseline severity of MR. Pierard and Lencellotti have suggested that exercise echocardiography provides useful information in the following patients with functional MR [ , ]: (1) patients with exertional dyspnea out of proportion to the severity of MR at rest; (2) those who suffer from acute pulmonary edema without any obvious causes; and (3) those with moderate MR before surgical revascularization.
Exercise-induced changes in MR severity
An increase of effective regurgitant orifice area >13 mm 2 carries adverse prognostic implications and reduced exercise capacity [ , , , ]. It is very difficult to predict the magnitude of increase in MR during exercise from the resting MR severity (Fig. 4 ). We previously reported that only baseline LV sphericity index evaluated by three-dimensional echocardiography could predict exercise-induced changes in functional MR [ ]. The mechanisms of exercise-induced changes in MR include complex and several factors, such as tenting area, systolic mitral annular area, wall motion score index, and the degree of apical displacement of the mitral annuls. Fig. 4 Example of a patient with mild functional mitral regurgitation who underwent exercise echocardiography. This patient had exercise-increased mitral regurgitation and exercise-induced pulmonary hypertension. R radius, ERO effective regurgitant orifice area, TRPG tricuspid regurgitant pressure gradient
Exercise-induced changes in SPAP
Exercise PHT can also be found in 40 % of the patients with functional MR [ , , ]. It often parallels the increase in MR severity and LV filling pressures as evaluated by E / e ′ [ , ]. Most of the patients with exercise-induced increased MR stopped their exercise test because of dyspnea. The optimal cut-off points for predicting cardiac events were an increase by 21 mmHg in SPAP or SPAP ≥ 60 mmHg during exercise [ , ]. The ACC/AHA and ESC guidelines recommended surgery as a class IIa or I indication in patients with severe functional MR (ERO ≥ 0.2 cm 2 and/or regurgitant volume ≥30 ml) undergoing coronary artery bypass graft [ , ], and moderate functional MR is still a matter of debate. However, functional MR is dynamic by nature; as previously described, exercise echocardiography is highly recommended in patients with moderate functional MR. When no surgical intervention is planned, close follow-up is mandatory and other mitral valve treatments such as cardiac resynchronization therapy and percutaneous mitral valve repair should be discussed.
Conclusions
In this review article, we investigated the exercise stress echocardiography for structural heart disease, particularly AS and MR. Most structural heart disease has dynamic components. Exercise echocardiography has emerged as an important modality of stress test in which the noninvasive assessment of dynamic changes in valve function, ventricular function, and hemodynamics can be coupled with the assessment of exercise capacity and symptomatic response. Exercise echocardiography is an important clinical tool in the evaluation and management of patients with structural heart disease and advantages of low cost and versatility for the assessment of disease severity. Nevertheless, large-scale studies are needed to examine the impact of exercise echocardiography on clinical outcome in patients with structural heart disease.