Introduction
Echocardiography is the method of choice for the evaluation of prosthetic valve function. This evaluation follows the same basic principles used for the evaluation of native valves with some important particularities and caveats specific to prosthetic valves.
Timing of post-operative echocardiographic follow-up
Ideally, the first baseline post-operative transthoracic echocardiographic (TTE) study should be performed at the first visit, 6–12 weeks after hospital discharge, when the chest wound has healed, ventricular function has improved, and anemia with its associated hyperdynamic state has resolved. However, if the patient is being transferred and/or returned, it may be best to perform the study before hospital discharge [ ]. Doppler TTE provides accurate measurements of transvalvular velocities and pressure gradients as well as detection and quantitation of valvular and paravalvular regurgitation [ , ]. Normal Doppler transvalvular velocities and gradients vary between different types and sizes of prosthetic valves but are also affected by patient-specific factors, including body size and cardiac output. In addition to imaging and Doppler flow data for the prosthetic valve, TTE provides assessment of other valve diseases, pulmonary hypertension, atrial size, left ventricular (LV) and right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy, LV and RV size and function, and pericardial disease.
The incidence of bioprosthetic valve dysfunction is low within 10 years of valve implantation but increases markedly after that point; as such, routine annual evaluation is a reasonable approach [ ]. Earlier evaluation may also be prudent in selected patients at increased risk of early bioprosthetic valve degeneration, including those with renal impairment, diabetes mellitus, abnormal calcium metabolism, systemic inflammatory disease, and in patients <60 years of age. In patients with mechanical valve prostheses, routine annual echocardiographic evaluation is not needed if the post-operative baseline study is normal in the absence of signs or symptoms of valve dysfunction [ ]. However, many of these patients require TTE for other indications, such as residual LV systolic dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, aortic disease, or concurrent valve disease. Comparison with the baseline post-operative echocardiography is particularly helpful for detection of prosthetic valve dysfunction.
Post-operative echocardiographic assessment
For all prosthetic valves, the comprehensive echocardiographic examination includes: measurements of cardiac chamber dimension, including the ascending aorta when an aortic valve replacement (AVR) is in situ, evaluation of LV and RV systolic function, assessment of other valve diseases, and estimation of RV systolic pressure.
A comprehensive assessment of the prosthetic valve itself is also important post-operatively. This assessment includes: a baseline assessment of the prosthetic valve, two-dimensional (2D) assessment of the prosthetic valve (morphology, seating and mobility), hemodynamic assessment of the prosthetic valve parameters, and evaluation of the degree and type of prosthetic valve regurgitation.
Hemodynamic assessment of the prosthetic valve includes measurement of the transprosthetic velocities and the maximum and mean pressure gradients, estimation of the effective orifice area (EOA), and the calculation of the Doppler velocity index (DVI) [ ]. For mitral and tricuspid prosthetic valves, the pressure half-time is also measured. Prior to performing an echocardiographic study, it is crucial that the type and size of prosthetic valve is known. The peak velocities and pressure gradients are measured via continuous wave (CW) Doppler. From the spectral Doppler trace, transprosthetic pressure gradients are estimated by application of the simplified Bernoulli equation. Importantly, mechanical AVRs must be assessed from multiple acoustic windows, because the trnasprosthetic jet direction may be quite eccentric.
EOA
Pressure gradients are dependent on the stroke volume (SV) across the valve as well as the prosthetic valve characteristics. Calculation of the EOA accounts for volumetric flow at the time of the study and therefore compensates for stroke volume changes. The EOA, rather than pressure gradients, is especially valuable in the serial assessment of prosthetic valves. Estimation of the EOA is based on the continuity principle: $${\text{EOA}}_{{}} = \, ({\text{CSA}}_{\text{LVOT}} \times {\text{VTI}}_{\text{LVOT}} ) \div {\text{VTI}}_{\text{PV}} ,$$ where CSA LVOT is cross-sectional area of the LVOT (cm 2 ), VTI LVOT is velocity time integral (VTI) of the LVOT (cm), and VTI PV is VTI across the prosthetic valve (cm).
The most common errors encountered in the calculation of the EOA in an AVR include underestimation of the LVOT VTI, substitution of the LVOT diameter with the prosthetic size, and measurement of the internal prosthetic valve dimension instead of the LVOT diameter. In cases where the LVOT diameter is difficult to measure, the surgically implanted AVR size may be used as a substitute; this substitution should be noted in the report. In patients with small LV cavities and basal hypertrophy of the interventricular septum, coexistent obstruction or non-laminar flow within the LVOT may occur. In this situation, the LVOT SV cannot be used to calculate the EOA. Instead the EOA can be estimated by substituting the RV outflow tract SV. Pressure recovery is an important concept that may result in an apparent overestimation of pressure gradients. Pressure recovery is encountered in small-sized bi-leaflet mechanical valves (19–21 mm) where the velocity at the smaller central orifice is higher than at the larger lateral orifices [ ]. Therefore, measuring velocities through the central orifice leads to overestimation of pressure gradients and underestimation of EOA. If the aorta is of small diameter, pressure recovery within the aorta immediately distal to an AVR may also occur, further exaggerating this phenomenon.
The recognition of prosthetic valve stenosis is better achieved by comparing the measured EOA to the normal reference value of EOA for the method and size of prosthesis implanted in the patient [ ].
EOA in transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI)
Since the introduction of devices for TAVI, echocardiography plays an essential role in identifying patients suitable for TAVI and providing intra-procedural monitoring, and is the modality for post-procedure follow-up [ ]. Measurement of the LVOT diameter and VTI are performed just proximal to the prosthetic valve stent or sewing ring. However, in transcatheter valves, the proximal portion of the valve extends deeper into the LVOT. For example, in the self-expandable CoreValve™, the stent is much longer and it may be quite low in the LVOT; while with the balloon-expandable Edwards SAPIEN™ valve the apical border of the stent is just below the native aortic valve annulus. Therefore, measurements of the LVOT diameter and VTI vary according to the type of transcatheter valve (Fig. 1 ). Importantly, the LVOT VTI should be measured proximal to the flow acceleration zone and the LVOT diameter should then be measured at the same anatomic location. For the transcatheter valves, measurements should be performed immediately proximal to the stent (pre-stent region) rather than at the base of the prosthetic valve leaflets (in-stent pre-cusp region). The pulsed-wave Doppler sample volume should be placed in the pre-stent position and not in the in-stent pre-cusp position. The LVOT diameter should be measured at the same location as the VTI. If the CoreValve sits low into the LVOT, then the LVOT diameter should be measured in-stent just proximal to the valve cusps (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 1 Transcatheter aortic valves. a The Edwards SAPIEN™ valve and the Edwards SAPIEN-XT™ valve. b The CoreValve™ ReValving system. Reproduced from Zamorano et al. [ ] Fig. 2 Measurement of the LV outflow (LVOT) tract diameter in a patient with a transcatheter aortic valve (CoreValve). In a patient with a self-expandable CoreValve where the stent sits low in the LVOT ( arrowheads ), the LVOT diameter should be measured in-stent just proximal to the valve cusps ( arrow )
According to the Valve Academic Research Consortium-2 definitions [ ], mild aortic prosthetic valve stenosis is considered to be present when the EOA is ≤1.1 cm 2 and the mean transprosthetic gradient is ≥20 mmHg, and moderate/severe stenosis is considered to be present when the valve EOA is ≤0.8 cm 2 and the mean transprosthetic gradient is ≥40 mmHg.
DVI
DVI is simply a dimensionless ratio that is derived from the VTI at the LVOT and the transprosthetic VTI. This ratio provides a quick and easy method for identifying prosthetic valve dysfunction. Calculation of DVI differs according to the site of the prosthetic valve [ , , ] (Table 1 ). Table 1 Normal and abnormal Doppler velocity indexes (DVI) Prosthetic valve Normal DVI Abnormal DVI Aortic valve ≥0.3 <0.3 Mitral valve <2.2 ≥2.2 Tricuspid valve <3.3 ≥3.3
Pressure half-time
The diastolic slope of the Doppler velocity spectrum across the mitral valve prosthesis reflects the pressure difference between the left atrium (LA) and LV over the diastolic period. Likewise, the diastolic slope of the Doppler velocity spectrum across the tricuspid valve prosthesis reflects the pressure difference between the right atrium (RA) and RV over the diastolic period. From these diastolic slopes, the pressure half-time is measured as the time taken for the early diastolic pressure gradient to fall to half its original value. While the pressure half-time cannot be used to estimate the EOA, it still provides important information regarding the normality of prosthetic valve hemodynamics. As for native stenosis, prolongation of the pressure half-time is expected when there is prosthetic valve obstruction or stenosis (Fig. 3 ) [ ]. Fig. 3 Continuous wave Doppler recordings of a prosthetic mechanical valve. a High transprosthetic velocity and prolongation of the pressure half-time was recorded. b After prosthetic valve replacement, peak transprosthetic velocity and pressure half-time were reduced
Prosthetic valve stenosis/obstruction
The etiology of prosthetic valve stenosis or obstruction is dependent on the valve type. In the bioprosthetic valves, stenosis is typically caused by leaflet thickening and degeneration secondary to fibrocalcific changes. In mechanical valves, the most common cause of obstruction is thrombosis and/or pannus formation. Mechanical valve obstruction may also occur due to faulty disc design or acute dehiscence of the valve. On color flow imaging, stenosis or obstruction is suggested by the presence of turbulent flow across the valve. On spectral Doppler examination, stenosis or obstruction is suggested by high transprosthetic velocities and pressure gradients, a decrease in the EOA, a decrease in the DVI for aortic prosthetic valve, and an increase in the DVI and prolongation of the pressure half-time in mitral and/or tricuspid prosthetic valves [ ] (Table 2 ). Table 2 Doppler echocardiographic criteria for detection of prosthetic valve stenosis/obstruction Normal Possible stenosis Severe stenosis Aortic valve Peak velocity (m/s) <3 3–4 >4 Mean gradient (mmHg) <20 20–35 >35 DVI ≥0.30 0.29–0.25 <0.25 EOA (cm 2 ) >1.2 1.2–0.8 <0.8 Contour of prosthetic valve jet Triangular, early peaking Triangular to intermediate Rounded, symmetrical contour Acceleration time (ms) <80 80–100 >100 Mitral valve Peak velocity (m/s) <1.9 1.9–2.5 ≥2.5 Mean gradient (mmHg) ≤5 6–10 >10 DVI <2.2 2.2–2.5 >2.5 EOA (cm 2 ) ≥2.0 1.0–2.0 <1.0 Pressure half-time (ms) <130 130–200 >200 Tricuspid valve Peak velocity (m/s) >1.7 Mean gradient (mmHg) ≥6 Pressure half-time (ms) ≥230
With mechanical valves, the mobility of the disk is often difficult to visualize due to reverberation and acoustic artifacts. In a normal bi-leaflet tilting disc valve, symmetrical reverberation artifacts during opening and closing of the valve are expected. A fixed or absence of reverberation artifact suggests that the disc remains in a fixed closed or fixed open position over the cardiac cycle.
Prosthesis–patient mismatch
Prosthesis–patient mismatch (PPM) is not an intrinsic dysfunction of the prosthesis. This problem occurs when the EOA of a normally functioning prosthesis is too small in relation to the patient’s body size, resulting in abnormally high post-operative gradients. The most widely accepted and validated parameter for identifying PPM is the indexed EOA. An indexed EOA of ≤0.65 cm 2 /m 2 in aortic position and ≤0.9 cm 2 /m 2 in mitral or tricuspid position are the cutoff values for severe PPM [ , ].
Stress echocardiography
Stress echocardiography is a valuable tool for the evaluation of prosthesis valve hemodynamic function, especially when there is discordance between the patient’s symptomatic status and the prosthetic valve hemodynamics. A disproportionate increase in transvalvular gradient (≥20 mmHg for aortic prostheses or ≥12 mmHg for mitral prostheses) generally indicates severe prosthesis dysfunction or PPM [ ].
Prosthetic valve regurgitation
Most mechanical prostheses have mild physiological closing and leakage volume regurgitation and this normal in-built regurgitation should be recognized and differentiated from pathological leaks. On color Doppler imaging, physiological regurgitant jets are usually short, narrow, and non-turbulent. The size and number of these normal regurgitant jets depends on the valve design. Pathological regurgitation may be transvalvular and/or paravalvular. The etiology of pathological prosthetic valve regurgitation is dependent on the valve type. In the bioprosthetic valves, transvalvular regurgitation is typically caused by leaflet degeneration. In mechanical valves, the most common cause of transvalvular regurgitation is thrombosis and/or pannus formation which prevents complete closure of the discs. Paravalvular regurgitation can occur due to prosthetic valve dehiscence and other associated abnormalities of the valve bed such as vegetations or fibrosis, and calcification of the native annulus.
In TAVI, paravalvular aortic regurgitation may occur due to incomplete prosthesis apposition to the native annulus caused by ridges of calcium, implantation of the valve too low or too deep, or implantation of a prosthesis too small for the valve annulus [ ].
The Doppler evaluation of prosthetic valve regurgitation is assessed by the standard qualitative and quantitative parameters used for native valve regurgitation. Color flow imaging is useful in distinguishing between transvalvular and paravalvular regurgitation; transvalvular regurgitation occurs within the sewing ring while paravalvular regurgitation arises outside the sewing ring, between the sewing ring and the valve annulus. The evaluation of prosthetic valve regurgitation should be performed in multiple views and at multiple imaging planes, including off-axis imaging. In patients with a mechanical mitral prosthetic valve, assessment of prosthetic valve regurgitation by TTE is especially difficult due to imaging artifacts. A clue to the presence of significant prosthetic valve regurgitation is the presence of systolic flow convergence on the LV side of the prosthetic valve (Fig. 4 ). Real-time three-dimensional (3D) transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) has provided unique en-face visualization of paravalvular defects. In addition, 3D color Doppler enables direct visualization of paravalvular regurgitation [ ]. Other indirect spectral Doppler clues to significant MR include: (1) the presence of a strong MR CW Doppler signal, (2) increased transmitral flow velocities (and mean pressure gradient) in the absence of prosthetic stenosis, PPM or high output states, (3) an increased DVI, and/or (4) an increased RV systolic pressure. Paravalvular regurgitation is always abnormal. An important clinical sign suggestive of paravalvular regurgitation is the presence of hemolysis [ ]. Fig. 4 Paravalvular regurgitation in a patient with a mechanical mitral prosthetic valve. A clue to the presence of significant prosthetic valve regurgitation is the presence of systolic flow convergence on the LV side of the prosthetic valve ( a ). Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) allows visualization of severe paravalvular regurgitation arising outside the sewing ring ( b ). Real-time 3-dimensional TEE provides information about the anatomic characteristics of the paravalvular regurgitation ( arrow ) ( c )
Prosthetic valve thrombosis/pannus formation
Prosthetic valve thrombus refers to the formation of a blood clot around the prosthetic valve. Prosthetic valve thrombus frequently interferes with prosthetic valve function; in particular, the valve may be stuck closed resulting in significant obstruction, or stuck open resulting in significant regurgitation. Prosthetic valve thrombus may occur in both mechanical and bioprosthetic valves but is more commonly seen in mechanical valves where there is inadequate antithrombotic therapy.
Pannus refers to a slow in-growth of fibrous tissue over the prosthetic valve sewing ring. This is a healing response whereby excessive scarring or keloid formation occurs. Pannus formation has been observed in both mechanical and bioprosthetic valves but is more commonly encountered with mechanical valves. This abnormal over-exuberant fibrous reaction, which usually develops over many years, may interfere with disk/leaflet motion, resulting in significant obstruction.
Echocardiographic and clinical distinction between thrombus and pannus is important as the management strategy is different for each [ ] (Table 3 ). Prosthetic valve thrombus may be treatable with thrombolytic therapy. In patients with prosthetic valve thrombus, serial Doppler studies have an important role in guiding the duration and the efficacy of thrombolytic therapy. Table 3 Parameters for differentiating prosthetic valve thrombus from pannus formation Parameters Thrombus Pannus Echocardiography Larger Smaller Soft tissue appearance Echo-dense appearance Mobile Firmly fixed Extension of mass beyond limits of prosthetic valve Annular location MVR > AVR AVR > MVR MVR mitral valve replacement, AVR aortic valve replacement
Prosthetic valve dehiscence
Prosthetic valve dehiscence refers to partial separation of the prosthetic sewing ring from the native valve annulus. This is a serious prosthetic valve complication as it can result in significant obstruction to forward flow as well as significant paravalvular regurgitation. The etiology of prosthetic valve dehiscence includes unraveling of the sutures or the pulling away of the prosthetic valve from the native valve annulus secondary to infective endocarditis (Fig. 5 ). The characteristic 2D echo appearance of prosthetic valve dehiscence is rocking of the prosthetic valve at an angle far in excess of its normal excursion. Evidence of an echo-free space between the prosthetic valve and native valve annulus with associated paravalvular regurgitation is also another clue to prosthetic valve dehiscence. Real-time 3D TTE and TEE provide additional information about the anatomic characteristics of the dehiscence [ ]. Fig. 5 The characteristic 2-dimensional echo appearance of prosthetic mitral valve dehiscence by transesophageal echocardiography. There is an echo-free space between the prosthetic valve and native valve annulus during systole ( arrow )
Prosthetic valve endocarditis
Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) is another serious complication which occurs due to an infection of the prosthetic valve leaflets (bioprosthetic valves) or between the sewing ring and the native valve annulus. The characteristic echocardiographic features of vegetations include an independently hypermobile mass which has a different echo appearance to underlying tissue; vegetations may also intermittently or persistently impair valve closure and valve opening resulting in varying degrees of prosthetic valve regurgitation and/or stenosis. Endocarditis can be further complicated by leaflet perforation (bioprosthetic valves), valve bed abnormalities such as paravalvular abscesses, dehiscence and paravalvular regurgitation, fistulas, or pseudoaneurysms. The detection of prosthetic valve endocarditis by transthoracic echocardiography is very challenging due to imaging artifacts produced by and occurring around the prosthetic valve. TEE has a higher sensitivity and specificity for the detection of PVE [ ]. TEE allows improved visualization of the LA surface of the mitral valve prosthesis, which is virtually always obscured by artifacts on TTE.
Differentiation between vegetations and other echogenic masses, such as pannus, thrombus, sutures, torn cusps, or residual cordal tissue, is very difficult. Comparison of the clinical presentation as well as comparison of the current study with the baseline study is very useful in determining the nature of these masses.
Conclusion
The specific flow pattern and imaging features of prosthetic valves pose major challenges for the Doppler echocardiographic assessment of prosthetic valve structure and function. Consequently, a comprehensive approach that integrates several parameters of valve structure and function obtained by TTE, TEE, and 3D echocardiography is key to the appropriate detection and quantitation of prosthetic valve dysfunction and complications.