Introduction
The life expectancy in wealthy countries has gradually extended, and the number of elderly patients with cardiovascular diseases is increasing. In particular, aortic stenosis (AS) is becoming more common in the elderly population. Once symptoms appear, the mortality rate without surgical treatment is about 50 % within 2 years [ ]. Aortic valve replacement (AVR) is well known to be associated with reduced symptom severity and improved survival rates [ , , ]. However, approximately 30–40 % of patients with severe AS are denied surgery because of high-risk factors and comorbidities [ , , ]. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI), a less invasive technique than AVR, appears to be a new option for elderly patients with AS. Many observational studies and multicenter registries have demonstrated favorable outcomes of TAVI [ , , , , ]. Physicians and cardiologists are required to make appropriate decisions regarding both patient selection and intervention timing under situations involving complex risk assessment and the establishment of new interventional therapies. To facilitate such decision-making, current clinical guidelines recommend the construction of a heart valve team consisting of an integrated, multidisciplinary group of healthcare professionals with expertise in valvular heart disease.
In this review, we clarify the clinical characteristics of elderly patients with AS for selection of appropriate candidates who would benefit from AVR and TAVI performed with optimal timing.
Clinical characteristics of elderly patients with AS
The three most frequent causes of AS are calcification of a congenitally bicuspid aortic valve, degenerative calcification of tricuspid aortic valves, and postinflammatory (presumably rheumatic) calcification and fibrosis. Degenerative calcification is currently the most common cause of AS in elderly patients [ ].
According to Bakaeen et al. [ ], elderly patients with AS have higher prevalence of peripheral vascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III/VI, prior myocardial infarction, and plasma creatinine level ≥1.5 mg/dl but lower prevalence of Canadian Cardiovascular Society angina class III/VI and functional independence than do younger patients with AS. Thus, elderly patients tend to have more associated comorbidities, and these factors influence increased operative mortality. Indeed, Langanay et al. [ ] reported that preoperative pulmonary disease, renal failure, NYHA functional class IV, right heart failure, chronic atrial fibrillation, and impaired left ventricular function were predictive for increased operative risk in elderly patients with AS. Several studies have reported that age alone is not a contraindication to surgical intervention [ ]. There is a wide variety of risk profiles in elderly patients, and the physiologic age of the patient may have a more influential impact on the outcome than the chronologic age.
Frailty in elderly patients with AS
Advanced age and comorbidities are considered to increase the operative risk for surgical interventions. Previous guidelines recommended clinical risk assessment using risk assessment scores. However, these risk scores are inadequate for evaluation of patient risk in some complex cases. To solve this problem, new guidelines from the European Society of Cardiology/European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (ESC/EACTS) and American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC) have added the concept of frailty to previous risk assessment scores [ , ]. Frailty is evaluated by the Katz Index of Independence in Activities of Daily Living (independence in feeding, bathing, dressing, transferring, toileting, and urinary continence) and independence in ambulation (no requirement for a walking aid or assist, or the performance of a 5-m walk in <6 s) (Table 1 ) [ ]. Stortecky et al. [ ] added mental and nutritional assessment to a previous frailty score and predicted all-cause mortality and major adverse cardiac and cerebrovascular events 30 days and 1 year after TAVI. They found that the risk prediction was improved by adding new information to global risk scores such as the Society of Thoracic Surgeons score and EuroSCORE. Although there are currently prevailing reports, there are no unified views on which frailty assessment is most useful; Further studies are required. Table 1 Risk assessment combining Society of Thoracic Surgeons risk estimate, frailty, major organ system dysfunction, and procedure-specific impediments Low risk (must meet all criteria in this column) Intermediate risk (any 1 criterion in this column) High risk (any 1 criterion in this column) Prohibitive risk (any 1 criterion in this column) STS PROM a <4 % 4–8 % >8 % Predicted risk of surgery-related death or major morbidity (all-cause) >50 % at 1 year Frailty b None 1 index (mild) ≥2 indices (moderate to severe) Major organ system compromise not to be improved postoperatively c None 1 organ system ≤2 organ systems ≥3 organ systems Procedure-specific impediment d None Possible procedure-specific impediment Possible procedure-specific impediment Severe procedure-specific impediment DLCO 2 diffusion capacity for carbon dioxide, FEV1 forced expiratory volume in 1 s, PROM predicted risk of mortality, STS Society of Thoracic Surgeons a Use of the STS PROM to predict risk in a given institution with reasonable reliability is appropriate only if institutional outcomes are within 1 standard deviation of STS average observed/expected ratio for the procedure in question b Seven frailty indices: Katz Index of Independence in Activities of Daily Living (independence in feeding, bathing, dressing, transferring, toileting, and urinary continence) and independence in ambulation (no requirement for walking aid or assist, or performance of 5-m walk in <6 s). Other scoring systems can be applied to calculate no, mild, or moderate to severe frailty c Examples of major organ system compromise: Cardiac—severe left ventricular systolic or diastolic dysfunction or right ventricular dysfunction, fixed pulmonary hypertension; chronic kidney disease stage ≥3; pulmonary dysfunction with FEV1 of <50 % or DLCO 2 of <50 % of predicted; central nervous system dysfunction (dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, or stroke with persistent physical limitation); gastrointestinal dysfunction—Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, nutritional impairment, or serum albumin of <3.0 g/dl; cancer—active malignancy; and liver—any history of cirrhosis, variceal bleeding, or elevated international normalized ratio in the absence of vitamin K antagonist therapy d Examples: tracheostomy present, heavily calcified ascending aorta, chest malformation, arterial coronary graft adherent to posterior chest wall, or radiation damage
New ESC/EACTS and AHA/ACC guidelines also recommend that patients with severe valvular heart disease should be evaluated by a multidisciplinary heart valve team when intervention is considered. The importance of a multidisciplinary approach has been recognized and has improved clinical outcomes such as quality of life and mortality in patients with a wide variety of diseases [ , , ]. This approach may be essential for not only preoperative assessment and decision-making regarding interventions, but also the postintervention clinical follow-up.
Timing of intervention in elderly patients with AS
Previous guidelines recommended AVR mainly for patients with symptomatic severe AS. For patients with asymptomatic AS, periodic monitoring for the development of symptoms and progressive disease was required, but routine AVR was not recommended [ ]. However, the classic symptoms of syncope, angina, and heart failure are late manifestations of disease; physicians and cardiologists need to detect early disease onset to avoid inappropriate delays of intervention. When we focus on elderly patients with severe AS, we sometimes experience difficulties in determining the optimal timing of surgical intervention. In particular, elderly patients tend not to complain of any symptoms because of their reduced daily activities. Although age alone is not currently a contraindication to surgery, many elderly patients with severe AS either refuse to undergo or are not offered an operation in daily clinical practice. The new ESC/EACTS and AHA/ACC guidelines added several factors (such as left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) of <50 %, other cardiac surgery, very severe AS, abnormal exercise test results, and progressive disease) to consider for intervention in patients with asymptomatic severe AS. These guidelines may open the possibility of earlier intervention for asymptomatic patients.
Echocardiography has provided a valuable method for noninvasive assessment of AS. Calcified aortic valves in the absence of ventricular outflow obstruction are common in elderly patients. Additionally, the presence of aortic sclerosis is associated with an increase in both death with cardiovascular causes and new myocardial infarction [ ]. Moreover, the severity of aortic valve stenosis is progressive, and its progression is more rapid in patients aged 80 years and older compared with patients aged younger than 80 years [ ]. Hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, and renal insufficiency are not associated with progression in elderly patients with calcified AS [ ]. Bahler et al. [ ] reported that more severe leaflet calcification and restricted leaflet motion were associated with more rapid hemodynamic progression of AS. Taken together, evidence to date indicates that aortic valve assessment by echocardiography only may not be sufficient to evaluate the progressive pathophysiology of elderly patients with AS.
To determine whether symptom-based decision-making provides the best intervention timing in elderly patients with AS, we evaluated both the aortic valve area and left ventricular geometry by echocardiography and investigated the association between the left ventricular geometry and both symptoms and mortality. We enrolled 136 patients with severe AS (aortic valve area of <1.0 cm 2 ) aged >65 years (Fig. 1 ). These patients were divided into two groups: those aged <80 and ≥80 years. The clinical characteristics and echocardiographic indices were compared between the two groups. Elderly patients had significantly greater blood urea nitrogen levels and logistic EuroSCORE and lower albumin and hemoglobin levels than did younger patients (Table 2 ). In terms of echocardiographic indices, the severity of AS was not significantly different between the two groups, but both the left ventricular mass index and relative wall thickness were lower in elderly patients (Table 3 ). Therefore, the left ventricular geometry was different despite the fact that the severity of AS was the same between the two groups. Furthermore, we divided these patients into four groups according to both the left ventricular mass index and relative wall thickness: normal patients (N), those with concentric remodeling (CR), those with concentric hypertrophy (CH), and those with eccentric hypertrophy (EH) (Fig. 2 ) [ ]. The distribution of left ventricular geometries is shown in Fig. 3 . The number of patients with CH was highest in all categories, and the number of patients with EH was significantly increased in patients with symptomatic AS aged ≥80 years. Next, we compared the mortality rates of elderly patients with AS between the EH and CH groups. The patients with EH exhibited a significantly lower survival rate than did those with CH ( p = 0.038) (Fig. 4 ). Furthermore, we compared the mortality rates between the CH and EH groups in symptomatic versus asymptomatic patients. The patients with EH exhibited a significantly lower survival rate than did those with CH among patients with asymptomatic AS ( p = 0.038) (Fig. 5 ). An important point of these results is that the mortality rates of patients with EH are higher than those of patients with CH, even asymptomatic elderly patients, although the poorer prognosis of EH may be partly attributed to the low-flow, low-gradient AS with reduced EF among EH patients. Thus, we suggest that both assessment of symptom onset and evaluation of left ventricular geometry by echocardiography may provide additive information with which to determine the best interventional timing in elderly patients with severe AS. Maayan et al. [ ] reported that diastolic function indices such as left ventricular relaxation and left atrial filling pressure were more greatly improved after TAVI in patients with severe AS exhibiting CH than in those with CR. They emphasized that the left ventricular geometry might be closely associated with changes in diastolic function after TAVI. Fig. 1 Description of the patient population Table 2 Comparison of clinical characteristics between patients with aortic stenosis aged <80 and ≥80 years <80 years ( n = 56) ≥80 years ( n = 80) p value Age in years 73 ± 5 85 ± 4 <0.01 Female 31 (55) 48 (60) 0.589 Body mass index (kg/m 2 ) 21.3 ± 3.5 21.1 ± 3.9 0.671 Blood urea nitrogen (mg/dl) 20.0 ± 11.4 26.4 ± 17.5 0.015 Creatinine (mg/dl) 1.08 ± 1.00 1.07 ± 1.20 0.953 eGFR (ml/min/1.73 m 2 ) 61.3 ± 23.2 54.9 ± 20.3 0.112 Albumin (g/dl) 4.0 ± 0.5 3.6 ± 0.5 <0.01 Hemoglobin (g/dl) 12.2 ± 1.8 11.0 ± 2.0 0.001 Glycosylated hemoglobin (%) 5.9 ± 1.4 5.9 ± 1.0 0.724 Brain natriuretic peptide (pg/ml) 397.5 ± 549.5 474.7 ± 519.2 0.495 Hypertension 38 (68) 51 (64) 0.649 Diabetes mellitus 17 (30) 23 (29) 0.694 Dyslipidemia 30 (54) 30 (38) 0.139 Atrial fibrillation 6 (11) 19 (24) 0.277 Logistic EuroSCORE (%) 8.6 ± 6.9 23.1 ± 29.1 <0.01 Data presented as n (%) or ±standard deviation eGFR estimated glomerular filtration rate Table 3 Comparison of echocardiographic measurements between patients with aortic stenosis aged <80 and ≥80 years <80 years ( n = 56) ≥80 years ( n = 80) p value Peak aortic velocity (m/s) 4.3 ± 1.0 4.1 ± 1.0 0.224 Mean pressure gradient (mmHg) 43.3 ± 22.0 40.7 ± 20.7 0.526 Aortic valve area (cm 2 ) 0.71 ± 0.18 0.71 ± 0.21 0.956 Indexed aortic valve area (cm 2 /m 2 ) 0.46 ± 0.12 0.50 ± 0.16 0.143 Left atrial dimension (mm) 40.2 ± 6.7 42.7 ± 8.1 0.054 Left ventricular mass index (g/m 2 ) 143.6 ± 40.5 128.9 ± 42.5 0.045 Relative wall thickness 0.53 ± 0.12 0.47 ± 0.11 0.003 Left ventricular ejection fraction (%) 66.5 ± 16.0 62.2 ± 13.8 0.105 E/E′ 21.4 ± 11.8 24.4 ± 13.0 0.196 Data presented as mean ± standard deviation E/E′ ratio of early transmitral flow velocity to early mitral annular velocity Fig. 2 Left ventricular geometry. Comparison of relative wall thickness (RWT). Patients with normal left ventricular (LV) mass can have either concentric remodeling (normal LV mass with increased RWT of >0.42) or normal RWT (≤0.42) and normal LV mass. Patients with increased LV mass can have either concentric (RWT >0.42) or eccentric (RWT ≤0.42) hypertrophy Fig. 3 Distribution of left ventricular geometries. Eccentric hypertrophy was significantly increased in patients with symptomatic aortic stenosis aged ≥80 years. N normal, CR concentric remodeling, CH concentric hypertrophy, EH eccentric hypertrophy Fig. 4 Kaplan–Meier survival curves for patients with severe aortic stenosis aged ≥80 years. Patients with eccentric hypertrophy exhibited a significantly lower survival rate than did patients with concentric hypertrophy ( p = 0.038). CH concentric hypertrophy, EH eccentric hypertrophy Fig. 5 Kaplan–Meier survival curves for elderly patients with aortic stenosis with or without symptoms. Among patients with asymptomatic aortic stenosis, those with eccentric hypertrophy exhibited a significantly lower survival rate than did those with concentric hypertrophy ( p = 0.038). CH concentric hypertrophy, EH eccentric hypertrophy
The advent of minimally invasive transcatheter technologies and lower rates of operative mortality may lead to a paradigm shift in the treatment of patients with AS. New guidelines have recently opened indications for interventions in patients with asymptomatic severe AS under several specific conditions. This trend will accelerate with continued technological developments in the future. Meanwhile, echocardiography must have a pivotal role in effective decision-making regarding therapeutic strategies for valvular heart diseases. Recently, measurement of the aortic valve annular geometry by three-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography to avoid prosthesis patient mismatch [ ] and assessment of the energy loss index [ ] have been reported as important predictors for cardiac events after aortic valve surgery. Further studies will be required to provide more beneficial information.
Elderly patients will be a target population of interest for new interventions. However, most elderly patients have several complications, and their levels of frailty and cognitive function differ from individual to individual. Therefore, comprehensive patient evaluation by a heart team will be effective for selecting appropriate patients, ensuring the best intervention timing, and assessing perioperative risks and mortality in elderly patients with severe AS.