Introduction
In the nervous system of neonatal animal, redundant synaptic connections are formed transiently. Subsequently, functionally important synapses are strengthened and remain, while unnecessary connections are massively eliminated. This process is known as “synapse elimination” and is widely thought to be important for refining immature neural circuits into functionally mature ones. Synapse elimination has been studied extensively in the neuromuscular junction and autonomic ganglia because of their simple structures and easy accessibility [ , ]. In contrast, such detailed and quantitative analyses of developmental changes are generally difficult to perform in the central nervous system (CNS), because of small sizes of synaptic structures, heterogeneity and abundance of synaptic inputs to each neuron, and complexity of synaptic organization. However, postnatal development of climbing fiber (CF) to Purkinje cell (PC) synapse in the cerebellum is an exceptional case and a good model to study developmental synapse elimination in the mammalian CNS [ , , , ]. PCs in the adult cerebellum receive two distinct glutamatergic excitatory inputs, namely parallel fibers (PFs) and CFs [ , ]. PFs are bifurcated axons of cerebellar granule cells (GCs) that receive excitatory inputs from mossy fibers originating from various precerebellar nuclei. Each PF forms one or two synapses on spines of distal dendrites in individual PCs. Each synaptic input is functionally weak, but as many as 100,000 PFs make contacts on a single PC [ , ]. In contrast, the majority of PCs in the adult cerebellum receive strong synaptic inputs from single CF (mono-innervation). Each CF forms several hundreds of functionally strong synaptic contacts on PC’s proximal dendrites [ ]. In early postnatal days, however, all PCs receive inputs from multiple CFs (multiple innervation). These surplus CFs are eliminated eventually and mono-innervation is attained in the third postnatal week [ , , , , , ]. The aims of this review article are to make an overview of how a single CF is strengthened, the other redundant CFs are eliminated, and CF mono-innervation of PC dendrites is eventually established, and to describe molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying respective processes of CF synapse elimination.
Postnatal Development of Climbing Fiber Innervation
Neurons in the inferior olive project ramified axons with thick and thin collaterals to the primitive cerebellum around E18 [ ]. At this stage, the thick collaterals of olivary axons, namely the “climbing fibers,” creep between PCs and form contacts with the smooth surface of immature dendritic processes (Fig. 1 , ~P3) (“creeper stage” [ ]). Each olivocerebellar axon forms about 100 “creeper” CFs, which is much more numerous than the collaterals of single mature olivocerebellar axon (~7) [ ]. The “creeper stage” is followed by the “pericellular nest” stage (P5~) during which CFs form contacts with the abundant pseudopodia around PC somata and thus make a plexus-like structure surrounding the lower part of PC somata (Fig. 1 , ~P7). Among the 100 “creeper” CFs, only around 10 can develop “pericellular nests.” It is during this stage that the density of the total perisomatic synapses peaks and CF synapses constitute as many as 88% of the total perisomatic synapses, indicating high synaptogenic activity of nest-type CFs [ ]. The “pericellular nest” stage is followed by the “capuchon” stage during which the plexus-like structure of CFs undergoes displacement to the apical portion of PC somata and main dendrites (Fig. 1 , ~P12). This stage is characterized by dynamic transition and reorganization in terms of the site of CF innervation (i.e., perisomatic to peridendritic), the input source of perisomatic innervation (CF to basket cell axon), and the perisomatic receptor phenotype (glutamatergic to GABAergic) [ ]. Then, the “capuchon” stage is followed by the “dendritic” stage during which CFs extend their innervation upward along growing PC dendrites (Fig. 1 , ~P18, Adult). Fig. 1 Postnatal development of synaptic wiring onto PC. Schematics depicting excitatory and inhibitory synaptic connections onto PCs at four representative stages during postnatal development (around P3, P7, P12, and P18) and in adult. PC Purkinje cell, CF climbing fiber, GrC granule cell, PF parallel fiber, BC basket cell
Earlier studies performed in vivo showed that CF-mediated responses were elicited in PCs after P3 following stimulation of the inferior olive [ ] and the responses were graded with increase in the stimulus strength [ ]. These results have revealed that PCs in neonatal rats and mice receive functional synaptic inputs from multiple CFs. Following studies in vivo demonstrated that both the percentage of PCs with multiple CF innervation and the mean number of CFs per PC decrease during postnatal development, and that CF mono-innervation pattern is established in most PCs by around P20 [ , ].
Functional Differentiation and Selective Strengthening of Single Climbing Fiber Inputs
Around 1990, techniques to perform patch-clamp recordings from cells in acute brain slices were established [ ]. When whole-cell recordings were performed and membrane currents were measured from voltage-clamped PCs in cerebellar slices at P2-3, clearly discernible excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) can be elicited by stimulating CFs. When stimulus strength was gradually increased, EPSCs appear with discrete steps, clearly indicating that PCs at this age are innervated by multiple CFs. To systematically search CFs innervating the PC under recording, the stimulation pipette was moved systematically and the stimulus strength was increased gradually at each stimulation site. The amplitudes of CF-induced EPSCs at this stage are much smaller than those at later developmental stages [ , , , , ], indicating that CF inputs become much stronger during postnatal development. In some PCs of anesthetized animals in vivo, CF stimulation elicited two CF-mediated responses whose amplitudes were quite different around P10 to P13 [ ]. This result suggests that a single CF is strengthened in each PC before the completion of synapse elimination.
Hashimoto and Kano quantitatively examined changes in the strengths of multiple CF synaptic inputs in individual PCs during early postnatal development in mice (P2 to P21) using whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings from PCs in acute cerebellar slices [ ]. This study demonstrates that more than five discrete CF-mediated EPSCs (CF-EPSCs) with roughly similar amplitudes are elicited in individual PCs from mice around P3 (Fig. 1 , ~P3). At around P7 and thereafter, single CF-EPSC is much larger in amplitude than the other CF-EPSCs in individual PCs with multiple CF innervations (Fig. 1 , ~P7 and ~P12). These results indicate that strengths of synaptic inputs from multiply innervating CFs are similar in each PC of neonatal mice, and then a single CF is selectively strengthened [ , , , ]. Disparity among the amplitudes of multiple CF-EPSCs in each PC progressively increases from P3 to around P7. These data indicate that one CF is selectively strengthened among multiple CFs innervating the same PC during the first postnatal week (Fig. 2 , (1) Functional differentiation of CF synapses) [ ]. Consistent with this electrophysiological study in mice [ ], a detailed morphological study showed that the innervation pattern of CFs over PCs drastically changes from “creeper type” at P4 to “nest type” at P7 in rats [ ]. Later, by using in vivo whole-cell recordings and two-photon calcium imaging, Kawamura et al. demonstrated that each PC at around P4 receives temporally clustered excitatory inputs from multiple CFs that generate burst spiking and accompanying calcium rise in that PC [ ]. They also presented results that suggested a single CF input closest in time to PC’s spike output selectively became stronger by P8 [ ], which is consistent with the previous in vitro study by Hashimoto and Kano (2003). Furthermore, by recording PC population activity using in vivo two-photon calcium imaging, Good et al. recently reported that CF responses were highly synchronized in newborn mice and massively desynchronized during P4 to P8 [ ]. This desynchronization of CF population responses appears to reflect the CF network refinement from “creeper type” to “nest type” terminals [ ]. Fig. 2 Eight key events related to postnatal development of CF-PC synapse
Possible functional differences between EPSCs elicited by the strongest CF input and those by the other weaker inputs were examined by estimating the sizes of glutamate transient, which reflect the peak concentration of glutamate, in the synaptic cleft during EPSC. The sizes of glutamate transients can be estimated by using non-equilibrium inhibition of AMPA receptors by a low-affinity competitive antagonist [ ]. These values are significantly larger for EPSCs elicited by the strongest CF than for those by the weaker CFs [ ]. However, in a low extracellular Ca 2+ concentration in which CF-EPSCs are considered to result from one-site one vesicle release, the amplitudes of glutamate transients for the strongest and the weaker CFs are the same [ ]. Therefore, the sizes of glutamate transients caused by single synaptic vesicles are considered to be the same between the strongest and the other weaker CF inputs. The larger glutamate transients by stimulating the strongest CF are thought to result from the higher probability of multivesicular release. Since release probability is shown to be similar between the two types of CF inputs, it is thought that the number of release sites facing a narrow postsynaptic region of PC is larger for the strongest CF than for weaker CFs.
Hashimoto et al. have demonstrated that Ca v 2.1, a pore-forming component of the P/Q-type voltage-dependent Ca 2+ channel (VDCC), is crucial for the biased strengthening of a single CF [ ]. The P/Q-type VDCC is the major voltage-activated Ca 2+ channels in PCs, constituting > 90% of the total Ca 2+ current density in PCs [ , ], and is abundantly distributed in PC dendrites and spines in addition to presynaptic terminals [ , ]. In PC-specific P/Q-type VDCC knockout mice, multiple CFs are strengthened similarly during the first postnatal week, indicating that the selective strengthening of a single CF input is severely impaired [ ]. Kawamura et al. used in vivo whole-cell recording and demonstrated that preferential strengthening of CF input closest in time to PC’s spike output was impaired in PC-specific P/Q-type VDCC knockout mice [ ], which supports the results of the in vitro study by Hashimoto et al. (2011). These results indicate that the P/Q-type VDCC in PCs is indispensable for biasing the competition towards a single CF input during the first postnatal week (Fig. 2 , (1) Functional differentiation of CF synapses, Table 1 ). Table 1 Site of action, function, and period of action for molecules involved in CF synapse development Molecules Site of action Function and period of action in CF development References P/Q-type VDCC/Ca v 2.1 PC (1) P3–P7 (3) P9–, (4) P7–P11 (5) P12–P17 Miyazaki et al. 2004 [ ] Hashimoto et al. 2011 [ ] Miyazaki et al. 2012 [ ] Kawamura et al. 2013 [ ] IGF-1 Not determined (2) P8–P11 (4) P8–P11 Kakizawa et al. 2003 [ ] C1ql1-Bai3 C1ql1 (derived from CF) Bai3 (C1ql1 receptor present on PC) (2) P7– (3) P26– (4) P7–P11 (5) P12–P17 Kakegawa et al. 2015 [ ] Sema3A-PlxnA4 Sema3A (derived from PC)) PlxnA4 (Sema3A receptor present in CF) (2) P8–, (4), (5) P8–P18 (accelerated CF synapse elimination) Uesaka et al. 2014 [ ] Progranulin-Sort1 Progranulin (derived from PC) Sort1 (CF (progranulin receptor present in CF)) (2) P11– (3) P13– (4), (5) P11–P16 (accelerated CF synapse elimination) Uesaka et al. 2018 [ ] Cbln1-GluD2 Cbln1 (derived from PF) GluD2 (Cbln1 receptor present on PC) (5) P12–P17 (7) P7– Kashiwabuchi et al. 1995 [ ] Hashimoto et al. 2001 [ ] Ichikawa et al. 2002 [ ] Hirai et al. 2005 [ ] Serotonin 3A (5-HT 3A ) receptor Granule cell (2) P7–8 (4) P7–P11 (5) P12–P17 Oostland et al. 2013 [ ] CSPG5/neuroglycan C PC (2) P8–P10 Jüttner et al. 2013 [ ] mGluR1 pathway (mGluR1, Gαq, PLCβ4, PKCγ) PC (5) P15–P17 (8) P16–P30 Kano et al. 1995 [ ] Kano et al. 1997 [ ] Levenes et al. 1997 [ ] Offermanns et al. 1997 [ ] Kano et al. 1998 [ ] Ichise et al. 2000 [ ] Ohtani et al. 2014 [ ] Ichikawa et al. 2016 [ ] Sema7A-PlxnC1, ItgB1, -Cofilin, FAK Sema7A (present on PC) PlxnC1, ItgB1 (Sema7A receptor present in CF) Cofilin, FAK (present in CF) (5) P15–P17 Uesaka et al. 2014 [ ] Uesaka and Kano 2018 [ ] NMDA-R Granule cell? (5) P14–P16 Rabacchi et al. 1992 [ ] Kakizawa et al. 2000 [ ] BDNF-TrkB BDNF (derived from PC) TrkB (BDNF receptor present in CF) (5) P16–P17 Bosman et al. 2006 [ ] Johnson et al. 2007 [ ] Choo et al. 2017 [ ] Arc/Arg3.1 PC (5) P13–P17 Mikuni et al. 2013 [ ] TARPγ2 PC (3) ~P21 (5) P15–P17 Kawata et al. 2014 [ ] GABAergic inhibition BC to PC (4), (5) P10–P16 (6) P7–P15 Nakayama et al. 2012 [ ] Ichikawa et al. 2011 [ ] Myosin Va Not determined (3) P14– (5) P11–P17 (delayed CF synapse elimination) but normal CF innervation in adult Takagishi et al. 2007 [ ] GLAST Bergmann glia (5) P14–P17 Watase et al. 1998 [ ] Miyazaki et al. 2017 [ ] BSRPs PC (5) P12–P17 Miyazaki et al. 2006 [ ] CaMKIV PC (4) or (5), not determined Ribar et al. 2000 [ ] αCaMKII PC Multiple CF innervations from P21 to P28 but normal CF innervation in adult Hansel et al. 2006 [ ] Numbers in parentheses in the third column correspond to the key events related to postnatal development of CF-PC synapse (see Fig. 2 )
Strengthening and Maintenance of Climbing Fiber Synapses
After selection of the single “winner” CF during the first postnatal week, CFs are continuously strengthened and maintained throughout postnatal development. Kakizawa et al. reported experimental evidence that suggests insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-1) strengthens/maintains both the strongest and weaker CF synapses and regulates the extent of elimination of surplus CFs from P8 to P12 [ ]. Sherrard et al. suggested that decrease in brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) to TrkB signaling might permit the elimination of surplus CF synapses during the early phase [ ], which was based on the notion that BDNF to TrkB signaling strengthens/maintains CF synapses (but see below about the role of BDNF in the late phase of CF synapse elimination). In addition, Kakegawa et al. recently demonstrated that C1ql1, a member of C1q family proteins, anterogradely strengthens and maintains a single winner CF after its selection through acting on brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor 3 (Bai3) in PCs [ ] (Fig. 2 , (2) Strengthening/maintenance of CF synapses, Table 1 ).
Since activity of postsynaptic PCs is crucial for the multiple phases of CF synapse elimination (see below), it is considered that there must be mechanisms that transmit signals retrogradely from postsynaptic PCs to CFs either to be strengthened or to be eliminated. Uesaka et al. performed a screening of candidate molecules that potentially mediate such retrograde signals. Using microRNA-mediated knockdown of candidate molecules in PCs and their receptors in inferior olivary neurons, they demonstrated that semaphorin 3A (Sema3A) presumably secreted from PCs strengthened CF synapses by retrogradely acting on plexin A4 (PlxnA4) on CF terminals [ ] (Fig. 2 , (2) Strengthening/maintenance of CF synapses, Table 1 ). This finding indicates that Sema3A to PlxnA4 signaling strengthens CF synapses and therefore opposes their elimination during the early phase [ ]. Very recently, Uesaka et al. demonstrated that progranulin, a growth factor implicated in the pathogenesis of certain forms of frontotemporal dementia, mediates retrograde signaling from PC to CF to counteract CF synapse elimination [ ]. Progranulin was shown to act on its putative receptor Sort1 on CFs and to reinforce CFs especially the strongest CFs. Although these actions of progranulin resemble those of Sema3A, these two retrograde signaling molecules are shown to function independently [ ] (Fig. 2 , (2) Strengthening/maintenance of CF synapses, Table 1 ).
Selective Translocation of Single “Winner” CFs to PC Dendrites and Extension of Their Innervation Territories
Morphological data demonstrate a shift of CF synapse location from soma to dendrite during early postnatal development, which is known as “climbing fiber translocation” [ ] (Fig. 2 , (3) CF translocation). Hashimoto et al. (2009a) estimated the location of CF synapses along the somato-dendritic domain of PCs during postnatal development by analyzing the kinetics of EPSCs arising from single synaptic vesicles (quantal EPSCs) in CF terminals [ ]. Quantal EPSCs arising from a CF can be recorded when the CF is stimulated in a Sr 2+ -containing external solution which causes asynchronous release of synaptic vesicles in response to electrical stimulation of presynaptic axon [ , ]. Since the rise time of quantal EPSCs is longer as the distance from the synaptic sites to the soma is larger [ ], distribution of the rise time of quantal CF-EPSCs reflects the extent of dendritic translocation of the stimulated CF.
At P7–P8 when the selective strengthening of a single CF onto each PC has just completed, the distribution of qEPSC rise time is similar between the strongest CF and the weaker CFs, indicating that synapses of these two types of CFs are located on the soma (Fig. 1 , ~P7). At P9–P10, qEPSCs with slow rise time are more frequently found for the strongest CF than for the weaker CFs (Fig. 2 , (3) CF translocation). The difference between the strongest CF and the other weaker CFs becomes larger from P11 to P14. While the fraction of qEPSCs with slow rise time becomes larger for the strongest CF, the qEPSC rise time for the other weaker CFs remain almost unchanged from P9 to P14. These electrophysiological data indicate the following scenario for the development of CF to PC synapse. Competition among multiple CF inputs occurs on the soma before P7 and a single CF wins in each PC (Fig. 1 , ~P3 and ~P7; Fig. 2 , (1) Functional differentiation). Then, only the strongest CF (“winner” CF) translocates to dendrites at around P9 and thereafter (Fig. 1 , ~P12; Fig. 2 (3) CF translocation), whereas synapses of the weaker CFs (“loser” CFs) are confined around the soma (Fig. 1 , ~P12).
This scenario of CF synapse development [ , , ] is supported by morphological data by labelling subsets of CFs with an anterograde tracer, biotinylated dextran amine (BDA). At P7, P9, and P12, pericellular nests of CFs are observed after injection of BDA into the inferior olive. At P7, although growing stem dendrites are present in PCs, CF synapses are confined to the soma. CF synapses on PC dendrites are first observed at P9. At P12 and thereafter, CF innervation territory on PC dendrites extends progressively along with the growth of PC dendritic tree. The CFs translocating to dendrites, which are presumed to be “winner” CFs, keep their synapses on PC somata until around P12. Synaptic terminals of the other CFs are confined to the soma and the basal part of the primary dendrite. These presumed “loser” CFs are thought to be collaterals of the strongest CFs innervating adjacent PCs. Therefore, “pericellular nests” appear to represent multiple CF innervation of PCs [ ].
Miyazaki et al. developed a method of morphological demonstration of multiple CF innervations of PCs [ ]. They stained subsets of CFs by an anterograde tracer and simultaneously labeled all CF terminals by immunostaining for the CF terminal marker vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (VGluT2). If a PC is wired by CF terminals double positive for tracer/VGluT2 and CF terminals single positive for VGluT2, the PC is judged to be innervated by at least two CFs with different cellular origins in the inferior olive. Using this technique, Hashimoto et al. demonstrated that multiple CFs innervated PC dendrites of PC-specific P/Q-type VDCC knockout mice [ ], indicating that the P/Q-type VDCC in PCs is crucial for dendritic translocation of a single winner CF in each PC (Fig. 2 , (3) CF translocation, Table 1 ). Carrillo et al. performed two-photon multicolor imaging of CFs in the developing cerebellum of normal mice in vivo [ ]. Their results largely confirm the conclusions derived from the electrophysiological and morphological data for normal mice described above. Moreover, their time-lapse imaging in vivo demonstrated that the motility of CF terminals on the soma was much higher than those on dendrites, and that the CF which began dendritic translocation indeed became the winner [ ].
In mice deficient in the C1ql1 to Bai3 anterograde signaling, insufficient strengthening of a single winner CF appears to permit weaker CFs to translocate into dendrites [ ]. In addition, the extent of dendritic translocation of the winner CF was reported to be reduced in mice lacking the C1ql1 to Bai3 anterograde signaling at P26 and thereafter [ ]. It has also been demonstrated that the extent of dendritic translocation of the winner CF is persistently reduced in adult PC-specific progranulin knockout mice [ ]. These results suggest that factors for strengthening and maintenance of CF synapses such as C1ql1-Bai3 and progranulin-Sort1 are important for proper extension of dendritic innervation territories of the winner CF throughout mouse life (Fig. 2 , (3) CF translocation, Table 1 ).
Early Phase of Climbing Fiber Synapse Elimination
Previous studies on spontaneous mutant mice [ , , , ] and on animals with reduced granule cells (“hypogranular” cerebella) [ , , , ] have revealed that normal formation of PF-PC synapses is indispensable for normal CF synapse elimination. Furthermore, Crepel et al. (1981) showed that developmental elimination of redundant CFs could be comprised of two distinct phases in rats, the early phase up to around P8 which proceeds normally in animals with “hypogranular” cerebella and the late phase from around P9 to P17 which is clearly impaired by inhibiting granule cell production [ ]. However, since the animal models with “hypogranular” or “agranular” cerebella, which were used in earlier studies, have various severe abnormalities of cerebellar development, it is not clear whether the observed impairment of CF synapse elimination results solely from reduced PF-PC synapse formation.
Detailed assessment of CF synapse development in mouse cerebellar slices have revealed no significant reduction in the average number of CFs per PC from P3 to P6 during functional differentiation of multiple CF inputs [ ]. Then, the value decreased progressively from P6 to around P15 [ , ]. These results indicate that net elimination of surplus CFs starts after the strengthening of single CFs in individual PCs (Fig. 1 , ~P7 and ~P12).
The analysis of GluD2 (GluRδ2) knockout mice indicates that there are at least two distinct phases of CF synapse elimination [ ]. GluD2 is richly expressed at the PF-PC synapse and its deletion causes marked impairment of PF-PC synapse formation (Fig. 2 , (7) Formation/maintenance of PF synapses, Table 1 ). The density of PF-PC synapses of GluD2 knockout mice is about half of wild-type mice. Nevertheless, general histoarchitecture of the cerebellum and the morphology of PCs are largely normal in GluD2 knockout mice [ , ]. The average number of CFs innervating each PC was similar between GluD2 knockout and wild-type mice from P5 to P11. However, the value was significantly larger than that of control mice from P12 to P14 [ ]. These results collectively indicate that CF synapse elimination in mice can be classified into two distinct phases, namely the “early phase” from P8 to around P11 which is independent of PF-PC synapse formation and the “late phase” from around P12 and thereafter which requires normal PF-PC synapse formation (Fig. 1 , ~P12 and ~P18; Fig. 2 , (4) Early phase and (5) Late phase of CF elimination) [ ].
Several reports indicate that PC activity is crucial for CF synapse elimination. In transgenic mice that overexpressed a chloride channel-YFP fusion protein in PCs, excitabilities of PCs were suppressed at P9 and multiple CF innervations persisted up to P90 [ ]. These results indicate that perturbation of PC activity impairs the “early phase” of CF synapse elimination. On the other hand, Andjus et al. disrupted CF activity pattern of rats at P9–P12 by administration of harmaline, which is known to induce abnormal synchronous activation of inferior olivary neurons [ ]. This treatment caused persistent multiple CF innervations of PCs in rats at P15–P87, suggesting that proper activity patterns of CF inputs and postsynaptic PCs are important for the early phase of CF synapse elimination. Hashimoto et al. analyzed PC-specific P/Q-type VDCC knockout mice and demonstrated that PC activity, activation of P/Q-type VDCC, and Ca 2+ elevation in PCs are crucial for the early phase of CF synapse elimination (Fig. 2 , (4) Early phase of CF elimination, Table 1 ).
Molecules that strengthen/maintain CF synapses including IGF-1 [ ], Sema3A-PlxnA4 [ ], and progranulin-Sort1 [ ] are thought to regulate the extent of elimination of surplus CFs. When these molecules are blocked or deleted, CF synapse elimination is reported to be accelerated [ , ] (Fig. 2 , (4) Early phase of CF elimination, Table 1 ). Therefore, these molecules are considered to counteract CF synapse elimination. In contrast, Kakegawa et al. recently reported that C1ql1-Bai3 anterograde signaling is required for elimination of weaker CFs after P9, whereas the same signaling is involved in strengthening/maintenance of the strongest CF and facilitating dendritic translocation of the winner CF [ ] (Fig. 2 , (4) Early phase of CF elimination, Table 1 ). In addition, Oostland et al. suggested that deletion of serotonin 3A (5-HT 3A ) receptor, which appeared to be expressed in granule cells, caused accelerated maturation of PC dendrites, abnormal physiological maturation of PF-PC synapse, and delayed CF synapse elimination [ ] (Fig. 2 , (4) Early phase of CF elimination, Table 1 ). On the other hand, Jüttler et al. (2013) showed acceleration of the early phase of CF synapse elimination in chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (CSPG)5/neuroglycan C knockout mice together with impaired presynaptic maturation of inhibitory synapses [ ] (Fig. 2 , (4) Early phase of CF elimination, Table 1 ).
The characteristic “pericellular nest” seen from around P7 to P12 consists of perisomatic synapses originating from a single predominant CF (“winner” CF) and from several weaker CFs (“loser” CFs), and thus represents multiple CF innervation of PCs [ ]. The pericellular nest disappears in parallel with the progress of pruning of redundant somatic CF synapses. It is therefore likely that CF synapse elimination is achieved by non-selective pruning of perisomatic synapses, which leaves dendritic synapses of a single predominant CF unaffected and eventually leads to mono-innervation of that CF [ ] (Fig. 1 , ~P7, ~P12, and ~P18).
Late Phase of Climbing Fiber Synapse Elimination
As mentioned previously, normal PF-PC synapse formation is prerequisite for the late phase of CF synapse elimination. In GluD2 knockout mice with reduced PF-PC synapse number to about half of that of wild-type mice, CFs invade into the distal dendrites and form ectopic synapses there [ , , ]. Mutant mice lacking Cbln1, the ligand for GluD2, display phenotypes essentially the same as those of GluD2 knockout mice [ ]. These ectopic CF synapses appeared around P10 when PF synapse formation as well as the extension of PC dendritic arbor occurs most vigorously. These results indicate that PFs compete for postsynaptic sites on PC dendrites with CFs during development, and confine the CF innervation territories to proximal dendrites (Fig. 2 , (5) Late phase of CF elimination and (7) Formation/maintenance of PF synapses, Table 1 ).
The other factor is that PF-PC synapses transmit signals from mossy fibers to PCs. In particular, impulses along PFs activate type 1 metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR1) and its downstream signaling cascades in PCs [ , , ], while mGluR1 can hardly be activated by CF inputs without blockade of glutamate transporters [ ]. Electrophysiological examination demonstrates that mutant mice deficient in mGluR1 are impaired in CF synapse elimination. Mice deficient in mGluR1 [ , ] and signaling molecules downstream of mGluR1, i.e., G αq , PLCβ4, and PKCγ [ , , , ], are all impaired in CF synapse elimination. In all of these four mutant mice, regression of CF synapse occurs almost normally during the first and second postnatal weeks but they all display clear abnormality in synapse elimination during the third postnatal week. Unlike GluD2 or Cbln1 knockout mice, formation of PF to PC synapses is apparently normal in the four lines of mice lacking mGluR1 signaling molecules. Therefore, the impaired CF synapse elimination in these four mutant mice is not considered to be caused secondarily by the defect in PF-PC synapse formation. These results collectively indicate that the signaling cascade from mGluR1 to PKCγ is essential for the late phase of CF synapse elimination [ ] (Fig. 2 , (5) Late phase of CF elimination, Table 1 ).
Three splice variants of mGluR1, namely mGluR1a, mGluR1b, and mGluR1d, have been reported [ ]. mGluR1a has a long C-terminal domain that interacts with scaffolding proteins in the postsynaptic density, but mGluR1b lacks such C-terminal domain [ ]. The defect in CF synapse elimination in mGluR1 knockout mice is restored in the mGluR1a-rescue mice in which mGluR1a has been introduced specifically into PCs [ ]. In contrast, PC-specific expression of mGluR1b into mGluR1 knockout mice failed to rescue the impaired CF synapse elimination [ ]. CF synapse elimination has been reported to be impaired in mice with PC-specific expression of a PKC inhibitor peptide [ ]. These results collectively indicate that the signaling from mGluR1a to PKCγ in PCs but in no other cell types is crucial for the late phase of CF synapse elimination.
Chronic pharmacological blockade of NMDA receptors within the cerebellum leads to the impairment of CF synapse elimination [ ] specifically in the late phase [ ]. It is well known that PCs are devoid of functional NMDA receptors at least during the developmental period of CF synapse elimination, but they are abundantly expressed at mossy fiber to granule cell synapses. Therefore, it is thought that neural activity along mossy fiber-granule cell-PF-PC pathway and the subsequent activation of mGluR1 are prerequisite for the late phase of CF synapse elimination [ ].
Recent studies have identified molecules that function downstream of mGluR1 to exert CF synapse elimination (Fig. 2 , (5) Late phase of CF elimination, Table 1 ). Uesaka et al. demonstrated that microRNA-mediated knockdown of semaphorin 7A (Sema7A) specifically in PCs of neonatal mice caused impairment of the late phase of CF synapse elimination [ ]. Double knockdown of mGluR1 and Sema7A in neonatal PCs impaired CF synapse elimination to the same extent as mGluR1 knockdown alone. In contrast, double knockdown of mGluR1 and either P/Q-type VDCC or GluD2 induced severer impairment of CF synapse elimination than single knockdown of either P/Q-type VDCC or GluD2. Overexpression of Sema7A into PCs with mGluR1 knockdown restored CF synapse elimination. These results indicate that Sema7A functions downstream of mGluR1 to eliminate surplus CF synapses. Uesaka et al. also reported that knockdown of putative Sema7A receptors, plexin C1 (PlxnC1), and integrin B1 (ItgB1), in inferior olivary neurons of neonatal mice impaired CF synapse elimination in PCs surrounded by CFs with PlxnC1 or ItgB1 knockdown. Furthermore, Uesaka et al. presented evidence that PlxnC1 and ItgB1 facilitate CF synapse elimination by inactivating cofilin and activating focal adhesion kinase, respectively, in CFs [ , ]. These results collectively indicate that retrograde Sema7A to PlxnC1/ItgB1 signaling from PCs to CFs is driven downstream of mGluR1 signaling and facilitates CF synapse elimination after P15 by regulating cofilin and focal adhesion kinase in CFs [ , ] (Fig. 2 , (5) Late phase of CF elimination, Table 1 ) .
Choo et al. (2017) recently reported that BDNF derived from PCs downstream of mGluR1 acts retrogradely onto TrkB in CFs and promotes the late phase of CF synapse elimination [ ] (Fig. 2 , (5) Late phase of CF elimination, Table 1 ). Previous studies showed that CF synapse elimination was impaired in mice with global or cerebellum-specific knockout of TrkB [ , ]. In support of these previous studies, Choo et al. demonstrated that CF synapse elimination after P15 was impaired in PC-specific BDNF knockout mice and in PCs with microRNA-mediated BDNF knockdown. They found essentially the same impairment of CF synapse elimination in PCs surrounded by CFs with TrkB knockdown by injecting lentivirus carrying microRNA against TrkB into the neonatal inferior olive. They further demonstrated that knockdown of mGluR1 in PCs of wild-type mice and that of PC-specific BDNF knockout mice caused impairment of CF synapse elimination to the same extent, suggesting that mGluR1 and BDNF function along the same signaling pathway. Interestingly, effect of Sema7A knockdown in PCs was occluded in PC-specific BDNF knockout mice. This result suggests that BDNF and Sema7A share a common signaling pathway for the late-phase CF synapse elimination presumably within CFs [ ].
As discussed in the previous section, P/Q-type VDCC is involved in the selection of a single “winner” CF during the first postnatal week, the dendritic translocation of “winner” CF, and the early phase of CF elimination. However, subsequent studies indicate that P/Q-type VDCC also plays important roles in the late phase of CF elimination. Mikuni et al. presented evidence that Ca 2+ influx to PCs through P/Q-type VDCC is required for elimination of redundant CF synapses after P12 [ ]. They showed that the expression level of the immediate early gene Arc/Arg3.1 in PCs was elevated by Ca 2+ influx to PCs through P/Q-type VDCC. microRNA-mediated knockdown of Arc in PCs of neonatal mice caused impairment of CF synapse elimination from PC somata after P12 and increase in CF-EPSC amplitudes. CF innervation patterns of Arc-knockdown PCs were not altered at P11 and P12, indicating that the early phase of CF elimination is not impaired in PCs with Arc-knockdown. Double knockdown of P/Q-type VDCC and Arc impaired CF synapse elimination to the same extent as knockdown of P/Q-type VDCC alone, indicating that Arc mediates CF synapse elimination downstream of P/Q-type VDCC. Furthermore, Kawata et al. analyzed CF synapse development in mice with PC-specific deletion of TARPγ2 (stargazin), the major AMPA-receptor auxiliary subunit in PCs [ ], and presented evidence that supports the results of Mikuni et al. [ ]. Due to the deletion of TARPγ2, the amplitudes of EPSCs in PCs of PC-specific TARPγ2 knockout mice were globally scaled down to about 60% of those of wild-type mice. Under current-clamp mode, Ca 2+ transients elicited by CF stimulation in PCs of knockout mice reduced to about half of those of wild-type mice. Despite these changes, relative differences between strong and weak CF-mediated EPSCs were preserved and the early phase of CF elimination was normal in PC-specific TARPγ2 knockout mice. In contrast, the extent of CF translocation to dendrites and the late phase of CF synapse elimination were clearly impaired because of insufficient activation of Arc in PCs [ ]. Overexpression of Arc into PCs rescued the impaired late phase of CF synapse elimination in PC-specific TARPγ2 knockout mice. These results indicate that P/Q-type VDCC-induced Ca 2+ elevation and subsequent activation of Arc are required for the late phase of CF synapse elimination (Fig. 2 , (5) Late phase of CF elimination, Table 1 ).
Several other molecules have been reported to be involved in the late phase of CF synapse elimination, as summarized in Table 1 . These include a motor protein, myosin Va [ ], a glutamate transporter, GLAST [ , ], and a novel brain-specific receptor-like protein family, BSRP [ ]. Since genetic or pharmacological deletion of these molecules in mice impairs CF synapse elimination in the second postnatal week, these molecules are thought to be involved in the “late phase” of CF synapse elimination. Recently, Miyazaki et al. revealed that GLAST is required for wrapping of PF and CF synapses by Bergmann glial processes. In GLAST knockout mice, mono-innervation of PCs by single strong CFs and segregation of CF and PF territories along PC dendrites cannot develop normally [ ]. Impaired CF synapse elimination was reported in null mutant mice deficient in Ca 2+ /calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMKIV), but it is unclear at what stage of postnatal development the impairment occurs [ ]. On the other hand, multiple CF innervations at P21–P28 were reported in null mutant mice deficient in αCaMKII, but this phenotype disappears in adulthood [ ].
It should also be noted that Sema3A-PlxnA4, C1ql1-Bai3, and progranulin-Sort1 are functional to strengthen and maintain CF synapses during the late phase of CF synapse elimination. Therefore, the lack of any of these molecules is reported to affect CF elimination during the late phase [ ].
Maturation of GABAergic Inhibition on Purkinje Cell Somata and Its Influence on Climbing Fiber Synapse Elimination
As mentioned previously, CF synapse elimination is critically dependent on PF-synapse formation especially for the late phase. Besides, it has become clear that maturation of GABAergic inhibition, particularly that from basket cells onto PC somata, is required for elimination of redundant perisomatic CF synapses. Ichikawa et al. revealed that CFs form synapses on somatic protrusions and thorns (collectively called spines) of PCs at around P9 [ ]. They also demonstrated that such somatic CF synapses steadily decrease in number from P9 to P15 and almost disappeared at P20 [ ]. In parallel with the decrease in perisomatic CF synapses, somatic spines appear to be taken over by basket cell axons and Bergman glia and transient GABAergic synapses are formed on somatic spines from P9 to P15. Then, postsynaptic receptors switch from glutamatergic to GABAergic, somatic spines disappear, and GABAergic terminals of basket cell axons are on the flat somatic membrane [ ] (Fig. 2 , (6) Maturation of GABAergic inhibition, Table 1 ).
Nakayama et al. demonstrated that CF synapse elimination after P10 was impaired in the heterozygous GAD67-GFP (Δneo) knock-in (GAD67 +/GFP ) mouse, which has a deletion of a single allele for the GABA-synthesizing enzyme GAD67 [ ] (Fig. 2 , (6) Maturation of GABAergic inhibition, Table 1 ). Persistent local application of a GAD inhibitor, 3-MP, to the cerebellum of wild-type mice caused a similar impairment of CF synapse elimination when MPP application started at P10, but not at P17. In GAD67 +/GFP mice, GABAergic inhibition of PCs by basket cells was attenuated in the second postnatal week. Persistent local infusion of a GABA A receptor sensitizer, diazepam, into the cerebellum rescued the impaired CF synapse elimination when diazepam application was started at P10 but not at P17. Because of the attenuated basket cell-PC inhibition, Ca 2+ transients in PCs induced by stimulating weaker CFs under current clamp mode were markedly enhanced in GAD67 +/GFP mice. Majority of Ca 2+ influx into PCs during CF activity is shown to be mediated by P/Q-type VDCC (Hashimoto et al. 2011). Based on the assumption that Ca 2+ elevation in PCs strengthens or maintains CF synapses, the results from GAD67 +/GFP mice suggest that the enhanced Ca 2+ transients in PCs through P/Q-type VDCC permitted survival of weaker CFs and caused persistent multiple CF innervation [ ].
Parallel Fiber Synapse Elimination Following the Late Phase of Climbing Fiber Elimination
A recent study has disclosed that massive elimination of PF-PC synapses from proximal dendrites follows the late phase of CF synapse elimination [ ] (Fig. 1 , ~P18 and Adult; Fig. 2 , (8) PF synapse elimination, Table 1 ). Mono-innervation by CF and segregated dendritic innervation by PF and CF are based on competitive equilibrium among the two distinct types of excitatory inputs. Experimental manipulations that sway the equilibrium significantly alter the PC’s synaptic wiring. It is well known that CFs and PFs innervate proximal and distal portions of PC dendrites, respectively. Besides, there are intermediate dendritic portions with mixed innervation by both CFs and PFs. With serial electron microscopic analysis of PCs during postnatal development, Ichikawa et al. demonstrated that the dendritic regions with mixed CF and PF innervations were steadily expanded until P15. Then the massive elimination of PF synapses from proximal dendrites occurs from P15 to around P30. Consequently, the dendritic regions with mixed CF and PF innervations become markedly smaller and the CF and PF territories become segregated [ ]. Importantly, mGluR1 to PKCγ cascade is required for this massive PF synapse elimination from P15 to around P30 [ ] (Fig. 2 , (8) PF synapse elimination, Table 1 ). These results indicate that mGluR1 to PKCγ cascade is essential not only for the late phase of CF synapse elimination but also for the subsequent PF synapse elimination.
Conclusions
In this article, we reviewed how mono-CF innervation in mature cerebellum is established from neonatal stage of multiple CF innervations. In newborn mice and rats, each PC is innervated by multiple CFs with similar synaptic strengths on the soma. A single CF is selectively strengthened subsequently from P3 to P7. Then, around P9, only the strongest CF (“winner” CF) starts to extend its innervation along growing PC dendrites. On the other hand, synapses of the weaker CFs (“loser” CFs) remain around the soma together with somatic synapses of the “winner” CF. These somatic CF synapses are eliminated progressively during the second and the third postnatal weeks. Finally, after the late phase of CF elimination, PF synapses are massively eliminated from the intermediate portion of PC dendrite from around P15 to P30.
Molecular and cellular mechanisms of CF synapse elimination have been pursued in the past 20 years by using a number of knockout mice, pharmacological approaches, and microRNA-mediated knockdown of candidate molecules (see Fig. 2 ). Neural activity is crucial for all the phases of CF synapse elimination. In particular, depolarization of postsynaptic PCs to activate P/Q-type VDCC and subsequent Ca 2+ elevation in PCs are essential for the functional differentiation, the CF translocation, the early and the late phases of CF synapse elimination. In contrast, mGluR1 and its downstream signaling molecules play crucial roles mainly in the late phase of CF synapse elimination. While P/Q-type VDCC is activated primarily by PC depolarization following CF inputs, mGluR1 signaling seems to be activated by PF inputs. The latter is in line with the fact that the late phase is critically dependent on normal PF-PC synapse formation. Besides molecules involved in elimination of CFs, those responsible for strengthening and maintenance of CF are also being elucidated in the past 10 years. Thanks to the development of RNAi technology to knockdown molecules in cell-specific manner, our knowledge about molecular cascades for the respective phases of CF synapse elimination is growing steadily. It is also important to study possible interaction of the multiple molecules involved in CF synapse elimination. For example, results from PC-selective P/Q-type VDCC knockout mice show that Ca 2+ elevation in PCs generates CF elimination signals, whereas results from GAD67 +/GFP mice suggest that Ca 2+ elevation in PCs produces CF maintenance signals. It is currently unknown how these opposing signals interact and finely regulate CF synapse elimination. Future studies would elucidate how the multiple molecules or signaling pathways are integrated and orchestrate the processes of CF synapse elimination.