Introduction
Although the extent of cerebellum functional roles is still debated (for a review, see, e.g., [ ]), its major role in motor function has been well recognized since the middle of the eighteenth century [ , ]. Apart from occulomotor control, cerebellar circuits indeed contribute (among others) to the movement regularity [ , , , ], minimization of motor execution errors (i.e., the difference between planned and executed movements [ ]), coordination of body parts and articulated (single- or multi-joint) movements [ , ], and modulation of sensorimotor cortex activity according to the predictability of the sensory consequences of motor actions [ ].
As evidence for the role of the cerebellum in motor control, patients with cerebellar lesions typically display numerous alterations of voluntary movement. Those alterations comprise over- or undershooting, increased variability from trial to trial, impaired timing, as well as errors in position, directional tuning, or velocity profiles (for a review, see, e.g., [ ]).
Taken together, these data suggest that the cerebellum plays a key role in the encoding/processing of voluntary movement kinematics.
The corticokinematic coherence (CKC, [ , , ]) quantifies the coupling between the kinematics of active, passive, or observed hand/finger movements and neocortical activity as recorded non-invasively with magnetoencephalography (MEG) or electroencephalography (EEG). CKC peaks at movement frequency (F0) and its first harmonic (F1) in a large cortical sensorimotor network predominating over the primary sensorimotor (SM1) cortex contralateral to hand movements [ , , ]. CKC is mainly driven by proprioceptive afference to SM1 cortex. This has been demonstrated by comparing CKC during active and passive movements [ ] and by evaluating CKC directionality with renormalized partial directed coherence (rPDC), an extension of Granger causality to the frequency domain [ ].
We have previously reported the existence of significant coupling between observed movement kinematics and cerebellar activity—in vermis and cerebellar lobule Crus I—during observed repetitive finger flexion-extension movements occurring at about 3 Hz [ ]. Additionally, coherence between rectified extensor digitorum communis (EDC) electromyogram (EMG) signals and ipsilateral cerebellar neuromagnetic activity was found during a writing task in healthy subjects and patients with writer’s cramp [ ], as well as during parkinsonian tremor [ ]. However, to the best of our knowledge, no MEG study has so far identified a direct functional coupling between cerebellar activity and movement kinematics (e.g., limb position, velocity or acceleration) during movement execution, nor evaluated the directionality of such coupling. Previous MEG studies repeatedly reported significant coupling in the alpha (8–12 Hz) frequency band between a large thalamo-cortical sensorimotor network and the cerebellum during various repetitive movement tasks like self-paced or sensory-cued uni- or bimanual movements [ , , ]. Furthermore, a phase relationship between neuromagnetic primary motor (M1) cortex activity and the cerebellum was also disclosed at F0 during a continuous visuomotor task [ ]. Of notice, in those MEG experiments, the activity of the M1 cortex contralateral to movement was entrained to movement rhythmicity at F0 as for the CKC phenomenon [ ].
Considering (i) the critical functional role of the cerebellum in encoding/processing voluntary movement kinematics [ ], (ii) the massive proprioceptive inputs projecting to the cerebellum via the spinocerebellar pathways [ ], and (iii) the fact that patients with cerebellar diseases display some degree of altered movement kinematics, we hypothesized that the cerebellum should display some degree of coupling with movement kinematics during voluntary movements. This study therefore aimed at characterizing the coupling between movement kinematics and neuromagnetic cerebellar activity and the impact of movement frequency on this coupling. To do so, we reanalyzed previously published data from our group [ ], in which the neuromagnetic activity of healthy subjects was recorded while they performed repetitive flexion–extensions of right-hand fingers at different movement rates (1, 2, and 3 Hz). We focused on source-space cerebellar activity estimated using state-of-the-art methods of source reconstruction. To better characterize the neuroanatomical pathways potentially involved in the cerebellar coupling, we finally estimated the directionality of the coupling between neocortical/cerebellar activity and movement kinematics using the rPDC approach.
Materials and Methods
The experimental data used in this study are derived from reference [ ].
Subjects
Eleven healthy adults (age range 24–40 years; mean age 31.1 years; 3 females, 8 males) without any history of neuropsychiatric disease or movement disorders were studied. All subjects were right-handed according to the Edinburgh handedness inventory [ ]. They participated after written informed consent. The study had prior approval by the CUB–Hôpital Erasme Ethics Committee.
Experimental Paradigm
During MEG recordings, subjects were asked to perform self-paced flexion–extensions of the right-hand fingers at three different movement rates: slow (~ 1 Hz), medium (~ 2 Hz), and fast (~ 3 Hz). Recording duration was adapted to each movement rate to equalize the number of movement cycles across conditions ( slow : 11 min, medium : 5 min, fast: 3 min). Subjects were asked to avoid touching the thumb with the other fingers during the flexions in order to minimize tactile input. Before each movement task, subjects performed a 1-min training during which they learned the condition-specific movement rate by moving to the pace of a pure tone played by a digital metronome. The order of movement tasks (i.e., slow , medium , and fast ) was randomized across subjects. Subjects were asked to fixate the gaze at a point in the magnetically shielded room (MSR) so as to avoid any gaze contact with the moved hand and to minimize eye-movement artifacts. Earplugs were used to dampen auditory noise associated with repetitive hand movements.
Data Acquisition
Neuromagnetic activity was recorded at the ULB–Hôpital Erasme with a whole-scalp-covering neuromagnetometer installed in a light-weight MSR (Vectorview & Maxshield™; Elekta Oy, Helsinki, Finland); the characteristics of which have been previously described [ , ]. MEG signals were recorded using a bandpass of 0.1–330 Hz and a sampling rate of 1 kHz. Four head tracking coils continuously monitored subjects’ head position inside the MEG helmet. The locations of the coils and at least 150 head-surface points (on scalp, nose, and face) with respect to anatomical fiducials were digitized with an electromagnetic tracker (Fastrak, Polhemus, Colchester, VT, USA). Right index finger movements were monitored time-locked to MEG signals with a 3-axis accelerometer (Acc; ADXL335 iMEMS Accelerometer, Analog Devices, Inc., Norwood, MA, USA). High-resolution 3D-T1 cerebral magnetic resonance images (MRIs) were acquired after the MEG sessions on a 1.5 Tesla MRI scan (Intera, Philips, The Netherlands).
Data Preprocessing and Coherence Analysis
MEG data were first preprocessed off-line using the signal space separation method to suppress external interferences and to correct for head movements [ ]. Acc signal amplitude was computed at each time sample as the Euclidian norm of the three band-passed (0.1–145 Hz) Acc channels. Then, to perform frequency and coherence analyses, MEG and Acc signals were split into epochs. Epoch size was fixed so as to include the same number of finger movement cycles (~ 6 movement cycles per epoch) across the three conditions ( fast : 2048 ms, medium : 3072 ms, slow : 6144 ms). An epoch overlap of 80% was used as it provides close-to-optimal coherence estimation [ ]. Epochs in which the MEG signal amplitude exceeded 3 pT (magnetometers) or 0.7 pT/cm (gradiometers) were marked as artifact-contaminated and rejected from further analysis. Given that the duration of experimental conditions was adapted to equalize the amount of finger movement cycles across movement tasks, a large number of epochs was obtained in each condition after artifact rejection (547 ± 48 epochs in slow, 554 ± 47 epochs in medium, and 489 ± 49 epochs in fast; mean ± SD across subjects) leading to comparable coherence noise levels across movement tasks [ ].
Coherence was estimated between Acc and MEG signals, at sensor and source levels following a procedure described in details in Marty et al. [ ]. Given that CKC is known to peak mainly at F0 and F1 regardless of movement frequency [ ], source-level coherence was estimated for all movement tasks at these frequencies only. In brief, individual MRIs were first segmented using the Freesurfer software (Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts, USA; [ ]). Then, we coregistered MRI and MEG coordinate systems using the three anatomical fiducial points for initial estimation and the head-surface points to manually refine the surface coregistration. On this basis, we computed the MEG forward model using a one-shell boundary element model of individuals’ intracranial space for three orthogonal current dipoles placed on a homogeneous 5-mm-grid source space covering the whole brain and the cerebellum (MNE suite; Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts, USA; [ ]). For each source, the forward model was reduced to its two principal components of highest singular value, which closely correspond to sources tangential to the skull. Data from source pairs were then combined in the direction of maximum coherence as done in Bourguignon et al. [ ]. Finally, we built a coherence map for each movement rate at F0 and F1 separately using the Dynamic Imaging of Coherent Sources (DICS) approach [ ]. However, in place of the classical DICS beamformer, we used a linearly constrained minimum-variance Beamformer derived from the broadband (0.1–45 Hz) MEG covariance during movement period [ ]. This is justified by that CKC has a relatively strong magnitude (coherence values up to 0.8) that easily leads to drastic cancelation of coherent sources in the classical frequency-specific beamformer formulation. Opening the band for covariance matrix computation thus limited the cancelation effects inherent to a beamformer approach [ ].
Finally, to assess the regularity of finger movements at the three movement rates, the principal component of the three high-passed (0.2 Hz) Acc signals was first extracted and its Fourier transform computed. The resulting power spectrum was then smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of FWHM set to 0.2 Hz in slow, 0.4 Hz in medium, and 0.6 Hz in fast. The first peak of the spectrum curve was then identified and its full width at half maximum (FWHM) was estimated. Peak FWHM over requested frequencies (1 Hz, 2 Hz, and 3 Hz) provided an indicator of movement regularity (i.e., the smaller its value, the more regular movement is).
Group Analyses
To build group maps, we first computed a non-linear transformation from individual MRIs to the standard Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) brain using the spatial normalization algorithm implemented in Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK). The obtained transformation was then applied to individual coherence maps to create normalized coherence maps in the MNI space for each subject and movement rate (i.e., slow , medium , and fast ). The group-level coherence map was finally built using the generalized f -mean of individual normalized maps, with f (x) = atanh(√(x)), i.e., the Fisher z-transform of the square root coherence. The f -transformation was used because it presents the advantage of transforming the noise on coherence estimates into an approximately normally distributed noise [ ]. In addition, this averaging procedure decreases the relative contribution of subjects characterized by high coherence values to the group analysis [ ].
Renormalized Partial Directed Coherence
We supplemented the coherence analysis with the estimation of the directional coupling between SM1, cerebellar, and hand acceleration signals, using the rPDC [ , ]. First, we applied the inverse operator to the continuous MEG data to estimate the time course of brain activity at locations of maximum group-level CKC at F0, i.e., the left SM1 cortex and the right cerebellum (see the “Results” section). These time courses will be henceforth referred to as MEG SM1 and MEG Cerebellum , respectively. We then estimated the rPDC between MEG SM1 , MEG Cerebellum , and Acc signals. These rPDC values were computed in the direction of maximum coherence with the accelerometer. In practice, the rPDC estimation necessitates fitting a multivariate autoregressive model to the data, and the parameters of the model determine the frequency resolution. Here, a multivariate autoregressive model of order 30 was fitted to the data low-pass filtered at 2.5 × F0 and resampled at 5 × F0 with the ARfit package [ ]. The model order of 30 represents a good compromise between the optimal order estimated based on Schwarz’s Bayesian criterion (range, 5–67; mean ± SD, 21 ± 22) and Akaike’s final prediction error (35–100; 90 ± 18) [ ]. The sampling frequency of 5 × F0 and this model order enabled us exploring frequencies up to 2.5 × F0 with a frequency resolution of F0/6. This procedure produced for each subject and each movement rate six rPDC spectra: two for the cerebellospinal interaction (MEG Cerebellum → Acc; Acc → MEG Cerebellum ), two for the corticospinal interaction (MEG SM1 → Acc; Acc → MEG SM1 ), and two for the corticocerebellar interaction (MEG Cortex → MEG Cerebellum ; MEG Cerebellum → MEG Cortex ). Given that the coupling between MEG SM1 and Acc has already been documented in Bourguignon et al. [ ], only the four rPDC spectra involving the cerebellum shall be considered in the present report.
Statistical Analyses
The methods used for sensor space statistics and the ANOVA assessing the effect of movement rate and coherent frequency (i.e., F0, F1) on sensor space coherence levels have been described in details in Marty et al. [ ].
For each movement rate (i.e., slow , medium , and fast ), the statistical significance of source space coherence at the group level was assessed with a non-parametric permutation test that compared genuine and surrogate coherence maps. To that aim, we first computed individual surrogate coherence maps, which are maps of coherence between real MEG signals and Fourier transform surrogate Acc signals. In Fourier transform surrogate signals, the phase of each Fourier coefficients is replaced by a random angle, an operation that eliminates the phase coupling and preserves the power spectrum [ ]. In brief, a difference map was first obtained for each movement rate and frequency of interest by subtracting the corresponding group coherence map with its surrogate map. Under the null hypothesis of no coherence in the data of interest, genuine and surrogate individual maps are exchangeable prior to difference maps computation [ ]. To reject this hypothesis and compute a threshold of statistical significance for the non-permuted difference maps, the sample distribution of the maximum of the difference maps’ absolute value, taken over the whole brain volume, was obtained from the exhaustive permutation set ( n = 2 11 possible permutations). The significance threshold at p < 0.05 was computed as the 95th percentile of this sample distribution [ ], and all suprathreshold local coherence maxima were then interpreted as indicative of brain regions showing statistically significant coherence with the kinematics of the executed finger movements.
The threshold obtained by computing the maximum statistic over the whole brain volume nicely corrects for the voxel-wise multiple comparisons involved in brain maps but it is known to be too conservative [ ]. Indeed, such whole-brain-volume maximum statistic is driven by the global coherence maximum (typically located at SM1 cortex in the present case; see the “Results” section), with the risk of missing other potentially meaningful sources of coherence (i.e., type II error). To avoid such drawback and as the main aim of this study was to search for cerebellar coupling, we also performed an additional permutation-based statistics identical to the one described above but where the maximum statistic was restricted to the cerebellum (see [ ] for an analogous methodology using a restricted region of interest (ROI)).
The effect of movement rate ( slow , medium , and fast ) on cerebellar coherence values was assessed with a repeated measure ANOVA. Results were considered significant at p < 0.05.
The effect of movement rate ( slow, medium, and fast ) on movement regularity parameter values was assessed with a repeated measure ANOVA. Results were considered significant at p < 0.05.
The statistical significance of rPDC was assessed analytically using the procedure described in Schelter et al. [ , ]. Briefly, under the null hypothesis of no directional coupling, rPDC values have a Chi-square distribution with 2 degrees of freedom. Hence, individual rPDC values at F0 were compared to 95th percentile of this distribution.
The effect of directionality and movement rate (i.e., slow , medium , and fast ) on rPDC values was assessed with a repeated measure ANOVA separately for each type of investigated coupling (i.e., Acc ↔ MEG Cerebellum and MEG Cortex ↔ MEG Cerebellum ). Results were considered significant at p < 0.05.
Results
Movement Kinematics
All subjects performed the task with a movement frequency of around 1 Hz (mean ± SD, 1.1 ± 0.2 Hz) in slow , 2 Hz (2.2 ± 0.3 Hz) in medium , and 3 Hz (3.0 ± 0.4 Hz) in fast . Movement regularity was similar across the three movement rates ( 0.44 ± 0.04 mean ± SD in slow, 0.46 ± 0.05 in medium, and 0.48 ± 0.06 in fast; ANOVA, F = 1.65, p = 0.21).
As described in details in Marty et al. [ ], coherence spectra showed statistically significant peaks at F0 or F1 in almost all subjects and movement rate with maximal coherence values at left rolandic MEG sensors. Also, the ANOVA test did not disclose any significant effect of movement rate, coherent frequency nor interaction on sensor space coherence levels ( ps > 0.05).
Functional Coupling Between Brain Activity and Movement Kinematics
Figure 1 presents the group-level coherence maps in all movement tasks, at F0 and F1. Fig. 1 Group-level coherence maps obtained at F0 superimposed on slices (left, sagittal slice; right, coronal slice) of the MNI brain. All maps are thresholded at statistical significant level based on the maximum statistic restricted to the cerebellum (lower bound of the color scale). Top: slow condition, middle: medium condition, bottom: fast condition
In all movement conditions, significant global coherence maxima were identified at the group level at F0 and F1 at MNI coordinates located at the left SM1 hand area (Table 1 ). A clear local coherence maximum was also identified at the group-level at F0 at the right posterior lobe of the cerebellum at MNI coordinates located at or close to the right lobule VIII (Table 1 ). Seven out of the 11 subjects displayed a clear right cerebellar local maximum at the different movement rates. Additionally, at F1, a clear group-level local coherence maximum was identified in the cerebellum only in the slow condition (coherence, 0.07; MNI coordinates, [26–70–46] mm). The coherence level of these group-level cerebellar local coherence maxima was only significant when the maximum statistic computation was restricted to the cerebellum. Of note and for indicative purpose only, the significance thresholds of sensor-level coherence computed as in [ ] were (mean ± SD) 0.05 ± 0.01 in slow, 0.05 ± 0.02 in medium, and 0.03 ± 0.02 in fast, which is much lower than the cerebellar coherence levels disclosed at the source level. Table 1 Group-level source space peak coherence values and MNI coordinates Coherence values [MNI coordinates x, y, z (mm)] SM1 cortex Cerebellum F0 F1 F0 Slow Medium Fast 0.36 [–37–19 60] 0.37 [–39–16 58] 0.29 [–41–18 57] 0.33 [–42–24 56] 0.39 [–38–23 58] 0.45 [–38–22 58] 0.12 [29–63–45] 0.13 [22–73–43] 0.12 [34–76–41]
The ANOVA performed on the cerebellar coherence levels at F0 did not disclose any significant main effect of movement rate ( F = 0.01, p = 0.99).
Of note, source space results were unchanged after equalization of the number (475 ± 34) of epochs across the three movement rate conditions.
Directional Coupling Between SM1 Activity, Cerebellar Activity, and Movement Kinematics
Figure 2 presents the rPDC values in all directions investigated here. Fig. 2 Mean renormalized partial directed coherence (rPDC) values across subjects and conditions between the accelerometer and neuromagnetic cerebellar signals: Acc ↔ MEG Cerebellum coupling and between the neuromagnetic primary sensorimotor (SM1) and cerebellar signals: MEG Cortex ↔ MEG Cerebellum coupling
The afferent coupling with the cerebellum (Acc → MEG Cerebellum ) at F0 was statistically significant in 6–10 of the 11 subjects (6 slow , 9 medium , 10 fast ). The efferent coupling (MEG Cerebellum → Acc) at F0 appeared significant in 2–7 subjects (7 slow , 2 medium , 4 fast ). The ANOVA performed on these rPDC values disclosed a significant main effect of direction (afferent vs. efferent; F 1,10 = 12.29, p < 0.01), with the afferent coupling (mean rPDC across subjects and conditions, 15.3) being 3.1 times stronger than the efferent coupling (mean rPDC across subjects and conditions, 4.9), but no main effect of movement rate ( F 2,20 = 0.4, p = 0.68) nor interaction ( F 2,20 = 0.72, p = 0.50).
The coupling from SM1 to cerebellum (mean rPDC across subjects and conditions, 4.3) was statistically significant at F0 in 0–5 subjects (5 slow , 0 medium , 1 fast ), and the coupling from cerebellum to SM1 (mean rPDC across subjects and conditions, 3.2) was statistically significant at F0 in 0–4 subjects (4 slow , 2 medium , 0 fast ).
The ANOVA performed on the coupling strength did not disclose any significant main effect of movement rate ( F 2,20 = 2.45, p = 0.11), main effect of direction (SM1 → cerebellum vs. cerebellum → SM1; F 1,10 = 2.22, p = 0.17), nor interaction ( F 2,20 = 1.27, p = 0.3).
Discussion
This study specifically tested the hypothesis that cerebellar activity recorded with MEG is coupled with finger movement kinematics. At all movement rates ( slow , ~ 1 Hz; medium , ~ 2 Hz; and fast , at ~ 3 Hz), the ROI-based statistics revealed significant coupling at F0 in the posterior lobe of the cerebellum ipsilateral to the moved fingers. Directionality analyses disclosed a stronger afferent than efferent coupling between cerebellar MEG and Acc signals, with no evidence of cortico-cerebellar and cerebello-cortical involvement in the observed coupling. No effect of the movement rate was observed neither on coherence levels nor on rPDC values.
Cerebellar Coupling with Finger Movement Kinematics
Previous CKC studies exploring movement tasks similar to the one used in this study (i.e., executed self-paced repetitive finger movements) did not disclose significant coupling between finger movement kinematics and cerebellar activity [ , , , , , ]. These results contrast with those of other studies that showed some degree of coupling between cerebellar and EMG signals during parkinsonian tremor or writing tasks [ , ], or between cerebellar activity and observed non-goal directed finger movement kinematics [ ]. The discrepancy between those results could be explained by the statistical method used in previous CKC studies to estimate the significance threshold in the source space, which relied on maximum statistic computed over the whole brain and assessed with non-parametric permutation tests. Such methods are typically used to deal with the multiple comparison problem ubiquitous in neuroimaging data [ ]. However, one well-known limitation of maximum statistic is that areas where the mean difference (here, between coherence and surrogate maps) fluctuates the most will dominate the permutation distribution. This may render the statistical assessment rather restrictive for voxels of small values regardless of their across-subject consistency and lead to a risk of type II errors [ ]. Consequently, the large coherence values typically observed at the SM1 cortex likely concealed the lower coherence values in the cerebellum; ipsilateral cerebellar coherence levels being about one third of those observed at contralateral SM1 cortex. Indeed, a clear cerebellar local coherence maximum was found at the group level at F0 in all movement rates but coherence level did not reach significance when maximum statistics was computed over the whole brain volume. To circumvent this flaw, we here focused our statistical assessment of coherence on a ROI covering the entire cerebellum.
Using such statistical approach, this study demonstrates significant coupling between cerebellar activity and movement kinematics mainly at F0 with a clear local coherence maximum observed at the group level in the right posterior lobe of the cerebellum at MNI coordinates located at or close to cerebellar lobule VIII. Of note, 7 out of the 11 studied subjects displayed a clear cerebellar local coherence maximum ipsilateral to movement. The group-level anatomical localization of the coherent cerebellar area is in line with the known motor function of the cerebellum. Indeed, previous neuroimaging data obtained in humans have demonstrated that the cerebellar cortex involved in sensorimotor function comprises two main areas, one in the anterior lobe (i.e., lobule V) and another in the posterior lobe (i.e., lobule VIII) of the cerebellum [ ]. The lobule VIII has been demonstrated to be involved in simple finger movement tasks such as finger flexion–extension and tapping [ ], which fits very well with the finger movements used in this study. Importantly, this study brings novel empirical data suggesting that activity within the posterior lobe of the cerebellum (presumably lobule VIII) is coupled with finger kinematics at movement frequency with no influence of movement rate on cerebellar coherence levels.
The fact that movement rate has no significant effect on cerebellar coherence levels is in line with our previous study, which demonstrated that the level of coherence at SM1 cortex is rather independent of movement frequency [ ]. These findings contrast with those observed for mouth (orbicularis oris muscle) movements during syllable repetition for which coherence is strongest at the frequency of spontaneous speech rhythmicity (i.e., about 2–3 Hz) compared with lower (e.g., 0.8 Hz, 1.1 Hz) or higher (3.7 or 5 Hz) targeted frequencies [ ]. Our findings could therefore suggest that this “preference” effect for spontaneous movement frequency does not hold for repetitive non-goal directed finger movements. Otherwise, this absence of “preference” could also be explained by the movement rates used in the present study, which are close to the average “spontaneous movement tempo” (about 2 Hz) observed in humans for a variety of movements, including spontaneous finger movements [ , , ] . Still, we did not assess the spontaneous subjects’ finger movement frequency in this study and we did not investigate a wide range of movement frequency. These aspects should be addressed in future dedicated studies.
Interestingly, the coherence between cerebellar activity and movement kinematics was much less consistent at F1 across movement rates and was only found significant in the slow movement condition. The functional significance of such coupling at F1 is still under debate [ , ]. The coupling between certain brain areas and voluntary movement kinematics might indeed depend on the spectral component of movement kinematics considered (e.g., F0 or F1), i.e., some brain areas might be involved in different aspects of movement kinematics [ ]. It could also represent an epiphenomenon related to the fact that the activity in certain brain areas is less sinusoidal compared with that in other coherent brain regions [ , ]. Further dedicated studies are needed to address the link between the observed cerebellar coupling at F1 and the movement rate.
Coupling Directionality
Previous studies established that CKC is mainly driven by proprioceptive afference to the contralateral SM1 cortex [ , ]. To bring further information about the phenomenon of cerebellar entrainment by finger movement kinematics, we complemented the coherence mapping with a directionality analysis in order to evaluate the relative contribution of spinocerebellar, cerebellospinal, cortico-cerebellar, and cerebello-cortical pathways on the observed cerebellar coupling. Results revealed that Acc signals were driving cerebellar rhythmic activity with no evidence supporting an influence of the contralateral SM1 cortex on this coupling. Hence, cerebellar activity is predominantly entrained at finger movement rate via spinocerebellar (presumably proprioceptive) pathways. On a neuroanatomical point of view, potential fiber tracts along which such proprioceptive spinocerebellar coupling could occur are the cuneocerebellar and the rostral spinocerebellar tracts that are the upper limb equivalent of the dorsal and the ventral spinocerebellar tracts for the lower limb [ ].
Taken together, our findings fit well with the recognized functional roles of the cerebellum in motor function. Indeed, the cerebellar coupling we observed probably relates to the transfer of somatosensory, presumably proprioceptive, information driven by movement kinematics to the cerebellar cortex via the spinocerebellar pathways. Such coupling might play a role in maintaining accurate finger movement regularity and coordination, in minimizing finger movement execution errors, or in establishing predictions about the sensory consequences of planned finger movement.
Conclusion
This study demonstrates the existence of significant (when statistical assessment is restricted to the cerebellum) coupling between finger movement kinematics and the neuromagnetic activity of the posterior cerebellar lobe ipsilateral to finger movement. The coupling occurs at F0 and is mainly driven by spinocerebellar, presumably proprioceptive, pathways with no influence of the movement rate. These findings suggest that the combination of MEG, CKC, and rPDC approaches is promising to probe spinocerebellar functions in humans and might be of interest to investigate the pathophysiology of neurological disorders affecting the corresponding neural pathways.