Introduction
Emergence of iPSCs has revolutionized the way to investigate the intractable neuronal diseases. iPSCs have been expected as important tools for regenerative medicine against brain damage. Recent advances in the techniques that differentiate iPSCs into specific types of cells enabled us to use these cells in a replacement (or regenerative) therapy. In addition, these techniques enabled us to construct in vitro models with disease-relevant cells that are differentiated from patient-derived iPSCs. iPSCs-derived disease models permit us to understand the pathophysiology related to disease mechanisms (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 In vitro differentiation into cerebellar neurons from human PSCs. a Simplified diagram showing the axial structure of the neural tube. ANR anterior neural ridge, DA dopaminergic, RA retinoic acid. b Schematic of SFEBq culture for various ectodermal progenitors from hPSCs. c Expression of markers in the embryonic neural tube (E12 mouse). tel telencephalon, di diencephalon, mes mescencephalon, met metencephalon, myel myelencephalon, sc spinal cord. d A schematic diagram showing the organization of the cerebellar plate. NTZ nuclear transitory zone, SVZ subventricular zone, PIPs Pax2 + interneuron progenitors, PCPs Purkinje cell progenitors, CP choroid plexus. e Procedure for cerebellar neuron-specific SFEBq culture of hPSCs. SB SB431542, Y Y-27632, gfCDM growth-factor-free chemically defined medium. c – e Modified from [ , ]
We developed 3D culture systems of hPSCs for neural induction with high efficiency. In serum-free floating culture of embryoid-body-like aggregates with quick reaggregation (SFEBq) method, robust neural differentiation is observed. Because neural induction in SFEBq culture recapitulates the mammalian neural development, PSC-derived neural progenitors have the ability to sense positional cues through the patterning signals. Manipulation of the positional information by adding secreted factors or their inhibitors in culture led to establishment of reproducible differentiation protocols for particular brain regions [ , ].
We previously demonstrated that cerebellar neurons are generated from PSCs in 3D culture [ , ]. To effectively generate cerebellar neurons from PSCs, we took an indirect strategy to induce the isthmic organizer that secondarily self-induces the cerebellar tissues. hPSC-derived Purkinje cells exhibited morphological and electrophysiological properties characteristic of bona-fide neurons. Of note, hPSCs self-organizes a polarized neuroepithelial (NE) structure in the culture. Step-wise addition of components that recapitulate human cerebellar development induced the generation of continuous cerebellar-like NE that are stratified as seen in the early cerebellar plate. Here, we review the principles of self-organization that we have demonstrated are important for the future of developmental biology in human. Attempts to generate the cerebellum from hPSCs will contribute to understanding the pathogenesis of cerebellar diseases, such as spinocerebellar ataxia.
Development of Mammalian Cerebellum
In human, the cerebellum develops over a long period of time, from the early embryonic days to the first postnatal year. Cellular and molecular studies on the cerebellar development have been done mostly in rodents. However, it is not known whether the mechanisms revealed in model animals are simply applicable to human or not. Thus, the cellular and molecular studies in human have been long-awaited for elucidation of functions and dysfunctions of the human cerebellum.
The initial phase of cerebellar development is the formation of the isthmic organizer, which lies at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB). The isthmic organizer secretes positional signals such as Fgf8 and Wnt1 and controls the anterior-posterior pattern of the caudal midbrain-rostral hindbrain. This organizer is maintained by the intricate regulatory functions of region-specific transcription factors such as En1/En2, Pax2/5/8, Otx2 and Gbx2. Following the onset of Fgf8 expression, the expression of another key signaling factor, Wnt1, starts in the MHB. A positive feedback loop between Fgf8 and Wnt1 contributes to the maintenance of the isthmic tissue identity and the expression of transcription factors such as En2 and Pax2. Under its inductive influence, the cerebellar anlage arises in the dorsal region of rostral hindbrain (alar plate of rhombomere 1) [ , , ].
Cerebellar cells are generated in the two distinct germinal zones in the rhombomere 1. One is the ventricular zone (VZ) of the cerebellar plate, which expresses the transcription factor Ptf1a. The Ptf1a + progenitors produce GABAergic neurons of the cerebellar cortex (Purkinje, basket, Golgi and stellate cells) and of the cerebellar nuclei (CN). The other one is the upper rhombic lip (RL), which expresses the transcription factor Atoh1. The Atoh1 + progenitors generate cerebellar glutamatergic neurons, including granule cells (GCs) and large CN projection neurons [ , , ]. The most prominent neuron type of the cerebellum is the Purkinje cell, with its large soma arranged in a plane (known as the Purkinje cell layer), and an extensive, flattened dendritic tree projecting into the molecular layer. Purkinje cells have a central role in integrating heterogeneous neural inputs from the mossy and climbing fibers. The dendrites of Purkinje cells receive synaptic input from parallel fibers of GCs, the main excitatory interneurons of the cerebral cortex. Purkinje cell dysfunction (hereditary or acquired) leads to severe motor discoordination.
Self-Organization of Cerebellar Tissue from hPSCs in 3D Culture
It has been difficult to establish effective methods for differentiation of cerebellar neurons from PSCs, due to the complexity of cerebellar development, which includes the requirement of the influential isthmic organizer, the ordered cell migration from two different germinal zones, and the specialized cell morphology and properties. Several culture protocols for inducing cerebellar neurons from PSCs had been developed utilizing a combinatory and sequentially treatment of positional signals, but they had problems in efficiency, specificity or reproducibility [ ]. Therefore, we took an indirect strategy that mimics the innate program of initial cerebellar development associated with isthmic organizer [ , ]. hPSCs robustly differentiate into neural progenitors when cultured as floating aggregates in chemically defined medium including the transforming growth factor ß (TGFß)-inhibitor, which prevents mesenchymal differentiation and promotes neuroectodermal differentiation, and the ROCK-inhibitor, which promotes cellular survival. The addition of moderate caudalizing factors, FGF2 and insulin, induced the expression of FGF8 and WNT1 , which are implicated in the function of the isthmic organizer formation. Then the majority of the hPSC-derived neural progenitors express EN2 and GBX2, representative rostral hindbrain markers, after 21 days in culture. Around 35 days in culture, about 30 % of hPSC-derived cells express Purkinje cell progenitor markers, LHX5, KIRREL2, PTF1A and SKOR2. For selective differentiation of mature Purkinje cells, we performed long-term co-culture with mouse RL-derived granule cells. As a result, hPSC-derived cerebellar progenitors became L7 + , Calbindin + , GABA + , and Aldolase C + (specific markers for mature Purkinje cells). L7 + /Calbindin + hPSC-derived Purkinje cells developed elaborate dendritic branches and spines that are positive for Purkinje cell-specific glutamate receptor GRID2. GRID2 was associated with CBLN1, which is expressed at the presynaptic termini of the parallel fibers. The electrophysiological properties of hPSC-derived Purkinje cells showed typical characters as seen in rodents [ ]. In addition to Purkinje cells, two other types of neurons, Neurogranin + Golgi cells and Parvalbumin + interneurons appeared in long-term culture. It is well known that BMP signals from the roof-plate are important RL formation. We previously showed that BMP signals are necessary for the induction of RL-derived Atoh1 + progenitors in culture of mESCs [ ]. In contrast, ATOH1 + /BARHL1 + granule cells and TBR1 + /SMI-32 + CN projection neurons were generated from hPSCs even in the absence of BMP4 [ ].
Thus, hPSCs in 3D culture with the combination of FGF2 and insulin treatment differentiate into a variety of cerebellar neurons including Purkinje cells, granule cells, GABAergic interneurons and glutamatergic CN neurons under the same culture conditions. It is suggested that the 3D culture of hPSCs recapitulates the normal cerebellar development by generating its neuronal components and the mutual neuronal connections.
Self-Formation of Polarized Cerebellar Structure
The formation of polarized cerebellar neuroepithelium was more or less stochastic in the 3D culture. We found that sequential application of FGF19 and SDF1 (also known as CXCL12) promoted self-formation of polarized cerebellar tissue that consisted of a RL-like region at the edge of the sheet and a cerebellum proper-like region in the center. Remarkably, in this condition, hPSC-derived cerebellar tissue displays an apico-basal layered arrangement of multiple precursor cell types. These layers are an inner layer of progenitors similar to the cerebellar VZ (SOX2 + /KIRREL2 + /PTF1A + ), an intermediate layer containing Purkinje cell precursors (OLIG2 + , LHX5 + , SKOR2 + , GAD + ) and an outermost layer occupied by ATOH1 + /BARHL1 + cells with characteristics of RL-derived granule cell precursors. hPSC-derived neural progenitors appear to have more potential self-organizing ability to differentiate into cerebellar tissues than those from mouse PSCs [ ].
Vulnerability of Purkinje Cells Generated from SCA6 Patient-Derived iPSCs
SCA is a group of hereditary ataxic neurodegenerative disorders without effective treatment or cure. Among them, SCA6 is an autosomal-dominant disease characterized by the loss of Purkinje cells. SCA6 is caused by expansion of polyglutamine-encoding CAG trinucleotide repeat in CACNA1A , which encode Cav2.1, α1A subunit of P/Q-type calcium channel [ ]. Despite accumulating information on the causative gene, the pathological mechanisms and effective therapeutic treatments are still unknown. To date, several animal models and human cell line models have been reported, but whether they recapitulate the human disease phenotypes remains controversial [ ].
We succeeded in generating Purkinje cells from patient-derived iPSCs [ ]. Patient-derived Purkinje cells exhibit increased level of full-length Cav2.1 protein while decreased level of its C-terminal domain (α1ACT). It is thought that α1ACT is translated from the bicistronic transcript and functions as a transcription factor for TAF1 and BTG1, which are important for Purkinje cell development [ ]. When tested, BTG1/ BTG1 and TAF1/ TAF1 also showed similar pattern to the expression of α1ACT. While the level of Cav2.1 protein in Purkinje cells was increased as the gene dosage increased, α1ACT decreased as the gene dosage increased. These results obtained from iPSC-derived Purkinje cells are consistent and complementary with the previous studies [ , ], supporting the hypothesis that polyQ-bearing α1ACT is involved in the pathogenesis of SCA6.
It is well known that thyroid hormone is important for proper maturation and maintenance of Purkinje cells in vitro. SCA6 iPSC-derived Purkinje cells exhibited thyroid hormone depletion-dependent degeneration in culture. The vulnerability of SCA6 iPSC-Purkinje cells can be suppressed by thyrotropin-releasing hormone, which has been used for treatment to SCA patients, and Riluzole, which is a drug used to treat amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Thus, we have constructed an in vitro disease model recapitulating both ontogenesis and pathogenesis. This model may be useful for pathological investigation and drug discovery.
Construction of Human Cerebellar Disease Models with Patient-Derived iPSCs
Human iPSCs have been widely used in construction of disease modeling to understand pathological mechanisms and discover therapies. The disease modeling depends primarily on the presence of efficient differentiation protocols for accurate disease-relevant cells. Disease models using patient-derived iPSCs for neuronal disorders, including ALS, Parkinson disease, Alzheimer’s disease and Rett syndrome, have been extensively studied [ , ]. However, few studies on iPSC-derived models of cerebellar diseases have been reported [ , , , , ].
Among the cerebellar diseases, SCA is a diverse group of neurological disorders, defined by a loss of motor coordination that results from the degeneration of specific populations of neurons in the cerebellar cortex (predominantly Purkinje cell), brainstem and spinocerebellar tracts [ , ]. Recapitulation of accurate disease-specific phenotypes in vitro with patient-derived cerebellar neurons would provide much more critical information and allow us to understand the pathological mechanisms [ ]. We have succeeded in the generation Purkinje cells from disease-specific-iPSCs [ , ]. The combination of the generation of patient-derived iPSCs and the differentiation of them into mature cerebellar neurons will lead to the establishment of disease models that accelerate the development of effective therapies against the cerebellar diseases. iPSCs research should provide us new knowledge to overcome these disorders.
Human iPSCs-derived 3D cerebellar tissues should provide us useful information on the developmental mechanisms, pathological processes and selective vulnerability for understanding the diseases. The self-organizing culture technique that differentiates hPSCs into cerebellar neurons will become a powerful tool for investigating intractable cerebellar disease.