Introduction
The cerebellum plays a substantial role in several non-motor and motor functions, including balance, postural, and gait control [ , ], by integrating a variety of proprioceptive, somatosensory, visual, and vestibular inputs to maintain the upright standing posture [ ]. Both sensorimotor integration deficit and cerebellar dysfunctions may cause impairment in balance, postural, and gait control [ ]. In fact, both sensorimotor areas and the cerebellum are activated during swaying and postural control tasks [ ]. In particular, numerous cerebellar lobules associated with both non-motor (lobule VIIb, Crus I, and posterior vermal lobules) and motor cortical areas (lobule V) are particularly active during balance tasks in healthy individuals [ , , ].
Several cerebellar functions related to motor control have been studied using non-invasive brain stimulation paradigms, including transcranial magnetic (TMS) and direct current (tDCS) stimulation, which were able to shape primary motor cortex (M1) excitability and cerebellum-brain interactions [ , , , ]. About that, the cerebellum-brain inhibition (CBI) paradigm, using TMS, can assess the inhibitory effect of the cerebellum on the contralateral M1 excitability [ , , , , , , , , , ]. It is likely that cerebellar TMS activates the Purkinje cells, which send inhibitory projections to deep cerebellar nuclei that, in turn, lead excitatory projections to thalamic nuclei. Therefore, the inhibition of the dentate-thalamic excitatory projection to M1 leads to a decreased M1 excitability [ , , , ]. About that, repetitive TMS (rTMS) enables the modulation of the excitability of cerebellar-thalamo-cortical circuits, resulting in an improvement of several cerebellar deficits [ ].
However, there is a few evidence concerning cerebellum-brain interactions by applying specific lower limb protocols employing TMS or tDCS [ , , ]. We have recently shown that transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS) may be a promising approach in shaping the plasticity of cerebellum-brain pathways in a safe and effective manner [ , ]. In these previous works, we delivered 50 and 300 Hz alternating currents, which led to a modulation of M1 excitability and CBI strength, besides an improvement in motor hand functions. We argued that such effects depend on a specific entrainment of distinct cerebellar networks by alternating currents. Likewise, tACS could offer the opportunity to maximize the engagement of distinct networks concerning lower limb functions. Hence, our work aimed to assess whether cerebellar tACS at different frequencies may tune M1-leg excitability and modify gait control in healthy human subjects. To this end, we tested the effects of different cerebellar tACS frequencies on M1-leg excitability, CBI, and gait parameters.
Materials and Methods
Subjects
We enrolled 25 healthy volunteers (14 females and 11 males; mean age 30 ± 6 years). None of the subjects had a history of neurologic and/or psychiatric disorders, past or actual lower limb alteration/damage/pathology, and lung or cardiovascular system diseases potentially limiting the ability to walk. All participants were naïve to the aim of the study. Lower limb dominance, evaluated by testing kicking and hopping on a single leg [ ], was balanced (13 rights, 12 lefts). Each subject underwent a standard electroencephalographic examination (EEG) before study enrollment to exclude possible EEG abnormalities. Our local Ethics Committee approved the study. The research followed the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki; all included subjects provided informed consent in writing after the explanation of the nature and possible consequences of the procedure.
Experimental Design
In the main experiment (Fig. 1 ), at baseline (PRE), the subjects underwent gait assessment. After 20 min of rest, they were tested for motor evoked potential (MEP) amplitude and CBI strength from both tibialis anterior (TA) muscles by using TMS paradigm with double-cone coils (DCC). Given that CBI was not elicited in resting or active TA, we pre-conditioned cerebellar excitability with a brief tDCS application. CBI was then evoked. Ten minutes after, the subjects administered a cerebellar tACS protocol at 10, 50, and 300 Hz, besides a sham stimulation. Each subject underwent all the conditioning protocols in a random but counterbalanced order, with a one-week interval. We repeated the gait analysis immediately after the conditioning protocol (T0) and after 2 h (T120), whereas the electrophysiological measures were taken 20 (T20) and 60 min (T60) after the end of the conditioning protocol. The participants and the experimenters who analyzed the data were blinded on the stimulation order. Fig. 1 Experimental design
We also performed some control experiments: (i) we verified whether the electrophysiological aftereffects we found could reliably depend on cerebellar networks related to lower limbs. In a subgroup of individuals (10), we tested whether tACS aftereffects were limited, or not, to lower limbs by measuring CBI and MEP amplitude from both the M1-hand areas (recording from abductor pollicis brevis muscle) with a classic TMS approach [ ]. (ii) In four individuals, we tested whether tACS aftereffects could have been due to a direct involvement of corticospinal tract by stimulating the corticospinal tract at the foramen magnum [ ]. (iii) We sought to determine whether tDCS conditioning could have reliably influenced CBI generation. About that, we employed in 10 participants a sham-tDCS immediately preceding CBI measurement and a real-tDCS 10 min before CBI assessment, either before (PRE) and after (T20, T60) 50 and 300 Hz tACS. (iv) Given that we tested only one interstimulus interval (ISI) for CBI in each subject in the main experiment (i.e., that yielding the strongest CBI), we assessed the time course of CBI at different ISIs from 0 to 8 ms from both TA (every 10 min from T0 to T60) in a subgroup of 10 participants. (v) Finally, to test whether cerebellar control of one hemisphere on M1 excitability was rigorously contralateral (as for upper limb in our previous cerebellar tACS studies) [ , ] or potentially bilateral, we stimulated the left cerebellar hemisphere in a subgroup of 10 individuals.
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
We registered 20 MEPs and 15 CBIs randomly intermingled in single trials at a frequency of 0.2 Hz, from both hemispheres, at PRE, T20, and T60.
MEPs were obtained through magnetic monophasic stimuli delivered by a high-power Magstim200 Stimulator (Magstim; Whitland, Dyfed, UK) wired to a DCC (cortical DCC) [ ]. The DCC was held over the mid-sagittal plane where the intersection of the two embedded coils were approximately 2 cm posterior to the vertex (taken as the intersection of the inter-aural and nasion–inion lines). Hence, the DCC induced a posterior-to-anterior current flow in the cortex. Slight adjustments of DCC position and intensity of stimulation were made until MEPs of 1 mV peak-to-peak amplitude were elicited from both TA muscles. Then, we recorded 15 MEPs. Following tACS application, the mean amplitude of the conditioned MEP was expressed as a percentage of the amplitude of the unconditioned one and considered as a measure of cortical excitability.
CBI assessment is well-established for upper limb, whereas truncal and lower limb muscles offered unsatisfactory CBI results [ ]. Because the simple increase of cerebellar stimulation with or without muscle activation was insufficient to evoke CBI from lower limbs (in fact, increasing the stimulation intensity only results in a co-activation of the pyramidal tract) [ ], we applied a brief conditioning tDCS before assessing CBI. This consisted in an anodal stimulation at 2 mA for 5 min (with 30 s of current ramping up/down). Electrodes were placed according to Pope and Miall montage for posterior lobe (given that lower limbs are mainly represented in the inferior part of the posterior cerebellar hemisphere, lobule s VIIb–IX) [ , , , , ]. Notably, such a brief tDCS conditioning has been demonstrated to modify cerebellar excitability for a short period, without although influencing MEP amplitude [ ]. Moreover, tACS was applied 10 min after the end of MEP and CBI assessment, so to avoid confounding interferences between tDCS at PRE and tACS application. CBI was tested by delivering a conditioning stimulus by using a DCC placed over the right or left cerebellar hemispheres (over the same positions used for transcranial current stimulation), set at 90% of AMT for the direct recruitment of the corticospinal tract at the level of the foramen magnum when the DCC is placed over the inion) (cerebellar DCC) followed by a conditioning stimulus delivered through the cortical DCC (at an intensity able to eliciting MEP from both TA). The ISI between the two DCC pulses was individually adapted to have the maximal CBI from TA muscle [ , , , , ]. We preliminary tested different ISIs from 0 to 8 ms (as inhibitory phenomena mediated by sensory afferents in the neck occur at ISIs longer than 8 ms) [ ], with 1 ms steps, and found that the most robust CBI occurred within 5–7 ms. The ISI yielding the strongest CBI was thus chosen for further analyses. CBI was measured as a percent of the unconditioned MEP evoked from TA muscle by using the cortical DCC. After tACS application, CBI modulation was expressed as percent of the CBI at PRE (unconditioned).
Electromyographic activity (EMG) was recorded through Ag-AgCl surface electrodes applied to TA using a classic muscle belly-tendon montage. Signals were amplified and filtered (from 32 to 1000 Hz) via a Digitimer-D150 Amplifier (Digitimer Ltd., Welwyn Garden City, Herts, UK), and stored using a sampling frequency of 10 kHz on a personal computer for off-line analysis (Signal Software, Cambridge Electronic Design, Cambridge, UK).
Cerebellar Transcranial Alternating Current Stimulation
Cerebellar tACS was delivered using a BrainStim battery-driven electric stimulator (E.M.S.; Bologna, Italy), wired to two conductive-rubber electrodes placed in saline-soaked sponges. tACS stimulation was set at 2 mA and consisted of 3000 cycles at 10 Hz, 15,000 at 50 Hz, and 90,000 at 300 Hz. In the sham protocol, the 50 Hz current was switched off after 30 s. Each participant practiced all the protocols in a random order and with a one-week interval. The active electrode (25 cm 2 ) was positioned over the right cerebellar hemisphere in the same position used for DCC (and brief tDCS), the reference over the ipsilateral buccinator muscle [ ]. In tDCS experiments, similar setup did not induce any visual or brainstem aftereffect [ ].
Gait Data Acquisition
Gait variables were obtained using a floor-based photocell system sampling at 1 kHz (OptoGait using the Optojump Next v.1.3.20.0) (Microgate; Bolzano, Italy) and a high-speed digital video camera operating at 120 Hz. The OptoGait system consists of two parallel bars (100 × 8 cm), containing 96 light emitting diodes each, mounted on both sides of the treadmill. The manufacturer specification of its accuracy is within 1 cm. This system was previously found to be valid for quantitative spatiotemporal gait analysis [ ]. A tripod-mounted digital video camcorder elevated 60 cm above ground and positioned 50 cm away from the front end of the treadmill was used to record the anterior view of gait.
Gait data were acquired with the subjects walking for 3 min in an 80-m-long hallway at a self-selected speed, without wearing shoes (to avoid shoe stiffness). Gait parameters were recorded on the OptoGait software. The following gait variables were considered for both the right and left foot: (i) step cadence (number of steps per minute); (ii) gait cycle (time from one right heel strike, i.e., the initial contact, to the next one, i.e., the end of terminal swing) (in seconds); (iii) step length (distance between the contact point of the right foot heel and the left foot one along the line of progression) (in centimeters); (iv) stance/swing ratio (ratio between stance from heel strike to toe-off, and swing phase duration from toe-off to heel strike); (v) gait speed (ratio between step length and step time) (in meter per second). The mean values of each parameter were used for subsequent analysis. In addition to mean values, the standard deviations (SD) of the gait variables for each participant were also obtained as a measure of gait variability. In order to assess global gait modifications following tACS paradigms, we estimated a perturbation complexity index (PCI) computed as the average of tACS-induced percent changes in all gait parameters as compared to the baseline values.
Statistical Analysis
Cerebellar tACS aftereffects on each electrophysiological and gait parameter were assessed through repeated-measure ANOVAs employing the factors time (three levels: PRE, T0 or T20, and T60 or T120), protocol (four levels: 10, 50, 300 Hz, and sham), and muscle (two levels: left and right TA). The Greenhouse–Geisser method was used if necessary to correct for non-sphericity. In all conditions, the normal distribution of the data was evaluated with the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test ( p > 0.2). For all statistical tests, a p < 0.05 was considered significant. Conditional on a significant F value, post hoc paired t tests (adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni method) were used to investigate significant main effects and interactions. All data are given as average or percent changes ± SD. All the correlations among clinical and neurophysiological findings were tested through Pearson correlation analysis.
Results
Main Experiment
At baseline, we found a similar MEP amplitude from left and right TA and a reduction of MEP amplitude of about 40% from both sides during CBI assessment ( p < 0.001), without a side-by-side difference (Fig. 2 ). The ISI used in each individual to evoke the maximal CBI ranged from 5 to 7 ms (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Mean aftereffects of tACS protocols on motor evoked potential (MEP) amplitude and cerebellum-brain inhibition (CBI) strength (measured as % of unconditioned MEP) from ipsilateral- and contralateral-to-cerebellar tACS tibialis anterior muscles. Asterisk indicates the significant change at T20 as compared to baseline (PRE). Square bracket indicates the significant side-by-side difference. Vertical error bars indicate ±1 SD
Fifty hertz tACS induced a MEP amplitude increase only in the right TA (i.e., ipsilaterally to tACS), a CBI increase (i.e., weakening) in the right TA (ipsilateral to tACS), and a CBI decrease (i.e., strengthening) in the left TA (contralateral to tACS) (Fig. 2 ; Table 1 ). Three hundred hertz tACS strengthened CBI in both the TA (Fig. 2 ; Table 1 ). Both 10 Hz- and sham-tACS yielded no significant aftereffects. Table 1 Statistical data of tACS aftereffects on motor evoked potential (MEP) amplitude and cerebellum-brain inhibition (CBI) strength from tibialis anterior muscles (TA) Time × protocol × muscle Time × muscle Time T20 T60 MEP F = 4.8 p < 0.001 50 Hz p = 0.1 t = 7.8 p < 0.001 t = 5.5 p < 0.001 CBI F = 14 p < 0.001 50 Hz F = 10 p < 0.001 Contra-TA F = 24 p < 0.001 t = 10 p < 0.001 t = 6.7 p < 0.001 Ipsi TA F = 30 p < 0.001 t = 7.9 p < 0.001 t = 3.8 p = 0.004 300 Hz p = 0.1 F = 66 p < 0.001 t = −3.8 p = 0.004 t = −3.8 p = 0.004
Control Experiments
Control experiment 1: we found no tACS aftereffects when recording MEP and CBI from abductor pollicis brevis muscle of both hand (all p > 0.6) (Fig. 3 a). Control experiment 2: the direct stimulation of corticospinal tract at the foramen magnum [ ] showed no significant MEP amplitude change following tACS (all p > 0.5) (Fig. 3 b). Control experiment 3: both sham-tDCS and tDCS delivered 10 min before CBI assessment yielded no CBI, either at PRE or after (T20, T60) sham, 50, and 300 Hz tACS application (all interaction and effects p > 0.6) (Fig. 3 c). Control experiment 4: we found a significant modulation of CBI following cerebellar tACS up to T50 ( time × protocol × muscle interaction F = 139, p < 0.001); in particular, 50 Hz tACS ( time × muscle interaction F = 239, p < 0.001) induced a CBI increase (i.e., weakening) in the right TA (ipsilateral) ( time effect F = 29, p < 0.001; each post hoc t test p ≤ 0.001 up to T50) and a CBI decrease (i.e., strengthening) in the left TA (contralateral) ( time effect F = 29, p < 0.001; each post hoc t test p ≤ 0.001 up to T50) (Fig. 3 d). Three hundred hertz tACS strengthened CBI in both the TA ( time × muscle interaction F = 3.4, p = 0.1; time effect F = 43, p < 0.001; each post hoc t test p ≤ 0.001 up to T50) (Fig. 3 d). Moreover, CBI was modulated at the ISI tested, i.e., each subject showed no CBI modulation outside the 5–7 ms range following tACS (Fig. 3 e); about that, we tested the effects of 300 Hz-tACS on different ISIs from 0 to 8 ms, recording from right TA ( ISI × time F = 23, p < 0.001). Control experiment 5: the stimulation of the left cerebellar hemisphere produced the same results observed following right hemisphere tACS (Fig. 3 f) as suggested by a non-significant time × protocol × muscle × side-of-stimulation interaction ( p > 0.8). Fig. 3 Results of control experiments. a Lack of tACS aftereffects on MEP and CBI recorded from upper limbs. b Lack of tACS aftereffects on MEP elicited from direct stimulation of corticospinal tract at the foramen magnum. c Lack of CBI with sham-tDCS or tDCS applied 10 min earlier. Asterisk indicates the significant change at T20 as compared to baseline (PRE). d Time course of CBI magnitude following 50 and 300 Hz tACS. e Lack of tACS aftereffects on CBI in each participant when using an ISI (from 0 to 8 ms) different from the 5–7 ms range. e Aftereffects of tACS applied on left cerebellar hemisphere. Vertical error bars indicate ±1 SD
Gait Analysis
There were no globally significant baseline differences between lower limbs parameters at a group level, whereas there were some individual differences depending on lower limb dominance.
tACS showed a significant safety profile, given that only 300 Hz-tACS slightly impaired step length ( t = 2.9, p = 0.04) (Fig. 4 ). We did not observe other significant changes at a group level, whereas there were some individual differences regarding gait performance, as measured by the PCI, and step velocity ( r = −0.901, p < 0.001) (Fig. 5 ). In particular, when subjects kept a higher step velocity, the global aftereffects of cerebellar 300 Hz-tACS on PCI were less evident, whereas the subjects keeping a lower step velocity disclosed some of the abovementioned aftereffects of 300 Hz-tACS. Fig. 4 Behavioral aftereffects of tACS protocols. Vertical error bars indicate ±1 SD. Asterisk indicates the significant change at T0 as compared to baseline (PRE) Fig. 5 Scatterplot of the correlation between gait speed (in meter per second) and the perturbation complexity index (PCI)
Discussion
Cerebellar tACS has been applied in heathy individuals to shape CBI, and in essential tremor, with promising results [ , , ]. In the present work, tACS was applied for the first time ever to cerebellar networks related to lower limbs. There are two main findings in our work: (1) our paradigm allowed eliciting CBI from lower limbs; and (2) our approach allowed exploring some aspects of cerebellar networks related to the lower limbs.
Concerning the first finding, the application of a pre-conditioning tDCS over the cerebellar hemisphere targeted with tACS allowed evoking CBI from lower limb (control experiment 3), without influencing upper limb cortical excitability or the corticospinal tract directly (control experiments 1 and 2, respectively). Moreover, tDCS at PRE did not affect tACS aftereffects, given that tDCS was brief (5 min), and there was a break of 10 min between tDCS at PRE and tACS. Also, tACS and tDCS did not influence each other following cerebellar tACS conditioning, given that the tDCS-induced CBI were differently modulated after cerebellar tACS application, depending on its frequency (control experiment 3). If confirmed by other studies, our approach may represent a simple way to study CBI from lower limb in neurological disorders involving the cerebellum.
About the second finding, tACS induced persistent electrophysiological aftereffects (up to 50 min) depending on the frequency (50 or 300 Hz) and consistent with the ISI used (control experiment 4). These modulations occurred contemporarily in both lower limbs when stimulating the right or left cerebellar hemisphere (control experiment 5), whereas they were rigorously contralateral when recording from hand muscles [ , ].
In keeping with our previous findings, we may argue that tACS can affect different and distinct networks of the cerebellar cortex according to the frequency employed. Fifty hertz alternating currents seem to entrain directly Purkinje cells, as they shaped both MEP and CBI. This modulation is in keeping with the issue that cerebellar projections to the motor cortex terminate on both excitatory and inhibitory neurons [ , , ], thus, regulating MEP and CBI magnitude by modifying local inhibitory activity, and confirming that CBI is of cerebral cortex origin [ , , ]. The fact that 50 Hz currents differently regulated MEP amplitude and CBI strength in left and right lower limb further confirm Purkinje cells as the main target of 50 Hz currents, according to the role of Purkinje cells in regulating motor inhibition and facilitation processes across groups of muscles [ , , , , ]. On the other hand, 300 Hz may interact with a vast interneuronal network that has a critical role in tuning Purkinje cell output, given that MEP amplitude was not affected [ , , ].
In addition, the ISI employed may play a crucial role in determining the direction of aftereffects. In fact, when changing the ISI to test CBI following tACS, the aftereffects of alternating currents on CBI disappeared (control experiment 4). This ISI specificity suggests that tACS at the frequencies used may reliably entrain target networks within cerebellar cortex mediating CBI. Notably, we did not find any CBI facilitation at 3 ms, as reported when recording from hand muscles [ ]. This discrepancy could depend on a different physiology of CBI recorded from lower limbs and by the stimulation setting we used.
Differently from our previous findings, the electrophysiological changes were not paralleled by behavioral modification in gait parameters. In fact, tACS affected marginally the learning of the spatial elements of walking (including step length, i.e., where to put the foot), while the learning of the temporal elements of walking (including gait cycle and stance/swing ratio, i.e., the phase lags between leg movements) was unchanged. This behavioral-electrophysiological dissociation may depend on the control of each cerebellar hemisphere on both lower limb (control experiment 5). Given that we stimulated only one cerebellar hemisphere (i.e., the right), we may speculate that the cerebellum compensated for the perturbations caused by tACS, in terms of either electrophysiological (a different MEP amplitude and CBI modulation in the left and right TA when using 50 or 300 Hz alternating currents) or behavioral aftereffects (mild changes in some spatial elements of walking) [ , , ]. Further studies should address whether bilateral M1 modifications may depend on: (i) a bilateral control on M1 by each cerebellar hemisphere; (ii) a reshape of transcallosal inhibition between M1 areas; or (iii) a sort of trans-hemispheric cerebellar modulation, given that parallel fibers can cross the midline from each cerebellar hemisphere to the other [ , , , ]. The lack of behavioral aftereffects may also depend on an influence of the cerebellum on the central pattern generators (CPG). In fact, we observed that the subjects with higher step velocity were less responsive to 300 Hz-tACS as compared to those individuals walking at lower velocity (according to the PCI). Therefore, we may argue that the activation of CPG (when walking with higher step velocity) may have limited the behavioral aftereffects of tACS. However, it would be necessary to test such aftereffects online, i.e., by applying tACS during gait at a different speed.
In conclusion, cerebellar tACS seems promising for shaping the cerebellar networks related to lower limb motor functions. Moreover, given that tACS may potentially reset abnormal cerebellar circuitries [ ], our paradigm might represent a useful tool to modulate walking training in people with cerebellum-related gait impairment.