Background
Machado Joseph disease, also known as spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3/MJD), is an autosomal dominant, untreatable polyglutamine (polyQ) disorder caused by a CAG repeat expansion (CAGexp) at ATXN3 gene. SCA3/MJD usually starts around 32–40 years [ , ]. Gait ataxia is the main neurological deficit, but ataxia later affects speech, swallowing, and limb coordination. Pyramidal, extrapyramidal, and peripheral nerve findings also occur during disease course. After some years, patients become bedridden. The median survival time after onset is 21 years [ ]. Expansion of the polyQ tract in ATXN3 is thought to promote an altered conformation in the protein ataxin-3, leading to changes in interactions with native partners and to the formation of insoluble aggregates. The principal disease mechanisms remain unclear [ ]. Mutant ataxin-3 might trigger multiple, interconnected pathogenic cascades, and an inflammatory response might be among them.
Cytokines are a large group of small soluble peptides that act as signaling molecules to regulate inflammation and modulate cellular activities such as growth, survival, and differentiation [ , ]. In the nervous system, cytokines work as neuromodulators and regulate neurodevelopment, neuroinflammation, and synaptic transmission [ ]. Microglia are the brain immune cells, responsible for orchestrating the brain innate immune response. In the disease state, activated microglia mediate neuronal and glial cell injury and death through production and release of proinflammatory cytokines, glutamate, and reactive oxygen species among others [ ]. Neurodegeneration is concomitant with astrogliosis, microgliosis, and microvasculature remodeling. Though the trophic factors released initially by astrocytes during astrogliosis aid in tissue repair, these factors might amplify the inflammatory response, and a balance between repair and proinflammatory factors might modify the outcome of a neurodegenerative process [ ] (Kettenmann et al. 2011).
Several studies already demonstrated an involvement of neuroinflammation in neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [ , , , ]. In Huntington disease (HD), a polyQ disorder, there is evidence that activation of the immune system starts in the presymptomatic stage of the disease [ , ].
Immune abnormalities were not seen in a transgenic mice model of SCA3/MJD that lacks the C-terminal part of ataxin 3 and, therefore, the polyQ stretch. However, this model mimics a neurodegenerative disorder that is pathologically distinct from human SCA3/MJD [ ]. Therefore, immune abnormalities and cytokine patterns related to SCA3/MJD patients are currently unknown.
In the present exploratory study, we aimed to determine the serum concentrations of cytokines, found among presymptomatic and symptomatic individuals carrying a CAGexp at ATXN3.
Methods
Population and Clinical Evaluations
Individuals were invited to participate in this study either if they were symptomatic and previously diagnosed with SCA3/MJD or if they were asymptomatic, at 50 % risk subjects looking for presymptomatic testing in our outpatient clinics from May, 2011, to July, 2013. Molecular characterization of the CAG repeats at ATXN3 in both symptomatic SCA3 and asymptomatic SCA3 groups was performed by amplifying region of interest using fluorescent-labeled primers. Following amplification, products were separated on an ABI3130xl Genetic Analyzer and length of CAGexp allele was determined against size standard 500 LIZ as well as positive and negative controls.
The symptomatic individuals comprised the symptomatic SCA3 group. After consent, their data was collected during baseline assessments of a randomized controlled trial where disease duration [DD] of more than 10 years was exclusion criteria [ ]. At-risk individuals proved to carry a CAGexp at ATXN3 and whose neurological examination was normally comprised the asymptomatic SCA3 group. The control group consisted of those at-risk individuals who do not carry CAGexp, plus healthy, unrelated individuals with age, gender, and environmental characteristics similar to the symptomatic individuals. Individuals with chronic or acute inflammatory, infectious, or allergic diseases were excluded.
Age at onset (AO) of the first symptoms and DD of the symptomatic individuals were noted. The clinical scales Neurological Examination Score for Spinocerebellar Ataxias (NESSCA) [ ], Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Ataxia (SARA) [ ], SCA Functional Index (SCAFI) [ ], and Composite Cerebellar Functional Score (CCFS) [ ] were applied.
This study was approved by the Ethics in Research Committee of our institution (register number 10-512).
Sample Collections
After consent, blood was collected to study peripheral cytokines. All subjects were under fasting conditions: collections were done between 8 a.m. and 4 p.m., and processing was done within 4 h. Serum was obtained by blood centrifugation at 6000 g for 5 min, frozen immediately, and stored at −80 °C until analyses [ ].
As already mentioned, the symptomatic SCA3 individuals were included in a recent phase 2 clinical trial in SCA3/MJD [ ]. Due to the design of that study, other serum samples were obtained 90 and 360 days after the first blood collection. The present cytokine panel was repeated in the samples collected at 90 and 360 days from the placebo group. Since we considered that the placebo intervention would not produce any biological effect, the placebo group of that trial comprised the prospective subgroup of symptomatic individuals of the present study.
Cytokine Measurements
We performed cytokine assessment in serum samples with the commercial kit Human Cytokine Magnetic 25-Plex Panel (Reference # LHC0009M, Invitrogen, USA). This is a solid-phase protein immunoassay that uses spectrally encoded antibody-conjugated beads as the solid support. Each bead is given a unique identification number, or bead region, allowing differentiation of one bead from another. The assay is performed in a 96-well plate format and analyzed with a Luminex ® instrument, which captures beads while simultaneously measuring the quantity of associated fluorophore.
The 25-Plex Panel “consisted of” eotaxin, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interferon (IFN)-α, IFN-γ, interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-1RA, IL-2, IL-2R, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12, IL-13, IL-15, IL-17, interferon gamma-induced protein (IP)-10, monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1, monokine induced by gamma interferon (MIG), macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-a, MIP-b, regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α (all measured in pg/ml).
This panel represents different functional cytokine profiles such as “cytotoxic cellular cytokines” (e.g., IL-1β, IL-2, IL-12, IL-15, IL-17, IFN-α, IFN-γ, and TNF-α), “humoural cytokines” (e.g., IL-4, IL-1RA, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-13), “growth factors” (e.g., GM-CSF, IL-7), “chemokines” [e.g., CXCL8 (IL-8), MCP-1, CCL3 (MIP-1a), IP-10, CCL4 (MIP-1b), MIG, CCL11 (eotaxin), and CCL5 (RANTES)] and “death receptors” (e.g., IL-2R) [ ].
Statistical Analyses
Since the distribution of all 25 cytokines under study was highly skewed, the obtained measurements were log 10 normalized.
Since this is an exploratory study without an a priori hypothesis, functional groups of cytokines were not chosen to be studied. Each cytokine was treated as a unique variable. However, some cytokines covariated with others and could be excluded from the analysis. In accordance, only those cytokines that did not present collinearity (variance impact factor = VIF <0.2) were picked up for further analysis.
The distribution of the selected cytokines among groups was then compared by discriminant analysis. This analysis was performed in three settings, in order to predict whether an individual was as follows: (1) a CAGexp-carrying (symptomatic SCA3 plus asymptomatic SCA3 groups) or a CAGexp-non-carrying individual (control group), to explore the possible patterns related to the presence of a CAGexp per se; (2) a symptomatic SCA3 or an unaffected individual (control group), to explore the possible patterns related to the disease status of SCA3/MJD individuals; and (3) a symptomatic SCA3 or an asymptomatic SCA3, to explore the possible patterns related to the appearance of symptoms per se and not to the presence of a CAGexp.
A stepwise analysis (using Wilk’s lambda method and with p -in = 0.05, p -out = 0.10) was done in order to identify the best or most useful cytokines for distinguishing between groups.
The cross-validated classification accuracy rate of the discriminant analyses shows the proportion of the original grouped cases that would be correctly classified by the cytokine panel. Cross-validated classification accuracy rates ≥20 % higher than the proportional by chance accuracy rate were considered good. The proportion by chance of the accuracy rate was computed by squaring and summing the proportion of cases in each group.
If a given cytokine was associated to any status under study (carrying a CAGexp at ATXN3 gene or being symptomatic), its serum levels along 90 and 360 days after baseline evaluation were studied by generalized estimation equation (GEE), in the prospective symptomatic subgroup.
Results
Sixty-six individuals comprised the symptomatic SCA3 group; 13, the asymptomatic SCA3 group; and 43, the control group (9 related and 34 unrelated to SCA3/MJD individuals). Clinical and demographic characteristics are described in Table 1 . Table 1 Clinical and molecular characteristics of the three subgroups under study Asymptomatic Symptomatic (those with 360-day follow-up) Controls N 13 66 (27) 43 Females 8 33 (15) 25 Age M ± SD 33.15 ± 8.2* 40.7 ± 9.5* (40.3 ± 9) 40.9 ± 14 Age at onset M ± SD 34.8 ± 9 (32.2 ± 8.9) CAG expanded repeats M ± SD 73.3 ± 3 74.91 ± 3.1 (75.5 ± 2.8) Disease duration M ± SD 5.9 ± 2.5 (6.13 ± 2.5) NESSCA baseline M ± SD 14.3 ± 4.8 (15 ± 5.1) SARA baseline M ± SD 10.7 ± 4 (11.6 ± 4) Ataxia severity at baseline M ± SD 2.17 ± 0.75 (2.2 ± 0.6) Only significant differences between comparisons were described M ± SD mean ± standard deviation * p < 0.05, t test
Twenty-seven out of 63 symptomatic individuals were followed for 360 days. Their gender proportion, age, AO, DD, CAGexp, NESSCA, SARA, and ataxia severity scores were similar to the overall group of symptomatic individuals (data not shown).
The cytokines that did not present collinearity (VIF <0.2) and that were selected for further analysis were the log10 of eotaxin, IFN-α, IFN-γ, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-12, IL-13, IL-17, IP-10, TNF-α, and RANTES, all reported as picogram per milliliter.
Comparisons Between the CAGexp-Carrying and CAGexp-Non-Carrying Individuals
Seventy-nine individuals (66 symptomatic SCA3 plus 13 asymptomatic SCA3) comprised the CAGexp-carrying group, whereas the 43 controls comprised the non-carrying group.
The 19 identified cytokines were not significantly different between groups. The panel was able to correctly classify 61.5 % of individuals.
The discriminant function did not reveal a significant association between groups and any predictors (the cytokines under study), accounting for 17.1 % of between-group variability. The cross-validated classification showed that, overall, 52.1 % were correctly classified, which is lower than 66.0 % (the proportional by chance accuracy rate times 1.20 or (0.355 2 + 0.645 2 ) ∗ 1.20).
Comparisons Between Symptomatic SCA3 and the Unaffected Individuals
The 66 symptomatic SCA3 individuals were compared against the 43 controls.
Again, the 19 identified cytokines were not significantly different between groups. The panel was only able to correctly classify 63.3 % of individuals.
The discriminant function did not reveal a significant association between groups and any predictors, accounting for 16.2 % of between-group variability. The cross-validated classification showed that, overall, 42.2 % were correctly classified, which is lower than 65.3 % (the proportional by chance accuracy rate times 1.20 or (0.394 2 + 0.606 2 ) ∗ 1.20).
Comparisons Between the Symptomatic and the Asymptomatic Carriers of CAGexp: Eotaxin as a Biomarker of Disease Status
The 66 symptomatic SCA3 individuals were compared against the 13 asymptomatic carriers of CAGexp. Since both groups showed significant differences between their age, age was included in the discriminant function.
Although the discriminant function revealed a significant association between groups and all predictors, it accounted for 47.0 % of between-group variability. The cross-validated classification showed that, overall, 85.9 % were correctly classified, which is lower than 88.7 % (the proportional by chance accuracy rate times 1.20 (0.154 2 + 0.846 2 ) ∗ 1.20).
The stepwise analysis identified eotaxin, IFN-γ, and age as the most important predictors. The discriminant function revealed a significant association between groups and eotaxin, but it accounted for 31.1 % of between-group variability. The cross-validated classification showed that, overall, 91.0 % were correctly classified using those three variables, which is higher than 88.7 %, the proportional by chance accuracy rate times 1.20.
Age differences between these groups were expected, however, and could act as a confounder. To study eotaxin and IFN-γ individually, ANCOVA was done, using age as covariate. Means of log IFN-γ in asymptomatic ( M = −0.9, standard error (SE) = 0.2) and in symptomatic SCA3 ( M = −0.5, SE = 0.1) groups were not significantly different ( p = 0.152). In contrast, mean of log eotaxin in asymptomatic carriers ( M = 2.3, SE = 0.2) was significantly larger than the value obtained in symptomatic SCA3 group ( M = 1.3, SE = 0.1, p < 0.001). In other words, the higher values of eotaxin among asymptomatic SCA3 individuals were not explained by differences in ages between groups (Table 1 ). Serum concentrations of log eotaxin are depicted in Fig. 1 . Serum log eotaxin levels of SCA3 symptomatic individuals were very similar to control values, whereas levels in SCA3 asymptomatic individuals were higher than SCA3 symptomatic and control groups. Fig. 1 Comparison of serum concentrations of eotaxin in asymptomatic carriers of ATXN3 CAG expansions with those found in symptomatic individuals and in controls
Among the asymptomatic carriers, no correlation was found between eotaxin levels and one of its main peripheral sources, number of peripheral eosinophils (rho = −0.07, p = 0.8, Spearman test).
A post hoc analysis was done in order to clarify if any of the cytokines excluded from the analysis covariated with eotaxin. None of them (GM-CSF, IL-1RA, IL-2R, IL-4, IL-7, IL-10, IL-15, MCP-1, MIG, MIP1a, MIP1b) presented a relevant correlation with eotaxin (rhos between 0.2 and 0.3).
Possible Associations of Eotaxin with Age, Disease Severity and Duration, and CAGexp: Eotaxin Progression During Time
Log eotaxin did not correlate with age or with any of the parameters of disease severity: DD, CAGexp, NESSCA, SARA, SCAFI, and CCFS (data not shown). Log eotaxin means obtained in subgroups of gait ataxia severity were compared, and no differences were found (data not shown). Although not a good candidate for a SCA3/MJD biomarker, the same analyses were done for log IFN-γ: no significant associations were observed (data not shown).
Clinical and molecular characteristics of the prospective symptomatic subgroup were similar to the other symptomatic SCA3 individuals (Table 1 ). In this subgroup, GEE was used to analyze if there was a change of log eotaxin along time. Log eotaxin presented a significant reduction in a 360-day interval ( p = 0.039), but not in 90 days ( p = 0.398) (Fig. 2 ). The same analysis was done for log IFN-γ: no significant changes were observed (data not shown). Fig. 2 Eotaxin progression during a 360-day interval in 27 SCA3 symptomatic individuals. a Log eotaxin changes: each line represents one individual. b Mean of log eotaxin changes in the overall group of symptomatic individuals
Discussion
Our study did not disclose an altered pattern of cytokines in SCA3/MJD, as occurs in diseases related to microglia activation. In contrast, the asymptomatic status of SCA3/MJD was associated with increased levels of only one cytokine, eotaxin, a peptide secreted by astrocytes to repel circulating immune cells and also on peripheral tissues mainly by T lymphocytes (Th2) [ , ].
Few studies have been done on the role of microglia and astrocytes, cells that secrete cytokines in response to the disease processes, in SCA3/MJD and other polyQ SCAs [ , , , , , ]. A transgenic mouse expressing the expanded human ataxin-3 with 94 CAGs showed astrogliosis but not microglial activation [ ]. In a conditional Tet-Off mouse model using the full-length human ataxin-3 cDNA with 77 CAGs, ataxin-3 was predominantly detected in glial cells of the cerebellum—not in neurons. This model showed that glial cells expressing expanded ataxin-3 can secondarily alter Purkinje cell function [ ]. Pathological studies in humans disclosed that microglial cells might be activated in degenerated brainstem nuclei of SCA3/MJD patients, an effect that might be related to late stages of the disease [ , ]. Distribution of reactive astrocytes is quite interesting. While present in affected and in preserved, nondegenerated gray matter regions such as thalamic and vestibular nuclei, reactive astrocytes were absent from some severely degenerated nuclei, such as lateral and interstitial vestibular nuclei, and pulvinar and reticular nuclei, in thalamus [ , ]. Similar findings were obtained in other polyQ SCAs [ ]. The possible astrocyte and microglial activation on cytokines was never studied, in SCA3/MJD.
We have chosen to perform a large exploratory study covering 25 cytokines belonging to different functional groups, in order to detect those that could be related to this disease. Unfortunately, only 13 asymptomatic carriers with normal neurological examination accepted to participate in this study. The low acceptance of presymptomatic testing among Brazilians might explain these numbers [ ]. Even so, an unbiased analysis was able to show that eotaxin serum levels in asymptomatic carriers of the mutation were significantly higher than those measured in symptomatic patients and higher than those found in controls. Moreover, eotaxin serum levels seemed to progressively drop among symptomatic individuals. If that is true, one would expect an association between eotaxin levels and DD among the symptomatic individuals. The lack of association in the present study may have been due to the low DD (up to 10 years) of the symptomatic subjects recruited.
Many different cell types can produce eotaxin: in CNS, astrocytes and, peripherally, lymphocytes, endothelial cells, and others [ , , ]. On periphery, eotaxin is strongly chemotactic for eosinophils, as well as for basophils and Th2 cells [ ]. As we measured serum eotaxin levels in SCA3/MJD, the first question would be if eotaxin crosses the blood-brain barrier (BBB) from periphery and/or if there is a brain efflux of eotaxin that may reflect CNS immune changes. Studies performed in vitro showed that eotaxin can cross the BBB in both directions [ ]. Since SCA3/MJD was never related to any allergic cascade, we decided to not discuss the possible relationship of peripheral sources of eotaxin with our findings.
Eotaxin is secreted by astrocytes in an attempt to keep away circulating immune cells [ , ]. Astrocytes are the primary cell type found in glia scar formation. They help the resolution of inflammation by reducing the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines and increasing anti-inflammatory processes [ ]. Increased numbers of reactive astrocytes and activated microglial cells are present in SCA3/MJD [ , ]. In polyQ SCAs, including SCA3/MJD, reactive astrocytes are often seen in affected and apparently preserved gray areas. In contrast, astrocytes are frequently absent from some of the totally degenerated gray matter areas. If these astrocyte losses reflect that functional capacities are exhausted or that they could be targets of the disease processes and could ultimately degenerate similarly to neurons remains to be tested [ ].
The present data shows that serum concentrations of eotaxin are higher in asymptomatic than in symptomatic carriers of a CAGexp at ATXN3 and in controls. Since there is no evidence in the literature in favor of a peripheral activation of the immune system in SCA3/MJD, a possible interpretation is that eotaxin is highly secreted by astrocytes during the presymptomatic period. Among the anatomical structures studied in detail, there is evidence that unaffected regions show astrogliosis [ , ]. Maybe, astrogliosis might start during the presymptomatic period. These concentrations drop as time passes, maybe when astrocytes get exhausted or degenerated and undergone cell death. This might roughly coincide with the symptomatic period. If the eotaxin measured in peripheral serum is portraying the eotaxin secreted by astrocytes, then our preliminary data matches with the theory that the progressive loss of astrocytes would be related to the disease process, in SCA3/MJD and other polyQ disorders, and to the start of symptoms. The astrocyte vanishing from the destroyed brain grays, in polyQ SCAs, suggests that after their functional capacities are exhausted, the progression of symptoms would appear [ ]. In this context, eotaxin either might play a direct protective role in the presymptomatic phase of the disease or might only be a biomarker of astrocyte dysfunction.
These are very speculative hypotheses. Understanding the role of cytokines in neurodegenerative diseases is complicated by several factors. The first is the distance between the serum and the central nervous system. The second is the cytokine dual roles in neuroprotection and neurodegeneration. The example of IL-6, a neurotrophin that promotes neuronal survival in some cases and brain diseases in others [ ], should refrain us to attribute a clear neuroprotective role to eotaxin, with the present evidence.
Conclusion
The study of cytokines in neurodegenerative diseases such as SCA3/MJD might enlighten the understanding of the disease process of this and other polyQ disorders. Moreover, changes in cytokine patterns could be used as a biomarker of disease state/progression. This exploratory study raised significant new information about cytokines in SCA3/MJD. There is no evidence of a generalized cytokine change associated with the disease. In contrast, serum levels of eotaxin, a cytokine secreted by astrocytes, were shown to be elevated in asymptomatic carriers; these levels decreased among symptomatic individuals in a progressive way. Eotaxin might be a good candidate biomarker of the presymptomatic state. In order to confirm this, further prospective studies, especially those measuring eotaxin in cerebrospinal fluid and those relating eotaxin with brainstem atrophy, are needed.