Dendrites
The nerve cell counts as an elementary unit of information processing in the brain, and neuronal networks evolve through synaptic connections between nerve cells. Dendrites are highly branched structures of nerve cells that are specialized for receiving and processing synaptic input [ ]. Hence, dendrites represent the structural substrate for synaptic inputs onto nerve cells and are the blueprint for synaptic connectivity in neuronal networks. As a matter of principle it is assumed that large network computing power is represented by large numbers of nerve cells and synapses. Thus, in the human brain an estimated 100 bn nerve cells contact more than 150,000 kilometers of dendrites through more than 10 15 synapses [ ]. Furthermore, dendritic structure defects provide anatomical correlates of neurological diseases such as for example Alzheimer’s, schizophrenia, Down syndrome, clinical anxiety as well as Rett syndrome and other autism spectrum disorders [ , ]. However, in most cases it remains unclear in how far the anatomical dendritic structure defect is the cause or a consequence of the cognitive disorder as neuronal dendrites are multifunctional and are still insufficiently understood.
In the face of the vast variety of dendritic architectures in different types of neurons, the multi-functionality of dendrites of functionally different neurons seems obvious. In fact, neurons are classified based on their dendritic morphology (Fig. 1 ). Although morphological variability between neurons of the same type definitely exists, the molecular identity of a neuron defines its dendritic morphology to a certain extent. Hence, medium spiny neurons of the basal ganglia (Fig. 1 a) and cerebellar Purkinje neurons of mouse and rat (Fig. 1 b) as well as cortical pyramidal neurons in mouse, rhesus monkey, and human (Fig. 1 c) each look more alike than all three different neuron types in mouse (Fig. 1 ). This neuron-type-specific dendritic architecture even remains unchanged to a certain degree after new outgrowth in primary cell culture following dissociation, implying that this feature is, at least in part, genetically determined. Since the neurons shown in Fig. 1 have entirely different functions in the basal ganglia, the cerebellum, and cortex and since these functions correlate with their respective characteristic morphologies, it is obvious to assume that dendritic structure contributes significantly to neuron-type specific function. But what are the different roles of different dendritic morphologies? Fig. 1 Dendritic morphology classifies neuron types. Examples of typical dendritic architectures of three different types of nerve cells from different mammals. All neuron reconstructions are from the Neuromorph database ( NeuroMorpho.org ). The respective Neuromorph identification numbers and original references are provided underneath the respective neurons. a Medium spiny neuron from the basal ganglia of mouse and rat. b Cerebellar Purkinje neurons from mouse and rat. All neurons in a and b are on the same scale. c Cortical pyramidal neurons from mouse, rhesus monkey, and human. Scale bar in c is 7‑fold smaller than in a and b
Morphological and functional diversity of dendrites
First, dendrites expand the receptive surface of a neuron by 10- to 20-fold [ ]. One obvious function of highly branched dendritic structure is also an increase of the number of possible input synapses and, hence, likely computing power. It was shown that in sympathetic ganglion cells dendritic length correlates linearly with the number of input synapses [ ], but because of space and cost issues total dendritic length and synapse number cannot be increased arbitrarily. Inspection of cortex suggests a construction principle in which the total dendritic length is minimized on the basis of the given number of synapses [ ].
Second, the density of coverage of input space of a neuron varies depending on its dendritic structure. Although on average the dendrites of medium spiny neurons in mouse (Fig. 1 a) reach at least as far as the ones of mouse Purkinje neurons (Fig. 1 b) and therefore cover a similar neuropil volume, the latter exhibit 10 to 30 times more branches and have a substantially larger total length. Accordingly, a Purkinje cell in cerebellum receives approximately 100,000 synaptic inputs from cerebellar climbing fibers, whereas the density of input synapses onto medium spiny neurons is estimated to be only about 15 synapses per 10 µm [ ] which corresponds to a total of about 2000–6000 synaptic inputs. Hence, the much more dense branching pattern of Purkinje cells in comparison to medium spiny neurons can likely be explained by the number of input synapses.
Third, naturally morphology does not only determine how many but also which neurons contact a specific dendrite and therefore the logic of connections in neuronal networks. Considering for example the anatomically separated apical and basal dendritic subtrees of pyramidal neurons (Fig. 1 c, green and pink), one could conclude that this may serve the segregation of various synaptic signaling pathways into different synaptic input domains of the same cell. This could simply be a consequence of the distribution of diverse synaptic partners at different locations, like for example in various cortical layers that are covered by Pyramidal neuron dendrites. On the other hand, differential modulation of disparate inputs may allow the separate influence of varying types of inhibitory interneurons or different synaptic learning events at various locations throughout a neuron [ ]. In Pyramidal neurons domain-specific synaptic input, modulation, and excitability appear functionally critical for coincidence detection, synaptic integration, and plasticity [ ]. In short, the functioning of dendrites reaches from the appropriation of sufficient surface for synaptic inputs to highly compartmentalized units for molecular signaling and electrical computation. The situation becomes even more complicated due to dendrites not only functioning as passive recipients of synaptic information, but they may also possess output synapses and non-linear voltage gated ion channels which enormously increases the theoretically possible computational power of a single neuron [ , , ]. Therefore, ultimately the specific function of dendritic architecture needs to be investigated for every neuron-type. However, basic rules of dendritic integration that in principle apply to all neuron types definitely exist, but depending on a neuron’s morphology and ion channel repertoire these rules may impart different functions.
Filtering of synaptic input in dendrites
The backbone of synaptic integration in all neurons is the passive dendritic architecture, even if the computational power of dendrites may be augmented and modified significantly by the expression of voltage gated ion channels. Most neurons encode information by the rate and timing of action potentials. Usually single excitatory synaptic inputs do not suffice to bridge the difference between resting membrane potential and firing threshold. Hence, in dendrites mostly many synaptic inputs need to be summed up to allow generation of an action potential. The temporal and spatial summation of synaptic inputs depends decisively on the passive architecture of the dendritic arbor. Forty years ago Wilfrid Rall started to formally describe the passive features of dendrites in a series of modeling studies using three cable properties: the axial resistance (R a ), the membrane capacitance (C m ), and the membrane conductance (G m ) or membrane resistance (R m = 1/G m ), respectively. The flux of a synaptic current directly at the position of an input synapse in a dendrite causes a local change of the membrane potential that depends upon the geometry and the three abovementioned cable properties [ , , ]. The key point is, however, what impact this local postsynaptic potential (PSP) has on the membrane potential at the action potential initiating zone. For demonstration purposes we assume that the action potential is generated in or close by the soma, as is the case in many vertebrate neurons, and that two different local synaptic potentials with varying distance from the soma cause identical local dendritic EPSPs (Fig. 2 a, synapse 1 blue, synapse 2 green). In a passive dendritic cable the axial resistance R a and the membrane conductance G m cause a continual decrease of the PSP amplitude on its way to the soma. Since in the example shown in Fig. 2 a the distal synapse 1 is further away than the proximal synapse 2, a single activation of the distal synapse 1 results in a smaller depolarization at the soma (Fig. 2 a). Thus, in passive dendrites the effective amplitudes of PSPs decrease with the distance to the soma. Furthermore, the membrane capacitance C m lengthens the time course of the synaptic potential. Since C m increases with an increasing membrane surface, distal synaptic inputs are temporally stretched more strongly than proximal ones (Fig. 2 a). Consequently, filtering in passive dendrites transforms a short and sharp PSP into a much smaller and broader electrical signal on its way to the soma (Fig. 2 a). Therefore, single synaptic inputs in purely passive dendrites should be less effective. On the other hand, dendritic filtering may lengthen the time window in which the activation of distal synapses overlaps with other inputs. This may increase the period in which effective temporal summation may occur (Fig. 2 a). We recapitulate that dendritic filtering may lead to smaller somatic PSPs produced by distant synapses which may in turn be subject to temporal summation over longer time periods. Already Rall’s theoretical contemplations [ , , ] predict that the various functions of input synapses in passive dendrites can be distinguished by their location. Fig. 2 Dendritic filtering. Schematic drawing of some properties of dendritic integration of synaptic inputs. a Amplitudes and time courses of postsynaptic potentials ( PSPs ) at the soma (or the action potential initiating zone) differ due to the passive filtering properties of dendrites depending on the distance of the input synapse ( left : sketch drawing of distal input synapse1, blue , and proximal input synapse, green , relative to the soma). The top two traces of the second column depict the respective PSPs at the synapse at equivalent synaptic current amplitudes and equivalent local input resistances. The bottom trace shows the resulting PSPs at the soma following activation of synapse 1 or 2. The third column represents PSPs at repetitive stimulation at the proximal synapse 2 ( green ) and the following temporal summation at the soma ( bottom trace ). Column four exhibits PSPs at repetitive stimulation at the distal synapse 1 ( blue ) and the resulting temporal summation at the soma ( bottom trace ). Temporal summation as observed at the soma is larger for the distal synapse. b The varying somatic PSP amplitudes may be compensated for either by gradually increasing input resistances from proximal to distal, or by gradually enhanced synaptic currents. However, this does not apply for the varying temporal summation of distal and proximal inputs. c Differing temporal summation as caused by distal or proximal synaptic inputs can be compensated for by gradually increased dendritic ion channels from proximal to distal (e. g. HCN channels)
Proximal inputs lead to temporally narrow responses with large amplitudes and may therefore act as coincidence detectors, whereas distal inputs may serve temporal integration [ ].
Democratization of effective amplitudes of synaptic inputs
Filtering properties of dendrites may as well be subject to alteration or be disintegrated altogether (Fig. 2 b, c). In many dendrites the local PSPs at different locations are not identical as suggested in Fig. 2 a, but the amplitudes of postsynaptic potentials upon identical synaptic currents vary depending on where the synapse is (Fig. 2 b). Formally, the amplitude of a local postsynaptic potential at the location of a postsynaptic current is a function of the input resistance at this very location. The input resistance, in turn, is a function of the membrane resistance, the axial resistance, and the geometry of the dendrite. The evoked difference of the local potential is larger the less current is shunted through neighboring dendrites, meaning the higher the specific axial (R a ) as well as the specific membrane resistances (R m ) are at this location. R m and R a increase along with a decrease of the diameter of the cable, but they are also affected by the branching structure. Since in many neurons the diameter of dendritic branches decreases more distally, the local input resistance increases with the distance from the soma or the action potential initiating zone (Fig. 2 b). This means that distal synaptic currents (Fig. 2 b, blue synapse) result in larger local membrane potential changes than proximal ones (Fig. 2 b, green synapse). As distal PSPs attenuate more strongly on their way to the soma these two effects act complementary. Larger local PSPs in distal dendrites and stronger attenuation of a signal on its way to the soma may be balanced in a way that the effective PSP amplitudes at the soma are identical for distal and proximal synaptic inputs (Fig. 2 b). This can even go thus far that synaptic inputs from all dendritic input sites elicit the same effective PSP amplitude at the action potential initiating zone, namely if for all synaptic sites in dendrites the decrease of the PSP amplitude over the distance is inversely proportional to the input resistance. This construction principle has been described in depth by Cuntz et al. [ ] in detailed multicompartment models using realistic geometries as well as passive biophysical properties of tangential cells of the fly visual system. Our own data using passive models of flight motoneurons of Drosophila melanogaster support this principle of synaptic democracy (see Fig. 4 ).
Other mechanisms exist to amplify the effective PSP amplitudes of distal synapses. First, distal input may be boosted by voltage dependent calcium and sodium channels. However, amplification through voltage gated channels does not appear to play a role until many synapses are activated because these channels only open at strongly depolarized membrane potentials, and their activation is counteracted by outwardly directed potassium currents [ ]. Second, and already of great importance with the activation of single synapses, evidence from pyramidal cells exist that synaptic strength is scaled with the distance from the soma so that dendritic filtering of PSP amplitudes on their way to the soma is counterbalanced [ ]. In principle, synaptic transmission strength with cumulative distance from the soma may be caused either by elevated transmitter release at distal presynapses or by increased postsynaptic conductance (Fig. 2 b, G syn ). Studies using CA1 pyramidal neurons suggest that the postsynaptic receptor density scales with the distance from the soma so that distal inputs cause larger local PSPs [ , ]. However, another unsolved problem is how the distance of a synapse to the soma is encoded so that it can be scaled accordingly. The construction principle of increasing input resistance in distal dendrites (inversely proportional to the decrease of PSP amplitude on its way to the soma) as well as the scaling of synaptic strength (elevated in distal dendrites) lead to democracy of the effective PSP amplitudes of all synaptic input sites but they do not affect the time course of the PSP (Fig. 2 a, b). The time course is slackened the more membrane is between the synaptic input site and the soma. Thus, the independence of the location of the PSP amplitudes does not necessarily affect the time window in which distal inputs are summed up (Fig. 2 a, b).
Democratization of the temporal integration of synaptic inputs
Certainly, in many neuron types, including pyramidal neurons, the width of somatically recorded PSPs does not depend upon the location of the input site. This means the temporal summation is vastly the same for all excitatory input synapses [ ]. In purely passive dendrites the time course of postsynaptic potentials depends upon the time constant (τ) of the membrane which in turn is the product of membrane resistance (R m ) and membrane capacitance (C m ). An increased time constant as a result of an increased membrane capacitance for distal synapses may, in principle, already be counterbalanced by an increasing density of open ion channels and, thus, a decreased membrane resistance (Fig. 2 c). In pyramidal neurons this is realized by a gradient of HCN channels, with an increasing channel density from proximal to distal (Fig. 2 c). HCN channels conduct sodium and potassium ions, open upon hyperpolarization, and a significant number of HCN channels are open at the resting membrane potential [ ]. This leads to a decrease of the membrane resistance in dendrites from proximal to distal because of the HCN channel gradient. In addition, HCN channels inactivate following local membrane depolarization. The resulting reduction of sodium influx causes a hyperpolarization that shortens the synaptic depolarization and, therefore, the duration of the EPSP. Thereby, the HCN channel gradient mediates a location-independence of the temporal summation of excitatory synaptic inputs. Although further active mechanisms exist, at least in pyramidal neurons HCN channels pose the most important mechanism to adjust temporal summation for all synaptic input sites because pharmacological block of HCN channels cause a significant broadening of PSPs from distal synapses [ ]. The strategic placement of voltage dependent ion channels in dendrites may therefore compensate for temporal filtering properties of passive dendrites and transform distal inputs conveying sustained temporal summation into shorter inputs used for coincidence detection. The combination of active conductances with different dendritic morphologies and the strategic localization of excitatory and inhibitory synapses permits a vast multiplicity of computational actions in various types of neurons [ , ] that will not be discussed any further here. In this article we will mainly focus on the dendrites of motoneurons innervating skeletal muscles.
Dendrites of motoneurons
In vertebrates the so-called lower motoneurons (LMNs) are located in the ventral horn of the spinal cord innervating skeletal muscles via the spinal nerves. In insects most motoneurons innervating skeletal muscles are in the ventral nerve cord (VNC) or ventral nervous system (VNS). Fig. 3 depicts motoneurons of three different vertebrate species, of three insects, and one pharyngeal motoneuron of the nematode C. elegans . An extensive dendritic tree is a commonality in all skeletal motoneurons, whether in vertebrates or insects, without any obvious subdivision into different domains. Motoneuron dendrites are distributed more or less evenly across the motor neuropils. However, it is known that inhibitory input synapses in vertebrate spinal motoneurons as well as in flight motoneurons of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster , mainly target dendrites that are proximal to the action potential initiating zone (cat, [ ]; Drosophila, [ ]). Consequently, temporal summation (Fig. 2 ) is shorter for inhibitory inputs as compared to excitatory inputs, meaning inhibition is usually sharper in motoneurons than excitation. In contrast, excitatory inputs are localized as far out as the most distal dendrites. The spatial distribution of dendrites is enormous. It reaches well to the neuropil borders. In the example of cat in Fig. 3 , spinal motoneuron dendrites reach 11 cm from the soma to the neuropil borders. Because of the dendritic filtering properties, in entirely passive dendrites distal excitatory inputs would only elicit very small effective amplitudes in the soma, and thus, not contribute significantly to action potential initiation. However, in vertebrate motoneurons the amplitudes of excitatory input are enhanced by dendritic voltage gated currents. The activation of persistent inward currents, mostly by L‑type calcium channels and sodium channels, results in amplification of excitatory postsynaptic potentials. Depending on the excitation status of the animal, this amplification of excitatory PSPs is modulated by descending aminergic neurons in brain stem [ ]. In addition, it becomes clear that the total dendritic length of vertebrate motoneurons scales with the size of the animal and, hence, the diameter of the spinal motor neuropils (Fig. 3 ; dendritic length spinal motoneuron of cat: 78 mm; rat: 45 mm; mouse: 22 mm). Correspondingly, also the average dendritic diameters scale (Fig. 3 ) which likely further counterbalances the attenuation of distal PSPs over large distances. Since the ventral nervous system of insects is usually smaller as compared to the spinal cord of vertebrates, the spatial dimensions of insect motoneurons are significantly less widespread. In Fig. 3 scales are matched for better visualization. The white boxes depict the spatial dimensions of the respective motoneurons but are scaled to the cat motoneuron. Although the spatial dimensions of dendrites in small insects are vastly smaller, the total dendritic length does, by no means, scale as compared to vertebrates. For example, the dimensions of the flight motoneuron of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster (Fig. 3 , example 5), are five times smaller as compared to mouse (Fig. 3 , example 3), but its total dendritic length is larger by a factor of three (6.5 mm vs. 2.2 mm). The reason is that insect motoneurons often exhibit vastly more dendritic arborizations. The large spinal motoneuron of cat has a total dendritic length of 78 mm but possesses only 254 single dendritic branches (Fig. 3 , example 1). By contrast, the flight motoneuron of the hawkmoth, Manduca sexta (Fig. 3 , example 4) has a total dendritic length of 39 mm but holds a total of 8000 single dendritic branches. So, usually insect motoneurons are way more branched than vertebrate motoneurons, and therefore, cover the neuropil significantly more densely (Fig. 3 ). Additionally, in relation to vertebrates they show an increased total dendritic length relative to their marginal spatial extent. Accordingly, despite their small dimensions insect motoneurons face the same dendritic filtering problems like spinal motoneurons. The solution to this problem appears to be similar in insects and vertebrates. Also in fruit fly motoneurons we find dendritically localized calcium channels [ , ] that boost excitatory postsynaptic potentials and are subject to modulation by aminergic inputs (Ryglewski et al., unpublished). Fig. 3 Dendritic structure of motoneurons of vertebrates, insects, and C. elegans. Comparison of the dendritic structures of cat, rat, and mouse spinal motoneurons, insect ( Manduca sexta adult; Drosophila melanogaster adult and larva) skeletal muscle motoneurons, and a C. elegans pharyngeal motoneuron (in this order, from left to right ). Due to the different scaling, the scale bars are adjusted accordingly. The white boxes depict the respective motoneurons at the same scale as the one of cat. Total dendritic length, number of dendritic branches, and average dendrite diameters are provided underneath the respective reconstructions. The three vertebrate and the C. elegans motoneuron reconstructions are from the Neuromorph database ( NeuroMorph.org ). The respective Neuromorph identification numbers are provided underneath the respective neurons
In insects, motoneuron dendrites scale with the size of the animal and, thus, the dimensions of the motor neuropils in the ventral nervous system, as in vertebrates. In the examples 4 and 5 in Fig. 3 the total dendritic length of the wing depressor motoneuron, MN5, in Manduca sexta (Fig. 3 , example 4) and in Drosophila melanogaster (Fig. 3 , example 5) is about twice the body size of the respective animal. The example motoneuron of the tinier Drosophila larva exhibits a lower total dendritic length. Overall, as compared to vertebrates, insect motoneurons are more complex, possess significantly more arborizations, and have an enormously enhanced total dendritic length in relation to their body size. Although this assumption is speculation, a possible reason may be that insect motoneurons must process relatively more synaptic information. First, graded muscle contraction in insects is often not realized by the activation of various motor units but by graded synaptic transmission onto the muscle. Second, insect muscles are innervated only by a small number of motoneurons but their motor performance is immense. As opposed to the complex motoneuron dendrites in vertebrates and insects, C. elegans pharyngeal motoneuron dendrites exhibit only a minimal structure (Fig. 3 ). It is worth mentioning, however, that C. elegans possesses only 302 neurons and few muscles.
In order to probe the function of the highly branched dendrites of insect or vertebrate motoneurons directly, they need to be manipulated in vivo to then test the consequences for the resulting neuronal activity patterns and motor behavior. In the following this is introduced using the Drosophila melanogaster wing depressor motoneuron, MN5 (Fig. 3 , example 5).
The identified flight motoneuron, MN5: a case study
MN5 is one of five motoneurons (Fig. 3 , examples 4 and 5, Manduca sexta and Drosophila melanogaster , respectively) that innervate the dorsolongitudinal wing depressor muscle (DLM). In Drosophila melanogaster the DLM depressor muscle mediates wing down stroke during flight and courtship song, the latter being the love song with which the male courts the female fly. Therefore, the function of MN5 during motor behavior is well known. The DLM is an asynchronous flight muscle, meaning that MN5 fires one action potential only about every 10 th to 20 th wing beat to tune the calcium concentration in this otherwise stretch-activated asynchronous muscle [ ]. This means that MN5 fires tonically at about 5–10 Hz at wing beat frequencies of approximately 200 Hz. The firing rates of all five DLM motoneurons are regulated conjointly, and alterations of these firing rates are directly and linearly related with modifications of the wing beat frequency and amplitudes, thereby directly regulating power output during flight [ ]. Thus, dipteran depressor motoneurons do not influence the temporal fine-adjustment of the wing beat but very much the contraction frequencies and amplitudes of the large flight muscles. During courtship song, two alternating song motifs are distinguished: the pulse and the sine song. During sine song the wings are waved up and down at low amplitude and a frequency of about 160 Hz, whereas pulse song is characterized by single large amplitude wing beats and species specific interpulse interval (~34 ms in Drosophila melanogaster ). During sine song only a subset of the DLM motoneurons are activated at a low frequency, whereas during pulse song all DLM motoneurons fire simultaneously at a higher frequency [ ]. The activation patterns of MN5 during flight and during courtship song are therefore sufficiently well known. The firing patterns can be recorded in vivo during behavior from the target muscle fiber using fine tungsten wires, and the genetic tools in Drosophila offer the possibility to selectively manipulate only the dendrites of the DLM motoneurons without affecting other properties or other neurons [ ]. This provides the prerequisite to now test the function of dendritic architecture of identified insect motoneurons directly in the context of behavior.
Location-independence of synaptic input in a Drosophila DLM motoneuron
The dendritic structure of vertebrate and insect motoneurons does not reveal any obvious domains (Fig. 3 ). Nonetheless, it appears important to obtain an estimate whether excitatory synaptic inputs onto different parts of the dendrite are biased based on dendritic filtering, meaning that specific areas of the dendrite need to be manipulated to be able to unravel the function. Based on multicompartment models that rely on realistic dendritic architecture as well as passive biophysical properties of MN5 as recorded in situ , hint at location-independence, at least with regard to the filtering of PSP amplitudes in dendrites (Fig. 4 , modified after Berger [ ]). Plotting the distribution of input resistances over all dendritic branches as a color code (Fig. 4 a), it becomes obvious that the input resistance R input increases in higher order distal dendrites and, thus, the local PSP amplitudes in these dendrites are larger following the same synaptic currents as compared to proximal dendrites (compare Fig. 2 b). Now, the decline of PSP amplitudes on their way to the action potential initiating zone (Fig. 4 b, V AP /V dendrite ) behaves exactly the opposite. In MN5 the action potential is not initiated at the soma but at the primary neurite (Fig. 4 , white arrow). In fact, for all dendritic locations the decline of the PSP amplitude on its way to the action potential initiating zone is inversely proportional to the respective specific input resistances (Fig. 4 d). Thereby, at least for a single current injection in every dendritic branch the effective PSP amplitudes are basically the same at the action potential initiating zone (Fig. 4 c). In addition, with regard to temporal summation of excitatory inputs several dendritic conductances mediate a certain location-independence (Ryglewski, unpublished). Therefore, a selective manipulation of specific parts of the dendritic tree does not seem imperative for the analysis of the function of this motoneuron’s dendritic structure. Fig. 4 Location-independence of PSP amplitudes in the passive geometry of an identified Drosophila motoneuron. a Distribution of the local input resistances in a passive multicompartment model based on realistic morphology and passive membrane properties as recorded in situ from the Drosophila wing depressor motoneuron MN5. Input resistances between 80 and 1000 MΩ and are color-coded. Input resistances increase from proximal to distal. b Color-code of the distribution of the ratio of PSP amplitudes at the action potential initiating zone ( V AP , white arrow ) relative to the local PSP amplitudes at the respective dendritic branches ( V dendrite ). V AP /V dendrite decreases from proximal to distal. c Relative PSP amplitudes at the action potential initiating zone are similar for all dendritic branches due to the inverse proportionality of the ratio of input resistance and PSP attenuation. d Because of the passive structure of the dendrite the local input resistances are inversely proportional to the PSP attenuation (V AP /V dendrite ). Multicompartment models modified after Berger [ ]
The function of the dendritic structure of an identified Drosophila motoneuron
Drosophila offers the opportunity to spatially restrict expression of RNAi transgenes to only few motoneurons using the binary GAL4/UAS expression system. With the use of specific GAL4 drivers only the DLM wing depressor motoneurons are addressed without affecting other neurons. However, to selectively test the function of dendritic architecture a manipulation is needed that only encumbers intrinsic dendrite growth but does not influence any other physiological properties of those neurons and that also does not indirectly affect other neurons. Targeted RNAi knock down of the cell surface molecule Dscam1 (Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule 1) yields a massive dendritic phenotype in the DLM motoneurons [ ]. For MN5 this means that the dendrites do not reach the neuropil borders anymore, and higher order branches are entirely missing. The total dendritic length is reduced by more than 90%, from 6 mm to below 600 µm (Fig. 5 a, b). This manipulation does not affect the axonal innervation of the target DLM muscle fiber, and neuromuscular transmission remains unaltered [ ]. Furthermore, the basically dendrite-less MN5 exhibits the same potassium, sodium, and calcium currents per membrane surface as their wildtype controls. And finally, even following a 90% reduction of dendrites, MN5 still receives excitatory cholinergic and inhibitory GABAergic input synapses [ ]. The conclusion is that a targeted Dscam1 RNAi knock down only in the DLM motoneurons selectively reduces their dendritic length by more than 90% but leaves all other properties of these neurons intact. This opens up the possibility to use targeted Dscam1 RNAi knock down to now selectively test the function of MN5 dendrites in the context of behavior. Fig. 5 The function of dendritic structure of an identified Drosophila wing depressor motoneuron. a The identified wing depressor motoneuron MN5 is a unipolar neuron comprising more than 6 mm of total dendritic length. The MN5 dendrites cover approximately 120 × 10 3 µm 3 of the neuropil. b Targeted Dscam1 RNAi knock down only in the wing depressor motoneurons reduces the total dendritic length by more than 90% below 0.6 mm and the neuropil coverage below 12 × 10 3 µm 3 . c Flies with basically dendrite-less wing depressor motoneurons are able to fly but the motoneuron firing frequency and the wing beat frequency are reduced. However, a loss of dendrites does not fundamentally change motoneuron function or its integration into the flight network. d MN5 firing frequency is subject to modulation by optomotor input. e Optomotor modulation of motoneuron activity is basically lost without dendrites. f Behavioral assay for optomotor stimulation. g Quantification of optomotor responses in dendrite-less vs. control motoneurons. h Male courtship song shows both song motifs, pulse and sine song, in animals with wing depressor motoneurons with and largely without dendrites. Sine and pulse songs are identical in the respective animals as is the relative song duration during courtship ( i ) but mating success is strongly decreased without dendrites ( i ). Following a loss of dendrites the courtship song is less successful because switching between song motifs is significantly more difficult ( i ). Figure is modified from Ryglewski et al. [ ]
What can a motoneuron still do after losing more than 90% of its dendrites? Strikingly, even with virtually dendrite-less wing depressor motoneurons fruit flies are still able to fly (Fig. 5 c), with MN5 showing its typical tonical firing pattern during flight. This allows the conclusion that a sufficient number of presynaptic partner neurons still contacts MN5 in a correct manner even though MN5 dendrite coverage of the neuropil is minimal. In controls MN5 dendrites cover a volume of neuropil of approximately 120 × 10 3 µm 3 (Fig. 5 a) but only about 12 × 10 3 µm 3 , all close to the primary neurite, following Dscam1 RNAi knock down (Fig. 5 b). Nevertheless, during development a sufficient number of axon terminals target the remaining MN5 dendrites to successfully integrate it into the flight network. This suggests that during pathfinding and synaptogenesis the presynaptic partners grow towards the motoneuron dendrites and not the other way around. Following Dscam1 knock down, however, MN5 appears to be equipped with fewer excitatory input synapses because it fires with a significantly lower frequency which in turn reduces wing beat frequency and flight time (Fig. 5 c) which does not seem to affect normal flight performance. With this the question arises why the flight motoneurons in wildtype flies exhibit more than 6 mm of dendrites. This becomes obvious if the flies are assigned challenging motor tasks. Fruit flies modulate flight performance upon optomotor input. Presenting flies with a high contrast horizon in their visual field and moving it up fools the fly into the illusion it would be losing altitude during flying (Fig. 5 f). Vice versa, moving the horizon down mediates the illusion of climb flight. The animals compensate for such differences in altitude with changing the flight muscle power output [ ]. During descent the motoneuron firing frequency is increased (Fig. 5 d) so that flight muscle contraction frequency and amplitude are enhanced. Such optomotor adjustments of flight performance by modulating motoneuron firing frequency are impossible following the loss of dendrites (Fig. 5 e). Quantification reveals that in MN5 with 90% fewer dendrites the firing rate can be adjusted less strongly by a factor of three and significantly slower as compared to control (Fig. 5 g, d, e). This implies that complex dendritic structure is not imperative for basic motoneuron functioning but very much so for adaptive motor performance. It is obvious that there is a high selection pressure on exquisite maneuverability during flight in dipterans.
The analysis of the role of motoneuron dendrites during Drosophila melanogaster courtship song makes this even clearer. As described above, DLM motoneurons are not only used during flight but also for wing movement during courtship song (Fig. 5 h). The male’s love song during the courtship ritual can be recorded with sensitive microphones, thus, illustrating that flies with dendrite-less wing depressor motoneurons sing just like wildtype flies do during courtship (Fig. 5 i), and both song motifs, sine and pulse song, are executed correctly (Fig. 5 h). Amplitudes, frequency, and interpulse intervals are not affected by a loss of flight motoneuron dendrites [ ]. Nevertheless, animals with dendrite defects in DLM motoneurons exhibit a four times reduced mating success (Fig. 5 i). Therefore, motoneuron dendrites seem to be essential for mating success, at least in this experiment. This observation may well explain the huge investment in more than 6 mm dendrites in wildtype motoneurons, because obviously mating success also means high selection pressure on dendritic structure. But what distinguishes the songs of animals with or without dendrites in the DLM motoneurons? Analysis of song records displays that both song motifs in themselves are executed correctly [ ]. However, the ratio of sine to pulse song in animals with dendritic defects is significantly increased (Fig. 5 i). The conclusion is that dendritic defects result in the inability of the fly to switch from sine to pulse song in a normal way. Already in 1977 Ewing has shown that during sine song only few DLM motoneurons are active at a low firing frequency, and during pulse song all DLM motoneurons are active at a higher frequency [ ]. This switch in the activation of the DLM motoneurons and, therefore, the quick change of song motifs seems impossible with an impaired dendritic structure. Interestingly, the degree of dendritic defect scales with the magnitude of the functional impairment both with regard to the modulation of motoneuron firing rates through optomotor input as well as the change between song motifs [ ]. This demonstrates that complex dendritic structure does not determine the basic motor function or how an insect motoneuron is incorporated into a motor network. However, dendritic structure is essential for adaptive motor performance that is imperative for mating success and survival.
Concluding remarks
Structure and function of neuronal dendrites are directly linked. Dendritic structure characterizes different neuron types, provides the blueprint for synaptic wiring in the nervous system, and filters synaptic inputs. Nonetheless, it remains impossible to directly infer the function of dendrites from their architecture. Although the passive filtering properties of dendrites in all neurons follow the same rules, these filtering properties can be adjusted fundamentally depending on ion channel equipment and varying synapse repertoire. Consequently, for each neuron type function and computing power of dendritic structure must be determined individually. Also for the same types of neurons in different species, specific differences and commonalities exist. The present article aimed to show for one identified Drosophila motoneuron that a loss of structure does not come with a change in function but that it coincides with reduced computing power during adaptive behavior. This is not true for all neurons. For our example motoneuron it seems irrelevant which dendrites are affected since synaptic inputs largely display location-independence. In other cases, however, clustering of excitatory and inhibitory inputs to different dendritic domains, for example, underlies specific computing power. A prominent example is an identified visual interneuron in the locust that encodes the time to collision with an object during flight that is progressively getting larger in the visual field. For this, differential excitatory and inhibitory inputs into different dendritic domains are needed [ ]. In this example a structural defect of such a dendritic domain would cause a false time-code. Hence, the function of this neuron would be altered fundamentally. By contrast, structural dendritic defects in the abovementioned Drosophila wing depressor motoneuron do not impair its function, but the extent of this structural defect scales with decreased computing power. This result is in accord with gradually diminished brain power with advancing dendritic defects during progressive neurological diseases. However, generalization is delicate due to the diversity of dendritic structure, the compartmentalization into various functional domains, and the equipment with different combinations of ion channels.