1 Introduction
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep is a stage of sleep that is characterized by skeletal muscle atonia, rapid eye movements, the presence of electroencephalography (EEG) theta waves (~ 6–9 Hz) originating from the hippocampus, and the ponto-geniculo-occipital (PGO) waves [ ]. As the brain appears active during REM sleep with desynchronized EEG waves, this stage of sleep has been known as “active” or “paradoxical” sleep.
Rapid eye movement sleep was described in 1953 at the University of Chicago [ ], and since, it has been shown that REM or REM-like sleep exists in both ectothermic and endothermic vertebrates [ , ]. In most mammals, non-REM (NREM) sleep and REM sleep continue to alternate through sleep in a cyclic fashion, with REM sleep periods usually becoming longer toward the end of sleep.
2 REM Sleep in Aquatic Species
The electrophysiology and behavior of sleep have been studied in more than 20 species of aquatic mammals [ ]. Although REM sleep is present in almost all terrestrial mammals that have been studied, no classical signs of this sleep state have been seen in cetaceans, which are placental mammals [ ].
Despite long monitoring of sleep in cetaceans, no REM sleep episodes, typical of terrestrial animals, have been observed in the studied species. Nevertheless, some features of REM sleep have been documented in behaviorally resting cetaceans such as muscle jerks, body twitches, and rapid eye movements [ ]. Moreover, muscle jerks have been observed during resting behavior in cetaceans when floating or during slow swimming. These muscle jerks are similar to the behavioral features of REM sleep in terrestrial mammals. However, the difference from terrestrial animals exists in the fact that the majority of jerks occur at the beginning of the sleep periods and during quiet waking. These muscular features are not considered as enough indicators of REM sleep in terrestrial mammals. Moreover, they also appear during wakefulness in cetaceans [ ]. Therefore, REM sleep in cetaceans is either absent or present in a different undetected form [ ]. Similarly, currently available evidence does not support the occurrence of REM sleep in dolphins; however, some authors suggested that it could present in a modified or undetected form [ , ]. Madan and Jha argued that the latter proposition seems unlikely as the semi-aquatic pinnipeds, which live in similar conditions in water and on land, develop the usual form of REM sleep and its accompanied features [ ]. Nevertheless, pinnipeds still have a significantly less REM sleep duration while in water.
With regards to fur seals, when on land, seals sleep in one of the following positions: sides, bellies or sitting. REM sleep occurs only when seals are lying down [ ]. In Juvenile (2–3-year-old) captive fur seals, REM sleep represents 5%, with single episodes lasting on average 3.6 min [ , ]. However, when in water, the amount of REM sleep considerably decreases and may even disappear for several days. When REM sleep is present in water, episodes do not exceed 1 min [ , ]. During REM sleep, the flipper movement stops and the seal’s head sinks [ ]. Seals’ sleep in water is characterized by sleeping at the surface on their sides, propelling with one front flipper, while keeping the other three fins above the surface to support their posture [ ]. It is postulated that this posture optimizes thermoregulation and reduces heat loss when fur seals are asleep in water [ , ]. Additionally, recently, it has been demonstrated that fur seals have a tiny amount of REM sleep when in water, and upon returning to land after spending weeks in the water, REM sleep appears during sleep, but without REM rebound [ ].
In a study that visually monitored sleep in juvenile walruses (another semiaquatic mammal), on land, REM sleep constituted 5%; however, when in water, REM episodes lasted less than 2 min [ ]. In water, all REM sleep episodes occurred during a single apnea [ ]. Similar findings have been reported in elephant seal [ ], and harp seal [ ].
Based on the above, aquatic and semi-aquatic mammals have absent or reduced REM sleep in water. This is supported by the findings that semi-aquatic animals have less REM sleep while in water. It seems that semi-aquatic mammals combine the sleep behavior of aquatic mammals (when in water), and terrestrial mammals (when on land).
3 Why REM Sleep is Reduced in Aquatic Mammals? Proposed Theories
3.1 REM Sleep and Thermoregulation
Thermoregulation seems to stop during REM sleep [ ]. It has been documented in terrestrial mammals that the response to thermal load and thermoregulatory mechanism is less efficient during REM sleep [ ].
Moreover, it has been shown in rodents that a warm ambient environment facilitates REM sleep [ ]. Three days of exposure to a warmer climate led to a 28% increment in REM sleep, compared with only a 5% increment in total sleep time [ ]. It is possible that a warm environment decreases the risk of heat loss, which allows the development of more REM sleep. However, the aquatic mammals live in thermally challenging environments, and it is known that conductive heat loss is approximately 90 times greater in water than air [ , ]. Therefore, it has been proposed that if aquatic mammals had significant REM sleep, they would encounter a great challenge to manage their core body temperature during REM sleep [ ]. Therefore, the absence of REM could be a protective mechanism.
3.2 REM Sleep and Gravity
In addition to the above plausible hypothesis, another possible mechanism is the fact that when in water, aquatic species do not have to support their weight and consequently do not experience REM sleep. Applying Archimedes’ principle to aquatic animals indicates that their weight in water is significantly lower. The effect of gravity could explain the dissimilarity between sleep behavior (regarding REM sleep) of aquatic mammals and terrestrial mammals in the two different environments: water, and land [ ]. During REM sleep, mammals cannot maintain position. This is supported by the data showing that several terrestrial animals can sleep while standing by locking their limbs; however, they do not progress into REM sleep until they lie down [ , ]. This infers that REM sleep is not achieved in mammals until the risk of falling is avoided, i.e., the body becomes supported on the ground. When seals and other semi-aquatic mammals are on land, sleep behavior becomes similar to the sleep behavior of terrestrial mammals with progression into REM sleep [ ].
It has been shown that REM sleep is reduced among astronauts in space [ , ], which supports the proposition that in a weightless environment, the need for REM sleep is lower than on land [ , ].
Therefore, it is possible that aquatic and semi-aquatic animals do not need REM sleep in water due to being in a low weightless environment. Gravity seems to play an essential role in progression into REM during sleep, where the amount of REM sleep is highest in terrestrial mammals, significantly reduced in semi-aquatic mammals and wholly absent or negligible in aquatic mammals.
3.3 REM Sleep and Brain Cooling
Recently, it has been proposed that fur seals’ switch from bilateral to uni-hemispheric NREM sleep in water may render REM sleep unnecessary and suggested that REM may serve to reverse the brain cooling that occurs in bilateral NREM sleep [ ]. However, an earlier study recorded evidence that whales may occasionally sleep with both sides of the brain [ ]. Despite that whales do not go into REM sleep. Therefore, this theory will not clearly explain the reduction of REM sleep in aquatic and semi-aquatic mammals when in water.
3.4 REM Sleep and Apnea
It has been demonstrated that REM sleep in semi-aquatic mammals is associated with apnea [ ]. REM sleep in fur seals was characterized by submergence of the head and long apneas [ ]. The need to remain floating and the need for breathing may further stop the central nervous system from attaining a relaxation condition similar to the terrestrial mammals; consequently, the semi-aquatic mammals do not progress into much REM sleep while in water.
Studies of cetacean species sleep revealed that these mammals display uni-hemispheric slow-wave sleep (USWS) where EEG slow waves appear in one cerebral hemisphere, and low-voltage EEG in the other hemisphere indicative of a waking state [ ]. Several evolutionary factors have been proposed to explain USWS including the necessity to come to the surface to breathe. Among these factors is the theoretical concern that the occurrence of high-voltage bilateral slow-wave sleep and REM sleep could be incompatible with normal breathing [ ]. Adopting a system that allows alternation of slow-wave sleep between the two hemispheres and maintaining one half of the brain awake at a time, and the significant reduction or modification of REM sleep, would resolve this major concern [ ].
3.5 The Partial Pressure of Carbon Dioxide (PaCO2) and REM Sleep Generation
Non-REM sleep dampens pulmonary ventilation [ ], and as a result, PaCO 2 levels gradually increase as NREM sleep progresses; [ ] this increase in CO 2 stimulates the chemosensory neurons including those in the locus coeruleus (LC) to increase ventilation [ ]. The respiratory center in the brainstem perceives the elevated CO 2 and changes in pH, and increases pulmonary ventilation to combat hypercapnia and acidosis. To do that, the sleeping mammal has to go periodically into either wakefulness or REM sleep [ ]. Since frequent arousal has deleterious physiological consequences, cycling REM sleep periods between NREM sleep would help to maintain optimum CO 2 level and consolidated sleep [ ].
Several studies suggested that REM sleep begins when LC REM-off neurons are hyperpolarized, a condition that seems to have a role in progression to REM sleep [ ]. Also, it has been demonstrated that the LC neurons are highly sensitive to changes in brain CO 2 level and get hyperpolarized with increased PaCO 2 [ ]. It has been proposed that some of the chemosensory neurons (possibly, the LC REM-Off type) can be hyperpolarized by moderate elevation in PaCO 2 [ ]. Madan and Jha hypothesized that LC REM-off cells are hyperpolarized by elevated PaCO 2 level during stable NREM sleep, which may help to initiate REM sleep [ ]. In other words, REM sleep might act as a protective mechanism to maintain normal brain CO 2 level during long unperturbed sleep periods.
Air-breathing marine mammals dive below the surface to forage for food, to sleep while minimizing the risk of predation, and save energy by reducing metabolic costs. However, due to rising PaCO 2 and dropping PaO 2 , they have to surface to the sea water level to breathe [ ]. Although air-breathing marine mammals do sleep under water, they need to surface frequently for breathing. We hypothesize that this frequent movement to the surface does not allow PaCO 2 to rise to the threshold level required to hyperpolarize the REM-off neurons. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that seals during resting or sleeping at the surface of the water may go into long apneas; however, they perform short periods of rapid respiration between these apneic periods [ ]. This may not allow PaCO 2 to reach the level needed to inhibit the REM-off neurons. This hypothesis needs to be investigated.
3.6 Predator Avoidance
Antipredation vigilance is one of the proposed functions of uni-hemispheric sleep. Uni-hemispheric sleep is a possible evolutionary mechanism for monitoring the environment for predators and conspecifics [ ]. Uni-hemispheric sleep does not allow REM sleep continuation as has been demonstrated in flying birds [ ]. Therefore, it is possible that the development of bilateral REM sleep in water may compromise this antipredation monitoring process.
3.7 Muscle Efficiency and REM Sleep
Another theory that was proposed to explain the reduced or absence of REM sleep in aquatic mammals is the role of REM sleep in muscle function and improvement of muscular efficiency. Recently, Cai proposed that one of the major roles of REM sleep is the improvement of muscular efficiency [ ]. He postulated that muscular atonia in REM sleep reduces muscular tension as compared to the waking state when muscles are frequently in use. This reduced tension may improve the efficiency of muscular contractions, increase the strength, and improve the performance of sophisticated skills with high accuracy [ ]. Cai tried to explain why REM sleep is absent in aquatic mammals such as dolphins, and is very short in duration in many birds [ , ]. He proposed that REM sleep is not required for the dolphins and birds to possess the atonic function of REM sleep needed for sophisticated skills [ ]. On the contrary, humans need highly sophisticated hand skills such as writing, and rodents with their very small size need to improve the efficiency and increase the strength of their poor muscles. Therefore, REM sleep with REM atonia is necessary to improve muscular efficiency directly [ ].
However, this theory will not explain why seals have reduced REM sleep while in water and a sleep pattern similar to terrestrial animals when on land.
4 Final Remarks
A recent study demonstrated that fur seals do not have REM rebound upon returning to land [ ]. This finding raises the possibility that fur seals do not need REM sleep while in water; therefore, they did not have REM sleep rebound after returning to land [ ]. Reduction of REM sleep percentage has been reported during fasting in several experiments in human and animals [ , , , ]; however, REM sleep rebound was not reported during recovery after 1 month of intermittent fasting [ ]. Additionally, the reduction in REM sleep during fasting did not affect the cognitive functions of fast performers [ ]. This means that the REM sleep rebound documented in experimental REM sleep deprivation is different from the low percentage of REM that is seen in other condition like semi-aquatic animals sleep in water or during fasting [ ]. The absence or low REM sleep in aquatic and semi-aquatic mammals is likely related to thermoregulation or as proposed by Gonfalone [ ] in a weightless environment, the need for REM sleep is not as strong as on land.