1 Introduction
Sleep disturbance is very common in modern society. Students, in particular, experience a number of sleep problems with a reported prevalence ranging 19.2–57.5% among university students [ ]. The consequence of sleep problems can be serious and long lasting. Overall physiology of an individual is compromised, in which decrements in cognitive performance is amongst the top-ranked ill effect of sleep disturbances [ , ].
Problems related to sleep are associated with gray and white matter shrinkage in brain. The lateral prefrontal cortex and the medial temporal lobe system, including the hippocampus are largely affected [ ]. This is in regard with ‘sleep-based neuropsychological perspective’ which states that the sleep disturbance intervenes with the working of certain cortical areas and thus impedes cognitive function [ ]. The most popular hypothesis in this classification is the ‘prefrontal vulnerability hypotheses’, which was proposed by Horne [ ]. This presents with a complicated presentation of cognitive alterations as cognition is controlled by the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus.
Sleep disturbances are associated with decrements in performance on various cognitive domains: speed of processing information, perceptual speed, executive function, concentration and attention, inhibition function, and memory [ , ]. Disturbance in sleep has also been seen to induce alterations in the morphology of event-related potentials (ERPs). The onset of P300 wave is somewhat delayed and its amplitude is reduced in sleep-disturbed individuals [ ]. The existing literature suggests the need of a study which explores some non-pharmacological and noninvasive interventions to ameliorate the reduced cognitive functions in sleep-disturbed adolescent and young adults.
Cognitive training is a particular form of learning. It simultaneously targets cognitive function rehab and provides regular, systematic, and performance adaptive learning [ ]. Despite the blooming interest in video games as intervention tools, evidence of their efficiency is mixed. Several studies report that most action video games are intense, fast, wild, and unpredictable, and might sometimes be violent, making these games unsuitable for many populations [ ]. Pathological gaming may later on lead to ‘addiction’ which is related to depression, lower academic achievement, behavioral and conduct problems as well as poor quality of life in younger population [ ]. However, recent literature including video game training suggests that playing action video games enhances various aspects of cognition like attention, perception, spatial skills, and peripheral vision [ , ]. Moreover, studies with young and older adults suggest that the cognitive improvements are not limited to action games [ ]. Recent research showed that the personalized video game-based cognitive training is specifically indicated for both cognitive as well as sleep enhancements in sleep-disturbed older adults [ ]. Yet, it remains unknown whether practicing non-action video games can be effective in enhancing fundamental cognitive functions in university students, which typically deteriorate due to disturbances in sleep. Thus, the present study is aimed to evaluate the effect of non-action video game-based training as a counter measure in the reduction of cognitive alterations, and improving sleep quality in university students.
2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Ethics
The current study was approved and conducted in compliance with the guidelines set out by the Institutional Ethics Committee, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi, India. The study was conducted in Neurophysiology Lab, Centre for Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation Sciences, Jamia Millia Islamia. All the participants gave their written informed consent before the start of the study. They were informed of their right to terminate participation in the study at any time.
2.2 Sample
The sample size was calculated using software G Power 3.1.9.2. Subjects were screened using PSQI, and those having poor sleep quality (score > 5) were recruited. A sample of 30 university students were assigned into groups (15 = experimental group, 15 = control groups) by computer-generated block randomization. All the participants reported normal hearing, and normal or corrected to normal vision, and all of them understood basic English language. Participants were excluded if they had a history of any neurological, psychological and psychiatric disorders, use of alcohol, other drug abuse, centrally active medications or if they were taking sleeping pills. Frequent gamers (with more than 1 h of video game play per week in the preceding year) were also excluded as they are already receiving some cognitive intervention, which could introduce the risk of biases in the study results. Intervention was given to experimental group. After 4 weeks, data from both the groups were analyzed.
2.3 Measures
2.3.1 Sleep Quality
PSQI was used to evaluate the subjective sleep quality of students. The 19 questions are combined into 7 component scores, each weighted equally from 0 to 3. The 7 component scores are added to obtain a global score ranging 0–21, with higher scores indicating worse sleep quality. The clinical and psychometric properties of the PSQI have been formally evaluated. The PSQI has a sensitivity of 89.6% and specificity of 86.5% for identifying the cases with sleep disorder, using a cut-off score of 5 [ ]. Participants were asked to fill the questionnaire before and after 4 weeks of the study duration.
2.3.2 Daytime Sleepiness
Day time sleepiness was measured using ESS. The ESS consists of eight self-rated items, each scored from 0 to 3, that measure a subject’s habitual ‘likelihood of dozing or falling asleep’ in common situations of daily living. The ESS score represents the sum of individual items, and ranges from 0 to 24. Higher scores on ESS signifies more sleepiness. Values > 10 are considered to indicate significant sleepiness and a score > 6 signifies moderate sleepiness [ ]. Subjects filled the questionnaire before and after 4 weeks of the study duration.
2.3.3 Neuropsychological Battery
This was done in a calm and quiet environment. The PennCNP, neuropsychological battery developed by University of Pennsylvania was administered on desktop, under supervision [ ]. Each test began with a practice module. Tests were done for the following domains, both before and after 4 weeks of the study duration.
Reaction time Reaction time involves perceptual decision making and motor planning [ ]. The reaction time task required moving the mouse and clicking as quickly as possible on a square that disappears after the click. The square gets increasingly smaller (Fig. 2 a). The median response time was used as the main dependent measure.
Visual memory Visual memory is important for online perceptual processing of visual stimulus [ ]. The word memory test presented 20 digitized words that are then mixed with 20 distractors (Fig. 2 d). The participant’s score reflects the number of correctly recognized targets and correctly rejected foils.
Logical reasoning It is a measure of abstraction, concept formation, and reasoning, with alternate forms [ ]. Subjects decide which of the four objects does not belong with the other three based on one of the three sorting principles (e.g., shape, size, line thickness). Sorting principles change after 10 successive correct responses (Fig. 2 g). An accuracy score was calculated by multiplying the proportion of correct responses by the number of categories attained.
2.3.4 Event-Related Potential P300
During wakefulness, long latency components of the ERPs are related to attention and information processing. The best known of these components is P300 [ ]. Therefore, P300 is considered as the electrophysiological correlate of cognition. It is an event-related potential which was measured using an auditory oddball paradigm. Both the amplitude and latency of the P300 wave were measured.
The subject was made to sit in a relaxed position. The scalp was gently cleaned with NūPrepTM skin prepping gel (Weaver and Company, USA) and Ten20TM conductive EEG paste was applied to different locations on the scalp for electrode placement. Ag–AgCl disc electrodes were used for recording. The active electrode was attached on the vertex (Cz), reference electrodes on mastoid (A1), and ground electrode on the forehead (Fpz). This electrode placement was in accordance with the previous studies done to capture the auditory event-related potential [ ]. The AERPs were recorded during a task involving standard auditory oddball paradigm (Fig. 3 a). The subjects were presented with two kinds of sounds through headphones, and were instructed not to count the number of (frequent, non-target stimuli) presentations of a low-pitch tone (S1), but to count the number of (rare, target stimuli) presentations of a high-pitch tone (S2). The S1 and S2 sounds were produced at a target:non-target ratio randomly. The inter stimulus interval was 1 s. Each tone lasted 50 ms. During the recording of AERPs, subjects were instructed to avoid excessive movement of the face, eyes, and neck [ ]. Recordings for P300 was taken before as well as after the study duration (Fig. 3 b).
2.4 Intervention
Participants assigned to the experimental group underwent 30 min of non-action video game training during the forenoon hours, 5 days a week for over 4 weeks. Games included in the study were speed match, memory matrix, mental calculation, face memory, rotation matrix, and Stroop’s color match from a web-based package (Lumosity), a cognitive training platform designed to enhance user’s cognitive abilities [ ]. The games were presented to the participants in a random order, which increased in their level of difficulty after every session. Participants in the experimental group practiced the game on a desktop under supervision. The control group did not receive training, but met with the researchers in laboratory twice. During these meetings, members of the research group interacted with the subjects about the general topics related to their interest for 15 min. They were asked not to play any sort of video games in the course of this study.
2.5 Statistical Analysis
Data were analyzed using SPSS version 21.0. Normality of the data was assessed by Shapiro–Wilk test. The demographic characteristics and the baseline criterion measures were compared and found to be comparable between the groups using independent samples t test. Participants in each group were tested using 2 × 2 mixed model ANOVA with group (control and experimental) and time effect (pre and post) for all the variables. A p value < 0.05 was considered as significant.
3 Results
All the demographic characteristics including age, weight, height, BMI, and Kuppuswamy socio-economic status were found to be comparable as assessed by independent t test (Table 1 ). Table 1 Demographic data comparison between groups Variables Grp 1 (mean ± SD) Grp 2 (mean ± SD) F values p values Independent t test Age (years) 24.13 ± 2.26 23.06 ± 2.60 0.546 0.466 0.241 Ht (cm) 163.99 ± 9.15 163.63 ± 9.60 0.227 0.637 0.917 Wt (kg) 58.66 ± 6.17 58.73 ± 6.47 0.262 0.613 0.977 BMI (kg/m 2 ) 21.78 ± 1.28 21.90 ± 1.28 0.022 0.883 0.811 KSSS 26.46 ± 0.51 26.53 ± 0.51 < 0.001 1.00 0.726 BMI body mass index, Ht height, Wt weight Data are presented as mean ± SD; significant difference p < 0.05
3.1 Sleep Quality
All the participants recruited in the study showed high scores of PSQI (> 5) indicating their poor sleep quality (Fig. 1 a). Moreover, group comparisons showed that their PSQI scores were similar at baseline, with no significant differences (Fig. 1 b). Video game training was given to the experimental group and sleep quality was measured in both the groups after 4 weeks. There was a significant decreased score for PSQI [ F (1,11.784) = 0.296, p = 0.002*] in experimental group as compared to the control group (Fig. 1 c). The result of PSQI showed an improved sleep quality with video game training in sleep-disturbed individuals. Within the control group no such effects were observed. Fig. 1 Sleep quality and daytime sleepiness. a Baseline characteristics of all the participants showing poor sleep quality (PSQI score > 5). b Between group comparison of PSQI scores showing no significant difference at baseline. c Pre- and post-intervention comparison of both groups showing improvement in sleep quality with intervention. d Baseline characteristics of all the participants showing excessive daytime sleepiness on ESS scale. e Between group comparisons of ESS scores showing no significant difference at baseline. f Pre- and post-intervention comparison of both the groups showing a decrease in excessive daytime sleepiness with intervention
3.2 Daytime Sleepiness
ESS scores were used to assess daytime sleepiness which showed high scores (> 6) indicating sleep debt in the study participants (Fig. 1 d). No significant difference in scores was found at baseline between the two groups (Fig. 1 e). ESS scoring was again done after the video game training. Group comparison for ESS scores showed significant decrease [ F (1,59.330) = 0.679, p ≤ 0.001*] with video game training (Fig. 1 f). Post-intervention ESS measures showed a decrease in daytime sleepiness in experimental group with no change in control group.
3.3 Reaction Time
There was a significant increase in reaction time in sleep-disturbed individuals as evaluated by PennCNP. Baseline measures for both the groups were similar and comparable (Fig. 2 b). However, post-intervention comparison between the control and experimental group showed a significant decrease in reaction time [ F (1,24.667) = 0.468, p ≤ 0.001*)] with video game training (Fig. 2 c). The result showed that video game training for 4 weeks restored sleep disturbance-induced increase in reaction time. Fig. 2 Neuropsychological assessment. a Representation of reaction time task. b Between group comparisons of reaction time showing no significant difference at baseline. c Pre- and post-intervention comparison of both the groups showing a decrease in reaction time with intervention. d Representation of visual memory task. e Between group comparisons of visual memory scores showing no significant difference at baseline. f Pre- and post-intervention comparison of both the groups showing an increase in visual memory scores with intervention. g Representation of logical reasoning task. h Between group comparison of logical reasoning scores showing no significant difference at baseline. i Pre- and post-intervention comparison of both groups showing an increase in logical reasoning scores with intervention
3.4 Visual Memory
Visual memory was also assessed during the neuropsychological battery. The data showed a significant and comparable decrease in correct responses in individuals with sleep disturbance (Fig. 2 e). The number of correct responses showed a significant increase [ F (1,22.30) = 0.452, p ≤ 0.001*)] in experimental group as compared to control group (Fig. 2 f). This indicates an improvement of visual memory in sleep-disturbed students after 4 weeks of video game training.
3.5 Logical Reasoning
Logical reasoning was assessed using analogy task on PennCNP. There was a significant decrease in correct responses in all sleep-disturbed participants. Baseline comparison of data showed similarity in the number of correct responses for both the groups (Fig. 2 h). Video game training increased the correct responses to a significant level [ F (1,54.207) = 0.659, p ≤ 0.001*)] in sleep-disturbed participants (Fig. 2 i). This implies that performance on logical reasoning task improved with video game training with associated sleep disturbances.
3.6 P300 Amplitude
Cognitive functions were assessed objectively by P300-evoked potential. Sleep-disturbed participants of both the groups showed a significant and comparable reduction in the amplitude of P300 (Fig. 3 c). Post-intervention analysis showed that P300 registered a significant increase in wave amplitude [ F (1,42.054) = 0.600, p ≤ 0.001*)] in the experimental group but no such difference was found in the control group (Fig. 3 d). The results showed that video game training restored the sleep disturbance-induced decrease in P300 amplitude. Fig. 3 Electrophysiological correlates. a Representation of auditory oddball paradigm. b Recording of the P300 wave showing an increase in amplitude and decrease in latency with intervention. c Between group comparisons of P300 amplitude showing no significant difference at baseline. d Pre- and post-intervention comparison of both groups showing an increase in P300 amplitude with intervention. e Between group comparison of P300 latency showing no significant difference at baseline. f Pre- and post-intervention comparison of both groups showing a decrease in P300 latency with intervention
3.7 P300 Latency
Latency for P300 wave was increased significantly with sleep disturbance and comparable between the groups at baseline (Fig. 3 e). Although latency of P300 did not show a significant change post-training when both the groups were compared, clinically there was a reduction in latencies of P300 wave [ F (1,8.685) = 0.237, p ≤ 0.006; Fig. 3 f)]. The result showed a decrease in trend in latency indicating an improvement in cognition with video game training in sleep-disturbed individuals.
3.8 Correlations Between Sleep Quality Parameters and Cognitive Function Parameters
To address this, we correlated the five cognitive parameters’ mean differences (post-intervention mean minus baseline mean) with the two sleep parameters’ mean differences presented in Table 2 , which shows that for subjects in the training group, the mean differences in P300 amplitude, logical reasoning, reaction time, and visual memory were significantly correlated with PSQI and ESS. For subjects in the control group P300 amplitude, logical reasoning, reaction time, and visual memory were related to both PSQI and ESS. The mean differences for the other cognitive abilities measured exhibit no relation to any of the mean differences in the sleep parameters. Table 2 Correlations between mean differences in cognitive abilities in the cognitive training and control groups d-PSQI d-PSQI d-ESS d-ESS Experimental group Control group Experimental group Control group d-P300 amp − 0.8777* 0.8908* − 0.8856* 0.7292* d-P300 lat 0.4375 0.9484* 0.1437 0.7066* d-LG − 0.8805* 0.2553 − 0.8217* 0.278 d-RT 0.8345* 0.9620* − 0.7723* 0.7665* d-VM − 0.9521* − 0.5405* − 0.8217* 0.6124* d mean differences (post-intervention mean minus baseline mean), PSQI Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, ESS Epworth Sleepiness Scale, P300 amp P300 amplitude, P300 lat P300 latency, LG logical reasoning, RT reaction time, VM visual memory
We computed Pearson’s correlation coefficients between the mean difference of two sleep parameters and the analysis showed that these were highly correlated with each other (PSQI and ESS, r = 0.8597*, Fig. 4 a). Fig. 4 Correlation analysis. a Pearson correlation coefficients between the mean difference of two sleep parameter showing a high correlation (PSQI and ESS, r = 0.8597*). b Correlation analysis between the mean difference of P300 amplitude and reaction time showing high negative correlation ( r = − 0.6500*). c Correlation analysis between the mean difference of P300 amplitude and logical reasoning showing high positive correlation ( r = 0.7117*). d Correlation analysis between the mean difference of P300 amplitude and visual memory showing high positive correlation ( r = 0.8753*)
We also ran a correlation analysis among all the cognitive improvements (P300 amplitude and reaction time, r = -0.6500*, Fig. 4 b; P300 amplitude and logical reasoning, r = 0.7117*, Fig. 4 c; P300 amplitude and visual memory, r = 0.8753*, Fig. 4 d; logical reasoning and reaction time, r = − 0.8204*, visual memory and reaction time, r = − 0.7704*, visual memory and logical reasoning, r = 0.8985*) and found these were moderately inter-correlated. This is explained by the fact that the cognitive abilities share some of the same constructs and depend upon the same cortical areas.
4 Discussion
Sleep disturbance in university students is known to alter various aspects of cognition. Lee et al. [ ] showed that sleep deprivation increases the P300 latency and decreases the P300 amplitude. Moreover, the performance on various cognitive tasks was decreased in the group with sleep problems [ ]. The present study was undertaken to find out the effect of non-action video game-based training on cognition and sleep in sleep-disturbed university students. Our results indicate that sleep quality and cognitive function improved as a result of non-action video game training for the cognitive training group but not for the control group.
Improvement in sleep quality with cognitive training is explained by Fogel and Smith findings [ ]. They found that following learning, individuals exhibit an increase in the duration of SWS and an increase in the duration of stage 2 sleep, an increase in the number and density of sleep spindles. These changes in sleep architecture are hallmark of improved sleep. Similarly, our result of sleep measures showed a reduced daytime sleepiness and an improved sleep with video game training in sleep-disturbed individuals. Sleep improvements after learning have been explained by ‘restitution’ theory which assumes that longer duration of SWS is required for cognitive restoration [ ]. Another possibility is that the cognitive training may have an indirect effect on sleep latency by reducing pre-sleep cognitive arousal, either because subjects were cognitively engaged and had homeostatically ‘used up’ their arousal and/or because cognitive training increased their cognitive fatigue [ ].
Video games are also known to improve the overall cognition along with sleep. The existing literature suggests that sleep enhances synaptic plasticity, promotes learning, facilitates the consolidation of memories, and processing of higher order cognition [ ]. The virtual environment of video games forces the player to simultaneously use almost all the cognitive functions [ ]. Likewise, we also found that video game training improves cognitive correlates,i.e., reaction time, visual memory, logical reasoning, and P300 ERP in university students with sleep disturbance.
Reaction time has been shown to improve with cognitive training in the previous studies [ ]. In the present study also, participants in the experimental group performed faster on the motor praxis task after 4 weeks of non-action video game intervention. The underlying mechanisms for this improvement in reaction time have been given by a recent study which showed video game players’ brains are more efficient collectors of visual and auditory information, and therefore, arrive at the necessary threshold of information they need to make a decision much faster than non-gamers [ ]. Therefore, playing video games trains people to make the right decisions faster, a function which is required for optimum performance on reaction time task.
The improvements in visual memory with video game training, found in the present study, are in line with the previous findings. Basak and colleagues [ ] found improvements on visual memory tasks after training older adults for 23.5 h with a real-time strategy video game training. In another recent study, the authors found reduced multitasking costs after 4 weeks of training with an adaptive version of Neuroracer in older adults [ ]. One possible explanation on how the computer-based non-action video game training improves memory is that it strengthens the encoding process [ ]. In visual neuroscience, recent literature reported the effect of visual stimuli on the neuronal plasticity during sleep. The tuning curve, the spatial frequency, the bandwidth, and the firing rate of inhibitory and excitatory neurons are modulated with the application of stimulus, and the alteration in this balance may play an important role in the improvement of visual memory [ , ]. In the present study also, this might be an underlying mechanism for the improvement in visual memory in video gaming group.
We found logical reasoning was improved in the non-action video game-based training group in our study. The results are in agreement with the previous studies which showed a significant training effect on the reasoning task [ ]. The improvement in reasoning ability is because that complex reasoning depends on working memory which relies on the same cortical areas [ ].
The present study also looked into the electrophysiological correlate of cognition, i.e., P300 ERP. This is indicative of selective attention, concentration, discrimination of a target stimulus in a train of non-target stimuli; matching the stimulus against the memory representation of the relevant (target) stimuli and decision making [ ]. We found a significant increase in P300 amplitude and decrease in P300 latency with video game training in sleep-disturbed university students. The result of this study is in accordance with the study done by Mishra and colleagues [ ] which showed significant improvement in the P300 characteristics post video game play.
The main limitation of the study was that we did not examine the transference effects of cognitive training on everyday life tasks like driving and academic performance. We also did not follow-up the long lasting beneficial effects of cognitive training. These are important issues which should be considered in future studies. Additionally, the control group in the present study was passive as kept in most studies to compare with the trained group [ , , ]. However, future studies may include active as well as passive control groups for better comparisons.
Despite these limitations, our study has many potential strengths. The present study used a novel approach to evaluate the neuropsychological and electrophysiological measures of cognition together. The study also attempted to establish the relationship between the neuropsychological tasks and P300 components with sleep measures. Moreover, this is the first study focusing on the beneficial effects of non-action video game-based training on cognitive parameters as well as sleep quality in individuals who are suffering from sleep disturbances. Also, the testing procedures done in the present study are in accordance with the gold standard equipment, and standardized protocols are used as per guidelines. All the training sessions were closely monitored and supervised. This may be a possible explanation for no dropouts in the present study. Considering all these facts, the present study proved to be an additive resource in research pertaining to the effect of video game training on sleep and cognition in university students.