1 Introduction
Sleep plays a vital part in individual’s life. This crucial physiological function is divided into two periods, i.e., non-rapid eye movement (NREM) and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep [ , ]. Cholinergic and glutamatergic neurons contribute to NREM/REM state switch [ ] and also partake in transmitting REM-related signals through ascending and descending projections to control cortical and motor tone [ ]. Sleep quality is an important clinical construct in maintaining health. Poor sleep quality which results from many sleep disorders as well as medical diseases, might even have a direct effect on increased mortality [ ]. Sleep loss is a common condition in new lifestyle while in many instances, its potential adverse impact is under-attended [ ]. Based on the experimental and population-based evidence, sleep restriction may generate numerous changes in the body, such as memory defects [ ], hormonal [ ], immunological abnormalities [ , ] and impaired motor activity [ ]. Meanwhile, the exact mechanism through which impaired sleep affects such functions needs to be further explained.
Today, the adverse outcomes of sleep deprivation and sleepiness have been regarded among the important health-related problems. Such consequences include heightened mortality, morbidity, accidents and errors, absenteeism from work, decreased productivity, and decline in personal and professional relationships [ , , ]. In addition, neurobehavioral issues such as hyperactivity, emotional swing, aggression, and impaired socialization have been frequently observed in sleep-disrupted children [ ]. Disrupted sleep is a thus a common attribute in many patients with neurodevelopmental disorders [ ]. Sleep disturbance impairs various molecular signaling centers and cellular pathways, hippocampal function, spatial memory and hence potentially leads to cognitive deficits [ ]. Our previous study showed that sleep loss may induce structural and behavioral changes of medial prefrontal cortex in a rat model [ ]. The current study was conducted to assess another important neurobehavioral feature, i.e., motor function of rats which underwent CSR. The present study was done using the rotarod task which is broadly used to assess rodents’ motor function.
2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Animals
The study was done on 21 male Sprague–Dawley rats bred in the central animal laboratory of Shiraz University of Medical Sciences. All experiments and animal handling were done under the standard ethical codes laid down by the institutional Animal Ethics Committee. Animals were arbitrarily divided into three groups (7 rats per each) and kept under standard lab conditions, i.e., the room temperature of 22–24 °C, a 12:12-h light–dark cycle with water and food at their disposal. The experimental groups comprised Group I (control) which remained in their standard home cage, Group II (grid-floor control) which were placed in cages with a grid-floor, and Group III which underwent CSR using the modified multiple-platform method. After a period of 21 days of the CSR procedure (18-h sleep deprivation per day for three consecutive weeks) [ ], animals were submitted to the rotarod test and were subsequently killed to have their brains excised and processed possibly for future histomorphological investigations.
2.2 Chronic Sleep Restriction
The setup used in this study was a modified multi-platform (mMP) container made of plastic that have been explained earlier [ , ]. The box floor contained 15 cylindrical platforms, 8.0 cm high and 6.5 cm in diameter. The box was filled with 24 °C water up to 1.0 cm below the top of platforms. Animals had access to food and water, ad libitum. They were placed on a platform while allowed for free movement. In mMP sleep restriction paradigm, once a rat enters the rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, it falls into the water due to muscle atonia. In our protocol, animals were placed in the mMP box for 18 h, from 18:00 to 12:00 the next day, followed by a 6-h recovery sleep window. The CSR process continued for 21 days during which the laboratory animals were kept in the multiple-platform apparatus for 18 h (from 06:00 PM to 12:00 PM the next day), followed by a 6-h sleep recovery window (12:00 PM to 18:00). This time interval (06:00 pm to 12:00 pm the next day) was selected because, in this period, rats are known to attain the highest paradoxical (REM) sleep whereas the homeostatic pressure of non-REM sleep has been already yielded [ , ]. The environmental control group was positioned in the grid-floor box, in which animals were placed onto a stainless steel grid. The tank which was filled with water was covered by the grid-floor 9 cm above water level. The rods were fixed 2.3 cm apart letting the animals lie down while preventing them from falling in the water. The tails could have been immersed into the water [ , ].
2.3 Motor Performance Test
A rotarod apparatus with programmed timers and falling sensors was used in this survey. Animals were located on a rod and were pre-trained on the rotarod machine. First, the rats were tested at a fixed-speed rotarod procedure and then on the accelerating rotarod procedure for 2 days. During the testing period, animals were tested at 8 different speeds, including 12, 16, 19, 21, 24, 26, 28, and 38 rpm, for the maximum of 60 s at each speed. Rats experienced the test three times at each speed with an interval of 20 min between each test. The latency to fall was recorded in each experiment. According to the accelerating rotarod procedure, animals were placed on the rotating rod with a progressively increasing speed from 4 to 40 rpm during a 300-s period. The latency to fall was recorded [ ].
2.4 Statistical Analysis
The data were analyzed using the analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s test. p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
3 Results
The outcome measures for the rotarod test are illustrated in Fig. 1 . The performance of the CSR rats was impaired in the fixed-speed rotarod. In addition, their riding time was 28 s at the lowest and 7 s at the highest speed. These measures were 54 s at the lowest and 18 s at the highest speed in the control group. The performance of CSR rats in the accelerating speed rotarod was also impaired and their riding time was decreased than that of the control group (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Rotarod task. Mean ± SD of the latencies to fall in the control, grid-floor control and chronic sleep restriction groups tested on the fixed and accelerating speed procedures. The p values < 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, and *** p < 0.001 (CSR vs. control); # p < 0.05, ## p < 0.01, and ### p < 0.001 (CSR vs. grid-floor control). NS non-significant
4 Discussion
Efficient sleep is known to play a defining role not only in key cognitive functions including memory performance but also in motor learning [ ]. Earlier studies have shown that a night of sleep leads to 20% increase in motor speed following a learned motor task [ ]. The present research which evaluated the motor performance in rats following exposure to sleep restriction, showed motor impairment in sleep-restricted animals. Sleep deprivation is considered risky for several pathological conditions such as anxiety and motor and cognitive dysfunctions. Falling asleep upon driving is one of the major causes for road traffic accidents [ ]. Yet, the impact of motor control after sleep loss in practical and operational contexts where the consequences of the human error may be catastrophic (e.g., car/truck drivers, air traffic controllers, pilots) has less been evaluated [ ]. It has been shown that patients with insomnia are three times more prone to serious road accidents and work-related errors [ , ]. According to Kumar and Singh, 72-h sleep-deprived mice showed significantly higher anxiety-like behavior, weight loss, impaired locomotor activity and oxidative damage as compared to naïve animals [ ]. From clinical perspective, Hack et al. found that individuals with sleep deprivation were subject to significant motor impairment on steering simulator performance test in an intensity-dependent way [ ]. Arendt et al. suggested that “sleepiness, like alcohol, is a factor that impairs functioning at the level of the central nervous system” [ ]. In such a way, alcohol intoxication and sleep deprivation similarly impair the central nervous system. Individuals who are sleep deprived have decreased reaction time and reduced awareness of their surroundings [ ]. The significant changes in motor inhibition measured by paired transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) during sleep deprivation may depend on changes in cortical excitability modulated by an ascending neurotransmitter system such as GABAergic and cholinergic mechanisms [ , ]. These neurotransmitter systems are closely related in hypnogenic mechanisms. Moreover, the activity of cholinergic system in various brain regions including brainstem, hypothalamus, amygdala, temporal and cingulate cortex is known to be linked to increased slow-wave sleep as well as REM sleep [ ]. Earlier investigations have postulated that 72 h of continuous sleep loss caused significant impairment in locomotor activity and resulted in severe anxiety-like behavior in animals [ ]. Sleep deprivation is thus not only found to be linked to anxiety-like behaviors, but motor dysfunction [ ]. Some notable behavioral changes following sleep loss may be attributed to structural changes in brain regions such as hippocampus, amygdala, and prefrontal cortex. When these areas undergo structural remodeling; memory dysfunction, anxiety and aggression may arise [ ]. Yang et al. reported that following a motor-learning process, sleep promotes the formation of postsynaptic dendritic spines on a subset of branches of individual layer-V pyramidal neurons in rodents [ ]. Motor training is known to result in structural plasticity in the related cortex. For instance, previous researches showed that rotarod motor learning increases dendritic spine formation on apical tuft dendrites of layer-V pyramidal neurons in the motor cortex within 2 days [ ]. As such, sleep and motor function are shown to be closely related while different aspects of this inter-relation require further explanation.
In conclusion, our study indicated a significant impairment in motor performance of the chronically sleep-restricted rats both in the fixed and accelerating speed rotarod test. To remediate motor dysfunctions secondary to sleep insufficiencies, and to plan for ideomotor skills empowerment in sleep-disordered subjects, further preclinical and clinical studies need to address different dimensions of link between sleep and motor function.