1 Introduction
About 5 years ago I began again to read into neuroscience, having not touched the subject much since my training as a psychologist in the 1980’s and early 1990’s. Not only was I amazed to find a much different looking discipline, but I also found a discipline that had begun to investigate and validate, sometimes inadvertently, the hypotheses about the mind and its relationship with the body presented in the spiritual science of yoga and meditation. This so fascinated me at the time that it led to the writing of a book on the processes of emotional purification ( citta - prasādana ) in yoga which presents the yoga theory of mind and the relevant neuroscience side by side [ ]. It was clear to me in the writing of that book that this is a time when yoga can collaborate with science in a way that can bear significant fruits for both. The sensitivity of the yogis to the intangible aspects of mind and matter present an opportunity to guide science towards measurable hypotheses concerning inner states. The validation of these methods by science can help to fulfill the ambition of my master, Swāmī Rāma of the Himālayas, to demonstrate the knowledge of the Himalayan masters scientifically. To him this seemed vital to yoga’s acceptance as a useful system of self-development and self-realization in the West. At a certain point, however, he abandoned empirical demonstrations either because the instrumentation was too crude to really capture what he wanted to show or because sometimes, when he could demonstrate something extraordinary, people simply did not believe their own eyes, their own experience, instruments or no instruments [ ].
One area where he did succeed admirably was to demonstrate the state of yoga nidrā , i.e., conscious entry into deep non-REM sleep maintaining both inward awareness and awareness of one’s surroundings, with validation via electroencephalography that he remained in a delta wave state throughout [ ]. He conducted this experiment in the laboratory of the Menninger Foundation, a prominent U. S. psychiatric institution. During the course of monitoring his demonstration two of the technicians in the lab were having a conversation in the next room. When he finished the demonstration, Swāmijī recounted the technicians’ conversation word for word.
In 2006, Swāmī Veda Bhāratī set out to replicate that experiment in the laboratory of Dean Radin Ph.D. at the Institute for Noetic Sciences in Petaluma, CA. Radin secured the electroencephalographic leads and was preparing to begin the experiment as he was carrying on a conversation with Swāmī Veda. He glanced down at the read-out on the EEG and discovered that he had inadvertently left the recorder running. To his amazement, even as they were having their conversation, Swāmī Veda was producing predominantly delta waves. It was clear to Radin that Swāmī Veda remained in a “normal” state of yoga - nidrā even when he was awake and talking or moving about [ , p. 69]. We cannot account for this result in any conventional scientific way. Swāmī Veda later wrote about what he later recognized as his experience of yoga - nidrā from early childhood onwards [ ]. He used these states at one point in his life to learn English in 3 weeks well enough to give a series of lectures. He also used them to heal his body, which had a number of serious health problems including type one diabetes and coronary artery disease of some severity. We suspect that these skills probably added something like 20 years to his lifespan. (He departed the body consciously in July, 2015.)
Swāmijī always maintained a strong interest in collaboration with researchers, but felt some frustration with their unwillingness to take a knowledgeable subject’s subjective experience of the experiment into account [ , pp. 41–42]. Since the advent of well-structured methods of qualitative research in the 1980’s and 1990’s, this kind of parallel use of qualitative and quantitative methodology has opened science to a greater ability to interpret data. In my doctoral studies I encountered a clever example of such a combined strategy [ ]. In this experiment, therapy sessions were recorded with a person who had HIV/AIDS. Stochastic mathematics were applied to the sample to derive something like a regression equation that could predict who would be speaking in the next second on the recording. The investigator then looked for violations of the pattern predicted by the equation. A time-stamped sample of the therapeutic conversation was transcribed and then the contents of the segments where the predicted pattern was violated were examined and analyzed. The investigators found that the pattern violations signaled moments of empathic failure on the part of the therapist. This combined methodology proved very helpful in refining the therapist’s technique to improve their empathy, avoid empathic errors and, subsequently, hasten the client’s healing. These qualitative methodologies were later described in book form in Langs [ ].
The addition of qualitative methods to neuroscientific investigation has begun to re-contextualize the empirical data in ways Swāmī Veda would have admired. He closely followed the collaboration between Richard Davidson, Francisco Varela and His Holiness the Dalai Lama, described in Evan Thompson’s [ ] recent lucid book Waking, Dreaming, Being . Such a methodology was called for in Cahn and Polich’s 2006 review of literature on electrophysiological investigations of meditation [ ]. They noted, especially how much meditative change parallel the electrophysiological changes of the early stages of sleep and the need for a phenomenological account to assess the differences (p. 202). More recently, the work of Dr. Aviva Berkovich-Ohana and her colleagues at the Department of Neurobiology at the Weizmann Institute in Rehovot, Israel has combined qualitative and quantitative methods into a combined methodology called neuro-phenomenology [ , ] that gives a much richer basis for interpretation of the quantitative data. In the first experiment cited, the phenomenological account of the subjects is used to identify where in the quantitative data a meditative state of selflessness was being measured.
Specifically in the domain of sleep research, Thompson (2015) argued that, “What the Indian conception of deep sleep suggests is that we need a finer taxonomy of sleep states—a taxonomy that is not just physiological but also phenomenological, and that accommodates the ways that sleep may be culturally variable, as well as flexible and trainable through contemplative practices.” ([ ], p. 262)
These examples point to a rich field of possibilities to advance our understanding of the meaning of quantitative measurements in the observation of states of consciousness. This article will argue that the adoption of these strategies in exploring the phenomenon of yoga - nidrā offers promise of new understandings of different types of sleep and a finer scientific understanding of states of consciousness in general.
2 Definitional Problems and the Traditional Literature on Yoga-nidrā
The problem of investigating consciousness has dogged neuroscience from the outset. Initially, given the hypothesis that mental activity is an epiphenomenon of neurotransmitter reactions and electrical signaling, it seemed as though there might be a way to observe consciousness objectively. Now that the field has shifted to looking at mind as something that organizes the material aspects of the nervous system [ ] this possibility appears more remote, and for good reason.
One of the foundational assertions of the Indian systems of philosophy that describe yoga and meditation is that consciousness is the first principle in the universe, preceding the manifestation of energy and matter [ ]. Since in this role it comprises ultimate and absolute subjectivity, it can never be studied as an object. Increasingly, this is also the view of a significant portion of the community of quantum physicists. Amit Goswami, for example, describes his moment of insight about this question. He tells the story of arguing with a philosopher friend of his about whether the brain came before consciousness or consciousness before the brain. When his friend, exasperated by Goswami’s clinging to the conventional materialistic physical view, exclaimed that consciousness comes before the brain, suddenly Goswami saw intuitively how this assumption of consciousness as a first principle resolved most if not all of the paradoxes presented by the conventional materialistic view of science and of Newtonian Mechanics in particular [ ]. This also harmonizes the scientific view with the darśana s of the meditative philosophies. If the universe exists as waves of probability until those waves, through the impact of consciousness, collapse into energy and matter, this becomes an elegant scientific way to explain the processes of manifestation of the universe in Sāṁkhya metaphysics. The parallels are even more striking if you compare this quantum view with the Kāśmira Śaiva philosophy, e.g., Lakshmanjoo [ ].
This is relevant to our discussion because sleep is an objective state of consciousness. The ultimate consciousness (without an object) as Brahman or Śiva has no states. What we consider to be states of consciousness are, of course, reductions of that ultimate absolute consciousness. The ultimate has its power to reduce and conceal itself ( māyā ) and so experiences the universe through a number of empirical states of consciousness. In most yoga philosophy and in Vedānta these are traditionally described as threefold: jagrat (waking), svapna (dream sleep) and suṣupti (deep sleep). These are treated in many textual sources, most notably in the Māṇḍukya Upaniṣad with the Kārikā s of Gauḍapāda , usually read as a single text.
The Kāśmira Śaiva school has a lesser known but interesting embellishment on this schema. In Śiva Sūtras I.10 [ ] the commentator Kṣemarāja explains that the above three states inhere within each other, so that we actually have 10 states instead of three: waking–waking, dream-waking, deep-sleep waking, dream-dreaming, waking-dreaming, deep sleep-dreaming, deep-sleep-deep sleep, dreaming deep sleep, waking deep sleep and turīya . Careful reflection on these definitions yields experientially recognizable states, the next to the last of which (waking-deep sleep) is a good definition of yoga - nidrā . This author suspects that it would not be too difficult to investigate the electroencephalographic correlates of these states, so here is one area already where yoga already appears to provide a clue to quantitatively measurable hypotheses concerning states of consciousness.
Before we can investigate the phenomenon of yoga - nidrā scientifically, it is necessary to arrive at a mutually agreeable definition of yoga - nidrā . Immediately, it will be useful to distinguish between use of the term for the procedures that lead to a state of yoga - nidrā and the state itself. The confusion of these two meanings already tends to muddy the results of the existing empirical studies, as we shall see. (For a detailed study of the meaning of the term yoga - nidrā in the larger Indian literary tradition, see Couture [ ].)
In practical terms, the contemporary practice of yoga primarily as āsana has resulted in a situation where a period of relaxation in śavāsana , the corpse posture, at the end of a āsana session is most often conducted with no guidance. This is actually not the traditional form of practice. (See Appendices on Sūkṣma - prāṇāyāma and Pratyāhāra in Bhāratī especially p. 773ff. [ ]) Relaxation practices are a detailed and refined science that has been maintained primarily in the oral tradition of yoga with very little mention in texts. (For perhaps the only extant examples, see Vasiṣṭha - saṁhitā III.57–75 and Yoga - yajñavalkya VII.1–37, translated by Bhāratī [ ] 771–773.) When someone does choose to guide the relaxation practice, that is often called yoga - nidrā in its practical sense, even though this falls well short of criteria given in the yoga texts or by masters of the practice like Swāmī Rāma, the living texts of yoga [ ] (pp. 186–191).
The textual tradition of yoga can yield a fairly precise definition of yoga - nidrā as a state of consciousness. The beginnings of the textual understanding go back at least to Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.1.15–20. In this passage Gārgya is instructed on the nature of sleep by Ajātaśatru. The last part of this passage describes deep sleep as being, at first, the gathering of external sensory awareness into the mind in dreaming and then, in deep sleep ( suṣupti ), with vijñāna - maya - puruṣa having withdrawn all its sensory and motor functions (active and cognitive senses) along the 72,000 nāḍī s dissolving them into the mind, resting in the region of the heart, one sleeps “not knowing anything…as a baby or an emperor, or a noble brāhmaṇa …at the acme of bliss” [ ] (pp. 284–285).
This state of blissful enjoyment is further elaborated in the Māṇḍukya Upaniṣad V:
That is the state of deep sleep wherein the sleeper does not desire any object nor does he see any dream. The third quarter ( pāda ) [of AUM] is the ( Prājña ) whose sphere is deep sleep, in whom all (experiences) become unified or undifferentiated, who is verily a mass of consciousness entire, who is full of bliss ( ānanda - maya ) and who experiences bliss, and who is the path leading to the knowledge (of the two other states) [ ] (p. 20).
Gauḍapāda’s kārikā and Śaṅkara’s commentary make it clear that it is called the path or doorway or entrance to knowledge of the other states ( ceto - mukha ) because it is a pure experience of witnessing awareness without any intervening activity of the sensory mind which exists in the other two states [ ] (p. 25).
Some further clues to the practice of yoga - nidrā are provided in the Yoga - sūtra s of Patañjali with its commentators, particularly Vyāsa. In defining the vṛtti (mental operation) of deep sleep, nidrā , Patañjali says, “ abhāva - pratyaya - ālambanā - vṛttir nidrā ” ( Yoga - sūtra I.10): “Sleep is the modification or operation of the mind-field resorting to the cognition principle of absence or negation and to the cause thereof.” (Bhāratī, YSI revised, p. 264.) Further along in I.38 Patañjali cites the mindful observation of sleep and dreams as a means to stabilizing the mind-field in preparation for samādhi , the deepest meditation. “ Svapna - nidrā - jñānālambanam vā: ” “also, [the mind-field whose] object in meditation is the observation, awareness and knowledge of the dream or sleep state [becomes stabilised].” (Bhāratī, unpublished manuscript, p. 513.) Veda Bhāratī explains these two sutras as follows:
The phrase nidrā - jñāna may be translated as ‘knowing the sleep’, or ‘knowing during sleep’ that suggests the practice of yoga - nidrā , the art of conscious rest, for mastery of sleep as well as for developing creativity. The commentators have for some reason refrained from going into any details of the yoga - nidrā practices. These are highly complex mental practices performed in the corpse position ( śhavāsana ), taught only in very advanced schools of yoga, starting from simple progressive relaxations, moving on to advanced relaxation practices, a series of practices similar to pratyāhāra as shown in the appendix of that title in our Volume II of this work, concentrations at a set number of points in the body, known as journey through the corpse ( śhava - yātrā ); Some schools include daydream-like visualizations. The school of this author’s tradition moves on to certain objectless concentrations ( abhāva - pratyaya - ālambana ) in the heart cave. Here the sādhaka reaches a state wherein one produces the delta brain waves that are normally associated with deep non-REM sleep or even coma, but remains fully conscious of one’s surroundings and can afterwards repeat sentences softly whispered by others [ ] (p. 513).
The detailed mindful observation of the process of going to sleep is alluded to in the Kaśmīra Śaiva text Vijñāna - bhairava - tantra (75), although the commentator does not give the details of the practice here either:
When sleep has not yet fully appeared, that is when one is about to fall asleep and all the external objects (though present) have faded out of sight, then the state (between sleep and waking) is one on which one should concentrate. In that state the Supreme Goddess will reveal herself [ ] (pp. 70–71).
Texts of haṭha - yoga also provide some descriptions of entry into the state of yoga - nidrā . Haṭha - yoga - pradīpikā (IV.43–50) and Śāndilya Upaniṣad (IV.43–44), one of the yoga Upaniṣads, offer a similar explanation of the process of entering yoga - nidrā through the practice of khecari - mudrā . When the suṣumnā - nāḍī or śūnya - svara seizes the prāṇa , khecarī - mudrā is established. From the establishment of khecarī the mental state of unmani (cessation of functioning of manas ) is attained. “One should practice khecarī until yoga - nidrā is attained. Once yoga - nidrā is attained, there is no such thing as kala (time)” [ ] (p. 149). The text proceeds to describe yoga - nidrā as a state where there is no mental activity and the movement of prāṇa is reduced to a minimum.
The most detailed textual description of the state of yoga - nidrā , and the one that seems most relevant to framing measurable hypotheses about it, occurs in the Yoga - tarāvali of Śaṅkarācārya verses 17–26. The first three verses (17–19) discuss the entry into the state of unmani , which they describe as a state where respiration has naturally ceased ( kevala - kumbhaka ) and senses are under volitional control. The next two verses (20–21) describe the entry into amānasaka - mudrā , where there is no activity of manas , the breath as subtle energy ( prāṇa ) has transcended the mind via entry into suṣumnā - nāḍī and becomes linked to the space in the heart, as described in the upaniṣadic passages above. In this state, the mind is described as devoid of activity ( vṛtta - śūnya ) and natural ( sahaja ). The text concludes that, “when both intentions and imagination are cut off, when uprooted from the web of karma , through unbroken practice, the yogini achieves yoga - nidrā ” [ ] (pp. 62–63). From this description, we can infer that the final state of yoga - nidrā is one without any objective mental activity of a sensory, thinking or intentional nature, in other words, purely witnessing mindful awareness.
Mahāyāna Buddhist texts describe similar processes of observing both dreaming and dreamless sleep that are an effort to attain what they call the “clear light” [ , ]. The procedures for entering the clear light state are described in Holecek [ ]. They involve learning the technique of remaining aware of one’s dream state both through practice during sleep as well as through a progression of exercises in meditative mindfulness similar to the preliminary practices for yoga - nidrā to be described below. The first stage of meditation practice is mindfulness of form through focus on external objects. This progresses to mindfulness of mind where one simply observes whatever comes before the mind without grasping the thought. There might be a momentary identification with the thought but only as a transition to the next thought. Finally there is formless mindfulness or objectless śamathā , pure awareness resting in itself. “One way to do this is to find and then rest in the gap between thoughts [ ] (p. 228),” identical to the methodology described in the yoga tradition of Kāśmīra Śaivism, which contemplates gaps between successive states of consciousness (e.g., Śiva - sūtras I.7 [ ], Spanda - kārikā 17 [ ]), or the voidness in various objects of contemplation, e.g., Vijñāna - bhairava - tantra 33 [ ].
The Buddhist descriptions of the clear light of awareness attained through deep sleep yoga appear very similar if not identical to the light of turīya as it is described in relationship to other objective states of consciousness by the Kāśmīra Śaiva yogis. This author has yet to find any Jaina yoga texts which describe similar practices of yoga - nidrā , although they may well exist.
The contemporary yoga literature provides both practical descriptions of yoga - nidrā procedures and definitions of the end-state of yoga - nidrā. These were reviewed in Parker et al. [ ] (pp. 13–14). The descriptions most faithful to the textual descriptions above were those presented by Rāma (1988) [ ] and Saraswatī [ ]. Although Satyānanda’s description is the most detailed account of the preparatory procedures, “it does not include resting the mind in the heart center or instruction about how to enter a state of deep sleep during which the mind, as manas, does not function. These methods are also not consistent with Shankara’s definition.” [ ] (p. 14.) They also do not follow the upaniṣadic description concerning centering one’s awareness in the heart center. (According to several Bihar School teachers who have attended our yoga - nidrā seminars, these last steps of yoga - nidrā are not included in the book but are taught orally to properly prepared students.)
The procedure described by Swāmī Rāma in his Path of Fire and Light (1988) [ ] involves a sequence of relaxation practices including a progressive muscle relaxation from head to toe and back, an exercise that involves visualizing a point of light at 61 points in the subtle body and a point-to-point breathing exercise he called śithali - karana , the five breaths exhaling and inhaling from the subtle psychophysiological centers between the eyebrows, at the pit of the throat, and in the heart center at the pericardium. The person then sinks her/his awareness into the heart center with no thought besides the awareness of breathing for ten minutes. (He never described why he limited the actual practice in the state of yoga - nidrā to ten minutes but he was very firm about it.) He also stated that there are five different methods of yoga - nidrā but did not describe the other methods. This author suspects that these additional techniques are meant for disciples who are well and specifically prepared. (In general in yoga, the greater the preparation of the student, the less technique is required.) This entire procedure requires about 90 min for a thorough practice.
Swāmī Veda Bhāratī demonstrated some additional procedural methods, but as stated above, he was an exceptional practitioner who remained in the state of yoga - nidrā even when awake and moving about. In experiments with Swāmijī yet to be published he repeatedly demonstrated the predominant production of delta waves while awake.
In Parker et al. [ ] (pp. 11–12), we presented a further phenomenological definition by Swāmī Veda of different levels of yoga - nidrā practice derived from his extensive, life-long experimentation and his knowledge of aspects of neuroscience. This definition has four levels: 1. The first level of practice entails preparatory practices of deep relaxation. During these practices the brain shifts from the beta wave activity of waking to the alpha wave activity of relaxation. Eventually this may deepen towards the slower theta waves. This level is useful for dealing with psychosomatic conditions like hypertension or migraine headaches. 2. The second level is characterized primarily by theta wave activity. It is a phase of creativity, decision-making, visualization, composition and the like. As this phase deepens, delta waves begin to appear. This is the level used by Swāmī Veda to learn languages efficiently. He also utilized this state to dictate his writings. 3. The third level of practice begins from the theta state and eventually deepens into a predominant delta wave state. The practitioner remains inwardly aware and aware of his or her surroundings. (This can be tested experimentally by reading a list of words throughout the exercise and asking for the list in the proper order when the practitioner has completed the practice.) This stage is as far as the vast majority of practitioners will go. It may require the direct transmission of an experience from a qualified preceptor to actually reach this state. It is measurable, of course, via electroencephalography. For some reason, which remained unexplained, Swāmī Rāma asked people to limit their practice at this level to ten minutes. [ ]. 4. The fourth level of practice requires mastery of the preceding three. In this practice one maintains a state of spontaneous meditation with awareness of Kuṇḍalinī , “the subjective experience of the very subtle power of consciousness in meditation” [ ] (p. 12). The practitioner may alternate between theta and delta states. This may last up to 3.5 h. 5. When total mastery of the above practices has been achieved, there is a state beyond these four, turīya , where the highest state of meditation, the asamprajñāta - samādhi , infuses all of one’s states and becomes one’s normal awareness. When this process is complete, Swāmī Veda hypothesizes that one’s EEG would go flat despite having one’s eyes open and moving about. This has yet to be demonstrated under controlled experimental conditions. Obviously, finding practitioners who might be willing to be tested is a tall order.
3 Review of Empirical Research Literature on Yoga Nidrā
The research literature on yoga - nidrā up to 2012 was reviewed in Parker, Bhāratī and Fernandez [ ] (p. 15). Even though several articles used the term yoga - nidrā in the title, it was clear from the description of their procedures that they were studying primarily the preparatory ( alpha wave) practices described in level one in Bhāratī’s description of levels of practice above. A couple of studies measured subjects reaching a theta state characterized by vivid, dream-like imagery. This would correspond to the second level described by Bhāratī. Only in a very few cases was there any effort to measure the brain wave activity of the subjects, which is crucial to determining whether a state of yoga - nidrā has been reached. In none of these studies did the investigators record subjects who had reached the delta wave state of deep sleep, which is yoga - nidrā by definition.
Another line of research was carried out by Richard Miller and his colleagues, the originators of the integrative rest or iRest method [ ] (p. 15). The studies we examined, however, were all outcome studies that used simple questionnaires as an outcome measure to inquire whether the subjects felt deeply relaxed as a result of the practice. Any of these practices are likely to produce this subjective result (confirmation bias) and they did not measure whether the state of yoga - nidrā was actually achieved in these studies either. Hence, this line of inquiry was not included in our review. None of these studies used any empirical measurement to ascertain whether the state of yoga - nidrā described by the textual tradition of yoga and by its master practitioners was actually obtained. Since 2012, this author has been unable to find another study that measured yoga - nidrā using electroencephalography.
At the conclusion of Parker et al. [ ] (p. 15), we identified the following implications for empirical studies of yoga - nidrā : 1. Yoga - nidrā involves the conscious entry into non-REM sleep which can be demonstrated by production of a predominance of delta waves while at the same time remaining aware of one’s surroundings as measured by repetition of a list of words read to the subject during the procedure. 2. Replication of existing studies will demonstrate initial production of alpha waves during the preparatory procedures to the state of yoga - nidrā . 3. The levels of Swāmī Veda’s model of yoga - nidrā can be differentiated by production of the predicted brain wave patterns for each level. 4. The state of turīya would be indicated by the absence of EEG activity predicted by Swāmī Veda and by the characterization of yoga as citta - vṛtti - nirodha, the cessation of activities of the mindfield.
These implications might at this point be modified. In one conversation with John Clarke M.D. of the Himalayan Institute Holistic Health Program, Dr. Clarke wondered whether turīya might not be more sensibly hypothesized to comprise brain waves in the infra-delta range of 0–0.5 Hz. The results with long-term meditators in Lutz et al. [ ] suggest the possibility that the state of turīya may result in the production of brain waves in the ultra-gamma (25–42 Hz) range at the other end of the spectrum. This is one place where the phenomenological account of the subject would be a very valuable assistance in interpreting quantitative results. We would, of course, face the challenge of identifying competent subjects who would consent to be studied.
Given the accounts of Swāmī Veda and others on the use of yoga - nidrā for tasks involving psychosomatic healing or learning, investigation of these activities might also yield valuable data. This author has long held the hypothesis that clinical hypnosis is actually a specialized case of yoga - nidrā . This has yet to be tested experimentally. Given the role of both non-REM and REM sleep in memory consolidation and the creation of narrative memory [ , ], phenomenological data accompanying quantitative studies of learning tasks would also greatly enrich our interpretive ability and refine our understanding of memory and learning.
This is a moment in the history of science and the history of yoga where the two disciplines have become much more open to each other. Recent discoveries in neuroscience have begun to point towards the organization and re-organization of the brain and nervous system through the operation of consciousness in the form of “mind,” a term which eluded scientific definition in any shared sense until recently. In 1992, Daniel Siegel at UCLA convened an interdisciplinary seminar to address the problem of arriving at a shared understanding. What they came up with is simple, elegant and functional: “The human mind is a relational and embodied process for managing the flow of energy and information” [ ] (p. 52).
To date, neuroscientific investigation has established that the “process” of mind can be shaped and focused through contemplative practices from the traditions of yoga and meditation. So long as this definition remains flexible enough to allow for differing levels of “energy,” it can serve as a framework for a great deal of fruitful collaboration. The exploration of contemplative practices around sleep provides a clear and practical starting point for the deepening of our knowledge of states of consciousness.