1 Introduction
OSA is now considered a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease and stroke [ ]. The association of OSA with coronary events, deranged lipid profile, dysglycemia and hypertension are well known [ , , ]. Yet, there are very few studies that have reported the abnormalities in the electric system of heart with OSA. Kwon in 1980s reported the daytime 12-lead ECG abnormalities recorded separately from a sleep study in patients undergoing sleep study [ ]. In the study, he explored the correlation between right bundle branch block (RBBB), ventricular paced rhythm and resting heart rate with OSA. Only recently, with the DREAM study, a graded correlation between OSA severity and ECG abnormalities was highlighted in western population [ ]. No data are available on the Indian population in this regard. Our study is the first attempt to quantify the prevalence and spectrum of ECG abnormalities in cases of OSA recorded in a sleep study in this population.
2 Aims of the study
Primary: To identify the ECG abnormalities in OSA patients whose diagnostic sleep studies were done over 1 year in our centre. Secondary: 1. To identify the associated comorbidities in OSA patients with arrhythmia. 2. To compare the severity of OSA in terms of apnea–hypopnea index (AHI) and basic demographic parameters between the cases with arrhythmia and total pool of patients with OSA.
3 Methods and methodology
All cases of OSA, aged 18–90 years, newly diagnosed or undergoing repeat diagnostic testing with a Level I study (using AASM recommended full sleep study montage and attended by a technician), done at a Sleep Centre Delhi (Neurology and Sleep Centre, Hauz Khas Enclave) or patients’ home in New Delhi between 1st September 2015 and 31st August 2016 were taken for evaluation in this retrospective study. The lab records (self-reported history and sleep study details) of cases with OSA were reviewed. The history sheet contained queries related to demographic details, checklist of comorbidities, and questionnaires related to sleep quality and daytime sleepiness evaluation. Sleep studies were scored according to the International Standards of American Academy of Sleep Medicine Manual of Scoring 2012 Update [ ]. Two sleep technicians screened for the abnormalities in the ECG recording of the whole night study independently and captured the screenshots of the abnormalities whenever found (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Image showing a 10 s snapshot (top), 15 s snapshot (bottom) of ECG abnormalities recorded during a sleep study, which were reviewed by an experienced cardiologist
Two or more recordings were also given for few patients who had different abnormalities on visual inspection by sleep technicians. If abnormalities were many, only the representative ones were picked up. Following this, an experienced cardiologist, blinded to the patient data, reviewed the recordings of ECG abnormalities provided by the sleep technicians. ECG recording were reported for their rate and rhythm abnormalities, ST-T changes and abnormal QRS complexes. While reporting the QRS abnormalities, if only a single VPC was seen in a 10-s record, it was taken as ‘occasional’ VPC. If more than one VPC were seen in the 10-s frame, they were considered monomorphic or polymorphic VPCs based on morphologies of the VPCs. Exact quantification of the total number of abnormalities was not done. All abnormalities were defined based on ICD-10 criteria for electrocardiographic abnormalities specified in sections I47–I49 [ ].
4 Results
The total number of sleep studies done was 357 and 273 (76.47%) of them had AHI ≥ 5 to qualify as OSA. These 273 cases were evaluated for ECG abnormalities. The number of OSA patients having ECG abnormalities was 29 (10.6% of all OSA patients). Out of these 29 patients, the abnormalities detected were ventricular ectopic beats in 22 (75.8%), atrial premature beats in 3 (10.3%), ST-T changes in 5 (17.2%), and non-sinus rhythm in 3 (10.3%) patients Table 1 . More than one abnormality was also reported in some patients. Table 1 Distribution of ECG abnormalities of 29 OSA patients Abnormality Rhythm abnormalities No of pts ST-T changes No of pts Atrial premature contractions No of pts Ventricular premature contractions No of pts Subtypes AF 1 Early repolarization 2 Isolated 2 Occasional 10 Junctional rhythm 1 T-inversion 3 With VPCs 1 Frequent monomorphic 11 Paced rhythm 1 ST depression 2 Frequent polymorphic 1 Tall T wave 1 Total patients 3 5 3 22 % of total abnormal ECG-bearing patients 10.3% 17.2% 10.3% 75.86%
Self-reported comorbidities in these patients with ECG abnormalities were type 2 diabetes mellitus 10 (34.48%), hypertension 17 (58.62%), coronary artery disease 2(6.8%), hypothyroidism in 3(10.3%), and COPD in 4 (13.79%). These patients reported daytime fatigue in 17(58.6%) and excessive daytime sleepiness in 34% patients (Table 2 ). Table 2 Self-reported comorbidities of OSA patients with ECG abnormalities Comorbidities a No ( n = 29) % Type 2 diabetes 10 34.5 Hypertension 17 58.4 Coronary artery disease 2 6.9 Stroke 2 6.9 Hypothyroidism 3 10.3 COPD 4 13.8 EDS 10 34 Daytime fatigue 17 58.6 a Comorbidities reported are self-reported by patients and are likely to be under-reported
Comparison of BMI, age, sex and AHI values between patients with ECG abnormalities and the total pool of OSA patients over the year revealed no significant differences between the two groups except for advanced age in patients with ECG abnormalities as shown in Table 3 . Table 3 BMI, male (%), AHI, age in OSA pool versus OSA with ECG abnormalities patient groups Parameter OSA pt with ECG abnormalities mean (SD) Total pool of newly diagnosed OSA patients (mean ± SD) p value for independent T test (unless specified) AHI 61.7 (39.7) 55.47 (37.0) 0.46 a BMI 32.3 (5.5) 31.4 (5.7) 0.41 Age 56.9 (14.6) 50.5 (10.2) 0.002 Male (%) 82 (8) 77 (11) – AHI of total pool of patients ( n = 273) was not normally distributed, hence non-parametric test applied. Median (Q1, Q3) were 62.9 (27.5, 88.0) and 49.8 (21.4, 85.3) in the total pool and ECG abnormalities bearing groups, respectively a Mann–Whitney U test
We carried out a comparison between the time spent in nocturnal hypoxemia (TST < 90%) between group of patients with occasional VPCs ( n = 10) and group with frequent VPCs ( n = 11) using Mann–Whitney U test (for non-parametrically distributed data even after log transformation). The medians were 5.2 (2.05–35.47) min in frequent VPCs group versus 3.6 (1.25–34.3) min in occasional VPCs group ( p value = 0.88). Hence, a dose–response relationship was not reported from our data. Therefore, there was no correlation found between the time spent in nocturnal hypoxemia and frequency of ventricular arrhythmia.
5 Discussion
Our result showed premature ventricular contractions (PVC) in 7.7% of all sleep apnea patients ( n = 273). Guilleminault et al. [ ] reported PVC in 19% patients with sleep apnea ( n = 400). Similarly, Flemons and Mehra reported PVCs in 2.6 and 41.5% sleep apnea patients, respectively [ , ]. The latter reported higher prevalence probably because the study was done among elderly population while other studies including ours, predominantly had middle aged men and women with OSA. Flemons, in his study, evaluated patients with sleep apnea with a mean age of 48 ± 11 years ( n = 76), similar to ours with a mean age 50 ± 5 years ( n = 273). Since Flemons reported only PVCs which were >30/h, the reported prevalence is much lower than any other study.
Self-reported comorbidities in cases with OSA and ECG abnormalities ( n = 29) were type 2 diabetes mellitus in 10 (34.48%), hypertension in 17 (58.62%), coronary artery disease in 2 (6.8%), hypothyroidism in 3 (10.3%) and COPD in 4 (13.79%) cases. No comparative evaluation with similar patient groups in other studies could be done as none were found to report the comorbidities in patients of OSA with arrhythmias selectively. Nevertheless, studies from US report prevalence of diabetes in around 12.0%, hypertension in 17.6% and CAD in 2.1% in patients with sleep apnea with or without arrhythmias [ ]. The higher incidence reported in our study may be because of multiple possible reasons—low sample size, higher prevalence of hypertension and diabetes in middle aged Indian population compared to western population [ ]. It can also be a direct result of strong association between these comorbidities, OSA and arrhythmias but this assumption is yet to be proven in clinical studies. None of these diagnoses conferred a significantly high risk for OSA in the pooled data probably due to low sample size. As of now, data indicate that OSA patients with increasing severity of AHI are at graded risk of PVCs, the most frequent type of arrhythmia reported in sleep study [ ]. A recent study among US war veterans showed similar increase in overall arrhythmias, especially significant for PVCs and intraventricular conduction delay in patients with sleep apnea [ ]. This strong association between OSA and arrhythmia has been ascribed to the structural and functional changes caused by sleep apnea on the heart.These effects have been proposed to be mediated by increased oxidative stress, increased transmural pressures on the heart muscles and excessive sympathetic activities [ ].
Supraventricular arrhythmias have shown less epidemiological association with sleep apnea. The prevalence of atrial fibrillation reported in our study was only 1 in 273 OSA patients, probably secondary to selection bias as our patients were most often referred by physicians for snoring and daytime somnolence rather than by cardiologists. Nevertheless, a lower prevalence of AF in patients with OSA (3–5.3%) has been reported among other studies [ , , ]. The corollary has not been true though. Sleep apnea has been reported in a high percent of patients with non-valvular AF (41–57%) [ ]. Furthermore, treating for OSA has shown to reduce the recurrence of OSA in patients with AF undergoing electrocardioversion [ , ]. Therefore, it is always a high yield task to screen for OSA in patients with atrial fibrillation.
6 Merits of the study
Initial attempt to draw attention to ECG abnormalities Tool for future assessment in prospective studies
7 Limitations of the study and recommendation for future research
Single centre study Retrospective nature of study prohibited accurate assessment of risk factors and comorbidities which can be overcome in prospective study design Quantification of ECG abnormalities and determination of prognostic significance could not be done. Future studies may follow the OSA cohorts for their morbidity and mortality outcomes Since this study involved only Lead II, causing to miss many axes and voltage abnormalities, integration of 12-lead Holter analysis in future studies can help determine detailed spectrum of abnormalities quantitatively as well as qualitatively Low event frequency in the current study assigns less precision to the results. Larger studies in future are essential to look for prevalence and associations more accurately
8 Conclusion
In our study, around 10% of patients with OSA were found to have some form of ECG abnormalities. VPCs formed the majority of patients diagnosed with any ECG abnormalities in OSA patients (up to 75%). Further research into the prognostic significance of these sleep study based asymptomatic ECG abnormalities can elucidate their importance. Both sleep physicians and cardiologists need to work in tandem to manage the cases with OSA and arrhythmia more effectively.