Highlights
Mojave rattlesnake venom can be neurotoxic (type A) without proteolytic activity or hemotoxic (type B) without neurotoxic activity. Using thrombelastography, it was demonstrated that carbon monoxide inhibited the anticoagulant activity of both types of venom. It may be possible that the neurotoxic activity of type A venom, which is dependent on the activity of a phospholipase A 2 it is bound to, may be inhibited by carbon monoxide.
Introduction
For nearly four decades a microcosm of venomic modulation in the Mojave rattlesnake ( Crotalus scutulatus scutulatus ) the Southwestern United States has been the focus of investigation [ , , , ]. Within a fairly circumscribed territory around and between the cities of Tucson and Phoenix in southern Arizona, this pit viper expresses a potent hemotoxic venom that is metalloproteinase abundant but without neurotoxins [ , , , ]; however, in regions outside this area in the Sonoran Desert extending into California, Mexico and Texas, the venom is all but devoid of hemotoxic enzymes and instead is resplendent with a multimeric neurotoxin (Mojave toxin) that is quite deadly [ , , ]. Venom containing this phospholipase A 2 (PLA 2 )-dependent neurotoxin is designated as Mojave venom type A, whereas the hemotoxic venom is denoted as Mojave venom type B [ , , ]. Clinically, if a patient is envenomed by type A venom, they have a tenfold increase in mortality and 50-fold increase in need for tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation than if they were bitten with type B venom [ ]. Studies have documented the effects of location and elevation on the phenotypic expression of these two venom types [ , ], with some individuals occasionally expressing both venom types [ ]. Within the proteome of type A venom there is, by percentage, < 0.1% fibrinogenolytic metalloproteinase, 37.7% serine protease, 9.4% free PLA 2 , and 45.8% Mojave toxin [ ], wherein Mojave toxin is a chimeric protein with a PLA 2 component complexed with a neurotoxic component [ ]—making the overall PLA 2 composition of Mojave A toxin 55.2% of the proteome. In sharp contrast, the proteome of type B venom is composed of 56.6% fibrinogenolytic metalloproteinase, 23.6% serine protease, 13.0% free PLA 2 , and 0% Mojave toxin [ ]. Critically, protein fractions isolated from Mojave type A venom have been found to be devoid of proteolytic, hemorrhagic and disintegrin activities [ ], whereas Mojave type B venom was found to be resplendent in all such enzymatic activities but devoid of Mojave toxin [ ].
Given the aforementioned differences in venom type within the same species, a unique opportunity was presented to assess a number of important issues surrounding the specific activities and enzymatic control of Mojave type A and B venoms. First, given that an isolated PLA 2 purified from cobra venom was able to act as an anticoagulant [ ] by lysing critical phospholipids required for thrombin generation in human plasma [ , ], it was potentially possible to detect PLA 2 -mediated anticoagulation induced by Mojave type A venom via thrombelastography. Second, it was recently demonstrated that inhibition of human plasmatic coagulation kinetics with an isolated, purified snake venom PLA 2 followed exponential-decay pattern anticoagulation via thrombelastography [ ]; further, this PLA 2 mediated anticoagulation kinetic pattern was inhibited in a sigmoidal fashion with carbon monoxide (CO), which was suggestive of PLA 2 modulation via an attached heme group. This assertion was based on a similar sigmoidal pattern of CO mediated inhibition of fibrinogenolytic activity derived from Crotalus atrox venom via thrombelastography [ ], coupled with the observation of an isolated fibrinogenolytic metalloproteinase obtained from C. atrox venom had an attached heme and was inhibited by CO [ ]. This last point is of particular interest, as the neurotoxic function of Mojave toxin is dependent on the PLA 2 it is attached to having activity [ ]—the implication being that if CO inhibits PLA 2 activity in Mojave type A venom, it may be that CO could de facto inhibit associated neurotoxic activity.
Considering the abovementioned information, the goals of the present investigation were to determine the anticoagulant effects of Mojave type A and type B venom activities on coagulation kinetics in human plasma and determine if these activities could be inhibited by CO via putative heme mediated modulation.
Materials and methods
Venoms, chemicals, and human plasma
Twenty mg of lyophilized Mojave rattlesnake venom type A and type B was obtained from the National Natural Toxins Research Center (NNTRC) located at Texas A&M University-Kingsville, Kingsville, TX, U.S.A. The National Institutes of Health fund the NNTRC out of the Office of Research Infrastructure Programs. The venom was reconstituted in calcium-free phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) at a concentration of 50 mg/ml, aliquoted, and stored at − 80 °C until experimentation. CORM-2 (tricarbonyldichlororuthenium(II) dimer, a CO releasing molecule), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and ursolic acid were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA. Calcium chloride (CaCl 2 , 200 mM) was obtained from Haemonetics Inc., Braintree, MA, USA. Tissue factor reagent was purchased from Diagnostica Stago S.A.S., Asnieres sur Seine, France. Lastly, pooled normal human plasma (George King Bio-Medical, Overland Park, KS, USA) anticoagulated with sodium citrate (9 parts blood to 1 part 0.105 M sodium citrate) stored at − 80 °C was utilized in all subsequently described experiments.
Thrombelastographic analyses
Specific volumes of subsequently described plasma and chemical additives varied by condition but summated to 360 µl. Sample composition consisted of 320 µl of plasma; 16.4 µl of PBS, 20 µl of 200 mM CaCl 2 , and 3.6 µl of PBS or venom (final concentration dependent on species of snake), which were placed into a disposable cup in a computer-controlled thrombelastograph ® hemostasis system (Model 5000, Haemonetics Inc., Braintree, MA, USA) at 37 °C, and then rapidly mixed by moving the cup up against and then away from the plastic pin five times before leaving the mixture between the cup and pin. The following elastic modulus-based parameters previously described [ , , ] were determined: time to maximum rate of thrombus generation (TMRTG): this is the time interval (minutes) observed prior to maximum speed of clot growth; maximum rate of thrombus generation (MRTG): this is the maximum velocity of clot growth observed (dynes/cm 2 /s); and total thrombus generation (TTG, dynes/cm 2 ), the final viscoelastic resistance observed after clot formation. Data were collected for 1530 min.
The initial concentration for both venoms was 1 µg/ml; if the onset of coagulation was doubled and/or the velocity of clot formation halved compared to plasma without venom addition, then this concentration would be used for experimentation. If not, then the concentration of venom was increased or decreased until this minimum compromise of coagulation kinetics was observed. This approach allowed comparison of relative potency between the two venoms.
CO exposures
With regard to exposure to CORM-2 to assess the effects of CO on venom activity, the following four experimental conditions were created: (1) control condition—no venom, DMSO 1% addition (v/v) in PBS; (2) venom condition—venom, DMSO 1% addition (v/v) in PBS; (3) CO condition—venom, CORM-2 1% addition in DMSO (100 µM final concentration; (4) inactive releasing molecule (iRM) condition—venom, inactivated CORM-2 1% addition in DMSO (100 µM final concentration). CORM-2 was inactivated as previously described [ , ]. Venom was placed in PBS with the aforementioned additions, and after 5 min of incubation at room temperature, 3.6 µl of one these four solutions were added to the plasma mixture in a thrombelastographic cup. Importantly, the subsequent concentration in the plasma sample of CORM-2 after this 1% addition was 1 µM, which would be expected to have no effect on coagulation kinetics [ ].
Inhibition of PLA2 activity
In order to more mechanistically discern the role played by PLA 2 activity on the anticoagulant effects of each venom type, venom in PBS was exposed to the irreversible, calcium-independent group IIa secretory PLA 2 inhibitor ursolic acid [ ]. Group IIa secretory PLA 2 are found in both Crotalidae and Viperidae venoms, which would include the venoms tested in this manuscript [ ]. A stock solution of 10 mM ursolic acid was made freshly, dissolved in DMSO just prior to experimentation. This was added to PBS containing no venom or either of the two venoms tested as a 2% v/v addition vigorously mixed, and then incubated for 30 min at room temperature prior to addition to human plasma as a 1% v/v addition in a thrombelastographic cup as in the immediately preceding section of CO exposure. Thus, the experimental conditions were no venom addition, Mojave A venom addition or Mojave B venom addition, all exposed to ursolic acid. Following calcium addition, data was collected for 30 min.
Calcium dependence of venom anticoagulant activity
While many snake venom PLA 2 are calcium dependent [ ], literature addressing whether the PLA 2 , Mojave toxin or fibrinogenolytic enzymes of the two venom types tested were calcium dependent could not be identified. To address this knowledge deficit, exposure of citrated plasma to venom for a period of time prior to calcium addition would allow either PLA 2 or metalloproteinases time to digest phospholipids or fibrinogen, respectively, if the enzyme activity was calcium independent. Thus, in this series of experiments, sample composition consisted of 326 µl of plasma, 10 µl of tissue factor reagent (1:500 final concentration), and 3.6 µl of PBS or venom that was placed in a thrombelastographic cup at 37 °C for 15 min. Thereafter, 20 µl of 200 mM CaCl 2 was added to commence coagulation and data was collected for 15 min.
Statistical analyses
Data are presented as mean ± SD. Experimental conditions were represented by n = 6 replicates per condition as this provides a statistical power > 0.8 with P < 0.05 using this thrombelastographic methodology [ , ]. A commercially available statistical program was used for one-way analyses of variance (ANOVA) comparisons between conditions, followed by Holm-Sidak post hoc analysis (SigmaPlot 14, Systat Software, Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). P < 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
Venom that exerts an anticoagulant effect will in general increase the time to maximum rate of thrombus generation (TMRTG, min, a measure of speed of onset of coagulation), decrease the maximum rate of thrombus generation (MRTG, dynes/cm 2 /s, a measure of the velocity of clot growth) and decrease total thrombus generation (TTG, dynes/cm 2 , a measure of clot strength) values in venom exposed plasma compared to control plasma conditions without venom addition. Not all anticoagulant venoms uniformly affect TMRTG, MRTG and TTG, but in general compromise at least two of these parameters. If a carboxyheme state inhibits venom activity, then TMRTG, MRTG and TTG values of plasma with addition of CORM-2 exposed venom will significantly improve towards values observed in control plasma samples. Critically, the final concentration of CO in the plasma sample following the 1% addition (v/v) of venom mixture would not be expected to directly affect coagulation [ ]. Lastly, to confirm that CO is responsible for this inhibition, plasma samples with addition of venom exposed to inactivated CO releasing molecule (iRM) typically have compromised TMRTG, MRTG and TTG values similar to that observed in plasma samples with addition of venom alone.
CO exposure
The data of these experiments are depicted in Figs. 1 and 2 . As seen in Fig. 1 , a concentration 125 ng/ml of Mojave A venom was required to diminish coagulation significantly to the degree required for experimentation, and preexposure of this venom to CO resulted in coagulation kinetics not significantly different from plasma without any additives. Exposure to iRM had no significant effect on Mojave A type venom mediated degradation of coagulation kinetics. As displayed in Fig. 2 , Mojave type B venom at a concentration of 250 ng/ml was required to degrade plasmatic coagulation kinetics to the degree required for experimentation, indicating that this metalloproteinase containing venom was approximately half as potent as the PLA 2 containing Mojave type A venom. As with Mojave type A venom, type B venom activity was inhibited by CO preexposure but not with iRM preexposure. The only difference observed in this regard was that iRM exposure significantly prolonged type B venom mediated prolongation of TMRTG. Fig. 1 Effects of Mojave venom type A on plasmatic coagulation kinetics. Experiments were performed with a venom concentration of 125 ng/ml. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Control = no venom or additives in plasma; A = Mojave A venom addition; A + CO = addition of venom exposed to CO released from 100 µM CORM-2; A + iRM = addition of venom exposed to 100 µM iRM. TMRTG time to maximum rate of thrombus generation (min); MRTG maximum rate of thrombus generation (dynes/cm 2 /s); TTG total thrombus generation (dynes/cm 2 ). *P < 0.05 versus Control; †P < 0.05 versus A; ‡P < 0.05 versus A + CO Fig. 2 Effects of Mojave venom type B on plasmatic coagulation kinetics. Experiments were performed with a venom concentration of 250 ng/ml. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Control = no venom or additives in plasma; B = Mojave B venom addition; B + CO = addition of venom exposed to CO released from 100 µM CORM-2; B + iRM = addition of venom exposed to 100 µM iRM. TMRTG = time to maximum rate of thrombus generation (min); MRTG = maximum rate of thrombus generation (dynes/cm 2 /s); TTG total thrombus generation (dynes/cm 2 ). *P < 0.05 versus Control; †P < 0.05 versus B; ‡P < 0.05 versus B + CO
Inhibition of PLA2 activity
Ursolic acid was added to Mojave venom type A at 50, 100 and 200 µM concentrations in preliminary studies, with maximum inhibitory effect (e.g., restoration of TMRTG, MRTG and TTG values towards control plasma values) seen at 200 µM (data not shown). Thus, control (PBS without venom), Mojave venom type A and Mojave venom type B mixtures in PBS had exposure to 200 µM ursolic acid prior to being added to plasma for analysis. The data from these experiments are displayed in Fig. 3 . Mojave venom type A exposed to ursolic acid had coagulation kinetics in plasma not significantly different from control conditions, confirming that PLA 2 activity was responsible for its anticoagulant effects. In sharp contrast, Mojave type B venom exposed to ursolic acid still had a profound anticoagulant activity with all coagulation kinetic parameters significantly different from the other two conditions. This result supported the notion that Mojave type B venom exerts its anticoagulant effects with fibrinogenolytic metalloproteinases. Fig. 3 Effects of ursolic acid inhibition on Mojave venom type A and type B activity on plasmatic coagulation kinetics. Experiments were performed with a Mojave A venom concentration of 125 ng/ml and a Mojave B venom concentration of 250 ng/ml. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Control = no venom or additives in plasma; A = Mojave A venom addition; B = Mojave B venom addition. All control and venom samples were exposed to 200 µM ursolic acid for 30 min at room temperature prior to placement into plasma. TMRTG time to maximum rate of thrombus generation (min); MRTG maximum rate of thrombus generation (dynes/cm 2 /s); TTG total thrombus generation (dynes/cm 2 ). *P < 0.05 versus Control; †P < 0.05 versus A
Calcium dependence of venom anticoagulant activity
The data from these experiments are found in Fig. 4 . Mojave type A venom demonstrated marked calcium independent anticoagulant activity evidenced by significantly prolonged TMRTG, decreased MRTG and decreased TTG values in plasma compared to control conditions. In contrast, Mojave type B venom only decreased TTG values in a calcium independent fashion compared to control conditions, but not different from values obtained with Mojave type A venom. Fig. 4 Calcium independent effects of Mojave venom type A and type B activity on plasmatic coagulation kinetics. Experiments were performed with a Mojave A venom concentration of 125 ng/ml and a Mojave B venom concentration of 250 ng/ml. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Control = no venom or additives in plasma; A = Mojave A venom addition; B = Mojave B venom addition. All control and venom samples were incubated at 37 °C for 15 min in plasma prior to calcium addition and commencement of coagulation. TMRTG time to maximum rate of thrombus generation (min); MRTG maximum rate of thrombus generation (dynes/cm 2 /s); TTG total thrombus generation (dynes/cm 2 ). *P < 0.05 versus Control; †P < 0.05 versus A
Discussion
The present study demonstrated that a neurotoxic venom and a hemotoxic venom phenotypically expressed by the same species of pit viper degraded plasmatic coagulation with a similar kinetic pattern, with neurotoxic Mojave type A venom being more potent as an anticoagulant than the hemotoxic Mojave type B venom. Further, both venoms were equivalently inhibited by the same concentration of CO, highly suggestive of a conserved, heme-based modulation of enzymatic activity between the two types of venom. Heme has been found attached as a presumed posttranslational modification of enzymes on a myriad of enzymes and other proteins [ ], and when it comes to biological targets, CO interacts with transition metals primarily such as the Fe +2 found in the center of the heme porphyrin ring [ ]. Thus, given its well documented lack of proteolytic activity [ ], Mojave type A venom likely diminished plasmatic coagulation kinetics via inhibition of thrombin generation secondary to digestion of critical phospholipids by PLA 2 activity, whereas Mojave type B venom metalloproteinase and PLA 2 activities likely exerted their anticoagulant effects by destruction of fibrinogen and digestion of phospholipids, respectively. The decrease in coagulation kinetics caused by Mojave type A venom was similar in pattern to that observed with a purified PLA 2 as recently published [ ]. This concept was confirmed by the experiments involving inhibition of PLA 2 activity wherein essentially all anticoagulant activity of Mojave type A venom was extinguished by ursolic acid whereas Mojave type B venom activity was still quite vigorous (Fig. 3 ). Also of interest, the PLA 2 mediated anticoagulant activity (free PLA 2 and Mojave toxin PLA 2 ) are calcium independent (Fig. 4 ), which is in contrast to most group IIa secretory PLA 2 in snake venoms which are calcium dependent [ ]. In contrast, the fibrinogenolytic metalloproteinases found in Mojave type B venom are for the most part calcium dependent in nature (Fig. 4 ). In summary, despite the remarkable differences in venom enzymatic composition and nature, the Mojave rattlesnake may regulate venom activity with the same heme-based inhibitory mechanism.
It is remarkable that thrombelastography was able to detect not just metalloproteinase mediated digestion of fibrinogen but also degradation of plasma phospholipid as mechanisms of anticoagulation in vitro, given that Mojave type A venom envenomation is not associated with local (bite site) or systemic bleeding, unlike in the case of Mojave type B venom [ ]. It seems likely that the amount of PLA 2 released from a bite involving type A venom is sufficient to effect systemic muscular paralysis but is insufficient to significantly damage plasmatic phospholipids and cause coagulopathy. This unique application of thrombelastographic method exploits the inability of enzymes in the sample mix to redistribute as would occur in vivo, allowing catalysis of phospholipids in plasma to document the activity of PLA 2 present despite the fact that these particular lipids are not the target sites associated with the toxicity of the venom. Given that PLA 2 are responsible for neurotoxicity, myotoxicity, cardiotoxicity and lethality [ ], it may be possible to utilize thrombelastography performed with plasma as an in vitro surrogate of PLA 2 activity when assessing interventions designed to block activity instead of utilizing animal models. Put another way, screening inhibitors of purified PLA 2 activity could potentially be performed with thrombelastography prior to potentially unnecessary sacrifice of animal life. Further investigation is required to determine if this use of the thrombelastograph is a viable alternative to in vivo study of PLA 2 activity and inhibitors.
In conclusion, this investigation defined thrombelastographically the anticoagulant activities of Mojave rattlesnake type A and B venom and demonstrated that both venoms could be inhibited by CO, likely involving a heme-based mechanism. These data may serve as the rationale for extension of these observations into animal models to determine if CO may inhibit not just hemotoxic venom enzymes, but also PLA 2 -dependent neurotoxic, myotoxic, cardiotoxic venom enzymes.