Highlights
Systemic thrombolysis is still underused in hemodynamically unstable patients with acute pulmonary embolism. A fluctuating trend in the use of thrombolytic therapy was observed over the years in multicenter prospective registries. Catheter-directed treatment and surgical embolectomy are rarely adopted in hemodynamically unstable patients enrolled in registries, and their use cannot be used to explain the reduced use of thrombolytic treatment in daily clinical practice. Among hemodynamically unstable pulmonary embolism patients, enrolled in multicenter prospective registries, only one on three receive a reperfusion treatment. There is an urgent need to improve the rate of reperfusion treatment in hemodynamically unstable patients without absolute contraindications promoting at the same time the diffusion of the percutaneous revascularization, trough the creation of a hub-and spoke network to partially overcame the limitations due to the higher costs and need of adequate expertise of the operator on this techniques.
Introduction
Hemodynamically unstable pulmonary embolism (PE) represents a complex and life-threatening event with a highly variable course and poor prognosis in the short-term period [ ]. Both the current European [ ] and American [ ] guidelines on the management of acute PE recognise the immediate reperfusion treatment with systemic thrombolysis (ST) as the mainstay of therapy for high-risk (or massive, according the American nomenclature) PE patients. Furthermore, a certain agreement exists on the need for immediate reperfusion therapy in unstable patients worldwide [ ]. However, previous larger investigations have reported that ST might be underused in daily clinical practice [ ], often for the fear and risk of bleeding complications. Despite that, the risk-to-benefit ratio of ST in hemodynamically unstable patients with acute PE remained uncontested, as stated in international consensus papers and several meta-analyses [ , ]. The gap between the international recommendations and the real ST administration in hemodynamically unstable PE patients in daily clinical practice creates an ambiguous situation which has been poorly investigated in the past. Moreover, it has been estimated that about one quarter of patient with venous thromboembolism (VTE) have at least one exclusion criteria preventing their recruitment in randomized clinical trials [ , ]. In order to assess the real use of ST in hemodynamically unstable patients in daily clinical practice, we reviewed the published prospective registries on acute PE.
Materials and methods
Literature search
A literature search, based on PubMed database, was performed to locate prospective registry studies of patients with acute PE, in English language, analyzing the data of hemodynamically unstable patients from January 1990 to January 2019. We used a combined text words and medical subject headings (MeSH) search strategy. The following combination of keywords were used: “Pulmonary embolism registry”, “Pulmonary thromboembolism registry”, “Thrombolysis Pulmonary embolism registry” and “Pulmonary embolism registry hemodynamically unstable” “. Moreover, we searched the bibliographies of target studies for additional references.
Study selection and data extraction
Titles and abstracts retrieved from the search were reviewed. Articles were included if (a) they reported the results of a prospective registry on acute PE; (b) it was a multicenter study; (c) patients have an objectively confirmed diagnosis of acute PE; (d) the number of patients hemodynamically unstable were present; (e) data on the use thrombolytic treatment were available and (f) data on short-term mortality were provided. Randomized trials were excluded from the analysis. Final determination of article inclusion was based on consensus by authors. Extracted data included: number of patients enrolled in the registry, number of patients hemodynamically unstable, definition of hemodynamic instability, age, gender (males), mean systolic blood pressure (SBP) at presentation, syncope, right ventricular dysfunction (RVD), absence of reperfusion, thrombolysis, catheter-direct treatment (CDT) and surgical pulmonary embolectomy (SPE). Moreover, we extracted data, when available, regarding the short-term mortality for all-causes and PE-related, in both all patients hemodynamically unstable and in those treated with thrombolysis. Moreover, for the same groups we included data regarding the bleeding events always in the short-term period, if available.
Results
Article selection and registries included in the analysis
A total of 1216 articles were identified. After excluding the duplicates obtained using the different searching MeSH (n = 703), 513 articles were screened and then excluded for not meeting inclusion criteria due the article type (editorial, review article, meta-analysis) or its design (single-center investigation, retrospective design, trial) or article not in the English language. As result, 13 articles were assessed for eligibility and carefully reviewed. Of them eight were excluded because they not provided data on unstable PE and/or ST [ , , , , , , , ]. Finally, five studies met the inclusion criteria and were included in the analysis (Table 1 ; Fig. 1 ) [ , , , , ]. Table 1 Pulmonary embolism registries included in the review accordingly their acronyms Acronyms Names of the registries MAPPET [ ] Management strategy and prognosis of pulmonary embolism registry ICOPER [ ] International cooperative pulmonary embolism registry EMPEROR [ ] Multicenter emergency medicine Pulmonary embolism in the real world registry IPER [ ] Italian pulmonary embolism registry RIETE [ ] Registro Informatizado de Enfermedad TromboEmbólica Fig. 1 Flow chart showing the searching method used in the review
Population
The identified study registries enrolled prospectively 41364 consecutive patients with acute PE between the 1993 and the 2016 [ , , , , ]. Among these, 2168 (5.2%) were hemodynamically unstable at presentation. The presence of a systolic blood pressure (SBP) < 90 mmHg was the commonest criteria used to define the presence of hemodynamic instability. Unfortunately, not all baseline characteristics were systematically reported in the reviewed registries. However, the mean age of patients, calculated using the data of four registries on five (n = 1574) was 67.3 years and of them 706 (44.8%) were males [ , , , ]. Conversely, the mean SBP at presentation, available on three studies (n = 367) was 78.3 mmHg [ , , ]. The prevalence of syncope, as emerging symptom of the acute PE was 40.7% (n = 1516) [ , , ]. Conversely, data on the presence of RVD were provided only in by two investigation (n = 1441) and was 54.1% (n = 651) [ , ] (Table 2 ). Table 2 Characteristics of the hemodynamically unstable patients enrolled in the prospective registries included in the analysis Registry Period of enrollment Year of publication Entire population Patients hemodynamically unstable N (%) Hemodynamic instability definition Characteristics of patients hemodynamically unstable N (%) Age Gender (males) SBP Syncope RVD No reperfusion Thrombolysis a CDT SPE MAPPET 1993–2004 1997 1001 594 (59.3) SBP < 90 mmHg; Shock; Circulatory collapse b NR NR NR NR NR 263 (44.2) c 306 (51.5) 19 (3.1) 6 (1,4) ICOPER 1995–1996 2006 2392 108 (4.5) SBP < 90 mmHg 64 ± 17 44 (40.7) 75 ± 10 41 (37.9) 38 (35.1) d 73 (65.7) 33 (32.4) e 1 (0.9) 3 (2.7) EMPEROR 2006–2008 2012 1875 58 (3.1) SBP < 90 mmHg 63.3 f 29 (50.0) 80.3 NR NR 51 (84.4) 7 (12.1) 0 2 (3.4) IPER 2006–2010 2012 1716 201 (11.7) ESC GL 2008 74 ± 14 74 (37.0) 80 ± 17 59 (29.3) NR 119 (55.2) 82 (41.0) 6 (2.9%) 2 (0.1) g RIETE 2001–2016 2018 34380 1207 (3.5) SBP < 90 mmHg for > 15 min 68 ± 17 515 (42.6) NR 518 (42.9) 613 (57.0) h 969 (80.2) 217 (17.9%) i 6 (0.49) 26 (2.1) SBP Systolic blood pressure, ESC European Society of Cardiology, GL Guidelines, RVD Right ventricular dysfunction, CDT Catheter-directed therapy, SPE Surgical pulmonary embolectomy, NR Not reported a Patients in some cases received more than one reperfusion treatments as well as thrombolysis failed b Referred to the sum of three of four groups analyzed in the registry (group 2 + group 3 + group 4) and defined as: Patients presenting with arterial hypotension (systolic blood pressure < 90 mm Hg or a pressure drop of at least 40 mm Hg for a time period > 15 min) but without clinical signs of cardiogenic shock or the need for catecholamine support of blood pressure (except for dobutamine, ≤ 5 mg/kg body weight per min) (Group 2); Patients with arterial hypotension accompanied by cardiogenic shock or judged by the attending physicians to require the administration of catecholamines (Group 3);Patients with circulatory collapse who underwent cardiopulmonary resuscitation at presentation (Group 4) c Considering all the four groups of the study d Percentage referred to 61 patients e One patient underwent both catheter embolectomy and thrombolysis; One patient underwent surgical embolectomy for failed thrombolysis fStandard deviation not reported g This number of patients is referred to the entire population enrolled in the registry. The registry not specified if these patients were hemodynamically unstable, however, considering that patients were stratified according the ESC guidelines, we considered those subjects as if they had been h Referred to 1080 patients i Patients received in some cases more than one reperfusion treatment. As cited in the registry, 238 patients have a reperfusion treatment. Patients untreated with reperfusion (n = 969) are calculated as difference from these
Reperfusion treatment
Data regarding thrombolysis were provided by all investigations, as per inclusion criteria of the review (Table 2 ). Among 2168 hemodynamically unstable patients with acute PE, ST was administered in 29.7% of patients (n = 645) while CDT was used only in 1.4% (n = 32) of cases. Conversely, SPE was adopted as reperfusion treatment in 39 patients (1.7%). However, in this latter subgroup of patients we included two patients, enrolled in IPER, of which was not specified if they were hemodynamically unstable. However, considering that the registry was based on the ESC criteria, we considered these subjects as they were unstable. If these two patients were not considered unstable, the percentage of patients treated with SE remained 1.7%. As stated in the different investigations, some patients received more than a reperfusion treatment. Indeed, CDT and SPE were generally used as second-line reperfusion strategy, especially when ST was contraindicated or failed. Data on patients treated with more than one reperfusion technique were not systematically reported in the studies reviewed. Intriguingly, the 68.0% (n = 1475) of patients not received any reperfusion treatment despite they were hemodynamically unstable at admission while only the 32.0% (n = 693) were treated according the international recommendations (Fig. 2 ). Among the different reperfusion options, ST was the most frequently used (90.3%), followed by SPE (5.2%) and CDT (4.5%) (Fig. 3 ). Analyzing the use of ST, accordingly the year of publication of the different studies, it appears a fluctuating trend in the use of ST. Indeed, a constant linear reduction was observed between the 1996 and the 2006 (MAPPET, ICOPER and EMPEROR registries, respectively) [ , , ], followed by a significant increase in the 2012, year of publication of the IPER registry [ ], finally followed by another significant reduction in 2018, as evidenced in the RIETE registry [ ] (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 2 a Comparison between hemodynamically unstable patients receiving or not a reperfusion treatment. b Use of reperfusion treatment in patients enrolled in the different registries. Reperfusion treatments were used as following: MAPPET n = 331; ICOPER n = 35; EMPEROR n = 7; IPER n = 82; RIETE n = 238 Fig. 3 Use of different reperfusion treatments in hemodynamically unstable patients enrolled in the review. CDT Catheter-directed treatment, SE Surgical embolectomy Fig. 4 Trend in the use of systemic thrombolysis in hemodynamically unstable patients enrolled in the reviewed registries over the years
Short-term outcomes
The short-term mortality of hemodynamically unstable patients for all-causes was 22.2% (n = 483); of them, 70 (76.6%) had a death PE-related. Unfortunately, all-cause and PE-related mortality in patients treated with ST were not systematically reported by the investigations reviewed. For example, in the RIETE registry, the number of events were calculated on the number of patients who received a reperfusion treatment (n = 238), which also included CDT and SPE [ ]. Moreover, the MAPPET registry not reported results on this issue [ ]. Therefore, all-cause mortality and PE-related mortality in patients treated with ST were 17.6% (64/362) and 11.3% (61/362), respectively (Table 3 ) including all patients treated with reperfusion therapy in the RIETE registry [ ]. Table 3 Different outcomes and bleeding events in hemodynamically unstable patients and in those treated with thrombolysis Registry Follow - up Patients hemodynamically unstable Outcomes and bleeding events in patients hemodynamically unstable Patients treated with thrombolysis Outcomes and bleeding events in patients treated with thrombolysis All-cause mortality PE-related-mortality Bleeding events All-cause mortality PE-mortality Bleeding events MAPPET [ ] In-hospital 594 187 (31.4) 172 (91.9) 61 (10.2) 306 NR NR NR ICOPER [ ] 3 months 108 56 (51.8) 35 (62.5) 19 (17.6) 35 15 8 8 (24.0) EMPEROR [ ] In-hospital 58 8 (13.8) 3 (37.5) 6 (10.3) 7 1 (14.2) 1 (14.2) 2 (28.5) IPER [ ] In-hospital 201 64 (31.8) 47 (73.4) NS 82 23 17 NS RIETE [ ] 1 month 1207 168 (14.0) 113 (67.2) 75 (6.2) 238 a 25 (10.5) 15 (6.3) 33 (13.8) NR Nor reported, NS not specified a Referred to all patients treated with a reperfusion therapy
Bleeding events
Bleeding events were registered in 8.1% of cases among hemodynamically unstable patients enrolled in four of five registries (n = 161/1967) [ , , , ]. Conversely, bleeding events in patients treated with ST, calculated on the data of only three registries, were 43/280 (15.3%) [ , , ]. Intracranial bleeding was observed in 2.0% and 2.2% of patients treated with Thrombolysis therapy in the MAPPET [ ] and IPER [ ] registries, respectively.
Discussion
Current use of reperfusion treatments
Our analysis demonstrates that ST was administered in only 32% of hemodynamically unstable patients enrolled in multicentric prospective registries during about 23 years. Moreover, about the 68% of patients not received any reperfusion treatment. A fluctuating trend in the use of thrombolytic therapy was observed over the years in these patients. As matter of a fact, the use of other reperfusion treatment, as CDT and SE, which has been also analyzed in our review, cannot be used to explain the reduced use of ST in daily clinical practice. Indeed, CDT and SPE were used only in 1.4% and 1.7% of patients hemodynamically unstable, respectively. The association between hemodynamic instability and a worst outcome in the short-term period or the risk-to benefit ratio of ST in these patients was unquestioned [ , ] and not represent the aim of the review. Indeed, both the efficacy and safety of ST in acute PE, especially in patients hemodynamically unstable, has already been demonstrated and was not the aim of the review. Marti et al., in a large meta-analysis reported that thrombolytic therapy was able to reduces both overall and PE-related mortalities as well as PE recurrence, but these decreases were not significant in hemodynamically stable patients with acute PE [ ]. More recently, another meta-analysis performed by Jimenez et al. based on similar inclusion criteria of our review, considered a cohort of patients based on four of the five registries included in our analysis. The authors highlighted that in hemodynamically unstable patients, thrombolytic treatment was associated with a lower all-cause and PE related mortality in the short-term period (OR 0.69, 95% CI 0.49–0.95 and OR 0.66, 95% CI 0.45–0.97, respectively) [ ].
Management of high-risk patients: a solved problem?
As well known, over the latest years, a growing number of investigations have analyzed the use of ST in cohort of hemodynamically stable PE patients, especially on those classified as intermediate-high risk. However, as demonstrated by the PEITHO trial [ ] and then recommended by current European guidelines [ ], these patients are not likely to benefit from the routine use of ST due the higher risk of intracranial and other major bleeding events. The relative high number of investigations performed on the use of standard or reduced dose of ST in hemodynamically stable patients seems to suggest that the problem represented by the management of high-risk (or massive) PE has been completely resolved. However, our data, which are in accordance with a previous large investigation performed by Stein et al. shows the contrary [ ]. Both the European [ ] and American [ ] guidelines recommended the use of thrombolytic therapy in hemodynamically unstable patients with a grade of recommendation IB and respectively. Moreover, both the consensus papers have introduced the use of percutaneous treatment as well as reaffirmed the use of SE in those patients in which the thrombolytic treatment was contraindicated or failed [ , , ]. Considering that only one patient on three received a reperfusion treatment, as a matter of fact, in most of cases hemodynamically unstable patients are managed only with anticoagulation using a watchful waiting approach. If we compare these results with other life-threatening disease in which a prompt reperfusion is needed, as ST-segment myocardial infarction (STEMI) or stroke, a great a significant discrepancy appears. For example, we couldn’t accept in modern era that the 70% of STEMI or stroke patients not received a reperfusion treatment. However, in the management of acute PE, this happens.
Underuse of systemic thrombolysis in high-risk pulmonary embolism: a multifactorial issue
The underuse of ST and, more in general of reperfusion treatment in PE, is probably multifactorial. Firstly, the “fear” of major bleeding events and ICH is the principal reason. Secondly, over the years, after the widespread diffusion of cath-labs and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), cardiologists and internists have lost their “handling” on the use of fibrinolytics. Thirdly, despite percutaneous techniques have recently emerged as a safe and effective alternative treatment option for massive PE especially when full-dose thrombolysis is contraindicated or ST has already failed, the absence of large-scale studies and comparative trials, as well as high cost and the scarce diffusion of the techniques, further limit the reperfusion in these patients [ , ]. It is also true that a randomized trial comparing ST and CDT will be difficult to realize. Indeed, it would be unethical randomizing patients dying from massive PE. From a pathophysiological point of view, thrombolytic treatment is administered in hemodynamically unstable patients with PE to reduce pulmonary vascular resistance and relieve right ventricular overload thereby improving cardiac output and systemic arterial pressure, in order to break the spiral of hemodynamic deterioration and prevent CV death [ ]. Considering that PE patients hemodynamically unstable have a 5.9-fold increased risk of death in the short-term period [ ], there is an urgent need to improve the rate of reperfusion treatment in these patients, especially in those without absolute contraindications, promoting at the same time the diffusion of the percutaneous revascularization, through the creation of a hub-and spoke network to partially overcame the limitations due to the higher costs and need of adequate expertise of the operator [ ]. Whether the more common administration of ST might have improved the clinical outcome remains undefined since many other variables should be considered as the patient’s specific bleeding risk, the time of thrombolysis administration from the symptoms’ onset, presence of other comorbidities and local resources [ ].
Limitations
Our review has some limitations. Firstly, all the baseline conditions were not systematically reported by the studies reviewed. Secondly data regarding mortality and bleeding events in hemodynamically unstable and patients treated with ST in some cases were missing. Moreover, as cited in the manuscripts analyzed, different patients hemodynamically unstable received more than one reperfusion treatment. However, considering the aim of the review, data regarding the use of thrombolytic treatment were available in all cases and allowed us to adequately respond to the aim of the study.
Conclusions
In hemodynamically unstable patients with acute PE, ST continues to be underused in daily clinical practice. Only one patient on three received a reperfusion treatment despite their hemodynamic conditions and the existing recommendations on the therapeutic approach provided by international guidelines.