Highlights
Anticoagulation in patients with Impella® devices can often be complicated due to unpredictable purge flow rates, pre-existing coagulopathy, or heparin allergies. A literature search on anticoagulation with Impella® devices was conducted with literature from 2014 to 2018. A total of 6 studies were identified that included 51 patients. Different dextrose concentrations for Impella® purge solutions, and use of argatroban in patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia showed similar rates of thrombosis and bleeding. Future studies that look at longer durations of support and possible operation of the Impella® device with a heparin-free purge solution are needed.
Background
Cardiogenic shock is a life-threatening condition that may occur secondary to a variety of cardiac conditions. It is a challenging condition to treat and is associated with mortality rates as high as 50–60% [ ]. Traditionally, pharmacologic agents have been the mainstay of therapy, however recent advances in mechanical circulatory support (MCS) are available to optimize hemodynamics [ , , ]. One example, the Impella® assist device for temporary ventricular support, has increased drastically over the past several years [ ]. The Impella® is a temporary, percutaneous ventricular assist device indicated to provide hemodynamic support during high-risk coronary interventions, in patients with cardiogenic shock, and/or advanced heart failure. The 2015 SCAI/ACC/HFSA/STS Clinical Expert Consensus Statement on the Use of Percutaneous MCS Devices in Cardiovascular Care recommends early placement of percutaneous MCS devices, such as Impella®, as they provide superior hemodynamic support compared to pharmacologic therapy in cardiogenic shock. Moreover, these devices are increasingly being utilized for longer term MCS support, as bridge to permanent Ventricular Assist Device (VAD) placement or heart transplant, or when rapid recovery is expected [ ]. A number of Impella® variations are available, each with varying levels of cardiac support and insertion techniques (Table 1 ).
Table 1 Description of Impella ® devices Impella device Ventricular support (left/right) Maximum cardiac output provided Insertion site Contraindications Impella 2.5® Lef 2.5 L/min Femoral artery Mechanical aortic valve; LV thrombus, significant right side heart failure, tamponade, peripheral vascular disease that precludes insertion Impella CP® Left 3.3 L/min Femoral artery Impella 5.0® Left 5.0 L/min Axillary artery Impella RP® Right 4.0 L/min Femoral artery Pulmonary artery wall disorders, mechanical valves/severe stenosis or regurgitation o tricuspid or pulmonary valve; mural thrombus, IVC filter
The Impella® device consists of an intravascular microaxial blood pump and cannula through which blood is aspirated from the left or right ventricle and expelled into the ascending aorta or pulmonary artery, depending on the type of pump used [ , , ]. As blood flows into the catheter, a purge solution runs counter current to the patient’s blood to create a pressure barrier that prevents blood from entering the Impella® motor. The purge solution requires heparin to maintain the patency of the purge pathway in the event blood enters the motor. Anticoagulation in patients with Impella® devices can often be complicated due to unpredictable purge flow rates, pre-existing coagulopathy, or heparin allergies. This article will describe current practice and recent updates in literature surrounding anticoagulation therapy for Impella® devices.
Anticoagulation: Review of Current Practices
Purge Solution
The Impella® technology comprises a purge solution which flows through the Impella® catheter in the opposite direction of the patient’s blood [ ]. Through a built-in pressure sensor, the device automatically sets and adjusts the purge flow anywhere between 2 and 30 mL/h to maintain an adequate purge pressure of 300–1100 mm Hg, which is required to maintain the device from clotting.
The dextrose concentration of the purge solution determines the viscosity and flow rate of the purge fluid. Lower dextrose concentrations, such as 5%, are less viscous and flow more quickly through the purge system thereby systemically delivering more heparin. Higher (more viscous) concentrations result in a slower purge flow rate and less overall systemic heparin exposure for the patient. Various dextrose solutions have been evaluated and validated, ranging from dextrose 5% (D5) to dextrose 40% (D40). The manufacturer currently recommends a heparin concentration of 50 IU/mL in a 5% dextrose as the initial purge solution, which, in most cases, will flow at a rate that allows delivery of adequate amount of heparin to achieve optimal anticoagulation. In cases where the maximal flow rates of the Impella® purge solution cannot maintain adequate pressures of at least 300 mmHg, or systemic heparin exposure results in too much anticoagulant effects, higher dextrose concentration solutions, up to 40%, can be used resulting in decreased purge flow rates and lower heparin exposure due to their higher viscosity.
Anticoagulation
Due to the potential thrombotic complications that may arise from Impella® use, adequate anticoagulation is required. Rates of thrombotic events are associated with poor outcomes. According to the manufacturer, the goal activated clotting time (ACT) is 160–180 s, and no recommendations are available for activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) goals. Many institutions utilize aPTT for the management of mechanical circulatory support (MCS) devices. In a study by Fitousis et al. that looked at anticoagulation in extracorporeal membrane oxygenation devices, a target aPTT of 60–75 s showed no difference in major bleeding and thrombotic events when compared to ACT target of 140–180 s [ ]. Different trials and case reports that have looked at anticoagulation for Impella® devices have utilized aPTT targets ranging between 55 and 80 s with similar outcomes [ , , , ].
In some patients, purge heparin may be sufficient to achieve anticoagulation goals; when insufficient, the addition of titratable, supplemental non-purge heparin is required to provide optimal anticoagulation. Alternatively, when patients are excessively anticoagulated with the purge being the only source of heparin, the manufacturer recommends switching to half concentration heparin (25 U/mL) in D5W in an attempt to minimize heparin exposure and achieve the anticoagulation targets. No further guidance is provided by the manufacturer when patients remain over anticoagulated despite the decreased heparin concentration. Potential resolutions include increasing the dextrose concentration of the purge fluid; this should theoretically result in slower flow rates and reduce the amount of heparin delivered. A purge solution of D20W will result in a 40% reduction in flow rates compared to a purge solution of D5W [ ]. However, with unstable patient hemodynamics the changes in flow rates can be unpredictable.
A study by Jennings and colleagues reported on four cases of patients on Impella® support with a reduced concentration of heparin in the purge solution (25 U/mL). No significant bleeding or thrombotic complications were reported [ ]. In ISAR-SHOCK, which compared Impella® to IABP in patients with cardiogenic shock, the Impella® 2.5 device was operated without heparin in the purge solution for a median of 25 h. Heparin was supplemented intravenously to target a aPTT of 60–80 s. In this study, the results showed no incidences of limb ischemia, bleeding, or technical failure [ ]. Jennings et al. also report a case of a patient on Impella® 2.5 who suffered from bleeding complications; to better control the amount of heparin delivered and reduce the bleeding risk, heparin was removed from the purge solution and supplemented externally. The heparin-free purge solution duration of support was 75 h [ ]. Another factor to be taken into consideration is the duration of support. The longest reported duration is 35 days with the Impella® 5.0; in this case report, the patient developed upper GI bleeding requiring reduction of the ACT anticoagulation goal to 150–160 (versus the recommended 160–180 s), as well as a thromboembolic event at explantation [ ]. In cases of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, the manufacturer recommends utilizing a direct thrombin inhibitor, bivalirudin or argatroban, outside the purge solution. No data exists on the management of anticoagulation for Impella® devices in patients with baseline elevated aPTT, such as patients with antiphospholipid syndrome. In those cases, clinical judgement is warranted, and a customized anticoagulation plan is required and can include monitoring heparin Anti-Xa levels, modification of the goal aPTT range, targeting an aPTT goal of 2 times the baseline aPTT, or using an aPTT reagent insensitive to lupus anticoagulant.
Safety Considerations
Patient safety is another factor that comes into play upon considering the choice of heparin solutions. Heparin is on the Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP) list of high-alert medications [ ]. ISMP recommends standardization of anticoagulation therapy through the development of different heparin order sets based on the various clinical indications, as well as standardizing the concentration of therapeutic heparin infusions and preparation and dispensing of non-standard concentrations [ , ]. Transition of care throughout the institution, from the operation room (OR) to the intensive care unit (ICU), may play a role in the choice of the initial heparin solution. To reduce the potential of errors, the available pre-mixed dextrose-heparin solutions in the OR need to be standardized. In alignment with manufacturer recommendations and given the availability of premixed heparin in 5% dextrose solution in most institutions, it may be a preferred first choice purge fluid. Transitioning to higher dextrose concentrations is dictated by patient’s heparin requirements and level of support upon transfer to the ICU.
The administration of heparin from two different sources creates possibilities of medication errors and patient harm. It is necessary to implement clear measures and policies to help distinguish the heparin solutions and prevent adverse outcomes. The electronic medical records should clearly delineate the orders for heparin in the purge solution from the orders for supplemental non-purge heparin. Institution-specific protocols that clearly establish anticoagulation goals and titration parameters as well as streamline the progression with the choices of the various heparin solutions can help minimize the potential for adverse events while optimizing coagulation status. Education on device operation and available protocols is another essential element. Clinicians also need to be aware of the methods of heparin delivery and take them into account upon decision making.
Review of New Literature
A PubMed search was conducted for recent literature in all languages within the previous five years (December 2013 to February 2019) regarding anticoagulation for Impella® devices. Search terms included anticoagulation, heparin, argatroban, bivalirudin, impella, left ventricular assist device, LVAD, percutaneous ventricular assist device, and pVAD. Due to limited literature regarding this population, case studies, case series, cohort, cross sectional, and randomized control studies were included. Additional inclusion criteria encompassed evaluation of anticoagulation strategy in the setting of Impella® placement. Studies that looked at anticoagulation evaluation solely in populations with permanent VADs, total artificial hearts, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation were excluded. Outcomes evaluated included thrombosis and major bleeding.
A total of 228 articles were initially obtained through the PubMed search. EndNote was used to screen for duplicates with none identified. The resulting citations were uploaded into Rayyan, a freely available web-based screening tool developed by the Qatar Computing Research Institute [ ]. Authors (MAW and EMS) independently reviewed and fully agreed on the exclusion of 222 articles and inclusion of 6 articles [ , , , , , ]. The remaining articles were read in full and analyzed. A summary of article filtration can be found in Fig. 1 .
Fig. 1 PRISMA 2009 flow diagram
A total of 51 patients had data in the four studies that were included in the review (Table 2 ). Sieg et al. reported on a single-center retrospective review that included 8 patients with an Impella® [ ]. Patients were on heparin anticoagulation, titrated to Anti-Xa levels of 0.15–0.25 IU/mL. A total of seven bleeds occurred in three patients, with six of these bleeding events in patients on Impella® 5.0 devices and axillary cannulation. No thrombotic events were seen. Laliberte et al. published a case report on a patient with an Impella® and suspected HIT from heparin [ ]. Heparin in the purge solution was switched to argatroban in the purge solution (no additional systemic argatroban infusion was used) until Impella® removal on day 9 of therapy. The patient did have minor bleeding but no thrombosis during therapy, and HIT lab tests returned negative. Another case series, published by Blum et al. described the use of argatroban purge solutions in two patients with suspected HIT [ ]. Both of these patients tolerated argatroban without bleeding or thrombotic events.
Table 2 New literature on anticoagulation with impella devices Trial Trial type Number of patients Purge solution Systemic anticoagulation Monitoring Patient or patient population Results Sieg et al. (ASAIO 2015) [ ] Single-center Retrospective 8 Dextrose 20% with heparin 12.5 U/mL (recommended) Dextrose 10% with heparin 12.5 U/mL Heparin Anti-Xa UFH Target range Low range: 0.15–0.25 IU/mL High range: 0.20–0.30 IU/mL Inclusion Exclusion Thrombosis events: 0 Major bleeding events (n): 7 6 GI bleeds 1 bleed at cannulation site Goal anti-Xa levels (%): 71.9% ≥ 18 years Implantation of CentriMag™, TandemHeart®, or Impella® Nondurable pVAD pVAD with oxygenator Anticoagulation with non-heparin agent Laliberte and Reed (AJHP 2017) [ ] Case Report 1 Heparin-based (25 U/mL) initially Argatroban-based (0.1 mg/mL) for suspected HIT None aPTT goal: 45–72 s 70 yo, 54 kg female with PMH of depression, hypothyroidism, alcohol abuse, and pancreatitis in cardiogenic shock Mean (± SD) purge flow rate (mL/h): 9.6 (± 1.5) Thrombosis events: none Bleeding events Transfused with 9 U of plasma and 5 U of PRBCs Right groin bleeding after device removal Dietrich and Kazmi (J of Pharm Prac 2018) [ ] Retrospective Cohort 12 Dextrose 20% with heparin 50 U/mL (D20 group) Dextrose 5% with heparin 50 U/mL (D5 group) Heparin aPTT goal: 55–85 s Inclusion Exclusion Patients with ≥ 1 supratherapeutic aPTT (%) D5 group: 63% D20 group: 0% Thrombosis events (n): 2 (1 in D5 group and 1 in D20 group) Lower extremity arterial clots Bleeding events (n): 3 in D5 group 1 GI bleed 1 LLE bleed 1 bleeding from NG and ET tubes Impella® implantation Heparinized purge solution Impella® Discontinued prior to leaving cardiac cath lab Discontinued prior to obtaining aPTT Anticoagulation with DTI Blum et al. (J of Pharm Prac 2018) [ ] Case Series 2 Argatroban-based (50 mcg/mL) for HIT Argatroban Case 1 aPTT goal: 42–84 s Case 2 aPTT goal: 47–87 s Case 1: 83 yo female requiring 3-vessel CABG Case 2: 55 yo male in cardiogenic shock secondary to occlusion of the LAD, LCx, and distal RCA Case 1 Thrombosis: none Bleeding: None reported Case 2 Thrombosis: DVT in setting of HIT Bleeding: None reported Lee et al. (J of Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther 2018) [ ] Case Series 10 Dextrose 20% with heparin 50 U/mL Dextrose 5% with heparin 50 U/mL Heparin ACT goal: 160–180 s Inclusion Exclusion Thrombosis events: none due to inadequate ACT Bleeding events: not reported Goal ACT values (%): 55% Second source of IV UFH ACT goal lower than 141–160 s Newsome et al. (J Pharm Pract 2019) [ ] Case series 18 Dextrose 20% with heparin 25 U/mL ACT goal: 160–200 s Inclusion Exclusion Thrombosis events: none Bleeding events BARC class II or IIIa (%): 61 Goal ACT values (%): 49% Impella CP® device Heparin 25 U/mL in D20W per protocol Transfer to another facility within 12 h of device placement Received concentration other than heparin 25 U/mL in D20W Received direct thrombin inhibitor ACT activated clotting time, aPTT activated partial thromboplastin time, BARC Bleeding and Academic Research Consortium, CABG coronary artery bypass graft, D20W 20% dextrose purge solution, DVT deep vein thrombosis, ET endotracheal tube, GI gastrointestinal, HIT heparin induced thrombocytopenia, hr hour, IV intravenous, kg kilogram, LAD left anterior descending, LCx left circumflex, LLE left lower extremity, mL milliliter, n number, NG nasogastric, PRBCs packed red blood cells, pVAD peripheral ventricular assist device, RCA right coronary artery, s seconds, SD standard deviation, UFH unfractionated heparin, VAD ventricular assist device, yo year old
The largest recent study on anticoagulation in Impella® devices was published by Dietrich et al. in 2018 [ ]. This retrospective, cohort analysis looked at twelve patients on either a D5W/heparin or D20W/heparin purge solutions. There was no statistical difference in patients who had a supratherapeutic aPTT (aPTT > 85 s) in patients on either of those purge dextrose concentrations (5 patients, 63% on D5W vs. 0 patients, 0% on D20W, p = 0.08). No differences were seen in need to reduce heparin concentration, or bleeding events between purge solutions (p = 0.49 for both outcomes).
Most recently, two separate studies evaluated ACT values while monitoring patients on Impella® [ , ]. Lee et al. included 10 patients in their quality improvement analysis and required that patients be on intravenous UFH in addition to heparin being received through the purge solution [ ]. Ultimately, 55% of the 101 ACT values fell within the goal range of 160–180 s with no report of thrombosis or bleeding events. The largest study to-date included 18 patients on purge solution with a heparin concentration of 25 U/mL in D20W [ ]. Approximately 49% of ACT readings were within the ACT goal of 160–200 s. While no thrombotic events were reported, 11 patients had clinically significant bleeding classified as either BARC class II or BARC class IIIA though only 13% of reading were classified as supratherapeutic (ACT > 200 s). Potential explanation for the increased bleeding observed may be secondary to the wider ACT goal specified in the protocol (160–200 s) than what is recommended by the Impella® manufacturer (160–180 s).
Future Directions
With limited manufacturer recommendations, the difficulty in conducting large randomized control trials involving cardiogenic shock patients, and the various practices implemented in management of complex patients on Impella® support, there is a need for real-world data to help develop best practices, support research, and improve outcomes. As such, the global cVAD registry was created in 2009. The registry collects data by conducting chart reviews and telephonic follow-ups with patients after Impella® implant with the aim of generating a data collection system that monitors usage and provides quality metrics and treatment algorithms to improve patient outcomes [ ]. Institutions are also advised to maintain internal databases on patients supported with Impella® and conduct periodic reviews to optimize the management of these patients.
As Impella® use increases, it is important to keep in mind the duration of support with the Impella® devices; most of the reported data look at relatively short durations of support particularly with the Impella® 2.5 device. In ISAR-SHOCK, the median duration of support was 25 h [ ]. Per the manufacturer, the maximum durations of support are 4 days for the Impella CP and 2.5 and 6 days for the Impella 5.0 and LD [ ]. However, real word data from the Impella® registry show that the mean duration of support was 123 ± 200 h (5 ± 8 days) and the 90th percentile of support duration was 120 h (5 days), 233 h (9.7 days), and 384 h (16 days) for patients supported with the Impella 2.5, Impella CP, and Impella 5.0, respectively [ ].
As such, and in light of current practice, more data is required for better assessment of the safety and efficacy of various anticoagulation methods with the different Impella® devices and longer durations of support.
Conclusion
Anticoagulation in the setting of MCS devices is a challenging aspect of critical care. With Impella® devices, the potential hemodynamic instability, multiple sources of heparin, and the lack of data and literature makes it more complicated. Institutions are encouraged to maintain internal registries and have set protocols that clearly define the options for anticoagulation, while allowing for clinical judgment when deviations are necessary. A major limitation of this review is the lack of robust data and small patient number available for evaluation. Regardless, a review of current literature helps highlight that further research is needed to optimize anticoagulation strategies in this population. Future studies that look at longer durations of support and possible operation of the Impella® device with a heparin-free purge solution could eliminate some of the uncertainties and create a relatively safer and flexible environment for Impella ® operation.