Highlights
Suspicion for heparin induced thrombocytopenia is high in patients with mechanical circulatory support while the actual incidence of HIT is low 4T and HEP scores are pre-test scoring tools that have been developed to identify the probability of a HIT diagnosis that has been only been validated in the general patient population Based on our study, both 4T and HEP scores have high predictability of HIT in the MCS population Both 4T and HEP scoring tools should be utilized to appropriately assess the probability of HIT in patients requiring MCS Implications for future direction and research include utilizing a larger patient population to evaluate the effects on device thrombosis as well as prospectively validating the correlation of these pre-test scoring tools to HIT diagnostic tests in the MCS population
Introduction
Mechanical circulatory support (MCS) devices such as extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and percutaneous ventricular assist devices provide hemodynamic stabilization in the setting of refractory cardiomyopathy or cardiogenic shock. Patients on both temporary and long term MCS devices carry a high risk for thrombocytopenia, with reports of up to 40–60% of patients with intraaortic balloon pumps (IABP) demonstrating a significant decrease in platelet counts [ , , ]. The causes of thrombocytopenia in MCS devices are multifactorial including device platelet consumption, blood loss, and concomitant medications [ ]. Due to the risk of thrombosis, patients with MCS devices generally require anticoagulation, with unfractionated heparin (UFH) being the most common. With the routine use of UFH and the innate increased risk of thrombocytopenia with MCS devices, heparin induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is commonly suspected.
Historically, in patients without MCS, only 1–5% of patients are reported to have true incidence of HIT after unfractionated heparin or low molecular weight heparin exposure [ , ]. Though there is a low prevalence, a diagnosis of HIT in the MCS patient population has several significant clinical implications. First, there is limited experience with use of intravenous direct thrombin inhibitors (DTI) with MCS devices and an overall lack of published data. Second, complications such as device thrombosis or hemorrhagic complications may increase in HIT, particularly when transitioning anticoagulation therapy from UFH to DTI [ ]. Finally, the use of oral or injectable anticoagulants to treat HIT may be contraindicated in these patients due to concomitant end organ dysfunction such as renal failure or hepatic dysfunction or have unfavorable kinetic profiles for use in patients who may require emergent procedures.
Laboratory diagnostic tests are utilized in addition to clinical diagnostic criteria to assist in confirming a HIT diagnosis. The two laboratory tests utilized in clinical practice include heparin PF4 antibody test and the serotonin release assay (SRA). Anti-PF4-heparin enzyme immunoassay detects the presence of IgG antibodies to heparin-PF4 complexes and is reported in optical density (OD) units. Heparin PF4 antibody test has a high negative predictive value (98–99%) however, it has a low positive predictive value due to the ability of the test to detect clinically insignificant heparin PF4 antibodies that do not cause platelet activation [ ]. The SRA lab test measures the percent release of serotonin which occurs during platelet activation. Unlike the heparin PF4 antibody test, SRA is highly sensitive and specific with reported sensitivities and specificities up to 100%. Two limitations in the use of SRA include cost and test result turnaround time. SRA results take on average 1 week to be reported since it is a send out lab in most institutions; therefore, SRA is not utilized to make an immediate decision on anticoagulation management but used to assist in making an accurate HIT diagnosis [ ]. Whereas identification of patients with HIT is clinically important, resource utilization for unnecessary testing can significantly add to the cost of managing patients. Therefore, we sought to evaluate the use of pre-test probability scoring tools 4specifically in the MCS population to assess probability of HIT.
The 4T and HIT Expert Probability (HEP) scoring tools are pre-test clinical scores that have been developed to identify the probability of a HIT diagnosis [ , , ]. While both scores evaluate percent platelet count fall, timing of platelet drop, presence of thrombosis, and other causes of thrombocytopenia, the HEP score evaluates these four criteria in greater detail providing positive and negative values depending on the criteria’s correlation with HIT probability. The HEP score also specifically identifies common other causes of thrombocytopenia which includes the presence of MCS. Table 1 compares and contrasts both HIT scoring tools. Both the 4T and HEP scoring tools have been validated in the general medical population and may not be reliable in patients with MCS devices due to unpredictable decline in platelet counts [ , , ]. This descriptive study seeks to assess the association of 4T and HEP scores to available HIT diagnostic tests in patients requiring MCS.
Table 1 Comparison of 4T and HEP scoring tools 4T score HEP score No. of clinical features evaluated 4 8 Scoring cutoffs to determine probability of HIT Low (0–3) Moderate (4–5) High (6–8) 2 interpretations for high HIT probability ≥ 2 or ≥ 5 Sensitivity a 0.43- 1.00 0.86–1.00 Specificity a 0.44–0.79 0.66–0.88 a Sensitivity and specificity dependent on the cut off score used
Methods
Patients
This was a retrospective observational study approved by the Houston Methodist Research Institute Institutional Review Board. Patients with an MCS device (IABP, Impella® or left ventricular assist device (LVAD)) on a heparin infusion with heparin PF4 antibody OD and/or SRA laboratory test results from May 24, 2016 to August 31, 2017 were included in this study. Patients who had history of HIT prior to MCS therapy, had heparin PF4 antibody test and/or SRA prior to placement of MCS device or drawn as part of orthotopic heart transplant or LVAD evaluation were excluded.
Patients were categorized into two probability groups: HIT probable and HIT not probable based on heparin diagnostic test results. Patients who had a heparin PF4 antibody OD ≥ 1, a positive SRA, or heparin PF4 between 0.4 and 1 and positive SRA, were placed in the HIT probable group. Those patients who had a heparin PF4 antibody ≤ 0.4 or heparin PF4 antibody between 0.4 and 1 with negative SRA or no SRA result were placed in the HIT not probable group.
The primary endpoint of our study was to describe the association of 4T and HEP scores to heparin PF4 antibody and/or SRA test results for HIT diagnosis. For patients in both HIT probability groups, a 4T and HEP score at the time of heparin diagnostic test ordering was calculated. Calculations were performed by primary investigator and validated by statistician using SAS software. Secondary endpoints included describing the association of 4T and HEP scores to the heparin PF4 antibody and SRA tests for each MCS device group and describing the predictability of these scoring tools in patients with MCS devices (Fig. 1 ).
Fig. 1 Patient Selection
Statistical analysis
Data analysis was performed using SAS® version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Descriptive analyses were used to generate mean, median, ranges and standard deviations (SD) for continuous variables and frequency distribution for categorical variables. Demographic characteristics were compared using t-tests for continuous variables and Chi square tests of proportions for categorical variables between the two probability groups. The t test with unequal variance was used to determine the association between the pretest scoring tools individually and HIT probability. Receiver-operating characteristics (ROC) analysis was used to assess the agreement between 4T score and HIT probability and between HEP score and HIT probability. Areas under the ROC curve (AUCs) were calculated using the trapezoidal method and compared using the Delong method for correlated samples [ ]. P-values of ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Predictability cut-off values for 4T and HEP scores were determined utilizing the ROC curve by calculating a Maximized Youden’s J Index and Minimized Euclidean distance (D) value.
Results
A total of 85 patients were included in the analyses. Of them, seven (8%) patients were deemed HIT probable, whereas the remaining 78 (92%) patients were deemed HIT not probable. Of the six baseline characteristics evaluated, only platelet count fall was statistically different between the two HIT probability groups (p = 0.02). The mean platelet count fall in the HIT probable group was significantly higher than the mean platelet count fall in the HIT not probable group (Table 2 ).
Table 2 Baseline characteristics Variable HIT probable (n = 7) HIT not probable (n = 78) p-value Age, year (%) 60 ± 8.8 64 ± 14.1 0.23 Gender 0.70 Male, no. (%) 50 (64.1) 5 (71.4) Female, no. (%) 28 (35.9) 2 (28.6) Height (n) 70 ± 3.0 a 67 ± 4.7 0.08 Actual body weight (kg) 94 ± 14.9 87 ± 21.5 0.31 Platelet count fall (%) 75 ± 14.5 58 ± 27.4 0.02 MCS device 0.62 IABP (%) 6 (85.7) 55 (70.5) Impella® (%) 1 (14.3) 16 (20.5) LVAD (%) 0 (0.0) 7 (9.0) IABP intraaortic balloon pump, LVAD left ventricular assist device a In the HIT Probable group, two observations were missing. Only six observations were included in the analysis
As depicted in Table 3 , the mean (± SD) 4T score of the HIT probable group was 5 (± 1.53), significantly higher than 2.87 (± 1.10) in the HIT not probable group (p = 0.0097). The mean (± SD) HEP score for HIT probable group was also higher at 3.29 (± 1.50) compared to the HIT not probable group at −2.34 (± 2.60) (p < 0.001) (Figs. 2 , 3 ).
Table 3 Descriptive statistics for 4T and HEP scoring tools HIT probability Mean SD Min. Max. p -value 4T score Not probable (n = 78) 2.87 1.10 1.00 6.00 0.0097 Probable (n = 7) 5.00 1.53 3.00 7.00 HEP score Not probable (n = 78) − 2.34 2.60 − 8.00 4.00 < 0.001 Probable (n = 7) 3.29 1.50 2.00 6.00
Fig. 2 4T Score Distribution
Fig. 3 HEP Score Distribution
In order to assess the sensitivity and specificity of utilizing 4T and HEP scores in the MCS population, the agreement between both scoring tools and currently available HIT diagnostic agents was analyzed using ROC curves [ ]. Based on the ROC curve, 4T score and HEP score had an area under the curve of 0.88 (CI 0.759–1.000) and 0.96 (CI 0.923–1.000), respectively, demonstrating high predictability of HIT. The AUC of HEP score was greater than the AUC of the 4T score, which suggests greater agreement with diagnostic test results; however, the difference in agreement was not statistically significant (p = 0.13). To determine cutoff values for 4T and HEP scores for our patient population, we specified the specificity and sensitivity needed and found the closest corresponding cutoff values using the ROC curve. By assessing cut-points with high specificity, we minimized the chance of false positives, and would therefore minimize the ordering of SRA as the confirmatory diagnostic test. Both maximized J and minimized D values for HEP score corresponded to a predictive probability of 0.91, which further corresponded to a cutoff value of 1 for the HEP score. On the other hand, both maximized J and minimized D values for 4T score corresponded to a predictive probability of 0.97, which further corresponded to a cutoff value of 3 for the 4T score (Fig. 4 ).
Fig. 4 Receiver Operating Characteristics Curve for 4T and HEP Score
Discussion
Our study aimed to describe the association of 4T and HEP scores with currently available HIT diagnostic laboratory tests. Of the 85 patients included in our study, only 7 (8.2%) of MCS patients were identified as HIT probable, suggesting a low incidence of HIT in the MCS patient population. These scoring tools have been previously validated in the general medicine population however, to our knowledge, these tests have not been validated in critically ill patients on MCS devices. In our study, we demonstrated that both 4T and HEP scores can be utilized as pre-test probability tools for HIT in the MCS population given the agreement of these scoring tools with available HIT diagnostic test results assessed by the AUC of the ROC curves for both scoring tools. The distribution of the HEP scores in the HIT probable group was narrower compared to the distribution of the 4T scores in the HIT probable group. However, no statistically significant difference was found between the two scoring tools. Although one tool is not superior, utilizing both tools provide a stronger specificity than using one tool alone, increase the ability to detect true HIT negative, and minimize false positive results. Based on our data, we suggest the utilization of the algorithm illustrated in Fig. 5 . This algorithm utilizes the cutoff values calculated for both 4T and HEP scores to assist clinicians in the appropriate HIT risk assessment and ordering of HIT diagnostic tests. The recommendation to start with calculating the 4T score is based on the ease of calculating the 4T score at bedside compared to the HEP score. If the 4T score is either 3 or 4, we recommend calculating the HEP score, since this scoring tool evaluates specific characteristics that is applicable to the MCS population such as presence of a MCS device. At our institution, each heparin PF4 antibody test and SRA test costs $405 and $672, respectively. If this proposed algorithm was utilized in the patients included in this study, it would have provided over $32,000 in cost savings over 1 year to our institution. More importantly, the utilization of this algorithm would limit the unnecessary conversion of patients from UFH to DTIs, minimizing the risk complications during cross titration.
Fig. 5 Suggested Algorithm for Determining Heparin Induced Thrombocytopenia Probability in Patients with Mechanical Circulatory Support Devices
Limitations includes the retrospective nature of the study which limits the investigator to data only retrievable in the electronic medical record. Also, this is a single center study which did only include IABP, Impella® and a few number of LVADs. Finally, patients were divided into two groups based on HIT probability because only 13 had SRA lab tests ordered limiting the ability to clearly divide patients into two groups based on a confirmed HIT diagnosis. Despite limitations, study did include a relatively large number of IABP and Impella® which are the most common MCS devices encountered in most institutions. Also, our study included a data validation step which allowed the external statistician to utilize SAS software to ensure accuracy of the 4T and HEP scores calculated during initial data collection.
In conclusion, both 4T and HEP scores have high predictability of HIT in the mechanical circulatory support population and the utilization of predictive scoring tools may assist in the reduction of inappropriate HIT diagnostic test ordering.