Introduction
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) causes multiple secondary brain injuries that lead to poor patient outcomes. Emerging evidence suggests that therapeutic agents targeting early brain injury (EBI) and cerebral vasospasm (CVS)-induced delayed cerebral ischemia (DCI) after SAH are neuroprotective under standardized basic research conditions [ , ]. Of interest, therapeutics targeting EBI are currently believed to be the major way to overcome the limitations of SAH treatments [ , ]. However, approach capable of adequately treating SAH in clinical settings is very limited.
Multiple mechanisms, including inflammatory response, oxidative stress factor accumulation [ ], and microcirculatory dysfunction [ , ], are key contributors to secondary tissue lesions after SAH. These processes not only cause neuronal injury following the primary hemorrhage but also increase cerebral white matter damage [ , ]. Although the susceptible white matter constitutes approximately 50% of human brain tissues, canonically, SAH studies have concentrated on the neuron-rich gray matter, and, therefore, acute white matter injury after SAH remains to be explored. It is likely that effective neuroprotection will not occur without the proper control of the abovementioned internal cerebral homeostasis dysregulation—a whole-brain protective strategy that targets both the cerebral gray matter and white matter.
Although it was reported that apolipoprotein E ( APOE : gene, ApoE: protein) genotypes, especially the APOE ε4 allele carrier, negatively affect the pathophysiological changes in neurological diseases [ ], the identification of new roles of apoE and its novel mechanistic targets have revived therapeutic interest of apoE in central nervous system (CNS) pathologies. Specifically, it has been reported that APOE genotype-dependent variation in post-brain injury outcome was attributed to an increase in ApoE4 instability and density, which resulted in a gain-of-negative effects in addition to a loss-of-positive effects [ ]. After binding to its receptor, LRP1, ApoE may regulate downstream pathways that include: anti-oxidant [ ], anti-inflammatory [ ], anti-excitotoxic [ ], and additional neurotrophic pathways. Our research has demonstrated that ApoE attenuated neuronal injury in EBI after SAH via stabilizing the BBB and activating anti-inflammatory pathways [ ]. In a clinical study, even good-grade SAH patients demonstrating an APOE gene polymorphism reported a higher incidence of ICP elevation and decreased cerebral blood perfusion levels in the white matter regions when compared with non- APOE ε4 allele carriers [ ]. These exciting observations link ApoE to both gray and white matter neuronal injury, and targeting ApoE may be a potential therapeutic intervention for EBI treatment after SAH.
Moreover, researchers showed that ApoE-derived mimetic peptides are neuroprotective against EBI and CVS-induced neurological impairments after SAH [ , ], ischemic brain injury [ ], traumatic brain injury [ , ], and intracerebral hemorrhage [ ]. Therefore, these studies demonstrate that ApoE and ApoE mimetic peptide-based basic science research is important in the drug development of neuroprotective agents for similar pathologies. In spite of an increase in investigative efforts, additional mechanistic studies are needed to fully understand the downstream targets associated with ApoE and its mimetic peptide.
In this study, we investigated the effect of ApoE against oxidative stress and inflammation through its downstream pathway, JAK2/STAT3/NOX2, in EBI after SAH.
Materials and Methods
Experiment Design
The current study consists of three parts. Based on our previous results [ ], we euthanized the animals at the peak of EBI, namely, at 48 h after SAH. Detailed group information and the schematic illustration of the experimental process were displayed in Fig. 1 . Sample size was calculated according to the previously reported [ ] formula: 10 ≤ n × M − M ≤ 20, where n means the number of animals in each group and M means the number of groups. Also, a power of 0.8 and α of 0.05 were taken into consideration when choosing the sample size. All experiments were performed in a blinded manner, concealing allocation, and randomization throughout all experiments. Fig. 1 Schematic graphic for the experiment design. On the left is the information of groups, in the middle is the timeline for the experiment process, and on the right side are the areas from which samples used in each assay come
Animals
Young adult male wild-type C57BL/6J mice (WT; 8–10 weeks; 18–22 g) and condition-matched Apoe −/− mice on a C57BL/6 background (KO; 8–10 weeks; 18-22 g) were used in the experiments. Mice were housed in an environment with a relative humidity of 50 to 60% and a room temperature of 24 ± 1 °C. The mice were allowed access to food and water and were maintained under a 12-h light/dark cycle. Detailed information about mice is listed in Table 1 . Table 1 Animal distribution and usage Experiments Groups MRI and WB IHC and TUNEL ELISA Death Mortality Experiment 1 WT-Sham 5 5 5 0 0 (0/15) KO-Sham 5 5 5 0 0 (0/15) WT-SAH 5 5 5 4 21.05% (4/19) KO-SAH 5 5 5 7 31.82% (7/22) Experiment 2 WT-Sham Shared with experiment 1 WT-SAH + DMSO 5 5 5 3 16.67% (3/18) KO-SAH + DMSO 5 5 5 8 34.78% (8/23) KO-SAH + AG490 5 5 5 5 25% (5/20) Experiment 3 WT-Sham Shared with experiment 1 WT-SAH + saline 5 5 5 4 21.05% (4/19) WT-SAH + 1410 5 5 5 2 11.76% (2/17) Total number WT 88 14.78% (13/88) KO 80 25% (20/80) Detailed information about animal distribution and usage in the current study. Although the mortality number in each subexperiment and overall mortality number were higher in Apoe −/− mice, no significant difference was achieved
Establishment of Experimental SAH
Experimental SAH was established by endovascular perforation, as previously reported [ ]. Briefly, the mice were anesthetized with 2% pentobarbital (50 mg/kg) by intraperitoneal injection. A ventral midline neck incision was made to expose the right external carotid artery (ECA) and the internal carotid artery (ICA). A 5–0 monofilament nylon suture (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA) was used to perforate the bifurcation of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) and the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) through the ECA and ICA. In the Sham group, all the operational procedures except the vessel puncture were repeated. During the operation, body temperature was maintained at 37.5 ± 0.5 °C with an electric blanket. Mice after surgery were administered with 50 mg/kg ampicillin in a 0.9% saline twice daily until killing. The mice that died due to severe SAH were immediately replaced with condition-matched animals.
Drug Treatment
To assess the effect of ApoE on the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling pathway and NADPH oxidase 2 (NOX2) expression after SAH, we injected the specific JAK2 inhibitor AG490 (5 mg/kg, i.c.v.) into the Apoe −/− mice immediately after SAH as previously reported [ ]. Briefly, AG490 was dissolved in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) to achieve a dosage of 10 mg/ml. AG490 (0.5 μl/g body weight) was injected into the lateral cerebral ventricle using the following coordinates relative to the bregma: 1.5 mm posterior, 1.0 mm lateral, and 3.2 mm below the horizontal plane of the bregma at a rate of 1 μl/min. For control, an equal amount of DMSO (0.5 μl/g body weight) was injected in the KO-SAH + DMSO group.
To assess the effects of ApoE-mimetic peptide on oxidative stress and inflammation, the ApoE-mimetic peptide COG1410 was dissolved in sterile 0.9% saline solution immediately before administration and was intravenously injected at a dose of 1 mg/kg in a volume of 0.2 ml/20 g body weight, as previously reported [ ]. An equal amount of saline was injected into WT-SAH + saline group as control. The first injection was given immediately after surgery, and the subsequent injections were given daily until the mice were killed.
Neurological Score
The neurological performances of all animals ( n = 15 to 23 for each experiment) were evaluated by a blinded investigator using an 18-point scoring system known as the modified Garcia neurological score. The neurological performance was evaluated with six tests assessing spontaneous activity, spontaneous movement of four limbs, forepaw outstretching, climbing, body proprioception, and responses to whisker stimulation, respectively.
Rota-Rod Latency
To further evaluate mouse neurological performance, we assessed Rota-Rod latency in all animals ( n = 15 to 23 each experiment) using an automated Rota-Rod (ZB-200 Rota-Rod Treadmill; Taimeng Software Co. LTD, Chengdu, China) by a blinded investigator, as previously reported [ ]. Briefly, all the animals completed a total of nine training sessions over a period of 3 days before surgery. The baseline Rota-Rod latency was assessed three times for each group before SAH induction using an accelerating-speed mode (the rotating speed started at 0 rpm and was accelerated by 3 rpm every 10 s until it reached 30 rpm) and was assessed again after SAH induction. The Rota-Rod latency was defined as the average time length for all three trials.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is a sensitive and reliable detector of white matter injury. To evaluate the effects of ApoE and the ApoE-mimetic peptide on white matter injury in the EBI stage after SAH, we performed post-neurological evaluation MRI with T2WI and DTI using a Bruker 7.0 T system (Bruker Biospin, Billerica, MA, USA), as previously reported [ ] ( n = 5). T2-weighted images were acquired using RARE (repetition time = 4000; echo time = 45; RARE factor 8, 0.5 mm; field of view = 2.5 cm, 256 × 256). After completion of the T2-weighted MRI scanning, multislice in vivo DTI was performed using the following parameters: TE/TR = 25/3000 ms, 4 signal average, 12 diffusion directions, b value = 1000 s/mm 2 , bandwidth = 200,000 Hz, and the same FOV, slice thickness, and number of slices as the T2-weighted images. T2-hyperintensity volume and DTI fractional anisotropy (FA) values were analyzed using the Bruker Paravision 6.0 software by a blinded investigator. The corpus callosum and outer capsule were chosen as region of interest (ROI) to evaluate white matter injury in EBI after SAH.
SAH Severity and Mortality Analysis
The SAH grade of all animals ( n = 15 to 23) was determined by a blinded investigator using the 18-point scoring method as previously described [ ]. Briefly, high-resolution pictures of the circle of Willis and basilar arteries were taken. The basal cistern was divided into six regions, and each region was assigned a grade ranging from 0 to 3, depending on the amount of blood clotting. The total score for the six regions was defined as the mouse SAH grade. Mortality was calculated as the number of dead mice divided by the total number of mice used for each group after SAH. Only mice with scores higher than 8, as well as mice that died due to severe bleeding, were analyzed.
Western Blot Analysis
Western blot (WB) analysis was conducted as previously described [ ]. Briefly, right hemisphere brain tissues were collected from each mouse ( n = 5), and the protein was extracted using a protein extraction kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, Jiangsu, China). Equal amounts of protein sample were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and then transferred to PVDF membranes (EMD Millipore Inc., Billerica, MA, USA), which were blocked before being incubated with the appropriate primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C. The following primary antibodies were used in the experiment: rabbit polyclonal NOX2 antibody (ab80508, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), mouse polyclonal iNOS antibody (ab49999, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), rabbit polyclonal JAK2 antibody (ab108596, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), rabbit monoclonal anti-phospho-JAK2 (ab32101, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), rabbit polyclonal anti-STAT3 (ab68153, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), rabbit monoclonal anti-phospho-STAT3 (ab76315, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), and rabbit polyclonal anti-GAPDH (50599-2-Ig, Proteintech Group, Wuhan, China). After being washed, the membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies. The bands were visualized using an ECL Plus Chemiluminescence Reagent Kit (32209; Thermo Scientific) and were photographed by a chemiluminescence imaging system (ChemiDoc XRS+; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Band densities were quantified by ImageJ software by a blinded investigator.
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (Boster Biotechnology, Wuhan, China) were used to quantify the expression of the proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 and the oxidative stress markers SOD and MDA, according to the manufacturer instructions ( n = 5). Briefly, homogenates of the right brain hemisphere were prepared for analysis, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein concentration of each sample was measured by a BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, Jiangsu, China), and inflammatory cytokine levels, SOD activity levels, and MDA levels were calculated from the standard curve for each kit and normalized to the protein levels by a blinded investigator.
Immunohistochemical Staining
Immunofluorescence staining was carried out as previously described [ ]. The following primary antibodies were used for the experiment: mouse monoclonal NeuN antibody (ab104224, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), mouse monoclonal GFAP antibody (60190-1-Ig, Proteintech Group, Wuhan, China), mouse monoclonal Iba-1 antibody (ab15690, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), rabbit polyclonal NOX2 antibody (ab80508, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), mouse polyclonal iNOS antibody (ab49999, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), and mouse polyclonal CD206 antibody (ab8918, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA). The following secondary antibodies were used in the experiment: DyLight 594 Goat Anti-rabbit IgG (GtxRb-003-D594NHSX, Abbkine, CA, USA), DyLight 488 Goat Anti-mouse IgG (GtxMu-003-D488NHSX, Abbkine, CA, USA), and DyLight 594 Goat Anti-mouse IgG (GtxRb-003-D594NHSX, Abbkine, CA, USA). Three nonadjacent coronal sections in each brain sample ( n = 5) separated by a minimum distance of 100 μm were selected. Next, five random visual fields were selected per section in the right hemisphere—including the cortex, hippocampus, and white matter—and analyzed using Image-pro plus (IPP) 6.0 software by a blinded investigator.
TUNEL Staining
Neuronal apoptosis was analyzed by TUNEL staining with the neural marker NeuN (ab104224, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA). The experiment was performed using a TUNEL kit (11684817910, Roche), according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( n = 5, shared with immunohistochemical staining). Three nonadjacent coronal sections in each brain sample separated by a minimum distance of 100 μm were selected, and five visual fields in each section were selected in the right hemisphere—the cortex, hippocampus, and white matter—and analyzed using Image-pro plus (IPP) 6.0 software by a blinded investigator.
Statistical Analysis
Data are expressed as the means ± standard deviation (SD). For normal distribution data, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare the means of different groups. The Bonferroni post hoc method was used to determine significant group differences among groups. Mortality analysis was performed by Fisher’s exact test. All the statistical values were analyzed using SPSS 19.0 software (SPSS, Inc. Chicago, IL, USA). Statistical significance was accepted at p < 0.05.
Results
ApoE Deletion Increases Both White Matter and Neuronal Injury After SAH
The current study showed that SAH grades were not significantly different between WT and Apoe -deficient mice, which suggests that the severity of the primary injury was similar in both groups. MRI-T2WI and MRI-DTI results showed that T2 hyperintensity was significantly increased; FA values were decreased in WT mice at 48 h after SAH. Also, these changes were clearly evident in Apoe −/− mice. The number of apoptotic neurons increased in Apoe −/− mice when compared with WT mice after SAH (Fig. 2 a, b, n = 5), which increased neurological deficits and animal death (Fig. 2 c, n = 15 to 22). Although the overall mortality number was higher in Apoe −/− mice, no significant difference was achieved. Collectively, Apoe deficiency may not significantly increase animal mortality, it does accelerate both white matter and neuronal injury in EBI after SAH. Fig. 2 Apoe deficiency-induced oxidative stress increases both white matter and neuronal injury after SAH. a Representative pictures of the dorsal view of mice brains, MRI scanning, and TUNEL-positive neurons. b Quantification of the MRI-T2 hyperintensity volume, DTI-FA value, and the TUNEL-positive neuron number for each group. c Quantification of the SAH grade, the overall mortality rate, and the neurological behavioral test results in each group. d The change of widely used oxidative stress makers. The expression of NOX2 increased significantly; the MDA level was also significantly increased, whereas SOD was dramatically decreased after SAH. Further changes at the levels of these markers were observed in Apoe -deficient mice. With the exception of mortality, the results are expressed as the mean ± SD; scale bar = 50 mm (for SAH grade, neurological test, n = 15 to 22; for MRI, TUNEL staining, n = 5. * p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01 WT-Sham vs. WT-SAH; # p < 0.05 and ## p < 0.01 WT-SAH vs. KO-SAH)
Apoe Deficiency Increases Oxidative Stress After SAH
NOX2 (also known as gp91phox), one isoform of the catalytic subunit of NADPH oxidase, is the main source of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and plays a critical role in the development of oxidative stress after SAH [ ]. Therefore, NOX2 may mediate the deleterious effects of neuronal apoptosis and white matter injury after SAH. In support, our hypothesis, our results showed that NOX2 expression was significantly increased in WT mice after SAH and increased to an even greater extent in Apoe −/− mice. Similar changes in the expression of the downstream targets of NOX2 were also noted using oxidative stress markers SOD and MDA. SOD activity levels were decreased, whereas MDA levels were significantly increased in WT mice after SAH. Also, SOD activity levels were significantly increased, while MDA levels were significantly increased in Apoe- deficient mice (Fig. 2 d, n = 5). These changes support the conclusion that ApoE plays an important role in the modulation of oxidative stress in EBI after SAH.
Analysis of NOX2 Localization in EBI After SAH
To determine how NOX2 activity is affected by ApoE in EBI after SAH, we determined the main source of NOX2 by immunofluorescence staining. We reported that a few NeuN-positive neurons and GFAP-positive astrocytes expressed NOX2; however, Iba-1-positive microglia cells predominately expressed NOX2 at 48 h after SAH. Despite the controversy over how to classify the reactive microglia [ ], each phenotype of microglia expresses unique genes with specific functions [ , ]. To explore which microglia subpopulation affects NOX2, we analyzed the co-localization of NOX2 with iNOS and CD206. We reported that NOX2 was expressed almost exclusively with iNOS-positive M1 microglia as opposed to CD206-positive M2 microglia (Fig. 3 , n = 5). These results show that the ability of ApoE to modulate oxidative stress after SAH was associated with changes in microglia activation. Fig. 3 Analysis of the localization of the key oxidative stress regulator NOX2 in EBI after SAH. a Images of double-staining with NOX2 + NeuN, NOX2 + GFAP, and NOX2 + Iba-1 revealed that NOX2 was co-localized mainly with Iba-1-positive microglia after SAH. b Images of double-staining with NOX2 + iNOS, and NOX2 + CD206 showed that NOX2 was found almost exclusively in iNOS-positive M1 microglia as opposed to CD206-positive M2 microglia. c Quantification of the ratio of NOX2 positivity in different cell types. The results are expressed as the mean ± SD; scale bar = 50 mm ( n = 5, * p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01 microglia vs. neuron and astrocyte; # p < 0.05 and ## p < 0.01 iNOS + M1 microglia vs. CD206 + M2 microglia)
Apoe Deletion Induces M1 Microglia-Related Oxidative Stress and Inflammation After SAH
When endogenous ApoE was deleted in the KO group, the protein expression levels of the most commonly used classical proinflammatory M1 microglia marker, iNOS, increased significantly in EBI after SAH and were significantly higher in Apoe −/− mice than in WT mice. The oxidative stress regulator NOX2 showed a similar change. Immunofluorescence staining revealed that the number of iNOS and NOX2 co-positive microglia was significantly higher in Apoe −/− mice compared with WT mice (Fig. 4 a, b, n = 5). It is well established that the increase of M1 microglia is associated with an increased proinflammatory cytokine secretion. Therefore, we assessed the proinflammatory cytokines after SAH: IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α. In line with literature, the expression levels of the downstream proinflammatory cytokines of microglia, namely, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, were all higher in Apoe- deficient mice than in WT mice after SAH (Fig. 4 c, n = 5). Taken together, our data supports that ApoE has a therapeutically synergistic effect on anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory pathways after SAH, which in part are associated with M1 microglia activation. Fig. 4 Apoe deficiency increases the number of M1 microglia in EBI after SAH. a The expression of the M1 microglia marker iNOS was significantly increased in KO mice compared with WT mice. Immunofluorescence double staining with NOX2 + iNOS showed that M1 microglia was significantly increased by Apoe deficiency. b The downstream proinflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α were all expressed at higher levels in KO mice than in WT mice. c The phosphorylation level of the upstream regulator of NOX2, the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway, was significantly increased in KO mice compared with WT mice. The results are expressed as the mean ± SD; scale bar = 50 mm ( n = 5, * p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01 WT-SAH vs. KO-SAH; # p < 0.05 and ## p < 0.01 WT-SAH vs. KO-SAH)
It has been reported that NOX2 mediates the switching of microglia from a proinflammatory M1 phenotype to an anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype [ ]. To determine how ApoE may affect the M1 microglia activation after SAH, we measured the activation of the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway, the upstream regulator of NOX2. The data demonstrated that the phosphorylation of both JAK2 (pJAK2) and STAT3 (pSATA3) was significantly increased to a higher level in the KO group compared with the WT group at 48 h after SAH (Fig. 4 d, n = 5). Our data suggests that Apoe deficiency upregulated NOX2 and activated M1 microglia through the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway after SAH.
ApoE Suppress NOX2 Expression Through the JAK2/STAT3 Pathway After SAH
To further confirm whether Apoe deficiency upregulated NOX2 and activated M1 microglia through the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway after SAH, we used a specific JAK2/STAT3 inhibitor, AG490, to block the downstream JAK2/STAT3 activation in Apoe -deficient mice. Immunoblotting analysis revealed that pJAK2 and pSTAT3 levels were significantly higher in Apoe -deficient mice than in WT mice and that the increases in pJAK2 and pSTAT3 expression increased NOX2 expression. Also, the JAK2 inhibitor AG490 group significantly reduced the activation of the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway. By reducing the expression of NOX2 and iNOS in Apoe -deficient mice after SAH (Fig. 5 a–c, n = 5), AG490 treatment significantly increased both the modified Garcia score and Rota-Rod test performance when compared with DSMO-treated Apoe -deficient mice (Fig. 5 d, n = 15–23). Fig. 5 AG490 reduces Apoe deficiency-induced NOX2 upregulating after SAH. a Immunoblotting analysis of pJAK2, pSTAT3, NOX2, and iNOS expression levels in each group. AG490 treatment significantly reduced JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway activation and NOX2 expression, thereby decreased the expression of the M1 microglia marker iNOS in Apoe -deficient mice after SAH. b Quantification of the relative protein expression levels of pJAK2 and pSTAT3. c Quantification of the relative protein expression levels of NOX2 and iNOS. d Quantification of the SAH grade, the overall mortality rate, and the neurological behavioral test results in each group. With the exception of mortality, the results are expressed as the mean ± SD ( n = 5; * p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01 WT-Sham vs. WT-SAH + DMSO; & p < 0.05 and && p < 0.01 WT-SAH + DMSO vs. KO-SAH + DMSO; # p < 0.05 and ## p < 0.01 KO-SAH + DMSO vs. KO-SAH + AG490)
COG1410 Treatment Reduced Microglia-Related Oxidative Stress and Inflammation After SAH
Treatment with ApoE-mimetic peptide, COG1410, significantly reduced the levels of pJAK2 and pSTAT3; NOX2 and iNOS were significantly reduced (Fig. 6 a, n = 5). Oxidative stress maker SOD activity was dramatically increased, whereas MDA was significantly reduced by COG1410 treatment. Moreover, the expression level of the microglial downstream proinflammatory cytokines: IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α was also significantly reduced by COG1410 compared with saline-treated group in EBI after SAH (Fig. 6 b, n = 5). Immunofluorescence staining for the M1 microglia markers iNOS and NOX2 yielded results similar to those mentioned in the immunoblotting analysis (Fig. 6 c, n = 5). Fig. 6 COG1410 treatment reduces the numbers of M1 microglia in EBI after SAH. a Immunoblotting analysis of NOX2, iNOS, pJAK2, and pSTAT3 expression levels in each group. Two times of COG1410 treatment significantly reduced JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway activation and thus reduced NOX2 and iNOS expression. b COG1410 significantly reduced the number of NOX2-positive M1 microglia and related oxidative stress and inflammation. SOD activity was significantly restored, whereas MDA levels were significantly decreased by COG1410 treatment. The expression of the downstream proinflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α was also significantly suppressed by COG1410. c Immunofluorescence double-staining with NOX2 + iNOS showed that NOX2-positive M1 microglia numbers were significantly decreased by COG1410 treatment. The results are expressed as the mean ± SD; scale bar = 50 mm ( n = 5; * p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01 WT-Sham vs. WT-SAH + saline; # p < 0.05 and ## p < 0.01 WT-SAH + saline vs. WT-SAH + 1410)
COG1410 Attenuated Both White Matter Injury and Neuronal Apoptosis After SAH
To assess the clinical therapeutic potential of ApoE-based whole-brain protection after SAH, we examined the effects of COG1410 on white matter injury and neuronal apoptosis using MRI and TUNEL staining. MRI-T2WI and MRI-DTI showed that white matter injury was significantly attenuated in COG1410-treated mice compared with saline-treated mice after SAH. COG1410-treated mice displayed significantly less T2 hyperintensity and higher FA values than saline-treated mice after SAH. Additionally, the number of apoptotic neurons was reduced in COG1410-treated mice compared with saline-treated mice after SAH (Fig. 7 a, b, n = 5). The short-term neurological performance of COG1410-treated mice was also dramatically improved compared with saline-treated mice, and the overall mortality was lower in COG1410-treated mice compared with saline-treated mice (Fig. 7 c, n = 15 to 19). Our data indicates that the ApoE-mimetic peptide, COG1410, similar to the ApoE holoprotein, exerts a whole-brain protective effect after SAH and may show clinical efficacy. Fig. 7 COG1410 treatment reduces both white matter and neuronal injury in EBI after SAH. a Representative MRI photographs and TUNEL-positive neurons. b Quantification of the MRI-T2 hyperintensity volume, the DTI-FA value, and the TUNEL-positive neuron number for each group. c Quantification of the SAH grade, the overall mortality rate, and the neurological behavioral test results in each group. With the exception of the mortality data, the results are expressed as the mean ± SD; scale bar = 50 mm (for SAH grade, neurological test, n = 15 to 19; for MRI, TUNEL staining, n = 5. * p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01 WT-Sham vs WT-SAH + saline; # p < 0.05 and ## p < 0.01 WT-SAH + saline vs. WT-SAH + 1410)
Discussion
Excessive oxidative stress plays a key role in the development and progression of acute brain injury in both human and animal studies. At the molecular level, oxidative stress accelerates inflammation [ ] and triggers matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activation [ ], which can lead to BBB disruption, white matter injury, and neuronal apoptosis. Therefore, basic science research supports the targeting of oxidative stress as a promising intervention in stroke pathologies [ ]. In a SAH study, however, the blockade of conventional oxidative pathways using a variety of agents (glucocorticoids) has been demonstrated to have limited benefits in improving SAH outcomes [ ]. One possible explanation may be attributed to the difficulty of medication diffusion across the BBB [ ]. Furthermore, a poor mechanistic understanding of post-SAH white matter injury may be a reasonable hypothesis for the limited benefits of treatment in the clinical setting. Thus, the development of antioxidative drugs that can cross the BBB or utilize local antioxidant molecules in the brain to target both white matter and neuronal injury is a promising research endeavor in the field of SAH treatment.
Despite the negative reports of APOE genotypes on oxidative stress response-related processes [ ], the therapeutic antioxidant effects of ApoE, especially in the cardiovascular system, are widely accepted and established. In support of our hypothesis, Apoe gene deficiencies are related to deleterious oxidative stress responses and atherosclerosis [ ]. Further, literature has confirmed that ApoE3 and ApoE4 play a similar antioxidative role in the CNS after traumatic brain injury (TBI) [ ]. Paralleling these findings, Lomnitski et al. reported that the antioxidant metabolism is impaired in ApoE-deficient mice and leads to increased damage in head injuries [ ]. Our data supports the hypothesis that the anti-oxidant properties of ApoE may ameliorate the damaged from SAH. However, whether ApoE affects oxidative stress in EBI after SAH remains unclear. From this perspective, we started to question whether the neuroprotective effects of ApoE against EBI are mediated by the modulation of oxidative stress.
To confirm ApoE’s ability to modulate oxidative stress, we investigated oxidative stress marker changes in expression in EBI in the presence and absence of ApoE at 48 h after SAH. Loss of ApoE remarkably accelerated EBI and enhanced mouse functional deficits after SAH by enhancing both neuronal apoptosis and white matter injury, indicating that ApoE deficiency lead to significant whole-brain injury. The enhancement of EBI was associated with a more severe oxidative stress response in Apoe −/− mice; SOD activity decreased, while MDA expression significantly increased compared with WT mice. Taken together, these findings suggest that ApoE plays an important role in decreasing oxidative stress and protecting the whole-brain after SAH.
Although we found that ApoE plays an important role in reducing oxidative stress and EBI after SAH, the mechanisms by which ApoE influences the response to oxidative stress after SAH have not been explored. NADPH oxidase (NOX), a multiunit enzyme initially discovered in neutrophils, has recently been shown to be the major generator of reactive oxygen species and oxidative stress [ ]. The activation of NOX, especially NOX2, also known as gp91phox, is the primary mechanism underlying the development of oxidative stress in various neurodegenerative conditions, such as SAH [ , ]. Evidence also suggested that NOX2 is activated and initiates the progression of oxidative stress-related injury after SAH [ ]. Moreover, it was reported that Apoe deficiency increases NOX2 expression and leads to a damaging oxidative stress response in atherosclerosis [ ]. To explore the mechanism by which ApoE may modulate oxidative stress in EBI after SAH, we studied the effects of ApoE on NOX2 expression after SAH. The results showed that NOX2 expression was significantly increased after SAH and was further increased by Apoe −/− deficiency. Furthermore, we found that almost all the NOX2 co-localized with Iba-1-positive microglia. Specifically, NOX2 was found to be predominately activated in iNOS-positive M1 microglia after SAH. Next, we investigated the ability of NOX2 to regulate the action of microglia. In support of our hypothesis, literature has reported NOX2 to be a regulator of switching microglia from a proinflammatory M1 phenotype to an anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype after TBI, and inhibition of NOX2 suppressed M1 microglia and attenuated brain damage [ ]. Interestingly, it has been reported that increased proinflammatory microglia numbers are associated with increased proinflammatory cytokine and oxidative stress levels. This phenomenon leads to the initiation of a vicious cycle and ultimately induces a more severe brain injury. In this study, Apoe deficiency significantly increased the number of proinflammatory microglia. The levels of the M1 microglia biomarker iNOS and the major downstream proinflammatory mediator TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 were significantly increased in Apoe −/− mice compared with WT mice. On the contrary, ApoE-derived mimetic peptide COG1410 administration significantly reduced NOX2 expression and reversed M1 microglia activation by reducing both proinflammatory cytokines and oxidative stress markers after SAH. These changes ultimately resulted in the attenuation of both neuronal and white matter injury during EBI after SAH.
Taken together, these findings suggest that ApoE exerts a combination of anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects through suppression of NOX2-induced M1 microglial activation. Therefore, understanding how the NOX2 activity is controlled in the context of EBI is helpful for recognizing the whole-brain protective effects of ApoE after SAH. The JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway is one of the most highly conserved JAK/STAT family pathways in which STAT3 has emerged as a key factor in NOX2 activation [ ]. Although studies have demonstrated that STAT3 activation is responsible for a series of brain injuries [ , ], there is also support for the therapeutic role of STAT3 in driving M1 microglia towards a M2 phenotype in chronic ischemic white matter injuries [ ]. During our study, another group reported that JAK2/STAT3 inhibition abrogated early brain injury by suppressing the expression and translocation of high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) after SAH [ ]. Congruently, our data also showed that the phosphorylation of JAK2 and STAT3 (pJAK2, pSTAT3) was significantly increased after SAH. Endogenous ApoE deletion further increased pJAK2 and pSTAT3 and thereby increased NOX2 expression. To determine whether the suppressive effect of ApoE on NOX2 and the subsequent events are dependent on the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway, we treated Apoe −/− mice with a specific JAK2/STAT3 pathway inhibitor, AG490. We reported that AG490 dramatically reduced pJAK2 and pSTAT3 expression levels, which reversed the excessive upregulation of NOX2 and the associated EBI in Apoe −/− mice. COG1410 administration in WT mice also significantly reduced the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway, leading to increased positive outcomes after SAH.
Collectively, the JAK2/STAT3/NOX2 pathway axis may be a reasonable explanation for the whole-brain protective effects of ApoE after SAH (Fig. 8 ). ApoE mainly binds to the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1). LRP1 suppresses proinflammatory microglial activation through TAK1/JNK/AP-1 and NF-κB signaling pathways [ ]. Our data supports that JAK2/STAT3 should also be added to the list of possible pathways influenced by ApoE activation of LRP1. Fig. 8 Schematic pathway summary of the whole-brain protective property of ApoE. JAK2/STAT3 pathway dependent NOX2 expression upregulation in EBI stage can result in resting microglia to M1 microglia transformation, contribute to both oxidative stress and inflammation and, finally neuronal apoptosis and white matter injury. ApoE could suppress the excessive activation of JAK2/STAT3/NOX2 pathway axis and exist a whole-brain protective property in EBI after SAH
Although our results are highly suggestive, this study consisted of only animal models and several limitations should be noted. To begin, the first dosage of ApoE-mimetic peptide was administered immediately after the surgery and may not be feasible in the clinical setting. Other studies have demonstrated that the effective time window for COG1410 may be expanded up to 2 h after brain injury [ ]; thus, a longer time window of drug administration may yield beneficial results. Second, this study focused on the effect of ApoE and ApoE-mimetic peptide against EBI after SAH, but no long-term outcomes were evaluated. The improved short-term outcomes may simply reflect the ability of ApoE and ApoE-mimetic peptide to improve recovery kinetics and not final long-term outcomes. Third, SAH patients are more commonly disabled due to cognitive and emotional deficits rather than motor dysfunctions [ ]. The current study focused on behavioral and motor functional deficits and may be limited compared with water maze tests to detect therapeutic improvements in cognitive deficits.
In summary, for the first time, the current study took both white matter and neuronal injury into consideration when uncovering the mechanisms behind EBI after SAH. Our results suggest that M1 microglia activation-induced neuroinflammation and oxidative stress may be the major cause of post-SAH whole-brain injury. Given the lack of treatment options for SAH, ApoE and ApoE mimetic peptide COG1410 provide a basis for the development of a combinational approach for targeting oxidative stress and inflammation. ApoE-derivative therapy shows promise for whole-brain protection strategies designed to prevent EBI following SAH.