Introduction
Intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) occurs in 40% of patients with ICH, among which 50% will develop into hydrocephalus [ ]. Both IVH and hydrocephalus are independent risk factors for poor outcome of intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) patients [ ]. We previously found that hemorrhage in brain parenchyma and ventricular systems contribute to brain injury and hydrocephalus after IVH via aggravating brain iron overloading [ , ], suggesting that speeding up hematoma absorption may be a novel therapeutic strategy in the treatment of IVH.
Statin, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitors, is associated with improved outcome among patients with ischemic stroke [ ]. In addition to lowering cholesterol, statins also have pleiotropic effects such as protecting blood-brain barrier, immunoregulation, anti-oxidation, and promoting angiogenesis [ , ]. Over the past few years, several large retrospective cohort studies have reported that inpatient statin use is associated with improved outcomes following acute ICH [ , , ]. However, to date, no randomized controlled trials have proved its neuroprotective effect on ICH, especial in ICH patients with ventricular extension.
Simvastatin, a fermentation-derived natural statin, owns the properties of high lipophilicity and blood-brain barrier permeability [ ]. Recently, investigators reported that simvastatin treatment significantly reduced intracranial hematoma size at 4 weeks after ICH [ ], which suggests that simvastatin may have the ability of accelerating hematoma absorption. However, its underlying mechanism remains elusive and the potential efficacy in the treatment of IVH was also unknown. Therefore, we hypothesized that simvastatin could ameliorate brain injury post-IVH via enhancing hematoma absorption. The present study set out to test whether early simvastatin use could promote hematoma absorption, reduce iron accumulation and ependymal cilia damage, and subsequently alleviate hydrocephalus and attenuate neurological deficits in a rat model of IVH.
Methods
Animals and IVH Model
Sixty-eight adult male Sprague–Dawley rats (250–350 g; the Third Military Medical University) were used. Animal use procedures were in compliance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and approved by the Laboratory Animal Welfare and Ethics Committee of the Third Military Medical University (SCXK-PLA-20120011). Animals were anesthetized with pentobarbital (40 mg/kg IP), and a feedback-controlled heating pad was used to maintain body temperature at 37.0 °C. The rat model of IVH was established according to our previous published works [ , ]. For the model of ICH with ventricle extension, a cranial burr hole (1 mm) was drilled, and a 29-gauge needle was inserted stereotaxically into the right caudate nucleus (coordinates: 0.2 mm posterior, 5.0 mm ventral, and 2.2 mm lateral to the bregma). Subsequently, 200 μL of autologous arterial blood was infused in 10 min using a microinfusion pump. Then, the hole was sealed using bone wax. The sham groups received only needle injection.
Experiment Groups
This study was divided into three parts (Fig. I in the Data Supplement). First, to explore the effects of simvastatin treatment on IVH, 22 rats had an intracaudate injection of 200 μL of autologous whole blood. The sham control received only needle injection ( n = 7). At 24 h after IVH, the animals were randomly assigned to two groups ( n = 11 per group). Group 1 received 2 mg/kg simvastatin, and group 2 (control group) received the same volume of saline daily for 1 week by oral gavage. The dose regimen of simvastatin was referred to previous studies [ , ]. All rats underwent a series of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans at days 1, 3, 7, 14, and 28 after IVH. During this process, motor function evaluation was conducted from days 1 to 7, and cognitive function test was evaluated from days 23 to 28 following IVH. Then, the rats were euthanized at day 28 for Perl’s staining, H&E staining, and transmission electron microscope (TEM) scanning. Second, to determine the ferritin expression level after simvastatin administrated to rat model of IVH, 12 rats ( n = 4 for each group, as described in part I) were euthanized at day 28 for Western blotting analysis. Third, to examine whether CD36 has a role in simvastatin-induced hematoma clearance following IVH, 27 rats ( n = 9 for each group, only received a consecutive 3-day simvastatin or saline) were euthanized at day 3 for Western blotting analysis and confocal immunofluorescence.
MRI and Volume Measurement
Rats were anesthetized with 2% isoflurane/air mixture throughout MRI examination. The MRI scans were performed in a 7.0-T Varian MR scanner (Bruker, USA) with a T2* gradient-echo sequence and a T2 fast spin-echo sequence using a view field of 35 mm × 35 mm and 17 coronal slices (1.0 mm thickness). Volumes were calculated as previously described [ ]. Bilateral ventricles and the hippocampus were outlined, and the areas were measured; volumes were assessed by calculating the areas of all slices and multiplying by the section thickness [ ]. Volume of parenchymal and intraventricular hypointensity, representing hemorrhage and iron accumulation, was calculated from T2* gradient-echo MRI using the same method as for intraventricular volume. All image analyses were performed using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA), and volume measurements were performed by two observers in blinded manner.
Assessment of Neurological Abnormalities
Neurological dysfunction of rats were evaluated using a modified Neurological Severity Score (mNSS) method and forelimb placing test as described previously [ , ]. Briefly, the assessment was performed on day 1 before and on days 1, 3, and 7 after ICH. First, the mNSS is a composite test of motor, sensory, and balance functions. Neurological function was graded on a scale of 0–18 (normal score, 0; maximal deficit score, 18). Then, each rat was tested 10 times for each forelimb, and the percentage of trials in which the rat placed the appropriate forelimb on the edge of the countertop in response to vibrissae stimulation was determined. Testers were highly experienced and blinded to the condition of the animal. The mean neurological score was evaluated by two blinded observers.
Neurocognitive Function Assessment
Twenty-three days after blood infusion, the Morris water maze test was performed to assess learning and memory of the animals, as previously described [ ]. Animals were placed in a metal pool (50 cm in depth, 200 cm in diameter) filled with water and were allowed to find the submerged platform within 120 s. Then, they were given 5 days of acquisition training using a random set of start locations in the four quadrants. The latency time was monitored and averaged across four trials per day. On the sixth day, each rat was subjected to a probe trial (120 s) in which the platform was removed. The percent time in the target quadrant were calculated.
Cell Counts
The cell counts were performed at days 3 and 28 after IVH, respectively. Cell counts analysis was performed as previously described [ ]. For quantification of the positive cells in the perihematomal area (0.2 mm anterior to bregma) and hippocampus area (−3.3 mm posterior to bregma), consecutive slices were made, and two sections per animal ( n = 6 per group) with 40-μm space in between were used for cell counts. Three high-power images (×40 magnification) were used for cell counting. OX42 and CD36 positive cells were counted in the perihematomal area at day 3 post-IVH. Hippocampal cells were counted in the CA1 region at day 28 post-IVH. Cell counts were performed by two researchers in a blinded manner. All measurements were repeated three times, and the mean value was used.
Western Blot Analysis
Western blot analysis was performed as previously described [ , ]. The brains were perfused with saline before decapitation at days 3 or 28 after injection. The perihematomal brain tissue (1-mm-thick brain tissue around the hematoma) was sampled. The primary antibodies included rabbit anti-ferritin heavy chain polyclonal antibody (1:2000 dilution; Cell Signaling Technology), goat anti-ferritin light chain polyclonal antibody (1:2000 dilution; Abnova), and rabbit anti-CD36 polyclonal antibody (1:1000 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The relative densities of the bands were analyzed using NIH ImageJ software.
Dissection of Lateral Ventricles and Scanning Electron Microscopy
Animals were decapitated under deep anesthesia, and the brains were removed immediately. The right lateral ventricles were exposed widely using the whole-mount dissection technique previously described [ ]. Brain samples were removed and a 1-mm-thick coronal brain slice was cut with a blade 4 mm from the frontal pole. The ipsilateral ventricular wall tissue was sampled and immersed in the same fixative overnight at 4 °C. Samples were then post-fixed with 1.0% OsO4 and dehydrated in graded ethyl alcohol. After completion of dehydration, samples were infiltrated with propylene oxide, embedded in Epon resin, and sectioned. Ultra-thin sections were then stained with uranyl acetate and Reynold’s lead citrate. Sections were evaluated using a Philips CM 100 transmission electron microscope (Hillsboro, OR, USA) and digitally acquired using a Hamamatsu (Hamamatsu City, Shizuoka, Japan) ORCA-HR camera.
Immunofluorescence Staining
Immunofluorescence staining of brain tissue was performed on fixed frozen sections as previously described [ ]. Rats were anesthetized with pentobarbital (100 mg/kg intraperitoneal) and perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 mol/L pH 7.4 PBS. The brains were removed and kept in 4% paraformaldehyde for 4 to 6 h and then immersed in 30% sucrose for 3 to 4 days at 4 °C. The brains were embedded in an optimal cutting temperature compound (SAKURA, USA), and 18-mm-thick slices were cut using a cryostat. The following primary antibodies were used: rabbit antibody to CD36 (1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and mouse antibody to OX42 (1:200, Abcam). The secondary antibodies included Cy3-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) (1:200; Beyotime Biotechnology) and FITC-labeled goat anti-mouse IgG (H + L) (1:200; Beyotime Biotechnology).
Statistical Analyses
The values in this study are presented as mean ± SD. Data were analyzed by Student t test for single comparisons or ANOVA with post hoc Bonferroni–Dunn correction for multiple comparisons. A P value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Simvastatin Accelerates Hematoma Absorption after IVH in Rats
In this study, we used a clinically relevant animal model of ICH with ventricular extension that was previously established by our team [ , ]. At 24-h post blood injection, vehicle versus simvastatin was administered (2 mg/kg) daily for 1 week by oral gavage. T2*-weighted MRI was subsequently used to measure intracranial hematoma volume in parenchymal and ventricles at days 1, 3, 7, 14, and 28 after IVH. First, we analyzed the baseline of hematoma volume between control and treatment groups at day 1. As displayed in Fig. 1 a, b, the simvastatin groups tend to form much bigger hematoma than vehicle groups but without statistical difference (34.02 ± 16.92 versus 26.74 ± 16.48 mm 3 ; P > 0.05; Fig. 1 b). However, interestingly, at day 28 after IVH, a tendency towards smaller hematoma volume was seen in the simvastatin group (8.24 ± 4.03 versus 9.45 ± 4.31 mm3; P > 0.05; Fig. 1 b), which indicates that simvastatin seems to promote hematoma scavenging. Thus, to further determine the role of simvastatin in hematoma clearance, we compared the absorption ratio of hematoma using the following formula: hematoma absorption ratio (%) = ∆ V / V 1 × 100%, ∆ V = ( V 1 − V x ). V 1 indicates the baseline hematoma volume at day 1, V x indicates hematoma volume at days 3, 7, 14, or 28 after IVH. As shown in Fig. 1 c, a much higher hematoma absorption ratio was observed after simvastatin treatment at day 7 (52.53 ± 12.66 versus 32.51 ± 14.43; P = 0.011; Fig. 1 c) and day 28 (74.52 ± 9.80 versus 59.80 ± 15.52; P = 0.031; Fig. 1 c) when compared to the control group, providing additional evidence that simvastatin accelerated intracranial hematoma clearance following IVH in rats. Fig. 1 a T2*-weighted MRI scans (coronal sections) show the time course of the hematoma volume changes after IVH. The triangle indicates hematoma. b Hematoma volumes at 1, 3, 7, 14, and 28 days after IVH onset. Values are expressed as mean ± SD, n = 7 for sham group, n = 11 for simvastatin and vehicle groups. NS no statistical differences. c Hematoma absorption ratio at days 3, 7, 14, and 28 after IVH. Hematoma absorption ratio (%) = ∆ V / V 1 × 100%, ∆ V = ( V 1 − V x ). Values are expressed as mean ± SD, V 1 indicates the baseline of hematoma volume at day 1, V x indicates hematoma volume at days 3, 7, 14, or 28 after IVH
Simvastatin Administration Attenuates Brain Iron Deposition and Ependymal Cilia Injury
Previous studies revealed that both iron and cilia injury may lead to hydrocephalus development [ , ]. So, to further determine the underlying mechanisms of simvastatin-mediated hydrocephalus control, we observed the change of iron deposition and paraventricular cilia after simvastatin treated on IVH rats. Both HE and Perls’ staining present iron deposition in simvastatin and vehicle groups at day 28 after IVH, but less iron accumulation was detected in the simvastatin group (Fig. 2 a–k, l). Interestingly, more iron accumulation was detected around the ventricles after simvastatin administration at day 3 following IVH. Notably, the Perls’ (+) cells were similar to the morphology of activated microglia under high-power microscope, which contained more iron after simvastatin treatment when compared with the control (Fig. II in the Data Supplement). This indicate that simvastatin promoted early blood phagocytosis which subsequently result in faster iron clearance later. Additionally, TEM analysis displayed that IVH induced severe ependymal cilia desquamating, but simvastatin group shows more survival cilia in the ventricular wall region than the vehicle group (Fig. 2 b). These results suggest that acute simvastatin therapy decreased IVH-induced brain iron accumulation and protected cilia from shedding. Much more, western blotting analysis revealed that simvastatin induced less ferritin expression than the control group, which provided evidence for simvastatin-reduced brain iron overloading after IVH (Fig. III in the Data Supplement). Thus, at current time, we have evidence that simvastatin alleviates ventricular expansion following IVH, which may via accelerating the brain hematoma removal, then reducing iron deposits and iron-mediated cilia damage, and ultimately improving the CSF circulation. Fig. 2 a HE staining and Enhanced Perls’ reaction display less brain iron accumulation in the simvastatin group than the vehicle group at 28 days after IVH. Black arrows indicate iron deposition. b Transmission electron microscopy shows that more ependymal cilia survival in the simvastatin group when compared with the control at 28 days after IVH. Red arrows represent ependymal cilia
Simvastatin Treatment Reduces Lateral Ventricular Dilation Following IVH
Previous studies found that intracranial hematoma contributes to hydrocephalus after IVH [ , , ]. We thus speculate that simvastatin has potential to reduce post-IVH hydrocephalus via expediting hematoma scavenging. In the present study, T2-weighted MRI was adopted to examine whether simvastatin administration could reduce ventricular dilation after IVH. As displayed in Fig. 2 a, b, analysis of MRI at day 1 showed that both vehicle groups and simvastatin groups developed remarkable ventriculomegaly, with no statistical differences between them (43.85 ± 13.33 versus 41.31 ± 18.32 mm 3 ; P > 0.05; Fig. 3 b). However, 4 weeks later, significant decrease of ventricular size was observed in the simvastatin group when compared with the control group (38.48 ± 15.92 versus 62.90 ± 14.49 mm 3 ; P < 0.05; Fig. 3 b). Taken together, our data indicate that simvastatin treatment effectively restricted chronic hydrocephalus development in rat model of IVH, which may via promoting hematoma resolution. Fig. 3 a T2-weighted MRI scans (coronal sections) show the time course of lateral ventricular volume changes after IVH. Arrows indicate expanded lateral ventricle. b Volumes of lateral ventricle at 1, 3, 7, 14 and 28 days following IVH. Values are expressed as mean ± SD, n = 7 for sham group, n = 11 for simvastatin and vehicle groups. NS no statistical differences; * P < 0.05 sham group versus vehicle group. # P < 0.05 simvastatin group versus vehicle group
Simvastatin Treatment Ameliorates Motor Dysfunction and Long-Term Cognitive Deficits
Having shown simvastatin promotes hematoma clearance and reduced ventricular dilation following IVH, we next examined its efficacy against short-term behavioral deficits (days 1–7, Fig. 4 a) and long-term neurocognitive injury (days 23–28, Fig. 4 a). In the vehicle group, the motor deficits induced by IVH gradually recovered for the duration of 7-day post-injury, as consistently indicated by mNSS (modified Neurological Severity Scores) and forelimb placement test. Nevertheless, simvastatin treatment facilitated and enhanced this process of motor function recovery after IVH ( P < 0.05, Fig. 4 b). Unlike motor dysfunction, changes in neurocognition are only apparent at least 3 weeks post-injury and can be determined via the Morris water maze test. With five consecutive days (days 23–37) of acquisition training, there was a remarkable decrease in the latencies to the goal in the simvastatin group compared with the vehicle group ( P < 0.05, Fig. 4 c), indicating that simvastatin attenuated learning deficits after IVH. During the probe trial (day 28), the simvastatin-treated animals spent more time traveling in the target quadrant than did the vehicle groups ( P < 0.05 or 0.01, Fig. 4 d), suggesting simvastatin improved memory dysfunction following IVH in rats. What’s more, H&E staining at day 28 post-IVH showed that more neurons exist in the CA1 region of hippocampus in the simvastatin group than the control group (Fig. IV in the Data Supplement). These data suggest that simvastatin showed the ability of protecting from motor and cognitive dysfunction following IVH in rats. Fig. 4 a Steps of neurological assessment after IVH. b mNSS and forelimb placement test were used to evaluate motor function of animals at 1 day pre-IVH and 1, 3, and 7 days post-IVH. Values are expressed as mean ± SD, n = 7 for sham group, n = 11 for simvastatin and vehicle groups. * P < 0.05 simvastatin group versus vehicle group. c , d Morris water maze was performed to test cognitive function of animals from days 23 to 28 after IVH. Escape latency in training trials ( c ), percent time in the target quadrant during probe trials ( d ). Values are expressed as mean ± SD, n = 7 for sham group, n = 11 for simvastatin and vehicle groups. * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01 sham group versus vehicle group; # P < 0.05, ## P < 0.01 simvastatin group versus vehicle group
CD36 Has a Role in Simvastatin-Mediated Hematoma Absorption after IVH
Consistent with the results from a previous research [ ], we also observed that simvastatin treatment promoted brain hematoma clearance in IVH rats. However, to our best knowledge, no one study investigated the underlying mechanism. Recently, CD36, a key scavenger receptor, having an important role in the process of phagocytosis, attracted much attention for its outstanding performance on promoting hematoma absorption after ICH [ , , , ]. Therefore, we next set out to determine whether CD36 involve in simvastatin-mediated hematoma absorption after IVH also. First, as a previous research reported that the peak level of CD36 expression around hematoma was on the third day following ICH [ ], we measured CD36 level at day 3 post-IVH using Western blotting analysis (Fig. 5 d). As displayed in Fig. 5 d, CD36 expression level was upregulated around hematoma after IVH animals treated with simvastatin. Then, the location of CD36 was confirmed by immunofluorescent double staining. Confocal microscopy showed that CD36 mainly co-located with OX42 (a marker for activated microglia or macrophages) around the hematoma after IVH (Fig. 5 a). And, more remarkable, the simvastatin group presented more OX42 and CD36 positive cells in perihematomal brain tissue than the control (Fig. 5 b, c). Much more, we found that more CD36 expression in the periventricular regions at day 3 after IVH, and simvastatin treatment significantly upregulated the expression level of CD36 (Fig. V in the Data Supplement). Taken together, our data indicate that simvastatin treatment recruited more active microglia or macrophages and increased CD36 expression in the edge of hematoma, via which enhances the phagocytosis of RBCs, and subsequently accelerates hematoma cleanup (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 5 a Representative photographs of immunofluorescence staining for OX42 ( green , a marker for microglia/macrophages) and CD36 ( red , a marker for scavenger receptor) in sham group and the perihematomal area 3 days after IVH. The cell counts of OX42 positive cells ( b ) and CD36 positive cells ( c ) around hematoma at day 3 after IVH. Values are expressed as mean ± SD, n = 5 per groups, # P < 0.05 versus vehicle group. d Coronal section of rat brain 3 days post-IVH. Red boxes indicated the sampling sites for Western blot assay. Western blot assay displays the expression level of CD36 around hematoma in the ipsilateral hemisphere in sham and IVH rat 3 days after IVH. Values are expressed as mean ± SD, n = 4 per groups, ** P < 0.01 versus sham group; # P < 0.05 versus vehicle group Fig. 6 Proposed mechanism underlying the neuroprotection of simvastatin against IVH. Previous studies indicate that extravasated RBCs will lyses and release a large amount of iron after IVH; then iron-induced oxidative stress products lead to ependymal cilia damage, which subsequently breaking the normal CSF circulation and finally causing hydrocephalus. After early simvastatin administration, CD36 scavenger receptor on microglia/macrophages was upregulated, and then promoting the phagocytosis of extravasated RBCs before lysis and subsequent toxicity occurs, by which simvastatin accelerates hematoma absorption, prevents cilia from injuring and reduces ventriculomegaly after IVH. CSF cerebrospinal fluid, RBC red blood cell
Discussion
In this paper, we show that simvastatin treatment significantly accelerated intracranial hematoma absorption and attenuated ventricular dilation and neurological deficits in a rat model of IVH. What’s more, simvastatin-induced upregulating CD36 expression may involve in faster hematoma absorption.
In addition to the most familiar effect of cholesterol reduction, statins also display pleiotropic effects, like anti-inflammation, promoting neurogenesis and neuroplasticity [ ]. Thus, statins are attractive candidates for the development of a neuroprotective strategy. In the past few years, some retrospective clinical researches were conducted to explore the efficacy of statins use in the acute therapy of ICH. While some data indicated that early statin use might be highly related to improvement of the outcome of patients with ICH [ , , ], other data suggested that statin may increase the long-term risk of recurrent hemorrhage [ , ]. Concerns about a potential increased risk of recurrent ICH may lead some clinicians to discontinue statin therapy during ICH hospitalization. Since no randomized clinical trial has been fully executed till this date, the use of statin therapy after ICH remains controversial. In the meantime, some preclinical researches investigated the efficacy of statins in autologous blood injection rat model of ICH. Results showed that early statin use protected blood-brain barrier, decreased tissue loss, improved neurological recovery, and increased neurogenesis and neuronal plasticity following ICH [ , ]. Recently, more remarkably, statins also performed the potential ability of promoting intracranial hematoma removal. In 2004, Lu et al. [ ] reported that atorvastatin reduces the volume of intraparenchymal and intraventricular hemorrhages at day 8 after traumatic brain injury in rats. Recently, Karki et al. [ ] investigated the neuroprotective effect of simvastatin in ICH rats and found simvastatin also significantly reduced hematoma volume at 4 weeks. Therefore, we speculated that statins could also promote hematoma resolution after IVH. In consideration of the high lipophilicity and blood-brain barrier permeability, we employed simvastatin in this IVH study. In consistence with previous studies, although no remarkable reduction of hematoma size was observed, simvastatin use significantly accelerated hematoma absorption after IVH. Further data analysis suggests that the unbalanced baseline of hematoma volume between the statin group and the control group may explain this result. Given that, larger sample size and more animal models are needed to examine the effect of hematoma resolution in the future.
Hydrocephalus is a commonly severe complication following IVH [ , , ]. Although some progress has been made in the treatment of hydrocephalus, like ventricular drainage and shunting, many complications can occur [ , ]. Over past decades, increasing evidences indicate that hemorrhage and its degradation products, like hemoglobin and iron, play a key role in the pathogenesis of hydrocephalus and brain injury after IVH [ ]. Some studies including ours have tested iron chelation in the treatment of IVH and showed that deferoxamine effectively alleviated ventricular dilation and brain injury [ , ]. But related randomized clinical trial has not yet been carried out. Recently, researches form our team and other labs reported that intracerebral and intraventricular hemorrhage contributes to hydrocephalus and brain injury after IVH via aggravating iron overloading [ , ]. Thus, faster removal of extravasated erythrocytes by activating phagocytosis before lysis may be a promising noninvasive treatment for IVH. Therefore, we hypothesized that simvastatin has potential to alleviate post-IVH injury through accelerating hematoma clearance. In the present study, we found that simvastatin treatment effectively attenuated ventriculomegaly and neurological dysfunction following IVH, which provided evidence for our hypotheses. These results implied that inpatient simvastatin use may be associated with improved outcomes after IVH, especial for patients treated with conservative treatment.
Ependymal cells are a layer of cells lining the ventricles and interventricular connections. Orchestrated beating of cilia on the ependymal cells is necessary for the normal CSF circulation; even cilia dysfunction or shedding is associated with the development of hydrocephalus [ , ]. Our previous studies indicated that iron overloading after IVH could induce oxidative stress injury to cilia through increasing malondialdehyde level [ ]. In accordance with previous researches [ , ], severe iron accumulation and ependymal cilia damage were detected after IVH in this study. And simvastatin administration significantly reduced iron deposition and cilia scaling. This may explained simvastatin-mediated hydrocephalus reduction after IVH.
Although simvastatin-induced intracranial clot removal was observed, the underlying mechanisms are still unclear. Phagocytosis of RBCs by microglia and/or infiltrating macrophages has also been suggested as having roles in resolution [ , ]. CD36, a well-recognized membrane protein located on microglia/macrophage cells, is known to mediate phagocytosis of damaged, apoptotic, or senescent cells, including erythrocytes [ , , ]. Recently, some investigators reported that upregulating the expression of CD36 on phagocytes leaded to hematoma size reduction in rodent models of ICH [ , ]. Additionally, Yang et al. found that CD36-deficient ICH patients had slower hematoma adsorption and severe neurologic deficits when compared to patients with normal CD36 expression [ ]. These data suggested that CD36 had a key role in hematoma resolution after ICH. Therefore, on the basis of the above findings, we speculated that CD36 may also involve in simvastatin-induced hematoma clearance after IVH. Our results provide evidence for our hypothesis and future research will focus on uncovering this association.
There are a few limitations in our study. First, we used only a single dose of simvastatin recommended in the work published by Karki et al. [ ] to fit with the cumulative dose used in rat model of ICH. More doses of simvastatin used can be discussed in the future. Second, we just examined the expression of CD36 around hematoma; subsequent experiments should focus on how simvastatin implements the regulation of CD36 after IVH by in vivo and in vitro tests. Last, as no death was observed in the whole process, more animal models are needed to investigate the effect of simvastatin on mortality following IVH.
Conclusion
In summary, early simvastatin treatment in rats with IVH effectively reduced ventricular dilation and attenuated neurological dysfunction, which may in part by upregulating CD36 expression on microglia/macrophages around hematoma, and subsequently enhancing phagocytes-mediated erythrocyte phagocytosis. Our data suggest that inpatient simvastatin use may be a promising strategy for IVH. More preclinical experiments and randomized controlled trials should be performed to further investigate this association.