Introduction
Stroke is a critical cerebrovascular disease caused by the occlusion of a cerebral artery. Given recent advances in stroke therapies, such as neuroendovascular and recombinant tissue plasminogen activator therapy, an increasing number of patients with stroke can undergo obstructed artery recanalization [ , ]. Thus, it is important to understand the fate of cells in the central nervous system (CNS) under transient ischemic/reperfusion injury when considering therapies that target endogenous neural cells, such as neural stem cells (NSCs). However, the events that occur in the CNS in response to nonlethal and lethal ischemia following transient ischemia/reperfusion injury have not been well documented.
Neurogenesis is a well-known occurrence around vascular niches in pathological brains, such as those affected by ischemic stroke [ , , ]. Although the precise origin of newborn neurons in the damaged brain remains unclear, NSCs are a strong candidate because they have the capacity to differentiate into various types of neural cells, including neurons. Traditionally, specific types of NSCs have been proposed in conventional neurogenic zones of the CNS, such as the subventricular zone [ ] and subgranular zone within the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus [ ]. In contrast, the precise traits of NSCs in areas outside of conventional neurogenic zones, such as the cerebral cortex, remain unclear. In a previous study, we used a mouse model of permanent cortical infarction to demonstrate the induction of NSCs within the cerebral cortex [ ] and found that these cells originate, at least in part, from brain pericytes around blood vessels [ , , ]. Pericyte-derived injury/ischemia-induced NSCs (iNSCs) are multipotent and thus, can differentiate into various neural lineages, including neurons. Following permanent ischemia, iNSCs were induced within ischemic areas but not within nonischemic areas. In addition, brain pericytes have been found to survive and convert into iNSCs under severe ischemic/hypoxic conditions [ ]. These findings indicate that severe ischemia is essential for the induction of iNSCs.
However, a recent study from another group demonstrated that neurons were newly generated even after transient cerebral ischemia [ ], suggesting that iNSCs can be induced by mild ischemia following transient ischemia/reperfusion injury. This finding also implies that pericyte-derived iNSCs might generate neurons under these conditions, suggesting that brain pericytes could serve as a target for neurogenesis promotion after transient ischemia/reperfusion injury. The purpose of the present study was to investigate whether iNSCs could be induced after nonlethal mild ischemia as well as after lethal severe ischemia and to examine the origin and fate of iNSCs following transient ischemia/reperfusion injury.
Materials and Methods
Animal Studies
All procedures were performed in accordance with a protocol approved by the Animal Care Committee of Hyogo College of Medicine and complied with the Guide for the Care and Use of Animals published by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in Japan. Animals were given ad libitum access to food and water throughout the duration of the experiments and were maintained in a 12-h light/dark cycle. Efforts were made to minimize the number of animals used and their suffering. Quantitative analyses were performed by investigators who were blinded to the experimental protocol and identities of the samples under study.
Induction of Transient Cortical Ischemia
Cerebral ischemia was induced in male CB-17/Icr- +/+ Jcl mice aged 6–10 weeks (CB-17 mice; Clea Japan Inc., Tokyo, Japan). The induction of infarct areas in the cerebral cortexes of mice on this background has been shown to be highly reproducible and limited to the ipsilateral cerebral cortex [ , ]. Transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (t-MCAO) was induced according to our modification of the Tamura method [ , ]. Transient focal cerebral ischemia was induced under halothane inhalation (0.5–2 %) anesthesia via transient occlusion with a monofilament nylon suture distal to the olfactory tract crossing. The tip of a 2-mm length of monofilament nylon suture (7–0; Tyco, Princeton, NJ, USA) was bent into a hook, and the suture was passed under the distal portion of the left middle cerebral artery (MCA). Subsequently, both ends of the suture were picked up and rotated 180° clockwise horizontally with the artery. Notably, the 7–0 nylon suture is stiffer than the artery, and thus rotation of the suture together with the artery does not twist the suture but rather loops the artery, resulting in a complete interruption of blood flow. To reduce the effects of volatile anesthetic as much as possible, anesthesia was maintained via 0.5–0.2% halothane inhalation during MCA occlusion for 15, 20, or 30 min to determine the threshold of lethal ischemic insult to the cortical neurons. After occlusion, MCA blood flow was restored by replacing the nylon suture via counterclockwise rotation. During surgery, the rectal temperature was monitored and maintained at 37.0 ± 0.2 °C using a feedback-regulated infrared heating lamp (Nipponkoden, Tokyo, Japan).
Evaluation of Infarct Volume
At 3, 5, or 7 days after the induction of transient ischemia, the mice were deeply anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg) to evaluate the infarct volume of brain tissue. Two-millimeter coronal forebrain sections were cut and stained with 1 % 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) to demarcate the border between viable and nonviable tissues. Staining was performed for 15 min at 37 °C in the dark, followed by fixation in 4 % paraformaldehyde/phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.4). The infarct volume was measured using a microscopic digital camera system (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The TTC-positive area of each hemisphere was estimated using the National Institutes of Health ImageJ software (Version 1.62), and the viable cortex volume was calculated by integrating the coronal-oriented area. The percent stroke volume was calculated according to the previously described equation: [(contralateral hemisphere volume) − (infracted hemisphere volume)] / [(contralateral hemisphere volume) × 2] × 100 % [ ].
Immunohistochemistry
For the histochemical analysis of post-transient cortical ischemic tissues, mice were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg) and transcardially perfused with 100 mL 4 % paraformaldehyde 3 or 7 days after MCA occlusion/reperfusion. After overnight fixation, brain samples were cryoprotected in 30 % sucrose and frozen at −80 °C. Coronal sections (20 μm) were then prepared using a cryostat and subjected to immunohistochemistry with antibodies against microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2; 1:500 dilution; Sigma-Aldrich), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; 1:1000; DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark), nestin (1:100; Millipore, Temecula, CA, USA), CD31 (1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRβ, 1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and doublecortin (DCX; 1:700; Millipore). Primary antibodies were visualized using Alexa Fluor 488- or 555-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:500; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA). Nuclei were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; 1:1000; Kirkegaard & Perry Laboratories, Gaithersburg, MD, USA). Images of sections were captured using a confocal laser microscope (LSM780; Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany).
Isolation of iNSCs Following Transient Ischemia
The transient ischemic cortex, including the pia mater, was removed 3 days after ischemia induction. The ischemic tissue was dissociated into a single-cell suspension by passage through 23- and 27-G needles. Cells were incubated with adherent cultures using poly- d -lysine-coated 6-well plates (Thermo Scientific, Rochester, NY, USA) in neural-conditioned medium (Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium/F12 [Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA] containing fibroblast growth factor-basic [20 ng/mL; Peprotech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA], 2 % fetal bovine serum, N2 [1 %; Invitrogen], and leukemia inhibitory factor [LIF, 0.025 μg/mL; Millipore]). On day 14 after incubation, the cells that had adhered were removed with trypsin. Then, these cultured cells were collected from the 6-well plates, and the numbers of cells were counted using a hemocytometer [ N = 3, for each transient ischemic group (15-min, 20-min, and 30-min t-MCAO)].
The cells were subsequently subjected to floating culture in a neural-conditioned medium that promoted the formation of neurosphere-like cell clusters [ , , , ]. Four weeks after incubation, the cell clusters were differentiated on poly- l -lysine-coated (0.05 %) glass coverslips for 7 days in neurobasal medium (Invitrogen) containing retinoic acid (0.06 mg/mL; Sigma-Aldrich) and B-27 supplement (Invitrogen). The clusters were then subjected to immunohistochemistry using antibodies against Tuj1 (1:1000; Stemcell Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) and MAP2 (1:1000; Millipore), followed by Alexa Fluor 488- or 555-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:500; Molecular Probes). In another sets of experiments, to identify the traits of cells isolated from various ischemic brains, the adherent cells were subjected to immunohistochemistry using antibodies against nestin (1:100; Millipore), PDGFRβ (1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and GFAP (1:1000; DAKO). Bound primary antibodies were visualized using Alexa Fluor 488- or 555-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:500; Molecular Probes). The positive cells were subjected to semiquantitative analysis as described previously [ , , ].
Immunoelectron Microscopy
For immunoelectron microscopic investigations of tissues collected 3 and 7 days after a 15-min t-MCAO, mice were perfused with a fixative solution containing 4 % paraformaldehyde and 0.1 % glutaraldehyde in phosphate buffer at pH 7.4. Following perfusion, the brains were removed and immersed in the same fixative at 4 °C overnight. Coronal brain sections were cut with a microtome at a thickness of 50 μm. These sections were subjected to immunohistochemistry using the avidin–biotin horseradish peroxidase (HRP) complex (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) and 3,3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB) technique. After treatment with 10 % normal goat serum for 30 min at a constant room temperature, the sections were incubated with rabbit polyclonal anti-GFAP (1:1000; DAKO), mouse monoclonal anti-nestin (1:100, Millipore), rabbit polyclonal anti-PDGFRβ (1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and guinea pig polyclonal anti-DCX (1:700; Millipore) overnight at 4 °C. Sections were further treated with goat biotinylated anti-mouse IgG (1:500; Vector Laboratories) for nestin, biotinylated anti-rabbit IgG (1:500; Vector Laboratories) for GFAP and PDGFRβ, and biotinylated anti-guinea pig for DCX (1:500; Vector Laboratories) for 60 min at a constant room temperature. The sections were then incubated with an avidin–biotin HRP complex (1:200; Vector Laboratories) for 60 min at room temperature, followed by staining with Tris–HCl containing DAB (0.2 mg/mL) and 0.003 % hydrogen peroxide.
After the DAB reaction, the sections were postfixed with 1 % OsO 4 for 1 h, then dehydrated, and flat embedded on siliconized glass slides in Epon resin. Ultrathin sections that included the pia mater and cortex were cut, mounted on Formvar-coated single-slot (2 × 1 mm) grids, and contrasted with 2 % uranyl acetate and lead citrate, after which electron micrographs were taken at 80 kV on a JEM-1200EX scope (JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).
Statistical Analysis
The results are presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). The data were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni post hoc tests. A p value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Brain Injury Following Transient Ischemia/Reperfusion
We previously described a reproducible murine model of permanent cerebral ischemia induced via electrocoagulation of the distal portion of the left MAC in CB-17 mice [ ]. In this study, we have modified this model to develop a reproducible model of transient ischemia/reperfusion injury. To investigate the durations of ischemia insult that induce nonlethal and lethal brain damage after transient ischemia/reperfusion, brain sections were stained with TTC at 3, 5, and 7 days after various durations of t-MCAO.
Staining with TTC after a 15-min t-MCAO indicated no apparent ischemia at day 3 or even later (days 5 and 7; Fig. 1a, b ). However, among mice subjected to 20-min t-MCAO, cerebral infarction was observed in three of eight animals and four of seven animals evaluated at days 3 and 5 after t-MCAO, respectively. Brain infarction was observed in all mice at days 3 and 5 after 30-min t-MCAO (Fig. 1a, b ). In mice subjected to 20-min t-MCAO, the percentages of the infarct areas respective to the entire brain (% stroke volumes) were 3.9 ± 5.6 % at day 3 and 3.8 ± 4.3 % at day 5. In mice subjected to 30-min t-MCAO, the % stroke volumes were 14.3 ± 2.4 % at day 3 and 13.3 ± 1.9 % at day 5; these infarction values were consistent with our previously reported results from permanent ischemia models using CB-17 mice [ ]. The time elapsed after reperfusion did not cause a significant difference in infarct area expansion between the mice subjected to 20- and 30-min t-MCAO, but the duration of transient ischemia did differ significantly (Fig. 1c ). Fig. 1 TTC staining at 3, 5, and 7 days after 15-, 20-, or 30-min t-MCAO ( a , b ). TTC staining ( a ) after 15-min t-MCAO revealed the absence of ischemia at all time points (days 3, 5, and 7). However, brain infarction was observed in some mice at days 3 and 5 after 20-min t-MCAO and in all mice at days 3 and 5 after 30-min t-MCAO. The graph ( b ) plots the % stroke volumes of all animals ( white circle , animals with no infarction and black circle , animals with infarction). No animals subjected to 15-min t-MCAO exhibited infarction on days 3 ( N = 6), 5 ( N = 6), and 7 ( N = 4) after ischemia/reperfusion. After 20-min t-MCAO, infarction was present in 3/8 and 4/7 animals at 3 ( N = 8) and 5 ( N = 7) days after ischemia/reperfusion, respectively. After 30-min t-MCAO, infarction was detectable in 4/4 and 6/6 animals at 3 ( N = 4) and 5 ( N = 6) days after ischemia/reperfusion, respectively. The % stroke volume was higher in mice after 30-min t-MCAO than after 20 min t-MCAO ( C ) ( white square , 3 days after ischemia/reperfusion and black square , 5 days after ischemia/reperfusion). Scale bar = 2 mm ( a ). * P < 0.01 vs. 20-min t-MCAO. t - MCAO transient middle cerebral artery occlusion, TTC 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride
Pre-existing Neural Cell Death Following Transient Ischemia/Reperfusion Injury
As shown above, neural cells within the infarct lesion likely undergo cell death in response to 30-min t-MCAO (Fig. 1 ). To confirm this, sham-operated mice (Fig. 2a–d ) or mice at day 3 after 15- (Fig. 2e–h ), 20- (Fig. 2i–l ), and 30-min t-MCAO (Fig. 2m–p ) were evaluated using immunohistochemistry. Mature neural cells, including neurons (MAP2 + cells; Fig. 2b, d ) and astrocytes (GFAP + cells; Fig. 2c, d ), were observed in nonischemic control mice. Although TTC staining after 15-min t-MCAO did not reveal an infarction at day 3 (Fig. 1a ), a histological examination after 15-min t-MCAO showed that MAP2 + mature neurons began to decrease simultaneously in ischemic regions (Fig. 2f, h ). These findings indicate that the histological changes were more sensitive than the changes in TTC staining (Fig. 1a ), as reported previously [ ]. These findings also indicate that a short t-MCAO duration is sufficient to induce CNS injury. Neuronal death became more apparent after 20-min t-MCAO (Fig. 2j, l ), and MAP2 + cells were rarely observed after 30-min t-MCAO (Fig. 2n , p ), when cerebral infarction became apparent via TTC staining (Fig. 1a ). Numbers of GFAP + cells were transiently increased within the ischemic and peri-ischemic regions following 15-min t-MCAO (Fig. 2g, h ). However, GFAP + cells were rarely observed within ischemic areas after 20-min t-MCAO but were observed in peri-ischemic areas (Fig. 2k, l ). No GFAP + cells were observed within ischemic areas after 30-min t-MCAO, although some GFAP + cells were observed in peri-ischemic areas (Fig. 2o, p ,). These findings indicate that 30-min t-MCAO is sufficient to induce the death of mature neural cells within ischemic areas. Fig. 2 MAP2 and GFAP immunohistochemistry in sham-operated ( a – d ) and transient ischemic mice after 15- ( e – h ), 20- ( i – l ), or 30-min t-MCAO ( m – p ). Mature neural cells, including MAP2 + and GFAP + cells, were observed in sham-operated mice [MAP2 ( b , d : green ), GFAP ( c , d : red ), and DAPI (nuclear stain; b – d : blue )]. After 15-min t-MCAO, MAP2 + cells began to decrease in ischemic regions, whereas GFAP + cells increased [MAP2 ( f , h : green ), GFAP ( g , h : red ), and DAPI ( f – h : blue )]. After 20-min t-MCAO, neural cells apparently decreased within ischemic areas [MAP2 ( j , l : green ), GFAP ( k , l : red ), and DAPI ( j – l : blue )]. After 30-min t-MCAO, neural cells were rarely observed within ischemic areas [MAP2 ( n , p : green ), GFAP ( o , p : red ), and DAPI ( n – p : blue )]. Scale bars = 50 μm ( b , f , j , n ). Results displayed are representative of the experimental protocol (sham, N = 3; 15-min t-MCAO, N = 10; 20-min t-MCAO, N = 7; 30-min t-MCAO, N = 8). DAPI 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, MAP2 microtubule-associated protein 2, GFAP glial fibrillary acidic protein, t - MCAO transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
Induction of Nestin+ Cells Following Transient Ischemia/Reperfusion Injury
Thus far, our data have shown that pre-existing mature neural cells undergo death following transient ischemia. However, our previous studies demonstrated that even under conditions of permanent ischemia in which mature neural cells could not survive, iNSCs developed within ischemic areas [ , ]. Based on these findings, we next examined whether iNSCs were induced following transient ischemia/reperfusion injury. For clarification, we investigated the localization of cells that expressed the NSC marker nestin on day 3 after t-MCAO (Fig. 3a ). Consistent with our previous findings [ , , , ], nestin + cells were rarely observed in nonischemic control mice (Fig. 3b ). Although nestin + cells emerged after 15-min t-MCAO, only a few nestin + cells expressed the pericytic marker PDGFRβ (Fig. 3c ), and most coexpressed GFAP (Fig. 3d–f ). These results indicate that most nestin + cells induced after nonlethal ischemia are likely reactive astrocytes that coexpress nestin and GFAP [ ]. However, after 20-min t-MCAO, nestin + cells within ischemic areas did not express GFAP (Fig. 3g, h ). In addition, these nestin + cells existed near CD31 + endothelial cells (Fig. 3i, j ), and a majority coexpressed PDGFRβ (Fig. 3k–n ). Similar findings were observed in ischemic areas after 30-min t-MCAO (data not shown). These results indicate that after lethal ischemia, nestin + cells within ischemic areas are observed among pericyte but not reactive astrocyte populations. Fig. 3 Localization of nestin + cells at day 3 after t-MCAO ( a ). Nestin + cells were rarely observed in sham-operated mice [nestin ( b : green ) and DAPI nuclear stain ( b : blue )]. Although a number of nestin + cells were observed in ischemic areas after 15-min t-MCAO, only a small fraction of nestin + cells expressed PDGFRβ [nestin ( c : green ), PDGFRβ ( c : red ), and DAPI ( c : blue )] ( arrow ), whereas a majority of cells expressed GFAP [nestin ( d , e : green ), GFAP ( d , f : red ), and DAPI ( d – f : blue )] ( arrows ). Although many nestin + cells were observed within ischemic areas after 20-min t-MCAO, GFAP + cells were rarely observed [nestin ( g , h : green ), GFAP ( g , h : red ), and DAPI ( g , h : blue )]. Most nestin + cells within ischemic areas after 20-min t-MCAO had localized near CD31 + endothelial cells [nestin ( i , j : green ), CD31 ( i , j : red ), and DAPI ( i , j : blue )] and expressed PDGFRβ [nestin ( k – m : green ), PDGFRβ ( k , l , n : red ), and DAPI ( k – n : blue )]. Scale bars = 50 μm ( b – d ) and 100 μm ( g , i , k ). Results displayed are representative of the experimental protocol (sham, N = 3; 15-min t-MCAO, N = 10; 20-min t-MCAO, N = 7; 30-min t-MCAO, N = 8). DAPI 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, GFAP glial fibrillary acidic protein, PDGFRβ platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta, t - MCAO transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
Pericytes Acquire a NSC Phenotype Following Transient Ischemia/Reperfusion Injury
Although our data indicated that nestin + cells were induced in ischemic areas following transient ischemia/reperfusion injury, it remained unclear whether they have the potential to generate iNSCs. To study this, brain tissues including MCA areas were removed 3 days after t-MCAO and dissociated by passage through needles (Fig. 4a ). The resulting cell suspensions were incubated as adherent cultures in medium that promoted the proliferation of iNSCs [ , , ]. No adherent cells were observed in cultures from sham-operated mice (Fig. 4b ). Although we observed only a small number of cells had adhered in cultures from mice subjected to 15-min t-MCAO [Fig. 4b, c (1.2 ± 0.5 × 10 5 cells/wells)], the number of adherent cells significantly increased in cultures from mice subjected to 20- [Fig. 4b, d (5.2 ± 1.8 × 10 5 cells/wells)] and 30-min t-MCAO [Fig. 4b, e (6.0 ± 0.9 × 10 5 cells/wells)]. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that nestin + cells from mice subjected to 15- (Fig. 4f–h ), 20- (Fig. 4l–n ), and 30-min t-MCAO (Fig. 4r–t ) expressed PDGFRβ (15-min t-MCAO, 93.8 ± 2.4 %; 20-min t-MCAO, 93.8 ± 3.1 %; 30-min t-MCAO, 94.6 ± 3.5 %). However, nestin + cells from 15- (Fig. 4i–k ), 20- (Fig. 4o–q ), and 30-min t-MCAO (Fig. 4u–w ) rarely expressed GFAP (15-min t-MCAO, 1.8 ± 0.2 %; 20-min t-MCAO, 1.1 ± 1.0 %; 30-min t-MCAO, 0.6 ± 1.0%). These results indicate that the adherent nestin + cells after nonlethal (15-min t-MCAO) and lethal (20- and 30-min t-MCAO) ischemia predominantly contain pericyte rather than reactive astrocyte populations, although lethal ischemia is needed to induce substantial numbers of these nestin + cells. Fig. 4 Adherent cells were not obtained from sham-operated mice; numbers of adherent cells isolated from ischemic areas were significantly higher after 20- or 30-min t-MCAO than after 15-min t-MCAO ( a – e ). Immunohistochemistry showed that adherent cells present after 15-, 20-, and 30-min t-MCAO largely expressed nestin. In addition, they expressed PDGFRβ but not GFAP [nestin ( f , g , i , j , l , m , o , p , r , s , u , v : green ), PDGFRβ ( f , h , l , n , r , t : red ), GFAP ( i , k , o , q , u , w : red ), and DAPI ( f – w : blue )]. * P < 0.05 vs. 15-min t-MCAO ( N = 3) ( b ). Scale bars = 50 μm ( c – e , f , i , l , o , r , u ). DAPI 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, GFAP glial fibrillary acidic protein, PDGFRβ platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta
To confirm that the adherent nestin + cells are a potential source of iNSCs, they were incubated as floating cultures in medium that promoted the formation of neurosphere-like cell clusters (Fig. 5a ), as described previously [ , ]. As a result, neurosphere-like cell clusters were obtained in cultures after 15- (Fig. 5b ), 20-, and 30-min t-MCAO (data not shown); no neurosphere-like cell clusters were obtained in cultures from sham-operated mice (data not shown), as the latter did not produce adherent cells (Fig. 4b ). In addition, cell clusters associated with all time points [15-min (Fig. 5c–e ), 20-min (Fig. 5f–h ), and 30-min t-MCAO (data not shown)] could differentiate into MAP2- and Tuj1-expressing neuronal cells. These results strongly suggest that pericytes were the likely origin of iNSCs produced following transient ischemia/reperfusion injury. Fig. 5 Following floating incubation, the adherent cells formed cell clusters ( a , b ). The cell clusters from mice treated with 15- ( c – e ) and 20-min t-MCAO ( f – h ) differentiated into neuronal cells expressing Tuj1 and MAP2 [Tuj1 ( c , d , f , g : green ), MAP2 ( c , e , f , h : red ), and DAPI ( c – h : blue )]. Scale bars = 50 μm ( b , c , and f ). DAPI 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, MAP2 microtubule-associated protein 2, t - MCAO Tuj1, class III β-tubulin
To further confirm that iNSCs originate, at least in part, from pericytes, brain samples of ischemic areas after 15-min t-MCAO were subjected to immunoelectron microscopy. Normal cerebral capillaries comprise thin endothelial cells, which feature flattened and elongated nuclei, and thin, continuous basal lamina outside of the endothelial cells. Pericytes are occasionally located outside of the endothelial cells and are also surrounded by the basal lamina. Normal pericytes feature large nuclei with condensed perinuclear chromatin, long, fine processes, and numerous mitochondria, with only a few ribosomes in the cytoplasm. The microvascular surfaces are also encircled by the end-foot processes of GFAP + astrocytes (Fig. 6a ). However, 3 days after 15-min t-MCAO, the basal lamina of cerebral capillaries occasionally formed multiple thick layers around endothelial cells, decreasing the density of these cells. The morphological aspects of pericytes around the endothelium also changed markedly. Their nuclei became lucent with fine granular chromatin, and their cytoplasm also became lucent with sparse granules and organelles. These pericytes were surrounded by swollen, GFAP + reactive astroglial end-foot processes with edematous features (Fig. 6b ). Immunoelectron microscopy also clearly demonstrated the localization of nestin + (Fig. 6c ) and PDGFRβ + (Fig. 6d ) cells; both were in contact with the lateral endothelial cell basal lamina after a 15-min nonlethal transient ischemia/reperfusion injury. Given the similarities with respect to the morphological nuclear features and localization, the nestin and PDGFRβ + cells were likely to share an origin. Therefore, it is possible that the pericytes surrounding capillaries convert to nestin + iNSCs following transient ischemia/reperfusion injury. Fig. 6 Immunoelectron microscopic analysis in sham-operated mice ( a ) and in mice after 15-min t-MCAO ( b ). In sham-operated mice, pericytes were present between the endothelial layer and the end-foot processes of GFAP + astrocytes ( a ). After t-MCAO, the processes of the astrocytes around pericytes became edematous ( b ), and the pericytes near endothelial cells expressed nestin ( c ) and PDGFRβ ( d ). Scale bars = 5 μm ( a , b ) and 2 μm ( c , d ). Results displayed are representative of three repetitions of the experimental protocol. GFAP glial fibrillary acidic protein, PDGFRβ platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta, t - MCAO transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
Perivascular iNSCs Give Rise to Immature Neurons In Vivo
Finally, to investigate the possible contribution of pericyte-derived iNSCs to neurogenesis following transient brain ischemia/reperfusion injury, we analyzed the fate of DCX-expressing immature neurons. We first examined whether DCX + cells were present in mice after 15-min t-MCAO (Fig. 7a ). Immunohistochemistry rarely revealed DCX + cells in the injured areas at day 3 after ischemia/reperfusion (Fig. 7b ). However, DCX + cells emerged in cells surrounding the microvasculature at day 7 after t-MCAO (Fig. 7c ). Immunoelectron microscopy also revealed that the fine structures of DCX + cells were in contact with endothelial cells after nonlethal ischemia. Morphologically, these DCX + cells exhibited a similar pattern as that observed in PDGFRβ + pericytes and nestin + cells (Fig. 6 ), with large clear nuclei, narrow cytoplasm, and poor organelles (Fig. 7d, e ). These findings strongly suggested that injured pericytes give rise to newborn neurons around the microvasculature after transient ischemia/reperfusion. To confirm this, we performed double immunohistochemistry to evaluate PDGFRβ and DCX expression in mice at day 7 after 15-min t-MCAO. Immunohistochemistry revealed that DCX + cells were predominantly located near PDGFRβ + pericytes. In addition, some DCX + cells expressed PDGFRβ (Fig. 7f–h ), indicating that immature neurons following transient ischemia/reperfusion originated at least in part from pericytes. Fig. 7 Localization of DCX + cells at 3 and 7 days after 15-min and 30-min t-MCAO ( a ). DCX + cells were not observed at day 3 after t-MCAO ( b ) but emerged around CD31 + cells at day 7 after t-MCAO ( c ). Immunoelectron microscopy conducted 7 days after 15-min t-MCAO showed that pericytes near endothelial cells expressed DCX ( d , e ). Immunohistochemistry conducted 7 days after 15-min t-MCAO confirmed that DCX + cells expressed the pericytic marker PDGFRβ [DCX ( f , g : red ), PDGFRβ ( f , h : green ), and DAPI ( f – h : blue )] ( arrows ). Immunohistochemistry after 30-min t-MCAO showed that DCX + cells expressed PDGFRβ at post-stroke day 3 [DCX ( i , j : red ), PDGFRβ ( i , k : green ), and DAPI ( i – k : blue )] ( arrows ), but DCX + cells were rarely observed at post-stroke day 7 [DCX ( l : red ) and DAPI ( l : blue )]. Scale bars = 50 μm ( b , c , f , i , l ) and 2 μm ( d , e ). Results displayed are representative of the experimental protocol ( N = 3 in each group). DCX doublecortin, PDGFRβ platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta, t - MCAO transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
We next investigated whether DCX + cells were present in mice subjected to 30-min t-MCAO. At day 3 after ischemia/reperfusion, DCX + cells were observed within the ischemic areas and they expressed PDGFRβ (Fig. 7i–k ). However, DCX + cells were rarely observed at day 7 after ischemia/reperfusion (Fig. 7i ). These findings showed that generation of immature neurons peaked earlier in mice subjected to lethal ischemia/reperfusion than in those subjected to nonlethal ischemia/reperfusion; this parallels the number of nestin and PDGFRβ double-positive pericytes, which presumably contain a pericyte-derived iNSC population observed in mice after lethal and nonlethal ischemia/reperfusion (Figs. 3 and 4 ).
Discussion
Ischemic stroke is a major cause of severe CNS disability. Previously, patients with stroke have had limited treatment options, such as antiplatelet therapy and behavioral rehabilitation. However, because of recent advances in stroke therapies, patients now have various treatment options, including neuroendovascular intervention and thrombolytic therapy [ , ]. These options indicate that the obstructed cerebral artery can be recanalized in an increased number of patients with stroke, although unsuccessful recanalization causes permanent ischemia. Therefore, ischemic stroke is associated with at least three major pathological conditions: (1) nonlethal ischemia/reperfusion injury following transient cerebral artery occlusion, (2) lethal ischemia/reperfusion injury following transient cerebral artery occlusion, and (3) lethal ischemic injury following permanent cerebral artery occlusion. Although we previously demonstrated that iNSCs could be induced after lethal ischemic injury following permanent cerebral artery occlusion [ , , , ], it remained unclear whether iNSCs functioned under pathological brain conditions after transient ischemia/reperfusion injury. The present study demonstrated for the first time that iNSCs can be induced even in response to nonlethal ischemia/reperfusion injury following transient cerebral artery occlusion (15-min t-MCAO) and that iNSCs can be induced after lethal ischemia/reperfusion injury following transient cerebral artery occlusion (20- and 30-min t-MCAO). Combined with the findings of previous studies, which showed that iNSCs could be induced after lethal permanent ischemia [ , , , ], iNSCs likely function under various ischemic conditions, including transient and permanent ischemia/reperfusion injury. This finding also suggests that iNSCs could be a therapeutic target under the ischemic conditions induced by cerebral artery occlusion.
Although the precise origin of iNSCs remains unclear, previous studies have suggested that GFAP and nestin-positive reactive astrocytes are candidate neural stem/progenitor cells following transient ischemia/reperfusion injury [ ]. Consistent with that report, the current study showed that GFAP + astrocytes transiently express nestin following nonlethal mild ischemia/reperfusion injury (15-min t-MCAO). Because we were able to obtain iNSCs after nonlethal ischemia, it is possible that some iNSCs induced under nonlethal ischemia might be derived, in part, from GFAP and nestin-positive reactive astrocytes. However, GFAP and nestin-positive reactive astrocytes were rarely observed within ischemic areas under lethal severe ischemia/reperfusion injury (20- and 30-min t-MCAO), suggesting that they were unable to survive under these conditions. Although the number of reactive astrocytes within ischemic areas was much lower after lethal severe ischemia/reperfusion injury (20- and 30-min t-MCAO) than after nonlethal mild ischemia/reperfusion injury (15-min t-MCAO), many iNSCs were obtained by incubating cells from ischemic areas following lethal severe ischemia/reperfusion injury compared with nonlethal mild ischemia/reperfusion injury. These findings suggest that cells other than reactive astrocytes are a principal source of iNSCs within ischemic areas. In support of this notion, the present study showed that iNSCs following ischemia/reperfusion injury are likely derived from brain pericytes near blood vessels.
Quiescent pericytes are slow-cycling during their resting stage. However, once pericytes become reactive in response to stimuli, they proliferate, migrate, and then differentiate into various types of cells [ , , ]. Under these conditions, pericytes are reported to alter their traits through activation of multiple factors related to cell growth, transcription, and stemness [ , ]. In support of this viewpoint, we have previously demonstrated that brain pericytes develop stemness under pathological conditions, such as after permanent ischemia, but not under normal brain conditions [ ].
Why are iNSCs particularly strongly induced under lethal severe ischemia/reperfusion injury, compared with under nonlethal mild ischemia/reperfusion injury? Although previous studies, including ours, have demonstrated that pericytes exhibit multipotency and can differentiate into neural cells [ , , , , ], a recent gene transduction study showed that reprogramming is essential for pericytes to acquire nonpericytic traits such as those associated with neural cells [ ]. Although ischemia in vivo is a very complex event, we previously demonstrated that severe, but not mild, oxygen-glucose deprivation stimulation promoted stemness in brain pericytes along with the increased expression of reprogramming factors such as Klf4 and Sox2. In addition, we showed that Sox2 is a key reprogramming factor by which brain pericytes develop the traits of iNSCs [ ]. This finding suggests that severe ischemia/hypoxia can convert brain pericytes into iNSCs, presumably through reprogramming. To support this notion, we demonstrated that pericyte-derived iNSCs could be easily isolated from ischemic areas induced by lethal ischemic injury following permanent cerebral artery occlusion and that these iNSCs expressed various stem and undifferentiated cell markers, including c-myc, Klf4, Sox2, and Nanog; in contrast, these cells could not be obtained from nonischemic areas [ , , , , , , , ].
In the CNS, neurogenic and vasculogenic interactions are coordinated in the context of pathological conditions, such as those occurring after ischemic stroke [ , ]. Our previous study, conducted in a mouse model of permanent ischemia, demonstrated that iNSCs are located near blood vessels within ischemic areas [ ] and originate from brain pericytes [ , ]. Although the precise fate of pericyte-derived iNSCs remains unclear, the present study showed that some of these cells give rise to immature DCX + neurons after nonlethal mild ischemia/reperfusion injury. These findings were consistent with a previous study in which neurogenesis was observed within ischemic areas even after mild transient ischemia [ ]. In the present study, we found that the number of DCX + immature neurons at day 3 was higher in mice after lethal severe ischemia/reperfusion (30-min t-MCAO) than in mice after nonlethal mild ischemia/reperfusion (15-min t-MCAO), in association with the number of nestin and PDGFRβ double-positive pericytes. However, DCX + immature neurons were rarely observed in mice at day 7 after lethal severe ischemia/reperfusion, consistent with findings observed after permanent ischemia [ ]. In addition, no Tuj1 + and MAP2 + mature neurons were present within the ischemic areas in mice after nonlethal and lethal ischemia (data not shown), although pericyte-derived iNSCs could generate these cells in vitro. These findings suggest that pericyte-derived immature neurons could not survive under severe ischemic conditions because various types of nurse cells that serve as a niche for iNSCs (e.g., astrocytes [ , ]) died under those conditions, as shown in this study. However, we previously demonstrated that appropriate niche support (e.g., from endothelial cells and astrocytes) promotes neurogenesis in pericyte-derived iNSCs, thereby accelerating functional recovery, even under severe ischemic conditions following permanent ischemia [ , ]. Thus, future studies may reveal that iNSC-derived neurogenesis occurs in response to these factors even under severe ischemic conditions; detailed mechanisms underpinning the integrated capacity for forming the neuronal network should be the focus of further studies.
In conclusion, we demonstrated that iNSCs could be induced under conditions of nonlethal and lethal ischemia/reperfusion injury following transient cerebral artery occlusion. In addition, we showed that iNSCs induced under these conditions originate from brain pericytes, and that pericyte-derived iNSCs have the potential to produce neurons in vivo and in vitro. Brain pericytes are important components of the BBB/neurovascular unit [ ]; as such, they are a promising source for the repair of this unit under conditions of both permanent [ ] and transient ischemia in patients with stroke.