Introduction
Targeting Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathology at single components is not likely to be feasible and a successful therapeutic strategy will require pleiotropic interventions [ , , , ]. Dual-specificity tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A (Dyrk1a) is an emerging target for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases [ ], attractive for its functional activity on multiple pathways implicated in AD and neuronal function. The Dyrk1a gene is located within the Down syndrome (DS) critical region on chromosome 21 and overexpression is a significant contributor to the underlying neurodevelopmental and AD-related abnormalities associated with DS [ , , , , , ]. Transgenic animals overexpressing Dyrk1a show marked cognitive deficits and impairment in hippocampal-dependent memory tasks [ , , ].
In addition to its function in neuronal development, recent evidence has implicated Dyrk1a in the pathology of neurodegenerative disorders such as AD, dementia with Lewy bodies, and Parkinson’s disease [ ]. Dyrk1a has been shown to promote the formation of the pathological hallmarks of these diseases via hyperphosphorylation of their most abundant components, such as tau in neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) [ , , , ], amyloid-β precursor protein (APP) [ , ], and α-synuclein in Lewy bodies [ ]. The protein levels, as well as the catalytic activity of Dyrk1a, are increased in cortical neurons in both DS and AD [ , , ]. Increased Dyrk1a immunoreactivity has been reported in the cytoplasm and nuclei of scattered neurons of the entorhinal cortex, hippocampus, and neocortex in neurodegenerative diseases associated with tau phosphorylation, including AD, DS, and Pick’s disease [ ]. These findings coupled with the observation that Dyrk1a inhibition can reduce tau hyperphosphorylation and rescue cognitive deficits in mouse models of DS [ , ] and AD [ ] indicate that Dyrk1a is a promising therapeutic target to treat these disorders.
The hyperphosphorylation of the microtubule-stabilizing protein tau contributes to the aggregation into NFTs, which are highly correlated with dementia severity in AD [ ]. We and others have shown that Dyrk1a is important for phosphorylation of the tau protein on multiple sites [ , , , ]. Phosphorylation of tau with Dyrk1a primes further tau phosphorylation by glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK-3β) [ ]. Inhibition of Dyrk1a is thus expected to reduce abnormal tau phosphorylation with additive reduction of tau phosphorylation by GSK-3β, thereby possibly acting at two critical kinase pathways with synergistic protection against tau hyperphosphorylation and toxicity. Dyrk1a has also been shown to phosphorylate the amyloid precursor protein (APP) at Thr668, resulting in increased amyloidogenic cleavage of APP and elevated Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 levels, exacerbating β-amyloidosis [ , , ]. In turn, Aβ oligomers are known to activate Dyrk1a [ ]. Thus, inhibition of Dyrk1a may synergistically reduce the formation of Aβ oligomers through inhibition of APP phosphorylation via the Dyrk1a pathway [ ]. Tau hyperphosphorylation is also induced by Aβ oligomers [ , ]. Inhibition of Dyrk1a may thus additionally reduce the formation of NFTs via reduction of Aβ oligomer levels. Indeed, we recently demonstrated that inhibition of Dyrk1a, when pathology is advanced in the 3xTg-AD mouse model, reduces AD-like amyloid and tau pathology and improves cognition [ ], consistent with the demonstrated roles for Dyrk1a in APP phosphorylation, Aβ production, and tau hyperphosphorylation.
Herein, we extend prior studies to demonstrate that Dyrk1 inhibition prior to the onset of AD-like pathology in 3xTg-AD mice significantly delays the onset of both amyloid and tau pathologies. We also confirm that a relatively rare mechanism of action, based on inhibitor-induced degradation of Dyrk1a protein, likely contributes to the beneficial effects seen on AD-like neuropathology that result from inhibition of Dyrk1 with type I kinase inhibitors.
Results
DYR219 Is a Potent and Selective Dyrk1 Inhibitor
DYR219 is a benzimidazole analog (Patent #US2016/050198) that functions as a type 1 ATP-competitive kinase inhibitor [ ] and through a rarely seen protein degradation mechanism not initiated by proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACS) [ ]. DYR219 was developed via a knowledge-based approach using co-crystal structures of harmine, D15, and Indy bound to Dyrk1a (PDB ref# 3ANQ, 2WO6, and 3ANR, respectively). Hybrid structures of these three early inhibitors were synthesized to afford low micromolar inhibitors and subsequent optimization gave DYR219. Using in vitro phosphorylation assays ([ATP] 45 μM) with synthetic peptide substrates, DYR219 inhibited Dyrk1a activity with an IC 50 of 34 nM. Like the majority of Dyrk1a inhibitors reported to date, DYR219 proved equipotent with Dyrk1b (IC 50 29 nM). It possessed only nominal activity versus two major tau kinases GSK3β (34% at 20 μM) and CDK5 (55% at 20 μM). To assess broader kinase selectivity, a KinomeScan™ (468 panel: https://www.discoverx.com ) was performed at the relatively high concentration of 10 μM for DYR219 ( K D 16 nM). The S(35)-selectivity score was 0.19 (Fig. 1 ), which is comparable with marketed kinase inhibitors ( K D Dyrk1a 16 nM). In in vitro phosphorylation assays using full-length recombinant tau protein, DYR219 inhibited Dyrk1a catalyzed tau phosphorylation at the pS396 epitope (IC 50 = 127 nM; [ATP] = 1 mM) (Fig. 2a ). In H4 neuroglioma cells expressing 4R0N tau [ , ], DYR219 inhibited tau protein phosphorylation at the pS396 epitope with an EC 50 of 142 nM (Fig. 2b ). Fig. 1 KinomeScan™ was performed against 468 kinases using 10 μM DYR219. The side legend correlates circle size to % activity relative to control. Additional data shown include IC 50 values against Dyrk1b and % inhibition of GSK3β and CDK5 at 20 μM. Select targets in the CMGC kinase family are indicated Fig. 2 DYR219 is a potent Dyrk1a inhibitor. Shown in a , in vitro phosphorylation results using recombinant Dyrk1a and tau proteins and the indicated concentrations of DYR219. Assays were performed per the “ Materials and Methods ” section. The IC 50 was 127 nM. In b , results from a cell-based assay of DYR219 effects on pS396 tau and total tau. The assay has been described previously in detail [ ]. The EC 50 was 142 nM for pS396 tau
DYR219 had a favorable cytotoxicity profile, reducing phospho-tau (and total tau) well before detection of cytotoxicity (> 95% viability at EC 50 ) (Fig. 3 ). In pharmacokinetic studies wherein DYR219 was delivered via intra-peritoneal (IP) injection (12.5 mg/kg), DYR219 readily crossed the BBB [brain: DYR219 C max 344 ng/ml (1.05 μM at 15 min)] and was cleared within ~ 1–3 h (Fig. 4 , Supplementary Table 1 ). These combined results indicated that DYR219 was a potent, brain-penetrant, and selective Dyrk1 inhibitor worthy of evaluation in an in vivo setting of AD. Fig. 3 DYR219 reduces pS396 tau before any significant cytotoxicity. Shown are graphs of results from westerns assessing levels of pS396 tau and total tau overlayed with MTT toxicity assay results for the indicated concentrations of DYR219. Viability is > 95% at the EC 50 concentration of DYR219. Error bars are standard deviation ( n = 3 per each concentration tested). Importantly, for visualization purposes, points are not directly overlayed above each concentration. However, the concentrations along the x -axis are the concentrations at which pS396 tau, total tau, and viability were assessed Fig. 4 Pharmacokinetic profile of DYR219. Brain exposure (ng/ml) is plotted at the indicated times ( x -axis) following a single intra-peritoneal injection at 12.5 mg/kg ( n = 3 mice per time point)
Dyrk1 Inhibition Reduces Tau Pathology in 3xTg-AD Mice
We previously demonstrated that treatment of 10-month-old 3xTg-AD mice with DYR219 after the mice had already developed neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) pathology significantly improved memory and reduced accumulation of insoluble, hyperphosphorylated tau protein [ ]. However, in that prior study, we observed no changes in overt NFT pathology. Herein, we tested the hypothesis that the DYR219 inhibitor would delay the onset of NFT pathology when Dyrk1 was inhibited prior to formation of NFT pathology. To do this, we treated 6-month-old 3xTg-AD mice prior to NFT pathology onset (Fig. 5 ). Mice were treated with either DYR219 via once daily IP injection (12.5 mg/kg) or vehicle. Both DYR219- and vehicle-treated groups were separated into two cohorts. One cohort received treatment for 3 months (pathology assessed at 9 months of age; N = 10 mice per vehicle and DYR219 groups) and the second cohort was treated for 6 months (pathology assessed at 12 months of age; N = 10 mice per vehicle and DYR219 groups). Fig. 5 Schematic representation of the study design. Six-month-old 3xTg-AD mice were dosed once daily for either 3 months or 6 months with DYR219 or vehicle. Following each dosing period, n = 10 mice per vehicle and DYR219 group were sacrificed and neuropathology assessed as described in the text
To determine if DYR219 could delay NFT pathology onset, we performed immunohistochemistry on hippocampal sections of 3xTg-AD mice using the AT8 phospho-tau antibody. Results demonstrated a significant delay in the onset of NFT pathology (Fig. 6a ). At 9 months of age, following 3 months of DYR219 administration, vehicle-treated mice developed NFT pathology as expected. In contrast, all 10 DYR219-treated mice had no detectable NFT pathology. In the 12-month cohort, vehicle-treated mice had abundant NFT pathology. In the DYR219-treated group, NFT pathology was significantly reduced. Indeed, 6 mice had no detectable NFT pathology at all and only a handful of NFTs could be identified in the remaining mice. This dramatic reduction in NFT pathology was accompanied by significant reductions in insoluble, hyperphosphorylated tau protein (Fig. 6b ), as assessed by western blot for pS396 tau ( p = 0.0024 at 9 months; p = 0.014 at 12 months). Levels of soluble phosphorylated forms of tau protein were unaffected (data not shown), similar to what was observed previously [ ]. Insoluble total tau protein was also significantly reduced in the 3-month treatment group ( p = 0.0036). There was a trend toward reduced total tau protein following 6 months of DYR219 treatment ( p = 0.092). However, while all treatment groups showed greater reductions to phosphorylated tau levels relative to total tau levels, DYR219 promoted tau degradation in cell culture (see below). Fig. 6 DYR219 delays tau pathology in 3xTg-AD mice. Shown in a , representative immunohistochemistry images from vehicle- and DYR219-treated mice at age 9 months and 12 months. No DYR219 mice had any neurofibrillary tangles after 3 months of treatment. Half of the 12 mice were completely clear after 6 months of daily dosing. Shown in b , western results of pS396 tau and total tau in the insoluble protein fraction from vehicle- and DYR219-treated mice. Bar graphs represent quantitation of westerns for all mice ( N = 10) per group. Error bars are standard deviation
Dyrk1 Inhibition Reduces Amyloid Pathology in 3xTg-AD Mice
In addition to tau pathology, 3xTg-AD mice show age-dependent amyloid pathology by 9 months of age [ ]. To determine effects of DYR219 on amyloid pathology, we immunostained hippocampus containing sections with an Aβ 42 -specific antibody. Remarkably, we found that DYR219 mice had no detectable amyloid pathology at 9 months of age, in sharp contrast to the substantial amyloid pathology observed in vehicle-treated mice (Fig. 7a ). At 12 months of age, DYR219-treated 3xTg-AD mice began to develop amyloid pathology, but at drastically reduced levels compared to vehicle-treated mice. Quantitative analysis of plaque load (Fig. 7b ) showed these results to be highly statistically significant ( p = 7.9E-05 at 9 months; p = 5.2E-05 at 12 months). Reductions to amyloid plaque burden were accompanied by significant reductions to insoluble forms of Aβ 42 and Aβ 40 peptides, as assessed by ELISA ( p = 0.0076 at 9 months; p = 0.0029 at 12 months) (Fig. 7c ). Consistent with our prior observations [ ], we observed no differences in soluble Aβ peptides in any treatment group (data not shown). We previously demonstrated that these changes to amyloid pathology and Aβ peptides are associated with reduced amyloid precursor protein (APP) phosphorylation and increased lysosomal degradation of full-length APP [ ]. Fig. 7 DYR219 delays amyloid pathology in 3xTg-AD mice. Shown in a , immunohistochemistry of amyloid plaques in vehicle- and DYR219-treated 3xTg-AD mice at the indicated ages. No DYR219-treated 3xTg-AD mice had any detectable amyloid plaques at 9 months of age. At 12 months of age, mice developed plaque pathology at levels lower than 9-month-old vehicle-treated mice. Quantitation of plaque load is shown in b ( n = 10 mice per group). Shown in c are ELISA results for Aβ 42 and Aβ 40 from the insoluble protein fractions ( n = 10 mice per group). Aβ peptides were significantly reduced in DYR219-treated mice at all time points
DYR219 Promotes Dyrk1a Degradation Via the Proteasome
DYR219 rapidly enters the brain following IP administration (Fig. 4 ). However, DYR219 is subsequently cleared from the brain within 2 h. An obvious question is how the robust neuropathological effects, observed both herein and previously [ ], can be achieved by relatively modest exposure. Dyrk1a is a dual-specificity kinase, undergoing autocatalytic tyrosine phosphorylations during synthesis of the protein [ ]. It has recently been discovered that type I inhibitors acting on Dyrk1a also inhibit this autophosphorylation event, preventing the formation of mature and active Dyrk1a while also promoting degradation of the protein [ ]. This appears to be a generalizable feature of Dyrk1a type I ATP-competitive kinase inhibitors, with the well-established inhibitors harmine, INDY, and CaNDY all showing this effect [ ]. To potentially explain the apparent pharmacodynamic/pharmacokinetic mismatch of DYR219, we sought to determine if DYR219 could also be promoting the degradation of Dyrk1a protein. To do this, we first treated H4 neuroglioma cells expressing the 4R0N tau isoform (first described in Azorsa et al. [ ]) with escalating concentrations of DYR219 and measured pS396 tau, total tau, and full-length Dyrk1a protein levels via western. We observed the expected reductions to pS396 tau (EC 50 = 134 nM) and total tau (EC 50 = 356 nM) that have previously been observed for a broad range of Dyrk1a inhibitors (Fig. 8a ) [ ]. However, we also observed a significant dose-dependent reduction in Dyrk1a protein levels (EC 50 = 625 nM), consistent with DYR219 promoting degradation of Dyrk1a. We next treated H4-Tau cells with 5 μM DYR219 in the presence or absence of MG-132 (5 μM), a potent proteasome inhibitor. Following 24 h of treatment, we observed consistent reductions to pS396 phosphorylated tau levels regardless of proteasome inhibition (Fig. 8b ). However, we found that the reductions to both total tau and Dyrk1a proteins were dependent upon proteasome function, as MG-132 prevented reductions to both proteins in the presence of DYR219. Lastly, we performed Dyrk1a westerns using cortical tissue from the 3-month and 6-month DYR219-treated 3xTg-AD mice and found significant reductions in steady-state Dyrk1A protein levels at both treatment time points (Fig. 8c ). These combined results indicate that DYR219 promotes degradation of Dyrk1a protein and that this effect, seen in vivo, could contribute to the pronounced pharmacodynamic effects of this compound. Fig. 8 DYR219 induces Dyrk1a protein degradation via the proteasome. Shown in a , pS396 tau, total tau, and Dyrk1a protein levels in H4-tau cells [ ] at the indicated concentrations of DYR219. The EC 50 against each protein is indicated. Shown in b , H4-tau cells treated with 5 μM DYR219 in the presence or absence of MG-132 (5 μM) to inhibit proteasome activity. Cells were treated for 24 h and pS396 tau, total tau, and Dyrk1a levels assessed. MG-132 prevented DYR219-induced reductions to total tau and Dyrk1a, but not pS396 tau. In c , cortical protein lysates from 3xTg-AD mice treated with vehicle or DYR219 for the indicated durations were analyzed for Dyrk1a expression via western. Dyrk1a expression was reduced at both 3-month and 6-month time points in DYR219-treated mice relative to vehicle controls
Discussion
Early Inhibition of Dyrk1 Delays Onset of AD-Like Pathologies
There are currently no therapeutic options to delay the onset or progression of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). We report here results of an AD pathology prevention study in the 3xTg-AD mouse model using the novel Dyrk1a inhibitor, DYR219. DYR219 is the identical Dyrk1a inhibitor that we previously reported as dyrk-inh in Branca et al. [ ]. However, herein, we extend prior findings to demonstrate that chronic Dyrk1 inhibition can significantly delay the onset of both amyloid and tau pathologies. The 3xTg-AD mouse model of AD generates age-dependent amyloid and tau pathologies [ ] and, as such, provides a useful model for testing interventions that may delay onset or progression of both pathologies. To test whether Dyrk1 inhibition could delay pathology onset or progression, we treated 6-month-old 3xTg-AD mice with the Dyrk1 inhibitor, DYR219, for periods of up to 6 months via once daily IP injection. At 6 months of age, the 3xTg-AD mice have no neurofibrillary tau (NFT) pathology and minimal amyloid plaque pathology in the CA1 region of the hippocampus [ ]. Following 3 months of DYR219 administration, all drug-treated 3xTg-AD mice were completely clear of both amyloid and tau neuropathologies, whereas vehicle-treated mice developed both pathologies. After 6 months, vehicle-treated mice accumulated large amounts of both amyloid plaque (Fig. 7 ) and NFT pathologies (Fig. 6 ) at 12 months of age, as expected [ ]. By comparison, DYR219-treated mice showed significantly reductions in the amounts of both pathologies, which was matched by significant reductions in the main protein components of these neuropathologies.
In prior work testing DYR219 in 3xTg-AD mice [ ], dosing was initiated at 10 months of age, a time point in which mice have developed substantial amyloid pathology and significant NFT pathology [ ]. In those studies, DYR219 treatment significantly reduced amyloid plaque burden, but did not alter the number of NFT present in the CA1 region. Here we clearly demonstrate that, if Dyrk1 inhibitors are administered prior to NFT formation, the onset of subsequent NFT pathology can be significantly delayed. This suggests that therapies targeting tau hyperphosphorylation will likely show the greatest effect if administered very early in the disease process. Importantly, while we previously demonstrated significant cognitive improvements in the absence of reduced NFT pathology [ ], we did not assess behavioral metrics in the current study. Thus, an outstanding question remains whether the improved neuropathological outcomes herein translate to improved cognitive outcomes as well.
In contrast to tau pathology, amyloid pathology can be reduced by Dyrk1 inhibition even if Dyrk1 is inhibited following the formation of amyloid plaques. Reasons for this distinction remain unclear. However, it is tempting to speculate that different mechanisms of clearance for each pathology could play an important role. Based on known effects of Dyrk1a activity in promoting Aβ peptide production [ , , ] and tau hyperphosphorylation [ , , , ], inhibition of Dyrk1a should slow the generation of Aβ plaques and NFT. In the case of amyloid plaques, subsequent clearance pathways, possibly mediated by microglia [ ], could then reduce amyloid plaque burden. Mature tau pathology cannot be cleared by Dyrk1 inhibition if administered after NFTs have already formed. This result is consistent with prior results in 3xTg-AD mice showing that Aβ immunotherapy approaches can reduce NFT pathology if administered early, but not late, in the progression of NFTs [ ], a result analogous to what is observed here with Dyrk1 inhibition.
Degradation of Dyrk1A Likely Contributes to Beneficial Effects on AD Pathology
Some small molecule kinase inhibitors have been shown to induce protein degradation of kinases via the proteasome. These inhibitors have typically been discovered serendipitously, as opposed to being uncovered through rational design strategies. An example is seen for inhibitors of MELK (maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase), which result in proteasomal degradation due to the postulated loss of autophosphorylation [ ]. Conversely, there are a plethora of rationally designed small molecules with clinical applications that control intracellular protein levels through chemical knockdown. As such, targets of interest binding moieties are typically coupled to recognition motifs of E3 ligases. When dual target and ligase binding occurs, protein is shunted to the proteasome and degraded. This technology, known as proteolysis-targeting chimeric molecules (PROTACS) [ ], is showing clinical promise. However, linker and ligase recognition motifs often confer physico-chemical properties that are detrimental to passive BBB penetration. As such, this raises the bar for PROTAC CNS drug discovery where managing appropriate physicochemical properties to enable brain exposure becomes more challenging for the medicinal chemist. The discovery that DYR219, devoid of a proteolysis targeting chimera, induces Dyrk1a degradation is thus a major advantage, which will likely reduce design burdens on type 1 ATP-competitive selectivity within the kinome as, to date, only a small subset of kinases have been shown to be susceptible to inhibitor-induced degradation.
Materials and Methods
3xTg-AD Mice
Generation of the 3xTg-AD mice has been described previously [ ]. In our colony of 3xTg-AD mice, the AD-like pathology in males is highly variable. However, the onset and progression of pathology in females is highly consistent and predictable [ ]. Thus, this study used only female mice. All mice were housed 4–5 per cage on a 12-h light/dark cycle and provided food and water ad libitum. Animal care and treatments were in accordance with the applicable regulation of the vivarium (The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Arizona State University).
DYR219
DYR219 was synthesized by Dr. Hulme (University of Arizona) and confirmed > 99% pure by liquid chromatography. For chronic treatments, DYR219 was delivered via daily intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection at 12.5 mg/kg in 50% PEG-400 and 50% 0.9% NaCl. Control (vehicle) mice were treated with an equal volume of vehicle. Mice were weighed weekly.
In Vitro Tau Phosphorylation Assay
Tau in vitro phosphorylation assays have been published previously [ ]. Evaluation of DYRK1A kinase activity was determined by incubating 0.08 μg of recombinant human Dyrk1a protein (Invitrogen) with 0.15 μg of 4R2N recombinant human tau (SignalChem) in 1X kinase buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 5 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 10 mM MgCl2—Cell Signal) and 1 mM ATP in a final volume of 20 μl for 30 min at 30 °C. The reaction was inactivated upon addition of 1X Novex LDS sample buffer and Novex sample reducing reagent, 50 mM DTT, (Invitrogen) followed immediately by heating for 10 min at 95 °C. Phosphorylated tau was resolved using 7% Tris-acetate gels and detected by western analysis. Westerns were probed for phospho-tau S396 (Abcam) at 1:5000 dilution and a secondary of goat anti-rabbit HRP (Jackson Immuno Labs) at 1:50,000 in 5% BSA. Membranes were stripped as above and reprobed with rabbit anti-human total tau (Dako) at 1:15,000 dilution and a secondary of goat anti-rabbit HRP (Jackson Immuno labs) at 1:100,000 dilution in 5% milk. β-Actin was used as a loading control to normalize proteins of interest.
Cellular Tau Assay
Details of the cellular phospho-tau assay have been published previously [ ]. H4-Tau cells [ ] were incubated with indicated concentrations of DYR219 for 96 h at 37 °C and 5% CO 2 . For experiments of Fig. 8b , treatment duration was for only 24 h. For other treatments, every 24 h, culture medium was removed and fresh culture media and compound were added. Cell viability was determined using MTT assays (Abcam) per the manufacturer’s protocol. For tau assays, cell lysates were prepared using the Complete Lysis-M, EDTA-free kit (Roche Applied Science) supplemented with phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 1 and 2 (Sigma). Lysates were quantified using the BCA protein assay (Pierce). Protein from lysates (30 mg total protein per lane) were separated on SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane. Membranes were blocked in 5% blocking solution for 1 h at room temperature (RT). Blocking buffer solution used for detection of non-phosphorylated protein contained 5% non-fat dry milk in 1X TBS-T (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 137 mM NaCl2, 2.7 mM KCl, 0.1% Tween). For detection of phosphorylated protein, blocking buffer solution contained 5% bovine serum albumin in 1X TBS-T. Membranes were probed with primary antibody [anti-tau (1:2000 dilution; Dako), anti-pS396 tau (1:5000 dilution; Abcam), and anti-DYRK1A (1:500 dilution; Santa Cruz)] in blocking buffer overnight at 4 °C on a rocker. Membranes were subsequently washed with 1X TBS-T and probed with secondary antibody in blocking buffer for 45 min using a 1:25,000 dilution of HRP-GAM or HRP-GAR (Jackson Immunoresearch), depending on the species (mouse or rabbit) in which the primary antibodies were raised. Following incubation with secondary antibody, membranes were washed in 1X TBS-T and developed with Super Signal West Femto Maximum Sensitivity Substrate Kit (Promega) and digitally imaged. Protein band signal saturation was assessed before any further analysis of multiple forms of tau. Alpha Innotech Fluoro Chem SF imaging software verifies degrees of saturation when signal intensity is beyond the dynamic range (which is from 0 to 65,535). Protein band signal intensities used for quantification were within the instrument’s dynamic range. To test multiple primary antibodies, membranes were stripped for 15 min at RT using ReBlot Plus Mild Antibody Stripping Solution (Millipore). Membranes were then washed for 5 min in 1X TBS-T and blocked for 1 h in 5% blocking solution at RT. For verification of protein loading, membranes were reprobed overnight at 4 °C with an anti-tubulin primary antibody (1:1000 dilution; Cell Signaling) or anti-actin primary antibody (1:10,000 dilution; Abcam).
Protein Extractions from Brain Tissue
Mice were sacrificed by CO 2 asphyxiation. Brains were removed and sagittally bisected. Half of the brain was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and used for subsequent immunohistochemical experiments. The other half was collected and stored at − 80 °C until use. Frozen brains (without cerebellum) were processed as described previously [ ]. Brains were homogenized in tissue protein extraction reagent (T-PER; ThermoFisher Scientific) containing 0.7 mg/ml of pepstatin A supplemented with a complete mini protease inhibitor tablet (Roche Applied Science) and phosphatase inhibitors (Millipore). The homogenates were centrifuged at 4 °C for 1 h at 100,000 g , and the supernatant was stored as the soluble fraction. The pellet was homogenized in 70% formic acid and centrifuged as described above. The supernatant was stored as the insoluble fraction.
Western Blot and ELISA of Brain Extracts
Proteins from insoluble and soluble fractions were resolved by 10% Bis-Tris SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (ThermoFisher Scientific) under reducing conditions and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Membranes were developed as described above. Ab 40 and Ab 42 levels were determined with commercial ELISA kits (ThermoFisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocols.
Immunohistochemistry
Brains were processed as previously described [ ]. Hemibrains were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline for 48 h and then transferred into 0.02% sodium azide in phosphate-buffered saline. Fifty-micrometer-thick free-floating sections were cut using a vibratome. For immunohistochemistry, sections were washed twice with TBS (100 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl) and incubated for 30 min in 3% H 2 O 2 . Sections were washed in TBS-A (100 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100) and TBS-B (100 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 2% bovine serum albumin) for 15 and 30 min, respectively. Primary antibody was then applied overnight at 4 °C (AT8 1:1000 from ThermoFisher; 6E10 1:3000 from Cell Signaling Technology). Sections were washed and incubated in secondary antibody for 1 h at RT. Signal was enhanced by incubating sections in the avidin-biotin complex (Vector Labs) for 1 h. Sections were then washed and developed with diaminobenzidine substrate using the avidin-biotin horseradish peroxidase system (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA). Images were obtained with a digital Zeiss camera and analyzed using ImageJ. To quantify Ab pathology, images from 12 mice/group were taken with a Zeiss AxioImager A1 using a × 10 objective. Images were then merged to rebuild the whole slice. Merged images were analyzed using ImageJ and the percentage of area occupied by plaques was graphed.