Highlights
A high frequency of PF4-ELISA testing in patients suspected to have HIT despite low 4T scores has been observed. Testing trends after the introduction of a HIT education program were evaluated in our institution. Calculation of 4T scores was poor with majority inappropriately performed in the ICU setting Clinician education alone is insufficient to reduce inappropriate PF4-ELISA testing. Further study is required to assess if initiating a hematology consult for each PF4-ELISA ordered would be an effective addition to methods used to decrease inappropriate HIT testing.
Introduction
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is a potentially life threatening prothrombotic disorder caused by the formation of platelet activating IgG antibodies against the platelet factor 4(PF4)-heparin complex [ ]. The incidence of HIT has been reported as ranging from 0.1% in patients receiving subcutaneous prophylactic doses of unfractionated heparin to 5% in patients receiving longer duration of intravenous heparin, with thromboembolic complications occurring in 60% of the patients diagnosed with HIT [ , , ]. Prompt and accurate diagnosis of HIT is of paramount importance as a missed diagnosis may delay initiation of appropriate therapy and place the patient at risk of developing life-threatening thrombosis [ ]. However, false positive diagnoses can result in unnecessary treatment of patients with alternative anticoagulation, putting patients at risk of major hemorrhage [ ].
Laboratory tests for the diagnosis of HIT include PF4-enzyme linked immunoassays (ELISA) and platelet function assays such as serotonin release assay (SRA). The PF4-ELISA test is sensitive but not very specific; it is commonly used as a screening test due to availability, low cost and rapid turnover time [ , ]. The 4T score is a pretest scoring system for HIT that has been validated and yields scores categorized as low, intermediate, and high-risk probability for HIT [ , ] (Table 1 ) [ ].
Table 1 4T Scoring System [ ] 2 points 1 point 0 points Thrombocytopenia Platelet fall > 50% and nadir ≥ 20 × 10 9 /L Platelet fall 30–50% or nadir 10–19 × 10 9 /L Platelet fall < 30% or nadir < 10 × 10 9 /L Timing of platelet count fall Onset day 5–10 or ≤ 1 day (prior heparin exposure within 30 days) Day 5–10 fall but not clear; after day 10; ≤1 day (prior heparin exposure 30–100 days ago) fall < days without recent exposure Thrombosis or other sequelae New thrombosis; skin necrosis at heparin injection sites; acute systemic reaction after intravenous heparin bolus Progressive or recurrent thrombosis; Non-necrotizing skin lesions; Suspected thrombosis none Other causes of thrombocytopenia None apparent Possible Definite
There is a high frequency of inappropriate testing of HIT reported in the literature in various institutions, including our own [ , , , ]. Many institutions have attempted to improve this in various ways. Education of ordering clinicians has been suggested in the literature as a possible effective method to reduce inappropriate HIT testing, [ , , , ] however the actual impact of education on testing trends is unknown.
In this study, we report current trends of PF4-ELISA testing in our institution after the introduction of a HIT education program that included ongoing education, feedback, and continuous clinical audit of PF4-ELISA utilization in the inpatient setting at a 750-bed academic medical center.
Methods
A HIT education program was implemented at our institution in 2015 [ ]. A combination of conventional lectures and problem-based learning (student-centered curriculum where students learn by actively solving problems) has been suggested as the most effective education method, and this was used as our template [ ]. Our program consisted of: (i) providing department-wide lectures to residents, fellows, and attendings on HIT testing and management including 4T score calculation; (ii) providing individual feedback from the inpatient hematology consult service to the ordering clinician when a false positive PF4-ELISA test was ordered inappropriately; (iii) providing interactive lectures based on real life case scenarios to internal medicine residents on calculating 4T scores. Pre and post-lecture questionnaires were not utilized.
To assess the impact of education provided on PF4-ELISA testing trends, we conducted a prospective cohort review of all adult patients (age ≥ 18) who had a PF4-ELISA ordered over a 3 month period from March 12, 2018 to June 11, 2018. The last quarter of the academic year was chosen to conduct our study to allow for time for education over the academic year and to truly assess the impact on the recipients. The Hematology Quality Improvement (QI) fellow (P.M.) and attending (M. Y. L.) received a list of all pending PF4-ELISA tests from the laboratory technician daily. All PF4-ELISA tests requested prior to 12 pm are resulted on the same day in the afternoon. 4T scores were independently assessed by the Hematology QI fellow and attending prior to the results being available to avoid bias. Testing trends, 4T scores, ordering services, and documentation of 4T scores by ordering clinicians were assessed.
As a Quality Improvement initiative, this study was exempt from the Medical University of South Carolina Institutional Review Board approval. Revised Standards for Quality Improvement Reporting Excellence (SQUIRES 2.0) guidelines were utilized in the preparation of this manuscript [ ].
Results
Seventy-two PF4-ELISA tests were ordered in the inpatient setting during the 3 month study period. Prospectively calculated 4T scores by investigators revealed 60 low-risk (83.3%), 9 intermediate-risk (12.5%), and 3 high-risk (4.16%) (Table 2 ). The majority of PF4-ELISA testing was ordered by the intensive care units (ICUs) (n = 32, 44.44%), followed by medical (n = 20, 27.77%) and surgical teams (n = 20, 27.77%).
Table 2 Testing trends and breakdown by ordering services 4T score Ordering service n (%) Low (n = 60, 83.33%) ICU 26 (43.33) Surgery 20 (33.33) Medicine 14 (23.33) Intermediate or High (n = 12, 16.66%) ICU 6 (50.00) Surgery 1 (8.33) Medicine 5 (41.66) Total = 72 Low pre-test probability of HIT = 4T score 1–3, Intermediate = score 4–5, High = score 6–8 [ , ])
Of the 60 patients with low risk 4T scores, PF4-ELISA was ordered by the ICU in 26 patients (43.33%), surgical services in 20 patients (33.33%), and medicine services in 14 (23.33%). Of the 12 patients with intermediate or high-risk 4T scores, PF4-ELISA was ordered by the ICU in 6 patients (50%), medicine services in 5 (41.66%), and surgical services in1 patient (8.33%) (Table 2 ).
Of the 72 patients, 1 patient had a positive serotonin-release assay (SRA); optical density (O.D.) of the PF4-ELISA was 2.499 and the calculated 4T score was intermediate risk.
The 4T score was documented in the clinical notes by the ordering clinician in only 7 cases; 5 of these revealed discordant calculation between the ordering clinician and the Hematology QI team. All documented 4T scores were performed by Internal Medicine services. In all discordant cases, ordering clinicians’ scores were higher than scores calculated by the Hematology QI team.
Discussion
Our study revealed that despite intensive education initiatives conducted throughout the academic year focusing on residents, fellows, and attendings (including one-on-one feedback, lectures, and interactive cases), the calculation of 4T scores at the last quarter of the academic year remained poor with no decrease in inappropriately ordered PF4-ELISAs, suggesting that education alone is insufficient.
Clinician education focusing on delivering high-value cost-conscious care on the frequency of laboratory testing has had varied results. Physicians who were educated about the Choosing Wisely campaign were more likely to reduce the number of times they recommended an unnecessary test or procedure in the past year [ ]. Conversely, education and feedback interventions directed at increased testing for diabetes, cholesterol, and HIV screening did not show statistically significant benefit in some studies [ , , ].
We also observed divergent 4T scores with the ordering clinician calculating a higher 4T score compared to the Hematology QI team. As such, introducing mandatory 4T score calculation prior to PF4-ELISA testing may not be helpful as ordering clinicians can bypass the restriction through inaccurate 4T score calculation.
We observed that the majority of PF4-ELISA testing was performed in the ICU setting, and the frequency of testing did not improve despite education. As studies have shown that thrombocytopenia is a common laboratory finding in up to 50% of ICU patients, this seems to suggest the difficulties that ordering clinicians have in distinguishing the multiple causes of thrombocytopenia in ICU patients [ ]. As such, overtesting for HIT has been reported as a challenge in various settings including the surgical ICU [ , ], medical ICU [ , ] and cardiac surgery/cardiac ICU [ , ].
Various interventions to reduce inappropriate PF4-ELISA testing include the development of anticoagulation stewardship programs and multidisciplinary collaborations between clinicians, hospital laboratory and pharmacy, and the introduction of mandatory 4T score calculators integrated with the EMR [ , , , , ]. Although these interventions have been shown to reduce unnecessary testing in the short term, there is limited long-term follow up data available on their effectiveness and sustainability. In our institution, despite initial success in decreasing HIT testing after implementation of a HIT Task Force, this was not sustained after changing to a new EMR system [ ]. There is also concern that clinicians can easily bypass mandatory EMR calculator restrictions by inaccurately calculating the 4T score. To further reduce inappropriate HIT testing, we propose to restrict PF4-ELISA testing to the hematology consult team. We have previously demonstrated that restricting ordering of inpatient thrombophilia testing to the hematology consult service resulted in a 79% reduction in inappropriate testing [ ].
Some limitations of this study must be considered. Even though this is a prospective study, the electronic medical record (EMR) was reviewed to evaluate whether a 4T score was calculated in the medical note. It is possible that 4T scores were calculated but not documented. As attendance at the lectures was not mandatory, it is possible that some ordering clinicians did not attend any sessions, which may explain lack of the impact of education to some extent. In an academic setting, we have high turnover with constantly rotating residents and fellows, and there may have been a time gap between the lecture and study period, which may have affected the effectiveness of the education program as well.
In conclusion, our study suggests that clinician education alone is insufficient to change practice patterns. Given that we are a teaching hospital, we feel inappropriate HIT testing can be decreased in our institution by multidisciplinary efforts including HIT education (perhaps with more focus on ICU and surgery), collaborations with lab, pharmacy and EMR, and dedicated hematology involvement in the ordering and lab processing of PF4 ELISA testing. Further study is required to assess if initiating an automatic hematology consult for each PF4-ELISA testing would be an effective addition in our continued attempt to decrease inappropriate HIT testing.