Overview
The human gastrointestinal (GI) tract, containing about 98% of our entire microbiome, harbors a genetically diverse microbial population that plays major roles in digestion, nutrition, inflammation, growth, and immunity against foreign pathogens; in addition to these bacteria are microbial eukaryotes, archaea, fungi, protozoa, viruses, and other commensal microorganisms which make up 2% or less of the remaining microbiota. Several excellent and comprehensive reviews have recently appeared [ , , , , , , , , ]. The largest proportion of the human GI tract microbiome (i) consists of ~ 10 14 bacteria from at least ~ 10 3 distinct bacterial species that form a complex, dynamic, and highly interactive microbial community [ , , , , ]; (ii) exhibits significant variations in abundance, stoichiometry, and aerobic requirements along the ~ 10-m length of the GI tract [ , , , , , , ]; (iii) has symbiotic associations and interactions with the host indispensable for human health and homeostatic physiological functions [ , , , , ]; and (iv) exhibits alterations in abundance, speciation, and complexity in response to developmental stage, dietary factors, GI tract disturbances, aging, and disease [ , , , , , , ].
Our acknowledgment that the human microbiome is a significant contributor to human health, disease is a relatively recent one, and direct experimental evidence linking microbial activities and secretory products to the development of human neurological diseases of the central nervous system (CNS) are surprisingly few. Only very recently has investigational evidence been provided that microbial nucleic acids and/or the highly toxic exudates of human GI tract resident anaerobic gram-negative bacteria such as LPS (i) are abundant in CNS compartments in age-related neurodegenerative diseases such as sporadic AD [ , , , ]; (ii) are capable of inducing an inflammatory signaling program in human neuronal-glial (HNG) cells in primary co-culture [ , , ]; and (iii) contribute to the activation of the pro-inflammatory transcription factor NF-kB (p50/p65) complex [ , , ]. LPSs appear to be directly involved in the up-regulation of a small family of NF-kB sensitive microRNAs (miRNAs) that down regulate their messenger RNA (mRNA) targets to contribute to inflammatory signaling and neuropathological change within the CNS. This paper is a current overview of what we currently know concerning the contribution of the human GI tract microbiome-resident gram-negative facultative anaerobe Bacteroides fragilis ( B . fragilis ) to human neurological disease, with specific emphasis on AD wherever possible. Based on these emerging data and evolving perspectives our overall hypothesis is that neurotoxic exudates such as BF-LPS, a remarkably abundant and pro-inflammatory glycolipid, and perhaps the most pro-inflammatory LPS known, is capable of triggering systemic inflammation and the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines after translocation across the GI tract into systemic circulation [ , , , , ]. This specific LPS represents an important pathogenic initiator component of a BF-LPS initiated NF-kB-miRNA-mRNA signaling program that has potential to down regulate specific gene expression known to be required for normal CNS homeostasis, and hence contribute progressively to AD-type neurodegenerative change (Fig. 1 ).
Neurotoxic Pro-Inflammatory Exudates from B. fragilis
Of the 54 general divisions of known bacteria, evolution has selected just a few major groups— Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria for example—as major components of the human GI tract microbiome. Of these, the Bacteroidetes member B . fragilis (phyla Bacteroidetes ) and the facultative anaerobe Escherichia coli ( E . coli ; phyla Proteobacteria): (i) together constitute about ~ 30–40% of all bacteria within the GI tract microbiome [ , ]; (ii) constitute about ~ 30–50% of the dry weight of human fecal matter [ , ]; (iii) are normally the most abundant gram-negative bacilli, respectively, of the middle and lower colon of the human GI tract [ , , ]; (iv) under optimal bacterial growth conditions B . fragilis or E . coli abundance doubles every 20 min [ ]; and (v) unless special biophysical processes of growth dynamics that are in operation, such as dormancy or hibernation, have a life span of up to several hundred minutes [ , , ]. Hence, large amounts of B . fragilis - or E . coli -generated neurotoxins can be generated quite rapidly. Obligate anaerobes such as B . fragilis display remarkably diverse antibiotic resistance mechanisms and display one of the highest resistance-to-antibiotics of any anaerobic pathogen [ , , ]. When compartmentalized within the GI tract microbiome B . fragilis is known to be generally beneficial to human health through their ability to break down dietary fiber containing substances such as cellulose, lignin, and pectin that are normally resistant to the action of host-encoded degradative enzymes. These dietary fibers are further broken down into digestible short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) such as acetate, propionate and butyrate, polysaccharides, and volatile fatty acids in part through the biosynthetic and enzymatic capabilities of this GI tract-abundant microbe [ , , , ]. However, under stressful or sub-optimal growth conditions B . fragilis can release an unusually complex, neurotoxic array of components of four major classes: (i) endotoxins and exotoxins, (ii) microbial amyloids, (iii) small microRNA-like non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs), and (iv) lipooligosaccharides (LOSs) and lipopolysaccharides (LPSs; see below and Fig. 1 ). Together, these neurotoxins may be released acutely and rapidly, or chronically, such as over the course of aging. When B . fragilis or their highly toxic secretions escape the microorganism-dense environment of the GI tract (~ 10 11 microbes/g of fecal matter), they can induce substantial systemic inflammatory pathology with significant morbidity and mortality [ , , , , , ]. Interestingly, enterotoxigenic strains of B . fragilis have been associated with bacteremia, colitis, diarrhea, sepsis, systemic infection, systemic inflammation, the development of GI tract cancers and neurological disorders including AD, and those neurological conditions that have significantly increased incidence with aberrant developmental programming and aging [ , , ]. Indeed several Bacteroidetes species have also been recently shown to propagate in dietary fiber-deprived animal models fed high fat-cholesterol (HFC) diets [ , , , , ]. Overall, this suggests that sufficient dietary fiber may have a significant role in regulating the abundance, complexity, and stoichiometry of certain microbial species resident in the GI tract microbiome, including B . fragilis . Therefore, dietary fiber may have an indirect effect on the abundance and profusion of the noxious secretions of B . fragilis and hence its neurotoxic potential [ , , , , , , , unpublished observations]. Fig. 1 Association of LPS with the periphery of neuronal nuclei in the superior temporal lobe of AD neocortex. A LPS (red stain; λmax = 690 nm) and DAPI (blue stain; λmax = 470 nm) show the relationship between LPS and nuclei in AD brain. B The addition of a neuron-specific NeuN stain (green stain; λmax = 520 nm) shows the relationship between LPS and neuronal nuclei. The sizes of all microscope fields in these two photos ( A and B ) are equal; for all panels magnification × 60, note that LPS deposits “bundled” or in some cases “caged” around the neuronal nuclear periphery in a “clathrin-like” lattice or “net” (yellow arrows in a ) . LPS did not associate with astroglial nuclei to anywhere near the same extent as neuronal nuclei (data not shown; 7–9). C Highly schematized depiction of a microbiome-mediated and BF-LPS-driven pathogenic pathway in inflammatory neurodegeneration. This pathogenic pathway involves neurotoxic exudates of the microbiome (LPS, endotoxins, amyloids, and/or sncRNA), stress-induced reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen species (ROS, RNS; see text), and modulated increases in NF-kB (p50/p65) driving “pro-inflammatory” microRNA signaling. Poly-ADP-ribose polymerases (PARPs) and other factors may also be involved in the regulation and intracellular trafficking of NF-kB. Interestingly, Aβ peptides and neuroinflammation have been shown to result in the activation of PARP enzymes and cell death [ , , ]. The abundance of Bacteroidetes (and hence BF-LPS) in the human GI tract is regulated by diet and dietary fiber intake. Highly pro-inflammatory GI tract-derived neurotoxins such as LPS must first cross two biophysical barriers from the GI tract into the CNS; these include the GI tract barrier and the blood-brain barrier (BBB). The pathogenic effects of other B . fragilis exudate such as endotoxins (such as fragilysin), amyloids, and sncRNAs have not been studied in detail. They may be expected to exert additional, and possibly synergistic, detrimental effects to normal brain cell homeostasis within the CNS including the support of pro-inflammatory neurodegeneration. Much of the support for these pathways comes from in vitro studies using human neuronal-glial (HNG) cell co-cultures, Western immunoassay, and ELISA, DNA, microRNA (miRNA), and messenger RNA (mRNA) arrays, specific reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS, RNS), PARP and NF-kB inhibitors, anti-miRNA blocking strategies, and bioinformatics analyses including miRNA-mRNA-linking algorithms [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ].
Neurotoxins and Biophysical Barriers
As humans age, senescence of the GI tract and immune system results in an increased bacterial burden as host-cell mediated biophysical barriers become “leaky” and innate-immune responses progressively decline. Maintaining the fidelity and integrity of biophysical barriers—including, prominently, the GI tract barrier, and the blood-brain barrier (BBB)—against an increasing bacterial pressure is essential to exclude an increasing bacterial load, in keeping GI tract-derived neurotoxins like LPS out of the portal and/or systemic circulation, and in minimizing LPS access to brain compartments. In fact, early GI tract or BBB dysfunction has been evidenced in AD long before inflammatory neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment occur [ , , , ]. Aging may further support the persistence and proliferation of anaerobic bacteria in the oral cavity that elicits a robust systemic pathogenic response mediated by pro-inflammatory cytokines such as epithelium-derived tumor necrosis factor (TNFα). TNFα represents a major pro-inflammatory cytokine involved in systemic inflammation, and prolonged exposure to high levels of circulating TNFα together with LPS further compromises the integrity of the these important biophysical barriers of the GI tract and the brain [ , , , , ].
In addition to their prodigious biosynthesis of the highly neurotoxic BF-LPS, B . fragilis exotoxins are a leading cause of anaerobic bacteremia, sepsis, and systemic inflammatory distress through their export of the highly pro-inflammatory zinc metalloproteinase fragilysin, also known as B . fragilis toxin or BFT [ , , , , , , , ]. Interestingly, BFT has been shown to effectively disrupt epithelial cells of GI tract barriers via cleavage of E-cadherin, a calcium-dependent transmembrane zonula adhesion protein and important structural component of the BBB [ , , , ]. Currently, it is not well understood if GI tract- or BBB-disrupting proteolytic endotoxins such as BFT are able to propagate their pathogenic activities via the systemic circulation to further disrupt the GI tract barrier or BBB at distant sites, to ultimately transfer endotoxins, exotoxins, LPSs, amyloids, and/or sncRNAs into the systemic and cerebrovascular circulation, to ultimately target brain cells within the CNS [ , , , , , , ]. It has also recently been reported that along with BFT, amyloid peptide-dependent changes in synaptic adhesion and barrier function affect the structure, integrity and function of synapses, suggesting that the observed failure of synaptic adhesion and barrier integrity in the AD brain play key roles in the progressive disruption of inter-neuronal signaling throughout brain communication networks, itself a pathological feature characteristic of AD brain [ , , , , , ].
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), Activation of NF-kB, and Pro-Inflammatory microRNAs
LPS, the major component of the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, is localized to the outer layer of the bacterial cell wall and in non-capsulated strains is secreted from the bacterial cell surface [ , , ]. With a molecular mass of ~ 10–20 kDa, LPS is a highly immunogenic antigen made up of three structural components: (i) a hydrophobic lipid section, lipid A, which is responsible for the toxic properties of the molecule; (ii) a hydrophilic core polysaccharide chain; and (iii) a repeating hydrophilic O-antigenic oligosaccharide side chain that is specific to the bacterial serotype. LPS and its hydrophobic lipid A moiety stimulate cells of the innate-immune system by the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) that recognizes common pathogen-associated molecular-patterns (PAMPs) and stimulates the production of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS, RNS) in human cells [ , , ]. ( https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/technical-documents/articles/biology/glycobiology/lipopolysaccharides.html ). ROS and RNS are strong oxidizers of neuronal lipids, proteins, and genetic materials (such as DNA and RNA) and both are an exceptionally potent inducer of NF-kB [ , , , , ]. The recent discovery of inducible, chronically up-regulated, and NF-kB-controlled miRNAs in the human CNS and altered miRNA-mRNA-coupled networks in sporadic AD brain has revealed an entirely new level of post-transcriptional gene control [ ]. For instance, LPS induced up-regulation of miRNA-34a and miRNA-146a and their down-regulated mRNA and gene expression targets that include SHANK3, TREM2, CFH, and TSPAN12 may be part of a much larger and dynamic miRNA-mRNA-coupled signaling system operating in the sporadic AD brain [ , , , , , , ] (Fig. 1 ). For example, SHANK3 is a major multi-domain proline-rich scaffold and synaptonuclear protein of the postsynaptic density that interconnects and organizes neurotransmitter receptors, ion channels, and other membrane proteins to the actin cytoskeleton and G-protein-coupled signaling pathways; each of which are known to be affected in sporadic AD tissues [ , , , ]. The triggering receptor expressed in myeloid/microglia cells (TREM2) is a microglial membrane integral protein that forms a receptor signaling complex with the tyrosine kinase-binding protein (TYROBP); TREM2 deficits are observed in AD that associate with ineffective amyloid plaque removal while triggering deficits in the normal activation of innate-immune responses [ , , , ]. Similar deficits in complement factor H (CFH) further support abnormal innate-immune signaling, as is observed in AD [ ], and deficits in the tetraspanin 12 (TSPAN12) transmembrane protein leads to altered proteolysis of the beta-amyloid precursor protein (βAPP; by physically interacting with the βAPP secretases) to yield more neurotoxic βAPP-derivatives [ , ].
Interestingly, even though the exact cause of sporadic AD remains elusive, and there are currently no effective treatments to stop or reverse the progression of this unique human and age-related neurological disorder, anti-NF-kB and/or anti-miRNA strategies pose a realistically and readily available therapeutic approach for intervention of progressive degenerative processes in the CNS, and as such may be highly efficacious in the clinical management of sporadic AD.
LPS and Association with Neuronal Nuclei
Very recently, in immunohistological studies, LPS has been observed to closely associate with the periphery of the nucleus of neuronal cells in AD brain, and in some cases, LPS deposition (i) appears to be in a structured “clathrin-like” lattice format adjacent to neuronal nuclei (yellow arrows in Fig. 1 A); and (ii) in some cases, completely envelops or ‘encapsulates’ normally transcriptionally active AD nuclei [ , , ] (Fig. 1 A, B). Moreover, run-on transcription studies using the incorporation of [α- 32’ P]-uridine triphosphate into newly synthesized total RNA further indicates that LPS is capable of significantly quenching the normally high output of genetic information (in the form of mRNA) from neuronal nuclei [ , , ]. Taken together, these studies strongly suggest that in AD, LPS may impair the efficient read-out of neuronal genetic information normally required for the homeostatic operation of brain cell function, impairing the exit of mRNAs (but not the significantly smaller miRNAs), and this may contribute to a progressive disruption in the read-out of genetic information from the AD-affected CNS.
Unanswered Questions
Many important and significant unanswered questions remain. Currently, microbiome and microbial genetics researchers have studied the molecular-genetics and LPS association of precisely just two of the ~ 1000 species of bacteria which make up the GI tract microbiome. While different LPS species appear to have different potential for inducing the pro-inflammatory transcription factor NF-kB (p50/p65 complex), and hence the potential to induce pro-inflammatory miRNAs, it is currently not well understood what might be the consequence of a neurotoxic cocktail of endotoxins and exotoxins, microbial amyloids, sncRNAs, and LPS, which is a physiologically and pathologically more realistic scenario in the aging human brain [ , , , , , , , , ]. Altogether, the ~ 1000 or so species of bacteria in the human GI tract might be expected to secrete exceedingly complex mixtures of neurotoxins of many different types, compositions, and toxicities and whose actions might well exhibit synergism in their neurotoxic potential, and their abilities to transverse normally protective physiological barriers. For example, the co-incubation of Aβ42 peptide with LPS potentiates Aβ42-peptide translocation, amyloidogenesis, and fibrillogenesis [ , , , , , ]. There are recent reports of general role for bacterial cell wall products in multiple amyloidopathies associated with chronic and inflammatory diseases such as AD; to cite just one example that both LPS and lipoteichoic acids potently induce anomalous fibrillar amyloid formation and complex electrostatic interactions appear to be required to efficiently sequester amyloid folds with LPS at the bacterial membrane surface [ , ]. Other factors such as poly-ADP-ribose polymerases (PARPs) may also be involved in the regulation and intracellular trafficking of NF-kB and amyloidogensis; interestingly, Aβ peptides and neuroinflammation have been recently shown to result in the activation of PARP enzymes and cell death [ , , ]. (Fig. 1 ). Convincing evidence for the first bacterial products such as LPS within CNS compartment appeared less than 1 year ago, and studies on LPS and its association with the periphery of the neuronal nuclei of AD brain, and its effects on inflammatory signaling in cultured human brain cells and AD tissues appeared in the literature just 4 months ago [ , , , ]. Both dietary fiber and the integrity of the genetically determined, endothelial cell-based BBB and the epithelial cell-based GI tract barriers during many decades of life may be more important than once thought [ , , , ]. Virtually, nothing in known about plant-derived microbiomes or their exudates, plant microRNAs and viroids, natural sncRNAs, and circular RNAs (circRNAs) widely distributed throughout the plant and/or animal kingdoms which are ingested daily in a typical human diet, and how they may contribute to the human microbiome in health and disease [ , , , , ].
Concluding Remarks
Well over 110 years since its original description, AD is now the leading cause of intellectual impairment and progressive dementia in our aging population, and represents a rapidly expanding socioeconomic and healthcare concern in Westernized societies [ , , ]. Few common, insidious, and lethal neurological disorders of the aging human CNS present the neurologist and neuroscience researcher with the complexity and heterogeneity of sporadic AD. Susceptibility genes that have been identified for AD are involved in an exceptionally wide and varied range of basic neurobiological functions; however, their generalized down-regulation in expression appears to contribute to a complex mixture of altered synaptogenesis, deficits in neurotrophism and phagocytosis, increases inflammation and/or amyloidogenesis that together characterize the major pathological pathways of sporadic AD (Fig. 1 C). Elucidation of the genetic, epigenetic, environmental, and life-style factors that contribute to the initiation, progression, and spreading of this chronic and fatal neurodegenerative disease mechanism will ultimately result in improved and effective diagnostics and intervention strategies. Indeed, the preliminary identification and characterization of GI tract microbiology and its contribution to neurobiology have together greatly expanded our perception, knowledge, and understanding of the complexity and dynamics of the GI tract microbiome, the microbial-mediated regulation of the neuronal transcriptome and pathogenic miRNA-mediated gene expression patterns in the human CNS [ , , , , , , , ].