Highlights
Many elderly people take both non-selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAIDs) for the relief of pain and low-dose aspirin for cardioprotection or stroke prevention NSAIDs are known to interfere with the antiplatelet effect of low-dose aspirin through competitive binding with COX-1 The clinical significance of this pharmacodynamic interaction has not been evaluated in large, randomized, well-controlled clinical outcome trials The interaction between NSAIDS and low-dose aspirin varies amongst agents, and is highly dependent on numerous factors including: dose timing, dose of aspirin, and dose of the NSAID in question The clinical decision making for concomitant NSAID and low-dose aspirin regimens remains at the patient level
Introduction
Aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are among the most widely used analgesics in the world, either as prescription or as over-the-counter (OTC) medications. Many common forms of pain are relieved effectively by NSAIDs, including low back pain, musculoskeletal pain associated with arthritis, postsurgical pain, headache, and menstrual pain. In addition, aspirin, the forerunner of modern NSAIDs, has become the cornerstone of secondary prevention of thrombotic cardiovascular events. There have been six large, randomized trials that used aspirin alone as long-term treatment after an acute myocardial infarction, five of which demonstrated a trend toward decreased mortality with aspirin therapy [ ]. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends low-dose aspirin for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults aged 50–59 years who have a 10% or greater 10-year cardiovascular disease risk, are not at increased risk for bleeding, have a life expectancy of at least 10 years, and are willing to take low-dose aspirin daily for at least 10 years [ ]. The USPSTF suggests that the use of low-dose aspirin for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults aged 60–69 years should be an individual decision [ ]. In addition, in the most recent American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines, aspirin 75–162 mg daily is recommended in all patients with coronary artery disease unless contraindicated [ ]. In a recent primary prevention trial of apparently healthy older adults, low dose aspirin therapy was associated with higher rate of all-cause mortality (HR = 1.14) compared to placebo that was attributed primarily to cancer-related death. Since other primary prevention trial demonstrated no effect of aspirin on all-cause mortality, the results of the latter trial should be interpreted with caution as suggested by the trial investigators [ ].
Pain is common and often co-exists with cardiovascular disease in the elderly. Consequently, among the aging population worldwide there is likelihood that many people will take both NSAIDs for the relief of pain and low-dose aspirin for cardioprotection or stroke prevention. In the US, it has been estimated that in 2010 approximately 43 million adults (19.0%) were regular aspirin users (at least three times per week for more than 3 months), and more than 29 million adults (12.1%) were regular users of NSAIDs; it was further estimated that 16.0% of all those taking either an NSAID or aspirin used both simultaneously [ ]. Another estimate suggested that concomitant use of low-dose aspirin is present in more than 20% of all patients taking either NSAIDs or COX-2 inhibitors [ ].
This high level of concomitant use is important because a potential interaction between aspirin and some NSAIDs may compromise the cardioprotective and stroke prevention effects of aspirin [ ]. Patients with cardiovascular disease taking aspirin and some NSAIDs appear to have increased vascular events [ ]; however, meta-analyses of observational studies have not replicated this finding [ , ].
The objective of this review was to assess the evidence from published clinical studies regarding the potential attenuation of the anti-platelet effect of low-dose aspirin by use of concomitant NSAIDs (both selective and non-selective). We searched for evidence from systematic reviews, randomized trials, observational studies, and epidemiological data. This review discusses the background to our current understanding and presents a narrative overview of the literature and summary of the current state of the evidence.
A predetermined search strategy, designed to find a high proportion of relevant studies, was developed. Following pilot searches, a specific search string was devised for the National Institutes of Health Medical Database (PubMed). The basic search string employed was: (nsaid OR naproxen OR celecoxib OR diclofenac OR meloxicam OR ibuprofen) AND (interaction AND platelet OR thromboxane) AND aspirin Sort by: Author Filters: Clinical Study; Humans; English. For the purposes of this search, we selected the five compounds with the highest market share based on US prescribing data mid-2014 to mid-2015.
Papers and conference materials published in English between 1 January 2000 and 1 September 2016 were included. No limits by sex, age, study design, or ethnicity of study participants were imposed.
Studies were only included in the final analysis that had human subjects who were dosed and the interaction between NSAID and aspirin to inhibit COX-1 was assessed. Studies conducted only in vitro were excluded. To avoid duplication of data, meta-analyses and other reviews utilizing previously published peer-reviewed data were also excluded. The PubMed search identified > 500 relevant citations, 55 of which fulfilled the initial inclusion criteria. Data were not found for all selected NSAIDs. Publications not identified by the approved search strategy and unpublished data sources meeting the inclusion criteria were included if recommended by the authors. Following author review of the titles and abstracts, duplicates and articles that did not satisfy the inclusion criteria were removed. Full publications of the first selection of references were retrieved and reviewed against the inclusion and exclusion criteria to provide the final selection.
Relevant data from the selected source documents were extracted and summarized in an Excel (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA) spreadsheet. Data sources and the extraction table were made available to all authors for review and analysis. A narrative synthesis of our findings is presented.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
NSAIDs are categorized generally as either non-selective cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors or selective COX-2 inhibitors (coxibs), according to their relative selectivity. Non-selective NSAIDs (such as ibuprofen and naproxen) interfere with the antiplatelet effect of low-dose aspirin by competing for binding sites in close proximity to the aspirin binding site in platelet COX-1. This interaction is attributed to steric hindrance at the active site of COX-1 by ibuprofen and similar NSAIDs [ ], which prevents aspirin from binding and irreversibly acetylating a serine residue on COX-1 [ ]. A single daily dose of ibuprofen before aspirin prevented inhibition of serum thromboxane B2 (TxB 2 ) and platelet aggregation by aspirin, as can multiple daily doses of ibuprofen [ ]. Similar effects have been described with naproxen. A single dose of naproxen 2 h before aspirin interfered with the antiplatelet effect of aspirin [ ], however, a recent study has demonstrated no pharmacodynamic interaction between concurrent naproxen and aspirin use with a single dose of naproxen [ ]. This recent study did demonstrate varying degrees of interaction after 10 days of treatment.
Although the aspirin-NSAID interaction has raised concern regarding the cardiovascular safety in high-risk individuals using low dose aspirin for cardioprotection, no outcome data are available upon which to assess the clinical implications of this pharmacodynamic interaction. In 2006, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued guidance to healthcare professionals regarding the concomitant use of ibuprofen and aspirin, stating that occasional ibuprofen use exposes the patient to minimal risk but that patients taking immediate-release, non-enteric-coated aspirin should take ibuprofen at least 30 min or more after, or more than 8 h before, aspirin dosing [ ].
Antiplatelet effect of aspirin and NSAIDs
In the early 1970s, the inhibition of prostaglandin biosynthesis was proposed as the mechanism of action of aspirin [ ]. Since the 1990s, it has been known that NSAIDs impart analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects by blockade of the cyclooxygenase (prostaglandin H-synthase) (COX). COX exists in two isoforms: COX-1, which is constitutively expressed in most cells, and COX-2, which is induced by proinflammatory stimuli (cytokines, growth factor, shear) in endothelial cells, monocytes/macrophages, tumor cells, and plaque-associated cells. In general, COX-2 expression is minimal under basal conditions. COX mediates the production of eicosanoids that serve multiple roles in normal homeostasis and disease. Prostanoid biosynthesis is initiated via release of arachidonic acid from the cell membrane by lipases, primarily phospholipase A2, and subsequent conversion by prostaglandin (PG) H-synthase to PGH2. PGH synthase has both COX activity that converts arachidonic acid (AA) to PGG2 and peroxidase activity that converts PGG2 to PGH2. The role of AA metabolites generated by COX in homeostasis of vascular tone and thrombosis has been well described. PGH2 is metabolized by tissue-specific isomerases such as thromboxane synthase in platelets to thromboxane (TX) A2; PGI synthase in endothelium, vascular smooth muscle cells, and renal cells to PGI2; and PGE synthase in gastric mucosa and renal cells to PGE2. In addition, leukocytes, vascular smooth muscle cells, endothelial cells, and platelets express PGE synthase and, as a result, are all capable of generating the inflammatory prostanoid, PGE2 [ , , , ].
Thromboxane A2 induces platelet aggregation and vasoconstriction (prothrombotic effects), and PGI2 induces vasodilation and nitric oxide generation and inhibits platelet aggregation (antithrombotic effects). Controversy exists regarding the source of PGI2. Some have opined that COX-2 activity in vascular smooth cells and endothelial cells is the dominant contributor to PGI2 biosynthesis, and that inhibition of PGI2 synthesis by coxibs can promote hypertension and thrombosis. However, others have opined that endothelial COX-1 activity was mainly responsible for PGI2 synthesis in healthy blood vessels. Also, prostanoids have important roles in modulating renal blood flow, glomerular filtration rate, and salt and water excretion. PGE2 induces mucus secretion, bicarbonate release, and mucosal blood flow, thus providing gastric protective effects [ , ].
Although NSAIDS are frequently used, safe use of these drugs, particularly among older patients who may have or be at high risk for CVD and/or adverse gastrointestinal (GI) events, is an ongoing challenge for the clinician. The NSAIDs are classified based on their relative selectivity in inhibiting COX-1 and COX-2. Nonselective NSAIDs inhibit both COX-1 and COX-2. These agents include diclofenac, naproxen, ibuprofen, indomethacin, and aspirin. Coxibs are NSAIDs that are COX-2 specific and include etoricoxib, rofecoxib and celecoxib. NSAIDs reversibly inhibit the COX enzyme and have a longer half-life compared with aspirin. In contrast, aspirin is only transiently exposed in the circulation and irreversibly acetylates serine 530 of COX-1. Aspirin prevents generation of TxA2 and TxA2-induced platelet aggregation for the lifetime of the platelet. Aspirin also irreversibly acetylates serine 516 of COX-2 and is 166 times more potent in inhibiting COX-1 than COX-2. COX-1 inhibition serves as the basis of the cardioprotective effects of aspirin and other NSAIDs. A pharmacodynamic interaction in the inhibition of the platelet has been suggested in patients co-administered aspirin and certain NSAIDS, but the clinical significance of this interaction is unknown [ , ].
While COX-1 inhibition provides cardioprotective benefits, COX-1 inhibition in gastric cells also prevents synthesis of prostaglandins that are protective for gastric mucosa, leading to aspirin-induced GI bleeding. The goal of the development of selective COX-2 inhibitors (coxibs) was pain relief with reduced GI adverse events as the anti-inflammatory properties of NSAIDs are conferred by COX-2 inhibition. In inflammation, COX-2 expression is induced, and pro-inflammatory prostanoid production produces pain.
An increased risk of CV events among patients receiving coxibs has been reported. Most mechanisms of enhanced CV event occurrence have been related to untoward effects of COX inhibition. For example, (1) resultant inhibition of renal PGE2 production leading to fluid retention, renal insufficiency, and hypertension; and (2) inhibition of PGI2 production leading to prothrombosis [ ].
Recent observations indicate that NSAIDs are potent inducers of reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation in cardiac cells and induce cardiotoxicity by a ROS-dependent mechanism involving mitochondrial and proteasome dysfunction [ ]. The association of prolonged NSAID use with the development of CVD may be explained, at least in part, by the latter mechanism.
Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic considerations
The plasma half-life of aspirin is very short, approximately 15–20 min, while the half-life of several non-selective NSAIDs is much longer (see Fig. 1 below). For example, the half-life of naproxen ranges from 12 to 17 h. As such, upon concurrent administration with a non-selective NSAID, aspirin competes for binding to COX-1. Aspirin can only bind once the agent has been released from the binding site. The specific half-life of an NSAID will determine the duration of interference with aspirin binding (Fig. 1 ).
Fig. 1 NSAID plasma half-life (Log Scale). Reproduced with permission from Goodman and Gilman [ ]
As noted previously, aspirin has an irreversible anti-platelet effect, while other NSAIDs, including ibuprofen and naproxen, have a reversible anti-platelet effect [ ]. COX-1-inhibition is irreversible because aspirin permanently acetylates a strategically located serine residue on the platelet COX-1 enzyme. Since platelets are anucleate and therefore cannot generate new COX; the effects last for the lifespan of the platelet (approximately 10 days) [ , ]. This antiplatelet effect is associated with prolongation of the bleeding time and inhibition of TxA 2 -dependent platelet aggregation [ ]. Several studies have demonstrated the efficacy of low-dose oral aspirin (81–100 mg per day) in preventing platelet thromboxane production. It has been widely believed that 100 mg of aspirin per day is sufficient to significantly reduce TX production [ ]. A single 100 mg aspirin dose reduced serum TxB 2 by 98% during the first hour [ , , , ]. Similarly, in a longer-term study, after seven daily doses of enteric-coated, low-dose (81 mg) aspirin, the mean percentage inhibition from baseline of ex vivo generated serum TxB 2 was 97.4%, compared with a 7.8% increase after placebo treatment [ ]. Of note, the antiplatelet effects of aspirin are not all mediated through COX-1 inhibition. In the ASPECT study, dose dependent effects of aspirin were observed in the inhibition of collagen- and shear-induced aggregation and urinary 11-dehydro thromboxane B 2 production, a marker of total body TxA 2 generation. The latter effect may be related to the dose-dependent inhibition of TxA 2 produced transcellulary in platelets from PGH 2 generated by COX-2 in leukocytes [ ].
TxB 2 is evaluated ex vivo to assess the interactions between NSAIDs and aspirin. 95% inhibition is the commonly used threshold to delineate an interaction based on previous demonstration that this level of inhibition ex vivo is required for in vivo inhibition determined by urinary 11-dh TxB 2 [ ]. Nonetheless, more recent evidence appears to suggest in certain vulnerable individuals, including in diabetics and high weight individuals, more frequent dosing may prove beneficial to effectively inhibit megakaryocyte prostaglandin production [ ].
Pharmacodynamic interaction between aspirin and NSAIDs
In the US, there are now at least 20 different NSAIDs from six major classes available [ ]. There were multiple studies of varying designs in diverse populations assessing interaction between NSAIDs and aspirin. These studies varied in terms of dose and the timing/schedule of dosing of aspirin and NSAIDs and in the primary outcome measures used (Table 1 ). The overall evidence indicated that pharmacodynamic interactions between aspirin and some NSAIDs occurred but that the interaction varied widely among agents [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ] (Table 1 ). For example, several studies suggested that co-administration of traditional NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen and naproxen, but not of coxibs, with low-dose aspirin interfered with the antiplatelet effect of aspirin [ , , , ].
Table 1 Aspirin and NSAIDs pharmacodynamic interaction studies Study (year) (Ref) Study type Design Study population Primary outcome measure(s) Outcomes Conclusions Catella-Lawson et al. (2001) [ ] Randomized, 6-day repeat-dosing crossover study 81 mg daily ASA 2 h before 400 mg ibuprofen, 1000 mg paracetamol 25 mg rofecoxib for 6 days and, the same medications in the reverse order after a 14-day washout period 6 subjects Serum TxB 2 and lipopolysaccharide-stimulated PGE2 formation. Urinary 2,3-dinor-6-keto PGF1a Serum TxB 2 and platelet aggregation Maximally inhibited in the subjects who took ASA before a single daily dose of any other drug, and who took rofecoxib or acetaminophen before taking ASA Inhibited when a single daily dose of ibuprofen was given before ASA The concomitant administration of rofecoxib, acetaminophen, or diclofenac did not affect the pharmacodynamics of ASA The concomitant administration of ibuprofen but not rofecoxib, acetaminophen, or diclofenac antagonizes the irreversible platelet inhibition induced by ASA Ibuprofen therapy may limit the cardioprotective effects of ASA Randomized, open-label, parallel-group study Enteric-coated ASA 81 mg plus: (1) 400 mg ibuprofen or (2) 75 mg delayed-release diclofenac 5 subjects Age 18–65 years Capone et al. (2004) [ ] Cross-over, open-label study 100 mg/day ASA or 500 mg BID naproxen for 6 days 9 healthy subjects Age 23–58 years Serum TxB 2 Urinary 11-dehydro- TxB 2 Naproxen or ASA caused a similar and significant suppression of TxB 2 production and urinary 11-dehydro- TxB 2 that persisted throughout the dosing interval Naproxen significantly but reversibly inhibits platelet cyclooxygenase-1 and needs to be dosed continuously to maintain its antiplatelet effect Van Ryn et al. (2004) [ ] Randomized, open-label, two-treatment, two-way crossover pharmacodynamic study 1. 15 mg daily meloxicam for 4 days, and then 100 mg daily ASA administered 2 h after meloxicam for an additional 7 days. 2. 100 mg daily ASA only for 2 days 16 healthy subjects Age 21–58 years Arachidonic acid-, collagen-, or adenosine diphosphate-induced Platelet aggregation. Serum TxB 2 Meloxicam alone had no effect on platelet aggregation but reduced serum TxB 2 . Addition of ASA resulted in complete inhibition of aggregation and TxB 2 for 24 h 100 mg ASA alone also resulted in complete inhibition of platelet aggregation and TxB 2 Despite its partial inhibition of platelet TxB2 production, meloxicam does not affect the ability of ASA to inhibit COX-1 in platelets Capone et al. (2005) [ ] In vitro study Naproxen (0.01–10 mol/l) incubated with washed platelets for 5 min before the addition of ASA (10 or 100 mol/l) NS Serum TxB 2 ASA and naproxen inhibited TxB 2 production in a concentration-dependent fashion Naproxen’s antiplatelet effect decreased in the presence of the higher concentration of ASA Acute concurrent but not staggered administration of naproxen attenuates antiplatelet effects of ASA Pharmacodynamic study 1. 100 mg daily ASA for 6 days F/U ASA and naproxen (500 mg bid) for further 6 days 9 healthy volunteers Age 20–30 years Platelet aggregation Serum TxB 2 , and urinary 11-dehydro- TxB 2 Antiplatelet effects of ASA were not significantly altered by the co-administration of naproxen, given either 2 h after ASA or in reverse order The concurrent administration of a single dose of ASA and naproxen did not affect serum TxB2 formation and platelet aggregation at 1 h after dosing but ASA alone caused maximal inhibitory effect Cryer et al. (2005) [ ] Prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, multiple-dose parallel-group study 81 mg daily ASA for 8 days: randomized to receive either ibuprofen 400 mg TID or placebo TID concomitantly for 10 more days 47 healthy volunteers Serum TxB2 Ibuprofen and ASA inhibited serum TxB 2 significantly No clinically meaningful reduction in TxB 2 inhibition when over the counter doses of ibuprofen administered in addition to ASA Renda et al. (2006) [ ] Randomized, placebo-controlled study Patients on long-term 100 mg ASA received celecoxib (200 mg twice daily), ibuprofen (600 mg 3 times daily) or placebo for 7 days 29 patients with osteoarthritis and stable ischemic heart disease Age 45–73 years Serum TxB 2, Urinary 11-dehydro-TXB2, Arachidonic acid and adenosine diphosphate-induced platelet aggregation Concomitant use of ibuprofen led to a significant increase in serum TxB2 level on day 7 and associated with a significant increase in arachidonic acid and -and adenosine diphosphate-induced platelet aggregation. Unlike ibuprofen, celecoxib did not interfere with ASA-induced the platelet inhibition Gengo et al. (2008) [ ] Randomized 3-way crossover study Single dose of 325 mg ASA, 400 mg ibuprofen or 400 mg ibuprofen followed after 2 h by 325 mg ASA with a minimum 6-day washout period between treatments 10 healthy volunteers Age 21–32 years Collagen- and arachidonic acid-induced platelet aggregation Significant reduction in platelet aggregation inhibition-induced by ASA when ibuprofen was given prior to ASA Ibuprofen attenuates the irreversible inhibition of platelet aggregation induced by ASA Observational study in stroke patients treated with concomitant NSAID ASA with ibuprofen (200–800 mg) or naproxen (220–500 mg): all were taking NSAID within 1 h of the daily dose of ASA 28 patients average age 60 ± 16 years No inhibition of ex vivo platelet aggregation while treated with ASA plus NSAID, but all showed distinct inhibition of platelet aggregation after discontinuation of the NSAID; 72% of patients had experienced a recurrent ischemic episode while taking ASA and NSAIDs concomitantly Gladding et al. (2008) [ ] Randomised, double-bind multiple crossover study Each subject investigated for three of six NSAIDs [naproxen (550 mg), ibuprofen (400 mg), celecoxib (200 mg), indomethacin (25 mg), tiaprofenic acid (300 mg) sulindac (200 mg)] and for placebo. 24 healthy volunteer subjects Age 23–67 years Platelet Function Analyzer 100: closure time Compared with placebo plus ASA, closure time was significantly reduced when indomethacin, ibuprofen, tiaprofenic acid ,or naproxen was given before ASA; sulindac and celcoxib did not appear to affect platelet function and did not blunt the response to ASA Ibuprofen, indomethacin, naproxen, and tiaprofenic acid attenuate the antiplatelet effect of ASA. Sulindac and celecoxib did not demonstrate any significant antiplatelet effect or reduce the antiplatelet of ASA Hong et al. (2008) [ ] Single-blinded, randomized, three-way crossover study Single doses of ASA (325 mg), ibuprofen (400 mg) and concomitant administration of ASA (325 mg) plus ibuprofen (400 mg) 10 healthy volunteers Age 21–51 years Whole blood collagen- and arachidonic acid-induced platelet aggregation ASA associated with complete inhibition of platelet aggregation whereas ibuprofen alone or in combination with ASA yielded only transient inhibition of platelet aggregation, with complete recovery within 6–8 h The study indicated pharmacodynamic interaction between ASA and ibuprofen Galliard-Grigioni et al. (2009) [ ] Randomized, placebo controlled trial 100 mg ASA daily plus 3 × 1 g acetaminophen, 3 × 50 mg diclofenac, 3 × 250 mg naproxen, or 3 × 1 placebo 11 healthy subjects Age: 21–58 years Platelet function analyzer 100 closure time Only naproxen enhanced the anti-platelet effect of ASA whereas diclofenac reduced the anti-platelet effect of ASA in the first 2 days and Acetaminophen had no effect compared with placebo. After 4 days of treatment platelet aggregation was similarly inhibited by all combinations NSAID at standard doses may enhance (naproxen) or inhibit (diclofenac) ASA-induced platelet inhibition at the beginning of a treatment, but not during regular treatment of > 2 days Schiff et al. (2009) [ ] Open-label, randomized, placebo-controlled, two-way crossover 3-week study: 7 days naproxen (500 mg BID or OTC dose: 220 mg two or three times daily) or placebo; 6-day wash-out, 7 days of ASA (81 mg/day) 48 healthy volunteers Age 20–64 years Serum TxB 2 generation Naproxane alone at all doses and also after 7 days of ASA significantly inhibited serum TxB 2 . Placebo treatment resulted in a mean inhibition of 47.3%. All doses of NAPSO were not inferior to EC-ASA OTC doses of naproxen have similar antiplaelet effect to low dose ASA suggesting that prescription dose naproxen does not pose a cardiovascular thrombotic risk Oldenhof et al. (2010) [ ] Randomized, open label, parallel group trial Repeated-dosing, three-period, study: 5 days of enteric-coated ASA 81 mg once daily followed by 5 days of ASA once daily either alone or concomitantly with either naproxen (220 mg t.i.d) or acetaminophen (1 g four times daily) 37 Healthy volunteers Age 20–70 years Serum TXB2 ASA significantly inhibited serum TxB 2 . There was no decrease in mean percentTXB2 inhibition after an additional 5 days of EC-ASA 81 mg either acetaminophen or naproxen compared with continued EC-ASA alone OTC dose of NAPSO (220 mg three times daily) do not interfere with antiplatelet effects of 81 mg EC-ASA taken concomitantly for 5 days Shuijt et al. (2009) [ ] Open-label, three-sequence, crossover, single/multiple-dose trial 30 mg or 80 mg daily for 7 days taken concurrently with either 800 mg three times ibuprofen or 50 mg three times daily diclofenac. After washout (14–42 days) another dosing regimen according to randomization 12 healthy volunteers Age 26–58 years Serum TxB 2 30 mg Aspirin reduced TxB 2 concentrations by 90.3%, whereas ASA (80 mg) reduced TxB 2 by 98.0% (range 96.8–99.2%). Diclofenac reduced TxB 2 concentrations significantly less than ibuprofen, but with more individual variation Diclofenac plus 80 mg ASA reduced TxB 2 to the same degree as 80 mg ASA, whereas ibuprofen plus 80 mg ASA reduced the TxB 2 concentration less than 30 mg ASA once daily NSAIDs such as diclofenac should be preferred to ibuprofen for combination therapy with ASA Angiolillo et al. (2011) [ ] Single-centre, double-blind, placebo-controlled study 81 mg ASA for 5 days, then EC-ASA plus either naproxen/esomeprazole magnesium or placebo twice daily on days 6 to 10 32 volunteers Age 50–73 years Serum TxB 2 Day 11 mean serum TxB2 inhibition was ~ 99% in the ASA plus placebo group and ASA plus naproxen/esomeprazole magnesium group Low-dose ASA plus naproxen/esomeprazole is non-inferior to ASA alone in inhibiting serum T TxB 2 in healthy volunteers Anzelotti et al. (2011) [ ] Cross-over, open-label study 3 treatment periods, 6 days in length, separated by 14-day washout periods: (1) naproxen (220 mg bid), first dose 2 h before ASA (IR; 100 mg), (2) ASA 2 h before naproxen, and (3) ASA alone 9 healthy volunteers Age 23–37 years Serum TXB2 and Arachidonic acid- and collagen-induced platelet aggregation 24 h after the administration on day 6 of naproxen 2 h before aspirin, serum TxB 2 was significantly lower than aspirin alone (P = 0.0007) or aspirin given 2 h before naproxen (P = 0.0045). All treatments produced a maximal inhibition of AA-induced platelet aggregation Sequential administration of 220 mg naproxen twice a day and low-dose aspirin interferes with the ASA-induced irreversible inhibition of platelet COX-1 afforded. The interaction was minimized when giving naproxen 2 h after aspirin Meek et al. (2013) [ ] Single-blind, prospective, placebo-controlled, ex vivo, serial crossover trial Two groups (nonselective NSAIDs ibuprofen and naproxen and COX-2 selective NSAIDs etoricoxib and meloxicam) defining three successive cross-over cycles Each cross-over cycle contained placebo 33 healthy volunteers Median age 33 years Platelet function analyzer 100 closure time No changes in closure time in placebo, ibuprofen, and etoricoxib cycles. Following naproxen and meloxicam, significant changes in closure time Naproxen had an inherent weak anti-platelet effect below the ASA response threshold Li et al. (2014) [ ] 1. Plain 325 mg ASA 8 Healthy volunteers COX-1 acetylation, serum TxB 2 arachidonic acid induced aggregation COX-1 acetylation reached its maximum after 4 h and then declined ∼ 7% per day; the time course of platelet COX-1 acetylation was mirrored by f serum TxB2 inhibition and arachidonic acid-induced platelet aggregation Indicated potent interaction between ibuprofen and ASA and between naproxen and ASA but not between celecoxib and ASA In isolated platelets, the interaction between celecoxib and ASA was less potent 2. Platelets isolated from healthy volunteers preincubated with ibuprofen, naproxen, or celecoxib for 10 min before treatment with ASA (50 or 250 µM) for 1 h at 37 °C 12 Healthy volunteer donors (n = 12) NSAIDs did not inhibit COX function, all three dose-dependently prevented ASA-induced COX acetylation at equal potency; the higher ASA dose was less susceptible to interaction with the NSAID 3. Healthy subjects administered 325 mg ASA alone and ASA 2 h after 600 mg ibuprofen, 500 mg naproxen, or 200 mg celecoxib in fixed-sequence crossover 21 healthy volunteers COX-1 acetylation by ASA was significantly reduced when ASA was given after ibuprofen or naproxen but not celecoxib. Ibuprofen markedly blunted inhibition of TxB2 formation by ASA, naproxen less potently, whereas celecoxib had no effect on the ASA-induced inhibition TxB2-formation. Ibuprofen completely prevented the inhibition of platelet aggregation by ASA, whereas naproxen or celecoxib had no effect ASA aspirin, EX-ASA enteric coated-aspirin, NSAIDs nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Most studies indicated that ibuprofen interacted with aspirin and interfered with the antiplatelet effects of aspirin [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. Interestingly, Cryer and colleagues found that concomitant use of ibuprofen did not significantly reduce aspirin-induced inhibition of TxB 2 inhibition [ ], although the use of immediate-release aspirin and timing of the ibuprofen dosing may have minimized the likelihood of a pharmacokinetic interaction. Ibuprofen was dosed 1, 7 and 13 h after daily aspirin. This dosing scheme minimized the potential overlap between the two agents in circulation. Cryer et al. utilized TxB 2 inhibition of > 90% as the threshold for defining an interaction, since this degree of inhibition correlated with near complete inhibition of platelet aggregation. More data are needed to understand the difference in interaction between enteric-coated and immediate-release low dose aspirin and ibuprofen as most of the available data has been generated with immediate release aspirin.
The evidence for a pharmacodynamic interaction is mixed for some other commonly used NSAIDs, such as naproxen. Naproxen is often suggested as an alternative to ibuprofen in patients with established CV risk who take daily low-dose aspirin for CV prophylaxis [ ]. Although studies have suggested that naproxen may also attenuate the antiplatelet effect of aspirin, the evidence is inconclusive (Table 1 ). The studies reported either (a) an absence of an interaction [ , , ], particularly if not administered concomitantly [ , ], (b) a relatively weak interaction [ ], or (c) a quite distinct interaction [ , ]. These conflicting results regarding the pharmacodynamic interaction between naproxen and low-dose aspirin may be due to different treatment regimens, dosage timings or study design (Table 1 ). A recent randomized, controlled, open label, parallel group study (KONTAKT study) investigated whether administration of immediate-release naproxen sodium 220 mg once or twice daily would result in a pharmacodynamic interaction when combined with a low-dose immediate-release aspirin (81 mg/day) regimen. The interval between naproxen sodium and aspirin dosing was also examined to determine whether timing influenced a potential pharmacodynamic interaction. In this study, 6 days of dosing with immediate-release aspirin 81 mg produced > 98% inhibition of TxB 2 (lower bound of one—sided 95% CI of mean). In all groups, TxB 2 inhibition > 95% was maintained at all time points over 24 h on the first day of concomitant dosing. Single or twice daily dosing with naproxen sodium 220 mg and IR-aspirin over 10 days resulted in a decline in serum TxB 2 inhibition compared to aspirin alone indicating a pharmacodynamic interaction between naproxen and aspirin. This study also revealed that the degree of interaction appears to be influenced by the timing of aspirin and naproxen dosing [ ].
The potential interaction of other NSAIDs interact with aspirin has been investigated in several studies. Catella-Lawson et al. found that the concurrent use of diclofenac, rofecoxib, or acetaminophen did not affect the inhibition of platelet aggregation by aspirin [ ]. Other studies also reported an absence of interaction for diclofenac [ ], meloxicam [ , ] and celecoxib [ , , ]. The potential for interactions with other NSAIDs that were not specified in the search was reported in some multi-compound studies that were included in our review. Among those, a relatively distinct interaction was noted with indomethacin [ ] but no interactions were reported with acetaminophen (paracetamol) [ , ] or sulindac [ ].
The timing of drug administration appears to influence the degree of interaction. In healthy subjects taking aspirin 81 mg/day for 6 days, ibuprofen 400 mg (given 2 h before each aspirin dose) blocked the irreversible inhibition of platelet aggregation by aspirin. Multiple daily doses of ibuprofen given 2, 7, and 12 h after enteric-coated aspirin also blocked platelet aggregation but a single daily dose of ibuprofen given 2 h after each dose of aspirin did not interact [ ]. Similar timing effects were noted with naproxen; while sequential dosing of 220 mg naproxen sodium twice a day and low-dose aspirin interfered with the irreversible inhibition of platelet COX-1 by aspirin, the interaction was minimized when naproxen sodium was given 2 h after low-dose [ ]. The study by Capone et al. also indicated that timing of drug administration appears to influence the degree of interaction and supports the administration of aspirin prior to naproxen to minimize the interaction [ ]. The KONTAKT study results further support that the timing of naproxen administration is important if used over multiple days and that the pharmacodynamic interaction may be attenuated by taking immediate-release aspirin at least 30 min before naproxen sodium. Single or twice daily dosing with naproxen sodium 220 mg and aspirin over multiple days produced a decline in serum TxB 2 inhibition compared to aspirin alone [ ]. Furthermore, this study suggested that occasional single day or single dose use of naproxen sodium is less likely to interfere with the antiplatelet effect of a low dose aspirin regimen.
The inherent antiplatelet effect and long half-life of naproxen do however complicate the interpretation of the pharmacodynamic interaction between aspirin and naproxen. For example, at higher systemic exposure to naproxen, co-administration of OTC naproxen (220 mg TID) or prescription naproxen (550 mg BID) with low-dose aspirin shows platelet inhibition at levels comparable to those observed with low dose aspirin alone [ , ]. The clinical significance of this observation is not known.
Several in vitro studies confirm the aspirin-NSAID pharmacodynamic interaction as well as the differences in the potential for interaction between individual NSAIDs, which may be largely driven by the difference in the kinetics of each drug [ , ]. However, the clinical implication of the interference by NSAIDs on the anti-platelet effect of aspirin remains unclear. As noted in a review by Nalamachu et al. the evidence for interaction in the clinical literature is conflicting [ ]. One large retrospective study found no evidence of reduced cardioprotective effects of aspirin when taken with NSAIDs [ ]. However, in a large study of patients taking low dose aspirin, those who also took ibuprofen had a higher rate of recurrent AMI than those who took aspirin alone as the duration of exposure increased. However, patients taking prolonger naproxen and aspirin had a trend toward lower rates of recurrent AMI compared to patients on aspirin alone [ ]. The recent PRECISION study also evaluated the effect of concomitant aspirin and NSAID use on major adverse CV events (MACE) and found not only a decreased risk of MACE event in subjects who received concomitant aspirin, but also demonstrated similar risk profiles for different NSAIDs e.g., no difference in risk between subjects receiving naproxen or celecoxib [ ]. This finding appears significant, as celecoxib has been shown to have no interference with aspirin and suggests that any anti-platelet effect of naproxen or ibuprofen does not influence the cardioprotection resulting from daily aspirin use.
Unfortunately, there are no clinical endpoint studies that evaluated the relation of the pharmacodynamic interaction to the cardioprotective effect of aspirin. A limitation to designing such studies is the lack of a surrogate pharmacodynamic marker for cardioprotection. There is no accepted ‘gold standard’ laboratory measures identified that correlates a threshold value for serum TxB 2 inhibition by aspirin with prevention of thrombotic cardiovascular events. Previously published studies have suggested ≥ 90% TxB 2 inhibition as the threshold for adequate platelet inhibition by aspirin [ , , ] whilst the KONTAKT protocol specified that no pharmacodynamic interaction was present if the lower bound of the one-sided 95% CI was ≥ 95% [ ]. The FDA has previously acknowledged ≥ 90% TxB 2 inhibition as the criterion used by several investigators to assess the clinical significance of a drug interaction with aspirin [ ]. However, others felt 95% TxB 2 inhibition is necessary for adequate cardioprotection, since this threshold correlated with the in vivo thromboxane generation as measured by urinary 11 dehydro TxB 2 levels [ ]. The implication of these findings with respect to aspirin interactions with the use of NSAIDs is unclear.
Conclusions
Oral NSAIDs are effective agents to treat pain but their use in patients using low dose aspirin for cardioprotection warrants further examination. Studies have shown that some NSAIDs may interfere with the antiplatelet effects of aspirin [ , ].
In our review, the literature appraised suggests that NSAIDs do have the potential to interfere with the cardioprotective effects of aspirin when the agents are administered according to certain dosing patterns. However, the interaction is variable and depends on several factors, including, dose of aspirin, dose of the interactive agent (i.e., a singular dose of naproxen) and dose timing. There is some evidence that interference may be minimized by specific dosing schedules of NSAIDs and aspirin. For example, administering naproxen at least 2 h after aspirin dose can diminish the interaction, furthermore, a singular dose of naproxen may have no pharmacodynamic effect.
The clinical significance of this pharmacodynamic interaction has not been evaluated in large, randomized, well-controlled clinical outcome trials. Such trials are unlikely to be conducted as trial design would face the challenge of having to control for imprecise estimates of aspirin use (including OTC purchases) and other factors, such as comorbidities and increased body weight that will confound the measurement of cardiovascular risk in patients who require concomitant NSAID and aspirin therapy. Consequently, the decision whether to use a concomitant NSAID with a low-dose aspirin regimen needs to be taken on an individual basis.