Introduction
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurodegenerative disease, first identified as a separate neurological disorder by the French neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot. Histopathological characteristics of MS lesions include oligodendrocyte death, demyelination, gliosis, axonal damage, and peripheral immune cell invasion. Although the histopathological characteristics of MS lesions are well described [ , , ], it is not entirely clear which mechanisms regulate the development and progression of demyelinating brain lesions. It was widely accepted that MS lesions are autoimmune in origin, with myelin sheaths and oligodendrocytes being subjected to an inflammatory attack [ ]. The autoimmune nature of the disease has recently come under question. Initial degeneration of oligodendrocytes has been proposed as a putative primary insult, followed by immune cell infiltration being a secondary phenomenon [ , , ]. Furthermore, during progressive disease, aberrant glia activation rather than peripheral immune cell invasion is responsible for neuronal destruction. In fact, with chronicity, the inflammatory response becomes trapped behind the blood-brain barrier, giving rise to slowly progressive inflammatory damage that affects the brain and spinal cord in a global sense [ ]. Thus, it is evident that MS pathology is more complex and heterogeneous than previously assumed. New findings suggest an important role of the innate immune response in the initiation and progression of active demyelinating lesions [ , ].
In general, an innate immune response can be induced, among other mechanisms, by pathogen-associated or danger-associated molecular patterns, which are identified by so-called pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) including the Toll-like receptors [ ]. The TLR family members, 13 described in mice and 11 in humans, can be distinguished by their subcellular localization and motif spectrum [ , ]. The receptor can bind a broad range of ligands, including lipoteichoic acid from Gram-positive bacteria, bacterial lipopeptides and glycolipids, fungal beta glucan (zymosan), and the endogenous danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) hyaluronan, heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), or high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1) [ ]. Results of some studies suggest that TLR2 expression is induced in the peripheral immune cells of MS patients as well as within demyelinating CNS lesions [ ]. Cell types expressing TLR2 in MS lesions have been identified to be endothelial cells, microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes [ ].
Astrocytes and microglial cells exert multiple functions including protective and restorative effects in response to CNS infection or injury [ ]. Microglial cells are involved in pathogen recognition and the activation of the innate immune orchestra, also including the recruitment of adaptive immune cells from the periphery [ , ]. Astrocytes, another member of the glial cell population, mediate neuroinflammation but are also required for neuronal support and the functional maintenance of the blood-brain barrier [ ]. In experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), one of the best characterized MS animal models, it has been shown that TLR2 expression is increased in the course of disease [ ]. It was suggested that TLR2 is an important innate immune checkpoint during neuroinflammation, and this receptor appears to play a dual role as both, pro- and anti-inflammatory mediator [ , ].
Another frequently used MS animal model is the cuprizone model [ , , ]. This model can be applied to study the function of brain intrinsic innate immune responses for oligodendrocyte pathology and demyelination. Although the exact mode of action of cuprizone intoxication is not well understood, it is believed that the copper chelation action of cuprizone inhibits mitochondrial enzymes of the respiratory chain, which require copper as co-factor. This leads to oxidative stress [ ] and consequently to primary oligodendrocyte apoptosis, which is closely followed by microglia and astrocyte activation. In fact, the timing and topographical localization of cuprizone-induced lesions are highly predictable, making this model ideal to study mechanisms of both de- and remyelination [ , , , ].
In this study, we used the cuprizone model to study the expression of the TLR2 during the course of acute demyelination. Furthermore, the functional relevance of TLR2 for cuprizone-induced demyelination as well as astrocyte and microglia activation was studied in TLR2-deficient and wild-type (WT) mice.
Material and Methods
Animals and Demyelination
TLR2-deficient and wild-type (WT) mice were bred in the Central Animal Care Facility of the RWTH Aachen University. TLR2-deficient mice have been originally described by Werts et al. [ ] and were kindly provided by Reiling et al. for the described experiments [ ]. Mice were backcrossed onto a C57BL/6 background for at least ten generations. Animals had free access to food and water and were housed under standard laboratory and pathogen-free conditions according to the Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Association’s recommendations. All experimental procedures were approved by the Review Board for the Care of Animal Subjects of the district government (North-Rhine Westphalia, Germany) and performed according to international ARRIVE guidelines on the use of laboratory mice. Demyelination was induced by feeding 8- to 9-week-old (19–21 g) male mice a diet containing 0.2% cuprizone (bis-cyclohexanone oxaldihydrazone, Sigma-Aldrich Inc., Germany), mixed into ground standard rodent chow (V1530-0; Ssniff, Soest, Germany) for 1, 3, and 5 weeks, ( n = 5 to 7 mice per group) [ , , , , ]. Control animals were fed normal powdered chow. The procedure of preparation of the chow containing 0.2% cuprizone was recently described in detail by Hochstrasser et al. [ ].
Tissue Preparation
Preparation of tissues was performed as previously described [ , , , ]. For histological and immunohistochemical (IHC) studies, mice were transcardially perfused with 2% paraformaldehyde. After overnight postfixation in the same fixative, brains were dissected, embedded in paraffin, and then coronary sectioned into 5-μm sections at the levels 215–275, according to the mouse brain atlas of Sidman et al. ( http://www.hms.harvard.edu/research/brain/atlas.html ). For gene expression analyses, mice were transcardially perfused with ice-cold PBS, brains quickly removed, and tissues snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at − 80 °C until further used [ ].
Immunohistochemistry
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded 5-μm whole coronary brain sections were deparaffinized, antigens unmasked with either Tris/EDTA buffer (pH 9.0) or citrate (pH 6.0) heating for 10 min in a microwave, unspecific bindings sites were blocked with 5% normal goat serum in PBS, and sections were then incubated with either polyclonal rabbit anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; 1:9000; RPCA-GFAP, EnCor, Gainesville, FL, USA), anti-IBA1 (1:10.000; 019-19741, Wako, Neuss, Germany), anti-proteolipid protein antibody (PLP; 1:500, mouse IgG; MCA839G, AbD Serotec, Bio-Rad, Pucheim, Germany), anti-CD4 (1:500, rabbit IgG; ab 183685, Abcam, Germany), or anti-adenomatous polyposis coli protein (APC; 1:500, mouse IgG; MABC200; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) overnight at 4 °C. At the next day, after washing in PBS, sections were incubated with biotinylated secondary antibodies (1:50; BA-1000 or BA-9200; Biozol, Eching), followed by peroxidase-labelled streptavidin-biotin (ABC kit, Vector Laboratories, Peterborough, UK) staining technique. For visualization of antigen-antibody complexes, Diaminobenzidine (DAB; DAKO, Hamburg, Germany) was used. Luxol fast blue (LFB)/periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stains were performed following established protocols [ , ]. After counterstaining with hematoxylin, the slides were mounted with either Aquatex (Boehringer, Mannheim, Germany) or Depex mountant (Serva, Germany).
For immunofluorescence staining, sections were deparaffinized, pretreated for 3 × 7 min by microwaving in citric acid buffer, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X in PBS for 10 min at room temperature, and, after blocking with 1.5% bovine serum albumine (BSA; Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) in TRIS, incubated with polyclonal goat anti-mTLR2 (1:250; sc12504; Santa Cruz, Heidelberg, Germany), combined with either rabbit anti-GFAP (1:2000; RPCA-GFAP, EnCor, Gainesville, FL, USA) or rabbit anti-IBAba1 (1:2000; 019-19741, Wako, Neuss, Germany), overnight at 4 °C. Finally, the sections were incubated with donkey anti-rabbit AlexaFluor 488 (Molecular Probes, Darmstadt, Germany) and rabbit anti-goat AlexaFluor 555 (all 1:250; Molecular Probes, Darmstadt, Germany) for 1 h at room temperature.
Quantification of Immunoreactive Cells
The following regions of interest were defined: midline of the corpus callosum, somato-sensory cortex, and hippocampus formation (dentate gyrus and cornu ammonis fields 1–3). Analyses were performed at the level 275 according to the mouse brain atlas of Sidman et al.
To quantify astrocyte and microglia cell densities within the hippocampus formation, an analysis Software Imaging System (microscope Keyence BZ-9000; Keyence, Neu-Isenburg, Germany) was used to measure the area of the hippocampal formation. Within this region of interest, GFAP + , IBA1 + , and APC + cells were manually counted by an observer blinded for the different treatment groups (i.e., WT versus TLR2-KO mice). The densities of immunolabeled cells are expressed as cells per square millimeter (mm 2 ). In other cases, anti-GFAP, anti-IBA-1, and anti-PLP staining intensities were quantified by densitometrical analyses within the ROI of binary-converted pictures using ImageJ (version 1.44h; Java 1.6.0_10). A value of 100% represents a maximum and 0% a minimum of staining intensity, respectively [ , ]. LFP/PAS stains were evaluated by independent and blinded researchers in two different regions (areas 225 and 265, according to the mouse brain atlas by Sidman et al.) on a scale from 0 (complete demyelination) to 10 (normal myelination). Results were averaged and expressed as percentage of control.
RNA Isolation and Real-Time RT-PCR
Total RNA was isolated using the peqGold Trifast reagent (Peqlab, Erlangen, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions as previously described [ , , ]. RNA samples were reverse-transcribed by moloney murine leukemia virus (M-MLV) reverse transcriptase (Fermentas, Burlington, Canada) and random hexamer primers (Invitrogen, Darmstadt, Germany). The cDNA products were subsequently used for SYBR green (Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany) real-time RT-PCR. Gene expression was monitored using the StepOne Plus apparatus (Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Calculation of normalized relative expression levels was done using the qbase+ software version 1.5 Referenz 1 (Biogazelle). Normalization was performed using two stably expressed reference genes [RPL13A (60S Ribosomalprotein L13a) and GAPDH (Glycerinaldehyd-3-phosphat-Dehydrogenase)] validated using the genorm+ Referenz 2 module in qbase+. The specificity of the amplification reaction was determined by subsequent melting curve analyses. Amplification efficiency was calculated using the LinRegPCR software package (version 12.7). The primers for Tlr2 , Rprl13a , or Gapdh were manufactured by Eurofins MWG Operon (Ebersberg, Germany; for primer sequences of TLR2, RPL13A, or GAPDH, please see Table 1 ). Table 1 Primer sequences for real-time RT-PCR gene analysis Primer Sequence Annealing temp [°C] RPRL13A For 5′-GGGCAGGTTCTGGTATTGGAT-3′ 59 Rev 5′-GGCTCGGAAATGGTAGGGG-3′ GAPDH For 5′-AGGTCGGTGTGAACGGATTTG-3′ 58 Rev 5′-TGTAGACCATGTAGTTGAGGTCA-3′ TLR2 For 5′-ACAGTCACTATCCGGAGGTTGC-3′ 57 Rev 5′-ATTCGCTTCACCTTCTCCAGG-3′
Statistical Analysis
The values for real-time RT-PCR analysis were expressed as the means of duplicate measurements. For statistical comparison, an ANOVA test, followed by Bonferroni multiple comparison test, was used. A value of p ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant. For statistical calculation, GraphPad Prism 5.0 was used (Graph Pad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).
Results
Cuprizone Intoxication Results in TLR2 Expression Induction
Cuprizone ingestion in mice induces a highly reproducible demyelination of distinct brain regions, among them the white matter tract corpus callosum (CC) and the telencephalic gray matter cortex (Cx) region [ , ]. In a first set of experiments, the mRNA expression levels of the Tlr2 was determined in the CC, Cx, or hippocampus 1, 3, and 5 weeks after initiation of the cuprizone diet, and compared to control tissues. As demonstrated in Fig. 1 , Tlr2 expression in the corpus callosum as well as hippocampus increased in a time-dependent manner. In both regions, Tlr2 expression was significantly increased 3 and 5 weeks after initiation of the cuprizone intoxication. In contrast, no increase of Tlr2 expression was observed in the cortex (Fig. 1 b). This shows a dynamic and region-specific induction of Tlr2 expression in the cuprizone model. Furthermore, we investigated the cellular localization of the TLR2 in control and cuprizone-intoxicated mice. To this end, we used double fluorescence microscopy with TLR2- and glial cell (GFAP for activated astrocytes and IBA-1 for microglia/macrophages)-specific antibodies. As shown in Fig. 2 a, severe astrocytosis was evident in the midline of the corpus callosum after 5 weeks cuprizone intoxication. Astrocytosis was by far less severe in the gray matter cortex and hippocampus region. Many GFAP + /TLR2 + cells were found in all three investigated brain regions after a 5-week cuprizone intoxication protocol. Similar results were obtained in TLR2/IBA1 double-stained sections. Severe microgliosis was evident in the midline of the corpus callosum after 5 weeks cuprizone intoxication. Microgliosis was by far less severe in the gray matter cortex and hippocampus region. Many IBA1 + /TLR2 + cells were found in all three investigated brain regions after a 5-week cuprizone intoxication protocol. Fig. 1 Increased TLR2 mRNA expression in the corpus callosum and hippocampus after cuprizone-induced demylination. Analysis of TLR2 mRNA expression in the corpus callosum ( a ), cortex ( b ), and hippocampus ( c ) after 1, 3, and 5 weeks cuprizone intoxication, quantified by real-time RT-PCR. The asterisks indicate a significant difference between treated and non-treated WT mice as determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni test (* p < 0.05; *** p < 0.001) Fig. 2 Increased TLR2 expression in microglial cells after cuprizone-induced demylination. Coronal brain sections from wild-type mice were stained against anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein ( a ; GFAP) to identify astrocytes or ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1 ( b ; IBA-1) to identify microglial cells/macrophages (red) and anti-mTLR2 (green) antibodies (nuclear counterstaining in blue). The figures show representative results for the corpus callosum, cortex, and hippocampus from one of three independent experiments (Scale bar = 200 μm for overview and 20 μm for detailed images)
TLR2 Deficiency Results in a Region-Specific Modulation of Glia Cell Activation
Next, we aimed to compare the magnitude of demyelination, microglia activation, and astrocytosis after cuprizone-induced demyelination between TLR2-deficient and WT mice. Therefore, mice were intoxicated with cuprizone for 5 weeks, and brain sections were subsequently immunohistochemically stained for the myelin marker protein PLP, the oligodendrocyte marker APC, the (activated) astrocyte-specific protein GFAP, and the microglia/macrophage marker protein IBA-1. Furthermore, LFB/PAS stains were performed to visualize myelin on the histochemical level. As illustrated in Fig. 3 a, cuprizone intoxication resulted in almost complete demyelination of the midline of the corpus callosum (CC), overlying cortex (Cx), and hippocampus (Hc) formation. Demyelination was comparable in WT and TLR2-deficient mice in the three brain regions included in the study (Fig. 3 b–d). In addition, we performed LFB/PAS stains and evaluated staining intensities in the midline of the CC. Comparable to what we found in anti-PLP-stained sections, severe demyelination was evident in the midline of the CC, and the extent of demyelination was comparable in WT and TLR2-deficient mice (Fig. 4 , upper row). We, furthermore, analyzed oligodendrocyte numbers in the midline of the CC using anti-APC stains. As demonstrated in Fig. 4 (bottom row), cuprizone intoxication resulted in a strong decrease of mature oligodendrocyte numbers. Comparable to what we found on the myelin level, the extent of mature oligodendrocyte cell loss was comparable in both genotypes. Fig. 3 TLR2 deficiency does not ameliorate cuprizone-induced demyelination. a Coronal brain sections of TLR2-deficient or WT mice with or without cuprizone for 5 weeks were stained with anti-PLP antibodies to analyze the extent of demyelination ( CC , corpus callosum; Cx , cortex; Hc , hippocampus) . Densitometric quantification of PLP staining area in the corpus callosum ( b ), cortex ( c ), or hippocampus ( d ) was assessed from five to seven mice per experimental group Fig. 4 TLR2 deficiency ameliorates oligodendrocyte loss. Coronal brain sections of TLR2-deficient or WT mice with or without cuprizone for 5 weeks were stained with LFB/PAS to analyze the extent of demyelination (upper row) and with APC to analyze numbers of mature oligodendrocyte in the corpus callosum (bottom row). The myelin status of the CC as determined by LFB/PAS staining is shown. Results are given as percentage of myelination. APC + -positive cell density in the corpus callosum was assessed from five to seven mice per experimental group. The asterisk indicates a significant difference between cuprizone-fed TLR2-deficient and WT mice as determined by two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni test (* p < 0.05)
As pointed out already above, cuprizone-induced demyelination is paralleled by the activation of astrocytes and microglia. To quantify both aspects, subsequent sections were either stained with anti-GFAP or anti-IBA1 antibodies, and staining intensities were analyzed. While in the CC and cortex anti-GFAP stains were evaluated by denistometry, magnitude of astrocyte activation within the hippocampus was evaluated by assessing cell densities (i.e., cells per mm 2 ). No significant difference was observed for GFAP staining intensities or cell numbers in naïve TLR2-deficient or WT mice. In line with reported findings in this model, cuprizone-induced demyelination resulted in a strong increase of GFAP immunoreactivity in the CC and Cx of WT mice (Fig. 5 a). Statistical analysis of the obtained densitometrical values revealed that GFAP staining intensities in the corpus callosum and cortex region were significantly lower in TLR2-deficient mice compared to WT littermates (Fig. 5 b, c). No significant increase in GFAP staining intensity could be observed in the hippocampus formation of either genotype (Fig. 5 d). Fig. 5 TLR2 deficiency ameliorates astrocytosis. a Coronal brain sections of TLR2-deficient or WT mice with or without cuprizone for 5 weeks were stained with anti-GFAP antibodies as marker for activated astrocytes ( CC , corpus callosum; Cx , cortex; Hc , hippocampus) . Densitometric quantification of GFAP staining in the corpus callosum ( b ) and cortex ( c ) and astrocytes density in the hippocampus ( d ). The asterisks indicate a significant difference between TLR2-deficient and WT mice as determined by two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni test (* p < 0.05; *** p < 0.001)
Next, we analyzed the extent of microgliosis in the different treatment groups. While in the CC and cortex anti-IBA1 stains were evaluated by denistometry, magnitude of microglia activation within the hippocampus was evaluated by assessing cell densities (i.e., cells per mm 2 ). No significant difference was observed for IBA1 staining intensities or cell numbers in naïve TLR2-deficient or WT mice. As shown in Fig. 6 a, cuprizone feeding induced a strong increase of IBA-1-positive cells in all three different brain regions of WT mice. Statistical analysis of the obtained densitometrical values revealed that IBA-1 staining intensity in the corpus callosum was significantly lower in TLR2-deficient mice compared to WT littermates. The opposite was true for the cortex region. There, IBA-1 staining intensity was significantly higher in TLR2-deficient mice compared to WT littermates. In the hippocampus, we observed a trend of lower microglia cells numbers in TLR2-deficient compared to WT mice (Fig. 6 d), but this difference was not significant. Fig. 6 TLR2 deficiency modulates microglia responses. a Coronal brain sections of TLR2-deficient or WT mice with or without cuprizone for 5 weeks were stained with anti-IBA-1 antibodies as marker for activated microglial cells ( CC , corpus callosum; Cx , cortex; HC , hippocampus) . The figures show representative pictures. Densitometric quantification of IBA-1-staining in the corpus callosum ( b ) and cortex ( c ) and microglial cell density in the hippocampus ( d ). The asterisks indicate a significant difference between TLR2-deficient and WT mice as determined by two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni test (* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01)
Absence of Lymphocyte Invasion in Cuprizone-Treated Mice
To analyze T helper cell infiltration in the cuprizone model, we next performed anti-CD4 staining in the different treatment groups. As positive control, we used sections of mice recently shown to contain relevant number of CD4 + lymphocytes [ , ]. As shown in Fig. 7 , no increase in CD4 + cells numbers was observed in cuprizone-treated mice, neither in WT nor in TLR2-KO mice. Fig. 7 No significant increase in CD4+ cells numbers in cuprizone-treated mice. Coronal brain sections of TLR2-deficient or WT mice with or without cuprizone for 5 weeks were stained with anti-CD4 antibodies as a marker for T helper lymphocytes . As positive control tissues, we used sections from WT mice immunized with MOG peptide [ , ]
Discussion
In the present study, the consequence of a lack of TLR2 was investigated in the toxic cuprizone demyelination model, which recapitulates some important aspects of MS pathology. Our results show that the expression of TLR2 increased in a region-specific manner with higher Tlr2 expression values in the corpus callosum and hippocampus, but not in the cortex region. TLR expression has been identified on CNS endothelial cells, microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes and on infiltrating cells in MS. It is up-regulated in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) mononuclear cells, and demyelinating lesions of MS patients [ ] or in another model for MS, the autoimmune model EAE [ ]. In this study, we show that, in the cuprizone mode, the bulk of TLR2 is expressed by astrocytes and microglia. Deficiency of TLR2 decreased the activation of astrocytes in the corpus callosum and cortex, whereas the extent of microglia activation was ameliorated in the corpus callosum and hippocampus. Furthermore, the activation status of microglia in the cortex was augmented in TLR2-null mice. Our results suggest that the TLR2 plays an important role in the induction and maintenance of glial cell activation in the course of cuprizone-induced demyelination.
The cuprizone model is characterized by early and severe oligodendrocyte damage with concomitant microglia activation, followed by severe astrocytosis. In contrast to other MS models, T cells are not functionally involved during the formation and progression of cuprizone-induced demyelination [ , ]. This was verified in this study by the absence of CD4 + lymphocytes after a 5-week cuprizone intoxication protocol. It has been suggested that the mechanism through which cuprizone induces demyelination could involve a decrease of mitochondrial activity in oligodendrocytes, paralleled by an increase in the production of reactive oxygen species, leading to primary oligodendrocyte apoptosis. Oligodendrocyte apoptosis is closely followed by the recruitment of microglia, which, through the secretion of high levels of inflammatory cytokines, would finally induce demyelination [ , ]. In line with this assumption, we were recently able to demonstrate that activation of the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), the main transcriptional regulator of the anti-oxidant stress defense, ameliorates the formation of demyelinating lesions in the cuprizone model [ ]. Beyond, chemokines such as chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 10 (CXCL10), chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2), and chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 3 (CCL3) modulate demyelination and glia activation in this model [ , ]. Interestingly, comparable to what we observed in the current study, CCL2 and CCL3 exerted their action in a region-specific manner. Cuprizone-induced demyelination, oligodendrocyte loss, and astrogliosis were significantly ameliorated in the cortex but not in the corpus callosum of chemokine-deficient animals [ ].
Previous work has shown that cuprizone ingestion in mice induces a highly reproducible demyelination of distinct brain regions, among them the white matter tract corpus callosum and the telencephalic gray matter cortex region [ ]. In line with these data, here, we showed a strong decrease of myelination in all three regions of interest included in this study. The absence of TLR2 did neither protect from nor boosted demyelination. Furthermore, loss of APC + mature oligodendrocytes after a 5-week cuprizone intoxication protocol was comparable in both genotypes. This finding is somewhat surprising considering that the extent of astrocyte and microglia activation was significantly lower in the corpus callosum of TLR2 −/− mice. Of note, this TLR2-mediated effect was more pronounced for astrocytes compared to microglia. Several reasons can account for this discrepancy. First, one should note that both glia cell populations are not just activated to orchestrate innate immune responses, but at the same time are important for regenerative processes. For example, in an elegant study, Skripuletz and colleagues were able to demonstrate that astrocytes regulate myelin clearance through the recruitment of microglia during cuprizone-induced demyelination [ ], and by this mechanism can activate remyelinating pathways. Furthermore, TLR2 has recently been shown to be expressed by oligodendrocyte progenitor cells, and its activation via hyaluronan inhibits their differentiation and myelination. Ablated expression of TLR2 also enhanced remyelination in the lysolecithin remyelination model [ ]. The consequence of TLR2 deficiency for remyelination, either beneficial or detrimental, in the cuprizone model has to be investigated in future studies. Another reason why the extent of demyelination was comparable in both genotypes might lie in the fact that the cuprizone model is very robust. As illustrated in this and other studies [ , , ], demyelination of the midline of the corpus callosum is almost complete after a 5-week cuprizone intoxication protocol. It might well be that at an earlier time point (for example at week 3), protective effects of TLR2-inactivation would have become evident. Finally, one should note that APC, under specific experimental conditions, might as well be expressed by other cells then mature oligodendrocytes [ ]. However, in our hands, we never observed APC + astrocytes in the cuprizone model (own not-published observations). We currently investigate this aspect more in detail by using transgene animals expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein specifically in GFAP + cells.
As already pointed out above, we observed an increase of Tlr2 mRNA expression in the corpus callosum as well as in the hippocampus. Co-localization experiments revealed that TLR2 is mainly expressed by astrocytes and microglial cells. Our previous work showed that the expression of other PRRs, such as FPR1, increased during cuprizone intoxication [ ]. We speculate that the increased PRR expression is a direct consequence of oligodendrocyte apoptosis, which leads to the release of danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) such as HMGB1 as one TLR2 ligand [ , , ]. The role of the TLR2 in the inflammatory response in the MS is still a matter of debate. TLR2 signaling activation is believed to be an important innate immune checkpoint during neuroinflammation and plays a dual role of both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory responses [ , ]. TLR2 activation promotes inflammation in MS and EAE by the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines or chemokines [ ]. However, as pointed out above, TLR2 stimulation in the CNS can have neuroprotective roles as well. For example, it has been suggested that the accumulation of the small heat shock protein and TLR2 ligand alpha B-crystallin (HSPB5) by stressed oligodendrocytes in brain tissue from people with MS triggers a TLR2-mediated protective response in surrounding microglia [ ]. Our previous results also suggest an anti-inflammatory role of TLR2 in an acute inflammation model [ ].
Several studies demonstrated the importance of glial cells in the development and regulation of inflammatory reactions in the course of MS [ , ]. Astrocytes are involved in the formation of the glial scar; they produce an array of chemokines and cytokines that aid recruitment of macrophages and B cells, and contribute to tissue damage. In addition, they play an important role in aiding remyelination and neuronal integrity in MS [ ]. Another important outcome of this study is the observation that astroglia cell responses are differently regulated. In WT animals, severe astrocytosis was found in the corpus callosum and cortex. As demonstrated in Fig. 4 , numbers of GFAP + astrocytes within the hippocampus formation did not increase after a 5-week cuprizone intoxication protocol. This contrasts results from our own recent study where we observed higher Gfap mRNA expression levels [ ] in the hippocampus of cuprizone-intoxicated mice. The reason for this discrepancy might be the fact that, in contrast to cortical astrocytes, hippocampal astrocytes express already high levels of GFAP in control animals. Therefore, to reliably measure low levels of astrocyte activation in the hippocampus, other astrocyte markers could be used such as ALDH1L1 (aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family, member L1). Alternatively, one might additionally analyze the morphology of astrocytes including hyperplasia and hypertrophy of their cell bodies and processes. Furthermore, it might well be that in this particular C57BL6 mouse strain, astrocytes of the hippocampus are less reactive in this model.
In summary, the present study provides clear evidence that TLR2 is important for the host defense during cuprizone-induced demyelination. Since astrocyte and microglia activation are meliorated in TLR2 −/− mice, this receptor plays a pro-inflammatory role in this model. The consequences of receptor inactivation for neuronal damage and remyelination remain, however, currently unknown.