Introduction
Hanahan et al. added two features on the original six characteristics of malignancy in 2011. Therefore, the hallmarks of cancer now comprise eight biological capabilities acquired during tumorigenesis (Berrout et al. ; Hanahan and Weinberg ). In these eight hallmarks, cancer cell number is increased by the first four capabilities. To satisfy the nutritional and energetic requirements of cancer cell growth, cancer cells reprogram their metabolic mode and induce angiogenesis. Activating invasion and metastasis make cancer cells invade ambient normal tissue or transfer to a remote organ, thus expanding the range of cancer cell growth. By evading immune destruction, cancer cells shape their immune environment to facilitate their growth. In sum, when cancer cells acquire these eight biological capabilities, they expand their territory to damage the human body until death. Acquiring an understanding of these hallmarks of cancer is a prerequisite for promoting the development of new means to treat cancer.
As a primary intracranial malignant tumor, prognosis of GBM is disheartened despite a series of standard treatments received by patients, including resection, chemo-radiotherapy (Perry et al. ; Sulman et al. , ). Furthermore, in GBM patients, prognosis is widely variable. Growing evidence has identified a number of aberrant molecules associated with prognosis of GBM, such as IDH1 mutation, the methylation of the MGMT promoter and 1p/19q codeletion (Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network ; Eckel-Passow et al. ; Hegi et al. ; Yan et al. ). According to theses aberrant molecules, Phillips divided GBM into three subtypes, including proneural subtype, proliferative subtype and mesenchymal subtype (Phillips et al. ). Subsequently, by analyzing TCGA data, GBM has been divided into different subtypes: proneural GBM, neural GBM, classical GBM, and mesenchymal GBM (Verhaak et al. ). Based on these studies, the 2016 WHO classification of brain tumors combined molecular parameters, such as IDH1 status, with histology to define GBM (Louis et al. ). However, this subdivision has not played a role in treatment decision-making hereto expect to predict patient survival. Therefore, there is an urgent need to understand the biological properties of GBM.
As a mode of epigenetic regulation, miRs bind to the 3′ untranslated region of target mRNA to repress its expression. MiRs have a hand in various biological and pathological processes, including the immune response, development, inflammation, and so on (Yu et al. ). More importantly, aberrant miRs also take part in the pathogenesis of malignant tumors, like lung cancer (Berrout et al. ), breast cancer (Lv et al. ), prostate cancer (Rodriguez et al. ), and GBM (Lang et al. ). Ciafre et al. identified substantial aberrant miRs by comparing the global expression levels of 245 miRs in GBM with surrounding normal tissue. Their results showed a significant low expression of some miRs and overexpression of the other miRs in GBM (Ciafre et al. ). Following the publication of this study, a myriad of studies investigated how aberrant miRs regulated the malignant phenotype of GBM (Berrout et al. ; Figueroa et al. ; Hu et al. ; Wang et al. ; Miroshnikova et al. ; Sumazin et al. ). It can be inferred from these studies that aberrant miRs are involved in every aspect of the malignant biological hallmarks of GBM. In the review, we sum up some evidence on how miRs modulate the malignant biological hallmarks of GBM according to Hanahan’s viewpoint. Furthermore, we briefly analyze the potential clinical application of utilizing aberrant miRs as biomarkers of prognosis and potential therapeutic targets in GBM.
MiRs Contribute to the Eight Malignant Biological Hallmarks of GBM
Shape of the Proliferative Phenotype of GBM Cells to Facilitate Growth
For the sake of self-growth, GBM employs various biological characteristics, mainly the first four capabilities of Hanahan’s viewpoint. Through these biological capabilities, the number of GBM cells is greatly increased. In this chapter, we detail how aberrant miRs regulate these biological hallmarks to increase their numbers.
Sustaining Proliferative Signaling
Cancer cells must own characteristic of deregulating proliferative signaling pathways to maintain proliferation. Aberrant expressions of some genes, which are involved in PTK networks, activate proliferative signals to promote proliferation of GBM cells. The activated RTKs further lead to abnormal activation of downstream pathways, especially the RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways (Montor et al. ). As an important post-transcriptional regulatory mode, miRs regulate the expression of some genes within the RTK signaling networks in GBM. Figure 1 shows how aberrant miRs modulate RTK signaling networks to promote the proliferation of GBM cells.
Fig. 1 Aberrant miRs modulate RTK signaling networks, mainly the PI3K/ AKT and RAS/MAPK pathways, promote proliferation in GBM cells (red represents oncogenic miRs and green represents anti-oncogenic miRs. ⊣ represents suppression; right arrow represents activation)
PDGFRA, MET, and EGFR which are the most commonly deregulated genes in the RTK signaling networks of GBM, are reportedly regulated by miRs. The downregulation of tumor suppressor miRs (Kefas et al. ; Papagiannakopoulos et al. ; Xu et al. ; Mathew et al. ; Rao et al. ; Li et al. ) significantly increases GBM cell proliferation via the upregulation of EGFR, including miR-7, miR-128, miR-133, miR-218, miR-219-5p, miR-491-5p, and so on. The overexpression of these miRs significantly decreases EGFR protein levels to impair the proliferative capability of GBM cells. Furthermore, miR-7 is a collective regulator involved in the RAS/RAF/MEK and PI3K/ATK pathways, exerting it effects downregulating PI3K and Raf-1 (Liu et al. ). Additionally, some aberrant miRs (Genovese et al. ; Papagiannakopoulos et al. ; Mathew et al. ), which include miR-34a, miR-128, and miR-218, inhibit proliferation and tumorigenesis by targeting PDGFRA. Apart from targeting EGFR and PDGFRA, miR-410, miR-144-3p, and miR-34a (Chen et al. ; Lan et al. ; Li et al. ), which are downregulated in GBM, also target c-Met expression. The overexpression of these miRs produces anti-proliferative effects.
The PI3K and RAS pathways are downstream effectors of RTK signaling. MiR-9 targets NF1 to promote RAS expression in GBM (Tan et al. ). It has been demonstrated that the RAS gene encodes three subtypes, including HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS (Zhang and Cheong ). These genes are vital to the regulation of some signal transduction pathways, especially RAF/MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR (Gyorffy and Schafer ; Orouji et al. ; Vieira et al. ). MiR-126 (Li et al. ), let-7a (Wang et al. ), and miR-622 (Wang et al. ) target KRAS to restraining glioma cells’ proliferation. HRAS and NRAS are target genes of miR-124 (Shi et al. ), and NRAS is a target gene of miR-143 (Wang et al. ) and let-7e (Gong et al. ) PI3K/AKT is another downstream effector of RTK signaling, and studies have shown that the activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway promotes proliferation and decreases apoptosis in GBM cells. The inhibition of PI3K in GBM may produce anti-tumorigenic effects (Strobele et al. ). Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog (PTEN) suppress proliferation of cancer cells by downregulating the activity of PI3K/AKT (Haddadi et al. ). Consequently, oncomiRs, such as miR-17-5p (Li and Yang ), miR-19a/b (Jia et al. ), miR-21 (Zhou et al. ), miR-1908 (Xia et al. ), miR-494-3p (Li et al. ), miR-10a/10b (Liu et al. ), miR-23a (Tan et al. ), and miR-26a (Huse et al. ) promote tumor growth by targeting PTEN. In addition, miR-542-3p targets AKT which is the downstream effector of PI3K (Cai et al. ). MiR-199a-3p represses the GBM cells’ proliferation by downregulating mTORC1 and mTORC2 which are downstream gene of the PI3K/AKT (Shen et al. ). MiR-34a targets Rictor, which is a element of the mTORC2 complex, to inactivate the PI3K/AKT (Rathod et al. ).
Evading Growth Suppressors
Apart from sustaining proliferative signals, cancer cells also possess the ability to escape growth inhibition and positively regulate cell proliferation. This mechanism mainly depends on the activation of two canonical tumor suppressors, RB and TP53, which govern proliferation, senescence, and apoptosis. Studies have reported that GBM frequently harbors somatic alterations related to RB and TP53 (Aoki et al. ; Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network ; Hu et al. ). In the face of DNA damage, RB and TP53 play a pivotal role in modulating cell cycle from the G1 phase to S phase, leading to the repair of genomic damage. RB mainly receives growth-inhibitory signals from outside of the cell, whereas TP53 plays a regulatory role in intracellular signals. When damage is not reparable, TP53 triggers apoptosis in the damaged cells. Figure 2 shows how miRs participate in the evasion of growth suppressor signaling by targeting genes relevant to the RB and TP53 pathways.
Fig. 2 Aberrant miRs participate in the evasion of growth suppressor signaling by targeting genes relevant to the RB and TP53 pathways (red represents oncogenic miRs and green represents anti-oncogenic miRs. ⊣ represents suppression; right arrow represents activation)
Studies have shown that miR-10b upregulated in human GBM and TP53 was its target gene. In addition, miR-10b promotes growth, invasiveness, and angiogenesis and inhibits apoptosis of glioma cells by downregulating various tumor suppressor genes (Lin et al. ; Ciafre et al. ). Furthermore, miR-10b indirectly modulates MMP14, uPAR, and RhoC by targeting HOXD10 (Sun et al. ; Sasayama et al. ). The knockdown of miR-10b may inhibit the growth of glioma (Sun et al. ). MDM2, which is highly expressed in GBM, widely participates in tumorigenesis and progression via suppressing the activation of p53 (Arena et al. ). MiR-25 and miR-32 significantly suppress tumorigenesis by targeting MDM2 (Suh et al. ). Similar to miR-25 and miR-32, miR-17-3p also represses its target gene MDM2 to dampen the proliferation of GBM (Li and Yang ). MDM2 is also a target gene of miR-181b (Sun et al. ). YWHAG, which is an isoform of the 14-3-3 family, acts as a scaffold in multi-protein complexes and modulates various biological functions, including cell migration, proliferation, apoptosis, protein trafficking, and the cell cycle (Schmidt and Ache ; Hou et al. ; Freeman and Morrison ). MiR-217 significantly enhances the proliferation of GBM cells by targeting YWHAG, which can promote the phosphorylation of MdM4, resulting in degrading p53 (Wang et al. ).
Unlike other cancers, RB mutation is found in only 6–11% of GBM (Knudsen and Knudsen ; Bamford et al. ). MiR-26a promotes GBM formation by targeting RB (Kim et al. ). In all of the cyclin-CDK complexes, CCND1 and cyclin E1 drive the progression of cell cycle from G1 to S phase (He et al. ; Resnitzky et al. ). The cyclin-CDK 4 and 6 complexes promote the pRB in G1, which loses its ability to bind E2F1, resulting in the inactivation of the growth-inhibitory function and promoting cell cycle (Resnitzky et al. ; Lee et al. ). MiR-329 and miR-320 inhibit cell proliferation by targeting E2F1 (Xiao et al. ; Sun et al. ). MiR-195 targets CCND1 and CCNE1 to block GBM cell proliferation by inducing G1-S arrest (Hui et al. ). In addition, let-7b (Guo et al. ), miR-15b (Sun et al. ), miR-34a (Sun et al. ), and miR-340 (Li et al. ) also target CCND1 to block cell cycle and proliferation in GBM cells. Other miRs, including miR-34a (Li et al. ), miR-107 (Chen et al. ), miR-138 (Qiu et al. ), miR129-3p (Ouyang et al. ), miR-29b-1 (Ouyang et al. ), miR-218 (Zhang et al. ), miR-129-1 (Kouhkan et al. ), miR-340 (Li et al. ), and miR-491-3p/5p inhibit cell cycle of GBM cells by targeting CDK6 (Li et al. ). CDKN2A codes p16INK4A and p14ARF, which are two tumor suppressors (Poi et al. ; Bai et al. ). p16INK4A binds to and inhibits cyclin-CDK 4 and 6 complexes to indirectly activate RB, whereas p14ARF blocks MDM2, resulting in the indirect activation of P53 (Ishii et al. ; Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network ; Serrano et al. ). MiR-10b targets CDKN2A/p16INK4A to arrest the cell cycle. EZH2, which is a catalytic subunit of PRC2 with histone methyltransferase activity, silences genes through the methylation of histones (Zhong et al. ). By repression of CDK6 and EZH2, miR-138 modulates EZH2-CDK4/6-pRb-E2F1 signaling loop to inhibit GBM cell proliferation (Qiu et al. ).
Resisting Cell Death
Apoptosis, autophagy, and necrosis act as protections to cancer development. In these death modes, apoptosis is more likely to be regulated by miRs, whereas necrosis or autophagy is seldom modulated by miRs, except for miRNA-17 (Comincini et al. ), miRNA-224 (Guo et al. ), and miRNA-30e (Chakrabarti et al. ). Figure 3 shows how miRs contribute to cell death regulation by modulating the extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic pathways.
Fig. 3 Aberrant miRs regulate cell death by modulating the extrinsic and intrinsic pathways of apoptosis signaling (red represents oncogenic miRs and green represents anti-oncogenic miRs. ⊣ represents suppression; right arrow represents activation)
After death receptors of the cell surface binding to specific death ligands, the extrinsic apoptotic signaling is activated (Xu and Shi ). There are three major specific cell death receptor/ligand pairs, which belong to TNFRSF. They are TNFα and TNF-R1, death receptors and TRAIL, Fas and FasL, respectively. The binding of receptor and ligand recruits FADD and initiator pro-caspase-8 to form a DISC. Then, DISC activates caspase-8 and caspase-10. Furthermore, activated caspase-8 directly activates downstream effectors, caspases-3 and -7, to induce apoptosis (Xu and Shi ). It is demonstrated that miR-21 suppressed the apoptosis in GBM stem cells (GSCs) by targeting FasL (Shang et al. ). Wang et al. showed that miR-133a suppressed the GBM cells’ apoptosis by targeting DR5 (Wang et al. ). However, the intrinsic apoptotic pathway induces the alteration of mitochondria to promote cellular apoptosis. That Bcl-2 family regulated MOMP to mediate the intracellular apoptosis. The Bcl-2 family is divided into pro-apoptotic protein and anti- apoptotic protein. The pro-apoptotic proteins include Bax, Bak, Bcl-xs, Bok, and Bcl-GL, Bim, Bid, Puma, etc. And, the anti-apoptotic proteins include Bcl-2, Bcl-w, Bcl-xL, A1, Mcl-1, and Bcl-B, etc (Xu and Shi ). Bax and Bak modulate MOMP to form openings in the outer mitochondrial membrane. Then, cytochrome c is released from the mitochondria to the cytosol. Combining cytochrome c with Apaf-1 forms a complex where pro-caspase-9 is recruited to trigger auto-cleavage and give rise to active caspase-9. Subsequently, caspase-9 activates caspase-3 to induce apoptosis (Xu and Shi ). Desiree et al. demonstrated that miR-363 targeted Bim and miR-582-5p targeted caspase-3, caspase-9. Through these regulations, miR-363 and miR-582-5p inhibit GSC apoptosis to promote GSC growth (Floyd et al. ). TAp63 transcriptionally modulates some genes associated to apoptosis, like the TRAIL receptors Bim and Apaf1 (Gressner et al. ). Quintavalle et al. found that miR-21 and miR-30b/c prominently inhibited TRAIL-induced apoptosis by targeting caspase-3 and TAp63, respectively (Quintavalle et al. ).
Interestingly, there exists a connection between the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways under special circumstances. For example, when there is no sufficient amount of downstream effector caspases to act as substrates of caspase 8, Bid is cleaved by caspase-8 to form the pro-apoptotic tBid, which then impels cytochrome c depart from the mitochondria. Bim localizes in the mitochondria and initiates mitochondria-mediated apoptosis by activating Bax/Bak (Zhang et al. ). Stojcheva et al. showed that miR-138 induced TMZ resistance in GBM by targeting Bim (Stojcheva et al. ). Kim et al. showed that miR-148a targeted Bim to decrease apoptosis of GBM cells (Kim et al. ). Likewise, Bim is also a target gene of miR-363 (Floyd et al. ) and miR-92a (Niu et al. ). MiR-16 (Yang et al. ), miR-34a (Duan et al. ), and miR-429 (Zhang et al. ) increase apoptosis to suppress proliferation in glioma cells by targeting Bcl-2. MiR-29b (Chung et al. ) targeted BCL2L2 (also known as Bcl-w) to induce apoptosis in GBM cells. Similarly, miR-182 increased TMZ-sensitivity in glioma cells by targeting Bcl2L12 (Kouri et al. ). Chen et al. reported that miR-125b decreased TMZ-sensitivity by targeting Bak1 in GSCs of GBM (Chen et al. ). Li et al. reported that MiR-139 promoted apoptosis related to TMZ by targeting Mcl-1 (Li et al. ). Irs-2 acts as a regulator of AKT to mediate survival signals. Xu et al. found that miR-153 inhibited survival and promoted apoptosis by targeting Mcl-1, Bcl-2, and Irs-2 in GBM (Xu et al. , ).
Enabling Replicative Immortality
Cancer cells require infinite replicative capacity to develop into macroscopic tumors. To meet these conditions, cancer cells alter genes expression. For example, TERT, which has a high frequency of mutation in GBM (Gutnikova et al. ), actively contributes to the capacity for unlimited proliferation. More importantly, a subpopulation of GSCs processes multi-lineage differentiation, self-renewal, and initiation potential in GBM. In addition, it is thought that GSCs are related to progression, recurrence, and therapeutic resistance in GBM (Hu et al. ; Lan et al. ; Zhang et al. ). GSCs maintain its stemness by modulating characteristic signaling pathways which include Notch, EGF, BMPs, NF-κB, Wnt, and Shh (Liebelt et al. ). Hypoxia has been described as an essential environment for the maintenance of GSCs (Colwell et al. ). So, we reviewed that miRs modulate some signal pathways related to GSCs, mainly Notch and EGF pathways, to maintain the immortality of GBM cells under hypoxic condition. Figure 4 illustrates how miRs, which are involved in the Notch and EGF pathways, maintain the stemness of GSCs in hypoxia.
Fig. 4 Aberrant miRs are involved in maintaining the stemness of GSCs to promote the immortality of GBM cells (red represents oncogenic miRs and green represents anti-oncogenic miRs. ⊣ represents suppression; right arrow represents activation; rightwards wave arrow represents translocation)
Notch signaling is important for mediating properties of GSCs (Kanamori et al. ). After the Notch receptors binding to ligands of adjacent cells, Notch signaling is activated. Notch receptors include Notch-1-4, and the Notch ligands consist of Jagged-1, Jagged-2, DLL-1, DLL-3, and DLL-4 (Miele et al. ). After activation, Notch is cleaved by γ-secretase-mediated proteolysis to release NICD into the cytoplasm. Then, NICD translocates into the nucleus and interacts with CSL, and begins to transcribe downstream genes, including HES, HEY, and VEGF (Wang et al. ; Fan et al. ). Gao et al. demonstrated that miR-141 suppressed the self-renewal of GSCs by targeting Jagged1 (Gao et al. ). One study reported that miR-181a suppressed GSCs formation and proliferation and increased apoptosis of GSCs by targeting Notch2 (Huang et al. ). In addition, GBMs characteristically contain extensive regions of tissue hypoxia. Hypoxic tumor cells are commonly regulated by HIF family. HIFs consist of a HIFα subunit which is oxygen sensitive, and a HIFβ subunit which is constitutively expressed. Under normoxic conditions, HIFα is suppressed by VHL, whereas hypoxic conditions can abolish this suppression. HIFα dimerizes with HIFβ to transcribe hundreds of downstream genes that participate in the regulation of cell survival, metabolism, and angiogenesis. The HIFα proteins include HIF1α, HIF2α, and HIF3α. HIF1α and HIF2α maintain the self-renewal and tumorigenic potential of GSCs by inducing stem cell markers (Soeda et al. ; Li et al. ). Kouri et al. demonstrated that miR-182 reduced the aggressive phenotype of GSCs by targeting HIF2α (Kouri et al. ). HIF1α transcriptionally regulated the HES and HEY, which are important elements of the Notch pathway, to indirectly modulate the Notch pathway. HIF1α also activates Notch signaling by stabilizing NICD. Thus, HIF-1α is vital to the hypoxia-maintained GSCs by activating the Notch pathway (Qiang et al. ). Wong et al. ( ) showed that miR-148a and miR-31 enhanced expression of HIF1α, and activated Notch signaling to maintain potential of GSCs by targeting hypoxia inducing factor 1α inhibitor (HIF1AN). In addition, HIFs also transcriptionally regulate the level of certain miRs, such as miR-215. Hu et al. demonstrated that HIF1α accommodated a hypoxic microenvironment by promoting the biogenesis of miR-215, a critical mediator in the reprogramming of GSCs. HIF1α exerted this effect by targeting KDM1B. Thus, this novel axis of HIF1α-MiR-215-KDM1B maintains the oncogenesis of GBM by regulating the response of GSCs to hypoxia (Hu et al. ).
EGFR signaling pathway also participates in the proliferation, survival, differentiation and migration related to GSCs. Overexpression of EGFR enhances GSCs’ self-renewal ability, leading to inducing their tumorigenic potential (Liebelt et al. ). Papagiannakopoulos demonstrated that miR-128 significantly suppressed proliferation in GSCs by targeting PDGFRα and EGFR, two mitogenic receptor tyrosine kinases (Papagiannakopoulos et al. ). Interestingly, hypoxia induces MIF expression in GBM cells (Guo et al. ). MIF activates the MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways (Zhang et al. ). Wang et al. demonstrated that miR-608 suppressed proliferation, invasion and promoted apoptosis in GSCs by targeting MIF (Wang et al. ). In addition to MIF, KLF4 and KLF6 also activate RTK signaling pathways. They are members of the KLF family, which are DNA-binding transcriptional factors which is involved in a multitude of biological processes, including proliferation, invasion, migration, and apoptosis (Hsieh et al. ; Marrero-Rodriguez et al. ). MiR-152 exerts tumor-suppressive effects by targeting KLF4 (Ma et al. ). Similarly, by targeting KLF6, miR-101 plays a similar function with miR-608 (Yao et al. ). MiR-449a, which is downregulated in GSCs, blocks proliferation and induces apoptosis in GSCs by targeting MAZ, which can activate the PI3K/AKT pathway (Yao et al. ). Likewise, WTAP, which is a downstream gene of QKI-6, also activates ERK and PI3K/AKT pathways. Johnson et al. reported that miR-29a repressed the malignant behavior of GSCs by targeting QKI-6 to downregulate WTAP expression (Xi et al. ). MIF also binds and activates CXCR2 and CXCR4 (Movila et al. ). It has been demonstrated that CXCR4 is overexpressed in gliomas and triggers multiple pathways to promote glioma progression (Ping et al. ; Cheng et al. ). Bone marrow stroma secretes SDF1 which binds to its receptor CXCR4 (Yang et al. ). GSCs are recruited to EC via the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis, and following induction by TGF-β, become vascular pericytes that support tumor growth (Cheng et al. ). Yu et al. showed that miR-663 effectively suppressed the invasion and proliferation of GBM cells by targeting CXCR4 (Shi et al. ). RTVP-1 positively increases the expression of CXCR4. Bie et al. found that miR-137 inhibited the self-renewal of GSCs by targeting RTVP-1 (Bier et al. ).
Activating Invasion and Metastasis
Invasion, migration, and metastasis are three principal modes of cancer cell dissemination. Extracranial metastases of GBM are rare (Hamilton et al. ; Johansen et al. ). However, invasion and migration, which severely restrict the curative effects of surgery in GBM, are the main causes of recurrence. Figure 5 shows how miRs regulate the capability which GBM cells invade surrounding brain tissue.
Fig. 5 Aberrant miRs regulate the invasion and migration of GBM cells (red represents oncogenic miRs and green represents anti-oncogenic miRs. ⊣ represents suppression; right arrow represents activation; rightwards wave arrow represents translocation)
The adhesion molecules, which regulate adherent junctions between GBM cells and the stroma, are involved in modulating the capability which GBM cells invade surrounding brain tissue. For example, the molecules include Cx43 and E-cadherin. As a tumor suppressor and major component which establish GJIC in GBM cells, Cx43 is common downregulated in high-grade gliomas (Yamasaki et al. ; Jaraiz-Rodriguez et al. ). MiR-221/222 suppress the migration and invasion of GBM cells by targeting Cx43 (Hao et al. ). ADD3, a membrane protein related to the regulation of epithelial junctions, downregulates E-cadherin to enhance cell invasion (Syed et al. ). MiR-145 (Rani et al. ) suppresses the invasion of GBM cells by targeting ADD3.
As the TGF-β family member, TGF-β1 promotes cellular invasion and migration by increasing MMP expression and inducing EMT (Song et al. ; Perera et al. ; Welch et al. ; Miettinen et al. ; Bhowmick et al. ). MiRNA-663 (Li et al. ), miRNA-181c (He et al. ), and miR-564 (Jiang et al. ) suppress the invasion of GBM by targeting TGF-β1. As a receptor, TGFBR2 play a vital role in TGFβ-mediated signaling. After binding with TGFBR2, TGFβ phosphorylates TGFBR2 to activate TGFBR1, which then phosphorylates Smad2/3. Smad2/3 transcriptionally regulates the expression of downstream genes (Massague ) MiR-373 (Wei et al. ) and miR-520c (Hu et al. ) that suppress the invasion of GBM by targeting TGFBR2. The MMPs (MMP-1, -3, -7, -9, -12, and -14) are important oncogenes that degrade extracellular matrix proteins and regulate various processes, including invasion, migration, metastasis, and angiogenesis of tumor cells (Shuman Moss et al. ; Egeblad and Werb ). Tumor suppressors miR-211(Asuthkar et al. ) and miR-491-5p (Yan et al. ) suppress the invasion of GBM by targeting MMP-9. MiR-152 (Zheng et al. ) suppresses the invasion of GBM by targeting MMP-3. The NF-κB signaling is also involved in cell invasion through the upregulation of MMP9 (Sato and Seiki ). MiR-16 (Yang et al. ) inhibits the invasion of GBM cells by targeting NF-κB1. Robo1 is regarded as a proto-oncogene related to the migration of cancerous cells (Legg et al. ). MiR-203 suppresses the migration of glioma cells by modulating the Robo1/ERK/MMP-9 axis (Dontula et al. ). Lymphoid-enhancing factor (LEF1) (Lin et al. ; Ramakrishnan et al. ), a member of the TCF/LEF family that is involved in the Wnt pathway, exerts its function by recruiting β-catenin to form the LEF1/β-catenin complex. It is proved that the LEF1/TCF complex modulates expression of some MMPs (MMP-2, MMP-7, MMP-9, and MMP-26). Liu et al. showed that miR-218 decreased MMP-9 to inhibit the invasion of GBM by targeting LEF1 (Liu et al. ). FAK, a protein tyrosine kinase, promotes the invasion of tumor cells via increasing MMP-2 and MMP-9 (Deng et al. ; Wang et al. ). MiR-7 suppresses the invasion of GBM by targeting FAK (Wu et al. ). Key inhibitors of MMPs include TIMP-3 (Kotzsch et al. ), which is an ECM-bound protease regulator, and the RECK (Takenaka et al. ), which is a membrane-anchored regulator. MiR-21 enhances the expression of MMPs and glioma cell invasione by targeting TIMP-3 and RECK (Gabriely et al. ). Similarly, miR-20a and miR-106a target TIMP-2 to increase the invasion of GBM (Wang et al. ).
By losing the epithelial markers and gaining mesenchymal markers, cancer cells obtain the ability of EMT, which make cancer cells process invasive and metastatic capacity (Thiery ; Oft et al. ; Kang et al. ). Calpains are members of a family of calcium-dependent intracellular cysteine proteases, such as calpain small subunit 1 (also known as Capn4). Calpains connect several fundamental physiological processes, including cytoskeletal remodeling, cellular signaling, apoptosis, and cell survival (Wang et al. ). Cai et al. showed that Capn4 promoted EMT and the invasion of glioma. MiR-124 inhibited the invasion of glioma cells by targeting Capn4 (Cai et al. ). The VSIG4, a new member of the B7 super family, significantly upregulated (Xu et al. ) and promoted EMT in GBM. Let-7g-5p inhibited GBM cell invasion and migration by targeting VSIG4 (Zhang et al. ). During tumor progression, it is reported that Snai1 and Snai2, as members of the Snail superfamily, promote EMT (Wang et al. ). MiR-203 inhibits the invasive and migratory capacity of GBM cells by targeting Snai2 (Liao et al. ). ZEB1 and ZEB2 also promote EMT (Gheldof et al. ). MiR-590-3p suppresses the invasive and migratory capacity of GBM cells by targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2 (Pang et al. ).
Inducing Angiogenesis
For survival, tumors need the capability to obtain nutrients, oxygen and to excrete metabolic waste, carbon dioxide. These requirements are met by inducing angiogenesis. More importantly, the state of activating angiogenesis is persistent in tumors, whereas it is instantaneous in normal tissues (Hanahan and Folkman ). The induction of neovascularization is primarily regulated by VEGF-A, which is a potential regulator of tumor-induced angiogenesis in glioma. On vascular endothelial cells, VEGF-A binds with two tyrosine-kinase receptors (VEGFR1 and VEGFR2) to exerts its functions (Ewan et al. ). MiR-205 inhibits the malignant phenotype of GBM by targeting VEGF-A (Yue et al. ). HGS participates in modulating the levels of VEGFR2 (Ewan et al. ). HGS transfers VEGF-A/VEGFR2 complexes into lysosomes, which then degrade VEGFR2. MiR-296 increases VEGFR2 expression to induce angiogenesis by targeting HGS (Wurdinger et al. ). Additionally, hypoxia promotes the expression of VEGF-A via inducing the expression of HIF-1α, and VHL also negatively modulate expression of HIF-1α (Harris ). MiR-23b (Chen et al. ), miR-21 (Zhang et al. ), and miR-566 (Xiao et al. ) upregulate VEGF-A expression by targeting VHL. PI3K/AKT and RAF/MEK/ERK activate mTOR, which regulates the expression of 70 kDa ribosomal S6 kinase 1 (P70S6K1), which is required for angiogenesis. P70S6K1 induces angiogenesis by modulating VEGF and HIF-1α (Shen et al. ; Bian et al. ). MiR-128 was shown to suppress tumor angiogenesis by targeting p70S6K1 (Shi et al. ). MAZ transcriptionally regulated expression of VEGF, and MiR-125b inhibited VEGF-mediated angiogenesis by targeting MAZ in GBM (Smits et al. ). The above explanation is pictured in Fig. 6 .
Fig. 6 Aberrant miRs induce angiogenesis in GBM (red represents oncogenic miRs and green represents anti-oncogenic miRs. ⊣ represents suppression; right arrow represents activation)
Evading Immune Destruction
Cancer cells employ varied methods of overcoming immune surveillance to ensure survival. Although the CNS was previously defined as an immune-privileged site, some studies have reported that the antigen within the CNS parenchyma can activate T cells outside of the CNS and be recognized by these activated T cells. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that there is a robust immune response to grafted tissue in non-parenchymal sites. GBM cells may modulate immune checkpoints by producing serial chemokines, which recruit suppressive TAMs and MDSCs, thus inducing a tolerogenic tumor microenvironment (Sahebjam et al. ). As shown in Fig. 7 , miRs are also involved in modulating the immune microenvironment of GBM.
Fig. 7 Aberrant miRs are involved in modulating the immune microenvironment of GBM by post-transcriptional regulation (red represents oncogenic miRs and green represents anti-oncogenic miRs. P phosphate; ⊣ represents suppression; right arrow represents activation; rightwards wave arrow represents translocation)
It is well known that by changing the immune state of the tumor microenvironment, tumor progression can be promoted or inhibited. It has been demonstrated that TAMs play an important role in the growth and invasion of glioma (Li and Graeber ). TAMs, the main components of infiltrating immune cells in GBM, are mobilized to gather around GBM cells by tumor-released cytokines, including CSF-1, TNF-α, and MIC-1. Subsequently, TAMs are induced to the M2 phenotype, which promotes immunosuppression and supports the growth of GBM (Tu et al. ). Interestingly, the immunosuppressive capability of GSCs was reversed by blocking the STAT3 pathway (Wu et al. ; Kitamura et al. ; Schmetterer and Pickl ). Wei et al. showed that in GSCs, the upregulation of miR-124 reversed immune suppression associated with T cells by targeting STAT3. Importantly, the existence of the immune response related to T cell was necessary for the antitumor effects of miR-124. Exhaustion of T cells (CD4+ and CD8+) completely counteracted role of miR-124 in the inhibiting glioma (Wei et al. ). Interestingly, it has been reported that STAT3 signaling also participated in modulating the immune response of GBM by regulating TAMs (Wu et al. ). VCAM-1, a cytokine on the surface of glioma cells, recruits TAMs, which then secrete more TNF-α. Then, TNF-α activates PP2A/SP-1 pathways by downregulating miR-181a/b. An activated PP2A/SP-1 pathway increases the expression of EGFR, which enhances VCAM-1 expression via activating the JAK/STAT3 pathway. This feedback loop positively enhances immunosuppression to promote GBM growth (Liu et al. ). Apart from the JAK/STAT3 pathway, the NF-κB pathway is also involved in immunosuppression. Interestingly, NF-κB also mediates STAT3-stimulated IDO upregulation in myeloid-derived suppressor cells (Colwell et al. ). IL-1β and TNF-α secreted by TAMs activate the NF-κB pathway by binding to the IL-1R or TNFRs, respectively. After binding with TNF-α, TNFRs recruit TRADD and TRAF6 to induce the autophosphorylation of TAK1. Then, the autophosphorylation of TAK1 activates IKK and causes IκBα to depart from the p65RelA:p50NF-κB1 (p65:p50) dimer. Finally, this process induces the degradation of IκB and activates NF-κB. Activated NF-κB promotes the transcription of downstream genes after migrating into the nucleus (Zhang et al. ; Ben-Neriah and Karin ; Chen ). Achyut et al. showed that blocking NF-κB signaling led to the phenotypic transformation of M2 to M1, which strengthened CD8+ T cell-mediated antitumor immunity in GBM (Achyut et al. ). Therefore, it was proven that NF-κB had partaken in the regulation of immunosuppression and macrophage polarization in glioma. Studies have reported that miRs target genes related to the NF-κB pathway in GBM. For example, miR-146b-5p targets TRAF6 and miR-31 targets TRADD (Liu et al. ; Rajbhandari et al. ). Through this regulation, miRs inhibit the proliferation of GBM cells. However, whether these miRs are involved in modulating the immunosuppression of GBM needs to be elucidated.
Tumor-associated T cells exhibit potential anti-tumor effects (Qian et al. ). Based on the origin and function of cytokines, T cells are classified into at least four subsets: Th1, Th2, Th17, and Treg cells (Zhu and Paul ). Th1 possesses important anti-tumor effects, whereas Th2 promotes tumor proliferation and immune escape. In addition to Th2, Treg also promotes tumor growth and immunosuppression (Nishikawa and Sakaguchi ; Knutson and Disis ; Hallett et al. ). TGFBR2 is essential for activating the TGF-β1 pathway, which increases immunosuppression and promotes tumor growth (Lin et al. ; Rossowska et al. ). Kosaka et al. demonstrated that overexpressed miR-17-92 in CD8+ T cells targeted TGFBR2, activated CD8+ CD44+ memory T cells (Th1 CD8+ T cells) which then secreted IFN-γ and increased resistance of CD8+ T cells to the immunosuppressive effects of TGF-β1 (Kosaka et al. ). PD-1 and its ligand PD-L1 regulate tumor immunosuppression by inducing T cell apoptosis and increasing Tregs (Intlekofer and Thompson ). Similarly, the CTLA-4 negatively regulates the activation of T cells and increases Treg (Callahan and Wolchok ). Wei et al. showed that overexpressed miR-138 in human CD4+ T cells reversed the immunosuppressive effects to exert antitumor properties by targeting CTLA-4 and PD-1 (Wei et al. ). NKT cells (Berzins and Ritchie ), a subgroup of T cells, exert anti-tumor effects by releasing antitumor cytokines, including perforin, IFN-γ, FasL, IL-4, and IL-13. In addition, NKT cells also participate in immune tolerance (Hegde et al. ). Tang et al. found that IL-6 + IL-10 + phenotype of NKT cells was induced by glioma-derived miR-92a, and that IL-6 + IL-10 + NKT cells inhibited the activity of cytotoxic CD8+ T. Therefore, this process decreased antitumor capacity and inhibited apoptosis in glioma cells (Tang et al. ). Moreover, NKG2D, as one of the most major activating NK cell receptors in glioma cells, binds with NKG2DL to provide synergistic stimulus signals for cytotoxic T cells (Ullrich et al. ) and to initiate a perforin for immune attack (Hayakawa et al. ). Although NKG2DL is expressed on the surface of glioma cells, its capability recognized by immune cell is paralyzed by NKG2DL-targeting miRs or immunosuppressive cytokines, such as TGF-β (Eisele et al. ; Crane et al. ). Paula et al. showed that NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity was markedly improved by downregulating NKG2DL-targeting miRs, including miR-20a, miR-93, and miR-106b (Codo et al. ).
Reprogramming Cellular Energetics
It is known that metabolic reprogramming is a vital hallmark and a valuable remedial target of cancer (Phan et al. ). GBM also possess this characteristic by increasing aerobic glycolysis to maintain malignant progression (Tabatabaei et al. ). Aerobic glycolysis is co-modulated by both oncogenes and anti-oncogenes in GBM. As shown in Fig. 8 , miRs modulate oncogenes or anti-oncogenes, such as glycolytic transporters and metabolic enzymes, to change the metabolism of GBM cells.
Fig. 8 Aberrant miRs alter the metabolic mode of GBM cells by modulating the expression of oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, such as glycolytic transporters and metabolic enzymes (red represents oncogenic miRs and green represents anti-oncogenic miRs. ⊣ represents suppression; right arrow represents)
To increase the energy obtained from glucose, GBM is mainly dependent on glycolysis rather than oxidative phosphorylation (Wolf et al. ). Thus, glycolysis features in maintaining the malignant behavior of GBM cells. GLUT3 moves extracellular glucose into the cytoplasm (Meneses et al. ). Alfardus et al. showed that miR-106a blocked glucose uptake in GBM cells by targeting GLUT3 (Dai et al. ). Glycolytic enzymes, such as PKM2 or HK2, feature in carcinogenesis (Liang et al. ; Wolf et al. ; Kefas et al. ). Zhao et al. showed that miR-143 suppressed glycolysis by targeting HK2 (Zhao et al. ). In addition, Kefas et al. found that miR-326 also suppressed glycolysis by targeting PKM2 (Kefas et al. ). Luan et al. reported that a let-7a/c-Myc/hnRNPA1 feedback loop regulated the expression of PKM2. In this feedback loop, let-7a targets c-Myc, whereas c-Myc upregulated hnRNPA1 expression. In addition, the knockdown of let-7a promoted hnRNPA1 expression and upregulated PKM2. Therefore, overexpressed let-7a can inhibit glucose metabolism and the growth of gliomas by modulating the c-Myc/hnRNPA1/PKM2 signaling pathway (Luan et al. ).
Potential for Clinical Application
MiRs Predicted GBM Radio-Chemotherapeutic Resistance
Surgery combined with radio-chemotherapy using TMZ is the current treatment for GBM. However, prognosis remains dismal (van den Bent et al. ). The eight biological hallmarks of GBM cells significantly affect the efficacy of every treatment mode. For example, the activation of invasion abates the possibility of total resection. Moreover, the other biological hallmarks of GBM cells debase the effects of radio-chemotherapy. Thus, aberrant miRs result in a poor prognosis by modulating the biological hallmarks of GBM cells and reducing radio-chemotherapeutic effects.
MiRs regulate GBM cell resistance to TMZ through survival signaling pathways. For example, miR-181b targets EGFR (Chen et al. ) and MEK1 (Wang et al. ) to increase the chemosensitivity of TMZ in GBM. Immunoglobulin-like domains 1 (LRIG1) enhances the chemosensitivity of TMZ by negatively regulating EGFR in GBM (Qi et al. ). Further, miR-20a confers TMZ-resistance by targeting LRIG1 in GBM (Wei et al. ). Likewise, STAT3 features in regulating TMZ-resistance of GBM cells. PIAS3 suppresses STAT3-mediated gene activation (Wang et al. ). Shi et al. reported that miR-125b enhanced the chemotherapeutic resistance of GSCs to TMZ by targeting PIAS3 (Shi et al. ). Chen et al. also found that TUSC3 significantly inhibited STAT3 expression and overcame the resistance of GBM cells to TMZ. MiR-132 enhanced TMZ resistance by targeting TUSC3 in GBM (Cheng et al. ). Moreover, miRs also regulate TMZ-resistance of GBM cells via the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. MiR-125b increased the TMZ-resistance of GSCs by targeting Bak1 (Chen et al. ), and miR-138 targeted BIM to increase TMZ-resistance of GBM cells (Stojcheva et al. ). In GBM, radiation-induced DNA damage actives AKT, which inhibits the activation of GSK3β. Through the blockage of the activation of GSΚ3β, cyclin D1 was redistributed between the nucleus and cytoplasm, resulting in an increased amount of cyclin D1 in the nucleus (Alt et al. ). Cyclin D1 mediates cell cycle from the G1 phase to S phase via binding to CDK4 (Coleman et al. ). Thus, AKT promoted DNA damage repair through GSK3β inactivation and the redistribution of cyclin D1. Deng et al. showed that miR-124 targeted CDK4 to enhance radiation sensitivity of glioma cells (Deng et al. ). Xiao et al. demonstrated that miR-135b decreased radiation sensitivity of GBM by targeting GSK3β (Xiao et al. ). GSK3β is also a target gene of miR-101, which enhances the radiotherapeutic resistance of GBM (Tian et al. ). In addition, the activation of AKT also increased DNA-PK expression and induced DNA damage repair by inhibiting GSK3β (Li et al. ). Zhang et al. reported that PTEN is a target gene of miR-221/222, which increased DNA-PK expression and decreased radiosensitivity through the PTEN/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway (Li et al. ). In addition, other genes modulated by miRs participate in DNA damage repair. For example, it has been demonstrated that miR-26a and miR-100 enhanced the radiosensitivity of GBM cells by targeting ATM (Guo et al. ; Ng et al. ). Other studies found that miR-370-3p (Gao et al. ), miR-198 (Nie et al. ), miR-181d (Zhang et al. ), and miR-603 (Kushwaha et al. ) increased GBM cell sensitivity to TMZ by targeting MGMT.
MiRs Act as Biomarkers for Prognosis and as Therapeutic Targets
As discussed above, aberrant miRs have been shown to be involved in the regulation of the eight biological hallmarks in GBM. Due to the unique characteristics of miRs, such as the effectiveness and affordability of miRs testing, and small volume and stability of clinical specimens, it is possible that miRs may act as biomarkers of prognosis for GBM patients. MiRs may also be useful as therapeutic targets (de Planell-Saguer and Rodicio ).
Recently, scholars have further proven that circulating miRs may act as prognostic biomarkers of GBM. Although many studies have confirmed that a single miRNA could act as prognostic factor of GBM, the ideal prognostic model should contain a combination of several miRs. For example, Chen et al. identified 7 miRs with promising prognostic value. Among these seven miRs, five miRs (miR-129, -124a, -218, -7, and -139) were downregulated and the other two (miR-15b and miR-21) were upregulated in GBM tissues. The seven-miR signature enhanced the predictability of disease recurrence and DFS, and GBM patients were successfully stratified into high-risk and low-risk categories. In addition, in survival prognostic capability, the seven-miR signature had advantage over other indices determined by ROC analysis (Chen et al. ). Zhao et al. identified that the combined 3-miR (miR-106a-5p, -182, and -145-5p) risk score was markedly related to 2-year OS and the 5-miR (miR-182, -222-3p, -106a-5p, miR-20a-5p, and -145-5p) risk score was markedly in relation to DFS among GBM patients (Zhao et al. ). Yuan et al. reported that four miRs accurately classified longer-term and shorter-term survival, and overexpression of the four miRs was markedly related to a good prognosis (Yuan et al. ). Recently, an important study analyzed miR expression profiles in the TCGA database and found that these miR signatures predicted patient survival more accurately than previously reported signatures. Another risk score was created based on the levels of nine miRs, and expression of the 9-miR was demonstrated to be markedly in relation to survival through analysis of the TCGA cohort of GBM patients. The 9-miR prognostic value was identified by Hayes et al., and they used the level of the 9-miR divide patients into high-risk group and low-risk group in all of the GBM subtypes, except for the non-G-CIMP proneural group (Hayes et al. ). In a larger patient cohort study, the analysis of the miR profiles in TCGA database showed that a combined profile of 10-miR may accurately predict patient survival. Srinivasan et al. obtained a risk score based on the 10-miR, and found that the patients were divided into high-risk group and low-risk group with perceptibly different survival according to the profile of the 10-miR (Srinivasan et al. ).
Besides the prognostic role, miRs may also become therapeutic targets. MiRs were divided into pro-oncogenic and anti-oncogenic miRs, thus producing two different targeted therapeutic modes: (1) to ablate oncogenic miRs via methods that include ASOs, miRNA-masking antisense oligonucleotide technology (miR-mask), and miRNA sponges; and (2) to restore tumor-suppressive miRs via the overexpression of double-stranded miRs, such as miR mimics or using a delivery system that includes AAV or MSCs. The R3V6 peptide, as a carrier of ASOs, safeguards anti-miR-21 oligonucleotides against nucleases and delivers anti-miR-21 oligonucleotides into the cells more efficiently than other modes (Oh et al. ). Song et al. showed that miR-21 levels were significantly reduced and apoptosis was increased in GBM cells via the ASOsR3V6 complex (Oh et al. ). Chen et al. ( ) demonstrated that miR sponges inhibited miR-23b, significantly reduced angiogenesis, and suppressed the invasion of GBM cells by decreasing the expression of MMP9, HIF-1α, VEGF, β-catenin, ZEB1, and MMP2. VHL and E-cadherin were also increased (Chen et al. ). Liao et al. ( ) reported that miR-203 was markedly downregulated in imatinib-resistant GBM. Using miR-203 mimics significantly downregulated Slug and sensitized GBM cells to imatinib. RAAV vectors are the most efficient, long-lasting, and safe somatic gene transfer vehicle in vivo. Although modified AAVs show a high transduction efficiency and specific tissue tropism, virus-associated immune response events affect its clinical application (Xie et al. ). Kota et al. transported target genes to liver cancer cells by AVVs, and the result showed significant promotion of apoptosis of cancer cells and suppression of proliferation of cancer cells (Kota et al. ). This suggests that AAVs may be an effective means of delivering miRs. Whether this method is suitable for use in GBM needs further verification. MSCs are an effective delivery vehicle for transferring miR-based therapies to GBM cells. Munoz et al. ( ) utilized MSCs to deliver anti-miR-9 to GBM cells and they found that anti-miR-9 enhanced TMZ-sensitivity of GBM cells and increased GBM cells’ death.
Conclusion
With the significant advances made in the past few decades, we have a very deep understanding of the molecular pathology of GBM. As a post-transcriptionally modulated mode, the role of miRs on the molecular biological hallmarks of GBM has been gradually gaining attention from researchers. Many have shown that aberrant miRs modulate every aspect of the eight biological capabilities in GBM as proposed by Hanahan et al. (Fig. S1, Table S1). With the future development of liquid detection, miRs may play a key role in the diagnosis and prognosis of GBM. Furthermore, with the development of various delivery technologies, such as nanotechnology and virus vectors, miRs may be used as molecular targets for the clinical therapy of GBM.