Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a pathological condition associated with progressive and multifarious neurodegenerative disorders. Based on statistics, this disease is the leading cause of dementia during senility. The pathological changes are mainly determined by the formation of cytoplasmic neurofibrillary networks and excessive accumulation of Aβ protein, which is known as senile plaques in scientific terminology (Kumar and Singh ). These plaques are composed of Aβ [1–40] fibrils, originating from Aβ precursor protein (APP) due to the inevitable role of the protein tau. The aberrant hyperphosphorylation status of tau was found to promote micro-aggregation of Aβ. Also, it has been shown that fibrillar Aβ plays a central role in neurotoxicity in AD brains (Butterfield and Boyd-Kimball ). Both in vitro and in vivo reports described a potent neurotoxic activity for soluble, non-fibrillar, oligomeric assemblies of Aβ peptide (Walsh and Selkoe ). Overall, these pathological changes result in the loss of neuronal function with accelerated atrophy of specific brain areas and decreased synapses in surviving neurons (Serrano-Pozo et al. ).
Neurosteroidogenesis in the Brain Under Normal and Abnormal Conditions
In healthy circumstances, normal neurosteroid activity is considered an essential component of the central nervous system (CNS) (Melcangi and Panzica ). According to chemical structure, neurosteroids consist of three distinct categories such as pregnane, androstane, and sulfated neurosteroids. These compounds promote brain excitability by modulating the activity of neuronal membrane receptors simultaneously with ion channels, peculiarly type A GABA receptors (Reddy and Neurosteroids ). To synthesize neurosteroids, cholesterol is transmitted into the cytosol through mitochondrial membrane by the effectors namely TSPO, VDAC, StAR, and ANT. P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme converts the transmitted cholesterol to pregnenolone. Following biochemical reaction in the cytosol, pregnenolone could produce different types of neurosteroids (Porcu et al. ). Evidence demonstrated that neurosteroids exert various effects on CNS such as neuron protection by the inhibition of apoptosis and inflammation during the initiation of degenerative diseases. As aforementioned, the potent role of GABA in the cell activity of neurosteroids must not be neglected (Porcu et al. ). It has been determined that the reduction of neurosteroids in laboratory animals such as rodents correlated with anxiety and aggressive behavior while a reduced GABA receptor sensitivity was also detectable against agonists. For instance, an increased 3 α-hydroxy-5 α-pregnan-20-one and 3 α, 5 α-tetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone levels reduced anxiety ( ). In human, long-term deprivation of allopregnanolone contributes to an increased cognitive impairment. Consistent with this statement, a close relationship was found between NSCs and neurosteroids in improving the memory function in transgenic animal models with the AD. Regarding the regulatory effects of allopregnanolone on the dynamics of cholesterol via Liver X Receptor (LXR), it was well established that down-regulation of LXR-α and -β subunits could predispose the AD (Irwin and Brinton ). Allopregnanolone has a potential to increase the rate of neurogenesis and cell survival rate in the hippocampus, resulting in the expression of LXR, white matter synthesis, and reduction of Aβ deposit (Brinton ).
Given that the gonadal steroid hormones are required for reproductive activity, androgens could affect different parts of the brain that are not essentially involved in reproduction, such as the amygdala, preoptic area, medial hypothalamic part, and hippocampus (Rossetti et al. ). It is noteworthy that neurosteroids may play a key role in the non-reproductive activity of various cells residing inside CNS (González-Flores et al. ). It was also reported that androgens manipulate neuroprotection, neuronal differentiation, survival, and sequential developments of CNS components at physiological state (González-Flores et al. ). Out of these, testosterone is the major endogenous anabolic/androgenic steroid hormone, and it plays a basic role in differentiation, promotion, and cellular growth (Bjelic et al. ). In neurons, testosterone operates as a neurosteroid and can induce changes at the cellular level, which in turn causes changes in behavior, memory, and mood (Schiller et al. ). It has been proven that the analogs of gonadal steroid hormones, like progesterone (P 4 ), have other roles beyond reproduction activities (Singh et al. ). In fact, multiple areas within the CNS beyond the hypothalamus area are affected by P 4 notably the cortex and hippocampus (Schumacher et al. ). P 4 , tetra-hydro-progesterone (THP), and its derivatives 5-alpha-dihydro-progesterone (DHP) can increase the proliferation of Schwann cells and activation of the myelinating program of the cells (Schumacher et al. ). On the other hand, 17β-estradiol (E 2 ) can elevate neurogenesis in various brain parts such as the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, assisting in region-specific learning and memory development (Marques et al. ). Furthermore, E 2 can quickly enhance dendritic spine contacts or dendritic spine numbers in the hippocampus, the medial amygdala, and hypothalamus, thus increasing hippocampus-dependent memory in monkeys (Tuscher et al. ). E 2 is also a powerful and effective mediator of synaptic transmission in the hippocampal system. In general, E 2 promotes neuronal plasticity and neurogenesis to maintain healthy cognitive activity and protects against a cognitive reduction in females during aging (Engler-Chiurazzi et al. ).
Neurosteroidogenesis and Alzheimer’s Pathogenesis
A plethora of evidence has been published regarding the pathogenesis of AD in human beings (Frontzek et al. ). For example, a reduction of sex-related hormones such as P 4 , E 2 , and testosterone was determined by aging in relation to the development of AD. Low levels of P 4 -derived allopregnanolone were shown in patients with the AD compared to normal healthy candidates. Both P 4 , E 2 have the capacity to regulate the unwanted effects of glutamates and Aβ neurons located at hippocampus (Frye and Walf ). By aging and the reduced production of sex-related hormones, the possibility of AD would be increased. Epidemiological studies revealed that menopausal changes and reduction of E 2 are related to the rate of the AD (Frye and Walf ). Regulating pathways implicated in Aβ production, sex hormones could potently decline their concentration through modulating mechanisms (Duarte et al. ). For instance, E 2 has been involved in the clearance of Aβ by the stimulation of microglial phagocytosis. In an in vitro condition, the primary treatment of human microglia with E 2 provoked Aβ phagocytosis (Chen and Small ), whereas microglial cultures from E 2 -deficient aromatase knockout mice showed an aborted Aβ clearance activity (Lee et al. ). A significant mechanism of Aβ clearance is the degradation of accumulated peptide oligomers and monomers by a variety of proteins communally mentioned as Aβ degrading enzymes (Del Campo et al. ). Some studies have also revealed that testosterone declined the rise of amyloid serum concentration, accelerated its elimination in the brain, and disrupted the behavioral performance of the hippocampus (Verdile et al. ). Reduced level of testosterone in men is associated with cognitive decline and the prevalence of AD. For example, men with the AD and other dementia conditions have lower testosterone levels compared to their normal counterparts (Bowen et al. ; Hogervorst et al. ). Calling attention, there is an association between serum testosterone concentration and cognitive performance in healthy elderly men (Barron et al. ). Longitudinal studies have demonstrated that lower free testosterone levels can be detected 5–10 years prior to the diagnosis of the AD (Moffat et al. ), suggesting that low testosterone is a risk factor for AD rather than merely a result of it. Furthermore, a reduction in testosterone levels is associated with increased plasma Aβ levels in dementia and in men who have undergone chemical castration (Gandy et al. ; Gillett et al. ). Compared to age-matched controls, reduced testosterone levels have also been observed in the brains of men neuropathologically diagnosed with the AD (Rosario et al. ; Vest and Pike ). The production of testosterone in the brain of a person diagnosed with the AD may be affected by altered neurosteroidogenic enzymes levels (Verdile et al. ), and it may become further impaired as a result of the development of neuropathology (Caruso et al. ). Furthermore, studies have exhibited that not only the brain levels of testosterone altered but also brain responsiveness may also be weakened due to the changes in the density and distribution of androgen receptor (Verdile et al. ). In an experiment, mouse hippocampal subfield CA1 was injected with Aβ, containing amino acids from 25 to 35. This manipulation contributed to the reduction of pregnenolone and progesterone, while at the same time increased the levels of 17β-estradiol (E 2 ) in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus. These results confirmed a site-dependent action of Aβ. Notably, the amino acid sequence of the protein structure induced the expression of pro-inflammatory factors such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β). Interestingly, progesterone could initiate a feedback on detrimental effects of this protein and could be imagined as a novel therapeutic agent for AD subjects (Verdile et al. ).
Neurosteroid Hormones Signaling Pathway in Brain Focuses on Growth, Differentiation, and Apoptosis
The PI3K/Akt signaling pathway plays an important role in many physiological processes such as cell growth and proliferation, apoptosis, and cell motility (Yao et al. ) (Fig. 1 ). Activated Akt can suppress cell apoptosis by inhibiting pro-apoptotic proteins such as Bax and caspase-3 and by provoking anti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl-xL and seladin-1 (Yao et al. ).
Fig. 1 Neurosteroid hormones signaling pathway in the normal brain. Neurosteroid hormones signaling pathway involved in many physiological processes such as cell growth and proliferation, apoptosis, and cell motility. The PI3K/Akt signaling pathway plays an important role in cell growth and apoptosis. Activated Akt by E 2 and DHT can suppress cell apoptosis by inhibiting pro-apoptotic proteins such as Bax and caspase-3 and by activating anti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl-xL and seladin-1. BDNF is a vital neurotrophic that promotes neuronal development, plasticity, and survival through TrkB. This subsequently results in down-streaming the activation of intracellular signaling pathways involving MAPK, PI3K, PLC-γ, and PKC. Testosterone increases neuronal viability through the AR-dependent and MAPK/ERK signaling pathway. TrkB tropomyosin-related kinase B, MAPK mitogen-activated protein kinase, PI3K phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, PLC-γ phospholipase C-γ, PKC protein kinase C, ERK extracellular signal-related kinase
Testosterone and Progesterone
Testosterone is routinely metabolized in the brain into the androgen analogs namely dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and the E 2 . Animal studies confirmed that E 2 , P 4 , and testosterone actively participate in the production of white matter and myelination in the context of CNS (Peper et al. ). Noteworthy, E 2 was found to decrease the number of apoptotic neurons by the expression of anti-apoptotic genes Bcl-xL, and Bcl-w while blocking the expression of the pro-apoptotic effectors such as Bim (Pike et al. ). Testosterone can mediate its effects through androgen or estrogen pathways. DHT is a biologically active testosterone metabolite formed by the enzyme 5-α-reductase in the brain. According to numerous experiments, DHT regulates cell growth and apoptosis in several neurodegenerative diseases such as the AD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Yao et al. ). DHT was also shown to significantly suppress the apoptosis in C6 cells induced by an intracellular cholesterol transport inhibitor U18666A. Rat C6 tumor cells originated from glial cells are equivalent to human glia blastoma multiforme (GBM) with highly vascularized stroma (Grobben et al. ). The selective PI3K inhibitor LY294002 can block the anti-apoptotic effect of DHT as well. Regarding the neuroprotective effects, DHT has a potential therapeutic role in U18666A-induced diseases and abnormalities (Yao et al. ). In fact, a study indicated that DHT increased the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase) signaling molecules (ERK-1 and ERK-2) in cells over-expressing cytoplasmic androgen receptor (AR), but not in wild-type cells or cells expressing the empty vector (Peterziel et al. ). The androgen activation of MAP kinase signaling pathway has been evidently proven. Further investigation revealed that DHT treatment reduced the Aβ-induced cytotoxicity in neuronal cells expressing the AR. Estrogen itself can activate the MAP kinase pathway (Carroll and Rosario ) and has also shown to induce α-APP’s secretion through the MAP kinase pathway (Pike et al. ). Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a potential mediator with sex hormone’s ability to affect dementia. It promotes neuronal development, plasticity, and survival (Park and Poo ). Its effects are largely mediated by the activation and provoking cognate receptor tropomyosin-related kinase B (TrkB) (Fig. 1 ). This hormone initiates signaling cascade through conformational changes and autophosphorylation of various tyrosine residues in the intracellular domain of TrkB. These events subsequently attribute in down-streaming the activation of intracellular signaling pathways involving mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), phospholipase C-γ (PLC-γ), and protein kinase C (PKC) (Fig. 1 ) (Castrén and Rantamäki ). Since being discovered near to three decades ago, many studies have unveiled that BDNF is not only vital to embryonic brain development, where it is originally seen in early synaptic and neuronal circuit formation (Autry and Monteggia ; Wright and Ribera ), it is also inevitable during post-natal period. In the post-natal phase, it supports neuronal maturation, homeostasis, survival, regulation of synaptic transmission, neuronal plasticity, promotion of neurogenesis via enhancing proliferation, differentiation, and survival of newly born cells (Link et al. ; Du and Hill ; Katoh-Semba et al. ; Chan et al. ; Lee et al. ). Not surprisingly, BDNF has been found to be effective for learning, memory, and higher cognitive processes (Yamada and Nabeshima ). Indeed, the region where the TrkB gene is located (9q22) has been genetically associated with the AD (Hamshere et al. ). Few studies have investigated the relationship between testosterone and BDNF. In vivo studies have demonstrated that progesterone and testosterone administration increased BDNF expression in castrated male rats (Verhovshek et al. ), while another study discovered that BDNF is essential to mediate testosterone’s positive effects on neuronal survival (Rasika et al. ). In vitro cell culture experiments provided the preliminary data that testosterone efficiently regulates Aβ deposition/scavenging and enzymatic activity on APP. The in vitro treatment of neuronal cells with testosterone resulted in an increased level of the soluble, neuroprotective α-APPs molecule, and a reduction in Aβ synthesis (Gouras et al. ; Goodenough et al. ). These observations suggested the increased activity of α-secretase pathway in the processing of APP. Indeed, it was shown that testosterone promoted the MAP kinase signaling pathway, which previously had been shown to induce APP through non-amyloid genic pathway favoring α-APPs production and the decrement of Aβ formation (Goodenough et al. ; Desdouits-Magnen et al. ). Therefore, it is also conceivable that testosterone could alter APP metabolism through estrogen-dependent pathways (Zhang and Xu ).
17β-Estradiol (E2)
The exposure of neurons with E 2 could change the Aβ-induced apoptosis by a marked reduction in the transcript level of Bcl-xL, mitochondrial release of cytochrome c, and the activation of caspase-3 (Pike et al. ; Green et al. ; Sawada et al. ). By contrast, this condition induced Bax expression (Fan et al. ; Mielke and Herdegen ). E 2 was also found to inhibit the Aβ-induced c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase (JNK) activity. These features confirmed the protective effects of E 2 against neuronal apoptosis after neurons exposure with Aβ. These features per se implied the critical role of mitochondrial activity and the JNK signaling in the pathogenesis of neuron cytotoxicity in AD subjects (Napolitano et al. ). Further several studies indicated that E 2 blunted Aβ-induced cell cytotoxicity. It also enhances factors associated with learning and memory, a function related to the hippocampal somatostatinergic system (Aguado-Llera et al. ). Following E 2 administration to Aβ-treated rats, it activates the somatostatinergic tone (Perianes-Cachero et al. ). The infusion of Aβ decreases leptin signaling, while E 2 triggers it (Clegg et al. ). Subsequent changes in intracellular signal provide the activation of STAT3 and phosphorylation of STAT5, which may strengthen brain insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) concentrations, promoting phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate I(IRSI) (Talbot et al. ). As a result, the activated Akt triggers cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation. The activated CREB elevates somatostatin (SRIF) and sst2 mRNA, and therefore, the protein level of both factors (Perianes-Cachero et al. ). The elevation in SRIF may strengthen the content of neprilysin and insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) in the hippocampus, decrease Aβ concentrations and cell death (Tundo et al. ). In addition, the phosphorylation of Akt activates glycogen synthase kinase-3b (GSK3b) by serine phosphorylation, thus decreasing cell death (Abdel-Aleem et al. ).
The Possible Relation Between Neurosteroid Hormones Signaling and Incidence of Alzheimer’s Disease
So far, the protective effects of neurosteroids were confirmed on the CNS. For instance, it was revealed that increased level of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) in the course of AD development coincided with the reduction of 3α-5α-THP showing the neuroprotective properties of DHEA in response to an accelerated generation of reactive oxygen species (Marx et al. ). Testosterone has been shown to increase neuronal viability in cultured hippocampal neurons through the AR-dependent and MAPK/ERK signaling pathways (Nguyen et al. ) (Fig. 1 ). It could also elevate the levels of neprilysin to facilitate Aβ clearance (Yao et al. ). Furthermore, it was found that the non-aromatizable androgen DHT provided neuroprotective effects. This outcome was achieved by activating the AR-dependent CREB signaling pathway observed in PC12 cells and cultured hippocampal neurons (Nguyen et al. ). Further evidence in AD mice models demonstrated that DHT could raise the levels of neprilysin and reduce Aβ levels via AR-independent pathway (Lau et al. ). A more recent finding exhibited that testosterone promoted the degradation of Aβ through an estrogenic pathway-independent manner (Fedotova et al. ). All these data suggested that the physiological level of testosterone is likely to reduce the chance of developing AD (Moffat et al. ). Estrogen can decline the Aβ production by tending the non-amyloidogenic pathway via MARK/ERK axis activation, decreasing β-secretase (BACE1) concentrations, and enhancing Aβ clearance. The decline in values is prompted by stimulating microglial degradation, phagocytosis, and regulating the concentrations of main enzymes engaging in Aβ degradation [64]. Similar to E 2 , P 4 probably triggers various neuroprotective mechanisms. For instance, in neuronal cultures, P 4 activates MAPK/ERK and Akt signaling pathways both of which correlated with neuroprotection (Nguyen et al. ; Nilsen and Brinton ; Moore et al. ; Kaur et al. , Su et al. ; Manna and Stocco ). P 4 could also attenuate the up-regulation of Bax/Bcl-2 proteins ratio and inhibit the activation of caspase-3 in Aβ-treated neurons. It could protect neurons by inhibiting Aβ-induced activation of JNK, which accelerate mitochondria-associated apoptotic pathway. P 4 exerts a protective effect against Aβ 25–35 -induced insults as well, at least in part, by two complementary pathways; (1) progesterone receptor membrane component 1-dependent inhibition of mitochondrial apoptotic pathway and (2) blocking Aβ-induced JNK activation (Qin et al. ).
E 2 signaling in the CNS is a highly complicated issue (Toran-Allerand ); however, the actions of estrogen can be roughly classified into genomic and non-genomic mechanisms. This hormone can attach to estrogen receptors (ERs), ERα or ERβ, which are typically located in the cytoplasm or nucleus (Nadal et al. ). The bound receptors act as transcription factors to regulate gene expression. These receptors form homo- or heterodimers that translocate to the nucleus and bind themselves to estrogen response elements (EREs) located in the promoter regions of target genes. However, approximately one-third of the genes regulated by ERs do not include ERE sequences (O’Lone et al. ). Therefore, it becomes clear that bound ERs can regulate gene expression through other mechanisms, such as protein–protein interactions with other transcription factors and their respective response elements (Bjornstrom and Sjoberg ). On the other hand, rapid, non-genomic effects are mediated through membrane-associated ERs, such as the G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) (Olde and Leeb-Lundberg ). It is also important to note that even non-genomic signaling pathways can result in gene transcription indirectly through downstream cascades, and these genes may differ from those directly activated through EREs (Ascenzi et al. ). The hippocampus contains ER-α, ER-β, and GPER receptors (Su et al. ). Intracellular ERs are located in the CA1, CA3, and the dentate gyrus in males and females, while GPER is most dense in the CA3 region in female mice (Duarte-Guterman et al. ). ERs are regulated by age, hormone exposure, and reproductive experience (Kordower et al. ). While there is less work seen related to the GPER, it is proved that GPER expression is reduced by E 2 in the granule cell layer but not in the CA1 and CA3 regions in females (Duarte-Guterman et al. ).
Estrogen therapy in women results in debatable advantages (Brinton ). There is, however, no clear evidence of the effect of testosterone replacement in men (Khera et al. ). Although the short-term estrogen therapy could provide advantages to the brain and bones, there is still a risk of endometrial and breast cancer following continued exposure (Daniel et al. ; Mogensen et al. ). The loss of neurons in the hippocampus may influence the signaling of these hormones. Moreover, enabling the IGF-I signaling may in turn be associated with the decline in Aβ concentrations following E 2 co-administration. Further studies are required to show the role and interactions of the ingredients analyzed here. In vitro analyses could highlight the specific roles of the ingredients induced by Aβ infusion and/or E 2 -administration. Eventually, apoptosis is not the only corresponding mechanism of degeneration in the AD. Other processes should be taken into evaluation for the enormous degeneration or pathologies seen in this disease. For example, reactive gliosis diminishes the Aβ clearance, intensifying AD pathogenesis (Perianes-Cachero et al. ). Besides, Aβ aggregation induces the phagocytosis and necrosis of neurons (Neniskyte et al. ). Aβ and E 2 regulate the somatostatinergic system by the modulation of IGF-1-related signaling (Støving et al. ). These results help us in finding out the mechanisms involved in E 2 protection and indicate that the somatostatinergic system, in a relationship with the activation of IGF-1 and leptin signaling, is involved in Aβ clearance through the modulation of hippocampal neprilysin and IDE concentrations (Torres-Aleman ). It is fundamental in the study to find out the processes implicated in the regulation of IGF-1 signaling and its association with alterations in the somatostatinergic system. This would help us ascertain protective factors against the AD by diminishing hippocampal Aβ aggregation and side effects later (Lanz et al. ).
Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease: Advances and Future Perspectives
Nowadays, current drug treatments of the AD, such as N -methyl- d -aspartate receptor (NMDA) antagonists or cholinesterase inhibitors, essentially assist in managing symptoms (Hartmann and Möbius ; Aisen ), thereby making unnecessary the need for new methods to encounter with the AD. In fact, some current therapeutic methods consist of reversible cholinesterase inhibitors such as rivastigmine (Shah et al. ). Epidemiological studies have significant contributions and future perspectives. For example, risks of developing Alzheimer’s disease can be reduced by smoking tobacco and it was demonstrated that nicotine inhibits neuronal apoptosis, which avoids the Aβ [25–35] -induced neurotoxicity (Xue et al. ). Natural products suggested by pharmacognosy are very helpful for the AD treatment, especially since modern sciences have built bridges between modern pharmacology and traditional Chinese medicines (Ghanemi and Boubertakh ). For example, Malay traditional physicians claim that Aquilaria subintegra leaves can treat AD, apparently through acetylcholine inhibition (Bahrani et al. ). It is noted that in another context amyloid formation could be inhibited by Silymarin, standardized extract of milk thistle (Yaghmaei et al. ). Moreover, as inflammation is an inherent factor in AD pathogenesis, compounds or extracts from plants with anti-inflammatory characteristics, such as Nigella glandulifera Freynet Sint, could represent a complementary therapy (Iwai et al. ; Boubertakh et al. ). Significantly, various results and research techniques are worthy of more attention. Molecules that inhibit Aβ, such as pinocembrin (Liu et al. ), that consist of glucagon-like peptide-1, are the emerging therapeutic targets for the treatment of AD (Iwai et al. ). By exploiting some strategies and recognizing new targets, a human can imagine hopes for AD treatment. The development of animal models of the AD and the explanation of molecules involved in varied pathogenesis such as cyclic peptides, the Aβ-targeted immunotherapy, 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT4) receptor-induced α-secretase activation, cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 antagonists and sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor are some examples (Ghanemi ; Luo and Abrahams ; Winblad et al. ; Pimenova et al. ; Lai et al. ; Couttas et al. ). Using novel diagnostic approaches, such as ultrasonography and positron emission tomography, is helpful in early AD diagnosis (Winblad et al. ; Chew and Silverman ). Moreover, they allow us to follow the evolution of treatment and identify new therapeutic targets. It should not be forgotten that AD development may be associated with metabolic disorders such as type-2 diabetes mellitus, insulin resistance, obesity, and metabolic syndrome (Xue et al. ). Overall, epidemiological data, varied traditional medicines, animal studies, and the recent studies about AD molecular and cellular aspects also provide potent starting points to introduce new therapeutic methods for the AD (Xue et al. ; Bahrani et al. ; Winblad et al. ). Multiple methods are under investigation and some have already demonstrated promising conclusions in AD patients. Immunotherapies that enhance Aβ aggregation in metabolic-based therapies and preclinical models are good examples (Winblad et al. ; Calvo-Ochoa and Arias ). Indeed, tau-related immunotherapy is awaiting additional development towards clinical trials as rising therapeutic strategies for both tauopathies and AD (Winblad et al. ; Medina and Avila ). Metal chelation is another example of AD treatment, as metal binding with Aβ has been shown (Xia and Liu ). The development of more novel methods to prevent spine degeneration in the AD seems forthcoming (Sclip et al. ). At the same time, study about AD must consider the parameters that could affect AD risks, pathogenesis or prognosis based on the patient’s gender (Winblad et al. ; Calvo-Ochoa and Arias ; Mielke et al. ). Nevertheless, AD studies still require overcoming different campaigns comprising regulations and legal aspects and the fact that various therapeutic theories need in vivo and biodistribution surveys before we see a speed-up in the improvement of AD researchers (Arias and Karlawish ).