Introduction
Secreted proteins, roughly comprising about 30% of the entire proteome, govern and influence a lot of physiological processes of a living entity. Apart from the specialized endocrine glands, these proteins are also secreted by certain organs/tissues like the brain (Hathout ). The secretome-mediated physiological effects are manifested primarily through paracrine or autocrine mechanisms. It could also be a rich source of potential biomarkers that may also serve as therapeutic targets in diseased states. The molecules secreted into the conditioned media under in vitro settings can be analyzed and extrapolated for an improved understanding of the in vivo pathological conditions and their mechanisms (Stastna and Van Eyk ). The regenerative potential of secreted, cell-derived biomolecules can be attributed to their paracrine mechanism of action instead of site-specific integration thereby resulting in targeted differentiation (Baglio et al. ; Basu and Ludlow ; Beer et al. ). There have been numerous reports and studies focused on the protective aspect of secretome over the last few years (Adamowicz et al. ; Bhang et al. ; Lee et al. ; Lu et al. ). As per reports the growth factor-enriched secretome of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) is by far the most promising therapeutic option for the treatment of neurological disorders like Parkinson’s disease (Teixeira et al. ), and ischemic stroke (Lahiani et al. ; Doeppner et al. ).
The most developed as well as the most sensitive system in an organism is the nervous system that drives all function of the body involving receiving and processing of the sensory signals. It is also the basic unit of survival. As such it is rendered highly susceptible to most of the injuries and insults resulting from internal and external stimuli (Cannon and Greenamyre ). It has been estimated by the World Health Organization that the disease burden of neurodegenerative diseases affecting the aged population will rise dramatically in the coming decades. There could be an increase by almost 50% from 2005 and 2030 in cases of dementia alone (Noble and Burns ). Such alarming predictions call for immediate and effective therapeutic measures against the disorders affecting the most vital component of the cellular system, i.e., neurons. There is reportedly a marked reduction in neurogenesis and neuroplasticity processes in the brains of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients that is often correlated with reduced endogenous or innate protection in neurons due to the lesser expression of growth factors. However, this could possibly be improved by regenerating the damaged neurons through growth factor supplementation or stem cell-based therapies (Enciu et al. ). Increasing the neurogenesis process can also be a possible alternative toward the cure of these debilitating diseases (Ernst and Frisén ), and stem cell secretome has largely contributed toward it (Tfilin et al. ).
Monocrotophos (MCP), a widely used organophosphate (OP) pesticide, is an established neurotoxicant under both acute and chronic conditions. It inhibits the activity of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) in the developing as well as adult brain that can aggravate the process of neurodegeneration (Kashyap et al. ; Vijay Kumar and Prakash ). There are several natural nontoxic alternatives available for inducing autophagy in such physiologically compromised cells. These include curcumin, spermidine, nicotinamide and resveratrol (Mariño et al. ). Though naturally obtained, these compounds/chemicals need further downstream processing to be administered to the cells/tissues. Another potential alternative that provides an absolutely natural protection to cells under stress is the conditioned medium of the cells. A plethora of literature exists to support the notion of conditioned medium-evoked protection in cells (Watanabe et al. ; Duan et al. ; Sun et al. ; Duarte et al. ). The effects of the conditioned medium are largely manifested via signaling molecules involved in cell survival pathways or the MAP kinase pathway (Dhandapani et al. ). However, a lot still needs to be explored in that area.
A stringently regulated autophagy process ensures appropriate secretion of proteins from the cellular vesicles. Consequently, it indirectly regulates the secretion of all the factors, both endocrine and exocrine, that are required for the treatment of multiple health disorders like cancer, neurodegeneration and autoimmunity (Bhattacharya et al. ). The past decade has also particularly witnessed a surge in the area of autophagy and the role it plays under normal as well as pathological conditions (Lee et al. ). It is a conserved auto cell death mechanism that can be defined as a catabolic pathway that degrades and recycles the erroneous cytoplasmic organelles and proteins to maintain cellular homeostasis (Liu et al. ). It is also a major defense strategy of cells against stress-induced apoptosis as well as in various health disorders (Kaufmann et al. ; Srivastava et al. ).
Another molecular event responsible for maintenance of homeostasis conditions is mitochondrial biogenesis. Mitochondrial biogenesis or the appropriate growth and division of preexisting mitochondria is an essential prerequisite for the standard functioning of cells. It is largely influenced by environmental stress such as exercise, caloric restriction, low temperature, oxidative stress, cell division and renewal and differentiation (Jornayvaz and Shulman ). Mitochondrial biogenesis maintains cellular homeostasis and is characterized by both removal of damaged and production of new mitochondria (Palikaras et al. ). Mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with a number of different diseases induced by neurotoxins and other stressors (Zhu et al. ; Meyer et al. ). Since autophagy is known to promote cell survival under conditions of stress, a correlation between the protective action of secretome and autophagy activation is a possibility. Its onset is additionally associated with the mitochondrial dysfunctions. Therefore, in this study we investigate to scrutinize the involvement of autophagy and mitochondrial dynamics, if at all, as one of the key underlying mechanisms of the restorative activity of cell secretome. If proved, autophagy upregulation and maintenance of mitochondrial dynamics can be targeted as vital parameters in secretome-mediated therapeutic interventions against monocrotophos-induced toxicity.
Materials and Methods
Chemicals and Reagents
All the culture grade reagents were purchased from Life Technologies and Sigma Aldrich, India, the antibodies from EMD Millipore and the culture ware from Nunc™.
Cell Culture
The human Wharton jelly-derived mesenchymal stem cells (WJ-MSCs) were procured from Hi-media, the rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cell line and human neuroblastoma SHSY-5Y cells were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). The hMSCs were cultivated in minimum essential medium α (MEMα) supplemented with 12% MSC fetal bovine serum (FBS), PC12 cell line was maintained in RPMI1640 supplemented with 10% horse serum (HS), 5% FBS, and SHSY-5Y cells were cultivated in Dulbecco’s MEM-F12 (DMEM-F12) supplemented with 10% FBS at 37 °C and 5% CO 2 in a humidified chamber. All the growth media were additionally supplemented with 1% antibiotic–antimycotic, 0.2% sodium bicarbonate and 1% glutamax (in case of hMSCs). The cells were subcultured at 70–80% confluence.
Preparation of Conditioned Medium (CM) of PC12 Cells Differentiating in Response to Nerve Growth Factor (NGF)
PC12 cells serve as the in vitro model for carrying out neurological studies. They undergo neuronal differentiation when exposed to optimal concentrations of nerve growth factor (NGF). To convert the PC12 cells into neuron-like entities the protocol Kashyap et al. ( ) was followed. Briefly, 3X10 6 cells were seeded per T75 flask (Poly- l -Lysine coated) in duplicate and incubated overnight at 37 °C, 5% CO2 in a humidified chamber. When the cells had attained appropriate morphology, they were incubated in serum-free medium for 2 h and then exposed to NGF (50 ng/µl). At every alternate day, this medium was collected and replaced with fresh NGF containing medium till day 8. The collected medium was centrifuged at 3133 g for 5 min and filtered through a 0.22-µm filter to remove any cell debris. This formed the CM of PC12 cells that were differentiated into neurons and was stored at − 80 °C until further use.
Cell Viability Analysis of CM-Exposed MCP-Challenged Cells
The cells receiving MCP insult were subjected to exposure to various concentrations of conditioned medium (CM) of differentiated PC12 cells. The protective response of CM in terms of the improved viability of cells was assessed by MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay. Both hMSCs and SHSY-5Y were divided into following groups: (1) unexposed control, (2) MCP (100 µM) exposed, (3) cells exposed to 50% CM prior to MCP exposure, (4) cells exposed simultaneously to CM and MCP and (5) cells exposed to 50% CM after MCP exposure. The percent viability of the cells with respect to control was determined at 24, 48, 72 and 96 h. Briefly, the cells were seeded at a density of 1X10 4 in 96-well culture dishes. After the completion of mentioned time-points, the 10 µl MTT reagent (5 mg/ml) was added to each well for 3–4 h following which the medium was aspirated off the wells. Further 200 µl dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) was added and incubated at room temperature for 10 min in dark after completely dissolving the formazan crystals formed after addition of MTT. The absorbance was recorded at 550 nm using a plate reader (Synergy Biotek).
Estimation of Oxidative Stress Marker
Cells under the physiological stress produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) as one of the defense mechanism. Briefly, the cells were seeded in 6-well culture plates at a density of 1–1.5 × 10 5 cells/well and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO 2 for at least 24 h. The exposure groups included were same as mentioned earlier along with a group of cells exposed to H 2 O 2 (100 nM), serving as positive control. After the exposure duration was completed cells were harvested, washed and incubated in 10 µM 2′,7′–dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFDA) dye (Cat No. D6883, Sigma Aldrich) for 20 min in dark, followed by another wash with phosphate buffer saline (PBS). Finally, the pellet obtained was resuspended in 1XPBS and analyzed by flow cytometry (BD influx, USA).
Alterations in Mitochondrial Membrane Potential (MMP)
The membrane-permeant JC-1 dye was used to monitor mitochondrial health. Briefly, 1 × 10 5 cells, both hMSCs and SHSY-5Y in different sets of experiments, were seeded per well in 6-well culture plate and incubated overnight at 37 °C and 5% CO 2 . The following day cells were subjected to an exposure regime as stated above for with staurosporine (50 nM) serving as the positive control group. The exposure lasted for 24 h following which the cells were harvested and washed with 1X PBS. The pellet obtained was incubated with JC-1 dye (5 µg/ml) in dark for 15 min followed by washing. Finally, the pellet obtained was resuspended in 1XPBS and analyzed by flow cytometry (BD influx, USA).
Expression Profile of Apoptosis Markers
For studying the expression profile of key apoptosis markers in the exposed cells, their protein was extracted using CellLytic M Cell Lysis Reagent (Cat no. C2978, Sigma Aldrich) and estimated through Bradford method. Changes in protein expression level were determined through western blotting. Equal amount (40 µg) of proteins was loaded on 10–12% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) gel and blotted on polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane using the wet transfer system (Biorad Laboratories India Pvt. Ltd.). The membrane was then blocked with a bovine serum albumin (BSA) and Tween-20-based blocking buffer (pH 7.4) for 1 h and further probed with anti-protein primary antibodies specific for BCl 2 (ab38629, Abcam), caspase-3 (04-440, Millipore), Bax (ab5714, Abcam), cytochrome-c (11940, Cell Signaling Technology), p53 (04-241, Millipore) and Apaf-1 (04-579, Millipore) overnight at 4 °C. All the antibodies were used at a dilution of 1:1000 in blocking buffer. β-actin (A5441, Sigma Aldrich) was used as an internal control at a dilution of 1:2000. The immunoglobulin G (IgG)-conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (Calbiochem, USA) (1:2000) was used to tag the primary antibodies for 2 h at room temperature and densitometry for protein-specific bands was done with the help of AlphaEaseTM FC StandAlone V. 4.0.0 software. The expression changes in BCl 2 were further analyzed through immunocytochemistry following the protocol of Kumar et al. ( ) (Kumar et al. ). After the completion of treatment, the cells were fixed with chilled paraformaldehyde (4%, pH 7.4) for approximately 30 min and then blocked for an hour. They were then probed with primary antibody specific for BCl 2 (Santa Cruz) at a dilution of 1:100 overnight at 4 °C. After this, the cells were again incubated in dark with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse (1:200) for 2 h at room temperature and stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), a nuclear stain, at a concentration of 1 µg/ml for 10 min. Finally, the images were captured under EVOS FL autoimaging system.
Changes in Neuronal Markers in Response to MCP
To ascertain the effect of PC12-derived CM against MCP-induced neurotoxicity in neuronal cells and the state of neuronal markers of injured neurons, we exposed the human neuroblastoma SHSY-5Y cells to MCP with and without CM and extracted their protein. Equal amount (40 µg) of SHSY-5Y proteins belonging to the above-mentioned groups was loaded on 10–12% SDS gel and blotted on polyvinylidene fluoride membrane using the wet transfer system (Biorad Laboratories India Pvt. Ltd.). After blocking for 1 h at room temperature, the membranes were incubated overnight with primary antibodies specific for tuj-1, NeuN (Cat No. MAB377, EMD Millipore), synaptophysin (Cat No. AB9272, EMD Millipore) and NFM (Cat No. AB5735, EMD Millipore) at 4 °C at a dilution of 1:1000. β-actin was used as the internal control. The membranes were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature with secondary anti-primary immunoglobulin G (IgG)-conjugated with horseradish peroxidase. The densitometry for protein specific bands was done with the help of AlphaEaseTM FC StandAlone V. 4.0.0 software.
Global Proteome Profile of Cells Exposed to CM and/or MCP Through 2D Gel Electrophoresis
The overall changes in the protein profile of exposed cells were observed through 2D gel electrophoresis and the matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) analysis of excised protein spots. Briefly, the exposed cells were harvested lysed in urea lysis buffer (Urea 7 M, thiourea 2 M, CHAPS 4%, 65 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), protease inhibitor cocktail). After centrifugation, the supernatant containing the protein fraction was collected and its concentration determined through Bradford assay. The immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strip (13 Cm) of pH range 3–11 was rehydrated with 1.25 mg of protein prepared in rehydration buffer (urea 7 M, thiourea 2 M, CHAPS 4%, 50 mM DTT, 5 µl ampholytes, 0.002% bromophenol blue) overnight. The following day the soaked IPG strip was loaded in the isoelectric focusing tray and the program for isoelectric focusing (IEF) set for overnight focusing of protein. The next day the IPG strip with focused proteins was equilibrated with DTT (20 mg/ml) and iodoacetamide (IAA) (25 mg/ml) dissolved in equilibration buffer (1.5 M Tris, 6 M urea, 2% SDS, 20% glycerol) 10 min each on a shaker. Post-equilibration the strip was loaded horizontally on top of 12% SDS 2D gel avoiding any space between gel and strip. After the strip was perfectly placed on top of gel, it was sealed with 0.5% agarose sealing buffer containing 0.002% bromophenol blue that acts as the dye front. Once the dye front reaches the bottom of gel, the gel is carefully removed from between the plates and fixed in a solution comprising of 45% water, 45% methanol and 10% acetic acid for 2–4 h. Post-fixation gel was left overnight in the Coomassie staining solution (10% ammonium sulfate, 10% orthophosphoric acid, 10% methanol, 0.15% Coomassie G-250 stain and water) on a shaker. After the protein spots became visible the gel was destained with 45% water, 45% methanol and 10% acetic acid for 1 h. The destained gel was finally visualized in a densitometer. The expression changes of the protein spots in the 2D gel were analyzed using PDQuest 8.0 2D analysis software. The spots that showed a significant fold change in expression between the control and treated groups were selected for further analysis through mass spectrometry. The selected spots were excised from the gel and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion involving extensive dehydration and rehydration steps using acetonitrile and ammonium bicarbonate. The supernatant carrying the protein fraction was obtained and dried in speed-vac. The dried protein fraction was reconstituted in extraction buffer (acetonitrile and trifluoroacetic acid), mixed with cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix and loaded on MALDI plate for mass spectrometry-based protein identification based on MASCOT software search.
Preparation of Cellular Protein Fractions
The mitochondrial, nuclear and cytosolic fractions from the hMSCs exposed to the above-stated exposure regime were isolated following the protocol of Drakulić et al. ( ) (Drakulić et al. ). Post 24 h, the cells were harvested and rinsed with 1X PBS (5000 rpm, 5 min). The pellet obtained was homogenized in the homogenization buffer (sucrose 70 mM/L, mannitol 210 mM/L, HEPES 5 mM/L, EDTA 1 mM/L, NaF, sodium orthovanadate, protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 7.4) at 2000× g for 10 min. The pellet (P1) contained the crude nuclear fraction while the supernatant S1 comprised of mitochondrial and cytosolic fraction. S1 was further centrifuged at 15,000× g for 30 min at 4 °C. The pellet (P2) contained the crude mitochondrial fraction that was dissolved in mitochondria extraction buffer (tris buffer 50 mM/l, EDTA 5 mM/l, NaCl 150 mM/L, NaF, sodium orthovanadate, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, pH 7.4) and incubated for 30 min on ice and centrifuged at 20,000× g for 30 min at 4 °C to yield the pure mitochondrial fraction that was stored in mitochondrial extraction buffer. The supernatant S2 containing the cytosolic fraction was ultra-centrifuged at 105,000× g for 1 h at 4 °C. The supernatant obtained carried the pure cytosolic fraction. P1 was dissolved in nuclear buffer (HEPES 10 mM/l, KCl 10 mM/L, MgCl 2 1.5 mM/L, EDTA 0.1 mM/L, EGTA 0.1 mM/L, DTT 1 mM/L, NaF, sodium orthovandate, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, pH 7.9) and incubated for 15 min on ice followed by addition of NP-40 (3%) and centrifugation at 10,000× g for 1 min at 4 °C. The pellet obtained was stored in the nuclear extraction buffer (HEPES 20 mM/L, NaCl 420 mM/L, MgCl 2 1.5 mM/L, EDTA 1 mM/L, EGTA 1 mM/L, DTT 1 mM/L, NaF, sodium orthovanadate, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, pH 7.9).
Estimation of Mitochondrial Dynamics in MCP-Exposed hMSCs
Changes induced in the expression of proteins involved in maintaining the mitochondrial dynamics were observed through western blotting following the established protocol as mentioned above. The proteins under study were fusion proteins Mfn1 (14739, Cell Signaling Technology), Mfn2 (9482S, Cell Signaling Technology) fission protein Fis1 (MABN391, Millipore), the mitochondrial transcription factor A TFAM (7495, Cell Signaling Technology), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator (PGC)-1alpha (AB3242, Millipore). Besides that, the role of SIRT1 AMPK pathway involved in regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis was also determined in these cells by observing the expression pattern of the associated proteins like SIRT1 (04-1557, Millipore), pAMPK (07-626, Millipore), pCREB. All the antibodies were used at a dilution of 1:1000 in blocking buffer. Maintenance of optimal NAD/NADH ratio is essential for mitochondrial function. Therefore, we calculated NAD + concentration in MCP- and CM-exposed cells through NAD/NADH cell-based assay kit from Cayman following the manufacturer’s protocol.
Analysis of CM-Mediated Protection Through Autophagy
Under conditions of stress usually apoptosis overshadows autophagy. Inducing autophagy in such instances reportedly protects cells from a lot of damage. Therefore, we studied whether the protective effect of CM of differentiated PC12 cells in case of MCP-exposed hMSCs was in anyway associated with autophagy induction. The expression profile of key autophagy markers LC3 (L8918, Sigma Aldrich), Beclin1 (3495, Cell Signaling Technology), Atg5 (12994, Cell Signaling Technology), Atg7 (8558, Cell Signaling Technology) and p62 (5114, Cell Signaling Technology) was therefore observed through western blotting following the protocol mentioned above. All the antibodies except LC3 were diluted at a ratio of 1:1000 in blocking buffer. LC3 was used at a ratio of 1:500.
Lysotracker (LTR) and Mitotracker Studies
The dyes that specifically stain lysosomes and mitochondria in living cells are known as lysotracker and mitotracker, respectively. An increase in their intensity signifies increased autophagy. Briefly, the cells were seeded at a density of 1.5 × 10 5 cells per well in 6-well culture dish. Post-overnight incubation the cells were segregated into four exposure groups including the control. Chloroquine diphosphate (CQ) (Cat no P36235, Invitrogen) served as the positive control. After 24 h of exposure cells were harvested and washed in 1X PBS. The pellet obtained was incubated with lysotracker (50 nM) (Cat No L7256, Invitrogen) and mitotracker (100 nM) (Cat no M22425, Invitrogen) for 1 h in pre-warmed culture medium at 37 °C. After this, the dyes were washed off and cells resuspended in PBS and analyzed through flow cytometry.
Co-localization of Lysotracker and Monodansylcadaverine (MDC)
To further confirm the involvement of autophagy in the protective action of CM against MCP-induced toxicity, we observed co-localization pattern of Lysotracker and MDC that stains autophagic vacuoles. Briefly, the cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 10 4 cells per well and exposed to the similar regime. Upon completion of exposure duration medium was aspirated and the cells were washed with 1XPBS followed by incubation in Lysotracker dye (50 nM) (Cat No L12492, Invitrogen) prepared in pre-warmed complete growth medium at 37 °C for 30–60 min. Finally, the cells were stained with MDC (Cat no 30432, Sigma Aldrich) in pre-warmed 1X PBS for 10–20 min and the images were finally captured through EVOS FL autoimaging system.
Pharmacological Inhibition of Autophagy
To re-affirm whether the protective effect was manifested by CM-induced autophagy, we pharmacologically inhibited autophagy process using 3-methyladenine (3-MA) (Cat no 3977, Tocris Biosciences). Briefly, the cells were seeded at a density of 4 × 10 6 per T-75 Cm 2 flask and after overnight incubation they were exposed to 3-MA (10 µM) for 24 h barring the control group. The following day cells were exposed to the same treatment regime, i.e., MCP (100 µM), 50% CM of PC12 cells and a combination of the two for another 24 h. The protein of all the groups was then isolated and immunoblotted on to PVDF membrane and the changes in expression of key autophagy and apoptosis markers mentioned above were observed.
Apoptosis Detection Assay
The apoptotic effects of any compound/chemical can be studied through the conventional Annexin-PI binding assay. The assay was carried out according to the manufacturer’s protocol (BD Biosciences). Briefly, the cells were seeded at a density of 1.5 × 10 5 cells per well in 6-well culture dish. Post-overnight incubation, the cells were segregated into above-mentioned exposure groups, with and without 3-MA, along with chloroquine diphosphate, a positive control for autophagy inhibition. After 24 h of treatment, the cells were harvested and washed in 1× PBS. The cell pellet was dissolved in 100 µl 1× Annexin binding buffer and incubated with 5 µl Annexin-V and propidium iodide (PI) for 15 min in dark. The final volume was made up to 500 µl with binding buffer and the fluorescence measured through flow cytometry.
Statistical Analysis
Results have been presented as mean ± standard error of mean (SEM) for each experiment that was performed in triplicate. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) in Graph Pad Prism (Version 5.0) software was used for the statistical analysis. The significance of the p values is: * p < 0.05 significant, ** p < 0.01 more significant and *** p < 0.001 highly significant.
Results
CM Restores the Cell Viability of MCP-Exposed Cells
Results of cell viability of different exposure groups of hMSCs and SHSY-5Y are summarized in (Figs. 1 a and 2 a). Cell death was evident in cells exposed to MCP (100 µM) as compared to the unexposed control group. There was a remarkable recovery in the cell viability of MCP challenged cells in the presence of 50% CM of differentiated PC12 cells but the pattern of recovery was rather erratic, especially in case of the pre-exposed group. However, the cells that were co-exposed to 50% CM of differentiated PC12 cells and MCP consistently showed the highest level of recovery from MCP-induced cell death all through the experiment at each time point. Fig. 1 Cytotoxicity of MCP in hMSCs and its restoration by conditioned medium (CM) of PC12 cells. a Percent cell viability at 24, 48, 72 and 96 h in response to MCP alone and with pre-, co-and post-exposure of MCP and 50% conditioned medium of PC12 cells, b changes in expression of apoptosis markers, c immunocytochemistry of BCl 2 in response to MCP exposure alone as well as in combination with 50% CM of differentiated PC12 cells, d The alterations in MMP, e ROS generation, in hMSCs in response to MCP alone and with pre-, co- and post-exposure of MCP and 50% CM of differentiated PC12 cells. The percent cell viability and fold change in expression of each marker in each exposure group was compared with one another and with control using Newman–Keules multiple comparison test. Values are represented as in MTT assay and western blotting are mean ± SE of the data obtained from three independent experiments (*** p < 0.001 with respect to control; ### p < 0.001 with respect to MCP) Fig. 2 Neurotoxicity of MCP in SHSY-5Y and the effect of CM of differentiated PC12 cells. a Percent cell viability by MTT assay at 24, 48, 72 and 96 h. b ROS generation, c the alterations in MMP, d expression profile of neuronal markers in SHSY-5Y in response to MCP alone and in combination with 50% CM of differentiated PC12 cells. The percent cell viability and fold change in expression level of neuronal markers in various exposure groups was compared with one another as well as unexposed control group using Newman–Keuls multiple comparison test. Values are mean ± SE of the data obtained from three independent experiments (*** p < 0.001 with respect to control; ## p < 0.01, ### p < 0.001 with respect to MCP)
MCP-Induced Toxicity is Alleviated by CM
High level of ROS generation was observed in MCP-exposed SHSY-5Y (25.23%) and hMSCs (45.45%) as compared to their respective untreated control groups (17.74 and 3.20%). However, upon simultaneous exposure with CM and MCP, a considerably low level of ROS was observed in both the cell lines, i.e., 10.25 and 16.13%, respectively. The ROS generation in CM alone group itself was 13.10% in SHSY-5Y cells while in hMSCs it was very near to control (5.39%) (Figs. 1 e and 2 b). Besides that, the alterations in MMP were most pronounced in MCP-exposed hMSCs and SHSY-5Y, respectively, as evident from the increased percentage of JC-1 monomers (10.11 and 24.80%) in comparison with untreated control (1.26 and 16.60%). These changes were particularly restored on simultaneous exposure of CM along with MCP (4.82 and 11.80%). The dissociation of JC-1 aggregates into monomers was around 4.21 and 14.67% in cells exposed to CM alone (Figs. 1 d and 2 c).
Involvement of Apoptosis
To further validate our hypothesis, we determined the expression changes in various apoptosis markers in cells exposed to MCP alone and in combination with CM (Fig. 1 b). The expression of BCl 2 which is an anti-apoptotic marker was far greater in cells co-exposed to MCP and CM as compared to MCP alone. All the other pro-apoptotic markers like Caspase-3, Bax, p53, Cytochrome-c, and Apaf-1 had higher expression in MCP-exposed cells than the cells co-exposed to MCP and CM of PC12 cells, respectively. This again substantiates the idea of CM having a cytoprotective efficacy in case of a toxic insult. The immunocytochemistry studies for expression of anti-apoptotic protein BCl2 in hMSCs also demonstrated reduced expression of BCl 2 in MCP-exposed hMSCs (Fig. 1 c). However, this expression was considerably upregulated when the cells were co-exposed to CM.
Restoration of Neuronal Markers Expression by CM in MCP-Challenged Cells
MCP exerts its neurotoxic effects by hampering the normal expression of neuronal markers and thus adversely affects the neurogenesis process of these cells. To check the neurorestorative potential of CM of PC12 cells, we analyzed the expression of neuronal markers in MCP and CM-exposed groups (Fig. 2 d). The MCP exposure in SHSY-5Y cells significantly hampered the expression of neuronal markers tuj-1, NeuN, NFM, and synaptophysin. The CM of PC12 cells significantly restored the expression of all these markers, upon its simultaneous exposure with MCP. The CM alone too induced a significant expression of these markers in the exposed cells in the same order.
Proteome Profile of MCP-Challenged Versus CM-Exposed Cells
Based on the analysis of mass spectrometry data of 2D gel spots of cells exposed to CM and/or MCP, approximately 15 proteins were found to have a significant differential expression ( p < 0.05) (Figs. 3 , 4 ). These included Chain A, solution structure of the mitochondrial ribosomal protein L17, Chain A, TapasinERP57 HETERODIMER, rho GDP-dissociation inhibitor 1 isoform a, peroxiredoxin-6, Chain A, crystal structure of a soluble form of Clic1, an Intracellular Chloride Ion Channel, protein disulfide-isomerase, ADP-ribose pyrophosphatase, mitochondrial isoform b, heat shock protein gp96 precursor, heat shock protein 27, MHC class I antigen, splicing factor, arginine/serine-rich 14, isoforms CRA_b, Annexin I, Chain A, Crystal Structure Of Human Enolase 1, gamma-glutamyltransferase and Chain A, Crystal Structure Of Pp-Galnac-T10 With Udp, Galnac And Mn2+. Interestingly all these proteins are associated with neurodegenerative disorders. The proteins having damaging effects on brain had a lower expression in the presence of CM while those that promoted neuroregeneration were observed to have a higher level of expression in it. Fig. 3 Proteome profile of MCP- and/or CM-exposed hMSCs. The differentially expressed proteins of hMSCs in response to 50% CM of differentiated PC12 cells, MCP and their combination as seen in 2D electrophoresis gel images Fig. 4 Differential protein expression in 2D electrophoresis. The expression changes in the selected protein spots based on difference in intensity for each treatment group; A—control, B—50% CM of differentiated PC12 cells, C—MCP, D—MCP+ 50% CM of differentiated PC12 cells
CM Enhances Mitochondrial Biogenesis via AMPK/SIRT1/PGC1α Pathway
As expected in case of apoptosis and stress the mitochondrial fission outdid the fusion process in MCP-exposed cells. The expression of fission protein Fis1 in MCP-exposed cells increased while that of fusion markers Mfn1 and Mfn2 reduced in comparison with CM alone group and the unexposed control group. However, CM restored the disturbed mitochondrial dynamics of these cells when co-exposed with MCP by promoting the expression of mitochondrial fusion proteins Mfn1 and Mfn2 over Fis1 (Fig. 5 a). It was also observed that the alteration in mitochondrial biogenesis was regulated by the AMPK/SIRT1/PGC1α pathway (Fig. 5 c). AMPK mediated phosphorylation of PGC-1α accompanied with deacetylation by SIRT-1 drives its activation which promotes rapid multiplication of mitochondria. The activation of PGC-1α triggers the activity of mitochondrial transcription factor TFAM and nuclear transcription factor CREB. As per our hypothesis, the expression of SIRT1 was significantly induced in the nuclear and cytosolic fractions of the cells exposed to CM alone and co-exposure groups, respectively, in comparison with MCP-exposed group. On the similar lines, the expression of pAMPK and PGC1α was also increased in the cytosolic fraction in the CM-exposed and co-exposed groups, respectively, unlike MCP-exposed cells. However, no major changes were observed in the translocation and expression of pCREB. The expression of TFAM was significantly higher in the CM alone and co-exposed group as compared to MCP. Activation of AMPK also stimulates SIRT1 activation by increasing the intracellular concentration of NAD + . It signifies the status of energy metabolism in cells and governs the ATP production process as well. The NAD + concentration reduced significantly on MCP exposure that further hinders the activity of mitochondria leading to increased cell death in the exposed cells as already observed. However, there was a drastic increase in the overall concentration of NAD + concentration when the cells were co-exposed to CM of PC12 cells along with MCP. In the CM alone group too this concentration was high enough indicating the improved mitochondrial function (Fig. 5 b). Fig. 5 Role of mitochondria in secretome-mediated effects on MCP-induced toxicity. a Expression profile of mitochondrial fission and fusion proteins, b Effect on the key regulatory pathway of mitochondrial biogenesis AMPK/SIRT-1/PGC1α and its signaling molecules in different cellular compartments, c effect on NAD + concentration that determines the redox potential and the SIRT1 activity in the MCP- and CM-exposed hMSCs, both alone as well as in their combination. The fold change in expression level of proteins in various exposure groups was compared with one another as well as unexposed control group using Newman–Keuls multiple comparison test. Values are mean ± SE of the data obtained from three independent experiments (** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001 with respect to control; ## p < 0.01, ### p < 0.001 with respect to MCP)
CM Ameliorates Apoptotic Effects of MCP via Induction of Autophagy
Autophagy induction by CM was clearly observed by an increased expression of all the markers of autophagy, except p62, when the cells were simultaneously exposed to MCP and CM in comparison with MCP alone group (Fig. 6 a). There was a remarkable increase in the conversion of LC3 I to LC3 II, the key molecule of autophagy pathway, in the co-exposure group specifically indicating an increased production of autophagosomes. The LC3 II had higher expression in the CM alone and the co-exposure group with respect to the untreated control group, respectively. This was a stark contrast from the MCP-exposed cells that very slightly expressed LC3 II. Besides LC3 other markers like Beclin-1, Atg5, Atg7 also followed a similar pattern in the CM alone, MCP alone and co-exposure groups, respectively. However, p62, being an autophagy substrate, reduced significantly in the CM alone, MCP alone and co-exposure groups, respectively. Fig. 6 Autophagy activation in response to 50% CM of differentiated PC12 cells. a Autophagy induction was observed through expression changes in autophagy markers, b the co-localization of MDC and lysotracker; A—control, B—50% CM of differentiated PC12 cells. C—MCP. D—MCP+ 50% CM of differentiated PC12 cells, E-CQ, c the percentage of lysootracker and mitotracker dye uptake by the cells was estimated through flow cytometry, in MCP- and CM-exposed hMSCs. The fold change in protein expression for each marker in various exposure groups was compared with one another as well as unexposed control group using Newman–Keuls multiple comparison test. Values are mean ± SE of the data obtained from three independent experiments (*** p < 0.001 with respect to control; ## p < 0.01, ### p < 0.001 with respect to MCP)
Although LysoTracker dyes label the acidic vacuoles in the cells in general and not specifically only lysosomes or autophagosomes, they still give us an idea of the estimated correlation between the number of lysosomes and autophagy induction. The data obtained by us showed a significant amount of lysotracker uptake by the cells co-exposed to CM and MCP (18.41%) in comparison with CM alone (1.20%) and MCP (0.43%). The chloroquine diphosphate (CQ)-treated cells served as the negative control with 46.79% of lysotracker uptake. Although it inhibits autophagy at the fusion step of endosomes and autophagosomes, it initially predisposes cells toward autophagy-like process hence the increased number of lysosomes. We also used mitotracker dye that stains the live mitochondria only and its emission reduces if there is a disruption in mitochondrial membrane potential. Consequently, there was a remarkable reduction in the percentage of mitotracker uptake by the co-exposed group of cells (0.16%) as compared to MCP alone (3.17%) and CM alone (2.52%). The positive control CQ reported 1.10% mitotracker uptake (Fig. 6 b). Monodansylcadavrine (MDC) specifically accumulates in the autophagic vacuoles. As such a co-localization of lysotracker and MDC could indicate the formation of autophagosomes or the autophagolysosomes signifying autophagy activation. The co-localization studies demonstrated an enhanced autophagosome turnover in case of CM alone and co-exposed group in comparison with MCP. The CQ-treated cells served as the negative control for autophagosome formation (Fig. 6 c).
Autophagy Inhibition Retards the Protective Efficacy of CM
3-MA is a known inhibitor of autophagy that blocks autophagosome formation step. Upon inhibiting autophagy, we found an equivalent inhibition in the expression of autophagy markers LC3-II, beclin-1 and the anti-apoptotic BCl 2 in the CM alone and co-exposure groups. Additionally, there was an upregulation in the expression of p62 and pro-apoptotic Caspase-3 (Fig. 7 a). The expression of autophagy markers reduced even more on co-exposing the cells with MCP and 3-MA while the apoptosis markers showed a highly pronounced expression. The Annexin V-PI assay determines the fate of the dying cells, i.e., whether they are apoptotic or necrotic or both depending upon the dye they uptake. It was observed that the group of cells pre-exposed to 3-MA exhibited a higher degree of apoptotic cell death with some percentage of necrosis as well (Fig. 7 b). Approximately 5.56% of MCP-exposed cells were apoptotic while 1.93% of them underwent necrosis. However, on 3-MA pre-exposure, the percentage of apoptotic cells increased to 12.09% and that of necrotic to merely 2.07%. Autophagy inhibition hampered the protective efficacy of CM since the percentage of apoptotic cells in the co-exposure group increased manifold to 21.05% as compared to 6.64% originally. In the CM alone group too there was a marked increase in apoptosis (14.31%) as opposed to the group that was not exposed to 3-MA (6.47%). The findings were validated by analyzing a group of cells that was exposed to CQ that inhibits autophagy. This group exhibited 18.80% apoptosis and 2.42% necrosis. However, when this group of cells was pre-exposed to 3-MA the percentage of apoptosis increased quite significantly to 47.49% with no difference in necrosis. This synergistic effect of CQ and 3-MA verified our observation that 3-MA indeed predisposes the cells toward apoptosis by inhibiting autophagy induction in them. Fig. 7 Pharmacological inhibition of autophagy. a Expression of autophagy and apoptosis markers in response to autophagy inhibitor 3-MA, b the apoptotic state of cells was determined by Annexin uptake through flow cytometry. The fold change in protein expression for each marker in various exposure groups was compared with one another as well as unexposed control group using Newman–Keuls multiple comparison test. Values are mean ± SE of the data obtained from three independent experiments (** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001)
Discussion
The advent of secretomics heralded a new era of repair and regeneration of damaged cells and tissues. The presence of growth promoting factors and components in the conditioned medium of cells acts as a shield that protects them or the adjacent cells or even the far-off cells of different origin from the adverse stress conditions through autocrine, juxtacrine or paracrine activity. This makes the cell secretome an attractive tool to rescue the injured or dying cells by promoting cell growth and survival. In this study, we take a leap further to observe the protective efficacy of the conditioned medium of differentiated PC12 cells over the MCP-challenged human mesenchymal stem cells and the mechanisms underlying this action. Fortunately, we observed a remarkable restorative potential of PC12 secretome over the MCP-exposed hMSCs via reduced apoptosis, improved mitochondrial biogenesis, and enhanced autophagy induction. Besides that, it also exhibited a significant degree of neuroprotection in case of injured neuroblastoma cells SHSY5Y (Fig. 8 ). Fig. 8 A schematic representation of the probable mechanisms underlying the conditioned medium-induced protection against MCP in cells through mitochondrial biogenesis and autophagy activation. The exposure to MCP leads to excessive ROS generation in cells accompanied with the induction of the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis involving caspase-mediated cell death. Additionally there’s an abnormal increase in the mitochondrial fission disturbing the homeotic conditions of the cell. This increased fission is balanced by mitochondrial fusion promoted by secretome of PC12 cells. Such mitochondrial dysfunctions are known to activate autophagy. Therefore, conditioned medium of differentiated PC12 cells rescues the cells from MCP-induced apoptosis by activation of autophagy that engulfs, digests and recycles the aberrant aggregates or cellular components. It additionally restores the normal balanced mitochondrial biogenesis of the cells by promoting mitochondrial fusion through the AMPK/SIRT-1/PGC-1α signaling cascade thus maintaining the cellular homeostasis
Monocrotophos (MCP) is an organophosphate that although insecticidal is also extremely toxic to other higher animals including humans (Krause et al. ). Its primary target is acetylcholinesterase that has a vital role in cholinergic neurotransmission and hydrolyzes acetylcholine at the synapses (Kashyap et al. ; Pamanji et al. ). This inhibitory effect on acetylcholinesterase underlies the MCP-mediated neurotoxicity affecting peripheral and central nervous system. Other deleterious effects of MCP include mitochondria-mediated apoptosis and generation of free radicals leading to oxidative stress, increased lipid peroxidation and altered glutathione disulfide ratio (Kazi and Oommen ; Vivek Kumar et al. ). Mitochondrial ROS generation is almost inseparably associated with cell damage that derails the normal physiology. It is a hallmark of many pathological conditions like neurodegenerative diseases, premature aging, diabetes and cancer (Sena and Chandel ). In line with these facts, it was observed in the present study that there is an enormous generation of oxidative stress in MCP-induced toxicity evident by the significantly increased levels of ROS in MCP-exposed cells. What was remarkable was its alleviation through the conditioned medium of differentiated PC12 cells when it was administered along with MCP in hMSCs and SHSY-5Y. Additionally, normal MMP occupies a central position in the process of energy production and any kind of perturbation in it has been associated with diseases, aging and other pathological conditions (Gerencser et al. ). The MMP abnormalities can be a major cause of apoptosis induction, excessive ROS generation, inhibited ATP synthesis and an upsurge in cytotoxic proteins (Kepp et al. ). The MCP-exposed hMSCs and SHSY-5Y cells also had similar depolarization in their mitochondrial membrane as evident by the increased breakdown of JC-1 aggregates into its monomers. The aggregate form of JC-1 denotes a higher MMP while the monomeric form of JC-1 corresponds to lower MMP (Troiano et al. ). From the data obtained, it can be seen MCP-induced MMP alteration was remarkably restored by the 50% CM of PC12 cells and brought to its near normal values indicating its restorative potential. Apoptotic effects of toxicants like MCP are quite noticeable ranging from morphological to biochemical and are linked with health disorders and diseases (Tait and Green ). The intrinsic pathway of apoptosis involves the action of Bcl2 family of proteins over mitochondrial membrane porosity. Cytochrome c which is otherwise located mitochondrial membrane is released into the cytosol where it binds with apoptotic protease activating factor (Apaf1) to produce apoptosome complex. This apoptosome then activates caspase-9 that further stimulates downstream caspase signaling (Chaabane et al. ). In the present study, the pro-apoptotic markers showed elevated expression in response to MCP which was reduced upon co-exposure with CM of differentiated PC12 cells in hMSCs while the anti-apoptotic BCl 2 had the reverse expression pattern.
Besides exerting its general protective effects over various cells secretome-mediated neuroprotection has also been explored with considerable success in many studies. The neuronal deficits associated with ischemic brain injury (Arien-Zakay et al. ), spinal cord injury (SCI) (Lu et al. ), cisplatin-induced neurotoxicity (Scuteri et al. ), etc. have reportedly been restored on the administration of stem cell secretome. In the present study, we estimated the neuroprotective effects of the secretome of differentiated PC12 cells over the SHSY-5Y cells under neuronal stress induced by MCP. Interestingly, the data obtained suggested a positive restorative effect of CM of PC12 cells over the MCP challenged, dying SHSY-5Y cells. The improvement in cell viability, reduced ROS generation, near normal MMP and enhanced expression of otherwise downregulated neuronal markers in the co-exposed group of CM and MCP as compared to the MCP alone exposed group was a clear indication of its neuroprotective efficacy in case of MCP-induced neurotoxicity that might eventually lead to neurodegeneration.
A balanced mitochondrial biogenesis is an essential prerequisite for the standard functioning of cells and is influenced by environmental stress such as exercise, caloric restriction, low temperature, oxidative stress, cell division and renewal and differentiation (Jornayvaz and Shulman ). Excessive expression of fission protein Fis1 and impaired activity of fusion proteins mitofusins is largely responsible for the onset of numerous neurodegenerative disorders marked by altered homeotic balance (Zorzano and Claret ). Reduced expression of Tfam also leads to abnormal mitochondrial functions and perturbed metabolic homeostasis (Liao et al. ). Consistent with these findings, the data obtained in the present study indicated toward improved mitochondrial fusion and lesser fission in the co-exposed group thus restoring the disturbed mitochondrial biogenesis due to MCP exposure. SIRT-1 is an important regulator of homeostatic conditions (Houtkooper et al. ) and is indirectly regulated by AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) (Hardie et al. ). AMPK can also directly phosphorylate and activate PGC-1α that further upregulates mitochondrial biogenesis (Birkenfeld et al. ). It also increases the levels of NAD + thus promoting the activity of SIRT1 that goes on to deacetylate and activate PGC-1α that eventually increases mitochondrial biogenesis (Cantó and Auwerx ). Thus, the AMPK/SIRT1/PGC1α signaling cascade is one of the major regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis and thus governs the overall energy metabolism and health of cells (Dominy and Puigserver ). In this study too we found a close association between increased biogenesis of mitochondria with the activated AMPK/SIRT1/PGC1α signaling. The CM alone and the co-exposure groups that exhibited increased mitochondrial biogenesis also expressed higher amounts of pAMPK and PGC1α in comparison with the MCP-exposed cells. This pathway further upregulated the expression of pCREB in the cells exposed to CM alone as well as in the co-exposure group of cells unlike the MCP-exposed cells. Since CREB promotes the synthesis of several mitochondrial genes involved in beta-oxidation pathway an upregulation of its expression denoted increased mitochondrial activity in CM and co-exposure group. It was also observed that the CM and co-exposed groups had higher NAD + concentrations as compared to MCP-exposed group of cells validating our observation that the hampered mitochondrial activity in MCP-exposed cells is restored when the cells are co-exposed to CM.
Under appropriate regulation, autophagy is implicated in protection against various health disorders (Nixon and Yang ). A plethora of the literature exists to support the protective and pro-survival effects of autophagy as in liver injury due to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) (Chen et al. ), osteoarthritis (OA) (Cheng et al. ), cancer pathogenesis (Qiang et al. ), etc. There are reports of autophagy being induced in case differentiation that exhibits conditions similar to nutrient starvation and hence needs increased bioenergetics, especially in case of stem cells (Fortini et al. ; Phadwal et al. ). Other study centered around Huntington’s disease reported activation of autophagy in affected neurons on the administration of CM of glial cells to R6/1 mice and suggested it as one of the potential therapeutic sources for the same (Perucho et al. ). In the present study, there was an increase in expression of autophagy markers when the MCP-exposed cells were co-exposed to CM of PC12 cells unlike the MCP-exposed group of cells. The CM alone group also highly expressed the autophagy markers signifying. However, upon autophagy inhibition through 3-MA there was a remarkable induction of apoptosis, especially in the MCP-exposed cells that had been pre-exposed to 3-MA, indicating an even more increased apoptosis-mediated cell death in the absence of autophagy.
In summary, going by the results obtained in the present study it couldn’t be ruled out that the neuronal cell secretome could be an effective alternative for repair and regeneration of injured tissues, especially neurons. Endowed with an array of growth factors, cytokines, neurotransmitters, etc., the secretome of PC12 cells boasts of protection against MCP-induced toxicity/neurotoxicity. This gives it an edge above the existing conventional chemical methods to cure various health disorders emanating from MCP exposure or for that matter in any case of environmentally induced toxicity, owing to its natural and lesser distorted properties. Its underlying mechanism of action, which so far remained somewhat elusive, could also be targeted and modulated to favor and enhance its protective efficacy against neurodegeneration. Thus, it would not be incorrect to say that PC12 or neuronal cell secretome could indeed be a promising alternative obtained from natural sources in the future secretome-based applications in tissue regeneration and repair.