Background
Eukaryotic cells are distinguished by their compartmentalized organelles. Each organelle has a specific function, which is identified by associated organelle-specific proteins. Nascent proteins that are translated at the ribosomes may be unstable and functionally inactive, but may undergo structural modification(s) by the Golgi complex (GC) to attain a functionally active conformation. Whether initially stable or not, the conformation of proteins must be protected to remain functional. In addition, the site of protein synthesis (ribosomes), the site of protein modification (GC) and the site of action (final destination of proteins) are not always in continuum. Hence, the proteins, especially secretory proteins, have a high probability of encountering alternating hydrophilic and hydrophobic environments of the cytosol and organelles, respectively. To avoid exposure to changing chemical environments, secretory proteins require a shuttling mechanism. To meet this need, the cell has evolved membrane-bound vesicles that encapsulate proteins for trafficking. However, the vesicles require additional molecular adaptors to switch between compartments and molecular signatures to aid in cross-talk and organelle targeting in cells. For trafficking and targeting of vesicles, three unique molecular tags have evolved, including Rab proteins and vesicle-Soluble NSF Attachment Protein Receptor (v-SNARE), target-SNARE (t-SNARE) (Bonifacino and Glick ; Jahn and Scheller ; Takamori et al. ). SNAREs and their roles are not part of the scope of this review; readers are referred to (Jahn and Scheller ) for this information.
Rab ( ra s genes from ra t b rain)-GTPases (hereafter Rab) are small molecular switches of ~ 200 amino acids. It is switched ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ by guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) and GTP hydrolysis activator protein (GAP) inhibitor, respectively. Rabs constitute the largest family of membrane trafficking proteins. Rab was first identified in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Gallwitz et al. ). It exists in all eukaryotic organisms from yeast to human. Till now, 11 Rab-related proteins (Ypt) have been discovered in yeast, whereas approximately 70 Rabs have been identified in human (Diekmann et al. ; Elias et al. ). This reflects the elaboration of Rabs in correspondence with increasing complexity of cells during evolution. Indeed, the cellular organization in higher order organisms is much more elaborated to meet specialized cellular functions, like vesicle budding and tethering, in the recruitment of molecular motors to organelles, intracellular signaling, and other critical functions. In neurons, these events are crucial for neurotransmitter release, an essential step to achieve simple sensory and motor functions, and also for complex cognitive tasks, including learning and memory, which are executed by neural networks in human brain. Rabs are critical intermediates in these subcellular events. Recent developments in screening and analysis of genes have revealed that many neurodegenerative diseases are associated with dysfunction of Rabs. Mutations of genes coding for Rabs are known to cause inherited neurodegenerative diseases, like Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s and Huntington’s diseases, cone-rod dystrophy, Griscelli syndrome, and Martsolf syndrome. This review will address our recent understanding of the molecular mechanisms in neurodegenerative diseases that are associated with dysfunction of Rabs.
Salient Structural Properties of Rabs
Rabs are evolutionarily conserved globular proteins. Their general structure contains a central core barrel, and its wall is defined by six β-sheets (β1-6) (Ostermeier and Brunger ). The core is ensheathed by five α-helices (α1-5) in parallel configuration (Fig. 1 ). The N- and C-termini are defined by β-1 and α-5, respectively. The α1 has a stretch of sequence, which is highly conserved among all Rabs. This stretch possesses a GTP-binding platform and an element for binding of Mg 2+ , a co-factor required for high-affinity binding and hydrolysis of nucleotides (Vetter and Wittinghofer ). Two specialized regions, called switch I and II, which are located between α1/β2 and β3/β4 loops, have been recognized in Rabs. These switches dictate functional specificity of Rabs, as they make contact with γ-phosphate of GTP. The switches and inter-switch regions are responsible for the large conformational changes during active or inactive states of Rab. Based on the structural variation of the switches in Rabs, they are classified into 8 different families (Pereira-Leal and Seabra ). Fig. 1 Structure of Rab3A-GTPase. Overall structure of Rab3A illustrated by a ribbon drawing. The barrel-shaped core scaffold consists of α1-5 helices (red). The wall of the barrel is filled with β1-6-sheets (green). The functional specificity of Rab is determined by switch regions that make contact with γ-phosphate of GTP. Positions of switch I-, II- and GTP-contacting sites are indicated. The 3D structure of mouse Rab3A was predicted using the I-TASSER server ( http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/I-TASSER/ ; (Yang et al. ; Roy et al. ; Zhang ) and visually portrayed using POLYVIEW ( http://polyview.cchmc.org )
The C-terminus of Rab is highly variable in its amino acid sequences. Hence, it is termed hypervariable domain, which is believed to help for subcellular localization of Rabs (Chavrier et al. ), though that was disputed (Stenmark et al. ). The hypervariable domain of Rab has 3 main configurations, CC , CXC , CAAX , where C, A, and X denote cysteine, aliphatic, and any amino acids, respectively. Cysteine of Rab undergoes posttranslational modification by covalent addition of isoprenoid, a hydrophobic unit that helps proteins to associate with membranes involved in cellular functions (Lane and Beese ; Leung et al. ).
Prenylation of Rab for Membrane Anchoring
Rabs exist in both soluble and membrane-bound pools. Soluble Rabs are capable of switching between being a compartment of either the membranous domains or the cytosol in the cells. The interfacing of hydrophilic soluble Rabs with hydrophobic membranes requires specialized membrane-anchoring chemical entities. This is accomplished by addition of isoprene units to the cysteine residues in the carboxyl terminal of Rab, using a thio-ether-linkage process, termed prenylation (Maltese ). The basic unit of isoprene comprises two or more units of hydrocarbons, with repeated long-chain fatty acids present in the cell membranes. This mechanism helps the Rab to properly insert into the lipid bilayer and thus serves as an anchor on the membrane surface. Prenylation is usually catalyzed by three enzymes, farnesyl transferase, CAAX protease, and geranylgeranyl transferase (Casey and Seabra ). Prenylation is a posttranslational modification of proteins adapted by eukaryotic cells (Maltese ) (Fig. 2 ). Most often, Rabs are anchored onto vesicles that bud off from donor compartments when en route for docking with target compartments, as well as on recycling vesicles. Thus, presence of prenyl moieties on Rab is critical for its cyclical interactions with intracellular membranes during protein trafficking (Goody et al. ). Fig. 2 Rab-GTPase cycle. Rab is activated by the exchange of GTP for GDP, a reaction catalyzed by guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF). Rab undergoes a conformational change upon exchange of GTP/GDP. The ‘active’ Rab-GTPase triggers the action of the effector molecule. The Rab-GTPase-activating protein (GAP) hydrolyzes GTP to GDP bound to Rab that reverts the conformational change of Rab to become ‘inactive’ form. The Rab-GDP is recognized by Rab escort protein (REP). REP escorts Rab-GDP to geranylgeranyl transferase (GGT). GGT geranylates Rab-GDP C-terminal cystein(s). The membrane attachment of geranylated Rab is regulated by Rab-GDP-dissociation inhibitor (GDI). Rab-GDI is membrane targeted by interacting with membrane protein GDI displacement factor (GDF)
Role of Rabs in Membrane Compartment Identity
In eukaryotic cells, organelles and membrane sub-compartments have specific identity. How the specificity is imparted to the compartment is not clear. Rab’s ability to anchor on membrane and the large family of Rabs in cells are suggested to help create compartment identity. Rabs’ variable region was proposed as a general mechanism to create specificity thought it was not always reliable (Ali et al. ). Moreover, Rabs on vesicles function upstream of SNARE (a complex for vesicle docking mechanism) (Pfeffer ; Zerial and McBride ) that indicates a role in compartment identity. The first evidence for Rabs as sub-compartment identifier was provided by Chavrier et al. ( ). They showed that Rab2 was part of the intermediate compartment between endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi apparatus, while Rab5 and Rab7 were part of early endosomes and late endosomes, respectively. However, every Rab is not exclusively restricted to a sub-compartment (Chen et al. ; Urbe et al. ; Goldenring et al. ; Takahashi et al. ), indicating involvement of additional factors for compartment identity.
The recruitment of Rab to specific compartment also requires compartment defining effector molecules. A new level of identity could be configured by effector molecules. GEF is a class of effector molecules associated with Rab. GEF provides a minimal mechanism to target Rab to specific site (Gerondopoulos et al. ; Blumer et al. ). However, GEF was not enough to define the sub-compartment identity. GEF function also requires its cognate partner, guanine nucleotide displacement inhibitor (GDI) (Fig. 2 ). Rab activation/inactivation requires GEF-GDI binary unit for proper targeting (Pylypenko et al. ). The activated Rab recruits site-specific effector molecules (e.g., p115 tether on COPII) target wise. Thus, Rab executes twofold proofing reading for targeting, one by transient sampling of membrane site, then meeting its cognate GEF-GDI for activation, and recruitment of effector molecules for membrane targeting. The effector molecules initiate the formation of transport vesicles and link them to the motor proteins. Furthermore, the effectors help recognition of the target docking proteins for delivering the cargo.
Even if Rab defines compartment identity, how a compartment evolves to another is not clear. The analysis of transport from early endosome to late endosome involving Rab5 and Rab7 revealed two compelling models. In a ‘maturing’ model, exchange of Rab5 by Rab7 was noted (Rink et al. ). In an alternate model, a new compartment with Rab7 was seen bud off from a compartment with Rab5 (Vonderheit and Helenius ; Mesaki et al. ). The budding was suggested as a sort of fission, where Rab5 and Rab7 were linking the compartments with motor proteins, which loaded the membrane compartments on to cytoskeleton. The cytoskeleton-dependent severing of a membrane compartment can generate a new compartment only with a novel Rab. These models still could not discern whether cargos are trafficking between stable compartments by shuttling the content or each compartment is retaining the cargo and maturating into a new compartment by merely exchanging the existing Rab for a new one, a process known as the Rab cascade. Besides Rabs, GTPases of Arf/Arl family and specific phosphoinositide lipids also impart identity to membrane compartments (Munro ; Di Paolo and De Camilli ), suggesting that membrane identity might not be defined by one class of molecule but a combination of various class of molecules (Barr ).
Rab as Molecular Switch
Relaying of vesicles along exocytic and endocytic routes requires rapid budding and fusion of membranes. This is an energy-dependent action, facilitated by Rab, which is the key effector that functions as a molecular switch by alternating between two different stable conformations in response to signaling cues (Fig. 2 ). GTP bound Rab is ‘active’ (ON) form, whereas hydrolysis of GTP generates Rab-GDP, which is ‘inactive’ (OFF) form. In essence, switching to ‘ON’ or ‘OFF’ state is triggered by addition or deletion of a phosphate group (PO 4 −2 ) to the guanine nucleotide (GTP/GDP) bound to Rab by its inherent GTPase activity.
Rabs accomplish their functions by cycling between GTP- and GDP-bound states (Fig. 2 ) and also by transiting from cytosol to membranous compartments. The nucleotide-bound state of Rab influences its localization and activity. The function of Rab is regulated by GEF and Rab-interacting protein GDP-dissociation inhibitor (Rab-GDI). GEF stimulates exchange of GDP for GTP, whereas Rab-GDI prevents the exchange of GDP from GTP to maintain Rab in its inactive state. A third regulatory protein, GTPase-activating protein (GAP) stimulates the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP to make Rab inactive and deactivates. Thus, GAP avoids over activation of Rab and allows next Rab in the cascade to be activated. (Mizuno-Yamasaki et al. ). In Rab molecular switching model, a specific Rab is integrated into the donor membrane, where GDP is replaced by GTP. The GTP form is incorporated in transport vesicles that bud off from the donor membrane. After vesicle docking and fusion with the target membrane, GAP stimulates the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP. It is further recycled by phosphorylation to obtain GTP and the cycle repeats. The regulation of Rab activation and inactivation is even linked to cellular signaling status (Lanzetti et al. ). For this, Rabs have distinct microdomains to inter-link with other signaling molecules that serve as the effector proteins in the cells.
In cells, Rabs occupy distinct subcellular domains, along exocytic or endocytic pathway. At these sites, Rab recruits a group of effector molecules on the membranes for use in membrane docking and fusion. For this, the Rabs have unique microdomains to interact with the effectors. The identification of effector proteins that bind two different Rab reveals the potential of such effectors to link two sequentially acting Rab microdomains to one another (de Renzis et al. ).
Cellular Distribution of Rabs: Exocytic and Endocytic Pathways
In eukaryotic cells, metabolites are shuttled from sites of production to their active site; subsequently, they are routed for recycling or elimination. The processes have well-defined trafficking routes, including exocytic and endocytic pathways, with the latter comprised of early, late, and recycling components (Zerial and McBride ). Each of the pathways is usually embedded with non-overlapping Rabs for discrete functioning and avoiding inadvertent mix ups (Fig. 3 ). For example, Rab1 and Rab2 are the parts of exocytic pathway, leading from ER to the GC (Plutner et al. ; Tisdale et al. ). Trafficking inside the GC is mainly mediated by Rab6 (Martinez et al. ). From trans-Golgi network (TGN) to cell surface trafficking (major part of exocytic pathway) is mediated by Rab8 (Huber et al. ), which is a key component of the exocytic pathway (Wang et al. ). In endocytic pathways, Rab4 and Rab7 are the components of early and late endosomes, respectively (McCaffrey et al. ). However, the entire network of Rabs is not always discrete, and the mechanistic details of its functioning have not been elucidated. For example, Rab11 is mainly involved in recycling of endosomes (Ullrich et al. ), but it is also a part of the exocytic pathway (Chen et al. ; Urbe et al. ; Goldenring et al. ; Takahashi et al. ) and exocytosis of recycling endosomes (Takahashi et al. ). Most importantly, how Rab11 avoids potential hazard of mix-up and mis-routing of metabolites, while being involved in multiple routes is still unknown. We could speculate that Rab11 might have hidden molecular signature to discriminate routes for various cargo. Fig. 3 Intracellular distributions of Rabs along the major exocytic and endocytic pathways. Secretory pathway in an epithelial cell highlighting the major Rabs involved in vesicle transport. Exocytic secretory pathways : RAB1 facilitates budding of vesicles at the ER exit site and the translocation of vesicles to pre-Golgi intermediate compartment. The transit of vesicles from ER to pre-Golgi might be regulated by RAB2-mediated reverse flow. RAB6 is mainly known for intra-Golgi trafficking of vesicles. RAB8 relays vesicle trafficking in secretory route leading from trans-Golgi network (TGN) to plasma membrane, including trafficking of GLUT4 and ciliogenesis. RAB3, RAB26, and RAB27 are involved in exocytosis. RAB27 might also be involved in membrane trafficking in cilia. Rab8, Rab11, Rab17, Rab23, Rab28, and Rab29 are implicated in trafficking to cilia. Endocytic recycling pathways : RAB5 is a resident of early endosomes, phagosomes, and plasma membranes and mediate endocytosis involving clathrin-coated vesicles (CCV). RAB11 participates participating in the slow endosome recycling. RAB4 facilitates fast recycling of endosomes from early endosome populations. RAB7 mediates maturation of late endosome (LE) and then ushers LE to lysosome for degradation. RAB9 links late endosome to TGN. (The figure is adapted from Stenmark, 2009, Nature Review Molecular Cell Biology )
Besides their variation in intracellular distribution, Rabs also display variation in distributions among the various cell types. For example, Rab3A is highly expressed in brain, whereas Rab27A is less expressed in brain (Gurkan et al. ). In neurons, owing to the highly polarized architecture with axons and dendrites, mechanisms for trafficking of domain-specific metabolites are required. This is served primarily by Rab-mediated mechanisms. The best example of this is the functional division displayed by Rab8, which is utilized for trafficking in dendrites, but not in axons (Huber et al. ). Indeed, the long axons uniquely require special mechanisms for membrane supply to meet their extended growth. Furthermore, neurons form synaptic junctions with neurons (synapse) or muscle cells (neuromuscular junction) or glands (neuroendocrine/exocrine) and the presynaptic neurons are enriched with numerous synaptic vesicles that are highly dynamic for release and recycling of neurotransmitters. The presynaptic vesicles (at axon terminal) normally release neurotransmitters by docking and fusing with synaptic membrane. The release of neurotransmitters from vesicles (exocytosis) helps to convert the chemical signals to the electrical signals from presynaptic neurons to the postsynaptic neurons. Therefore, exocytosis is an inevitable event during neurotransmission. In the brain, neurotransmission events are innumerable because of the vast neural ensemble and interconnections. Therefore, the brain requires specialized Rabs to facilitate the neurotransmission. In brain tissue, the most abundant class of Rab is Rab3, which has three isoforms (Rab3A-C). Rab3A is associated with docking and fusion of synaptic vesicles, loaded with neurotransmitters (Mizoguchi et al. ; Motoike et al. ), whereas Rab3B and Rab3C are highly expressed in neurons and localized in the synaptic vesicles (Touchot et al. ; Matsui et al. ). Thus, Rabs display variations in distribution within the intracellular domains. In contrast, isoform Rab3D is expressed in adipocytes (Baldini et al. ), which provides another example of cell type variation of an isoform. The system level analysis of Rab expression has provided insights into Rab isoforms that account for the cell-specific sub-specializations. However, evolutionarily divergent Rabs are capable of performing seemingly similar functions in divergent cell types (Gurkan et al. ).
Functions of Rabs
Rabs are present in almost all organelles, such as in ER, GC, endosomes, lysosome, nucleus, mitochondria, centrioles and in the plasma membrane (including plasma membrane modifications like cell junctions and focal adhesions) (Martinez and Goud ). Rabs usher trafficking of vesicles in exocytic and endocytic pathways. To relay vesicles, Rabs act as molecular tags and are involved in virtually all steps of vesicular trafficking, such as vesicle budding, translocation from ER to the GC and TGN. Further, vesicle transport along microtubule cytoskeleton and vesicle fusion are aided by Rabs, which function as adaptors and tethers (Stenmark ); (Hutagalung and Novick ). Rabs also help render an identity to the compartment for organizing the events of membrane trafficking functionally distinct (Barr ; Pfeffer ). For example, Rab32 is an anchoring protein that helps targeting of protein kinaseA to the mitochondria and regulates onset of apoptosis, providing membrane properties unique to mitochondria-associated membranes (MAM) (Bui et al. ). Rab2 is essential for maturation of pre-GC intermediates (Tisdale et al. ). Rab5 facilitates translocation of Adaptor Protein Phosphotyrosine interacting with PH domain and Leucine zipper (APPL) protein to the nucleus, where it triggers epigenetic changes, such as chromatin remodeling and gene expression (Miaczynska et al. ). They also play a key role in cell–cell or cell–matrix adhesions.
Rabs are critical for both local and long-range trafficking of vesicles in cells. The local vesicle trafficking is mediated by tethering of vesicles to the actin filaments. The actin filaments are roped by myosin motors. For example, Rab27A is utilized as a tag to connect with myosin-V motor for the delivery of melanosomes (Wu et al. ). For long-range trafficking, vesicles are tethered to microtubules by molecular motors, like kinesin and dynactin. Similarly, Rab6, a Golgi-associated Rab, interacts with kinesin for cargo delivery (Echard et al. ) and is also involved in insulin targeting of caveolin-2 to the nuclear membrane via microtubule networks (Jeong et al. ). Rab7 has an indirect role in dynein-mediated trafficking of vesicles (Jordens et al. ). Inside the photoreceptors, the modified cilia, Rabs utilize similar molecular motors for intraflagellar transport (IFT). For example, Rab8 is implicated in IFT in cilia and photoreceptors (Yoshimura et al. ; Nachury et al. ), but its role is not unequivocally established. Besides being a tag for the vesicles carrying cargo, few Rabs directly interact with such cargo, as signaling receptors, integrins and ion channels. Thus, they can directly regulate the function of cargo, instead of merely delivering them to the site of function (Bucci and Chiariello ; Aloisi and Bucci ).
The delivery of cargo requires fusion of vesicles to the target organelles and is mediated by cognate SNARE complexes, both on vesicles and on the target membrane. This process is tightly regulated by the Rab/Ypt family of proteins (Novick and Zerial ). Rab interactions with effectors regulate vesicle targeting and membrane fusion in three ways. First, Rab helps in the transportation of vesicles from their site of origin to the acceptor compartments through cytoskeleton elements and motor proteins. Second, Rab effectors regulate membrane trafficking at the vesicle docking step. For example, Rabphilin-3A interacts with Rab3A and Rab3B for neurotransmitter release in hippocampal neurons (Deak et al. ; Fukuda ). Rabaptin-5 and EEA1 interact with Rab5A for docking of vesicles within the membrane of early or late endosomes. Similarly, Rim interacts with Rab3 on synaptic vesicle during exocytosis of neurotransmitters (Coppola et al. ). The third and final step in membrane fusion of vesicles is SNAREs-driven docking on membrane.
Many Rabs are required to accomplish the neuronal function. Rab2 regulates vesicle trafficking and maturation in neurons and several other cells. It is also involved in dense core vesicle formation and their sorting (Sumakovic et al. ). Rab5, along with Rab7, helps in early to late endosome maturation events, dense core vesicle release in neurons, and trafficking in sensory cilia. Rab8 is a key player in intracellular trafficking and is involved in ciliogenesis and for the generation of outer segments of photoreceptors (Moritz et al. ). In photoreceptors, Rab8 isoforms are essential for apical, but not for basolateral, trafficking (Sato et al. ). In contrast, it is required for basolateral trafficking in epithelial cells (Ang et al. ), suggesting a context-based functional distinction for Rabs. Rab8 is also required for targeting of neurotransmitter receptors in postsynaptic terminals (Gerges et al. ).
Rab10 is involved in ciliogenesis (Babbey et al. ). It is necessary for axonal membrane trafficking, axonal elongation, ER-dynamics, and fusion of glucose transporters, such as Glut4 on the plasma membrane. Rab28 is localized to the basal body and rootlet of cilia in the photoreceptors and is critical for visual function (Roosing et al. ). It is also present in retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), a critical component for photoreceptor survival.
Rabs in Neurons
Neurons are highly polarized cells with distinct input channels via dendrites and output via axon. Some axons are really long, and their development requires huge amount of membrane trafficking. Membrane vesicles with Rabs deliver membrane for axonal outgrowth. Rabs attach the vesicles to molecular motors and convey on microtubules tracks to axon terminals (Bucci et al. ). The membranes required for expanding axons are derived from endocytic and exocytic pathways. Rab10 enhances trafficking of membrane vesicles delivered for expansion of axon (Wang et al. ). GRAB-mediated Rab8–Rab11 cascade is a facet of axonal outgrowth (Furusawa et al. ). Rab11A, involved trafficking of recycling endosome, is required for the axonal extension (Takano et al. ). Rab13 is implicated in neuronal outgrowth that demands enormous amount of membrane delivery (Sakane et al. ), something which is highly required in extension of long axons. Neurotrophic receptors (TrkA, TrkB, TrkC) are localized at the axon terminals. These receptors couple the BDNF signaling for neuronal survival, differentiation and axon formation (Fig. 4 ). TrkB receptors were sorted to the axon terminals by vesicles that required a complex containing Rab27 (Arimura et al. ). This complex links TrkB to kinesin-1 for anterograde transport of vesicles to the axon terminals. Rab33 was selectively seen at post-Golgi apparatus and synaptophysin marked vesicles, which were transported to growth cone during axon outgrowth (Nakazawa et al. ). Rab35 was shown to favor axonal extension in hippocampal neurons. Rab35 is degraded by p53-related protein kinase (PPRK). This reaction was prevented by microtubule-associated protein 1B (MAP1B) during axonal extension to sustain Rab35 (Villarroel-Campos et al. ). Fig. 4 Molecules essential for neurites branching and neural transmission are transported by RAB tagged vesicles in neurons. Neurotropic receptors, upon binding to neurotropins trigger signaling for neurite outgrowth and dendritic branching. The vesicles carrying neurotropin receptors, tagged with RAB11, are transported by kinesin via microtubules to axon terminals. RAB33 and RAB35 are also involved in targeting neurotrophic receptors to the axonal terminals. At the terminals, receptors are activated by binding to the ligand and signaling is triggered. The signaling endosomes are transported in retrograde with the help of RAB conversion (i.e., RAB5 replaced by RAB7). These endosomes are trafficked in contact with the microtubules of the axon toward the cell body, where Rab7 containing late endosome (LE) is abundant. RAB5 and RAB22 are tagged to early endosomes (EE). They trigger neurite outgrowth. RAB conversion takes over at the junction of EE and LE. The retrograde trafficking of endosomes on microtubules is mediated by dynein–dynactin motors toward the neuronal body, which is dense with LE. LE sends signals to the nucleus for gene expression. Newly synthesized neurotropin receptors are translocated to the membrane of dendrites, where ligand binding to receptors initiates new branching. Free receptors are recycled by recycling endosome (RE). RAB11 marked RE is trafficked by kinesin motors on microtubules to the axon terminal. RAB3 is highly present in presynaptic area for exocytosis of neurotransmitter. Rab8 and Rab11 are mediating the translocation of glutamate receptor to dendrites. (The figure is adapted from Bucci et al., 2014, Membranes )
Synaptic transmission at interneuronal, neuromuscular and neuro-glandular synaptic junctions is mediated by vesicles (Fig. 4 ). An intracellular rise in Ca 2+ concentration in presynaptic neurons triggers fusion of vesicles with plasma membrane to release neurotransmitters.
Many neuron-specific Rabs are actively involved in neuronal signaling cascade (Fig. 4 ). Among them, Rab3 subfamily members are prominent in neurons that mediate docking, fusion, and regulated secretion of neurotransmitter release (Fig. 5 ) (Star et al. ). It also helps in anterograde axonal transport of vesicles (Szodorai et al. ). Rab11 regulates recycling of endosomes in neurons (Kawauchi et al. ), which is relevant for recycling of receptors in neurons (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 5 Rabs in vesicle fusion (exocytosis) and recycling (endocytosis) at synaptic junction. RAB3 and RAB27 play key roles in translocation of synaptic vesicles (SV) to the plasma membrane during exocytosis. They are key players in neurotransmitter release. SV fusion is mediated by vesicle (v)-SNARE and target (t)-SNARE with the help of RAB and adaptor/tether molecules. RAB5 participates in endocytosis of clathrin-coated vesicles (CCV) for recycling of their contents in lysosome (L). A fraction of SVs is directly recycled at the active zone components. Some SVs are believed to be quickly recycled in a ‘kiss-run’ mode at the fast-acting synapses. RAB26 relays a subset of SV to the autophagosomes and the late endosomes (LE) for degradation. RAB35 is also participating in recycling of SV. The spent receptors at the postsynaptic membrane are endocytosed by CCV and are targeted to lysosome for degradation. RAB8 (and often RAB7) is implicated in the recycling of receptors at the postsynaptic membrane. On the other hand, RAB8, RAB11 and RAB17 are involved in targeting of neurotransmitter receptors to the postsynaptic membranes by exocytic pathway
Rabs in Neurite Outgrowth
The process of neurite outgrowth is essential for establishing synaptic connections. Neurite outgrowth involves membrane trafficking with the help of Rabs and SNAREs. Rab13 is mainly present in cortical cytoskeleton and also co-localizes with growth- and regeneration-associated proteins. Hence, Rab13 is considered to play a role in both the growth and regeneration of neurites (Di Giovanni et al. ). Similarly, Rab11 is a part of anterograde exocytosis and endosome recycling of the membrane, which promotes neurite outgrowth by interacting with protrudin, a vital synaptic protein (Shirane and Nakayama ). In rod photoreceptors, the outer segment extension requires membrane trafficking, which is believed to be supplied by rhodopsin-carrying vesicles which are tagged with Rab6 and Rab8. It has been reported that Rab6 is associated with post-Golgi membranes, and Rab8 mediates the morphogenesis of the outer segment, or membranous disk, of rods (Deretic and Papermaster ; Deretic et al. ) (Shetty et al. ). Rab11 is also required for the development of outer segment of rod cell membranes (Reish et al. ).
Rabs in Exocytosis and Recycling of Synaptic Vesicles
The salient feature of neurons is the ability to generate action potentials, which trigger exocytosis of synaptic vesicles that release the neurotransmitters for the activation of the postsynaptic neuron (Fig. 5 ). The initial step of exocytosis requires Rabs, but the final step of vesicle fusion is mediated by pairing of v-SNAREs (v-tag) on vesicles and t-SNAREs (t-tag) on the target membrane. SNARE - ing docks the vesicle. The cytoplasmic domains of vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP), a v-tag, and syntaxin, a t-tag on opposing membranes coalesce into an elongated alpha helical bundle, resulting in membrane fusion (Poirier et al. ; Sutton et al. ). The interchange between the two membranes results in fusion of vesicle with the membrane, which is catalyzed by an energy-dependent step mediated by Rab. Thus, Rab serves as master regulator for vesicle fusion and the effector of membrane trafficking. However, if a neuron is continuously active, the neurotransmitter reserves will be emptied and neuron will not be able to fire and become fatigued. To avoid this, the content of synaptic vesicles (SVs) must be recycled. The recycling (endocytosis) of cargo requires the reverse process of exocytosis. First, the membrane bound with spent cargo invaginates to engulf cargo. This invagination is then primed with adaptor proteins for pinching off vesicles. Rab5 has been implicated in SV endosomal recycling (Fig. 5 ) (Wucherpfennig et al. ). Similarly, Rab35 has recently been implicated in SVs recycling at the presynaptic endosomal compartments (Binotti et al. ). Instead of recycling, some of the expired proteins in SVs are eliminated through autophagy. For example, Rab7, Rab8, Rab26, and Rab33 usher the unwanted proteins to be degraded via autophagy (Fig. 5 ) (Szatmari and Sass ; Binotti et al. ).
Rabs in Homeostasis of Receptors
Neural transmission between neurons is established by binding of ligands (like neurotransmitter) to their receptors. Therefore, neuronal receptors are an essential player in nerve conduction. They are key components for accomplishing neuronal excitability, synaptic transmission and synaptic plasticity. Rabs play an important role in modulating the synaptic plasticity, and they are present both at axon terminals and dendrites of the neurons. All neurotransmitters act via specific receptors. For example, glutamate binds to specific receptors, glutamate receptor. In neurons, the receptors in synaptic vesicles are exocytosed for recruitment into the membrane and are endocytosed for recycling (Fig. 5 ). Thus, vesicle-trafficking machinery including Rabs is essential for neural functions.
Cognitive function like memory is largely dependent on glutamate receptors like the AMPA, Kainate, and/or N -acetyl d -aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Their recruitment at the neuronal membrane helps to mediate synaptic plasticity and memory formation by regulating, long-term potentiation (LTP), which is the molecular correlate of learning and memory. During LTP, new receptors are inserted (exocytosis) into the synaptic membrane that increases synaptic strength. Thus, LTP reinforces memory. On the other hand, during long-term depression (LTD), receptors are removed (endocytosis) from the neuronal membrane, which cause a reduction in the synaptic strength. Rab5 recycles AMPA receptors from synaptic membrane during LTD in hippocampal neurons, a process triggered by NMDAR-mediated activation of Rab5 (Brown et al. ). During LTP, AMPA receptors are recruited to the postsynaptic membranes by recycling endosomes. The importance of the Rab11 has been demonstrated by showing that mutated Rab11 impairs LTP in hippocampal slice cultures (Park et al. ). In addition, Rab8 and Rab11 are responsible for translocation of AMPA receptor to dendritic spines and insertion of these receptors into the synaptic membrane during LTP (Brown et al. ) (Gerges et al. ). The LTP, which is independent of NMDA in hippocampal mossy fiber synapses, requires Rab3A-mediated exocytosis of glutamate (Castillo et al. ). Rab17 is known to regulate surface expression of Kainate receptor, GluK2, to the dendritic membrane (Mori et al. ). These are a few examples of how Rabs are involved in trafficking of receptors associated with cognitive functions, but a detailed comprehensive overview of this is beyond scope of the article.
Rabs in Primary Cilia
Cilia are membranous extensions on the cells which are supported by microtubule scaffolds. They are seen on almost all cell types in human body. The building and functioning of cilium requires numerous proteins, and at least some of them are targeted to the cilium in vesicles, or in protein complexes, which are regulated by specific Rabs. For example, Rab8A, Rab8B, Rab10, Rab11 Rab23, and Rab29 have been implicated in ciliogenesis (Sato et al. ; Lim et al. ) (Fig. 3 ). Rab8 is required for cilia extension in hTERT-RPE cells; however, this phenotype is not seen in Rab8a/Rab8b double KO mouse model, which developed photoreceptor outer segment, a process that depends on ciliogenesis (Sato et al. ). This suggested that Rabs might have context dependent function. Rab11 is required for ciliogenesis and is interacting with Rab8 via Rabin8 (Knodler et al. ). Rab23 plays a role in targeting of Kif17 (a kinesin motor) to cilia (Lim and Tang ). Rab29 has been demonstrated to control the length of cilia in multiple cell lines (Onnis et al. ). Since the contribution of Rabs is very significant to maintain the function of cilia, dysfunction of Rabs can lead to the impairment of cilia functions, causing multi-system disorders, termed as ciliopathies. Recent research has led to the identification of a first-of-its-kind class of human disease caused by a defective Rab in cilia (e.g., Rab28 (Roosing et al. ; Lee et al. ). However, the precise role of most of above Rabs in cilia is yet to be determined.
Neurodegenerative Diseases Associated with Rab Dysfunction
In cells, Rabs are inevitable for endocytic and exocytic pathways. Therefore, mutations in Rabs can lead to dysfunction of cellular dynamics, including in neurons. As a consequence of their defects, eventually several systemic defects may develop, which can be manifested through many pathological symptoms in humans, as discussed below.
Choroideremia
Choroideremia is an X-linked genetic disorder affecting the retina. It is characterized by chorioretinal degeneration, progressive night blindness, loss of peripheral vision, which, eventually, culminates in complete blindness. A mutation in CHM gene is the known molecular cause for this disease (van den Hurk et al. ). CHM encodes the Rab escort protein-1 (REP1), which is a Rab-associated protein, predominantly observed in the cytosol of rod photoreceptor cells, but not in cones (Syed et al. ). It helps in vesicle transportation, so mutations in CHM genes result in trafficking defects that affects photo-transduction in rod photoreceptor cells. REP1 prenylates RAB-27A, which is essential for photoreceptor function (Larijani et al. ). An animal model of Chm mutation displays progressive degeneration of the photoreceptors and RPE, due to the prenylation defects of Rabs (Tolmachova et al. ).
Griscelli Syndrome (GS)
Griscelli syndrome is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder characterized by silvery hair and hemophagocytic syndrome, due to the uncontrolled T-cells and macrophage activation (Griscelli and Prunieras ; Klein et al. ). The majority of GS cases are due to mutation in RAB27A gene (Menasche et al. ). The patients have neurological complications, possibly due to the leukocytes infiltrating into the brain during episodes of syndrome. Reduced T cell cytotoxicity, due to defective cytolytic granules exocytosis (Menasche et al. ), is observed in both in human patients and mouse models of GS ( ashen ( Rab27aash ) (Wilson et al. ).
Warburg Microsyndrome and Martsolf Syndrome (MS)
Warburg microsyndrome (WMS) is characterized by microcephaly, intellectual or developmental disability, microcornea, congenital cataract, optic atrophy and hypogenitalia. MS has clinically overlapping features with WMS, but is milder than MWS. Mutations in the catalytic and non-catalytic domains of Rab3-GAP2 result in WMS (Aloisi and Bucci ; Aligianis et al. ). Rab3-GAP inactivates Rab3, which is involved in regulating exocytosis of neurotransmitters (Aligianis et al. ). Mutations in Rab3-GAP1, Rab3-GAP2, and Rab-18 are correlated with WMS and MS (Handley et al. ). Therefore, these are promising target genes for further research for understanding the WMS mechanism.
Charcot–Marie–Tooth-Type 2B (CMTB)
Charcot–Marie–Tooth-type 2B (CMTB) neuropathy primarily affects the sensory and motor neurons and is characterized by the loss of muscle tissue and touch sensation. One of the causes of CMTB is a mutation in Rab7A (Meggouh et al. ), which mediates late endocytic trafficking and long axonal vesicles transportation. Experiments in zebrafish demonstrated that mutant Rab7A compromised axonal extension in sensory neurons (Ponomareva et al. ). Mimicking the human Rab7A mutation in a rodent model may further extend our understanding of the role of Rab7A in CTMB disease.
Cone-Rod Dystrophy (CRD)
Cone-rod dystrophy (CRD) is a rare eye disorders that affects the rods and cones in the retina. It is characterized by the primary loss of cone photoreceptors and subsequent loss of rod photoreceptors. Rab28 is one of the genes associated with CRD (Roosing et al. ; Lee et al. ). In photoreceptors, Rab28 is thought to play a role in opsin transportation and is localized in connecting cilia. However, the function of RAB28 is not yet clear. Experiments in C. elegans suggested that Rab28 may be associated with the BBSome and IFT machineries utilized in cilia (Jensen et al. ). The development of a vertebrate model of CRD should help researchers elucidate the molecular mechanisms of this disease.
Carpenter Syndrome
Carpenter syndrome (CR) is characterized by acrocephaly, mental retardation, hearing loss, obesity, polydactyly, and many other developmental defects (Temtamy ; Carpenter ). It is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by the mutation of Rab23 (Jenkins et al. ). Rab23 is involved in vesicle transport and is a negative regulator of hedgehog (Hh) signaling. The phenotype of the affected individual is similar to that of those with defective Hh signaling pathways. Rab23 has a role in the development and maintenance of primary cilia (Lim and Tang ). Primary cilium is a hub for Hh signaling components and Rab23 is apparently regulating the subcellular localization of Hh pathway components (Eggenschwiler et al. ). Although a disease model for Rab23 has been developed, it is lethal in embryonic stage, so a new strategy for exploring the molecular roles of Rab in CR is needed (Tobin and Beales ).
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD)
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an age-related, progressive neurodegenerative disorder. The hallmark pathologies of AD are the accumulation of misfolded amyloid beta proteins (Aβ) and phosphorylated tau in extracellular and intracellular spaces, respectively (Selkoe ). The major pathological alteration observed in AD was the synaptic failure, which might be due to abnormalities of neurotransmitter vesicles formation, impairment of protein clearance pathways (proteasome system, molecular chaperones and autophagy lysosomal pathway), as well as dysfunction of endocytosis (Ghavami et al. ; Maiti ). Since Rabs are integral to vesicle trafficking, endocytosis, and autophagy, they are implicated in Aβ deposition and neurodegeneration in AD (Perez et al. ; Nixon ; Wu and Yao ; Ridge ; Tam et al. ). Several Rabs are associated with Aβ production and AD pathology and are discussed below.
Rab3A is involved in anterograde transport of amyloid precursor proteins (APP) and regulates Aβ production (Szodorai et al. ; Coleman et al. ). In addition, Rab3A effector, Rabphilin-3A (RBP3A), was also significantly diminished in AD postmortem brains, which was correlated with an increase in accumulation of Aβ42, cholinergic deafferentation, and impairment of cognitive function (Tan et al. ). In contrast, knockdown of all isoforms of Rab3 decreased both Aβ42 and soluble APP levels and improved cognitive function in an animal model of AD (Udayar et al. ). Similarly, Rab4 is also associated with APP processing. Interestingly, exogenous Aβ42 has been localized within the Rab4 compartments in the early stages of endosome in experimental animal models of Down syndrome/AD (Arriagada et al. ; Arriagada et al. ). Interestingly, higher Aβ production has also been observed in Rab5-endocytic vesicles in the early endosome and lysosomes in the AD brain, whereas silencing of only Rab5C isoform significantly increased APP, soluble APP, and Aβ42 levels (Li and Stahl ).
Rab6A transports the APP from the GC to the plasma membrane (Siniossoglou and Pelham ; Mallard et al. ), whereas Rab6B is involved in transport of Aβ from the membrane to the Golgi complex and ER (Opdam et al. ; Wanschers et al. ). Presenilin-1 (PSEN1), the major Aβ-catalyzing enzyme, also regulates Rab6-mediated trafficking of APP to the plasma membrane (Scheper et al. ). Rab7 also plays a pivotal role in Aβ degradation by routing it through recycling and autophagy pathways (Armstrong et al. ).
Rab10 is involved in processing of APP, whereas Rab11 regulates Aβ levels in the AD brain (Udayar et al. ). Although the role of Rabs in AD can be inferred from analyses of the patient samples, we lack a genetic case of AD due to mutations in Rab.
Lewy Body Diseases (LBD)
Lewy body diseases (LBD) are characterized by progressive neurodegeneration and dementia (Dalfo et al. ) and are closely associated with Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases. The precise mechanism and etiology of LBD is not clear yet, but it is suspected that several mutations and physiological abnormalities affecting synaptic Rabs could contribute to a spectrum of neurodegenerative disorders. For example, α-synuclein (α-Syn) is a protein that is abundantly present in human brain, especially in presynaptic terminals and its misfolding and accumulation in intracellular spaces of neurons are known to result in LBD. α-Syn interacts with Rab3A and Rabphilin for synaptic vesicle docking and fusion. Therefore, mutations in these proteins can lead to the development of diffuse LBD (Dalfo et al. ). Defects in any of the above proteins can prevent the exocytosis and neurotransmitter release, as well as increase the aggregation of α-Syn, which can result in LBD. Developing animal models for such a complex, multi-genic disorder is quite a challenging task. However, the functional network of proteins coded by these genes can be systematically analyzed in genetic disease models of LBD.
Parkinson’s Disease (PD)
Parkinson disease (PD) is an age-related complex, idiopathic neurological disorder, characterized by tremor, bradykinesia and muscle rigidity, impairment of gait and posture, and changes of speech, which affects millions of people globally (Spillantini et al. ; Kontopoulos et al. ; Lee et al. ). In addition, many PD patients also exhibit fronto-striatal-mediated executive dysfunction, including deficits in attention, speed of mental processing, impulsivity, verbal disturbances, and impairment of working memory, with the degree of severity depending on the age of onset and stage of the disease (Fortin et al. ). Dopaminergic neuronal loss in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc), and depletion of dopamine (DA) levels in striatum represent the hallmark pathologies of PD (Kubo et al. ). The major pathology observed in degenerated dopaminergic neurons in PD is the Lewy bodies, which mainly consist of a misfolded α-synuclein (α-syn) (Spillantini et al. ; Spillantini and Goedert ).
Rab3A, Rab5, and Rab8 are known to interact with α-syn (Dalfo et al. ). Rab1, Rab3A, and Rab8A have neuroprotective effects or α-syn-induced neurotoxicity in dopaminergic neurons in animal models of PD. Rabs also interact with several PD-related genes, such as Leucine - rich repeat kinase 2 ( LRRK2 or PARK8 ), PINK1 or Parkin, transmembrane protein 230 ( TMEM230 ), which control the function of α-syn, and thus indirectly control the development of PD (Hutagalung and Novick ). RAB39B mutations have been reported to cause X-linked, early-onset PD with a clinical pathology similar to α-syn-induced neurotoxicity (Wilson et al. ).
Huntington’s Disease (HD)
HD is a progressive, autosomal dominant inherited neurodegenerative disease, which is characterized by psychiatric and cognitive symptoms, progressive motor impairment, weight loss, and ultimately death. It is caused by an expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) stretch, due to mutation of Huntingtin ( HTT ) gene. When the nucleotide triplet CAG (glutamine code) repeats length is beyond 40 in the gene-encoding HTT, it ensues the manifestation of HD symptoms, such as chorea or movement disorder (Walker ). Accumulation of polyQ results in a broad array of cellular dysfunctions, including transcriptional dysregulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, impaired cell signaling, as well as impaired synaptic transport and activity in medium spiny neurons (MSN) in the striatum (Imarisio et al. ). Rab5, Rab8, and Rab11 have been implicated in pathogenesis of HD. One of the distinct cellular abnormalities observed in HD is the reduction of neurotrophic factors and their receptors, such as BDNF and TrkB in the MSN of striatum, and Rab5 is involved in retrograde transport of these activated neurotrophin/receptor complexes. Experimental data suggest that the overexpression of Rab5 significantly decreases mHTT-induced neurotoxicity and the levels of mHTT in MSN of HD, whereas its down-regulation has opposite effects (Ravikumar et al. ). In contrast, Rab8 interacts with HTT and regulates its trafficking from GC to the cell membrane, but mutated HTT cannot interact with Rab8, causing altered post-Golgi trafficking to lysosome compartments, which cause increased aggregation of defective HTT (Sahlender et al. ). Similar disease pathology was also observed due to inability of HTT to interact with Rab11 (Li et al. ; Li et al. ). In addition, Rab11 dysfunction causes reduced glutathione (GSH) levels in HD, because it impairs delivery of glutamate/cysteine transporter EAAC1 to the plasma membrane. Rab11 affects recycling of endosomes used for glucose transporters, therefore, leading to the induction of oxidative stress, disruption of glucose uptake and, eventually, neuronal death in HD (Li and DiFiglia ).
Epilepsy
Epilepsy is a neurological disorder caused by hyper excitation and/or lack of inhibition of neurons in the brain (Stafstrom and Carmant ). Impaired brain development, mutations in genes encoding ion channels or its accessory proteins, and disrupted mechanisms of protein trafficking can lead to epilepsy. Since Rabs are involved in receptor recycling and neurite outgrowth, impairments in these processes can cause epilepsy. Mutation in RAB39B was reported to cause epilepsy in humans (Giannandrea et al. ). This loss-of-function mutation results in deficits in neuronal differentiation and synapse formation. Such patients can also have autistic behavior, which may be due to impaired synapse formation. DENN domain confers activity for GEF, a Rab-associated protein. DENND5A is a DENN containing protein. Its mutation had been reported to cause epilepsy (Han et al. ). Thus, Rab mutations are recognized as potential causative agents for epilepsy. Animal models with these mutations are yet to be generated, but when and if they are developed, they could help to decode the cellular function observed in epilepsy.
Conclusions
Rab-GTPases are proteins that help inter-compartmental transportation of vesicles carrying cargoes in and out of cells and organelles. They act as molecular tags by interacting with SNARE complexes, which mediate specificity for vesicle docking and fusion. Rabs have predominant role in the regulation of vesicle trafficking in cells, which are integral to many cellular processes, such as cell proliferation, cell nutrition, innate immune response, mitosis, and apoptosis. Their structural organization is suited to quickly adapt to cytosolic and membranous interfacing. Posttranslational modifications, such as prenylation, enable the Rab proteins to easily interface with the membranes of various organelles. Their activity is stringently regulated by the energy-dependent GTP-GDP cycle. As molecular switches, their roles in specific cellular events are determined by the specific GAPs and GEFs. However, several questions remain unanswered, including how Rab-GTPases activities are restricted to the particular subcellular compartments. Membrane expansion is essential for neuronal development, and this requires the delivery of membranous materials by the synaptic vesicles. Rabs also mediate delivery and recycling of neurotransmitters and their receptors at the neural terminals. Therefore, it is not surprising that Rab dysfunction is associated with many neurodegenerative diseases.