Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease, characterized by the presence of extracellular deposits of amyloid plaques, and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles of hyperphosphorylated tau (Huang and Mucke ; Palop and Mucke ). The clinical manifestation of the disease usually starts with patients experiencing memory loss, and as the disease advances, atrophy of the brain occurs with substantial gray matter loss (Selkoe ), accompanied by the progressive decline in cognition and function, ultimately leading to dementia (Huang and Mucke ; Palop and Mucke ; Selkoe ).
The majority of AD patients are sporadic cases, and ApoE4 is the strongest genetic risk factor for sporadic AD (> 60 years old) (Corder et al. ). Human ApoE exists in three isoforms, namely the ApoE2 (cys112, cys158), ApoE3 (cys112, arg158) and ApoE4 (arg112, arg158), and they differ from each other by having either a cysteine or an arginine residue at position 112 and position 158 (Mahley and Huang ). Unlike ApoE3, which is expressed in ~ 80% of the population, ApoE4 is expressed in ~ 14% of the population. However, ApoE4 carriers account for > 50% of all sporadic patients and accelerates onset of AD (Mahley and Huang ). Although the association between ApoE4 and AD has been extensively studied, their mechanism remains elusive. Hence, the underlying pathways associated with ApoE4 expression, memory impairment and ultimately AD deserve more investigation.
Interestingly, many groups have shown that the AD brain to be in an insulin resistant state (Craft and Watson ; Hoyer ). Insulin receptors were markedly and globally reduced in AD clinical samples (Cole and Frautschy ; Correia et al. ; Craft and Watson ; de la Monte ; Frolich et al. ), and the hippocampus formation of AD patients was demonstrated to be unresponsive to physiological doses of insulin (Talbot et al. ), suggesting that insulin signaling in the brain was impaired in AD brains. Moreover, memory tasks in AD subjects could be improved by increasing insulin availability (Craft et al. ). However, this observation was restricted by the ApoE profile of the AD subjects. Among AD subjects, ApoE4 carriers did not benefit from increased insulin availability (Craft et al. ).
Aβ and insulin share a similar common recognition motif [RGFFYTPKT], which is the sequence required for insulin to bind to the insulin receptor (IR) (Chan et al. ; Townsend et al. ; Verdier et al. ; Xie et al. ; Zhao et al. ), and we have previously shown that insulin signaling deficits precede Aβ42 accumulation in an AD mouse model (Chua et al. ). Furthermore, several groups have also shown that a functional insulin signaling pathway could potentiate long-term potentiation (LTP) (Nistico et al. ; Zhao and Alkon ), while insulin rescued Aβ-mediated LTP impairment (Bomfim et al. ; De Felice et al. ; Lee et al. ; Townsend et al. ).
Recently, we have shown that neuronal insulin resistance in the presence of Aβ42 was ApoE isoform-dependent in mice (Chan et al. , ). While the expression of ApoE4 alone did not produce insulin dysfunction in hippocampal neurons, the presence of both ApoE4 and Aβ42 can impair downstream insulin signaling (Chan et al. ). This may due to the entrapment of IR in the endosome (Zhao et al. ), and ApoE4 expression can accelerate amyloid pathology (Huynh et al. ; Liu et al. ).
In contrast, Aβ42 did not attenuate insulin signaling in ApoE3 neurons. Previous work has shown that binding of Aβ42 to IR impaired insulin signaling (Townsend et al. ; Xie et al. ; Zhao et al. ). In ApoE3 expressing neurons and mice, we have detected the binding of ApoE3 to IR (Chan et al. ) and this could have protected the neurons from Aβ42-induced insulin signaling impairment.
However, the experimental models used in these reports were not conducted with clinical samples that more accurately reflect human disease. Furthermore, while it is known that ApoE4 supports and promotes oligomerization of Aβ peptides, thereby increasing plaque formation (Beffert and Poirier ; Garai et al. ), different groups have shown conflicting reports as to which ApoE isoform binds Aβ more. The use of synthetic ApoE, or ApoE secreted from transfected cell lines may not represent ApoE in a physiologically relevant way (Tai et al. , ). In this study, we investigated the effect of ApoE genotype on the insulin signaling pathway in control and AD human brain samples.
Materials and Methods
Human Samples
The human postmortem frontal cortex samples were provided by the Alzheimer Disease Research Center (ADRC) at the University of California San Diego (UCSD). Patient consent had been administered at UCSD ADRC. The samples were provided in a coded fashion. Research has been conducted according to the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki. Analysis of the de-identified samples was performed with research approval by the National University of Singapore (NUS) Institutional Review Board.
Immunoblotting
Human brain homogenates were prepared and quantified as descried previously (Ong et al. ). Brain lysates were run using a 10% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel or a NuPAGE ® Bis–Tris gels (Life Technologies), and transferred overnight at 15 V, onto a nitrocellulose membrane. The membranes were probed with the following primary antibodies and exposed to horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies.
The primary antibodies used in this study were antihuman ApoE (Calbiochem, Cat#178479), antihuman ApoE (Santa Cruz, Cat#SC98573), anti-P-IRS-1 (Y608) (Millipore, Cat#09-432), anti-IRS-1 (Cell Signal Tech, Cat#2382), anti-IR (Cell Signal Tech, Cat#3020), anti-P-Akt (S473) (Cell Signal Tech, Cat#4060), anti-P-Akt (T308) (Cell Signal Tech, Cat#2965), anti-Akt (Cell Signal Tech, Cat#4691), anti-Actin (Sigma, Cat#A2066) and anti-Aβ (1–17) (6E10) (Covance, Cat#SIG-39300).
Densitometry analysis of the bands was performed as described (Ong et al. ), using NIH ImageJ software and by measuring the optical densities of the targeted protein bands. The optical densities of the actin bands were measured to ensure equal loading of the sample. For quantifying phosphorylated proteins, the optical densities of the phosphorylated protein bands were measured relative to the targeted total protein level from the same brain sample. Results were expressed as a fold change unless stated otherwise.
Immunoprecipitation
Brain lysates were pre-cleared for 1 h at room temperature before incubating with antihuman ApoE (Santa Cruz, Cat#SC98573) overnight on a rotating rotor at 4 °C. Pierce Protein A/G Plus Agarose beads (Research Instruments Co. Ltd.) were added, and the lysates were rotated on a rotating rotor for 4 h at room temperature. Subsequently, the beads and lysates were washed five times with PBS and prepared for immunoblot analysis as described above.
Sandwich ELISA
To capture ApoE, Nunc-Immuno™ MicroWell™ 96 well solid plates (Sigma-Aldrich, Singapore) were coated with antihuman ApoE (Santa Cruz, Cat#SC98573) overnight, and blocked with 10% FCS the following day. The incubated brain samples were loaded onto the plates and incubated overnight. The following day, the unbound brain samples were removed and the plates were then washed. Next, either anti-IR (Cell Signal Tech, Cat#3020), or anti-Aβ (1-17) (6E10) (Covance, Cat#SIG-39300) was added and incubated for 1 h. The plates were washed again before adding in mouse horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies. After 1 h, 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) solution was added and incubated for 20 min. The absorbance from the wells was then read at absorbance of 410 nm.
Results
Reduced Expression of Insulin Signaling Targets in Postmortem AD Brain Samples
We and others have reported the role of ApoE4 in insulin signaling impairment (Chan et al. ; Ong et al. ), and AD disease progression (Bales et al. , ; Bien-Ly et al. , ; Cramer et al. ). However, these experiments were performed using mouse models and may not truly reflect human brain.
To examine if ApoE isoforms modulate protein expression within the insulin signaling pathway, we performed immunoblot analysis on the frontal cortex of human brain samples (Fig. 1 a) and compared between ApoE3/3 homozygous control cases (3/3 control), ApoE3/3 homozygous AD cases (3/3 AD) and ApoE4/4 (4/4 AD) homozygous AD cases. We used ApoE homozygous cases, as we did not want heterozygosity in ApoE isoforms to affect analysis of the data. In addition, when using heterozygous samples, it was not possible to decipher which of the two ApoE isoforms was the dominant phenotype, or if the isoforms were codominant. Fig. 1 Expression of proteins downstream of the insulin receptor, were reduced in human AD brains. a Representative immunoblot analyses of homozygous 3/3 control, 3/3 AD and 4/4 AD cases showed reduced downstream insulin signaling in all AD cases. Equal loading was confirmed by re-probing the same membrane with anti-actin antibody. b Quantification of immunoblot analyses with densitometry. Results were expressed as a fold change in protein expression as compared to 3/3 control cases (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, # p < 0.05). Error bars represent ± SEM ( n = 4 per case)
When comparing against 3/3 control cases, phosphorylated IRS-1 Y612 expression was significantly reduced in AD cases (one-way ANOVA, F = 57.69). As compared to 3/3 controls, we observed an 82 and 84% reduction in phosphorylated IRS-1 Y612 expression in 3/3 AD and 4/4 AD (** p < 0.01) cases, respectively (Fig. 1 b). Reflective of this observation, expression of IRS-1 was significantly reduced in AD cases (one-way ANOVA, F = 76.19). We also observed a 79 and 86% reduction in IRS-1 expression in 3/3 AD and 4/4 AD cases (** p < 0.01). Furthermore, there was also a 59 and 61% reduction in phosphorylated Akt S473 expression levels (* p < 0.05) and a 51 and 52% reduction in phosphorylated Akt T308 expression levels (** p < 0.01) in 3/3 AD and 4/4 AD cases, respectively (one-way ANOVA, F = 5.988, 29.75, respectively).
In addition, ApoE expression was significantly reduced only in 4/4 AD cases (one-way ANOVA, F = 13.76). ApoE expression was 72 and 62% lower than 3/3 control and 3/3 AD cases, respectively (** p < 0.01, # p < 0.05 Tukey–Kramer). Taken together, our results showed that protein expression within the insulin signaling pathway was reduced at the end stage of AD, regardless of ApoE genotype (Tukey–Kramer), and were consistent with several published literature (Frolich et al. ; Hoyer ).
ApoE Modulation on Glutamate Receptor Expression in Human Postmortem Samples
Up-regulation of glutamate receptors is closely associated with LTP, which is the cellular analogue for learning and memory (Malinow and Malenka ). Here, to investigate whether expression of glutamate receptors in control and AD samples was ApoE isoform-dependent, we probed for expression of GluR1 subunit of AMPA receptors and NR2A and NR2B subunits of NMDA receptors in the postmortem tissues (Fig. 2 a). Fig. 2 Expression of AMPA receptor, GluR1 subunit, NMDA receptor, NR2A and NR2B subunits, in human control and AD brains. a Representative immunoblot analyses of homozygous 3/3 control, 3/3 AD and 4/4 AD cases showed reduced GluR1 subunit expression and increased NR2B subunit expression in AD cases. Expression of NR2A subunit was comparable between control and AD cases. Equal loading was confirmed by re-probing the same membrane with anti-actin antibody. b Quantification of immunoblot analyses with densitometry. Results were expressed as a fold change in protein expression as compared to 3/3 control cases (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01). Error bars represent ± SEM ( n = 8 per case)
We observed a significant reduction in GluR1 expression in AD cases, regardless of ApoE genotype (one-way ANOVA, F = 13.76, Tukey–Kramer). The expression of GluR1 was 59 and 67% lower in 3/3 AD and 4/4 AD cases, respectively (** p < 0.01). Interestingly, while we observed no significant difference in expression of NR2A subunit between control and AD cases (one-way ANOVA, F = 0.1263), we observed a significant increase in NR2B subunit expression in AD cases, regardless of ApoE genotype (one-way ANOVA, F = 3.635, Tukey–Kramer). NR2B subunit expression was 51 and 62% higher than 3/3 control cases in 3/3 AD and 4/4 AD cases, respectively (* p < 0.05) (Fig. 2 b).
More ApoE is Immunoprecipitated with IR in Control Cases
We and other groups have shown that Aβ can bind to IR (Chan et al. ; Townsend et al. ; Zhao et al. ). In the ApoE/APP mouse models, we showed that this binding was ApoE isoform-dependent (Chan et al. ). To determine if ApoE isoform-dependent binding to the IR and Aβ differed in human control and AD cases, we pulled down ApoE from the postmortem brain lysates and probed for IR and Aβ (Fig. 3 a). Fig. 3 a Representative immunoblots of bound antigens immunoprecipitated with antihuman ApoE antibody in human frontal cortex samples ( n = 8 per case). (Top) less IR was immunoprecipitated with ApoE in all AD cases. Comparing between 3/3 AD and 4/4 AD cases, more Aβ was bound to the 4/4 AD than to 3/3 AD. Equal amounts of antibody incubated with each sample were confirmed by probing the membrane for the IgG heavy chain. (Bottom) representative immunoblots of lysates used in immunoprecipitation. Equal amounts of protein used were confirmed by re-probing the same membrane with anti-actin antibody. b More IR was bound to ApoE in control cases than in AD cases, while more IR was immunoprecipitated with ApoE3 in 3/3 AD cases than to ApoE4 in 4/4 AD cases (** p < 0.01, ## p < 0.01). c More Aβ was bound to ApoE in AD than in control cases. Among AD cases, more Aβ was bound to ApoE4 in 4/4 AD cases than to ApoE3 in 3/3 AD cases (** p < 0.01, ## p < 0.01). Error bars represent ± SEM ( n = 10 per case)
We observed that more IR was immunoprecipitated with ApoE in 3/3 control cases and less IR is immunoprecipitated in all AD cases, regardless of ApoE isoform (Fig. 3 b). When comparing among AD cases, we observed more ApoE4 being pulled down with Aβ compared to ApoE3. We further quantified this ApoE isoform-dependent binding to IR and Aβ by setting up a sandwich ELISA to capture ApoE.
Compared to control cases, there was a 2.5-fold and fivefold reduction in the amount of IR immunoprecipitated in 3/3 AD cases and 4/4 AD cases, respectively (Fig. 3 b) (one-way ANOVA, F = 60.23, ** p < 0.01). Comparing among AD cases, there was twice less amount of IR immunoprecipitated in 4/4 AD cases compared to 3/3 AD cases (## p < 0.01, Tukey–Kramer). When comparing the amount of Aβ immunoprecipitated between control and AD cases, there was fourfold and eightfold more Aβ pulled down in 3/3 AD cases and 4/4 cases, respectively (Fig. 3 c) (one-way ANOVA, F = 49.27, ** p < 0.01). There was also 1.8-fold more Aβ pulled down in 4/4 AD cases compared to 3/3 AD cases (## p < 0.01, Tukey–Kramer).
Discussion
The AD brain has been described to be at an insulin resistant state, and it has been shown that memory improvement from intranasal insulin infusion is ApoE isoform-dependent (Craft and Watson ; Verghese et al. ). While ApoE4 is strongly associated with AD, the underlying mechanism remains to be elucidated. Here, we reported an ApoE isoform-dependent effect on the expression of brain insulin signaling targets in control and AD cases. Our immunoblot analysis on postmortem human samples reveal that expression of effector proteins of the insulin signaling pathway was significantly attenuated in AD cases, regardless of ApoE expression. As these samples represented the disease at its end stage, we can affirm that insulin signaling is indeed reduced in AD, which was consistent with several published studies (Craft and Watson ; Hoyer ; Talbot et al. ).
The targets of the immunoblot analysis in this study were phosphorylated IRS-1 Tyr612 (Y612), Akt serine 473 (S473) and threonine 308 (T308). We chose not to probe for phosphorylated insulin receptor as previous work has shown that despite activating the insulin receptor by Y1151 phosphorylation, downstream insulin signaling was not affected as IRS-1 Y612 phosphorylation was deficient (Talbot et al. ). Hence, probing for downstream activation of the insulin receptor such as IRS-1 Y612 phosphorylation and activated Akt will better reflect insulin receptor activation. Furthermore, IRS-1 Y612 is the binding site for the p85 subunit of PI3 K (Gual et al. ; Hemmings and Restuccia ; Myers et al. ), and activation of Akt will indicate subsequent PI3 K activity, and amplification of the insulin signaling cascade (Hemmings and Restuccia ; Manning and Cantley ).
We also found a reduction in GluR1 subunit expression in all AD cases, regardless of ApoE genotype. The GluR1 subunit expression is associated with enhancement of LTP, which is the cellular analogue for learning and memory (Hayashi et al. ; Malinow and Malenka ). Interestingly, we observed no changes to the expression levels of NR2A subunit and found that the NR2B subunit was increased in AD cases. While our human samples represent the manifestation of the disease at end stage, we draw parallel conclusions to previous reports using AD animal models. In vitro studies have shown that Aβ42 can enhance NMDA receptor function selectively by binding to the NR2B subunit with moderate affinity, leading to increased caspase 3 and caspase 8 activity, which results in increased cell death (Lacor et al. ; Liu et al. ). In addition, exposure to Aβ40 leads to a reduction in AMPA receptor and PSD95 expression, which could be reversed by application of the NR2B selective antagonist, ifenprodil (Roselli et al. ).
Although studies have shown that overexpressing the NR2B subunit can enhance learning and memory, the reduced glutamate uptake in AD brains led to the activation of extrasynaptic NR2B subunits that impair LTP (Li et al. ) and cause neuronal death (Hardingham and Bading ). Interestingly, insulin treatment has been shown to reduce the number of binding sites of Aβ42 to NR2B, without a change in total surface expression (Decker et al. ). This further suggests that the greater impairment of insulin signaling in 4/4 AD cases may contribute to earlier neurotoxicity induced by NR2B subunit expression, leading to earlier onset of memory decline.
It is known that ApoE and IR can bind to Aβ (Townsend et al. ; Xie et al. ; Zhao et al. ) in mouse models, but little is known if this binding occurs in the human brain in normal and AD states. To investigate this, we performed immunoprecipitation on human control and AD cases. We found that less IR was immunoprecipitated with ApoE in AD cases, regardless of ApoE isoform, while more Aβ is immunoprecipitated with 4/4 AD cases. However, when comparing between 3/3 AD and 3/3 control cases, more IR is immunoprecipitated with ApoE in 3/3 control than in 3/3 AD cases.
Among the AD cases, we found less IR and more Aβ was immunoprecipitated with ApoE4, and the reduction was more apparent in the presence of the ApoE4 than in the ApoE3. This may be due to the entrapment of IR in the endosome (Zhao et al. ), thereby facilitating ApoE4 expression to accelerate amyloid pathology (Huynh et al. ; Liu et al. ).
Given that insulin sensitivity is impaired in AD (Talbot et al. ), and that insulin infusion could enhance performance in cognitive tasks (Holscher ), our results suggest that perhaps it is this increased binding of ApoE to IR in control cases, whether directly or not, that results in the beneficial effects of insulin on memory and cognition.
Previous findings have shown that Aβ is also capable of binding to ApoE (Beffert and Poirier ; Garai et al. ; LaDu et al. ; Sanan et al. ; Tai et al. ) and IR(Townsend et al. ; Xie et al. ; Zhao et al. ), but we need to consider a few differences. Firstly, the groups who have reported that ApoE3 bound more Aβ 42 used ApoE secreted from HEK cells into the culture medium (LaDu et al. ; Sanan et al. ; Tai et al. ). Secondly, the Aβ added was obtained from the culture media of cells lines overexpressing APP, and the Aβ species present were mostly oligomers (Townsend et al. ; Xie et al. ; Zhao et al. ).
In these studies, the insulin receptor was exposed only acutely to the oligomeric Aβ, whereas in our study, the insulin receptor is constantly exposed to endogenously produced Aβ, across time. As we did not detect an association between the insulin receptor and Aβ in AD cases, it is possible that while some Aβ may have bound to the insulin receptor, thereby inhibiting downstream insulin signaling, and ApoE4 itself may have bound the other free Aβ in the brain and stabilizing them to form fibrils and eventually plaques. In addition, other groups have shown that it was ApoE4 that bound more to Aβ 25–35 , which is the biologically active site of Aβ, and an overlapping region within Aβ 42 (Beffert and Poirier ). Taken together, our results show that the differences in binding of ApoE3 and ApoE4 to the IR in control and AD brains may influence the effects of Aβ on insulin signaling dysfunction, leading to dementia.