Introduction
Progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra is a fundamental pathological feature of Parkinson’s disease (PD) (Bensaid et al. ). Increasing evidence indicates that mitochondrial dysfunctions, oxidative stress, and endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) may represent the principal molecular events linking to dopaminergic neuron death (Khalil et al. ). For several decades, the dopamine precursor levodopa has been the primary therapy for PD (reviewed by LeWitt et al. ). However, dopamine replacement therapy is mainly targeted at masking or reducing disease symptoms but fails to retard the underlying neuronal degeneration (reviewed by Smulders et al. ). Novel understanding of the pathogenesis of the disease is creating new opportunities for the development of neuroprotective and/or neurorestorative therapies (reviewed by Olson and Gendelman ).
ERS-coupled apoptotic cell death has been implicated in neurodegenerative disorders including PD (reviewed by Tsujii et al. ). Endoplasmic reticulum is sensitive to oxidative stress and also plays a crucial role in oxidative stress-induced neuronal damage (Nakka et al. ). It is known that plants produce a variety of antioxidant components, which could be beneficial for human health, to protect their structures against reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced during photosynthesis (Tattini et al. ). Indeed, many Chinese herb-derived components possess their ability to reduce oxidative stress (Xu et al. ; Li et al. ).
Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) is an important transducer of the unfolded protein response (Zhu et al. ). Activated IRE1 triggers ERS-specific caspase-12 activation (Xu et al. ). Caspase-12 knockout mice are resistant to ERS-induced apoptosis (Liu et al. ). ERS also induces mitochondrial dysfunction, caspase activation, and apoptosis via organelle crosstalk between the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria (Penke et al. ). Ample empirical evidence suggests that mitochondria dysfunction evoked by genetic and environmental factors that are associated with PD plays key roles in dopaminergic neuronal loss (reviewed by Camilleri and Vassallo ).
Based on a retrospective review of the historical role of a number of Chinese herbs in the medical treatment of tremor syndrome, Uncaria rhynchophylla , a non-model plant, might potentially provide natural treatment for PD (Shim et al. ). Isorhynchophylline (IRN) is one major tetracyclic oxindole alkaloids found in Uncaria rhynchophylla and possesses diverse biological activities including antioxidant (Xian et al. ), anti-apoptosis (Xian et al. ), and neuroprotection (Chen et al. ). There is still no strong and direct evidence to conclude that the beneficial neuroprotective effects of IRN are mediated by antioxidation in the PD-related neurotoxin context.
Here, we ask (i) whether IRN comprises neuroprotective effects against PD-related neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP + ), (ii) whether neuroprotective effects attributed to its anti-antioxidant properties, and if so, (iii) what would be the signaling pathway involved in IRN-mediated neuroprotection. To answer these questions, we hypothesized that IRN neuroprotective effect attributed to its antioxidative properties involving regulation of ROS-independent both endoplasmic reticulum- and mitochondria-dependent pathways. Indeed, Lu et al. give the first evidence that this hypothesis holds true (Lu et al. ). Results in the current study support our hypothesis and provide novel insights into the mechanisms of the neuroprotective effect of IRN against MPP + -induced neurotoxicity.
Materials and Methods
Cell Culture and Treatments
PC12 cells were obtained from Shanghai Institute of Cell Biology (Shanghai, China) and cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. To initiate neurodifferentiation, the medium was changed to include 100 ng/mL of 2.5S nerve growth factor obtained from Promega (Madison, WI). The concentrations of MPP + were chosen according to our previous study (Wang et al. ). PC12 cells were treated with IRN for 24 h at the concentrations indicated in each figure. In some experiments, cells were treated with caspase-1 inhibitor Z-YVAD-FMK (10 μM), caspase-2 inhibitor Z-VDVAD-FMK (50 μM), caspase-4 inhibitor Z-LEVD-FMK (20 μM), caspase-5 inhibitor Z-WEHD-FMK (50 μM), caspase-6 inhibitor Z-VEID-FMK (50 μM), caspase-8 inhibitor Z-IETD-FMK (25 μM), caspase-9 inhibitor Z-LEHD-FMK (25 μM), caspase-10 inhibitor AEVD-FMK (10 μM), caspase-12 inhibitor Z-ATAD-FMK (4 μM), NADPH oxidase inhibitor diphenyleneiodonium (DPI; 10 μM), c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) inhibitor SP600125 (100 nM), p53 inhibitor pifithrin-α (20 μM), or transiently transfected with IRE1α shRNA, dominant-negative (DN)-ERK2, DN-JNK1, or DN-p38α to assess if these pathways play a role.
Analyses of Cell Viability and Proliferation
A MTS/PMS reagent-based CellTiter 96 ® Aqueous Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay kit (Promega) was used to measure the cell viability according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Apoptosis Assays
Apoptosis was determined by flow cytometry (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) using Annexin V-FITC/propidium iodide (PI) Apoptosis Detection Kit (KeyGEN BioTECH, Nanjing, China), according to manufacturer’s protocol.
Cell Death Detection Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) PLUS (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) was used to measure spectrophotometrically the mono-oligonucleosomes (histone-associated DNA fragments), a characteristic of apoptosis, according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Caspase-3/7 activities were measured by Caspase-Glo ® 3/7 Assay kit (Promega) using a luminogenic substrate containing the DEVD sequence according to manufacturer’s instructions. Caspase-9 activities were measured based on the release of p-nitroanilide (p-NA) from Ac-LEHD-pNA using Caspase 9 Activity Colorimetric Assay Kit (Biobox Biotech, Nanjing, China). Caspase-12 activities were measured based on detection of cleavage of substrate ATAD-AFC using the Caspase-12 Fluorometric Assay Kit (BioVision Inc, Milpitas, CA). The luminescence and absorbance were determined by a Safire2 microplate reader (Tecan Group Ltd, Maennedorf, Switzerland) and an ELX800 microplate reader (BioTek Instruments Inc., Vermont, USA), respectively.
Measurement of Oxidative Stress
The total glutathione (GSH + GSSG) and glutathione disulfide (GSSG) were assessed using the GSH/GSSG-Glo™ Assay Kit (Promega) by a fluorometric method according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The cellular GSH/GSSG ratio was then calculated.
Intracellular ROS levels were determined by oxidative conversion of cell permeable non-fluorescent dichloro-dihydro-fluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) to fluorescent DCF using the components provided in the OxiSelect™ Intracellular ROS Assay Kit (Cell Biolabs, Inc., San Diego, USA).
Lipid peroxidation (LPO) was assessed by using Lipid Hydroperoxide Assay kit obtained from Cayman Chemical Company (Ann Arbor, MI) according to the kit’s instruction. The colorimetric assays were based on measure of the hydroperoxides directly utilizing the redox reactions with ferrous ions.
Total intracellular nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides (NADH + NAD + ) and NADH levels were determined using the NAD + /NADH Quantification Kit (BioVision) in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer. The ratio of NAD + /NADH was calculated based on results of NAD and NADH levels.
Stress-Activated Protein Kinase (SAPK)/JNK Kinase Assays
SAPK/JNK activity was analyzed with the SAPK/JNK Kinase Assay Kit (Non-Radioactive) (Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, SH-SY5Y cells treated with or without IRN in the presence of MPP + were harvested and lysed with the lysis buffer. Equal amounts of proteins were immunoprecipitated with an immobilized phospho-SAPK/JNK (Thr183/Tyr185) rabbit antibody. The precipitated enzymes were then incubated with c-Jun fusion protein and ATP. c-Jun phosphorylation was quantified by Western blot analysis using phospho-c-Jun (Ser63) antibody.
Western Blot Assay
Cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions were separated using a Cell Mitochondria Isolation Kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, Nantong, China). SDS-PAGE and subsequent immuno-reactions were conducted as we previously described (Dong et al. ). All antibodies were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA) except activating transcription factor (ATF)-6α antibody (Santa Cruz, CA), phosphor-IRE1 and IRE1 (Abcam Inc., Cambridge, MA). Quantitation of blots was done using an AlphaImager™ 2200 using AlphaEaseFC™ Software (Witec, Littau, Switzerland).
Real-Time Quantitative PCR
RNA was isolated from PC12 cells using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogene, Carlsbad, CA). Synthesis of cDNA was performed using primeScript™ RT reagent kit (Takara Biotechnology, Dalian, China). Quantitative PCR was performed by using an Agilent Stratagene M×3005P (Agilent Stratagene, CA) with a SYBR ® premix Ex Taq™ (Takara) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The primer pairs were as follows: 5′-AGACACCTGAGCTGACCTTGGAG-3′ (forward) and 5′-GTTGAAGTTGCCATCAGCAAACA-3′ (reverse) for Bax; 5′-GCC CAT CCT TAC CAT CAT CAC-3′ (forward) and 5′-CAC AAA CAC GAA CCT CAA AGC-3′ (reverse) for p53; 5′-GGC ACA GTC AAG GCT GAG AAT G-3′ (forward) and 5′-ATG GTG GTG AAG ACG CCA GTA-3′ (reverse) for GAPDH. Comparative Ct method was used to calculate the relative fold changes normalized against the GAPDH.
Reporter Gene Activity Assays
PC12 cells were transiently co-transfected with pGMp53-Lu (Genomeditech, Shanghai, China) and renilla luciferase reporter plasmid pRL-TK (Promega) by using FuGENE ® 6 Transfection Reagent obtained from Promega. p53-luciferase activity was measured using a Dual-Glo ® Luciferase Assay System (Promega) as per the manufacturer’s protocol.
Measurement of Calpain Activity
Calpain activity was quantified by using a commercially available colorimetric calpain activity assay kit (Biovision) with Ac-LLY-AFC as substrates according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Statistical Analysis
Data in bar graphs represent means (SD) and means were obtained from average data of at least three independent experiments. Statistical analysis was performed using the one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc analysis in SPSS software. Statistical significance was accepted for p values <0.05.
Results
IRN Protects the PC12 Cells from MPP+-Induced Apoptosis
Concentration–response studies were conducted to determine the suitable concentration of IRN used in the experiments. The MTS assay for cell viability indicated that IRN pre-treatment significantly protected PC12 cells (Fig. 1 a) and primary cultured hippocampal neurons (Fig. 1 b) from the injury induced by MPP + . Maximal cytoprotective effect was observed at 10 μM. IRN (0.3–10 μM) affords protection against MPP + -induced PC12 cells death in a concentration-dependent manner. A plateau of protection was reached for 24 h of IRN treatment (Fig. 1 c). Given this result, the treatment of PC12 cells with IRN at 1–10 μM or 10 μM for 24 h was selected in subsequent experiments. Fig. 1 IRN attenuates MPP + -induced cell viability reduction in concentration- and time-dependent manner. PC12 cells were pre-treated with different concentrations of IRN for 1 h and then incubated with or without MPP + for 24 h ( a ). Primary cultured hippocampal neurons were pre-treated with different concentrations of IRN for 1 h and then incubated with or without MPP + for 24 h ( b ). PC12 cells were pre-treated with 10 μM of IRN and then incubated with or without MPP + for different times ( c ). Cell viability was detected by the MTS assay. * p < 0.05 versus MPP + -alone treatment
Apoptosis is widely recognized as the major mechanism of neuronal cell death induced by the PD-related neurotoxin (reviewed by Heusinkveld et al. ). It was next determined whether IRN-mediated neuroprotection is associated with inhibition of apoptosis. Annexin V-FITC/PI staining followed by flow cytometric analysis showed that IRN attenuates MPP + -induced apoptosis in a conspicuous dose–response pattern (Fig. 2 a, b). To address the role of individual caspase family members in IRN-mediated neuroprotective action, we examined the effects of various caspase inhibitors. We observed the caspase-9 and 12 to be prerequisite for IRN neuroprotection because IRN-mediated inhibition of apoptosis is abolished completely or partially by the Z-LEHD-FMK or Z-ATAD-FMK in MPP + -treated PC12 cells (Fig. 2 c). Consistent with this DNA fragmentation assay, caspase activities assays also demonstrated that pre-treatment with IRN resulted in a reduced levels of caspase-3/7, 9, or 12 activities in MPP + -treated PC12 cells (Fig. 2 d). Fig. 2 IRN suppress caspase-dependent apoptosis induced by MPP + . a PC12 cells were pre-treated with indicated concentrations of IRN for 1 h and then incubated with or without MPP + for 24 h. b Determination of the percentages apoptosis by Annexin V-FITC/PI staining and flow cytometric analysis. c PC12 cells were pre-treated with indicated concentrations of IRN for 1 h and then incubated with or without MPP + for 24 h in the presence or absence of various caspase inhibitors. Cytoplasmic histone-associated DNA fragments were determined by Apoptosis ELISA. d Caspase-3/7, caspase-9, and caspase-12 activities were measured by fluorometric or colorimetric assays. § p < 0.05 versus control; * p < 0.05 versus MPP + -alone treatment; ∫ p < 0.05 versus combined treatment with MPP + and IRN
IRN Dose-Dependently Blocks MPP+-Induced Oxidative Stress
To explore the underlying mechanisms by which IRN attenuates MPP + -induced apoptosis, we hypothesized that IRN possesses potent antioxidant properties that may contribute to its neuroprotective action. Before testing our hypothesis, the antioxidant capability of IRN was evaluated. As shown in Fig. 3 a, IRN attenuates MPP + -induced increases in the level of cellular ROS in PC12 cells. Further experiments indicated that IRN significantly decreased, as expected, the content of cellular LPO in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. These results collectively demonstrated the antioxidant capability of IRN in the context of MPP + challenge. The GSH/GSSG and NAD + /NADH ratio are two indicators of cell health and oxidative stress (Cargnoni et al. ). Therefore, we were interested to examine the effects of IRN on both GSH/GSSG and NAD + /NADH ratio in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. We found that IRN treatment caused dramatic increases in GSH/GSSG and modest increases in NAD + /NADH ratio accompanied by significant increase in total GSH and NAD + levels in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. This increases occurred with a conspicuous concentration–response pattern (Fig. 3 b, c). Fig. 3 IRN alleviated MPP + -induced oxidative stress. PC12 cells were pre-treated with indicated concentrations of IRN for 1 h and then incubated with or without MPP + for 24 h. a The levels of cellular ROS were measured using the DCF-DA assay, and LPO levels were measured by a colorimetric method. b The concentration of GSH and GSSG was determined using the end point method, and the GSH/GSSG ratio was then calculated. c Intracellular NADH and NAD + concentration was measured spectrophotometrically using the thiazolyl blue microcycling assay, and then the ratio of NAD + /NADH was calculated. § p < 0.05 versus control; * p < 0.05 versus MPP + -alone treatment
IRN Inhibits MPP+-Induced ERS
Since caspase-12 activity is closely related to ERS-induced apoptosis (Zhang et al. ), we hypothesize that IRN inhibits MPP + -induced ERS. This hypothesis was affirmed by Western blot, which showed that MPP + -inducible phosphorylation (indicating activation) of IRE1 was strongly inhibited by IRN treatment in concentration-dependent manner, whereas IRN had no effect on PKR-like ER kinase (PERK) phosphorylation and ATF-6α protein expression in MPP + -treated PC12 cells (Fig. 4 a, b). Calpain, a calcium-dependent cysteine protease, has been implicated in ERS-mediated neuron death (Hashimoto et al. ). Therefore, the effects of IRN on calpain activity in MPP + -treated PC12 cells were also examined. However, a slight but not significant alteration of calpain activity due to IRN could also be observed in MPP + -treated PC12 cells (Fig. 4 c). Fig. 4 IRN attenuates MPP + -induced up-regulation of ER stress sensor IRE-1. PC12 cells were pre-treated with indicated concentrations of IRN for 1 h and then incubated with or without MPP + for 24 h. a Phosphorylation of IRE-1, phosphorylation of PERK, and ATF-6α expression were analyzed by Western blot using specific antibodies. Corresponding total protein or GAPDH served as loading controls. b Densitometric quantitation expressed as the relative phospho-protein to total protein or GAPDH ratio. Note that the levels of total protein and GAPDH remained constant. c Calpain activity was measured in intact cells by measuring hydrolysis of the cell permeant calpain fluorogenic substrates by fluorimetry. § p < 0.05 versus control; * p < 0.05 versus MPP + -alone treatment
IRN Suppresses MPP+-Induced Apoptosis Signal-Regulating Kinase-1 (ASK1)/JNK Pathway Activation
We showed that blocking caspase-12 by Z-ATAD-FMK partially but significantly abolished IRN-mediated neuroprotective action, while Z-LEHD-FMK abolishes it completely, suggesting that other mechanisms than ERS pathways may also contribute to IRN inhibition of apoptosis in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. This led us to hypothesize that a mitochondria-dependent pathway may be involved IRN-mediated inhibition of apoptosis. Caspase-3/7 activities assays demonstrated that DN-JNK1 over-expression significantly reversed IRN-mediated inhibition of caspase-3/7 activity in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. In contrast, the transfection of DN-ERK2 or DN-p38α failed to change caspase-3/7 activity in the presence of IRN and MPP + (Fig. 5 a). Immunoprecipitation with anti-phospho-SAPK/JNK antibody and in vitro kinase assays using c-Jun fusion protein as JNK substrate revealed that IRN significantly inhibits JNK kinase activity in a concentration-dependent manner in MPP + -treated PC12 cells (Fig. 5 b, c). The results of Western blot showed that the both phosphorylated ASK1 and phosphorylated JNK in the MPP + -treated PC12 cells were significantly inhibited by IRN. Fig. 5 IRN inhibits JNK-dependent caspase-3 activation induced by MPP + . a PC12 cells were transiently transfected with indicated dominant-negative mutant, and then pre-treated with indicated concentrations of IRN for 1 h prior to incubation with or without MPP + for 24 h. Caspase-3 activities were measured by fluorometric assays. b PC12 cells were pre-treated with indicated concentrations of IRN for 1 h and then incubated with or without MPP + for 24 h. JNK kinase assays was analyzed by a specific immunoprecipitation with immobilized phospho-SAPK/JNK antibody followed by an in vitro kinase assay of its substrate, c-Jun fusion protein, and quantified by Western blot analysis. c The band intensities of phosph-c-Jun were quantified by densitometry and normalized to c-Jun. § p < 0.05 versus control; * p < 0.05 versus MPP + -alone treatment. ∫ p < 0.05 versus combined treatment with MPP + and IRN
IRN Inhibits MPP+-Induced Mitochondrial-Dependent Apoptosis
Mitochondria in vertebrates are active regulators of apoptosis. They release cytochrome c from the intermembrane space into the cytosol through modulation of the Bcl-2 protein family. In the present study, IRN significantly inhibits, as expected, release of cytochrome c (Cyt c ), up-regulation of p53, and up-regulation of Bax expression triggered by MPP + (Fig. 6 a–c). Consistent with these Western blot analyses, real-time PCR results showed that IRN caused a dose-dependent reduction in expression of both p53 and Bax at levels of transcription in MPP + -treated PC12 cells (Fig. 6 d). Fig. 6 IRN inhibits ASK1-JNK pathway and down-regulates anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. a Phospho-JNK, phospho-ASK1, p53, Bax, and Cyt c were analyzed by Western blot using specific antibodies. Corresponding total protein or GAPDH served as loading controls. b Densitometric quantitation expressed as the relative phospho-protein to total protein. Note that the levels of total protein remained constant. c The band intensities of p53, Bax, and Cyt c were quantified by densitometry and normalized to GAPDH. d Total RNA was isolated and real-time PCR was performed, normalized by GAPDH. § p < 0.05 versus control; * p < 0.05 versus MPP + -alone treatment
IRN Suppresses p53 Promoter Activity is Dependent on Inhibition of JNK Located Downstream of ASK1
Treatment with IRN resulted in reduced levels of phosphorylated ASK1 (downstream kinase of ROS), phosphorylated JNK, and p53 expression, release of Cyt c , and Bax expression, and those were associated with mitochondria-mediated apoptosis (reviewed by Ueda et al. ). The interesting results prompted us to map out cause–effect relationship among intracellular signaling elements. Inhibition of ROS by DPI abolished IRN-mediated JNK dephosphorylation, whereas pifithrin-α failed to do so (Fig. 7 a, b). Furthermore, SP600125 abolished IRN-mediated inhibition of p53 promoter activity (Fig. 7 c). This findings indicate that ASK1 dephosphorylation located downstream of ROS scavenging is upstream to JNK inactivation, which, in turn, resulted in a marked decrease in the promoter activity of p53 by IRN. Fig. 7 IRN inhibits JNK phosphorylation is a ROS-mediated event in IRE1α-independent manner. a PC12 cells or PC12 cells transfected with IRE1α shRNA were pre-treated with indicated concentrations of IRN for 1 h and then incubated with or without MPP + for 24 h in the presence or absence of DIP, pifithrin-α or Z-ATAD-FMK. Phosphorylation of JNK was analyzed by Western blot using phospho-JNK antibody. Total JNK served as loading controls. b The band intensities of phospho-JNK were quantified by densitometry and normalized to total JNK. c The p53 promoter-linked firefly luciferase vector, pGMp53-Lu, was transiently transfected into PC12 cells. Renilla luciferase reporter plasmid pRL-TK served as a control of transfection efficiency. Transfected cells were pre-treated with indicated concentrations of IRN for 1 h prior to incubation with or without MPP + for 24 h in the presence or absence of DPI, SP600125 or Z-ATAD-FMK, then the luciferase activity were measured. § p < 0.05 versus control; * p < 0.05 versus MPP + -alone treatment
Inhibitions of Both the Cascades of ASK1/JNK and of IRE1/Caspase-12 by IRN are Independent
ROS utilizes an ERS pathway, including IRE1, in addition to mitochondria-associated pathway to regulate dopaminergic neuron apoptosis (Yen et al. ). Given that IRN blocks both ASK1/JNK and IRE1/caspase-12 pathway in MPP + -treated PC12 cells, we hypothesized that IRN attenuation of MPP + -induced apoptosis is regulated by crosstalk between ASK1/JNK and IRE1/caspase-12 signaling pathways. As shown in Fig. 8 a–c, our results show that DPI blocked inhibitions of the caspase-12 activity, release of Cyt c , and cleaved caspase-9 expression by IRN in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. When SP600125 was used, inhibition of p53 promoter activity by IRN was completely reversed. However, the caspase-12 activity did not change. Similarly, transfection of IRE1α shRNA plasmid had no effect on IRN-mediated inhibition of Cyt c release in MPP + -treated PC12 cells, while this transfection completely blocked IRN-mediated inhibition of caspase-12 activity in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. This suggests that inhibition of both ASK1/JNK pathway and of IRE1/caspase-12 pathway by IRN are independent, which is not in line with our initial expectation. Fig. 8 IRN inhibits caspase-12 activation is an IRE1α-mediated event in JNK-independent manner. a PC12 cells or PC12 cells transfected with IRE1α shRNA were pre-treated with indicated concentrations of IRN for 1 h and then incubated with or without MPP + for 24 h in the presence or absence of DPI, SP600125, or pifithrin-α. Caspase-12 activity was measured by fluorometric assays. b Cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE, and Western blot analysis was conducted using specific antibodies. GAPDH or Cox IV served as loading controls. c The band intensities of Cyt c and caspase-9 were quantified by densitometry and normalized to GAPDH or Cox IV. § p < 0.05 versus control; * p < 0.05 versus MPP + -alone treatment
Discussion
To our knowledge, the present study is the first to demonstrate that IRN inhibits MPP + -induced apoptosis through attenuating ROS-mediated both ERS and mitochondrial dysfunction. This conclusion is supported by the following results: (1) ROS inhibitor DPI blocks IRN-mediated inhibitions of both caspase-12 activity and release of Cyt c from the mitochondria in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. (2) Blockade of ASK1/JNK and of IRE1/caspase-12 pathways by IRN are mediated by independent mechanisms, revealed by using pharmacological inhibitors SP600125, pifithrin-α, Z-ATAD-FMK and IRE1α shRNA, respectively. (3) JNK-mediated inhibition of p53 promoter activity/expression partially contributed to anti-apoptosis activity of IRN, revealed by DN-JNK1 or SP600125. If studies using IRN in an in vivo model of PD prove this beneficial effect, the use of IRN might be considered as an adjunct therapeutic strategy to combat neural demise in PD.
In the last decade, advances in the understanding of genes leading to dopaminergic neuron loss are impressive (reviewed by Cai et al. ). However, at present no effective therapy is available to halt the progression of PD. Due to the limited success of dopamine replacement therapy, new efforts are being directed toward neuroprotective strategy as an alternative approach to delay or slow the illness (reviewed by Muroyama ). While we acknowledge that in vitro models may not be clinically relevant, our data suggest that IRN is a promising candidate for the treatment of PD. Bioactive compounds in traditional Chinese medicines possess complex structures that presumably have evolved to exert effective interactions with the molecular targets. Elucidation of the action mechanisms of bioactive compounds is a valid starting point for drug discovery (Minunni and Bilia ). Research into East Asian historical literature has revealed that Uncaria rhynchophylla , particularly its reputation as being good for anti-tremor, may be relevant to PD treatment. However, active ingredients and molecular mechanisms for anti-parkinsonian effects of Uncaria rhynchophylla are unknown. In the present study, we have shown that IRN, identified primarily from the Uncaria rhynchophylla , is one such compound shown to exhibit anti-apoptosis activities in the PD-related neurotoxin MPP + -treated PC12 cell. We observe cytoprotective effect in both differentiated PC12 cells and primary cultured hippocampal neurons, demonstrating that this is not a cell type-specific finding. Lu et al. reported that IRN promoted clearance of α-synuclein protein and decreased the expression levels of α-synuclein protein in different neuronal cell lines, including PC12 cells (Lu et al. ). However, the data presented here underscore the possibility that IRN mediated neuroprotection via direct antioxidant mechanisms.
PC12 cells readily recapitulate key events in dopamine synthesis and have been widely used as an inducible cell model to study cellular toxicity and oxidative stress (Shindo et al. ; Tabakman et al. ). For example, studies in PC12 cells have shown that MPP + (the active product of MPTP), 6-hydroxydopamine, or rotenone not only induced mitochondrial dysfunction, ERS, and apoptosis, but also elicited excessive ROS production. Primary neurons are more physiologically relevant model of PD than immortalized cell lines, but the potential for variability and the need to continually prepare new cultures make it difficult to achieve very large amounts of cells for study (reviewed by Arenas et al. ). PC12 cells line are more amenable to high-level transfection and clone than the primary neurons. Therefore, we inferred that PC12 cells as used in the present study would provide a suitable approach to determine whether IRN affords protection against MPP + -induced neurotoxicity (Ryu et al. ).
Based on results from MTS assays, it was concluded that IRN up to 100 μM was not toxic to cultured PC12 cells. This working concentration of IRN in most of our experiments in this report is in the range used by many other researchers (Zhang et al. ). In the present study, the caspase-3 data and Annexin V-FITC/PI staining data did not correlate exactly with each other. For example, IRN at a concentration of 10 μM caused a 35% reduction in caspase-3/7 activity but only a 23% reduction in Annexin V-positive cell. These observed differences could be interpreted in two ways. One interpretation is that the precision of each assay is unlikely to be the same. The other is that caspase-3 activity assay is only a measure of one out of the 16 known caspase enzymes, which triggering an apoptosis cascade through interaction. Recent studies have demonstrated that PC12 cells treated with MPP + led to autophagic cell death, which was confirmed by accumulation of acidic vesicles, and a Beclin-1 and ATG expression increase. Future experiments will focus on roles of autophagy in neuroprotective effect of IRN (Rodríguez-Blanco et al. ; Lu et al. ).
Free radical-induced oxidative damage has been implicated in the pathogenesis of a variety of human diseases such as PD (reviewed by Gaki and Papavassiliou ). We have previously found that ROS played a pivotal role in apoptosis induced by MPP + (Zou et al. ). Given that oxidative stress results from an imbalance between oxidants and antioxidants, antioxidant is necessary to counteract ROS-mediated apoptotic injury, while antioxidant therapy is unlikely to provide a panacea against neurotoxicant effects. In the present study, it was exhibited that antioxidant properties of IRN, an intracellular ROS scavenger, may play a protective role against MPP + -induced PC12 cell injury. Although ROS scavenging was involved in IRN-induced neuroprotection in MPP + -treated PC12 cells, we did not identify the origin of the ROS, i.e., whether it originated from the cytosol or the mitochondria. Our findings must be interpreted in the context of certain limitations.
It is widely accepted that mitochondria play a key role in the regulation of apoptosis. Mitochondria were both the source and target of ROS (Lee et al. ). ROS led to release of Cyt c from mitochondria, a key initiative step in the apoptotic process. Once in the cytosol, Cyt c triggered activation of pro-caspase-9, which, in turn, cleaves pro-caspase-3 and 7. These effector caspases are responsible for DNA breakage, nuclear chromatin condensation, and cell apoptosis (reviewed by Garrido et al. ). In the present study, the IRN-induced inhibition of both Cyt c release and caspase-9 activation could be abolished by the simultaneous addition of the DPI, which supports a role of IRN-induced ROS scavenging in the mitochondria-dependent apoptosis in MPP + -treated PC12 cells.
ROS acts as a second messenger to regulate mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation (reviewed by Jalmi and Sinha ). ROS can activate ASK1, a member of the MAPK family, and triggers various biological responses such as apoptosis and survival in various cell types (Ahn et al. ). Our data show that DN-JNK1-induced JNK inhibition, but not ERK1 and p38, reverses IRN-mediated inhibition of apoptosis, indicated by caspase-3 activity. Further, ASK1 is inactivated by IRN in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. However, it is yet to be determined whether ASK1 inactivation is indeed essential for the JNK inactivation. IRN inhibited MPP + stimulation of p53 activation/expression in MPP + -treated PC12 cells, but SP600125 abolished these changes, suggesting a JNK-dependent mechanism. As a downstream event, we observed that IRN suppressed expression of the pro-apoptotic factor Bax.
It has been suggested that oxidative stress and ERS are involved in neuronal cell death in the pathology of PD besides mitochondrial dysfunction. ERS is often accompanied by increased ROS generation. ROS is one of the important stimuli that trigger ERS (Kim et al. ). PERK, ATF6, and IRE1 are the three major mediators of the ERS response (reviewed by Liu et al. ). Our data showed that MPP + -inducible IRE1 phosphorylation was strongly inhibited by IRN treatment. However, we failed to observe a significant effect of IRN on PERK phosphorylation as well as on the ATF-6α expression in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. Interestingly, the caspase-12 inhibitory effect of IRN was lost due to shRNA-induced IRE1 knockdown. We found that caspase-12 is essential, but not sufficient, for IRN-mediated inhibitions of apoptosis and that one or more factors in addition to caspase-12 are also involved. Accumulation of misfolded proteins α-synuclein is the culprit in PD. Recent studies show that MPP + -induced misfolded α-synuclein aggregates cause ER stress in the PC12 cells (Ryu et al. ; Su et al. ). Further studies are required to explore role of misfolded proteins in neuroprotection afforded by IRN.
JNK can be activated by IRE1 or ASK1 (Mantzaris et al. ). Therefore, we hypothesized that JNK serves as an important crosstalk mediator of the ASK1/JNK pathway with IRE1/caspase-12 pathways under the protective effect of IRN against MPP + -induced neurotoxicity. In our study, the IRN-mediated dephosphorylation of JNK did not change by shRNA-induced IRE1 knockdown as well as no significant alteration in caspase-12 activity was observed by the addition of a SP600125, suggesting that the inactivation of the ASK1/JNK and IRE1/caspase-12 signaling pathways by IRN is mediated by independent mechanisms. ASK1 and IRE1 could regulate parallel pathways affecting cytoprotective effect of IRN in MPP + -treated PC12 cells, such that each contributes independently to resistance to MPP + -induced apoptosis in an additive manner.
Indeed, the IRN-induced inhibition of p53 transcriptional activity could be abolished by the simultaneous addition of the sp600125, which supports a role of IRN-induced inhibition of JNK activation in the inactivation of p53 transcriptional activity in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. Interestingly, blockade of p53 by p53 inhibitor pifithrin-α dramatically, if not completely, abrogated the ability of IRN to alter the expression of cleaved caspase-9 and release of Cyt c , suggesting that alteration of the expression of mitochondria-related proteins by IRN might be mediated by p53. ASK1/JNK and IRE1/caspase-12 signaling pathways might play additive or synergistic roles in IRN-mediated the inactivation of caspase-3 in MPP + -treated PC12 cells. On the other hand, p53 inhibitor pifithrin-α failed to abolish IRN-mediated activation of JNK, corroborating that JNK dephosphorylation is located upstream of p53 inactivation.
To explore the protective mechanisms of IRN against MPP + -induced apoptosis of PC12 cells, a model of sequential events is proposed in Fig. 9 . IRN reduces p53 activity by suppressing JNK activation, which is mediated by ROS-dependent inactivation of ASK1. These inhibitory effects might collectively reduce mitochondria-mediated caspase-3 activity. In addition, IRN inhibits ROS-dependent IRE1 phosphorylation, which suppresses the caspase-12 activity, leading to the reduction caspase-3 activity. Inactivation of the ASK1/JNK and IRE1/caspase-12 signaling pathways by IRN is mediated by independent mechanisms. It should be emphasized that our results and the proposed model do not exclude the involvement of any other anti-apoptotic mechanisms in neuroprotection afforded by IRN. Nevertheless, the underlying mechanisms are certainly more complex than it is described here. The relevance of our findings to in vivo clinical situations remains to be demonstrated. Our results in this report suggested that IRN is a potential candidate for further preclinical study aimed at the treatment of PD. Fig. 9 Schematic model for the mechanism of IRN in protecting against MPP + -induced apoptosis of PC12 cells. IRN inhibits MPP + -induced ROS production, which in turn, suppresses both ASK1/JNK signaling-mediated mitochondria pathway and IRE1α-mediated ERS pathway. As a result, IRN protect PC12 cells from caspase 9-dependent apoptosis. “ T ” symbol represents inhibition, and “ upwards arrow ” indicates the actions of MPP + , while “ filled triangle ” denotes the effects of IRN. See detailed description in “ Discussion ” section