Introduction
Proper sialylation of glycoproteins on terminal residue is crucial for their normal cellular functions such as host–pathogen interaction, cell–cell adhesion, cell migration and modulation of immune response. Sialic acids are nine carbon acidic sugars synthesized in the cytoplasm by UDP- N -acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/ N -acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE/MNK) enzyme, a 79-kDa bifunctional enzyme (Varki and Varki ; Varki ). Mutations in GNE result in muscular myopathy with rimmed vacuoles (GNE myopathy) characterized by muscle weakness and atrophy. Around 180 different mutations have been identified all over the world and M743T (kinase mutant) is more prevalent in the Persian Jewish population, whereas D207V (Epimerase) and V603L (Kinase) mutations are common in Japanese population. The treatment of these disorders mainly relies on oral administration of sialic acid that slows disease progression. Various modified forms of sialic acid are under clinical trials that increase uptake of these molecules in the cell. However, in absence of clear understanding of the pathomechanism of disease at molecular and cellular level, identification of novel drug targets is a big challenge.
As mentioned above, at cellular level, the pathomechanism of these neuromuscular disorders is poorly understood. Hyposialylation of glycoproteins due to reduced normal GNE enzyme activity has been speculated as the major cause of the myopathy. Also, GNE has been shown to affect other cellular functions, in addition to its role in sialic acid biosynthesis. Mutation in GNE causes increased β -1 integrin-mediated cell adhesion (Grover and Arya ) and impairs apoptosis in cells (Singh and Arya ). It influences expression of sialyl transferases, which has impact on cellular proliferation (Wang et al. ). GNE is also shown to be involved in the development, survival and organization of skeletal and cardiac muscles (Milman Krentsis and Sela ). In addition, GNE interacts with α-actinin-2 and co-localizes with α-actinin-1 in skeletal muscle (Amsili and Zer et al. ; Harazi and Becker-Cohen ). GNE also interacts with factors such as the collapsin response mediator protein 1 (CRMP-1), protein involved in the organization of the cytoskeleton network and the promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein (PLZF), nuclear transcription factor indicating nuclear role (Weidemann and Stelzl ). Proteomic profile of GNE myopathy muscle biopsies and cultures suggested that majority of protein network affected is associated with cytoskeleton and sarcomere organization (Sela and Milman Krentsis ). Taken together, all these studies indicate that there may be other cellular mechanisms regulated by GNE besides sialic acid biosynthesis. Hence, there is a need to identify more pathways and identify new targets which are directly regulated by GNE to understand the pathomechanism of the disease.
With an aim to identify differentially expressed proteins due to reduced normal GNE activity, we analyzed proteome profile of pathologically relevant GNE mutations (D207V-epimerase domain) and (V603L-kinase domain) using HEK293 cell-based model system. In this system, mutant GNE proteins are overexpressed and effect of mutation was determined by reduced sialylation of mutant cells compared to vector or wild-type GNE-overexpressing cells (Grover and Arya ; Singh and Arya ). As shown in previous reports (Grover and Arya ; Singh and Arya ), these cells showed increased adhesion and apoptosis due to reduced normal GNE enzyme activity. In the present study, proteins that were differentially expressed in response to these mutations were identified by 2D gel electrophoresis followed by MALDI-TOF/TOF MS/MS. The identified protein was validated and functionally characterized in response to GNE mutations. Our study opens up a new therapeutic area for drug development in the field of GNE related myopathy.
Materials and Methods
Cell Lines Used and Whole Cell Lysate Preparation
HEK293 cell-based model system harboring different mutations of GNE (D207V and V603L) already established in the laboratory was used for the study (Grover and Arya ). Since, sialic acid is present as a serum component and might interfere with data analysis, sialic acid uptake was avoided by growing the cells in high-protein DCCM medium (Biological Industries) (Hinderlich and Salama et al. ; Sela and Milman Krentsis et al. ).
Cells were grown in DCCM media for 48 h and harvested at 80% confluence with 2 mM EDTA. Pellet was washed with 1× PBS and resuspended in lysis buffer composed of 50 mM Tris–Cl (pH 7.4), 0.1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitor cocktail (1:100). Protein concentration was estimated using Bradford reagent (Sigma-Aldrich).
Sample Preparation for 2D Gel Electrophoresis
Two hundred micrograms of whole cell lysate was mixed with 350 µl of rehydration buffer (urea-7M, thiourea-2M, CHAPS-1.2% w/v, DTT-20 mM, ampholyte-0.25% v/v, bromophenol blue-0.005% w/v). Samples were subjected to passive rehydration for 16 h.
Isoelectric Focusing
IEF was performed using IPG Strips (Immobiline Dry strips, pH 3.0–10.0, 18 cm, GE Healthcare). Isoelectric focusing was performed as follows 500 V for 7 h, 1000 V for 1 h, 8000 V for 3 h, 10,000 V for 3 h, and 10,000 V for 3 h using IPG phor system (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech Inc.).
The current per strip was limited to 50 µA/strip and temperature to 20 °C. The focused strips were first equilibrated with equilibration buffer Tris (pH 8.8)-50 mM, urea-6M, glycerol-30%, SDS-2%, bromophenol blue-0.002% plus 1% DTT (added fresh at the time of use) for 15 min and consecutively with equilibration buffer plus 2.5% iodoacetamide for 15 min.
The focused strips were subjected to 12% SDS-PAGE (Ettan DALT six electrophoresis unit, GE) and then manually silver-stained (Baik and Kim ). Images were scanned and differential spot pattern was analyzed by Progenesis SameSpots analysis software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 4.5.4). Protein spots which had a fold change ≥1.5 and ANOVA p value ≤0.05 were selected.
In-Gel Tryptic Digestion
Gel spots were excised manually and were mixed with 30 mM potassium ferricyanide and 100 mM sodium thiosulphate (1:1) for destaining. The destained gel spots were washed thrice with MQ and then with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile (1:1). The gel spots rehydrated with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated again with acetonitrile twice for 15 min. The spots were dried again with speedvac for 5 min and were subjected to trypsin digestion. Freshly prepared trypsin (20 ng/µl) (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to the dried gel spots, incubated for 30 min at 4 °C and overnight at 37 °C. The spots were overlaid with minimum amount of ammonium bicarbonate to prevent drying. Extraction of tryptic peptides was done by sonicating with 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA followed by drying in speed vac.
Peptide Mass Fingerprinting and Identification of Proteins
After trypsin digestion, the extracted peptides were resolubilized with 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA, mixed with matrix solution consisting of cyano-4-hydroxy cinnamic acid matrix (CHCA, Bruker Daltonics) in 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA in a ratio of 1:1. The mix was applied to the target plate, air-dried and subjected to MALDI-TOF/TOF (Ultraflex III, Bruker Daltonics) in the positive ion mode at the accelerating voltage of 25 kV under the Flex Control software (version 3.0, Bruker Daltonics). Peptide mass fingerprints were analyzed by using Biotools (version 3.1, Bruker Daltonics) by Flex Analysis 3.0. The generated peptide mass list was submitted to in-house licensed version of the MASCOT database search engine (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). The SWISS-PROT database was used with the following search parameters; Homo sapiens as taxonomy with ±100 ppm peptide mass tolerance, maximum one missed cleavage site permitted and carbamidomethyl (cysteine) as fixed modification. MOWSE scores >56 were considered significant. For each identified protein, at least one peptide was used for MS/MS (TOF/TOF) analysis so as to confirm the protein identity. The MS/MS spectrum was acquired by instrument in LIFT mode (TOF/TOF) and fragment mass tolerance error 0.5–1 Da was used. Gene annotation analysis was done using DAVID Functional Annotation Software (Padhy and Sethy ).
Quantitative Real-Time PCR
Cells were grown in DCCM media for 48 h. Total RNA was isolated using ONE step RNA Reagent (Bio Basic Inc., USA). Concentration was estimated by Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, USA). Purity of isolated RNA (A260/A280) was ~2.0, and RNA integrity was checked on 1.2% Agarose gel prior to cDNA synthesis. RNA was further treated with DNase1, RNase-free enzyme (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) for preparation of RNA free of genomic DNA. For synthesis of cDNA, RNA (DNase treated) was reverse-transcribed to cDNA using Revert Aid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermantas, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc). A control GAPDH amplication reaction was carried out to check cDNA preparation.
Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) was performed using TaqMan chemistry on ABI 7500 Instrument (Applied Biosystems, USA). Quantitation of expression of two genes peroxiredoxin III (PrdxIII) and peroxiredoxin IV (PrdxIV) was done. Mean of expression levels of two reference genes β-actin and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used for normalization. Pre-designed TaqMan assay (Invitrogen Life Technologies, USA) was used for PrdxIV (Hs9999905_m1), PrdxIII (Hs00428953_g1), β-actin (Hs01060665_g1), and GAPDH (Hs01056076_m1). NTC (no template control) and minus RT( no reverse transcriptase enzyme) were used as negative control, three technical replicates were used. The reaction conditions are as follows: initial hold at 50 °C for 2 min, hold at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of melting at 95 °C for 15 s, and annealing/extension at 60 °C for 1 min. Comparative C t (Delta delta C t (ΔΔ C t )) method was used for quantitation of gene expression.
Immunoblotting
To validate the expression levels of two proteins PrdxIII and PrdxIV, cells were grown in DCCM media for 48 h and harvested with 2 mM EDTA. The pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer Tris (pH 7.4)-50 mM, 0.1% Triton X-100, protease inhibitor cocktail (1:100), whole cell lysate separated on 12% SDS-PAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane. The membrane was blocked with 5% fat-free skimmed milk powder in 1× PBST for 2 h. The blot was further probed with mouse monoclonal anti-PrdxIII (Abcam, UK 1:1000) and mouse monoclonal anti-PrdxIV primary antibody (Abcam, UK 1:2000) followed by HRP conjugated anti-mouse secondary antibody (SantaCruz Biotechnology Inc, USA). GAPDH was used as a loading control and was probed with anti-GAPDH (SantaCruz Biotechnology Inc, USA). The blots were further developed by using chemiluminiscent HRP substrate (Millipore, USA).
Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) Measurement
Total ROS species was measured using 2′,7′-dichorofluorescin diacetate (H 2 DCFDA, Sigma) (Ling and Tan ). H 2 DCFDA is a cell-permeable non-fluorescent probe which is de-esterified by cellular esterases to H 2 DCF which upon subsequent oxidation by ROS species, yields highly fluorescent 2′, 7′-dichlorofluorescein (DCF) with excitation maxima of 485 nm and emission maxima of 530 nm. In brief, cells were grown in DCCM media for 48 h, trypsinized and 2 × 10 4 cells were seeded back in 96-well black plate in triplicates for overnight attachment. Cells were loaded with 10 µM DCFDA and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min in dark. After 30 min, cells were washed with 1x PBS, and fluorescence intensity (excitation = 485 nm and emission = 530 nm) was measured by fluorimeter (Varioskan Flash, Thermo Scientific, USA). Fold change in ROS production was calculated using the following equation: ( F test − F blank )/( F vector control − F blank ), where F test , F blank , F control represent the fluorescence readings from the GNE-mutated cells, the unstained cells, and pcDNA empty vector control wells, respectively.
H2O2 Turn Over Assay Using Amplex Red Dye
H 2 O 2 released from cells was measured using Amplex Red Hydrogen Peroxide/Peroxidase Assay Kit (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen) as per the manufacturer’s instruction. Amplex Red reagent, in presence of HRP, reacts with H 2 O 2 in 1:1 ratio to produce a fluorescent product, Resorufin with excitation maxima of 571 nm and emission maxima of 585 nm or absorbance at 560 nm. r-wt-GNE, r-D207V-GNE, r-V603L-GNE, and pcDNA3 control cells were grown in DCCM medium for 48 h and trypsinized, and 1 × 10 5 cells were resuspended in 250 µl of 1× PBS in triplicates (Tavender, Sheppard et al. ). Initially, 20 µM of H 2 O 2 was added to the cells and incubated at 37 °C. After 30 min, cells were centrifuged for 5 min at 2000 rpm, and 50 µl of supernatant was added to micro-titer plate. Residual H 2 O 2 in the supernatant was measured using Amplex Red Hydrogen Peroxide/Peroxidase Assay Kit (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen) and calculated as percentage of their respective zero time samples.
Co-localization of PrdxIV with ER Marker GRP94 by Confocal Imaging
1 × 10 5 Cells were grown on lysine-treated glass coverslips in DCCM medium for 48 h. Cells were fixed with 3.7% paraformaldehyde for 10 min, and blocking and permeabilization were done with 1% BSA and 0.1% Triton X-100 in 1× PBS. Primary antibody, anti-PrdxIV (Abcam) and anti-GRP94 (SantaCruz Biotechnology Inc, USA) were incubated O/N at 4 °C in a humid chamber. Further, Alexa Fluor 488 and Alexa Fluor 555 conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen) were incubated for 45 min at room temperature. Images were acquired with Olympus FluoView FV1000 ver1.7a at 488 nm (Green laser) and 555 nm (Red laser) at 100X objective. Quantitation was done using Olympus FluoView FV1000 ver1.7a.
Co-immunoprecipitation
pcDNA Vector control, r-wt-GNE, r-D207V-GNE, and r-V603L-GNE cells were grown in T-75 flasks in DCCM medium for 48 h. After 48 h, cells were harvested by trypsinization, washed with 1x PBS, and resuspended in 2 ml of lysis buffer (Tris–HCl-50 mM, NaCl-150 mM, EDTA-1 mM, sodium deoxycholate-0.25%, NP40-0.1%, sodium orthovandate-1 mM, PMSF-1 mM, PIC-1:100). Resuspended cells were incubated on ice for 45 min and centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 30 min. Supernatant was separated and protein concentration was estimated by Bradford reagent. One milligram of whole cell lysate was precleared with 10 µl of protein A/G beads for 2 h at 4 °C. Precleared lysate was incubated with mouse anti-PrdxIV antibody (Abcam, UK)-2 µg overnight at 4 °C. Twenty microliters of protein A/G beads was washed with 1 ml of RIPA buffer thrice. Antibody–lysate complex was added to pre-washed protein A/G beads and rotated on gyratory shaker at 4 °C. After 45 min, bead–protein complex was separated from unbound lysate by spinning at 13000 rpm for 10 min. Bead–protein complex was further washed thrice with RIPA and once with 1× PBS. Forty microliters of 4X SDS loading dye was added to beads and boiled at 100 °C for 10 min. Further, the supernatant was run on 10% SDS-PAGE followed by western blotting onto PVDF membrane. Membrane was blocked with 5% skimmed milk and probed with mouse anti-myc (1:1000) primary antibody (Santa Cruz, USA) followed by HRP-anti-mouse secondary antibody. Blot was developed by enhanced chemiluminescence.
Monitoring ER Redox State with MERO-GFP
MERO-GFP (Mammalian endoplasmic reticulum-localized RedOx-sensitive Green Flourescent Protein) is a GFP which has been modified by appending mouse BiP signal at the N-terminal and ER localization signal KDEL at the C-terminal of redox-sensitive GFP (Kanekura, Ishigaki et al. ). It is used to monitor ER redox state in mammalian cells. MERO-GFP has fully oxidized state at excitation wavelength of 405 nm and at reduced state at 476 nm and emissions at 508 and 510 nm, respectively. It is based on ro-GFP used for monitoring redox state in Yeast (Merksamer and Trusina ; Kanekura and Ishigaki ).
MERO-GFP Construct
pEntr1a Plasmid containing MERO-GFP (sequence between Sal1 and Not1 sites) was a kind gift from Prof Fumihiko Urano, Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. MERO-GFP sequence was sub-cloned in pET30 vector between SalI and NotI sites. pET30a containing MERO-GFP sequence was further sub-cloned in pcDNA3.1 between EcoRI and XhoI sites. MERO-GFP expression and precise monitoring of in vivo redox state were done by confocal analyses.
Confocal Analyses
2 × 10 5 cells of pcDNA vector control, r-wt-GNE, r-D207V-GNE, and r-V603L-GNE were seeded on lysine-treated coverslips in six-well plates. Next day upon 90% confluency, transfection was done using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen) with 2.5 µg of plasmid DNA (pcDNA + MERO-GFP-endotoxin free). Forty-eight hours post-transfection, cells were treated with 0.2 mM of DTT for 10 min, washed with 1× PBS, and fixed with 2% formalin solution for 10 min and mounted with 80% glycerol. Images were acquired with Olympus FluoView FV1000 ver1.7a at 405 nm (Blue laser) and 488 nm (Green laser) at 60X objective. Quantitation was done using Olympus FluoView FV1000 ver1.7a. Untransfected pcDNA empty vector cells were taken as control. MERO-GFP ratio was calculated as follows mean fluorescence intensity at 488 nm upon fluorescence at 405 nm.
Statistics
Experimental values were reported as mean with SEM and are represented as data of at least three independent different biological sets of experiments. Statistical comparisons were made using one-way ANOVA test, followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparison test and p value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. All data analyses were done using Graph Pad Prism5 software.
Results
Identification of Differentially Expressing Proteins by 2D Gel Electrophoresis
HEK293 cell-based model system already established in the laboratory harboring different mutations of GNE (D207V and V603L) was used for identification of differentially expressed proteins (Grover and Arya ). pcDNA3 empty vector, r-wt-GNE (GNE wild type), r-D207V-GNE and r-V603L-GNE mutant cell lines were grown in sialic acid devoid DCCM medium for 48 h. Whole cell lysates were prepared and resolved by 2D-PAGE followed by silver staining. A consistent gel pattern was observed on 18 cm gels after IEF using IPG strips pH 3–10 (Fig. 1 ). The gel pattern of the samples was compared to the vector control by Progenesis SameSpots software 4.5.4. Protein spots which had a fold change ≥1.5 and anova p value ≤0.05 were selected; these 39 spots were further excised from the gels, destained and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion as described in “ Materials and Methods .” The mass of the peptides was analyzed by MALDI-TOF/TOF and MS/MS. From the 39 differentially expressed spots, 10 proteins were successfully identified. A comparative image analysis of identified 10 differentially expressed spots is shown in Fig. 2 . A reference image showing position of these spots on the gel is shown in Fig. 3 . The highest MASCOT score was found for triose phosphate isomerase, peroxiredoxinIV (PrdxIV), proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and alpha-enolase (Table 1 ). The table shows downregulation of PrdxIV in GNE mutant cells compared to vector control which is a protein involved in antioxidant defense mechanism (Tavender and Bulleid ). PrdxIV also regulates neurogenesis by controlling surface expression of GDE2 (Yan, Wladyka et al. ). Also, levels of transcriptional regulator protein zinc finger containing protein 3, were found to be reduced in GNE mutant cells compared to vector control. As reported in our earlier studies (Singh and Arya ), levels of PCNA were drastically reduced in GNE mutant cells compared to vector control reconfirming decreased proliferating activity of GNE mutant cells. Interestingly, calreticulin, endoplasmin and DOCK9 proteins were also found to be downregulated in GNE mutant cells indicating effect on calcium signaling pathway, altered ERAD pathway, and defective cytokinesis. GNE was involved in sialic acid synthesis pathway where precursor molecule is glucose and downregulation of triosephosphate isomerase in GNE mutant cells indicates hampered glycolysis pathway. We also identified an uncharacterized protein, which did not match SWISSPROT and NCBI database. Fig. 1 Representative 2D gel images of control (pcDNA3.1 empty vector), GNE overexpression (r-wt-GNE) and mutants r-D207V-GNE and r-V603L-GNE. Whole cell lysates (200 µg) were separated by isoelectric focusing using pH 3–10; 18-cm IPG strips followed by 12% SDS-PAGE separation and the gel was subjected to silver staining as described in “ Material and Methods ” section Fig. 2 Zoom-in images of differentially expressed spots in 2D-GE of pcDNA empty vector, r-wt-GNE, r-D207V-GNE and r-V603L-GNE, spots were identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF MS/MS Fig. 3 Reference image showing position of identified differentially expressed proteins on 2D gel map (generated by Progenesis, SameSpots software, TotalLabs, version 4.5) Table 1 List of differentially expressed proteins in r-wt-GNE, r-D207V-GNE, and r-V603L-GNE cell lines compared to vector pcDNA3 control S. no. Spot ID Protein name MASCOT protein score Observed pI/M.W. Sequence coverage (%) Fold change (sample/control) (value of pcDNA vector is 1) Protein function r- wt-GNE r-D207V-GNE r-V603L-GNE 1 1162 Peroxiredoxin IV 148 5.86/29 60 0.7 0.23 0.32 Cellular response to oxidative stress 2 1170 Triosephosphate isomerase 149 7.22/29 53 0.88 0.75 0.707 Key enzyme of glycolysis pathway 3 670 Alpha-enolase 101 6.93/46 26 1.38 0.98 0.827 Key enzyme of glycolysis pathway 4 105 Endoplasmin 93 4.76/104 14 0.831 0.166 0.637 ER-associated degradation 5 504 Calreticulin 87 4.29/48 23 0.669 0.558 1.06 Molecular chaperone & maintaining adequate Ca levels 6 1021 Proliferating cell nuclear antigen 103 4.55/35 37 1.37 0.577 0.689 Role in DNA Replication and nucleic acid metabolism 7 1161 Zinc finger CCCH domain-containing protein 3 62 6.12/29 16 0.29 0.248 0.386 Transcription regulation 8 810 Zinc finger protein 485 59 6.82/43 15 2.26 0.763 0.691 Transcription regulation 9 1093 Putative uncharacterized protein 61 6.31/32 57 0.417 0.385 0.569 10 854 Dedicator of cytokinesis protein 9 57 6.34/42 5 1.006 0.457 0.489 Involved in intracellular signaling network Protein score is −10*log( P ), where P is the probability that the observed match is a random event Protein scores greater than 56 are significant ( p < 0.05)
The MASCOT score of endoplasmin and calreticulin was significantly high indicating altered ERAD pathway and affected molecular chaperone activity regulating calcium signaling. Several previous reports have suggested factors such as oxidative stress, lysomal dysfunction and apoptosis as contributing factors toward myopathies similar to GNE myopathy (Tateyama and Takeda ). Also, increased expression of manganese superoxide dismutase with nitrotyrosine (marker of oxidative stress) is seen in myopathies with rimmed vacuoules (Tsuruta and Furuta ). Cell stress and inflammation markers such as iNOS and αβ-crystallin, induced during oxidative stress, are reported to be expressed in GNE myopathy muscle samples. Also markers of RNA and DNA oxidation, 8-hydroxy guanosine and 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine (8OHdG&G) were found to be uniformly distributed in myopathies with rimmed vacuoles (Fischer and Kleinschnitz ). Considering that oxidative stress and cell stress might play a role upstream of muscle degeneration in myopathies with rimmed vacuoles, we speculated low levels of antioxidant enzyme PrdxIV might lead to oxidative stress in GNE mutants (Epimerase and Kinase) and might play an important role in progression of the disease. We further validated downregulation of PrdxIV at transcript level and protein level.
Validation of Downregulation of PrdxIV in GNE Mutants by Western Blotting and Real-Time PCR
Expression of PrdxIV at protein level was validated by immunoblotting with PrdxIV antibody. A significant decrease in PrdxIV expression was seen in GNE mutants 46.88% in r-D207V-GNE ( p value ≤0.05) and 51.918% in r-V603L-GNE ( p value ≤0.05), which is in correlation with 2D-GE result (Fig. 4 a) (Full blot Supplementary Fig. 1a). To check variation in expression levels of other members of Prdx family, we studied expression levels of PrdxIII, mitochondria-localized peroxiredoxin. However, no change in expression levels of PrdxIII was observed in GNE mutant cells (Fig. 4 b) (Full blot Supplementary Fig. 1b). This indicates that the variation in differential expression of peroxiredoxin is limited to PrdxIV, which is an ER-localized peroxiredoxin. Interestingly, sialic acid supplementation with 5 mM sialic acid in GNE mutant cell lines could not completely restore PrdxIV levels in GNE mutant cells compared to vector control (Fig. 4 c) (Full blot Supplementary Fig. 2). This finding also strengthens alternate role of GNE in cell functions in the cells besides sialic acid biosynthesis. Fig. 4 a Determination of expression of PrdxIV in GNE mutant cell lines by immunoblotting. Whole cell lysates of indicated cell lines were run on 12% SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting with anti-PrdxIV primary antibody. GAPDH was used as loading control. p value for *, ** are <0.05 and <0.005, respectively. b Determination of expression of PrdxIII in GNE mutant cell lines by immunoblotting. Whole cell lysates of indicated cell lines were run on 12% SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting with anti-PrdxIII primary antibody. GAPDH was used as loading control. c PrdxIV expression levels after supplementation with sialic acid. PrdxIV expression levels were determined after supplementation with 5 mM sialic acid in GNE mutant cell lines. Whole cell lysates were run on 12% SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting with anti-PrdxIV primary antibody. GAPDH was used as loading control. Densitometric analysis of blots was done using Alpha Ease FC 4.0 software and normalized to pcDNA empty vector as internal control and GAPDH as loading control. Data shown as mean ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments after normalization wrt pcDNA empty vector control
Levels of PrdxIV in GNE mutant cells were further validated at transcript level by quantitative real-time PCR. Taqman probes were designed as described in “ Material and Methods ” section. Total RNA was isolated from r-wt-GNE and mutant cells along with pcDNA3 cell lines. GAPDH and β-actin were used as internal control. A significant decrease in mRNA levels of PrdxIV was observed 39.32% in r-D207V-GNE ( p value ≤0.002) and 49.22% in r-V603L-GNE ( p value ≤0.002) (Fig. 5 a). Consistent to protein expression results, mRNA levels of PrdxIII (member of peroxiredoxin family of proteins) were found to be unaltered (Fig. 5 b). Our results indicate specific inhibition of PrdxIV at both RNA and protein levels in response to GNE mutation. Fig. 5 Validation of downregulation of PrdxIV expression at transcript level. Quantitation of mRNA levels of a PrdxIV and b PrdxIII was done by real-time PCR using Taqman probes. Two endogenous controls GAPDH & β-Actin were used for normalization. *** p value <0.0002. Data shown as mean ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments after normalization wrt pcDNA empty vector control
Effect of PrdxIV Downregulation on Cellular Functions in HEK Cell-Based Model for GNE Myopathy
Peroxiredoxins (Prdx) are antioxidant enzymes primarily involved in the maintenance of cellular redox homeostasis by fine tuning the levels of cellular H 2 O 2 (Tavender and Bulleid ; Poynton and Hampton ). With an aim to study effect of reduced PrdxIV levels on ROS production in GNE mutant cells, we measured total ROS levels by DCFDA dye as described in “ Material and Methods ” section. As shown in Fig. 6 a, no significant change in ROS production was observed in GNE mutant cells compared to vector control indicating that other proteins might be masking the effect of PrdxIV in antioxidant defense mechanism. Fig. 6 Measurement of total reactive oxygen species (ROS) and H 2 O 2 turnover assay in GNE mutant cells. a Measurement of total reactive oxygen species (ROS) in pcDNA vector control, r-wt-GNE, r-D207V-GNE, r-V603L-GNE was measured using 2′–7′ dichlorofluorescein diacetate (Sigma). Data shown as mean ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments after normalization wrt pcDNA empty vector control. b Measurement of H 2 O 2 turnover using Amplex Red dye. Residual H 2 O 2 (initial 20 µM) was measured after 30 min incubation at 37 °C in r-wt-GNE, r-D207V-GNE, r-V603L-GNE and pcDNA vector control cells using Amplex Red kit. Residual H 2 O 2 was measured and calculated as percentage of their respective zero time samples. Data shown as mean ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments after normalization wrt pcDNA empty vector control
Further to establish role of PrdxIV in GNE mutant cells, we treated the cells with exogenous H 2 O 2 and measured the residual H 2 O 2 left in the cell after the degradation of H 2 O 2 by various peroxidases in the cell. As shown in Fig. 6 b, no significant residual H 2 O 2 was found remaining in GNE mutant cells compared to vector control indicating PrdxIV alone may not be responsible for H 2 O 2 quenching and other cellular peroxidases and antioxidant defense mechanisms within the cell might be combating increased levels.
H 2 O 2 released from the cells was measured by using Amplex Red dye as per the manufacturer’s instruction. However, no significant release of H 2 O 2 in mutants compared to pcDNA empty vector was observed (Data not shown). Our study clearly indicates that although PrdxIV levels are reduced due to reduced normal GNE activity, it is not involved in generating reactive oxygen species in GNE mutant cells. An alternate role of PrdxIV in these cells may involve proper folding of mutant protein in ER via regulating PDI (protein disulfide isomerase) reoxidation.
Effect of Altered PrdxIV on ER Redox State
Since PrdxIV is a major ER oxidase involved in reoxidation of PDI during disulfide bond formation, downregulation of PrdxIV might affect ER redox state. We first confirmed the localization of PrdxIV in ER by confocal microscopy in GNE mutant cells (Fig. 7 a). Figure 7 b shows that PrdxIV co-localized with GRP94 (ER marker) in GNE mutant cells indicating that mutation in GNE does not alter its localization. Fig. 7 Co-localization study of PrdxIV with ER marker GRP94 by confocal imaging. a pcDNA vector control, r-wt-GNE, r-D207V-GNE, r-V603L-GNE cells were subjected to immunofluorescence. Cells were immunostained with anti-PrdxIV and anti-GRP94 followed by incubation with Alexa Flour 488 (Green) and Alexa Flour 555 (Red) conjugated secondary antibody. Confocal imaging was done at 100X objective with Olympus FV1000. b Quantitation of merge images GRP94 with PrdxIV (overlap of images) was done using Olympus FluoView FV1000 ver1.7a (Color figure online)
In order to understand role of PrdxIV in GNE-deficient cells, it was of interest to determine whether PrdxIV directly interacts with GNE or its mutant form. Considering PrdxIV to be an ER-resident protein and preferential localization of r-V603L-GNE in ER, it would be important to know whether GNE is a substrate for PrdxIV to affect protein folding process. With this objective, a co-immunoprecipitation assay was set up with anti-PrdxIV pulldown using protein A/G beads as described in “ Material and Methods ” section and immunoblotting with anti-Myc (GNE detection). Specific band for GNE could be observed after anti-PrdxIV pulldown shown in Supplementary Fig. 3. The input lysates showed the expressed recombinant GNE or mutant protein. The study suggests that wild-type GNE protein does not interact with PrdxIV directly. However, after mutation, ER-resident mutant GNE may interact with PrdxIV in ER.
Further, ER redox state was measured by determination of MERO-GFP ratio (Mammalian Endoplasmic reticulum-localized RedOx-sensitive Green Fluorescent Protein), i.e., fluorescence ratio between excitation 488 nm (reduced state) versus 405 nm (oxidized) (Kanekura and Ishigaki ). Cells were challenged with strong reducing agent such as DTT to determine difference in oxidizing capacity of the ER between control and GNE mutant cells showing downregulation of PrdxIV. Upon treatment with 0.2 mM DTT, significant increase in green fluorescence intensity was observed in r-D207V-GNE and r-V603L-GNE mutant cells compared to wild type or vector controls, while the blue fluorescence (oxidized) remained nearly the same (Fig. 8 a). As a result, ratio of the fluorescence from excitation 488 and 405 nm (reduced by oxidized) significantly increased in GNE mutants r-D207V-GNE (2.9 fold) and r-V603L-GNE (3.34 fold) indicating impaired oxidizing capacity of the ER (Fig. 8 b). Thus, our study clearly indicate that reduced PrdxIV levels do not affect ROS levels in GNE mutant cells rather alter ER redox state that may contribute toward misfolding of proteins in ER. Fig. 8 Determination of ER redox state using MERO-GFP. a pcDNA, r-wt-GNE and mutants r-D207V-GNE, r-V603L-GNE were transiently transfected with 2.5 µg plasmid DNA (pcDNA + MERO-GFP) for 48 h. Cells were treated with 0.2 mM DTT for 10 min, fixed and viewed with Olympus confocal microscope at 60X objective. b Quantification of acquired image and ratio of 488/405 fluorescence was used to calculate MERO-GFP ratio (Reduced/oxidized). p value *** is <0.001 (Color figure online)
Discussion
GNE myopathy is a rare neuromuscular disorder with unclear pathomechanisms. Recent studies have identified other possible roles of GNE in cellular functions besides sialic acid biosynthesis. Apart from hyposialylation of various glycoproteins and glycoconjugates, mutant GNE can affect cell apoptosis, proliferation through mitochondrial deregulation and ganglioside production, respectively (Wang and Sun ; Singh and Arya ). Several proteins involved in cytoskeletal network were differentially expressed in muscle biopsies and muscle culture study of GNE mutants (Sela and Milman Krentsis ). Integrin-based cell adhesion mechanism was found to be altered in HEK cell-based model to understand GNE functions (Grover and Arya ). Additionally, interaction of GNE with alpha-actinin, PLZF, and CRMP1 raises an intriguing question of alternate GNE functions (Weidemann and Stelzl ).
As reported, GNE deficiency in mice is embryonically lethal at day E8.5 (Schwarzkopf and Knobeloch ) and mice harboring the homozygous kinase mutant ( Gne M743T/M743T ) cannot survive beyond P3 due to severe glomerular proteinuria (Galeano and Klootwijk ). We had also tried generating GNE knockout L6 rat skeletal muscle cell lines which was also lethal even after supplementation with sialic acid (data not shown). Hence, HEK cell-based model overexpressing GNE mutant proteins offers a mechanism to understand and correlate genotype with phenotype characteristic.
With an urge to identify new pathways regulated by GNE, we studied the proteomic profile of HEK293 cells overexpressing pathologically relevant GNE mutations. Ten differentially expressed proteins in mutants r-D207V-GNE and r-V603L-GNE were identified using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by MALDI-TOF/TOF MS/MS.
In the proteomic study, we observed reduced expression of PrdxIV in mutants r-D207V-GNE and r-V603L-GNE with reference to vector control that was validated at transcription level also. Peroxiredoxin IV (PrdxIV) is involved in regulating antioxidant defense mechanism within the cell by facilitating peroxide removal in a thiol-dependent catalytic cycle and providing protection against ROS species (Tavender and Bulleid ; Abbasi and Corpeleijn ). Hence, reduced PrdxIV levels in GNE mutant cells may affect ROS levels in the cell. However, in our experiments to measure total ROS species in the cells, we did not observe any significant effect of reduced PrdxIV on ROS generation. Removal of H 2 O 2 to H 2 O was also not affected as indicated by H 2 O 2 turnover assay. This could be due to compensatory effect of other enzymatic antioxidants such as glutathione peroxidase (GPX) and non-enzymatic antioxidants in the cells that control redox homeostasis (Valko and Leibfritz ; Trachootham and Lu ). Like other non-muscle cells, mitochondria are major sites of ROS production; however, after contraction, a 100-fold increase in oxygen consumption leads to only 2 threefold increase in total ROS production indicating presence of other non-mitochondrial sources of ROS production in muscle cells (Choi and Ow ). Interestingly, a recent report on GNE myopathy mice model ( Gne −/− h GNE D207V-Tg) indicated that hyposialylation leads to impaired ROS scavenging and muscle atrophy (Cho et al. 2017). Increased oxidative stress was also observed in cultured myotubes from Gne −/− h GNE D207V-Tg mice that was reversed after supplementation with sialic acid. The effect of altered PrdxIV levels in GNE mutant cell lines may be restricted to ER-specific response and affect primarily ER redox state.
Being an ER-localized peroxiredoxin, PrdxIV scavenges H 2 O 2 produced during disulfide formation in oxidative protein folding process. Usually protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) catalyzes disulfide bond formation and Ero1α transfers electrons from molecular oxygen to PDI to assist protein folding and generate H 2 O 2 in the process. PrdxIV, then, converts H 2 O 2 generated by Ero1α to H 2 O and also helps in reoxidation of PDI (Zito and Melo ). We found that PrdxIV co-localized with GRP94 in GNE wild-type as well as mutant cells indicating that PrdxIV localization was not altered in the absence of functional GNE. Now the question is whether reduced levels of PrdxIV affect ER redox homeostasis of GNE mutant cells. To measure this, we studied redox state of ER using MERO-GFP ratio that shows different excitation spectra in oxidized and reduced state as described in Methods. Significant increase in MERO-GFP ratio (Flourescence at 488/405 nm) indicates reduced state of ER and a reducing environment of ER in absence of functional GNE. This reducing environment of ER may contribute to misfolding of proteins observed in absence of functional GNE.
Key pathological characteristic observed in muscle biopsy samples of patients suffering with GNE myopathy is the presence of rimmed vacuoles and inclusion bodies. These inclusion bodies seem to be the result of aggregation of misfolded proteins in response to ER stress in GNE myopathy (Broccolini and Mirabella ). Upregulation of chaperones in ER of muscle biopsy samples and AβPP deposition leading to activation of UPR response indicate stress condition of ER in GNE myopathy (Li and Chen ). Even the mouse model of GNE myopathy Gne −/− h GNE -D207V-Tg showed amyloid β deposition in response to hyposialylation of glycoproteins that could lead to oxidative stress and autophagy. Further, it has been reported that hyposialylation of muscle glycoproteins such as neprilysin might lead to accumulation of Aβ amyloid, leading to oxidative stress. All these events eventually lead to muscle fiber degeneration in GNE patients (Broccolini and Mirabella ). Proteins which are involved in stress response to unfolded proteins such as HSP70, Crystallin, and HSPB1 have been found to be differentially regulated in GNE myopathy biopsies and cell culture by proteomic study (Sela and Milman Krentsis ). It has also been reported that ER stress and protein folding are affected in several neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Huntington’s disease (Roussel and Kruppa ). Our study clearly provides an additional supporting evidence for altered ER redox state of the cell due to reduced normal GNE activity.
In addition to PrdxIV, we also observed downregulation of proliferative cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in proteomic profile study of GNE mutant cells. Previous study from our laboratory also reported reduced levels of PCNA in GNE mutant cells (Singh and Arya ). Since PCNA controls cell proliferation and is a processivity factor for DNA polymerase in eukaryotes (Kwofie and Skowronski ), low levels of PCNA may lead to reduced muscle mass observed in GNE myopathy. Some of the other differentially expressed proteins include zinc finger protein 485 (transcription regulator), DOCK9 (Dedicator of Cytokinesis 9), Calreticulin (calcium-binding ER-resident protein), and Endoplasmin (ER chaperone). Future studies need to be performed to validate and study the effect of these proteins on cell function in absence of functional GNE.
Conclusion and Proposed Model
In the present study, downregulation of PrdxIV was observed in GNE mutant cells both at protein and transcript level. PrdxIV is an ER-resident peroxiredoxin that quenches H 2 O 2 released in the cells. Here we propose that in absence of functional GNE, instead of directly affecting ROS levels or H 2 O 2 accumulation, PrdxIV controls the redox environment of ER keeping it in reduced state (Fig. 9 ). This may affect PDI reoxidation process via ERo1α required during disulfide formation of protein folding process (Oka and Bulleid ). Improper protein folding leads to misfolding and aggregation of misfolded proteins in the cell that may contribute to pathogenesis. Fig. 9 Proposed model: role of peroxiredoxin IV in maintenance of ER redox homeostasis in the cell. GNE myopathy is associated with formation of rimmed vacuoles and inclusion bodies due to mutations in GNE enzyme that may cause accumulation of misfolded protein leading to ER stress (Center). In the cell, O 2 is converted to H 2 O 2 by Ero1α, which then is converted to H 2 O by PrdxIV (Left). Thus, PrdxIV acts as ROS scavenger. However, in cells with mutation in GNE, downregulation of PrdxIV affect ER redox homeostasis. Low levels of PrdxIV may affect reoxidation of molecular chaperone (PDI) that is required for proper protein folding (Right). This may lead to accumulation of misfolded protein in ER and generation of ER stress in the cell