Introduction
In both civilian and military populations, traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality. More than 1.7 million people sustain TBI each year in the US alone, as estimated by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control (NCIPC) (Faul et al. ). In the military, over 339,000 US Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) service members have been diagnosed with TBI (Fischer ). The vast majority (83 %) of civilian and military TBI cases involve mild TBI. (Department of Defense ; Coronado et al. ). Mild TBI (mTBI) is defined by the American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine as a head trauma, resulting in loss of memory for immediate events following the injury, brief loss of consciousness lasting up to 30 min and alteration in mental state (confusion, disorientation) within 24 h of injury (Kay et al. ). Mild TBI typically results in the lack of structural abnormalities using conventional brain imaging techniques, and although most patients recover after injury, a few (10–15 %) experience persistent post-injury symptoms (Røe et al. ; Williams et al. ). Numerous studies to date have demonstrated the chronic effects of mTBI on neuropathological outcome in both humans and animal models (Brenner ; Xiong et al. ). However, there are currently no objective biomarkers available to assist clinicians with diagnosing this central nervous system (CNS) disorder.
Currently, available biomarkers for TBI show good sensitivity for assisting with clinical diagnosis of severe cases, since they are associated with parenchymal damage and can be detected in blood during the acute phase of the injury due to the disruption of the blood brain barrier (BBB) (Mondello et al. ; Kövesdi et al. ; Papa et al. ; Raabe et al. ; Romner et al. ). These include S100 calcium-binding protein B (S100B), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), neuron specific enolase (NSE) and ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase (UCHL-1). Furthermore, these biomarkers not only show good sensitivity and specificity for severe TBI, but especially the diagnostic performance of UCH-L1 has shown promising results in the acute and sub-acute settings of mild to moderate TBI (Papa et al. ). Yet, these biomarkers lack the desired sensitivity to detect mTBI at chronic timepoints post-injury. Thus, this underscores the vital need to identify putative, noninvasive biomarkers that can be utilized as a diagnostic or prognostic tool following exposure to mTBI and that are present at chronic stages of mTBI.
Phospholipids (PLs) are a major constituent of the plasma membrane and make up 45 % of the total dry weight of the brain. They are important for the proper function of membrane proteins such as receptors, enzymes and ion channels. Maintaining not only functional and structural integrity of membranes, they also play important roles in inflammation and trafficking (Purdon et al. ; Vance and Vance ; Frisardi et al. ; Kosicek and Hecimovic ). Investigation of PL abnormalities associated with TBI can be expected to illuminate their biological functions and their role in TBI pathogenesis. Abdullah et al., investigated PL levels in controlled cortical impact (CCI) injured mice 3 months post-injury and observed lower ether PE levels in the cortices and plasma of injured animals. Moreover, ratios of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) to arachidonic acid (AA), which play a role in inflammatory responses, were lower in the hippocampi, cortices and plasma of injured mice, indicating that TBI has an effect on brain, as well as plasma PL levels (Abdullah ).
Clinical evidence of PL involvement in TBI comes from a study by Pasvogel and colleagues, who showed increased phosphatidylcholine (PC) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients who died within days following severe TBI compared to those who survived (Pasvogel et al. ). Furthermore, a cross-sectional study showed increased PLs in lipoprotein fractions within the CSF in patients with TBI compared to control subjects (Kay et al. ).
Moreover, our group previously examined PL profiles in a cross-sectional cohort of active duty soldiers in order to explore the possibility of PL changes in human mTBI and specifically to look in blood as a more readily accessible biomarker than CSF to fill the gap in research in this area (Emmerich et al. ). We showed that having a history of mTBI correlated with chronic changes in phospholipid classes, such as PC and PE. We observed decreases in total PC and PE content, as well as ether PE. Moreover, in mTBI patients, ratios of AA- to DHA-containing species were significantly decreased within PC and PE classes.
In this current study, we used liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) analyses to investigate long-term plasma PL profiles in our closed head injury (CHI) mouse model of mTBI in order to determine whether this model captures the lipid changes observed in human mTBI patients. This lifelong characterization will also provide the platform for further investigation of the impact and role of lipids in TBI, eventually aiming to identify therapeutic targets. The use of laboratory models of relevance to human TBI enables biomarker profiling over extended periods post-injury, which would be very difficult to perform in human patient populations. Our mTBI model has been extensively characterized neurobehaviorally and neuropathologically from 24 h to several chronic timepoints post-injury (Mouzon et al. , ; Mouzon et al., pers. comm. ). These studies have shown that mice exposed to a single mTBI have short-term behavioral abnormalities showing transient deficits in motor function and spatial memory. In trials of cognitive performance, the injured animals had recovered to the same level of performance as their uninjured control counterparts by 6 months after injury, remaining at comparable levels at subsequent evaluations (Mouzon et al. , ). These observations are consistent with findings in human patients in which those suffering from mild head injury often return to their pre-concussive status within a week (Lovell et al. ; McCrea et al. ). Moreover, this animal model showed reactive astrocytosis and sparse APP-immunoreactive axonal pathology in the corpus callosum, which manifested as a degree of neuroinflammation and white matter loss (CC thinning). This pathology, which peaked at 6 months, remained static at the 12 and 24 months timepoints (Mouzon et al. , Mouzon et al. pers.comm. ).
Our longitudinal profiling of PL levels in mTBI in plasma from these mice has identified changes, which are consistent with our previous findings in human subjects. In future studies, these changes will be verified in other models and in human populations for their use as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers.
Materials and Methods
Animals
Male, C57BL/6 J mice (10 weeks, 24–30 g, Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) were singly housed under standard laboratory conditions (23 ± 1 °C, 50 ± 5 % humidity, and 12 h light/dark cycle) with free access to food and water throughout the study. We used a standard diet (ENVIGO, IN) that contains a standard mixture of fatty acids [both omega-6/omega-3, SFA (0.8 %), MUFA (1.1 %) and PUFA (2.9 %)].
Mice were allowed to adapt to the vivarium for 1 week prior to experimental procedures. All procedures involving mice were performed under Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approval and in accordance with the National Institute of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
Injury Protocol
Mice were injured via a CHI mTBI model as previously described (Mouzon et al. , ). Briefly, mice were anesthetized with 1.5 L/min of oxygen and 3 % isoflurane and their heads shaved; each mouse was transferred into a stereotaxic frame (Stereotaxic, Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL) mounted with an EM controlled impact device (Impact OneTM Stereotaxic Impactor, Richmond, IL). The injury was triggered using the myNeuroLab controller at a strike velocity of 5 m/s, strike depth of 1.0 mm and dwell time of 200 ms, a paradigm specifically developed to avoid fractures and bleeds to allow correlation with human mTBI. Based on the manufacturer’s instructions, the force applied to the mouse head at the time of impact is 72 N under these conditions. At the end of the procedure, each animal was allowed to recover and was then returned to its home cage. Control animals underwent the same procedures and anesthesia of the same duration, but did not receive a hit, in order to control for the effects of anesthesia.
Injury Groups and Schedule
For the lipidomic analyses, a total of 40 mice were randomly assigned to one of two groups; single injury (mTBI) or single sham (sham: control, anesthesia alone matched for the anesthesia duration of injured mice). Single injury/sham was administered as before (Mouzon et al. ) and samples collected at five different timepoints—24 h and 3, 6, 12 and 24 months post-injury ( n = 8 per timepoint, comprising 4 mTBI and 4 sham mice).
Sample preparation
To obtain blood specimens suitable for measurement of plasma phospholipid analysis, animals were lightly anesthetized with isoflurane prior to euthanasia, and approximately 500 µl of blood was withdrawn into EDTA capillary tubes by cardiac puncture to avoid coagulation. Protease and phosphatase inhibitors were added as additional preservatives. Blood was then centrifuged at 5000× g for 3 min to avoid shearing of cells (Norman et al. ; Crawford et al. ). Plasma was collected and stored at −80 °C until lipidomic analysis. Figure 1 shows the outline of our experimental schedule. On the day of euthanasia, all mice in that cohort were euthanized randomly between 9 am and 2 pm to avoid any bias from collection time. All mice, injured or sham, were nonfasting at the time of euthanasia; it has been shown that fasting has not effect on changes in PL levels (Begum et al. ); given the standardization of diet and treatment/handling of all animals, we expect PL levels to be stable across groups apart from any influence of mTBI. Fig. 1 Outline of experimental schedule
Thiobarbituric Acid Reactive Substances (TBARS) ELISA
For the 24 h and 3 months timepoint, lipid peroxidation was assessed via a TBARS ELISA (Cayman Chemical, MI). As lipid peroxides are unstable, a number of compounds are formed, including malondialdehyde (MDA). Therefore, the level of peroxidation is measured by the occurrence of MDA. The ELISA was performed following manufacturer’s instructions. A MDA-thiobarbituric Acid (TBA) adduct was formed by the reaction of MDA and TBA under high temperature (90–100 °C) and acidic conditions, and measured colorimetrically at 530–540 nm.
Lipidomic Analysis
All samples were analyzed with the experimenter blinded to the group and timepoint to which each animal was assigned. Lipids were extracted from plasma ( n = 4 mTBI and n = 4 sham for each of the 5 timepoints post-injury; total n = 40) using the Folch method (Folch et al. ; Emmerich et al. ). Synthetic internal standards (di-14:0 fatty acid [FA]-containing PC and PE, 14:0 FA-containing LPE and LPC, d18:1/17:0 sphingomyelin (SM), and di-16:0 for phosphatidylinositol [PI]) were added to plasma prior to lipid extraction. As previously described (Emmerich et al. ), lipid extracts were resuspended in isopropanol and separation was achieved using hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) on a 1 mm × 100 mm column packed with 3 µm Pinnacle II silica particles (Restek Corporation, Bellefonte, PA, USA). A 15-min isocratic separation was performed with 70 % solvent A (100 % acetonitrile [ACN]) and 30 % solvent B (78 % methanol, 1 % formic acid, 0.6 % ammonium hydroxide) at a flow rate of 55 µl/min with the column temperature at 40 °C. Mass spectrometry (MS) was performed with a Thermo LTQ-XL linear ion trap mass spectrometer equipped with a Surveyor HPLC pumping system and Micro AS autosampler (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). Full scan negative ion electrospray mass spectra were acquired from m / z 200 to 2000 with in-source collision induced dissociation (SCID), with relative energy of 15 %. All spectra were obtained with a 200 ms maximum ion time and by summing of 5 microscans. Mass spectra were summed over the chromatographic peak for each PL class (using the Qual module in Excalibur 3.0 software, Thermo), converted to values with a threshold of 0.01 % base ion intensity, exported to Microsoft Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA), and then analyzed with LipidomeDB online using custom target lists for each PL class (University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA; http://129.237.137.125:8080/Lipidomics/ ) to identify and quantify each PL molecular species.
The measured concentration of all molecular species identified within each PL class was summed to generate total PC, LPC, PE, LPE, SM and PI concentration values. Each phospholipid class of PC, LPC, PE, LPE and PI was then separately grouped according to their degree of unsaturation of each molecular species (SFA—saturated fatty acids, MUFA—monounsaturated fatty acids and PUFA—polyunsaturated fatty acids). Sphingomyelin was excluded from this analysis due to its lack of PUFA-containing SM species.
We analyzed the ratios of arachidonic acid (AA)-containing lipid species to docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)-containing species of PC, LPC, PE, LPE and PI. For PC, we used AA-containing PC (36:4, 16:0/20:4), PC (38:4, 18:0/20:4) and PC (38:5, 18:1/20:4). For DHA-containing PC, we used PC (38:6, 16:0/22:6) PC (40:6, 18:0/22:6) and PC (40:7, 18:1/22:6). For LPC, AA-containing LPC (20:4) and DHA-containing LPC (22:6) were examined. For PE, AA-containing species, PE (38:4, 18:0/20:4), PE (38:5, 18:1/20:4), PE (36:4, 16:0/20:4) and ether PE (ePE 38:4, o-18:0/20:4) were examined. DHA-containing PE species included PE (40:6, 18:0/22:6) and ePE (40:6, o-18:0/22:6). For LPE, AA-containing LPE (20:4) and DHA-containing LPE (22:6) were used. For (AA)-containing PI species, we calculated PI (36:4, 16:0/20:4) and PI (38:4, 18:0/20:4), and for DHA-containing PI species, we used PI (40:6, 18:0/22:6) We previously determined the identification of these species as containing AA and DHA based on MS/MS analyses (Abdullah et al. ). Ether PC (ePC), ePE, eLPC and eLPE were grouped separately, as these lipids contain ether linkage at the SN1 position.
Statistical Analyses
As these were exploratory studies, post hoc calculations were conducted using the G-power software which showed a greater than 90 % power at alpha 0.05 for the effect size (Cohen d > 1.0) for the sample size utilized in this study. Statistical analyses were performed as we have previously described (Abdullah et al. ; Emmerich et al. ). Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was used to minimize multi-collinearity and achieve dimension reduction, as used routinely for the evaluation of lipidomic data. First, the Kaiser–Mayer–Olkin (KMO) and Bartlett’s test for Sphericity was used to ensure sampling adequacy for PCA. Sampling adequacy as determined by a KMO value of >0.6 and Bartlett p value <0.05 were further investigated. Variables with eigenvalues of ≥1 were retained, PCA was used for extracting components, and varimax with Kaiser normalization was used for rotation to simplify and clarify the data structure. In order to perform mixed linear modeling (MLM) regression analysis on each component (the outcome measure), the Anderson–Rubin method was used for exporting uncorrelated scores while adjusting for random (mice) and fixed (injury, time and replication) factors. Following data analysis using MLM, Fisher’s least significant difference (LSD) correction and the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure (B–H) were used for multiple-test correction and control of false discovery rate (FDR). All data were analyzed using SPSS version 22.0.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY). B–H ( α = 0.05) was calculated using JMP 11 (SAS, Cary, NC). Data were normally distributed and as such are presented as means and standard error of the mean (SEM).
Results
We used HILIC LC/MS to identify and quantify various phospholipid classes and their molecular species. Supplemental Fig. 1A shows a representative total ion chromatogram of the internal standards for PC, LPC, PE, LPE, PI and SM molecular species. Supplemental Fig. 1B shows an ion MS spectrum of PC molecular species.
Long-Term Plasma Profiling of Total Phospholipid Classes in mTBI and Control Animals
Our aim was to establish a long-term plasma PL profile in mTBI injured mice and compare them to matched control mice (sham). We examined PL profiles at an acute timepoint (24 h) and at multiple chronic post-injury time points (3, 6, 12 and 24 mo post-injury).
In Fig. 2 a–f, we first evaluated possible effects of aging on total PL levels in control mice (solid lines) and mTBI mice (dashed lines). Figures 2 a–f show mean concentrations of various PL classes ranging from 24 h to 24 months. For control mice, we observed significantly lower PC, PE, PI and SM levels at the 24 month timepoint relative to 24 h ( p < 0.05), but no significant differences between 24 h and any of the other timepoints that were evaluated in this study. No effect of aging was observed for LPC and LPE. Mild TBI animals showed the same aging curves as control animals for total PC, LPC, PI and SM. Differences were observed for LPC and PE. In mTBI mice, total LPC, reached significantly lower levels at 24 month compared to 24 h. For total PE, the 12 and 24 months were decreased compared to 24 h. Fig. 2 a–f Effect of aging on total plasma PC, PE, PI, LPC, SM and LPE in control and mTBI animals, represented in mean ± SEM in percentage their 24 h timepoint. Individual molecular species of PC, PE, PI, LPC, SM and LPE quantified by LC/MS were summed after LipidomeDB analyses to generate total lipid levels. Each total lipid class was calculated in regard to their respective 24 h timepoint (100 %). For control mice, total PC, PE, PI and SM were significantly decreased 24 month post-injury. No significant difference was observed for any other timepoints or for total LPC and LPE ( Asterisk denotes to p < 0.05 in control, solid line ). MTBI mice behaved as their control counter parts for total PC, LPC, PI and SM. However, for total LPC, mTBI mice reached significant lower levels at 24 month compared to 24 h. For total PE, the 12, and 24 months were decreased compared to 24 h (∞ denotes to p < 0.05 in mTBI, dashed line )
Next, we analyzed plasma PL changes in mTBI animals and aged matched control mice. Total concentrations of each PL class are shown in Fig. 3 . Overall, plasma levels of several major PL classes were decreased in mTBI compared to control mice at several chronic post-injury timepoints. More specifically, relative to control mice, total PC, LPC, PE, LPE and PI were consistently lower in mTBI mice at the post-injury timepoint of 3–24 months, with differences being significant for 3, 12 and 24 months post-injury. However, SM levels were only significantly lower at 24 months post-injury. Absolute plasma concentrations for all major PL classes in sham and mTBI mice can be found in supplemental Table 1. Figure 4 shows a summary figure of total lipid changes over time following head injury. Overall, while there is a small but non-significant increase at 24 h post-injury, PL decreases are prominent at 3 month post-injury, which is then followed by a recovery phase at 6 month. Long-term PL changes are evident at 12 months post-injury with PL further decreasing at 24 months post-injury, where an additional aging effect is eminent. Fig. 3 Significant changes in total plasma phospholipids in mTBI mice, represented in mean ± SEM in percentage of control at 24 h, 3, 6, 12 and 24 mo post-injury. Individual molecular species of PC, PE, PI, LPC, SM and LPE quantified by LC/MS were summed after LipidomeDB analyses to generate total lipid levels. Table gives significant p values for all timepoints. Based on MLM regression and post hoc analysis, total PC was significantly decreased at 3, 12 and 24 mo post-injury ( p < 0.01) compared to sham mice. Total LPC ( p < 0.01) and LPE ( p < 0.001) were significant at the 3 and 24 mo timepoint. Total PE ( p < 0.01) and PI ( p < 0.05) were decreased at 3, 12 and 24 mo. Total SM was different between injury and sham at 24 mo ( p < 0.01) Fig. 4 Summary figure providing an overview of our PL findings: Our overall data suggest decreases in PL at 3 months post-injury, followed by a recovery phase (up to 6 months) and long-term lipid changes, which are then accompanied by aging effects. Black / gray lines indicate total changes of each PL class over time. The red line shows average changes at 24 h, 3, 6, 12 and 24 month post-injury in mTBI mice
Analysis of the Degree of Unsaturation of PL Classes
The brain can synthesize SFAs and MUFAs, whereas PUFAs are largely acquired through the periphery due to the low capacity of the brain to synthesize these de novo . We therefore examined whether there was an effect of injury on the degree of unsaturation within different PL classes (Fig. 5 a–e) at the chronic post-injury timepoints. Overall, SFA, MUFA and PUFAs were decreased at several timepoints for PC, LPC and LPE in mTBI mice compared to their control counterparts. Exceptions were MUFA-containing PE and PI species, which did not reach significance for any given timepoint ( p < 0.05, Fig. 5 c and e). However, 24 h post-injury, SFA-containing PE species were significantly increased ( p < 0.05), whereas the degree of unsaturation of other PL classes was unaffected at this acute timepoint. Moreover, for all PL classes, PUFA-containing lipids were significantly decreased 24 month post-injury. Fig. 5 Degree of unsaturation of PL classes in plasma of mTBI mice compared to sham. Mean ± SEM percentage of control. a Significant changes of SFA ( p < 0.01)-, MUFA ( p < 0.001)- and PUFA ( p < 0.05)-containing PC species were observed over time, * p < 0.05; MLM regression with post hoc analysis. b Within mTBI mice, SFA ( p < 0.01)-, MUFA ( p < 0.001)- and PUFA, ( p < 0.001)-containing LPC species were significantly decreased at 3 and 24 mo post-injury, * p < 0.05; MLM regression with post hoc analysis. c Within mTBI mice, SFA-containing PE species ( p < 0.01) were significantly increased after 24 h post-injury and decreased 3 mo, whereas MUFA-containing PE species showed no significance for mTBI. PUFA-containing PE species ( p < 0.01) were significantly decreased at 3, 12 and 24 mo, * p < 0.05; MLM regression with post hoc analysis. d SFA ( p < 0.01)-, MUFA ( p < 0.01)- and PUFA ( p < 0.01)-containing LPE species showed significant changes in mTBI mice compared to sham animals, * p < 0.05; MLM regression with post hoc analysis. e Within mTBI mice, MUFA-containing PI species showed no significant difference ( p > 0.05). PUFA-containing PI species ( p < 0.05) were significantly decreased at 3, 12 and 24 mo, * p < 0.05; MLM regression with post hoc analysis. Table gives significant p values for all timepoints
Examination of Ether Lipids in Plasma of mTBI Injured Mice Compared to Control Animals
Since ether PC and ether PE are dependent upon peroxisomes for their synthesis, we grouped these lipids separately. Figure 6 shows that ePE levels were significantly different in injured mice compared to controls ( p < 0.05). Ether PE species were increased 24 h post-injury and then decreased afterward significantly at 3, 12 and 24 months. Ether-containing PLs in other classes were not altered after post hoc correction. Fig. 6 Differences in total ePC, eLPE, ePE and eLPE in plasma of mTBI mice. Mean ± SEM percentage of control. Levels of ePC, eLPC and eLPE were not significantly different in mTBI mice compared to control. Ether PE species were increased 24 h post-injury before showing a decrease at 3 and 12 mo ( p < 0.05), p * < 0.05; MLM regression with post hoc analysis. Table gives significant p values for all timepoints
Profiling of AA- and DHA-Containing Phospholipid Species in mTBI Mice
We examined AA- and DHA-containing species due to their potential role in inflammatory responses, which are shown to accompany chronic pathology of mTBI. Figure 7 shows individual DHA-containing PL species in plasma of mTBI mice compared to controls, whereas Fig. 8 represents individual AA-containing PLs. In general, DHA-containing PL species [such as PC(38:6), PC(40:6), LPC(22:6), PE(40:6), LPE(22:6) and PI(40:6); p < 0.05] were decreased at several chronic post-injury timepoints. However, ePE(40:6) was elevated at 24 h post-injury but significantly decreased at 3- and 12- month post-injury ( p < 0.05). Fig. 7 DHA-containing phospholipid species in plasma of mTBI mice compared to sham. Mean ± SEM percentage of sham. DHA-containing PC species were significant different in mTBI mice compared to sham ( p < 0.05). Within mTBI mice, DHA-containing PC(38:6) and PC(40:7) showed significant decrease at 12 and 24 mo post-injury. PC(40:6) was only lower at 12 mo. LPC(22:6) was significantly decreased 3 mo and 6 mo post-injury ( p < 0.05). DHA-containing PE species ( p < 0.001) revealed an increase at 24 h for ePE(40:6) and showed together with PE(40:6) a decrease at 3 and 12 mo post-injury. For LPE(22:6), difference was observed at 12 and 24 month ( p < 0.01) for injured animals. PI(40:6) ( p < 0.05) showed significant lower levels at 12 mo. * p < 0.05; MLM regression with post hoc analysis. Table gives significant p values for all timepoints Fig. 8 AA - containing phospholipid species in plasma of mTBI mice compared to sham. Mean ± SEM percentage of sham. Within mTBI mice, AA-containing PC species were significantly different in mTBI mice compared to sham ( p < 0.05). AA-containing PC(36:4) was decreased 3 and 12 mo post-injury, whereas PC(38:4) showed significant decrease only at 12 mo. PC(38:5) was reduced at 3, 12 and 24 mo. For LPC(22:4), we observed significant decrease in mTBI animals ( p < 0.01) 3 and 6 mo post-injury. AA-containing PE species ePE(38:4) revealed an increase at 24 h and a decrease at 3 and 12 mo. PE(36:4) and PE(38:5), both, were lower at 3 and 12 mo post-injury. PE(38:4) was significantly decreased at 3, 12 and 24 mo. LPE(20:4) ( p < 0.001) showed lower levels at 12 and 24 mo. AA-containing PI species ( p < 0.05), revealed for PI(36:4) lower levels in injured mice at 24 h and 24 mo, whereas PI(38:4) was reduced 3, 12 and 24 mo post-injury, * p < 0.05; MLM regression with post hoc analysis
Similar to the results for DHA, in general, AA-containing PL species were decreased at several chronic post-injury timepoints (such as PC(36:4), PC(38:4), PC(38:5), LPC(20:4), PE(36:4), PE(38:4), PE(38:5), LPE(20:4), PI(36:4) and PI(38:4); p < 0.05). As with DHA, an ePE species (ePE(38:4)) was increased at 24 h post-injury and decreased at 3- and 12- month ( p < 0.05).
Profiling of Individual Molecular Species of PC, LPC, SM, PE, LPE and PI in Plasma of mTBI Mice
Supplemental Tables 1–6 show values of individual phospholipid molecular species in plasma, grouped by class, that were identified by PCA to be significantly associated with injury at different timepoints as well TBI/control ratios.
For PC, multivariate PCA of the plasma data shows that component 1 explained 81 % of variance in the dataset and was the strongest predictor of mTBI ( p < 0.001 ) of individual PC species at timepoints 24 h, 6 months [PC(32:0) only] and 24 months post-injury. Components 2 and 3 were associated with the 3 and 12 month timepoints. PC(42:6) was only modulated at the acute timepoint, whereas PC(34:1), PC(38:6), PC(40:5) and PC(40:7) started to be significantly lower at the most chronic timepoints 12 and 24 months post-injury. Supplemental Table 1 shows individual PC species that were significant for different timepoints post-injury.
For LPC, component 1 of the PCA, there was significance for mTBI, which explained 70 % of the total variance in the dataset (p < 0.05) and was associated with 24 h, 3, 6, and 24 months post-injury. For the acute timepoint, only LPC(16:1) was significantly modulated in mTBI mice and LPC (o-16:1) showed a 46 % decrease by 24 months post-injury. Supplemental Table 2 shows all individual LPC species that were identified to be significant by PCA in component 1 for different timepoints post-injury.
For PE, multivariate PCA of the plasma data showed that component 1 explained 68 % of variance in the dataset and was a strong predictor for injury ( p < 0.001) at timepoints 24 h, 3, 12, and 24 months. For the acute timepoint, several species [e.g., ePE(38:5), ePE(38:6) and PE(38:0)] showed an increase of between 66 and 72 %. The same species were observed to be decreased at chronic stages. Supplemental Table 3 shows individual PE species that were significant for different timepoints post-injury.
For LPE, component 1 of the PCA, which explained that 52 % of the total variance in the dataset ( p < 0.05), was significantly associated with mTBI for all chronic timepoints. No individual LPE species was different from control at 24 h post-injury. Supplemental Table 4 shows individual LPE species that were specific to PCA component 1.
For PI, component 1 explained 66 % ( p < 0.05) of the total variance and was a predictor for mTBI for all timepoints. Supplemental Table 5 shows individual PI species in plasma with significant changes for the different timepoints post-injury.
For SM, component 1 explained 59 % of the total variance ( p < 0.05) and was significantly associated with mTBI at 6-and 24 months post-injury. No significance was observed at the acute timepoint. Moreover, SM species SM(d18:1; 22:1) and SM(24:0) were only modulated at 24 months post-injury. Supplemental Table 6 shows individual significant SM species that were specifically significant with PCA component 1.
Lipid Peroxidation at 24 h and 3 Month Post-Injury
Our PL analysis revealed that there were no differences between control and mTBI mice at 24 h post-injury, whereas we observed a significant decrease for many PUFA-containing PL species at 3 months. Thus, we investigated lipid peroxidation at both timepoints by measuring MDA production (Fig. 9 a, b). No difference was observed for mTBI and sham mice at 24 h post-injury ( p > 0.05). At 3 months, we observed a significant increase for MDA in mTBI mice compared to control with a fold change of 1.77 ( p = 0.003). Fig. 9 MDA concentrations in plasma of mTBI mice compared to sham at 24 h and 3 month post-injury. a No differences were observed in peroxidation levels between sham and mTBI mice at 24 h post-injury ( p > 0.05; control: 2.04 ± 0.58 μM; mTBI: 2.40 ± 0.67 μM in mean ± SEM). b MDA concentration was significantly increased in mTBI mice ( n = 4) compared to control ( n = 4) at the 3 month timepoint ( p = 0.003; control: 2.32 ± 0.44 μM; mTBI: 4.10 ± 0.49 μM)
Discussion
The secondary damage that follows TBI includes inflammation, blood brain barrier dysfunction and axonal injury, which can persist over a long time period (Brenner ; Xiong et al. ). Moreover, chronic mTBI is often undiagnosed emphasizing the need for more chronic biomarkers for diagnosis as well as to monitor change. Previous studies, including ours, have shown that PL levels are altered in subjects with a history of mTBI and in a controlled cortical impact mouse model of relatively severe TBI. These findings suggest that PL may be important in pathophysiology of TBI and could in the future serve as translational biomarkers. They would also be useful for improving our diagnostic and prognostic capabilities for injury. Such biomarkers could be also used theragnostically, as surrogate markers for assessing the therapeutic response to potential TBI treatments. Given our previous findings suggesting PL biomarkers of TBI at chronic timepoints post-injury in a human population, we sought to determine whether such changes were evident in our laboratory model of mTBI, which would support its relevance to the human population and lead to further translational studies.
We first examined PL profiles in sham mice to determine whether aging itself had impact on plasma PL profiles. While LPC and LPE levels did not differ over time, PC, PE, PI and SM all showed a significant decrease at the 24 month timepoint. At 24 months post-injury (26.5 months of age), mice are nearing the end of their lifespan (Jackson Laboratories ). It is known that PLs are the major components of membranes and play a role in maintaining the membrane integrity as well as in functional activity. Lipid metabolism and its turnover, especially oxidation of fatty acids, have been implicated in apoptosis, and aging causes an increase in molecular damage to the cell membranes and changes in the normal asymmetrical architecture of membranes (Ovsepian et al. ; Chaurio et al. ; Dalleau et al. ; Renò et al. ). Ovsepian et al. have shown that PC, PE and SM decreased in the brains of 25-month-old rats, whereas LPC and PI increased. Moreover, a study by Kim et al. compared PC, LPC and SM levels in the serum of young (4 month) and old mice (21 month) and showed that lipid levels were decreased with aging for PC and SM, as well as some LPC species (Kim et al. ). Our findings confirm these results. Although LPC does not reach significance at 24 months in our study, a non-significant trend is visible. A decrease in PL at 24 months post-injury could be due to an increase in oxidation. Further studies are needed in order to understand the biological pathway of the changes, which could reveal a link to aging-dependent metabolite differences. When evaluated the aging effect in mTBI mice, we observed the same decreases as in control mice. However, additionally, we observed a decrease in LPC at 24 months as well as an earlier starting decrease (12 months) in PE compared to their 24 h counter partners. Because we used age-matched controls for each timepoint were our analysis was not affected by the aging component. Yet, as seen by comparing control and mTBI mice with their 24 h counter parts, 24 month post-injury, the TBI group showed lower PL levels, beyond that of “normal aging”. Moreover, the fact that lower levels were also observed at 12 month could hint to an accelerated aging effect observed in TBI animals. Although more investigation on this subject is necessary to make clear conclusions, multiple studies have shown association of TBI with accelerated and elevated risk for dementia (reviewed by Vincent et al. ).
In the case of mTBI, overall, total PL levels for all classes evaluated in this study did not show major differences at the acute 24 h post-injury timepoint. We then focused our study on the impact of mTBI on plasma profiles over time post-injury. At 3 months post-injury, we observed a decrease in injured animals compared to their control counterparts in PC, LPC, PE, LPE and PI, but not for SM. Total PC, PE and PI also showed significantly lower levels at 12 months and all classes were decreased at 24 months post-injury in the mTBI group compared to controls. The 6-month timepoint did not reach significance due to increased variance in control animals seen at this timepoint. Higher variance was also observed for SM levels at timepoints prior to 24 months post-injury.
Kay et al. were able to detect PL disturbances from the brain in the CSF in humans, showing that brain alterations can be detected in peripheral biofluids (Kay et al. ). Moreover, Abdullah et al. investigated PL profiles in different brain regions, as well as plasma at 3 months post-injury in a CCI model showing that even at chronic stages post-injury, PL changes persist (Abdullah ). We also conducted a clinical study involving active duty military with a history of mTBI, and we detected changes in plasma lipids at this chronic stage. It is important to note that clinical evidence from our military study confirms the findings of this study. Total PL levels were decreased in soldiers with mTBI as well for all classes (Emmerich et al. ).
Overall in our mouse model, lipid levels were steady at 24 h post-injury but changed over the next 3 months as indicated by the decrease in mTBI versus sham at the 3 months timepoint. We then observed a possible recovery phase around the 6 months timepoint, where PL levels returned to those of sham animals. Finally, lipid levels dropped again at the chronic 12- and 24 months timepoints post-injury.
It is known that saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids can be synthesized de novo within the brain; however, polyunsaturated fatty acids are mainly supplied from the periphery (Bazinet and Layé ). In this study, we observed that saturation status, specifically levels of unsaturation, was different in injured compared to control mice.
Overall SFAs, MUFAs and PUFAs were decreased for PC, LPC and LPE at different timepoints. In our clinical study, we also showed differences in PL degree of unsaturation and its decrease at the chronic stage. It is interesting to observe that SFAs, MUFAs and PUFAs are differently regulated within different PL classes. It is also interesting to mention, that in mice, MUFAs of PE and PI did not reach significance at any timepoint. However, in order to better understand the molecular mechanisms of PL involvement following TBI and their unsaturation status, it will be necessary to investigate enzymes that are involved in their BBB transport, desaturation of SFAs and/or elongation of MUFAs to PUFAs. This study was not intended to investigate specific aspects of TBI pathogenesis as it related to lipid metabolism, but rather to develop potential biomarker profiles. Nonetheless, we were interested in whether or not lipid peroxidation was a factor in our findings, and we found total lipid peroxidation to be elevated in mTBI compared to control at 3 months post-injury chronic timepoint when PUFA levels were significantly reduced. As PUFAs, owing to the presence of multiple double bonds, are susceptible to oxidative degradation, these findings of higher levels of lipid peroxidation are consistent with the observed decreases in PUFA levels at this timepoint. However, an assay with the sensitivity to detect oxidized PL by MS needs to be employed to draw further mechanistic conclusions.
We analyzed ether-containing PLs and characterized their response to injury. Changes in ether PLs (LPC o-16:0 and LPC o-18:0), which are precursors to inflammation promoting platelet-activating factors (PAFs) were found to be significant. Although eLPC were not significantly modulated by mTBI, LPC (o-16:0) was significantly lower 24 months post-injury. Furthermore, for other ether lipids, such as ePC and eLPE, no significant differences were observed. A majority of ether PE species are plasmalogens (Braverman and Moser ). We observed increased ePE 24 h post-injury before it decreased at 3 months and again at 24 months. This correlates with our clinical studies, where we only observed lower levels of ePE in TBI subjects, all of whom were recruited at chronic timepoints after injury. As ePEs are enriched for DHA and AA, serving as reservoirs for their bioactive lipid metabolites(Braverman and Moser ), a decrease in these lipids could mean increased synthesis of eicosanoids and docosanoids that modulate inflammation following TBI. However, specific monitoring of bioactive lipid metabolites will be necessary to draw further conclusions in this regard.
It is known that bioactive metabolites of DHA and AA, the most abundant ω-3 and ω-6 PUFAs in the brain, contribute to the immune and inflammatory balance within the CNS and the periphery. DHA is a precursor of the anti-inflammatory mediators, resolvins and neuroprotectins, whereas AA is a precursor of pro-inflammatory lipid mediators, such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes (Serhan et al. ; Fredman and Serhan ). Therefore, we further investigated DHA- and AA-containing lipid species. We only observed a significant reduction in the AA/DHA ratio for the lipid class PE, at 24 h post-injury (data not shown). This correlates with our clinical data, where we observed reduction in AA- to DHA-containing molecular species only in PE. Although ratios did not change for other lipid classes in mice, we observed changes in specific DHA-containing and AA-containing PL species in mTBI versus control mice. For the acute 24 h timepoint, we observed a significant increase in AA-containing ePE(38:4) as well as in DHA-containing ePE (40:6). Although no other AA or DHA-containing species reached significance at 24 h, PC(40:6), PE(40:6), as well as PE(38:4) showed a trend of higher levels. This correlates with a clinical study by Yang et al., who showed that AA was enhanced in serum metabolites in TBI subjects shortly after injury (Yang et al. ). Apart from elevation at the 24 h timepoint, individual DHA- and AA-containing species were significantly decreased at several chronic stages in mTBI mice compared to control animals. As the brain particularly needs DHA, there may be an increased need for DHA-containing lipids after injury for repair and other related functions(Hamilton et al. ; Polozova and Salem ; Spector ). Therefore, lowered levels could reflect the early increase in respond to the injury, and subsequent decrease owing to their increased utilization. Tracking the changes in plasma AA and DHA in PL could potentially serve as a surrogate marker once it is confirmed that AA and DHA changes in plasma reflect brain changes. Furthermore, truncated products, such as prostaglandins and resolvins of AA and DHA, respectively, should also be evaluated. Moreover, we hope to replicate this study in mTBI mice of other strains and genetic backgrounds, which will help further verify our work. Our focus in recent years has been on mild TBI; therefore, this study does not include severe closed head injury paradigms, though for future study this would definitely be an interesting area of investigation and comparison. Our expectation, and hope, is that publication of these profiles will enable other researchers working on their own preclinical models of mTBI to provide validation or comparisons and contrasts.
Conclusion
We were able to confirm our human findings of altered plasma PL profiles after TBI are also seen in our mouse model, validating it for future translational studies. This will include investigating the underlying molecular pathways that are associated with perturbed PL profiles in TBI. Moreover, this mTBI model has previously shown pathological and behavioral features, over timepoints with which these PL profiles correlate, which are comparable to those observed in human subjects. Additional investigation of lipid metabolizing enzymes, lipid transport and oxidation studies will build our understanding of the biological mechanisms behind these observations. Furthermore, in our clinical study, we observed a strong influence of APOE genotype on plasma lipid levels. The study of mTBI in mice genetically modified at the APOE locus could bring further understanding of the effects of mTBI, to not only enable the development of biomarkers but also the discovery of molecular targets for personalized medicine.