Introduction
Neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson’s (PD), Huntington’s (HD) or Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are becoming major social problems in aging populations. Previous studies have revealed that many of these neurodegenerative diseases share common pathological phenotypes such as compromised autophagy (Menzies et al. ), accumulation of misfolded and aggregated proteins (Soto ), and oxidative stress due to toxic reactive oxygen species (Barnham et al. ), which lead to impairments in neurotransmission, neuroplasticity and neurogenesis, and increased apoptosis. Based on these findings, different approaches aimed at several therapeutic targets have been investigated in a number of clinical studies. However, despite these efforts, only a limited number of treatment strategies continue to show clinical efficacy, making the cure of neurodegenerative disease nearly impossible.
Among the numerous described neurotrophins (NT), that is, molecules essential to the growth and survival of neurons (Bibel and Barde ), the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has been shown to contribute to neuronal synaptic plasticity in the central nervous system (CNS) (Narisawa-Saito et al. ). Subsequent studies on BDNF have suggested that a marked decrease in the levels of this specific NT is involved in the pathophysiology of numerous neurodegenerative diseases (Autry and Monteggia ), which are corroborated by postmortem reports (Nagahara and Tuszynski ; Lu et al. ). Decreased expression of BDNF mRNA and protein has been reported in the hippocampus, neocortex and Meynert nucleus basalis of patients with AD (Phillips et al. ; Peng et al. ; Lee et al. ), while a reduced BDNF level due to decreased BDNF gene transcription has been found in the substantia nigra pars compacta of patients with PD (Murer et al. ) and a reduced BDNF level in the striatum (Ferrer et al. ) and cerebral cortex (Zuccato and Cattaneo ) due to loss of huntingtin-mediated BDNF gene transcription has been reported in patients with HD (Zuccato et al. ).
On the other hand, various microRNAs (miRNAs), that is, short noncoding RNA segments of approximately 22-nucleotides in length (Carthew and Sontheimer ), have been found to modulate the expression of key genes involved in CNS neuronal synaptic plasticity, suggesting that these miRNAs regulate the expressions of BDNF during their signaling processes (Keifer et al. ). In this regard, recent studies have identified several miRNAs that not only downregulate the expression of BDNF but also negatively modulate BDNF-related synaptogenesis (Lee et al. ; Gao et al. ; Zhao et al. ; Sheinerman et al. ; Caputo et al. ). The loss of these brain-specific miRNAs leads to improved synaptic plasticity in mouse models, as reflected by enhanced learning and memory in mouse models (Konopka et al. ). Considering that a single miRNA can regulate the translation of many mRNAs and thereby lead to substantial changes at a cellular level, the above findings suggest that an anti-miRNA-based therapy targeting specifically BDNF-inhibitory miRNAs might be among the new exciting treatment strategies to combat neurodegenerative disorders through upregulation of synaptogenesis (Ha and Kim ). Furthermore, evidences of the abundance and stability of miRNAs within the human CNS also indicate that this method of treatment might efficiently suppress a number of BDNF-inhibitory miRNA targets (Sethi and Lukiw ; Maes et al. ).
However, while anti-miRNA-based therapeutics offer various advantages such as small size and high target specificity due to known and conserved sequence, gene delivery itself is invasive to the patient and poses several important limitations that remain to be overcome such as lack of an effective mode of delivery, inability to cross the blood–brain barrier, or degradation by mononuclear phagocytic cells in the CNS (Nagahara and Tuszynski ). In this review, we summarize the specific molecular mechanisms by which several miRNAs negatively modulate the expressions of BDNF, and discuss the potential clinical difficulties that can be faced during the development of anti-miRNA-based therapeutics and propose some strategies to overcome these challenges.
Physiology of Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF)
BDNF, the most abundant and widely spread neurotrophic factor in the rodent brain (Kolbeck et al. ), is distributed throughout the entire CNS, and its expression and concentration levels are especially high in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex (Maisonpierre et al. ). The expression of BDNF in the CNS is modified by numerous stimuli including physical exercise (Gomez-Pinilla et al. ; Ding et al. ; Garcia-Mesa et al. ), cognitive impairment (Buchman et al. ) and brain insults such as stress, seizure ischemia or hypoglycemic coma (Lindvall et al. ). Alterations in BDNF expression have been reported to play a key role in several neuropsychiatric pathologies such as depression, epilepsy, AD or PD (Tapia-Arancibia et al. ). BDNF levels have been extensively measured in several fluids and tissues in individuals with various neuropsychiatric disorders, with the bulk of research indicating that BDNF is downregulated in people with these conditions, although there is not a disease-specific pattern (Autry and Monteggia ). Although some studies have shown that BDNF levels are correlated among different tissues (e.g., blood and brain) in animal models (Karege et al. ), the association is more controversial in humans. Despite the altered levels of BDNF in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid found in AD patients, the aforementioned lack of correlation between fluids and tissues precludes that BDNF can be considered as an unspecific biomarker in neuropsychiatric or neurodegenerative disorders (Diniz and Teixeira ).
BDNF, as occurs with the rest of NTs, is initially synthesized from precursors known as proBDNF, which is secreted into the extracellular space and cleaved by various extracellular proteases such as serine protease plasmin and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) to produce mature BDNF, with the latter primarily promoting neuronal survival via activation of its specific type B tyrosine kinase receptor (TrkB) (Pang et al. ; Lee et al. ) (Fig. 1 ). In contrast, proBDNF that does not undergo proteolytic cleavage binds to the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75 NTR ), thereby resulting in apoptosis of the neuron cell (Teng et al. ). Overall, the selective secretion of either pro- or mature BDNF along with the expressions of either p75 NTR or Trk receptors is thought to determine whether a neuron undergoes cell death or, by contrast, does survive (Lu et al. ). Since the regulation of cell death and survival is crucial to the establishment of functional neuronal circuits, high expression levels of mature BDNF are considered to be essential to the process of synaptic plasticity in the CNS. Furthermore, the fact that p75 NTR activates RhoA, a small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) that impedes the neurite elongation and induces growth cone repulsion, indirectly suggests that mature BDNF may also be involved in the process of neurogenesis, dendritic and axonal growth, and growth cone turning, all of which are vital to the formation of new synapses (Yuan et al. ; Yamashita et al. ). Fig. 1 Schematic of the molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), miRNAs and transcription factors. BDNF brain-derived neurotrophic factor, tPA tissue plasminogen activator, MMP matrix metalloproteinase, P75NTR neurotrophin receptor p75, RhoA Ras homolog family member A, miR microRNA, MECP2 methyl CpG-binding protein 2, CREB cAMP response element-binding protein, TrkB tropomyosin-related kinase receptor type B, SHC SH2 domain protein C3, Grb2 growth factor receptor-bound protein 2, SOS Son of Sevenless, MAPK mitogen-activated protein kinases, MEK mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases, ERK extracellular signal-regulated kinases, PLCγ1 phospholipase C-γ-1, IP3 inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate, cAMP cyclic adenosine monophosphate, DAG diacylglycerol, PKC protein kinase C, RhoGDI Rho GDP-dissociation inhibitor
Involvement of miRNAs in the Pathogenesis of Neurodegenerative Diseases
Epigenetic modulation of miRNAs is nowadays a promising avenue for treating neurodegenerative diseases (Peedicayil ). More than one-third of all protein-encoding genes are predicted to have miRNA binding sites (Liang and Li ). In fact, miRNAs are implicated in finely tuning the gene expressions of a wide variety of biological processes, including those that are vital to CNS functions. These miRNAs are thought to regulate gene expression in an epigenetic manner similar to histone modification and gene methylation. Recently, these small regulatory non-proteins coding RNAs were found to modulate higher-order brain functions including learning, memory and emotions (Forero et al. ; Bredy et al. ; Salta and De Strooper ). Moreover, those miRNAs that can modulate gene expressions specifically in some regions of the brain (Kosik and Krichevsky ) have also been identified. Regarding neurodegenerative disorders, some authors have suggested that miRNAs act as cellular effectors independently or in concert with genetic variations in disease susceptibility-related genes to provoke pathogenic outcomes (Kocerha et al. ; Salta and De Strooper ). More recently, neuronal activity-dependent regulation of miRNA expression was found to be associated with maintaining synaptic plasticity and memory of the adult brain (Wayman et al. ; Silva et al. ; Krol et al. ). Based on these findings, subsequent studies have focused on those miRNAs that are associated with the expression of BDNF wherein five major miRNAs (miR-134, miR-206, miR-30, miR-26 and miR-132) were identified. In one study, the expression of miR-29c was markedly reduced in patients with AD along with a decreased expression of BDNF compared with healthy controls (Yang et al. ).
miRNA Regulating BDNF via cAMP Response Binding Protein (CREB)
MiR-134, a CNS-specific miRNA, was found to regulate the expression of BDNF. Schratt et al. (Schratt et al. ) previously demonstrated that miR-134 is enriched in the synaptodendritic regions of the hippocampal neurons, where it negatively regulates the size of dendritic spines. Overexpression of miR-134 was shown to post-transcriptionally downregulate the expression of the cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), which mediates the transcription of BDNF by forming a transcriptional complex with its coactivators CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 (Johannessen et al. ), ultimately resulting in reduced BDNF expression (Gao et al. ; Zhao et al. ). In addition, a previous study (Gao et al. ) also had revealed that the mammalian Sir2 homolog SIRT1 normally functions to limit the expression of miR-134 via a repressor complex containing the transcription factor YY1. Unchecked miR-134 expression following SIRT1 deficiency was thus shown to downregulate the expression of CREB and BDNF, which in turn resulted in impaired synaptic plasticity. In conjunction with these molecular mechanisms, clinical studies by Sheinerman et al. ( ) have demonstrated that miR-134 levels are significantly elevated in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD compared to age-matched controls. Conversely, Zhao et al. ( ) showed that resveratrol, a SIRT1-activating molecule which is a natural compound found in grapes and red wine, can upregulate the expression of CREB and thus promote synaptic plasticity through BDNF synthesis.
miRNA Regulating BDNF via Targeting at BDNF 3′-UTR by Post-Transcriptional Modification
While miR-134 indirectly downregulates BDNF by reducing the levels of proteins involved in BDNF transcription, other miRNAs can directly repress BDNF through allele-specific binding with the 3′-untranslated regions (UTR) of the BDNF mRNA. This type of regulation is in fact the most common gene regulatory pathway used by miRNAs wherein the sequence variations at miRNA binding sites often affect the base pairing of the target mRNA and miRNA (Caputo et al. ), hence allowing a wide range of gene expressions profiles to occur (Georges et al. ; Sethupathy et al. ).
Sequence analysis has recently shown three available miR-206 target sites in BDNF mRNA, two BDNF 3′UTRs in the long chain and one BDNF 3′UTR in the short chain. Transfection of pre-miR-206 can reduce the levels of endogenous BDNF mRNA by directly binding to the BDNF 3′UTR of the long chain (Miura et al. ). In normal neurons, miR-206 is repressed by sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling, which in turn elevates the BDNF levels needed to extend neuronal axons and form new innervations (Lee et al. ). More recently, based on the finding that miR-206 downregulates BDNF and memory function in AD mice, intraventricular and intranasal administration of AM206, a neutralizing inhibitor of miR-206 (antagomiR) was shown to successfully reduce dendritic spine degeneration and to attenuate the detrimental effects of amyloid-β on BDNF (Krutzfeldt et al. ).
Similar to miR-206, miR-30a-5p and miR-26 were additionally identified as direct post-transcriptional inhibitors of BDNF in the prefrontal cortex (Mellios et al. ; Caputo et al. ). Subsequent studies using exogenous miR-26 mimics also showed marked BDNF downregulation. In general, the BDNF 3′-UTR was found to have many predicted target sites for miRNAs expressed in the human cerebral cortex, thus allowing for multiple miRNAs to regulate its expression.
miRNA Regulating BDNF via Homeostatic Control of MeCP2 Expression
In contrast to the above miRNAs, several miRNAs have been found to regulate the expression of BDNF via indirect mechanism involving homeostatic control of the expression of methyl CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2), a protein crucial to the modulation of neuroplasticity in post-mitotic neurons. Furthermore, a steady increase in MeCP2 levels during infancy is vital for the normal maturation of synapses, and a reduced MeCP2 expression during this period is linked with delayed synaptogenesis (Fukuda et al. ) and dysfunctional dendritic and axonal arborization (Jugloff et al. ). Based on these findings, both an increase and a decrease in MeCP2 levels outside the normal range can cause severe neurodevelopmental defects (Klein et al. ).
Recently, the miR-212 can homeostatically interact with MeCP2 within the dorsal striatum to mediate cocaine addiction, a clinical sign representative of impaired neuroplasticity (Im et al. ). Likewise, miR-132 might cause marked loss of synaptic plasticity by reducing the expression of BDNF via a decrease in MeCP2 levels. Thus, subsequent experimental studies confirmed an increase in both MeCP2 and BDNF levels by blocking the miR-132. The loss of MeCP2 might reduce both BDNF and miR-132, thus suggesting that a feedback loop may act in place to provide a homeostatic control of MeCP2 expression (Klein et al. ).
Regulation of miRNAs by NTs in a Feedback Loop
Although many miRNAs regulate the expression of BDNF, some NTs such as BDNF can also regulate miRNA expression via transcription factors such as CREB and NF-κB, thereby forming a regulating feedback loop. In fact, several miRNAs, i.e., miR-124a, miR-29 and miR-132, have a conserved cAMP response element (CRE) site in their promoters (Wu and Xie ). The transcription of miR-212/132 cluster was also found to be activated by BDNF via either extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and Dicer or ERK1/2 and CREB through both mitogen- and stress-activated kinase (MSK)-dependent and independent mechanisms (Remenyi et al. ). Likewise, p75 NTR signaling can also regulate NF-κB signaling (Underwood and Coulson ), which in turn upregulates miRNAs such as miR-9, miR-125 and miR-146a (Lukiw ). In fact, the p65 subunit of NF-κB was found to modulate the expressions of miR-146a in a HD cellular model (Ghose et al. ). These results overall indicate that there exists a homeostatic loop between various miRNAs and BDNF and that the regulatory network between BDNF and miRNAs is still beyond our understanding.
Challenges Expected When Using miRNA Inhibitors for Therapeutic Purposes
Although exogenous delivery of miRNAs able to increase BDNF expression would obviously represent the ideal approach to increase synaptic plasticity, the absence of known miRNAs with such effect makes suppressing those miRNAs that downregulate BDNF the only viable therapeutic approach. In various clinical studies, RNA interference (RNAi) has been shown to successfully knock down the expression of several selected target genes, suggesting that RNAi-based therapy may offer new therapeutic means of treating even far-fetching diseases such as neurodegenerative disorders (Bumcrot et al. ; de Fougerolles et al. ).
In theory, miRNA-based therapeutics offer various advantages over conventional treatments including the ability to control multiple genes in a common network, to target proteins at multiple levels of the same pathway, or to reverse cellular phenotypes without evoking an immune response. Currently, two miRNA-based therapeutic strategies involving miRNA mimics and anti-miRNAs have been evaluated in vivo. The goal is to deliver these therapeutic genes to either downregulate the expression of a specific target protein involved in the pathogenesis of a given disorder or the gene that contains a gain-of-function pathogenic mutation.
Interestingly, one trial has been conducted with miRNA inhibitor for the regulation of BDNF (Lee et al. ). In addition to being a crucial regulator of synaptic plasticity, BDNF has also been reported to be a key element in regulating energy balance (Xu et al. ). Thus, Cao et al. ( ) investigated the therapeutic efficacy of increasing BDNF levels by delivering an anti-miRNA gene into mouse models of obesity and diabetes. As expected, this anti-miRNA gene transfer not only raised the expression of BDNF but also resulted in a marked weight loss and alleviation of obesity-associated insulin resistance. To facilitate a safe clinical translation and ensure that the BDNF protein expression was appropriately decreased as the weight loss progressed, Cao et al. ( ) also designed a molecular auto-regulatory system involving a single recombinant viral vector harboring two expression cassettes, one constitutively driving BDNF and the other driving a specific miRNA targeting BDNF. This design of BDNF regulation much resembled that of a physiological regulation wherein the expressions of pro-BDNF and mature BDNF were bidirectionally regulated by pathways of either Trk receptor tyrosine kinase or p75 NTR in the CNS.
However, with regard to neurodegenerative diseases, only one study has conducted an in vivo experiment using AM206, a neutralizing inhibitor of miR-206 (‘antagomiR’) (Lee et al. ). After administering AM206 to Tg2576 AD mice, using intranasal and intraventricular injections, Lee et al. ( ) observed elevated BDNF levels in the hippocampus, striatum and cortex of the treated animals, which also showed higher behavioral scores on tests assessing their memory functions.
Nevertheless, despite recent advances in the design and the use of miRNA inhibitors (or ‘anti-miRNAs’) (Hutvágner et al. ; Petersen and Wengel ; Petersen et al. ), potential treatments with these molecules are expected to face substantial challenges during the upcoming clinical translations. Unmodified RNAs have low biological stability and are rapidly degraded by cellular and serum nucleases, making their delivery impractical (Aagaard and Rossi ). Furthermore, the small size and negative charge associated with these RNAs inhibit their ability to cross-cellular membranes, not to mention the blood–brain barrier in the case of neurodegenerative diseases. Although several subsequent studies have come up with solutions using both viral and non-viral vehicles such as liposomes, polymers, antibodies and nanoparticles, impaired function of the administered miRNAs (Vorhies and Nemunaitis ; Chen et al. ; Zhao et al. ), failure to cross the capillary endothelium, and severe toxicities and immunogenicities associated with these target vehicles have made their utility limited in studies of neurodegenerative disorders.
In addition, data regarding the pharmacodynamics of anti-miRNA-based therapies including time for its distribution and clearance, degrees of stability and cytotoxicity in the brain, and cell-type specificity have not been evaluated. Furthermore, the use of anti-miRNA therapeutics to induce a loss of function in the expression of endogenous miRNAs carries the inherent risk of affecting RNA species other than the intended miRNA target (Hendrickson et al. ). Thus, the functional effects from miRNA inhibition and the physiological repercussions of long-term miRNA antagonism along with the understanding of potential off-target effects must be considered in future clinical studies for a successful anti-miRNA-based therapy.
Efficient in vivo delivery to the CNS of anti-miRNA oligonucleotides, synthetic single-stranded RNA molecules complementary to the target miRNA (Garzon et al. ), is another critical factor that needs consideration to ensure that miRNA-based therapeutics retain their efficacies (Davis et al. ). Previously, Krutzfeldt et al. ( ) revealed that ‘antagomiRs’ were unable to reach the brain or were less effective in the brain when injected intravenously. Subsequent studies have used intracerebroventricular injection of locked nucleic acid (LNA)-based antagomiRs, and although this method was successful in reducing the expression of endogenous miRNA, further analyses found the long-term beneficial effects of antagomiRs through this method not to be sustainable, besides the invasiveness of the procedure itself (Jimenez-Mateos et al. ).
Furthermore, the toxicity profile of anti-miRNA-based therapy is another problem that needs further clarifications. Although Lee et al. reported no apparent adverse effects after administering high doses of AM206, it is still possible that its effect on miR-206 could have resulted in an unnoticeable upregulation of other targets. In fact, in the study by Lee et al. ( ), levels of synaptophysin, which is not a predicted target of miR-206, increased after the injection of AM206, thereby suggesting that the effects from an antagomiR can be more pervasive than intended. Considering the fact that many of the miRNAs found to regulate BDNF also act as tumor suppressors in other organs, these anti-miRNA therapeutics require extreme caution in the event of direct administration into the systemic circulation.
Strategies that Can be Used in Conjunction with miRNA Inhibitors
The current strategy of increasing BDNF expression and thus restoring synaptic plasticity in neurodegenerative diseases relies heavily on a successful delivery of exogenous miRNA inhibitors. Although studies continue to focus on synthesizing target vehicles with minimal toxicity and immunogenicity and with greater delivery efficiencies, the idea of increasing endogenous BDNF as an adjuvant treatment to the exogenous injection of BDNF should also be considered. This is important not only because there are several challenges in delivering the miRNA inhibitors to the CNS but also because the injection of these miRNA inhibitors can sometimes produce an amount of BDNF not high enough to actually treat neurodegenerative disorders. Furthermore, in the event of an overdose, there is no method of reducing the levels of miRNA inhibitors unless the system of incrementally increasing the dosage from an initial small dosage is applied.
Recently, numerous studies, some of them performed by our research group, have shown that physical exercise (Garcia-Mesa et al. ; Gomez-Pinilla et al. ), miRNA regulation of receptors p75 NTR (Irmady et al. ) and Trk (Guidi et al. ), or estrogen modulation (Berchtold et al. ; Solum and Handa ) can also help increase the expression of endogenous BDNF. In fact, both resistance and aerobic exercises were found to elevate serum BDNF levels, which were also found to correlate with the intensity of the exercise (Colbert et al. ; Yarrow et al. ). Although the mechanism is uncertain, an increase in BDNF-TrkB signaling promotes improvements in cognitive functions in the exercised individuals (Widenfalk et al. ; Berchtold et al. ). Although there is currently no consensus regarding the best exercise regimen for improving clinical outcomes in AD patients, aerobic physical exercise was previously demonstrated to improve attention and frontal cognitive functions in patients with AD (Hernandez et al. ; Pareja-Galeano et al. ). In humans, the increase in BDNF induced by aerobic exercise training ameliorates age-related hippocampal atrophy and memory dysfunction while reducing depression-like symptoms (Erickson et al. , ). Physical exercise temporarily raises BDNF serum levels in patients with PD and ameliorates some of the main disease features, including an improvement in extrapyramidal signs, as well as in motor and daily living activities (Angelucci et al. ). Higher amounts of moderate-to-vigorous physical exercise attenuated the progression of PD (Ahlskog ; Ellis et al. ). Resistance training improves muscle strength and walking speed in patients with moderate–severity PD (Hass et al. ; Lima et al. ), whereas regular walking ameliorates spatiotemporal parameters of walking in PD patients, and such benefits can persist for 2 months after training cessation (Herman et al. ). On the other hand, exercise positively impacts functional capacity and quality of life while decelerating the deterioration of disease-related brain changes in patients with HD (Cruickshank et al. ). Similarly, considering that neuronal apoptosis is exacerbated through the interaction between uncleaved proBDNF and NT receptor p75 NTR , reduced expression of receptor p75 NTR through a reciprocal increase in the expression of p75 NTR regulating miRNAs (mainly miR-592) attenuates pro-apoptotic signaling in neurons and increases synaptic plasticity (Irmady et al. ). In addition, microRNAs such as miR-128, miR-485-3p, miR-765 and miR-768-5p can induce neuronal proliferation by reducing the expression of truncated non-catalytic isoform of kinase-active receptor (T-TRKC) and increasing the number of catalyzing full-length receptor (FL-TRKC), suggesting that the co-delivery of these microRNAs can also potentially increase BDNF signaling (Guidi et al. ). Moreover, some studies have indicated that the increase in serum estrogen levels also directly raises the levels of BDNF in neurons (Berchtold et al. ; Solum and Handa ). BDNF and estrogen receptor have been found to be co-localized in pyramidal cells of the cornu ammon (CA) 3 subregion, and gonadectomized rats were found to have significantly reduced BDNF mRNA levels that were only recovered after the administration of estradiol benzoate (Solum and Handa ). However, since one clinical trial (Shumaker et al. ) has reported that a continuous, combined administration of estrogen and progestogen initiated at age over 65 years increased the risk of dementia, whether estrogen has neuroprotective effects is still a matter of debate. Another trial (Yaffe et al. ) evaluating the effects of administration of high doses of raloxifene, a selective estrogen receptor modulator, reported a decreased incidence of both AD and mild cognitive impairment. Thus, the aforementioned findings overall suggest that physical exercise and administration of estrogen can also help raise the levels of endogenous BDNF in neurodegenerative diseases. More recently, the use of estrogen-based therapies as an adjuvant treatment for schizophrenia via increase in BDNF expressions showed promising results (Wu et al. ). Likewise, the induction of endogenous BDNF using exercise and estrogen should be considered together with the exogenous delivery of miRNA inhibitors. Furthermore, recent studies reporting enhanced synaptic activity via BDNF modulation through antidepressants suggest that these drugs may be the next exciting candidate for adjuvant therapy with miRNA inhibitors (Ninan ).
On the other hand, reports on nitric oxide (NO) and glucocorticoid downregulating the expression of BDNF suggest that the use of these medications due to other comorbid illnesses should be re-evaluated when using any of the above therapeutic strategies since they may not induce (or sometimes actually reverse) the expected treatment effects (Liu et al. ).
Conclusions and Future Perspectives
The use of miRNA inhibitors to target the miRNAs that downregulate the expression of BDNF holds prospects of restoring BDNF-based synaptic repair in neurodegenerative diseases, but much more research is needed. In addition, since the expression of miRNAs in mouse brain is altered during normal aging (Inukai et al. ), the therapeutic relevance of these miRNA targets needs to be confirmed. Of the various miRNAs that were mentioned in this review for their capacity to suppress BDNF-TrkB signaling, only miR-134 has been reported to be naturally downregulated in the brain of an older mouse (Inukai et al. ). More importantly, further research might indicate whether neurodegenerative diseases are associated with an alteration in the miRNA profile that differs from that naturally occurring during the normal aging process, as suggested by the reduced expression of miR-134 found in older mice process (Inukai et al. ). However, even after locating these targets, many challenges still remain in translating microRNA inhibitors into clinical practice given that the target organ of interest is the CNS. Nevertheless, adjuvant therapies that also increase the production of endogenous BDNF, and chiefly physical exercise, offer new means of enhancing the therapeutic effects to a level that cannot be achieved by an exogenous treatment alone. In addition, though we have mainly discussed the potential use of anti-miRNA therapies to increase endogenous levels of BDNF, therapeutic approaches targeting miRNAs with altered profiles in patients with neurodegenerative diseases should also be considered. For example, in patients with AD, miR-26a, miR-27b, miR-30e-5p and miR-34a were found to be upregulated, and miR-9, miR-132, miR-146b and miR-212 downregulated, respectively, in the hippocampus, cerebellum and medial frontal gyrus (Cogswell et al. ). Likewise, in patients with HD, miR-100, mi-151-3p, mi-16, mi-219-2-3p and mi-27b were reported to be overexpressed, and miR-128, miR-139-3p, miR-222, miR-382 and miR-433 downregulated, respectively, in the frontal cortex and striatum (Marti et al. ). In patients with PD, miR-133b, miR-34b/c and miR-29a were downregulated, while miR-181, miR-331-5p and miR-137 were generally overexpressed. Thus, therapeutic strategies targeting mRNAs with expression profiles with a neurodegenerative disease-specific altered profile should also be explored.