Introduction
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a devastating progressive disorder of the central nervous system and is characterized by the degenerative loss of dopaminergic (DA) neurons located in the substantia nigra parts compacta (Tieu ; Zhang et al. ). Although the exact cause of DA neuronal loss is not fully understood, it is generally believed that oxidative stress plays a vital role in PD pathogenesis (Subramaniam and Chesselet ; Gaki and Papavassiliou ). Many genetic and neurotoxic insults associated with PD have been shown to elevate oxidative stress, which in turn lead to dysregulation of pro-survival pathways including phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt/glycogen synthase kinase −3β (GSK3β) (Henchcliffe and Beal ). For instance, the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenylpyidinium ion (MPP + ) selectively damages DA neurons in the substantia nigra through induction of intracellular reactive oxygen species, inhibition of mitochondrial complex I activity and interruption of mitochondrial membrane permeability (Lin et al. ; Wang et al. ), and therefore induces severe PD-like syndromes as observed clinically. Currently available therapies for PD only provide moderate symptom-relieving benefits without disease-modifying potential (Schapira et al. ). Years of efforts have failed to establish ideal neuroprotective interventions that could slowdown the disease progression because no genuine novel therapeutic targets modulating DA neuronal survival and novel molecules are available (Rascol et al. ).
Myocyte enhancer factor 2 proteins are a family of transcription factors that consists of four different isoforms (MEF2A-2D). Though originally identified in muscle cells, these four MEF2 genes are also expressed in a wide range of tissues including the brain (Rashid et al. ). Increasing lines of evidence indicate that MEF2, MEF2D in particular, plays a critical role in several key intracellular events including neuronal survival (Yang et al. ; Wang et al. , ) and that PD-related neurotoxins (MPP + and 6OHDA) cause damage to DA neurons via inhibition of MEF2D transcriptional activity (Yao et al. ), strongly suggesting that MEF2D is a promising therapeutic target for treating PD. Indeed, both in vitro and in vivo studies have demonstrated that activation of MEF2D, such as by bis(3)-cognitin, substantially protects DA neurons against neurotoxicity induced by 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (Yao et al. ). More recently, several studies have revealed that pro-death signals including oxidative stress and GSK3β caused by PD-associated neurotoxins converge their inhibitory effects on MEF2D (Wang et al. ). Collectedly, these findings indicate that molecules that could activate MEF2D may have therapeutic value in PD treatment.
The rhizome of Salvia miltiorrhiza Bge. (known as “Danshen” in Chinese) and Ligusticum chuanxiong Hort. (known as “Chuanxiong”) have been used for hundreds of years for the treatment of complex diseases in particular cardiovascular and neurodegenerative disorders (Zhang et al. , ; Fang et al. ; Zhang et al. ; Kum et al. ). And notably, Danshen has been used as a dietary ingredient by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, and employed as a natural food preservative and dietary herbal supplement (Wang et al. ; Roberts et al. ; Zhong et al. ). Chuanxiong is also used as a major ingredient in tea or soups for regular consumption to promote good health (Li et al. ). Danshensu (DSS) and tetramethylpyrazine (TMP), the active ingredients of Danshen and Chuanxiong, respectively, possess a variety of therapeutic properties such as anti-oxidation cardioprotection and neuroprotection (Zhao et al. ; Kao et al. ; Guo et al. ). It has been reported that structural combination of two compounds with known biological activities may lead to a novel molecule with multiple and unique properties (Chen et al. ). We accordingly synthesized and developed a novel analogue named DT-010 in which TMP was coupled to DSS through an ester bond and two allyl groups at the carboxyl group (Fig. 1 a). The current study well characterized the neuroprotective effects of DT-010 in both cell line and primary cultures, and provided evidence for the potent neuroprotection of DT-010 through stimulating transcription factor MEF2D via the activation of PI3K/Akt/GSK3β pathway, thus offering molecular insights into the potential application of DT-010 for PD treatment. Fig. 1 DT-010 inhibits MPP + -induced neuronal death in PC12 cells more potently and efficaciously than its monomers DSS and TMP. a the chemical structures of DSS, TMP and DT-010. b DT-010 protects PC12 cells from MPP + -induced neuronal death more potently and efficaciously than its monomers DSS and TMP. PC12 cells were pre-treated with DT-010 (1–30 µM), DSS (30–100 µM) or TMP (30–100 µM) for 2 h, then exposed to 2.5 mM MPP + for 48 h, and subjected to MTT assay for measuring cell viability. ** p < 0.01, compared to control group; ## p < 0.01, compared to MPP + group
Materials and Methods
Reagents
DT-010 was synthesized at Jinan University. DSS was purchased from Xi’an Honson Biotechnology (China) and TMP from Shanghai Banghai Chemical Company (China). LY294002, Hoechst 33342, LiCl, 2′7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) and MPP + were obtained from Sigma Chemicals (St Louis, MO, USA). Medium and supplements for cell culture were from Gibco (Carlsbad, CA, USA). Antibodies against phospho-Ser473-Akt, total Akt, phospho-Ser9-GSK3β, total GSK3β, Bcl-2, Bax, β-actin and Histone H3 were from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA). Antibody against MEF2D was from BD Biosciences (Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). Antibody against β-actin and secondary antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA).
PC12 Cell Culture
The rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) and maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS) in a 37 °C, 5 % CO 2 incubator. For the experiments with MPP + , PC12 cells (5 × 10 4 cells/ml) seeded in 96-well or 6-well plates were pre-treated with tested chemicals 2 h prior to MPP + exposure.
Primary Rat Cerebellar Granule Neuron (CGN) Cultures
All animal experimental procedures were performed according to the institutional animal experimental ethical guidelines at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Rat CGNs were prepared from 8-day-old Sprague–Dawley rats as we previously reported (Hu et al. , ). After isolation and purification, CGNs were plated at a density of 2.0 × 10 6 cells/ml in basal modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10 % FBS, 25 mM KCl, 2 mM glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. All the experiments were carried out after 8 days in culture.
MTT Assay
3(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2.5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay for measuring cell viability was carried out as we previously described (Hu et al. , ). Briefly, 24 or 48 h after MPP + treatment, MTT solution at a final concentration of 0.5 mg/ml was added to each well in 96-well plates, and cells were then incubated at 37 °C for 4 h. After removal of culture medium, the resultant formazan was dissolved in DMSO. The absorbance was recorded using a Bio-Rad Microplate Reader (Model 680, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) at a test wavelength of 570 nm with 655 nm as a reference wavelength.
Hoechst 33342 Staining
Hoechst staining assay for evaluating apoptotic chromatin condensation was carried out as we previously reported (Hu et al. , ). After MPP + treatment, PC12 cells grown in 6-well plates were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 5 % glucose, and then stained for 5 min with Hoechst 33342 (5 μg/ml) at 4 °C. The nuclei were observed under a fluorescence microscope (Nikon Instruments Inc., Melville, NY, USA).
DNA Laddering Assay
DNA laddering assay for assessment of apoptosis was performed as we previously described (Hu et al. ). Briefly, after treatment, cells were lysed with buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCL (pH 7.6), 20 mM EDTA, 0.5 μg/μl proteinase K and 0.5 % v/v Triton X-100. Following centrifugation, the fragmented DNA in the lysate was extracted, separated by 1.2 % agarose gel electrophoresis, then stained with ethidium bromide and photographed under UV light.
Intracellular ROS Assay
Intracellular accumulation of ROS was evaluated as we previously described (Hu et al. , ) with minor modifications. After drug treatment, cells were incubated for 30 min at 37 °C with fluorescent probe DCFH-DA (10 µM) in FBS-free medium, washed twice with PBS, and then visualized under the Nikon fluorescence microscope.
MEF2 Luciferase Reporter Gene Assay
MEF2 luciferase reporter assay was carried out as we previously reported (Yao et al. ). Briefly, PC12 cells were transfected with a MEF2 luciferase reporter gene (MEF2 binding site: TCGACGGGCTATTTTTAGGGCC) using a pGreenFire1™ reporter lentivector (System Biosciences, Mountain View, CA, USA). Cells were lysed at −80 °C for 10 min, and cellular extracts were collected for luciferase activity assay using a luciferase assay system (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA).
Purification of Nuclear Compartment
Nuclear proteins in PC12 cells were purified using a nuclear/cytosol fractionation kit (Biovision, Milpitas, CA, USA) according to the manufacture’s instruction.
MEF2D Short Hairpin RNA (ShRNA) Assay
The short hairpin RNA (shRNA) against MEF2D was designed as reported by targeting the sequence 5′-GTAGCTCTCTGGTCACTCC-3′ (Flavell et al. ). Briefly, PC12 cells were transfected with the indicated plasmids by using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at the ratio of 1:2 (plasmids/liposome). Selection media that contained 100 μg/ml G418 (Sigma Chemicals, St Louis, MO, USA) were added to the cells 24 h after transfection. Experiments were carried out 48 h after the cells were transfected.
Western Blot Analysis
Western blot assay was performed as we previously reported (Hu et al. , ). After treatment, protein was collected by centrifugation, separated on SDS-polyacrylamide gel, and transferred onto polyvinyldifluoride membranes. After 2 h of blocking at room temperature, the membranes were probed with various primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C, followed by 45 min of incubation with secondary antibodies. The blots were developed using an enhanced chemiluminescence plus kit (Amersham Bioscience, Aylesbury, UK), exposed to autoradiographic films, and quantified by densitometric analysis.
Statistical Analysis
Data, representative of at least three independent experiments, were presented as mean ± S.E.M and analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). A probability value of p < 0.05 was taken as statistically significant.
Results
DT-010 Protects PC12 Cells from MPP+-Induced Death More Potently and Efficaciously Than Its Monomers
MPP + -induced death of PC12 cells has been widely used to mimic DA neuronal loss in PD (Dun et al. ; Li et al. ). Exposure of PC12 cells to 2.5 mM MPP + for 48 h caused a remarkable decrease in cell survival as assayed by MTT (Fig. 1 b). The danshensu/tetramethylpyrazine derivative DT-010 at 3–30 µM offered remarkable neuroprotection against MPP + , more potently and efficaciously than its monomers DSS and TMP. In contrast, both DSS and TMP could offer weak neuroprotection only when their concentrations exceeded 100 µM. Furthermore, Hoechst staining and western blot analysis were carried out to test whether DT-010-mediated neuroprotection was through an anti-apoptotic pathway. As shown in Fig. 2 , DT-010 substantially reduced the number of condensed nuclei, as well as the ratio of Bax/Bcl-2. Fig. 2 DT-010 substantially suppresses MPP + -induced apoptosis in PC12 cells. a PC12 cells were pre-treated with or without 10 µM DT-010 for 2 h, then incubated with 2.5 mM MPP + for 48 h, and stained with Hoechst 33342. The arrows ( white ) indicate apoptotic cells. b the number of apoptotic nuclei stained by Hoechst was calculated from ( a ) in 4 randomly chosen fields. ** p < 0.01, compared to control group; ## p < 0.01, compared to MPP + group. c PC12 cells were treated as described in ( a ). 48 h after treatment, the cellular proteins were extracted and subjected to western blot assay. ** p < 0.01, compared to control group; ## p < 0.01, compared to MPP + group
DT-010 Inhibits MPP+-Induced Intracellular Accumulation of ROS in PC12 Cells
ROS is considered to contribute significantly to MPP + -dependent neuronal death (Wang et al. ). To evaluate the inhibitory effect of DT-010 on MPP + -induced oxidative stress, the levels of intracellular accumulation of ROS were measured using probe DCFH-DA. It was found that DT-010 effectively inhibited the abnormal generation of ROS induced by MPP + (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 DT-010 markedly inhibits MPP + -induced intracellular accumulation of ROS in PC12 cells. a PC12 cells were pre-treated with or without 10 µM DT-010 for 2 h, then incubated with 2.5 mM MPP + for 48 h, and stained with DCFH-DA. The mean intensity values of fluorescence images were derived from four randomly chosen fields. ** p < 0.01, compared to control group; ## p < 0.01, compared to MPP + group
DT-010 Prevents MPP+-Induced Neurotoxicity in Primary CGNs
To corroborate these findings observed in PC12 cell line, we evaluated the effect of DT-010 in primary culture of CGNs. A dose–response curve was plotted after incubation with gradually increasing concentrations of DT-010 and MPP + for 24 h in CGNs. It was evident that DT-010 provided neuroprotection with an EC 50 of 2.5 µM (Fig. 4 a). With the increase in incubation time, the neuroprotective effects of DT-010 gradually decreased but still significant even 48 h after the MPP + insult (Fig. 4 b). Similarly, DSS and TMP exerted neuroprotective effects in CGNs only when their concentrations were up to 100 µM (Fig. 4 a). Fig. 4 DT-010 concentration dependently and time dependently attenuates MPP + -induced neuronal death in primary cerebellar granule neurons (CGNs). a at Day 8 in vitro (8 DIV), CGNs were pre-treated with DT-010 (0.1–30 µM), DSS (100 µM) or TMP (100 µM) for 2 h, then incubated with 50 µM MPP + for 24 h, and subjected to MTT assay for measuring cell viability. IC 50 value was evaluated using Origin Pro 8 statistical software from the sigmoidal inhibition curve. ## p < 0.01, compared to MPP + group. b at 8 DIV, CGNs were pre-treated with 10 µM DT-010 for 2 h, then incubated with 50 µM MPP + for different lengths of time (12, 24, 36 or 48 h). Cell viability was measured using MTT assay. ** p < 0.01, compared to control group; ## p < 0.01, compared to MPP + group
To further confirm the neuroprotection of DT-010, phase contrast microscopical analysis, Hoechst staining and DNA fragmentation assays were performed in succession. As clearly demonstrated in Fig. 5 a, numerous neurons and extensive neurite networking are prominent in control CGNs. Incubation with MPP + resulted in a marked decrease in the number of neurons and a dramatic loss of neurite networking. In contrast, neurons treated with MPP + and DT-010 showed a very significant sparing of cell bodies and neurites. Similarly, fluorescent staining results revealed that DT-010 reversed the decrease in Hoechst-stained apoptotic cells caused by MPP + (Fig. 5 a, b). Moreover, DNA fragmentation analysis indicated that DT-010 effectively blocked typical DNA ladder (Fig. 5 c), the hall mark of apoptosis. Fig. 5 DT-010 effectively blocks MPP + -induced apoptosis in primary CGNs. a at 8 DIV, CGNs were pre-treated with 10 µM DT-010 for 2 h, and then incubated with 50 µM MPP + . 24 h after MPP + treatment, cells were assayed with a phase contrast microscope and Hoechst 33342 staining, respectively. With control CGNs, arrows ( yellow ) indicate healthy cell body morphology while arrow heads ( yellow ) indicate healthy neurites. With MPP + treatment, red arrows and red arrow heads indicate degenerative neurons and neurites, respectively. With MPP + +DT-010 treatment, green arrow and green arrow heads represent relatively preserved cell bodies and neurites. The arrows ( white ) indicate apoptotic cells. b the counts of apoptotic bodies by Hoechst staining as in ( a ). c 24 h after MPP + treatment, DNA fragmentations were extracted and electrophoresis was performed (Color figure online)
DT-010 Protects Against MPP+-Induced Neurotoxicity via Activating MEF2D
It has been recently demonstrated that activation of transcription factor MEF2 is an important underlying mechanism in antagonizing neurotoxins such as MPP + (Yao et al. ). We therefore tested the possibility that DT-010 might stimulate MEF2 transcriptional activity against MPP + insult. For this study, we transfected PC12 cells with MEF2-dependent luciferase reporter construct, and treated cells with DT-010, DSS or TMP 2 h prior to MPP + insult. This analysis revealed that DT-010, but not DSS or TMP, greatly reversed the inhibition of MEF2 activity caused by MPP + (Fig. 6 a). Consistent with this, DT-010 effectively protected against MPP + -induced reduction of protein expression of nuclear MEF2D, an isoform of the MEF2 family that particularly regulates neuronal survival (Fig. 6 b). More importantly, genetic depletion of MEF2D by ShRNA rendered DT-010 largely ineffective in protecting PC12 cells from MPP + -induced neurotoxicity (Fig. 6 c), suggesting that the neuroprotection of DT-010 was mainly dependent on MEF2D. Fig. 6 DT-010 protects against MPP + -induced toxicity via stimulation of MEF2D ( a ), DT-010, but not DSS or TMP, reverses MPP + -induced inhibition of MEF2 gene transactivation activity. PC12 cells were transfected with MEF2 luciferase reporter construct, pre-treated for 2 h with DT-010 (3–30 µM), DSS (30–100 µM) or TMP (30–100 µM), and then exposed to MPP + . The luciferase reporter activity was measured 48 h after treatment. b DT-010 attenuates MPP + -induced inhibition of MEF2D expression in nuclei. PC12 cells were transfected with MEF2 luciferase reporter construct, pre-treated with or without DT-010 for 2 h, and then exposed to MPP + . Lysates from nuclear extracts were probed with antibodies against MEF2D and Histone H3 (nuclear loading control). c Genetic depletion of MEF2D significantly abolishes the neuroprotection provided by DT-010. PC12 cells were transfected with pGPU6-green fluorescent protein (GFP) plasmid (vector) and pGPU6-GFP plasmid encoding MEF2D ShRNA (ShMEF2D) or GAPDH (ShNC). 48 h after transfection, cells were subjected to western blot analysis using anti-MEF2D and β-actin antibodies ( upper panel ). After transfection, PC12 cells were pre-treated with or without 10 μM DT-010 for 2 h, then exposed to MPP + , and subjected to MTT assay for measuring cell viability ( Lower panel ). ** p < 0.01, compared to MPP + group; ## p < 0.01, compared to vector group or ShNC group
DT-010 Potentiates Akt Against MPP+ to Down-Regulate MEF2D Inhibitor GSK3β
Since GSK3β pathway has been demonstrated to negatively regulate MEF2 activity (Yao et al. ; Wang et al. ), we examined the possibility that DT-010 might enhance MEF2 activity through the inhibition of GSK3β. Our analysis revealed that the GSK3β inhibitor LiCl substantially protected cells (Fig. 7 a) and reversed the inhibition of MEF2 transcriptional activity caused by MPP + (Fig. 7 b), suggesting GSK3β pathway was involved in MPP + -induced neurotoxicity in PC12 cells. LY294002, the specific inhibitor of PI3K, significantly abolished the neuroprotective effects of DT-010 (Fig. 7 a). Consistent with this, DT-010 reversed the reduction of Akt activity and the inhibitory phosphorylation of GSK3β at Ser-9 (Fig. 7 c), suggesting that DT-010 could activate PI3K/Akt pathway to down-regulate MEF2D inhibitor GSK3β. Fig. 7 DT-010 potentiates Akt against MPP + to down-regulate MEF2D inhibitor GSK3β in PC12 cells. a PI3K inhibitor LY294002 significantly abrogates the neuroprotection of DT-010 against MPP + in PC12 cells. PC12 cells were pre-treated with LY294002 for 2 h, then incubated with DT-010 for 2 h, and finally exposed to MPP + . Cell viability was examined using MTT assay. ** p < 0.01, compared to control group; ## p < 0.01, compared to MPP + group; △△ p < 0.01, compared to DT-010 plus MPP + group. b GSK3β inhibitor LiCl reverses MPP + -induced inhibition of MEF2 transcriptional activity. PC12 cells were transfected with MEF2 luciferase reporter construct, pre-treated 2 h with LiCl (3–10 µM), and then exposed to MPP + . The luciferase reporter activity was measured 48 h after treatment. ** p < 0.01, compared to control group; ## p < 0.01, compared to MPP + group. c DT-010 effectively reverses MPP + -induced decrease of phospho-Ser473 Akt and phospho-Ser9 GSK3β. PC12 cells were pre-treated with LY294002 for 2 h, incubated with DT-010 for 2 h, then exposed to MPP + , and lysates were immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. ** p < 0.01, compared to control group; ## p < 0.01, compared to MPP + group; △△ p < 0.01, compared to DT-010 plus MPP + group
Discussion
Current anti-PD therapies such as medical and surgical treatments only offer symptom-relieving benefits without delaying the disease progression (Jankovic and Aguilar ). Hence, identifying novel molecular targets implicated in the key pathological processes of PD and these targets-based neuroprotective agents is one of the great challenges for future PD treatment. Recently, it has been documented that transcription factor MEF2D plays a critical role in neuronal survival and activation of MEF2D is an important underlying mechanism in antagonizing neurotoxins associated with PD (Yao et al. ; Yang et al. ), a finding that strongly suggests MEF2D as a promising and effective anti-PD target.
In the past decades, much attention has been paid to the development of dimeric or hybrid compounds, which combine two molecules or fragments with known or unknown biological activities. Naturally occurring DSS and TMP are active ingredients originally from Danshen and Chuanxiong, respectively, both of which are valuable herbs used as medicines and food supplements (in the form of soup or tea). One of our attempts was the development of DT-010, a hybrid derived from DSS and TMP. We investigated whether this novel dimeric compound could exhibit an improved or even new neuroprotection profile, in terms of potency and efficacy.
The PC12 cell line derived from a pheochromocytoma of the rat adrenal medulla is widely used as a cell model for studying neuroscience. These cells are popular because they are able to synthesize and release catecholamine in a manner similar to dopaminergic neurons (Tang ). There is compelling evidence that MPP + -induced death of PC12 cells has been extensively adopted to mimic DA neuronal loss as observed in PD (Li et al. ; Zou et al. ). Our current study showed that DT-010, which is more potent and more efficacious than its monomers DSS and TMP, exerted substantial neuroprotective effects against MPP + -induced neurotoxicity in PC12 cells (Figs. 1 b, 2 , 3 ), as evidenced by the increase in cell survival, as well as the decrease in the number of Hoechst-stained apoptotic nuclei and in the level of intracellular accumulation of ROS. Moreover, we corroborated the neuroprotective effects of DT-010 in primary CGNs (Figs. 4 , 5 ), a widely used in vitro model associated with PD (Cui et al. , ; Zhang et al. , ). More encouragingly, the neuroprotection of DT-010 was most likely to be dependent on the activation of transcription factor MEF2D, a conclusion supported by the fact that DT-010 enhanced MEF2 transcriptional activity (Fig. 6 a) and protected MEF2D in nuclear compartments, as well as that genetic depletion of MEF2D significantly abrogated the neuroprotective effects provided by DT-010 (Fig. 6 c). Furthermore, western blot analysis revealed that DT-010 stimulated MEF2D transcriptional activity via the activation of PI3K/Akt/GSK3β pathway (Fig. 7 ). Compared with the previous study in which MEF2D activity was enhanced using recombinant viral approach (She et al. ), the small molecule that we identified in the present study represents a promising anti-PD drug candidate and provides practical approach of modulating MEF2D activity in neurons. Collectively, these results suggest that DT-010, acting as a MEF2D activator, may have therapeutic value for PD treatment. What is more noteworthy is that DSS and TMP, the monomers of DT-010, did not show any stimulatory effects on MEF2 transcriptional activity, suggesting that dimerization of available molecules could be one of the most effective and economic strategies for the development of novel multifunctional drugs.
How did DT-010 enhance MEF2D activity in the MPP + -dependent cell model? There is considerable evidence to support that MEF2 could be regulated by a variety of survival- and death-related signals (Rashid et al. ; Yang et al. ; Wang et al. ). For instance, P38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (8), extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5 (ERK5) (Liu et al. ) and protein kinase A (PKA) (Kato et al. ) promote MEF2 function via phosphorylation in the transactivation domain, whereas oxidative stress, GSK3β (9) and cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) (Gong et al. ) were shown to reduce MEF2-dependent transcription. Our analysis clearly demonstrated that DT-010 could indirectly inhibit GSK3β activity through the activation of PI3K/Akt pathway, suggesting that DT-010 may protect MEF2D from MPP + -induced inhibition in nuclear compartment via inhibiting, at least partially, GSK3β pathway.
And notably, based on the fact that PI3K inhibitor LY294002 could not completely abolish the neuroprotective effects provided by DT-010 and that GSK3β inhibitors LiCl was not able to fully protect neurons, we could not rule out the existence of any other possible contributing upstream cytoplasmic targets (kinases or enzymes). Delineating these mechanisms in PD and other model systems may broaden the potential application of DT-010. To figure out whether DT-010 directly inhibit GSK3β to confer neuroprotective effects, more molecular biological assays, including GSK3β activity assay and molecular dynamics simulation, are being systematically undertaken in our laboratory.
In conclusion, we provided evidence that DT-010 markedly protected against MPP + -induced neurotoxicity in PC12 cells, and these neuroprotective effects were mediated through the activation of MEF2D, possibly via the inhibition of GSK3β (Fig. 8 ). Collectedly, DT-010, acting as a MEF2D activator, might be a novel drug candidate for treating PD and other neurodegenerative disorders. Fig. 8 Molecular model for the signaling pathways involved in the neuroprotection of DT-010 against MPP + -induced neuronal apoptosis. DT-010 reverses the inhibition of PI3K/Akt/GSK3β pathway caused by MPP + , stimulates MEF2D transcriptional activity, then protects neurons