Introduction
Germinated brown rice (GBR), a staple food became popular in Asian because of its rich fiber and good preserving nutrient contents. GBR is made from brown rice which has been germinated by soaking in water for up to one or 2 days. The germ produces the physiologically active substances and enzymes to improve the texture of brown rice and healthy of human (Patil and Khan ; Lin et al. ; Cho and Lim ). During germination, GBR contains gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and higher nutrients in comparison with white rice and brown rice, such as dietary fiber, inositol, vitamin E and vitamin B (Mohd Esa et al. ; Ng et al. ). Moreover, GBR also contains high levels of phenolic compounds such as flavonoids, ferulic acid, sinapinic acid and p-coumaric acid (Wu et al. ). GBR has been reported as one of those antioxidant and antiapoptosis substances (Park et al. ; Azmi et al. ). Its phenolic compounds have antioxidant and anticancer properties and those are known to exert various physiological effects in humans, such as preventing oxidative damage of lipid, free radical scavenging capabilities and decrease in oxidative stress in animals (Oh and Oh ). GBR also contains considerable phytic acid with a powerful anticancer activity and a prolyl endopeptidase activity inhibitor related to the metabolism of peptide. In addition, the protease activity of GBR increased 1.5 times after germination (Yamada et al. ; Patil and Khan ). Recently, GBR and pre-GBR have been reported to possess high neuroprotective activity such as suppression of cell death induced by H 2 O 2 in SH-SY5Y cells by blocking the cell cycle reentry and apoptotic mechanisms (Ismail et al. ), and the antidepressant-like effect by increasing 5-HT levels in the mouse frontal cortex (Mamiya et al. ).
Parkinson’s disease (PD), the second most common neurodegenerative disease after Alzheimer’s disease, is characterized by selectively specific nigrostriatal dopaminergic degeneration and its pathologic hallmark, fibrillar cytoplasmic inclusions called Lewy bodies containing α-synuclein and ubiquitin (Iwatsubo et al. ; Spillantini et al. ). This neurodegenerative disorder is characterized by cardinal features, including resting tremor, slowness of movement, rigidity and postural instability as a result of progressive loss of the dopaminergic (DA) neurons in substantia nigra par compacta (SNc). It is believed that environmental and genetics factors play important roles in the pathogenesis of PD. Previous studies have reported that mutations in genes such as α -synuclein, parkin and ubiquitin carboxyterminal hydrolase L1 are associated with cases of familial PD (Polymeropoulos et al. ; Kitada et al. ; Leroy et al. ). The pesticide exposures and rural living are involved the epidemiologic studies of sporadic PD (Gorell et al. ; Menegon et al. ). There seem to be several factors responsible for neurodegeneration. Schapira ( ) reported that one of these factors is mitochondrial complex I deficiency and it was found that non-familiar sporadic PD is characterized by 15–30 % reduction in complex I activity (Schapira et al. ).
Moreover, one of the organic pesticides rotenone (RT) has been reported as a complex I inhibitor to have a selective toxicity on DA cells in vitro (Marey-Semper et al. ) and suggested that DA neurons are especially vulnerable to complex I inhibitors. In addition, RT has been shown to induce oxidative stress and apoptosis in Neuro-2a cells that is associated more with intracellular calcium rather than free radicals (Swarnkar et al. , ). In a previous study of Betarbet et al. ( ), RT caused the rats developed motor and postural deficits characteristic of PD and expressed ubiquitin and alpha-synuclein inclusions in brain shared the features of Lewy bodies.
The present study was designed to investigate the neuroprotective effects of GBR on the motor behavioral deficits and the DA neuronal cell death in PD-like disease rats. Reactive oxidative species (ROS) generated by chronic subcutaneous injection of RT lead to neuronal apoptosis particularly in the nigrostriatal DA system and produce many features of PD such as bradykinesia and motor impairments. In this study, 4-phenylbutyric acid (4-PBA), a chemical chaperone, low-molecular-weight fatty acid was used to be the positive control because 4-PBA has been previously reported to inhibit RT-induced neuronal death and decreased the protein level of α-synuclein and suggested that 4-PBA might be one of the therapeutic reagents for neurodegenerative disorders (Inden et al. ).
Materials and Methods
Animals
Thirty-six male Sprague–Dawley (SD) rats (from Nation Laboratory Animal Center, Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom Thailand) aged 6 weeks were chosen for the experiment. At the beginning of the experiment, the rats weighed 200–260 g. After acclimatization of one week period, rats were housed in cages with soft bedding in a room maintained at a constant temperature of 25 °C, 50–60 % humidity and a 12-/12-h light–dark cycle (7:00–19:00). They obtained dry rat food, and water was available ad libitum. All experiments were performed in compliance with international ethical standards and have been approved by the local animal care committee (Ethical Committee on Animals experiments of Mahidol University, SI-ACUP 008/2556).
Chemicals
The GBR was provided by Institute of Nutrition, Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand. The GBR was prepared by soaking brown rice named Khao dawk mali 105 (KDML 105), incubating at 35 °C for 18 h for germination, freeze-dried and pounded. The rotenone (RT) (Sigma-Aldrich# R8875-1G, MO, USA) was dissolved in 1:1 (v/v) sunflower oil. In this study, a 450 mM aqueous stock solution of 4-PBA is prepared by dissolving 4.11 g 4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA, 99 %, Sigma# P21005-25G, FW164.2) in 35 ml of autoclaved ddH2O. This solution is titrated with an equimolar amount of 1 N NaOH (approximately 20.4 ml) to pH 7.0 to form the sodium salt.
Murine TNF-α ELISA Development kit (K54-900, PeproTech) and all solvents for ELISA were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Annexin V-FITC Apoptosis Detection Kit (APOAF, Sigma) was used for flow cytometry. Mouse monoclonal antityrosine hydroxylase (TH-16, Sigma), EnVision Kit (K8002-40, Dako); FLEX/HRP (SM802, Dako), FLEX DAB + Chromogen (DM827, Dako), FLEX Substrate Buffer (SM803, Dako) and Harris hematoxylin (cat. # HHS35-1L; Sigma) were used in immunoperoxidase staining.
Treatment
The rats were randomly divided into six groups of six rats each as follows: group I, control (CT) or vehicle injected group, group II, 4-PBA, group III, GBR, group IV, rotenone (RT), group V, 4-PBA+RT, and group VI, GBR+RT.
In this study, GBR was mixed with normal rat food (Charoen Pokphand Foods PCL, Thailand) in a ratio 24:1 g/day (normal rat food: GBR). Previous report by Pober and Calhoun ( ) showed that the normal daily food intake of male SD rats (140–260 g of body weight) was 10–16 g/day and the average of preliminary experimental result performed for the confirmation of maximum amount of rat foods consumed per day by each rat was 22 ± 0.8 g. Therefore, rats in the GBR and GBR+RT groups were fed orally (ad libitum) with mixed GBR food, 25 g/day once a day at the same time for 10 weeks instead of normal rat food.
After 8 weeks, 4-PBA at dose of 120 mg/kg according to a previous report by Inden et al. ( ) was intraperitoneally (i.p.) injected daily in the 4-PBA group and 30 min before each RT treatment for rats in the 4-PBA+RT group. Saline injected in parallel with the corresponding vehicle control in other rat groups.
After 8 weeks and pretreatment of 4-PBA for 30 min, i.p. at same day, the induction of experimental PD rats in the RT, 4-PBA + RT and GBR + RT groups was performed by six doses (at day 57, 59, 61, 63, 65 and 67) of RT injection (1.5 mg/kg/48 h, s.c.) in a volume of 5 ml/kg (Zaitone et al. ). Sunflower oil was injected as vehicle to rats in the CT, 4-PBA and GBR groups (1 ml/kg).
Motor Behavioral Study
To determine the effect of GBR on motor deficit that caused by the degeneration of nigro-striatal pathway, motor function of the rats was tested using the open field test and pole test 1 day after the last injection of RT or day 69. It is because the akinesia (partial loss of voluntary muscle movement, or showed initiation of motor movement) and attention dysfunction (deficits in working memory and verbal fluency) are commonly seen in parkinsonism. Both open field test and pole test had been used previously to assess basal ganglia-related movement disorder and PD in mouse and rat models (Shimohama et al. ). For the open field test, the open field arena sized 113 × 113 × 44 cm was made of plastic box. The floor was painted with white lines that formed a 5 × 5 cm pattern. Rats were introduced individually to the open field arena and observed for 10 min. The ambulation (the number of squares crossed) and mobility duration (time of paw movement) were scored.
For the pole test, rats were placed head-up on top of a vertical wooden pole 50 cm long (1 cm in diameter). The base of the pole was placed in the home cage. When placed on the pole, animals oriented themselves downward and descended the length of the pole back into their home cage. Rats received 2 days of training that consisted of five trials for each session. On the test day, the animals received five trials, and time to orient downward (t-turn) and total time to descend (t-total) were measured. The mean of the five trials was calculated and compared.
Perfusion and Collection of Blood and Brain
After one day of the motor behavioral test (day 70) , rats of all groups of this experimental were anesthetized intramuscularly by the combination of ketamine (35 mg/kg) and xylazine (2.4 mg/kg). Blood collections were performed by heart puncture having a minimal flow resistance to avoid hemolysis. Blood was allowed to coagulate for 2 h and then centrifuged at 3000 rpm, 4 °C. Serum was separated and stored at −20 °C until being used for determining of TNF-α (Parker et al. ). After blood collection, rats of all groups were perfused transcardially with 250 ml of 0.1 M phosphate buffer saline (PBS) for each rat. The brain was removed and separated into two halves. The right half of brain was weighed, homogenized immediately and used for TNF-α assay and flow cytometric investigation. The left half of brain was fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde (PFA) overnight at 4 °C and then processed for tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoperoxidase staining.
Brain Homogenization
For determining of TNF-α, each half brain was weighed and prepared to 50 % (w/v) homogenate in ice-cold medium containing 50 mM Tris–HCl and 300 mM sucrose. Suspended cells were filtered using 50-µm pore size mesh, and cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 15 min, at 4 °C. The supernatant was separated and stored at −70 °C until used.
For flow cytometry, brain tissue was immediately prepared by manual disaggregation procedure (Ballesteros et al. ; Mahmoud and Abdel Moneim ). Briefly, a few drops of ice-cold Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium (RPMI) media were added to each half brain and then minced until complete tissue disaggregation was achieved. Suspended cells were filtered using a 50-μm pore size mesh and then centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 10 min at 4 ºC. Cells were resuspended in protein bovine serum, counted and washed by calcium buffer and then centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended, and then cells were counted in the same day.
Flow Cytometry
As previously described by Mahmoud and Abdel Moneim ( ), viability and apoptosis of brain cells were assessed by flow cytometry using Annexin V-FITC apoptosis detection kit (propidium iodide included). FAC scan Becton–Dickinson flow cytometer was used, and Cell Quest software data were used to analyze the number of apoptotic, necrotic, dead and viable cells in the brain tissue.
Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assay (ELISA) for TNF-α
The ELISA method for TNF-α determination is performed according to the previous reports by Taechowisan et al. ( , ).
Plate Preparation
Each well of a 96-well ELISA plate was precoated with 100 µl of capture antibody (goat antimurine TNF-α) diluted with PBS to a concentration of 1 µg/ml, then sealed and incubated overnight at room temperature. After that, the wells were aspirated to remove liquid and washed four times using 300 µl of wash buffer per well. After the last wash, the plate was inverted to remove residual buffer and blotted on paper towel. Then, 300 µl of block buffer was added to each well. The plate was incubated for at least 1 h at room temperature. Finally, the plate was aspirated and washed four times.
ELISA Protocol
Standard TNF-α was diluted in serial dilution with PBS. Then, 100 µl of standard or sample (10 % of supernatant) is added to each well in duplicate. The plate was incubated at room temperature for at least 2 h. Then, the plate was aspirated and washed four times. The detection antibody was diluted with PBS to a concentration of 0.25 µg/ml and then added 100 µl per well. The plate was incubated at room temperature for at least 2 h. Next, the plate was aspirated and washed four times. Avidin-HRP Conjugate was diluted in diluent to a dilution of 1:2000 and added 100 µl per well. The plate was incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Next, the plate was aspirated and washed four times. Finally, 100 µl of 2, 2′-azino-bis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) substrate solution was added to each well. The plate was incubated at room temperature for color development ( protected from light) and should be monitored at 5-min intervals for approximately 35 min with an ELISA reader at 405 nm with wavelength correction set at 650 nm.
Tyrosine Hydroxylase Immunoperoxidase Staining
After the left half of brain was fixed overnight in 4 % PFA at 4 °C, it was dehydrated, infiltrated and then embedded into paraffin blocks. The paraffin blocks were cut coronally into 3-µm-thick sections with a microtome and mounted on glass slide. Slides with brain sections were in an oven at 60 °C for 40 min. Then, it was deparaffinized by immersing in xylene three times for 10 min each and rehydrated for 5 min each in following solutions, absolute alcohol three times, 95 % alcohol, 80 % alcohol, 70 % alcohol and then distilled water for 30 s. The antigen retrieval procedures should be performed before subjected to immunoperoxidase staining and slides were transferred into 10 mM sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.0) and incubated in oven at 95 °C for 40 min. The slides were cooled for 30 min at room temperature and blocked with 3 % H 2 O 2 for 5 min and non-specific binding with 2 % BSA for 20 min, subsequently washed with PBS twice. The sections were then subjected to immunoperoxidase staining using mouse monoclonal antityrosine hydroxylase (TH-16, 1:800 for 1 h) and EnVision Kit. After staining, the sections were counterstained with Harris hematoxylin for 30 s, dehydrated twice with absolute alcohol, then cleared in xylene three times for 10 min each and mounted. The number of DA surviving neurons in SNc was analyzed using light microscope and computer image analysis.
Image Analysis for Measurement of Dopaminergic Neurons
The number of TH-immunopositive neurons in the SNc was measured by a computerized image analysis system using the software Image Tool version 3.0 for Windows, UTHSCSA, Texas University, USA, and Adobe Photoshop CS3. Three 20X images per slide were captured with Olympus microscope digital camera, DP73. Three slides (included three sections per slides) of each rat were chosen, and only one section has been captured. In each section, three representative images of the SNc were cropped with area of 20.02 × 10 2 µm 2 . Each crop was examined and counted the number of TH-immunopositive neurons in the SNc per area showing the characteristic of viable cells, i.e., round large clear nucleus with prominent nucleolus. The sum of three sampling windows and three crops was calculated for each slide; then, data of three slides were averaged for each rat. Finally, the number of surviving DA neurons of all rats in each group was statistically analyzed and expressed as mean ± SEM.
Statistical Analysis
All results were expressed as mean ± SEM and statistically analyzed using SPSS program, version 17 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The significance of differences was determined by analysis of variance (ANOVA). Further statistical analysis for post hoc comparisons was performed using the Tukey’s test. The level of significant difference was taken at P < 0.05.
Results
In the present study, the neuroprotective effects of GBR on the motor behavioral deficits and the DA neuronal cell death were investigated in PD rats. Repeated systemic administration of RT to rats (1.5 mg/kg/48 h/6 doses, s.c.) was performed to produce motor impairment, histopathological changes and biochemical deficits.
Body Weight Loss
The average changes in body weight during 10 weeks of the experimental period are shown in Fig. 1 . Rats fed with GBR gained weight more than twice and showed significant difference after 4 weeks at P < 0.05 when compared to the CT group in the same period. After 8 weeks of receiving RT and 4-PBA treatments, the body weight loss was significantly detected in rats only in the RT and 4-PBA+RT groups at P < 0.05 when compared to the CT group in the same period of time, but not significantly in the GBR+RT group which showed decrease in body weight close to the CT group. 4-PBA treatment caused no significant changes in the body weight when compared to the CT group in the same period of time. Fig. 1 Change in body weight during 10 weeks (W) of the experimental period was compared among groups, control (CT), 4-PBA, germinate brown rice (GBR), rotenone (RT), 4-PBA+RT and GBR+RT. Asterisk (*) was significant difference at P < 0.05 when compared to CT group at the same period of time
Motor Behavioral Impairment
The Open Field Test
In Fig. 2 a, b, it was observed that feeding with GBR and intraperitoneal injection of 4-PBA (120 mg/kg) did not cause much deterioration of the motor performance in the open field test, whereas chronic subcutaneous injection of RT showed a significant decrease in locomotion, a lower rearing frequency and a shorter mobility duration at P < 0.05 when compared to the CT group. GBR and 4-PBA significantly enhanced the motor activity of the GRB+RT and 4-PBA+RT rats in the open field test only in the ambulation but not in the mobility duration when compared to the RT group. Fig. 2 Motor behavioral deficits in the open field test and the pole test were evaluated the ambulation ( a ), the mobility duration ( b ), time to orient downward (t-turn) ( c ) and total time to descend (t-total) ( d ) and compared among groups, control (CT), 4-PBA, germinate brown rice (GBR), rotenone (RT), 4-PBA+RT and GBR+RT. a was significant difference at P < 0.05 when compared to CT group. b was significant difference at P < 0.05 when compared to RT group
The Pole Test
In Fig. 2 c, d, feeding with GBR increased time for both t-turn and t-total significantly at p < 0.05 when compared to the CT and 4-PBA groups. However, RT-treated rats showed significantly higher t-turn and t-total than the GBR group when compared to the CT group. Pretreatment with GBR as well as 4-PBA ameliorated both of the measurements (t-turn and t-total) in the pole test as compared to the RT group and only in the 4-PBA group showed significantly lower t-turn and t-total.
Histopathological Changes
Neuronal Apoptosis
Flow cytometric analysis of cell types by using annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide (PI) staining is shown in Fig. 3 and expressed as four quadrants: the percentage of early apoptotic (lower right), early necrotic (upper left), dead (upper right) and viable cells (lower left). Pretreatment of brain cells with GBR and 4-PBA caused apoptosis with the percentage of 38.17 % and 54.85 %, respectively. Apoptotic cells in the RT group (85.98 %) showed a significant ( P < 0.05) increase versus the CT group (17.50 %). RT-induced apoptosis in neurons was abolished by the protective effect of GBR in GBR + RT group with decreasing the number of apoptotic cells (79.32 %), whereas, increased the number of viable cells (17.94 %) when compared to the RT group (10.79 %) (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 3 Flow cytometric analysis of apoptosis by annexin V and propidium iodide staining on brain tissue of rats in control (CT) pretreated with GBR or 4-PBA and/or rotenone (RT) injection groups was shown and expressed as four quadrants: viable cells ( lower left ), the percentage of early apoptotic ( lower right ), early necrotic ( upper left ) and dead ( upper right ) Fig. 4 Percentage of apoptotic cells ( a ) and viable cells ( b ) was assessed by annexin V and propidium iodide staining on brain tissue and compared among groups, control (CT), 4-PBA, germinate brown rice (GBR), rotenone (RT), 4-PBA+RT and GBR+RT. a was significant difference at P < 0.05 when compared to CT group. b was significant difference at P < 0.05 when compared to RT group
The Dopaminergic (DA) Neuronal Cell Loss
TH-immunopositive staining for DA neurons and evidence of degeneration were demonstrated in the SNc and ventral tegmental area (VTA) but not shown in other brain regions where neurons were present in normal appearance including basal ganglia nuclei, such as globus pallidus and subthalamic nucleus,.
In this study, RT was used to induce toxicity and it caused degradation of nigro-striatal pathway in brain indicated by the DA neuronal cell loss in SNc (Fig. 5 ) and loss of striatal dopamine in caudate (Fig. 7 ). The number of surviving DA neurons assessed by TH immunoperoxidase staining demonstrated that CT, 4-PBA and GBR rats showed normal SNc neurons with obvious nuclei. However, RT rats showed marked degeneration as follows low number/area of neurons as shown in Fig. 5 . The average number of DA neurons per 20.02 × 10 2 µm 2 was 18.33 ± 0.37 cells in the CT group, whereas in the RT group it was 8.63 ± 1.45. GBR and 4-PBA could attenuate the DA neuronal cell loss, histopathological changes in SNc neurons with visible nuclei and greater increase in the number of surviving DA neurons in the GBR+RT (11.44 ± 0.48) and 4-PBA+RT (15.74 ± 0.87) groups as compared to the RT group (Fig. 6 ). Loss of striatal dopamine in caudate or caudate DA fibers was shown as pale area in the RT group (Fig. 7 ), but 4-PBA and GBR could attenuate the loss of DA fibers in caudate in the 4-PBA+RT and GBR+RT groups as compared to the RT group. Fig. 5 DA neuronal cell death demonstrated by TH immunoperoxidase staining. CT, 4-PBA and GBR rats showed normal SNc neurons with obvious nuclei. However, RT rats showed marked degeneration in SNc; neurons appeared with low number/area and with indistinct neuronal boundaries. Scale bar is 10.0 µm Fig. 6 Number of surviving DA neurons in SNc was assessed by TH immunoperoxidase staining, The average number of DA neurons per 20.02 × 10 2 µm 2 expressed as mean ± SEM was compared among groups, control (CT), 4-PBA, germinate brown rice (GBR), rotenone (RT), 4-PBA+RT and GBR+RT. RT group showed greater degree of DA neuronal cell death. a was significant difference at P < 0.05 when compared to CT group. b was significant difference at P < 0.05 when compared to RT group Fig. 7 Loss of striatal dopamine in caudate or caudate DA fibers was demonstrated by TH immunoperoxidase staining as shown by pale area in RT group, and 4-PBA and GBR could attenuate the loss of DA fibers in caudate in 4-PBA+RT and GBR+RT groups. Scale bar is 2.0 mm
Tumor Necrosis Factor-α (TNF-α)
The levels of TNF-α in serum and brain are assessed by ELISA as shown in Fig. 8 . In the present study, RT increased TNF-α level in the RT group both in serum and in brain significantly at P < 0.05 when compared to the CT group. 4-PBA could attenuate the increase in TNF-α significantly both in serum and in brain of the 4-PBA+RT group, but GBR showed significantly only in the brain of the GBR+RT group when compared to the RT group. Fig. 8 Levels of TNF-α in serum ( a ) and brain ( b ) were assessed by ELISA and compared among groups, control (CT), 4-PBA, germinate brown rice (GBR), rotenone (RT), 4-PBA+RT and GBR+RT. a was significant difference at P < 0.05 when compared to CT group. b was significant difference at P < 0.05 when compared to RT group
Discussion
In this study, we evaluated the neuroprotective effects of GBR on the motor behavioral deficits and the DA cell death in PD rats and compared them with those of 4-PBA. To our knowledge, this is the first report of effects of GBR in PD rats.
During this experiment, the body weight of pretreated GBR (25 g/day of mixed normal rat food: GBR, 24:1) rats significantly increased. Rats gained weight more than twice at 4 weeks and gradually increased till the end of the experiment. This agreed with the report by Mamiya et al. ( ) that pre-GBR and polished rice gained more weight twice than cornstarch significantly at 4 weeks. On the other hand, Ho et al. ( ) reported the observed antiobesity effects in the GBR group with the reduction in lipid peroxidation levels and activity of hepatic enzymes (alanine transferase, ALT and aspartate transaminase, AST). GBR may have better flavor and texture than normal rat food. Therefore, rats were preferred to eat more and gained weight.
After 8 weeks of this experiment, the induction of experimental PD rats was carried out by six doses of RT injection (1.5 mg/kg/48 h, s.c.) according to Zaitone et al. ( ). Several studies (Betarbet et al. ; Sherer et al. , , ; Inden et al. ; Swarnkar et al. , ; Zaitone et al. ) reported the differences of systemic exposure to RT which were dependent on species and strains of animals, doses of RT and routes of administration such as chronic subcutaneous RT exposure (Sherer et al. , , ; Zaitone et al. ) demonstrated highly selective DA degeneration, α- synuclein aggregation and reproduced neurochemical, neuropathological and behavioral features of PD in rats including reduced mobility, flexed posture, some rigidity and even catalepsy. In addition, Sherer et al. ( , , ) described that control rats always gained weight while RT rats were often characterized by weight loss. Following 8 weeks, RT also caused the decrease in body weight in all RT-treated rats, but pretreatment with GBR and 4-PBA attenuated the weight loss effect until close to CT rats’ weight at the end of experiment. All RT-treated rats with demonstrable DA cell loss showed impaired motor function and motor coordination could be the result of the degeneration in nigrostriatal DA pathway. The results of our study demonstrated the loss of striatal DA terminals in caudate following RT treatment, and postsynaptic striatal elements were spared. This degeneration could be traced through the medial forebrain bundle to the SNc demonstrating degeneration of DA fibers. In agreement with the study by Sherer et al. ( , , ), RT-induced nigrostriatal DA degeneration was highly selective. There was no TH-immunopositive staining in other brain regions where neurons were still present in normal appearance.
It has been shown that DA depletion in the striatum produces profound deficits in reaction time of movement in rats that may be related to the akinesia and attention dysfunction commonly seen in parkinsonism. After GBR and 4-PBA treatments, a loss of TH-immunopositive neurons in SNc was attenuated and resulting in no depletion of the striatal DA content in caudate. In addition, motor deteriorations were improved gradually and significantly only the ambulation frequency in the open field test and t-turn in the pole test. The increase in weight may be one of the reasons that the motor performance of rats was not improved in mobility duration and t-total after GBR treatments because it was difficult to do the task such as falling down from the pole, not climbing and being lazy to move and perform test.
RT is a membrane-permeable compound and can cross the blood brain barrier because of its lipophilic structure. RT has several molecular targets, such as mitochondrial complex I inhibition (Betarbet et al. ) and microtubule depolarization (Ren et al. ). Previous studies have suggested that the chronic infusion of RT (2–3 mg/kg/day) in Lewis rats induced nigrostriatal DA neurodegeneration and the development of cytoplasmic inclusions resembling Lewy bodies (Betarbet et al. ; Sherer et al. , , ). DA neurons are relatively more susceptible to rotenone cytotoxicity than other neurons because of chronic exposure to oxidative stress by DA metabolites (Beal ) and disruption of the microtubule-based transporter of DA vesicles (Ren et al. ). Previous study in PC12 cells by Hirata et al. ( ) demonstrated that the dopamine transporter (DAT) is the most relevant target site for the specificity of 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion (MPP+), one of the mitochondrial inhibitors or neurotoxin-like RT. In addition, dopamine transporter inhibitor inhibited MPP+-induced DNA fragmentation but did not affect rotenone-induced DNA fragmentation in PC 12 cells. Chronic RT treatment causes oxidative stress, proteosomal dysfunction and increase in DJ-1(PARK7) in vitro and in vivo (Inden et al. ). DJ-1 is known to behave as an oxidative sensor with antioxidative properties.
4-PBA, one of the chemical chaperones, is known to protect other proteins from misfoldings, resulting in a reduction in protein–protein aggregate formations and providing cellular protections. It has been shown that 4-PBA could also penetrate the BBB of mice (Ono et al. ) and exert significant neuroprotective effects in some mouse models of human diseases (Gardian et al. , ; Ryu et al. ). It was also used for the treatment of various other diseases such as urea metabolism disorders (Maestri et al. ), homozygous b-thalassemia (Collins et al. ), spinal muscular atrophy (Mercuri et al. ) and tumor (Carducci et al. ). Furthermore, several studies have reported that 4-PBA is able to reverse the mislocalization and/or aggregation of proteins associated with human diseases and to suppress endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress (Ozcan et al. ; Yam et al. ). Inden et al. ( ) reported that both pre- and posttreatment with 4-PBA did not inhibit RT-induced ROS production, but both treatments inhibited DJ-1 expression in SH-SY5Y cells. In addition, 4-PBA has been previously reported to inhibit RT-induced neuronal death and decreased the protein level of α-synuclein which is the major component of Lewy bodies in the brain with PD (Inden et al. ), and might be one of the therapeutic reagents for neurodegenerative disorders. Therefore, 4-PBA was used as the positive control in the present study. In agreement with report by Ono et al. ( ), 4-PBA significantly improved bradykinesia and motor coordination following RT treatment in the pole test and the rotarod treadmill task. In the present study, 4-PBA and GBR were also improved motor deteriorations gradually even though in different motor behavioral tests (in open field and pole test), resulting in rescuing DA neurons in SNc and attenuated the loss of DA content in striatum. However, no previous evidence of 4-PBA treatment showed the effect in changes of body weight.
Astroglial activation and apoptosis were reported as a major feature in RT-induced neurotoxicity (Swarnkar et al. , ). It was described that RT exposure produces the selective and extensive microglial and astroglial activation in the nigrostriatal pathway. These activations were through ROS production and contributed to oxidative damage in selective brain areas (Sherer et al. , , ). It was related to previous reports that the levels of pre-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α or interleukin (IL)-1β are increased in the striatum and cerebrospinal fluid of patients with PD (Mogi et al. , ) and in the striatum of parkinsonian mice treated with 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) (Mogi et al. ). The increased cytokines may be a secondary response to neuronal death or may be related to the cause of cell death. In this study, a high level of TNF-α has been demonstrated in RT-treated rats. The microglia activated by RT may be responsible for the release of TNF-α, which causes neuronal degeneration. The present results suggest that TNF-α plays a role in sustaining DA degeneration in chronic parkinsonism and causes the apoptosis cell death (Tansey and Goldberg ). GBR and 4-PBA could attenuate the percentage of apoptotic cell and the increase in TNF-α in serum and brain both in GBR+RT and in 4-PBA+RT rats; therefore, both GBR and 4-PBA showed the antiinflammatory effects.
Recently, the higher GABA content in GBR has been reported (Oh and Oh ; Mohd Esa et al. ; Ng et al. ; Kim et al. ). GABA is an amino acid that functions as an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. It reduces the sensitivity of muscle cells to nerve stimulation and decreases muscle movement. The amount of GABA present in the brain decreases in Parkinson’s disease, particularly in the subthalamic nucleus (Marino et al. ; Meissner et al. ), possibly contributing to symptoms such as tremors, restless leg syndrome, L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia and dystonia. A GABA agonist named baclofen (common brand name Lioresal) is taken to relieve these symptoms, binds with GABA receptors and mimics the action of GABA. However, there is also some evidence that GABA functions to an extent as a dopamine antagonist, blocking the effect of this neurotransmitter, which is already depleted in Parkinson’s. Previous study by de jong et al. ( ) has demonstrated the significant decrease in GABA levels in CSF in untreated PD patients and nearly normal GABA levels in PD patients under treatment with L-DOPA or anticholinergics. This may suggest that the altered GABA function in PD is secondary to changes in the DA system. As it has been previously reported that pre-GBR and GBR contain a large amount of GABA, and GABA can be carried into the brain through the BBB (Mamiya et al. ), therefore, GBR may attenuate the decrease in GABA level in PD condition.
Taken together, the large amount of GABA in GBR which plays a crucial role in PD patients and high levels of phenolic compounds such as flavonoids, ferulic acid, sinapinic acid and p-coumaric acid (Wu et al. ) may describe that in this study, the effect of GBR has been suggested to arise from its antiinflammatory, antioxidant and antiapoptosis substances (Park et al. ; Azmi et al. ). Although GBR has resulted most of the effects less than or similar to 4-PBA which was used as the positive control group, the different mechanism of action was described.
Conclusions
In conclusion, GBR pretreatment exhibits neuroprotective effects in chronic RT-induced PD rats (at dose1.5 mg/kg/48 h, s.c.) which selectively induced nigrostriatal DA neurodegeneration, and GBR has decreased in serum and brain TNF-α, RT-induced DA neuronal loss, motor deficits, the percentage of apoptotic cells. Therefore, these results suggest that GBR consumption added in the daily life may help to prevent neurodegenerative disease and may reduce the risk of the development of PD in aging people.