Introduction
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a progressive, autoimmune, demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS), where chronic inflammation is thought to cause axonal injury and loss, resulting in deficits of motor and cognitive functions (Sturm et al. ). MS is heterogeneous, involving multiple clinical and neuroimaging pathologies. Among common MS clinical presentations is the cardiovascular autonomic nervous system (ANS) dysfunction.
A number of functional units in the CNS control visceral, endocrine, and behavioral responses. One such functional unit is the central autonomic network, which includes a number of structures, such as insular and ventromedial prefrontal cortices, the paraventricular and related nuclei of the hypothalamus, and the nucleus of the solitary tract, among others. These structures are reciprocally interconnected with the information flowing bi-directionally. The output of the central autonomic network is mediated by sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons, which are thoracolumbar and sacrospinal neuronal networks, respectively (Thayer and Lane ).
The primary output of the central autonomic network is mediated via the preganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons, whereas the two neurons innervate the heart through stellate ganglia and vagus nerve. The neurotransmitter at preganglionic part of the sympathetic branch is acetylcholine (Ach), whereas the post-sympathetic ganglionic nerves secrete norepinephrine, which acts through α- and β-adrenergic receptors. The preganglionic and post-ganglionic parasympathetic nerves, on the other hand, use Ach as transmitter, which functions through nicotinic and muscarinic receptors.
The interaction between sympathetic and parasympathetic outputs at the sino-atrial node of the heart is manifested by a complex beat-to-beat variability in both frequency and amplitude. This heart rate variability (HRV), termed also R–R intervals, is an indicator of neurovisceral activity, connecting the central autonomic network output to cardiac autonomic tone (Malliani et al. ). HRV has been often measured to assess cardiac health, and low HRV due to sympathetic over-activity has been associated with cardiovascular disorders, diabetes, and other metabolic conditions (Rajendra Acharya et al. ).
HRV can be measured noninvasively by the time-domain analysis or frequency domain analysis. The time-domain measures the temporal distribution of power in the different ANS branches, whereas the frequency domain measures the short-term power spectral density of heart beat interval series. Using Fourier transform algorithm or autoregressive algorithm, the frequency domain analysis demonstrates the distribution of power as a function of frequency, with the potential quantifying the autonomic balance at any given time. However, the autoregressive approach thought to be a preferred method of analysis, since it takes into consideration the non-periodical nature of HRV and eliminates the need for windowing or filtering the data (Pagani et al. ).
The power spectral analysis shows two main oscillations; the high oscillation frequency components (HF, 0.15–0.4 Hz), which correspond to the variation in respiration, also known as respiratory sinus arrhythmia, an index of the parasympathetic tone; and the low-frequency oscillation components (LF, 0.04–0.15 Hz), which are the rhythms corresponding to the vasomotor tone, involving mainly the arterial pressure variabilities, an index of sympathetic tone. In addition, RR-interval time series analysis also yields a peak at very low-frequency ranges (VLF) (<0.04 Hz). The VLF physiological significance is much less defined, but seems to involve abnormal respiratory pattern. The VLF contributes to the Total Power (TP = VLF + LF + HF, from 0 to .4 Hz), which is a short-term estimate of overall the neurovisceral activity (Malliani et al. ; Eckberg ).
The LF, HF, and VLF power components are usually measured in absolute values in ms 2 units. However, normalized LF (nLF) and normalized HF (nHF) values represent the relative value of each power component in proportion to the TP minus the VLF component. Measured in percentages, the nLF and nHF minimize the effect of VLF on LF and HF components, emphasizing the controlled and balanced behavior of the two ANS branches (Malliani et al. ). The nLF seems to better reflect the sympathetic modulation than absolute LF; the latter thought to reflect both the sympathetic and vagal influences (Appel et al. ).
LF is mainly influenced by the myocardial norepinephrine spillover, a value that correlates with muscle sympathetic nerve activity and plasma norepinephrine levels, both at rest and during physical and mental exercises (Kingwell et al. ; Wallin et al. ). The HF, which is measured after administration of a large dose of atropine to β-adrenergically blocked subjects, is influenced by the respiratory frequency of the R–R interval spectral power (Kollai and Mizsei ). In addition to genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors described below, internal factors such as circadian rhythm, wakefulness, and mechanical forces due to breathing, and external factors such as consumption of food and water, gastric distension and bladder filling can affect the HRV (Heathers ).
The ratio of LF to HF is known to present the net effects of the sympathetic and parasympathetic ANS interactions at the sinus node. The LF/HF ratio is an indicator for HRV, and a marker of neurovisceral activity. HRV measures fluctuations in autonomic inputs to the heart, and thought to describe the sympathovagal balance. HRV and can be shifted toward sympathetic or parasympathetic, depending on alterations in LF, HF or a combination of both (Pagani et al. , ).
Through sensory and immune related stimuli to the brain, ANS also regulates the function of the immune system. This neurovisceral regulation extends beyond organs such as bone marrow, spleen, and thymus, into that of cells involved in innate and adaptive immunity (Nance and Sanders ); and achieved via the expression of adrenergic and cholinergic receptors on immune cells (Kohm and Sanders ; Kawashima et al. ). Signaling through these receptors is known to influence immune cell proliferation and cytokine production, cellular inflammation, adhesion, and cell migration (Sanders and Straub ). MS alterations in both adrenergic (Giorelli et al. ) and cholinergic (Anlar et al. ) receptors and their correlation with clinical and MRI indicators of disease activity (Zoukos et al. ), suggest that ANS dysfunction may play a role in MS immune dysregulation and promotion of inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes.
In series of studies, Thayer and Lane proposed the neurovisceral integration of cardiovascular modulation, and its impairment as a cause of a number of disorders. These investigators argued that an optimal ANS function is the one that has no equilibrium, but is highly variable, flexible, and able to adapt to ever changing environmental demands; whereas, autonomic imbalance is perceived as the predominance of one ANS branch over the other and a suboptimal or lack of system flexibility and adaptability. This adaptability is thought to be mediated via the parasympathetic branch of the ANS which exerts tonic inhibitory influences on heart rate (HR) and is geared to quickly respond to environmental demands, while minimizing the energy requirements of the organism (Thayer and Lane ).
In this model, the reduced vagal influences thought to play a significant role not only in cardiovascular disease but also in the related modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors (Thayer and Lane ). The impaired parasympathetic function has been attributed to a reduced prefrontal inhibitory control over sympathoexcitatory circuits in the brainstem (Thayer and Lane ). A similar model has been proposed for neurovisceral integration of emotions, suggesting that emotions, such as anxiety and depression, are the byproducts of faulty negative feedback, which then gives rise to unregulated and uninhibited positive feedback loops (Thayer and Lane ).
Using a battery of neuropsychological tests and fMRI, the same group of investigators demonstrated a relationship between ANS function and cognitive function, and between ANS function and cerebral blood flow (Richard Jennings et al. ). Individual differences in HRV were related to the executive function tasks and to prefrontal cortical activity; where alteration in HRV levels were accompanied by changes in performance on executive function tasks (Thayer et al. ). The results of these studies are in line with those in MS patients showing a relationship between ANS dysfunction and impaired memory and attention (Meyer et al. ), and between the severity of ANS dysfunction and reduced cerebral blood flow (Marchione et al. ).
In a recent evidence-based review, we described the involvement of ANS dysfunction in many MS-related morbidities, including depression, fatigue, and sleep disorder, migraine, and hemodynamic impairments. We demonstrated a close relationship between ANS dysfunction and MS clinical morbidities, showing that these pathologies are intertwined with MS inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes (under peer review). However, unlike Thayer and Lane’s model of neurovisceral dysregulation which is based on the inhibition of vagal activity and dominance of sympathetic activity (Thayer and Lane , ; Thayer et al. ), we propose that lower-than-normal sympathetic output is the main cause for sympathovagal imbalance in the majority of MS patients, contributing to MS clinical morbidities.
Consistent with this assumption, MS patients show lower systolic BP readings and plasma glucose levels than non-MS patients (Sternberg et al. ; Sternberg et al. ), two variables which are determined by the sympathetic ANS function. MS patients also exhibit hypothalamus pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis hypoactivity, both at rest and during physiological stress (Arata and Sternberg ). Sympathetic activation is a prerequisite for the rise in the corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and for the rise in ACTH secretion (Plotsky et al. ; Plotsky ).
Both MS patients (Brezinova et al. ) and patients with cardiovascular disorders (Kamath and Fallen ) present with reduced HRV values when compared to controls. The reduced HRV in patients with cardiovascular disease is due to high levels of sympathetic input, which is known to diminished HRV, whereas the reduced sympathetic outflow is likely to contribute to the reduced HRV observed in MS patients (Malik and Camm ).
The dysfunction of both sympathetic and parasympathetic ANS responses have been reported in MS patients, correlating with disease activity and progression to disability (Flachenecker et al. ). The tests of the cardiovascular ANS function, such as BP response to sustained handgrip (as a measure of sympathetic vasomotor function) and HR response to active change of posture (as a measure of parasympathetic function) show alterations in MS patients (Flachenecker et al. , ), resulting in reduced LF/HF ratio in MS patients, compared to healthy controls (Brezinova et al. ).
ANS dysfunction is observed in 45 % of MS patients, although the percentages greatly vary depending on one or a combination of tests. Ewing et al. (Ewing et al. ) assessed autonomic abnormalities in HR and BP in a large number of diabetic patients, using five simple noninvasive cardiovascular reflex tests. Assessing the ANS dysfunction on graded level, these investigators concluded that one single test is inadequate for determining the degree or severity of ANS abnormalities. However, cardiovascular reflex tests are known to be less sensitive measurements of ANS function than the spectral analysis of the HRV (Brezinova et al. ).
The sympathetic dysfunction is known to be more prevalent than parasympathetic dysfunction (30 vs. 18 %); and the latter is often observed in MS patients with long disease duration and advanced clinical disability (Kodounis et al. ). Consistent with these results, the comparison of absolute LF and HF frequency powers between MS patients and control subjects shows a more significant reduction in the LF power than in HF power (66 vs. 49 %) (Brezinova et al. ). Nevertheless, the existence of both sympathetic and parasympathetic dysfunctions in the same MS patient (Sanya et al. ) suggests that the parasympathetic dysfunction may not be an independent phenomena, but may result from an impaired interaction between a dysfunctional sympathetic branch, with the parasympathetic branch (Malliani et al. ).
Among factors that could lead to ANS dysfunction in MS patients is the damage to locus coeruleus (Polak et al. ). Located in the pons structure of the brainstem, it is the principal site for brain norepinephrine synthesis and is involved in physiological responses to stress. Locus coeruleus has projections to many brain structures, including hypothalamus, brain stem and spinal cord, cerebral cortex, amygdala, and hippocampus, and it receives input from hypothalamus, prefrontal cortex, and cerebellum, among others. The far-reaching inputs to and outputs from locus coeruleus suggest that the damage to this structure may have widespread adverse effects on physiological processes of many organs.
In fact, locus coeruleus is known to have a role in cognition, attention and memory, arousal, sleep-wake cycle, posture and balance, blood flow control, and mood and addiction (Sara and Bouret ; Sara ; Takahashi et al. ; McGregor and Siegel ). MS patients show reduced brain norepinephrine (Polak et al. ), and reduced catecholamine concentrations in the peripheral blood lymphocytes (Rajda et al. ). The reduced central and peripheral norepinephrine levels can promote inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes, and contribute to MS clinical morbidities (under peer review).
The contribution of genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors to neurovisceral integration of cardiovascular modulation in general, and this modulation in a heterogeneous disease such as MS, is mostly unknown. Twin studies show some degree of genetic influences on ANS function (Rana et al. ; Piha et al. ), whereas other studies (Osztovits et al. ; Berger et al. ), including a study in homozygotic twins (Osztovits et al. ), show that environmental factors, more significantly than genetic factors, play a role in modulating ANS function. An in-depth understanding of the genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors influencing the neurovisceral integration of cardiovascular modulation, and the nature of interactions among these factors, would be critical for interventions targeted to restore the function of this system, not only in MS patients, but also in patients with other autoimmune and neurodegenerative disorders where the dysregulation of neurovisceral integration of cardiovascular modulation plays a role.
Discussion
Genetic Factors
Gene Polymorphisms
Polymorphism in both α- and β-adrenergic receptors (Johnson and Liggett ) have the potential influencing ANS functional activities. For example, individuals with α 2- CDel322-325 deletion polymorphism show an increase in sympathetic ANS activity both during rest and during pharmacologically-induced catecholamine release (Neumeister et al. ). In addition, the polymorphisms of the gene encoding the β2-adrenergic receptors have been shown to affect HRV in healthy individuals, with lower values reported for individual with Arg16 homozygotes than those who were Gly16 carriers (Yang et al. ). Nevertheless, the study investigating β 2 -adrenergic receptors polymorphism in relation to MS disease course in Japanese patients was inconclusive, although a trend toward a higher Gly allele frequency in codon 16 was observed in the secondary progressive MS group (Niino et al. ).
Another polymorphism with the potential influencing ANS function is the polymorphism in the gene expressing catestatin, the product of which acts on neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs), inhibiting catecholamine release. The 364Ser variant of catestatin shows an association with a lower sympathetic, but higher parasympathetic ANS activity, in both hypertensive and control subjects (Rao et al. ). In addition, a number of gene variants of tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate limiting enzyme in the catecholamine synthesis, are associated with the level of catecholamine secretion, and with BP increases and hypertension (Rao et al. ). The polymorphisms in catestatin and tyrosine hydroxylase have not been studied in MS patients; however, peripheral blood mononuclear cells derived from these patients show reduced tyrosine hydroxylase expression levels (Cosentino et al. ).
A common single-nucleotide polymorphism in human brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) influences ANS function. This polymorphism is associated with the substitution of valine to methionine at amino acid residue 66 (Val66Met). BDNF is produced by both immune cells and neurons and has the potential exerting immunomodulatory and neuroprotective effects (Stadelmann et al. ). Strategies to increase neuronal norepinephrine (Chen et al. ), as well as the stimulation of vagus nerve (Follesa et al. ) are known to increase BDNF levels. The frequency domain analysis of the HRV in healthy subjects shows that compared with the Val/Val genotype, the Met/Met genotype in the BDNF gene is associated with an increase in LF/HF ratio, an index for sympathovagal balance (Yang et al. ). This increase is attributed to the higher BDNF production in the Met/Met genotype group (Lang et al. ). MS patients with the Met allele in the BDNF gene present with a higher gray matter fraction and lower brain atrophy compared with patients with Val/Val allele (Dinacci et al. ), suggesting the role of sympathovagal imbalance in MS neurodegenerative processes. The BDNF serum levels are reduced in MS patients (Comini-Frota et al. ), and the levels increase after antidepressant treatment (Shimizu et al. ). The association between low BDNF serum levels and depressive disorders (Lang et al. ) may explain the high prevalence of depression in MS patients (Minden and Schiffer ).
Age
Among genetic factors with the potential for modulating ANS function is the physiological age. Aging is known to be associated with alterations in both sympathetic and parasympathetic ANS functions. Investigation of the HRV frequency domain in subjects 45- to 54- and 55- to 64-year-age groups showed reduced LF and HF components of HRV in the older group compared with younger one (Liao et al. ).
Using autoregressive algorithm, Pagani et al. ( ) measured the absolute and normalized parameters of HRV in healthy subject ranging in age from 20 to 60 years, in resting recumbent position. The age increase was accompanied with increases in resting systolic and diastolic BP, and a significant reduction in RR-variance. Measurement of normalized HRV parameters showed reduced TP, reduced nLF, and reduced LF/HF ratio, although the latter was not statistically significant. In addition, the aging-related changes differ between sympathetic and parasympathetic branch due to divergent neural pathways, and therefore the relative contribution of sympathetic and parasympathetic branches to the LH/HF ratio is age dependent, and has a different equilibrium in older subjects compared with younger ones (Pagani et al. ).
Despite reduced LF, older subjects show higher plasma norepinephrine levels compared with younger subjects, especially during stress. However, these higher levels are the result of a reduced norepinephrine neuronal reuptake (Esler et al. ), and reduced norepinephrine clearance (Mazzeo et al. ), rather than an increase in neurotransmitter release. In addition, the increase in synaptic norepinephrine concentration due to the diminution of its neuronal reuptake, does not necessarily translate to higher sympathetic-derived responses, since physiological aging is known to decrease the number and sensitivity of the high affinity β-adrenergic receptors (Santulli and Iaccarino ).
These age-related alterations can in turn result in an impaired generation of cyclic AMP, and or attenuated activation of downstream components which are known to mediate β-adrenergic signal transduction pathways (Santulli and Iaccarino ). In addition, older subjects have a predominance of Th2-derived cytokines (Rink et al. ). Unlike the Th1-derived cytokines, the Th2-derived cytokines are unable to stimulate the ANS function (Sanders et al. ). In MS patients, the predominance of Th2-derived cytokines may occur at a significantly earlier age, as a result of the chronic use of immunomodulators, and their ability to shift the profile of Th1 cells to Th2 cells (Krakauer et al. ; Schrempf and Ziemssen ).
Age-related alterations in ANS function, age-related predominance in Th2-derived cytokines, the chronic use of immunomodulators, and the deterioration in ANS functional activities due to MS disease burden (Gunal et al. ), all can adversely impact the ANS function, contributing to a more progressive course of the disease in older MS patients compared with younger ones (Leray et al. ). Similarly, the risks of cerebral hemodynamic impairments (Dolic et al. ; Lanzillo et al. ) and fatigue (Cook et al. ) are known to be higher in older MS patients compared with younger ones, suggesting a link between physiological aging, ANS dysfunction, and MS clinical morbidities.
Gender
Studies in healthy controls, measuring the LF and HF spectral power of the HRV show that women present with lower sympathetic and higher cardiovagal input, whereas men demonstrate higher sympathetic activity, both at baseline and in response to external stressors, resulting in a lower LF/HF ratio in women compared with men (Liao et al. ; Mann et al. ). This lower ratio is mostly attributed to gender differences in LF rather than HF (Carter et al. ). Similar conclusion was derived from the recent study of MS patients who presented with the narrowing of the internal jugular veins (IJVs), where the majority of females had BP readings within lower limits of the normal ranges, whereas male patients’ BP readings often fell within higher limits of normal ranges (Sternberg et al. ). These observations are consistent with the reduced basal norepinephrine secretion and a reduced adrenergic reactivity to various stimuli in females as compared with male subjects (Hinojosa-Laborde et al. ).
Whether the low sympathetic ANS outflow accounts for the 3.2–4 times higher female-to-male MS sex ratio, observed at young age (Cossburn et al. ), is unknown. Nevertheless, a decline in female-to-male sex ratio has been observed in middle age women (Cossburn et al. ), when low estrogen levels result in an increased sympathetic tone (Gautam et al. ). Since hypothalamus regulates ANS function (Leicht et al. ), differences in the hypothalamic nuclear and cytoplasmic estrogen receptors (Kruijver et al. ) may contribute to gender differences in ANS function. The differences in estrogen receptors could also lead to gender differences in hypothalamic progesterone receptors (Brown et al. ).
Steroid hormones differ in their effects on cardiovascular ANS function. The estrogen replacement therapy of middle aged and post-menopausal women is known to decrease sympathetic activity and increase parasympathetic activity (Vongpatanasin et al. ; Huikuri et al. ). Consistent with these observations, the pick estrogen levels during ovulation coincides with an increase in parasympathetic tone, whereas the sympathetic activity is higher at the pick of progesterone, during the luteal phase (Leicht et al. ; Yildirir et al. ).
Among female MS patients, 56 % show high plasma estrogen, low plasma progesterone, or both (Zakrzewska-Pniewska et al. ); a pattern that correlates with higher MRI lesions when compared to patients who have low levels of both hormones (Zakrzewska-Pniewska et al. ). These data suggest a relationship between the imbalance in the estrogen/progesterone ratio, ANS dysfunction, and MS neurodegenerative processes. This conclusion is consistent with the results of a study showing a significant reduction in Gd-enhancing lesion numbers and volumes on monthly cerebral MRI scans, and an increase in cognitive function after treatment of relapsing-remitting MS patients with estriol (Sicotte et al. ), a weak type of estrogen, produced mainly during pregnancy, which has the potential for exerting anti-estrogenic effects (Lappano et al. ; Melamed et al. ). The Estriol’s anti-estrogenic activity is likely to beneficially alter estrogen/progesterone ratio, promoting a state of an improved sympathovagal balance.
The importance of the estrogen/progesterone ratio on ANS function and MS disease course is indicated by the results of a longitudinal study of 254 pregnant MS women. The study shows that in the third trimester of pregnancy, when the level of estrogen and progesterone are high, patients experience significant reduction in the rate of clinical relapse (from 0.7 per woman/year in the year before pregnancy to 0.2 during third trimester), whereas the rate of relapse is increased to 1.2 during the first 3 months post-partum, during which progesterone is significantly reduced, but estrogen remains relatively high (Confavreux et al. ).
Interestingly, the low rate of clinical relapse and the pick plasma estrogen and progesterone levels in female MS patients during pregnancy coincides with a rise in the production of norepinephrine plasma levels (Shetty and Pathak ). However, post-partum increase in the rate of clinical relapse is characterized by a high estrogen to progesterone ratio and a 40 % reduction in norepinephrine plasma levels (Aune et al. ), as well as reduction in the number and affinity of β 2 -adrenergic receptors, expressed on the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (Aune et al. ). These results strengthen the association between steroid hormone imbalance, ANS dysfunction, and MS inflammatory processes.
The ongoing POPART’MUS trial has the objective of evaluating the beneficial effects of combined administration of the estradiol and progestin on the rate of MS clinical relapse (Vukusic et al. ). We propose that this treatment modality should take into consideration patient’s baseline levels of the two steroid hormones, and the administered doses should be as such leading to an improved estrogen/progesterone ratio, which could beneficially impact ANS function.
Similarly, testosterone is known to modulate ANS function. A lower than normal testosterone levels is known to be associated with lower sympathetic and lower parasympathetic activities (Ramesh et al. ), adversely influencing the sympathovagal balance. Among male relapsing-remitting MS patients, 39 % present with morning testosterone plasma levels below 288 ng/dL (Bove et al. ). Furthermore, high estradiol serum concentrations are associated with T1 hyperintense and T2 hypointense lesions in these patients (Tomassini et al. ).
An inverse association between testosterone/estradiol ratio and EDSS has been reported in male MS patients (Bove et al. ). In a longitudinal analysis, a higher baseline serum testosterone levels were associated with less decline in cognitive function in males (Bove et al. ), and the treatment with testosterone gel improved cognitive performance and slowed the rate of brain atrophy (Sicotte et al. ). The relationship between ANS function and testosterone serum levels in male MS patients is unknown. Nevertheless, estrogen/progesterone imbalance in females, and testosterone/estrogen imbalance in males contribute to MS clinical pathology. Future studies should encourage gender-based treatment of MS patients in general, and that of steroid hormone treatment, in particular.
Race
Race is an additional genetic factor, with the potential for influencing ANS function. African-Americans (AA) show lower LF, HF, and LF/HF ratio than Caucasian (Lampert et al. ; Choi et al. ), indicating lower sympathetic, lower parasympathetic and impaired sympathovagal balance in AA, as compared to Caucasian subjects. The adrenergic receptors polymorphism has been shown to contribute to differences in ANS function between AA and Caucasians (Belfer et al. ; Neumeister et al. ). These racial differences have been shown to contribute also to a more severe MS disease in AA as compared to Caucasians, indicated by higher EDSS scores (Klineova et al. ). Compared to Caucasians, AA patients also present with a less favorable response to treatment with disease modifying drugs (DMDs), indicated by a higher number of new MS lesions on T2-weighted brain MRI post-DMD therapy (Cree et al. ). Racial differences in ANS function could also contribute to higher reported sleep disturbances and daytime fatigue in AA patients compared to Caucasians (Grandner et al. ).
Epigenetic Factors
The epigenetic mechanisms present the link between genetic factors and the external environment, leading to specific biological processes. The epigenetic mechanisms include DNA methylation, histone modifications, and miRNAs. These factors interact with each other in modulating chromatin architecture, resulting in either gene activation or its silencing. Although epigenetic mechanisms are known to be involved in MS pathology (Koch et al. ), studies on epigenetic influences on ANS function are scarce.
The importance of epigenetic in the modulation of ANS function is indicated by the notion that defects in tubulin genetic acetylation and impairment of microtubule-based protein trafficking may be an underlying cause of Familial Dysautonomia, a disease of the autonomic and sensory nervous systems dysfunction (Gardiner et al. ). In addition, an increase in the trimethylated histone H3K9 (H3K9me3), leads to a decrease in the transcriptional activity of the cholinergic M1 muscarinic receptors and an impaired Ca 2+ -dependent neuronal signal transduction (Lee et al. ). These alterations thought to underlie the neuronal cell death associated with Huntington’s disease (Lee et al. ).
Furthermore, the methylation of the norepinephrine transporter gene and its subsequent silencing are known to contribute to stress and hypertension (Esler et al. ). The inhibition of norepinephrine reuptake could lead to the pathologies associated with sympathetic over-activation. The role of epigenetic mechanisms in modulating ANS function in MS patients and their influences on the disease course is mostly unknown and warrants future investigations.
Environmental Factors
Infectious Agents
Among environmental agents, with the ability to modulate ANS function, are infectious agents in general, and viruses in particular. The newly diagnosed MS patients show positive antibody titer to Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, and rubella virus (Djelilovic-Vranic and Alajbegovic ). EBV, a double-stranded DNA herpes virus and the cause of infectious mononucleosis, is one of the most studied viruses in relation to MS.
In addition to immunomodulatory effects via B cell immortalization and CD8 + T cell activation (Thorley-Lawson ; Kuppers ), EBV has the potential for exerting neuromodulatory effects. In vitro studies show that EBV stimulation of B cells leads to the synthesis of auto-antibodies to acetylcholine receptors (Brenner et al. ). Similarly, EBV transformation of lymphocytes leads to a reduction in β-adrenergic receptors, indicated by a reduced isoproterenol-stimulated cyclic AMP synthesis (Ebstein et al. ). The acute EBV infection has been shown to also affect the activity of the α-adrenergic post-ganglionic neurons, resulting in ANS dysfunction and orthostatic hypotension (Itoh et al. ).
MS patients, presenting with high anti-Epstein-Barr neutralizing antibody (EBNA)-1 IgG serum levels, experience increased MRI activity (Kvistad et al. ). A higher anti-EBNA-1 IgG serum levels are also associated with the first clinical diagnosis of CNS demyelination (Lucas et al. ), suggesting an association between EBV and MS inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes. EBV infection is known to also be associated with a higher rate of cerebral hemodynamic impairments in MS patients (Dolic et al. ).
Although its role in MS fatigue has not been investigated, EBV is thought to be the cause of chronic fatigue syndrome (Lopez-Navidad et al. ). Patients with chronic fatigue syndrome suffer from an array of symptoms that simulate those often observed in MS patients, including headache, sleep disturbances, depression, loss of cognitive function manifested by loss of memory and loss of ability to concentrate, and abnormal findings on MRI brain scan (Jason et al. ; Barnden et al. ). The treatment of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome with antiviral drugs improves both physical and cognitive functioning (Montoya et al. ; Daugherty et al. ). The similarities in clinical symptoms among MS patients and those with chronic fatigue may stem from EBV adverse effects on ANS function. Future studies should investigate the relationship between EBV antibody titer and ANS dysfunction, and whether the clinical benefits of MS treatment with antiviral drugs is related to the improvement in autonomic function tests.
Smoking/Nicotine
A retrospective study shows that approximately 30 % of MS patients are current or past smokers (Sternberg et al. ). Epidemiological studies link smoking to an increased risk of developing MS (Ghadirian et al. ; Hernan et al. ; Riise et al. ; Hernan et al. ; Wingerchuk ), and a relationship between smoking and MS disease progression has been reported (Hernan et al. ; Koch et al. ; Pittas et al. ; Di Pauli et al. ; Wingerchuk ). However, the results of these studies contrast the notion that nicotine activation of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) has the potential for increasing parasympathetic activity and reducing inflammation (Hedstrom et al. ). Consistent with this assumption, population studies in Sweden show lower incidence of MS in subjects who use dry snuff (inhaled tobacco) (Hedstrom et al. ), or moist snuff (placed under the upper lip for extended periods of time) (Hedstrom et al. ), than those who do not.
Both smoking (Lucini et al. ) and oral administration of nicotine to nicotine-naïve healthy subjects (Sjoberg and Saint ) have been shown to adversely affect ANS function, reducing the HRV. Furthermore, patients, who quit smoking with the aid of a nicotine patch, show low HRV and they return to a higher HRV after nicotine withdrawal (Stein et al. ). Nicotine’s adverse effects on ANS function are thought to be the underlying cause of many inflammatory-related diseases, including cardiovascular disease (Yun et al. ). However, the effect of nicotine on ANS function in MS patients has not been thoroughly investigated.
Factors mediating nicotine’s adverse effects on ANS function are complex. Nicotine is known to exert both peripheral and central effects. Nicotine increases both HR and BP by activating the nAChRs localized on the peripheral postganglionic sympathetic nerve endings, leading to the release of catecholamines (Haass and Kubler ). Yet, the activation of the central nAChRs is known to exert antidepressant effects (Semba et al. ), increasing the release of norepinephrine and serotonin in the hippocampus (Czubak et al. ) and dopamine in striatum (Meyer et al. ). The administration of nicotine to rats has been shown to enhance the antidepressant-like effects of Citalopram (Popik et al. ) and Venlafaxine (Nowakowska et al. ), whereas the nAChR antagonist, mecamylamine, impairs it (Tizabi et al. ). The activation of nAChRs and the subsequent increase in CNS norepinephrine levels may underlie the reported nicotine’s beneficial effects on cognitive function, in both animal models (Levin and Simon ; Brioni et al. ) and humans (Levin et al. ; Heishman et al. ).
nAChRs are assembled from among nine known α subunits, α2–α10, and three β subunits, β 2 –β 4 . These receptors are widespread in the CNS, especially in the areas of the brain important for cognitive function, including the hippocampus and cortex (Levin et al. ). The broad expression of nAChR subtypes throughout the brain, as well as the differences in their sensitivity and their pattern of activation and inactivation are among factors dictating the responses to nicotine (Kennett et al. ).
Very few studies have investigated nAChRs in MS patients. A PET study with the 2FA-BP tracer, which binds α 4 β 2 subunits showed reduced FA-BP binding in the frontal, cingulate, temporal, parietal and occipital cortices, and cerebellum of MS patients (Meyer et al. ). The reduced binding correlated with impaired memory and attention (Meyer et al. ). However, the pathological changes in cholinergic receptors may contribute not only to cognitive impairment, but may also influence MS patients’ response to nicotine.
Further complexity arises from differences between the short-term and long-term nicotine’s effects on ANS function. In healthy nonsmokers, acute smoking causes a transient increase in LF power of HRV, a decrease in HF power of HRV, and an increase in LF/HF ratio (Karakaya et al. ). In addition, the acute systemic nicotine injection to rats increases both the expression and activity of the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase in the locus coeruleus (Mitchell et al. ). The increase in tyrosine hydroxylase activity is associated with an increase in the norepinephrine release in the hippocampus. Nicotine’s effects on HRV parameters can result in an improved sympathovagal balance in MS patients, who exhibit low sympathetic outflow. Nevertheless, MS locus coeruleus dysfunction (Polak et al. ) has the potential for modifying the acute response to nicotine-induced a rise in norepinephrine.
Unlike the acute effect, the chronic exposure to nicotine has been shown to lead to the downregulation and desensitization of the neuronal nAChRs (Wang and Sun ). Consistently, PET studies of living human brain show reduced brain uptake of 18 F-AZAN, (a radioligand tracer known to bind to the nAChRs α 4 β 2 subunits) in chronic smokers (Wong et al. ). In addition, post-mortem studies show 60 % lower tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity in locus coeruleus of long-term smokers compared with nonsmokers (Klimek et al. ), suggesting reduced norepinephrine synthesis in the brain of chronic smokers.
Nicotine’s adverse effects on the noradrenergic system is also indicated by downregulation of the β-adrenergic receptors on lymphocytes of chronic smokers (Laustiola et al. ), and absence of an increase in norepinephrine plasma levels in habitual smokers after acute smoking (Niedermaier et al. ). The chronic smoking-induced downregulation of the noradrenergic system may in part explain the close association between heavy smoking habit and depression (Glassman et al. ). The adrenergic and cholinergic adaptations to chronic smoking may be especially detrimental in MS patients who initially present with both adrenergic and cholinergic systems’ dysfunction (Meyer et al. ; Polak et al. ).
Similar to β-adrenergic receptors, chronic smoking also reduces the number of the α 2 -adrenoceptors in the locus coeruleus by 40 % (Klimek et al. ). The activation of these receptors is associated with reduced brain tyrosine hydroxylase synthesis and promotion of neurodegeneration (Pi and Garcia-Sevilla ; Marien et al. ). Therefore, the reduction in α 2 -adrenoceptors may imply neuroprotective effects of chronic smoking. However, smoking effects on α 2 -adrenoceptors in MS patients, who present with locus coeruleus damage, is unknown, and warrants further investigations.
Differences between acute and chronic smoking are also apparent on the level of the immune system. The acute intra-cerebrovascular injection of nicotine to mice activates the peripheral sympathetic ANS, increasing IL-6 plasma levels, as well as IL-6 mRNA expression in the liver and spleen, in a transient manner (Song et al. ). These results are consistent with the beneficial effects of IFN-β in MS patients being attributed to a transient increase in IL-6 serum levels (Nakatsuji et al. ). In contrast, chronic smoking leads to the induction of Th1 to Th2 shift (Nakatsuji et al. ; Shi et al. ). Cytokines derived from Th2 cells are unable to stimulate ANS function. This fact may be among factors reducing the efficacy of IFN-β in MS patients who are chronic smokers (Jernas et al. ).
The bioavailability, the level of nicotine absorption per unit dose, and the time for nicotine to reach maximum blood concentrations, vary among nicotine products. Cigarette smoking produces the highest peak concentration and most rapid rate of nicotine absorption (1–2 mg within 5 min), whereas nicotine delivered through nasal spray, nicotine patch, or nicotine gum, all show lower peak concentrations and or slower rates of nicotine absorption (Benowitz et al. ).
Studies in rats show the release of norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin after CNS administration of low doses of nicotine, a dose similar to one that could be achieved from a single cigarette (Shearman et al. ), suggesting that nAChRs respond to low doses of nicotine. However, this dose response is heterogeneous in different brain structures and further modulated by muscarinic receptors (Shearman et al. ). The interplay between nicotine’s delivered dose, its absorption rate, and the route of administration; and MS adrenergic (Polak et al. ), cholinergic (Meyer et al. ), and muscarinic (Anlar et al. ) dysfunctions present the complexity of MS patients’ response to nicotine.
The detrimental effects of chronic high nicotine dose are expected to be more profound in chronic progressive older MS patients, with longer disease duration. These patients are likely to have a more sever ANS dysfunction (Flachenecker et al. ), due to physiological aging, the predominance of aTh2 phenotype, MS disease burden, and the chronic use of immunomodulators (Schrempf and Ziemssen ; Krakauer et al. ; Sorensen and Sellebjerg ; Rink et al. ).
Based on differences between biological effects of acute versus chronic and low versus high nicotine doses, we postulate that unlike chronic high dose, the intermittent use or pulse of low-dose nicotine may benefit MS patients, via upregulating the sympathetic ANS function. This assumption holds specifically for the chronic progressive MS patients, who present with a more severe ANS dysfunction (Flachenecker et al. ), and for female MS patients, who demonstrate lower sympathetic ANS activity than males (Evans et al. ).
Smoking is known to also interact with both genetic and environmental factors modulating the risk of developing MS. Individuals who are chronic smokers, and who are carriers of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DRB1*15 and are negative for HLA A*02, are 2.8 times more likely to develop MS, compared with those without the genetic risk factors (Hedstrom et al. ). In addition, individuals positive for EBNA-1 fragment 385–420, positive for HLA-DRB1*15 and negative for HLA-A*02 have a 16-fold increased risk of MS (Hedstrom et al. ). In older chronic smokers, higher anti-EBNA titers are associated with a greater risk of developing MS (Simon et al. ). It is likely that in the setting of both EBV and age-induced deterioration in ANS function, chronic smoking could promote MS disease development in older genetically susceptible subjects.
Cardiovascular Drugs
Among cardiovascular drugs with the potential influencing ANS function are the antihypertensives. Both α- and β-adrenergic modulators are used in the treatment of approximately 32 % of MS patients (Sternberg et al. ). The effect of these drugs on ANS function may vary depending on their selectivity toward α- and β-adrenergic receptors.
The β-blockers have the potential to adversely affect the ANS functional activities, by inducing a Th1 to Th2 shift, and reducing norepinephrine levels (Gage et al. ). Although β-blockers and ACE inhibitors have similar effects on Th1 and Th2 cytokines, β-blockers reduce plasma norepinephrine more significantly than ACE inhibitors (Gage et al. ). ARBs also promote a Th1 to Th2 shift, but without directly affecting the noradrenergic activity (Liu et al. ).
In sleep-deprived subjects who show increased LF, decreased HF, and increased LF/HF ratio, 7 day treatment with the selective B 1 -blocker Metoprolol increases nHF, and reduces nLF and LF/HF ratio (Chen et al. ). Similar results were observed after treatment of coronary heart disease patients with the non-selective β-blocker Propranolol (Acanfora et al. ) and Metoprolol (Zhang et al. ). Although these characteristics make B-blockers useful in treating patients with cardiovascular disease, who often exhibit sympathetic over-activity and vagal underactivity, the chronic use of these drugs could aggravate the sympathovagal imbalance in MS patients, who often exhibit low sympathetic outflow. This assumption holds especially for pre-menopausal females MS patients, who are known having lower sympathetic and higher parasympathetic activities than males (Liao et al. ; Mann et al. ).
Changes in HRV parameters are more significant with the β-blocker, Metoprolol compared with ACE inhibitor Verapamil (Zhang et al. ). Similarly, the treatment of subjects, who suffer from hypertension, diabetes, and autonomic neuropathy, with Metoprolol abolishes HRV, whereas HRV is not significantly altered by the ACE inhibitor Enalapril (Salo et al. ). These results collectively suggests that compared with ACE inhibitors and ARBs, β-blockers may have more detrimental effects on ANS function in MS.
Pagani et al. ( ) investigated the chronic effects of non-selective β-blocker Propranolol in 12 normal subjects at rest, measuring both absolute and normalized HRV parameters. The drug reduced BP and HR and increased R–R variance. However, the chronic use of Propranolol reduced LF, increased HF, leading to a reduced LF/HF ratio. These β-blockers’ characteristics may augment the sympathovagal imbalance in MS patients, although the clinical implications of an increase in RR variance in the context of reduced LF/HF ratio is unknown in MS patients.
Furthermore, the α 2 -adrenergic receptor agonist, Clonidine, can interact with α 2 -adrenergic receptors expressed on presynaptic sympathetic peripheral nerve endings, inhibiting norepinephrine release through a negative feedback mechanism (Sakuma et al. ). Clonidine acts also centrally and has the potential for promoting CNS neurodegenerative processes (Marien et al. ). Similarly, the centrally acting β 1- adrenergic antagonist, Atenolol, and Propranolol, have been shown to impair memory retention in rats (Zarrindast et al. ). The centrally acting α 2 -adrenergic receptor agonists and β - adrenergic antagonists could promote neurodegeneration and therefore be more detrimental in MS patients than peripherally acting antihypertensive agents.
Both genetic and environmental factors have the potential for modulating the clinical efficacy of antihypertensive drugs, and hence their influence on ANS function. For example, studies in hypertensive subjects show that homozygotes for Ser49 and Arg389 β 1- adrenergic polymorphism have better clinical responses to BP lowering effects of the β - blocker Metoprolol than non-carriers (Liu et al. ; Johnson et al. ). In addition, Clonidine reduces norepinephrine plasma levels more significantly in females than males (Del Rio et al. ), suggesting that the adverse effects of antihypertensive drugs on ANS function may be amplified in MS females, who exhibit lower sympathetic activity than males (Liao et al. ; Mann et al. ). Furthermore, antihypertensive properties of drugs is reduced in chronic smokers (Leone ). The interaction between smoking and antihypertensive agents could modulate the effects of antihypertensive agents on ANS function in MS patients who are habitual smokers.
An additional cardiovascular drug with an effect on ANS function is the class of hypolipidemic agents, statins. Our recent retrospective study show that among MS patients, 21 % use statins (Sternberg et al. ). Statins have been suggested as a new treatment modality for MS, due to their anti-inflammatory effects (Zamvil and Steinman ), and their potential to inhibit Th1 cytokines and promote Th2 type cytokines (Hakamada-Taguchi et al. ). However, this effect of statin can have a negative impact on ANS function. The two first clinical trials investigating the clinical benefits of statins in MS patients, reported anti-inflammatory effects of short term statins’ monotherapy in young, DMD-naïve MS patients, indicated by a reduction in Gd-enhancing T1 lesions on MRI scan (Sena et al. ; Vollmer et al. ). However, in a subsequent clinical trial (Birnbaum et al. ), the treatment of MS patients with a combination of high doses of Atorvastatin and INF-β increased both the clinical and neuroimaging indicators of disease activity.
Although the effect of statin on ANS function in MS patients has not been studied, the combined treatment with high doses of statin and IFN-β, two agents which have both direct (through reducing noradrenergic activity) (Hamaad et al. ; Rajda et al. ) and indirect (through inducing Th1 to Th2 shift) (Hakamada-Taguchi et al. ; Krakauer et al. ) adverse influences on ANS function, may have caused a steep reduction in the ANS functional activities and unfavorable clinical outcomes. This is especially likely due to patients’ clinical characteristics of being relatively older, who were chronically treated with DMDs (2 years), before entering the study. Figure 1 presents Factors affecting ANS function in MS patients, and Table 1 describes the genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors, and their influences on autonomic function in the non-MS (1A) and MS (1B) population. Fig. 1 Factors influencing neurovisceral integration of cardiovascular modulation in MS patients. The diagram demonstrates genetic and epigenetic factors that influences ANS function and their interactions with environmental factors such as infectious agents, smoking and cardiovascular drugs. In addition, MS disease burden, disease duration, and the chronic use of DMDs can interact with genetic and environmental factors, influencing the ANS functional activity level. ANS autonomic nervous system, DMD disease modifying drugs, MS multiple sclerosis. Dashed lines indicate interactions Table 1 Genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors, and their influences on autonomic function in non-MS (1A) and MS (1B) populations Genetic factors Effects observed in non-MS population (1A) References Gene polymorphisms α 2- AR-CDel322-325 deletion Increased resting and stimulated sympathetic activity Neumeister et al. ( ) β 2 AR-Arg16 homozygotes Lower HRV Yang et al. ( ) β 2 AR- Gly16 carriers Higher HRV Yang et al. ( ) β 1- AR homozygotes for Ser49 and Arg389 Improves clinical response to BP lowering effects of β-blockers Liu et al. ( ), Johnson et al. ( ) 364Ser variant of catestatin gene Reduces sympathetic and enhances parasympathetic activity Rao et al. ( ) Tyrosine hydroxylase gene polymorphism Influences sympathetic activity and BP Rao et al. ( ) Met/Met genotype in the BDNF gene Increases HRV Yang et al. ( ) Age Reduced LF, reduced HF, reduced HRV Reduced ANS function Liao et al. ( ) Reduction in the number-sensitivity of β-ARs Reduced ANS function Santulli and Iaccarino ( ) Predominance of Th2-derived cytokines Reduced ANS function Sanders et al. ( ) Gender LF/HF ratio Males > females Liao et al. ( ), Mann et al. ( ) NEP Males > females Hinojosa-Laborde et al. ( ) Adrenergic reactivity to stimuli Males > females Hinojosa-Laborde et al. ( ) Response to α 2 -AR agonists Reduces NEP in females > males Del Rio et al. ( ) Estrogen Decreases sympathetic and increases parasympathetic activity Vongpatanasin et al. ( ), Huikuri et al. ( ) Low testosterone levels Associated with low sympathetic and parasympathetic activities Ramesh et al. ( ) Race LF, HF, LF/H ratio AA < Caucasians Lampert et al. ( ), Choi et al. ( ) α 2- AR(a, b, c) polymorphism Accounts for HRV differences between AA and Caucasians Belfer et al. Epigenetic factors Defects in tubulin gene acetylation Autonomic and sensory dysfunction, leading to FD Gardiner et al. ( ) Increase in the trimethylated histone H3K9 Reduced transcription of the cholinergic M 1 AchRs, neuronal cell death, leading to HD Lee et al. ( ) Methylation of the NEP transporter gene NEP transporter gene inactivation, leading to stress and HT Esler et al. ( ) Environmental factors Infectious agents EBV infection of B cells Synthesis of auto-antibodies to AchRs Brenner et al. ( ) EBV transformation of lymphocytes Reduction in β-ARs Ebstein et al. ( ) Acute in vivo EBV infection ANS dysfunction, orthostatic hypotension Itoh et al. ( ) Chronic EBV infection Chronic fatigue syndrome Lopez-Navidad et al. ( ) Nicotine/smoking Nicotine (acute) Releases brain NEP and DA/antidepressant effects Czubak et al. ( ), Semba et al. ( ), Meyer et al. ( ) Nicotine (acute) Increases tyrosine hydroxylase expression/activity in the locus coeruleus Mitchell et al. ( ) Nicotine (acute) Increases NEP release in the hippocampus Mitchell et al. ( ) Nicotine (acute) Leads to peripheral sympathetic activation, increases Th1-derived cytokines Song et al. ( ) Smoking (acute) Increases LF, decreases HF, increases LF/HF ratio Karakaya et al. ( ) Nicotine (chronic) Downregulates/desensitizes neuronal nAchRs Wang and Sun ( ) Smoking (chronic) Reduces nAchRs α 4 β 2 subunit Wong et al. ( ) Smoking (chronic) Reduces hydroxylase immunoreactivity in locus coeruleus Klimek et al. ( ) Smoking (chronic) Downregulates β-ARs on lymphocytes Laustiola et al. ( ) Smoking (chronic) Eliminates the increase in NEP plasma levels of acute smoking Niedermaier et al. ( ) Smoking (chronic) Depression, known to be associated with reduced CNS NEP Glassman et al. ( ) Smoking (chronic) Th1 to Th2 shift Nakatsuji et al. ( ); Shi et al. ( ) Nicotine (low dose) Release of brain NEP Shearman et al. ( ) Nicotine (nasal spray, patch, gum) Low nicotine blood levels, nAchRs activation and NEP release Benowitz et al. ( ) Nicotine (cigarette smoking) High blood nicotine levels-rapid, rate of absorption, nAchRs desensitization Benowitz et al. ( ) CV drugs β-blockers Th1 to Th2 shift, reduced NEP Gage et al. ( ), Salo et al. ( ) ACE inhibitors Th1 to Th2 shift, reduced NEP Gage et al. ( ) ARBs Th1 to Th2 shift Liu et al. α 2 -AR agonists Inhibits peripheral and central NEP release Sakuma et al. ( ); Marien et al. ( ) Hypolipidemics Statins Inhibit Th1 type cytokines, promote Th2 type cytokines Hakamada-Taguchi et al. ( ), Krakauer et al. ( ) Statins Reduce noradrenergic activity Hamaad et al. ( ); Rajda et al. ( ) Genetic factors Effects observed in MS population (1B) References Gene polymorphisms Met/Met genotype-associated with reduced HRV Higher gray matter fraction, lower brain atrophy Dinacci et al. ( ) Age Reduced LF, HF, and HRV Progressive course in older MS patients Leray et al. ( ) Reduced high affinity β-ARs number/sensitivity Increased risk of cerebral hemodynamic impairments Dolic et al. ( ), Lanzillo et al. ( ) Predominance of Th2-derived cytokines Reduces ANS activity, increases fatigue Cook et al. ( ) Gender Estrogen Decreases sympathetic and increase parasympathetic activity Vongpatanasin et al. ( ), Huikuri et al. ( ) Progesterone Increases sympathetic activity Leicht et al. ( ), Yildirir et al. ( ) High estrogen/progesterone ratio imbalance Reduces sympathetic activity, higher MRI lesions Zakrzewska-Pniewska et al. ( ) Estrogen/progesterone ratio balance during pregnancy Rise in NEP plasma levels, reduced rate of clinical relapse Shetty and Pathak ( ), Confavreux et al. ( ) High estrogen to progesterone ratio postpartum Reduced NEP plasma levels, reduced number and affinity of β2-ARs, increased MS clinical relapse Aune et al. ( ) Lower than normal testosterone levels Reduced sympathetic and parasympathetic activities Vongpatanasin et al. ( ), Huikuri et al. ( ) Low testosterone to estrogen ratio Advanced clinical disability Bove et al. ( ) Higher baseline serum testosterone levels Less of decline in cognitive function Bove et al. ( ) Treatment with testosterone Improves cognitive performance, slows the rate of brain atrophy Sicotte et al. ( ) Gender Lower LF, HF, and LF/HF ratio in AA than Caucasian Higher disease severity in AA compared to Caucasians Klineova et al. ( ) Reduced response to immunomodulatory therapies in AA compared to Caucasians Cree et al. ( ) Higher sleep disturbances and fatigue in AA compared to Caucasians Grandner et al. ( ) Epigenetic factors Non-reported Environmental factors Infectious agents High anti-EBNA-1 IgG serum levels Increased CNS demyelination Lucas et al. ( ) Chronic EBV infection Higher rate of cerebral hemodynamic impairments Dolic et al. ( ) Positive for EBNA-1 fr-385–420, and HLA-DRB1*15, and negative for HLA-A*02 Greater risk of developing MS Hedstrom et al. ( ) Nicotine/smoking nAchRs and mAchRs alterations Modified response to nicotine Meyer et al. ( ); Anlar et al. ( ) Locus coeruleus damage Modified response to nicotine Polak et al. ( ) Combination of chronic smoking, older age, and high anti-EBNA titers Greater risk of developing MS Simon et al. ( ) Combination of chronic smoking and positive for HLA-DRB1*15 or negative for HLA-A*02 Greater risk of developing MS Hedstrom et al. ( ) CV drugs Antihypertensives Non-reported Statins Mixed results depending on the dose, duration, and pts characteristics Sena et al. ( ), Vollmer et al. ( ), Birnbaum et al. ( ) AA African American, ACE angiotensin-converting-enzyme, ANS autonomic nervous system, AR adrenergic receptor, ARB angiotensin receptor blocker, BDNF brain-derived neurotrophic factor, CV cardiovascular, DA dopamine, EBNA Epstein–Barr neutralizing antibody, EBV Epstein–Barr virus, FD familial dysautonomia, HD Huntington’s disease, HF high frequency, HRV heart rate variability, HT hypertension, LF low frequency, mAchR muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, nAchR nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, NEP norepinephrine
MS patients use many other drugs which could impact ANS function in one way or another. For example, between 40 and 85 % of MS patients suffer from spasticity (Rizzo et al. ). Among medication used to treat spasticity, GABA-like drugs such as Baclofen, benzodiazepines and gabapentin/pregabalin and the α 2- agonists, tizanidine. Similar to antihypertensive agents, these drugs have the potential for reducing sympathetic ANS function, and promoting neurodegeneration, depression, and fatigue (Crayton and Rossman ; Ordia et al. ; Sternberg ). Baclofen (Kataoka et al. ) and some benzodiazepines (Cohen et al. ) are known to reduce parasympathetic ANS activity too. The more extensive discussion of pharmacological substances with adverse effects on ANS function could be found elsewhere (Sternberg ). It is noteworthy that the discussion in this review is limited to the effect of the chronic use of many classes of drugs on HRV and neurovisceral activity. However, these drugs may have many other clinical effects that could influence the course of MS in one way or another (Torre and Falorni ).
Concluding Remarks
Accumulating data suggest the dysfunction of neurovisceral integration of cardiovascular modulation in MS patients. This dysfunction is attributed mainly to low sympathetic outflow, in part, due to damage to the locus coeruleus. The ANS dysfunction could promote not only to inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes, but can also lead to other MS morbidities, including depression, fatigue, sleep disorder, migraine, osteoporosis, and cerebral hemodynamic impairments.
Many environmental factors could influence ANS functional activity level in one way or another. The influences imparted by the environmental factors are further modulated by their interactions with both genetic and epigenetic factors. However, these interactions may be more complex in MS patients who suffer from both adrenergic and cholinergic dysfunctions. In addition, MS disease burden, disease duration and the chronic use of DMDs could interact with genetic and environmental factors, leading to an earlier and a more steep deterioration in ANS function in MS patients, as compared to that observed in an age- and gender-matched general population.
Due to the physiological importance of an optimal ANS function, we have recently offered pharmacological, non-pharmacological, including diet and exercise, and surgical techniques that could be adopted to restore the sympathovagal balance in MS patients, noting that these corrective measures should take into consideration the degree and the nature of the imbalance (Sternberg ). Similar strategies could be also applied to other autoimmune and neurodegenerative diseases where ANS dysfunction plays a role.
Strategies for restoring sympathovagal balance in MS patients who demonstrate reduced HRV due to reduced sympathetic activity should be targeted to enhancing sympathetic outflow, assuming that this intervention would beneficially alter LF/HF ratio, increasing the HRV. However, this view is rather simplistic due to the complex interaction between the two ANS branches, where a specific intervention could potentially lead to nonlinear reciprocal or parallel changes in either branch (Eckberg et al. ; Fagius and Sundlof ). Parasympathetic activation has been shown to influence the LF component of HRV, as much as sympathetic neural activity modulates the HF component of the R–R interval variability (Taylor et al. ; Cohen and Taylor ). These interactions could in turn complicate the interpretation of changes in LF/HF ratio post-intervention.
The degree of the increase in sympathetic activity should also be taken into consideration. For example, it has been shown that although small changes in sympathetic activity, indicated by increase in arterial BP, provoke reciprocal changes in sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve activity, large increases in sympathetic activity lead to increases in parasympathetic nerve activity without altering the sympathetic activity (Eckberg ; Rea and Eckberg ). Similarly, an increase parasympathetic activity has been shown to initially increase HRV values until a point of saturation is reached, beyond this point, the increase in parasympathetic reduces HRV value (Goldberger et al. ). These studies collectively suggest that interventions involving large increases in sympathetic or parasympathetic activities may actually have adverse effects on sympathovagal balance, making the intervention and the choice of an optimal strategy, a challenging one.
In normal healthy control subjects, the value of the LF component is normally greater than that of HF, leading to a LF/HF ratio >1, although factors such as age and gender modulate this value in one way or another (Eckberg ). We propose that the restoration of the sympathovagal balance in MS patients should take into account not only the increase in LF/HF ratio, via increasing sympathetic activity, but also the relative contributions of the sympathetic and parasympathetic branches to this equilibrium. The optimal intervention should involve modifying the activity of both branches in a manner that the relative contribution of the two branches to the LF/HF ratio would approximate that in healthy controls. This assumption is supported by studies in post-MI patients, where HRV modification due to sympathetic reduction alone did not translate into cardiac protection (Malik and Camm ). This new improved balance is likely to halt the progression of inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes and prevent and or minimize the MS-related morbid conditions, improving patients’ quality of life.