Introduction
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a central nervous system (CNS) disease characterized by focal inflammation and neurodegeneration. Inflammatory demyelination produces partially reversible clinical symptoms that can remit, but axonal loss and gray matter neuronal injury contribute to disease progression and permanent neurological deficits (Lovas et al. ). Epidemiological studies show that the inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes may be parallel and independent of each other (Wilkins and Scolding ). Given this possibility, determining whether degeneration or autoimmunity initiates MS is difficult. Axonal degeneration is a major cause of permanent disability in patients with MS, but no therapies are known to be effective for axonal protection.
Myelin-associated axonal growth inhibitors—including myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), Nogo, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), and repulsive guidance molecule—trigger inhibition of axonal growth via the Rho kinase (ROCK) pathway (Mueller et al. ; Yamashita et al. ; Hata et al. ; Kubo et al. ). Blocking the common intracellular effectors in this pathway is an effective strategy for re-establishment of functional axonal signaling (Kubo et al. ).
Rho family small GTPases, such as Rho, Rac, and Cdc42, regulate cytoskeletal reorganization in different ways (Kaibuchi et al. ; Jaffe and Hall ). Rho regulates stress fiber formation, cell contraction, microtubule dynamics, and cell polarity through ROCK (Riento and Ridley ). In the CNS, Rho and ROCK play important roles in neurite elongation and neuronal architecture (Amano et al. ) via phosphorylation of various neuronal proteins, such as collapsing response mediator protein 2 (CRMP-2), myosin phosphatase target subunit 1, and myosin light chain, which leads to growth cone collapse (Arimura et al. , ; Amano et al. ; Hirose et al. ). The neuroprotective potential of ROCK inhibitors has been demonstrated in animal models of spinal cord injury and stroke (Hara et al. ; Dergham et al. ; Sung et al. ; Yamashita et al. ).
Previous studies have confirmed that Fasudil, the only clinically available ROCK inhibitor, has therapeutic potential in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a mouse model of MS (Yu et al. ; Liu et al. ). Here, we measured ROCK activity in serum of MS patients and investigated the effect of Fasudil on the synaptic protection and molecular mechanism as a neuroprotective therapy for MS.
Materials and Methods
Patient Recruitment and Sample Collection
Serum was collected from patients diagnosed with MS, according to the McDonald criteria (McDonald et al. ) (Table 1 , n = 63; age range 15–70 years; median age 38 years; 33 women and 30 men; median disease duration 1.75 years) and from age-matched healthy volunteers ( n = 36; age range 16–73 years; median age 34.5 years; 20 women and 16 men). Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) was obtained from patients with MS (Table 1 , n = 5; age range 29–55 years; median age 48 years; 3 women and 2 men) and from patients diagnosed with other neurological diseases (OND) (neuralgia, hereditary ataxia, benign intracranial hypertension, progressive spinal muscular atrophy, tethered cord syndrome, Tolosa-Hunt syndrome, brainstem encephalitis, cerebellitis, and subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord) (Table 2 , n = 11; age range 16–73 years; median age 42 years; 7 women and 4 men). Samples were stored at −80 °C in sterilized EP tubes. All patients and healthy volunteers gave informed consent, and the study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Huashan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Table 1 Clinical data of patients with multiple sclerosis No. Gender Age (years) Type of MS Disease duration (years) Active lesion(s) Disability progression 1 Female 51 RR 0.5 √ 2 Female 53 PP 0.16 √ √ 3 Male 36 RR 6 √ 4 Male 15 RR 1 √ 5 Female 43 SP 6 √ √ 6 Male 33 RR 3 √ 7 Female 22 RR 0.5 √ 8 Male 52 PP 2.66 √ 9 Male 34 PP 4 √ √ 10 Female 40 RR 0.33 √ 11 Female 60 RR 1 √ 12 Male 32 RR 7 √ 13 Female 33 RR 3.5 √ 14 Female 22 RR 1.58 √ 15 Male 47 PP 4 √ √ 16 Female 39 RR 7 √ 17 Male 36 RR 0.08 √ 18 Female 46 RR 1.5 √ 19 Female 35 RR 7 √ 20 Female 21 PP 1 √ √ 21 Male 27 RR 5 √ 22 Female 40 RR 9 √ 23 Male 30 RR 0.42 √ 24 Male 68 PP 7 √ √ 25 Male 26 RR 0.75 √ 26 Male 34 RR 6 √ 27 Male 35 RR 9.5 √ 28 Female 20 RR 0.33 √ 29 Female 15 RR 0.33 √ 30 Male 43 RR 1.5 √ 31 Male 45 RR 4 √ 32 Male 52 PP 2 √ √ 33 Female 54 RR 27 √ 34 Female 48 PP 0.67 √ √ 35 Female 55 RR 24 √ 36 Female 27 RR 4 √ 37 Female 41 PP 0.25 √ √ 38 Male 49 PP 8 √ √ 39 Male 56 RR 9 √ 40 Female 23 RR 0.33 √ 41 Female 47 RR 0.5 √ 42 Male 44 RR 1.16 √ 43 Female 36 PP 10 √ 44 Female 36 RR 1.5 √ 45 Female 38 RR 0.5 √ 46 Female 41 RR 1.58 √ 47 Male 33 RR 2 √ 48 Male 30 PP 1 √ 49 Female 28 RR 5 √ 50 Female 15 RR 0.25 √ 51 Female 49 PP 1 √ √ 52 Female 44 RR 2 √ 53 Male 36 RR 1.66 √ 54 Male 46 RR 2 √ 55 Male 27 RR 1.75 √ 56 Male 70 RR 7 √ 57 Male 40 RR 2.5 √ 58 Male 32 RR 0.66 √ 59 a Male 55 RR 0.33 √ 60 a Female 34 RR 0.83 √ 61 a Female 51 PP 2 √ √ 62 a Male 48 PP 17 √ 63 a Female 29 RR 0.25 √ – RR, relapsing-remitting; PP, primary progression; SP, secondary progression; active lesions is defined as the occurrence of clinical relapse or the presence of new T2 or gadolinium-enhancing lesions (Lublin FD. New multiple sclerosis phenotypic classification. Eur Neurol, 2014, 72 Suppl 1: 1–5) a Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) was also obtained from these patients Table 2 Clinical data of patients with other neurologic diseases (OND) No. Gender Age (years) Disease Disease duration (years) 1 Female 52 Cerebellar ataxia 6 2 Female 52 neuralgia 0.5 3 Female 32 Benign intracranial hypertension 0.16 4 Male 42 Tethered cord syndrome 20 5 Male 46 Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy-2 1 6 Female 60 Progressive spinal muscular atrophy 7 7 Male 73 Subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord 7 8 Female 25 Miller-Fisher syndrome 0.08 9 Male 19 Brainstem encephalitis 0.08 10 Female 16 cerebellitis 0.08 11 Female 36 Tolosa-Hunt syndrome 0.83
Induction and Clinical Evaluation of EAE in C57BL/6 Mice
Female C57BL/6 mice (8–10 weeks old, 20–22 g) were purchased from Shanghai SLAC Laboratory Animal Co. (Shanghai, China). All experiments were conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the International Council for Laboratory Animal Science. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Huashan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China. All mice were housed under pathogen-free conditions, received food and water ad libitum, and were kept under a reversed 12:12 h light/dark cycle in a temperature-controlled room (25 ± 2 °C) for 1 week prior to experimental manipulation.
To induce chronic EAE, mice were immunized subcutaneously with 300 μg of MOG 35–55 (CL. Bio-Scientific Company, Xian, China; aminophenol sequence MEVGWYRSPFSRVVHLYRNGK) in Freund’s complete adjuvant (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) supplemented with 3 mg/ml of Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Ra (BD Difco, Detroit, MI, USA; 400 μg/mouse) on the upper dorsal flanks. The mice were then injected with 400 ng of pertussis toxin (Enzo Life Sciences, Farmingdale, NY, USA) via the abdominal cavity at the time of immunization and again 48 h later. Animals were weighed and evaluated for clinical score every other day in a blinded fashion by at least two investigators. Clinical scores for EAE were graded according to the following criteria: 0, healthy; 1, limp tail; 2, ataxia or paresis of hind limbs; 3, paralysis of hind limbs or paresis of forelimbs; 4, tetraparalysis; 5, moribund or dead. All experiments were repeated 3 times.
Serum Collection and Protein Extracts from EAE Mice
On day 28 post-immunization, the EAE mice were killed. Serum and protein extracts from spleen, brains and spinal cords were diluted 1:20 with 0.1 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and ROCK activity was detected.
Primary Neuron Culture and Treatment with Serum, Scratch and TNF-α
Cortical neurons isolated from brains of C57BL/6 mice on embryonic day 16 under a 10 × microscope were cultured in Neurobasal-A medium (Life technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) supplemented with 2 % B27 (Life technologies), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Sigma, USA). Cells were plated at a density of 1 × 10 5 cells/cm 2 on plates coated with poly- d -lysine (0.1 mg/ml, Sigma). Every 3 days, the medium was replaced with fresh Neurobasal-A medium containing 2 % B27.
After 6–7 days of culture, the neurons were treated either with serum from MS patients or serum from healthy controls at a final concentration of 10 % (v/v), and then the treated neurons were incubated for 48 h. To evaluate the effect of ROCK inhibition, we also conducted experiments in which we first treated sample serum with Fasudil (final concentration in medium, 15 μg/ml) or anti-ROCK I and anti-ROCK II mixed antibodies (mixed antibodies/medium, 1:200 dilution) at room temperature for 30 min and then added the treated serum to the neuron culture medium.
Primary cortical neurons were scratched carefully by fine needle. After 48 h, the expression of phosphorylation of ROCK substrates on neurons were evaluated in both scratch proximal region and scratch distal region.
TNF-α (final concentration in medium, 100 ng/ml) was used to stimulate primary neurons. The synaptic injury and ROCK activity of stimulated neurons were explored. Fasudil was added with final concentration of 15 μg/ml in medium to evaluate the effect of synaptic protection to primary neurons.
ROCK Assay
Using a Rho-Kinase Assay Kit (CycLex, Nagano, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, we assayed ROCK activity in serum and CSF samples obtained from MS patient, healthy volunteers and patients with OND as controls. ROCK activity in serum and protein extracts from spleen, brains and spinal cords from EAE mice and TNF-α stimulated (with or without Fasudil) primary neurons were also assayed. The absorbance of each well was measured with a Synergy H1 Hybrid reader (BioTek Instruments, Winooski, VT, USA) at a wavelength of 450 nm. All samples were tested in duplicate wells.
Neuronal Viability Assay
To determine neuron viability, we cultured cells in 96-well plates in triplicate. Human serum and TNF-α with or without Fasudil was added to the cultured neurons. After 48 h, serum was depleted by replacement with fresh medium. Cell viability was tested by 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay and determined as a percentage relative to the control group.
Immunocytofluorescence Staining
Upon completion of treatment with human serum, scratch and TNF-α, cultured cortical neurons were washed with 0.1 M PBS and were fixed with 4 % buffered paraformaldehyde. Slices were fixed in acetone for 10 min, treated with 3 % calf serum to block nonspecific sites and permeabilized with 0.1 % Triton X-100 in PBS for 30 min. The slices were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with the following primary antibodies: rabbit monoclonal p-MYPT1 (Thr853) (1:200, Cell Signaling Tech, Danvers, MA, USA), mouse monoclonal p-MLC (Ser19) (1:200, Cell Signaling Tech), mouse monoclonal anti-MAP-2 (1:200, Millipore, Temecula, CA, USA) and rabbit monoclonal anti-synaptophysin (1:200, Epitomics, Burlingame, CA, USA). After being carefully washed, the slices were incubated with appropriate secondary antibodies: Alexa Fluor 488 anti-mouse (1:1000, Invitrogen, Eugene, Oregon, USA) Alexa Fluor 488 anti-rabbit (1:1000, Invitrogen) and Alexa Fluor 555 anti-rabbit (1:1000, Invitrogen). As a negative control, additional wells were treated without the primary antibodies. The nuclei were stained with Hoechst 333342 (1 μg/ml, Sigma) in PBS for 30 min. All the wells were independently and blindly examined under a fluorescence light microscope (Olympus BX60, Center Valley, PA, USA) by two investigators.
Following staining, fluorescent photomicrographs were captured with a 20 × objective and a digital camera. Images were acquired from randomly selected fields ( n = 8) for each group and analyzed by ImageJ (a public-domain image-processing program, http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij ) (Zhang et al. ). The percentage of positive p-MYPT1 and p-MLC neurons were calculated. The length of the longest neurite outgrown from each neuron with positive MAP-2 staining in both the cell body and the neurite was measured by an investigator blinded to the experimental groups. Each experimental group was done in duplicate wells, and at least three independent experiments were done to get the final results. Average lengths of neuronal neurites were used for quantification of neurite outgrowth.
Western Blot Analysis
Neurons were harvested and lysed with 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, and 1 % Triton X-100 on ice. Equal amounts of lysate were loaded for protein separation by SDS-PAGE, and the proteins were electroblotted onto nitrocellulose membranes (Merck Millipore, Tullagreen Carrigtwohill, Cork, Ireland). After blocking with 5 % nonfat dry milk, the membranes were incubated at 4 °C overnight with the following antibodies: rabbit monoclonal anti-synaptophysin (1:2000, Epitomics, Inc., Burlingame, CA, USA), mouse monoclonal anti-β-actin (1:5000, Epitomics), rabbit polyclonal anti-phospho-CRMP-2 (Thr514) (1:500, Cell Signaling Tech) and rabbit polyclonal anti-CRMP-2 (1:500, Cell Signaling Tech). Bands were scanned with a Molecular Imager ChemiDoc XRS + System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA), and band intensities were quantified with Image Lab software (Bio-Rad Laboratories). The ratio of the band intensity of p-CRMP-2 to that of CRMP-2 was compared.
Statistical Analyses
Comparisons between groups were made with a two-tailed Student’s t test. Probability values of <0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.
Results
ROCK Activity was Elevated in Serum with MS and EAE
To obtain direct evidence of increased ROCK activity, we measured the levels of ROCK activity in serum or CSF of patients with MS using a ROCK assay kit. As shown in Fig. 1 a, ROCK activity was higher in sera of MS patients than in that of healthy controls ( p < 0.05). However, the levels of ROCK in CSF of both MS patients and healthy controls were relatively lower and did not exhibit significant difference (Fig. 1 a). We further determined ROCK activity in sera, spleen, brain and spinal cord of mice with EAE and control. The results showed that ROCK activity was increased in serum, spleen, brain and spinal cord in EAE mice than in control mice (Fig. 1 b, p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively). Fig. 1 ROCK activity was elevated in serum with MS and EAE. The results of serum ROCK were obtained from 63 patients with MS and 36 age-matched healthy volunteers. The results of CSF ROCK were obtained from 5 patients with MS and 11 controls with OND. a 4–6 case-pooled sera (MS patients: n = 14 and healthy volunteers; n = 9) and CSF from MS patients and controls. b Pooled sera and protein extracts from spleen, brain and spinal cord of EAE and control mice. ROCK activity was measured with a ROCK assay kit. The results from EAE mice were mean ± SEM from 8 mice of two independent experiments with similar results ( n = 4/each experiment). * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01
The Activation of ROCK in Cultured Neurons Treated with Scratch or TNF-α
Our results clearly indicated that ROCK was activated in both brain and spinal cord of mice with EAE. Question is which factors can lead to the activation of ROCK. Here, we detected ROCK activity in cultured neurons treated with scratch or TNF-α. Figure 2 a indicated an immunostaining of cultured neurons with MAP-2 antibody and the region of stained neurons near the scratch, that is: 1 = scratch proximal region and 2 = scratch distal region. The immunostaining of p-MYPT1 and p-MLC, phosphorylated by ROCK, demonstrated that positive staining for p-MYPT1 and p-MLC neurons in both scratch proximal region and scratch distal region was obviously enhanced as compared with neurons without scratch (Fig. 2 b, p < 0.01 and p < 0.001, respectively). Fig. 2 The scratch stimulated primary neurons to up-regulate ROCK activity. The culture of primary cortical neurons was established and grew for 6–7 days. The expression of phosphorylated ROCK substrate MYPT1 and MLC was measured 48 h after with or without scratch by immunofluorescence staining. a The immunofluorescence staining in cultured primary neurons and representative photomicrographs in both scratch proximal region (besides the scratch) and distal region (1 mm distance from the proximal region) showed in the plate diagram, b microphotographs are representative of three independent experiments, and c quantitative value of p-MYPT1 + and p-MLC + neurons represents mean ± SEM from six samples of two independent experiments with similar results. Scale bars 50 μm. ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001
We further used TNF-α to stimulate primary neurons and explored the possibility of ROCK activation in vitro. Compared with cultured neurons without TNF-α (left), TNF-α stimulation resulted in the synaptic fracture of neurons (Fig. 3 a, middle arrow). The addition of ROCK inhibitor Fasudil prevented the synaptic fracture of neurons (Fig. 3 a, right). TNF-α stimulation also declined the cell viability and elevated ROCK activity in cultured primary neurons (Fig. 3 b and c, p < 0.01 and p < 0.05, respectively). Fasudil maintained the cell viability and inhibited ROCK activation (Fig. 3 b and c, p < 0.05, respectively). These results reveal that both physical scratch and inflammatory stimulation can cause ROCK activation in cultured neurons, and Fasudil can inhibit TNF-α-induced ROCK activation and synaptic fracture. Fig. 3 TNF-α induced the synaptic fracture of neurons and upregulation of ROCK activity. The culture of primary cortical neurons was established and grew for 6–7 days. The immunofluorescence of MAP-2, cell viability and ROCK activity was measured 48 h after TNF-α or TNF-α plus Fasudil treatment. a Representative immunofluorescence staining of MAP-2 in cultured primary neurons, b cell viability of cultured neurons by the MTT assay, and c ROCK activity of cultured supernatants. The quantitative value of cell viability and ROCK activity represents mean ± SEM from six samples of two independent experiments with similar results. Scale bars 25 μm. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01
The Effect of MS Serum and Fasudil Treatment on Synaptic Formation of Cultured Primary Neurons
Next, we explored whether MS serum influences the synaptic formation and Fasudil treatment prevents the synaptic damage on cultured primary neurons. As shown in Fig. 4 a, the addition of MS serum reduced the synaptic extension of primary neurons, while Fasudil enhanced the synaptic extension stained with MAP-2. Cell viability was lower, and neurites were shorter when treated with MS serum. Fasudil abrogated the effects of the MS serum and exhibited a therapeutic effect by synaptic injury protection (Fig. 4 b, p < 0.05 and p < 0.001, respectively). However, the addition of anti-I ROCK and II ROCK mixed antibodies in MS serum partially declined ROCK activity (Fig. 5 , upper left), but did not improve neurite outgrowth (Fig. 5 , photograph). Fig. 4 MS serum damaged the synaptic formation, and Fasudil treatment prevents the synaptic damage on cultured primary neurons. The culture of primary cortical neurons was established and grew for 6–7 days. Pooled sera from six randomly chosen MS patients and normal controls were separately co-cultured with cortical neurons in the presence or absence of Fasudil (15 μg/ml) for 48 h. a Representative immunofluorescence staining of MAP-2 in cultured primary neurons, b cell viability of cultured neurons by the MTT assay, and c neurite length of cultured neurons. The quantitative value of cell viability and neurite length represents mean ± SEM from six samples of two independent experiments with similar results. Scale bars 50 μm. * p < 0.05; *** p < 0.001 Fig. 5 The culture of primary cortical neurons was established and grew for 6–7 days. Pooled sera from six randomly chosen MS patients were treated with anti-ROCK I and anti-ROCK II mixed antibodies (1:200 dilution) for 30 min and then added to cultured neurons for 48 h. Upper left ROCK activity before co-culture of neurons with serum. Photograph Representative immunofluorescence staining of MAP-2 in cultured primary neurons. The quantitative value of ROCK activity represents mean ± SEM from 4 samples of 6 case-pooled MS serum. * P ≤ 0.05
The Effect of MS Serum and Fasudil Treatment on Guidance Molecules in Synapse Formation and Plasticity
Synaptophysin, as a specific marker of synaptic proteins, is a synaptic vesicle membrane protein and involved in the synaptic plasticity and formation (Li et al. ). In this study, immunofluorescent staining and western blot assay showed that the expression of synaptophysin in neurons treated with MS serum was markedly lower when compared with normal serum-treated neurons (Fig. 6 a and b, p < 0.05). However, the addition of Fasudil enhanced the expression of synaptophysin compared with Fasudil-untreated neurons (Fig. 6 a and b, p < 0.05). Fig. 6 MS serum and Fasudil treatment influenced the expression of synaptophysin. The culture of primary cortical neurons was established and grew for 6–7 days. Pooled sera from six randomly chosen MS patients and normal controls were separately co-cultured with cortical neurons in the presence or absence of Fasudil (15 μg/ml) for 48 h. a Immunofluorescence staining of synaptophysin plus MAP-2 in cultured primary neurons, and b western blot of synaptophysin. The quantitative value of synaptophysin expression represents mean ± SEM from six samples of two independent experiments with similar results. Scale bars 150 μm. * p < 0.05
Collapsin response mediator protein-2 (CRMP-2), a cytosolic phosphoprotein enriched in the axon shaft and growth cone, plays a pivotal role in promoting axon formation, neurite outgrowth and elongation in neuronal cells (Inagaki et al. ). In this study, western blot assay showed that the scratch resulted augment in the phosphorylation of CRMP-2 compared with neurons without scratch (Fig. 7 a, p < 0.05), while Fasudil treatment inhibited the phosphorylation of CRMP-2 compared with neurons scratched only (Fig. 7 a, p < 0.05). Further observation exhibited the phosphorylation of CRMP-2 in neurons treated with MS serum was significantly higher when compared with normal serum-treated neurons (Fig. 7 b, p < 0.05). However, the addition of Fasudil suppressed the enhanced phosphorylation of CRMP-2 compared with Fasudil-untreated neurons (Fig. 7 b, p < 0.05). Fig. 7 Scratch, MS serum and Fasudil treatment influenced the phosphorylation of CRMP-2. The culture of primary cortical neurons was established and grew for 6–7 days. Scratch was performed as well as pooled sera from six randomly chosen MS patients, and normal controls were separately co-cultured with cortical neurons in the presence or absence of Fasudil (15 μg/ml) for 48 h. a Level of phosphorylated CRMP-2 in neurons with scratch, and b level of phosphorylated CRMP-2 in neurons containing serum treatment. The quantitative value of phosphorylated CRMP-2 represents mean ± SEM from six samples of two independent experiments with similar results. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01
Discussion
In this study, we first assessed the ROCK activity in serum and CSF from MS patients and healthy controls, finding that ROCK activity was higher in MS serum than in serum from healthy controls. But we did not observe any difference in ROCK activity of CSF between MS patients and patients with OND. The negative results of CSF may be due to two reasons: (1) low concentration of ROCK activity in CSF and (2) relative controls, but not healthy CSF. In this study, we did not collect CSF from healthy subjects, owing to the difficulties of sampling.
Using EAE model, ROCK activity in serum, spleen, brain and spinal cord of EAE mice was elevated when compared with control mice. In recent years, the assumption that MS is a white matter disease has been challenged by observations of axonal damage and neuronal loss in gray matter of the cortex, subcortex, and spinal cord (Malik et al. ). We try to explore whether neuron scratch induce ROCK activity under culture condition. The results showed that the scratch of neurons induced the upregulation of ROCK activity in both proximal and distal regions of neuron damage. Similarly, TNF-α stimulation also elevated ROCK activity in cultured primary neurons. Axonal injury is a common feature in a large spectrum of metabolic, inflammatory and traumatic peripheral nerve conditions. Following CNS inflammatory demyelination, myelin is disrupted, leaving large amounts of regenerative inhibitory materials. Myelin-derived inhibitory molecules subsequently converge on the small guanosine triphosphate (GTP) binding protein RhoA. In turn, activated RhoA leads to actin–myosin interaction and axonal growth cone collapse via ROCK (Fawcett ). For a long time, MS has been classified as CNS inflammatory demyelinating disease. In fact, the extent of axonal damage and neurologic deficit in MS are correlated (Wood ). TNF-α promotes monocyte chemotaxis toward mesangial cells via a ROCK/p38 MAPK-dependent pathway (Matoba et al. ). Our results provided evidence that ROCK activity can be induced through TNF-α, revealing that inflammatory microenvironment of MS in the CNS may trigger ROCK activation, besides inhibitory molecules derived from damaged neurons. Based on these considerations, there is reason to believe that ROCK in the CNS of MS should be upregulated or activated.
Although axonal damage is a well-understood component of MS, relatively little is known about axonal repair during pathogenesis of MS patients. Because of the importance of ROCK in axon generation and cell survival, the inhibition of ROCK activity appears as a promising strategy for neurorestorative approaches. The addition of Fasudil to cultured primary neurons treated with MS serum resulted in neurite elongation in vitro, revealing that MS sera inhibited neurite outgrowth and synapse formation. In addition to the morphological changes in the neurons and neurites, we also observed that synaptophysin expression was decreased in neurons treated with MS serum and increased after Fasudil treatment. Synaptophysin is a glycoprotein located in the membrane of synaptic vesicles and expressed ubiquitously in almost all types of synapse-forming neurons, participating in synaptic transmission (Wiedenmann and Franke ).
The Rho-ROCK pathway inhibits neurite elongation and affects neuronal architecture through downstream effectors. One of these effectors, CRMP-2, is abundant in the brain and has been implicated in growth cone collapse and neuronal polarization by interaction with tubulin reorganization (Arimura et al. ). CRMP-2 is phosphorylated by ROCK upon stimulation with lysophosphatidic acid, ephrin-A5, and MAG, causing growth cone collapse and neurite retraction (Arimura et al. , ; Mimura et al. ). We found that Fasudil treatment decreased the expression of p-CRMP-2 (Thr514) on primary cortical neurons with scratch and MS serum treatment. Therefore, we concluded that Fasudil protects against neuron and synapse damage in cultured primary neurons by suppressing CRMP-2 phosphorylation. The problem is how the extracellular ROCK acts by signaling pathway on synaptic plasticity. ROCK has many downstream reaction molecules, such as myosin light chain phosphatase (MLCP), LIM kinase (LIMK), ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) and p38. Inactive ERM proteins reside in the cytosolic fraction of cells, whereas activated ERMs are membrane-associated and bind with integral membrane proteins via their N-terminal FERM domain and with F-actin via their C termini, contributing to the formation of various membrane structures and to signal transduction pathways (Ivetic and Ridley ). We try to investigate the mechanisms of extracellular ROCK action on synaptic plasticity. This result could provide new insights into the pathogenesis of MS. Further studies will be required to identify the neurite outgrowth inhibitory factors in MS sera.
The elevation of extracellular ROCK in serum from MS patients should reflect the increase or activation of intracellular ROCK which subsequently results in the inhibition of neurite outgrowth and the loss of growth cone. The co-culture of neurons with serum from MS patients showed that the neurite outgrowth was inhibited, and the addition of Fasudil in MS serum promoted the formation of neurite outgrowth. However, the addition of anti I ROCK and II ROCK in MS serum did not affect the change of neurite outgrowth. We speculate another possibility that other components of the MS serum, such as Nogo, MOG or TNF-α, can trigger intracellular ROCK pathway, resulting in the inhibition of neurite outgrowth. Fasudil in MS serum should block intracellular ROCK activation by inhibiting Nogo, MOG or TNF-α-mediated activation of ROCK pathway, indirectly promoting the formation of neurite outgrowth.
In conclusion, our results indicate that axonal loss in MS may be related to increased ROCK activity. Fasudil promoted synaptogenesis in vitro and thus may contribute to preventing the irreversible neurological disability associated with MS. Each of the synaptic stabilization mechanisms is potentially a gateway for therapeutic strategies to protect against synapse loss to arrest disease progression. Further studies should explore stabilizing pathways to reinforce synaptic stability or block destabilizing mechanisms and re-establish neuronal function.