Introduction
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease of the brain and spinal cord, primarily affecting young adults (Compston and Coles ). Dysregulation of the immune system in this neurodegenerative disease is considered to be a fundamental aspect of both initiation and progression. CD4 + T cell-mediated autoimmunity is widely regarded as one of the most important aspects of MS pathogenesis, particularly in the early stages of disease initiation (Sospedra and Martin ; Pettinelli and McFarlin ). More specifically, interferon gamma (IFNγ)-producing T helper (T h )1 cells have been characterized as the effector T cells that mediate both MS pathogenesis and also the pathogenesis of its animal model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) (Diveu et al. ; Windhagen et al. ; Lock et al. ). However, subsequent studies have indicated that the interleukin (IL)17-producing T h cells (T h 17) also contribute to the MS pathogenic mechanism and have suggested that their role may be as critical as that of the T h 1 cells (Kebir et al. ). Other intriguing findings include demonstrations of mice with fewer T h 17 cells being less susceptible to EAE (Langrish et al. ; Ivanov et al. ) and T h 17 cells being detected in brain lesions upon autopsy of human MS patients (Tzartos et al. ).
Another CD4 + T cell subset, CD4 + CD25 + regulatory T cells (T regs ), is a critical regulator of protective autoimmunity and against tissue injury (Sakaguchi ). Suggestive evidence for the existence of these T reg cells in humans (Jonuleit et al. ) and their role in the regulation of human autoimmune diseases has likewise been found (Baecher-Allan and Hafler ; Ehrenstein et al. ). Additional analysis of the potential role of this subset of T cells in MS, in particular, has indicated that they are present at a lower frequency in MS patients and are defective with respect to their suppressor functions in vitro (Haas et al. ). These studies have suggested a functional antagonism between T h 17 and T reg cells, and that there may also exist a dichotomy in their generation, with the differentiation pathway of CD4 + naïve T cells depending upon the relative levels of various cytokines that control differentiation of each cell subset.
In a complex regulatory nexus, transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ) can induce the differentiation of T reg cells from naïve T cells. Mature T reg cells can then regulate peripheral tolerance through the secretion of immunosuppressive cytokines, such as IL10, thereby preventing the onset of autoimmune diseases (Mucida et al. ; Chen et al. ). However, T reg differentiation is altered in the presence of IL6, which then leads to TGFβ production. IL6 and TGFβ subsequently induce the differentiation of T reg cells to the T h 17 subset. This skewed pattern of differentiation leads to secretion of the proinflammatory cytokine IL17 with autoimmune disease development, but does not promote production of Foxp3 + T reg cells or to TGFβ production (Oukka ). IL-6 and TGF-β are critical in differentiation of T h 17 cells by inducing the IL17-specific transcription factors, retinoic acid-related orphan receptor (RORγt) (Ivanov et al. ). Hence, IL6 blockade could potentially be used to control T h 17-mediated immune responses, including responses found in autoimmune diseases (Nishihara et al. ). Despite these multiple lines of evidence, the underlying regulatory mechanisms involving the T h 17/T reg axis in MS have not been established.
Improvements in MS diagnosis, monitoring of disease activity and progression, and evaluation of treatment responses would greatly benefit from the identification of reliable MS biomarkers. However, identification of suitable MS biomarker sets based on peripheral blood is a research area still in its infancy (Bielekova and Martin ; Otaegui et al. ). Nonetheless, T h 17/T reg balance appears to be critically involved in MS pathogenesis (Zhang et al. ), and regulators of T h 17 differentiation are viewed as having valuable potential for disease diagnosis and treatment.
MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small endogenous noncoding regulatory RNAs that can post-transcriptionally repress gene expression. Dysregulation of miRNA expression and function is associated with a variety of human diseases, including cancer and many inflammatory diseases (O’Connell et al. ), and alterations in miRNA function can therefore potentially serve as useful diagnostic markers for these pathologies (Lu et al. ). The enzyme responsible for regulatory RNA biogenesis, Dicer, is required for lymphocyte function, suggesting a regulatory role for miRNAs in the immune system; miRNAs have been proposed as regulators of immune cell development (Baltimore et al. ; Xiao and Rajewsky ), as involved in the inflammatory response (O’Connell et al. ), and as key players in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases (Nelson et al. ).
Recently, much research has focused on determining the properties of expression, regulation, and function of miRNAs in MS, and as a result many miRNAs have been characterized as highly dysregulated in MS patients and in the EAE mouse model. Ma et al. ( ) summarized the upregulated miRNAs and downregulated miRNAs in different samples from MS patients and EAE mice, all of which may play critical roles in MS pathogenesis, and suggested that these miRNAs may represent a signature for MS diagnosis or prognosis. To date, however, the therapeutic potential of differentially regulated miRNAs in MS has only been shown for a few of these miRNAs in studies using the EAE mouse model of MS. Specifically, Murugaiyan et al. ( ) demonstrated that anti-miR-155 treatment significantly inhibits EAE development, and Du et al. ( ) showed that in vivo silencing of miR-326 significantly inhibits Th17 cells and markedly decreases EAE severity. Another study by Zhu et al. ( ) showed that miR-23b acts to downregulate IL-17, as well as to inhibit the activation of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF)-α and the IL-1beta-induced nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB); furthermore, these authors showed that miR-23b affects the downstream target gene transcription related to EAE pathogenesis in the mouse model. Taken together, these results suggest that miRNAs may be a good target for molecular therapy of MS.
In the present study, the EAE model was used to demonstrate that miR26a may influence both T h 17/T reg balance through translational inhibition of the cytokine IL6—a positive regulator of T h 17 differentiation—and that this alteration of regulatory T cell balance may contribute to MS. Ultimately, our data suggest that miR26a may possibly serve as a potentially useful diagnostic marker, prognostic marker, or therapeutic target.
Materials and Methods
This study was approved by the ethics committee of China Medical University (Shenyang, Liaoning, P. R. China), and oral and written informed consent was obtained from all study participants. Animal studies were conducted in accordance with the Animal Component of the Research Protocol guidelines at China Medical University.
Patient Characteristics
All patients in this study, whose disease was clinically defined as being in the RRMS phase, were recruited consecutively from the Department of Neurology in The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University (Shenyang, Liaoning, China). Healthy blood donors, with no history of autoimmune diseases and no prior treatment with immunosuppressive agents, were enrolled as the control cohort. Whole blood samples (10 mL) were taken from all participants, after allowing 30 min of acclimatization to room temperature.
Mice
C57BL/6 (8–10 weeks old) female mice were purchased from Shanghai SLAC Laboratories Animal Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, P. R. China). Mice were housed under a 12-h light/dark cycle in micro-isolator cages contained within a laminar flow system to maintain a pathogen-free environment.
Induction of EAE
C57BL/6 mice were immunized subcutaneously at two sites on their back (dorsal torso) with 100 mL (200 mg) of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG 35–55 ) peptide dissolved in distilled water and emulsified with an equal volume of complete Freund’s adjuvant supplemented with 4 mg/mL. Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Ra. All animals were additionally injected intraperitoneally on days 0 and 2 with 400 ng of Pertussis toxin. Control animals followed an identical immunization protocol but were injected intraperitoneally with Pertussis toxin and subcutaneously with adjuvant without added MOG peptide. Animals were weighed daily and assessed for clinical signs of EAE by two independent observers. A clinical EAE scoring system was used to assess neurological deficits in our mouse EAE model according to the following scale: 0, no disease; 1, loss of weight and tail weakness; 2, weakness in hind limb; 3, complete hind limb paralysis; 4, hind limb paralysis with forelimb weakness or paralysis; and 5, moribund or deceased.
Pathologic Examination
For histopathological studies, spinal cord tissue was dissected from female mice, fixed in 10 % formalin in phosphate-buffered saline, embedded in a single paraffin block and sectioned. The resulting 6- to 10-μm-thick sections were stained with H&E and luxol fast blue, and subsequently evaluated by optical microscopy for immune cell infiltration and demyelination. For electron microscopy (EM) studies, samples were fixed in 2.5 % glutaraldehyde in phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, post-osmicated and processed routinely for EM. Transverse ultrathin sections (0.1 µm) of brain tissue were examined using an H-600 transmission electron microscope (Hitachi Inc., Tokyo, Japan).
Vector Construction and Lentivirus Production
A 200-bp DNA fragment corresponding to pre-miR26a and its flanking sequences was amplified from mouse genomic DNA and was subsequently cloned into pLVTHM lentiviral vector ( http://www.addgene.org/Didier_Trono ). For miR26a inhibition sequence, cDNA and shRNA for IL6 were cloned into the same lentiviral vector. The production, purification, and titration of lentivirus were performed as described by Tiscornia and colleagues (Tiscornia et al. ). The packaged lentiviruses were named LV-26a, LV-anti26a, LV-IL6, and LV-shIL6, respectively. The empty (untransformed) lentiviral vector LV-Con served as control. Target cell HEK293 cells were infected by virus according to the user’s manual(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).
RNA Isolation, Reverse Transcription, and Quantitative Real-Time PCR
Total RNA was extracted using the Trizol Reagent (Takara Bio Inc., Otsu, Shiga, Japan); cDNA was prepared as recommended (Progema) and used as the template for quantitative PCR. Levels of miR26a and of mRNAs for RORγt and Foxp3 transcription factors, and for IL17 and IL6 from all groups were analyzed by real-time PCR, performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions(Takara Bio Inc., Otsu, Shiga, Japan). Specific primers are shown in Table 1 . To normalize for differences in the amount of total RNA in each sample, the β-actin gene was used as endogenous control. All values were expressed relative to the expression of β-actin, using the \(2^{{ - \varDelta \varDelta C_{\text{t}} }}\) method. Table 1 Primer sets used for real-time PCR in this study Species Gene Forward 5′–3′ Reverse, 5′–3′ miR26a AAGGAGAACCCGTAGATCCG GTGCAGGGTCCGAGGTATTC Homo IL17 CAAGACTGAACACCGACTAAG GTTGGTCTGTTGATCTCTGAG IL6 AATAACCACCCCTGACCCAAC CCAGAAGAAGGAATGCCCATT RORγt CTCAAAGCAGGAGCAATGGAA AGGGAGTGGGAGAAGTCAAAGA Foxp3 CGCCACAACCTGAGTCTGC TGTTCGTCCATCCTCCTTTCC β-actin CTTAGTTGCGTTACACCCTTTCTTG CTGTCACCTTCACCGTTCCAGTTT Mus miR26a AAGGAGAACCCGTAGATCCG GTGCAGGGTCCGAGGTATTC IL17 CTGTGTCTCTGATGCTGTTGC GTGGAACGGTTGAGGTAGTCT IL6 ACTTCCATCCAGTTGCCTTCTT TCATTTCCACGATTTCCCAGA RORγt CAGTATGTGGTGGAGTTTGCCAAG TGTAGGCCCTGCACATTCTGAC Foxp3 CAGCTCTGCTGGCGAAAGTG TCGTCTGAAGGCAGAGTCAGGA β-actin CTGTGCCCATCTACGAGGGCTAT TTTGATGTCACGCACGATTTCC
Western Blot Analysis
Mouse brain tissue samples were homogenized in cold lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors, then centrifuged (12,000 g , 10 min, 4 °C). Total protein concentration was measured using the bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA). Normalized protein was separated by 10 % SDS-PAGE and transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (EMD Millipore Corp., Billerica, MA, USA). The membranes were blocked with 5 % skim milk and incubated with antibodies against IL17 (1:100) and IL6 (1:1,000), followed by horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled secondary antibodies (1:5,000). Signals were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham Biosciences Corp., Piscataway, NJ, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. β-actin was employed as protein-loading control.
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
Cytokine production from human serum and mouse serum and tissue was assessed with IL6 and IL17 ELISA kits (R&D Systems, Shanghai, P. R. China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A standard curve was generated using known amounts of the respective purified recombinant cytokines.
miRNA Target Validation
A 328-bp fragment of the IL6 3′ untranslated region (UTR) was amplified by PCR and cloned into the pGLO vector (Promega Corp., Madison, WI, USA), downstream of the firefly luciferase gene. This vector was named wild-type (wt) 3′ UTR. Site-directed mutagenesis of the miR26a binding site in IL6 3′ UTR was performed using the Gene Tailor Site-Directed Mutagenesis System (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) and named mutant (mt) 3′ UTR. For reporter assays, wt or mt 3′ UTR vector and the control vector pRL-TK (Promega) were co-transduced in HEK293 cells. Luciferase activity was measured 36 h after transduction, using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega).
Statistical Analysis
SPSS 13.0 software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used for statistical analysis. Data were presented as mean ± SD. The two-tailed Student’s t test was used for comparisons of two independent groups. The relationship between IL6 and miR26a expression was assessed by Spearman’s correlation. Statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05.
Results
miR26a is Downregulated in MS Patients
In clinical samples of RRMS patients, it was found that miR26a expression was significantly lower in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) of patients with RRMS (Fig. 1 a) as compared with those of age-matched controls ( p < 0.01). Detailed analysis showed that PBLs from patients with relapsing MS had significantly lower miR26a expression, while PBLs from patients with remitting MS did not ( p < 0.01, Fig. 1 a); this suggested a specific association of miR26a expression with relapsing MS. Fig. 1 MS patients show reduced miR26a expression. a – e Quantitative PCR analysis of mRNA expression of miR26a ( a ), of the transcription factors RORγt and Foxp3 ( b ), and of the cytokines IL17 and IL6 ( c ) in PBLs from normal controls ( n = 38) or from patients with RRMS ( n = 42) and in PBLs from patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis ( n = 25) or remitting multiple sclerosis ( n = 17). d ELISA analysis of protein expression of the cytokines IL17 and IL6 in PBLs from normal controls ( n = 38) or from patients with RRMS and PBLs from patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis ( n = 25) or remitting multiple sclerosis ( n = 17). e The linear correlation between miR26a and IL6 transcripts in PBLs from MS patients ( n = 20) is shown. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01 versus normal controls. # p < 0.05; ## p < 0.01 versus remitting multiple sclerosis patients
As previously noted, it has been found that CD4 + T cells that participate in MS pathogenesis mainly take on the phenotype of T h 17 cells or T reg cells, and that IL6 plays a crucial role by regulating the T h 17/T reg polarization. In order to determine which CD4 + T cell-subset was associated with miR26a downregulation in patients with RRMS, gene expression was determined as follows: expression of RORγt ( p < 0.01, Fig. 1 b), IL17 ( p < 0.01, Fig. 1 c), and IL6 ( p < 0.01, Fig. 1 c) were found to increase with lower miR26a expression in PBLs of patients with RRMS or patients with relapsing MS. In contrast, the Foxp3 gene ( p < 0.05, Fig. 1 b) showed the same pattern with miR26a. Using ELISA, similar results were demonstrated at the protein level in PBLs of patients with either RRMS ( p < 0.05) or relapsing MS ( p < 0.01), for IL17 and IL6 (Fig. 1 d). Linear correlation analysis of miR26a and IL6 transcripts in PBLs of patients with RRMS further demonstrated that miR26a expression was inversely correlated with IL6 expression (Fig. 1 e).
miR26a is Downregulated in EAE Mice
To explore the expression of miR26a and its correlation with disease severity in EAE mice, the expression of miR26a and RORγt, Foxp3, IL17, and IL6 were determined by quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (Takara Bio, Inc.) and ELISA at peak acute phase. Brain tissues from EAE mice showed significantly higher expression of RORγt ( p < 0.01, Fig. 2 a), IL17 ( p < 0.01, Fig. 2 a), and IL6 ( p < 0.01, Fig. 2 a) mRNA in the acute phase, but significantly lower expression of miR26a ( p < 0.01, Fig. 2 b) and Foxp3 ( p < 0.05, Fig. 2 a). Changes in protein expression mirrored that of the mRNAs for IL17 and IL6 ( p < 0.05, Fig. 2 c). The findings in patients with RRMS were similar. Fig. 2 Downregulation of miR26a in EAE mice. a , b Quantitative PCR analysis of mRNA expression of the transcription factors RORγt and Foxp3, of the cytokines IL17 and IL6 ( a ), and of miR26a ( b ) in the brain during EAE development ( n = 6). c ELISA analysis of the protein levels of IL17 and IL6 in the brain of EAE mice during the peak phase or in the normal controls. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01 versus normal control
miR26a Regulates EAE Development
Given that the post-transcriptional regulatory function of miRNA has been extensively verified, the potential effects of miR26a on EAE development were investigated through the construction of lentiviral vectors for transformation of EAE mice. Vectors encoding pre-miR26a (LV-26a), its inhibitor (LV-anti 26a), and an empty lentiviral vector (LV-Con) delivered approximately 2 × 10 7 transforming units of recombinant lentivirus to mice by injection through the tail vein; the efficacy of lentivirus infection was assessed 7 days later by quantitative real-time PCR analysis of miR26a expression in the brain of LV-26a-infected mice and LV-Con-infected mice ( p < 0.05, Fig. 3 a). Lentivirus-infected mice were immunized with an encephalitogenic peptide of MOG35–55 on day 7 after virus injection. Relative to LV-con-infected mice, LV-26a-infected mice exhibited somewhat mild EAE, whereas LV-anti26a-infected mice developed severe EAE (Fig. 3 b). Histological analysis of spinal cord sections also showed that LV-26a-infected mice exhibited mild central nervous system pathology ( p < 0.05), whereas LV-anti26a-infected mice developed prominent inflammatory infiltration ( p < 0.01, Fig. 3 c, d) and demyelination (Fig. 3 c, e). Transmission EM revealed the obvious disappearance of mitochondrial cristae and obscuring of tight junctions of vascular endothelial cells in brain tissues of LV-anti26a-infected mice (Fig. 3 f), demonstrating that miR26a is a critical factor in the development of EAE. Fig. 3 miR26a regulation of EAE development. a Quantitative PCR analysis of miR26a mRNA expression in the brains of mice infected with LV-26a or LV-Con (day 7 after lentivirus administration; n = 3). b Clinical scores for EAE in mice infected with lentivirus ( n = 9). c Histological evaluation of spinal cords from lentivirus-infected mice (day 19 after immunization; n = 3). d – e Quantification of spinal cord infiltrates ( d ) and demyelination ( e ) in the H&E-stained paraffin sections, presented as demyelination area relative to total analyzed area ( left ) and infiltrates per mm 2 ( right ). The boxed areas in the left columns (×40) are enlarged on the right (×400). Scale bars 100 µm. f Transmission electron micrograph of brain tissue from lentivirus-infected mice (on day 19 after immunization; n = 3) shows the EAE characteristic vascular endothelial injury and cellular ultrastructure changes (×8,000). * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01 versus normal controls
miR26a Regulation of the Balance of Th17 and Treg Cell Subsets is Dependent on the Inhibition of IL6 Expression in EAE Mice
Through use of the TargetScan database ( www.targetscan.org ), it was predicted that miR26a has target sites in the 3′ UTR of the IL6 mRNA. By examining the expression of T h 17- and T reg -related cytokines IL17, IL6 and their transcription factors RORγt and Foxp3 in the brain of lentivirus-infected EAE mice, it was further determined whether miR26 and IL6 affected the balance of T h 17 and T reg subsets in EAE mice. The expression of T h 17- and T reg -related cytokines IL17, IL6 and their transcription factors RORγt and Foxp3 were examined in the brain of lentivirus-infected EAE mice, with results indicating that, relative to their expression in LV-Con-infected mice, the expression of genes for RORγt ( p < 0.05, Fig. 4 a), IL17 ( p < 0.05, Fig. 4 a), and IL6 ( p < 0.05, Fig. 4 a) was significantly downregulated in LV-26a-infected mice and upregulated in LV-anti26a-infected mice, whereas an inverse result was found for the Foxp3 gene ( p < 0.05, Fig. 4 a) in LV-26a- and LV-anti26a-infected mice. Likewise, the protein levels of IL17 ( p < 0.05, Fig. 4 b) and IL6 ( p < 0.05, Fig. 4 b) in the three groups of lentivirus-infected mice mirrored the results for their mRNAs. Fig. 4 In EAE mice, miR26a regulates the T h 17/T reg cells’ balance through inhibition of IL6. a – f Quantitative PCR analysis of mRNA expression of RORγt, Foxp3, IL17, and IL6 ( a , c , e ) and Western blotting analysis of IL17 and IL6 ( b , d , f ) protein in the brains of lentivirus-infected mice (day 19 after immunization; n = 6). a , b Mice were immunized with MOG35-55 on day 7 after LV-26a or LV-anti26a virus injection. c , d Mice were immunized with MOG35-55 on day 7 after LV-26a or LV-shIL6 virus injection. e , f Mice were immunized with MOG35-55 on day 7 after LV-26a and LV-IL6 virus were co-transfected. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01 versus normal controls
In order to elucidate whether the balance of T h 17 and T reg subsets was mediated by miR26a’s inhibition of IL6 expression in the brain of EAE mice, gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies were performed. First, IL6 was silenced in order to investigate whether reducing the expression of IL6 could mimic the effect of miR26a. After EAE mice were infected with either LV-shIL6 or LV-26a, gene expression levels of RORγt, Foxp3, IL17, and IL6 were examined. As shown in Fig. 4 c through d, IL6 knockdown led to the downregulation of RORγt ( p < 0.05, Fig. 4 c), IL17 (Fig. 4 c, p < 0.05, and d, p < 0.01), and IL6 ( p < 0.01, Fig. 4 c, d) and to the upregulation of Foxp3 ( p < 0.05, Fig. 4 c), results that were similar to those found by using miR26a. Subsequently, in order to evaluate whether IL6 overexpression could inhibit the effect of miR26a on RORγt, IL17, and Foxp3, EAE mice were co-infected with LV-26a and LV-IL6 encoding the full-length IL6 coding sequence but without the 3′ UTR. Results showed that IL6 overexpression led to significant suppression of the miR26a-induced downregulation of RORγt ( p < 0.05, Fig. 4 e), IL17 ( p < 0.05, Fig. 4 e, f), and IL6 (Fig. 4 e, p < 0.05 and f, p < 0.01) and to the upregulation of Foxp3 ( p < 0.05, Fig. 4 e).
IL6 is a Direct Target of miR26a in HEK293 Cells
In order to support our data suggesting that the miR26a level may be inversely associated with IL6 level in EAE mice, a luciferase reporter assay was performed to determine whether miR26a could directly target the 3′ UTR of IL6 mRNA in HEK293 cells. Either the wt target sequence of IL6 3′ UTR (wt 3′ UTR) or the mutant sequence (mt 3′ UTR) were cloned into a luciferase reporter vector (Fig. 5 a), and subsequently used to transfect HEK293 cells, which received miR26a mimic and either wt or mt 3′ UTR vector. A significant decrease of luciferase activity was found when compared with the miR control ( p < 0.05, Fig. 5 b). The activity of the mt 3′ UTR vector was unaffected by a simultaneous transfection with miR26a ( p < 0.05, Fig. 5 b). Moreover, co-transfection with anti-miR26a and wt 3′ UTR vector in HEK293 cells led to a two-fold increase of luciferase activity ( p < 0.05, Fig. 5 c). Taken together, these results strongly suggest that IL6 is a direct target of miR26a in HEK293 cells. Fig. 5 IL6 is a direct target of miR26a in HEK293 cells. a Diagram of the IL6 3′ UTR—containing reporter constructs. b-c Luciferase activity assay of HEK293 cells at 36 h after co-transfection with miR26a ( b ) or miR26a inhibitor ( c ) and pGLO-IL6-3′ UTR or pGLO-IL6-3′ UTR mutant. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01 versus normal controls
Discussion
T h 17/T reg balance is critically involved in the pathogenesis of MS and regulators of T h 17 differentiation represent promising targets of clinical diagnostic or treatment methods. Here, we report the demonstration of miR26a as a critical contributing factor to the pathogenesis of MS and its mechanism involving regulation of the T h 17/T reg balance. Specifically, we showed that miR26a expression in PBLs is well correlated with disease in patients with relapsing MS and that its inhibition substantially aggravates disease severity in the EAE model. Finally, we demonstrated that miR26a targeting of IL6, a known positive regulator of T h 17 differentiation, leads to inhibition of T h 17 cell generation in vivo, and that this event can be reversed by the reintroduction of an IL6 gene engineered to be resistant to miR26a suppression.
Collectively, our data suggest that miR26a is a MS-associated miRNA, and in contrast to research results previously cited, our data have provided multiple lines of evidence for this finding. miR26a appears to be centrally involved in the pathogenesis of MS and EAE by targeting the cytokine IL6. Our data show that miR26a expression in PBLs is inversely correlated with the disease state in patients with relapsing MS, and also that its overexpression substantially ameliorated disease severity in the EAE model of MS. Moreover, our data strongly confirm that by targeting IL6, a known positive regulator of T h 17 cells, miR26a inhibited the generation of T h 17 and instead, promoted the generation of T reg in vivo, with this outcome reversed by the re-introduction of an IL6 gene construct designed to be resistant to miR26a suppression.
Several studies published in recent years have described investigations into the role of miRNAs in MS (Otaegui et al. ; Murugaiyan et al. ; Du et al. ; Junker et al. ; Keller et al. ; Lindberg et al. ; Cox et al. ). In particular, the research conducted by Otagui et al. ( ) focused on miRNA upregulation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) during MS relapse in patients; however, the study population was too small to ensure that results reached statistical significance. However, Keller et al. ( ) examined 20 relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) patients during treatment and identified a number of miRNAs that were up- or downregulated, providing more indication for the potential of these molecules as contributing to the condition. Du et al. ( ) chose to study a Chinese population and identified miR-326 as a major determinant of the MS disease but not of another common autoimmune disease, neuromyelitis optica (classified as an MS-like illness). The study of MS patients conducted by Cox et al. ( ) identified miR-17 and miR-20a as inhibitors of T cell activation genes, which were demonstrated as under-expressed patient whole blood samples. In an earlier study of MS patients, miR-15a was shown to be upregulated in active brain white matter lesions obtained from patients with MS (Junker et al. ), but a related study carried out at a later date showed this miRNA to be downregulated in CD4 + T cells from peripheral blood samples of RRMS patients (Lorenzi et al. ). The collective findings from these various studies involving patients of different ethnicities and with various MS disease conditions suggest that regulation of miRNA expression in MS is complicated.
The results in the current study did not absolutely agree with those from previous studies. For example, Honardoost et al. ( ) showed that a high level of miR-26a expression in PBMCs was associated with RRMS and that a decreased level of miR26a expression in PBLs was associated with relapse (compared to the remitting phase or healthy individuals) in our current study, and the miR26a expression level was also lower in all MS patients (compared to the healthy group), including those in remission or experiencing relapse. These difference in findings between studies may be due to either different samples from relapsing phase patients, which may influence miR26a gene expression or limited number of clinical subjects. It is also possible that the different findings are related to the heterogeneity that exists among the miR26 family members (such as miR26a1, miR26a2 and miR26b, which are coded by different genome loci); focused comparison studies are needed to confirm the distinctive and similar functions of each of these family members in MS, and it would be crucial to develop the above study in large case–control samples.
The tissue- and time-dependent expression profiles of miRNAs are known to influence protein translation during distinct cellular processes. For example, studies of liver cancer and lymphoma have shown disease-related downregulation of miR-26a and other studies have shown that ectopic expression of miR-26a can suppress cell proliferation (Kota et al. ; Sander et al. ; Ji et al. ). However, in glioblastomas and gliomas, miR-26a expression was found to be amplified and was shown to promote cell growth (Huse et al. ; Kim et al. ). These controversial results suggested that miR-26a may have a tumor-specific function and/or be highly dependent upon its targets in cancer cells; indeed, in general, aberrant expression of miRNAs and their target genes can affect different biological signals with diverse functions (Ambros ).
As reported previously, maintaining Th17/Treg balance is involved in the pathogenesis of MS. Our results suggest that miR26a is a IL6-associated miRNA and is therefore an indirect regulator of the T h 17/T reg cells balance in both MS patients and EAE mice. The analysis of IL6-deficient animals also points to an important role for IL6 in the differentiation of T h 17 cells because these animals are resistant to the development of EAE and do not develop a competent T h 17 cell response (Bettelli et al. ). Therefore, under inflammatory conditions, the IL6 cytokine may act to promote the differentiation of T h 17 cells, thereby further influencing the T h 17/T reg balance in vivo.
Our study has shown that the level of miR26a is dramatically decreased in relapsing MS patients. Moreover, miR26a level was found to have a significant inverse correlation with the level of IL6 mRNA, as shown in both MS patients and EAE mice. It was also found that the features of milder disease severity and of greater downregulation of RORγt and IL17 or of upregulated Foxp3 expression in LV-26a-transducted mice were largely reversed by co-infection of these mice with LV expressing IL6 with a mutated 3′ UTR. These findings indicate that IL6 acts as a key target of miR26a to regulate T h 17/T reg balance, at least during the development of EAE and MS.
In conclusion, miR26a may exert its functions in MS patients and EAE mice to elicit protective effects, acting at least partly through repression of IL6 expression. Because of the stable expression of miR26a and its easy detection in blood samples from MS patients, our results suggest that this miRNA has potential clinical value as a biomarker for MS diagnosis and/or prognosis, or to evaluate response to drug treatment. Additionally, given that miR26a is downregulated in MS patients, it is conceivable that reintroduction of this mature miRNA into target tissues could represent an effective and safe therapeutic strategy to reduce the expression of targeted genes using a natural mechanism; miR26a may therefore be poised to serve as a new and valuable target for clinical applications in MS patients.