Introduction
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction (POCD) is the degeneration of cognitive capability after anesthesia and surgery, which is presented as impaired memory, concentration, or information processing (Bittner et al. ). The hippocampus plays a critical role in maintaining normal cognitive function. The oxidative stress and apoptosis in hippocampal neurons have been reported to involve in cognitive impairment in several neurodegenerative disorders (Bittner et al. ; Finkel and Holbrook ). In rats, it was reported that central administration of angiotensin II induces impaired memory (Bonini et al. ). While the inhibition or reduction of central angiotensin II attenuates hippocampal oxidative stress and improves cognitive function (Bild et al. ).
Due to poor antioxidant defenses (Floyd and Hensley ), the mammalian brain is particularly susceptible to oxidative stress which has been found to be involved in the neuropathology of several neurodegenerative disorders (Finkel and Holbrook ). Mitochondrion is reported to be the major source of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the initiation of apoptosis (Handy and Loscalzo ; Martinou and Youle ). In addition, the p66 Shc adaptor protein plays a specific role in mitochondrial ROS generation and translates oxidative stress signals into cell apoptosis (Giorgio et al. ; Migliaccio et al. ; Trinei et al. ). The regulation of p66 Shc function is a complicated process. Protein kinase CβII (PKCβII) induces p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation (Diogo et al. ; Paneni et al. ), then Ser 36 -phosphorylated p66 Shc is isomerized by a prolyl isomerase Pin1, and dephosphorylated by phosphatase A2 (PP2A) (Diogo et al. ). Only Modified p66 Shc could translocate into the mitochondria, resulting in ROS accumulation (Paneni et al. ). ROS accumulation induced mitochondrial disruption and subsequent cell apoptosis (Bonati et al. ). Studies have indicated that deletion of p66 Shc could ameliorate spatial memory and attenuate oxidative stress in the mouse hippocampus (Berry et al. ).
The clinical efficacy of propofol for the induction and maintenance of anesthesia has been clearly demonstrated in clinical practice and reported by many literatures. Besides its wide use as a sedative-hypnotic, propofol also exhibits neuroprotective functions (Young et al. ). However, the underlying mechanisms by which propofol protects against angiotensin II-induced hippocampal oxidative stress and cell apoptosis have not been well recognized. In the present study, we investigated whether and how propofol improved angiotensin II-induced apoptosis in mouse hippocampal HT22 cells.
Materials and Methods
Cell Culture
Mouse hippocampal HT22 cells (GuangZhou Jennio Biotech Co. Ltd, Guangzhou, P.R. China) were cultured in DMEM with 10 % fetal bovine serum in incubator containing 5 % CO 2 at 37 °C. Cells were sub-cultured when reaching 90 % confluence. The eighth passage of HT22 was employed in the present study.
Study Design
HT22 were cultured in DMEM with 1 μM angiotensin II for 12 h. During general anesthesia, the plasma concentration of propofol ranges from 5 to 50 μM (Mathy-Hartert et al. ). Therefore, HT22 cells were incubated with different concentrations (5, 25, and 50 μM) of propofol (Sigma) for 1 h. The optimal concentration of propofol with significant protective effects against angiotensin II-mediated cell viability was thereafter determined. These treatment conditions were used in the subsequent studies in which HT22 were cultured and divided into four groups to examine the underlying signaling pathways. Group 1: HT22 were cultured in DMEM without angiotensin II nor propofol as control; Group 2: HT22 were cultured in DMEM and co-incubated with 25 μM propofol for the last 1 h; Group 3: HT22 were treated with 1 μM angiotensin II for 12 h; Group 4: HT22 were treated with 1 μM angiotensin II for 12 h and co-incubated with 25 μM propofol for the last 1 h.
Analysis for Cell Viability
Cell suspensions (3,000 cells/100 μl) were added to each well in the 96-multiwell culture plate and incubated at 37 °C. After corresponding treatments, 10 ul CCK-8 was then added to each well and the cells were further incubated for 2 h. Finally, the optical density at 450 nm was measured using an immunoplate reader. The cell viability curve was determined by accounting the mean value and standard deviation of optical density for every six wells.
Western Blot Analysis
Whole-cell extracts were prepared with the use of cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA), while mitochondrial extracts and cytosol extracts were prepared with the use of mitochondrial Extract Kit (Shanghai Shengong Bioengineering Institute, Shanghai City, P. R. China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Equal amount of protein extracted from different groups of HT22 was separated by 8 or 12 % SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. After being blocked in 5 % skim milk, the membranes were incubated with correspondent primary antibody at 4 °C for overnight. The primary antibodies used were monoclonal antibody against β-actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), cytochrome c oxidase IV (COX IV) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), caspase 3 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA), PKCβII (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), p66 Shc (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA), p-p66 Shc –Ser 36 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), cytochrome C (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), Pin-1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) and PP2A (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA). Thereafter, the primary antibodies were washed away, and the membranes were incubated with secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Subsequently, the membranes were washed with TBST for three times and detected by the ECL system. The respective densities of the protein bands were analyzed by Scan-gel-it software. In the present study, β-actin was used as loading control in whole-cell extracts and cytosol extracts, while COX IV was used as loading control in mitochondrial extracts. Also, the data were expressed as the ratio of specific protein expression and beta-actin or COX IV expression.
Superoxide Anion (O 2 .− ) Accumulation Assay
O 2 .− accumulation was measured by the reduction of ferricytochrome c assay as described previously (Zhu et al. ). Briefly, cells were washed and cultured with Krebs-HEPES buffer containing 20 μM ferricytochrome c (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in the presence or in the absence of superoxide dismutase (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). The absorbance was read at 550 nm spectrophotometrically. Reduction of ferricytochrome c in the presence of superoxide dismutase was subtracted from the data in the absence of superoxide dismutase. Arbitrary unit was used as the unit for absorbance difference. Then, we counted the cell number and expressed the data as arbitrary unit/10 6 cells.
Statistical Analysis
Results were expressed as mean ± SD, and n represents the number of experiments. Statistical significance was determined in multiple comparisons among independent groups of results in which analysis of variance indicated the presence of significant difference. A value of p < 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
1 μM Angiotensin II-Mediated Inhibition of Cell Viability, Caspase 3 Activation and Release of Mitochondrial Cytochrome C, and Its Modulation by Propofol
In HT22, compared with control group, 1 μM angiotensin II caused a significant inhibition of cell viability (Fig. 1 a). We also found that propofol could attenuate 1 μM angiotensin II-mediated the inhibition of cell viability in a concentration-dependent manner. Compared with 1 μM angiotensin II treatment, incubation of cells with additional 25 μM propofol for 1 h demonstrated a significant reversal of the inhibition of cell viability (Fig. 1 a). This treatment was used in the following experiments to study the signaling pathways responsible for the protective effects of propofol. Fig. 1 Effects of propofol on angiotensin II-mediated inhibition of cell viability, caspase 3 activation and release of mitochondrial cytochrome c. Cells were cultured in medium with angiotensin II for 12 h. At the end of 12 h incubation of angiotensin II, cells were co-incubated with different concentrations (5, 25, and 50 μM) of propofol for the last 1 h. Cells were cultured in DMEM without angiotensin II treatment as a control. a Compared with control group, angiotensin II could inhibit cell viability in HT22 which could be reversed by propofol in a concentration-dependent manner. Propofol solvent dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) did not affect angiotensin II-mediated the inhibition of cell viability. b , c Western blot and densitometric quantification of active caspase 3 expression. d , e Western blot and densitometric quantification of cytochrome c release from mitochondria. Bar graphs represent percentage change of cytochrome c in the cytosol versus mitochondrion. (* p < 0.05 vs. control group; # p < 0.05 vs. angiotensin II treatment, n = 5. Data are shown as mean ± SD.)
In HT22, compared with control group, 1 μM angiotensin II treatment increased the expression of active caspase 3 by 176 % ( p < 0.001, Fig. 1 b, c), and these effects were alleviated by propofol treatment (Fig. 1 b, c). Consistently, compared with control group, 1 μM angiotensin II treatment increased the release of mitochondrial cytochrome c by 290 % ( p < 0.001, Fig. 1 d, e), and these effects were reversed by propofol treatment (Fig. 1 d, e).
1 μM Angiotensin II-Induced O 2 .− Accumulation, Mitochondrial p66Shc Expression, Cytosol p66Shc–Ser36 Phosphorylation, and Its Modulation by Propofol
In HT22, compared with control group, 1 μM angiotensin II increased O 2 .− accumulation, and these effects were attenuated by propofol treatment (Fig. 2 a). Fig. 2 Effects of propofol on angiotensin II-induced O 2 .− accumulation, mitochondrial p66 Shc expression and cytosol p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation. Cells were cultured in medium with angiotensin II for 12 h. At the end of 12 h incubation of angiotensin II, cells were co-incubated with 25 μM propofol for the last 1 h. Cells were cultured in DMEM without angiotensin II treatment as a control. a Compared with control group, angiotensin II-induced O 2 .− accumulation in HT22 which could be reversed by propofol treatment. b , c , d Western blot and densitometric quantification of mitochondrial p66 Shc expression and cytosol p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation. (* p < 0.05 vs. control group; # p < 0.05 vs. angiotensin II treatment, n = 5. Data are shown as mean ± SD)
Compared with control group, 1 μM angiotensin II increased p66 Shc expression in mitochondrial extracts by 162 % ( p < 0.001, Fig. 2 b, c), and these effects were attenuated by propofol treatment (Fig. 2 b, c).
Compared with control group, 1 μM angiotensin II increased p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation in cytosol extracts by 176 % ( p < 0.001, Fig. 2 b, d), and propofol had no effects on angiotensin II-induced p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation. Moreover, compared with control group, propofol treatment increased p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation by 218 % ( p < 0.001, Fig. 2 b, d).
1 μM Angiotensin II-Induced PKCβII, Pin-1, and PP2A Expression, and Its Modulation by Propofol
Compared with control group, 1 μM angiotensin II increased the expression of PKCβII by 150 % ( p < 0.001), which was inhibited by propofol treatment (Fig. 3 a, b). Fig. 3 Effects of propofol on angiotensin II-induced PKCβII, pin-1 and PP2A expression. Cells were cultured in medium with angiotensin II for 12 h. At the end of 12 h incubation of angiotensin II, cells were co-incubated with 25 μM propofol for the last 1 h. Cells were cultured in DMEM without angiotensin II treatment as a control. a , b , c Western blot and densitometric quantification of PKCβII, pin-1 and PP2A expression. (* p < 0.05 vs. control group; # p < 0.05 vs. angiotensin II treatment, n = 5. Data are shown as mean ± SD.)
Compared with control group, 1 μM angiotensin II increased the expression of pin-1 by 192 % ( p < 0.001), and propofol did not show significant effect on 1 μM angiotensin II-mediated pin-1 expression (Fig. 3 a, c).
Compared with control group, 1 μM angiotensin II increased the expression of PP2A by 180 % ( p < 0.001, Fig. 3 a, d). Moreover, compared with control group, propofol decreased PP2A expression with or without angiotensin II treatment by 53.8 or 57.8 %, respectively (Fig. 3 a, d).
1 μM Angiotensin II -Mediated Inhibition of Cell Viability, Caspase 3 Activation and Release of Mitochondrial Cytochrome C, and Its Modulation by Propofol, PP2A Inhibitor Calyculin A, PP2A Activator FTY720, PKCβII Inhibitor CGP53353, and PKCβII Activator PMA
Calyculin A, an inhibitor of PP2A, improved angiotensin II mediated the inhibition of cell viability, which was similar with that of propofol treatment (Fig. 4 a). Moreover, the protective effect of propofol could be reversed by FTY720, an activator of PP2A (Fig. 4 a). CGP53353, an inhibitor of PKCβII, could reverse angiotensin II mediated the inhibition of cell viability, and the effect was also similar with that of propofol (Fig. 4 a). However, the protective effect of propofol was not affected by PMA, an activator of PKCβII (Fig. 4 a). Fig. 4 Angiotensin II-mediated inhibition of cell viability, caspase 3 activation and release of mitochondrial cytochrome c, and its modulation by propofol, calyculin A, FTY720, CGP53353 and PMA. Cells were cultured in medium with angiotensin II for 12 h. At the end of 12 h incubation of angiotensin II, cells were co-incubated with 25 μM propofol, 1nM calyculin, 2.5 μM FTY720, 10 μM CGP53353 or 1 μM PMA for the last 1 h. Cells were cultured in DMEM without angiotensin II treatment as a control. a Compared with control group, angiotensin II inhibited cell viability in HT22 which could be reversed by propofol, calyculin and CGP53353. Moreover, the effect of propofol could be reversed by FTY720, rather than PMA. b , c Western blot and densitometric quantification of active caspase 3 expression. d , e Western blot and densitometric quantification of cytochrome c release from mitochondria. Bar graphs represent percentage change of cytochrome c in the cytosol versus mitochondrion. (* p < 0.05 vs. control group; # p < 0.05 vs. angiotensin II treatment, n = 5. Data are shown as mean ± SD.)
Consistently, calyculin A inhibited angiotensin II-induced active caspase 3 expression (172 vs. 106 %, p < 0.001, Fig. 4 b, c) and cytochrome c release to cytoplasm (291 vs. 131 %, p < 0.001, Fig. 4 d, e), which was similar with propofol treatment. Moreover, the effects of propofol could be reversed by FTY720 (Fig. 4 b–e). CGP53353 inhibited angiotensin II-mediated active caspase 3 expression (172 vs. 105 %, p < 0.001, Fig. 4 b, c) and cytochrome c release to cytoplasm (291 vs. 132 %, p < 0.001, Fig. 4 d, e), and the effect was also similar with that of propofol (Fig. 4 a–d). However, the protective effect of propofol was not affected by PMA (Fig. 4 a–d).
1 μM Angiotensin II-Mediated Mitochondrial p66Shc Expression, Cytosol p66Shc–Ser36 Phosphorylation and O 2 .− Accumulation, and Its Modulation by Propofol, Calyculin A, FTY720, CGP53353, PKCβII and PMA
Calyculin A decreased angiotensin II-induced p66 Shc expression in mitochondrial extracts (166 vs. 105 %, p < 0.001, Fig. 5 a, b), which was similar with propofol treatment. Moreover, the effect of propofol could be reversed by FTY720 (Fig. 5 a, b). CGP53353 could decrease angiotensin II-induced p66 Shc expression in mitochondrial extracts (166 vs. 109 %, p < 0.001, Fig. 5 a, b), and the effect was also similar with that of propofol (Fig. 5 a, b). However, this effect of propofol was not affected by PMA (Fig. 5 a, b). Fig. 5 Angiotensin II-mediated mitochondrial p66 Shc expression, cytosol p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation and O 2 .− accumulation, and its modulation by propofol, calyculin A, FTY720, CGP53353 and PMA. Cells were cultured in medium with angiotensin II for 12 h. At the end of 12 h incubation of angiotensin II, cells were co-incubated with 25 μM propofol, 1nM calyculin, 2.5 μM FTY720, 10 μM CGP53353 or 1 μM PMA for the last 1 h. Cells were cultured in DMEM without angiotensin II treatment as a control. a , b , c Western blot and densitometric quantification of mitochondrial p66 Shc expression and cytosol p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation. d Compared with control group, angiotensin II-induced O 2 .− accumulation in HT22 which could be reversed by propofol, calyculin A and CGP53353. Moreover, the effect of propofol could be reversed by FTY720, rather than PMA. (* p < 0.05 vs. control group; # p < 0.05 vs. angiotensin II treatment, n = 5. Data are shown as mean ± SD.)
In HT22, compared with control group, 1 μM angiotensin II treatment increased p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation in cytosol extracts, which was only inhibited by CGP53353 (Fig. 5 a, c). Propofol, calyculin A, propofol plus FTY720, propofol plus PMA all did not affect angiotensin II-induced p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation (Fig. 5 a, c).
Calyculin A decreased angiotensin II-induced O 2 .− accumulation, which was similar with propofol treatment (Fig. 5 d). Moreover, the effect of propofol could be reversed by FTY720 (Fig. 5 d). CGP53353 could decrease angiotensin II-induced O 2 .− accumulation, and the effect was also similar with that of propofol (Fig. 5 d). However, this effect of propofol was not affected by PMA (Fig. 5 d).
1 μM Angiotensin II -Mediated PP2A and PKCII Expression, and Its Modulation by Propofol, Calyculin A, FTY720, CGP53353 and PMA
Calyculin A inhibited angiotensin II-induced PP2A expression (180 vs. 55.6 %, p < 0.001, Fig. 6 a, b), which was similar with propofol treatment. Moreover, the effects of propofol could be reversed by FTY720 (Fig. 6 a, b). CGP53353 had no effect on angiotensin II-induced PP2A expression (Fig. 6 a, b). The effect of propofol on angiotensin II-induced PP2A expression was not affected by PMA (Fig. 6 a, b). Fig. 6 Angiotensin II -mediated PP2A and PKCβII expression, and its modulation by propofol, calyculin A, FTY720, CGP53353 and PMA. Cells were cultured in medium with angiotensin II for 12 h. At the end of 12 h incubation of angiotensin II, cells were co-incubated with 25 μM propofol, 1nM calyculin, 2.5 μM FTY720, 10 μM CGP53353 or 1 μM PMA for the last 1 h. Cells were cultured in DMEM without angiotensin II treatment as a control. a , b , c Western blot and densitometric quantification of PP2A and PKCβII expression. (* p < 0.05 vs. control group; # p < 0.05 vs. angiotensin II treatment, n = 5. Data are shown as mean ± SD.)
Calyculin A inhibited angiotensin II-induced PKCII expression (157 vs. 101 %, p < 0.001, Fig. 6 a, c), which was similar with propofol treatment. Moreover, the effects of propofol could be reversed by FTY720. CGP53353 inhibited angiotensin II-induced PKCII expression (157 vs. 102 %, p < 0.001, Fig. 6 a, c), and the effect was also similar with that of propofol (Fig. 4 a, 4 b). However, this effect of propofol on angiotensin II-induced PKCII expression was not affected by PMA.
Discussion
The main finding of the present study is that angiotensin II activated PKCβII and induced p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation and p66 Shc mitochondrial translocation, resulting in ROS accumulation, cytochrome c release to cytoplasm, caspase 3 activation and therefore the inhibition of cell viability. Propofol could protect HT22 cells against angiotensin II-induced apoptosis and oxidative stress. Our data also suggested that the protective effects of propofol might be achieved by down-regulating PP2A expression, resulting in the inhibition of p-p66 Shc –Ser 36 dephosphorylation and p66 Shc mitochondrial translocation.
The brain has its own intrinsic rennin–angiotensin system. Moreover, it was reported that brain rennin–angiotensin system is involved not only in the regulation of blood pressure, but also in the modulation of the brain functions, including memory (Braszko et al. ; Ciobica et al. ). Studies have indicated that inhibition of central angiotensin II could attenuate angiotensin II-induced hippocampal oxidative stress and improved memory function in rats (Bonini et al. ; Bild et al. ). It is well known that perioperative patients are usually under stress status, which may lead to the activation of the rennin–angiotensin system. In the previous studies, angiotensin II has been shown to induce cardiomyocyte, renal and vascular endothelial apoptosis (Zhou et al. ; Wolf ; Hsu et al. ; Lee et al. ). Lately, more and more research groups have been working on POCD which may be induced by surgery-mediated neuro-inflammatory reactions (Sanderson et al. ; Hovens et al. ) and the usage of anesthetic agents intro-operatively (Lin et al. ). In the present study, we found angiotensin II could induce hippocampal HT22 cells oxidative stress and apoptosis. These results may postulate that excessive angiotensin II generation induced by perioperative stress reaction could play an important role in the occurrence of POCD.
The adaptor protein p66 Shc works as a redox enzyme, which is involved in mitochondrial ROS generation and translates oxidative stress signals into cell apoptosis (Giorgio et al. ; Migliaccio et al. ; Trinei et al. ). The adaptor protein p66 Shc mitochondrial translocation resulted in cytochrome c oxidation, and subsequent ROS accumulation (Paneni et al. ). ROS accumulation induced mitochondrial disruption and cell apoptosis (Bonati et al. ). Deletion of p66 Shc could ameliorate spatial memory and attenuate oxidative stress in the mouse hippocampus (Berry et al. ). In the present study, we found angiotensin II increased p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation (Figs. 2 b, 3 a, 5 a) and induced p66 Shc mitochondrial translocation (Figs. 2 b, 5 a), thus inducing O 2 .− accumulation (Figs. 2 a, 5 d) and apoptosis (Figs. 1 , 4 ). Moreover, PKCβII inhibiter CGP53353 could inhibit angiotensin II-induced p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation and p66 Shc mitochondrial translocation (Fig. 5 a), leading to improvement of angiotensin II-induced O 2 .− accumulation and apoptosis in HT22 cells (Figs. 4 , 5 ). These data indicated that angiotensin II could induce oxidative stress and apoptosis via PKCβII activation and p66 Shc mitochondrial translocation in HT22 cells.
Propofol is a widely used intravenous anesthetic in clinical settings. Besides its use as a sedative-hypnotic, propofol exhibits neuroprotective functions (Young et al. ). In the present study, we found propofol inhibited angiotensin II-induced p66 Shc mitochondrial translocation (Figs. 2 b, 5 a), caspase 3 activation and improved cell viability (Figs. 1 , 4 ). Interestingly, we also found that propofol increased p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation (Figs. 2 b, 5 a). The inconsistency between p66 Shc and Ser 36 phosphorylation and p66 Shc mitochondrial translocation may be explained by the inhibitive effect of propofol on PP2A expression, inhibiting dephosphorylation of isomerized p66 Shc –Ser 36 . Indeed, in a previous study, it was reported that propofol could not only down-regulate PP2A expression, but inhibit PP2A activity as well (Whittington et al. ). In the present study, the effect of propofol on PP2A expression was similar with the previous study. We also found propofol decreased PKCβII expression in HT22 (Figs. 3 a, 6 a) and improved HT22 cells apoptosis (Figs. 1 , 4 ). However, in the present study, the protective effects of propofol on angiotensin II-induced HT22 apoptosis could be inhibited by FTY720, an activator of PP2A, rather than PMA, an activator of PKCβII (Fig. 4 ). So we indicated that the protective effect of propofol on angiotensin II-induced HT22 apoptosis was achieved by inhibition of PP2A expression. In this study, we found propofol could inhibit PKCβII expression induced by PMA and angiotensin II (Fig. 6 ). It has been reported that activation of PKCβII was associated with ROS accumulation (Rask-Madsen and King ). So we speculate that the antioxidative effect of propofol is a potential mechanism responsible for the beneficial effect on angiotensin II and PMA-mediated PKCβII activation.
This study has some limitations. First, the study was carried out in mouse hippocampal HT22 cells, which is an in vitro system. It differs from in vivo settings, especially when drug effectiveness and toxicity is considered. Secondly, our pre-experiments have found angiotensin II receptor (ATR) expressed in HT22 cells, including AT1R and AT2R (data not shown). At present, we did not know by which ATR angiotensin II played the role in this study. Further studies in in vivo and ex vivo models are necessary to clarify these issues.
In summary, the present study suggested that angiotensin II via inducing PKCβII activation, up-regulated p66 Shc –Ser 36 phosphorylation and increased p66 Shc mitochondrial translocation, resulting in ROS accumulation, mitochondrial cytochrome c release, caspase 3 activation and hippocampal HT22 cells apoptosis. More importantly, the present study indicated that propofol down-regulated PP2A expression, inhibiting dephosphorylation of isomerized p66 Shc –Ser 36 and p66 Shc mitochondrial translocation, decreasing O 2 .− accumulation, mitochondrial cytochrome c release, caspase 3 activation and improving hippocampal HT22 cells apoptosis.