Introduction
Glioma, a diverse group of malignancy of glial cells, is classified as astrocytoma, ependymoma, oligodendroglioma and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) (Furnari et al. ; Kyritsis et al. ), with the latter constituting more than 50 % of all brain tumours. During the period of our study, the most commonly occurring brain tumour was found to be GBM among the recruited South Indian population. Patients with GBM have a life expectancy of less than 1 year even after surgery, chemo- and radiotherapies when compared to other grades. The efforts to improve the surgical, radiotherapeutic and chemotherapeutic approaches to glioma treatment have failed to, substantially, increase long-term disease control, which necessitates the individual characterization of the grades of glioma and a novel molecular approach that is epigenetic based.
Epigenetic events, especially aberrant DNA methylation, is a hallmark of several human malignancies, which could lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation or tumourigenesis. Recent studies support the significance of characterization of different grades of glioma and even the GBM subgroups pertaining to gene expression or DNA methylation profiles. Previously, we had reported that an increased methylation frequency (MF) of p73 gene in patients with high-grade glioma (HGG) resulted in poor survival (Palani et al. ), thus proposing the methylated p73 gene as an independent predictive biomarker of worse outcome in HGG. In this line, investigations on the influence of epigenetic events are crucial for better diagnosis and for more effective treatment strategies (Burgess et al. ; Maleszewska and Kaminska ) against glioma.
Recent studies have been focussing much on neurotrophins and their corresponding tropomyosin-related kinase ( NTRK ) family of neurotrophin receptors ( NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3 ), which have been shown to induce a variety of pleiotropic responses in malignant cells, including enhanced tumour cell invasiveness and chemotaxis (Brodeur et al. ; Jin et al. ; Yu et al. ). Despite their close homology, alterations in NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3 receptors behave very differently in different types of tumour. NTRK1 fusions occur in a subset of papillary thyroid cancers and colon carcinomas (Greco et al. ; Vaishnavi et al. ), and expression of NTRK1 is elevated in pancreatic cancer (Cheng et al. ) as well as in neuroblastoma (Pajtler et al. ). NTRK2 was reported to be overexpressed in pancreatic cancer (Sclabas et al. ), neuroblastoma (Light et al. ) and adenocarcinomas (Terry et al. ). NTRK2 fusion genes were also reported in noncerebellar tumours (Jones et al. ). Similarly, increased expression of NTRK3 was found in neuroblastoma (Brodeur et al. ), in medulloblastoma (Kim et al. ) and in neuroectodermal brain tumours (Grotzer et al. ). Furthermore, a variety of nonneuronal tissues such as breast, lung and pancreatic cancers have been shown to express mutated NTRK3 (Jin et al. ; Wood et al. ). Very recently, suppression of NTRK3 expression and the neoplastic transformation in colorectal cancer (Luo et al. ) have been reported. These reports suggest the importance of NTRKs in malignancy and can be used as potential biomarker. However, knowledge about the expression of neurotrophin family receptor genes and their epigenetic status are still unknown in different grades of glioma. The present study investigates the promoter methylation status and expression of NTRK family along with an analysis of the expression of p75 NTR protein in different grades of glioma.
Subjects and Methods
Patient Characteristics and Tumour Specimens
Patients with brain tumour diagnosed at the Department of Neurosurgery, Madras Medical University & Government Hospital, from 2007 to 2010 were recruited for the study. The demographical data of the recruited subjects are presented in Table 1 . All of the patients recruited in the study were untreated subjects. All of the study subjects were provided the required written consent forms, and the study was approved by the Institutional Human Ethical committee of Government General Hospital, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India (Approval No. 12299/P&D/Ethics/Dean/GGH/Chennai, 19 July 2007). Glial tumour samples were collected from these South Indian individuals whose age ranged from 18 to 77 years (mean = 53 ± 23.9 years). Pathological diagnosis was made according to the WHO classification. Two hundred and twenty glioma samples were collected [47 Grade I: pilocytic astrocytoma (PA), 50 Grade II: ependymoma (ED), 26 Grade III: oligodendroglioma (OD), 29 Grade III: anaplastic astrocytoma (AA) and 68 Grade IV: GBM]. The study included control samples that comprise of benign lesions and adjacent tissue obtained from the subjects ( n = 30), which were histologically confirmed as nonmalignant. These samples were obtained from the operator who operates based on the MRI. Table 1 General characteristics of glioma cases and controls Patients characteristics Number (%) Gender Male 122 (55.5) Female 98 (44.5) Age 18–50 77 (35) 50–60 89 (40.4) 60–80 54 (24.5) Tumour type PA 47 (21.3) ED 50 (22.7) AA 29 (13.1) OD 26 (11.8) GBM 68 (30.9) Grades High 123 (55.9) Low 97 (40) Tumour location Sub 38 (17.2) Sup 92 (41.8) FL 41 (18.6) TL 27(12.2) PL 10 (8.02) OL 11(4.5) Other 1 (0.45) Tumour hemisphere Left 112 (50.9) Right 107 (48.6) Both 1 (0.45) PA pilocytic astrocytoma (Grade 1), ED ependymoma (Grade II), AA anaplastic astrocytoma (Grade III), OD oligodendroglioma (Grade III), GBM glioblastoma multiforme (Grade IV), Sub subtentorial tumour, Sup supratentorial tumour, FL frontal lobe, TL temporal lobe, PL parietal lobe, OL occipital lobe, left and right hemisphere
Informed Consent
After obtaining the Institutional Human Ethical Clearance (IHEC), informed consent was obtained from the general practitioners (GPs), clinicians and the patients themselves. The patients were provided with written information about the study both in their mother language (Tamil) and in English. Information about the study was provided along with the enquiry of whether they were willing to participate. In the written and the oral information, it was clearly stated that participation was voluntary and that confidentiality was assured.
Bisulfite Treatment
Bisulfite modification was done as previously reported (Herman et al., ). DNA (1 μg) in a volume of 50 μl was denatured by NaOH (final concentration, 0.2 M) for 10 min at 37 °C. Thirty microlitres of 10 mM hydroquinone and 520 μl of 3 M sodium bisulfite at pH 5 were added and incubated under mineral oil at 50 °C for 16 h. The modified DNA used was immediately stored at −20 °C.
Methylation-Specific PCR (MSP)
Methylation of the NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3 genes was determined by methylation-specific PCR adopting a reported procedure (Herman et al. ). PCR was carried out in a 10-μl mixture containing PCR buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.3, 50 mM KCl), 2.5 mM MgCl 2 , dNTPs (250 μM each), sense and antisense primers (0.75 μM each) (sequences are provided in Table S1), 0.5 U Taq DNA polymerase and 40 ng bisulfite-modified DNA. Amplification was carried out in a robot thermal cycler with an initial denaturation at 95 °C for 5 min followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for 30 s, annealing for 30 s at 60 °C (methylated reactions) or 58 °C (unmethylated reaction) and extension for 30 s at 72 °C, followed by a final extension for 5 min at 72 °C. Control reactions without DNA were performed for each PCR. DNA of lymphocytes obtained from healthy blood donors was either treated or untreated with Sss1 methyl transferase followed by bisulfite treatment (to serve as positive and negative controls). Amplified products were electrophoresed on 3 % agarose gels and were visualized with ethidium bromide.
Reverse Transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted with RNA extraction kit (Synergy Scientific, India), and cDNA was synthesized from 5 μg of total RNA using reverse transcriptase (Life Technologies) in 50 μL of reaction solution according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RT-PCR was performed using 10 pmol of each primer, 250 μmol/L of dNTP mix, 10 % dimethyl sulfoxide, 2U of Taq Polymerase (Life Technologies), 1x PCR buffer (Life Technologies), 150 μmol/L of MgCl2 and 40 ng of cDNA.
The PCR conditions were as follows: 1 cycle of 3 min at 95 °C, 35 cycles of 30 s at 95 °C, 40 s at 60 °C, 40 s at 72 °C and 1 cycle of 3 min at 72 °C. The quality of cDNA was confirmed by parallel PCR amplification of the GAPDH gene. The PCR conditions were as follows: 1 cycle of 3 min at 95 °C, 28 cycles of 30 s at 95 °C, 40 s at 58 °C, 40 s at 72 °C and 1 cycle of 3 min at 72 °C.
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Assay
ChIP assays were performed using Upstate ChIP Assay Kit (Catalog No. 17-295) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Fresh glioma samples [47 Grade I: pilocytic astrocytoma (PA), 50 Grade II: ependymoma (ED), 26 Grade III: oligodendroglioma (OD), 29 Grade III: anapalstic astrocytoma (AA) and 68 Grade IV: GBM] and control (30) tissues were taken for the study. Briefly, the brain tissue samples were chopped into pieces with scalpel, and 5.0 ml of media was added. Formaldehyde was added to a final concentration of 1 % and rotated for 15–20 min at room temperature. The samples were subjected to low-speed centrifugation and washed; ice-cold PBS was added to the pellet for disaggregation by homogenizer. Then, the tubes were centrifuged, and to the pellet was added PMSF 15 μl/ml, and a lack of clumping was ensured. The samples were incubated in ice and treated with 500 μL of MNase digestion buffer and incubated for 1 h on ice. The nuclear pellet was resuspended in 1 mL of nuclei lysis buffer for ChIP supplemented with protease inhibitors. Cross-linked DNA was sheared to 500 bp, and sonicated cell supernatant was diluted tenfold in ChIP dilution buffer. A sample was removed after dilution and labelled as “input” sample. The remaining diluted cell supernatant was precleared with salmon sperm DNA/protein A-agarose 50 % slurry. The collected agarose beads were saved as control IgG. Primary anti-acetyl histone H3 antibody (Upstate Biotechnology) and HDAC4 were used for immunoprecipitation to the remaining precleared supernatant and incubated overnight. Agarose was pelleted by centrifugation, and the precipitates were washed sequentially with 1 mL of low-salt washing buffer, high-salt washing buffer and LiCl washing buffer and were washed twice with 1 mL of TE buffer and extracted twice with 250 µl of freshly made elution buffer (1 % SDS, 0.1 M NaHCO 3 ). The pooled eluent in a total volume of 500 µl was mixed with 20 µL of 5 M NaCl and heated at 65 °C for 10 h to reverse the formaldehyde cross-linking. DNA fragments were then purified by phenol/chloroform and precipitated with ethanol.
Five microlitres from the 30-µL DNA extraction was amplified by PCR with the following pairs of primers for the proximal promoter region of the genes of interest. [ NTRK1 (forward: 5′-CTC CTG GGC TTT CAG ACT TC-3′, reverse: 5′-CCC TAG TTG ACA GGC TAA ATA-3′), NTRK2 (forward: 5′-GTTACGGTTTGTCACCCGAC-3′, reverse: 5′-TTCCCAGATCGTGGATTCAC-3′) and NTRK3 (forward: 5′-GGGATTTGGTGATTTTAGTATTATTT-3′, reverse: 5′-AACCCACATAATCCAACCAAAC-3′)]. Initially, PCR was performed with different numbers of cycles or dilutions of input DNA to determine the linear range of the amplification; all results shown fall within this range. Following 30 cycles of amplification, PCR products were run on 2 % agarose gels and analysed by ethidium bromide staining.
Immunofluorescent Analysis of p75NTR
Dehydrated paraffin-embedded tissue sections were blocked with 3 % BSA in TBS and then immunostained with primary antibody goat polyclonal IgG to p75NTR (rabbit polyclonal, 1: 5,000 dilution) followed by conjugated secondary antibody (1: 5,000 dilution). Incubation was done overnight at 4 °C. After washing, the slides were incubated with their corresponding fluorescence isothiocyanate (FITC) conjugate secondary antibody followed by counterstaining. The slides were visualized under a fluorescent microscope (Nikon TE 300; excitation wavelength/emission wavelength of 345 nm/456 nm for DAPI; 494 nm/525 nm for FITC). Cell population examinations of 25 grid field (each field measuring 0.245 mm 2 ) were counted, and the mean score per tissue was calculated.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using the chi-square test and Fisher’s exact test for differences between grades. Hypothesis testing method included one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by least significant difference (LSD) test for quantitative assessment. p < 0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. All the results were expressed as mean ± SD. Univariate analysis of overall survival was carried out by Kaplan–Meier method using the log-rank test. Multivariate overall survival analysis was carried out by Cox’s proportional hazards model.
Results
In the present study, we examined the promoter methylation status and the expression pattern of NTRK s in each grade of glioma. Clinical characteristics of control and glioma patients included in this study are summarized in Table 1 . Glioma samples were categorized based on the different grades of glioma and availability of samples. A total of 47 samples of Grade I (PA), 50 samples of Grade II: (ED), 26 samples of Grade III: (OD), 29 samples of Grade III: (AA), 68 samples of Grade IV: (GBM) and 30 samples of control tissues were analysed. Comparisons were made among control and glioma, among the grades and low-grade (LG) (I and II) versus high-grade (III and IV) glioma samples.
Analysis of MF of NTRKs (Table 2 ; Fig. 1 ) showed no significant promoter methylation of NTRK1 and NTRK2 . However, a significant increase in MF of NTRK3 in HGG was observed when compared with LG ( p = 0.04) and control samples ( p < 0.05). When the expression of NTRK mRNAs was investigated, interestingly, the results showed a differential expression pattern of NTRKs in each grade of glioma samples when compared with control (Fig. 2 i–iii). An increase in the expressions of both NTRK1 and 2 mRNAs ( p < 0.01) could be found in glioma when compared to control tissues with varied expressions among different grades of glioma. NTRK1 showed a significantly increased expression ( p < 0.05) when the following comparisons were made: Grade II versus Grade III, LG versus high grade (Fig. 2 v) and LG depicting an increased expression when compared to high grades (HG). Both NTRK1 and 2 had registered a significant variation ( p , 0.05) in Grade II when compared to Grade III. No significant difference was found when comparisons were made among Grade I versus Grade II and Grade III versus Grade IV samples. A negligibly reduced expression of NTRK3 mRNA was observed in all grades (I, II, III, IV) with a complete loss in GBM when compared to control (Fig. 2 iii). When the relationship between the methylation and expression level of NTRKs in glioma samples was analysed, no significant correlation was observed when glioma was compared with control and also when Grade II was compared with III; however, a significant correlation ( p , 0.05) was observed for NTRK3 when LG was compared with HG. Table 2 Methylation frequency of NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3 genes in 220 brain tumour patients (Grades: Grade I: PA; Grade II: ED; Grade III: OD, AA; Grade IV: GBM) and 30 control samples Grades NTRK1 NTRK2 NTRK3 n (−ve) n (+ve) n (−ve) n (+ve) n (−ve) n (+ve) Grade I ( n = 47) 44 (93.6 %) 3 (6.3 %) c, d 43 (91.4 %) 4 (8.5 %) c, d 36 (76.5 %) 11 (23.4 %) c, d Grade II ( n = 50) 44 (88 %) 6 (12 %) c, d 40 (80 %) 10 (20 %) c, d 37 (74 %) 13 (26 %) c, d Grade III (oligodendroglioma) ( n = 26) 26 (100 %) 0 (–%) 26 (100 %) 0 (–%) 26 (100%) 0 (–%) Grade III (anaplastic astrocytoma) ( n = 29) 24 (82.7 %) 5 (17.2 %) c, d 22 (75.8 %) 7 (24.1 %) c, d 20 (68.9 %) 9 (31.0 %) c, d Grade IV ( n = 68) 58 (85.2 %) 10 (14.7 %) c, d 55 (80.8 %) 13(19.1 %) c, d 36 (52.9 %) 32 (47.0 %) b control ( n = 30) 29 (96.6 %) 1 (3.3 %) c, d 28 (93.3 %) 2 (6.6 %) c, d 25 (83.3 %) 5 (16.6 %) a Fisher’s exact test was performed n Number of samples, −ve negative expression represents unmethylated, +ve positive represents methylated samples a,b ( p ≤ 0.05); [comparison (glioma vs control & Low garde vs High grade respectively)], c, d comparison of Grade II vs Grade II and Grade III vs Grade IV (non-significant) Fig. 1 Methylation PCR (MS-PCR) analysis of NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3 genes in different grades of glioma and control samples. i Represents methylation and unmethylation of promoter NTRK1. ii Represents methylation and unmethylation of promoter NTRK2. iii Represents methylation and unmethylation of promoter NTRK3 . iv Quantitative measure of samples subjected to MS-PCR. (L-DNA ladder, U-PCR product amplified by unmethylated-specific primers, M-PCR product amplified by methylated-specific primers, NC negative control lymphocytic DNA, PC positive control-SssI methyl transferase-treated DNA, GBM glioblastoma multiforme, AA anaplastic astrocytoma, OD oligodendroglioma, ED ependymoma, PA pilocytic astrocytoma, C control benign brain tissues) Fig. 2 RT-PCR analysis of NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3 genes in different grades of glioma and control samples. Total RNA was isolated from tissue as indicated, then subjected to reverse transcription (RT-PCR) analysis using NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3 primers as mentioned in “Materials and Methods”. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as internal controls for normalization purposes. Lane PA Grade I ( n = 47); Lane ED Grade II ( n = 50); Lane OD Grade III ( n = 29); Lane AA Grade III ( n = 26); Lane GBM Grade IV ( n = 68); Lane C control benign samples ( n = 30); Lane NC negative control. Fig. 2 (i, ii, iii) represents NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3 gene expressions, and Fig. 2 (v) represents quantitative data expressing the corresponding mRNA level assessed using densitometry and expressed in relative intensity (arbitrary units). Hypothesis testing method included one-way ANOVA followed by least significant difference (LSD). The p values of less than 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. a glioma versus control; c Grade II versus III; e LG versus high grade. § No significant difference was observed between Grade I and II and Grade IV and III
To further confirm the impact of methylation on NTRK genes, we performed ChIP analysis to amplify the gene promoter DNA bound to the HDAC4/anti-acetyl histone H4 protein in different grades of glioma samples (Fig. 3 ). Following the formaldehyde-induced in situ cross-linking of DNA–protein complexes, the samples were immunoprecipitated with an antibody specific to HDAC4, anti-acetyl histone H4, and the DNA fragments recovered from the immune complexes were amplified using primers for NTRK gene family. Both NTRK1 and NTRK2 promoters showed positive bands for anti-acetyl histone H3 in all grades of glioma as evidenced by the appearance of PCR fragment of expected size, whereas with respect to HDAC4 antibody, there were no or low intensity bands in glioma as well as in control samples. In contrast, NTRK3 with HDAC4 antibody resulted in high intensity bands in HG, whereas moderate expression was found in LG of glioma and complete loss in control samples (Fig. 3 ). On the other hand, immunoprecipitation with anti-acetyl histone H4 antibody showed binding of the proteins to promoters of both NTRK1 and NTRK2 and loss of binding to promoter of NTRK3 . Fig. 3 Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3 genes in different grades of glioma and control samples. Quantitative ChIP assay: anti-acetyl histone H4 ( i ) and HDAC4 ( ii ) bound binding to the NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3 promoters. Purified immunoprecipitated DNA was quantified using primer sets corresponding to the NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3 promoters. The relative enrichment of the bands presented. Lane PA Grade I; Lane ED Grade II; Lane OD Grade III; Lane AA Grade III; Lane GBM Grade IV; Lane C Control; Lane NC IgG negative control; PC RNA polymerase III positive control. iii Input DNA. Quantitative data expressing the corresponding DNA level were assessed using densitometry and are expressed in relative intensity (arbitrary units) ( iv and v ). Hypothesis testing method included one-way ANOVA followed by least significant difference (LSD). The p values of less than 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. a glioma versus control; c Grade II versus III; e LG versus high grade. § No significant difference was observed between Grade I and II and Grade IV and III
Since the above result showed no impact of methylation but altered mRNA expression pattern, we examined the possible role of P75 NTR expression, which is the important regulator of NTRKs receptor. A significant loss of expression of p75 NTR ( p < 0.05) was observed in glioma compared with control samples (Fig. 4 ). There was a significant loss of p75 NTR expression ( p < 0.05) in samples with HGG, which showed positive expression of NTRK1 gene. No such significant difference was found with other NTRK2 and NTRK3 genes expression in glioma samples. Fig. 4 Immunofluorescent analysis of p75 NTR in the different grades of glioma and control samples. i Tissue sections were immunostained with the p75 NTR antibody and an FITC-conjugated secondary antibody ( green ). Tissue sections were also counterstained with DAPI ( blue ). ( Scale bar 100 μm). Lane PA Grade I ( n = 12); Lane ED Grade II ( n = 30); Lane OD Grade III ( n = 16); Lane AA Grade III ( n = 21); Lane GBM Grade IV ( n = 41); Lane C control benign ( n = 16) samples. ii Hypothesis testing method included one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by least significant difference (LSD). The p values of less than 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. a glioma versus control; c Grade II versus III; e LG versus high grade. § No significant difference was observed between Grade I and II and Grade III and IV (Color figure online)
We further examined the relationship between the expression pattern of NTRK gene family and clinical outcome of patients with HGG. Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed in 123 HGG samples with clinical variables of age, sex, KPS score and relative expression of NTRK genes. Clinical variables such as age (greater than 60) and KPS (less than 70) have a risk of poor survival. With respect to expression, a significant loss of NTRK1 expression in HGG linked to poor survival on univariate analysis ( p = 0.02), which was further confirmed by multivariate analysis (0.3728, 95 % CI = 0.2238 to 0.6211, p < 0.0001) (Fig. 5 i). The median survival period was found to be 9-10 months in patients with loss of NTRK1 expression. Similarly, loss of NTRK2 expression was found significantly correlated with poor survival of HGG patients on univariate analysis ( p = 0.001) and on multivariate analysis (0.3154, 95 % CI = 0.1883 to 0.5281, p < 0.0001) (Fig. 5 ii). Overall survival of HGG patients with loss of expression of NTRK2 genes was found to be 6-8 months. In contrast, no influence of expression of NTRK3 in survival of high glioma patients was observed. Fig. 5 Kaplan–Meier survival curve analysis of NTRK1 and NTRK2 mRNA expression in GBM patients ( n = 68) is shown. i The analysis of glioblastoma multiforme (WHO Grade IV) between NTRK1-positive and NTRK1-negative glioma patients with the log-rank test ( p = .002) further confirmed by multivariate analysis (0.37, 95 % CI = 0.22 to 0.61, p < 0.0001). ii The analysis of GBM between NTRK2 -positive and NTRK2 -negative glioma patients with the log-rank test ( p = .001) further confirmed by multivariate analysis (0.31, 95 % CI 0.19 to 0.53, p < 0.0001)
Discussion
Tropomyosin-related kinase family of neurotrophin receptors and the p75 neurotrophin receptor exert their specific effect in regulating neuronal cell proliferation, differentiation, survival and apoptosis (Longo and Massa, ). Further, they induce a variety of pleiotropic responses in malignant cells, including enhanced tumour invasiveness and chemotaxis (Jin et al., ; Miknyoczki et al., ; Nakagawara, ), angiogenesis (Eggert et al., ; Ricci et al., ) and mitogenic potential causing tumour growth (Singer et al., ). They are also said to be involved in the inhibition of apoptosis (Bouzas-Rodriguez et al., ) and cell spreading and metastasis (Desmet and Peeper, ; Menter et al., ). In this study, we had illustrated higher MF of NTRK3 (29.6 %) in HGG than other family members ( NTRK2 15.4 %; 11.3 % NTRK1 ) when compared to control samples with no significant variation among the grades. ChIP analysis using HDAC4/anti-acetyl histone H4 followed by PCR analysis of NTRKs cumulatively provides an impression that there exists no involvement of promoter methylation as an epigenetic event as far as these genes are concerned in glioma.
In addition to the assumption that no promoter methylation of NTRKs is involved in gene silencing in HG, it could be speculated that there might be other possibilities for the regulation of NTRKs in different grades of glioma. The possibilities could be: (i) an alternative usage of an upstream promoter that is not under the control of the analysed CpG island may influence the regulation of these genes (Sakamoto et al. ); (ii) specific methylation at non-CpG islands that might play a crucial epigenetic role in the versatility and plasticity of NTRKs expression as reported by Fujimoto et al, (Fujimoto et al. ), suggesting that a sporadic methylation at or adjacent to the transcription factor-binding site located in non-CpG islands could modulate the gene expression (both negatively and positively) without affecting the global chromatin structure; (iii) presence of ligands, a positive differentiation, guidance or survival signal, which could modulate the specificity of neuronal response to neurotrophins by the type of receptor, differential splicing and the absence or presence of p75 NTR ; (iv) structural alterations or mutations of these receptors that may cause silencing of gene at later stage of cancer. Even though the categorical reason behind the regulation of the genes in low grade and HG of glioma is unclear, the results of this current study strongly suggest that the promoter methylation need not necessarily be involved in regulating NTRKs in different grades of glioma.
NTRK mRNAs did show variations in their expressions in the investigated samples. Unlike NTRK3, NTRK1 and 2 mRNAs have shown an increased expression in LG than in HG, implying a differential mRNA expression pattern of NTRKs in different grades of glioma, which may have different implications in invasiveness and gliomagenesis (Assimakopoulou et al., ; Wadhwa et al., ). Contradictory to our observation, Chiaretti et al. ( ) had reported reduced expression of NGF and NTRK1 in low-grade astrocytomas and ependymomas, suggesting that a different degree of redundancy exists among members of the neurotrophic factor family and that their expression may be correlated with the biology and the behaviour of these tumours. It is assumed that an increased expression of NTRK1 and NTRK2 might occur during early stages (LG) of glioma leading to proliferation and malignant potential, but the possible reason behind the loss of expression in HG remains unclear. Both receptors (NTRK1 and NTRK2) might interact with their neurotrophin ligands mediating glial proliferation in early astrocytomas [Alba et al. ), thus supporting the current observation.
Unlike NTRK1 and NTRK2, the expression pattern of NTRK3 was found to be reduced with no significant impact of methylation, even though MF of this member was found to be comparatively higher among the NTRKs. This suggests that NTRK3 might act in a different signalling pathway as evidenced by different studies. For example, NTRK3 pathway favours the prognostic value in medulloblastoma (Kim et al., ; Polkinghorn and Tarbell, ), and overexpression was found to be a critical regulator of metastasis in breast cancer (Jin et al., ). Loss of expression in NTRK3 in HG, observed in the current study, well coincides with the reports stating that there appears to be a strong correlation between expression of NTRKs receptors and malignancy of tumour such as neuroblastoma and astrocytomas (Assimakopoulou et al., ; Pajtler et al., ; Wang et al., ). The more malignant the tumour, the lower the level of NTRK3 expression. The reason for this apparent receptor downregulation at advanced stages of the tumours is not clear. However, it might be argued that the tumour cells become less responsive to the available neurotrophin during malignancy and follow neurotrophic-independent cell growth and survival. Decreased expression of p75 NTR in LG and loss in HG, together with downregulation of apoptotic proteins (data not shown), suggests that NTRK1 activation may block p75 NTR -induced apoptosis by suppressing the JNK-p53-Bax pathway (Assimakopoulou et al., ). PI3 k pathway that is found to be upregulated in glioma (Sabarinathan and Vanisree ) is speculated to be facilitated by NTRK signalling, leading to proliferation, migration and invasion, angiogenesis and resistance to apoptosis (Miller and Kaplan, ).
Further, we investigated the clinical characteristics of HGG patients and their possible impact of methylation and gene expression of NTRK s using survival analysis. Neither the gender nor the age or the histological tumour subtype of the recruited patients showed any significant correlation with distinct methylation events. However, higher age and lower KPS score showed a risk of poor survival of GBM patients. Analysis of the overall survival with their relative positive or negative expression of NTRKs revealed a significant association of loss of expression of both NTRK1 and NTRK2 with poor survival in samples of HG glioma, indicating that these genes could be as very good independent predictors for poor prognosis especially in GBM patients. In contrast, no significant association was found with reduced expression of NTRTK 3 in our study, though very recent reports have shown positive correlation of this member with survival in colon cancer, neuroblastoma and melanoma (Brodeur et al., ; Luo et al., ; Xu et al., ).
Thus, the study highlights the significance of determining the grade status of glioma based on NTRK s (MF and mRNA expression) and clarifies the lack of promoter methylation as an epigenetic event in regulating NTRKs. Further, it was shown for the first time the link between NTRKs with survival pattern, thus proposing NTRKs as biological predictors of clinical outcome in glioma patients.
However, the authors concede the limitations of the study pertained to the nonavailability of control brain tissues from normal individuals, reliability on the data obtained from the adjacent area (which are discriminated as nonmalignant) and also from benign SOL (space-occupying lesions). Nonetheless, considering the samples size and the methodology followed, the observations made deserve due attention. The significance of predictability of NTRK- associated prognosis as well as the grade-based variation reported here might have implication for an effective management, of course, with further probing of the factors involved.