Introduction
Pharmacological or electrical cardioversion improves quality of life in patients affected by paroxysmal or persistent atrial fibrillation (AF) [ ]; however, cardioversion may carry a non-negligible burden of cardiovascular complications. An appropriate anticoagulation is therefore required to reduce the risk of stroke/systemic embolism (SSE), which remains high even in the following weeks after cardioversion, despite heart rhythm normalization [ ]. Current American and European guidelines therefore recommend the continuation of anticoagulant therapy for at least 4 weeks after cardioversion (either pharmacological or electrical) in patients with AF lasting > 48 h or of unknown onset, independently of the CHA2D2-VASc [ , ].
The non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants, also known as direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) represent a breakthrough in the management of chronic thromboembolic prophylaxis, because of their fixed daily dosage, no needing of daily monitoring, less food/drugs interaction, and, mainly, the greater safety in comparison with warfarin, as largely shown in four registrational trials: the RELY (Randomized Evaluation of Long Term Anticoagulation Therapy with dabigatran), the ROCKET-AF (Rivaroxaban Once Daily Oral Direct Factor Xa Inhibition Compared with Vitamin K Antagonism for Prevention of Stroke and Embolism Trial in Atrial Fibrillation), the ARISTOTLE (Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke and Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation), and finally the ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 (Effective anticoagulation with factor Xa next generation in atrial fibrillation) which assessed the efficacy profile of the edoxaban [ , , , ].
Two recent metanalyses by Renda et al. [ , ] already examined post-hoc analyses from the abovementioned trials [ , , , ], and data coming from two prospective randomized trials which appositely explored the efficacy of rivaroxaban and edoxaban when used for cardioversion of AF: the X-VeRT, [ ] and the ENSURE-AF [ ] studies, which confirmed DOACs non-inferiority.
After the recent presentation of the results coming from the third dedicated randomized trial on DOACs used in cardioversion (the Eliquis evaluated in acute cardioversion. coMpared to usuAl treatmeNts for AnTicoagulation in subjects with NVAF Trial Examined, EMANATE) [ ], we aimed to performe an additional meta-analysis assessing the safety and efficacy of DOACs in the clinical setting of non-valvular AF cardioversion.
Methods
The present meta-analysis was planned, conducted, and reported in accordance with currently available statements for the design, analysis, and reporting of meta-analyses of randomized and observational studies. We searched PubMed, the Clinical Trials Registry (www. clinicaltrials.gov), the Cochrane Library, and Web of Science, as well as abstracts from major cardiologic societies’ meetings. Search terms used were “dabigatran” OR “rivaroxaban” OR “apixaban” OR “edoxaban” AND “warfarin” AND “atrial fibrillation” AND “cardioversion.” Web sites, including the-heart.org, escardio.org, were also searched for relevant materials. References of the articles identified in this manner were also searched through to locate additional references that—not identified by the search strategy—might be useful for the purpose.
The search was limited to the English-language publications. We included study-level data derived from randomized, controlled trials comparing DOACs with warfarin in patients with AF undergoing cardioversion.
Study selection
After study selection, 7 randomized, controlled trials reporting early outcome data of AF patients randomized to DOACs or vitamin-K antagonists (VKAs) and treated with cardioversion. Data were collected from the 4 post hoc analyses of the RELY, ARISTOTLE, ROCKET-AF, ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48, and data from the X-VeRT, ENSURE-AF and EMANATE [ , , , , , , ] (Table 1 ).
Table 1 Principal characteristics of the studies included in the meta-analysis Direct oral anticoagulant Dabigatran Rivaroxaban Apixaban Edoxaban Author Nagarakanti et al. Piccini et al. Cappato et al. Flaker et al. Ezekowitz et al. Plitt et al. Goette et al. Study name RE-LY ROCKET-AF X-VeRT ARISTOTLE EMANATE ENGAGE-AF ENSURE-AF Size 1270 364 1504 540 1500 365 2199 Methods Post-hoc analysis of an open label multicenter, prospective RCT Post-hoc analysis of a double blind, double dummy, multicenter RCT Multicenter, open label, randomized, blinded end-point parallel-group phase III study Post-hoc analysis of a double blind, multicenter RCT Multicenter, open label, randomized, blinded end-point, anticoagulation naive Post-hoc analysis of a double blind, multicenter RCT Multicentre, prospective, randomised, open- label, blinded end- point Bias Retrospective analysis sample bias Retrospective analysis sample bias Observer bias sample bias Retrospective analysis sample bias, post-randomization cardioversion, therapy adherence Observer bias Sample bias Retrospective analysis, sample bias, no data on TEE Observer bias sample bias Heterogeneity • TEE versus non TEE guided • Use of aspirin or clopidogrel – • Early versus delayed cardioversion • Previous anticoagulant treatment • Different vitamin-K inhibitors • Possible additional parenteral anticoagulant • More frequent cardioversion in warfarin group • Loading dose allowed – • TEE versus non TEE guided • Eastern Europe versus other regions Pre-treatment duration (days) 21 – 1/5–21/56 21 1–21 – 1/3–21 Post-treatment duration (days) 30 30 42 30 30 30 28 Follow-up (days) – 700 30 – – – 30
The two co-primary end points were stroke/systemic embolism (SSE) and major bleeding (MB).
Statistical analysis
From abstracted data, we calculated the risk ratio (RR) using the Mantel–Haenszel method for each study outcome to allow for pooling of similar outcomes. We obtained the average effects for the outcomes and 95% confidence interval (CI) using a random-effects model. Heterogeneity of the effect across studies was assessed by means of the Cochrane Q χ 2 and I 2 statistics. Lack of homogeneity was considered for Cochrane Q χ 2 test P 0.10 and/or for an I 2 statistic 50%.
We computed the z statistic for each clinical outcome and considered results statistically significant at a P < 0.05. We assessed the likelihood of publication bias using funnel plots by displaying individual study RR with 95% CIs for the endpoints of interest, and evaluated it by the Egger regression asymmetry test (P < 0.10 was here considered as indicative of statistically significant publication bias).
RR calculated in registrational studies and ad hoc studies enrolling exclusively subjects treated with cardioversion were compared with Breslow-Day test in a per strata analysis. A stratified analysis was therefore conducted to investigate the association between the type of anticoagulant and the outcome after stratifying by the type of publication (post hoc study vs. ad hoc study). Homogeneity between the stratified risk ratios was tested using a Chi square test of homogeneity.
Results
A population of 8564 patients was finally included in the meta-analysis. When compared with patients receiving VKAs, patients receiving DOACs had a lower although non-significant risk of SSE (Fig. 1 ) (RR 0.70, 95% CI 0.33–1.46, P = 0.34), without significant statistical heterogeneity among studies (Cochrane Q P = 0.48; I 2 = 0%). MB rates in patients treated with DOACs were lower although non-significantly (RR 0.86, 95% CI 0.47–1.58, P = 0.62), with heterogeneity statistically null (Cochrane Q P = 0.57; I 2 0%) (Fig. 2 ).
Fig. 1 Forest plot describing the risk ratio and 95% confidence interval of stroke/systemic embolism with use of direct oral anticoagulants compared to vitamin-K antagonists
Fig. 2 Forest plot describing the risk ratio and 95% confidence interval of major bleeding with use of direct oral anticoagulants compared to vitamin-K antagonists
Funnel plot analysis showed, however, a non-significant trend toward lower RR with ad hoc studies in comparison to registrational studies (Fig. 3 ). The latter were characterized by higher although non-statistically significant rates of SSE (RR 1.13, 95% CI 0.41–3.16, P = 0.81) and MB (RR 1.42, 95% CI 0.54–3.74, P = 0.48) with DOACs, which instead were associated with lower rates of SSE (RR 0.40, 95% CI 0.13–1.24, P = 0.11) and MB (RR 0.62, 95% CI 0.28–1.35, P = 0.23) in ad-hoc studies. The use of DOACs in registrational studies was associated with an increased although non-significantly RR of SSE (RR 2.82, 95% CI 0.62–12.93, P = 0.18) and MB (RR 2.29, 95% CI 0.66–7.97, P = 0.19) in comparison to the use of DOAC in ad-hoc studies.
Fig. 3 Funnel plot showing lower RR with more recent studies enrolling exclusively patients treated with cardioversion
However, differences between registrational studies versus ad hoc studies were not statically significant neither at test per subgroup differences nor at per strata analysis.
Discussion
In this study we performed an updated meta-analysis on the use of DOACs compared to VKAs for cardioversion of AF, including the last presented randomized study on apixaban. In comparison to last published meta-analysis concerning the same topic, we found lower rates of SSE (RR 0.70 vs. 0.82, 12% RR reduction) and MB (RR 0.86 vs. 0.98, 12% RR reduction).
Originally, we split data coming from registrational studies from those entirely enrolling patients treated with cardioversion. When results were compared, a study bias was found and a trend toward a higher profile of efficacy and safety was observable with studies enrolling entirely patients treated with cardioversion. The bias was also evident at funnel plot.
Despite the prompt restoration of sinus rhythm with cardioversion, the risk of SSE remains over time because of atrial stunning phenomenon [ , ], with local hypocontractility in the left atrium (mostly in the left atrial appendage) even after restoration of sinus rhythm and consequent risk of thrombus formation and embolization [ , ]. Additionally, the DC shock is able to damage myocardial cells, increasing the pro-thrombotic milieu as in the Virchow’s triad [ ].
Rapid onset of action (1–2 h for the thrombin inhibitors, 3–9 h for apixaban and rivaroxaban vs. some 2 days for VKAs) [ ], and direct effect on coagulation cascade, make the DOACs theoretically suitable for the pharmacological/electrical cardioversion requirements, where re-establishing the electromechanical physiology of the atrium at the earliest possible is clinically relevant [ ].
According to our results, DOACs used before and after cardioversion are non-inferior to VKAs in terms of safety and efficacy, consistently with the previous reported meta-analyses [ , ]. However, it is worthwhile to observe that the inclusion of the last published study on DOACs used for cardioversion [ ] was associated with an even lower risk of both SSE and MB in comparison to previous meta-analyses.
The reason for such difference may be just partly hypothesized. Patients enrolled in the latest studies (ENSURE-AF) are oldest and it has been shown that DOACs greatly reduce the incidence of adverse events in older patients in comparison to warfarin [ , ].
Difference in type of DOAC used in the two groups of studies may be also related to outcomes. Apixaban and edoxaban are able to significantly reduce complications in the case of AF in elderly patients [ , ], while there are actually no studies entirely enrolling patients treated with cardioversion with dabigatran. That may have influenced the better outcome in non registrational studies.
Post-hoc analysis of great trials may also have been influenced by unknown bias, as usual in subgroup analyses, while data coming from ad-hoc randomized studies may more overtly display the real potential of DOACs in reducing adverse events.
Larger populations, however, are required to confirm these preliminary analyses; such larger population including newer studies with DOACs would be perhaps able to reach the statistical significance.
Future studies should address some critical points that characterized previous studies such as non standardized heparin treatment, non standardized and centralized use of vitamin-K antagonists, sub-optimal target time range, adherence to DOAC therapy, comorbidities possibly influencing thrombosis, sample size unable to show significant differences in outcomes, open-label design, local investigators’ choice possibility between early or delayed cardioversion, prevalence of male gender, loading dose not used for AF.
Limitations
Larger populations of subjects are probably required to show significant differences with actual RR found in this meta-analysis, as acknowledged by EMANATE trialists [ ]. Different studies were based on a different design (RELY, XvERT, ENSURE and EMANATE were open label, on the contrary of the others double-blinded) as well as on type of outcome analysis, being the majority of these based on the intention to treat.
Few is known about compliance, necessities of heparin bridging in patients taking warfarin, and lastly, no distinction was referred between electrical and drug treatment.
Conclusions
DOACs represent a valid alternative to warfarin for the prevention of both SSE and MB in the setting of nonvalvular-AF cardioversion. An interesting trend toward a better efficacy in terms of less SSE complications can be observed in the more recent randomized studied which enrolled only patients treated with cardioversion.