Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease of unknown etiology and is manifested as extracellular senile plaques (SP) and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) (Hardas et al. ; J. Li et al. ). Numerous studies have reported an elevated inflammation level in the brain of AD patients and APP transgenic mice. Such inflammatory response can thus become important mechanisms for neuropathologic damage of AD (Sastre et al. ; Tweedie et al. ). However, the underlying factors that induce brain inflammation in AD remain unclear.
Amyloid-β (Aβ) 1–42 can aggregate to form oligomers and fibrils, which represent the preferred approach for the intervention studies on AD. In this study, Aβ 1–42 was used to construct a rat model of AD (Dodel et al. ; Kasza et al. ). At present, the majority of AD cases are associated with the impairment of Aβ degradation or clearance. These may cause the secretion of inflammatory mediators and the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines by activated microglia and astrocytes surrounding amyloid deposits. Therefore, neuroinflammation plays a dual role in the pathogenesis of AD. It can result in neurotoxicity and lead to cognitive defects, or confer a neuroprotective effect and reduce Aβ deposition due to phagocytic clearance by microglia (Mawuenyega et al. ; Couturier et al. ).
The deposited Aβ plaque induces glial cell activation and promotes the expression of inflammatory cytokines (Ramirez et al. ). The activation of glial cells produces a number of inflammatory mediators such as pro-inflammatory cytokines, inflammatory proteins, nitric oxide (NO), and so on (Finch and Morgan ). Inflammatory cytokines released by glial cells include interleukin 1β (IL-1β), interleukin 6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) (Zheng and Yenari ). Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is often used as a marker of astrocyte activation, and the characteristic protein activated by microglia is Iba-1. In addition, CD45 and CD11b are increased due to microglia activation (Jeon et al. ). Therefore, the activity of glial cells can be assessed through the changes in inflammatory proteins and the expression of inflammation-related markers.
Microglia play a central role in Aβ-induced brain injury. The activation of microglia is classified into two subtypes: M1 and M2 microglia. M1 represents the classical type of activation that induces tissue inflammatory lesions, indicated by the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), CD86, etc., and the production of reactive oxygen species and pro-inflammatory factors. M2 has been selectively activated and expressed mainly Arginase-1 (Arg-1), CD206 and YM-1. The regulatory activities of M2 include the inhibition of immune-inflammatory reactions and the promotion of tissue repair. Each of these molecular mechanisms can be used to evaluate the impacts of drugs on microglia activation.
Safflor yellow (SY) is the main active component in the traditional Chinese medicine of Safflower. SY exerts several pharmacological effects, such as expanding coronary arteries, increasing myocardial blood supply, anti-coagulation and inhibiting thrombosis. In recent years, SY has been shown to have potential application prospects in the nervous system. Our previous studies have demonstrated that SY can improve learning and memory capacity, regulate Aβ metabolism in the brain of Aβ 1–42 -induced rats and transgenic mice (Ma et al. ; Shi et al. ), exert neuroprotective effect and inhibit tau phosphorylation in APP/PS1 mice (Ruan et al. ).
In this study, we investigated the neuroprotective and anti-neuroinflammatory effects of SY on Aβ-induced AD rats, in order to determine whether SY can inhibit the release of inflammatory cytokines in activated glial cells.
Materials and methods
Materials
Safflower yellow (SY) is the major active constituent of Carthamus tinctorius L., Yunnan Tonghai Yangshi Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Yunnan, China) supplied the experimental agents. Donepenzil was obtained from Eisai China Inc.. All drugs were dissolved in distilled water: SY at the concentration of 10, 30, 100 mg/kg, and Donepenzil at the concentrations of 0.5 mg/kg.
Amyloid β (1–42) (Aβ 1–42 ) was purchased from Sigma (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). The final concentration of 500 μM peptides was prepared by dissolving Aβ 1–42 in sterile saline and immediately stored in aliquots at −20 °C before assaying, and incubated at 37 °C for 7 days to obtain polymeric Aβ 1–42 . Each preparation of aggregated Aβ 1–42 was freshly made by incubating at 37 °C for 7 days prior to injection.
Animals
Male Wistar rats weighting between 150 and 200 g were obtained from the Laboratory Animal Center, Xinjiang Medical University. Rats were raised and acclimatized to the context of the experiment (12-h shift of the light-dark cycle) with ad libitum feeding.
Animals were treated according to the guidelines of Medical Laboratory Animal Management Regulations of the Ministry of Health of the People’s Republic of China (documentation Number 55, 1998, Ministry of Health of PR China). The experiments werewere approval by the Committee of Experimental Animal Administration of Shihezi University.
Establishment of Alzheimer’s disease model
Rats were anesthetized and drilled burr holes in the skull over the lateral ventricles, coordinates were confirmed according to the Paxinos and Watson rat brain atlas: 3.8 mm posterior to bregma, ±2.5 mm lateral, and 3.5 mm below the dura. The aggregated Aβ 1–42 was injected into hippocampus bilaterally using a 2.5 μl CMA micro-injector at a speed of 0.5 μl/min, the needle was inserted 2.7 mm below the surface of the skull. Rats of sham group were received sterile saline in an identical manner. The rats were given five days of recuperation time after modeling.
Fifty model rats were divided into 5 groups at random: Aβ 1–42 -model, Aβ 1–42 -SY (10 mg/kg), Aβ 1–42 -SY (30 mg/kg), Aβ 1–42 -SY (100 mg/kg), and Aβ 1–42 -Donepezil (0.5 mg/kg) groups, and sham-operated rats were defined as the sham group, five days after surgery, drugs were orally administrated for four weeks.
Morris water maze
For purpose of estimating the long-term memory, Morris water maze (MWM) was used, which was operated in a round black water tank (150 cm diameter). Rats tested in 22–24 °C water, a circular platform (diameter of 15 cm) was 1.5 cm lie underwater and placed at the midpoint of the southeast quadrant (target quadrant).
The rats were gently released into the water-level with their nose facing the tank wall, set to swim freely for 1 min to probe the target, and allowed to stay 10 s if they smoothly reached it. Otherwise, guided them manually and rested 10 s. Rats were practiced twice per day and repeated five days. Computer tracking program recording the time spend to scramble up the platform, which was defined as escape latency. On the 6th day, moving the hidden platform away, the escape latency and the numbers of crossing over the platform within 60 s provide a reference for us to consider the memory of rats.
Step-down test
In order to evaluate the learning and short-term memory impairment in rats, the step-down apparatus was utilized. Before training, each rat was placed in the reaction chamber to accommodate the surroundings for 5 min and then placed on the platform. After electric currents were delivered, if rats stepped down, they were accepted an electric foot shock (36 V, AC), barring accidents, they would jump back onto the platform instinctively to avert a five-minute shock. After 24 h, procedure was carried out in a similar manner, and the time (latency) that the animal step down from the wooden platform and error times were served as learning performances.
Tissue preparation
After the behavioral experiments, before perfusion via cold PBS in heart, all rats were deeply anaesthetized, then removed and decollated brain samples at low temperatures. Five hemispheres were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde before conventional dehydration by the graded ethanol and embedded tissues in paraffin. After that, coronal slices (4-μm) were prepared employing a microtome. The rest of cerebrums were immediately divided into prefrontal cortex and hippocampus, frozen at −80 °C for use.
HE staining
Slides were deparaffinized and rehydrated, dyed with hematoxylin and differentiated with 1% hydrochloric acid ethanol, then stained with HE dyes for histological study. Finally, the coverslips were applied to cover the sections with permount TM mounting medium, followed by using Axio imager M2 microscope to take pictures.
Immunohistochemistry
Slides were dewaxed and hydrated, after antigen retrieval, blocked the endogenous peroxidase activity in 3% H 2 O 2 , sections were incubated with anti-GFAP antibody (1:200, Boster, China), IBA-1 (1:100, Boster, China), anti-CD11b antibody (1:200, Abcam, UK) and anti-CD45 antibody (1:100, Sigma, USA) overnight at 4 °C. After washing the sections were incubated with biotin-coupled, goat anti-rabbit or goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (ZSGB-BIO, China) before incubation with streptavid in-horseradish peroxidase and visualization with DAB chromogen solution (Dako, USA). Every slides was photographed on CA1, CA3 and DG areas of hippocampus and the frontal cortex regions by Olympus CX31 microscope (Olympus, Japan). The integrated optical density and area of the positive cells were analyzed.
Cytokine ELISA assay
The cerebra tissue was weighted and quickly homogenized with cold tissue lysis buffer with tissue homogenizer. The total protein concentrations were detected with the BCA protein assay reagent (Solarbio biotechnology, Beijing, China). The IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α ELISA kits (Boster, China) were used to detect cytokine levels, following the assay’s instructions. At least three independent tests should be confirmed each sample.
Determination of NOS activity(R. Li et al. 2007)
The total NOS activity and inducible NOS (iNOS) activity of cerebral was detected by the NOS colorimetric activity kit (tNOS, Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute), following the manufacturer’s specification. NBT in the presence PMS react chemically with NADPH to produce visible formazan, was determined at 530 nm using a plate reader. Deducted iNOS activity from the total NOS activity obtained the value of Endothelial NOS (eNOS) activity, and results were normalized against the mean value of control and expressed as fold changes.
Western blot
Cerebral cortex and hippocampus total protein were severally extracted by ice cold lysis buffer and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). NanoDrop 2000 system (Thermo, USA) was used for the determination of the concentration of protein. To denature, boiled equal quantity of total protein mixed with loading buffer for 5 min. 50 μg total proteins were electrophoresed in 10% SDS-PAGE gels then transferred onto NC transfer packs (GE, Germany) with a semi-dry transfer cell (Bio-Rad, USA). Then membranes were blocked for an hour in the TBST (Tris-buffered saline containing 0.1% Tween-20) plus either 5% NFDA or 5% BSA before hybridized with primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight. After that, the membranes were incubated with homologous secondary antibody for an hour. The following antibodies were used as indicated: Rabbit polyclonal anti-Arginase-1 (1:800, Cell Signaling Technology, USA), or rabbit monoclonal anti-CD86 (1:1000, Abcam, UK) was used as the primary antibody, horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG antibodies or anti-mouse IgG antibodies (1:10,000, ZSGB-BIO, China) was used as the secondary antibody. Blots were visualized with luminescence substrate (Millipore, USA).
Real-time quantitative PCR
The quantitative extraction of RNA from cortex and hippocampus was via the UNIQ-10 pillar Trizol total RNA extraction kit (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China) following the direction for use, and reverse-transcribed by using PrimeScript™ RT Reagent Kit (Takara, Dalian, PR China) to synthesize cDNA. Quantitative real-time mRNA analysis was performed on Rotor-Gene Q using QuantiNova™ SYBR Green PCR kit (Qiagen). A total of 25 μl reaction volume was applied to the real-time PCR reaction. Data were normalized to the expression of GAPDH. The expression levels of the mRNA were then reported as fold changes vs sham control. The forward and reverse primer sequences were as followed: 5’-GTGCTAATGCGGAAGGTCAT-3′ and 5’-GAAGGCGTAGCTGAACAAGG-3′ for iNOS, 5’-AGTCATCAAATTCCTTCGCCAGTAT-3′ and 5’-GCCTTGGGATTTCTTGCTCAGT-3′ for Ym-1, 5′- CAAGGAAGGTTGGCATTTGT-3′ and 5’-CCTTTCAGTCCTTTGCAAGC-3′ for CD206, 5’-GTGCTGAGTATGTCGTGGAGTCT-3′ and 5’-ACAGTCTTCTGAGTGGCAGTGA-3′ for GAPDH.
Statistical analysis
SPSS 17.0 software was used for data analysis. Results were expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean (S.E.M.). Statistical Data were performed by one-way ANOVA followed by the Dunnett’s post-hoc test. Statistically significant level was accepted at P < 0.05.
Results
Safflower yellow improved a long term memory in the Morris water maze test
After consecutive daily administration of SY for one month, Morris water maze tests were performed on the rats. In the first 5 days of hidden platform trial, the escape latency of rats in each group gradually decreased with the increase of training time. But the model group showed an obvious increase ( P < 0.01) compared with the sham group, indicating that the model rats had significant spatial learning impairment. In comparison with the model group, the rats gavaged with donepezil alone or SY (30 and 100 mg/kg) ( P < 0.01) had a shortened escape latency (Fig. 1 a), indicating that SY or donepezil could improve the spatial learning during the 5-day training period of rats. Fig. 1 Effect of safflower yellow (SY) on cognitive dysfunction induced by Aβ 1–42 injection in rats ( n = 10). The model rats were orally treated with SY (10, 30, and 100 mg/kg) or donepezil (0.5 mg/kg) for one month, after which their learning and memory ability was evaluated by a Morris water maze test: ( a ) latency in finding the destination and ( b ) number of platform crossings. The results are expressed as means ± SEM. ## P < 0.01 versus the sham rats; ** P < 0.01 versus the model rats
In the space exploration experiment on the 6th day (Fig. 1 b), compared with the sham group, the times of crossing platforms of the model group was significantly reduced ( P < 0.01), suggesting that the memory capacity of the model group was significantly decreased. Moreover, the rats treated with SY (10, 30, and 100 mg/kg) and donepezil traversed the platform more frequently than the model group ( P < 0.01), indicating that the safflower yellow can make the long-term memory better than dementia rats.
Safflower yellow improved a short term memory in the step-down test
The first day was memory acquisition period, no significant difference can be found in latency between groups. The second day is the memory consolidation testing. As shown in Fig. 2 , the number of errors in the sham-operated group was (0.13 ± 0.13), and the latency was (262.3 ± 37.7) s. Compared with the sham group, the number of errors in the model group increased significantly (1.25 ± 0.25, P < 0.001), and the latency decreased significantly (101.1 ± 52.2 s, P < 0.01), indicating that the model rats had significant memory impairment. In contrast to the model group rats, the SY treatment (30 and 100 mg/kg) and the donepezil treatment (0.5 mg/kg) was significantly prolonged the latency ( P < 0.05), and significantly reduced the number of errors ( P < 0.05), indicating that safflower yellow can improve the short-term memory of rats. Fig. 2 Effect of SY in the step-down test on the model rats (n = 10): ( a ) escape latency and ( b ) error times. The SY treatment significantly attenuated the learning and memory deficits compared with the model rats. The data are expressed as means ± SEM. ## P < 0.01 and ### P < 0.001 versus the sham group; * P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 versus the model group
Safflower yellow reduced neuronal cell loss in model rats induced by amyloid-β
To visually observe whether the administration of SY has neuroprotective effect, HE staining was carried out to analyze the density and morphology of neurons in brain (Fig. 3 ). The results of HE staining showed that the neurons in the sham-operated group had no obvious damage. The neurons in the sham group were intact, arranged in an orderly manner and the nucleus were large, round, light and rich in cytoplasm. In the model group, neurons in the hippocampus and cortex were pyknotic, the cytoplasm color was deepened, and the arrangement of neurons in the cortex and hippocampus were disordered and loose. Compared with the model group rats, the SY treatment (10, 30 and 100 mg/kg) and the donepezil treatment, the number of neurons in each area were more, the arrangement were more orderly, pyknosis and necrosis were not significant. With the increase of SY dose, the neuronal morphology was closer and closer to the normal group, the overall morphology of the administration group was better than that of the model group. Fig. 3 Effect of SY in the HE staining of the hippocampus and cortex of rats after Aβ 1–42 injection. ( a ) Photomicrographs of the HE staining of the hippocampus and cortex of rats after Aβ 1–42 injection (magnification, 200×). ( b ) Number of non-necrotic neurons. The data are expressed as means ± SEM. ## P < 0.01 and ### P < 0.001 versus the sham group; * P < 0.05 and ** P < 0.01 versus the model group
Effects of safflower yellow reduced GFAP, Iba-1, CD45, and CD11b expression
Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is the backbone protein of astrocytes and a marker protein of astrocytes. The expression of GFAP can be used as a marker to study the astrocyte response after brain injury. The increase of GFAP expression suggests that astrocytes are activated (Han et al. ; Ding ). Iba-1 is a calcium-binding protein that is expressed in the cytoplasm and nucleus of microglia and macrophages (Ohsawa et al. ). The expression of Iba-1 is elevated during the activation of these cells, and Iba-1 antibody is a good marker of the central nervous system. The microglia and peripheral mononuclear phagocyte lineage cells can show whether they are in an activated hyperplasia state. CD45 is expressed in various forms in early amoeba type, mature branch type and intermediate microglia between them (Cuadros et al. ). CD11b (integrin αM) is also one of the specific markers of microglial activation.CD11b and CD45 positive cells were used to evaluate the activation level of microglia. By immunohistochemistry, it was found that the positive staining of the model group was significantly lower than that of the sham group. Safflower yellow and donepezil treatment reduced the positive staining (Fig. 4 ). These results showed that the rats after Aβ1–42 injection, Aβ1–42 could activate microglia and astrocytes, while SY could decrease the activation of glial cells. Fig. 4 Effect of safflower yellow on GFAP, Iba-1, CD45 and CD11b expressions. ( a - d ) Photomicrographs of the immunohistochemical staining for GFAP, Iba-1, CD45 and CD11b in the hippocampus and cortex (magnification, 200×). ( e - h ) Histograms of the optical density values of GFAP, Iba-1, CD45 and CD11b in the hippocampus and cortex of rats under different conditions. The values are expressed as means±SEM ( n = 6). ## P < 0.01 versus the sham group; * P < 0.05 and ** P < 0.01 versus the model group
Effect of safflower yellow regulated the release of inflammatory cytokines
To study the effects of safflower yellow in regulating the release of inflammatory cytokines, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α were investigated. The results indicated that safflower yellow inhibited the release of inflammatory cytokines (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 5 Effect of safflower yellow (SY) in regulating the release of inflammatory cytokines. The level of ( a ) IL-1β, ( b ) IL-6, and ( c ) TNF-α in supernatant was determined by ELISA (means ± SEM from six experiments. # P < 0.05 and ## P < 0.01 versus the sham group; * P < 0.05 and ** P < 0.01 versus the model group
Compared to the sham group, the contents of IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α in the cortex and hippocampus of the model group were increased, with significant differences ( P < 0.01). The contents of IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α in cortex of rats treated with safflower yellow (10, 30, and 100 mg/kg) and donepezil (0.5 mg/kg) were significantly lower ( P < 0.01), compared to the model rats. Besides, safflower yellow oral administration (30 and 100 mg/kg) significantly reduced the level of IL-1β in hippocampus ( P < 0.05). The SY treatment groups at doses of 10, 30, and 100 mg/kg and treated with donepezil lower the level of IL-6 ( P < 0.01), whereas treated with safflower yellow at doses of 30 and 100 mg/kg and with donepezil at 0.5 mg/kg had remarkable decreased the level of TNF-α ( P < 0.05).
Effects of safflower yellow decreased NOS activity
The effects of safflower yellow on NOS activity were studied, and the results showed that safflower yellow made a reduction in the level of NOS (Fig. 6 ). Compared with the sham group, the levels of iNOS in brain of the model rats were increased; both have a significant difference ( P < 0.01) in cortex and hippocampus. The safflower yellow–treated rats (10 and 30 mg/kg) showed a significantly decreased iNOS content ( P < 0.05) in the cortex, and the donepezil (0.5 mg/kg)-treated rats showed a decreased iNOS level in the cortex ( P < 0.01); the rats treated with safflower yellow (10, 30, and 100 mg/kg) and donepezil (0.5 mg/kg) showed a significantly lower level of iNOS in hippocampus ( P < 0.01), in comparison with the model group. Fig. 6 Effect of safflower yellow (SY) on the Aβ 1–42 -induced activities of NOS in the cortex and hippocampus. The level of INOS in supernatant was determined by ELISA (means ± SEM from six experiments). # P < 0.05 and ## P < 0.01 versus the sham group; * P < 0.05 and ** P < 0.01 versus the model group
Safflower yellow regulated the expression of CD86 and arginase-1
The microglial response to activation depends on the phenotype. Thus, the expression of CD86 in M1 microglia and of arginase 1 (Arg-1) in M2 microglia was evaluated. We used western blot to detect the presence of microglial cell activation. As shown in Fig. 7 , CD86 and Arg-1 showed opposite trends in the cortex and hippocampus, SY treatment at different doses regulated their expression in different regions separately. In hippocampus, SY administration (10, 30 and 100 mg/kg) and donepezil treatment significantly decreased the expression of CD86 by 31.1%, 39.3%, 1.3% and 51.0% ( P < 0.01) separately. However, in the cortex, the dosing group had no significant effect on the protein expression. There was also no difference in CD86 level between the groups in cortex (Fig. 7 b). These consequences suggested that SY lavage administration has a region-specific effect on decreasing CD86 activity. Fig. 7 Safflower yellow regulated the expression of arginase-1 and CD86 ( a ) Representative western blots of CD86 and Arg-1 in the cortex and hippocampus of sham or model rats treated with normal saline or SY and donepezil, respectively. ( b ) Quantitative analysis of CD86 and Arg-1. The quantified results were normalized to the β-actin expression. The values are expressed as percentages compared with normal saline-treated sham rats (set to 100%) and as the group mean ± SEM ( n = 10). # P < 0.05 and ## P < 0.01 versus the sham rats; * P < 0.05 and ** P < 0.01 versus the Aβ 1–42 -injected rats
Compared with the sham rats, the model rats showed a significant decrease in arginase-1 in both the cortex and the hippocampus. Treatment with SY at 30 mg/kg, SY at 100 mg/kg, and donepezil at 0.5 mg/kg was found to increase the expression of Arg-1 in the hippocampus and cortex ( P < 0.01) (Fig. 7 b).
Effect of safflower yellow on the mRNA expression of iNOS, YM-1, and CD206
Compared to the control group, Aβ stimulation resulted in upregulation of the iNOS mRNA and downregulation of the YM-1/CD206 mRNA, as determined by RT-PCR ( P < 0.05–0.001; Fig. 8 ), suggesting Aβ-induced neuroglia cell activation. In contrast, SY treatment effectively reduced iNOS expression and enhanced the expression of YM-1/CD206 at levels of mRNA ( P < 0.05–0.001), indicating a suppressive role of SY in inhibiting glial cell activation. Fig. 8 Real-time quantitative PCR results of the gene expression of microglial activation markers in rats induced by Aβ 1–42 . The time course expression of mRNA for iNOS, YM-1, and CD206 was measured in the presence of their respective primers and Taqman probes. The real-time PCR reaction was done in duplicate for both the target gene and the GAPDH normalizer. The level of gene expression was calculated after being normalized against GADPH in each sample and is given in relative mRNA expression units. The values are expressed as means±SEM (n = 10). # P < 0.05, ## P < 0.01, and ### P < 0.001 versus the sham rats; * P < 0.05 and ** P < 0.01 versus the Aβ 1–42 -injected rats
Discussion
AD is a progressive neurodegenerative disease, accompanied with the decreased activity in learning, memory and intelligence. Aβ deposition has been proposed to explain the pathogenesis of AD. SP induced by Aβ deposition represents one of the main neuropathological features of AD (Wang et al. ). In this study, bilateral hippocampal injection of Aβ 1–42 was used to eliminate the high toxicity induced by Aβ accumulation in AD rats (Liu et al. ). Then, Morris water maze experiment was used to evaluate the learning and memory abilities of AD rats. Consistent with previous reports, AD rats demonstrated worse performance on neurobehavioral tests as compared to sham rats. In addition, Aβ deposition was found to induce the activation of glial cells. Interestingly, one-month treatment with SY significantly ameliorated the learning and memory deficits in Aβ 1–42 -induced AD rats. Moreover, the effects of SY on gliocyte activation were examined. A morphological analysis of astrocytes and microglia was carried out by detecting the expression levels of surface antigens (i.e. CD11b, Iba1, and CD45) and astrocyte marker (i.e. GFAP). Our results indicated that glial cell expression was relatively high in AD model group, and SY may reverse the activation of glial cells.
Furthermore, the molecular mechanism underlying SY effects were clarified by the expression of inflammation-related proteins. Our results showed that iNOS levels were higher in AD model group than sham group, and treatment with SY may reduce the increased expression of iNOS. NO plays an important role in many neurodegenerative diseases, by mediating immunity and inflammation. iNOS is primarily distributed in microglia and macrophages, which involved brain injury, inflammation, oxidation and cell apoptosis (Murphy et al. ). Once activated, iNOS produces sustained expression of NO and results in excitotoxic death of surrounding neurons by inhibiting mitochondrial respiration and releasing glutamate from neurons and glial (Bal-Price and Brown ). Therefore, iNOS can induce neurotoxicity and damage adjacent neurons in AD rats, and SY treatment can alleviate Aβ-induced oxidative damage.
Activated glial cells not only exert phagocytosis, but also secrete a mass of neurotoxic substances and inflammatory factors, including IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α. IL-1β is a crucial modulator of immune response and is involved in the occurrence and development of complex endocrine and inflammatory reactions (Halle et al. ). IL-6 plays an important role in triggering inflammation and immune response (Ghosh et al. ). TNF-a plays a pivotal role in the regulation of cytokine cascade. During inflammation or disease state, the activated microglia can release TNF-a, pro-inflammatory cytokines and neurotoxic substances (Griffin ). In this study, we found that IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-a inflammatory mediators were released in the cortex and hippocampus of AD rats. Treatment with SY significantly decreased the levels of IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-a, and thus alleviated the inflammatory response. In addition, SY reduced the nerve toxicity in the brain of AD rats by inhibiting the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines.
Additional experiments were carried out to determine whether SY can attenuate the release of inflammatory cytokines by inhibiting glial activation. M1 cells, through the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, can induce toxicity in both neurons and glial cells. In contrast, M2 cells reduce tissue damage via the secretion of inflammatory cytokines. M2 microglia cells possess a neuroprotective effect, promote wound healing and tissue repair, and suppress the release of inflammatory factors (Hu et al. ; Boche et al. ; Wang et al. ). During inflammation, the two subtypes can be transited into each other to regulate the immune response. Different inflammatory factors such as cytokines, chemokines and protein kinases may contribute to the differential function of microglia, either synergistically or antagonistically(Liu et al. ; Pisanu et al. ). In the early stage of Aβ-induced glial activation, pro-inflammatory M1 microglia cells are first activated and release a large amount of pro-inflammatory mediators in order to initiate the inflammatory responses. If the inflammation has not been controlled immediately, it may aggravate the progression of AD. In order to prevent tissue destruction caused by M1 microglial inflammatory response, it can shift to M2 subtype to inhibit the inflammation. At molecular levels, M1 microglia cells expressed high levels of iNOS, for the decomposition of arginine to NO and the induction of neuronal damage. On the other hand, Arg-1 is highly expressed in M2 microglia cells, which can compete with iNOS for arginine substrate, in order to inhibit NO production and reduce inflammatory damage. The common M1-associated markers of glial cells are iNOS and CD86, whereas the M2-related markers are Arg-1, CD206 and YM-1. Aβ 1–42 increased the expression levels of iNOS and CD86 but inhibited the expression levels of Arg-1, CD206 and YM-1. SY treatments downregulated M1 markers: iNOS and CD86, while unregulated M2 markers: Arg-1, CD206 and YM-1.
Conclusion
The present study revealed that SY treatment can effectively inhibit glial activation, reduce Aβ deposition and ameliorate the learning and memory deficits in Aβ-induced AD rat model. Moreover, Aβ clearance was correlated with the phagocytosis of glial cells. The activation of neuroglia cells was attenuated by SY treatment in AD rats. Furthermore, SY inhibited the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and increased the expression of M2 cells to repair and heal the injured brain of AD rats. Taken altogether, these findings indicated that SY exhibits therapeutic anti-inflammatory effects on AD rats, and can therefore serve as a potential drug for AD treatment.