Introduction
Depression is the most common debilitating psychiatric disease with lifetime prevalence of more than 10%. The World Health Organization estimates that more than 350 million individuals of all ages suffer from depression, highlighting this illness as a major contributor to the global burden of disease (Whiteford et al. ; Walker et al. ). At present, the available antidepressants are effective, but 20% of these patients do not respond to any intervention and almost 50% of patients fail to reach sustained remission against depression (Gaynes et al. ). Because of these drawbacks, better drugs for more effective treatment are considered and needed to explore.
Currently, it is suggested that oxidative stress and neuroinflammation play important roles in the pathogenesis of major depression (Pandya et al. ). For example, depressed patients have been reported to show enhanced oxidative damage and disrupted levels of antioxidant enzymes (Ng et al. ; O’Donnell et al. ). Evidences demonstrate chronic treatments with antidepressants reduce the levels of oxidative stress markers and increase several endogenous antioxidants (Maes et al. , ). Additionally, multiple investigations suggest there is close linkage between inflammation and depression. Many inflammatory mediators, such as TNF-α and IL-1β are involved in the pathogenesis of depression (Lopresti et al. ; Rawdin et al. ). In animal models, the enhanced levels of inflammatory factors might result in depressive-like behaviors (Sukoff et al. ). Therefore, oxidative stress and neuroinflammation are crucial components in the biological and cellular pathogenesis of depression (Xu et al. ).
In past decades, more and more molecules are discovered to play critical roles in the pathogenesis of depression, especially AKT and β-catenin. A large number of studies have shown that AKT/GSK-3β is an important neuroprotective survival kinase, especially under stress (Li et al. ). Atto vastatin exhibites an antidepressant effect by regulating AKT/GSK-3β mediated neuroprotection (Ludka et al. ). AKT activation consequently downregulates glycogen synthase kinase (GSK-3β) and increases β-catenin levels. A study with postmortem suggests that the protein level of β-catenin is decreased in the prefrontal cortex region. Fluoxetine (FLX) and citalopram exhibite antidepressive effects through modulation of β-catenin (Hui et al. ; Chen et al. ). What is more, recent studies show that β-catenin regulates multiple biological and pathological process, including attenuation ROS (reactive oxygen species) and inflammatory factors (Chen et al. ). Therefore, AKT/β-catenin pathway has become a potential drug target and the regulation of this pathway benefits the treatment of depression as well.
There is an increasing interest in exploring new antidepressants based on antioxidation and anti-inflammation properties. Food-medicines, such as natural extracts and plant preparations, were particular considered and popularly in use. Kaempferol (KFL), a natural flavonoid, was the major constituent of various fruits and vegetables, and exerted a wide range of pharmacological actions, such as anti-inflammation and antioxidant activity (Kim et al. , ). Recently, more and more studies report that KFL possesses neuroprotective effects, including ameliorating cerebral ischemia/ reperfusion damages, attenuating stroke risk, and depressive-like behaviors (Yu et al. ; Lopez-Sanchez et al. ; Taiwe et al. ). However, the therapeutic actions of KFL on the depressive-like behaviors induced by chronic social defeat stress were unclear, and whether the antidepressive effects of KFL were involved in the inhibitions of oxidative stress and neuroinflammation remains unknown.
Here, we identified that KFL conspicuously ameliorated the depressive-like behaviors, reduced oxidative stress and neuroinflammation partly mediated by AKT/β-catenin pathway. Therefore, KFL might be a promising food-medicine agent for depression treatment.
Method
Animals and experimental design
The male CD1 and C57 mice (8-week-old) were purchased from the Experimental Animal Center of China Three Gorges University and maintained in a temperature-controlled vivarium (22 ± 2 °C) under a 12-h light/dark cycle with lights on at 7:00 AM and housed five per cage (relative humidity 55 ± 10%) for 1 week with free access to food and water. Behavioral experiments were carried out during the light phase. The experiment procedures involving animals and their care were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, China Three Gorges University, and conducted in compliance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and with the European Communities Council Directive of 24 November 1986 (86/609/EEC). Animal studies are reported in compliance with the ARRIVE guidelines.
Drug preparation
KFL was obtained from Yuanye Biotechnology Company (Shanghai, China). Fluoxetine and LY294002 were purchased from Sigma Chemical (St Louis, MO, USA). All drug were administered via direct intraperitoneal injection (i.p.). Animals received KFL at a dose of 10, 20 mg/kg. The doses of fluoxetine and LY294002 were 10 mg/kg and 7.5 mg/kg, respectively. The KFL, LY294002, and fluoxetine dosage was dependent on the previous publications (Suchal et al. ; Jiang et al. ; Jian-yong, et al. ). Fluoxetine was dissolved in 0.9% saline. KFL and LY294002 were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to a volume of 10 μl per gram of body weight. The final concentration of DMSO used in the solvent was less than 1 ‰ ( V /V).
CSDS procedure and behavioral tasks
After 1 week for adaptation, all C57 mice were divided randomly into five groups ( n = 10/group): control, CSDS, CSDS+10 mg/kg KFL, CSDS+20 mg/kg KFL, CSDS+10 mg/kg fluoxetine. Adult C57 mice were functioned as intruders and the aggressive CD1 were retired breeders. As shown in Fig. 1 , the CSDS procedure, conducted as previously described (Jiang et al. ; Deng et al. ), lasted for 10 days (day1-day10). The stressed mice were housed individually. Briefly, during each day, the experimental C57 mice were exposed to different aggressive CD1 mice for up to 10 min. Then, we put the plastic dividers containing holes to separate them in next 24 h. During the defeat episode, in order to avoid the physical wounding, when C57 mice displayed submissive behaviors including fleeing, trembling, immobility, crouching and upright posture (8–10 min required in this study), then the plastic divider was set. The non-stressed mice were served as control, which were handled daily. On the day 11, behaviors tests (SPT, SIT and TST) were used to screen the successful models, which were delivered by drugs. Then the selected stressed mice were divided into different groups and received different drug daily, fluoxetine, LY294002 and vehicle for 28 days. The behavioral tests were preformed from day 29 to day 34. Mice were sacrificed at the day 35. Fig. 1 Schema for experimental schedule, behavioral experiments, and sampling. SIT: social interaction test; TST: tail suspension test; SPT: sucrose preference test
The sucrose preference test lasting for 4 days was carried out. During the first 2 days, the test mice were individually exposed to two bottles containing pure water and 1% sucrose solution, respectively. On the 3rd day, both the food and two bottles were deprived for 18 h. On the 4th days, the test lasted for 6 h, with the two bottles weighed before and after the test period. The sucrose preference was calculated as a percentage of the consumed sucrose solution relative to the total amount of liquid intake.
The social interaction test containing two trials (“target absent” trial, “target present” trial) was performed. Each trial lasted for 5 min, and the duration time in the interaction zone spent by the test mice was individually recorded. In the “target absent” trial, each mouse was allowed to explore in an open-field apparatus with fixed plastic enclosure freely and the interaction zone was predefined. In the “target present” trial, each mouse was returned to the same open-field apparatus with an unfamiliar CD1 mouse. The apparatus was cleaned and olfactory cues was removed before each trial.
In the TST, the test C57 mice were individually suspended 60 cm above the floor. Adhesive tape was used to fasten the mice (1 cm from the tail tip). The duration of the immobility period was recorded during the last 5 min of the 6-min test by an investigator blind to the study, which reflected the depressive state of the animal (Steru et al. ). Mice were considered immobile only when they hung passively and were completely motionless, and any mice that did climb their tails were removed from the experimental analysis.
Real time quantitative PCR
Q-PCR was performed according to the previously described procedure (Gao et al. ). Total RNA was isolated from the entire prefrontal cortex tissues using Trizol. A reverse transcription kit (Takara, Japan) was used to synthesize the first strand of cDNA by the template RNA and quantitative PCR instrument (Agilent Technologies Co., Ltd) was performed for gene amplification. The relative mRNA expression was calculated by the eq. 2 -ΔΔCT and normalized to β-actin. The forward and reverse primer sequences were as below: β-actin: Forward:5‘-CCTCTATGCCAACACAGT-3’, reverse:5′- AGCCACCAATCCACACAG-3′, CD11b: Forward:5’-AGGAGTGTGTTTGCGTGTC-3′, Reverse:5′- CTTGGTGTTCTTGCGGACT-3’ Iba-1: Forward:5’-ATTATGTCCTTGAAGCGAATGC Reverse:5’-TCTCAAGATGGCAGATCTCTTG (Invitrogen, Shanghai, China).
Western blot
Western blot was performed according to the previously described procedure (Gao et al. ). 80 μg protein was separated by 10% SDS-PAGE gels and subsequently transferred to PVDF membranes (0.45 μm, Millipore, USA). 5% nonfat milk dilution in TBST was used to blocked the membranes for 2 h at room temperature, then incubated overnight at 4 °C with the primary antibody dilutions in TBST: β-actin, total AKT (1:1000), P-AKT (1: 500), β-catenin (1:1000). All primary antibodies were obtained from Cell Signaling. Then the membranes were incubated with secondary antibody for 2 h at room temperature. Immunoreactivity was detected with chemiluminescence kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and visualization instrument (Clinx Science Instruments Co., Ltd). The Image J analysis software was used to quantify the optical density of each band.
Measurement of cytokine release by ELISA
To detect the levels of pro-inflammatory factors in the prefrontal cortex, brain homogenates were obtained from the prefrontal cortex, and separated by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C to remove cellular debris. The concentration of protein was measured by the ultramicro spectrophotometer (BIOCHROM, Britain). The concentrations of IL-1β and TNF-α in the stored supernatant were measured using a commercial kit obtained from Boster (Wuhan, China).
Measurement of oxidative products and anti-oxidant enzyme activity
The content of MDA, protein carbonylation and enzyme activities of CAT, SOD, GPx, and GST were measured according to the instruction of commercial kits (Nanjing Jiancheng, China). The concentration of protein was measured by the ultramicro spectrophotometer (BIOCHROM, Britain). The activities of enzyme and contents oxidative stress markers were then normalized to the corresponding protein concentration, and finally showed as fold changes.
Statistical analysis
The data are shown as means ± SD. The SPSS 19.0 software (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) was used to perform the analysis. The comparisons between groups were performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by post hoc LSD test. A value of P < 0.05 was considered as significant.
Results
Effects of KFL on behavioral tasks of CSDS mice
Figure 1 showed the schematic timeline of the experimental procedure. At the first, the CSDS model was built, and the SPT, SIT, and TST were used to screen the CSDS mice, and the effects of KFL (10 and 20 mg/kg) were also examined. The results of the behavioral tests were shown in Fig. 2 . Our data showed that KFL (10 and 20 mg/kg) and fluoxetine (10 mg/kg) significantly increased the bodyweights, sucrose consumption, social interaction time, and the mobility time of TST in the CSDS mice. The data were subjected to a one-way ANOVA with drug treatment as the factor and revealed a significant main effect of drug treatment [bodyweight: F(4,45) = 5.167, p < 0.01; SPT: F(4, 45) = 66.285, p < 0.01; SIT: F(4,45) = 18.001, p < 0.01; TST: F(4,45) = 47.373, p < 0.01]. The results suggested that KFL contributed antidepressive effects in the CSDS mice model of depression. Based on the above results, dose of 20 mg/kg KFL was used to investigate the potential mechanism. Fig. 2 Effects of social defeat stress and kaempferol (KFL) treatment on the body weight ( a ), sucrose preference ( b ), social interaction test ( c ), and immobility time in the tail suspension test ( d ). n = 10 mice/group. Values represent the mean ± SD, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 vs control group. # p < 0.05, ## p < 0.01 vs CSDS model
Effects of KFL on oxidative stress markers in the prefrontal cortex
As shown in Fig. 3 , the activites of SOD, CAT, GPx, and GST significantly decreased in the prefrontal cortex tissues of CSDS mice. Treatment with 20 mg/kg KFL significantly increased the enzyme activites of CSDS mice. Social defeat stress caused significant oxidative damage as evidenced by increase in MDA and protein carbonylation in the prefrontal cortex compared to the non-stressed group. KFL (20 mg/kg) treatment significantly attenuated the MDA and protein carbonylation levels in the prefrontal cortex of CSDS mice. Treatment with fluoxetine (10 mg/kg) in CSDS mice showed similar results, as shown in Fig. 3 a–f. These results indicated that KFL possessed potential antioxidation effects in the CSDS model. Fig. 3 Effects of social defeat stress and KFL treatment on the biochemical markers in the prefrontal cortex. a SOD, b CAT, c GPx, d GST, e MDA, f Protein carbonylation. n = 6 mice/group. Values represent the mean ± SD. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 vs control group. # p < 0.05, ## p < 0.01 vs CSDS model
Effects of KFL on neuroinflammation in the prefrontal cortex
As shown in Fig. 4 , CSDS mice showed a significant increase in the IL-1β and TNF-α concentrations respectively in the prefrontal cortex compared to the non-stressed group. Treatment with KFL (20 mg/kg) and fluoxetine (10 mg/kg) markedly attenuated the concentrations of TNF-α and IL-1β. The effects of KFL and fluoxetine on neuroinflammation were also evaluated by examining the gene expression of the microglial cell surface marker, CD11b. The results revealed that elevation expression of CD11b mRNA was exhibited in the prefrontal cortex of CSDS mice, which was obviously inhibited by KFL and fluoxetine. These results indicated that KFL decreased levels of inflammatory mediators and microglial activation in the CSDS mice. Fig. 4 Effects of social defeat stress and KFL administration on the levels of IL-1β ( a ), TNF-α ( b ), and mRNA expression of CD11b ( c ) and Iba-1 ( d ) in the prefrontal cortex. n = 6 mice/group. Values represent the mean ± SD. ** p < 0.01 vs control group. ## p < 0.01 vs CSDS model
Effects of KFL on Akt/β-catenin cascade in the prefrontal cortex
Studies showed that increased Akt activity might reduce brain damage (Matsuda et al. ). Furthermore, elevation of Akt/β-catenin pathway activity linked the alleviation of inflammation and oxidative stress (Covey et al. ). Therefore, we investigated the change of Akt/β-catenin activation level in the prefrontal cortex of CSDS model. As shown in Fig. 5 , social defeat stress decreased P-Akt and β-catenin protein expressions in the prefrontal cortex of mice. Treatment with 20 mg/kg KFL and 10 mg/kg fluoxetine significantly increased protein expressions of P-Akt and β-catenin. These results indicated that KFL activated Akt/β-catenin cascade in the prefrontal cortex of CSDS mice. Fig. 5 Effects of social defeat stress and KFL administration on the protein expressions of P-AKT ( a ) and β-catenin ( b ) in the prefrontal cortex. n = 4 mice/group. Values represent the mean ± SD. ** p < 0.01 vs control group. # p < 0.05, ## p < 0.01 vs CSDS model
KFL reversed depression behaviors of CSDS mice involved in Akt/β-catenin pathway
We next investigated whether Akt/β-catenin pathway was involved in KFL protective effects. LY294002, blocking the expression of P-Akt, was used. First, we found LY294002 decreased the P-AKT protein level. Then, when CSDS mice were treated with LY294002 for 28 days, there were no significant improvements on CSDS mice behavioral deficits in KFL (20 mg/kg) + LY294002 treatment group. The data were subjected to a one-way ANOVA with social defeat stress as the factor and revealed a significant main effect of social defeat stress [SPT: F(3,36) = 18.374, p < 0.01; SIT: F(3,36) = 79.662, p < 0.01; TST: F(3,36) = 27.705, p < 0.01]. Taken together, these results suggested that KFL was able to confer antidepressive effects in CSDS mice by enhancing Akt/β-catenin pathway activity (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Effects of LY294002 administration on the P-AKT ( a ), sucrose preference ( b ), social interaction test ( c ), and immobility time in the tail suspension test ( d ). n = 4 mice/group for P-AKT measurement, n = 10 mice/group for behavioral tasks. Values represent the mean ± SD, ** p < 0.01 vs control group. ## p < 0.01 vs CSDS model
KFL ameliorated oxidative stress and neuroinflammation in the prefrontal cortex of CSDS mice via Akt/β-catenin pathway
As shown in Fig. 7 , the improvements of KFL on the oxidative stress markers were significantly prevented by LY294002 in the prefrontal cortex of CSDS mice. What is more, KFL (20 mg/kg) + LY294002 could not decrease the concentrations of IL-1β and TNF-α, and the gene expression of CD11b in the prefrontal cortex of CSDS mice (Fig. 8 ). These results indicated that the effects of KFL on anti-oxidative stress and anti-inflammation through AKT/β-catenin pathway in the prefrontal cortex. Fig. 7 Effects of LY294002 administration on the biochemical markers in the prefrontal cortex. a SOD, b MDA. n = 6 mice/group. Values represent the mean ± SD. ** p < 0.01 vs control group. ## p < 0.01 vs CSDS model Fig. 8 Effects of LY294002 administration on the levels of IL-1β ( a ), TNF-α ( b ), and mRNA expression of CD11b ( c ) and Iba-1 ( d ) in the prefrontal cortex. n = 6 mice/group. Values represent the mean ± SD. ** p < 0.01 vs control group. ## p < 0.01 vs CSDS model
Discussion
In the present study, we examined for the first time the antidepressive effects of KFL, which protecting mice against social defeat stress mediated behavioral deficits, oxidative damages, and neuroinflammation. KFL was a major constituent isolated from many plants used in food and medicine. Researches frequently focused on its action in inhibition of inflammation and oxidative stress among its wide array of bioactivities. There have been a number of studies showed that KFL might act on multiple targets and led to a concerted positive effect, such as preventing cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury and stoke, attenuating oxidative stress and targeting to inflammation in brain (Lagoa et al. ). In the present study, we demonstrated that KFL treatment ameliorated depression-like behaviors, attenuated oxidative stress damages and neuroinflammation via AKT/β-catenin pathway.
Large number of studies reported that oxidative disturbances were remarkableky exhibited in depressed patients, especially increased oxidative damage and decreased antioxidant enzyme levels (O’Donnell et al. ). In animal model, the brain tissue of CUMS rats showed decreased antioxidant enzyme activities and glutathione levels (Sahin and Gümüşlü ). Furthermore, antidepressants treatment improved oxidative stress damage, as well as increased levels of several endogenous antioxidants (Maes et al. ). In addition, antioxidants were reported to possess antidepressant effects by regulation the antioxidant abundances (Pandya et al. ). In addition to oxidative stress, several adverse mechanisms contributed pathogenesis of depression more complex and heterogeneous. Depressive-like behaviors accompanied with neuroinflammation as well, including increased levels in proinflammatory cytokines and microglial activation (Fan et al. ; Yamawaki et al. ). In the serum of depression patients, the levels of proinflammatory cytokines were higher than those of normal people (Azar and Mercer ). Microglial activation might induce the over-production of multiple cytotoxic substances, especially proteolytic enzymes, complement proteins, reactive oxygen species and nitric oxide (Noworyta-Sokołowska et al. ). More importantly, exaggerated oxidative stress and neuroinflammation exerted detrimental damages on membrane lipids, functional proteins, mitochondria, and DNA, ultimately resulted in cellular dysfunction and depression occur. In this study, our data were in line with the previous studies. The behavioral tasks showed that social defeat stress-challenged mice exhibited depressive-like behaviors, as evidenced by reduction in the sucrose consumption in SPT, interaction time in SIT and mobility time in TST. CSDS mice also accompanied with elevation of oxidative damage and neuroinflammation in the prefrontal cortex region.
Numerous studies indicated the key role of AKT/β-catenin pathway in the pathophysiology of depression. Moreover, research reports suggested that therapeutic actions of antidepressants were mediated through the AKT/β-catenin pathway (Moriguchi et al. ). In the prefrontal cortex of suicide victims, a decrease of phosphorylated PI3K and Akt was observed, these results suggested that the attenuation of Akt kinase activity in depressed suicide victims might be due to the combined dysregulation of PI3K (Karege et al. ). Furthermore, biological activities of up-regulation antioxidants and anti-inflammation were associated with Akt pathway activation (Chan and Chan ). Several studies also reported that under hypoxic conditions, cytoplasmic β-catenin reduced the gene transcription of other genes, ROS-mediate cytotoxicity inhibited activation of β-catenin-dependent transcriptional activity (Kaidi et al. ; Shin et al. ), and induced neuroinflammation, which was both a cause and consequence of chronic oxidative stress (Zhou et al. ). In order to understand the change of AKT/β-catenin pathway after social defeat stress, we examined the protein expressions of P-AKT and β-catenin. We observed in the present study a significant reduction of protein expressions of P-AKT and β-catenin in the prefrontal cortex of CSDS mice. Our results provided evidences that harmful impact of chronic social defeat stress on the brain, inducing oxidative stress and neuroinflammation, decreasing AKT/β-catenin pathway, finally impacting behaviors.
For the KFL treatment, firstly, the results showed behavioral deficits were conspicuous ameliorated by KFL therapy. Secondly, we found that KFL could attenuate the MDA and protein carbonylation contents, increase antioxidant enzyme activities, reduce IL-1β and TNF-α concentrations, inhibite CD-11b mRNA level in the prefrontal cortex of CSDS mice, as well as enhance AKT/β-catenin pathway. Furthermore, LY294002 appeared to partly inhibit KFL-mediated protective effects in the CSDS mice. Taken together, we speculated that the mechanisms for KFL to improve behaviors deficits might be attributed to its capacities on activating AKT/β-catenin pathway in the prefrontal cortex of CSDS mice.
It is intriguing to compare the antidepressive effects of KFL with fluoxetine. Based on the present results, KFL and fluoxetine shared a large amount of common beneficial features, the improvements of behavioral deficits, antioxidation and anti-inflammation. These results suggested that KFL and fluoxetine might ameliorate depressive-like behavior by improving oxidative stress and inflammation in the prefrontal cortex.
In conclusion, we showed for the first time the protective effects of KFL by preventing oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory cytokine levels related to depression in the prefrontal cortex. The actions of KFL were possibly mediated by increase the AKT/β-catenin cascade activity in the prefrontal cortex. KFL could provide a new potential option for the prevention of behavioral dysfunction in depression.