Introduction
Diabetes mellitus is a heterogeneous and chronic metabolic disorder occurring with different prevalence across countries. The International Diabetes Federation (IDF ) estimates that there are approximately 415 million people with diabetes in the world, and that number may reach 642 million people in 2040. It is known that diabetes is frequently accompanied by hormonal and neurochemistry changes that can be associated with anxiety and depression (Golden et al. ; Collins et al. ; Egede and Ellis ; Renn et al. ; de Morais et al. ; Zanoveli et al. ). In fact, diabetic patients have a nearly 30–40% higher risk for depression and anxiety than the general population (Anderson et al. ; Grigsby et al. ; Clavijo et al. ; Lin et al. ; Champaneri et al. ; Roy and Lloyd ).
It has been pointed out that hyperglycemia seems to play a fundamental role in the pathophysiology of these psychiatric comorbidities (Kamei et al. ; Wrighten et al. ). It was demonstrated that, through different mechanisms, it causes damages that leads to an increase of oxidative stress, pro-inflammatory cytokines and/or a significant dysregulation of different neurotransmitter systems in brain areas related to anxiety and depression, such as prefrontal cortex and hippocampus (Bambolkar and Sainani ; Baburao and Anand ; de Morais et al. ; Dipnal et al. ; da Silva Dias et al. ; Siba et al. ). Our main interest for this work was to study the relationship of oxidative stress in diabetic animals with behaviors related to anxiety and depression. The oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance in the cellular reactions of reduction and oxidation resulting in an increase of reactive species of oxygen or nitrogen (ROS/RON) and/or decrease in the antioxidant defense system (Gasparovic et al. ). It is known that central nervous system is very vulnerable to increased oxidative stress due to its need of large amount of oxygen and modest antioxidant defense (Bouayed et al. ; Kanazawa et al. ). Thus, there is no doubt of the pathophysiological complexity of these diseases associated with diabetes. In addition, the seeking for the highly effective treatments is of the great importance.
Based on the above, the present study aimed to study the effects of long-term treatment with the antioxidant polyphenolic compound gallic acid (3, 4, 5-trihydroxybenzoic acid; (Kade and Rocha ) in animals with diabetes induced by streptozotocin (STZ) injection undergoing to different behavioral tests. It is known that the gallic acid is abundant in tea, grapes, berries and wine. Interestingly, study point out that the consumption of fresh fruits, vegetables and plants that are rich in natural antioxidants is associated with the prevention of diabetes (Lee et al. ). Moreover, evidence has shown that gallic acid treatment is able to improve the glycemic control of diabetic animals (Latha and Daisy ; Punithavathi et al. ; Stanely et al. ). However, until the present moment there is no study investigating the effects of the prolonged treatment with gallic acid on behavioral responses related to depression and anxiety in DBT animals. For this purpose, the effects of long-term treatment with gallic acid (0, 10, 20 and 40 mg/kg) in diabetic animals submitted to behavioral tests related to depression and anxiety, such as the modified forced swim test (mFST), elevated plus-maze (EPM) test and light-dark transition (LDT) test were studied. Also, indirect parameters of oxidative stress (levels of lipid peroxidation - LPO and reduced glutathione levels - GSH) were evaluated in the hippocampus (HIP) and prefrontal cortex (PFC) of these animals, as well the evaluation of diabetic condition itself - weight gain and glycemia of these animals. Besides, the 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) assay was done to corroborate the antioxidant property of this compound.
Experimental procedures
Animals
The experiments were conducted using male Wistar rats (200–220 g), provided by the Federal University of Paraná. The animals were housed in plastic cages (41 × 32 × 16.5 cm) with food and water available ad libitum and maintained in a temperature-controlled room (22 ± 2 °C) under 12 h/12 h light/dark cycle (lights on at 7:00 a.m.). All experiments were conducted in accordance with the norms and legislation of the local Ethics Committee on Animal Research (CEUA #959) and all efforts were made to minimize animal suffering.
Drugs and treatment
The following drugs were used: streptozotocin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., USA), sodium citrate (Merck S.A., Brazil), polyphenolic 3, 4, 5-trihydroxybenzoic acid (gallic acid – GA; Sigma, USA) and fluoxetine (FLX; Pharma Ltda, Brazil). Streptozotocin was dissolved in citrate buffer (10 mM, pH 4.5) and administered intraperitoneally (i.p.) at the dose of 60 mg/kg, GA was dissolved in saline and tween (one drop) and administered orally (gavage) at doses of 10, 20 and 40 mg/kg (Punithavathi et al. ; Latha and Daisy ). The serotonin selective reuptake inhibitor FLX (10 mg/kg; gavage) was used as a positive control of antidepressant and anxiolytic effects and was dissolved in saline. All drugs were prepared immediately prior to application and their doses were based on previous studies (Chhillar and Dhingra ; de Morais et al. ; Gupta et al. ; Kurhe and Mahesh ; Gambeta et al. ; da Silva Dias et al. ).
Diabetes induction
Experimental diabetes was induced following an overnight fast by a single intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin (type-1 diabetes model) at a dose of 60 mg/kg freshly dissolved in citrate buffer (10 mM, pH 4.5). Hyperglycemia was confirmed 72 h after streptozotocin administration by applying a small volume of peripheral blood collected from the tail of the animals on test strips impregnated with glucose oxidase (Accu-Check ActiveTM, Roche) and confirmed again at ending of the behavioral tests. All animals that received the streptozotocin injection were maintained in the study. Thus, animals with fasting blood glucose levels ≥250 mg/dL were considered diabetics and divided in different groups of treatment; while animals with fasting blood glucose levels ≤250 mg/dL were considered as non-diabetics and they were kept in the behavioral studies. All animals were observed daily and weighed regularly during the experiments.
2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl assay
The 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) assay is used to evaluate the free radical scavenging activity of antioxidants. It is based on the principle that DPPH, upon accepting a hydrogen atom from a scavenger molecule (as an antioxidant), is reduced, and the purple color of the solution becomes yellow, concomitant with a decrease in absorbance (Mishra et al. ). Thus, following the protocols described by Blois ( ) and Chen et al. ( ), with minor modifications, different concentrations of either gallic acid and flouxetin (1, 3, 10, 30, 100, 300 e 1000 μg/ml) were mixed with DPPH methanolic solution (10 μg/ml). Ascorbic acid (50 μg/ml) was used as a positive control and distilled water was used as a negative control. Absorbance was measured at 517 nm using a multi-mode microplate reader (Bio Tek Synergy HT, Bio Tek Instruments, Highland Park, VT,USA).
Elevated plus-maze test
To evaluate anxiety behavior, the animals were submitted to the elevated plus-maze (EPM) test described by Pellow et al. ( ). The apparatus used in this experiment is made of wood and is raised to 50 cm from the floor. It has 4 arms, 2 open arms and 2 closed arms, and at the cross between the arms, there is a central area of 10 cm 2 . In this test, a 40 lx illumination was used. The animals were then placed individually in the center of the maze and for 5 min, their movements were recorded with a Sony action cam 4 K. After the end of experiments, a trained observer that was blind to treatments evaluated the time each animal remained in the open arms, as well as the number of entries in the closed arms (being considered the entrance when the animal surpasses with the four legs the delimitations of each arm), end open arm exploration (time that animals spend at the end of the open arms) and number of head dips. The apparatus was cleaned after each test with a 5% ethyl alcohol solution and dried.
Light-dark transition test
In this experiment, a box made of wood with dimensions of 48 × 24 × 27 cm is used. This box is divided by a door (10 × 10 cm) through which animals can cross the two compartments that have equal dimensions (24 × 24 × 27 cm). Thus, one of these compartments is painted in white and illuminated with a portion of light of 40 lx and the other painted in black and unlit.
This test also evaluates anxiety behavior in animals and it was conducted according to Vicente and Zangrossi ( ). In this way, during the test, the rats were placed with the face facing the door separating the two compartments. Right after the first transition to the dark compartment, the behavior of the animal was recorded for a period of 5 min through a Sony action cam 4 K. At the end of each test session, the box was cleaned with a 5% ethanol solution. The total time spent by the animal in the lit compartment and the number of transitions between the two compartments was then analyzed by a trained observer that was blind to treatments.
Modified forced swim test
All groups of rats were submitted to modified forced swim test (mFST) as described by Porsolt et al. ( ) and Cryan et al. ( ) with minor modifications. The test was conducted in two sessions. First, in the pre-test session rats were placed individually to swim in a tank (30 cm × 40 cm height containing 30 cm of water at 22 ± 1 °C) for 15 min. Twenty four hours later, animals were submitted to a 5 min session of forced swim (test) and the behavior of the animal was recorded with Sony action cam 4 K. During this session, the behaviors evaluated were animals immobility (except small movements required to float), swimming (movements through the plastic cylinder) and climbing (movement with the front legs in the cylinder wall in an attempt to leave it). Every 5 s of interval of the test session, predominant behavior was recorded: (1) immobility, (2) climbing or (3) swimming. After each session (pre-test and test session), the animals were removed and allowed to dry in a separate cage before being returned to their home cages and the tank was cleaned. These recordings were analyzed by a trained observer that was blind to treatments.
Evaluation of oxidative stress parameters in the rat brain
Brain samples
The rats were euthanized by decapitation until 2 h after the last session of behavioral tests. The brain removed was from the following groups of animals: NGL(VEH), DBT(VEH), DBT(FLX10), DBT(GA; effective dose) and DBT(GA; it was chosen only one of non-effective doses). The prefrontal cortex (PFC) and hippocampus (HIP) were dissected, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C until further analysis. The brain samples were homogenized in potassium phosphate buffer (0.1 M, pH 6.5) in a 1:10 dilution. One part of the homogenate was used to determine reduced glutathione (GSH) levels, and the other was centrifuged at 9000 g in a micro-high-speed refrigerated centrifuge (VS-15000 CFNII, Vision Scientific, Daejeon, South Korea) for 20 min. The supernatant was used to evaluate lipid peroxidation (LPO).
Evaluation of reduced glutathione levels
The reduced glutathione (GSH) levels were measured according to Sedlak and Lindsay ( ), with minor modifications. 100 μl of the homogenate was mixed with 80 μl of 12.5% trichloroacetic acid and centrifuged at 6000 rotations per minute (rpm) for 15 min at 4 °C. Afterwards, 20 μl of the supernatant was mixed with 280 μl of Tris buffer (0.4 M, pH 8.9) and 5 μl of DTNB (5,5′-dithiobis-[2-nitrobenzoic acid] or Ellman’s reagent; 0.01 M). Absorbance was read at 415 nm using a multi-mode micro plate reader (Bio Tek Synergy HT,Bio Tek Instruments, Highland Park, VT, USA). The individual values were interpolated in a standard curve of GSH (0.375–3 μg) and the results are expressed as μg/g of tissue.
Evaluation of lipid peroxidation
Lipid peroxidation (LPO) was measured according to the method described by Jiang et al. ( ), with minor modifications. First, 100 μl of the supernatant was suspended in 100 μl of methanol, vortexed, and centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. Then, 100 μl of the supernatant was added to 900 μl of FOX2 reagent (Wolff’s reagent; 4 mM BHT, 250 mM FeSO4, 250 mM H 2 SO 4 , and 100 mM xylenol orange). The samples were then vortexed and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Absorbance was read at 560 nm using a multi-mode microplate reader (Bio Tek Synergy HT, Bio Tek Instruments, Highland Park, VT, USA). The results are expressed as [hydroperoxides] nmoL. min −1 /mg of tissue.
Experimental design
After confirmation of diabetic (DBT) condition, the animals were divided into 7 groups ( n = 6–8/group): DBT-VEH (animals treated with saline used as vehicle), DBT-FLX (animals treated with fluoxetine – 10 mg/kg), DBT-GA10 (animals treated with gallic acid – 10 mg/kg), DBT-GA20 (animals treated with gallic acid – 20 mg/kg) and DBT-GA40 (animals treated with gallic acid – 40 mg/kg). For the control of the DBT condition and of the streptozotocin injection, one group of normoglycemic animals (animals that received an injection of citrate buffer and were treated with vehicle; NGL-VEH) and one group of animals that received streptozotocin injection but did not become diabetic (non-DBT) were also performed.
Behavioral tests started after 28–30 days of diabetes induction (fourth week). The long-term treatment with GA (different doses), FLX or VEH was initiated after 7 days of streptozotocin injection lasting 23 days. FLX was used as a positive control to the antidepressant and anxiolytic effects. All behavioral tests were performed one hour after drug administration.
On the 28th day the EPM and LDT tests were performed. On the following day (29th day), the pre-test session of the mFST was performed, and on the 30th day the mFST was performed. After the test, the animals were euthanized and the HIP and PFC were dissected for the analysis of parameters related to oxidative stress. For that, we used HIP and PFC from the following groups of animals: NGL(VEH), DBT(VEH), DBT(FLX10), DBT(GA; effective dose) and DBT(GA; it was chosen only one of non-effective doses) (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Time course of experimental protocol. STZ: streptozotocin; VEH: vehicle; BG: blood glucose; EPM: elevated plus maze; LDT: light-dark transition; mFST: modified forced swimming test
Statistical analysis
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Levene tests were initially employed to ensure that the data satisfied the criteria for carrying out parametric tests. When criteria were satisfied, the results were reported as the mean ± Standard Error of Mean (SEM). The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with groups as a single independent factor. When appropriated, Newman–Keuls tests were used for post hoc analyses. Differences were considered statistically significant when p < 0.05. All the tests were carried out using the GraphPad Prism program (version 6, San Diego, CA, USA).
Results
DPPH assay
One-way ANOVA followed by Newman-Keuls test revealed that in the DPPH assay only gallic acid [F (7, 16) = 1625; p < 0.05], but not fluoxetine [F (7, 16) = 3113; p > 0.05] treatment presented a free radical scavenging activity even in the lowest concentrations (Fig. 2 A; p < 0.05). Fig. 2 Effect of gallic acid, fluoxetine, ascorbic acid (AA; positive control) and water (negative control) on free radical scavenging activity in the DPPH assay. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM and the analysis performed was one-way ANOVA followed by Newman–Keuls post hoc test. The tests were performed in triplicate. *** p < 0.05 compared to negative control
Gallic acid reduced the hyperglycemia and increased the reduced weight gain of diabetic animals
In both glycemia and weight gain (Fig. 3 - panels A and B), the one-way ANOVA showed that the different groups were able to change the glycemia [F(6,44) = 72.06; p < 0.05] and weight gain [F(6,44) = 31.89; p < 0.05]. Newman-Keuls post hoc test showed that DBT animals presented hyperglycemia ( p < 0.05) and reduction in weight gain (p < 0.05) when compared to NGL animals. Moreover, no significant difference was observed between NGL and non-DBT animals ( p > 0.05). Also, the post hoc test showed that treatment with gallic acid (DBT-GA10) reduced glycemia ( p < 0.05) and increased weight gain (p < 0.05). However, post hoc test showed no significant difference between the DBT groups treated or not-treated with FLX (p > 0.05). Fig. 3 Effect of prolonged treatment with gallic acid (GA, 10, 20 or 40 mg/kg), fluoxetine (FLX, 10 mg/kg) or vehicle (VEH) in normoglycemic (NGL) or diabetic animals (DBT) or non-diabetic (non-DBT) in glycemia ( A ) and weight gain ( B ). Results are expressed as mean ± SEM; n = 6–8; and the analysis performed was one-way ANOVA followed by Newman–Keuls post hoc test. *p < 0.05 compared to NGL/VEH; #p < 0.05 compared to DBT/VEH
Gallic acid prolonged treatment induced anxiolytic-like effect in diabetic animals
As can be seen in Fig. 4 (panels A, C and D), the one-way ANOVA showed that the different groups were able to change the spent time in open arms [F(6,44) = 3.435; p < 0.05], end arm exploration [F(6,44) = 5.741; p < 0.05] and head dipping [F(6,44) = 6.274; p < 0.05], but the one-way ANOVA did not show difference between the groups in the number of entries in the enclosed arms (panel B) [F(6,44) = 1.903; p˃0.05]. Newman-Keuls post hoc test showed that DBT animals presented decreased time in open arms, end open arm exploration and head dips (p < 0.05) when compared with NGL animals. Moreover, no significant difference was observed between NGL and non-DBT animals ( p > 0.05). Also, the post hoc test showed that gallic acid treatment (DBT-GA10) increased the spent time in open arms, end open arm exploration and head dippings ( p < 0.05), without changing the enclosed arm entries (p > 0.05). No significant difference between the DBT groups treated or not-treated with FLX was observed ( p > 0.05). Fig. 4 Effect of prolonged treatment with gallic acid (GA, 10, 20 or 40 mg/kg), fluoxetine (FLX, 10 mg/kg) or vehicle (VEH) in normoglycemic (NGL) or diabetic animals (DBT) submitted to the EPM test. A time spent in open arms, B closed arm entries, C time of end open arm exploration and D number of head dips. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM; n = 6–8 and the analysis performed was one-way ANOVA followed by Newman–Keuls post hoc test. *p < 0.05 compared to NGL/VEH; #p < 0.05 compared to DBT/VEH
As showed in Fig. 5 (panel A), one-away ANOVA showed that the different groups were able to change the time in light compartment [F(6,44) = 5.559; p < 0.05], but the one-away ANOVA did not show difference between the groups when the number of crossings was evaluated [F(6,44) = 4.463; p˃0.05; Fig. 5 panel B]. Newman-Keuls post hoc test showed that DBT animals presented a decrease in the spent time in light compartment when compared with NGL animals (p < 0.05). Interestingly, no one significant difference was observed between NGL and non-DBT animals ( p > 0.05). In addition, the post hoc test showed the treatment with gallic acid (DBT-GA10) increased the spent time in light compartment ( p < 0.05). However, post hoc test showed no significant difference between the DBT groups treated or not-treated with FLX (p > 0.05). Fig. 5 Effect of prolonged treatment with gallic acid (GA, 10, 20 or 40 mg/kg), fluoxetine (FLX, 10 mg/kg) or vehicle (VEH) in normoglycemic (NGL) or diabetic animals (DBT) submitted to the LDT test. A time spent in lit compartment and B number of crossings. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM; n = 6–8 and the analysis performed was one-way ANOVA followed by Newman–Keuls post hoc test. *p < 0.05 compared to NGL/VEH; #p < 0.05 compared to DBT/VEH
Gallic acid prolonged treatment did not change the depressive-like behavior in diabetic animals
As can be seen in Fig. 6 (panels A, B and C), one-way ANOVA showed difference between the groups when frequency of immobility [F(6,44) = 5.90; p < 0.05], swimming [F(6,44) = 6.98; p < 0.05] and climbing [F(6,44) = 3.036; p < 0.05] was evaluated. Newman-Keuls post hoc test showed that DBT animals presented increased frequency of immobility and decreased swimming and climbing frequencies when compared with NGL animals ((p < 0.05). Interestingly, no significant difference was observed between NGL and non-DBT animals ( p > 0.05). Also, the post hoc test showed that treatment with FLX reduced the frequency of immobility and increased the swimming frequency (p < 0.05), without changing the climbing frequency (p > 0.05). However, post hoc test showed no significant difference between the DBT groups treated or not-treated with gallic acid (p > 0.05). Fig. 6 Effect of prolonged treatment with gallic acid (GA, 10, 20 or 40 mg/kg), fluoxetine (FLX, 10 mg/kg) or vehicle (VEH) in normoglycemic (NGL) or diabetic animals (DBT) submitted to the modified forced swimming test. Immobility ( A ), swimming ( B ) and climbing ( C ) frequencies. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM; n = 6–8 and the analysis performed was one-way ANOVA followed by Newman–Keuls post hoc test. *p < 0.05 compared to NGL/VEH; #p < 0.05 compared to DBT/VEH
Effect of prolonged treatment with gallic acid and fluoxetine on the lipoperoxidation and reduced gsh levels in prefrontal cortex and hippocampus from diabetic animals
One-way ANOVA showed that the different groups were capable to change the LPO level [F(4,30) = 5.972; p < 0.05] and GSH level [F(4,30) = 5.644; p < 0.05] in HIP (Fig. 7 - panels A and B). In addition, as showed in Fig. 7 (panels C and D), the one-away ANOVA showed that the different groups change the LPO level [F(4,26) = 6.648; p < 0.05] and GSH level [F(4,30) = 6.244; p < 0.05] in PFC. Newman-Keuls post hoc test showed that DBT animals presented increased LPO level (p < 0.05) and decreased GSH level (p < 0.05) in HIP and PFC when compared NGL animals. Also, the post hoc test showed that treatment with gallic acid (DBT-GA10) in DBT animals reduced LPO and increased GSH levels in these brain areas (p < 0.05). However, post hoc test showed no significant difference between the DBT groups treated or not-treated with FLX (p > 0.05). Fig. 7 Effect of prolonged treatment with gallic acid (GA, 10 or 40 mg/kg), fluoxetine (FLX, 10 mg/kg) or vehicle (VEH) in normoglycemic (NGL) or diabetic animals (DBT) on lipid peroxidation levels (LPO, [hydroperoxides] per nmoL. min-1/mg of tissue – figures A and C ) and reduced glutathione levels (GSH, μg/g of tissue – figures B and D ) in hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM; n = 6–8 and the analysis performed was one-way ANOVA followed by Newman–Keuls post hoc test. *p < 0.05 compared to NGL/VEH; #p < 0.05 compared to DBT/VEH
Discussion
The main finding of the current study is that gallic acid (at a dose of 10 mg/kg) induced an anxiolytic-like effect, but not antidepressant-like effect. Moreover, this treatment was able to improve oxidative stress indirect parameters in PFC and HIP besides the diabetic condition per se, such as the reduced weight gain and hyperglycemia.
As expected and according to previous studies (Gomez and Barros ; Wayhs et al. ; Can et al. ; Caletti et al. ; Aksu et al. ; Gupta et al. ; de Morais et al. , ; da Silva Dias et al. ; Gambeta et al. ; Redivo et al. ; Siba et al. ), our results demonstrated that DBT animals exhibited depressive and anxiogenic-like behavior more pronounced when compared to normoglycemic animals. Moreover, we observed for the first time that DBT animals, when ethological parameters were analyzed during EPM test, presented a reduced time spent in the end of open arm and a lower frequency of head dippings when compared to normoglycemic ones, reinforcing the anxiogenic-like behavior. The gallic acid prolonged treatment was capable of inducing anxiolytic-like effect, i.e . , treated-DBT animals showed a significant increase in time spent in open arms (EPM) and lit compartment (LDT), besides an increase in the spent time in the end of open arms (EPM) and in the frequency of head dippings (EPM). This anxiolytic-like effect of gallic acid was already shown in other studies (Dhingra et al. ; Mansouri et al. ).
An interesting point to highlight is that, since the animals were evaluated in our study 1 h after the last injection and the half-life of gallic acid is around 200 min (Yu et al. ), an acute effect could not be ruled out. It should be mentioned that an acute anxiolytic-like effect with gallic acid has already been observed in the study conducted by Mansouri et al. ( ). The authors evaluated the effect of one injection of gallic acid in different doses and observed that the low dose (30 mg/kg), but not the highest dose (500 mg/kg), was effective in inducing anxiolytic-like effect. Reinforcing the anxiolytic-like effect of the gallic acid at lower doses, Dhindra and collaborators ( ) also observed an anxiolytic-like effect at the same effective dose of the present study (10 mg/kg). However, as in the present study, the authors submitted the animals to a continuous treatment and evaluated the anxiety responses 45 min after the last injection. Thus, based on these findings, the effect of treatment with gallic acid could be due to the acute effect. Here, it is important to note that none of the mentioned above studies were performed with diabetic animals. Our study was the first to show an anxiolytic-like effect in diabetic animals treated with gallic acid (at the lowest dose used and after a long-term treatment). The fact of being a diabetic animal leads us to suggest that our result may be related preferentially to a long-term effect than an acute effect because these animals present a series of neuroadaptive changes, such as dysregulation in different neurotransmitter systems, reduced neuronal plasticity, neuroinflammation, among others that can link depression/anxiety to diabetes (Bambolkar and Sainani ; Baburao and Anand ; de Morais et al. ; Dipnal et al. ; Gambeta et al. ; da Silva Dias et al. ; Siba et al. ). In the same way, studies conducted in diabetic animals have shown an improvement in different diabetes-related parameters, such as protective effects on pancreatic β-cell, decreased levels of blood glucose, brain lipid peroxidation products and lipid, besides the increase on the activities of brain enzymic antioxidants only after a prolonged and sustained treatment with gallic acid (Latha and Daisy ; Punithavathi et al. ; Stanely et al. ; Patel and Goyal ).
The behavioral responses observed in our study seem not to be due to locomotor impairment, since no difference was observed in all groups of animals when the number of entry in the enclosed arm of the EPM and the number of transition between the compartments in the LDT test were evaluated. In addition, animals that received streptozotocin injection but not become DBTs showed behavior similar to normoglycemic rats when evaluated in all behavioral tests, being their glycemia similar to the animals that not received STZ injection. This result indicates that the behavioral responses observed in DBT animals are not related to the effect of STZ injection per se , but they are related to the hyperglycemic state induced by STZ injection in animals.
Differently from other studies conducted in diabetic animals (Rebai et al. ; Aswar et al. ), the positive control to the anxiolytic and antidepressant-like effects used in the present study, the fluoxetine, was not able to alter the anxiety-related behaviors assessed in DBT animals. The lack of effect observed in the present study can be explained by the difference in dosage; i.e. while in the present study the animals were treated with a dose of 10 mg/kg, in the above cited studies the dosage used were 15 and 20 mg/kg. Moreover, controversial results with antidepressant drugs of the serotonin selective reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) class have been observed in previous studies with animals undergoing different anxiety tests. According to Borsini et al. ( ), the results with SSRI drugs obtained from studies conducted in EPM test with different rodent species and with different dosage and time of treatment (chronic and/or acute treatment) are inconsistent. The paradoxical effects of serotonin (5-HT) manipulation in animal models have been attributed both to the recognition that these animal models reflect different neurobiological mechanisms, and to multiple 5-HT receptors located either pre- or post-synaptically that have distinct functions in various aspects of anxiety (Bourin ).
The property antioxidant of the compounds used in the current study was evaluated in the DPPH assay where gallic acid demonstrated antioxidant activity with significantly lower absorbance levels than negative control (water) even in the lowest concentrations, while fluoxetine had absorbance levels closer to the negative control used (water). Based in the antioxidant property of gallic acid demonstrated in the present study, the treatment with gallic acid was able to reestablish the increased LPO levels of DBT animals to the basal levels and also to significantly increase the reduced GSH levels in the HIP and PFC of these animals, which helps to corroborate the action of an antioxidant mechanism of this compound. The LPO is a crucial part of oxidative stress because it comprises several chain reactions allowing the propagation of damage caused by ROS and RON to macromolecules (proteins, nucleic acids and lipids) (Siba et al. ). Thus, high levels of LPO are attributed to the increase of ROS and RON; in addition, it affects cell integrity only when antioxidant mechanisms are no longer able to cope with the generation of free radicals (Anwer et al. ). The GSH is the main antioxidant in the brain (Kanazawa et al. ) and it is known to protect the cellular system against the toxic effects of LPO. Thereby, according to Sharma et al. ( ), this decline in the level of GSH in DBT animals may be due to excessive free radical generation, exposure to high glucose level. In addition, it has been proposed that antioxidants that maintain GSH concentration may restore cellular defense mechanisms by blocking LPO and helping to protect the tissue against oxidative damage (Anwer et al. ). Interestingly, studies show that compounds with antioxidant activities induce antidepressant-like effect in DBT animals and are able to improve oxidative stress parameters in PFC and HIP (Wayhs et al. ; de Morais et al. , ; Rebai et al. ), which was not observed in the current study after gallic acid treatment. This lack of effect is not due to the animal test, since treatment with the antidepressant fluoxetine was able to induce an antidepressant-like effect by reducing the frequency of immobility and increasing the frequency of swimming even without changing oxidative stress parameters in PFC and HIP of DBT rats.
In this aspect and according to its property evaluated by DPPH assay, treatment with the antidepressant fluoxetine was not able to reduce LPO levels and to increase GSH levels in both HIP and CPF of diabetic animals. However, previous studies showed that the treatment with fluoxetine induced antidepressant-like effect in DBT animals and also presented some antioxidant and neuroprotective activity (Bilici et al. ; Khanzode et al. ; Herken et al. ; Moretti et al. ). More recent studies show that prolonged treatment with fluoxetine is able to induce several beneficial effects on the central nervous system, such as antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects, which have been related to its therapeutic effect (Huether and Schuff-Werner ; Caiaffo et al. ; Todorović and Filipović ) proposed that this protective effect might be because this class of drugs increases the 5-HT availability that also presents a neuroprotective effect on the brain. Thus, it appears that the neuroprotective mechanisms of fluoxetine may not be straightforward, since in the DPPH assay conducted in the present study it did not show direct antioxidant activity. Nevertheless, it is important to point out that in this study, the antioxidant activity of gallic acid was not able to produce an antidepressant-like effect in treated-DBT animals, nor the absence of the antioxidant effect of fluoxetine interfered in its effect, which was an antidepressant-like effect. Thus, these findings reinforce that oxidative stress may have an important role on the physiopathology of psychopathologies associated with diabetes, but this seems not to be an essential mechanism involved, at least in some psychopathologies such as depression.
Taken together, this data suggests that increased oxidative stress is not the only mechanism involved in diabetes-related depression and that the emergence of anxiety associated with diabetes appears to be more sensitive to this imbalance in the natural antioxidant system. On the other hand, it is important to note that other mechanisms of action related to the anxiolytic-like effect of gallic acid have been reported. Singh et al. ( ) proposed that anxiolytic-like effect observed after the LDT and EPM tests are similar to the effects of the benzodiazepine diazepam and that a possible mechanism of action of this drug may be through its GABAergic properties. However, Mansouri and colleagues ( ) suggest that the anxiolytic-like effects of gallic acid are mainly mediated via serotonergic system. They observed that the anxiolytic-like effects of this compound were antagonized by 5-HT1A receptor antagonist WAY-100635 and only partially antagonized by GABA-benzodiazepine receptor antagonist flumazenil. Thus, further studies are still needed to better elucidate the gallic acid mechanism of action related to its anxiolytic-like effect. Importantly, the prolonged gallic acid treatment was able to improve the DBT condition of the animals, i.e. , the animals presented a significant weight gain and a reduction of the blood glucose levels when compared with non-treated DBT animals. This antihyperglycemic activity has already been reported (Latha and Daisy ; Punithavathi et al. ; Stanely et al. ; Patel and Goyal ). For example, Punithavathi et al. ( ) demonstrated that long-term treatment with gallic acid significantly diminished the levels of blood glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin, while the levels of plasma insulin were increased after the treatment in these DBT rats. In the same way, Latha and Daisy ( ) showed that long-term treatment with gallic acid significantly increased plasma insulin and restored the body weight of diabetic rats to near normal. In addition, other beneficial activities have been shown after the gallic acid treatment such as anti-inflammatory (Kroes et al. ), anticancer (Inoue et al. ) and antioxidant (Kim et al. ). Here it is important to highlight that the primary prevention of diabetes is increasingly recognized, and this has stimulated an interest in the role of dietary factors in the etiology of diabetes as well as an alternative treatment as adjunct (Redivo et al. ; Siba et al. ). Our findings indicate that long-term treatment with gallic acid is able to induce an anxiolytic-like effect and antioxidant/neuroprotective effects, together with a significant improvement on diabetic condition per se . However, since other mechanisms of action for gallic acid have been proposed to mediate the anxiolytic-like effect, it is suggested that increased oxidative stress is not the only mechanism involved in the pathophysiology of the anxiety associated with diabetes, and depression as well. Therefore, still further studies are needed to obtain a better understanding and knowledge of the pathophysiological mechanisms that relate depression/anxiety to diabetes.