Introduction
The Cobalamin C (cblC) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder of inborn error of cobalamin metabolism (Carrillo-Carrasco et al. ). Mutations of the methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinemia type C protein (MMACHC) gene are responsible for cblC disease. The biochemical markers for the disease are elevated total homocysteine (Hcy) in plasma and methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) in both plasma and urine (Lerner-Ellis et al. ; Carrillo-Carrasco et al. ). Most patients with cblC deficiency reveal symptoms in infancy period, while less than 20% patients are normal until in the adolescent or adult, named late-onset cblC (Carrillo-Carrasco et al. ). The late-onset cblC sibling patients were rarely reported. In this study, we retrospectively analyzed four pairs of Chinese sibling cases with late-onset cblC mainly showing neuropsychiatric presentations to raise awareness for this rare but often treatable disease.
Methods
This study included four pairs of Chinese patients who were diagnosed with late-onset cblC at Qilu Hospital, Shandong University. Informed consents were obtained from all patients. This study was in compliance with Ethics Guidelines and approved by the Ethics Committee of Qilu Hospitals, Shandong university. All patients underwent routine blood tests to assess electrolytes, glucose, liver and kidney function, serum total homocysteine, folate and vitamin B12 levels. All patients underwent tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) to measure plasma amino acid levels and gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC/MS) to measure urine concentrations of organic acids (MILS International, Japan). Most patients underwent brain and spinal MRI with a 1.5 T system (GE Healthcare, USA). Mutations analysis in the MMACHC gene using PCR and sanger sequencing was carried out in all patients (Kingmed Diagnostics, Guangzhou, China).
After diagnosis, all patients received treatments of cyanocobalamin (intramuscular injection, 0.5–1 mg/day), methylcobalamin (intravenous/intramuscular injection, 0.5–1 mg/day), folic acid (oral, 10-15 mg/day), L-carnitine (intravenous infusion/ oral, 1–3 g/day), betaine (oral, 0.5–2 g/day) and compound vitamin B (oral, 20–60 mg/day). When the condition was stable, all patients received intramuscular injection of cyanocobalamin (1–2 mg/week) and oral administration of methylcobalamin (1–1.5 mg/day), folic acid (10–15 mg/day), betaine (0.5–2 g/day), L-carnitine (1–3 g/day) and compound vitamin B (20–60 mg/day). All patients were followed for 1–3 years after treatments.
Moreover, we also searched the reported literature of cblC sibling patients by PubMed.
Results
There were seven female and one male patients. The mean age at disease onset was 13.7 (range 2–19) years. The mean time delay of diagnosis from disease onset was 4.6 (range 1–13) years. The neuropsychiatric disturbances including cognitive decline (3/8), psychiatric disturbances (4/8), gait instability (2/8), lower extremity weakness and numbness (3/8) and thromboembolic events (1/8). Two patients suffered nephropathy (2/8). The mean serum homocysteine when patients were diagnosed was 109.4 (range 69.5–138 μmol/L; reference range 0-15 μmol/L). The mean methylmalonic acid level in urine was 103.7 μmol/L (range 26.7–185.8 μmol/L; reference range 0.2–5.6 μmol/L) (Table 1 ). The folate and vitamin B12 serum levels of all patients were normal. The abnormal radioimaging included scoliosis by X-ray (5/6), cerebral atrophy (4/6), spinal cord atrophy (3/6) and hyperintensity of cerebellum (1/6) by MRI scan (Fig. 1 ). Table 1 The clinical presentations, treatments and outcome in Chinese sibling cases with late-onset cblC deficiency Patient (Pair) Sex Age/ onset age (years) Clinical presentation Urine MMA (0.2–5.6 μM/L) Serum tHcy (0-15 μM/L) Other exams Mutations Treatments Outcome Mu 1 Mu 2 Cobalamin Betaine Carnitine 1 (Pair 1) F 15/14 lower limb weakness abnormal gait 54.5 69.5 thoracic cord atrophy scoliosis c.354G > C c.570insT x x x improved 2 (Pair 1) F 3/2 – 26.7 80.2 – c.354G > C c.570insT – – – asymptomatic 3 (Pair 2) F 19/18 lower limb weakness abnormal gait psychiatric symptoms 52.6 138 thoracic cord atrophy scoliosis cerebrum hyperintensity/atrophy c.445_446del c.482G > A x x x improved 4 (Pair 2) F 14/13 mild cognitive impairment 185.8 110 – c.445_446del c.482G > A x x x improved 5 (Pair 3) M 18/7 lower limb numbness nephropathy psychiatric symptoms 97.0 127.6 cerebrum atrophy scoliosis c.452A > G c.452A > G x x x improved 6 (Pair 3) F 20/19 psychiatric symptoms cognitive impairment nephropathy 178 155 megaloblastic anemia scoliosis thoracic cord, cerebrum atrophy c.452A > G c.452A > G x x x improved 7 (Pair 4) F 24/14 psychiatric symptoms pulmonary embolism phlebothrombosis 111.7 114 megaloblastic anemia scoliosis, bow feet thoracic cord, cerebrum atrophy c.656_658del c.482G > A x x x improved 8 (Pair 4) F 19/6 mild cognitive impairment 123.7 96 – c.656_658del c.482G > A x x x improved Fig. 1 The neuroimaging features of the sibling patients with cblC deficiency. Spine X-ray showed scoliosis (Arrow) (A; Patient 1). Spine axial and sagittal MRI T 2 WI showed atrophy in thoracic spinal cord (Arrow) (B,C; Patient 1). Brain axial MRI T 2 WI showed diffused modest atrophy of cerebrum (Arrow) (D; Patient 6). Brain axial MRI T 2 WI showed hyperintensity in the bilateral cerebellum. The abnormal signals disappeared and cerebellum atrophy was found in the follow-up MRI scan. This refers to a process of vasogenic edema (Arrow) (E,F; Patient 4)
Three pairs of siblings showed heterozygous mutations of MMACHC gene including c.482G > A (4/6), c.354G > C (2/6), c.570insT (2/6), c.445_446del (2/6) and c.656_4658del (2/6). The other siblings showed homozygous mutation with c.452A > G.
After treatments for 2–4 weeks, the psychiatric symptoms were alleviated in the four suffered patients and the lower extremity strength of the patients were also increased. While gait abnormalities showed little change. During the 1–3 years follow-up examinations, the neuropsychiatric presentations and lower extremity strength of all the suffered patients kept alleviated.
Until now, only six pairs of sibling cases have ever been reported in the literature (Goodman et al. ; Gold et al. ; Augoustides-Savvopoulou et al. ; Powers et al. ; Boxer et al. ; Wu et al. ). Their clinical presentations, radioimaging abnormality and treatment outcomes were analyzed (Table 2 ). Table 2 The clinical presentations, treatments and outcome of the sibling cases with late-onset cblC deficiency in the literature NO. (Reference.) Sex Diag/Onset age Clinical presentation Other exams Serum Hcy (μM/L) Gene mutations Treatment Outcome 1 (Augoustides-Savvopoulou et al.) F 11/10 learning difficulties behavioural changes ataxia and myoclonic jerks MRI:dilation of subarachnoid space frontoparietally EEG:frequent generalized bursts from slow waves 225 – OHCbl folinic acid betaine improved 2 (Augoustides-Savvopoulou et al.) F −/inborn seizure developmental delay spastic paraparesis – – – – died at 13 3 (Gold et al.) F 30/17 relapsing and remitting myelopathy and neuropathy EMG:chronic denervation nerve biopsy: axonal neuropathy 174 – OHCbl improved 4 (Gold et al.) F 31/− asymptomatic EMG: tibial nerve conduction velocity was at the lower limit of normal – – – lost follow-up 5 (Goodman et al.) M 14/14 psychiatric symptoms mental retardation incoordination – – – – improved 6 (Goodman et al.) M 1/− asymptomatic – – – – – 7 (Powers et al.) M −/32 extremities numbness/ weakness waddling/scissoring gait gradually quadriplegia CSF: protein level increased MRI: periventricular white matter abnormality Autopsy: cerebral perivascular demyelination – fibroblast analysis: cblC defect cortisol died at 34 8 (Powers et al.) M −/44 impairments of calculation/ speech abnormal gait CSF: protein level increased MRI: periventricular white matter abnormality Autopsy: perivascular demyelination of white matter – fibroblast analysis: cblC defect cortisol died at 45 9 (Wu et al.) M 33/31 insomnia, exaggerated expression euphoria, irritability, blurred vision MRI: mild diffuse atrophy of cerebral cortex 65 c.482G > A c.658_660del MeCbl folic acid betaine improved 10 (Wu et al.) M 29/29 irritability, euphoria cognitive impairment MRI: mild diffuse atrophy of cerebral cortex 115.3 c.482G > A c.658_660del MeCbl folic acid betaine improved 11 (Boxer et al.) M 42/39 seizures cognitive deficits MRI: periventricular white matter hyperintensities 308.9 – OHCbl folic acid, clopidgrel betaine, vitamin B6 improved 12 (Boxer et al.) F −/6 seizures, dementia, paraplegia – – – – died at 17 OHCbl , hydroxy-Cobalamin
Discussion
The cblC deficiency is the most common type cobalamin metabolic defects with the gene encoding for the MMACHC located at 1p34.1(Lerner-Ellis et al. ). Depending on the initial age, cblC deficiency patients are divided into early-onset type and late-onset type which is occurs in adolescents and adults. Approximately 90% of reported patients with the cblC deficiency was early-onset type with obvious clinical presentations (Fischer et al. ). The late-onset cblC deficiency is rare and difficult to diagnose due to its wide spectrum of clinical manifestations. Up to now, no more than 100 late-onset cblC cases have been reported (Huemer et al. ; Liu et al. ). In preschool children with late-onset cblC, haemolytic uraemic syndrome and pulmonary hypertension are the main presenting symptoms. In adolescents, neurological symptoms including psychiatric symptoms, cognitive impairment, ataxia neuropathy, unsteady gait, myelopathy and seizures are more likely to occur. Moreover, thromboembolic events, glomerular lesions, neuropathy, myelopathy and dementia are the most prominent features in adults patients (Lerner-Ellis et al. ; Carrillo-Carrasco et al. ). Sometimes, anorexia and delusions are the initial symptoms of the late-onset patients (Liu et al. ). cblC may present with acute or insidious onset, and show sudden deterioration during long stable phases (Liu et al. ). The early diagnosis of cblC is really challenging. To avoid misdiagnosis, it is strongly suggested that cblC should be considered in the patients of neurological and/or visual and/or haematological symptoms and/or unexplained thrombosis and/or spinal cord degeneration and/or atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome (Martina et al. ).
The reported six pairs sibling cases of late-onset cblC also showed a significant variation of clinical symptoms, with age ranging from 1 to 42 years (Goodman et al. ; Gold et al. ; Augoustides-Savvopoulou et al. ; Powers et al. ; Boxer et al. ; Wu et al. ). Psychiatric symptoms, cognitive impairments, seizures and abnormal gait were observed in these sibling patients. The myelopathy and neuropathy were also reported (Augoustides-Savvopoulou et al. ; Boxer et al. ). In our case series, psychiatric disturbance was the most frequent symptom. And cognitive decline, gait instability, lower extremity weakness were also obeserved. Moreover, two sibling patients suffered nephropathy and thromboembolic events which were never reported in the literature. One asymptomatic patient was diagnosed by family gene screening after the diagnose of her symptomatic sibling sister. As reported, two asymptomatic patients were diagnosed after diagnostic workup in their symptomatic siblings. And two symptomatic patients were finally confirmed the diagnosis after death since their symptomatic siblings were corrected diagnosed (Goodman et al. ; Gold et al. ; Augoustides-Savvopoulou et al. ; Powers et al. ). The timely diagnosis of cbl C deficiency is really a challenging job for clinicians.
The cblC deficiency causes both elevated Hcy and MMA by preventing formation of methyl-cobalamin in the enzyme methionine synthase and preventing formation of adenosyl-cobalamin in the enzyme methylmalonyl CoA mutase. Acute encephalopathic features and long-term neurotoxicity may be attributed to elevated MMA in the brain with a “trapping” mechanism (Kölker et al. ). MMA is also known to be involved in chronic renal failure by impairing mitochondrial energy metabolism (Martinelli et al. ). The vascular thrombosis is attributed to the elevation of Hcy concentrations. In fact, elevated plasma Hcy is an important diagnosis hallmark of cblC. According to the guideline, the measurement of total, not free homocysteine in blood is strongly recommend when a patient is suspected with cblC (Martina et al. ) .
The radioimaging features of cblC lack specificity. The cerebral white matter involvement and basal ganglia lesions were the most common findings in early-onset patients. While diffuse cerebrum, spinal cord atrophy and bilateral hyperintensity in the deep white matter on the MRI imaging were frequently reported in the late-onset patients (Carrillo-Carrasco et al. ; Huemer et al. ). Interestingly, in our cases, scoliosis was the most common radioimaging abnormality. No scoliosis had ever been reported in the sibling patients with late-onset cblC probablely because of the ignorance by researchers. About one half of our patients showed brain and spinal cord atrophy in the MRI scan. According to the literature, five out six patients who had done MRI scan showed cerebral white matter abnormality or atrophy (Augoustides-Savvopoulou et al. ; Powers et al. ; Boxer et al. ; Wu et al. ). Unfortunately, no spine MRI information was showed about these sibling patients (Goodman et al. ; Gold et al. ; Augoustides-Savvopoulou et al. ; Powers et al. ; Boxer et al. ; Wu et al. ). Interestingly, one patient showed “reversible vasogenic edema” radioimaging of cerebellum on MRI scans which may be associated with the capillary bed injury by the metabolic products.
Until now, more than 80 different mutations of MMACHC had been reported (Lerner-Ellis et al. Carrillo-Carrasco et al. ). The European cblC patients showed high frequency with c.271dupA mutation (Huemer et al. ). While the most common mutant allele in Chinese patients was c.609G > A (Wang et al. ). In the late-onset patients, c.271dupA (21%), c.394C > T (21%) and c.609G > A (11%) were the most frequent mutated alleles (Huemer et al. ). While the most frequent mutation associated with the late-onset cblC disease was c.482G > A (Liu et al. ; Wang et al. ). In our four pairs of Chinese late-onset sibling patients, MMACHC gene mutation c.482G > A was also the most frequent genotypes. Moreover, two sibling patients with homozygous c.452A > G mutation showed both psychiatric symptoms and nephropathy. In previous studies, only one pair of sibling patients with cblC deficiency had done gene analysis which proved heterozygous MMACHC gene mutations of c.482G > A and c.658_660del (Wu et al. ).
The therapy medicines of cblC include cobalamin, levocarnitine, betaine, folic acid and vitamins B6 (Carrillo-Carrasco et al. ). As reported, most late-onset cblC patients responded well to the treatments with significant improvements of biochemical parameters, clinical manifestations and neuroimaging changes (Huemer et al. ). The immediate treatment with parenteral hydroxycobalamin for cblC patients was recommended according to the guidelines. Moreover, oral betaine treatment is recommended to ameliorate hyperhomocysteinaemia of cblC patients. However, the beneficial effects with folic acid and carnitine are still lack powerful evidence (Martinelli et al. ). The diet therapy with high-calorie and low protein to treat cblC patients also did not show beneficial effect on the metabolic control (Carrillo-Carrasco et al. ). So protein restriction dose not be recommended for the patients with cbl C (Martinelli et al. ). Our siblings patients also exhibited a rapid response to the treatments including cobalamin. However, in the reported six pairs of sibling patients, only six patients showed clinical improvements after treatments. Four patients died without corrected diagnosis and prompted treatments (Goodman et al. ; Gold et al. ; Augoustides-Savvopoulou et al. ; Powers et al. ; Boxer et al. ; Wu et al. ).
In summary, sibling patients with late-onset cblC deficiency were rare. The early diagnosis is challenging due to a wide diversity of symptoms. The correct diagnosis is important because timely treatments usually can bring clinical improvements. When juvenile or adult patients with high serum level of homocysteine present with neurological symptoms that are unexplained by common neurological diseases, cblC deficiency needs to be considered. The organic acid screening and genetic analysis for MMACHC gene are recommended to the early diagnosis.