Introduction
Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) is a hepatic enzyme that catalyzes the hydroxylation of phenylalanine (Phe) to tyrosine in a reaction requiring tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) as a cofactor. Impaired activity of PAH leads to PKU disease characterized by the accumulation of Phe and its metabolites in the blood and brain of patients, brain damages and mental retardation (Scriver ). Early diagnosis and dietary restriction of PKU patients to maintain the plasma level of Phe within the range of 2 to 6 mg/dl, or administration of BH4 could prevent brain damage in these patients. Extremely restricted diet, however, increased the risk of nutritional deficiencies in the patients (Singh et al. ). In this context, the deficiency of antioxidant substances including vitamins and minerals in the PKU patients has been previously reported (Robert et al. ) . Moreover, reduced endogenous synthesis of some antioxidants such as ubiquinone-10, glutathione, and antioxidant enzymes due to hyperphenylalaninemia and restricted diet has also been reported (Rocha and Martins ). On the other hand, production of pro-oxidant substances such as reactive oxygen species (ROS) is enhanced by the high level of Phe and its metabolites (Rocha and Martins ). Decreasing antioxidant defense system and increasing the production of oxidants imposes oxidative stress on the PKU patients. The effect of hyperphenylalanemia-induced oxidative stress on brain damage has been clearly indicated in the rodent model of PKU (Schuck ). In addition, the benefits of antioxidant administration in preventing and improving these disorders have been implicated (Rocha and Martins ; Singh et al. ). Thus, the evaluation of the oxidative status of the PKU patients may be very important.
Several markers including MDA (Sitta et al. , ), 8-oxoguanosine (Deon et al. ), isoprostane (Deon et al. ), and cellular level of the antioxidant enzyme have been used to determine oxidative stress status of the PKU patients (Moraes et al. ).In a recent study (Tavana et al. ), the serum level of prooxidant-antioxidant balance (PAB), a reliable method for measuring plasma oxidant and antioxidant balance (Heshmati et al. ), was applied to assess the level of oxidative stress in the PKU patient. Human serum albumin (HSA) is the most abundant serum protein which is responsible for 70% of free radical scavenging activity of the serum (Bourdon et al. ). Oxidative damage to the amino terminal of HSA during hypoxia or oxidative stress results in the formation of IMA. The binding affinity of IMA to a number of metals such as cobalt is lower than HAS. This is the basis of IMA assay using albumin cobalt binding (ACB) test (Bourdon et al. ). Recent studies have revealed increased level of IMA in several oxidative stress-associated diseases including diabetes mellitus (Seshadri Reddy et al. ), coronary artery disease (Voudris et al. ), renal disease (Kotani et al. ), and endocrine disorders (Erem et al. ). To the best of our knowledge, no study has addressed the relationship between oxidative stress and serum level of IMA in the PKU patients. Therefore, the aim of this study was to measure the serum IMA level and to evaluate its association with the markers of oxidative stress including the level of GGT, MDA, and UA in the PKU patients under restricted dietary treatment. Furthermore, we assessed the relation between the levels of oxidative stress and the serum level of Phe, which is routinely used as an index of stringency in dietary restriction of these patients.
Methods
Subjects
Fifty treated PKU patients (25 male and 25 female) ranging from 2 to 16 years old and 50 healthy controls were enrolled as the study group. The patients were diagnosed as PKU based on the blood level of Phe and national guidelines for screening and diagnosis of PKU (Karamifar et al. ). All of the patients were treated with dietary restriction of Phe intake early and continuously after diagnosis of PKU. The absence of clinical evidence of any major diseases (liver, kidney, and thyroid) was inclusion criteria for the control and PKU subjects. The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee at Shiraz university of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. Informed written consent was obtained from all the participants.
Biochemical determinations
A fasting venous blood sample was collected in both groups, after an overnight 12- h-fasting. The sera were separated immediately and stored at −70 °C until biochemical analyses were performed. Serum concentration of HSA, UA and GGT activity were measured using commercially colorimetric assay kits (Pars Azmon Co. Iran). Serum Phe concentration was measured using isocratic reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography method with ultraviolet detection (HPLC-UV, Knauer HPLC system, Knauer, Germany). The quantification of serum Phe concentration was performed by comparing the chromatographic peak area of Phe to that obtained from a known standard solution and to the peak area of the internal standard (N-methyl phenylalanine) with known concentration. Results were reported in μmol/L.
Measurement of serum IMA
Serum IMA levels were measured using ACB test as described previously (Takhshid et al. ). In brief, 50 μL of CoCl 2 6H 2 O (Sigma-Aldrich Lot: 83 K8154) solution (1 g/L) was added to 200 μl of patient serum, followed by vigorous mixing, and 10-min incubation at room temperature. Dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich Lot: SLBN7593V) (50 μL of a 1.5 g/L solution) was then added and mixed. After 2-min incubation, 1.0 mL of a 9.0 g/L solution of NaCl was added. The absorbance of assay mixtures was read at 470 nm. The blank was prepared similarly with the exclusion of DTT. A direct relationship exists between the level of IMA in the sample and its absorbance. The level of IMA in each sample is expressed as unit of absorbance (ABSU). IMA index was calculated from IMA/serum albumin concentration. All chemicals, including cobalt chloride and DTT, were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Measurement of serum MDA
Serum MDA level, a marker of lipid peroxidation, was measured using the thiobarbituric acid test as described previously (Jentzsch et al. ). Briefly, the serum samples were heated with TBA–HCl reagent (TBA, Sigma-Aldrich Lot: 045M3288V). The mixture is cooled and the pink color formed was read at 532 nm. Serum MDA levels were then calculated and expressed as μmol/L using the standard curve of 1,1,3,3-tetramethoxypropane (TEP, Sigma-Aldrich Lot: 023 K0818). The preparation of standard curve was performed using TEP subjected to the same treatment as that of the serum.
Statistical methods
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 15.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The normal distribution of the continuous variables in the groups was assessed by the Shapiro–Wilk test. The normally distributed variables (IMA, UA and Phe) and variable with an abnormal distribution (MDA, GGT, Alb, and IMA index) were analyzed using the Student’s t-test and Mann–Whitney U test, respectively. The data were presented in mean ± standard deviation (SD) or median (IQR) for variables with or without normal distribution, respectively. Multivariate general linear model controlling potential confounders including age and serum Phe level were then used to determine whether there were any significant differences between PKU patients and control subjects. The Pearson correlation analysis was conducted to assess the correlation of serum IMA level, biochemical and demographic variables. After correlation analysis, those variables that significantly correlated to circulating IMA level were entered into multiple stepwise linear regression analysis to determine which factors were significantly and independently associated with the serum IMA level. Serum Phe tertiles were calculated according to the serum Phe level of the patients. The difference in the serum IMA level across the Phe tertiles of the patients was computed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by LSD post hoc test. For all comparisons, p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.
Results
Comparison of clinical characteristics between subjects with and without PKU
The clinical characteristics of PKU patients and healthy controls are shown in Table 1 . PKU patients had a significantly higher level of serum Phe, MDA, albumin, IMA and IMA index than non-PKU subjects. The mean of serum GGT activity level was similar in the PKU group and non-PKU subjects. Blood UA level was also similar in the groups (Table 1 ). In multivariate analysis and after adjustment for potential confounders including age, and serum Phe, significant differences observed between PKU patients and control subjects regarding serum level of MDA, UA, IMA and IMA index (Table 2 ). Table 1 Demographic characteristics and biochemical measurements in the PKU patients and healthy control subjects Variable Control group ( n = 50) PKU group ( n = 50) P value Male/Female, n 21/29 25/25 0.161 Age (year) b 16.5(15.0) 7.0(8.5) 0.0 Phe (μmole/L) a 84.5 ± 26.2 363.4 ± 198.5 0.0 MDA (µmole/L) b 14.7(5.3) 22.7(5.6) 0.0 Uric acid (mg/dl) a 4.2 ± 1.6 4.1 ± 1.4 0.664 GGT (U/L) b 22.0(7.8) 23.0(10.0) 0.290 Albumin (gr/dl) b 4.6(0.44) 5.4(0.9) 0.001 IMA (ABSU) a 0.176 ± 0.090 0.361 ± 0.159 0.0 IMA index b 0.038(0.020) 0.072(0.040) 0.0 Phe , serum phenyalanine; MDA , Malondealdehyde; GGT , γ- glutamyl transferase; IMA , Ischemia modified albumin; ABSU , absorbance unit. Student- t test and Mann-Whitney U test were used for comparing variables with (a) or without normal (b) distribution between groups, respectively. Values are presented as mean ± SD or median (IQR) Table 2 Biochemical measurements in the PKU patients and Non- PKU subjects after adjustment for confounding factors including age and serum Phe level Variable Control group PKU group P value MDA (μmole/L) 12.7 ± 2.2 20.6 ± 0.9 0.003 Uric acid (mg/dl) 5.0 ± 0.42 3.7 ± 0.18 0.017 GGT (U/L) 21.1 ± 3.7 25.2 ± 1.6 0.281 Albumin (gr/dl) 4.1 ± 0.16 5.4 ± 0.17 0.001 IMA (ABSU) 0.082 ± 0.048 0.295 ± 0.020 0.000 IMA index 0.024 ± 0.010 0.056 ± 0.004 0.010 MDA , Malondealdehyde; GGT , γ- glutamyl transferase; IMA , Ischemia modified albumin; ABSU , absorbance unit. Values are presented as mean ± SD. Multivariate general linear model with group as the factor and age and serum Phe level as covariates was used to determine any significant differences between PKU patients and control subjects
Correlation between serum IMA and clinical parameters
Pearson correlation analysis of serum IMA levels with various variables is shown in Table 3 . Serum IMA levels were positively correlated with MDA ( r = 0.340; p = 0.026) and UA ( r = 0.314; p = 0.034) in healthy control subjects. In the PKU patients serum IMA level was negatively correlated with serum Phe ( r = −0.410; p = 0.004) (whereas it had a positive correlation with MDA ( r = 0.585; p = 0.000) and UA ( r = 0.600; p = 0.000) (Table 3 and Fig. 1 ). These variables entered into stepwise multiple regression models. The results of stepwise analysis revealed that MDA and UA (β = 0.451, P = 0.001 and β = 0.351, P = 0.012, respectively) were independent predictors of serum IMA level in the PKU patients. MDA accounted for 34.2% of the variance, whereas 11.1% is accounted for UA. Table 3 Correlations of serum IMA levels with various variables in PKU patients and control subjects PKU patients Control subjects Variable r P value r P value Age −0.172 0.253 0.181 0.207 Phe −0.410 0.004* 0.271 0.090 MDA 0.585 0.000* 0.340 0.026* Uric acid 0.600 0.000* 0.314 0.034* GGT 0.180 0.253 0.143 0.350 Albumin −0.066 0.658 −0.044 0.766 MDA , Malondialdehyde; GGT , γ- glutamyl transferase; IMA , Ischemia modified albumin; Phe , serum phenylalanine. Values are correlation coefficients (r) and P values. Pearson’s correlation test was used to examine the correlation between serum IMA and other variables. * Statistically significant Fig. 1 Corrleation of serum IMA levels in the PKU patients with serum phenylalanine and MDA levels. IMA: Ischemia modified albumin, ABSU: absorbance unit
Serum IMA levels in PKU patients according to tertiles of serum phenylalanine concentrations
The relationship between Phe tertiles and IMA levels has been shown in Fig. 2 . PKU patients with the lowest serum Phe tertile (< 266 μmole/L) had significantly higher serum IMA concentrations in comparison with those who were in the second tertile (266–412 μmole/L) and third tertile (> 412 μmole/L) ( P < 0.05). The level of IMA index was also higher in the patients with the lowest serum Phe tertile compared to those in the second and third tertile ( P < 0.05). No significant difference was found between the second and third tertile groups. Fig. 2 Serum IMA levels in the PKU patients according to tertiles of serum phenylalanine concentrations. Values are presented as mean ± SD. The differences of serum IMA across serum phenylalanine tertiles were tested using ANOVA and least significant difference ( LSD ) as post hoc test. IMA: Ischemia modified albumin, ABSU: absorbance unit. * P < 0.05 compared to control group. #P < 0.05 compared to second and third tertiles
Discussion
Due to role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of some PKU-associated disorders, most notably brain disorders, and the benefits of anti-oxidants therapy in improving these disorders (Ribas et al. ), monitoring the status of oxidative stress is very important for timely intervention and management of the disease. IMA assay is a fast, simple, reliable, low cost, and sensitive marker of oxidative stress that is frequently used for monitoring oxidative stress in many conditions (Voudris et al. ; Seshadri Reddy et al. ). In this study, we measured the serum level of IMA in the treated-PKU patients and evaluated its association with the alteration in the level of three known serum markers of oxidative stress including serum MDA, UA, and GGT levels and also with the level of serum Phe, as an index of stringency in the restricted diet of the patients.
The results of the current study indicated a significant increase in the serum level of MDA and a decrease in the serum level of UA in the treated-PKU patients compared to healthy subjects. These findings are in accordance with the data reported by other researchers and confirmed the presence of oxidative stress in the PKU patients (Sitta et al. , ). GGT is located at the cell membrane of numerous tissues including liver, kidney, and pancreas. This enzyme involves in the degradation of reduced glutathione (GSH), a vital antioxidant that plays a critical role in the homeostasis of oxidative stress. An elevated level of serum GGT is routinely used for diagnosing cholestasis and alcoholism. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that serum GGT, in its normal physiological range, is a sensitive marker for the evaluation of oxidative stress status in several conditions (Lee et al. ). However, the serum activity of GGT in the our PKU patients was not significantly different from healthy control subjects. Our findings also showed a significant elevated level of IMA and IMA/albumin in the PKU patients compared to non-PKU control subjects. A positive significant correlation between IMA and MDA and between IMA and UA was also observed. Furthermore, MDA was the most important predictor of serum IMA level in the PKU patients (β = 0.451, P = 0.001), suggesting that oxidative stress is the main determining factor of IMA level in the PKU patients. Similar findings were obtained from other pathological conditions which were associated with elevated level of oxidative stress (Guven et al. ; Oncel et al. ), indicating the efficiency of IMA assay for evaluation of oxidative status in PKU patients.
Oxidative stress occurrs when the balance between the production of oxidative substances such as ROS and their neutralization by the body antioxidant defense system is disrupted. Therefore, the presence of oxidative in the PKU patients may be the consequence of two possible causes. The first one is the hyperphenylalaninemia-induced ROS production, especially in the PKU patients with late diagnosis or in those with poor metabolic control. (Sanayama et al. ; Okano and Nagasaka ). In this context, an increase in the production of oxidation products of lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids in animal models of hyperphenyalanemia and in the PKU patients with a high level of serum Phe has been demonstrated (Sanayama et al. ). Furthermore, some studies have reported a positive correlation between the serum concentration of Phe and the level of oxidative stress markers such as MDA (Sanayama et al. ) and PAB value (Tavana et al. ) in PKU patients, suggesting major role of hyperphenylalaninemia in inducing oxidative stress in these patients. The second proposed cause of oxidative stress in the PKU patients is deficiencies in the enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidant system of PKU patients, mainly in those who are under extremely restricted diet. Indeed, deficiencies in the circulating levels of several natural antioxidant including coenzyme Q10, alpha tocopherol, L-carnitine, beta-carotene, which the later causes a reduction in the activity of glutathione peroxidase, have been demonstrated in PKU patients (Sitta et al. ; Rocha and Martins ). The improvement in antioxidant status of these patients following dietary intake of antioxidant such as L-carnitine, selenium, vitamin E and C, confirmed the role of antioxidant deficiencies in oxidative stress of PKU patients (Sitta et al. , Martinez-Cruz et al. ). In the current study, all PKU patients, regardless of their serum Phe levels, showed a higher level of serum IMA than healthy control subjects. In addition, our results revealed a significant negative correlation between the serum levels of Phe and IMA, suggesting a higher level of oxidative stress in the patients with lower level of serum Phe. Because the stringency in restriction diet of PKU patients is reflected by their level of serum Phe, this inverse relationship may be described by a higher level of antioxidants deficiency in the PKU patients that strictly adhered to the restricted diet. In this context, Sitta et al. have shown a significant lower level of L-carnitine in the PKU patients with strict adherence to restricted diet compared to patients with poor adherence to the diet, indicating higher level of oxidative stress in patients who strictly adhere to the protein-restricted diet (Sitta et al. ). Sanayama et al. ( ) have suggested that serum concentration of Phe in the PKU patients should be kept below 700–800 μmol/l to prevent oxidative stress. The mean of serum Phe concentration in our treated-PKU patients was about 363.4 μmol/l. This data suggests that oxidative stress in PKU patients is an important concern even in the well control treated-PKU patients with the low level of serum Phe. The reasons for the discrepancy between the findings of different studies have not been clear. However, it may be attributed to the difference in dietary regimen, age of the patients, and the method used for the evaluation of oxidative stress. In conclusion, results obtained in this study suggested that serum IMA level is increased in the PKU patients and could be used to monitor the status of oxidative stress in these patients.