Introduction
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system (CNS). One of the diagnostic features of MS is the presence of white matter (WM) lesions in the brain and spinal cord, detected with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), reflecting a variable extent of myelin and/or neuronal damage (Lassmann ; Trapp et al. ; Bjartmar et al. ). Concurrent with the lesions are a range of clinical symptoms that can vary considerably between patients. For some, these clinical manifestations are a“lifelong occasional nuisance”, while others experience severe incapacity (DeLuca et al. ). This disparity in disability outcome appears to be unrelated to the use of disease modifying therapies (Tremlett et al. ; Karim et al. ; Shirani et al. ; Zhang et al. ; Pittock and Rodriguez ; Curtiss ).
What is apparent is that disability in MS involves a failure of functional connectivity in the CNS (Faivre et al. ; Lyksborg et al. ). One of the most studied mechanisms in MS relates to injuries in WM connectivity involving both functional and structural connectivity. This is in turn related to inadequate remyelination of axons following myelin loss and may result in neurodegeneration if demyelination is not addressed timeously and sufficiently (van Rensburg et al. ; Bartzokis ). While axons are myelinated by oligodendrocytes, remyelination is accomplished by oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs), the adult stem cells resident in the CNS that mature into oligodendrocytes (Barnett and Prineas ). The risk factors for preventing OPCs from remyelinating the axons have not yet been fully established, presenting an opportune field for scientific investigation in MS. However, it is already apparent that insufficient myelination and the consequent increased disability is unlikely to be related to a single cause, and may rather result from a combination of various genetic and lifestyle factors that have already shown such associations (Ascherio et al. ; Thouvenot et al. ; Manouchehrinia et al. ; Moccia et al. ; Tettey et al. ; Nelson et al. ; Swank and Dugan ; D’hooghe et al. ; van Rensburg et al. ; Davis et al. ). An important risk factor for inhibition of myelin synthesis is iron deficiency, since myelin production is dependent on sufficient energy production in OPCs and mature oligodendrocytes (van Rensburg and van Toorn ; Bartzokis ; Connor and Menzies ; Phillips et al. ). Importantly, iron deficiency, reflected by blood iron parameters, is associated with significant morbidity and mortality as it can adversely affect neurocognitive development and function, work productivity and may even result in death (Phatlhane et al. ).
Assessment of disability in MS is greatly aided by objective measuring instruments, such as the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) as described by Kurtzke ( ). The EDSS is used in clinical studies as a ‘gold standard’ with a range between 0 and 10, where higher values indicate greater disability. Patients having EDSS values below 3 for extended periods of time are regarded as having a ‘benign disease course’ (DeLuca et al. ; Pittock and Rodriguez ).
Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) has been employed in MS as a method to investigate the association between disability and microstructural properties of WM, thus highlighting damage not macroscopically visible on conventional neuroimaging (Sbardella et al. ).
Studies have shown that low FA values could be indicative of myelin damage or demyelination as an impediment in the directional selectivity of water molecule movement within tissue (Liu et al. ); therefore FA is anticipated to be lower in MS patients than healthy controls, relating to dysfunction and disability (i.e. higher EDSS values). It is however not clear whether all people diagnosed with MS have lower FA irrespective of their disability status. Significantly lower FA has been found in specific white matter tracts (WMTs) of patients in some studies but not in others (Liu et al. ; Cesar et al. ; Llufriu et al. ; Koenig et al. ; Hasan et al. ; Onu et al. ). Some authors also found that FA was inversely associated with disease duration, while other studies showed no such associations (Asaf et al. ; Rashid et al. ). Since published results are not consistent, an “extremes of outcome” strategy was employed in the present study to investigate the role of FA in MS cases who are extremely discordant for clinical status (EDSS ≤ 3 and ≥6). Grouping patients from the opposite ends of the disability spectrum reveals crucial differences by reducing the sample size necessary to observe an effect while substantially increasing statistical power (DeLuca et al. ).
This strategy was further employed to investigate associations between iron parameters, FA and disability. Since biochemical testing is the only option available for clinicians to determine and monitor iron levels in patients, it is important to assess whether blood iron can be used as a proxy for brain iron. The role of iron in MS has been debated (reviewed by van Rensburg et al. ) and the detection of brain iron deposits in some MS patients has raised concern to the extent that some have advocated reduced iron intake or removal of iron via chelation therapy in order to reduce oxidative free iron. Clinical trials with iron chelators in MS have however not been successful in all patients, while severe side effects have been experienced (Weigel et al. ). Several natural iron chelators are present in the brain, such as transferrin (Tf) and melatonin (Evans et al. ; Limson et al. ). A recent study has reviewed the role of melatonin in MS (Anderson and Rodriguez ). While the benefits of melatonin to patients are evident, care has to be taken not to chelate iron that could be essential for myelination. It is important to note that previous chelation studies with deferoxamine excluded patients with low iron, low ferritin or anemia (Weigel et al. ). Alternatively, for patients with severe iron deficiency due to genetic variations (Moremi et al. ), long-term iron supplementation has been suggested as an intervention strategy (van Toorn et al. ).
Studies to investigate the relationship of blood iron to brain iron have shown that injection of iron isomaltoside-1000 in the tail vain of iron deficient mice corrected the regional brain iron deficiencies in the mice without producing iron overload in any of the brain regions studied, involving both diurnal and regional regulation (Unger et al. ). Iron regulatory proteins found in gastric enterocytes (Anderson et al. ) have been identified at the blood brain barrier (Simpson et al. ) as well as the choroid plexus (Rouault et al. ), suggesting that blood iron concentrations may be related to brain iron when the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is intact.
The objectives of the present study were to investigate (1) the relationship between FA and disability in patients with MS and (2) whether blood iron parameters were associated with FA and disability.
Methods
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Stellenbosch (N07/09/203 and N10/01/021) and the Health and Wellness Science Research Ethics Committee of the Cape Peninsula University of Technology (REC-230408-014), in line with the ethical guidelines provided by the Declaration of Helsinki ( ). Control results were obtained from a concurrent study (Stellenbosch University Ethics Committee approval number M07/05/019). Written informed consent was obtained from all subjects and the ethical standard of confidentiality has been upheld. Patients, n = 107, 93 females and 14 males with neurologically confirmed MS, according to the criteria of McDonald et al. ( ) were included in the study. Twenty females underwent DTI studies; they also completed an MRI screening form. EDSS assessments (Kurtzke ) were performed at the time of the MRI by a specially trained clinician. To increase the statistical power in this small sample and to obtain homogeneity in the study group, only female patients with EDSS values ≤3.0 and ≥6.0 were included in the DTI study. This was according to the extremes of outcome method whereby patients with low versus high disability scores (EDSS ≤3 and ≥6 respectively) were grouped and the data analysed and compared. Of the 20 patients identified, 16 completed the DTI assessment. Of the four who did not have the scans, two were claustrophobic, one decided against having the scan and one did not arrive. In 5 patients the scans could not be used for DTI analysis due to subject movement or illegible data, therefore leaving 11 patients with useable DTI data. The 11 patients were between 37 and 57 years of age, with an EDSS range of 1.0–7.5 and a diagnosis of MS for more than 4 years. The control group consisted of 12 healthy females subjected to MRI in the concurrent study (Lochner et al. ).
Brain imaging protocol
Patients were scanned with a Siemens Magnetom Allegra 3.0 Tesla (T) MRI scanner at the Cape Universities Brain Imaging Centre (CUBIC), Tygerberg, South Africa. Diffusion- weighted images were acquired in axial orientation on a standard four-channel transmit-receive RF head coil with the following parameters: 2×2×2 mm 3 resolution, field-of-view of 220 mm, TR = 9500 ms, TE = 88 ms, 70 slices, distance factor of 0, 2x GRAPPA acceleration, 30 b = 1000 mm/s2 directions and 3 b = 0 mm/s2 reference images. Scan acquisition was repeated 3 times.
Imaging analysis
Data was imported into FSL (FMRIB Software Library 5.0.1; and MATLAB R2012b for initial pre-processing and analysis (Smith et al. ). Data were corrected for eddy current distortions and the three acquisitions were affine registered to the b = 0 mm/s2 of the first acquisition. For each acquisition, outliers were calculated at a Z-value of the 25th and 75th percentile of the tensor estimate. Rigorous criteria were applied regarding scan quality; values further than three standard deviations from the mean estimate were excluded. The three acquisitions were averaged for export to the TBSS toolbox of FSL. Maps of FA were created by fitting a linear tensor model to the average of the diffusion-weighted acquisitions. Brain extraction was performed with FSL BET (Brain Extraction Tool) at a threshold of 0.3. Images were then processed with the TBSS pipeline, which has been described previously (Smith et al. ). After processing with TBSS, 48 white matter regions-of-interest were extracted from the FA data, utilizing the built-in atlas of Mori and colleagues (Mori et al. ). Figure 1 shows the flowchart outlining the steps for TBSS analysis. The 48 tracts were the following: 1: Middle cerebellar peduncle; 2: Pontine crossing tract; 3: Genu of corpus callosum (CC);4: Body of CC; 5: Splenium of CC; 6: Fornix; 7 and 8: Corticospinal tract right hemisphere (RH) and left hemisphere (LH); 9 and 10: Medial lemniscus RH and LH;11 and 12: Inferior cerebellar peduncle RH and LH;13 and 14: Superior cerebellar peduncle RH and LH;15 and 16: Cerebral peduncle RH and LH;17 and 18: Anterior limb of internal capsule RH and LH; 19 and 20: Posterior limb of internal capsule RH and LH; 21 and 22: Retrolenticular part of internal capsule RH and LH; 23 and 24: Anterior corona radiata RH and LH; 25 and 26: Superior corona radiata RH and LH; 27 and 28: Posterior corona radiata RH and LH; 29 and 30: Posterior thalamic radiation RH and LH; 31 and 32: Sagittal stratum RH and LH; 33 and 34: External capsule RH and LH; 35 and 36: Cingulum RH and LH; 37 and 38: Fornix RH and LH; 39 and 40: Superior longitudinal fasciculus RH and LH; 41 and 42: Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus RH and LH; 43 and 44: Cingulum (hippocampus) RH and LH; 45 and 46: Uncinate fasciculus RH and LH; 47 and 48: Tapetum RH and LH.
Biochemical analysis
Biochemical analysis was done as published previously (Davis et al. ; van Rensburg et al. 2006, 2012). Blood samples were collected from the MS patient cohort by phlebotomy in the morning between 9 h00 and 10 h30 to standardize for diurnal variation. Laboratory analysis of the following blood iron parameters was performed by an accredited pathology laboratory: hemoglobin (Hb), serum iron, transferrin (Tf) and ferritin. Tf saturation (%Tf sat) was calculated according to the formula: % saturation = [iron / (transferrin × 25.6)] × 100%. C-reactive protein (CRP) was also measured to control for inflammation. Hemoglobin was determined by full blood count analysis on a Beckman Coulter auto analyser, while serum iron, ferritin, Tf and %Tf sat as well as CRP were determined using a Siemens Advia 1800 auto-analyser.
Statistical analysis
Relationships between iron parameters and the EDSS were tested using Spearman correlations. FA was obtained for 48 WMTs in each of the 11 patients, giving a total of 528 WMTs for analysis. An exploratory factor analysis (using parallel analysis to indicate the number of factors) was used to demonstrate the viability of using average FA over all WMTs as a summary measure of white matter microstructure. Factor analysis indicated FA as the single factor that explained 85% of the variance in the data. This served as motivation for calculating mean FA values over all the WMTs and then using the mean FA as a representative variable. The data were analysed using Statistica 13. One-way ANOVA was used to compare mean FA values between the groups. Fisher least significant difference (LSD) tests were used for post hoc comparison. Non-parametric Mann-Whitney U and Kruskall-Wallis tests were also conducted parallel to the ANOVA (F-tests), but in general the data was found to conform reasonably to the normality assumptions, and interpretations therefore utilised the ANOVA F-test p -values. Spearman correlations were used for testing relationships between biochemical variables and FA. Since the control subjects were younger than the patients and FA varies with age, an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was done to determine age effects. Multiple testing across analyses of FA variables in conjunction with the small sample size is recognized as a restriction in the interpretation of the results, and therefore the results should be regarded as exploratory. Patients were grouped according to their EDSS scores to evaluate associations between FA and patient disability. P -values were considered significant at <0.05.
Results
Fractional Anisotropy (FA) in MS versus controls
Table 1 provides the demographic and clinical characteristics of 11 patients with MS and 12 healthy controls admitted to the MRI study. The table differentiates the two patient groups of high and low disability according to the EDSS; with 3 patients in the EDSS score range of 6.0–7.5 and 8 in the score range of 1.0–3.0. Table 1 Demographic and clinical characteristics of patients with MS and healthy controls Characteristics Controls MS patients with high EDSS MS patients with low EDSS No of patients (%) 12 3 (27) 8 (72) Age at MRI, mean (range) *27.6 (18–43) 52.7 (48–57) 47 (37–55) EDSS score, mean (range) NA 6.7 (6.0–7.5) 1.4 (1.0–4.5) Disease duration, y, mean (range) NA 16.7 (11–23) 8.5 (4–19) Immunomodulatory therapy, n (%) NA 2 (67) 2 (25) Betaferon NA 0 1 (13) Avonex NA 1 (33) 1 (13) Novantrone NA 1 (33) 0 Untreated NA 1 (33) 6 (75) Mean (±SD) FA of WMTs 0.45 (±0.036) a 0.34(±0.067) b 0.44 (±0.014) a *Age at MRI of patients with MS significantly different from controls, p < 0.01 a,b FA significantly lower in patients with high EDSS than controls and patients with low EDSS ( p < 0.01) High EDSS: EDSS scores ≥6; Low EDSS: EDSS ≤3.0
The mean FA in patients with MS ( n = 11) was lower than the mean FA in the controls ( n = 12), but the difference was not significant (0.41 ± 0.056 vs 0.45 ± 0.036 respectively; p = 0.07) (Online Resource Table OR 1 ). FA in patients with MS was lower than controls in all 48 tracts except the CC splenium and the fornix, where the FA values were similar (Online Resource Table OR 1 ). The difference in FA values between cases and controls had p-values <0.05 in 19 of the 48 tracts (39.6%). Of these, 4 demonstrated highly significant differences ( p < 0.01): the inferior cerebellar peduncle RH, the superior cerebellar peduncle LH, the posterior limb of the internal capsule RH and the rentolenticular internal capsule RH (Online Resource Table OR 1 ).
When the patients with MS were grouped according to disability status, patients with low disability had FA values similar to controls (0.44 ± 0.014 and 0.45 ± 0.036; p = 0.5) respectively, while patients with high disability had significantly lower FA values (0.34 0.067) than controls or patients with low disability status (p < 0.01) (Table 1 and Online Resource Table OR 2 ).
Associations between FA and the EDSS in MS patients
The EDSS was inversely associated with the FA in all of the WMTs, indicating that in addition to associations with microstructure, lower FA was suggestive of myelin dysfunction (Online Resource Table OR 3 ). When the patients with MS were grouped according to extremes of disability status, the FA for patients with low EDSS was similar to control values in all the tracts, while the FA values for the patients with high EDSS were significantly lower than the FA for the controls and the low EDSS group, except for the sagittal stratum RH and sagittal stratum LH which had similar FA values for all three groups (low EDSS, high EDSS and controls). Figure 2 and Online Resource Table OR 2 show the mean FA of patients with high EDSS (0.34 ± 0.067), low EDSS (0.44 ± 0.014) and controls (0.45 ± 0.036). Fig. 1 Flowchart outlining the steps for TBSS analysis. After preprocessing, the FA maps were created ( a ). These images were co registered to a target FA template and an MNI152 T1 template respectively ( b - c ). After registration the images were resliced and a mean FA skeleton was created ( d ). Distance maps were created for the purpose of projecting individual FA images to the mean skeleton ( e ). After projection, a GLM model was fitted to each skeleton voxel to examine WM differences ( f ). The statistical threshold was p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons Fig. 2 Mean FA for controls, patients with low EDSS and patients with high EDSS scores. There was no difference between the FA of the controls and patients with low EDSS scores (a; p = 0.5), while the FA was significantly lower in patients with high EDSS scores compared to controls and patients with low EDSS scores (b; p < 0.01)
In individual tracts, similar results were evident (Online Resource Table OR 2 ): In the CC, which may show demyelination from the early stages of the disease (Llufriu et al. ), patients with low disability had FA values similar to controls in the CC body; ( p = 0.802), CC genu; ( p = 0.816) and CC splenium; ( p = 0.115), while there were significant differences between patients with high EDSS and controls in these tracts: CC body; ( p = 0.015), CC genu; ( p = 0.017) and CC splenium; ( p = 0.007) and between patients with high EDSS versus low EDSS: CC body; ( p = 0.013), CC genu; ( p = 0.016) and CC splenium; ( p = 0.0007). In the fornix, related to cognitive function and memory, patients with low EDSS also had similar FA values to controls ( p = 0.135), while there were significant differences between patients with high EDSS and controls ( p = 0.008) and between patients with high EDSS and low EDSS ( p = 0.001). A similar result was found in the superior longitudinal fasciculus LH, a WMT involved with cognition and movement, such that there was no difference between patients with low EDSS and controls ( p = 0.82), while there were highly significant differences between patients with high EDSS and low EDSS ( p = 0.0002) and patients with high EDSS and controls ( p = 0.0001). This pattern that patients with low EDSS scores had FA values similar to controls, while the patients with high EDSS scores had lower FA values, was seen in 46 of the 48 WMTs (95.8%), with the exception of the superior cerebellar peduncle (LH) and the posterior limb of internal capsule (RH) (Online Resource Table OR 2 ).
Patients with low EDSS scores had similar mean FA values to controls, despite the fact that the patients were on average older than the controls ( p < 0.01), suggesting that factors other than age were the primary drivers of FA differences in these subjects. An ANCOVA done on the three groups (controls, high EDSS and low EDSS) indicated a significant effect of high EDSS on mean FA after controlling for age [(F2, 19) = 8.45, p = 0.002], while the effect of low EDSS on mean FA after controlling for age was not significant ( p = 0.507). Overall, FA increases during childhood and adolescence, reaches a peak between 20 and 42 years of age, and then decreases; however, rates and timing of development and degradation in different trajectories vary regionally (Lebel et al. ).
Associations of blood iron parameters and FA in individual WMTs
When associations between iron parameters and FA were assessed in the individual 48 tracts, it is notable that the associations are positive, with some tracts showing high r-values and low p -values (Online Resource Table OR 4 ). In the case of serum iron, 12 of the tracts (27%) had p-values <0.05: the inferior cerebellar peduncle (RH), anterior limb of the internal capsule (LH), posterior limb of the internal capsule (LH), retrolenticular internal capsule (RH), anterior corona radiata (RH), superior corona radiate (RH and LH), posterior corona radiata (RH and LH), external capsule (RH), superior longitudinal fasciculus (RH and LH) and superior fronto-occipital fasciculus (LH). Spearman correlations ranged from weakly correlated ( r = 0.12) for the sagittal stratum, to strongly correlated ( r = 0.74) for the retrolenticular internal capsule RH (Online Resource Table OR 4 ).
For the %Tf sat, in 25 of the 48 WMTs assessed the positive associations had p-values of < 0.05, while in 14 of these tracts the associations were highly significant ( p < 0.01; Online Resource Table OR 4 ). Spearman correlation r-values ranged between 0.22 (weakly correlated) for the CC genu to 0.84 (strongly correlated) for the external capsule RH. In particular, the superior fronto occipital fasciculus (LH) showed an association between the %Tf sat and FA of p < 0.001 ( r = 0.83). Overall, the mean FA of all the WMTs correlated significantly with the %Tf sat ( r = 0.77, p = 0.01), shown in Fig. 3 . Tf is the primary carrier protein entering the brain from the circulation (Simpson et al. ) and the amount of iron transported by Tf is expressed as the %Tf sat, calculated from the ratio of serum iron and Tf concentration (see Methods). This result concurs with a recent study by Phatlhane et al. ( ) that showed a cut-off point for a normal %Tf sat concentration of >20%. The present study independently shows that most MS patients with %Tf sat values of >20% had high FA values. These patients also formed part of the low EDSS group. (Fig. 3 : blue circles denote patients with low EDSS values, while red squares denote patients with high EDSS). Fig. 3 Association of mean FA for all the WMTs with the % Tf saturation (r = 0.77, p = 0.01). Blue circles denote patients with low EDSS values, while red squares denote patients with high EDSS
Associations between FA, disease duration and blood iron parameters in MS patients
A significant inverse association was found between the mean FA and disease duration ( r = − 0.79, p < 0.01). No associations were found between FA and age of first symptoms; however, significant associations were found between mean FA and age at diagnosis in the corticospinal tract RH (r = 0.74, p < 0.01), the superior corona radiata LH ( r = 0.75, p < 0.01), as well as the fornix/stria terminalis RH ( r = 0.68, p = 0.02), the superior corona radiata RH ( r = 0.63, p = 0.04) and the posterior corona radiata LH (p = 0.04) (Online Resource Table OR 5 ).
Table 2 shows positive Spearman correlations (r-values) between mean FA and all iron parameters tested, ranging from weakly correlated for the carrier protein Tf ( r = 0.07), moderately correlated for Hb ( r = 0.37) to strongly correlated for the amount of iron on Tf (%Tf sat; r = 0.77) (Table 2 ). The association between the mean FA and %Tf sat was significant (p < 0.01). No negative associations were found (Table 2 ): Table 2 Associations between mean FA and Iron Parameters Iron parameter Spearman r Spearman p-value Mean FA Haemoglobin 0.37 0.26 Mean FA Serum iron 0.59 0.06 Mean FA % Tf saturation 0.77 <0.01 Mean FA Serum Transferrin 0.07 0.84 Mean FA Serum Ferritin 0.59 0.09 A significant association was found between FA and %Tf sat (shown in bold)
Significant inverse associations were found between disease duration and Hb ( r = − 0.64, p = 0.04) and % Tf sat ( r = − 0.69, p = 0.02; shown in bold) (Table 3 ): Table 3 Associations between Disease Duration and Iron Parameters Iron parameter Spearman r Spearman p Disease duration Haemoglobin −0.64 0.04 Disease duration Serum iron −0.52 0.1 Disease duration % Tf saturation −0.69 0.02 Disease duration Serum Transferrin −0.1 0.77 Disease duration Serum Ferritin −0.28 0.47 A significant association was found between FA and %Tf sat (shown in bold)
% Transferrin saturation and EDSS
In order to determine whether iron parameters would show an association with the EDSS, iron parameters were analysed in all 107 patients. Male gender and smoking were found to be confounders. When males and smokers were excluded, there was a trend for inverse associations between serum iron ( p = 0.08) and %Tf sat ( p = 0.05) with the EDSS, such that greater disability was shown to be associated with lower iron parameters (Fig. 4 ). Iron parameters differ between males and females (Phatlhane et al. ), while iron inhaled from tobacco smoke could alter blood iron parameters (Weinberg ). Fig. 4 Trend for association of % Tf sat with the EDSS in 76 non-smoking females diagnosed with MS (p = 0.05)
Hemoglobin, ferritin, transferrin and FA
Neither blood concentrations of Hb nor the iron carrier protein Tf showed an association with FA in any of the WMTs assessed (see Discussion). (Online Resource Tables OR 4 and OR 6 ). After adjusting for high CRP, ferritin showed positive associations ( p < 0.05; r-values 0.69–0.79) in 9 of the tracts (middle cerebellar peduncle, medial lemniscus RH, inferior cerebellar peduncle RH, anterior limb of internal capsule LH, retrolenticular internal capsule RH, posterior thalamic radiation RH, sagittal stratum LH, superior longitudinal fasciculus LH and the superior fronto occipital fasciculus RH), while 4 other tracts showed highly significant associations ( p < 0.01, r-values 0.81–0.92; strongly correlated): posterior limb of internal capsule LH, anterior corona radiata RH, anterior corona radiata LH and the external capsule RH (Online Resource Table OR 4 ). Both CRP and ferritin are acute-phase proteins that are elevated during inflammation. Therefore, serum ferritin levels were interpreted together with CRP concentrations, since elevated CRP is exclusively a marker for inflammation, while ferritin could be raised either as a result of increased iron levels or as a result of inflammation. CRP therefore helps to distinguish between these options.
Discussion
The present study investigated associations between FA, blood iron parameters and disability in patients with MS. Twenty females with MS were included in a DTI study; scans of 11 subjects yielded useable FA data. When the FA was calculated for all 11 patients as a single group, decreased mean FA was found in the patient group compared to the control group (Online Resource Table OR 1 ). This is a similar finding to results of other studies (Onu et al. ; Asaf et al. ; Temel et al. ). A novel finding of the present study was that when the patients with MS were grouped according to their EDSS scores, patients who had a low disability status (EDSS scores ≤3.0), had FA values similar to controls in 46 of the 48 WMTs investigated (Online Resource Table OR 2 ). This suggests that the three patients with high disability scores (≥ 6.0) masked the favorable FA outcome of the other 8 patients who had low EDSS scores (≤ 3.0), so that the MS group as a whole seemed to have lower FA values. Similar results were found by Keser et al. ( ) using the cognitive impairment index in MS. This finding may explain the inconsistencies found in the literature regarding differences in FA between patients with MS and controls (see Introduction). The patients with low EDSS had fewer white matter lesions than the patients with high EDSS scores (Herbert ), indicating that the patients with low lesion loads experienced FA values similar to controls within the WMTs. Additionally, inverse associations were found between FA and the EDSS in all the WMTs; in this patient group higher FA values were thus associated with milder patient disability measures. The associations were significant (p < 0.05) in 32 of the 48 tracts. When the threshold was lowered to include only associations of p < 0.01, 16 of the tracts still showed significant associations (Online Resource Table OR 3 ).
A second novel finding of this study is that FA was positively associated with some of the blood iron parameters evaluated (Online Resource Table OR 4 ). While Hb was not associated with FA in any of the 48 WMTs, FA showed significant positive associations with serum iron, suggesting that higher blood iron parameters were beneficial with respect to FA. Spearman correlations showed that the FA in 25 of the tracts was strongly correlated ( r = 0.63 to r = 0.84) with the %Tf sat. The amount of iron transported by Tf is expressed as the %Tf sat, and is calculated using a formula (see Methods). Tf-bound iron delivered to cells is used for multiple metabolic processes, including energy production by the mitochondria (Lane et al. ).
As the associations of FA with blood markers are a novel area of investigation, association of peripheral markers of iron with the EDSS was furthermore assessed in 107 MS patients, 93 females and 14 males. Smoking and gender emerged as confounders: when smokers and males were excluded, a trend was found for an inverse association of the EDSS with serum iron ( p = 0.08) and %Tf sat ( p = 0.05) in 76 non-smoking females. Iron parameters differ between males and females (Phatlhane et al. ; van Rensburg et al. ), while iron inhaled from tobacco smoke could alter blood iron parameters (Weinberg ). Smoking was shown to have a deleterious effect on disability in MS patients (Davis et al. ).
This result may confirm previous studies suggesting that higher blood iron values (and the iron which is transported into the brain) is important for white matter synthesis and maintenance by the oligodendrocytes, that are known to have the highest iron concentration of all cells in the brain under normal conditions. The iron is mostly stored in ferritin (Phillips et al. ), which encases iron as hydrate ferric iron-oxide crystals (Xu and Chasteen ). Although the iron in ferritin is a normal part of brain iron metabolism and is available for iron delivery to oligodendrocytes (Todorich et al. ), the iron crystals in ferritin can be registered as “iron deposits” by MRI (Xu et al. ; Syka et al. ). Iron accumulation in white matter lesions is revealed by susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) or T(2) relaxometry (Burgetova et al. ); however the significance of these findings for patient disability is not clear. Although iron deposition in the brain has been regarded as pathological, the study by Burgetova et al. ( ) identified less iron accumulation in patients with larger lesion loads than in patients with smaller lesions. Additionally, Khalil et al. ( ) found that changes over time in R2* relaxation rates in gray matter were not associated with disease activity or changes in disability. Furthermore, notably, Williams et al. ( ) showed that iron deposition was independent of inflammation in a model of MS. Hametner et al. ( ) found a significant decrease of iron in normal appearing white matter (NAWM) in chronic MS, which corresponded with disease duration. This means that lower brain iron in MS could paradoxically play a role in perpetuating the disease process.
Likewise studies investigating FA and iron in the brain have been contradictory. Xu et al. ( ) found that while FA decreased with aging, elevated iron concentration was associated with increased FA. Syka et al. ( ) also found that increased iron, as estimated by relaxometry (the T2 relaxation rate RR) showed a strong positive relationship with FA. Both studies interpreted increased FA in the presence of increased iron as an artefact due to the magnetic properties of iron, specifically in ferritin or haemosiderin. However, a study by Phillips et al. ( ), investigating FA in WM of patients with Huntington’s disease, interpreted increased FA in the presence of higher brain iron as maintenance of myelin microstructure. This study employed T2* weighted (iron/ferritin sensitive) MRI to investigate iron associated with remyelination. They showed that iron content in WMTs may vary due to a decrease in oligodendrocyte numbers due to myelin damage or an increase during the regenerative phase when they are involved in remyelination. As oligodendrocytes are the cells with the highest iron content in the brain, an increase in their numbers translated to an increase in iron content. This was interpreted as a repair mechanism that ensured adequate function in the early stages of the disease (Phillips et al. ).
In the present study, the most significant favourable associations between both the FA and the EDSS were seen with the %Tf sat. Tf in the blood delivers iron to the barrier cells of the BBB and the choroid plexus, where the iron is transferred to Tf synthesized by oligodendrocytes in the brain (Simpson et al. ; Rouault et al. ; Jahanshad et al. ). This may suggest that the iron transported into the brain may be of significance for white matter synthesis, maintenance and functionality, since the energy needed to create myelin is extremely high (Connor and Menzies ). According to Rensvold et al. ( ), iron deprivation decreases mitochondrial biogenesis through transcriptional regulation of both nuclear and mitochondrial genes. Hence, if there is a lack of iron together with other requirements of the electron transport chain in the mitochondria (van Rensburg et al. ) myelination and remyelination cannot occur. Myelination is associated with brain function well into adulthood, not only during development (Bartzokis ; Schmithorst and Wilke ; Bengtsson et al. ; Vollmann et al. ).
In patients with MS, iron absorption from the gut may be impaired due to inflammation, or genetic variations that cause reduced iron uptake or increased iron loss (Moremi et al. ; van Rensburg et al. ). Furthermore, the significant inverse associations between disease duration and Hb ( p = 0.04) and disease duration and %Tf sat ( p = 0.02) suggest that iron parameters may decrease over time in patients with MS (Table 3 ). The lack of significant associations of FA values with Hb may indicate that the iron in this protein is not available for WM synthesis (Online Resource Table OR 4 ). In patients with iron deficiency, Hb is the last parameter to decrease, since iron incorporation into Hb for oxygen delivery is preferentially protected (van Toorn et al. ). Measuring Hb alone may therefore not provide a dependable estimate of iron availability for myelin functionality. Nevertheless, a study by Rodrigo et al. ( ) found that 28 out of 72 patients with MS (39%) had iron deficiency anaemia (Hb < 13 g/dl in males and <12 g/dl in females). Van Rensburg and van Toorn ( ) have previously suggested that measurement of all the iron parameters in patients with MS would provide important information regarding myelin function and hence could influence the management of patients with MS.
In the present study, serum ferritin showed significant ( p < 0.05) positive associations with FA in 13 WMTs after adjusting for high CRP, while 4 of these tracts showed Spearman correlations of 0.81–0.92 (strongly correlated) (Online Resource Table OR 4 ). Apart from its storage capacity, ferritin also functions as an antioxidant to “mop up” any iron that is released due to haemorrhage (Worthington et al. ) and therefore ferritin has a buffering function that protects the CNS from toxic free iron. However, while ferritin is often used as a surrogate marker for iron concentration, ferritin levels in serum are regulated by several factors including inflammation, and it is therefore not sufficient to only measure ferritin levels to determine the iron status of a patient with MS.
As far as we are aware, the present study is the first to investigate the association of FA of WMTs with blood iron parameters done concurrently with MRI. Jahanshad et al. ( ) determined FA in healthy adult twins who had serum Tf measured when they were adolescents. They found increased FA in several brain regions (external capsule, superior longitudinal fasciculus, and the cingulum bilaterally) associated with lower Tf data previously determined. Since there is generally an inverse correlation between serum iron levels and Tf (Jahanshad et al. ), these authors concluded that having higher iron levels in adolescence predicted improved myelination as adults. In the present study there was no association of FA with serum Tf levels (Online Resource Table OR 6 ). The difference could be explained by the different times of Tf measurement in the two studies, or by the fact that Tf concentrations may be variable in patients with MS due to inflammation (Zeman et al. ), since Tf is a negative acute phase protein.
Limitations and strengths of the study
The first major limitation of this study is the small number of patients for whom the DTI could be used for analysis. In the “high EDSS” group, FA data of only 3 patients could be used. It is however notable that the FA data from these 3 patients needed to be analysed separately since the true outcome of FA in the whole cohort was masked by the significantly decreased FA in these patients. A second limitation of the study was multiple testing across analyses of FA variables. Future studies, including a larger sample size, should be done to verify these results and should furthermore include biochemical measurements of the control subjects to determine whether iron parameters also have positive associations with FA in healthy controls.
The strength of the study was the availability of blood iron parameters and EDSS measurements in patients with MS at the time of MRI, which presented the opportunity to evaluate the association of systemic iron concentrations and patient disability with FA.
Conclusions
Despite the small sample size, this study had some novel findings. First, the FA of WMTs was lower in patients with MS compared to controls only in those who had high EDSS scores. Subjects who had EDSS scores ≤3.0 (i.e. who had “benign” disease outcomes) had FA values similar to the FA values of the control group and this finding was not related to age or disease duration. Second, the associations found between FA, EDSS and iron parameters, especially with %Tf sat, support previous studies that indicated that iron availability to the WM may be a requirement for optimal myelin microstructure and function. In the present study no negative associations were found between FA and blood iron parameters (serum iron, %Tf sat and ferritin), suggesting that higher blood iron parameters were not detrimental to WM. Third, the lack of association between FA and Hb suggests that the iron in this protein is not available for WM synthesis. However, the significant inverse association found between Hb and disease duration suggests that iron deficiency may increase over time in patients with MS and that it may be important to assess iron parameters regularly.