Introduction
Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsies (PDE) are a cause of childhood epilepsy due to rare autosomal recessive disorders. They classically present with seizures from the first days of life, not responsive to conventional antiepileptic drugs (Baxter ). In PDEs, seizures generally cease after parenteral pyridoxine (vitamin B6) administration. The diagnosis is established by the occurrence of seizures after pyridoxine withdrawal (within days to weeks) and cessation after a second trial of pyridoxine administration (Baxter ). Atypical forms include seizures that are only partly responsive to pyridoxine (named pyridoxine-responsive epilepsies), and the late-onset forms (Baxter ).
There are few reports on the epidemiology of PDEs, with a considerable heterogeneity of published prevalence, ranging from 1:20.000 in a German pyridoxine trial (Ebinger et al. ) to 1:396.000 in a survey of cases admitted to neuropediatric clinics of the Netherlands (Been et al. ), and 1:687.000 in the UK and Ireland (Baxter et al. ; Baxter ).
Mutations in the gene encoding for the Alpha-aminoadipic-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH7A1) have been identified at first instance, resulting in the related enzyme deficiency (Millis et al. ; Stockler et al. ; Yeghiazaryan et al. ). More than 80 gene mutation variants are associated with the expression of ALDH7A1, among which 9 represent 61% of the total mutations (Bennett et al. ; Salomons et al. ). A different genetic variant is also due to mutations in the gene encoding for the pyridoxal-5′-phosphate oxidase enzyme (PNPO), on chromosome 17q21.2 (Plecko et al. ), and it is responsive to pyridoxal-5′-phosphate (PLP) administration (Plecko et al. ).
Currently, there are few clinical studies describing the diagnostic and therapeutic management of PDEs. The first was published in 1999, in which the authors described the clinical features and electroencephalogram patterns of French neonates with PDE (Nabbout et al. ). A more recent cohort study was performed on eight Chinese patients, in which the relation between clinical diagnosis, therapeutic options and ALDH7A1 gene mutations were analysed (Xue et al. ). The authors described a heterogeneous clinical presentation, with seizures in the neonatal period and different degrees of developmental delay, electroencephalogram patterns, varying from normal to focal and multifocal discharges, and molecular analysis showing classical mutations and a novel IVS11 + 1G > A splice site variant (Xue et al. ). Other reports in regards have been published as single case studies.
Herein, we present a retrospective observational study, led on a cohort of pediatric patients, describing the clinical, electroencephalogram, molecular features of children with PDEs and the diagnostic and therapeutic flow-chart performed on the studied patients.
Experimental procedures
We performed a retrospective observational study on children with PDEs, diagnosed and followed-up in Italian Pediatric Departments. The study was multicentre and the following Pediatric Units were included: General Pediatrics O.U., Policlinico-Vittorio-Emanuele Hospital, University of Catania, Italy; Paediatric Neurology O.U., Giannina Gaslini Institute, University of Genoa, Italy; Pediatric Neurology O.U., Padua Policlinic University Hospital, University of Padua, Italy; Pediatric Neurology O.U., Sant’ Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, University of Bologna, Italy; and Pediatric Neurology O.U., Bambin-Gesù Hospital, University of Rome, Italy.
In our study we included all patients with intractable seizures of unknown origins, from birth to three years of age, who responded to Pyridoxine administration, at first instance by IV route and then as maintenance therapy by oral route.
We excluded children over three years of age, with seizures responding to standard anticonvulsant therapy, with a known origin of seizures (such as metabolic or genetic causes, different from pyridoxine gene alterations), not responding to Pyridoxine administration.
Data were retrospectively analysed from records of PDE patients from January 2016 to January 2017.
In each centre, the authors collected data of a cohort of children admitted for intractable seizures, responsive to pyridoxine administration and resistant to other anticonvulsant therapies. The following clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic data were collected from medical records of each patient: patient demographic data (including age and sex), parents’ consanguinity, anomalies during pregnancy, post-partum and perinatal anomalies, neonatal associated diseases, gestational age, birth weight, APGAR at birth, metabolic neonatal diseases, presence of anaemia, seizure onset in hours or days, seizures semiotic and duration, neurological development assessment at onset, inter- and critical- EEG at onset and follow-up, biochemical blood and urine profile, administration of antiepileptic drugs, age at first pyridoxine administration and route and dosage of pyridoxine, adverse reaction to pyridoxine, age at first pyridoxal-phosphate (PLP) administration (when applicable), development of pyridoxine/PLP dependency, neuroimaging results, course of epilepsy, developmental milestones (age of independent sitting and walking, speech, school performance and IQ), presence of any developmental delay, neurological outcome, associated health problems, genetic tests and results, follow-up at 6-, 12-, 24- months after the first pyridoxine administration. In our study the degree of cognitive dysfunction was measured by clinical neurologic examination at follow-up and analysis of school performances.
Records of patients who had not performed adequate neurologic diagnostic chart were excluded from our analyses. We also excluded all patients with known major neurologic diseases and/or syndromes, with neurologic symptoms due to metabolic causes (eg. tremors from hypocalcaemia and/or hypoglycaemia), with major cardiovascular and surgery diseases and/or with known hypersensitivity to pyridoxine.
Collected data were screened by three independent neuropediatricians to determine whether they met the inclusion and exclusion criteria and then reported into a central database to perform statistical analysis.
At admission all patients’ parents signed a consent form on every treatment (invasive procedures, mechanical ventilation, drug medications) had to be performed to every patient in each NICU. They also signed a consent form on the collection of data to write the present study.
The study protocol conformed to the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki as revised in 2000 (Riis ) and was approved by the ethic committee of the University of Catania, Italy.
All authors declare not to present any conflict of interest in the publication of the present study.
Statistical analysis
For statistical evaluation, we used dedicated software: JMP (produce of SAS Institute Inc. Cary, NC 27513–2414, USA) e GraphPad 5.0 (La Jolla, CA, U.S.A.). We reported qualitative variables as percentage and quantitative ones as mean ± standard deviation. For those variables represented as mean ± standard deviation, normal distribution was checked by Kolmogorov-Smirnov One-Sample Test and statistics for kurtosis and symmetry. Chi-square test was used to compare qualitative variables. We moreover used the Spearman’s Rho correlation tests to calculate the strength of the association between linear variables.
P -values under 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Results
In this study, we included 16 patients, 13 males (81.25%) and 3 females (18.75%), with a mean age at first admission of 9.61 years ±9.17 standard deviation (SD). The main clinical data of the studied patients are shown in Table 1 . Table 1 clinical details of the studied patients Case Nos Consanguinity Term birth by week of gestation Fetal distress Peri-natal diseases Onset of seizures (days of life) Onset of B6 treatment (days of life) Psychomotor delay Genetic mutation 1 – 34 – – 3 60 – ALDH7A1 2 + 37 – – 3 30 + PROSC 3 + 40 – – 9 31 + PROSC 4 – 33 – + 1 3 + PNPO 5 – 40 – – 1 3 + ALDH7A1 6 + 40 + + 2 40 + ALDH7A1 7 + 39 – – 1 3 + ALDH7A1 8 – 41 – – 5 12 – ALDH7A1 9 – 40 – – 600 600 – PNPO 10 – 38 – – 5 48 + ALDH7A1 11 – 40 – – 4 20 + ALDH7A1 12 – 34 – + 90 185 + negative 13 – 40 – – 150 940 + ALDH7A1 14 – 41 – + 2 4 + negative 15 – 38 – – 1 30 + negative 16 + 39 – – 30 60 + PNPO
Five (31.25%) patients had a family history of consanguinity (four patients were sons of first line cousins, one of third line cousins). All patients had a normal obstetrical anamnesis except for one female patient, in whom cerebral malformations were diagnosed in utero (for the presence of cortical thickening, corpus callosum agenesis and cerebellar hypoplasia).
As far as the perinatal history of the studied patients was concerned, 4 (25%) presented with respiratory distress at birth, but no metabolic diseases, anaemia or other neonatal pathologies were recorded. Their mean gestational age was 38.37 ± 2.57 weeks of gestation, and birth weight was 3.235.18 g ± 673.49 SD. Their mean APGAR index at the first minute was 8.06 ± 1.84 and at the fifth was 9.68 ± 0.47.
In our cohort, the onset of seizures varied from the first days of life after birth to months of age. Symptoms occurred during the neonatal age (3.08 ± 2.39 days of life) in 12 (75%) patients, while 4 of them (25%) had a later onset (217.5 ± 259.66 days of life).
The most common type of seizures was generalized tonic-clonic seizures in 7 patients (43.75%); other semiotic features included: focal motor seizures in 4 children (25%), infantile spasms in 3 (18.75%), myoclonus in 3 (18.75%), and generalized hypertonia in 2 (12.5%). In 8 (50%) patients, seizures were associated with ocular manifestation (upward or downward eye deviation). Mean duration of seizures was 8.06 ± 9.21 min.
All patients underwent an electroencephalogram (EEG) study at admission that showed the presence of burst suppression in 7 patients (43.75%), multiple spikes in 4 (25%), spike and wave activity in 5 (31.25%), and, paroxysmal multifocal abnormalities in 2 (12.5%). In addition, a poorly organized and/or slow background activity was found in 3 patients (18.75%). These abnormalities were predominantly generalized, involving all cortical areas, but when focal, they mostly involved the frontal and centro-temporal areas, rarely the occipital lobes. EEG was normal in 2 children (12.5%). EEG at follow-up, after the onset of pyridoxine treatment, normalized in 13 patients (81.25%), with late improvements also in the rest of children.
All patients underwent brain MRI that was normal in 9 (56.25%); a temporal and frontal atrophy was found in 3 patients (18.75%); one patient had a dilatation of CSF spaces in the frontal and temporal lobes and left ventricles; cortical thickening, corpus callosum agenesis and cerebellar hypoplasia was confirmed in that patient with a foetal diagnosis; one patient had a medullar vein thrombosis; one presented with T2-white matter hyper-intensities, swollen cerebral hemispheres, vermis and cerebellar hemisphere hypoplasia.
As far as laboratory tests were concerned, only 6 (37.5%) patients underwent a dosage of serum and/or urine alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde and pipecolic acid, the last was increased in 3 patients, and normal in the other cases. The rest of children (62.5%) had an ex-juvantibus diagnosis.
Before pyridoxine administration, other anticonvulsant drugs were used in 93.75% of patients, with consequent onset of drug-resistance. Phenobarbital was used in 14 patients (87.5%) and was the most frequently drug used as first line treatment. Other administered anticonvulsant drugs were: benzodiazepine in 6 patients (37.5%), levetiracetam in 4 (25%), valproic acid in 4 (25%), midazolam in 4 (25%), vigabatrin in 2 (12.5%), phenytoin in 2 (12.5%), ACTH in 1 (6.25%). Only one patient directly received pyridoxine as first line treatment. Mono-administration of anticonvulsant before pyridoxine treatment was performed in 5 patients (31.25%), while the others received anticonvulsants in combination of two or more drugs (68.75%).
Pyridoxine was started in all patients with a variable period of time between the onset of seizures and first administration of IV or oral pyridoxine. The onset of treatment was started at a mean time of 137.54 days of life ±268.39 SD. In Table 2 is represented the time between seizures onset and first pyridoxine administration in days of life. The mean time between the onset of symptoms and first pyridoxine administration was 75.46 days ±199.39 SD (Table 2 ). We also calculated the Spearman’s Rho correlation to know whether there was an association between the age at diagnosis, and the time between the onset of seizures and the first treatment administration, which was statistically significant ( r = 0.66; p < 0.05). This meant that the elder was the age at diagnosis, the longer was the time between seizures onset and the administration of first pyridoxine dose. Table 2 time lapsing between onset of seizures and first pyridoxine administration Case Nos Onset of seizures (days of life) Onset of B6 treatment (days of life) Time lapsing between seizures onset and the first treatment administration (days of life) 1 3 60 57 2 3 30 27 3 9 31 22 4 1 3 2 5 1 3 2 6 2 40 38 7 1 3 2 8 5 12 7 9 600 600 0 10 5 48 43 11 4 20 16 12 90 185 95 13 150 940 790 14 2 4 2 15 1 30 29 16 30 60 30
Pyridoxine was administered intravenously (IV) in 9 cases (56.25%) (an IV bolus of 100 mg of B6 vitamin), then continued orally as a single dosage daily. In all other cases (43.75%) pyridoxine was started orally. When given by oral route, different dosages were used, with a range between 10 and 50 mg/Kg once a day. None of the patients had short- or long-term adverse reaction after pyridoxine administration. All acute symptoms remitted after pyridoxine treatment.
Pyridoxine dependency after treatment was only stated in 8 patients (50%) with the onset of B6-dependency after few hours of administration.
As far as genetic diagnostic tests were concerned, we found that 8 patients (50%) were positive for ALDH7A1 mutation, 3 (18.75%) had a mutation of the PNPO gene, 2 (12.5%) had a mutation of the PROSC gene, and 3 (18.75%) had negative genetic results.
Analysis among groups
We further divided our cohort into two subgroups: 1) patients carrying the classic genetic mutation ALDH7A1; 2) patients carrying other than the classic mutation (PNPO, PROSC and Unknown mutations). In our cohort 50% of patients was ALDH7A1 positive.
We compared the following variables between groups: age at seizure onset, birth weight, gestational age, EEG features, neuroimaging results, age at first pyridoxine administration, number of anticonvulsant-drugs before pyridoxine administration, and outcome at follow-up visits. We found that ALDH7A1 had a higher prevalence of burst-suppression results at EEG ( p < 0.05), that the number of anticonvulsant drugs used in the “other mutations” group was higher than those in the ALDH7A1 group (p < 0.05), abnormal neuroimaging results were found in higher percentage in ALDH7A1 patients (p < 0.05), and the outcome features at follow-up visits (in terms of seizure-free patients and developmental delay) were better for ALDH7A1 patients (p < 0.05 respectively for both measures) (Table 3 ). Table 3 Comparison between groups on clinical, EEG, neuroimaging, treatment and outcome features of patients with classic genetic mutations (ALDH7A1) and other different mutations (including PNPO, PROSC and negative cases) ALDH7A1 patients Other mutations p -value t-di student and chi-square test Age at seizure onset (days of life ± SD) 21.37 ± 51.99 92.25 ± 207.37 ns* Birth weight (gr ± SD) 3332.87 ± 430.31 3137.5 ± 874.63 ns* Gestational age (weeks ± SD) 39.0 ± 2.20 37.75 ± 2.91 ns* Burst suppression at EEG 62.5% 37.5% p < 0.05 Spikes and waves at EEG 37.5% 37.5% ns* Polyspikes at EEG 25% 25% ns* Age at first pyridoxine administration (days of life ± SD) 140.5 ± 323.75 117.87 ± 203.34 ns* Number of anticonvulsant drugs used before pyridoxine administration 2.25 ± 1.58 4.87 ± 2.74 p < 0.05 Abnormal neuroimaging 62.5% 25% p < 0.05 Seizure-free patients at follow-up visits 62.5% 12.5% p < 0.05 Developmental delay 75% 87.5% p < 0.05 Bold values are those with a statistical significance ns * not statistically significant
Analysis of follow-up
At follow-up visits (6-, 12-, and 24- months after pyridoxine treatment onset) 43.75% of patients were seizure-free, 37.5% had sporadic convulsive episodes, and 18.75% had a decrease frequency of convulsive episodes.
In our study we assessed the neurological outcome of all included patients. We found that 81.25% developed developmental delay, 56.25% developed motor delay, and 87.5% had moderate to severe cognitive disabilities. Patients with psychomotor delay acquired some developmental milestones with significant delay (they were able to sit independently at about 12 months, first speech at about 24 months, started walking at about 24 months), presenting moderate to severe cognitive disabilities and learning difficulties. Cognitive dysfunctions were assessed by testing attention, language and learning skills, visual-spatial processes abilities, and executive functioning skills.
When we divided those patients with classic genetic mutation (ALDHA1 mutation) vs those with other mutations (PNPO, PROSC or negative genetic test), we found that those patients with the classic form had a better outcome at follow-up visits, in terms of seizure-free patients and developmental-delay, with respect to those with different genetic mutations, and these results were statistical significant ( p < 0.05) (Table 3 ).
Discussion
We performed a retrospective observational study on pyridoxine-dependent epilepsies in childhood. To our knowledge, this is the largest cohort study ever published. Other studies have been published before, reporting 4 to 8 patients respectively (Nabbout et al. ; Xue et al. ; Oliveira et al. ; Koul ). Other reports have been published as single cases, since the first PDE description in 1954 (Hunt et al. ; Goutières and Aicardi ). This lack of a global vision has caused an under-extimation of the condition, as the disease is usually not suspected before neonatal seizures are considered resistant to conventional anticonvulsant drugs. In regards, in our study we found that 93.75% (15/16) patients underwent conventional anticonvulsant therapy before starting pyridoxine administration and 62.5% had an ex-iuvantibus diagnosis, as specific serum diagnostic tests had been performed in only 37.5% of patients, by alpha-AASA and pipecolic acid blood and serum dosage.
We found a higher male prevalence (M:F = 16:3). This prevalence was also stated in previous studies (Nabbout et al. ; Xue et al. ; Oliveira et al. ; Koul ), but it has been never discussed. It is known that PDE is transmitted via autosomal recessive inheritance, mostly involving mutations on chromosome 5 (Stockler et al. ; Yeghiazaryan et al. ), but, until now, no data have been published on epigenetic factors influencing its phenotypic expression, possibly related to a higher prevalence of the disease in male patients rather than females. Nevertheless, considering the small sample of patients studied in all these papers, due to the limited incidence of the disease, further studies have to confirm this data.
As far as the pathogenesis of PDEs is concerned, following the description of pipecolic acid as a first diagnostic marker of PDE (Millis et al. ; Stockler et al. ; Yeghiazaryan et al. ; Bennett et al. ; Salomons et al. ; Plecko et al. ), mutations in the gene for alpha-aminoadipic-semialdehyde dehydrogenase and resultant enzyme deficiency were identified as the major underlying genetic cause of PDE (Millis et al. ; Stockler et al. ; Yeghiazaryan et al. ; Bennett et al. ; Salomons et al. ; Plecko et al. ). This enzyme (also known as ALDH7A1 or antiquitin, ATQ) is encoded by the ALDH7A1 or ATQ gene, and its function lies in the cabolism of lysine. ATQ (ALDH7A1) takes part in lysine catabolism in the brain and in the liver. This catabolism can be performed by two biochemical pathways: the saccaropine pathway, mainly in the liver and many other tissues; the pipecolic acid pathway, mainly dominant in the brain (Millis et al. ; Stockler et al. ; Yeghiazaryan et al. ; Bennett et al. ; Salomons et al. ; Plecko et al. ). While the saccaropine pathway is mitochondrial, the pipecolic acid one is peroxisomal (Millis et al. ; Stockler et al. ; Yeghiazaryan et al. ; Bennett et al. ; Salomons et al. ; Plecko et al. ). Convergence of the two pathways occurs at the level of alpha-AASA formation, which occurs in the cytosol, where alpha-AASA is in spontaneous equilibrium with the O 1 -piperideine-6-carboxylic acid (P6C) and is oxidized by ATQ to α-aminoadipic acid, which is eventually oxidized to produce acetyl CoA (Millis et al. ; Stockler et al. ; Yeghiazaryan et al. ; Bennett et al. ; Salomons et al. ; Plecko et al. ). This reaction requires NAD as cofactor. It also protects from oxidative stress by metabolizing a number of highly reactive aldehydes derived from lipid peroxidation (Millis et al. ; Stockler et al. ; Yeghiazaryan et al. ; Bennett et al. ; Salomons et al. ; Plecko et al. ). In ATQ deficiency, alpha-AASA accumulates due to a block in α-aminoadipic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (α-AASA-DH = ALDH7A1 = ATQ). P6C undergoes chemical condensation with pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) resulting in PLP deficiency. Pipecolic acid (PA) accumulates due to backpressure from the enzymatic block (Millis et al. ; Stockler et al. ; Yeghiazaryan et al. ; Bennett et al. ; Salomons et al. ; Plecko et al. ). These metabolites are therefore response to cerebaral oxidative stress resulting in neuronal hyperactivity, and in vit B6 deficiency, important for its neurotropic properties above all in neonatal-life and in early infancy.
In our study, our patients were born after an uneventful pregnancy, the majority of whom born on term, with a birth weight within the normal percentiles, and a normal perinatal period. Only 4 patients (25%) had a respiratory distress at birth, while five patients (31.25%) had a family history of consanguinity. These results may be indicative of no environmental pathognomonic risk factors for the onset of the disease.
In our cohort, seizures not always started during the neonatal period. 75% of patients presented their symptoms within the neonatal age, while 25% had a later onset. This is in contrast with prior literature data affirming that seizures usually occur very early, mostly in the first days of life (Nabbout et al. ). There are also reports of children with first seizures occurring as late as three years of age (Koul ).
In order to study any genetic influence on the onset of seizures, we divided our cohort into two subgroups: 1) those with the classic ALDH7A1 mutation and 2) those with other mutations different than the classic one; nevertheless we did not find any statistical difference on the age of seizures onset between groups (Table 3 ). This highlights the need for ampler size cohort and epigenetic studies.
Literature data report seizures of various type in PDE patients, including: focal seizures, generalized tonic-clonic seizures, myoclonus, and infantile spasms (Nabbout et al. ). In our cohort, the most frequent seizure type was generalized tonic-clonic (43.75%), but we also had focal seizures (25%), infantile spasms (18.75%), myoclonus (18.75%), and focal or generalized hypertonia (12.5%). These symptoms were associated with ocular movement abnormalities in 50% of patients.
Some EEG studies in PDEs confirm the presence of variable patterns characterized by burst-suppression, polymorphous tracings, spikes, poly-spikes, high voltage rhythmic delta slowing, and hypsarrythmia (Nabbout et al. ). In our patients, the most frequent EEG pattern was the “burst-suppression” one (43.75%); other described patterns were: poly-spikes (25%), spike and wave activity (31.25%), and paroxysmal multifocal abnormalities (12.5%). A poorly organized and/or slow background activity was also observed in 18.75% of EEG results. These abnormalities were predominantly generalized, involving all cortical areas, but when focal, they mostly involved the frontal and centro-temporal areas, rarely the occipital lobes. EEG was normal in 2 children (12.5%). EEG at follow-up, after pyridoxine treatment, normalized in 81.25% of patients, with late improvements also in the rest of children. When we divided patients according their genetic variants, we found a statistically significant higher prevalence of burst-suppression in the ALDH7A1 group, while the other EEG patterns were equally distributed between the two groups. Therefore, in our study the burst-suppression pattern was predominantly pathognomonic for the ALDH7A1 forms.
PDE diagnosis is usually established by iv or oral pyridoxine trials. Inclusion criteria are: 1) cessation of clinical and electrographic seizures following iv administration of 100 mg pyridoxine 2) no seizure recurrence while on long-term treatment (Stockler et al. ). Nevertheless serum/urine laboratory tests, including dosage of alpa-AASA, pipecolic acid, pyridoxine and pyridoxal-5′-phosphate oxidase can confirm the diagnosis. In our study laboratory tests were only performed in 37.5%, showing an increase of pipecolic acid in 3 patients. The rest of children (62.5%) had an ex-iuvantibus diagnosis. In our cohort 8/16 (50%) were tested for B6 dependency after treatment, and in all of them the test was positive.
The lack of a standardized diagnostic work-up is often the cause for a delay in the diagnosis. Conventional anticonvulsant drugs are often used as first-line treatment and only after drug-resistance, a diagnostic suspect is performed. In our study 93.75% of patients underwent a treatment with conventional anticonvulsant drugs, the most used of which was phenobarbital. Only one patient directly received pyridoxine as first line treatment. Mono-administration of anticonvulsant before pyridoxine treatment was performed in 31.25%, while the others received anticonvulsants in combination of two or more drugs (68.75%). These results are extremely important, as these patients underwent antiepileptic therapy, with related adverse events, incorrectly administered for this condition. Moreover the time between the onset of seizures and the first dose of pyridoxine administration was 75.46 days ±199.39 SD, with a mean age of first pyridoxine administration of 137.54 days of life ±268.39 SD, that is a long time for the diagnosis to be performed. This highlights the strong delay in diagnosing the condition, the incorrect use of conventional drugs in these patients, with possible onset of adverse events, and the need for a correct and fast diagnostic work-up to include the diagnosis of PDEs. We moreover calculated the Spearman’s Rho correlation to know whether there was an association between the age at diagnosis and the time lapsing between the onset of seizures and the first pyridoxine administration. This test resulted statistically significant ( r = 0.66; p < 0.05). Therefore the elder was the age at diagnosis, the longer was the time between seizures onset and administration of the first pyridoxine dose. This is important for those late-onset forms that are difficult to recognize as PDEs and should be more deeply described in literature. Interestingly, when we divided our cohort according to their genetic variants, we found a statistical significant higher number of anticonvulsant drugs used in the “other mutations” group, even if the clinical presentation and the timing of seizures onset did not vary significantly between groups. This may be ascribed to the fact that unconventional forms are less known than those caused by conventional mutations and their diagnosis usually results more difficult, driving the therapeutic choice towards other forms of infantile epilepsies.
In regards, as suggested in the literature, an IV pyridoxine test should be performed in all those children up to the age of three years, with seizures of unknown origin, as first line treatment, before starting a therapy with conventional anticonvulsant drugs (Fujikawa et al. ).
In our cohort we noticed that if on one hand iv pyridoxine administration was standardized (it was performed in 56.52% of cases as iv bolus of 100 mg of B6 vitamin), the oral administration did not follow any therapeutic guidelines, ranging between 50 mg and 600 mg once a day. In literature a daily dose of 15–30 mg/Kg has been recommended for lifelong treatment, and this should be started after the iv bolus test if positive (Koul ). Moreover the oral route of pyridoxine at 50 mg/Kg twice a day for two days was found as effective as the iv route to confirm the diagnosis (Stockler et al. ; Koul ). None of our patients had short- or long-term adverse reactions after pyridoxine administration. All acute symptoms remitted after pyridoxine treatment.
Genetic studies in our cohort confirmed the presence of ALDH7A1 mutation in 50% of patients, PNPO mutation in 18.75%, PROSC mutation in 12.5% and negative results in 18.75%. Both PNPO and PROSC genetic mutations have already been described in literature (Plecko et al. ; Schmitt et al. ; Vitaliti et al. ; Darin et al. ), but our results confirmed that more has to be done in the genetic field of this condition, as those negative cases, had a positive clinical diagnosis. These cases were not submitted to whole genome sequencing, and probably more detailed genetic tests would help in their diagnosis. This also means that PDEs are not the results of a single mutation, but of different genetic mutations that may have a least common denominator. The importance of their genetic diagnosis is also referred to some pathognomonic features and prognostic aspects of the different genes involved, as when we divided our cohort into the two subgroups we found that ALDH7A1 patients had a higher prevalence of burst-suppression at EEG ( p < 0.05), that the number of anticonvulsant drugs used before pyridoxine administration in the “other mutations” group was higher than those used in the ALDH7A1 group (p < 0.05), ALDH7A1 patients had a higher prevalence of abnormal neuroimaging results (p < 0.05), and better outcome features at follow-up visits (in terms of seizure-free patients and developmental delay) (p < 0.05 respectively for both measures).
Further studies have to confirm these data. Genetic studies are also important to determine those cases not responsive to pyridoxine, as the PNPO ones that should be treated with implementation of pyridoxal-phosphate.
Finally, as far as short- and long-term follow-up after treatment is concerned, the condition seems to have a severe prognosis. In fact, seizures significantly improved in all patients, but 81.25% of children presented developmental delay, 56.25% motor delay and 87.5% had moderate to severe cognitive disabilities, even if no variables have been found associated with worst or better prognosis. Further studies should clarify if early diagnosis, early start of treatment and/or specific genetic mutations can be of help for a better prognosis.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the importance of our study relies on the need of a deeper knowledge of PDEs, in terms of early diagnosis, avoiding incorrect treatment and related adverse events, knowledge of clinical and EEG pathognomonic features that could help the diagnostic work-up, and the knowledge of genetic aspects of the disease. We suggest considering the condition in all children with drug-resistant epilepsies up to the age of three years, when no underlying cause is found. We moreover suggest performing a pyridoxine trial with IV or oral pyridoxine to all children up to three years of age with convulsion without an underlying cause, using pyridoxine as first line treatment, before starting conventional anticonvulsant drugs. Finally, more clinical studies are mandatory to draft standardized guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of the condition.