Introduction
Asparagine synthetase deficiency (ASNSD) (OMIM #615574) is a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism characterized by severe developmental delay, congenital microcephaly, excessive irritability, spasticity and refractory seizures. The genetic defect is in ASNS , which encodes the protein asparagine synthetase (EC 6.3.5.4). It is involved in the de novo synthesis of amino acid asparagine by transfer of ammonia from glutamine and aspartate (Ruzzo et al. ). Deficiency of asparagine in brain or accumulation of aspartate/glutamate results in the neurological manifestations. The condition is extremely rare and all the reported cases have been identified by the next generation sequencing (Alfadhel et al. ; Ben-Salem et al. ; Palmer et al. ; Ruzzo et al. ; Seidahmed et al. ; Yamamoto et al. ; Sun et al. ). Till date, fourteen pathogenic variants in twelve unrelated families have been reported. We report another case with a novel variant in ASNS and review the literature.
Patient and methods
Patient
We report a nonconsanguineous Indian family with one affected female child who had unexplained severe developmental delay, epilepsy and congenital microcephaly. Genomic DNA from the proband and parents was extracted from peripheral blood by a whole blood genomic DNA extraction kit (Qiagen, German) after an informed written consent. This study has been approved by Institutional Ethics Committee at All India Institute of Medical Science, New Delhi.
Clinical exome sequencing
DNA extracted from peripheral blood was used to perform targeted gene capture for 6440 clinically relevant genes using Numblegen SeqCap EZ choice XL (Roche, USA) custom capture kit. In short, whole genome libraries were prepared using the Kapa library preparation kit followed by target enrichment using biotinylated probes for targeted genes. The resultant libraries were sequenced to mean > 80-100X coverage on Illumina sequencing platform. The sequences obtained were aligned to human reference genome (GRCh37/hg19) using BWA program (Li H and Durbin R ; Meyer et al. ) and analyzed using Picard and GATK version 3.6 (Li et al. ; McKenna et al. ) to identify variants relevant to the clinical indication. GATK best practices framework was followed for identification of variants in the sample. Gene annotation of the variants was performed using VEP program (McLaren et al. 2010) against the Ensembl release 87 human gene model ( http://www.ensembl.org ). Clinically relevant mutations were annotated using published variants in literature and a set of diseases databases – ClinVar (Landrum et al. ), OMIM (Hamosh et al. ; http://www.omim.org ), GWAS (Welter et al. ; http://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/ ), HGMD (Stenson et al. ; http://www.biobase-international.com/product/hgmd ) and SwissVar (Mottaz et al. ). Common variants were filtered based on allele frequency in 1000Genome Phase 3 (The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium ), ExAC ​(Lek et al. ), EVS, dbSNP147 ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/ ), 1000 Japanese Genome and our internal Indian population database (Nagasaki et al. ). Non-synonymous variants effect is calculated using multiple algorithms such as PolyPhen-2, SIFT, Mutation Taster2, Mutation Assessor and LRT. Annotated files were used for variant interpretation.
Sanger DNA sequencing
Sanger sequencing of PCR amplified products was used to genotype p. A380S variant using both forward primer (5′-GCAGTTTGGTAGGAAGGAAGG-3′) and reverse primer (5′-CCACCTCAAACAACCTATGGA -3′).
Modeling of human asparagine synthetase
The three-dimensional structure provides detailed molecular information about the protein and the impact of mutations on both structure and function. The wild type human asparagine synthetase was homology modeled based on the crystal structure from E. coli (PDB ID: 1CT9) (Larsen et al. ) using MODELLER 8.2 program (Sali & Blundell ) available in Discovery Studio (DS) 2.0 ( ) (Accelrys Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). The sequence similarity in their protein sequence is 55.3%. The verified model was refined by energy minimization programs to remove the steric clash and followed by a short molecular dynamics (MD) simulation for 10 ns to relax the model structure. The mutant Ala380Ser was generated from the wild type with the help of "Build Mutant" protocol. MD simulation was performed on both wild type and mutant structures using Desmond 4.0 (Bowers et al. ) with the help of OPLS2005 force field (Banks et al. ). The quality of the models was verified by PROCHECK (Laskowski et al. ) and Verify 3D (Eisenberg et al. ).
Results
Clinical data
A two and a half years old female child born to a non-consanguineously married couple presented with severe developmental delay, microcephaly, excessive irritability, spasticity and refractory seizures. There was history of fetal hypokinesia on antenatal ultrasound. Child was born at full term by spontaneous vaginal delivery and had no adverse perinatal events. Soon after birth, parents noticed excessive irritability followed by onset of generalized tonic and multifocal clonic seizures at 3 months of age. Seizures were initially refractory and were partially controlled with valproate and clonazepam. She had feeding difficulties and significant failure to thrive. There was non-attainment of any developmental milestones. At evaluation weight was 6.5 Kg (< −3SD) and length for age was 79 cm (< −3SD). Head circumference was 38.30 cm (< −6 SD) suggestive of severe microcephaly. She had left convergent squint and cortical blindness. Fundus examination revealed optic nerve hypoplasia. There was spastic quadriparesis (Fig. 1 a) with hyperreflexia leading to contractures involving bilateral ankle joints. MRI brain showed generalized cerebral atrophy, vermian hypoplasia, and small sized pons (Fig. 1 b to g). Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed multifocal epilepsy. Enzyme assay for Krabbe disease and metachromatic leukodystrophy were normal. Her metabolic workup including liver function tests, renal function tests, serum calcium, phosphate and alkaline phosphatase, acyl carnitine levels, arterial blood gases, lactate, and blood ammonia was normal. Fig. 1 a Proband with extreme spasticity and limb contractures. b Axial T1 W TSW fat suppressed, c T2 W TSE and d T1 W IR MR images of brain reveal generalized cerebral atrophy as evidenced by the prominence of the subarachnoid spaces and parenchymal volume loss. The myelination is proper for age; the posterior limb of internal capsule (PLIC) is myelinated (arrows). The basal ganglia signal intensity appears normal. e Coronal T2 W TSW and f , g sagittal T1 W TSE images of brain reveal inferior vermian hypoplasia (arrow) and decreased size of pons (block arrow). Note the corpus callosum thinning (block arrow in g)
Biochemical studies
All amino acids based on their retention time were detected by using Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) method under specified experimental conditions. Further calculations were based on the area under peak established for a given amino acid of known concentration. UHPLC of the affected child showed low levels of asparagine with normal glutamate and aspartate level. Asparagine level was found to be 9 μmol/L (normal range- 28-65 μmol/L) with retention time 4.167 (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography showing the low peak of asparagine indicated by a black arrow
Supplementary table provides comparison of the present case with the previously reported 19 cases. Table 1 summarizes their phenotypic characteristics. Table 1 Summary of phenotypic characteristics of patients with Asparagine Synthetase Deficiency Symptoms and signs Present study Percentage of occurrence ( N = 20) Term gestation + 89% (17/19) Apgar ≤6 at 1’ 2/8 Apgar at 7–10 at 1’ + 6/8 Apgar ≤6 at 5’ Apgar at 7–10 at 5’ + 8/9 Congenital microcephaly (Head circumference ≤ −2SD) + 80% (16/20) Postnatal progressive microcephaly + 100% (17/17) Severe to profound developmental delay + 100% (19/19) Seizures 70% (14/20) • GTC + 64% (9/14) • Myoclonic − 50% (7/14) • Tonic + 50% (7/14) • Partial complex − 21% (3/14) Neonatal onset + 71% (10/14) Cortical blindness + 100% (13/13) Feeding difficulties + 72% (13/18) (GER in 3) Jitteriness − 78% (11/14) Hyperekplexia − 55% (11/20) Appendicular hypertonia + 95% (19/20) Hyperreflexia + 100% (20/20) Axial hypotonia + 72% (13/18) Dysmorphism • Receding forehead • Big fleshy ears − 76.9% (10/13) 9/10 5/10 Generalized cerebral atrophy + 100% (20/20) Thin corpus callosum − 58.8% (10/17) Enlarged ventricular system − 61% (11/18) Small Pons + 88.8% (16/18) Cerebellar/Inferior vermian hypoplasia + 50% (9/18) Simplified gyral pattern − 80% (16/20) Delayed Myelination − 72.2% (13/18) Mild lactate peak on MRS − 4/6 Abnormality at EEG 90% (18/20) Multiple independent spike foci + 13/18 Hypsarrythmia + 4/18 Decreased plasma Asparaginase levels + 50% (8/16) Undetectable CSF Asparagine levels ND 50% (2/4) Evidence of progressive arrest of fetal head growth NA 58.3% (7/12) Normal metabolic tests, includingacyl carnitine and urine organic acids N 20/20 + Present; − Absent; ‘Min, ND Not done, NA Not available, N Normal, GER Gastroesophageal reflux disease, GTC Generalized Tonic-Clonic, MRS Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, EEG Electroencephalogram, CSF Cerebrospinal fluid
Clinical exome sequencing
Clinical exome analysis showed presence of a novel homozygous missense variation (chr7:97,483,992; C > A; c.1138G > T) in exon 11 that results in the amino acid substitution of Serine for Alanine at codon 380 (p.A380S) (Fig. 3 a). This mutation was found to belong to the C-terminal Asparagine synthetase domain of the protein (Palmer et al. ). The frequency of this mutation on EXAC database is 0.000008313. In silico predictions for this mutation for its effect on protein structure were carried out using Variant Effect Predictor v. 84, which revealed it to be ‘Damaging’ on SIFT v. 5.2.2 and LRT (November 2009 release from dbNSFPv3.1) and ‘Possibly Damaging’ on PolyPhen-2 v. 2.2.2. Online tool Mutation Taster also revealed this mutation to be ‘Damaging’. Sanger confirmation was done for the proband and both the parents. Both parents were carriers of the same mutation (Fig. 3 b). As the diagnosis was confirmed in the proband, the family could be offered prenatal diagnosis at 11 weeks. Fetus was found to be a carrier for the same mutation and a healthy male baby was delivered. Fig. 3 a Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) profile showing homozygous chr7:97483992; C > A (c.1138G > T; p.A380S) mutation. b Family pedigree and electrophoregrams showing the parents to be heterozygous carriers for this mutation. c Cartoon representation of model structure of human asparagine synthetase showing N-terminal domain (yellow) and C-terminal domain (green) having characteristic helix-turn-helix motif (magenta). Side chain of residue Ala380, site of mutation, is shown as ball and stick. d Model structure of wild type (cartoon, green) and e mutant (cartoon, cyan) human asparagine synthetase. Side chain of residue 380 and interacting residues are shown as ball and stick
Modeling studies suggest that the mutation affects the helix-turn-helix motif and affects asparagine synthetase function
Asparagine synthetase (AS) is an enzyme which catalyses the condensation of aspartate and ammonia obtained by hydrolysis of glutamine to form asparagine utilizing ATP. Human AS has 561 amino acids comprising two domains, an N-terminal domain which catalyses the hydrolysis of glutamine to produce ammonia and a C-terminal domain which catalyses the condensation of this ammonia and aspartate to form asparagine. N-terminal domain has two layers of β-sheet where each β-sheet consists of antiparallel strands while C-terminal domain consists of five stranded parallel β-sheet surrounded by 16 helices (Fig. 3 c). The root mean square deviation (RMSD) between model structure and template structure (AS from E. coli ) was 2.48 Å with variations limited to the loop regions. The Ala380Ser mutant is housed on a characteristic helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif in the C-terminal domain and near the binding pocket of ATP and substrate aspartate. The residues in the smaller helix (residue 374–380) of the motif are highly conserved. Ala380 lies at the end of smaller helix of the HTH and it is surrounded by non-polar hydrophobic residues Phe377, Ala386 and Ile438 (Fig. 3 d). In the wild type, Ala380, also a non-polar residue is present in a similar hydrophobic environment. Its role is crucial for substrate binding as it stabilizes this region and orients other non-polar residues through hydrophobic and van der Waal interactions. The replacement of Ala380 by Ser in mutant protein introduces a polar charge leading to disruption of the hydrophobic environment present in the wild type. The non-polar Ala380 side chain lies within the hydrophobic interior of the wild type protein. The polar Ser380 side chain is alien to this environment and is pushed onto the protein surface in mutant. This leads to loss of important non-polar interactions responsible for maintaining the helix-turn-helix motif. The smaller helix of HTH motif also uncoils in the mutant structure as indicated through MD simulation while it is retained as a helix in wild type protein (Fig. 3 e). Moreover, in the absence of these interactions, the two helices in the HTH motif move apart to a distance of 9.2 Å from 5.6 Å in the wild type. These two alterations lead to the loss of the structural characteristics of the typical HTH motif due to which the protein can no longer carry out the necessary function.
Discussion
Asparagine synthetase deficiency is a newly described rare inborn error of metabolism characterized by in utero onset, severe developmental delay, microcephaly, spasticity, refractory seizures and generalized cerebral atrophy. Asparagine synthetase is expressed ubiquitously with higher expression levels in brain (Ruzzo et al. ). Asparagine depletion due to AS deficiency can cause increased neuronal apoptosis leading to brain atrophy and increased neuronal excitability causing seizures and hyperekplexia due to brain accumulation of aspartate and glutamate. Biochemically, the CSF and blood asparagine levels are low. Due to the presence of nonspecific clinical features, clinical diagnosis was hardly ever made prior to the identification of the causative variants by exome sequencing. Exome sequencing has led to the identification of nineteen cases from twelve unrelated families in the past few years (Alfadhel et al. ; Ben-Salem et al. ; Palmer et al. ; Ruzzo et al. ; Seidahmed et al. ; Yamamoto et al. ; Sun et al. ). To date, fourteen variants have been identified in ASNS . This paper adds twentieth case from the thirteenth family with a novel mutation and reviews previous cases to further define this disorder ( Supplementary table ).
ASNS deficiency is a panethnic disorder and has been reported earlier in Iranian Jews, Bangladeshi, Arabian, French Canadian and Indian families. About half of the families had consanguinity with male preponderance. Seven out of 13 had positive family history. Table 1 summarizes the percentages of occurrence of the phenotypic features of the reported patients with ASNS deficiency ( Supplementary table ). Majority of the patients were born at term gestation with poor Apgar score at 1 min in one fourth of the patients. Eighty percent head circumference below -2SD at birth with a mean head circumference of 30.5 cm (± 1.8 SD) in term babies. Eighty five percent affected children had neonatal onset. Progressive microcephaly and severe to profound developmental delay were observed in all the patients with possible follow-up. About 70 % patients had seizures at presentation with onset during neonatal period. The epilepsy phenotype was variable and included generalized tonic clonic, myoclonic and tonic seizures. Half of the patients had hyperkplexia. Our patient had excessive irritability in the neonatal period followed by seizures at 3 months. The seizures in ASNS deficiency are refractory and require multiple antiepileptic drugs. Major EEG findings were multifocal independent spikes and hypsarrhthmia. The other predominant features included cortical blindness, hypertonia and appendicular hypotonia. Characteristic neuroimaging findings included generalized cerebral atrophy, simplified gyral pattern and small pons (Table 1 ). There was no significant dysmorphic clue except for the presence of sloping head, large ears and prominent nose in few patients. Prenatal onset of lag of fetal head growth was observed in 58% of the patients. Metabolic investigations such as liver and renal function tests, blood gases, ammonia, lactate, acyl carnitine levels and urine organic acid analysis were normal in all the patients. Pathophysiologically, asparagine level should be low both in plasma and CSF due to deficient or reduced activity of asparagine synthetase, however such biochemical change may not be seen universally. CSF asparagine levels are one tenth of plasma levels and highly dependent upon the intracellular asparagine synthetase (Hawkins et al. ). Plasma asparagine and aspartate levels were low in 8/16 (50%) and 3/16 patients, respectively. CSF asparagine levels were performed only in 4 patients and two had undetectable levels (Table 1 and Supplementary table ). CSF asparagine levels were not detectable only in 2 patients as these were not performed in the majority. Presence of mild elevation of lactate on Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) in previous few patients suggests possible linkages between asparagine metabolism and mTOR pathways warranting more research (Curatolo P ).
The clinical phenotype associated with this condition overlap with several other causes of primary microcephaly as listed in Table 2 . Mutations in the genes related to Serine biosynthesis defects, glycosylation defects and in CLPB , are few metabolic disorders that can be a close mimicker for this disorder. A triad of neonatal hypertonia, microcephaly and low asparagine level can aid the clinicians in suspecting this disorder from the whole gamut of related disorder. Table 2 Differential diagnosis of congenital microcephaly Etiology Diagnosis Symptom and signs Diagnostic investigations References Hereditary Primary autosomal recessive microcephaly (MCPH) OFC at birth below - 2 or - 3 SD, OFC growth remains poor after birth, Slanting forehead, Prominent nose and ears, Mild to moderate intellectual deterioration, Seizures Multi-gene panel Kinsman and Johnston ; Verloes et al. Autosomal Dominant Upslanting palpebral fissures, Mild forehead slant Mild intellectual subnormality, Seizures Exome sequencing Kinsman and Johnston ; Merlob et al. Developmental malformations of the brain Lissencephaly-Pachygyria Failure to thrive, Gross developmental delay, Severe seizures, Optic nerve hypoplasia, Micro-ophthalmia, MRI Brain Multi-gene panel Kinsman and Johnston ; Back and Plawner ; Verity et al. Miller-Dieker syndrome Prominent forehead, Midface hypoplasia, Upturned nose, Omphalocoele, Lissencephaly MRI Brain, Genetic testing for LIS-1, Chromosomal microarray for sub-microscopic deletions on Chromosome 17p13.3 Kinsman and Johnston ; Back and Plawner ; Verity et al. Aicardi syndrome (Agenesis of corpus callosum) Onset of seizures within 3–6 months – Infantile spasms, Chorio-retinal lacunae, Vertebral anomalies, Severe mental subnormality MRI Brain, Multi-gene panel Kinsman and Johnston ; Back and Plawner ; Sutton et al. Chromosomal disorders Trisomy 13, 18, 21, 4p-, 5p- Characteristic craniofacial dysmorphic features Karyotyping, Chromosomal microarray Kinsman and Johnston ; Back and Plawner Genetic syndromes with or without involvement of other organs Smith-Lemli-Opitz (SLO) Bitemporalnarrowing,ptosis, epicanthic folds, anteverted nares, broad nasal tip, prominent lateral palatine ridges, micrognathia, low-set ears,Y shaped toe syndactyly,cardiacdefect Mutation testing in the DHCR7 gene Kinsman and Johnston ; Back and Plawner Cornelia de Lange (CdLS) Intrauterine growth restriction, poor postnatal growth,synophrys,thindownturning upper lip, proximally placed thumb,moedrate to severe intellectual subnormality Multi gene paneltesting for CdLS Kinsman and Johnston ; Kline et al. Neurodegenerative disorders Metachromatic leukodystrophy – infantile onset Onset between 12 and 18 months, developmental regression,mentaldeterioration,spasticity, Peripheral neuropathy, myoclonic seizures, No hepato-splenomegaly Enzyme study, Gene mutation testing Rezvani and Rezvani ; Kohlschutter and Eichler Krabbe disease (Globoid cell leukodystrophy) Onset between 6 and 12 months,rritability, progressive developmental regression,severe mental deterioration,opticatrophy,hypertonia, opisthotonus Enzyme study, Gene mutation testing Rezvani and Rezvani ; Cederbaum and Berry Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) HaltiaSantavuori disease Onset by 12 months,mental deterioration, myoclonic seizures, spasticity,blindness Genetic study for CLN10 gene mutation coding for cathepsin Rezvani and Rezvani ; Cederbaum and Berry Schindler disease Onset between 9 and 15 months,rapidly progressive developmental regression,psychomotorretardation,corticalblindness,myoclonic seizures Enzyme study, Gene mutation testing Rezvani and Rezvani ; Kohlschutter and Eichler Methymalonicacidemia with homocystinemia Intrauterine growth restriction, failure to thrive,mentaldeterioration,lethargy, poor feeding,seizures,persistent stomatitis, megaloblastic anemia Plasma GCMS for MMA and Homocysteine levels, Mutation study on MMACHC gene and MMADHC gene Rezvani and Rezvani ; Cederbaum and Berry Inherited metabolic disorders Serine biosynthesis defects A spectrum disorder with an infantile onset disease manifesting with severe psychomotor retardation, microcephaly,severe hypertonia and Seizures, ichthyosis,, seizures, contractures, as an intermediate phenotype Plasma and CSF serine levels Multigene testing El-Hattab et al. CLBP mutation related Microcephaly, small birth weight, severe encephalopathy, Urine organic acid for 3-methylglutaconic aciduria Exome sequencing/ Gene sequencing Capo-Chichi et al. Congenital disorder of glycosylation Developmental delay, microcephaly, and multi-organ involvement. Cerebral and cerebellar atrophy on neuroimaging Isoelectric focussing Exome sequencing Barba et al. DNA repair related defects PNKP gene related defect Microcephaly, seizures, developmental delay Targeted gene analysis Shen et al. Seckel syndrome (SCKS) Intrauterine growth restriction, Slanting forehead, Triangular ‘beak like’ nose, Micro/ retrognathia Poor postnatal growth, Delayed bone maturation Single gene testing, Multi-gene panel Kinsman and Johnston ; Verloes et al.
ASNS has 11 coding exons along with N terminal and C terminal domain that catalyze the generation of ammonia from glutamine followed by its transfer to aspartate to form asparagine which is essential for cellular function and growth. Table 2 represents the different variants from reported 13 families in these two domains. Majority of the previously reported mutations were located near or in the C-terminal asparagine synthetase domain except c.17C > A that is located in the N-terminal glutamine aminotransferase domain. Our study showed a novel missense homozygous mutation in the C terminal domain near the beta aspartyl AMP intermediate formation site. Among previously reported cases, nine families had missense homozygous and 1 nonsense homozygous variations. Three were compound heterozygous. All the mutations were novel except c.1084 T > G (p.Phe362Val) that was found in 2 unrelated Iranian families and c.1648C > T (p.Arg550Cys) found in homozygous in a Bangladesh family and compound heterozygous state in the French Canadian family (Table 3 ). Landscape of these mutations across ASNS along with the phylogenetic conservation of alanine at position 340 is represented in Fig. 4 . There was no genotype and phenotype correlation found to be related to the neurological manifestation or the outcome. In our patient, a detailed functional analysis in transfected cells, estimation of AS protein levels could not be done, however protein modelling showed that this mutation leads to the formation of functionally less active protein. Table 3 Review of the previously reported ASNS mutations and their respective in-silico prediction scores Reference Ethnicity Consanguinity Mutation (Type, Zygosity) Genotype Novel (N)/Reported (R) In-silico Prediction Score (Reported/Current*) Variant Amino acid change SIFT PolyPhen-2 Mutation Taster Ruzzo et al. Iranian Jews Yes Missense, homozygous c.1084 T > G F362 V/F362 V N 0.04 0.95 0.999 Damaging Possiblydamaging Disease causing Iranian Jews No Missense, homozygous c.1084 T > G F362 V/F362 V - - - - Bangladeshi Yes Missense, Homozygous c.1648C > T R550C/R550C N 0.01 1.00 0.999 Damaging Possiblydamaging Disease causing French Canadian No Missense, Compound heterozygous c.17C > A/ c.1648C > T A6E/ R550C N - 0.02 0.898 0.999 Damaging Possiblydamaging Disease causing 0.01 1.00 0.999 Damaging Possiblydamaging Disease causing Ben-Salem et al. Arab Yes Missense, Homozygous c.1193A > C Y398 C/Y398C N 0 0.997 0.999 Damaging Possiblydamaging Disease causing Alfadhel et al. Arab Yes Missense, Homozygous c.1160A > G Y377C/ Y337C N 0 1.000 0.999 Damaging Possibly damaging Disease causing Palmer et al. Japanese No Missense, Compound heterozygous c.866G > C / c.1010C > T G289A/ T337I N N 0 0.908 0.999* Damaging Possibly damaging Disease causing 0.002 1.000 0.999 Damaging Damaging Disease causing Sun et al. Indian Yes Missense, Homozygous c.1019G > A R340H/R340H N - 1.000* 0.999* Possibly damaging Disease causing Yamamoto et al. Japanese No Missense, Compound heterozygous Pt 1: c.434 T > C/ c.740 T > G L145S/ L247 W N N 0 0.965* 0.999* Damaging Possibly damaging Disease causing 0 1.000 * 0.999 Damaging Possibly damaging Disease causing Japanese No Missense/ Frameshift, Compound heterozygous Pt 2: c.1466 T > A/ c.1623_1624del V489D/ W541Cfs*5 N N 0 0.405 0.999 Damaging Benign Disease causing - - 0.999 Disease causing Seidahmed et al. Arab Yes Nonsense, Homozygous Pt 1 c.1219C > T R407*/ R407* N - - 0.99 Disease causing Arab Yes Missense, Homozygous Pt 2 c.944A > G Y315 C/Y315C N 1.0 0.992 0.99 Damaging Probably damaging Disease causing Current case Indian No Missense, homozygous c.1138G > T (Novel) A380S N 0.03 Score-1 p -value: 1 Deleterious Probably damaging Disease causing * Current in-silico prediction score Fig. 4 a Diagrammatic representation of cytogenetic location of ASNS on chromosome 7. b Landscape of ASNS mutation spectrum-all reported variants till date and novel variant found in our patient. c Phylogenetic conservation of Alanine at position 380 shown by multiple sequence alignment of protein asparagine synthetase among different species indicated by dotted rectangular box
Overall this disorder carries a poor prognosis. In majority of the reported patients, there was a significant lag between symptoms and diagnosis. Half of the patients had died between 11 days-12 months and rest had poor neurological outcome. There is no effective treatment except for the supportive therapy. Supplementation with dietary asparagine may not be effective due to the impaired transport across blood brain barrier and interference with uptake of other amino acids.
To conclude, one should consider AS deficiency in any infant with congenital and progressive microcephaly, early onset epilepsy, severe developmental delay, generalized cerebral atrophy, small pons and simplified gyral pattern and perform plasma and CSF amino acid estimation as a baseline workup. A particular feature of this IEM defect is frequent prenatal presentation with abnormalities of brain morphogenesis and congenital microcephaly presented already at birth, as well as technical difficulties in the detection of metabolic marker of the disease, which is low asparagine concentration in the body fluids. The latter is a very important feature from the practical point of view, because it causes remarkable delay in the appropriate diagnosis, as well as genetic counseling delivered to the family at risk. Till date, all the cases of AS deficiency have been identified through exome sequencing suggesting the difficulties in accurate phenotyping due to common and nonspecific symptoms that can mimic several other neurological disorders. Exome sequencing remains the ultimate modality for the diagnosis of such overlapping disorders.