Introduction
Hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S) has been proposed as the third endogenous gasomediator (Vandiver and Snyder ), which participates in many physiological processes (Hu et al. ; Pearson et al. ). H 2 S also functions as a cytoprotectant against ischemic injuries in many organs and tissues, such as brain (Gheibi et al. ), heart (Calvert et al. ), liver (Wang et al. ), lung (Fu et al. ) and kidney (Han et al. ). The neuroprotective effect of H 2 S is attributed to multiple factors, including anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antiapoptotic properties (Hu et al. ). Nevertheless, the exact mechanism of H 2 S in cerebral ischemia remains to be elucidated.
Autophagy is a conserved and programmed catabolic process that degrades damaged proteins and organelles (Mizushima and Komatsu ). Physiological or moderate levels of autophagy could be protective for cerebral global (Papadakis et al. ) or focal ischemia (Wang et al. ). However, exacerbated or persistent activation of autophagy may be deleterious (Qin et al. ). Our recent study has demonstrated that the neuroprotective effect of H 2 S is associated with a reduction in the accumulation of autophagy marker LC3-II (indicative of the amount of autophagic vacuoles) (Shui et al. ). Autophagic flux, the dynamic changes in autophagic vacuoles, involves formation of autophagosomes and their degradation by lysosomes (Klionsky et al. ; Zhang et al. ). Therefore, this H 2 S-induced reduction of autophagic vacuoles may be caused by the decreased synthesis or the increased degradation, or both. However, it needs to be determined.
In this study, using oxygen and glucose deprivation/reoxygenation (OGD/R) in vitro and cerebral I/R model in vivo, we demonstrated for the first time that the neuroprotective effect of exogenous H 2 S against mouse transient focal cerebral ischemia is at least partly mediated by facilitating autophagic degradation to enhance autophagic flux.
Materials and methods
Animals
Adult male KM mice (22–25 g, Vitalriver, Beijing, China) were given free access to food and water. The experimental procedures and animal care were performed following the guidelines of Care and Use of Laboratory Animals by the Beijing Committee on Animal Care and Use in accordance with the National Institutes of Health guide (NIH Publications No. 8023, revised 1978). The protocol was approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments in the Peking University Health Science Center (Permit Number: LA2013–69). Efforts were made to reduce the number of animals used and their suffering.
Chemicals and antibodies
H 2 S donor, NaHS (sodium hydrosulfide), was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, USA), Bafilomycin A 1 (BafA1) from J&K (Beijing, China). Anti-β-actin (sc-47,778) antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, USA), anti-LC3B/MAP1LC3B (NB600–1384) antibody from Novus Biologicals (Littleton, USA), anti-p62 (PM-045) antibody and positive control for anti-LC3 antibody (PM036-PN) from MBL (Nagoya, Japan), anti-ULK1 (D8H5) antibody from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, USA), anti-p-ATG13 (pS318) and anti-ATG13 antibodies from Rockland (Limerick, USA). Peroxidase-conjugated affinipure goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) (ZB-2301) was obtained from ZSGB-BIO (Beijing, China), and goat anti-mouse IgG (IS001) from M&C Gene Technology (Beijing, China).
Cell culture
SH-SY5Y cells from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, USA), was cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM, M&C Gene Technology, Beijing, China) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, Australia) and 0.05 U/mL penicillin and 0.05 mg/mL streptomycin at 37 °C with humidified 5% CO 2 and 95% air. The cultured medium was changed twice a week.
OGD/R-induced cell injury and treatment
Cells were plated onto 6-well plates and incubated until 80–90% confluency. OGD/R model was prepared as described previously (Wang et al. ). The regular medium was replaced with Earle’s balanced saline solution (EBSS, M&C Gene Technology, Beijing, China) without glucose. Cells were cultured in an anoxia chamber (Billups-Rothenberg, San Diego, USA) at 37 °C and ventilated with 95% N2 plus 5% CO 2 for 2 h. Then, they were re-cultured in DMEM (with 2% FBS) at 37 °C with 5% CO 2 and 95% air for 6 h to achieve reoxygenation. The in vitro experiment was divided into five groups: Control, OGD/R, OGD/R + NaHS, OGD/R + BafA1, and OGD/R + NaHS + BafA1. Data were collected from triplicate wells for one group in each independent experiment. Cells were pre-treated with indicated concentration (12.5, 25, 50, 100, 200, 400, or 800 μM) of NaHS 15 min before anoxia. BafA1 is an autophagic flux inhibitor that blocks the autophagosome-lysosome fusion, which is commonly used in research of autophagy flux. According to the guidelines, the time of BafA1 action needs to be relatively short (1–2 h) for comparisons of the amount of LC3 in cells/animals with or without BafA1 treatment (Klionsky et al. ). Thus, BafA1 (20 nM) was added 2 h before the end of 6-h reoxygenation.
Cell viability assay
Cell viability was measured using the sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay according to the previous report (Sagias et al. ). After OGD/R treatment, the supernatant was discarded, each well was then fixed with 500 μL of cold trichloroacetic acid (500 mg/mL) at 4 °C for 1 h. Cells were washed five times with deionized water, and incubated with 500 μL/well of SRB (4 mg/mL) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. After washing five times with 1% acetic acid, the dye bound to proteins was dissolved by adding 300 μL/well of 10 mM unbuffered Tris base and transferred to 96-well plate. The absorbance at 515 nm was measured by a Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vantaa, Finland).
Transient focal cerebral ischemia
Cerebral I/R was induced by transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) in mice using suture-occluded method as described previously (Shui et al. ). Briefly, mice were anesthetized with chloral hydrate (500 mg/kg, ip), and the body temperature of mice was maintained at around 37 °C with a heating pad during surgery. The right common, external, and internal carotid arteries were exposed, followed by introducing a monofilament nylon suture (size 6–0, with a round tip) into the internal carotid artery through an incision in the external carotid artery and gently advancing 9–10 mm until the rounded tip reached the entrance of the MCA. The cerebral ischemia was stopped by removing the monofilament after 1.5 h, and the blood supply was restored. The laser Doppler flow-probe (PeriFlux System 5000, Perimed AB, Jarfalla, Sweden) was fixed to the skull with tissue glue, and the change of cerebral blood flow was monitored throughout the surgery, which decreased or increased to a steady value indicating ischemia or reperfusion, respectively.
Intracerebral ventricular (i.c.v.) injection
Mice were anesthetized with chloral hydrate (500 mg/kg, i.p.) and placed in a small animal stereotaxic apparatus (ZS-B, Beijing zhongshidichuang Science and technology development Co.,Ltd., China). The skull was exposed through an incision along the sagittal suture, revealing the bregma. Intracerebroventricular injection in the right lateral ventricle was performed at the specified location (−0.3 mm anteroposterior, 1.0 mm mediolateral, −2.5 mm dorsoventral relative to bregma) using a flat-ended syringe (TP-0003HPLCZ, GAOGE, China) at a speed of 0.25 μL/min.
In vivo experimental design
Mice were randomly divided into five groups: sham (control), I/R (MCAO mice treated with normal saline), I/R + NaHS, I/R + BafA1, I/R + NaHS + BafA1. NaHS-treated mice were injected (i.p.) with different doses (1, 2, or 4 mg/kg) of NaHS at the onset of ischemia to establish the optimum dose. Mice were administrated with 2 mg/kg NaHS, and put to death after 6 h, 12 h or 24 h reperfusion for western blotting analysis of autophagy in cerebral ischemia at different time points. BafA1 (dissolved in ethanol at 6 mM concentration) was given (300 nmol/kg, i.c.v.) 2 h before sacrificed for western blotting analysis (Klionsky et al. ), similar to that in cells. To examine the effect of autophay on cerebral infarction, autophagy inhibitors or activators usually administrated at the early stage of I/R. Thus, the same dose of BafA1 was injected (i.c.v.) at 6 h during entire 24-h reperfusion for infarct volume determination.
Evaluation of infarct volume
Mice were subjected to a neurological examination after 24 h I/R in a blinded manner to the observer using an established method (Thal et al. ). After scoring neurological function , mice were anesthetized with chloral hydrate (350 mg/kg, i.p.) and transcardially perfused with cold normal saline. Brains were quickly collected and sectioned into five coronal slices, and stained with 2% 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazoliumchloride (TTC) (Amresco, Solon, USA) at 37 °C for 30 min. Then, the slices were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) overnight and photographed. The infarct regions were not stained and appeared pale in color. The infarct volume was calculated with Image J software (NIH Image, developed at the U.S. National Institutes of Health and available on the Internet at http://rsb.info.nih.gov/nih-image/ ) by measuring the white regions of each slice across the thickness of every slice (Jackman et al. ).
Western blotting analysis
Western blotting analysis was performed as previously described (Zhu et al. ). Mice were anesthetized and perfused transcardial with pre-cooled PBS at different time points after ischemia. Then cerebral cortex, hippocampus and striatum were isolated from ischemic cerebral hemisphere, respectively. Proteins in the tissues or cells were extracted by ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer containing 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM DTT and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (P8340, 1 mL; Sigma). The protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE (for p62, ULK1, ATG13 and β-actin) or Tricine-SDS-PAGE (for LC3), blotted onto PVDF membrane (Millipore) using a semi-dry electroblotter (Bio-Rad), and incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C. Recombinant protein (PM036-PN, MBL) was used as positive control for anti-LC3 antibody. Then, blots were incubated with corresponding secondary antibody, peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG or goat anti-mouse IgG at room temperature for 2 h. Immunoreactive bands were visualized using Chemiluminescent HRP Substrate (Millipore) and quantified using the Imagelab software.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
Ultrastructural change was observed using TEM as previously described (Zhu et al. ). After 6 h of reperfusion, the animals were anesthetized by chloral hydrate (350 mg/kg, i.p.) and sacrificed by transcardial perfusion with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) followed by cold fixation buffer containing 2% glutaraldehyde and 2% PFA. Next, the cerebral fragments were fixed with 3% glutaraldehyde solution for 48 h at 4 °C, followed by post-fixed in 1% phosphate-buffered (pH 7.4) osmium tetroxide for 2 h. The tissues were dehydrated in ascending series of ethanol and embedded in araldite. The ultrathin sections were cut, doubly stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and examined with a transmission electron microscope (JEM-1400, JEOL, Japan) and photographed.
Statistical analysis
All data were represented as means ± S.E.M. Statistical analyses were performed using the two-way ANOVA, followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc test. p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.
Results
The neuroprotective effect of exogenous H2S against OGD/R injury
To determine the neuroprotective effect of H 2 S in vitro, SH-SY5Y cells were subjected to OGD/R injury. Two hours of OGD followed by 6 h of reoxygenation decreased cell viability by 29.4% (Table 1 ). Pre-treatment with NaHS (12.5–200 μM) for 15 min rescued the cell viability in a dose-dependent manner, while higher concentration (400, 800 μM) of NaHS lost the protective effect. These data suggest the protective effect of NaHS at a narrow dosage range on OGD/R-induced cell injury. Table 1 Exogenous H 2 S protects SH-SY5Y cells against OGD/R-induced injury Group NaHS (μM) Cell viability (%) Control 0 100 ± 1.8 OGD/R 0 70.6 ± 2.1^^ OGD/R + NaHS 12.5 75.7 ± 2.9 25 79.8 ± 2.7 50 81.4 ± 2.6* 100 85.3 ± 3.2** 200 89.2 ± 3.0** 400 79.1 ± 3.1 800 77.9 ± 3.9 All data represent means ± S.E.M. of seven independent experiments. ^^ p < 0.01 compared with control group * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 compared with OGD/R group
H2S enhances autophagic flux by accelerating the autophagic degradation but having no effects on autophagosome synthesis in OGD/R cells
We examined whether exogenous H 2 S affects the autophagic flux in SH-SY5Y cells subjected to 2 h OGD and subsequent 6 h reoxygenation. OGD/R induced an activation of autophagy as indicated by a notable increase in LC3-II protein level, while adding 20 nM BafA1 4 h at the reoxygenation further resulted in a higher amount of LC3-II (Fig. 1 ), implying an active degradation of autophagomes during OGD/R injury. NaHS pre-treatment (200 μM) significantly restored OGD/R-induced LC3-II to the normal levels (Fig. 1 ), suggesting indirectly that H 2 S could reduce the numbers of autophagic vacuoles. The amount of LC3-II in cells treated with OGD/R + BafA1 and OGD/R + NaHS + BafA1 was at approximately the same level, indicating that H 2 S would not increase or decrease autophagosome synthesis, according to the guidelines for the interpretation of autophagy detection (Klionsky et al. ). More importantly, BafA1 treatment completely hindered H 2 S-induced enhancement of autophagic flux (Fig. 1 ). These data demonstrated that exogenous H 2 S facilitates autophagic degradation but does not affect autophagosome synthesis in OGD/R-injured neuronal cells. Fig. 1 Bafilomycin A 1 (BafA1) blocks H 2 S-iniduced enhancement of autophagic flux in vitro . Representative western blotting analysis ( bottom ) and quantification ( top ) of LC3-II expression in SH-SY5Y cells treated with indicated reagents after 6-h reoxygenation. NaHS (200 μM) was administrated 15 min before hypoxia, and BafA1 (20 nM) was administrated 2 h before the end of 6-h reoxygenation. Data represent means ± S.E.M. of five independent experiments. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 compared with indicated group
To further confirm that H 2 S did not regulate autophagosome synthesis, we examined whether H 2 S affects the ULK1 complex, one of the main molecular complexes involved in the process of autophagosome formation (Nazio et al. ). On autophagy induction, ULK1 is ubiquitinated by Lys-63-linked chains, followed by the self-association and stabilization of ULK1. Increased self-associated ULK1 renders its redistribution from the soluble to the insoluble fraction (Driessen et al. ; Nazio et al. ). In SH-SY5Y cells, there was a notable decrease in the soluble fractions and increase in the insoluble fractions of ULK1 following 2-h OGD/6-h R, indicating an OGD/R-induced elevation of ULK1 self-association (Fig. 2 a). However, there was no significant difference in the insoluble fractions of ULK1 between OGD/R and OGD/R + NaHS groups. Moreover, we examined the kinase activity of ULK1 by detecting the ULK1-dependent ATG-13 phosphorylation (p-ATG13) (on S318). The amount of p-ATG13 decreased significantly after OGD/R, indicating a significant reduction in ULK1 kinase activity caused by increased self-association (Fig. 2 b). However, no evident changes of p-ATG13 in OGD/R cells were observed with or without NaHS pre-treatment. Therefore, exogenous H 2 S did not affect the OGD/R-induced increased self-association and decreased kinase activity of ULK1. Fig. 2 Exogenous H 2 S has no effect on OGD/R-induced increase of ULK1 self-association and decrease of ATG13 phosphorylation. a The changes in the soluble and insoluble fractions of endogenous ULK1, and ( b ) the protein level of p-ATG13. Representative western blotting analysis and the quantifications are shown on the left and right, respectively. SH-SY5Y cells were subjected to 6 h OGD/R with or without NaHS pre-treatment for 15 min, and then RIPA-soluble or -insoluble fractions, or total cell extracts were prepared and analyzed by western blotting using anti-ULK1, anti-p-ATG13, anti-ATG13 and anti-β-actin antibodies. Data are presented as means ± S.E.M. of 5–6 separate experiments. * p < 0.05 compared with control group
H2S inhibits the accumulation of autophagic vacuoles in mouse brain after I/R injury
We used a reliable and reproducible cerebral I/R model through real-time monitoring of artery occlusion and reperfusion (Fig. 3 a). NaHS-treatment (a single injection, i.p.) exhibited a maximal neuroprotection at a dose of 2 mg/kg and less protection at 1 or 4 mg/kg, with significantly reduced infarct volume (Fig. 3 b and c). Fig. 3 NaHS administration protects mouse significantly against cerebral I/R damage. a Doppler measures of cerebral blood flow velocity in MCAO mouse for monitoring artery occlusion and reperfusion. The dot line represents the real-time changes of blood flow. b Representative TTC-stained brain coronal sections of mice treated with saline or NaHS at the onset of MCAO and were euthanized after 24 h reperfusion. c Quantitative analysis of cerebral infarct volume. All data presented as means ± S.E.M. of 7–12 animals. ^^ p < 0.01 compared with sham group. * p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01 compared with I/R group
Then, we examined the change of autophagy at multiple time points in different regions of brain. The significantly increased amount of LC3-II and decreased p62 in ischemic cerebral cortex after 1.5 h ischemia and subsequent 6, 12, or 24 h reperfusion indicated that cerebral I/R-induced autophagy activation caused an accumulation of autophagic vacuoles (Fig. 4 a). Moreover, LC3-II content in cortex had the tendency of increasing with time of reperfusion. Treatment with NaHS reversed partially and significantly the upregulation of LC3-II and downregulation of p62. In ischemic hippocampus, LC3-II amount showed a trend of an increase at 6 and 12 h reperfusion and a further increase in NaHS-treated mice (Fig. 4 b). There was a significant rise of LC3-II and diminution of p62 at 24 h reperfusion, which was reversed by pretreatment with exogenous H 2 S. In the striatum, there was no significant change of LC3-II and p62 protein levels among the sham, I/R and I/R + NaHS groups (Fig. 4 c). However, the same tendency was seen in cortex, hippocampus and striatum that NaHS treatment reduced the accumulation of autophagic vacuoles at 24 h reperfusion. Fig. 4 NaHS treatment prevents the increase of LC3-II, decrease of p62 and accumulation of autophagosomes induced by cerebral I/R injury. Representative western blots (left) and quantitative evaluation (right) of the expression of LC3-II and p62 in cortex ( a ), hippocampus ( b ) and striatum ( c ) of mouse brain. I/R- or I/R + NaHS (2 mg/kg, i.p.)-treated mice were subjected to 1.5 h ischemia and subsequent 6, 12, or 24 h reperfusion, respectively. Data represent means ± S.E.M. of 5–7 animals after β-actin normalized. ^ p < 0.05 compared with sham group. * p < 0.05 compared with I/R group. ( d ) Representative electron microphotographs showing autophagosomes in the ischemic cerebral cortex. Mice were subjected to 1.5 h ischemia and 6 h reperfusion, and then euthanized for electron microscopic examination on the ischemic penumbra of cerebral cortex. Autophagic vacuoles containing morphologically intact mitochondria (bottom and upper-right, arrow) and partially degraded mitochondrion (upper-right, arrow) in I/R- and I/R + NaHS (2 mg/kg, i.p.)-treated mice, respectively, are presented. Scale bar =0.5 μm
Ultrastructural analysis with TEM was further used to confirm the results of western blotting analysis. The cells showed normal morphology, and autophagosomes were rarely observed in the sham group (Fig. 4 d). In the ischemic penumbra of cerebral cortex following 1.5 h ischemia and 6 h reperfusion, the numbers of autophagosomes were obviously increased. However, autophagosomes were observed much less frequently in NaHS-treated mice. Moreover, there were fewer early autophagic vacuoles (containing intact mitochondria, ribosomes, or endoplasmic reticulum) and more degradative autophagic vacuoles (containing partially degraded contents) in I/R + NaHS-treated mice compared to I/R-treated mice (Fig. 4 d). This indicated that H 2 S may accelerate the process of autophagic degradation, causing autophagic flux to run more smoothly in the ischemic cortex.
H2S enhances autophagic flux by increasing autophagic degradation in vivo
Since exogenous H 2 S promotes autophagic degradation in OGD/R cells (Fig. 1 ), we addressed whether H 2 S regulates autophagic degradation in vivo. The LC3-II protein level in ischemic cortex of I/R mice was examined at two points: early and late in the reperfusion. At the early stage of reperfusion (6 h), LC3-II increased markedly, and showed a further significant rise with BafA1 treatment (300 nmol/kg, i.c.v., 4 h at the 6-h reperfusion), indicating an active autophagy and uninterrupted autophagic flux (Fig. 5 a). NaHS-treatment (2 mg/kg, i.p., at the onset of ischemia) decreased the I/R-induced elevation of LC3-II, which was reversed by BafA1 administration. Moreover, the amount of LC3-II was nearly equal between I/R + BafA1 and I/R + NaHS + BafA1 groups, suggesting indirectly that the synthesis of autophagosome is not affected by H 2 S. In addition, the level of LC3-II in I/R + NaHS-treated animals was much less than that in I/R + NaHS + BafA1 group, indicating that autophagosome degradation was enhanced by NaHS-treatment. In mice subjected to a longer period of reperfusion (24 h), there was a dramatic increase of LC3-II (Fig. 5 b). However, BafA1 (300 nmol/kg, i.c.v., 22 h at the 24-h reperfusion) treatment did not cause a significant increase of LC3-II, suggesting that autophagic flux is obstructed at the late stage of reperfusion. Similar to the result of 6-h reperfusion, the I/R-induced accumulation of LC3-II was decreased by NaHS-treatment, which was reversed by co-treatment with BafA1. This effect of H 2 S might be also attributed to its accelerating autophagic degradation in the early phase of I/R. Therefore, H 2 S could improve autophagic flux by promoting autophagic degradation without inhibiting the synthesis of autophagosome after transient focal cerebral ischemia. Fig. 5 Bafilomycin A 1 (BafA1) treatment eliminates H 2 S-induced enhancement of autophagic flux and abolishes the neuroprotective effect of H 2 S in cerebral I/R injury. LC3-II expression in cerebral cortex of mice subjected to sham, I/R, I/R + NaHS, I/R + BafA1, I/R + NaHS + BafA1 after 6 h ( a ) or 24 h ( b ) reperfusion, respectively. Representative western blotting analysis ( bottom ), and the quantification ( top ) are presented. NaHS (2 mg/kg, i.p.) was given at the onset of ischemia, and BafA1 (300 nmol/kg, i.c.v.) was administered 2 h before sacrificed. Data are presented as means ± S.E.M. of six independent experiments. ( c ) Representative TTC staining from mouse brains in the sham, I/R, I/R + NaHS and I/R + NaHS + BafA1 groups. ( d ) Quantitative analysis of brain infarct volume from each group. Mice were treated with NaHS (2 mg/kg, i.p.) at the onset of ischemia, or cotreated with BafA1 (300 nmol/kg, i.c.v.) 6 h after the onset of reperfusion. After 24 h I/R, mice were sacrificed and the cerebral infarction was determined. Data are presented as means ± S.E.M. of 8–13 animals. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 compared with indicated group
Autophagic flux contributes to the neuroprotection of H2S against cerebral I/R injury
We further investigated whether H 2 S-induced increase of autophagic degradation contribute to its neuroprotective effect in cerebral I/R. NaHS treatment (2 mg/kg, i.p., at the onset of ischemia) significantly decreased the infarction volume from 27.2 ± 2.8% to 16.4 ± 2.2% (Fig. 5 c and d). In contrast, combined treatment of NaHS with BafA1 (300 nmol/kg, i.c.v., 6 h after the onset of reperfusion) did not show any significant protection against the ischemic damage, and the infarct volume reached 27.8 ± 2.4% (Fig. 5 c and d). Thus, blocking autophagic flux in the degradation phase by BafA1 abolished the protective effects of H 2 S on cerebral infarction. Therefore, the neuroprotection of exogenous H 2 S is mediated by the upregulation of autophagic flux in a mouse cerebral I/R model.
Discussion
H 2 S exhibits cytoprotection against injuries in many tissues/organs through its anti-oxidative, anti-inflammatory and/or anti-apoptotic effects. Recently, we have found that the neuroprotection of exogenous H 2 S against cerebral I/R injury is associated with the reduced accumulation of autophagic vacuoles (Shui et al. ). In this study, we further provide solid evidence that this reduction was attributed to enhanced autophagic flux through facilitating autophagic degradation without any impact on the synthesis of autophagosome. First, treatment with the autophagy maturation inhibitor BafA1 eliminated H 2 S-induced neuroprotective effects in I/R mice; Second, BafA1 blocked H 2 S-induced enhancement of autophagic flux both in vitro and in vivo; Third, H 2 S treatment did not affect the self-association and kinase activity of ULK1 complex in OGD/R cells, which is a key member for the initiation of autophagosome formation (Driessen et al. ; Nazio et al. ). However, further investigations are needed to precisely reveal how autophagic degradation is improved by H 2 S.
We found that autphagic vacuoles in ischemic cortex accumulated with the growing reperfusion time. Moreover, I/R-induced activation of autophagy in cortex is earlier and more severe than that in other regions. This regional response difference validates previous reports that hippocampus and cortex of brain slice show different autophagic response to OGD injury (Perez-Rodriguez et al. ). One possible interpretation is that the ischemic area is located mainly in the cortex and relatively far away from the hippocampus and striatum. The regional difference in the levels of autophagy in cerebral ischemia is closely related to the severity of ischemia (Xu et al. ). Another possibility is that different cells may show different autophagy response to ischemic insults, due to their diverse basal levels of autophagy (Perez-Rodriguez et al. ).
It is also controversial whether H 2 S is neuroprotective or neurodestructive in ischemic stroke. Increasing reports showed that the effect of H 2 S in I/R injury depends on its concentration. In cerebral ischemia model, NaHS showed protection at 1.4 mg/kg, exerted no protection at 5 mg/kg, and even deteriorated the injury at 10 mg/kg (Qu et al. ; Ren et al. ; Wang et al. ). Therefore, H 2 S was thought to be beneficial at low concentration and toxic at higher concentration. In this study and our previous works (Shui et al. ), we validated that a single injection of NaHS (i.p.) shows best protection at 2 mg/kg, less protection at 1 or 4 mg/kg, and no protection at 8 or 16 mg/kg against mouse cerebral I/R injury. Therefore, the effective dose of NaHS is limited to a narrow range, and a smaller or larger amount won’t be so beneficial. Another concern might be the speed of H 2 S generation. The commonly used H 2 S donors, such as inorganic sulfide salts NaHS or Na 2 S, cause a rapid and large release of H 2 S, which may reach toxic/lethal concentration and accordingly aggravate the ischemic injury. To reach a sustainable and defined concentration range of H 2 S, new agents for the controllable and persistent release of H 2 S are needed.
In summary, we demonstrate that increased autophagic degradation contributes to the neuroprotection of exogenous H 2 S against cerebral ischemia/hypoxia and reperfusion/reoxygenation injury. These results suggest that reducing the accumulation of autophagic vacuoles in autophagic flux by facilitating autophagic degradation may be a promising strategy to protect brain from ischemic injury.