Introduction
Neuropathic pain is the main type of chronic pain, which also commonly accompanies with traumatic brain injury and subsequent emotional disorders, therefore impeding the recovery process in such patients (Han et al. ). Studies have shown that negative emotions such as anxiety increase pain perception, so we believe that changes in protein expression in the emotional related brain regions can affect pain. There are no currently available designated treatments for these conditions. Resveratrol (3, 4′, 5-trihydroxystilbene), a naturally occurring polyphenol compound present in significant amounts in several plants when attacked by fungi or bacteria, has been found to exert numerous pharmacological properties including anti-oxidative, anti-inflammatory and anti-aging activities (Mullin ). It is found in two isomers, cis - (Z) and trans - (E) resveratrol. Cis -Resveratrol was considered biologically inactive; while trans -resveratrol seems to be more potent than cis -resveratrol in most of the comparative studies, indicating certain stereo-specific activity of the molecule (Orallo ). trans- Resveratrol inhibits synthesis of pro-inflammatory mediators by suppressing cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase pathways, suggesting that trans -resveratrol may have analgesic activity (MacCarrone et al. ; Subbaramaiah et al. ; Jang et al. ), and may therefore be used in treatment of refractory neuropathic pain.
Calcium (Ca 2+ ), as a second messenger, mediates a variety of cell-related functions. Reports indicate that calcium ion plays an important role in the nociception and anti-nociceptive reaction (Schmidt and Way ; Venegas and Schaible ; Heinke et al. ; Galeotti et al. ; Chen et al. ; Weiss and De Waard ). Nociceptive reaction can increase Ca 2+ flow in hippocampus and spinal cord, but little information was clarified about hippocampus and the related analgesic effects. L-type Ca 2+ channel antagonists, such as nimodipine, produce analgesic effects after central and peripheral administration (Del Pozo et al. ; Miranda et al. ; Wong et al. ; Todorovic et al. ; Mahani et al. ). In addition, the effects of L-type Ca 2+ channel inhibitors on nociception differ depending on the drug dosage, route of administration and the algesimetric test used (Prado ). Intracellular Ca 2+ pools residing in the endoplasmic reticulum play an important role in regulation of intracellular free Ca 2+ levels in cells. CaMKII and BDNF are involved in oxaliplatin-induced mechanical abnormal pain (Shirahama et al. ), suggesting their roles in the pathway related to the anti-nociceptive reaction (Ogawa et al. ).
The present study investigated the antinociceptive effects of trans -resveratrol by regulation of the L-type calcium channels and calcium/caffeine sensitive pools, as well as neuropathic pain-related proteins expression, i.e. p-CaMKII and BDNF. The results suggested that calcium ions play in a crucial role in the antinociceptive effects of trans -resveratrol. Reducing the intracellular calcium concentrations resulted in significant analgesic effects of trans- resveratrol, while increased intracellular calcium concentrations blocked such effects of trans- resveratrol.
Results
Analgesic effects of trans-resveratrol and related changes in p-CaMKII and BDNF protein expression in the mouse hippocampus
trans- Resveratrol at doses of 10, 20 and 40 mg/kg increased the paw withdraw latency in the hot plate test in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1a ), which were consistent with previous studies (Yin et al. ; Sharma et al. ). We then investigated whether the changes of p-CaMKII and BDNF expression were related to behavioral changes after treatment with trans -resveratrol. The results showed that compared with the control group, the expression of mouse hippocampal p-CaMKII were significantly decreased (Fig. 1b ), while the expression of BDNF were significantly increased (Fig. 1c ) after treatment with trans -resveratrol at dose of 40 mg/kg. Fig. 1 The analgesic effects of trans -resveratrol in the hot plate test and changes in p-CaMKII and BDNF expression in the mouse hippocampus. Mice were administered vehicle or trans -resveratrol (10, 20, 40 mg/kg, p.o.) 1 h before testing. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. Values were the means ± S.E.M. with 10 mice in each group. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, compared with the vehicle-treated control group. RES: trans- resveratrol
Mk 801 potentiated trans-resveratrol-induced antinociceptive effects and p-CaMKII and BDNF expression in the mouse hippocampus
To determine whether N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist Mk 801 affected the analgesic effect of trans- resveratrol, we examined its antinociceptive effect in the hot plate test when mice were pretreated with Mk 801 before treatment with trans -resveratrol at 10 mg/kg. Pretreatment with Mk 801 at the dose of 0.5 mg/kg potentiated the effect of low dose of trans -resveratrol on the nociceptive stimulus, as evidenced by the increase in the paw withdraw latency (Fig. 2a ). Fig. 2 Mk 801 potentiated trans -resveratrol-induced antinociceptive effects and changes in p-CaMKII and BDNF expression in the hippocampus. Mice were administered vehicle or Mk 801 (0.1 and 0.5 mg/kg, i.p.) 30 min before trans -resveratrol treatment. Behavioral tests were conducted 1 h after trans -resveratrol treatment. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. Values were the means ± S.E.M. with 10 mice in each group. * p < 0.05, compared with the vehicle-treated RES (10 mg/kg) group
In order to assess whether Mk 801 also affected the neurochemical changes in the hippocampus induced by resveratrol, the expression of p-CaMKII and BDNF were examined. As shown in Fig. 2b and c , treatment with Mk 801 prior to a low dose of trans- resveratrol (10 mg/kg) induced a significant decrease in p-CaMKII expression and an increase in BDNF expression in the hippocampus compared to the vehicle-treated control group.
Nimodipine potentiated trans-resveratrol-induced antinociceptive effects and p-CaMKII and BDNF expression in the mouse hippocampus
To evaluate whether L-type Ca 2+ channels were involved in the antinociception of trans -resveratrol, nimodipine was administered before low dose of trans -resveratrol was treated and the antinociceptive response was determined. The previous study suggested that the paw withdraw latency in mice treated with nimodipine (2.5, 5, 10 mg/kg, i.p.)alone was not significantly different from that in vehicle (Liang et al. ). In the present study, trans- resveratrol at 10 mg/kg also did not increase the paw withdraw latency in mice hot plate test. However, the effect of trans- resveratrol on nociceptive stimulus was potentiated by nimodipine, i.e. the paw withdrawal latency was significantly increase when pretreatment with 10 mg/kg nimodipine (Fig. 3a ). Fig. 3 Nimodipine potentiated trans -resveratrol-induced antinociceptive effects and p-CaMKII and BDNF expression in the hippocampus. Mice were administered vehicle or nimodipine(2.5, 5, 10 mg/kg, i.p.)30 min before trans -resveratrol treatment. Behavioral tests were conducted 1 h after resveratrol treatment. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. Values were the means ± S.E.M. with 10 mice in each group. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, compared with the vehicle-treated RES (10 mg/kg) group. RES: trans- resveratrol
In order to evaluate the influence of trans- resveratrol on p-CaMKII and BDNF expression after co-administration with nimodipine, these two protein levels were detected in the hippocampus. The results showed that pretreatment with nimodipine, 10 mg/kg trans -resveratrol led to the decrease in p-CaMKII (Fig. 3b ) and the increase in BDNF (Fig. 3c ) expression in the hippocampus.
CaCl2 reversed trans-resveratrol-induced antinociceptive effects and p-CaMKII and BDNF expression in the mouse hippocampus
We then designed to explore the effect of the i.c.v. injection of CaCl 2 on the antinociceptive response of trans- resveratrol. Liang et al. ( ) found Ca 2+ (25–200 nmol) alone did not produce antinociceptive effects or side effects. However, i.c.v. administration of CaCl 2 at dose of 200 nmol reduced the antinocicetive effects of trans -resveratrol (20 mg/kg p.o.), as evidence by the reduced paw withdraw latency when pretreatment with CaCl 2 before high dose of trans -resveratrol (Fig. 4a ). Fig. 4 CaCl 2 reversed trans -resveratrol-induced antinociceptive effects and p-CaMKII and BDNF expression in the mouse hippocampus. Mice were administered vehicle or CaCl 2 (25, 50, 100, 200 nmol per mouse, i.c.v.) 30 min before resveratrol treatment. Behavioral tests were conducted 1 h after resveratrol treatment. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. Values were the means ± S.E.M. with 10 mice in each group. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 compared with the vehicle-treated control group. # p < 0.05, compared with the vehicle-treated RES (20 mg/kg) group. RES: trans- resveratrol
The expression of p-CaMKII and BDNF were also determined under such treatment regimen. The results showed that pre-injection of CaCl 2 into the mouse hippocampus followed by 20 mg/kg trans- resveratrol, led to significantly increased p-CaMKII (Fig. 4b ) and decreased BDNF expression (Fig. 4c ).
EGTA potentiated trans-resveratrol-induced antinoceception and p-CaMKII and BDNF expression in the mouse hippocampus
We explored the effects of the i.c.v. injection of EGTA, a selective Ca 2+ chelator, on the antinociceptive effects of trans- resveratrol. In contrast with intracerebral injection of Ca 2+ , i.c.v. injections of EGTA at 20 and 30 nmol increased the paw withdraw latency when combined with 10 mg/kg trans- resveratrol; while this dose of trans- resveratrol used alone did not affect the paw withdraw latency. These results were consistent with the previous study that suggested that EGTA did not affect the paw withdraw latency when the dose was less than 30 nmol (Liang et al. ) (Fig. 5a ). Hippocampal infusion with EGTA followed by 10 mg/kg trans -resveratrol resulted in the decrease in p-CaMKII (Fig. 5b ) and increase in BDNF (Fig. 5c ) expression in the hippocampus. Fig. 5 EGTA potentiated trans -resveratrol-induced antinoceception and p-CaMKII and BDNF expression in the mouse hippocampus. Mice were administered vehicle or EGTA (5, 15 and 30 nmol per mouse, i.c.v.) 30 min before resveratrol treatment. Behavioral tests were conducted 1 h after resveratrol treatment. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. Values were the means ± S.E.M. with 10 mice in each group. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 compared with the vehicle-treated RES (10 mg/kg) group. RES: trans- resveratrol
Ryanodine potentiated trans-resveratrol-induced antinociception and p-CaMKII and BDNF expression in the mouse hippocampus
The previous in vitro studies suggested that ryanodine inhibits Ca 2+ release from intracellular microsomal pools (Rousseau et al. ; McPherson et al. ). Therefore, it is necessary to explore whether inhibition of Ca 2+ release from microsomal pools by ryanodine is able to affect trans -resveratrol-induced antinociceptive response. Liang et al. ( ) found that i.c.v. injections of ryanodine (0.25–2 nmol) alone did not produce antinociceptive or toxic effects. In the present study, the increased paw withdraw latency in the hot plate test in mice was observed when 1 and 2 nmol ryanodine was combined with 10 mg/kg trans -resveratrol (Fig. 6a ), which demonstrated that the effects of low dose of trans -resveratrol was potentiated by ryanodine. Fig. 6 Ryanodine potentiated trans -resveratrol-induced antinociception and p-CaMKII and BDNF expression in the mouse hippocampus. Mice were administered vehicle, ryanodine (0.25, 0.5, 1 and 2 nmol per mouse, i.c.v.) 30 min before resveratrol treatment. Behavioral tests were conducted 1 h after resveratrol treatment. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. Values were the means ± S.E.M. with 10 mice in each group. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** P < 0.001 compared with the vehicle-treated RES (10 mg/kg) group. RES: trans- resveratrol
As shown in Fig. 6b and c , pretreatment with ryanodine followed by 10 mg/kg trans- resveratrol induced significant decrease in p-CaMKII and increase in BDNF expression.
Discussion
Neuropathic pain is a kind of pain syndrome caused by primary lesion or dysfunction in central or peripheral nervous system (Sałat et al. ; Siniscalco et al. ). Most of neuropathic pain is accompanied by neurosurgery such as traumatic brain injury and other neurological dysfunction, which usually leads to emotional changes and provoke pain (Baron ). Currently, the analgesic therapy can only alleviate 40–50% of symptoms among 30–40% of pain-suffered patients (Backonja and Woolf ). These analgesics also have many disadvantages including drug resistance, addiction, multiple organ side effects and so on (Harden ). Therefore, to find a safe and effective, long-lasting analgesic with little to no side effects has become the main objective of research in this field.
trans -Resveratrol is a natural polyphenolic compound, which produces protective effects against neuropsychological disorders, such as traumatic brain injury induced depression, anxiety and antinociceptive stimuli without significant toxic effects (Russo ; Granados-Soto et al. ). The present study demonstrated that systemic (i.p.) administration of trans -resveratrol induced dose-dependent analgesic effects in the mouse hot-plate test. Our data indicated that systemical administration of trans -resveratrol did not affect motor activity in mice at doses that induced antinociception (data not shown), suggesting the antinociceptive action of trans -resveratrol was not due to non-specific suppression in central nervous system.
Calcium ion (Ca 2+ ), an intracellular second messenger, is involved in a series of functional activities (Liang et al. ). Central Ca 2+ is closely related to neurotransmitter transmission of pain. Oral administration of L- type calcium channel antagonist nimodipine can improve the pain threshold (Miranda et al. ; Wong et al. ). Furthermore, studies have shown that Ca 2+ / caffeine sensitive microsomal pools, calmodulin and CaMKII participate in β-endorphin and morphine analgesia (Smith and Stevens ). Elevated Ca 2+ levels could antagonize the analgesic effects of opioid. For example, intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injections of Ca 2+ vector (such as X-537A and A23187) are able to shift Ca 2+ from extracelluar to intracellular locations, thereby increasing the intracellular Ca 2+ concentration, leading to decreased analgesic effects of opioids (Vocci et al. ; Chapman and Way ) as evidenced by the decrease in paw withdraw latency in hot-plate test. On the contrary, intracerebral injection of the Ca 2+ chelator EGTA could enhance the analgesic effects of opioids (Kakunaga et al. ; Ben-Sreti et al. ), as evidenced by the increase in paw withdraw latency. The present results were consistent with the previous studies, which suggested that the increase in central Ca 2+ concentration could decrease the threshold of the nociceptive response and reversed the effects of trans -resveratrol on pain.
CaMKII is a peripheral sensitized and central sensitized regulator of chronic pain. Increased intracellular Ca 2+ concentration can directly activate calcium-sensitive protein kinases such as calmodulin kinase II. CaMKII is highly expressed in the forebrain and accounts for 2% of the total protein in the hippocampus (Bennett et al. ), which affects many neuronal functions, such as neurotransmitter synthesis, regulation of ion channels and many signal pathways. Intracellular Ca 2+ signaling is usually significantly enhanced during the pain process (Lisman et al. ; Eisenach et al. ), in which CaMKII phosphorylation is increased, and there are elevated Ca 2+ /calmodulin binding sites. Recently, CaMKII has been shown to be preferentially localized in pain-processing regions in the nervous system (Brüggemann et al. ; Carlton ). These findings suggested that pain in the process of CaMKII activation plays a crucial role in intracellular pathways that underlie the neuronal hyperexcitability and neuropathic pain. Our results confirmed the previous finding that the decreased CaMKII expression in the hippocampus induced by trans -resveratrol is correlated with its effects on pain threshold.
As the most abundant neurotrophic factor, BDNF plays an important role in cell survival and neurotransmission. In hippocampus, in response to external stimuli, Ca 2+ enters the intracellular environment through L- type voltage-gated calcium channels or NMDA receptors and the downstream BDNF transcription are usually activated (Ghosh et al. ; Tao et al. ; Kolarow et al. ). Our results indicated that BDNF transcription is Ca 2+ dependent, and increased expression of BDNF alleviated pain perception, such as those measured in the hot plate test. These findings are agreement with the previous study that suggested that elevated BDNF could alleviate neuropathic pain after peripheral nerve injury (Eaton et al. ).
Mk 801 is widely used as an open channel blocker for NMDA receptors, which includes the ligand-gated calcium ion channels (Wigestrand et al. ; Evans et al. ; Guo et al. ). The present studies showed that the Mk 801 improved the analgesic effects of trans -resveratrol in the paw withdraw test, down-regulated p-CaMKII and up-regulated BDNF expression in the hippocampus. Firstly, compared with the control mice, there was an elevated expression of p-CaMKII in the hippocampus of mice suffering from pain. In the present study, we found a dose-dependent inhibition of pain by Mk 801, with 0.5 mg/kg being the minimum effective dose. Mk 801 also improved the anti-nociceptive effects induced by trans -resveratrol and decreased the expression of p-CaMKII in the hippocampus. Upon administration of Mk 801, glutamate may not be able to bind to its receptor, leading to Mg 2+ trap near the cell membrane, and closed state Ca 2+ channels. Under such conditions, Ca 2+ influx is blocked, leading to reduced intracellular Ca 2+ levels, which may explain decreased p-CaMKII and increased BDNF expressions.
L-type calcium channel antagonist nimodipine (2.5–10 mg/kg, i.p.) did not produce any analgesic effects on its own (Liang et al. ), but were able to potentiate the analgesic effects of resveratrol in hot-plate test, by reducing its minimum effective dose to 10 mg/kg. Blockade of L-type calcium channels by nimodipine led to reduce intracellular Ca 2+ levels, thereby inhibiting the expression of p-CaMKII, and promoting the expression of BDNF, which contributed to the analgesic effects of resveratrol.
Ca 2+ ionophore facilitates the transport of extracellular Ca 2+ ions through the cell membrane and subsequently increases in the intracellular Ca 2+ concentration (Vocci et al. ; Chapman and Way ; Wang et al. ). Intracerebroventicular (i.c.v.) administration of Ca 2+ or Ca 2+ ionophores (e.g., X-537A and A23187) is known to reduce opioid-induced antinociceptive responses. This is also consistent with the findings that reduced concentration of calcium ions in neurons could produce analgesic effects, and increased intracellular calcium ion concentration could antagonize the analgesic effect (Miranda et al. ). Therefore, we proposed that analgesic effects of trans -resveratrol could also be attenuated by increased intracellular calcium ion concentrations. In the present study, intracerebral administration of Ca 2+ reduced the analgesic effects of trans -resveratrol, and significantly increased the p-CaMKII levels and decreased BDNF expression.
Administrations of Ca 2+ chelators (e.g., EGTA and EDTA) through i.c.v. injections, on the other hand, are known to enhance antinociceptive effects of opioids (Ben-Sreti et al. ; Harris et al. ). Our current experiments showed that injection of calcium ion selective chelator EGTA could enhance the analgesic effect of trans -resveratrol. Similar to L- type calcium channel antagonist, intracerebral injection of calcium ion selective chelator EGTA can reduce the concentrations of extracellular calcium, which led to reduced intracellular calcium concentrations through permeable processes. Not surprisingly, downstream neurochemical changes such as p-CaMKII and BDNF were also altered towards the direction of anti-nociception, i.e. decreased p-CaMKII and increased BDNF expressions in response to the combination treatment of trans- resveratrol and EGTA.
Like most cells, distribution of Ca 2+ in neurons are not only affected by the balance of intra- and extra-cellular Ca 2+ concentrations, but also by Ca 2+ storage pools, which are regulated by inositol triphosphate and ryanodine receptors. Ryanodine receptors play an important role in the regulation of Ca 2+ release from storage pools (McPherson et al. ). Saeki et al. ( ) found that brain-type ryanodine receptors in the hamster were always calcium and caffeine sensitive. Studies have also shown that ryanodine are able to block the release of calcium from calcium/caffeine sensitive microsomal pools (McPherson et al. ), thereby decreasing the intracellular Ca 2+ concentration. In addition, ryanodine could reduce the influx rate of calcium ions from the extracellular environment into the cells (Friel and Tsien ), further decreasing the intracellular concentration of Ca 2+ . In our experiments, intracerebral injection of ryanodine significantly potentiated the analgesic effects of trans- resveratrol ( P < 0.01). Moreover, ryanodine also reduced the expression of p-CaMKII, and enhanced the expression of BDNF in the hippocampus, which is in agreement with our previous findings regarding the neurochemical changes in anti-nociceptive conditions.
In summary, the present study demonstrated that calcium ions participated in the analgesic effects of trans -resveratrol. Reducing the concentrations of intracellular calcium can potentiate the analgesic effects of trans- resveratrol, high calcium concentrations did the opposite effects. During the presence of analgesic effects from combination of trans -resveratrol and the reference drugs, there were increased BDNF expression and decreased p-CaMKII expression, which are consistent with the results of behavioral tests. However, the analgesic effects of trans -resveratrol were blocked by increased Ca 2+ concentration, the following neurochemical changes in the hippocampus induced by trans -resveratrol were also blocked.
Materials and methods
Animals
We used Male ICR mice (25–30 g) housed in the Animal Center of Shanghai Branch of Chinese Academy of Science. The mice were bred under standard laboratory conditions, keep on a 12 h natural light/dark cycle and had free access to food and water. Ambient temperature and humidity were continuously maintained at 23–25°Cand 50 ± 10%, respectively. Animals were adapted to laboratory conditions for 1 week prior to the relevant test. According to the random schedule between 10:00 am and 6:00 pm, each treatment group used 10 mice for the experiment. All experiments were conducted in accordance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (Publication No. 85–23, revised 1985), and approved by the Nanjing Medical College Committee on Animal Care and Use.
Drugs and chemicals
The used drugs and chemicals: resveratrol (Wuhan St. Tianyu Technology Co., Ltd., China), nimodipine (Enzo Biochem, Inc., USA), CaCl 2 (Quzhou Juhua Reagent Co., Ltd., China), ethylene glycolbis (ß-aminoethyl-ether)-N, N, N′, N′-tetraacetic acid (EGTA) (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., China), ryanodine (Tocris Bioscience, UK), Mk 801 (Sigma, USA). In the case of oral administration (through gavage, p.o. with a volume of 10 ml/kg), trans -resveratrol was dissolved in 0.5% sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC-Na) and diluted to the desired concentration on the day of the test (Xu et al. ). We dissolved other drugs and chemicals in 0.9% saline except for nimodipine, which was dissolved in one drop of ethanol and diluted with saline, and EGTA, which was dissolved in sterilized H 2 O (Liang et al. ). We used CMC-Na or saline as vehicle control in all the tests. Nimodipine and Mk 801 were injected i.p. in a volume of 10 ml/kg, and CaCl 2 , EGTA and ryanodine were given by i.c.v. administration.
The i.C.V. administration
We carried out the i.c.v. injections as described previously (Haley and McCormick ; Zhao et al. ). Vehicle or drugs were injected in a volume of 1 μl/side into the mouse hippocampal CA1 area (Hafeshjani et al. ). In short, during anesthesia, the animals’ skulls were cannulated bilaterally at coordinates adjusted for hippocampus CA1 area by using stereotaxic apparatus. A 27-gauge needle attached to a 50 μl Hamilton syringe was inserted perpendicularly into the brain, no more than 2 mm, and 1 μl of solution was injected. The injection site was 2 mm from either side of the midline drawn through the anterior base of the ears. To verify the injection sites, we injected a volume of 10 μl of 1% methylene blue and the brains were sectioned and subjected to histologically.
Hot plate test
The hot plate test was carried out following the method of da Matta et al. ( ) and Eddy and Leimbach with minor modification (Eddy and Leimbach ). In this experiment, mice were placed on the hot plate heated to 55 ± 0.5 °C. Each animal was placed individually on the center of the hot plate and the latency (s) of the first sign of hind paw licking/shaking or jumping to avoid heating pain was recorded as an index of the nociceptive threshold (Horiguchi et al. ). A cut-off reaction time was set at 15 s to prevent damage to tissues of the foot. Each mouse was used only once because repeated testing can lead to systematic latency alterations.
Western blotting
We dissected the tissue samples from hippocampus and the samples stored at −80 °C until analysis. The supernatant fluid containing 60 μg of protein well were loaded and separated in a polyacrylamide gel and transferred onto PVDF membranes. The membranes were blocked with 5% non-fat dried milk in Tris-buffer saline containing Tween 20 for 1.5 h at room temperature (25 °C), and the membranes were incubated with rabbit anti-CaMKII monoclonal antibody (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology, USA), rabbit anti-phosphorylated CaMKII polyclonal antibody (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology, USA) or with rabbit anti-BDNF polyclonal antibody (1:1000, Abcam, USA) at 4 °C overnight. After three washing with TBST and incubating with an HRP-conjugated monkey anti-rabbit IgG (1:10,000, Santa-Cruz) for CaMKII or pCaMKII or BDNF for 1 h at room temperature. Finally, membranes were washed again to remove unbound secondary antibodies and quantified using ChemiDoc XRS System. The blots were then re-probed with a polyclonal rabbit anti-β-actin antibody (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology, USA) as the corresponding loading controls. Ten animals in each group were used in the Western blotting analyses. The density of particular bands was detected using a computerized image analysis system.
Statistical analysis
Data are shown as mean ± standard error (SEM) and statistical evaluation was analyzed with repeated measures analysis of variances (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett’s post-hoc tests. The priori level of significance at 95% confidence level were considered to be statistically significant at P < 0.05.