Introduction
Development of intracranial hypertension and cerebral herniation is a common cause of death in patients with acute liver failure (ALF). The pathogenesis of the cerebral complications of acute liver failure (ALF) remains incompletely understood (Bernal et al. ; Karvellas et al. ), but has for more than a decade been believed to involve both hyperammonaemia and systemic inflammation as dominant factors (Shawcross and Jalan ). Both experimental and clinical ALF studies indicate that impaired cerebral oxidative metabolism due to mitochondrial dysfunction in astrocytes is of importance during severe hyperammonaemia (Bjerring et al. ; Bjerring et al. ; Bai et al. ). In some animal models of acute hyperammonaemia functional mitochondrial assessment indicates a reduced respiratory capacity and decreased adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production in brain tissue (Chadipiralla et al. ; García ; Kosenko et al. ). Furthermore it is a consisting finding in several studies of liver failure and hepatic encephalopathy that lactate accumulates in the brain (Zwingmann et al. ; Bosoi et al. ; Tofteng and Larsen ) supporting this concept of mitochondrial dysfunction. However, conflicting data have been found in both large animal studies (Rose et al. ) and clinical studies (Bjerring and Larsen ; Strauss et al. ). Here, findings of normal enzymatic activity of mitochondrial complexes in brain tissue from pigs with ischemic liver failure as well as near normal levels of extracellular lactate and metabolic ratio between oxygen and glucose in ALF patients challenge the idea of impaired oxidative metabolism. We therefore consider it unclear if the pathophysiology of hepatic encephalopathy actually involves a cerebral mitochondrial dysfunction.
In the present study we aimed to evaluate the mitochondrial function in brain tissue from two rat models with hyperammonaemia and elevated intracranial pressure (ICP). We furthermore compared the findings with the changes in cortical lactate concentration both in the extracellular space of the brain, and in the total tissue content of cortex. Finally, we conducted a dose-response study of the effect of ammonium on cortical respiration in vitro. We hypothesized that ammonium exposure would lead to increased brain lactate and reduced respiratory capacity due to mitochondrial dysfunction.
Materials and methods
Study design
The study consists of two parts: an ex vivo study (A) and an in vitro dose-response study (B). In (A) we studied brain respiration in two well-characterised rat models of acute hyperammonaemia by high-resolution respirometry. In the first of these models acute hyperammonaemia and systemic inflammation was induced by infusion of ammonium acetate and injection of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), respectively (Pedersen et al. ; Rohde et al. ). In the second model we induced liver insufficiency by a partial hepatectomy and hyperammonaemia by ammonium acetate infusion (Dethloff et al. ; Gaub and Iversen ). In both models we measured the tissue content of lactate in brain cortex. In the first model we also measured the extracellular concentration of brain lactate with biosensors before and after inhibition of neuronal lactate uptake. In (B) we examined the respiratory capacity of healthy rat brain cortex in vitro in a dose-response study with increasing concentrations of ammonium acetate added to the medium.
Experimental groups A: Group 1: LPS + ammonium acetate infusion ( n = 11) Group 2: LPS + sodium acetate infusion ( n = 7) Group 3: Saline + ammonium acetate infusion ( n = 10) Group 4: Saline + sodium acetate infusion ( n = 6) Group 5: Saline + saline infusion ( n = 8) Group 6: Partial hepatectomy + ammonium acetate infusion ( n = 6) Group 7: Partial hepatectomy + saline infusion ( n = 6)
Experimental groups B: Doses of 0, 0.5, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 mM of ammonium/sodium acetate ( n = 6 for each concentration) was added to brain cortex homogenate from healthy rats.
Animals
Wistar rats (Charles River, Sulzfeld, Germany) of 260–390 g were housed in plastic cages, fed on a regular chow diet with free access to water. They were kept on a 12:12 light/dark cycle at a constant room temperature and humidity. All procedures involving laboratory animals were conducted in accordance with the European Communities Council Directive of 24 November 1986 (86/609/EEC) and approved by the Danish Animal Inspectorate (license no. 2012–15–2934-00334). The experiments were performed in the animal facilities associated with the Department of Hepatology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Chemicals
All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Denmark A/S (Copenhagen, Denmark).
Experimental procedures
Study A
General procedures
Anaesthesia was induced with isoflurane and 0.2–0.3 ml pentobarbital (50 mg/ml) administered in a tail vein. Catheters (PE-50) were placed in the femoral arteries and veins as well as peritoneum for measurement of blood pressure, blood sampling, and drug administration, respectively. The arterial catheters were flushed with heparin (50 IE/mL in saline), and one arterial catheter was connected to a pressure transducer. The animals were tracheotomised, intubated and mechanically ventilated (Hallowell EMD; E-vet, Haderslev, Denmark) with a frequency of 60 min −1 and a tidal volume of 5–10 ml with a mixture of atmospheric air and oxygen. A capnograph connected to the respirator allowed the expiratory CO 2 level to be monitored continuously. The temperature was kept at 37 °C by the aid of a heating blanket connected to a peritoneal temperature probe. The head of the rat was fixed in a stereo-tactic instrument and a midline scalp incision was made. A borehole was drilled over cisterna magna in the occipital region. A catheter (PE-10) was inserted into cisterna magna and connected to a pressure transducer reset at the mid-level of the body for measurements of the ICP. Continuous recordings of arterial blood pressure and ICP were saved on a computer using the software Perisoft (Perimed, Stockholm, Sweden). This software was also used to calculate the average values of mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) and ICP on 5 min intervals at baseline and after 120 min. Stable baseline values of MAP, ICP and normal arterial partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide were secured before the initialization of the experiment.
In specific groups LPS ( Escherichia coli 0127 B8, Sigma Aldrich) dissolved in sterile saline (1 mg/ml) or vehicle alone was administered i.p. (1 mg/kg) and subsequently also i.v. 1 mg/kg. After 10 min i.v. infusion with either ammonium acetate (Sigma Aldrich) (140 μmol/kg/min), sodium acetate or saline was initiated at a rate of 2.4 ml/h and the time set to 0. The experiment was terminated after 120 min and the animals sacrificed while anaesthetized. The brain was quickly removed and the cortex dissected.
Partial hepatectomy
During isoflurane anaesthesia, a 90% partial liver resection (PHX90) was done as described in (Strauss et al. ). Vitality of the remaining liver tissue was ensured and the abdomen was sutured in two layers. The rats were returned to their cages and were used in the actual experiment after 24 h.
Cortical lactate measurement
Cortex from one hemisphere was immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C for subsequent lactate analysis. Thawed cortex was weighed and homogenized in a six-fold amount of ice-cold 1 M HClO 4 . The homogenate was centrifuged and the supernatant neutralized by ice-cold 1.6 M KOH containing 0.4 M K 2 CO 3 . Lactate content was measured in the supernatant and by an enzymatic method on an YSI 2300 (YSI, Ohio, USA) and the content expressed as μmol/g tissue.
High resolution respirometry
The contralateral brain cortex was used directly for respirometry and placed in an ice-cold BIOPS buffer solution (10 mM Ca-EGTA buffer, 0.1 μM free calcium, 20 mM imidazole, 20 mM taurine, 50 mM K-MES, 0.5 mM DTT, 6.56 mM MgCl 2 , 5.77 mM ATP, 15 mM phosphocreatine, pH 7.1). The respirometry was done with an Oxygraph 2 K (Oroboros Instruments, Innsbruck, Austria). Cortex was homogenized in a MiR05 solution (0.5 mM EGTA, 3 mM MgCl 2 , 60 mM k-lactobionate, 20 mM taurine, 10 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 20 mM HEPES, 110 mM sucrose, 1 g/l BSA, pH 7.1) obtaining a concentration of 1 mg wet weight brain tissue/10 μl MiR05. Each cortical sample was analysed in duplicate simultaneously. 20 μL of the homogenate (2 mg tissue) was added to each of the two measurement chambers of 2 mL each. The chambers were prefilled with MiR05 and either 2.5 mM ammonium acetate or sodium acetate depending on the experimental group. The respiratory capacity of the tissue was assessed by the oxygen consumption, i.e. the change of oxygen concentration over time, and recorded in real-time using DatLab 4.3 software (Oroboros Instruments) during titration of substrates, uncouplers and inhibitors as described below and modified from (Gnaiger ; Karlsson et al. ). After stabilization of the homogenates at basal respiration without exogenous substrates the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) capacity of complex I (OXPHOS CI ) was reached by successively adding the substrates malate (5 mM in 2 mL chamber), pyruvate (5 mM), ADP (1 mM) and glutamate (5 mM) thereby supplying complex I with reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. Then the maximal OXPHOS capacity of both complex I and II (OXPHOS CI+CII ) was attained by adding succinate (10 mM). By adding the ATP–synthase inhibitor oligomycin (2.5 μM) the LEAK respiration was observed. To find the maximal convergent respiratory capacity of the electron transport system (ETS CI + CII ) carbonyl cyanide p-trifluoro-methoxyphenyl hydrazone (FCCP, a protonophore) was titrated to reach maximal respiration in steps of 0.5 μM. The inhibitor of complex I, rotenone (0.5 μM), was added to measure the ETS capacity through complex II (ETS CII ). Finally addition of the complex III inhibitor antimycin-A (1 μg/ml) allowed measurement of the residual oxygen consumption not related to the ETS. The duration of the complete titration protocol was approximately 1 h.
In the subsequent analysis of the respirometry data, the residual oxygen consumption was subtracted from the different respiratory states. Control ratios were calculated for both maximal capacity of OXPHOS and ETS by dividing the respective oxygen consumption rate with LEAK respiration rate. To adjust for the potential variation in mitochondrial content in the samples we measured the citrate synthase activity and expressed the absolute oxygen consumption in relation to this. We used a commercial citrate synthase assay (Sigma-Aldrich) in accordance to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Biosensor measurements
In three separate groups of animals (i.e. group 1: LPS + ammonium acetate infusion ( n = 11), group 4: Saline + sodium acetate infusion, ( n = 5) and Group 5: Saline + saline ( n = 7)) the extracellular lactate in cortex was measured with enzymatic biosensors (Sarissa Biomedical Ltd., Coventry, UK). After anaesthesia and fixation of the head in a stereo tactic instrument as described above, a cranial window measuring approximately 4 × 6 mm was carefully cut with a dental burr over the left parietal cortex and uncovered dura mater. The dura mater was removed and the cortical surface exposed. A plastic cylinder with an in- and outflow plastic tube was fixated to the bone surrounding the cranial window by the use of dental cement and served the purpose of an in situ perfusion chamber. Meanwhile brain tissue was kept moist with an artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF, pH 7.4, 10 mM NaPi, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 2 mM glycerol). Microelectrode biosensors sensitive to lactate and a null sensor were connected to a potentiostat (Duo-Stat ME200+, Sarissa Biomedical Ltd) and polarized in the perfusion chamber against a subcutaneous reference electrode. The perfusion chamber was perfused with recycling a CSF at a flow rate of 5 ml/min. The biosensors were inserted into the parietal cortex and after 10–15 min of equilibration retracted again to obtain a calibration curve by perfusing stepwise increasing known concentrations of lactate in the perfusion chamber. The signal difference between the lactate and null sensors was used for estimation of tissue concentration of lactate after fitting a second order standard curve. After measurement of extracellular lactate at t = 90 min 2 mM of α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamate (4-CIN) was added to the perfusate and lactate measured again at t = 120 min to observe the extracellular lactate concentration after inhibition of neuronal lactate uptake through the monocarboxylate transporter 2 (MCT-2).
Study B
The animals were anaesthetized with isoflurane and decapitated. Cortex was quickly removed and placed in ice-cold BIOPS and thereafter homogenized in MiR05 as described above. 20 μL of homogenate was added to each chamber containing 2 mL of MiR05 and the same titration protocol as above was followed. However after the addition succinate ammonium acetate was added to a randomly chosen chamber and sodium acetate to the other. Before proceeding with the titration protocol we allowed two hours to pass to obtain an ammonium exposure similar to (A). Then we registered and calculated the ratio between the oxygen consumption after and before addition of ammonium and sodium acetate. We used concentration of ammonium and sodium acetate of 0.5 mM, 5 mM, 10 mM, 20 mM, 40 mM, 80 mM as well as a control group with no addition of acetate to investigate the dose-response relationship.
Statistical analysis
Kruskal-Wallis analysis of variance was applied for statistical comparisons between study groups due to small sample sizes and non-normality. Post-hoc multiple comparisons were done according to (Siegel and Castellan ). Pairwise comparison in the dose-response experiment was done with Wilcoxon signed rank test on the differences between groups. Values are reported as medians (interquartile range). A p -value below 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
Study A
Baseline values of MAP, ICP, plasma lactate, blood glucose and pH were comparable between groups, although ICP was slightly higher in group 2 (Table 1 ). After 120 min of ammonium infusion a significant degree of hyperammonaemia developed (Table 2 ) and a lower MAP was seen in group 1 and 3, i.e. the groups receiving ammonium acetate, compared to the groups not receiving ammonium acetate. In the hepatectomised rats ammonium acetate did not lead to a lower MAP, but we found a significantly higher ICP in both the hepatectomised as well as the rats given LPS compared to the respective control groups. The plasma lactate level was higher in the groups with LPS and also the hepatectomised rats with ammonium infusion. Table 1 Baseline values (median (interquartile range)) Group MAP ICP Blood glucose Plasma lactate Blood (mmHg) (mmHg) (mM) (mM) pH 1: LPS + ammonium acetate 117 (11) 2.0 (1.1) 7.0 (0.7) 1.7 (0.5) 7.45 (0.06) 2: LPS + sodium acetate 111 (12) 3.9 (1.1)* 7.7 (0.8) 2.1 (0.3) 7.48 (0.03) 3: Saline + ammonium acetate 113 (21) 1.2 (1.9) 7.2 (0.8) 1.8 (1.3) 7.44 (0.03) 4: Saline + sodium acetate 117 (3) 3.2 (1.2) 8.1 (0.2) 1.7 (0.6) 7.50 (0.01) 5: Saline + saline 115 (12) 1.6 (1.0) 6.6 (0.7) 1.5 (0.4) 7.46 (0.05) 6: PHX90 + ammonium acetate 109 (9) 2.3 (0.8) 5.1 (1.0) 2.0 (0.3) 7.45 (0.08) 7: PHX90 + saline 110 (13) 1.8 (1.2) 6.4 (0.6) 1.9 (0.3) 7.50 (0.07) ICP intracranial pressure, MAP mean arterial pressure, LPS lipopolysaccharide, PHX90 90% partial hepatectomy *Significantly different from group 3 ( p < 0.05) Table 2 Values at T = 120 min (median (interquartile range)) Group MAP ICP Blood glucose Plasma lactate Blood Plasma ammonium (mmHg) (mmHg) (mM) (mM) pH (μM) 1: LPS + ammonium acetate 85 (12)* ,€ 5.8 (2.6) #,€ 12.6 (5.3) &,€ 4.1 (1.8) §,€ 7.35 (0.10) ¤,€ 1600 (815)* 2: LPS + sodium acetate 104 (14) 4.2 (1.2) 9.2 (1.2) 4.8 (0.8) §,€ 7.58 (0.05) € 56 (17) 3: Saline + ammonium acetate 78 (12)* ,€ 2.3 (0.8) 11.5 (2.9) &,€ 1.9 (0.9) 7.45 (0.03) 1080 (88)* 4: Saline + sodium acetate 107 (5) 2.4 (1.2) 7.9 (0.5) 3.4 (1.5) 7.56 (0.04) € 46 (2) 5: Saline + saline 108 (6) 1.8 (0.5) 7.9 (1.3) 1.8 (1.4) 7.44 (0.03) 46 (17) 6: PHX90 + ammonium acetate 100 (13) 5.7 (3.6) %,€ 6.9 (0.6) 4.1 (1.4) %,€ 7.42 (0.10) 2138 (1237) % 7: PHX90 + saline 87 (13) € 3.1 (0.4) 5.6 (0.3) 2.6 (0.4) 7.42 (0.05) 92 (34) ICP intracranial pressure, MAP mean arterial pressure, LPS lipopolysaccharide, PHX90 90% partial hepatectomy *Significantly different from group 2, 4 and 5 ( p -value < 0.05) # Significantly different from group 3, 4 and 5 ( p -value < 0.05) & Significantly different from group 4 and 5 ( p -value < 0.05) % Significantly different from group 7 ( p -value < 0.05) § Significantly different from group 3 and 5 ( p -value < 0.05) ¤ Significantly different from group 2, 3 and 4 ( p -value < 0.05) € Significantly different from baseline ( p -value < 0.05)
Brain lactate
The total lactate content of cortical tissue was significantly higher in the hyperammonaemic groups receiving LPS and after hepatectomy (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Barplot of median lactate concentration in brain cortex homogenate ( error bars : median absolute deviation). LPS : lipopolysaccharide; PHX90 : 90% partial hepatectomy. *: Significantly different from group 4 and 5 ( p < 0.05). # : Significantly different from group 7 ( p < 0.05)
In selected groups we also measured the extracellular lactate levels and found that groups infused with acetate (both ammonium acetate and sodium acetate) had a significantly lower extracellular lactate concentration (Table 3 ). The increase in the extracellular lactate after inhibition of neuronal lactate uptake with 4-CIN was also significantly lower in both of these groups. Table 3 Extracellular lactate in cortex measured with enzymatic biosensors Group T = 90 min T = 120 min (after 4-CIN) (μM) (μM) 1: LPS + ammonium acetate 47.5 (59.4) 91.8 (20.6) 3: Saline + sodium acetate 5.2 (10.8) 10.9 (21.1) 4: Saline + saline 80.4 (71.1)* 247.3 (93.6)* ,# 4-CIN α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamate, LPS lipopolysaccharide *Significantly different from the other groups ( p < 0.05) # Significantly different from T = 90 min ( p < 0.05)
Cortical respiration
The ex vivo respiratory capacity of cortex was not decreased in the hyperammonaemic groups in any of the respiratory states (Fig. 2 a, b). In contrast, we actually observed slightly higher oxygen consumption rates in rats receiving both ammonium acetate and sodium acetate in the OXPHOS CI+CII , LEAK, ETS CI+CII and ETS CII states in the model with LPS. This was however not the case in the hepatectomy model. We also compared the respiratory capacities after adjusting for citrate synthase activity in group 1, 4 and 5 which did not reveal any differences (data not shown). The respiratory control ratios where not different between the groups in either of the models (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 2 Ex vivo brain cortex respiration in rats with hyperammonaemia and systemic inflammation a and 90% partial hepatectomy b (the horizontal bars represent the median). LPS : Lipopolysaccharide; PHX90 : 90% partial hepatectomy; OXPHOS CI-glu : respiration related to the oxidative phosphorylation capacity of mitochondrial complex I before addition of glutamate. OXPHOS CI : oxygen consumption related to the oxidative phosphorylation capacity of complex I after addition of glutamate. OXPHOS CI+CII : oxygen consumption related to the oxidative phosphorylation capacity of complex I and II. LEAK : oxygen consumption after inhibition of adenosine triphosphate synthase. ETS CI+CII : the maximal convergent respiratory capacity of the electron transport system. ETS CII : the respiratory capacity of the electron transport system after inhibition of complex I Fig. 3 Respiratory control ratios of brain cortex homogenate from rats with hyperammonaemia and systemic inflammation a and 90% partial hepatectomy b . LPS : Lipopolysaccharide; PHX90 : 90% partial hepatectomy; LEAK : oxygen consumption after inhibition of adenosine triphosphate synthase
Study B
In accordance with study A we also observed a slight increase in the respiratory capacity of brain cortex after two hours of both ammonium and sodium acetate exposure in vitro at concentration of 5 and 10 mM (Fig. 4 ). When exposed to the highest concentrations of ammonium acetate a slight reduction in oxygen consumption was seen compared to sodium acetate. The analysis of the leak control ratio revealed a significant increase in the oxygen consumption not related to ATP synthesis at the highest concentration and this effect was most pronounced in the ammonium acetate group (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 4 In vitro oxygen consumption of brain cortex homogenate related to the oxidative phosphorylation capacity of mitochondrial complex I and II after exposure to ammonium acetate or sodium acetate for two hours. The data express the relative oxygen consumption in percent of baseline consumption. *: Significantly different than levels at 5 and 10 mM of both ammonium and sodium acetate ( p < 0.05). # : Significantly difference between ammonium acetate and sodium acetate ( p < 0.05) Fig. 5 Leak control ratio of brain cortex homogenate respiration after exposure to ammonium acetate or sodium acetate for two hours expressed. The data express the percent of the oxygen consumption that is related to the leak of protons over the mitochondrial inner membrane and not the oxidative phosphorylation. *: Significantly different than levels at 0, 0.5 and 5 mM of both ammonium and sodium acetate ( p < 0.05). # : Significantly difference between ammonium acetate and sodium acetate ( p < 0.05)
Discussion
In this study we evaluated brain cortex respiration in two rat models of acute hyperammonaemia. In both well-characterized models (Pedersen et al. ; Rohde et al. ; Dethloff et al. ; Gaub and Iversen ) we observed significant hyperammonaemia and elevation of ICP within 120 min. Like previous reports we also found lactate accumulation in the cortical tissue (Zwingmann et al. ; Rose et al. ). We observed a synergistic effect between ammonia and LPS. LPS itself led to increased plasma levels of lactate but not significantly higher concentrations in brain homogenate. Interestingly we concurrently detected a reduced lactate concentration extracellularly, but this was also a feature in the group given sodium acetate. This observation most likely can be attributed to the fact that the acid residue acetate is predominantly metabolized by astrocytes due to the compartmentalized distribution of selective monocarboxylate transporters (Waniewski and Martin ). We speculate that the acetate exposure competitively suppressed glucose uptake and metabolism in the astrocytes and thereby reduced the flux of lactate from astrocytes to neurons – i.e. the astrocyte neuronal lactate shuttle (Pellerin et al. ). In theory, a significant increase in neuronal uptake of lactate could also reduce the extracellular lactate concentration, but since the inhibition of MCT2 did not lead to significant extracellular lactate increase we find this highly unlikely. Although we did not specifically measure the lactate content in the astrocytic and neuronal compartment separately or used tracers in our study, a possible interpretation of the data could be that the ammonium induced lactate accumulation is intracellular and most likely neuronal, at least in the presence of acetate. This interpretation is supported by recent findings in a PET study of patients with hepatic encephalopathy due to cirrhosis, where the reduced cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen indirectly could be attributed to metabolic effects in the neurons (Iversen et al. ).
The main objective of the study was to assess whether ammonium induced lactate accumulation takes place due to a mitochondrial dysfunction. In astrocyte cultures mitochondrial dysfunction following ammonium exposure (5 mM for 24 h) a pathogenesis of mitochondrial dysfunction has been termed “the Trojan horse hypothesis” (Albrecht and Norenberg ). In the brain ammonium is removed by the conversion of glutamate to glutamine in astrocytes (Norenberg and Martinez-Hernandez ). Glutamine is then actively transported out of the brain over the endothelium, but the transport mechanism can saturate when cerebral glutamine levels above 2 mM are reached (O’Kane and Hawkins ). This will lead to glutamine accumulation in the brain which indeed has been demonstrated in patients with ALF by using cerebral microdialysis (Bjerring et al. ). According to “the Trojan horse hypothesis” intracellular glutamine is taken up by the astrocytic mitochondria and then converted back to glutamate and ammonium. Once inside the mitochondrion the ammonium is responsible for events that ultimately initiate the mitochondrial permeability transition (mPT), which in turn leads to loss of the mitochondrial function and astrocytic swelling (Albrecht and Norenberg ; Jayakumar et al. ; Rama Rao and Norenberg ). In vivo data supporting this concept are scarce, but high levels of ATP degradation products such as hypoxanthine and inosine has been found in brain dialysate from patients with ALF (Bjerring et al. ) and also a reduced metabolic rate of oxygen in the brain of patients with overt hepatic encephalopathy (Iversen et al. ). Conversely, the reversibility of hepatic encephalopathy in both acute and chronic liver failure, as well as the reversibility of the astrocyte swelling in cerebral oedema, argues against the hypothesis, since the mPT in essence is irreversible and potentially causes cell death. Furthermore, mPT inhibition has only been shown to be beneficial in in vitro studies of cell cultures and not in in vivo animal models so far (Larsen et al. ). In our study we assessed the respiratory capacity ex vivo rather than the actual oxygen consumption in vivo. This allowed us to evaluate the mitochondrial function during ammonium exposure but otherwise metabolic neutral circumstances. If mPT was the cause of lactate accumulation one would expect reduced respiratory capacity during respirometry. This was not the case in our experiments and we conclude that the brain tissue from animals with hyperammonaemia, brain lactate accumulation and elevated ICP has normal mitochondrial function.
This conclusion leads to the interesting question, why does lactate then accumulate in the brain during hyperammonaemia? Our animals were all normoxic, had normal haemoglobin (data not shown) and had a sufficient cerebral perfusion pressure despite the elevated ICP. Lactate from the systemic circulation might have contributed to some extent but de novo lactate synthesis in the brain has been clearly demonstrated in tracer studies (Zwingmann et al. ). Under the assumption that lactate accumulates in order to restore the reducing equivalents due to impaired oxidative metabolism, we have previously proposed that hyperammonaemia induces a type of cytopathic hypoxia (Bjerring and Larsen ). Distinct classes of tissue hypoxia are well described and worth considering here (Siggaard-Andersen et al. ). 1) Ischemic hypoxia due to low perfusion pressure 2) low oxygen extraction due to either low pO2, anaemia, or increased haemoglobin oxygen affinity 3) arteriovenous shunting 4) increased diffusion distance or reduced endothelial diffusion area 5) impaired electron transport in the mitochondrial ETS 6) decreased ATP synthesis due to uncoupling of proton gradient (i.e. mPT) 7) hypermetabolism. Of these possibilities most can be excluded in the present and other studies cited above or are intuitively unlikely. However dysperfusion in the cerebral microcirculation due to shunting might be a possible explanation that we did not investigate.
In our dose-response experiment we observed a small reduction in the respiratory capacity after exposure to rather extreme ammonium concentrations. While the achieved plasma ammonium levels in the hyperammonaemic groups are quite high but still physiological relevant and somewhat comparable to clinical observations, ammonium levels of 40 and 80 mM must be considered unphysiological. In the dose-response study the leak control ratios displayed proportionality with both the ammonium and sodium acetate levels. We presume that it is a consequence of the increasing extracellular osmolality and the associated change in the transmembrane osmotic gradient rather than an uncoupling phenomenon.
Some limitations deserve to be addressed in the present study. Firstly, the use of acetate turned out to influence the extracellular lactate levels substantially. Hence we were not able to evaluate the effect of ammonium in itself on the lactate transport between astrocytes and neurons. An important observation was however that sodium acetate infusion alone did not lead to cerebral lactate accumulation and the ammonium ion must be the responsible factor when acting in concert with either systemic inflammation (LPS) or liver insufficiency (PHX90). Secondly, 4-CIN was used as an inhibitor of neuronal lactate influx through MCT-2. It is well described that 4-CIN also inhibits transmembrane transport of e.g. pyruvate over the mitochondrial inner membrane (Halestrap and Denton ). This could affect the citric acid cycle and further aggravate intracellular lactate accumulation. However, we did not see an increase in extracellular lactate concentration in animals treated with acetate and importantly, we did not use brain tissue from animals exposed to 4-CIN for respirometry as these were studied in separate groups. Thirdly, our choice of using brain tissue homogenates for respirometry rather than the more classical choice of isolated mitochondria should be addressed. Based on literature review we judged that the benefits of using homogenates outweighed the limitations. In a thorough comparative study homogenate was found an excellent substitute for isolated mitochondria, providing comparable qualitative mitochondrial parameters (Pecinova et al. ). Furthermore the most commonly used mitochondrial isolation methods can affect the respiratory function significantly through alterations of organelle morphology and oxidative stress (Picard et al. ). As we did not find differences between the experimental groups using cortex homogenate, we find it unlikely that studies of subcellular fractions, eg. isolated mitochondria or synaptosomes, would reveal physiologically relevant discrepancies. Overall we believe our observations of unimpaired respiratory capacity are sound and speak strongly against a mitochondrial dysfunction as a cause of the lactate accumulation.
In conclusion, our study showed that in two rat models of severe hyperammonaemia, as seen in acute liver failure, intracellular lactate accumulation takes place in brain tissue with preserved mitochondrial function. Hence brain lactate accumulation and the reduced cerebral oxygen consumption observed in acute liver failure must be related to other pathophysiological mechanisms than mitochondrial dysfunction.