Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder of the central nervous system associated with progressive cognitive and memory loss. Molecular hallmarks of the disease are characterized by extracellular deposition of the amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) in senile plaques, the appearance of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), cholinergic deficit, extensive neuronal loss and synaptic changes in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus and other areas of the brain essential for cognitive and memory functions (Parihar and Hemnani ; Wimo et al. ). Formation of beta-amyloids might impair the coupling of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors with G-proteins. This can lead to decreased signal transduction, a decrease of trophic and non-amyloidogenic amyloid precursor protein (APPs) and generation of more beta-amyloids, aggravating further the cholinergic deficiency (Fisher ; Schliebs and Arendt ). Thus, raising the expectation that restoring the cholinergic hypofunction to normal may alter the onset or progression of AD dementia (Tariot and Federoff ). The drugs clinically used for the treatment of this disease include; acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEIs) and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, which are limited by adverse effect such as tacrine-induced hepatotoxicity (Watkins et al. ), urinary incontinence and cardiovascular effects (Kroger et al., Kröger et al. ; Howes ). Hence, the need for effective drugs, as stimulated the search for new compounds with potential clinical utility from natural product.
Dietary polyphenols have gained research attention due to their interesting biological activities, and more specifically their antioxidant properties. Abundant evidence not only demonstrates the full spectrum of oxidative damage to neuronal macromolecules, but also reveals the occurrence of oxidative events early in the course of the disease and prior to the formation of the pathology, which support an important role of oxidative stress in AD (Wang et al. ). These findings provide important insights into the development of potential treatment regimens and even allude to the possibility of a preventative cure (Bonda et al. ; Mancuso et al. ). Garcinia kola Heckel (Guttiferae) is a herb grown in Nigeria with a characteristic astringent, bitter and resinous taste. It is used in ethnomedicine in the treatment of laryngitis, cough, liver disease and dementia (Iwu ; Cyril-Olutayo et al., ). Kolaviron (KV) (Fig. 1 a), a biflavonoid complex containing the C-3/8-link biflavanones; GB-1, GB-2, GB-la and kolaflavanone, is the predominant constituent of G. kola (Iwu et al. ). It has been reported to prevent hepatotoxicity mediated by carbon tetrachloride, paracetamol, thioacetamide, D-galatosamine, aflatoxin B1 and 2-acetylaminoflourene (Iwu et al. ; Adaramoye and Adeyemi ; Olaleye et al. ; Farombi et al. ). Similarly, kolaviron has been reported to elicit strong antioxidant, anti-neuroinflammatory and anticholinesterase activities in both in vivo and in vitro experimental models (Farombi and Nwaokeafor ; Adaramoye ; Akinmoladun et al. ; Olajide et al. ; Onasanwo et al. ). Thus, the present study sought to investigate the cognitive enhancing effect of kolaviron in rats as well as antioxidant property in discrete brain regions of scopolamine treated rats. Fig. 1 a kolaviron. b Experimental protocol for drug administration and behavioural studies
Materials and methods
Plant materials
Seeds of Garcinia kola were purchased from herb seller in Agege market, Lagos State, Nigeria. Botanical identification and authentication was done by Mr. O. Oyebanji and Prof. J.D. Olowokudejo, respectively, both of the Department of Botany, University of Lagos, Nigeria. A voucher specimen (LUH 6138) was deposited in the Herbarium for reference.
Isolation of kolaviron
Isolation of kolaviron was carried out using the procedure previously described by Iwu ( ). Garcinia kola seeds were peeled and air dried in the laboratory and ground into powdered form. Six thousand, one hundred and fifty grams (6150 g) of the powdered seeds was extracted with light petroleum ether (bp 40–60 °C) in a Soxhlet extractor. The defatted, dried marc was repacked and then extracted with methanol in a Soxhlet extractor. The extract was concentrated and diluted to twice its volume with distilled water and partitioned with chloroform. The concentrated chloroform fraction gave a yellow brown solid known as kolaviron (Fig. 1 a). The percentage yield was calculated to be 0.52% w /w. Kolaviron was dissolved in arachis oil overnight.
Experimental animals
Male albino rats (150–200 g) and mice (20–25 g) used in this study were obtained from the Laboratory Animal Centre, College of Medicine, University of Lagos, Nigeria. The Animals were housed in plastic acrylic cage at room temperature under standard environmental conditions (12 h light /dark cycle), received standard diet (Livestock feeds, Lagos, Nigeria) and had free access to drinking water. The experimental procedures adopted in this study were in strict compliance with the ethical standards of the Research Grant and Animal Experimentation Committee of the College of Medicine, University of Lagos, Nigeria and in accordance with the United States National Institutes of Health Guidelines for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals in Biomedical Research (2001).
Drugs and chemicals
Ethanol, chloral hydrate, tacrine, glacial acetic acid, Folin-Ciocalteu reagent, scopolamine hydrobromide, thiobarbituric acid, sodium chloride, sodium hydroxide, thiobarbituric acid, potassium ferricyanide, trichloroacetic acid, napthylethylenediamine dihydrochloride, ferric chloride, dithio-bis-nitrobenzoic acid (DTNB), and bovine serum albumin were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis MO, USA, while normal saline was purchased from Unique Pharmaceutical Ltd., Lagos, Nigeria.
Acute toxicity test
The acute toxic effect of kolaviron was determined using the fixed dose protocol of the Organization of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) guidelines for testing of chemicals, TG 420 (OECD, 2001) for oral administration. 11 female mice were given kolaviron (250 mg/kg, p .o., n = 1; 2000 mg/kg, p .o., n = 5; and 4000 mg/kg, p .o., n = 5). Behavioural signs of toxicity and mortality were observed following kolaviron administration; during the first 30 min, then the second, fourth, sixth hour and once daily for 14 days for delayed toxicity or mortality. Physical manifestations of toxicity such as writhing, gasping, salivation, hyperactivity, drowsiness and mortality were recorded during the experimental period.
Behavioural test
Treatment regimen
Male albino rats (150–200 g) were randomly divided into 6 groups ( n = 6) and treated as follows for 3 consecutive days: Group 1- arachis oil (10 ml/kg; p.o .; vehicle-normal control), Group 2- arachis oil (10 ml/kg, p.o., negative control), Group 3- tacrine (5 mg/kg; i.p .), Group 4–6: kolaviron (25, 50 or 100 mg/kg; p.o., respectively). One hour after vehicle or drug administration on day 3, scopolamine (3 mg/kg, i.p.) was administered to rats in all the groups except animals in Group 1 (Fig. 1 b).
Y-maze test
The test relies on the innate tendency of rats to explore a novel environment. On third day, 1 h after drug administration, scopolamine was administered and animals were subjected to Y-maze task. The Y-maze was made of wood (Y-shaped), each 40 cm long, 30 cm high and 15 cm wide. Rat naïve to the maze was placed in the centre of the Y-maze facing the south arm ‘B′ and was allowed to explore the maze freely for a period of 5 min. The number and the sequence of arm entries were recorded by an observed unaware of the treatment groups. An arm entry was scored when all four paws were in the arm. Alternation behaviour was defined as consecutive entries into all three arms (i.e., ABC, CAB, or BCA but not BAB) (Sarter et al. ). The percentage of spontaneous alternation was measured as an index of working memory by calculating the ratio of the actual number of alternations to the possible number (defined as the total number of arm entries minus two) multiplied by 100, i.e., % alternation [(number of alternations)/(total number of arm entries - 2)] × 100. The total number of arm entries was recorded as an index of locomotor activity (Hritcu et al. ).
Morris water maze test
Morris water maze (MWM) is the most widely used task in behavioural neuroscience for studying neural mechanisms of spatial learning and memory. Animals acquire information about spatial location and reach hidden platform in circular pool. Thus, a decrease in the time to reach the hidden platform suggest learning. The MWM apparatus consisted of a circular water tank (110 cm diameter and 60 cm height) filled with water (26 ± 2 °C) to a depth of 30 cm. The pool was divided into four hypothetical quadrants, designated as: N (North), E (East), W (West), S (South). A black round platform of diameter 10 cm was placed 2 cm below the surface of the water in a constant position in the middle of the southwest quadrant in all trials. On third day, 1 h after drug administration, scopolamine was administered and animals were subjected to MWM test. The MWM tasks were given for five consecutive days (day 3–7). The rats were given a maximum of 60 s (cut-off time) to locate the hidden platform and were allowed to stay on it for 30 s. The time taken for the rat to locate the escape platform was recorded using a stop watch. In the event that the animal was unable to locate the hidden platform within 60 s, it was gently guided to it and was allowed to stay on it for 30 s. Each rat was subjected to a daily session of 3 trials per day for 5 consecutive days. Escape latency time (ELT) (time to locate the hidden platform in the water maze) was used as an index of learning (Morris ; Ishola et al. ). On day 8, the platform was removed from the tank, and the rats underwent a spatial probe trial in which they were given 45 s to search for the platform. The time spent in a 2× (40 cm diameter) concentric area surrounding the platform (time in platform annulus ) was recorded. The experimenter was blinded to the treatment groups.
Brain tissue preparation
Forty-five minutes after the MWM test on day 8, the rats were anaesthetized with chloral hydrate (300 mg/kg, i.p.) and rapidly decapitated. The skull was cut open and the brain was exposed from its dorsal side. The whole brain was quickly removed and the prefrontal cortex (PFC), striatum (STR) and hippocampus (HIP) were isolated on an ice-cold plate. The isolated brain areas were weighed and homogenized in 0.03 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH -7.4 with an Ultra-Turrax T25 (USA) homogenizer at a speed of 9500 rpm. The homogenate was used to assay for malondialdehyde (MDA), glutathione (GSH), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and nitrite.
Biochemical estimations
Estimation of MDA level
MDA, which is an indicator of lipid peroxidation, was spectrophotometrically measured using the thiobarbituric acid assay procedure as previously described by Ohkawa et al. ( ). Two hundred microliters of supernatant were added and mixed with 1 mL of 50 % trichloroacetic acid in 0.1 M HCl and 1 mL of 26 mM thiobarbituric acid. After mixing on a vortex, samples were maintained at 95 °C for 20 min, after which samples were centrifuged at 960 g for 10 min and supernatants were read at 532 nm. A calibration curve was constructed using MDA as standard and the results were expressed as U/mg protein.
Measurement of glutathione (GSH)
GSH, the endogenous antioxidant, was determined by its reaction with 5, 5′-dithiobis (2-nitrobenzoic acid) (Ellman’s reagent) to yield a yellow chromophore which was measured spectrophotometrically (Sedlak and Lindsay, ).). The brain homogenate was mixed with an equal amount of 10 % trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and centrifuged (Remi cold centrifuge) at 2000× g for 10 min at 4 °C. To 100 μl of processed tissue sample, 200 μl of phosphate buffer (pH 8.4), 500 μl of 5, 5′-dithiobis (2-Nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB) and 400 μl of double-distilled water were added and the mixture was shaken vigorously on a vortex mixer. The absorbance was read at 412 nm within 15 min.
Determination of superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity
The activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD, EC 1.15.1.1) was assayed according to the method described by Winterbourn et al. ( ). Each 1.5 mL reaction mixture contained 100 mM TRIS/HCl (pH 7.8), 75 mM nitro-blue-tetrazolium (NBT), 2 μM riboflavin, 6 mM EDTA, and 200 μL of supernatant. The absorbance was read at 560 nm. One unit of SOD is defined as the quantity required to inhibit the rate of NBT reduction by 50 %. The enzyme activity is expressed as units/mg protein.
Nitrite estimation
Nitrite (U/mg protein) level, an indicator of nitric oxide production, was estimated in the rat brain using the Greiss reagent. Nitric oxide has a short half-life and is rapidly converted to the stable end products nitrate (NO 3 − ) and nitrite (NO 2 − ). One hundred microliter of Greiss reagent (1:1 solution of 1 % sulphanilamide in 5 % phosphoric acid and 0.1 % napthylamine diamine dihydrochloric acid in water) was mixed with 100 μl of supernatant and vortexed. The absorbance was measured at 542 nm (Green et al., ).
Acetylcholinesterase assay in brain
The brain homogenate in volume of 500 μl was mixed with 1 % Triton X-100 and centrifuged at 100,000×g at 4 °C in a Beckman Ultracentrifuge (LE 80, USA) for 1 h. The supernatant obtained was stored at 4 °C for cholinesterase estimation (Ellman et al. ). The kinetic profile of enzyme activity was measured spectrophotometrically (Shimadzu, USA) at 412 nm with an interval of 15 s. One unit of acetylcholinesterase activity was defined as the number of micromoles (μmol) of acetylthiocholine iodide hydrolysed per minute (min) per milligram (mg) of protein. The specific activity of acetylcholinesterase is expressed in micromoles/min/mg of protein.
Protein estimation
Protein was measured in all brain samples by the method of Lowry et al. ( ). Bovine serum albumin (BSA) (1 mg/ml) was used as standard and measured in the range of 0.01–0.10 mg/ml.
Statistical analysis
Results obtained were expressed as mean ± SEM ( n = 6). The statistical level of significance was determined by one- or two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc multiple comparison test (whichever is applicable) using Graphpad prism version 6 (Graphpad prism Inc., CA, USA).
Results
Acute toxicity studies
Kolaviron up to 4000 mg/kg did not induce any behavioural toxic effect nor mortality.
Effect of kolaviron on scopolamine-induced memory deficit in Y-maze test
One-way ANOVA showed significant effect of treatment on relative proportion of spontaneous alternation behaviour [F (5, 29) = 14.09 P < 0.001] (Fig. 2 a). Post hoc analysis revealed that scopolamine administration produced significant ( P < 0.01) decrease in alternation behaviour in comparison with vehicle treated rats. However, pretreatment of rats with kolaviron produced dose dependent prevention of scopolamine-induced decrease in spontaneous alternation behaviour in Y-maze test. However, neither scopolamine nor kolaviron affect total number of arm entries F (5, 29) = 3.237 P = 0.0192] when compared with vehicle treated control group (Fig. 2 b). Fig. 2 a - b Effect of kolaviron on (A) spontaneous alternation behaviour and (A) number of arm entries in scopolamine- induced memory deficit test in Y-maze test. Values are expressed as mean ± SEM ( n = 6), ## p < 0.01 versus vehicle only treated; α p < 0.05; β p < 0.01; γ p < 0.001 versus vehicle + scopolamine treated, b p < 0.01 versus kolaviron 25 mg/kg treated group. Statistical analysis by one way ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc multiple comparison tests
Effect of kolaviron on scopolamine-induced memory deficit in Morris water maze test
As shown in Fig. 3 a, vehicle only treated rats quickly acquired the spatial task as indicated by a decrease in escape latency time (ELT) [F (4, 20) =5.054 P < 0.01]. Two way ANOVA revealed significant differences of kolaviron or tacrine pretreatment [F (4, 120) = 29.90, P < 0.001], scopolamine injection [F (5, 120) = 29.78, P < 0.001] and kolaviron or tacrine pretreatment × scopolamine [F (201,120) = 2.31,P < 0.01] (Fig. 3 a). Post hoc analysis showed that scopolamine injection, 5 min before MWM paradigm produced no significant change in ELT between session 2 and 5 when compared with 1st session. However, pretreatment of rats with kolaviron produced a session dependent decrease in ELT when compared with the 1st session. Moreover, kolaviron (25 or 50 mg/kg) significantly decreased mean ELT time from the 4th session when compared with the 1st session while kolaviron (100 mg/kg) produced a significant decrease in mean ELT time from the 3rd session when compared with the 1st session. Administration of tacrine (5 mg/kg; i.p), on the other hand, significantly decreased the mean ELT from the 2nd session when compared with the 1st session. Fig. 3 a - b Effect of kolaviron on spatial learning following scopolamine-induced memory impairment in the Morris water maze test in rats. Values are expressed as mean ELT (s) ± S.E. M (n = 6). α P < 0.05; β P < 0.01; γ P < 0.001 versus 1st session ELT or vehicle-scopolamine treated, respectively. ### P < 0.001 versus vehicle-control treated (one or two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc multiple comparison test)
In the probe trial, the time spent in the target quadrant area was recorded after the platform was removed. One way ANOVA showed significant effect of treatment (F (5,30) = 30.60, P < 0.001). Post hoc analysis showed that the scopolamine-treated rats spent lesser time in the target quadrant indicating working memory impairment, whereas, the vehicle-treated control group spent more time in the target quadrant ( P < 0.05). Pretreatment of rats with kolaviron or tacrine reversed working memory deficit induced by scopolamine. Evidenced in increased swimming time in the target quadrant (Fig. 3 b).
Effect of kolaviron on MDA level
One way ANOVA revealed significant effect of treatment on MDA level in the hippocampus [F (5, 30) = 4.53, P < 0.01], striatum hippocampus [F (5, 30) = 3.83, P < 0.01] and prefrontal cortex [F (5, 30) = 18.79, P < 0.001] (Fig. 4 a, b and c). Post hoc analysis showed that scopolamine injection increased MDA generation by 2.70 and 4.35 folds (P < 0.001) in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, respectively. However, 3 days pretreatment of rats with kolaviron significantly attenuated MDA level by 2.21 and 5.48 folds (at 100 mg/kg) in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, respectively (Fig. 4 a, c). Conversely, neither scopolamine injection nor kolaviron pretreatment affect malondialdehyde generation in the striatum when compared with vehicle treated group (Fig. 4 b). Fig. 4 a - c The effect of kolaviron on malondialdehyde level in the (A) hippocampus (B) striatum (C) prefrontal cortex of scopolamine-induced amnesic rats. Values are expressed as mean ± SEM (n = 6). ### p < 0.001 versus vehicle treated; α p < 0.05; γ p < 0.001 versus vehicle + scopolamine treated. Statistical level of significance analysis by one way ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc multiple comparison test
Effect of kolaviron on GSH level
One way ANOVA revealed significant effect of treatment on GSH level in the hippocampus [F (5,30) = 3.31, P < 0.05] (Fig. 5 a). Post hoc analysis showed that the glutathione level within the hippocampus of scopolamine-treated rat was significantly reduced by 2.03 fold ( P < 0.001) when compared with the vehicle rats. However, pretreatment of rats with kolaviron (25, 50 or 100 mg/kg) for 3 consecutive days reversed deficit induced by scopolamine producing significant increase in GSH level by 2 folds (P < 0.05; P < 0.01) in the hippocampus. Although, tacrine increased ( P > 0.05) the level of GSH in the hippocampus by 1.7 folds (Fig. 5 a). In addition, one way ANOVA depicted significant effect of treatments on GSH level in the striatum [F (5,30) = 4.41,P < 0.01] (Fig. 5 b). Post hoc analysis showed that scopolamine injection significantly reduced GSH level by 2-folds in the striatum when compared with vehicle treated. However, the GSH deficit induced by scopolamine was dose-dependently reversed by kolaviron pretreatment [F (5, 30) = 4.474 P < 0.01], but tacrine pretreatment failed to reverse the GSH deficit (P > 0.05) in the striatum (Fig. 5 b). One way ANOVA also revealed significant effect of treatment on GSH level in the prefrontal cortex [F (5,30) = 8.94, P < 0.001]. Furthermore, post hoc analysis revealed that scopolamine caused significant reduction of GSH level (1.5 fold) in the prefrontal cortex when compared to vehicle treated rats. Moreso, pretreatment of rats with kolaviron (50, or 100 mg/kg) but not tacrine (5 mg/kg) reversed the GSH deficit induced by scopolamine in the prefrontal cortex (Fig. 5 c). Fig. 5 a - c The effect of kolaviron on glutathione level in (A) hippocampus (B) striatum (C) prefrontal cortex of scopolamine-induced amnesic rats. Values are expressed as mean ± SEM (n = 6). # p < 0.05; ### p < 0.01 versus vehicle treated, α p < 0.05; β p < 0.01; γ p < 0.001 versus vehicle + scopolamine treated. Statistical level of significance analysis by one way ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc multiple comparison test
Effect of kolaviron on superoxide dismutase level
As shown in Fig. 6 a, b and c, one way ANOVA revealed no significant effect of treatment on SOD level in the hippocampus [F (5,30) = 2.12, P > 0.05] and prefrontal cortex [F (5,30) = 0.64,P > 0.05] when compared with vehicle-treated control. Moreover, post hoc analysis showed no significant effect of kolaviron or tacrine pretreatment on superoxide dismutase level in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex (Fig. 6 a and c). However, one way ANOVA revealed significant effect of treatments on SOD level in the striatum [F (5,30) = 9.89,P < 0.01] (Fig. 6 b). Post hoc analysis showed that scopolamine injection caused significant reduction in superoxide dismutase level in the striatum by 2.17 folds when compared to vehicle treated rats. Conversely, the pretreatment of rats with kolaviron (100 mg/kg) increased ( P < 0.001) the superoxide dismutase level in the striatum by 2.61 folds when compared with scopolamine treated rats (Fig. 6 b). Fig. 6 a - c The effect of kolaviron on superoxide dismutase activity on (a) hippocampus (b) striatum (c) prefrontal cortex of scopolamine-induced amnesic rats. Values are expressed as mean ± SEM ( n = 5). ). # p < 0.05 versus vehicle treated; γ p < 0.001 versus vehicle + scopolamine treated. c p < 0.001 versus kolaviron 25 mg/kg + scopolamine treated
Effect of kolaviron on nitrite generation
As shown in Fig. 7 a, one way ANOVA depicted no significant effect of treatment on nitrite level [F (5,30) = 2.42,P > 0.05]. Post hoc analysis revealed that scopolamine and kolaviron treatment did not affect the level of nitrite release in the hippocampus of the rats when compared with vehicle treated rats (P > 0.05). In contrast, one way ANOVA showed significant effect of treatment in nitrite level [F (5,30) = 20.24,P < 0.001] and [F (5,30) = 13.88,P < 0.001] in the striatum and prefrontal cortex, respectively, (Fig. 7 b and c). Post hoc analysis showed that scopolamine treatment caused significant increase in nitrite generation by 1.62 and 1.19 folds (P < 0.001) in the striatum and prefrontal cortex, respectively, in comparison with vehicle treated rats. Interestingly, pretreatment of the rats with kolaviron (25, 50, 100 mg/kg) produced a dose dependent and significant reduction in nitrite level in the striatum of the rats (Fig. 7 b). Moreso, kolaviron (50 mg/kg) showed a significant reduction in nitrite level of the prefrontal cortex when compared with scopolamine treated rats (Fig. 7 c). Fig. 7 a - c The effect of kolaviron on nitrite level in the (A) hippocampus (B) striatum (C) prefrontal cortex of scopolamine-induced amnesic rats. Values are expressed as mean ± SEM (n = 6). Statistical level of significance analysis by one way ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc multiple comparison test. ### p < 0.001 versus vehicle-treated; β p < 0.01; γ p < 0.001 versus vehicle-scopolamine treated; c P < 0.001 versus KV 25 mg/kg + scopolamine treated
Effect of kolaviron on acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity
As shown in Fig. 8 , one way ANOVA revealed significant effect of treatment on acetylcholinesterase activity [F (5,30) = 14.26;P < 0.001]. Post hoc analysis showed that scopolamine induced significant ( p < 0.001) increase in AChE activity in comparison to vehicle-treated control group. As expected, pretreatment of rats with tacrine significantly ( p < 0.05) decreased AChE activity. Moreover, pretreatment of rats with kolaviron significantly ( p < 0.01) reduced the increase in AChE activity induced by scopolamine. Fig. 8 Effect of kolaviron on brain AChE activity. Values are expressed as mean AChE activity (μmol/min/mg protein) ± S.E. M (n = 6). ### p < 0.001 vs vehicle treated-control group; * p < 0.05; *** p < 0.001 vs vehicle-scopolamine treated group. Statistical level of significance analysis by one way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc multiple comparison test
Discussion and conclusion
The present study investigated the effects of kolaviron, a biflavonoid complex isolated from Garcinia kola seeds on scopolamine-induced memory and learning deficits in rats. We also determine the effect kolaviron on scopolamine-induced nitrosative and oxidative stresses in rats. Findings from this study showed that acute administration of scopolamine induced learning and memory deficit in rats, considered characteristic of cholinergic deficits in AD which was ameliorated by pretreatment of rats with kolaviron. Moreover, scopolamine administration increased the level of nitrosative and oxidative stress status in discrete brain regions of rats which was attenuated by kolaviron pretreatment.
Scopolamine, a non-selective muscarinic antagonist block cholinergic signalling and produce cognitive dysfunctions, including long-term and short term memory impairment (Souza et al. ; Ishola et al. ). In the present study, two well-established memory tasks were used: Y-maze and MWM tests to evaluate the effect of the kolaviron on scopolamine model of AD in rats. Y-maze test is a behavioural test used to assess the memory function and willingness of rodents to explore new environments. Spontaneous alternation behaviour using the Y-maze test has been viewed as an indicator of spatial working memory (Hritcu et al. ). In this test, rats must remember the arm most recently entered in order to alternate arm choice. Furthermore, treatment with scopolamine has been demonstrated to impair spontaneous alternation behaviour in animal models (Klinkeberg and Blokland ). In this study, scopolamine injection induced spontaneous alternation deficits suggestive of cognitive impairment evidenced in the decreased number of percent alternations. However, oral administration of kolaviron ameliorated the spontaneous alternation deficits caused by scopolamine in the Y-maze test with no influence on the number of arm entries.
To evaluate the effect of kolaviron on long term memory, the Morris water maze task was carried out in rats. The Morris water maze (MWM) test has been used extensively to investigate spatial learning and memory in rodents (Morris ; Rudi and De Deyn ). In the present study, the vehicle-treated control group exhibited rapid reductions in escape latency time from the 3rd session and reached a stable escape latency time. In contrast, we observed impaired learning and memory in rats after intraperitoneal injection of scopolamine, which agrees with the results of our previous study (Ishola et al. ). Interestingly, the pretreatment of rats with kolaviron for 3 consecutive days produced session dependent decrease in escape latency time from the 3rd session in rats indicating improvement in spatial learning and memory. In previous studies, a strong correlation between pathlength and escape latency time were reported (Ishola et al. ; Tota et al. ). Moreover, pretreatment of rats with kolaviron improved target quadrant preference evidenced in dose dependent increase in time spent in platform zone during probe trial in MWM.
Cholinergic system plays a critical role in learning and memory functions (Blokland ). Cholinergic deficit is a major neuropathological feature that is associated with memory loss and closely correlated with the severity of cognitive dysfunction in AD (Hasselmo ). The most important strategy to increase cholinergic function is inhibition of AChE. In this study, scopolamine administration increased AChE activity, suggesting excessive hydrolysis of acetylcholine. Thus, inhibition of AChE activity could serve as a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of AD. Our results showed that kolaviron significantly inhibit the activity of AChE, which is agreement with report of Ijomone and Obi ( ), suggesting that kolaviron ameliorated cognitive deficits induced by scopolamine through enhancement of cholinergic neurotransmission.
It is generally accepted that oxidative stress plays a prominent role in the pathogenesis of AD. Both preclinical and clinical studies have shown increased level of oxidative stress during latent period of the disease, which often leads to sudden onset of symptoms of AD, including cognitive decline (Sultana et al. ). Brain tissue in particular is more susceptible to the deleterious effects of reactive oxygen species (ROS) because of its high rate of oxygen consumption and reduced antioxidant defense systems. ROS initiate lipid peroxidation, which triggers degeneration of several neuronal population especially central cholinergic pathways (Tabet et al. ). Post-mortem studies have confirmed elevated levels of MDA, an index of lipid peroxidation in AD brains, which further supports the role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of the disease (Sultana et al. ). There are increasing evidences that support the role of antioxidant supplementation in the prevention and treatment of age-related diseases (Uttara et al. ; Natalie et al. ). Indeed, several compounds with antioxidant property have been shown to improve cognitive dysfunctions and to slow down the progression of AD (Natalie et al. ). Moreover, scopolamine-induced memory impairment has been linked to increased oxidative stress in the whole brain, as well as specific regions associated with learning and memory (Ishola et al. ; Budzynska et al. . The results of the present study confirmed that the memory impairment induced by scopolamine was accompanied by increased oxidative stress, as shown by elevated brain levels of MDA (in prefrontal cortex and hippocampus) and decreased antioxidant defense systems (hippocampus, striatum and prefrontal cortex). Thus, the ability of kolaviron to reverse scopolamine-induced oxidative stress and deficit in antioxidant system suggests enhancement of antioxidant defense system and attenuation of oxidative stress in the brain (Uttara et al. ). This action might have resulted from its ability to overcome the pro-oxidant effects of scopolamine in the brain, through increase in antioxidant defense systems (GSH, SOD and catalase) and a decrease in MDA and nitrite levels in the brain (Budzynska et al. . Based on the results obtained from the behavioural and biochemical studies, it may be suggested that kolaviron may act directly as a free radical scavenger or regulator to ameliorate oxidative stress in neurons induced by scopolamine (Farombi and Nwaokeafor ). However, further studies are required to determine the ability of kolaviron to permeate the blood brain barrier.
Findings from this study showed that kolaviron demonstrated a significant improvement in both short term and long term memory as shown in Y-maze and Morris water maze, respectively, as well as a significant decrease of the oxidative stress status in the hippocampus, striatum and prefrontal cortex. The inhibition of acetylcholinesterase activity by kolaviron might also explain its anti-amnesic effect. Thus, could be used as an adjunct in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease.