Introduction
The major mechanisms underlying spinal cord injury (SCI) involve primary and secondary injuries, which cause tissue damage and pathophysiological changes that include ischemia, edema, lipid hydrolysis, free radical release, and inflammation (Alexander and Popovich ; Beattie ). Secondary injury causes additional damage to neural elements and motivates a complex series of cellular and molecular events that induce cell apoptosis (Yune et al. ). Traditional therapy during acute injury includes controlling inflammation, alleviating pain, and reducing edema. However, neurological function recovery depends on the neural plasticity and compensatory mechanisms of the spinal cord (Fawcett et al. ; Weaver et al. ; Ziu et al. ). Alleviating the secondary injury of SCI is critical to the improvement of neurological functions.
Estrogen is a multi-active steroid that has multiple effects on the central nervous system (CNS) (Kan et al. ). Estrogen has favorable effects on various neurological diseases, particularly against injury-induced apoptosis through transcriptional potentiation of the anti-apoptosis Bcl-2 gene (Chaovipoch et al. ; Samantaray et al. ). Estrogen receptor ERα, but not ERβ, can be integrated with the regulatory subunit of PI3K and enhance the phosphorylation levels of PI3K/AKT. The up-regulation of phosphorylated PI3K/AKT then phosphorylates nuclear ERα, leading to the modulation of ERα activities (Hein et al. ; Stoica et al. ). As we know, the balance between apoptosis and anti-apoptosis is disrupted upon SCI damage. PI3K/AKT plays an important role as a pro-survival factor by activating pro-survival signaling pathways and inhibiting apoptotic signal cascades. Upon activation, the AKT signaling pathway leads to the transcriptional upregulation of pro-survival genes BCL-2 and inhibition of pro-apoptotic proteins Bax. Therefore, PI3K-AKT-ERα-estrogen survival crosstalk contributes to balance Bcl-2 and Bax expression upon SCI and finally inhibit cell apoptosis and improve cell survival (Ghidoni et al. ; Hou et al. ).
Isopsoralen (2H-Furo[2,3-H]chromen-2-o ne; PubChem CID: 10,658, Fig. 1 a), a chemical ingredient of traditional Chinese herb medicine, is a furocoumarin isolated from Psoralea corylifolia L (PCL). A number of components have been isolated and characterized from this plant, including coumarins, flavonoids and a meroterpene phenol which exhibit antibacterial, antitumor and estrogen-like activities (Simoben et al. ). The coumarins shows selectivity for ERa, whereas flavonoids and bakuchiol have a dual action on ERa and ERβ but preferentially activating ERβ which causes the agonistic or antagonistic effects dependent on target organs characterized by selective estrogen receptor modulators (Xin et al. ). Isopsoralen has various pharmacological effects, including antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, bone fracture, osteoporosis, and estrogen-like activities (Liu et al. ; Xin et al. ; Zhang et al. ). The seed of Psoralea corylifolia L. (PCL) is applied as a tonic or an aphrodisiac agent; it is commonly used in China as a remedy for bone fracture, osteomalacia, and osteoporosis (Xin et al. ). Most phytoestrogens contribute to their affinities to the estrogen receptor; differences in the ligand structure of each phytoestrogen may dictate whether they act as agonists and/or antagonists in each ER subtype (Miksicek ). As a type of phytoestrogen, isopsoralen is reported as an ERα agonist (Xin et al. ). However, the potential therapeutics of isopsoralen on acute SCI is not known. Fig. 1 Improvement of locomotion by isopsoralen in SCI mice a Structure of isopsoralen (molecular weight 186.169, PubChem CID: 10,658). b The BMS subscore in the mice 3 days after SCI. c The BMS score in the mice 3 days after SCI. d The angles in the inclined plane test in the mice 3 days after SCI. e Isopsoralen (5 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg for 2 weeks) increased the BMS subscore as comparing to the model group. f Isopsoralen increased the BMS score as comparing to the model group. g Isopsoralen increased the angles in the inclined plane test. These effects were blocked by the ERα antagonist MPP (0.3 mg/kg), but not by the ERβ receptor antagonist PHTPP (0.3 mg/kg). n = 6 in each group, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 vs sham group; #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01 compared with model group
The present study aims to evaluate the activities of isopsoralen on the recovery of locomotor function and spinal cord damage of SCI models. Results show that isopsoralen performs estrogen-like neuroprotection through ERα, which mediates the phosphorylation of PI3K/AKT and anti-apoptotic activities.
Materials and methods
Animals
Adult male C57BL/6 mice (25-30 g) were obtained from the Laboratory Animal Center of the Fourth Military Medical University (FMMU). Animals were individually housed on a 12:12 h light-dark cycle with free access to food and water. All experiments were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the Fourth Military Medical University. Animals were randomly divided into six groups ( n = 6 per group). For spinal cord injury (SCI), a laminectomy and unbilateral facetectomy was executed at the T9 for exposing the circle of dura, and then spinal cord was compressed by a period of 15 s under anesthesia as previously described (Joshi and Fehlings ). Behavioral testing was conducted at 1 day before SCI injury and 3, 14 days after SCI injury during Am 9:00 to Am12:00. Then mice were sacrificed under anesthesia.
Drugs
All of the chemicals and reagents were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA) unless otherwise illustrated. Isopsoralen (Shanghai pure biological technology, Shanghai, China) was dissolved in 1 ‰ DMSO, intraperitoneally given at low-dose (5 mg/kg) and high-dose (10 mg/kg) respectively after 1 h post-SCI injury (5 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg, once per day). Both MPP and PHTPP (0.3 mg/kg dissolved in 1 ‰ DMSO) were intraperitoneally injected followed by 10 mg/kg isopsoralen administration.
Behavior assessment
Basso mouse scale (BMS)
BMS was used to assess the motor function of the hindlimbs (Basso et al. ). All mice were pretrained and tested in a round open field (120 cm in diameter). Each mouse was observed separately by two investigators blinded to the treatment group. Each session lasted for 4 min. The mice were scored in seven categories, including ankle movement, plantar placement, stepping, coordination, paw position, trunk instability, and tail position. Hindlimb movements were assessed with a BMS score and subscore ranging from 0 (no ankle movement) to 9 (complete functional recovery) points. The scores for the left and right hindpaws were averaged to obtain a single value per mouse, which represented the mobility of the mouse.
Inclined plane test
The mice were placed horizontally on a smooth tilted board (60 cm × 80 cm) with an adjustable angle of 0°–90° as previously reported (Sedy et al. ). The angle was gradually elevated to the vertical position from a preliminary angle of 30° at a speed of 2.5°/s until the mouse was no longer able to hold its position for 5 s without sliding. The last angle that the mouse was able to hold for 5 s was recorded at 1 day before injury and at 3 and 14 days after injury. The mice were tested on whether they faced the raised side of the board with either their head or tail.
HE staining and immunohistochemistry
Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining was conducted as previously described (Lee et al. ). Spinal cord tissues (T5-L1 vertebrae) were removed at 14 days after injury and fixed by 4 % paraformaldehyde in 0.01 M PBS (pH = 7.4) overnight at room temperature. After dehydration by graded ethanol, the tissues were embedded in paraffin. Next, 5 μm-thick sections were incised transversely and deparaffinized with xylene, followed by staining with HE. The extents of lesions were determined by measuring the number of cavitation formations at the epicenter of the injury, which was photographed by a microscope (Olympus BX61, Japan). The unstained areas were defined as cavitation, and the cavitation volume was calculated in each slice using image analysis software (Adobe Photoshop CS3for Windows).
The transverse paraffin sections were incubated in 3 % H 2 O 2 to eliminate endogenous peroxidase activity, followed by PBS washing. After incubation with 0.15 % Triton X-100 at room temperature and blocking with 1 % goat serum albumin in PBST for 1 h, the sections were incubated at 4 °C overnight with rabbit anti-ERα antibody (1:200; Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX, USA). After triple washing in PBS, the sections were incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped with 3,3-diaminobenzidine. The results were detected and photographed by a microscope (Olympus BX61, Japan) (Sato et al. ). The intensity of ERα immunoreactivity was calculated in each slice using an image analysis software (Image J).
Western blot analysis
Samples (T5-L1 vertebrae) was collected and protein extracted with RIPA (1×) buffer (Beyotime Institute Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) and then briefly sonicated. Aliquots of 25 μg were used for western analysis using the following primary antibodies: PI3K (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), phosphor-PI3K (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology), AKT (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology), phosphor-AKT (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology), Bax (1:500; Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA), Bcl-2 (1:500; Chemicon), ERα (1:400; Santa Cruz), ERβ (1:400; Santa Cruz) and β-actin (1:10,000; Sigma) (as an internal control). Immune complexes were detected with appropriate secondary antibodies and chemiluminescence reagents (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). The Imaging and densitometry were performed by ChemiDoc XRS (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). For quantification, band intensity was calculated to ratio according to the β-actin. Setting band intensity ratio of sham group as 100 %, the band intensity ratios of other groups were calculated as percentage to the sham group.
Data analysis
Results were expressed as mean ± SEM. Statistical comparisons were performed by unpaired Student’s t–test. One way ANOVA was applied for comparing multiple groups followed by a Dunnett T-test. In all cases, p < 0.05 was regarded as statistical significance.
Results
Isopsoralen improves locomotion in SCI mice
BMS provides a general locomotion evaluation of limbs, while the subscore reflects more distinct measures of locomotor control, such as plantar stepping, coordination, and paw position. Therefore, the BMS (sub) score and the angle of inclined plane test were employed to illustrate whether the drug has beneficial effects on functional recovery after SCI (Basso et al. ). At 3 days after injury, the BMS (sub) score and the angle of inclined plane test significantly decreased (Figs. 1 b– 1 d); indicating that hindlimb locomotion was notably impaired. Isopsoralen (5 or 10 mg/kg once per day) had no effect on locomotion dysfunction 3 days after SCI. However, isopsoralen treatment for two weeks markedly improved the BMS (sub) score and performance in the inclined plane test in a dose-dependent manner (Figs. 1 e– 1 g). These effects were blocked by the ERα antagonist MPP (0.3 mg/kg), but not by the ERβ receptor antagonist PHTPP (0.3 mg/kg). This suggested that the protection of ISO was blocked by MPP and that estrogen-like neuroprotection of isopsoralen may be mediated by ERα rather than by ERβ.
Isopsoralen reduces the spinal cord lesion
HE staining was used to evaluate the lesion of the spinal cord (T5-L1 vertebrae) based on the area of cavitation formation. SCI injury induced higher cavitation and cell degeneration and necrosis in the tissues (Fig. 2 a). Isopsoralen (5 and 10 mg/kg per day for two weeks) significantly reduced the volume of cavitation and the area of damage in the gray matter (Fig. 2 b). MPP (0.3 mg/kg), but not PHTPP (0.3 mg/kg), markedly weakened the protective effects of isopsoralen (Fig. 2 b). These results indicated that isopsoralen alleviated the injury though the activation of ERα. Fig. 2 Isopsoralen reduces the spinal cord lesion a SCI injury induced higher cavitation and cell degeneration and necrosis in the tissues. Scale bars: upper 50 μm, lower 20 μm. b Isopsoralen (5 and 10 mg/kg per day for two weeks) significantly reduced the volume of cavitation and the area of damage in the gray matter. MPP (0.3 mg/kg), but not PHTPP (0.3 mg/kg), markedly weakened the protective effects of isopsoralen. n = 6 in each group, **p < 0.01 vs sham group; ##p < 0.01 compared with model group
Isopsoralen induces up-regulation of ERα
The intensity of ERα was displayed in the gray matter of the ventral and dorsal horns through immunohistochemical staining (Fig. 3 a) and Western blot (Fig. 4 a). In the model of mice with SCI, ERα expression was dramatically decreased in the spinal cord at two weeks after spinal injury (Fig. 3 b and 4 b). Isopsoralen treatment (5 and 10 mg/kg) reversed the decrease of ERα expression induced by SCI, but was abolished by MPP (0.3 mg/kg). However, ERβ expression was not changed by SCI or isopsoralen treatment (Fig. 4 c). These data indicated that isopsoralen could up-regulate the expression of ERα after SCI. Fig. 3 Isopsoralen induces up-regulation of ERα a The intensity of ERα in the gray matter of the ventral and dorsal horns through immunohistochemical staining. Scale bars: upper 50 μm, lower 20 μm. b ERα expression was dramatically decreased in the spinal cord at two weeks after spinal injury. Isopsoralen (5 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg) significantly increased the intensity of ERα immunoreactivity, but was abolished by MPP (0.3 mg/kg). n = 6 in each group, **p < 0.01 vs sham group; ##p < 0.01 compared with model group Fig. 4 Levels of ER receptors a Western-blot samples of ERα and ERβ. b Levels of ERα was dramatically decreased in the spinal cord at two weeks after spinal injury. Isopsoralen (5 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg) significantly increased the levels of ERα, but was abolished by MPP (0.3 mg/kg). c Levels of ERβ were not changed by SCI or isopsoralen treatment. n = 6 in each group, *p < 0.05 vs sham group; #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01 compared with model group
Isopsoralen reduces SCI-induced apoptosis through PI3K/AKT pathway
SCI is followed by an acute but long-lasting inflammatory response marked by an increase in cell apoptosis (Wang et al. ). Next, we detected the expression of apoptosis-related proteins Bax and Bcl-2 in the spinal cord (Fig. 5 a). The levels of Bax significantly increased in the SCI models, but decreased in mice treated with isopsoralen (Fig. 5 b). The levels of Bcl-2 decreased after SCI, but were reversed by isopsoralen treatment (Fig. 5 c). PHTPP (0.3 mg/kg) had no effect on the actions of isopsoralen, whereas MPP (0.3 mg/kg) abolished it. Fig. 5 Inhibition of apoptosis by isopsoralen a Western blot analysis of the levels of Bcl-2 and Bax. b The levels of Bax significantly increased in the SCI models, but decreased in mice treated with isopsoralen (5 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg). c The levels of Bcl-2 decreased after SCI, but were reversed by isopsoralen treatment. MPP (0.3 mg/kg) abolished the effects of isopsoralen. n = 6 in each group, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 vs sham group; #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01 compared with model group
The PI3K/AKT signaling pathway is important for cell growth, proliferation, metabolism, neuroplasticity, and survival (Brazil et al. ). The levels of PI3K and AKT were not altered in each group. However, the levels of phosphorylated PI3K and AKT (P-PI3K and P-AKT) obviously decreased in the SCI models (Figs. 6 a and b). Isopsoralen enhanced the expression of P-PI3K and P-AKT in the SCI models, but these effects were inhibited by MPP (0.3 mg/kg). These results indicated that isopsoralen could induce the phosphorylation of PI3K/AKT and balance the expressions of Bcl-2 and Bax against cell apoptosis. Fig. 6 Effects of isopsoralen on the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway a Upper panel: Sample of the Western blot analysis of AKT and p-AKT. Lower panel: The levels of AKT were not altered, but P-AKT decreased in the SCI models. b Upper panel: Sample of the Western blot analysis of PI3K and P-PI3K. Lower panel: The levels of PI3K were not altered, but P-PI3Kdecreased in the SCI models. Isopsoralen enhanced the levels of P-PI3K and P-AKT in the SCI models, but these effects were inhibited by MPP (0.3 mg/kg). n = 6 in each group, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 vs sham group; #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01 compared with model group
Discussion
We demonstrate that isopsoralen protects the spinal cord against acute injury by inhibiting cell apoptosis and secondary damage. Isopsoralen improves hindlimb locomotion function, reduces cavitation formation, attenuates gray matter damage, and increases neuronal survival at the lesion epicenter in a time-dependent and dose-dependent manner. Additionally, isopsoralen markedly attenuate the apoptosis induced by SCC by balancing the levels of Bax and Bcl-2. The underlying mechanism of isopsoralen appears to involve the activation of ERα and the phosphorylation of PI3K/AKT.
Anti-apoptosis is an important therapeutic strategy in the treatment of SCI (Beattie ; Springer ). The Bcl-2 protein family plays an important role in regulating the permeability of mitochondrial outer membrane by controlling the formation of a permeability transition pore (Antignani and Youle ). By contrast, Bax, a pro-apoptotic protein, accelerates the release of cytochrome C from the mitochondria by forming complexes with proteins that contain BH3. Bcl-2 inhibits BH-3 from forming pores and prevents the formation of permeability transition pore; this phenomenon stops the release of apoptotic-inducing factors (Zhang et al. ). Studies have demonstrated that SCI attenuates the expression of Bcl-xL at time points associated with enhanced apoptosis (Nesic-Taylor et al. ; Qiu et al. ). Isopsoralen significantly enhances the expression of Bcl-2 and decreases the expression of Bax, effects that suggest the regulation of apoptosis may be a fundamental mechanism of isopsoralen-mediated neuroprotection.
The activation of PI3K-AKT pathways through ERα balances Bcl-2/Bax expression and improves cell survival (Campbell et al. ). ERα can enhance the phosphorylation levels of PI3K/AKT. In turn, the up-regulation of phosphorylation levels of PI3K/AKT can phosphorylate nuclear ERα, leading to its modulated expression and activity. We found that ERα expression is dramatically decreased in the spinal cord, and isopsoralen can up-regulate ERα expression. The ERα antagonist MPP, but not ERβ antagonist PHTPP, abolishes the protective effects of isopsoralen. These results indicate that isopsoralen alleviates injury by activating ERα. However, the possibility that ERβ may play a supportive role in SCI-induced injury through other signal pathways cannot be ruled out.
Meanwhile, it is reported that ERα and ERβ induce opposite effects in human breast cancer cell (MCF-7) proliferation and tumor formation. ERα modulates the breast cancer-promoting effects of estrogens and ERβ modulates inhibitory effects (Paruthiyil et al. ). Long-term use of isopsoralen acting as ERα-selective agonists might increase the risk of carcino-genesis. Therefore, further studies are required to assess the physiological significance and clinical use of isopsoralen to avoid side-effects in animals and humans.
Isopsoralen significantly reduced the volume of cavitation and the area of damage in the gray matter and improved the motor functions. These effects were blocked by the ERα antagonist MPP, but not by the ERβ receptor antagonist PHTPP. Activation of ERα leads to the enhancement of PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, which is important for cell growth, proliferation, survival (Brazil et al. ). Previous study has indicated that the PI3K/AKT pathway mediated signaling promotes cell survival. i) Activation of PI3K by radiation leads to the phosphorylation/activation of AKT; ii) AKT inhibits pro-apoptotic proteins Bad, Bax, Bim, and Noxa; iii) AKT phosphorylates and activates pro-survival transcription factor NF-κB, leading to the upregulation of pro-survival genes BCL-2 and BCL-XL. Thus, it is reasonable that ISO balances the Bal-2/Bax expression through PI3K/AKT pathway (Hein et al. ).
This study suggests that isopsoralen promotes neuronal cell survival by inhibiting apoptosis evoked by SCI. However, the probability that isopsoralen may present estrogen-like neuroprotective activities through other signaling pathways cannot be negated. The present study may be helpful in broadening the clinical application of isopsoralen in the treatment of neuropathic diseases and disorders involving CNS injury.