Introduction
Ischemic stroke or cerebral ischemia is the third most common cause of death worldwide after heart disease and cancer (Lloyd-Jones et al. ) and the main cause of adult long-term disability in developed countries. Global cerebral ischemia is associated with a variety of functional and metabolic changes in brain tissue, especially in so-called selective vulnerable brain areas. Among them, the hippocampus occupies a prominent place, because it shows regional differences in vulnerability to ischemia. The hippocampus is a brain structure that has protracted development, retains the ability to produce new neurons in adulthood in most mammalian species (Gould ), and plays an important role in memory storage and executive functions (Kumaran et al. ), as well as in the stress response. Cerebral ischemia leads to selective cell death of vulnerable pyramidal neurons in the CA1 region of the hippocampus (Lipton ). Results from many proteomic studies have been generated using tissue from the entire hippocampus (Yang et al. ; Fountoulakis et al. ; Carboni et al. ; Kirchner et al. ; Poirrier et al. ). Because of the presence of many cell types in the hippocampus, which have shown regional susceptibility to postischemic reperfusion, we decided to examine hippocampal tissue only from the CA1 pyramidal layer. This region belongs to the brain areas most vulnerable to cell death after ischemic injury and on the other hand, granule cells in the dentate gyrus region are relatively ischemia resistant (Kirino ). Because of the hippocampal regional difference in the vulnerability to ischemia, a strict separation of sensitive and resistant cells allows us to follow changes in those protein profiles, which can be components of possible ways to acquire ischemic tolerance. Our intention was to identify changes in protein profile occurring in the rat CA1 region of the hippocampus after a short (8 min) ischemia and 3 days of reperfusion in comparison with the same ischemic process with a delayed postconditioning (PostC) application. Our previous results (Burda et al. ) have demonstrated the existence of some cellular machinery that can prevent the process of delayed neuronal death in the vulnerable hippocampal neurons in a cell-protective manner. Therefore, we decided to apply PostC 2 days after ischemic injury to save the highest proportion of CA1 neurons.
Bradykinin (BK) is a bioactive compound involved in the kallikrein-kinin system as well as in the pathophysiology of secondary brain damage following global and focal cerebral ischemia where it promotes brain damage through an increase of vascular permeability and thus, brain edema (Waldner et al. ). On the other hand, BK PostC is able to prevent cell death of vulnerable neuronal populations after cerebral ischemia if applied 2 days after transient forebrain ischemia in the rat; however the detailed mechanisms of its action are not known. BK in this case serves as a nonspecific stressor and can be replaced by at least 2 different compounds that have been tested in our laboratory (norepinephrine, 3 nitropropionic acid) (Danielisova et al. ). There is limited knowledge of intracellular protein machineries underlying the effect of postC on hippocampal pyramidal neurons in CA1, although protein synthesis is known to contribute to learning and memory formation (Henninger et al. ). Detailed characterization of ischemic-injured brain tissue protein patterns can contribute to understanding of the PostC protective effect. Qualitative differences in the number of identified proteins after ischemia in comparison to postconditionned CA1 pyramidal neurons might indicate pathways for further comprehensive examination of cellular mechanisms effective in ischemic tolerance acquisition.
Protein fingerprints of the rat CA1 hippocampal region were mainly focused on comparative analysis of protein distribution in cultured CA1 cells (Corti et al. ), examining toxicity effects of neurotoxins with implications for Alzheimer’s disease (Li et al. ) or mapping proteomic changes in hippocampal synapses (Klemmer et al. ; Villa et al. ). Studies about proteomic analysis of rat hippocampus selected regions after cerebral ischemia were reported effects of hypoxia/intermittent hypoxia in CA1 and CA3 (Klein et al. ) or preconditioning effects in CA1, CA2, CA3 and dentate gyrus (Nakajima et al. ). Neuronal cell death in CA1 is mainly caused through glutamate excitotoxicity and oxidative stress (Szatkowski and Attwell ; Lipton ), however exact mechanisms of this process is still unknown. Despite this fact, proteomic analysis is widely used for protein identification as a biomarker discovery tool in several neurodegenerative diseases or neuron-harming injuries. Investigation of the varied protein profiles can be useful for CA1 pyramidal neuron vulnerability to ischemia clarification. However, there has been no report on proteomic analysis of CA1 after global cerebral ischemia affected by PostC in a rat model. We performed an alternative and complementary step to proteomic analysis by protein pre fractionation at the peptide level. Our interest was mainly focused on proteins involved in metabolic pathways, which are part of the glutamate-scavenging system and oxidative stress elimination after ischemia and PostC. Proteins in CA1 hippocampal samples were digested in solution and the resulting peptides were separated using 2D-chromatography: nano-HPLC carried out in salt-plug mode was followed by MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometry (2D-LC MALDI MS) for protein identification in the rat CA1 region injured by ischemia and reperfusion, together with examination of the same tissue affected by bradykinin PostC. Our intention was to identify proteins involved in cell survival after ischemic insult and to examine changes in the protein profile after PostC with a special interest in proteins contained in glutamate excitotoxicity after ischemic injury. To avoid stochastic false-positive results produced by proteomic analysis and for results verification, we performed two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis of relevant protein gel spots, which were identified previously by 2D-LC MALDI MS technique. Supposition of exact protein identification from a certain gel spot guarantees the opportunity for results validation on the same level as those of western blot analysis or immunohistochemistry.
Materials and methods
Animals and surgery
Experiments were approved by the Institutional Ethical Committee in accordance with current national legislation. Adult male albino Wistar rats weighing 250–300 g (aged between 12 and 16 weeks) were maintained on a 12-h light/dark cycle and given food and water ad libitum. A model of transient forebrain global ischemia (Pulsinelli and Brierley ) with four-vessel occlusion modifications (Schmidt-Kastner et al. ) was used for ischemic reperfusion injury induction. Briefly, both vertebral arteries were cauterized through foramina alare and both carotids were occluded under light isoflurane anesthesia (0.5 %) by aneurysm clips to induce forebrain ischemia. After 8 min of bilateral carotid occlusion, blood flow was restored by releasing the clips. The criteria for forebrain ischemia were as follows: loss of the righting reflex, mydriasis, and paw extension. The ischemic group of animals (ISCH) was allowed to survive for 3 days after ischemia. Animals in the postconditionned group (PostC) underwent the same ischemic insult, but a dose 150 μg/kg (500 μl i.p.) of bradykinin (Arg Pro-Pro-Gly-Phe-Ser-Pro-Phe-Arg, C50H73N15O11.3C2H4O2, Sigma Aldrich, Germany) was administered 48 h after ischemia. Sham-operated controls (SHC) were treated similarly to the ischemic group, only the common carotid arteries were not occluded.
Histochemistry and immunohistochemistry
Three groups of rats were randomized for histological analysis. Sham-operated animals were in the first group as controls (SHC; number of rats = 4) and in the second group were rats that underwent transient cerebral ischemia and reperfusion (ISCH; number of rats = 5). The third group of animals (PostC; number of rats = 5) also underwent transient cerebral ischemia and reperfusion, but bradykinin was applied as postconditioning after 2 days of postischemic reperfusion. Rats were sacrificed by transcardiac perfusion under deep anesthesia. Perfusion via the left ventricle started with a washout of blood vessels with 200 mL of 0.9 % NaCl. Brains were perfused and fixed with 4 % ( w / v ) paraformaldehyde solution in phosphate buffer, pH 7.6, removed, and postfixed overnight in the same fixative prior to vibratome sectioning. The 33-μm coronal sections of brain were prepared at the level of the bregma, −3.3 ± 0.2 mm. The sections were randomly selected for Fluoro Jade B (FJ-B) used to stain all degenerating neurons, regardless of the mechanism of cell death, and NeuN staining was used to visualize neurons present in the CA1 region after ischemia with or without postconditioning.
Sections for FJ-B staining were mounted on 2 % gelatin-coated slides and then dried on a slide warmer at 50 °C for 30 min. The slides were then immersed in a solution containing 1 % sodium hydroxide in 80 % alcohol for 5 min. This was followed by 2 min in 70 % alcohol and 2 min in distilled water. The slides were then transferred to a solution of 0.06 % potassium permanganate for 10 min, and subsequently rinsed in distilled water for 2 min. After 20 min of incubation in the staining solution containing 0.0004 % FJ-B dye (Histo-Chem Inc., Jefferson, USA), the slides were rinsed three times for 1 min in distilled water. Excess water was removed by briefly (approximately 15 s) draining the slides vertically on a paper towel. The slides were then placed on a slide warmer set to approximately 50 °C until they were fully dry (5–10 min). The dry slides were cleared by immersion in xylene for at least 1 min before coverslipping with DPX (Fluka or Sigma). The slides were examined using an Olympus BX 51 fluorescent microscope with a DP 50 digital camera.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on the prepared coronal free-floating 33-μm vibratome sections. Sections containing the hippocampus were immunostained for NeuN, a neuronal marker. Briefly, the sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with monoclonal mouse NeuN antibody (CHEMICON International, Temecula, USA, 1:500) in 0.1 mol/L PBS (pH 7.4) with 0.2 % Triton. After washing with 0.1 mol/L PBS (pH 7.4) with 0.2 % Triton, secondary anti-mouse IgG antibody made in horse (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, USA) was applied for 90 min at room temperature. After further washing, ABC Elite (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, USA) was applied for 90 min, then the slides were rinsed with PBS followed by Tris Buffer (pH 7.6), and reacted with DAB (0.1 mol/L Tris, 0.04 % DAB, 0.033 % H 2 O 2 ); the reaction was stopped with phosphate buffer. The slides were dehydrated, cleared, and coverslipped for analysis.
Proteomic sample preparation
Three groups of rats were randomized for proteomic analysis. Every experimental group of animals included a biological duplicate and every biological unit/entity was present in at least 2 technical replicates. The grouping for experimental treatment was identical: first group - sham operated animals as controls (SHC), second group - ischemic rats (ISCH) and third group - ischemic animals with bradykinin application as postconditioning after 2 days of postischemic reperfusion (PostC). For proteomic analysis, animals were sacrificed immediately after the reperfusion period (3 days after onset of ischemia) by decapitation under light isoflurane anesthesia (0.5 %) and the brains were quickly removed and maintained at 0 °C. The CA1 region was dissected under a microscope, then weighed and homogenized in a glass-Teflon homogenizer (5 strokes, 800 rpm, 4 °C) in a homogenization buffer 20 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.5) containing 1 mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT), 50 mM magnesium acetate, 140 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM EGTA with addition of protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche, Germany), and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were aliquoted and frozen at 80 °C until analysis. Total protein concentrations in the samples were determined using the method described by Bradford ( ) and bovine serum albumin was used to establish a standard curve.
Protein identification
Samples for analysis were taken from every rat CA1 in every experimental group and 2D-LC MALDI-TOF/TOF analyses were repeated at least 4 times to evaluate the reproducibility of the analysis. The protein contents of individual sample and experimental groups were as follows: SHC = 2.77 and 3.28 μg/μl; ISCH = 1.8 and 0.81 μg/μl; PostC = 0.98 and 3.04 μg/μl. Samples were digested in solution to obtain a tryptic peptide mixture as follows: 10 μl of each sample were added to digestion buffer containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic; Fluka, Germany). Bovine trypsin (sequencing grade; Roche Diagnostics, Germany) was used as a digesting enzyme with a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50. Samples were reduced with 45 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich, India) followed by alkylation with 100 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, USA), then bovine trypsin was added to the samples and incubated overnight at 37 °C in 50 mM AmBic. After incubation, samples were concentrated in a vacufuge concentrator (Eppendorf) before 2D-LC MALDI MS analysis. Each sample injection was purified before loading onto HPLC analytic columns using ZipTip® C18 (Millipore Corporation, USA) pipette tips. Briefly, the peptide solution (10 μl) was injected into the HPLC (UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano Thermo Scientific Inc.) in 2D LC salt-plug mode based on strong cation exchange (SCX) separation in the first dimension and reversed phase (RP) separation in the second dimension. The first dimension separation step was carried out through an SCX column (300 μm I. D × 10 cm, 10 μm, Thermo Scientific Inc.). Peptides were then pre-concentrated and washed on the RP pre-column nano trap C18 (100 μm I.D. × 2 cm, 5 μm, Acclaim® PepMap100, Thermo Scientific Inc.) followed by separation on the analytical column (C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 column 75 μm I.D. × 15 cm, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific Inc.) using a linear gradient 4–55 % (80/20 % ACN/H 2 O) in 65 min with a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. For each sample, 3 different NaCl concentrations (1 mM, 2 mM and 5 mM NaCl solutions) were used for the first dimension to elute peptides from the SCX column. Sample eluates were spotted (Proteineer FcII, Bruker Daltonics, Germany) onto the MALDI target (AnchorChip™ 384, Bruker Daltonics, Germany). LC fractions, automatically mixed with α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid MALDI matrix (HCCA; Bruker Daltonics, Germany) were deposited on the target every 15 s. Sample inject eluate, as well as eluates from the 3 chosen NaCl concentrations mentioned above, were analyzed on a mass spectrometer and the merged data set from each sample and 3 NaCl concentrations were considered as one 2D salt-plug analysis per sample.
Spectra were acquired by UltrafleXtreme MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) in positive reflectron mode in a mass range of 700 to 3500 Da. The search parameters were as follows: Rattus as the taxonomic category, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed and methionine oxidation as variable modifications, allow up to 1 missed trypsin cleavage, monoisotopic ions, 1+ charge. All LC-MALDI data were analyzed using the Mascot MS/MS ions search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the SwissProt database with 100 ppm MS and 0.5 Da MS/MS tolerances. Results filtering and compilation of a nonredundant protein/peptide list were performed by applying the ProteinExtractor algorithm. For protein identification, a 95 % confidence interval threshold ( p < 0.05) was set. Positive protein identification was based on at least 1 unique peptide and a false discovery rate of less than 1 % (FDR < 1 %).
2D-DIGE proteomics
Two-dimensional differential gel-electrophoretic separation (2D-DIGE) was performed for protein verification and samples were prepared the same way as described above (Protein sample preparation part). Sample supernatant with protein concentration adjusted to 50 μg.μl −1 from CA1 tissue from each experimental group was resolved in 20 mM Tris buffer, 8 M urea and beta-mercaptoethanol (all Sigma Aldrich, Germany). Fluorescent Lumiprobe (Florida, USA) Cy2 (ISCH group), Cy3 (PostC group) and Cy5 (SHC group) NHS ester dyes for protein labeling were added to each sample, then mixed together and applied to an SDS-PAGE gel for isoelectric focusing using IPG strips in the pH range of 3–10. Focusing started at 500 V and the voltage was gradually increased to 2000 V over 4 min and kept constant for a further 2 h. Strips were equilibrated in equilibration buffer (0.186 M Tris, pH 6.8; 15 % glycerol; 9 % SDS) for 20 min prior to second-dimension SDS-PAGE. Strips were then immediately applied to a 12 % SDS-PAGE gel and electrophoresed at a constant 200 V for 90 min in a Bio-Rad Criterion vertical gel electrophoresis apparatus. After protein fixation with 50 % methanol, gels were scanned on a Bio-Rad PharosFX gel imaging system. Gel images were analyzed by PDQuest 2D analysis software from Bio-Rad and qualitative differences in the protein spots detected were considered for every group. Differentially expressed protein spots in the PostC group as well as spots presented in both PostC and SHC groups were considered. Gels were then stained with Coomassie blue and spots were excised manually, referring to previous specifications of relevant protein by PDQuest software.
For detection on MALDI TOF/TOF, gel spots were destained in buffer containing 25 mM AmBic and 50 % ACN. Gel pieces were subjected to gel digestion according the digestion protocol described above with bovine trypsin (at a concentration of 10 ng/μl). Digested peptides were extracted with 50 % ACN, concentrated in a vacufuge concentrator (Eppendorf), mixed with HCCA as a matrix and manually spotted on a MALDI target plate. Detection and search parameters on UltrafleXtreme MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometer were the same as mentioned above with the exception of MS/MS fragment ion tolerance (0.3 Da).
The identified proteins were submitted to the open source Reactome database (v56) to provide bioinformatics data for pathway interpretation and analysis, where entities (nucleic acids, proteins, complexes, vaccines, anticancer therapeutics, and small molecules) are grouped into pathways in which they participate in reactions and form a network of biological interactions.
Statistical analysis
Validation of complex tandem MS proteomics results by comparison of samples to identify biological relevance were executed by Scaffold (Proteome Software, v4.4.6) and statistical analysis of the results was performed by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Results
Neurodegeneration in the CA1 rat hippocampal region
The coronal sections were used to determine neurodegeneration by FJ-B staining and NeuN immunohistochemistry in the CA1 rat hippocampal region after ischemic injury and after bradykinin PostC in comparison with control (SHC). Representative photomicrographs of neurodegeneration are shown in Fig. 1 visualized by FJ-B histochemical staining (A, B, C; A´, B´, C´) as well as by immunostaining with a neuronal marker NeuN (D, E, F; D´, E´, F´) in the hippocampal CA1 region after 8 min of ischemia and 3 days of reperfusion (B, B´; E, E´), after 8 min of ischemia and 2 days of reperfusion followed by bradykinin application as PostC, and the day after reperfusion (C, C´; F, F´). The photomicrographs show the extent of neurodegeneration in sections from the CA1 hippocampal region. Figure 1 shows the CA1 layer practically without injury in controls (A - overview, A´ - detailed view; D, D´ - the same situation but stained with NeuN), then in injury after ischemic insult: visible green cells destined to neurodegeneration (B, B´) or decreased cell survival indicated by NeuN staining (E, E´) and, simultaneously, clearly visible viable neurons after PostC (C, C´; F, F´) in both cases. Immunostaining showed induction of delayed neuronal death in the selectively vulnerable CA1 after 8 min of ischemia 3 days later. When bradykinin PostC was used 2 days after 8 min of ischemia, it nearly completely prevented delayed neuronal death in CA1. The results confirmed the role of PostC in the acquisition of ischemic tolerance and were based on previous demonstrated evidence from our laboratory (Burda et al. ). A comparison of the absolute number of FJ-B and NeuN-positive responding CA1 neurons in 1 mm of CA1 layer for all respective experimental groups (SHC, ISCH, and PostC) is shown in Graph 1 . A person who was unaware to experimental condition performed positive cell counting in both FJ-B and NeuN-positive stained neurons. Neurodegeneration visualizing FJ-B showed the highest proportion of cells despite a completely opposite NeuN result, where only the viable cells were stained. Graph 1 clearly shows the positive impact of PostC application, which increased the number of surviving CA1 neurons. Fig. 1 Representative photomicrographs of neurodegeneration visualized by Fluoro Jade B (A, B, C; A´, B´, C´) staining and immunostaining for a neuronal marker, the specific nuclear protein NeuN (D, E, F; D´, E´, F´), in the rat brain hippocampus and in the CA1 selective vulnerable pyramidal layer detail. Figs. A, A´; D, D´ show controls (SHC); B, B´; E, E´ ischemic injury after 3 days of postischemic reperfusion (ISCH) and C, C´; F, F´ after bradykinin application (PostC). Images (A, A´, D, D´) clearly show no pyramidal neuron death in SHC in a whole hippocampal area as well as in the detailed CA1 view. After ischemic injury, there is apparent (B, B´, E, E´) pyramidal cell loss and the lowest line of images (C, C´, F, F´) show a similar situation as in the SHC, thus PostC is effective in the preservation of cell viability. Scale bars: A, B, C, D, E, F - 500 μm; A´, B´, C´, D´, E´, F´ - 100 μm Graph 1 Graphic presentations of changes in the number of pyramidal cells per 1-mm length, results were tested using a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t -test and expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). *Statistically significant difference from rats subjected to sham operation ( P < 0.05); n = 5. # Statistically significant difference from rats subjected to ischemia ( P < 0.05); n = 5
Proteomic identification
A total of 209 proteins in the rat hippocampal CA1 region were identified by the proteomic approach together with statistical evaluation of all 3 experimental groups (Fig. 2 ). There were 183 protein hits identified in the control (SHC) group. Cerebral ischemia lasting 8 min followed by 3 days of reperfusion (ISCH) resulted in 173 proteins in non-postconditioned ischemic tissue. Tandem MS analysis after bradykinin application (PostC) during postischemic reperfusion (2 days after ischemic insult) identified 186 protein hits. One hundred forty eight (148) common proteins of 209 total proteins were present in all 3 experimental groups. A comparison among experimental groups showed different numbers of proteins, which were identified only after each treatment application: 12 unique proteins in the SHC group, 3 in the ISCH group, and 9 in the PostC group. Some detected proteins were common to two experimental groups: 8 proteins in SHC and ISCH; 15 in SHC and PostC; 14 proteins that were common to ISCH and PostC. The total number of identified proteins, the distribution, and the mutual overlap among all 3 experimental groups are shown in the Venn diagram in Fig. 2 Information about all identified proteins is given as supplemental material (Online Resource 1) to this study using data from the UniProt database: the protein accession code and short name, as well as the protein full name and molecular weight. Moreover, brief and simple information for every identified protein about molecular function and abundant cellular localization originating from UniProt database gene ontology is given. Fig. 2 The identified protein number demonstration and distribution in every experimental group, as well as the mutual overlap among all three experimental groups, is shown in the Venn diagram in the figure. Proteins identified as present in all three experimental groups (SHC = control, ISCH = ischemic and PostC = postconditionned one) were in the middle of concentric circles ( n = 148). The sum of 183 (148 + 15 + 8 + 12) proteins is assigned to control (SHC) group, in which these were identified. Similarly, the protein sum identified after ischemic injury (ISCH) was 173 (148 + 14 + 8 + 3) and the protein sum in the group after postconditioning (PostC) was 186 (148 + 15 + 14 + 9)
The targeted evaluation of the proteins we identified mainly focused on these compounds, which were uniquely identified in the group to which PostC was applied. The same attention was devoted to mutual proteins in SHC control and PostC groups. This design was based on our previous confirmation of the role of PostC used 2 days after lethal ischemia for the protection of selectively vulnerable brain neurons against delayed neuronal death (Burda et al. ). Because we obtained a wide data set of abundant proteins from all 3 experimental groups, we concentrate only on a few compounds with their assumed positive role in neurodegeneration prevention. All identified proteins in every group were submitted to the free online database of cellular pathways ( Reactome.org ). Analysis was performed by including interaction data from the IntAct database. Curated entities and interactor backgrounds may overlap; therefore, this analysis result uses the union of both backgrounds and entities in the overlapping area are counted only once. We focused on proteins that were unique to the PostC group as well as on proteins that were common to the SHC and PostC groups overlapping because of the expected incidence of neuroprotection in these two groups. The PostC group identified proteins (9) of which, after submitting them to the Reactome database, 6 were not identified and 3 were present in cell cycle pathways (1 pathway from 608 known pathways - 1/608 with an FDR of 0.462); developmental biology (1/606, FDR 0.461); DNA replication (1/128, FDR 0.142); gene expression (1/1288, FDR 0.745); hemostasis (1/589, FDR 0.451); immune system (2/1445, FDR 0.428); metabolism (2/1997, FDR 0.618) and signal transduction (1/2803, FDR 0.963). More interesting results were obtained from the combination of SHC and PostC groups. Only two UniProt database identifiers from 15 proteins detected in this result group were not present in the Reactome database (P63055 - Purkinje cell protein 4; P62959 - histidine triad nucleotide-binding protein 1) and the rest was classified to be involved in 9 pathways: cell cycle (1/608, FDR 0.644); developmental biology (3/606, FDR 0.14); DNA repair (1/320; FDR 0.414); gene expression (2/1288, FDR 0.646); hemostasis (1/589; FDR 0.632); immune system (4/1445, FDR 0.203); metabolism (8/1997; FDR 0.127); neuronal system (1/419, FDR 0.505) and signal transduction (4/2803, FDR 0.722). A schematic drawing of the involved pathways common to the SHC and PostC groups is shown in Fig. 3 . Fig. 3 Graphic demonstration of results from pathway data analysis of proteins identified as common for SHC and PostC experimental groups through free, open-source, curated, and peer-reviewed pathway database ( Reactome.org ). Proteins involved in the respective pathways are highlighted in yellow-green in individual pathway events in the graphic visual display. The highest number of proteins was identified in metabolism pathways (8 entities from 1986; FDR 0.129). Developmental biology (3/584; FDR 0.136), immune system (3/1410; FDR 0.425) and signal transduction (3/2709; FDR 0.875) pathways involved three identified entities each. Cell cycle (1/606; FDR 0.649), DNA repair (1/318; FDR 0.417), gene expression (1/1276; FDR 0.899), hemostasis (1/566; FDR 0,623) and neuronal system (1/364; FDR 0.462) pathways contained a single identified entity in each
2D-DIGE proteomics analysis
Sample separation from rat hippocampal CA1 by the 2D-DIGE technique completely revealed 459 spots in the master gel as determined by PDQuest software (Fig. 4 , part A) visualized like SYPRO Ruby fluorophore. Figure 4 , parts B, C, and D show spot distribution in every laser channel scan (B for Cy2 - ISCH; C for Cy3 - PostC and D for Cy5 - SHC) with an emphasis on horizontal and vertical plots of increased density in the spot marked with yellow crosshairs, in which the metabolic enzyme aspartate aminotransferase (AATC) was identified by tandem MS. The number of spots matching those on the master gel was 147 for the Cy2 channel with a 44 % match rate and 87 for the Cy5 channel with a 56 % match rate (the Cy3 channel was considered as the master gel with a 100 % match rate). The AATC enzyme was detected in the protein profiles of both SHC and PostC groups by 2D salt-plug LC-MS analysis as well as only after bradykinin treatment in the PostC group; 2D-DIGE gel analysis confirmed this result. The identified spot is marked by yellow crosshairs with matching intensity histograms and it is clearly visible. The scan with the Cy2 fluorophore (red color, ISCH) showed no histogram or spot position; thus, in the ISCH group, this enzyme was not identified and no signal for Cy2 was recorded. Fig. 4 Vertical and horizontal plots of density in the 2D-DIGE gel spot identified by tandem MS as aspartate aminotransferase (AATC) protein, divided into laser scan channel view for each fluorescent label used. Figure part B is Cy2-fluorescently labeled sample (ISCH group); Cy3-labeled sample (PostC group) is in C part and D part is Cy2-labeled sample (SHC group). Figure part A shows master gel, where the most intensive and visible spots are highlighted. The yellow crosshair indicates a gel spot with positive identification of AATC by MS and MS/MS. Horizontal graphic alignment shows increased counted density for Cy3 (C, blue fluorophore, PostC group) as well as for Cy5 (D, green fluorophore, SHC group). Red trace Cy2 (B, red fluorophore, ISCH group) showed considerably reduced density in this specific spot. Similarly, the same situation is displayed on vertical alignment of the spot crosshairs. The specific spot shows signals for both Cy3 and Cy5 fluorescent dyes, but there was no signal detected for Cy2 in this position. The figure was taken from PDQuest 2D analysis software
The distribution of whole gel spots and intensity of the fluorophores (Cy2, ISCH - red; Cy3, SHC - green; Cy5, PostC - blue) in the 2D-DIGE gel through the PD Quest multichannel viewer is shown in Fig. 5 . The yellow crosshair is placed on the specific gel spot position, where AATC was detected by MS. There is a visible increased density in this spot for Cy3 and Cy5 dyes on the horizontal and vertical plots, emphasized by histogram peaks. In contrast, the signal for Cy2 in the ISCH group (red color) was not recorded. Figure 6 demonstrates a section of the same gel, but in a more detailed view targeted to the AATC spot where there are two obviously detectable fluorophores (blue Cy5 and green Cy3) and red Cy2 for ischemic-injured CA1 tissue is missing. Fig. 5 The figure shows a merged multichannel 2D gel image view with all three fluorescently labeled samples. The yellow crosshair is placed exactly in the gel position with positive identification of AATC enzyme by MS and MS/MS analysis. The histogram above the image shows increased counted density in the spot for blue Cy3 (PostC) and green Cy5 (SHC) channel, but no signal for red Cy2 (ISCH). A similar situation is presented on the left edge of the image, as it shows the crosshair position Fig. 6 The figure demonstrates the same gel position of crosshairs as was indicated on Fig. 5 in the detailed view, where the two colors spot is clearly visible (blue Cy3 for PostC and green Cy5 for SHC) without red Cy2 (ISCH) trace
Figure 7 demonstrates the distribution of gel spots in 2D DIGE gel visualized by Coomassie blue staining; on the left (A, B, C, and D) are overviewed gel images and detailed gel sections (A´, B´, C´, and D´) are placed on the right half of the figure. Horizontal and vertical plot histograms on the both sides of the figure show the relative spot density in the particular location of the spot where the gel was manually excised and AATC analysis by MS/MS positive identification performed. Coomassie blue was chosen for spot visualization to facilitate the specific gel spot chosen for MS/MS identification. Spots were manually excised and digested in the gel, then analyzed by tandem MS through MALDI-TOF/TOF instrumentation by laser-induced dissociation of the most intensive peaks, identified as parent ions from the AATC protein. MS/MS analysis confirmed that the AATC gel spot showed amino acid sequences detected as fragments originating from AATC protein tryptic peptides. Detailed PMF-LIFT results analysis revealed 7 peptides belonging to AATC protein with known amino acid sequences and they are shown in table (Table 1 ). Fig. 7 Vertical and horizontal plots of density in the 2D DIGE gel spot identified by MS/MS as aspartate aminotransferase (AATC) protein, divided into each laser scan channel view. Spot visualization in the 2D gel was performed with Coomassie blue staining. Part A, A´ represents master gel; similarly B, B´ - PostC; C, C´ - ISCH and D, D´ - SHC. A, B, C, D are gels overview; A´, B´, C´, D´ are more detailed views of the AATC-positive spot Table 1 Peptide masses obtained by MS/MS analysis of the most intensive peaks for aspartate aminotransferase (AATC). MS/MS ion fragmentation of parent masses give us the probability that measured peptide belonging to the exact protein based on identified sequences. The table shows measured and expected mass in Da; standard deviation (SD) in Da and in ppm, determination of the peptide uniqueness (based on Mascot search engine) and sequence of AATC identified. Data in parentheses belonging to measured masses 848.506; 1297.751 and 1511.832 (Da) did not reach the required positive detection score, but were still identified as unique sequences for AATC. Ion fragmentation of measured masses 1012.521; 1271.751; 1723.005 and 2422.322 (Da) allowed us to identify reliably peptide sequences forming part of the AATC protein Measured m/z (Da) Expected m/z (Da) SD (Da) SD (ppm) Unique Peptide (amino acids sequence) (848.506 847.499 0.043 51.2 U R.IGADFLGR. W) 1012.521 1011.514 0.036 36.0 U K.NFGLYNER. V 1271.751 1270.744 0.045 35.2 U R.VGGVQSLGGTGALR. I (1297.706 1296.698 0.041 31.5 U R.ITWSNPPAQGAR. I) (1511.832 1510.824 0.046 30.7 U R.TDDSQPWVLPVVR. K) 1723.005 1721.998 0.056 32.4 U R.VGNLTVVGKEHDSVLR. V 2422.322 2421.314 0.070 29.0 U K.IANDHSLNHEYLPILGLAEFR. S
Discussion
In this study, we have tried to map the colocalization of expressed proteins in the selective vulnerable CA1 rat hippocampal region after ischemia as well as after acquisition of ischemic tolerance stimulated by the application of bradykinin. Thus, we intended to support the intrinsic capacity of neurons to overcome delayed death developed by cerebral ischemic injury. An automated 2D-LC salt-plug system of protein/peptide fractionation and separation of the sample coupled with tandem MS protein identification in our methodology allowed us to designate various protein sets in all three experimental groups as well as in each group itself. The effectiveness of bradykinin PostC as a second stress in ischemic nervous tissue was derived from the bradykinin-dependent secondary brain damage mechanism. This process appears to be a result of postischemic disturbances in the cerebral microcirculation. The hemodynamic disturbances can be caused by a no-reflow phenomenon resulting from a combination of increased blood viscosity and perivascular edema. In addition, the severity of injury can be increased with the duration of ischemia (Hossmann ). Our intention was to administer an adequate dose of exogenous bradykinin at an appropriate time after ischemia as a stressor capable of modulating pathways involved in delayed neuronal death in a neuroprotective manner. In the present study, applying bradykinin as PostC resulted in a certain number of identifiable proteins and also changed the proteomic pattern classification, when we compared 3 experimental groups of rats. Treating with bradykinin did not dramatically increase the number of proteins that could be detected in general, but we detected several proteins after PostC that were different from those found in the other experimental groups. The most important metabolic disturbance following postischemic injury and leading to delayed neuronal death is prolonged and deep inhibition of protein synthesis and this effect is manifested even after as little as 5 min of ischemia. Despite evident postischemic inhibition of protein synthesis, it is still possible to identify a relatively large group of expressed proteins after postischemic reperfusion interrupted by PostC, as well as after cerebral ischemia, in the CA1 vulnerable region. Thus, we may hypothesize that PostC could be a trigger for a defense mechanism that not only initiates increased protein synthesis but also modulates the expression of specific neuronal protective proteins.
Using the methodology described above, we were able to detect proteins belonging to different pathways. It may be that some of these specific proteins are involved in the mechanisms behind the survival of increased hippocampal neurons after delayed cell death occurring in CA1 after ischemic injury (Burda et al. ). Our original intention was to examine and evaluate the compounds detected predominantly after PostC as a result of neuroprotective changes caused by the influence of PostC. However, we identified and discussed some compounds that could also have considerable roles in protective mechanisms and were present in SHC as well as in the protein patterns of the PostC group. All identified proteins in every group were submitted to the open access database of cellular pathways ( Reactome.org ). From among the proteins identified in this study to be part of cellular reactive pathways, we focused on the ones present only in the PostC group as well as those present in the combination of SHC and PostC patterns. The PostC-only group identified proteins that were mostly involved in the immune system and metabolism, followed by those in developmental biology, DNA replication, gene expression, hemostasis, and signal transduction.
We achieved more interesting results with proteins identified in the combined SHC and PostC groups. We identified the cytoplasmic aspartate aminotransferase (AATC) in the intersection of SHC and PostC groups, but among proteins in the ISCH group, the enzyme was not found. This result was confirmed by 2D-DIGE analysis followed by MALDI-TOF/TOF MS identification. The most prominent result from the metabolic pathways survey was the finding that PostC and SHC both enabled the functioning of amino acid metabolic pathways in the metabolic cycle of the neurotoxin glutamate. The enzyme AATC is known as an important mediator of the intrinsic cell glutamate scavenging system and appears to be part of the endogenous neuroprotective machinery after ischemic injury. Concurrently, this protein was not detected in rats, which succumbed to ischemic insult without bradykinin treatment. Aspartate transaminase or aspartate aminotransferase is a pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)-dependent transaminase enzyme. AATC or glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (GOT1) is a homodimer enzyme involved in one specific amino acid metabolic pathway. AATC as a metabolic enzyme is active in amino acid transamination catalysis (aspartate + alpha keto-glutarate <= > oxaloacetate + glutamate), where neurotoxic glutamate is metabolized in the tricarboxylic acid cycle. AATC is a component of L-glutamate biosynthesis from L-aspartate or L-cysteine and selectively binds two amino acids (Asp and Glu) with different side chains. It is an important regulator of levels of glutamate, the major excitatory neurotransmitter of the vertebrate central nervous system and acts as a scavenger of glutamate in brain neuroprotection. Glutamate is a nonessential amino acid and a major excitatory neurotransmitter in the vertebrate CNS that is actively involved in biosynthetic, bioenergetic, and metabolic signaling pathways (Willard and Koochekpour ). There is strong evidence for an extracellular elevation of glutamate after global ischemia (Chen et al. ). AATC acts as a scavenger of glutamate in brain neuroprotection and thus, the increased extracellular glutamate level after ischemia is eliminated. Glutamate excitotoxicity as a cause of postischemic neuronal death is nowadays at the center of neuroscientific studies (Guo et al. ; Arranz et al. ; Bonova et al. ). For example, the glutamate transporter in glial cells plays an important role in the reabsorption of glutamate from the synaptic cleft and suppression of the glutamate transporters increases the concentration of glutamate in the synaptic cleft. In addition, reabsorption of glutamate depends on intracellular metabolism (Otis and Jahr ). Intravenous administration of glutamate-oxaloacetate transaminase (GOT) and glutamate-pyruvate transaminase (GPT) enzymes can be used to lower blood glutamate levels and to improve the neurological outcome following transient brain ischemia and stroke (Boyko et al. ). Moreover, the synaptosomes derived from the rat hippocampal CA1 region have, under physiological conditions and during aging, lower GOT and GTP potential catalytic activities, explaining on a functional proteomic basis, the induced postischemic hyper-excitability by glutamate on CA1 neurons (Villa et al. ). GOT1 activity was recognized as an oxygen-inducible protective mechanism useful to harness excess neurotoxic extracellular glutamate during acute ischemic stroke as a metabolic substrate in cultured neuronal cells (Rink et al. ). GOT can metabolize glutamate into tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates and can support cell survival as long as there is sufficient oxygenation. As ischemic stroke is associated with an excessive release of glutamate into the neuronal extracellular space, a decrease in blood glutamate levels could provide a mechanism to remove it from the brain tissue, by increasing the brain–blood gradient. In this regard, the ability of AATC to metabolize glutamate in blood could represent a potential neuroprotective tool for recovery after ischemic stroke. Recent progress in the studies of glutamate levels after ischemia and reperfusion in blood and brain tissue samples detected a meaningful elevation, but PostC used 2 days after ischemia resulted in important glutamate decrease up to control values (Bonova et al. ). We can propose that AATC expression after PostC potentially contributes to recovery of the protein synthesis machinery.
Enzymes involved in protein dephosphorylation may play an important role in protein metabolism. We identified several phosphatases in the protein set from the PostC group, e. g. the beta isoform of serine/threonine-protein phosphatase 2 A 65 kDa regulatory subunit A (2AAB). Detection of 2AAB in our set of unique proteins identified in the PostC group allows us to hypothesize that this could be a part of recovery or preservation of the protein synthesis machinery after ischemic injury as a consequence of PostC effects. It is known that synthesis of proteins in postischemic CA1 neurons is irreversibly inhibited (Bodsch et al. ; Thilmann et al. ) and the inhibition is caused by phosphorylation of eIF2α (Burda et al. ) as a consequence of decreased activity of protein phosphatase PP1 and protein phosphatase PP2A (Martin de la Vega et al. , ; Cid et al. ; Garcia-Bonilla et al. ). Persisting inhibition of protein synthesis logically results in cell death, thus recovery of translation is a necessity for survival. Due to the complexity of cell death development, it is not possible to say that only protein translation recovery is fully responsible for CA1 neurons survival, but functional protein machinery is one of the first preconditions for cell viability. Detection of 2AAB in our set of uniquely identified proteins in the PostC group allows us to hypothesize about protein synthesis machinery recovery/preservation after ischemic injury as a consequence of PostC. Precise detection of 2AAB by MALDI/TOF-TOF remains as a further challenge for our ongoing research in this field of study.
The results of our study offer suggestions for further investigation. Obvious elucidation of proteins effective in the cell death protective pathways after brain ischemia and reperfusion remains unclear. However, based on this proteomic analysis, we can conclude that postconditioning can be an effective approach to preserve postischemic neurons from delayed cell death, possibly due to a capacity to evoke expression of proteins that aid in the development of ischemic tolerance in CA1 neurons.