Introduction
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is a chronic and prevalent disorder that may develop following exposure to traumatic events. The individuals with PTSD have psychiatric comorbidities, such as major depression and generalized anxiety disorder (Nemeroff et al. ). As a general principle, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (e.g sertraline (Ser) and paroxetine) are the first-line treatment options for the core symptoms of PTSD (MacNamara et al. ). However, SSRIs have drawbacks including a delayed onset of action, a response or non-response with residual symptoms, and severe side effects (Zhang et al. ). Despite a variety of psychological and pharmacological interventions, a large proportion of patients with PTSD did not achieve satisfactory outcomes. Based on this information, discovery of novel pharmacological therapy for anti-PTSD drugs is needed.
Morinda officinalis is one of the best-known herbs in Asia and especially popular in Southern China. It is cultivated in subtropical and tropical regions and has been used in traditional herbal medicines and nutrient supplements for more than 2,000 years (Yang et al. ). To date, various biological activities of morinda officinalis have been reported, including antiosteoporosis (Wu et al. ), antifatigue (Zhang et al. ), antistress (Li et al. ), antioxidant, hypoglycemic (Zhang et al. ), and antidepressant (Zhang et al. ). In addition, Inulin-type oligosaccharides of morinda officinalis (IOMO) is important to ameliorate symptoms in animal models of depression (Li et al. ; Deng et al. ; Zhang et al. ). However, no reports concern the anti-PTSD-like effects of IOMO.
The present study was to evaluate the anti-PTSD-like effects of IOMO. To evaluate this, the single prolonged stress (SPS) model was used in the present study. The model, which associated with biological and phenomenological correlates of PTSD, is widely used in PTSD studies (Miao et al. ). The effects of IOMO on the PTSD-like behavior were assessed and performed by several behavioral tests, such as the open-field (OF) test, the contextual fear paradigm (CFM), and the elevated plus-maze (EPM) test, which were used in the PTSD studies previously (Zhang et al. ).
In addition, studies had previously shown that the altered allopregnanolone was associated with the symptoms of PTSD (Rasmusson et al. ). The decreased allopregnanolone biosynthesis was implicated as one of possible contributors to aetiology of PTSD (Pinna and Rasmusson ). The lowered allopregnanolone levels in patients with PTSD might contribute to an imbalance in inhibitory versus excitatory neurotransmission, leading to re-experiencing symptoms of PTSD (Zhang et al. ). Based on these evidences above, the present study is to evaluate the role of allopregnanolone biosynthesis in the anti-PTSD-like effects of IOMO. To evaluate this, the animals are decapitated at the end of the behavioral tests and the allopregnanolone is measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Materials and methods
The extraction of IOMO and administration
The dried roots of morinda officinalis were purchased from the market (Foshan city, Guangdong province, China) and identified and provided by Dr. Zhuo-Wei Gao (Shunde Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital which is affiliated to Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine). The preparation and extraction of morinda officinalis was based on the previous study with minor administration (Zhang et al. ). The dried roots (4 kg) were pulverized and macerated at room temperature (23–25 °C) with 95 % ethanol in water for 7 days then filtered. The filtrate obtained was dried, suspended in water and partitioned with CHCl 3 , ethyl acetate and n-butanol in turn. The dried extracts were obtained after evaporation of solvents, including CHCl 3 fraction 15 g, ethyl acetate fraction 5 g, n-butanol fraction 45 g and aqueous layer fraction 522 g. The aqueous extract was identified by chemical and spectroscopic methods. It mainly consisted of inulin-type oligosaccharides, which include nystose (7.95 % of total aqueous extract), 1 F-fructofuranosylnystose (6.25 %), inulin-type hexasaccharide (IHS) (11.68 %) and inulin-type heptasaccharide (30.16 %). Sertraline (Ser), purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO, U.S.A.), was administered as a positive control in all behavioral tests at a dose (15 mg/kg, i.g.) based on previous PTSD studies (Zhang et al. , ). It was prepared in distilled water. The drug administration was based on the previous treatment regimen for SPS-treated model with minor modifications (Zhang et al. ). Morinda officinalis was prepared in distilled water each day before testing and given once daily at a dose of 12.5, 25, and 50 mg/kg (i.p) for 13 days (i.e., from days 2 through 14) following SPS procedures (see Fig. 1 ). The doses of morinda officinalis were based on the literature of the antidepressant-like effect of morinda officinalis (Zhang et al. ). All the behavioral tests were performed 30 min after drugs administration. Control animals received distilled water. The design of the treatment schedule and behavioral tests is outlined in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 Treatment and behavioral test schedules for the SPS-treated model. Animals were subjected to SPS on day 1. From days 9 through 14, animals were performed testing sessions that were composed of three different behavioral tests: Open field ( OF ) test, Contextual fear paradigm ( CFP ), and Elevated plus maze ( EPM ) test. IOMO (at doses of 12.5, 25.0 and 50.0 mg/kg, i.p.) and Ser (at a dose 15 mg/kg, i.g.) were administered daily from days 2 through 14. The drugs were administered 1 h before testing, respectively
Animals and housing
The male Sprague-Dawley rats were purchased from the Vital Laboratory Animal Technology Company (China). The total number of animals was 60 (ten in each group). The animals were kept in a humidity- and temperature-controlled room. All animals were housed in a 12-h light/dark cycle environment during the tests and had access to water and food ad libitum. The rats were group-housed with the same mates throughout the acclimation and testing periods. The experiments were performed in compliance with the current laws and those of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. All efforts were made to minimize the number of animals used.
The preparation of SPS model in rats
This model was prepared by basing the design on a previous study (Zhang et al. ). Each rat was placed in a perspex restrainer for 2 h with the tail-gate adjusted to keep comfortable without impairing the circulation to the limbs. After that, the rats were placed individually into a clear acrylic cylinder (diameter 18 cm, height 40 cm, and contained 23 cm of water that was maintained at a constant temperature of 25 °C) so that the animals were subjected to a 20-min forced swim. Following the 15-min recuperation period, rats were exposed to ether vapors until loss of consciousness, and then removed from the restrainer. The control group was remained in a room adjacent to the SPS-treated rats during the SPS procedure and handled for several minutes. The drugs were administered daily from days 2 through 14.
Open field (OF) test
We evaluated whether IOMO affected the locomotor activity in animals. The OF test was performed as described previously with minor modifications (Xue et al. ). Rats were placed in the corner of a plastic box (dimensions: 76 × 76 × 46 cm) with the base divided into equal sectors for a 5-min acclimation period. Following that, the number of crossings (with all four paws placed into a new square), rears (with both front paws raised from the floor), and fecal pallets was recorded for 5 min.
Contextual fear paradigm (CFP)
The freezing response upon re-exposure to the traumatic context was used as the measure of conditioned associative fear memory as a symptom of PTSD (Eskandarian et al. ). The test was performed as described previously with minor modifications (Zhang et al. ). Each rat was exposed to a 180-s conditioning context without any stimulation. Immediately after that, a foot electric shock (at 0.8 mA, for 4 s) through the stainless steel grid floor (Med Associates Inc., USA) was given. Following the foot shock, rats remained in the chamber for an additional 1 min before being returned to their home cages. Each rat was placed in the conditioning chamber where it had been foot shocked 24 h previously. The contextual fear response was evaluated by measuring the duration of freezing behavior during the 5-min interval.
Elevated plus maze (EPM) test
The EPM test is one of the widely used assessments for evaluating the PTSD-associated anxiogenic behavior in rodents (Wang et al. ). It has been well validated in detecting responses to external stressful stimuli (Liebsch et al. ). The rat was placed in the center of the maze (60 cm above the floor) facing an enclosed arm. The time spent in, and the number of entries into (with all 4 paws) both the open and enclosed arms (60 × 12 cm) was recorded for 5 min as described previously in detail. The percentage of time spent in and the entries into the open arms was calculated by dividing the time spent in and the entries into the open arms by the total time spent in and the total arm entries into the both arms, respectively (Li et al. ).
Long-term effects of morinda officinalis on the allopregnanolone in the SPS model
The pathology of PTSD is associated with the dysfunction of particular brain regions, including the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus and amygdala (Davis et al. ; Harvey et al. ; Zhang et al. ). Based on these evidences, the brain regions were selected in the present study. The experimental procedure was conducted as described previously (Qiu et al. ; Zhang et al. ). The rats were decapitated at the conclusion of the behavioral tests in 24 h and there was a last drug treatment 1 h before the rat killing. For the level of brain allopregnanolone measurement, the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus and amygdala were quickly removed and dissected on ice. All brain regions were extracted in 1 mL extraction buffer/100 mg tissue. Brain tissue samples were homogenized in an ice-cold lysis buffer containing 137 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 10 % glycerol, 1 % NP40, 1 mM PMSF 10 μg/mL aprotinin, 1 μg/mL leupeptin, and 0.5 mM sodium vanadate. The tissue homogenate was centrifuged at 13,000× g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were collected. All samples were kept at −80 °C for further research. The samples were assayed with ELISA. Based on the studies of allopregnanolone measurement (Zhang et al. ), level of allopregnanolone was quantified by Enzyme Immunoassay kit (Raybiotech, 3B362, USA) that was specific for allopregnanolone measurement. Six samples in each group were used to determine the optical density (OD) values at 450 nm in ELISA plate reader and used for statistical analyzes.
Statistical analysis
The data were analyzed by GraphPad Prism 5.0 (GraphPad Prism 5.0, version 2.0; GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA) and presented as the mean ± S.E.M. The statistical significance of experimental observations was analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison tests. Differences with an alpha value of p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant for all tests.
Results
Effects of IOMO on the locomotor activity in rats
The effects of IOMO on locomotor activity are shown in Fig. 2 . There was no significant effect on the number of line crossings (F (5,54) = 0.3795, p > 0.05, Fig. 2a ), rears (F (5,54) = 0.1348, p > 0.05, Fig. 2b ), or fecal pallets (F (5,54) = 0.1790, p > 0.05, Fig. 2c ) among the groups. These results indicated that neither SPS modeling nor IOMO or Ser treatment affected locomotor activity in rats. Fig. 2 Effects of IOMO on locomotor activity. None of the treatments altered the number of line crossings ( a ), rears ( b ), and fecal pallets ( c ) in the OF ( n = 10)
Effects of IOMO on the contextual freezing behavior in rats
The effects of IOMO on the contextual freezing behavior in rats are shown in Fig. 3 . After exposure to SPS, the percentage of the freezing time was significantly increased in rats, which was also markedly reversed by IOMO treatment (25.0 and 50.0 mg/kg, i.p.) and Ser (15 mg/kg, i.g.) (F (5,54) = 14.12, p < 0.001). These results indicated that IOMO treatment alleviated the contextual freezing behavior in rats. Fig. 3 Effects of IOMO on the freezing behavior of rats re-exposed to a context in which they received footshock after SPS-treated exposure. ## p < 0.01 vs. vehicle-treated SPS (−) group; * p < 0.05, and ** p < 0.01 vs. the vehicle-treated SPS (+) group ( n = 10)
Effects of IOMO on the EPM test in rats
As shown in Fig. 4 , the percentage of the time (F (5,54) = 6.440, p < 0.01; Fig. 4a ) spent in, and the time spent on the entries (F (5,54) = 5.874, p < 0.01; Fig. 4b ) into open arms was significantly reduced in rats after SPS-treated exposure, while both of the above parameters were reversed by administration of IOMO (25.0 and 50.0 mg/kg, i.p.) and Ser (15 mg/kg, i.g.). There was no significant difference in terms of the total time (F (5,54) = 0.4051, p > 0.05; Fig. 4c ) in arms, and the total arm entries (F (5,54) = 0.2608, p > 0.05; Fig. 4d ) seen among the groups. These results indicated that IOMO ameliorated PTSD-like behavior in the EPM test. Fig. 4 Anti-PTSD-like effects of IOMO treatment in rats following exposure to SPS. The behavior was presented by percentages of time spent ( c ) in and entries ( d ) into the open arms in the EPM, as well as total time spent in the arms ( a ), total arm entries ( b ). ## P < 0.01 vs. vehicle-treated SPS (−) group; * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01 vs. the vehicle-treated SPS (+) group ( n = 10)
Effects of IOMO on the allopregnanolone in rats
The effects of IOMO on allopregnanolone in rats are shown in Fig. 5 . Following SPS-treated exposure, the level of allopregnanolone in the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus and amygdala was significantly decreased. However, the decreased allopregnanolone was significantly reversed by treatment with IOMO (25.0 and 50.0 mg/kg, i.p.) and (15 mg/kg, i.g.), in the prefrontal cortex (F (5,30) = 3.522, p < 0.05; Fig. 5a ), hippocampus (F (5,30) = 5.115, p < 0.05; Fig. 5b ), and amygdala (F (5,30) = 3.355, p < 0.05; Fig. 5c ), respectively. These results indicated that IOMO was associated with the brain allopregnanolone biosynthesis. Fig. 5 The effects of IOMO administration on allopregnanolone in the prefrontal cortex ( a ) hippocampus ( b ), and amygdala ( c ). # p < 0.05, ## p < 0.01 vs. vehicle-treated SPS (−) group; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 vs. vehicle-treated SPS (+) group ( n = 6)
Discussion
The present study was performed to evaluate the role of allopregnanolone biosynthesis in the anti-PTSD-like effect of IOMO. IOMO significantly ameliorated the PTSD-like behavior without affecting locomotor activity in rats. Furthermore, the level of allopregnanolone in the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala was increased by IOMO. It was indicated that the anti-PTSD-like effect of IOMO was associated with the brain allopregnanolone biosynthesis.
The present study indicated that SPS induced the PTSD-like behavior in rats, which was consistent with previous work that PTSD-associated freezing and anxiogenic activity was induced by SPS (Miao et al. ; Zhang et al. ). Also, the decreased open arm exploration in the EPM test following exposure to SPS was consistent with the previous reports (Zhang et al. ). One possible explanation for the behavioral deficits was that SPS elicited an acquisition of conditioned fear, such as exaggerated fear (Li et al. ). The dampened allopregnanolone in the central nervous system (CNS) was associated with PTSD-like behavioral deficits (Agís-Balboa et al. ). In addition, our results were consistent with the observations determined for socially isolated mice. A model that was relevant in the context of PTSD showed a robust decrease in corticolimbic allopregnanolone levels with anxiety-like behaviors, fear, and heightened aggression (Pibiri et al. ; Pinna ). The decrease of allopregnanolone on tonic gamma-amino-butyric acid (GABA)-mediated inhibitory conductance might contribute to the pathophysiology of aggression, anxiety, and PTSD (Pibiri et al. ).
Additionally, the PTSD-like behavior after SPS-treated exposure was reversed by IOMO treatment. The reduction of the freezing time in the CFP test and the increases in open arm exploration in the EPM test was reversed by IOMO, indicated that IOMO significantly ameliorated the contextual fear and PTSD-like behavior in this model. The dose ranges of IOMO was almost confirmed between the CFP and the EPM, and was concordant with prior studies of IOMO treatment that showed reversed the depression behavioral deficits (Zhang et al. ).
The main constituents of morinda officinalis extract are inulintype oligosaccharides, which include nystose, 1F-fructofuranosylnystose, IHS and inulin-type heptasaccharide (see methods section). Our unpublished observations found that the extracts of morinda officinalis possessed no anti-PTSD-like action when the content of IOMO was extremely low (data not shown). In addition, previous studies had been shown that the antidepressant-like action of morinda officinalis was associated with the content of inulin-type oligosaccharides (Li et al. ; Zhang et al. ). Based on the previous and present studies, inulin-type oligosaccharides maybe the main effective component mediating the anti-PTSD-like activity of morinda officinalis.
It is important to note that SSRIs were able to reverse the decreased neurosteroid levels (such as allopregnanolone) and attenuate the behavioral deficits expressed by socially isolated mice (Pinna and Rasmusson ). Also, clinical studies demonstrated that treatment with SSRIs normalized the cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF) allopregnanolone content in patients with depression. These data were in line with the present study that the PTSD-like behavior was significantly ameliorated by Ser in the behavioral tests. Similar to the results of Ser, the level of allopregnanolone in the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala was significantly decreased after SPS-treated exposure, while the decrease was significantly reversed by IOMO. These effects were similar to the selective brain steroidogenic stimulants (SBSS), which increased the corticolimbic allopregnanolone, and normalized the contextual fear responsiveness (Pibiri et al. ). The possible explanation accounting for the observation is most likely due to the allopregnanolone synthesis that was stimulated by SBSS. Allopregnanolone is the potent and selective positive endogenous modulator of action at brain GABA A receptors (Nelson and Pinna ). Allopregnanolone might also interact with the GABA A receptor at neurosteroid recognition sites to produce the anxiolytic- and anticonvulsant- like effect, and improve PTSD-induced memory performance (Akk et al. ; Hosie et al. ).
Moreover, our results are in line with other studies showing that the antidepressant- and anxiolytic- like effects were elicited by allopregnanolone (Nin et al. ). Allopregnanolone normalized the exaggerated contextual fear responses and anxiety in socially isolated mice, which was blocked by pretreatment with finasteride, a 5α-reductase inhibitor that associated with allopregnanolone biosysthesis (Pibiri et al. ). Also, previous reports had been shown that allopregnanolone as a mediator of affective switching in reproductive mood disorders, including premenstrual dysphoria and postpartum depression (Schiller et al. ). Based on the previous and present studies described herein, the anti-PTSD-like effects of IOMO are likely associated with the allopregnanolone biosynthesis.
Accumulating evidence demonstrates that serotonin (5-HT) dysfunction plays an important role in the etiology of PTSD, and 5-HT systems are also implicated in the treatment of PTSD (Zhang et al. ). Decreased 5-HT levels in animal models and human studies have been associated with increased impulsivity, aggression, fear, and sadness/depression (Zhang et al. , ). Morinda officinalis extract was found to bind selectively to 5-HT 1A receptor and to protect cultured cortical and hippocampal cells from neuronal lesion induced by 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine (5,7-DHT) and to increase brain norepinephrine (NE) and 5-HT contents in olfactory bulbectomized rats (Zhang et al. ). Moreover, all of the above mentioned pure compounds isolated from morinda officinalis extract significantly increased the 5-HT-induced head twitches in mice (Cai et al. ). The data is indicated that the antidepressant-like activity of morinda officinalis was closely associated with the level of 5-HT. Based on these, it is likely that the level of 5-HT also play an important role in the anti-PTSD-like effect of IOMO. However, more and further researches are needed to testify this hypothesis.
Conclusion
The present study has demonstrated that IOMO ameliorated behavioral deficits in the SPS model without affecting spontaneous motor activity. The lowered level of allopregnanolone that was induced by SPS, was reversed by administration of IOMO. Our results indicated that IOMO exert anti-PTSD-like behaviors, which maybe associated with the brain allopregnanolone biosynthesis.