Introduction
In 1958, the study of the mechanisms of antidepressants and the biological causes of depression were driven by the discovery of tricyclic antidepressants (Kuhn ). By the 1960s, most scholars agreed that noradrenaline was involved in both the mechanisms of antidepressants and the pathogenesis of depression (Schildkraut ; Bunney and Davis ). Only a few researchers, such as Lapin, advocated for the serotonin hypothesis of depression. In 1968, Lapin et al. injected imipramine into the amygdala of cats and observed that imipramine enhanced the central effects of serotonin (Vakhing et al. ; Allikmets et al. ). To study the effect of serotonin in the treatment of depression, Lapin used frogs (the brains of frogs contain mostly serotonin) to observe behavioral effects that are specific for serotonin. The results demonstrated that tertiary tricyclic (serotonin uptake inhibitors), but not secondary tricyclic (noradrenaline uptake inhibitors), antidepressants potentiated the behavioral effects of serotonin (Lapin et al. ; Oxenkrug and Lapin ). According to these results, Lapin proposed that the enhancement of central serotoninergic processes was a decisive factor of the thymoleptic component. Because serotonin plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of depression and that the flux of the kynurenine pathway from the formation of serotonin to the formation of kynurenine can cause serotonin deficiency, Lapin proposed that kynurenine, the metabolite of tryptophan, and its metabolites could affect brain functions. This was the first time that the serotonin-kynurenine hypothesis of depression was proposed, which linked tryptophan metabolism to brain diseases.
The catabolism of tryptophan is regulated by several metabolic pathways. For example, tryptophan (Trp) is catalyzed into serotonin, an important neurotransmitter, by tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH). Alternatively, the kynurenine pathway, the major pathway of tryptophan catabolism, results in the formation of kynurenine (KYN), a neuroactive metabolite. Kynurenine has two metabolic outcomes. One includes kynurenine aminotransferases (KATs), which catalyze kynurenine into kynurenic acid (KYNA), the antagonist of both the N-methyl-D-aspartic acid receptor (NMDAR) and the α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (α7nACh), via transamination. While the other is the hydroxylation of kynurenine, thereby forming 3-hydroxykynurenine (3-HK), the neurotoxic free radical generator, by kynurenine 3-monooxygenase (KMO). Then, 3-HK undergoes hydrolytic cleavage of the Cβ-Cγ bond by kynureninase (KYNU) to become 3-hydroxyanthranilic (3-HAA) (Phillips ). 3-HAA is then oxidized into quinolinic acid (Quin), a neurotoxic metabolite, by 3-HAA oxygenase (3-HAO). (see Fig. 1 ) In mammals, there are three heme-containing enzymes that catalyze the initial step of the kynurenine pathway: IDO1 (Indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase 1), IDO2 (Indoleamine-2, 3-dioxygenase 2) and TDO. Emerging studies have demonstrated that TDO is involved in the pathology of certain brain diseases, including schizophrenia, Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and glioma. Fig. 1 A summary of the major components of the kynurenine pathway for the oxidation of tryptophan. IDO: Indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase; TDO: Tryptophan-2,3-dioxygenase; KMO: Kynurenine 3-Monooxygenase; 3-HAO: 3-HAA oxygenase; KYNU: kynur- eninase; KAT: Kynurenine aminotransferase; TPH: tryptophane hydroxylase
The biological function of TDO
TDO was first discovered in the liver of rats in the 1930s (Kotake and Masayama ). In humans, TDO contains 406 amino acids and is encoded by the tdo2 gene, which is located on chromosome 4. The length of tdo2 is 65,669 bps, which contains 12 exons and 11 introns. The regulatory region of tdo2 contains two glucocorticoid response-like elements (Comings et al. ). There are exon and intron variants in the tdo2 gene that cause polymorphisms and are correlated with psychiatric disorders (Gongkai et al. ; Comings et al. ; Vasiliev et al. ; Miller et al. ), such as Tourette’s syndrome. Some bacteria have two TDOs, while there is only one TDO encoded by tdo2 gene (it will be hereafter referred to as TDO) in human. TDO is originally expressed in the liver, but under certain stimuli it is expressed in other tissues, including the epididymis (Britan et al. ), the placenta (Minatogawa et al. ), the testis (Britan et al. ), the brain (Haber et al. ) and the pregnant uterus (Tatsumi et al. ). Besides TDO, IDO1 and IDO2 are also the initial enzymes in the kynurenine pathway. These enzymes altogether constitute a superfamily of heme-containing enzymes. TDO can convert tryptophan into kynurenine to cause tryptophan starvation in the microenvironment, which suppresses the proliferation of immunocytes. Meanwhile, kynurenine, the metabolite of tryptophan in the kynurenine pathway, is an e ndogenous tumor-promoting ligand of the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), which activates AHR and causes immunosuppression (Christiane et al. ). Hence, TDO also has a role in the progression of tumors, which has garnered the increasing attention of researchers. Interestingly, TDO is not regulated by inflammatory cytokines, but can be induced by glucocorticoids (Schutz et al. ; Wolf and Brown ), tryptophan (Altman and Greengard ; Knox and Mehler ), glucagon (Nakamura et al. ) and estrogens (Braidman and Rose ). This implies that the mechanism of regulation of TDO is different from that of IDO. Hence, in view of the regulatory mechanism, IDO and TDO are not redundant.
The evolution of TDO
TDO is distributed across many species, from mammals to invertebrates, such as insects (Mukabayire et al. ; Lorenzen et al. ; Fabrick et al. ; Reed and Nagy ) and scallops (Hu et al. ). In insects, tdo2 is also named the Drosophila bright-red-eye-color gene (Searles and Voelker ). TDO has also been found in yeast (Iwamoto et al. ), Pseudomonas fluorescens (Tshimura et al. ) and Bacillus brevis (Matsumura et al. ), but has not been found in fungi (Ball et al. ). Although TDO has been found in many species, they do not constitute a monophyletic group. Meanwhile, bacterial TDO shows significant sequence homology with human TDO, which suggests that the TDO gene is quite ancient. Interestingly, the two TDOs of a few bacteria are far from each other in the phylogenetic tree, which implies that the two TDOs are the production of genetic transfer, but not of gene duplication (Ball et al. ).
The structure of TDO
TDO is a tetrameric protein and has specific enzymatic activity for L-Tryptophan (L-Trp); while IDO is a monomeric protein and has a wide range of substrates, such as L-Tryptophan, D-Tryptophan, serotonin, 5-hydroxytryptophan and tryptamine (Hirata and Hayaishi ; Hayaishi ; Shimizu et al. ). The differences in structure may partly account for the differences in catalytic range. Recently, the structure of rmTDO ( Ralstonia metallidurans ) (Zhang et al. ), xcTDO ( Xanthomonas campestris ) (Forouhar et al. ) and hTDO (human TDO) (Meng et al. ) have been reported. The overall structure of TDO could be described as a dimer of dimers because the N-terminal residues of each monomer form part of the substrate binding site in an adjacent monomer. In humans, each homotetramer contains four monomers, which are associated with one another by three mutually perpendicular two-fold axes. The long helices of the four monomers form a central channel in the center of the molecule. The overall structure of the monomer is an α-helix that contains 15 α-helices. As the structure of the heme-binding site of hTDO has not been explored, Ralstonia metallidurans was chosen to elucidate the structure of the heme-binding site. Each monomer of rmTDO has a heme site, which is situated at the end of one of the long helical bundles. Two 3 10 helices (3 10 –1 and 3 10 –2), the two glycine-rich loops, six α-helices (α3, α4, Rα5, α6, α11 and α12) and helix α1 from the adjacent subunit form a mostly hydrophobic cavity. The heme-binding site has an open conformation and a closed conformation. In the closed conformation, residues 270–273 make a type I β-turn and cover the heme-binding site. Conversely, the heme group is partially exposed to the solvent in the open form of loop 266–276. The size of the cavity is barely sufficient to contain the substrates (Zhang et al. ). (see Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 The structure of hTDO. The four monomers of hTDO are colored in green, red, orange and blue respectively. (we here thank Meng, B et al. for providing this picture. This picture from the RCSB PDB ( www.rcsb.org ) of PDB ID 4PW8 (Meng, B, Wu, D, Gu, J.H, Ouyang, S.Y, Ding, W, Liu, Z.J) Structural and functional analyses of human tryptophan-2,3-dioxygenase(2014) Proteins 82: 3210–3216)
The catalytic process of TDO
TDO catalyzes L-Trp into N-formylkynurenine (NFK) by incorporating both oxygen atoms of oxygen molecules into the indole moiety of tryptophan. The process of the conversion of L-Trp to NFK can be divided into three steps:(1) substrate binding, (2) the formation of the hydroperoxide inte- rmediate, (3) the rearrangement of the hydroperoxide intermediate. Substrate binding has two parts: the interaction between the heme site of TDO and the carboxy and ammonium groups of L-Trp and the interaction with the indole ring system. For example, in xcTDO, the carboxy group of L-Tyr interacts with Tyr113, Arg117, and Thr254 of TDO. Meanwhile, the substrate ammonium group binds to the 7-propionate group of the heme, the side chain hydroxy group of Thr254 and a water molecule. The indole ring of the substrate binds into a pocket that is hydrophobic and interacts with certain hydrophobic residues. After substrate and dioxygen binding to the ferrous protein, the dioxygen, the ferrous protein and substrate together form the ternary complex. The initial formation of the ternary complex activates O 2 , and catalysis proceeds through the formation of a hydroperoxide intermediate in which the ternary structure loses the indole proton. Finally, the hydroperoxide intermediate rearranges via either a Criegee or a dioxetane intermediate to form the product N-formylkynurenine (Dipanwita and Syun-Ru ; Thackray et al. ).
TDO in schizophrenia
The NMDA hypofunction hypothesis in schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a mental disorder that is characterized by abnormal social behaviors and cognitive disorder. Common symptoms include a reduced social engagement, unclear or confused thinking, auditory hallucinations, emotional expression, and the lack of motivation, and affects 1 % of the worldwide population (Andreasen ; Bromet and Fennig ; Carpenter and Buchanan ). The factors of inheritance (Straub et al. ) and environment (Van Os and Kapur ) are proven to contribute to the occurrence and development of schizophrenia. A widely accepted hy- pothesis is that the NMDA receptor (NMDAR) has an important role in the development of schizophrenia (Konradi and Heckers ). Schizophrenia may present with both a hypo- and a hyper-glutamatergic function. The hypo-glutamatergic function of schizophrenia was pivotal in its support that some NMDAR antagonists, such as dizocilpine, ketamine, or phencyclidine, can induce cognitive disorder similar to those in schizophrenia in an animal model (Jentsch and Roth ; Newcomer et al. ; Cochran et al. ) and aggravate those symptoms in schizophrenia patients (Coyle ; Moghaddam and Javitt ). The potential mechanism of NMDA hypofunction hypothesis is that the acute and long-term administration of an NMDAR antagonist influences the activity of dopaminergic neurons and dopamine transmission in some areas of brain, such as the striatum, the caudate, and the prefrontal cortex (Doherty et al. ; Bowers and Hoffman ; Deutch et al. ; Hertel et al. ; Verma and Moghaddam ; Jentsch et al. ).
TDO may be involved in the pathology of schizophrenia by increasing KYNA levels (see Fig. 3)
Fig. 3 A summary of the involvement of TDO in the three groups of brain diseases: (A) schizophrenia (SZ), (B) Alzheimer’s disease (AD), (C) Glioma (GLI). The picture also illustrates that the activation of TDO will cause the accumulation of kyn in liver. Kyn will penetrate the blood brain barrier and enter the brain. The activation of TDO can decrease the tryptophan levels and increase the kynurenine levels and its metabolites in those tissues locally. These metabolites have an influence on the function of neurons and T cells. Trp: Trptophan; kyn: kynurenine; kynA: kynurenicacid; 3-HK: 3-hydroxykynurenine; 3-HAA: 3-hydroxyanthranilic; Quin: quinolinic acid; TDO: tryptophan-2,3-dioxygenase
KYNA, an endogenous antagonist of the NMDAR, has aroused interest among researchers concerning its potential involvement in the development of schizophrenia. Some research has demonstrated that the level of KYNA was increased in the post-mortem prefrontal cortex (Schwarcz et al. ) and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) (Erhardt et al. ; Nilsson et al. ; Linderholm et al. ) of schizophrenic patients. Furthermore, other studies (Rassoulpour et al. ; Amori et al. ; Carpenedo et al. ) have demonstrated that increasing KYNA levels decreased dopamine levels in the striatum and glutamate levels in the rat caudate nucleus by the inhibition of KAT or loc- al applications of kynurenate. However, other researchers (Miller et al. ) have found that KYNA is decreased and 3-HAA is increased in schizophrenia. Increased quinolinic acid and decreased neuroprotective ratio (Torrey et al. ; Myint et al. ) activate NMDAR to release ROS and deplete energy stores resulting in further glutamate release and cell damage (Betzen et al. ). Glutamate dysfunction will also drive changes in dopamine (DA) release culminating in positive and negative symptoms (Schwartz et al. ). Meantime, another research (Möller et al. ), using a neurodevelopmental animal model of schizophrenia in rats, demonstrated altered schizophrenia-like behavior was linked to mitochondrial, inflammatory and immunological disturbances, together with altered kynurenine metabolism (increased quinolinic acid and decreased KYNA), and changes in cortico-striatal dopamine. Moreover, many of these bio-behavioral changes are reversed by N-acetyl cysteine, including the changes in kynurenine metabolism, which provides robust evidence for the central role of altered redox state. Which one is the real etiology agent needs to be further investigated. The mechanism of elevation of kynurenate concentrations in schizophrenia has not been totally clear. One mechanism involves the suppression of the KMO enzyme to shunt kynurenine metabolism from the formation of 3-hydroxykynurenine (3-HK) to the formation of kynurenic acid (KYNA). One study (Zwilling et al. ) has shown this effect by using MJ6, an inhibitor of KMO, to increase the kynurenic acid levels in the blood. Meanwhile, another study discovered that an intronic SNP within the KMO gene reduced KMO mRNA levels in schizophrenia patients (Wonodi et al. ), which further supported this mechanism. Another mechanism is the enhancement of L-KYN production. Some studies have found that the ratio of kynurenine/tryptophan rises in the post-mortem anterior cingulate cortex of subjects with schizophrenia (Miller et al. ). Interestingly, TDO, but not IDO1, is selectively upregulated in the post-mortem frontal cortex of schizophrenic patients (Miller et al. ). This indicated that TDO is involved in schizophrenia and may have a more important role than IDO1 in the development of schizophrenia. Notably, the regulatory region of the tdo2 gene contains glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) and can be upregulated by dexamethasone, an anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid drug, in the rat liver (Danesch et al. ; Danesch et al. ). Additionally, KMO is induced by proinflammatory cytokines, such as IFN-γ. When considered together, these studies imply that the upregulation of TDO and the downregulation of KMO are caused by an anti-inflammatory environment. Recently, a study that supports this hypothesis has demonstrated that the ratios of IFN-γ/IL-4, IL-2/IL-4, IFN-γ/IL-10 and TNF-α/IL-4 are reduced significantly in the serum of schizophrenic patients (Chiang et al. ), indicating the microenvironment shunts Th1 cytokines to Th2 cytokines.
TDO in Alzheimer’s disease
The role neuroinflammation plays in AD
Alzheimer’s disease is a progressive disease that accounts for 60 %–70 % of all cases of dementia. It starts slowly with a common early symptom of forgetfulness, and progresses over time. As the diseased brain deteriorates, symptoms can develop into problems with language, disorientation, mood swings, loss of motivation, mismanagement of self-care, and behavioral issues. The anatomical features of AD are the presence of β-amyloid (Aβ) plaques, gliosis and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). Over the past decades, much attention has been paid to the activity of neurons; however, emerging research (Rojo et al. ; Mcgeer and Mcgeer ) has concentrated on the role of neuroinflammation in the development of AD during recent years. Activated microglia and astrocytes are found in close proximity to neuritic plaques. Some studies have demonstrated that TNF-α, IL-2, IL-1 and IL-8 levels were increased in AD patients (Alsadany et al. ; Niranjan ). Meanwhile, it was also discovered that IL-6 was increased in the post-mortem brains of AD patients (Huell et al. ). The precise significance of the inflammation in response to neurodegeneration has not been understood completely. One hypothesis is that extracellular damage to neurons induced astrocytes and microglia to produce inflammatory cytokines; however, there is a vicious circle between inflammatory cytokines and amyloid β (Aβ). Infla- mmatory cytokines secreted by astrocytes and microglial cells may be involved in the synthesis of the amyloid precursor protein (AβPP) (Del Bo et al. ; Blasko et al. ). Conversely, microglia that were cultured from AD patients and exposed to Aβ1–42 trigger the production of NF-α, pro-IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-8 (Lue et al. ; Gitter et al. ; Chong ), which accelerates the process of AD. In recent years, emerging evidence has shown that quinolinic acid was accumulated in the brain of AD pati- ents and that the immunoreactivity of quinolinic acid is detected in cortical microglia, astrocytes and neurons of the hippocampus of AD patients (Guillemin and Brew ; Guillemin et al. ). This implies that quinolinic acid may be involved in the pathology of AD by inducing immunoreactivity.
TDO may be involved in the pathology of AD by increasing quinolinic acid levels (see Fig. 3)
Quinolinic acid, a metabolite of the kynurenine pathway, was first demonstrated by Stone and Perkins to have the ability to activate neurons to express NMDARs (Stone and Perkins ). Then, the neurotoxicity of quinolinic acid was assessed by Schwarcz (Schwarcz et al. ), and it has been found to be involved in the pathology of several neuroinflammatory diseases (Guillemin et al. ; Heyes et al. ; Stone ). One study has demonstrated that the kynurenine pathway was activated in AD patients, which results in the accumulation of quinolinic acid in the brain. Furthermore, quinolinic acid can lead to tau hyperphosphorylation and may be a determinant factor in the formation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) (Rahman et al. ). Nevertheless, the mechanism of elevated quinolinic acid is not completely understood. Preclinical evidence supports the use of KMO, TDO, IDO, and 3HAO inhibitors to offset the effects of neuroinflammation in AD. Moreover, other observations have demonstrated that the ratio of kynurenine/tryptophan is increased in the serum of AD patients (Widner et al. ). Another study, which coincides with the former result, discovered that IDO1 was upregulated in the brain of AD patients and was related to senile plaques (Bonda et al. ). Meanwhile, the secretion of cytokines that were stimulated by Aβ1–42 can also induce microglia and monocytes to express IDO1 (Guillemin et al. ). This evidence indicates that IDO1 may account for the increased quinolinic acid levels in AD. Yet, another study demonstrated that TDO levels were also increased in the human AD hippocampus. Interestingly, TDO levels were significantly higher when compared to IDO1 levels and were related to NFTs and senile plaques. Furthermore, TDO and quinolinic acid were colocalized in the hippocampus of AD patients (Wu et al. ). This evidence suggests that TDO is involved in the pathology of AD and has a more important role than IDO in the development of AD. Nevertheless, the mechanism of the expression of TDO and the role of TDO in AD requires further elucidation. The microenvironment of the brain in AD patients is inflammatory, while TDO is induced by anti-infl- ammatory cytokines. Some studies have demonstrated that prolactin and cortisol are increased in AD brains (Huang et al. ; Oxenkrug ), which may partly account for the expression of TDO. Yet, this relationship is not well understood.
TDO in glioma
TDO promotes the progression of glioma by suppressing the immune system (see Fig. 3)
Glioma is a type of tumor that originates from glial cells, initiates in the brain or spine, and constitutes 80 % of malignant brain tumors. Glioblastoma, a type of glioma, is an aggressive tumor and patients with Glioblastoma have a poor prognosis. The median survival time of Glioblastoma is approximately 14.6 months with maximal treatment (radiotherapy plus temozolomide) (Stupp et al. ). This highlights the significance of exploring new therapies that are more effective than current therapies. In 1995, Heyes et al. de- monstrated that quinolinic acid levels were increased in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with brain tumors (Heyes et al. ). Another study (Csaba et al. ) demonstrated that tryptophan is uptaken in oligodendrogliomas and glioneuronal tumors. Those studies indicated that the kynurenine pathway may be involved in the pathology of glioma. In 2003, one study (Uyttenhove et al. ) revealed that the activity of IDO is increased in malignant gliomas. Recently, additional research (Christiane et al. ; Adams et al. ) has demonstrated that TDO levels were also increased in gliomas. Interestingly, one of these studies suggested that IDO1 and IDO2 are not responsible for tryptophan metabolism, but that TDO accounts for the release of kynurenine. Meanwhile, comparing the enzymatic catalytic rate between the two enzymes, the catalytic rate of TDO is much higher than that of IDO and TDO could more quickly impact kynurenine concentrations (Brady et al. ; Grant et al. ). This implies that TDO may play a more important role than IDO in the development of gliomas. During the progression of tumors, malignant cells can escape the immune system by suppressing the immune system. The acc- umulation of kynurenine and the starvation of tryptophan can suppress allogeneic T-cell proliferation (Mellor ; Mellor and Munn ; Rond et al. ). There is evidence (Christiane et al. ) that demonstrated that kynurenine formation by glioma-derived TDO is inversely correlated with allogeneic T-cell proliferation. Additionally, the blockade of TDO in gliomas can restore allogeneic T-cell proliferation. It is also observed that sections of human glioma with high TDO expression were infiltrated with less CD8 + immune cells and less leukocyte common antigen (LCA)-positive cells. This evidence indicates that kynurenine accumulation mediated by TDO can suppress the antitumor immune response. Interestingly, a study (Pilotte et al. ) has shown that TDO was also expressed in many other human tumor samples, including hepatocarcinomas, bladder carcinomas and melanomas. This evidence implies that TDO, like IDO, has a significant role in suppressing antitumor immune activity and that TDO has the potential to be a novel therapeutic target for antitumor therapies.
Conclusion: what are the future directions of TDO in brain diseases
Exploring whether TDO is involved in other brain diseases
We herein reviewed evidence that demonstrates that TDO is involved in several brain diseases and may be a therapeutic target in brain diseases. Furthermore, increasing evidence implies that TDO may be involved in the pathology of other brain diseases. For example, a study of Huntington’s disease (HD) demonstrated that KYNA levels were decreased in the brain of HD patients (Beal et al. ). Additionally, the activity of KATs, the biosynthetic enzymes of KYNA, were reported to be decreased in the brain of HD patients (Jauch et al. ), which suggested an alteration in the kynurenine pathway from the formation of kynurenic acid toward the formation of quinolinic acid. Conversely, the levels of 3-HK and quinolinic acid were increased in the post-mortem brain of HD patients (Pearson and Reynolds ; Guidetti et al. ). Furthermore, another study has demonstrated that the activity of 3-HAO was increased in HD brains (Schwarcz et al. ). When considered together, these studies demonstrate that the kynurenine pathway is under a state of dysregulation. Moreover, some researchers have shown that the ratio of kynurenine/tryptophan was increased in HD brains and is correlated with the number of CAG trinucleotide repeats and disease severity in HD patients (Stoy et al. ; Forrest et al. ). This indicates that the initial and rate-limiting enzyme of the kynurenine pathway is activated in HD. As clinical samples are difficult to obtain, it is still unknown which enzyme of the initial step of the kynurenine pathway, IDO or TDO, is upregulated. Similarly, there is dysregulation of the kynurenine pathway in other brain diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease and epilepsy. Those results (Widner et al. ; Monaco et al. ; Liimatainen et al. ) demonstrated that kynurenine/tryptophan is increased in the serum or cerebrospinal fluid of those patients. Nevertheless, whether TDO regulates the kynurenine pathway is still unknown.
Exploring the effects of TDO inhibition on brain diseases
Using the kynurenine pathway as a therapeutic strategy has been studied in animal models. KATII-selective inhibitors can reduce central KYNA levels and improve performance during sustained attention tasks (Chapin et al. ). In the HD animal model, the genetic or pharmacological blockade of KMO can reduce loss of neurons and synapses and improve the survival rate (Campesan et al. ; Zwilling et al. ). In PD, the inhibition of KMO can reduce the severity of dystoniain dt sz mutant hamsters (Richter and Hamann ; Hamann et al. ). When considered together, the use of the kynurenine pathway as a therapeutic strategy is promising. Meanwhile, in the nematode, C. Elegans , the genetic inhibition of TDO has been shown to suppress the toxicity of α-synuclein (αSyn), which is involved in PD pathology, as well as the formation of Aβ1–42 and a polyglutamine (40Q) protein (Vander et al. ). This also demonstrates the promising potential of TDO inhibition as a therapeutic strategy in the treatment of brain diseases. Yet, there is still little research concerning the effect of TDO inhibition on any animal models of brain diseases. Whether TDO inhibition alleviates or reverses the disease progression in animal models still requires further investigation, which will provide a foundation for the translation of this therapy to the clinic.
Developing more effective TDO inhibitors
The research and development of TDO inhibitors was initially driven by depression therapy. The monotherapy of depression can induce serotonin syndrome by elevating serotonin levels (Walinder et al. ; Thomson et al. ; Oung ); however, a combined reuptake inhibitor and tr- yptophan treatment was found to be more effective, and without enhanced side effects, than either agent alone. In 1995, Salter et al. (Salter et al. ) developed two novel inhibitors (68OC91 and 709 W92) and found that these two inhibitors could inhibit the activity of TDO effectively and noti- ceably increase the levels of tryptophan. As 709 W92 also inhibits the reuptake of serotonin, it is not a suitable inhibitor for TDO. 68OC91 is an attractive compound as it is endowed with a potent TDO inhibition effect and does not inhibit the reuptake of 5-HT. Nevertheless, the solubility and bioavailability of 68OC91 is poor. Another study has demonstrated that the tryptophan analogues can also inhibit the activity of TDO, but the inhibitory activity is mild (Civen and Knox ). Indole-3-acetamide, indole-3- acetonitrile and indole-3-acrylic acid exhibited a potent inhibition for mammalian tryptophan-2, 3-dioxygenase, while they moderately inhibited the pseudomonad enzyme (Eguchi et al. ). Research has emerged to identify inhibitors that are endowed with good inhibitory activity, bioavailability and specificity. In 2011, Eduard Dolusi and Pierre Larrieu developed a better inhibitor, LM10, which was characterized by a 6-fluoroindole that was substituted in the 3-position by a tetrazolylvinyl side chain (Eduard et al. ). LM10 appeared to be a good inhibitor of TDO, which was endowed with good inhibition potency, high solubility and bioavailability. It also displayed effective antitumor activity (Pilotte et al. ). Yet, its specificity still remains to be explored. Meanwhile, allopurinol (widely used to treat gout) may also be a potential TDO inhibitor. Recently, one research demonstrated that allopurinol could block stress-related increases in immobility in the forced swimming test (FST) and circulating kynurenine concentrations by inhibiting TDO in rat (Gibney et al. ). But, research into this aspect of allopurinol are still focused on animal models. More information about allopurinol inhibition on human TDO still needs to be further investigated, such as thermodynamical or kinetical experiment. Furthermore, a structure-based virtual screening strategy comprising homology modeling, ligand-support binding site optimization and structure clustering analysis should be implemented. There is still a long way to go before TDO inhibitors are used clinically. When compared with TDO inhibitors, IDO inhibitors have progressed significantly. 1-MT (IDO inhibitor) presents a good anti-tumor effect and is currently used clinically as a specific inhibitor of IDO (Löb et al. ). As the structure of hTDO has not been fully explored, it will be difficult to explore and screen better TDO inhibitors. However, it is very important to develop better TDO inhibitors. The development of better TDO inhibitors not only strongly advances research regarding TDO but also promotes the development of new drugs for anti-tumor therapies and brain disease treatments.
Inhibiting TDO may be a therapeutic strategy in the above brain diseases. While TDO performs important functions under normal physiologic conditions, inhibiting TDO may have important side effects. TDO is mainly expressed in liver, which is very important for controlling excess tryptophan levels rapidly and synthesizing NAD quickly under conditions of niacin or nicotinamide deficiency in the diet (Ball et al. ). Meanwhile, some of the downstream products of TDO are beneficial for us. For example, 3-hydroxykynurenine helps shield our eyes from UV light (Gallas ). Moreover, other researchers point out that KYNA has neuroprotective effects (Gellért et al. ). How to solve the potential problems is worthy of our thinking as well.