Introduction
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) has demonstrated similar mid to long-term mortality compared to surgical aortic valve replacement for symptomatic, severe aortic stenosis [ , ]. One of the major areas that remain controversial in care of patients who have undergone TAVI is the optimal regimen and duration of anti-platelet therapy. Current guideline recommends dual anti-platelet (DAPT) for 6 months over single anti-platelet (SAPT) therapy, however, this is based only on expert opinion [ ]. Although anti-platelet therapy is considered necessary to avoid valve related events until appropriate endothelialization is achieved, TAVI patients often have multiple comorbidities that may expose them at increased risk of bleeding or atherosclerosis related events (i.e. stroke, myocardial infarction), which makes it difficult to balance the risk and benefit of anti-platelet regimen and duration. It is of paramount importance to explore the safety and efficacy of SAPT and DAPT following TAVI to adjust the risk and benefit of bleeding and atherosclerosis related events.
Several previous studies and meta-analyses have addressed this topic. Nonetheless, individual randomized controlled studies have been unable to draw conclusions because of low cohort numbers, while results of other studies have been limited mainly due to observational study design, heterogenic anti-platelet administration regimen and including patients on oral anticoagulants (OAC) [ , , , , , , , ]. Previous meta-analyses have included and combined randomized control trials and observational studies with different inclusion and exclusion criteria, therefore the conclusions may have been biased [ , , ]. Therefore, we performed an up-dated meta-analysis with only the randomized control trial to address this clinically important issue.
Methods and materials
Data source and search strategy
This systematic review and meta-analysis was performed in accordance with Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. A systematic literature search was conducted by two independent researchers (T.A and H.T) through PUBMED, EMBASE and ClinicalTrials,gov from its inception to May 25th 2017 for randomized clinical trials or observational studies that applied propensity-matched analysis. The search term was; aortic valve AND (percutaneous OR transcatheter OR transluminal OR transarterial OR transapical OR transaortic OR transcarotid OR transaxillary OR transsubclavian OR transiliac OR transfemoral OR transiliofemoral OR “Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement”[Mesh]) AND (“Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors”[Mesh] OR antiplatelet OR antithrombotic OR aspirin OR clopidogrel OR ticagrelor). Only published data in peer-reviewed scientific journals were included and conference abstracts were excluded. The search was limited to articles published in English. First, the search resulted articles were screened based on its’ title or abstract whether it contained relevant data or not. Then, the full-version of screened articles were downloaded and reviewed by two independent reviewers (T.A and H.T). Based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria, manuscripts were decided to be included for quantitative meta-analysis or not. References included in the final analysis and previous review articles were also investigated for relevant articles.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria were 1: randomized control trials that compared the clinical outcomes between SAPT and DAPT after TAVI 2: at least one of the clinical outcomes of interest were reported and absolute event numbers in both arms were available for extraction. 3: Clinical outcomes were reported according to the Valve Academic Research Consortium criteria [ , ].
Exclusion criteria were 1: The study compared clinical outcomes in no anti-platelet therapy vs. DAPT. 2: patients taking anti-coagulation were included 3: observational study.
Outcomes
Outcomes were divided on safety and efficacy. For safety, 30-day life-threatening bleeding, major bleeding, major vascular complication were evaluated. For efficacy, 30-day major stroke, myocardial infarction, mortality and mortality beyond 30-day follow-up were assessed.
Quality assessment of the study
Quality of randomized clinical trials was assessed by Cochrane risk of bias tool for randomized clinical trials by two independent reviewers (T.A. and H.T.). Any disagreement was solved through discussion with another extra reviewer (L.A.).
Statistical analysis
Absolute event numbers were either directly extracted or calculated. Pooled estimates of odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) for SAPT vs. DAPT calculated with Mantel–Haenszel methods. Heterogeneity of the pooled estimates were assessed with I 2 statistics and was considered significant when either I 2 > 50% or P for heterogeneity <0.05. Random-effects model was used to when there was significant heterogeneity and fixed-effect model was applied when there was no significant heterogeneity. Publication bias was evaluated visually for asymmetry. Then if there was asymmetry observed, publication bias was quantitatively assessed with Egger’s test when ≥10 studies were included in a meta-analysis ( http://handbook.cochrane.org ). Meta-analyses were performed with the Review Manager (RevMan) Version 5.3 (Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration, 2012, Copenhagen, Denmark). A p-value of <0.05 was considered significant.
Results
Summary of included studies
A total of three randomized control trials [ , , ] were identified and included in quantitative meta-analysis. A total of 421 patients (210 SAPT and 211 DAPT) were included. Publication bias was not assessed because the included studies were less than 10. Characteristics of the included studies are summarized in Tables 1 and 2 . The study selection flow is summarized in the supplement.
Table 1 Summary of included studies for study design, included cohort, intervention regimen, and inclusion/exclusion criteria Author (publication year) Rodés-Cabau (2017) [ ] Stabile (2014) [ ] Ussia (2011) [ ] SAPT DAPT SAPT DAPT SAPT DAPT Study design Randomized, open-label, multi-center trial in Canada, Europe, and South America Randomized study Randomized, open-label, single-center study Cohort, numbers 111 111 60 60 39 40 Anti-platelet regimen for both SAPT and DAPT group Patients were randomized the day before the TAVR procedure to receive aspirin (80 to 100 mg/day) or aspirin (80 to 100 mg/day) plus clopidogrel (75 mg/day) following the TAVI Randomly assigned to aspirin (75 to 160 mg/day) and clopidogrel 75 mg/day or ticlopidine 500 mg/twice daily or aspirin alone. Randomized to receive 300 mg loading dose of clopidogrel on the day before TAVI followed by a 3-month maintenance daily dose of 75 mg clopidogrel plus aspirin 100 mg lifelong or aspirin 100 mg alone. Loading of anti-platelet 300-mg of clopidogrel was administered within 24-hours prior to transfemoral-TAVI. Same dose loading was administered within 24-hours post non-transfemoral TAVI Not reported 300-mg of clopidogrel was administered on the day before TAVI Major inclusion criteria Inclusion Inclusion Inclusion 1: Patients with clinical indications for TAVI with a balloon-expandable Edwards SAPIEN XT or SAPIEN 3 valve 1: Severe aortic stenosis defined as aortic valve area < 0.8 cm 2 (or aortic valve area index < 0.5 cm 2 /m 2 ) and mean aortic gradient >40 mmHg or peak jet velocity >4.0 m/s 2: NYHA functional class more than II or syncope 3: High surgical risk 1: Consecutive patients who met the clinical and anatomic criteria for TAVI Major exclusion criteria Exclusion Exclusion Exclusion 1: Need for chronic anticoagulation 2: Major bleeding within the 3 months before TAVR 3: Prior intracranial bleeding 4: Drug-eluting stent implantation within the year before the TAVI 5: Allergy to aspirin and/or clopidogrel 1: Aortic annulus diameter <18 or >25 mm 2: Aortic dissection or iliac-femoral dimensions or disease precluding safe sheath insertion 3: Untreated coronary artery disease requiring revascularization 4: Severe aortic regurgitation or mitral regurgitation or prosthetic valve (any location). 5: Acute myocardial infarction within 1 months 6: Upper gastrointestinal bleeding within 3 months 7: Cerebrovascular accident or transient ischemic attack within 6 months 8: Any cardiac procedure, other than balloon valvuloplasty, within 1 month or within 6 months for drug-eluting stents 9: Indication for oral anticoagulation therapy 10: Aspirin or thienopiridine intoleratnce/allergy 1: Liver cirrhosis, recurrent pulmonary embolism, porcelain aorta, respiratory failure, history of radiotherapy to the mediastinum, and severe connective tissue disease 2: Previous percutaneous coronary intervention or acute coronary syndrome requiring DAPT 3: Need for oral anticoagulation therapy 4: Allergy or intolerance to any of the study drugs DAPT dual antiplatelet therapy, NR not reported, SAPT single antiplatelet therapy, TAVI transcatheter aortic valve implantation
Table 2 Summary of demographic and clinical features of included studies Author (publication year) Rodés-Cabau (2017) [ ] Stabile (2014) [ ] Ussia (2011) [ ] SAPT DAPT SAPT DAPT SAPT DAPT Age, years (mean ± SD) 79 ± 9 79 ± 9 81.1 ± 4.8 80.2 ± 5.7 81 ± 4 80 ± 6 Male, % 53.2 63.1 40.0 33.3 41.0 50.0 Hypertension, % 79.8 77.5 95.0 95.0 79.5 87.5 Diabetes, % 32.7 36.9 25.0 28.3 20.5 32.5 Previous myocardial infarction, % 18.4 23.4 NR NR 10.3 17.5 Previous coronary artery bypass graft, % 38.5 35.1 NR NR 10.3 5.0 Peripheral vascular disease, % 20.0 25.2 NR NR 10.3 7.5 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, % 30.0 25.2 NR NR 17.9 25.0 Chronic renal failure, % 63.1 63.1 NR NR 12.8 15.0 Society of Thoracic Surgeon score, % 6.4 ± 4.6 6.2 ± 4.4 10.4 ± 6.8 9.7 ± 5.1 7 ± 3 8 ± 5 Mean gradient, mmHg 43 ± 15 43 ± 16 63.6 ± 14.1 59.4 ± 15.4 57 ± 18 52 ± 16 Left ventricular ejection fraction, % 54 ± 13 55 ± 12 NR NR 51 ± 12 54 ± 8 Aortic valve area, cm 2 0.40 ± 0.11 † 0.42 ± 0.13 † NR NR 0.6 ± 0.2 0.6 ± 0.3 †Indexed aortic valve area (cm 2 /m 2 ) DAPT dual antiplatelet therapy, NR not reported, SAPT single antiplatelet therapy
Safety endpoints
Life-threatening bleeding was similarly observed in SAPT compared to DAPT (2.9 vs. 6.2%, OR 0.45; 95% CI 0.17–1.20, p = 0.11, I 2 = 13%, Fig. 1 ) as well as major bleeding (2.9 vs. 4.3%, OR 0.66; 95% CI 0.23–1.89, p = 0.44, I 2 = 0%, Fig. 1 ). No significant difference in the rate of life-threatening and major bleeding was observed (5.7 vs. 10.4%, OR 0.52; 95% CI 0.25–1.08, p = 0.08, I 2 = 0%, Fig. 2 ). Major vascular complication was also similar between SAPT and DAPT (3.0 vs. 6.0%, OR 0.53; 95% CI 0.14–2.01, p = 0.35, I 2 = 29%, Fig. 2 ).
Fig. 1 Forest plot of random-effects model for life-threatening bleeding or major bleeding
Fig. 2 Forest plot of random-effects model for life-threatening bleeding and major bleeding and major vascular complication
Efficacy endpoints
The incident of major stroke was similar between SAPT and DAPT (1.9 vs. 1.4%, OR 1.36; 95% CI 0.30–6.15, p = 0.69, I 2 = 0%, Fig. 3 ). Myocardial infarction was only reported in one study and was comparative between SAPT and DAPT.
Fig. 3 Forest plot of random-effects model for major strokes and myocardial infarction
Thirty days mortality did not differ between SAPT and DAPT patients (3.8 vs. 5.2%, OR 0.72; 95% CI 0.28–1.84, p = 0.49, I 2 = 0%, Fig. 4 ). The combined outcomes of 30-days mortality, life-threatening and major bleeding showed tendency toward higher event rates in DAPT compared to SAPT (9.5 vs. 15.6%, OR 0.57; 95% CI 0.31–1.03, p = 0.06, I 2 = 5%, Fig. 4 ). Mortality beyond 30-days follow-up (3–6 months) was also comparative (5.7 vs. 6.6%, OR 0.86; 95% CI 0.38–1.90, p = 0.70, I 2 = 0%, Fig. 4 ).
Fig. 4 Forest plot of random-effects model for 30 day mortality and mortality during follow-up
No significant heterogeneity was observed in all of the clinical outcomes.
Two studies [ , ] have reported the echocardiographic outcomes during follow-up period of 6 months. Both studies did not report any valve gradient deterioration and the mean aortic gradient remained stable. One study only reported mean aortic gradient at the time of discharge and was in the acceptable range [ ].
Quality of the included studies
Quality of the included studies is summarized in Table 3 .
Table 3 Risk of Bias Rodés-Cabau (2017) [ ] Stabile (2014) [ ] Ussia (2011) [ ] Random sequence generation Unclear Unclear Unclear Allocation concealment Low Unclear Unclear Performance bias Unclear High High Detection bias Low Low Low Attrition bias High Unclear Low Reporting bias Low Low Low Other bias High High High
Discussion
The main findings of our meta-analysis were 1: 30-day safety (life-threatening bleeding, major bleeding, combined life-threatening and major bleeding and major vascular complication) was similar between SATP and DAPT following TAVI. 2: 30-day efficacy (major stroke, myocardial infarction and mortality) and mortality during follow-up (3–6 months) did not differ between SAPT and DAPT after TAVI. The combined outcomes of 30-day mortality, life-threatening and major bleeding showed tendency toward higher event rates in DAPT compared to SAPT.
Although our meta-analysis has included less total number of studies compared to previous meta-analyses, this meta-analysis included only randomized controlled trials including the most updated study [ ] with the largest number of cohorts.
Safety and efficacy
Our results were different from previous meta-analyses especially in the risk of bleeding events but in agreement with the previous studies in regards to 30-day outcome in myocardial infarction, stroke and death. Our meta-analysis revealed similar 30 day life-threatening, major or combination of life-threatening and major bleeding between SAPT and DAPT cohorts. Aryal et al. reported a meta-analysis from 2 randomized control trials and 2 observational studies. They concluded bleeding at 30-days (major, minor and bleeding requiring transfusion) was lower in SAPT compared to DAPT (relative risk 0.41, p < 0.001) while stroke, myocardial infarction and death was similar between the two groups [ ]. Gandhi et al. reported meta-analysis with worse 30-day bleeding events (lethal and major bleeding, OR 2.62, p = 0.008) in the DAPT than SAPT patients but similar 30-day outcomes in stroke, myocardial infarction and death [ ]. These differences in results are mainly due to difference in characteristics of patients in included studies as well as design of the studies. Notably, two observational studies included in the previous meta-analysis were studies that included all-comers and could have resulted in biased results from heterogeneous patient population. Our results showed a strong trend toward more life-threatening and major bleeding events in the DAPT group. Future adequately powered studies with longer follow-up duration should assess the bleeding risk of different anti-platelet regimens.
Our meta-analysis included only the randomized control studies with strict and similar inclusion and exclusion criteria, which makes the results of our meta-analysis more homogeneous. It will be important to recognize the difference of patient characteristics in the included studies in previous meta-analyses (including studies from registries) and the present study (data from randomized control studies) when considering the anti-platelet regimen in the clinical practice.
In agreement with previous studies, the risk of major vascular complication was similar between SAPT and DAPT following TAVI. The risk of vascular complication has decreased with increased center and operator experience and was also relatively low in this meta-analysis with recent patient inclusion period [ ]. This may limit the power to detect differences in the risk.
Clinical implications
Current AHA/ACC guidelines recommend aspirin plus 3 months of vitamin-K antagonist in both post surgical mitral and aortic bioprosthetic valves replacements [ ]. However, no recommendation was made related to OAC in post-TAVI patients. Recently, Chakravarty et al. reported that TAVI patients had higher risk of developing subclinical leaflet thrombosis, which was associated with increased rates of cerebrovascular events, compared to those who underwent surgical aortic valve replacement. Interestingly, the leaflet thrombosis was neither preventable nor treatable with anti-platelets but was so with OACs [ ]. This clinically important observation raises the question whether OAC should be added to post-TAVI regimen. However, because TAVI candidates often suffer multiple comorbidities that expose them to risk of bleeding, DAPT plus OAC could significantly increase the risk of serious bleeding events beyond its potential benefit. In this setting, one strategy might be to continue SAPT plus OAC in those who OAC are clinically indicated (i.e. atrial fibrillation) following TAVI. Nevertheless, because TAVI candidates have high prevalence of significant coronary artery disease requiring coronary intervention prior or post-TAVI, the optimal anti-platelets and OAC regimen remain unclear in patients who also require both DAPT and OAC. In this context, results of our study may suggest that DAPT plus OAC may offer similar safety and efficacy compared to SAPT plus OAC in patients who have undergone TAVI and require both DAPT and OAC. However, patients on DAPT and vitamin K antagonist had increased event rates of bleeding while no further benefit of decreased stroke or death during median of 13 months follow-up [ ]. Further studies are warranted to assess the optimal regimen of anti-platelets in combination with OAC post-TAVI. There are currently several undergoing clinical trials. One is Safety Profile Evaluation of Ticagrelor Alone Compared to a Combination of Lysine Acetylsalicylate-Clopidogrel in the Context of Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation (TICTAVI) (NCT02817789). This trial is designed to assess the 30-days outcome between DAPT (aspirin plus clopidogrel) and ticagrelor alone. Antiplatelet Therapy for Patients Undergoing Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation (POPular-TAVI) trial (NCT02247128) is planned to compare the one-year safety and efficacy in DAPT (aspirin plus clopidogrel), SAPT (aspirin alone), OAC plus clopidogrel or OAC alone. In addition, Anti-Thrombotic Strategy After Trans-Aortic Valve Implantation for Aortic Stenosis (ATLANTIS) (NCT02664649) will assess the safety and efficacy of apixaban compared to standard of care. These trial results will further elucidate the uncertainty of optimal anti-platelet and anti-coagulation strategy after TAVI.
There are several limitations in our study. First, the number of included studies was only three with limited cohort numbers. However, all the studies were randomized controlled trials with similar anti-platelet regimen while excluding candidates for OAC. Exclusion of candidate patients for OAC is important in the evaluation of the safety and efficacy post-TAVI as it would significantly bias the evaluation of outcomes. This is different from previous meta-analyses and one of the strength of our study. Second, because the rate of events was generally low, especially for stroke and myocardial infarction, the analyses may be underpowered to detect differences in incidence rates. Lastly, most of the outcomes were limited to 30-days.
In conclusion, SAPT provided similar safety without adding incremental efficacy compared to DAPT but showed tendency of lower combined endpoints of 30-day mortality, life-threatening and major bleeding. Further research with larger cohort and longer follow-up is warranted to determine the optimal anti-platelet regimen that offers minimal bleeding risk and maximal cardiac and cerebrovascular protective effect.