Introduction
Dermatomycoses, often caused by dermatophytic and non dermatophytic fungi, affect the epidermis, nail, and hair (Gupta et al. ). They are the most fungal infection of pets and livestock and affect animal and human health due to their zoonotic potential (Gupta et al. ). The most common clinical manifestations include alopecia and/or crust-like, circular grayish-white raised lesions, pustules, nodules, etc. (Aneke et al. ). These lesions are mostly seen on body regions such as the face, neck, and thorax while the less commonly affected areas include the hind limbs (Aneke et al. ). Sufficient knowledge of the clinical signs, epidemiology, macroscopic lesions, and diagnosis of this disease is very important for instituting appropriate treatment (Cafarchia et al. ). In the tropics and sub-tropics, the disease can be epizootic and can result in considerable economic losses as a result of production losses such as premature culling, treatment costs, decrease in meat and milk production, and hide and skin rejection and downgrading (Nweze ). Although dermatophyte infections can be treated, there is a high rate of reinfection; it is still unclear whether this is due to relapse or a new infection (Nweze ). There is an increase in resistance against antimycotics, and this has become a worldwide challenge. Therefore, the search for effective and easily consumable new substances with antifungal activity is now of necessity. Studies on the in vitro antifungal susceptibility profiles for some dermatomycotic agents have been herein carried out; however, reference method for testing the antifungal susceptibility of these has not been standardized resulting in variable and not comparable susceptibility profiles to antifungal drugs (Aneke et al. ). Therefore, the development of more effective and less toxic antifungal agents is required for the treatment of dermatomycosis (Adejumo and Bamidele ). Medicinal plants and their preparations have been used mainly for the treatment of dermatomycoses in humans, and this has led to a reduction in the dependence on the use of chemically synthesized antifungal agents and thus overcome the global problem of resistance to chemically synthesized antifungal agents (Adejumo and Bamidele ), but there are no studies on their use on animals yet.
Therefore, there is the need to ascertain if these medicinal plants have an in vitro activity against the dermatomycotic agents from domestic animals. The present study aimed to isolate dermatomycotic agents from domestic animals in South Eastern Nigeria and evaluate the in vitro antifungal susceptibility profile of the dermatomycotic isolates to Ocimum gratissimum (scent leaf) and Vernonia amygdalina (bitter leaf) ethanolic extract.
Materials and methods
Ethical considerations
The study was conducted in accordance with the Ethics and Regulation Guiding the Use of Research Animals as approved by the University of Nigeria, Nsukka. Housing, handling, and welfare of the animals used for the study were done humanely.
Study area and animals
A total of 698 domestic animals (dogs, sheep, goats, and pigs) from Orba market and Ikpa abattoir located about 105 m and 55 m respectively from the University of Nigeria, Nsukka campus (Ugochukwu et al. ), Veterinary teaching hospital, University of Nigeria Nsukka, and South Eastern households were examined for skin lesions suggestive of dermatomycosis. Samples from the skin of animals with suspected lesions of cutaneous mycoses were obtained by scraping the epidermal scales with a sterile scalpel blade (one blade per animal) (Brilhante et al. ). This was done after disinfecting the affected area with 70% ethanol. The sample from each lesion was placed in separate plastic bags and labeled accordingly. The samples were transported to the Microbiology laboratory of the Department of Veterinary Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, immediately after collection and processed using standard mycological techniques.
Fungal isolates
A little portion of each sample was planted onto the surface of Sabouraud Dextrose Agar (SDA) prepared media plate with the sample partly submerged. Inoculated plates were incubated at room temperature (25–30 °C) and examined daily for fungal growth for up to 4 weeks. Following the appearance of suspected fungal colonies, they were subcultured on fresh SDA slants to get pure culture for accurate identification (Sephavard et al. ). Colony from each growth of pure SDA culture were subcultured on the Potato Dextrose Agar (PDA) (Raymond and Pihet ) for proper sporulation and incubated at room temperature for up to 4 weeks. Wet mounts using lactophenol cotton blue were observed using magnification (× 40) with the diagnostic feature clearly displayed for easier identification. The mycotic agents were identified to generic and some species level based on the morphological characteristics such as the presence of conidiophores and conidia, nature of the hyphae (septate or non-septate), and size, shape, and appearance of the conidia (micro or macro) using the standard mycological manual (Frey et al. ; Evans and Richardson ; Baron et al. ; Ellis et al. ). These isolates were used for the antifungal susceptibility test studies, and the tests were performed in triplicate.
Plant collection and identification
Fresh leaves of O. gratissimum and V. amygdalina were collected from Ikpa market in Nsukka Local Government Area, Enugu State, Nigeria. They were identified by a taxonomist at the herbarium section of the Plant Science and Biotechnology Department of the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Enugu State, Nigeria, and deposited accordingly with registration numbers 3978 and 3979.
Preparation and extraction of crude extract
The leaves of O. gratissimum and V. amygdalina were separated manually. The materials were cleaned with sterile distilled water, air dried, and finely ground using a grinder mill. Twenty grams of the fine powder from O. gratissimum and V. amygdalina leaves were placed in 250 ml of solvent (95% ethanol) each respectively, placed in a conical flask, and refluxed at 50 °C for 60 min; these were done according to the standard procedures as described by Chen et al. ( ). The extracts were filtered through Whatman filter paper No. 1, and ethanol extracts were evaporated to dryness using a hot air oven at a much reduced temperature (40 °C). The residues obtained were dissolved in 1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The weight of the extract was determined and stored below ambient temperature. Phytochemical analysis of the extracts was done as described by Harbone ( ).
Preparation of inoculum
The hyphae-conidial inoculum of each isolate was prepared from a 7-day-old culture using the Clinical and Laboratory Standard Institute (CLSI)–approved guideline for filamentous fungi (CLSI, ).
Evaluation of antifungal activity
The fungal suspension was made in 5 ml of sterile normal saline, mixed homogeneously with a vortex mixer. The harvested fungal spores were standardized to 10 5 colony-forming unit per ml using a hemocytometer. Using the agar well diffusion assay, 50 μl of the inocula was pipeted onto the plate and a sterile swab stick was used to streak homogeneously throughout the Sabouraud Dextrose Agar plate. Appropriate wells (4 wells) were made on the agar plates using a cork borer of 6-mm diameter. Fifty microliters of ethanolic extracts (128 μg/ml) of the two leaf extracts, the control positive drug (VOR) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), was introduced serially into the wells. Incubation period of 48–72 h at 25̊C was maintained for observation of the antifungal activity of the drugs. The antifungal activity was evaluated by measuring the zones of inhibition of fungal growth against the leaf extracts and VOR. VOR was positive control and DMSO the negative control. The activities of the leaf extracts on the isolates tested were compared with voriconazole (0.03 μg/ml). The results were interpreted as susceptible or resistant using voriconazole the control positive if ≥ 17 considered susceptible as a standard according to Kirby-Bauer ( ).
Results
The results of the dermatomycotic agents isolated are presented in Table 1 . The antifungal activities are shown in Table 2 and Fig. 1 . A total of 60 fungal isolates were isolated from goats (45) and pigs (15). No skin lesion was found in dogs and sheep. A total of 5 dermatophytes and 55 non-dermatophytes were identified. The genera observed were Microsporum , Trichophyton , Aspergillus , Penicillium , and some other unidentified mold. All the isolates were susceptible to both ethanolic leaf extracts except Penicillium spp. Table 1 Occurrence rate (%) of mycotic agents isolated from domestic animals with skin lesions Dermatophytes Dog (0) Goat ( n = 45) Sheep ( n = 0) Pig ( n = 15) Microsporum spp . 0 3 (75) 0 1 (100) Trichophyton spp . 0 1 (25) 0 0 Total 0 4 (100) 0 1 (100) Non-dermatophyte Aspergillus spp . 0 29 (70.7) 0 8 (57.1) Penicillium spp . 0 4 (9.6) 0 1 (7.1) Unidentified molds 0 8 (19.5) 0 5 (35.7) Total 0 41 (100) 0 14 (100) Table 2 Antifungal susceptibility test profile of Ocimum gratissimum and Vernonia amygdalina against mycotic agents from skin lesions of domestic animals showing diameters (mm) of zones of inhibition Mycotic agents O. gratissimum V. amygdalina Voriconazole (control positive) DMSO (control negative) Microsporum spp . 20 18 42 0 Microsporum spp . 26 20 40 0 Microsporum spp . 26 32 20 0 Microsporum spp . 30 38 50 0 Trichophyton spp . 44 36 46 0 Aspergillus spp . 22 42 44 0 Aspergillus spp . 20 18 38 0 Aspergillus spp . 24 38 46 0 Aspergillus spp . 38 22 50 0 Penicillium spp . 0 0 0 0 Fig. 1 Antifungal activities of Microsporum spp. and Aspergillus spp. respectively against the leaf extracts and controls
Discussion and conclusion
In this study, the occurrence and antifungal activity profile of fungal agents isolated from skin lesions of domestic animals (dogs, sheep, goat, and pig) in some local markets in Nsukka and Ikpa slaughterhouses were presented. A total of 698 domestic animals were screened, and 60 (8.6%) had skin lesions that were fungal positive on culture. Culture of the collected samples showed five isolates of dermatophytes made up of four Microsporum species and one Trichophyton species, with isolation rate of 8.33% (five out of sixty fungal positive samples); the result was lower than the result obtained by Hassan ( ), Chah et al. ( ), and Rashidat ( ). Emenuga and Onyeka ( ) screened 4860 domestic animals for skin lesions, and 24% had cutaneous fungal lesions. Nichita and Marcu ( ) screened 101 samples from domestic animals; out of which, 86 (85.14%) were positive with mycotic agents. Paixao et al. ( ) examined 92 samples; 21 (23) were positive for dermatophytes; no fungal growth was found in 10 samples, and the remaining 61 samples resulted in fungal growth of which were not dermatophyte organisms, especially Aspergillus and Penicillium species. The lower isolation rate of the dermatophytes obtained in this study can be attributed to the fact that samples were collected from both clinical and asymptomatic cases, coupled with the management practices of farmers and the period of isolation as fungi thrives well in humid areas. The most common fungi isolated from the skin of domestic animals with mycoses in this study were saprobes, especially Aspergillus species and Penicillium species, and this is in agreement with the previous report by Paixao et al. ( ). This finding may be explained by the fact that these fungi are commonly found in soil, air, plants, and on other materials (Mancianti and Papini ). It has been established that environmental factors like pH, temperature, and humidity enhance the growth and spread of fungal infection (Onyeka and Ugwu ). In Nigeria and other developing countries, milking of animals is done manually with hands under unhygienic conditions (Emenuga and Onyeka ). These hands could have been the source of fungal contamination or the soil where the animals lay often (Emenuga and Onyeka ). All the ethanolic leaf extracts of O . gratissimum and V. amygdalina studied in our work showed high in vitro activity against dermatomycotic isolates except Penicillium species by using agar dilution method at 128 μg/ml. This is almost similar to the results of Silva et al. ( ) who reported that extracts of O . gratissimum at 125 μg/ml were active in vitro against some of the human pathogenic dermatophytes tested. The findings of this study also agree with that of several researchers that demonstrated the efficacy of this extracts on the isolates from humans and their antifungal activity against several species of fungi (Lima et al. ; Nwosu and Okafor ). The efficacy of these extracts as reported by Ogundare ( ) on isolates from children may be due to the period of harvest of the plant materials, age of the plant, and solvent extraction and extraction method. Mbakwem et al. ( ) recommended that other methods of extraction should be tried to determine the best method for an optimal yield of medicinal plants.
In conclusion, the main dermatophyte organisms discovered in this study were Microsporum species and Trichophyton species. Additionally, the study showed the presence of a great variety of non-dermatophyte fungi in domestic animals. There were limitations to the study as these isolated fungi were identified to the genera level, but the organisms were sent to a molecular biology laboratory in Spain for identification to the species/strain level. Nevertheless, the participation of these fungi as the primary etiology of the lesions is inconclusive as further studies are necessary to ascertain if they are the primary etiology or normal skin flora of these animals. It also justifies that the use of ethanolic extracts of O. gratissimum and V . amygdalina in traditional medicine practice as a therapeutic agent is more effective and less toxic against dermatomycosis and can explain the traditional use of these plants as they give high treatment margin at 128 μg/ml. It could therefore be suggested that these leaf extracts have antimicrobial property which depends on the different pharmacologically active phytochemicals present in the leaves. This can further be investigated for possible use in the formulation of antifungal compounds.