Introduction
Infertility has a variety of reasons and pathogeneses consist of biochemical and physical etiologies in which electromagnetic waves are of the physical agents. Electromagnetic waves and fields that are emitted in a wide range of energy and frequencies play both positive and negative roles in organism’s life. The electromagnetic spectrum can be divided into ionizing and non-ionizing segments. Recently, there was an increasing interest on non-ionizing extremely low frequency electromagnetic fields (ELF-EMF) from a health and safety point of view. Non-ionizing part of the electromagnetic spectrum is categorized into two groups; the use of electricity creates low frequency electromagnetic fields (ELF-EMF has a frequency of 100 Hz) and wireless communication equipment exposes radio frequency electromagnetic fields (RF-EMF has a frequency of 1 KHz 1000 GHz) (Ahmadi et al. ; Khaki ; Lee et al. ).
One of the major environmental and health concerns in recent decades is steadily increasing exposure to electromagnetic fields due to generation, distribution, and use of electricity including electric power systems and electronic appliances and industrial devices (Kumar ; Nourmohammadi et al. ; Tenorio et al. ). We are constantly floating in a sea of electromagnetic fields specially, those of 50–60 Hz ELF-EMF not only from power lines and wiring inside and outside the home but also from transformers and domestic appliances that use 50–60 Hz ELF-EMF (Salvatore et al. ).
In recent decades, concerns about declining fertility rates in the human population is growing. According to global statistics, an average of one in six couples has fertility problems (Menezo et al. ). So researchers approached to herbal treatments because of antioxidant effects (Nasirzadeh and Rasouli ; Tamjidipoor et al. ). To date, many in vivo and in vitro experiments have shown that ELF-EMF radiations, as well as chemotherapy and antibiotics, are able to affect morphology and function of sperm (Bernabò et al. ; Gholami et al. ; Kushki et al. ; Li et al. ; “Restoring faith in anthropology ;” Roychoudhury et al. ) and reproduction system (Al-Akhras et al. ; Forgács et al. ; Khaki et al. ; Tenorio et al. ; Tenorio et al. ), sex hormones (Al-Akhras ; Dundar et al. ), estrous cycle, and follicular growth (Cecconi et al. ) and also can cause testicular germ cells apoptosis (Hajiaghalou et al. ; Lee et al. ) and changes in embryo development in human and animals. However, adverse effects of EMF on function of reproduction system and fertility is still unknown and under debate (Bernabò et al. ; Cao et al. ).
There are possible mechanisms that ELF-EMF might influence human body (Bernabò et al. ). ELF-EMF may induce reactive oxygen species (ROS) production in various tissues (Nielsen et al. ). Exhaustion and loss of antioxidant systems is one of the causes of oxidative stress that occurs as a result of increasing production of ROS, or free radicals. Thus, biological antioxidant systems may be damaged by exposure to electromagnetic fields (Lee et al. ). According to conducted studies, oxidative stress can have adverse effects on female fertility. Therefore, dietary and pharmacological interventions can be used as an effective strategy to preserve female fertility (Luderer ; Ménézo et al. ).
Antioxidant compounds found in foods play vital role in human life (Devine et al. ; Srinivasan ). Allium cepa which has long been used in traditional medicine is one of the antioxidants of many types of onions that is commonly used in our everyday diet (Lee et al. ). Cinnamon is another medical plant that has been consumed for more than 4000 years in Asia. Cinnamon is rich in antioxidants called polyphenols and it increases uterine blood flow and accelerates tissue regeneration and restoration (Markham ; Shen et al. ).
In the current study, we were trying to investigate the adverse effect of 50 Hz wave, (3 mT) ELF-EMF on ovarian tissue and serum oxidative stress biomarkers, and protecting effect of Allium cepa and cinnamon in such conditions.
Material and methods
Animals
Approximately, 8–9-week-old female Wistar rats weighting 220 ± 10 g were quarantined and acclimatized for 1 week in plastic cages under laboratory conditions at 20 ± 2 °C with fluorescent light controlling for 12 h light and 12 h dark and humidity was maintained at 35 to 60%. The rats were randomly divided into four groups. One control group (ten rats) and three treatment groups (ten rats in each group). The control group was administered with 3 cc of normal saline (0.9%) daily and was treated for 6 weeks. The second group was exposed to ELF-EMF of 3 mT for 4 h/day, 7 days/week for 6 weeks. The third group received Allium cepa (3 cc onion juice) and cinnamon (75 mg/kg body weight) daily for 6 weeks. The fourth group was exposed to ELF-EMF of 3 mT for 4 h/day, 7 days/week and received Allium cepa and cinnamon (75 mg/kg body weight) daily for 6 weeks. Animals were kept under standard conditions of humidity, illumination, and temperature. On the 42nd day, blood samples were collected from the tail vein. Also, pentobarbital (40 mg/kg) was used for anesthesia through intraperitoneal injection, and then, the peritoneum was opened by transverse abdominal incision. Right ovaries were removed in all groups. The rats were sacrificed by cervical dislocation of the neck.
Preparation of cinnamon
Cinnamon was bought in Istanbul province, Turkey. A hundred grams of cinnamon were powdered. Then 75 mg/kg of it was dissolved in 2 cc distilled water for each day of administration for 42 consequences days (Khaki et al. ).
Preparation of Allium cepa
The bulbs of Allium cepa (onion) were collected from Ilkhchi, Tabriz, East-Azerbaijan, Iran. The skins of onions were removed and their fresh juice was prepared using a fruit juice extracting machine (Khaki et al. ).
EMF producing system
The ELF-EMF used in the present study was produced by a pair of Helmholtz coils, which work following Fleming’s right hand rule and are able to produce an alternate current of 50 Hz and create an ELF-EMF of 3 mT.
Transmission electron microscopy
For transmission electron microscopy (TEM), the ovarian samples obtained from right ovaries of rats were cut into pieces using a scalpel, about 1 mm 3 .
Glutaraldehyde 2.5% in a 0.1 M phosphate buffer (purchased from Thuringowa Central Qld 4817, Australia) was used for primary fixation, and post-fixation was in 1% aqueous osmium tetroxide (TAAB, Berkshrie, UK). Then the pieces were dehydrated through serial concentrations of ethanol and embedded in resin. Toluidine blue was used to stain 1-μ semi-thin sections of the samples. Ultra-thin sections from selected blokes were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and observed in a LEO 906 type TEM (Oberkochen, Germany) (Hajhosseini et al. ).
Measurement of malondialdehyde levels
Tissue malondialdehyde (MDA) levels were evaluated through thiobarbituric acid (TBA) method and expressed as nmol MDA formed/mL. Serum MDA concentrations were evaluated by spectrophotometer. A calibration curve was prepared by using 1,1′, s3, 3′-tetramethoxypropane as the standard (Hajhosseini et al. ).
Measurement of superoxide dismutase
SOD activity was measured by the method of Beyer and Fridovich (Beyer and Fridovich ).
Measurement of glutathione peroxidase
Glutathione peroxidase (GPX) activity was quantified by decrease in absorbance at 365 nm induced by 0.25 mM H 2 O 2 in the presence of reduced glutathione (10 mM), NADPH, (4 mM), and 1 U enzymatic activity of GR (Yoshikawa et al. ).
Measurement of catalase
Serum CAT activity was evaluated through measuring the decrease in absorbance at 240 nm due to the decomposition of H 2 O in a UV recording spectrophotometer. The reaction mixture (3 ml) contained 0.1 ml of serum in phosphate buffer (50 mM, pH 7.0) and 2.9 ml of 30 mM H 2 O 2 in phosphate buffer pH 7.0. An extinction coefficient for H 2 O 2 cm −1 was used for calculation. The specific activity of CAT was expressed as moles of H 2 reduced per minute per mg protein. At 240 nm of 40.0 M −1 cm −1 was used for calculation. The specific activity of CAT was expressed as moles of H 2 O 2 reduced per minute per milligram protein (Usoh et al. ).
Data analysis
One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test was used for comparison of data among the experimental groups after validation of normal distribution. The results were reported as mean ± SD (standard deviation). Alpha 0.05 was considered as significance level.
Result
TEM studies
In the control group and the third group that received Allium cepa and cinnamon, normal healthy granulosa cell, mitochondria in oocyte cytoplasmic projection, and microvilli in the zona pellucida were visible (Figs. 1 and 3 ). Fig. 1 Transmission electron micrographs of ovary in control group rats. Normal healthy granulosa cell (G), mitochondria (M) in cytoplasmic projection and microvilli (MI) in the zona pellucida are visible (× 4400)
In the second group in which rats were exposed to 3 mT ELF-EMF, the number of microvilli that penetrates the zona pellucid was decreased (Loos of microvilli) and the appearance of zona pellucid altered and was not visible clearly. Also, changes in cytoplasmic organelles in ovarian follicles and irregular oocyte with damaged heterochromatic nuclei were observed. In degenerative oocytes, mitochondria lost their cristae. Also, the number and size of cytoplasmic vacuoles increased. Irregular-contracted granulosa cells with dark nuclei appeared and zona pellucid lost its normal appearance (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Transmission electron micrographs of ovary in rats exposed to ELF-EMF. Lack or loose of microvilli penetrate the zona pellucida (Zp) from the oocyte cytoplasm (× 32000)
However, in exposed group in which received 3 cc Allium cepa and 75 mg/kg of cinnamon, the toxic effect of ELF-EMF was modified. Comparing to the second group, granulosa cells were damaged less and microvilli presence in zona pellucida was more than the second group. Comparing the forth group of rats to the second group, cytoplasmic vacuolization was reduced. The number of damaged granulosa cells was decreased. Also, the number of damaged cytoplasmic mitochondria reduced (Figs. 3 and 4 ). Fig. 3 Transmission electron micrographs of ovary in third group rats which received Allium cepa and cinnamon. Microvilli (Mv) penetrate the zona pellucida (ZP) from the oocyte cytoplasm (× 12,000) Fig. 4 Transmission electron micrographs of ovary in rats exposed to ELF-EMF and received Allium cepa and (× 3000)
Results of serum MDA
MDA level in the control group was 4.99 ± 1.11mmol/L and in experimental groups was 6.97 ± 7.11, 2.05 ± 2.11, and 6.00 ± 5.05 mmol/L respectively. ANOVA test showed significant differences between experimental groups in comparison to control group ( P < 0.05; Table 1 ). Table 1 Serum analysis Samples Group Control ELF-EMF a Cinamon b and Allium cepa c ELF-EMF Cinamon and Allim cepa Malondialdehyde, mmol/L 4.99 ± 1.11 6.97 ± 7.11 2.05 ± 2.11 6.00 ± 5.05 Super oxide dismutase, u/g Hb 1020 ± 5.05 985 ± 3.11 1300 ± 4.82 1000 ± 5.05 Glutathione peroxidase, u/mg Hb 123 ± 7.55 103 ± 5.66 145 ± 6.41 117 ± 4.66 Catalase, u/mg Hb 310 ± 5.55 289 ± 4.11 350 ± 4.11 297 ± 5.11 a ELF-EMF of 3 mT for 4 h/day, 7 days/week for 6 weeks b Allium cepa and cinnamon (75 mg/kg) daily for 6 weeks c ELF-EMF of 3 mT for 4 h/day, 7 days/week and received Allium cepa and cinnamon (75 mg/kg) daily for 6 weeks
Results of serum SOD
SOD level in the control group was 1020 ± 5.05 u/g Hb and in experimental groups was 985 ± 3.11, 1300 ± 4.82, and 1000 ± 5.05 u/g Hb respectively. ANOVA test showed significant differences between experimental groups in comparison to the control group ( P < 0.05; Table 1 ).
Results of serum GPX
GPX level in the control group was 123 ± 7.55 u/g Hb and in experimental groups was 103 ± 5.66, 145 ± 6.41, and 117 ± 4.66 u/g Hb respectively. ANOVA test showed significant differences between experimental groups in comparison to the control group ( P < 0.05; Table 1 ).
Results of serum CAT
CAT level in the control group was 310 ± 5.55 u/g Hb and in experimental groups was 289 ± 4.11, 350 ± 4.11, and 297 ± 5.11 u/g Hb respectively. ANOVA test showed significant differences between experimental groups in comparison to the control group ( P < 0.05; Table 1 ).
Discussion
Oxidative stress is a condition caused by an imbalance between ROS systematic production and the detoxification ability of biological systems (antioxidant protection) or to repair the resulted damage (Bodera et al. ). Oxidative stress has been implicated in pathogenesis of infertility in females, including abortion, recurrent pregnancy loss (Agarwal et al. ; Mitra and Boroujeni ), defective embryogenesis, endometriosis, ovarian cancer, polycystic ovary disease (Agarwal et al. ; Amini et al. ) and also can affect assisted fertility (Agarwal and Allamaneni ). ROS could affect physiological functions of reproductive system and in high levels could cause pathological changes in female reproductive tracts (Vijayprasad et al. ).
ELF-EMF may affect production of ROS in various tissues. Correct function of ovarian tissue plays a critical role in maintaining fertility and public health and is dependent to ovarian follicle development (Agarwal et al. ). There are solid evidence indicating the involvement of ROS in initiation of apoptosis in the tissues which are under the influence of chemical and physical factors (Ahmadvand et al. ); of course every apoptosis is not pathologic. Many studies have been conducted on reproductive toxicity of ELF-EMF. According to the conducted studies, ELF-EMF exposure could cause harmful effects on mammalian female fertility (Han et al. ).
Oxidative damage of lipids in the ovary under the influence of many toxic agents such as EMF may decrease quality of ovarian tissue. ELF-EMF could cause changes in uterus and ovary of exposed rats (Cao et al. ). Adverse effects of ELF-EMF on ovarian tissue in the rats received Allium cepa and cinnamon were modified. Many morphologic and biochemical parameters such as follicular growth, antrum formation, granulosa cell apoptosis, and oocyte meiotic maturation as follicular physiological development indicators have been examined (Kidder and Vanderhyden ). Mature egg production in mammals is the result of coordinated sequence of events in ovarian follicle. The healthy ovarian follicle consists of an oocyte surrounded by a layer of granulosa cells. Also, ultrastructural morphology of healthy oocyte showed mitochondria that appear round or oval and have small numbers of cristae (Devine et al. ). In addition, the ovarian stimulation used in assisted reproduction can cause morphological changes (Devine et al. ; Fayazi et al. ; Telli et al. ) through increasing oxidative stress (Alviggi et al. ).
ELF-EMF could cause morphologic changes in oocyte. Based on the previous studies, ELF-EMF has adverse effects on most of physiological parameters of exposed follicles that it could influence normal differentiation of oocyte. Also, shrunken nest and nuclei of oocyte were reported in the rats exposed to ELF-EMF of 3 mT. ELF-EMF could cause DNA synthesis of granulosa cells and may increase the density of its nucleus. Irregular-contracted granulosa cells with dark nuclei and increase in cytoplasmic vacuolization were observed in exposed rats. Nuclear congestion of granulosa cells, loss of microvilli, and abnormal mitochondrial cristae and alternation in the appearance of the zona pellucida were reported by ultrastructural studies. Also, more clinical studies are required to detect if increasing EMF exposure in daily life could cause ovary reserving capacity reduction leading to infertility (Khaki ; Khaki et al. ; Roshangar et al. ) (Fig. 5 ). ELF-EMF influence not only ROS production but also enzymatic activity. ELF-EMF might alternate free radical metabolisms and lead to antioxidant capacity reduction (Bułdak et al. ). Fig. 5 Diagrammatic scheme of ovarian tissue ultrastructure study in rats exposed to ELF electromagnetic field
MDA is one of the most common genotoxic lipid peroxidation products that are considered as indicators of oxidative stress (Nielsen et al. ). Exposure to 50 Hz ELF-EMF could cause decrease in blood serum antioxidants by increasing the level of MDA and ultimately lead to cell damage by ROS (Hajhosseini et al. ). Limited information obtained from studies on rats suggests that many antioxidant enzymes that protect cells against ROS may be able to play an effective role in follicular development and fertility (Ménézo et al. ). Every living organism has immune systems that protect them against different oxidants. Systems such as antioxidant vitamins (A, E, C), SOD, catalase CAT, glutathione (GSH), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-PX), and protect cells against lipid oxidation (Showell et al. ). Exhaustion and loss of antioxidant systems is one of the causes of oxidative stress that occurs as a result of increased production of ROS, or free radicals. The importance of SOD in eradicating of free radicals has been established, although effects of electromagnet field expose on SOD activity as a fundamental antioxidant has been widely investigated (Marracino et al. ).
In this study, biochemical analysis revealed that serum MDA and ROS significantly increased in exposed groups. However, SOD, GPX, and CAT significantly decreased in exposed groups. Recently, natural antioxidants exist in herbs and spices have attracted widespread interest. It seems that polyphenol compounds due to their antioxidant activity are able to enhance body immune system function against oxidative stress (Li et al. ).
Cinnamon is rich in the antioxidants called polyphenols and has long been prescribed to alleviate the risk of infertility and other complications caused by oxidative stress (Khaki et al. ). Based on conducted studies, Allium cepa has high antioxidant activity and contains antioxidants such as glutathione (Lee et al. ). Comparing the onion and Allium cepa group with the control group showed that there was a significantly increased in SOD, GPX, and CAT levels. Also, in the group of rats which were exposed to ELF-EMF that received cinnamon and Allium cepa , adverse effects of ELF-EMF on serum antioxidants and MDA levels was reduced. However, ultrastructural studies on ovarian tissue showed that in exposed rats which received Allium cepa and cinnamon, oxidative damages were reduced comparing the group that did not receive herbal antioxidants.
Conclusion
Our findings indicated that ELF-EMF exposure had a deleterious effect on ovarian tissue in rat, which may lead to infertility and subfertility. Also, it seems that using Allium cepa and cinnamon as a nutritional supplements has beneficial effects on protection of biological antioxidants and reproductive systems in this life area population exposed to electromagnetic fields. However, more studies are required to evaluate effects of antioxidants on ultrastructure of ovarian tissue and other female reproductive tracts and fertility.