Introduction
Brucellosis by Brucella ovis is a chronic infectious disease caused by Gram-negative bacteria (Niilo et al. ; Baigún et al. ). Cardiac complications have been reported in humans affected by zoonotic and rough strains of brucellosis, including systolic murmur, mild cardiomegaly, and increased levels of cardiac lesion biomarkers such as creatine phosphokinase, lactate dehydrogenase, and troponin (Gatselis et al. ; Kaya et al. ). There is no record of changes and cardiac lesions caused by B. ovis , however, events at the cellular level may occur in the heart during the acute phase of bacteremia, and thus interfere in cardiac energetic metabolism and cause oxidative stress.
Cardiac muscle is highly dependent on mitochondria to provide energy and blood to all organs of the body (Meyers et al. ); mitochondria produce 90% of cellular energy by generating adenosine triphosphate (ATP) (Neubauer ). ATP is a direct source of energy suitable for cardiac physiological functions, and the enzymes of the phosphotransfer network, particularly creatine kinase, have an essential role in the bioenergetic homeostasis between ATP synthesis and ATP consumption (Carvajal and Moreno-Sanchez ).
The phosphotransfer network is fundamental to cardiac bioenergetic homeostasis, with a significant role in heart energetics by catalysis of nucleotide exchange, facilitating intracellular energy communication in order to maintain a balance between cellular ATP consumption and production (Dzeja and Terzic ; Neumann et al. ). CK catalyzes the reversible transfer of a phosphoryl group from ATP to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and creatine to produce phosphocreatine (PCr), considered a central controller of energy homeostasis in order to prevent a reduction on ATP levels (Schlattner et al. ). PK is the key enzyme in the glycolytic pathway, catalyzing the irreversible transfer of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to ADP to form pyruvate and ATP, the principal provider of energy for cellular and tissue functioning (Wang et al. ). Finally, AK catalyzes the reversible transfer of the γ-phosphate group to adenosine monophosphate (AMP), releasing two molecules of ADP, playing a significant role for processing, and delivering metabolic signals in sites of ATP synthesis and utilization (Dzeja and Terzic ).
Despite the absence of records of cardiac changes in B. ovis infection, we believe that tissue cell lesions occur due to the inflammatory process and oxidative stress (Perin et al. ). Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate whether B. ovis infection alters the activities of cardiac enzymes of the phosphotransfer network and cause oxidative stress in experimental conditions.
Material and methods
Animals, experimental study, and sample collection
We used frozen heart fragments of 24 mice experimentally infected via intraperitoneal injection with 100 μL of B. ovis suspension containing 1.3 × 10 7 CFU/mL (Perin et al. ), as well as hearts of 24 healthy mice as a control group. The animals were euthanized with isoflurane in an anesthetic chamber at days 7, 15, 30, and 60 PI. At these time points, we collected hearts for histopathology and biochemical analyses. B. ovis DNA was detected in whole blood of 6/6 animals (days 7 and 15), 2/6 (day 30), and 5/6 (day 60) by PCR, the methodology described by Perin et al. ( ).
Tissue homogenization
The fragments of hearts were washed in SET buffer (0.32 M sucrose, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4) and homogenized (1: 10 w / v ) in SET buffer with a Potter-Elvehjem glass homogenizer. The homogenates were centrifuged at 800× g for 10 mins at 4 °C. Part of the supernatants was used to evaluate AK activity; the pellet was discarded and the supernatant was once again centrifuged at 10,000× g for 15 mins at 4 °C. The supernatants containing cytosol were collected for determination of PK and cytosolic CK activity. The pellet, containing mitochondria, was washed twice with SET buffer, then resuspended in 100 mM Trizma and 15 mM MgSO 4 buffer (pH 7.5) to evaluate mitochondrial CK activity. The supernatants were stored for no more than 1 week at − 80 °C.
CK, AK, and PK activities
CK activity was assayed in the reaction mixture containing the following final concentrations: 65 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, 7 mM PCr, 9 mM MgSO 4 , and 1 μg of protein in a final volume of 150 μL. After 10 mins of pre-incubation at 37 °C, the reaction was started by the addition of 0.3 μmol of ADP and was stopped after 10 mins by the addition of 1 μmol of ρ-hydroxymercuribenzoic acid. The creatine levels were estimated according to the colorimetric method (Hughes ). The color was developed by the addition of 0.1 mL of 2% α -naphthol and 0.1 mL of 0.05% diacetyl in a final volume of 1 mL and was read at 540 nm after 20 mins. Results were expressed as nmol of creatine formed per minute per milligram protein.
AK activity was measured with a coupled enzymatic assay using hexokinase (HK) and glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), according to authors (Dzeja et al. ). The reaction mixture contained 100 mM KCl, 20 mM HEPES, 20 mM glucose, 4 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM NADP + , 1 mM EDTA, 4.5 U/mL of HK, 2 U/mL of G6PD, and 20 μL of homogenate. The reaction was initiated by the addition of 2 mM ADP, and the reduction of NADP + was evaluated at 340 nm for 3 mins in a spectrophotometer. ADP, NADP + , G6PD, and HK were dissolved in Milli-Q-purified water. The concentration of the reagents and the assay time (3 mins) was chosen to assure linearity of the reaction. The results were expressed as picomoles of ATP formed per minute per milligram protein.
PK activity was assayed essentially as described (Leong et al. ). The incubation medium consisted of 0.1 M Tris/HCl buffer, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl 2 , 0.16 mM NADH, 75 mM KCl, 5.0 mM ADP, 7 U l -lactate dehydrogenase, 0.1% ( v / v ) Triton X-100, and 20 μL of the mitochondria-free supernatant in a final volume of 500 μL. After 10 mins of pre-incubation at 37 °C, the reaction was started with the addition of 1 mM PEP. All assays were performed in duplicate at 25 °C. Results were expressed as micromole of pyruvate formed per minute per milligram protein.
Oxidants and antioxidants
As an index of lipid peroxidation, TBARS formation during an acid-heating reaction was determined as previously described (Ohkawa et al. ). Malondialdehyde (MDA) solution was used as a reference standard. TBARS levels were determined by the absorbance at 532 nm and were expressed as MDA equivalent (nmol MDA/mg protein).
For measurement of NPSH levels, the hearts were homogenized (1:10 w / v ) in a glass Potter tube with Tris-HCl buffer (10 mM, pH 7.4), and centrifuged at 2000x g for 10 mins. Cardiac NPSH levels were determined colorimetrically at 412 nm as previously described (Ellman ). A cysteine solution was used as the reference standard. NPSH were expressed as micromole SH per gram tissue.
The SOD activity was spectrophotometrically evaluated as described (Misra and Fridovich ), and the enzymatic activity was expressed as SOD units per milligram of protein.
Histopathology
One cardiac sample of each group was collected on days 7, 15, 30, and 60 PI and was preserved in 10% formaldehyde solution. The samples were placed in paraffin blocks followed by staining with hematoxylin-eosin (HE), to be analyzed by light microscopy. The lesions were classified as absence, mild, moderate, and severe.
Statistical analysis
The data were subjected to normality testing using the Shapiro-Wilk test and did not present normal distribution. Therefore, the data were transformed to logarithmic form and the comparisons were performed using the Student’s t test considering P < 0.05. Results were expressed as average ± standard deviation.
Results
Cardiac cytosolic CK activity was higher in infected animals than in the control group on days 30 and 60 PI, while cardiac mitochondrial CK activity was lower at the same moments of infection. Moreover, cardiac PK activity was lower in infected animals than in the control group on day 60 PI, while no significant difference was observed between groups regarding cardiac AK activity (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Cardiac cytosolic ( a ) and mitochondrial ( b ) creatine kinase (CK), pyruvate kinase (PK), and adenylate kinase (AK) activities of mice experimentally infected with Brucella ovis on days 7, 15, 30, and 60 post-infection (PI). * P < 0.01; ** P < 0.05
No microscopic or macroscopic lesions were observed in either group during the entire experimental period (data not shown). Cardiac TBARS levels were higher in infected animals than in the control group on days 30 and 60 PI, while NPSH levels were lower on days 30 and 60 PI. Finally, cardiac SOD activity was higher in infected animals than in the control group on day 60 PI (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Cardiac thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) and non-protein thiol (NPSH) levels, and superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity of mice experimentally infected with Brucella ovis on days 7, 15, 30, and 60 post-infection (PI). * P < 0.01
Discussion
The present study is novel since it evaluated several alterations of the cardiac phosphotransfer network of mice experimentally infected with B. ovis. Our data clearly demonstrated impairment in energetic homeostasis between sites of ATP utilization and ATP consumption, possibly leading to a decrease in cardiac ATP availability. However, the mice did not present cardiac lesions, which confirms our hypothesis, that is, the infection causes interference in the energy metabolism, but these biochemical alterations are of low intensity and do not induce the lesion. Based on these data, we considered it important to investigate these biochemical variables in Brucella zoonoticas ( Brucella strains that cause human brucellosis), where descriptions of cardiovascular alterations have already been described (Gatselis et al. ; Kaya et al. ), even though they are bacteria of different morphology and pathogenicity.
At 30 and 60 days, B. ovis infection elicited severe inhibition of cardiac mitochondrial CK activity, indicating an impairment in ATP production in tissue with intermittently high and fluctuating energy requirements and in an organelle linked directly linked to energy production. In addition, the inhibition of mitochondrial CK activity indicated an inability of PCr to form ATP in order to restore mitochondrial energetic homeostasis (Schlattner et al. ). It is important to emphasize that the existence of micro-compartments of CK isoenzymes in sites of energy production (mitochondria) and energy consumption (cytosol) is considered key to maintenance of cellular energetic homeostasis (Alekssev et al. ), i.e., the existence of a reciprocal compensatory mechanism between compartments occurs in order to safeguard cellular energy economy. In this sense, we observed that cardiac cytosolic CK activity was stimulated by B. ovis infection, possibly a compensatory mechanism acting as a temporal and spatial energy buffer to maintain cellular energy homeostasis and to restore ATP levels. Therefore, B. ovis infection inhibited mitochondrial CK activity, leading to an imbalance of energy homeostasis that was compensated for by stimulation of cytosolic CK activity. A significant reduction of cardiac PK activity was observed in mice experimentally infected by B. ovis after 60 days of infection, provoking a decrease in the availability of cardiac ATP content and impairment of communication between sites of ATP generation and ATP utilization. In summary, the inhibition of cardiac PK activity led to impairment of energy metabolism during B. ovis infection.
A study demonstrated that the activity of enzymes belonging to the phosphotransfer network was highly susceptible to free radicals and oxidative damage (Glaser et al. ). In this sense, we evaluated some parameters associated with oxidative stress in order to identify a possible pathway involved in the impairment of cardiac energetic metabolism. We observed an increase in cardiac lipid peroxidation in infected animals, as reported (Serefhanoglu et al. ) in plasma of humans affected by brucellosis and in mice experimentally infected by B. abortus (Kim et al. ). The augmentation of lipid peroxidation induced damage to cell membranes and increased in extracellular fluidity (Barreiros et al. ). The damage to lipids may be related to the impairment of CK and PK activities observed in the present study. Studies demonstrated that oxidative damage to proteins was directly related to the inhibition of CK activity during exposure to methylmercury (Glaser et al. ), in agreement with the observations of the present study. In addition, it is important to emphasize that a thiol group is present in the catalytic site of CK and exerts a putative role in the protection against inactivation of free radicals, developing a key role for suitable enzymatic CK activity (Koufen and Stark ). In this sense, the lower levels of the thiol group in cardiac tissue on days 30 and 60 of infection could contribute directly to the inhibition of cardiac mitochondrial CK activity observed at the same moment of infection. A study demonstrated that oxidative stress caused inhibition of PK activity (Aisaki et al. ). This inhibition implicates a reduction in pyruvate content, impairing cell and tissue homeostasis (Vanderperre et al. ). Finally, cardiac SOD activity was stimulated in infected animals on day 60 PI, an effect that can be considered a defense mechanism against excessive production of free radicals (Birben et al. ), in agreement with observations in serum of dairy cows seropositive for B. abortus (Perin et al. ). According to these authors, stimulation of SOD activity contributed to the abolition of ROS production in cow naturally infected with B. abortus , possibly contributing to the prevention or reduction of lesions provoked by disease.
Based on these preliminary results, the data demonstrated that B. ovis severely affected CK activity in mice, an essential enzyme for maintaining cellular energy homeostasis in the heart. In addition, the inhibition of cardiac CK and PK activities appears to be mediated by the oxidation of lipids and thiol groups.