Introduction
Aspirin and the other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are broadly used because of their analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-pyretic effects, but their use may be associated with undesirable side effects such as erosions and ulcers (Flower et al. ; Dehpour et al. ; Wiklund ). On the other hand, pharmaceutical management of peptic ulcer with available drugs can lead to adverse effects, drug interactions, and relapses (Srinivas et al. ). Hence, natural compounds are considered alternatives for various disease treatments including peptic ulcer.
Mumie (also known as shilajit, mumijo, mineral pinch, and black asphaltum) is a blackish to brown exudate found in cracks and fractures of the mountains, particularly the Himalayan Mountains between India and Nepal, Pakistan, Tibet, Afghanistan, Russia, and the north of Chile (Ghosal et al. ; Korago ). There are different hypotheses about the origins of mumie, most of which claim that it is formed by long-term humification of the bryophyte plants (Ghosal et al. ; Bowman et al. ; Schepetkin et al. ). Mumies from different regions differ in percentage ratio of components, but have same general physical characteristics and chemical composition. Mumie generally contains water, minerals, proteins, lipids, steroids, nitrogen-free compounds, amino acids, carbohydrates, alkaloids, and other compounds (Garedew et al. ). Mumie has been used in folk medicine for thousands of years against jaundice, digestive disorders, nervous diseases, asthma, anemia, eczema, wounds, bone fractures, arthritis, and many other diseases (Schepetkin et al. ; Goel et al. ). In recent years, extensive studies have identified numerous mumie properties, including anti-inflammatory, antioxidative, anti-ulcerogenic, memory enhancement, anxiolytic, immunomodulatory, and anti-diabetic activity (Agarwal et al. ).
This research was carried out to assess the protective effects of the mumie aqueous extract on aspirin-induced gastric mucosal damage in rats by measuring oxidative stress indicators and macroscopic and histopathological analysis.
Material and methods
Animal ethics
The protocols were permitted by the research animal Ethic committee of Shiraz University.
Plant material and extraction
Mumie was purchased from a local herbal pharmacy (Dr. Yousefi’s Herbal Drug stores, Kerman) and authenticated by a botanist from the biology department of the Bahonar University of Kerman. The aqueous extract of mumie was provided by cutting plant materials into small pieces. Then, 70 g of the sample was macerated with 1000 ml of distilled water on a shaker for 10 h at room temperature. Afterward, the solutions were filtered through a Whatman paper (No. 41) and freeze dried. Then, the prepared extract was stored at − 20 °C until experimental using.
Experimental protocol
Thirty-eight male Wistar rats weighing 180–230 g were kept under standard condition (temperature of 21–24 °C and 12-h light/dark cycle) in the animal house and housed 1 week before the experiment to acclimatize. They were allowed free access to water and standard commercial rat pellets. Twenty-four hours prior to the experiment, rats were kept off feed with free access to water. Then, they were randomly allocated as follows: Group I (normal control, n = 8): received only 1 ml of normal saline Group II (positive control, n = 10): received 1 ml normal saline 1 h before lesion induction Group III (standard control, n = 10): received omeprazole (20 mg/kg, p.o.; KRKA Pharmaceutical Co., Slovenia) 1 h before lesion induction (Stephen et al. ) Group IV (treatment, n = 10): received mumie (600 mg/kg, p.o.) 1 h before lesion induction (El-Sayed et al. )
Gastric lesions were induced by a single dose of aspirin (500 mg/kg, p.o.; Pars Darou Co., Iran) and 4 h after lesion induction (Sharma et al. ), rats were sacrificed under anesthesia with ketamine and xylazine; stomachs were immediately removed, cut along the greater curvature, and was gently rinsed with cold normal saline solution (0.9%).
Macroscopic lesions
Macroscopic lesions were examined and analyzed using computer software (Digimizer Version 4.1, MedCalc Software, Belgium). Based on the method of Szabo et al. ( ), the surface area of the glandular stomach, the sum of the area of the lesions, the percent of lesion area, and the total number of lesions per glandular stomach were recorded. Then, the lesions were classified as: 0 (normal mucosa); 1 (1–4 small petechiae); 2 (5 or more petechiae or hemorrhagic streaks up to 4 mm); and 3 (erosions longer than 5 mm or confluent hemorrhages).
Histopathological evaluation
A piece of gastric tissue was collected, fixed in neutral buffered formalin (10%), embedded in paraffin, prepared at 5 μm sections, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for light microscopic examination.
Gastric mucosal enzymatic activity assay
After the macroscopic analyses, the glandular part of the stomach was scraped and homogenized using 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution pH = 7.4 (5 cc for each g of tissue). After centrifugation at 4000–6000 rpm (20 min at 4 °C), catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPX), glutathione reductase (GR), superoxide dismutase (SOD) enzyme activity, and malondialdehyde (MDA) levels were determined in the supernatant.
Antioxidant enzyme measurement
The commercial kits (ZellBio Company, Germany) were used to assess SOD, GPX, GR, and catalase activities. The antioxidant enzyme activity was stated as international unit per mg tissue protein.
Malondialdehyde measurement
MDA was measured by ZellBio GmbH kit (Germany) based on the reaction with thiobarbituric acid in acidic condition and high temperature, and the color complex was calorimetrically measured at 535 nm. The values were finally expressed as mmol/mg tissue protein.
Statistical analysis
The findings were shown as mean ± standard error (SE). Analysis of data was done by one-way ANOVA, post hoc Tukey’s test, and SPSS version 22 software. p < 0.05 was statistically considered significant.
Results
Macroscopic evaluation
As shown in Fig. 1 and Table 1 , the positive control group represented mucosal lesions with lesion area 2.10 ± 0.56 mm 2 . In mumie and omeprazole groups, both gastric lesion area and number significantly decreased compared to the positive control group ( p < 0.05). The preventive effect of the mumie aqueous extract was comparable to that of omeprazole. There were no statistically significant differences in the lesion score between the positive control, omeprazole, and mumie groups. Fig. 1 Macroscopic appearance of stomach in various groups. a Normal control group, scale bar = 5.3 mm. b Positive control group, scale bar = 5.5 mm. c Rats treated with omeprazole, scale bar = 5.5 mm. d Rats treated with the mumie aqueous extract, scale bar = 5.3 mm Table 1 Comparison of gastric lesion indexes among different groups (mean ± SEM) Groups N Total surface area (mm 2 ) Total lesion area Lesions (mm 2 ) (%) Score (0–3) Number Normal control 8 342.25 ± 14.24 0.00 ± 0.00 b 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 b 0.00 ± 0.00 b Positive control 10 346.86 ± 17.56 2.10 ± 0.56 a 0.61 2.00 ± 0.00 a 31.00 ± 4.40 a Omeprazole 10 333.78 ± 18.86 0.16 ± 0.06 b 0.47 1.70 ± 0.15 a 8.10 ± 1.40 b Mumie 10 345.58 ± 16.87 0.28 ± 0.11 b 0.08 1.60 ± 0.16 a 8.00 ± 1.60 b N , number of rats in each group Different small letters show the significance ( p < 0.05)
Histopathological evaluation
No lesion was seen in the gastric sections of the normal control group (Fig. 2a ), while the rats of the positive control group revealed moderate mucosal damage with moderate edema and mild leukocyte infiltration in the submucosal layer (Fig. 2b ). Fig. 2 Histopathological evaluation of tissue sections. a Normal control group: no lesion was observed. b Positive control group: moderate mucosal damage (arrows), moderate submucosal edema (*), and mild leukocyte infiltration. c and d Mumie and omeprazole groups: mild mucosal damage (arrows), mild submucosal edema (*), and little leukocyte infiltration. H&E, scale bar = 100 μm
In the mumie and omeprazole groups, mild mucosal damage with mild submucosal edema and little leukocyte infiltration was observed (Fig. 2c, d ).
Oxidative stress parameters evaluation
The mean ± SEM of parameters, including MDA concentrations, CAT, GPX, GR, and SOD activity are shown in Table 2 . Table 2 Comparison of parameter values in the gastric tissue homogenate among different groups (mean ± SEM) Groups N MDA (mmol/mg tissue protein) CAT (IU/mg tissue protein) GPX (IU/mg tissue protein) GR (IU/mg tissue protein) SOD (IU/mg tissue protein) Normal control 8 0.57 ± 0.007 a 0.69 ± 0.012 a 96.07 ± 10.92 ab 14.62 ± 1.63 ab 15.73 ± 1.53 a Positive control 10 0.63 ± 0.011 b 0.50 ± 0.009 b 57.60 ± 5.26 b 8.44 ± 0.44 a 11.75 ± 0.60 a Omeprazole 10 0.61 ± .008 b 0.59 ± 0.009 c 201.48 ± 33.18 c 18.48 ± 2.47 b 25.92 ± 2.52 b Mumie 10 0.62 ± .008 b 0.55 ± 0.011 c 183.67 ± 28.08 ac 19.30 ± 2.50 b 35.16 ± 3.59 c N , number of rats in each group; MDA , malondialdehyde; CAT , catalase; GPX , glutathione peroxidase; GR , glutathione reductase; SOD , superoxide dismutase Different small letters show the significance ( p < 0.05)
The positive control group showed a significant increase in gastric MDA concentration compared with the normal control group. Although MDA concentration decreased in the mumie and omeprazole groups, no significant difference was represented compared with the positive control group (Fig. 3a ). The oxidative enzyme activity levels of mumie and omeprazole groups significantly increased in comparison with the positive control group. Furthermore, tissue SOD activity showed a significant increase in the mumie group compared with the omeprazole group (Fig. 3b–e ). Fig. 3 a – e MDA levels, CAT, GPX, GR and SOD activity in various groups, respectively (mean ± SEM). Significant differences are indicated by dissimilar letters ( p < 0.05)
Discussion
An imbalance between aggressive factors (oxy-radical generation, gastric acid, pepsin) and mucosal defenses (gastric mucus, bicarbonate, prostaglandins) leads to an interruption in the mucosal integrity and causes gastric mucosal damage (Tarnawski et al. ; Wallace and Granger ). Therefore, antioxidant compounds may play an influential role in the prevention of gastric lesions by scavenging free radicals. NSAIDs such as indomethacin and aspirin result in gastric mucosal damage as they inhibit prostaglandin synthesis and increase release of ROS and lipid peroxidation (Pohle et al. ). Therefore, this study was carried out to assess the protective effect of the Mumie aqueous extract on aspirin-induced gastric mucosal damage in rats.
The current study revealed that both the lesion area and numbers were significantly reduced by the mumie administration compared with the positive control group, which was comparable with omeprazole as a standard drug. The primary component of mumie is fulvic acid, a powerful antioxidant. Furthermore, the gastric mucosal antioxidant effects of mumie can be explained by the presence of dibenzo-a-pyrones and tannic acid as major free-radical scavenging and lipid peroxidation inhibitor components of the mumie aqueous extract (Ghosal et al. ; Kaul and Khanduja ; Schepetkin et al. ). In addition, previous studies have demonstrated that the presence of phenolic compositions such as fulvic acid, benzoic acid 4′-methoxy-6-carbomethoxy biphenyl (MCB), and tirucallane-type triterpenoids in mumie can decrease secretion of acid pepsin, mucosal cells shedding, and gastric ulcer index, improve cellular generation and repairing, and increase secretion of mucin and carbohydrate/protein ratio, which all together play a powerful role as an anti-inflammatory and antioxidant (Goel et al. ; Rajic et al. ; Czinner et al. ; Talbert ).
Naturally produced antioxidant enzymes, including GPX, GR, CAT, and SOD, are the main inner defenses against lipid peroxidation in tissues and have been proposed as the major gastric oxidative stress biomarkers (Radovanović et al. ). It is believed that the effectiveness of the radical scavenging activity of SOD is improved when followed by CAT and GPX activities (Slater ). Previously, it has been reported that the administration of NSAIDs such as aspirin decreases the tissue levels of CAT, SOD, and GPX (Das and Roy ; Jainu and Devi ). In the present research, reduced gastric SOD, GPX, GR and catalase activities by aspirin administration is in agreement with the findings of the previous studies. Furthermore, the levels of SOD, GR, and GPX increased in treated rats with mumie.
On the other hand, malondialdehyde (MDA) is one of the most extensively used biomarker of lipid peroxidation (LPO). The production of this aldehyde is used as an indicator for measuring the level of oxidative stress and damage (Moore and Roberts ). In the present experiment, a considerable increase in gastric MDA concentration of the positive control group was seen compared to the normal control group. Although MDA concentrations decreased in treated rats with omeprazole and mumie in comparison with the positive control group, the difference was not significant.
Although the levels of oxidative enzyme activity significantly increased in rats of the mumie and omeprazole groups in comparison with the positive control group, no significant reduction was seen in their MDA concentration. The mentioned enzymes, as the first line of defense antioxidant enzymes, rapidly increase in oxidative stress while changes in MDA, as a lipid peroxidation product, are time-consuming processes. Thus, it was likely to observe a significant reduction in MDA concentration with a more prolonged period (Ayala et al. ).
As stated by Frawley and Lad ( ), anti-stress and anti-anxiety effects of mumie are another source of gastric ulcer healing. Eventually, the anti-ulcer effects of mumie may be due to the biochemical effects such as antimicrobial, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-anxiety, anti-stress, regenerative, and healing effects.
In conclusion, the present findings indicated the protective effects of mumie against aspirin-induced gastric lesions with comparable results to that of omeprazole. This protective effect was related to the increased antioxidant enzyme activity.