Introduction
Many factors affect the reproductive health of animals and may lead to infertility, such as venereal and parasitic diseases, physiological and genetic defects, and toxic agents. Toxic agents including mycotoxins appear to be the least understood among these factors (Gimeno ). From the economic and toxicological point of view, mycotoxin contaminations represent a problem in animal production that affects health and productivity in ruminants.
The most important contaminants of animal feed are Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus. These mycotoxins have been detected in animal blood and feed, which led to pathological changes in many organs (Hassan et al. ).
Fungi such as Penicillium , Fusarium , and Aspergillus species have a proclivity to grow during the storage of cereals in silage in tropical and sub-tropical regions due to high ambient temperature and humidity (Patterson and Roberts ). Molds of Aspergillus species such as Aspergillus flavus , Aspergillus parasiticus , and Aspergillus nomius pollute plants and plant products and produce different types of aflatoxins such as B1, B2, G1, and G2 which are classified as mycotoxins. Hydroxylated metabolites of aflatoxin B1 and B2 are aflatoxins M1 and M2 and may be present in milk or milk products produced from cattle that consumed contaminated feed (Kumar et al. ). Seventeen types of aflatoxins have been detected, and the most frequent one in contaminated samples is aflatoxin B1 (AFB1); aflatoxins B2, G1, and G2 are generally not formed in the absence of AFB1 (Gimeno ).
Direct consumption of aflatoxin-contaminated feed resulted in decreased body weight, increased incidence of disease associated with immune suppression, and decreased fertility (El-Saad and Mahmoud ). AFB1 affects the reproductive capacity of lab animals adversely. Female rats exposed to aflatoxin exhibited decreases in the size of ovaries and uterus and increases in rates of fetal resorption, implantation loss, and intra-uterine death. It influences sexual maturation, follicular growth and maturation, hormonal levels, pregnancy, and growth of fetus (Kourousekos and Lymberopoulos ).
Growth of aflatoxin in feed and increases rate development of this toxin from the critical range (20 ppb in diet and 0.5 μg/kg in milk) lead to a reduction in fertility and reproductive ability in animals (Kabar et al. ).
Generally and to our knowledge, the impact of aflatoxin in feed on the ovarian function of buffaloes has not been studied sufficiently, but the influence of toxic substances on reproductive health has been studied in cattle (Kolesarova et al. ). The aim of the study was to clarify the effects aflatoxicosis on some reproductive hormones and physicochemical composition of milk in buffaloes.
Material and methods
Animals and management
The experiment was conducted during the period from February 2018 to April 2018 proceeding in accordance with the Ethics Committee on Animal Experimentation of Aswan University faculty of veterinary medicine. Forty pluriparous, cyclic, lactating, and apparently clinically healthy buffaloes with a body weight of 450 ± 30 kg were included. The animals belong to a private farm in Aswan governorate (latitude/longitude, 24° 5′ N, 32° 53′ E). At the beginning of the experiment, all buffaloes were palpated rectally and exhibited clinically healthy reproductive tracts. During the experiment, the buffaloes were between the 70th and 150th day post-partum. All animals were fed total mixed rations (TMR), which met the lactation requirements of dairy cattle according to NRC (NRC ), and water was offered ad lib. Coincidentally and through analysis of a newly purchased ration, we found out that part of the feed was contaminated with fungi secreting aflatoxin. Consequently, the animals were divided into two groups: The first one (aflatoxin high group (AHG), 20 buffaloes) was fed TMR containing aflatoxin above 65.2 ppb. The second group (aflatoxin low group (ACG), 20 buffaloes) was fed TMR that had aflatoxin below 5 ppb. All animals were fed that rations for 3 months.
Feed, blood, and milk samples were collected to determine the presence of aflatoxin and its concentration in ration and milk as well as determine the serum hormonal level and physiochemical properties of the milk. Blood samples were collected via jugular vein puncture during the estrous cycle twice weekly for 3 months.
Determination of aflatoxin in feed and milk
Determination of aflatoxin levels in feed was done by using HPLC system (Charoenpornsook and Kavisarasai ). Compositions of milk samples were measured by Lactoscan SL (Chappalwar et al. ); this apparatus can be used also for somatic cell count (manufactured by Milkotronic Ltd., Bulgaria).
Hormones analysis
Blood samples were collected via jugular vein puncture from each cow at day 0 (day of estrus according to records of the farm), then twice weekly for 2 weeks and centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 10 min. Serum samples were stored at − 20 °C until hormonal analysis. Determination of FSH was done by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (Rose ). Determination of LH was done by ELISA kits (Rebar et al. ) and estradiol determination of total E2 by radioimmunoassay (RIA) kits (Xing et al. ). Progesterone was measured by radioimmunoassay technique (Abraham ). Prolactin was determined by radioimmunoassay technique (Sinha ). Cortisol was evaluated using radioimmunoassay technique (Pickering and Pottinger ).
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was done by using SPSS Software (SPSS ). Differences in means were analyzed using Student’s t test for comparison between two groups. The data were presented as means and standard errors of means. The p value was considered significant if it was less than 0.05.
Results
The clinical signs recorded in buffaloes in AHG include diarrhea, to some extent dehydration, hair loss, decrease in feed intake, marked decrease in body weights, and reduced milk yield. The results showed that the aflatoxins, which were detected in dietary ration and milk of the buffaloes, are AFB1 and AFM1 respectively. The mean concentration of AFM1 found in raw buffalo milk was (0.04 ± 0.002 ppb) in ACG while the concentration increased in AHG (0.42 ± 0.043 ppb).
There were no significant changes in the composition of the milk between the two groups (Table 1 ). Table 1 Physicochemical composition of raw buffalo milk samples with different AFM1 concentrations in aflatoxin low group (ACG) and aflatoxin high group (AHG) Sample group Fat% SNF% Lactose% Salts% Protein% Total solids% pH Density Conductivity ACG 7.1 ± 0.02 10.28 ± 0.04 5.4 ± 0.03 0.76 ± 0.01 4.1 ± 0.02 17.39 ± 0.04 6.5 ± 0.05 31.51 ± 0.9 4.02 ± 0.04 AHG 7.05 ± 0.03 10.27 ± 0.06 5.33 ± 0.02 0.77 ± 0.03 4.15 ± 0.03 17.34 ± 0.05 6.55 ± 0.04 31.47 ± 0.07 4.06 ± 0.03 Data were present as means ± SD
The AHG has a significant ( P < 0.001) lower level of FSH and LH than in ACG, where they are 0.19 ± 0.01 ng/mL vs. 0.14 ± 0.002 ng/mL and 2.48 ± 0.05 ng/mL vs.2.22 ± 0.03 ng/mL respectively (Table 2 ). The progesterone concentration was lower in AHG than in the ACG (0.14 ± 0.0.03 ng/mL vs. 0.60 ± 0.009 ng/mL). Table 2 Comparisons between aflatoxin high group (AHG) and aflatoxin low one (ACG) in hormone concentrations Hormone AHG ( n = 20) ACG ( n = 20) FSH (ng/mL) 0.19 ± 0.07* 2.48 ± 0.51 LH (ng/mL) 0.14 ± 0.02* 2.22 ± 0.28 Progesterone (ng/mL) 0.14 ± 0.02* 0.60 ± 0.19 Estradiol 17ß (pg/mL) 22.34 ± 4. 7* 10.79 ± 4.04 Cortisol (μg/dL) 1.90 ± 0.15* 0.55 ± 0.24 Prolactin (ng/mL) 0.16 ± 0.02 0.15 ± 0.02 Data were present as means ± SD *Significant at p < 0.05
Data shown in Table 2 indicate that AFB1 administration led to a significant ( P < 0.001) increase in estradiol 17ß and cortisol in AHG than that recorded in ACG, 22.34 ± 0.03 ng/mL vs. 10.79 ± 0.08 ng/mL and 1.90 ± 0.02 μg/dL vs. 0.55 ± 0.006 μg/dL respectively.
Measurement of prolactin showed that there is a slight elevation in AHG reached to 0.16 ± 0.0.002 ng/mL when compared with ACG (0.15 ± 0.004 ng/mL) but this elevation was not significant.
Discussion
The recorded clinical signs in the current study coincided with that reported before including decreased feed intake, feed rejection, poor feed conversion, decreased body weight, and increased disease referred to immune suppression caused by aflatoxicosis in rats (El-Saad and Mahmoud ). These occur as the absorption of toxin from the gastrointestinal tract and cause toxicity. Once in the liver, the microsomal enzymes metabolize aflatoxin B1 to different metabolites through hydroxylation, hydration, demethylation, and epoxidation. Thus, hydroxylation of AFB1 at C4 or C22 produces AFM1 and AFQ1, respectively. Hydration of the C2–C3 double bond causes the production of AFB2a, which is quickly produced in certain avian species (Padhy et al. ). AFP1 is produced from demethylation, while the AFB1-epoxide is formed by epoxidation at the two, three double bond. Aflatoxicol is the only metabolite of AFB1 formed by a soluble cytoplasmic reductase enzyme system. AFM1 is one of the most important mycotoxins that contaminate milk and causes severe public health hazards among infants, children, and other heavy consumers of milk (Pirestani and Toghyani ).
In the present study, AFM1 was detected in 100% (40/40) of all examined buffalo milk samples; overall, 67.5% (27/40) of the samples have AFM1 concentrations exceeding the permissible limits set by the European Commission (European Commission ) and Egyptian Organization for Standardization and Quality Control (ES, 2010 No.7136) (0.05 ppb) with mean concentrations of 0.42 ± 0.043 ppb. While with the remaining samples, 32.5% (13/40) have mean concentrations of 0.043 ± 0.002 AFM1 that did not exceed the EU and ES permissible limits. Similar results were reported by Shaker and Elsharkawy (Shaker and Elsharkawy ); they recorded AFM1 in 100% of examined raw buffalo milk samples in Upper Egypt. The lower values were reported by Mahmoud et al. (Mahmoud et al. ), who detect AFM1 in 54.4% of examined raw buffalo milk samples collected from north west region of Iran, and only 16.3% of positive samples were above EU permissible limits. The presence of AFM1 in milk is a result of exposure of dairy buffalo to AFB1 through feedstuffs and worldwide about 25% of crops are contaminated annually with mycotoxins (Mahmoud ). The difference of AFM1 concentration between milk samples may attribute to an uneven distribution of AFB1 in the ration due to its storage pattern. Many researchers said that there was a linear relationship among the quantity of AFM1 in milk and AFB1 in feed ingested by the animals (NRC ; Gonçalves et al. ) .
The result in the current study showed that there is no relation between AFM1 concentrations and fat%, SNF%, Slats%, protein%, total solids%, PH, density, and conductivity of examined milk samples, similar to that recorded before (Pickering and Pottinger ). Decreasing the daily consumption of feed contaminated by aflatoxin B1 for dairy cattle and implementing a food control system, such as the HACCP system and frequent analytical surveillance by food control agencies, are highly approved to control the occurrence of mycotoxin contamination (Elsayed and Abd El-Fatah ). Similarly, reported before that, the carryover of these mycotoxins into milk is negligible; their occurrence in feed is not considered to be of significant concern with respect to the safety of dairy products for consumers, with potential implications for animal health which may in turn affect their fertility (Driehuis et al. ).
The current results indicate that toxicity with AFB1 in buffaloes led to highly significant ( P < 0.001) decrease in FSH and LH hormones and progesterone in comparison with the control group. The results agreed with the results recorded before (Handan and Güleray ); they found that the levels of LH and progesterone hormones are significantly decreased ( P < 0.05). Structural similarity between AFB1 and steroid hormones leads to direct antagonistic interaction of AFBI with steroid hormone receptors that interfering with gonadal hormone secretion of estrogen and progesterone (Cheeke and Shull ). Data support our results, as there were significant decreases in levels of mid-luteal progesterone. This may be explicated by interference with the progesterone production from the unruptured follicles of the ovary. In addition, the toxic effects of aflatoxins on the liver may inhibit enzyme synthesis, fatty acid metabolism, and production of sex hormones precursor molecules (Ibeh et al. ).
Most authors theorize that aflatoxin may influence the reproductive system by its toxic effect on the liver causing desquamation of the membranes of hepatocytes, the mitochondria, the cytosol, and the endoplasmic reticulum. This cellular destruction could involve inhibition of enzyme synthesis and/or enzyme activity or inhibition of lipid metabolism or fatty acid synthesis, which may derail the capacity of the hepatocytes to handle the conversion of intermediate biomolecules, such as precursor molecules for gonadal as well as gonadotropic hormones, e.g., FSH, luteinizing hormone (LH), testosterone, and progesterone. Depression or disturbance of normal hormonal levels could lead to a great degree of deterioration in sexual organs (Handan and Güleray ).
Aflatoxin may also affect the reproductive system by causing lysis of germ cells, and we will do further studies to clarify such points. In addition, this decrease may be due to impaired metabolism. It was believed that mycotoxins which cause a variety of adverse health effects decrease progesterone synthesis by inhibition of the follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) secretion. The main influence of these toxins is the suppression of protein synthesis throughout conjugation with DNA. RNA may be as a result of interference with nitrogen metabolism causes immunosuppression and decrease antibody synthesis (Hassan et al. ). Ismail (Ismail ) had recorded similar results of significant ( P < 0.001) decrease in serum follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and serum luteinizing hormone (LH) in female rats orally administrated with aflatoxin when compared with the control group. The aflatoxin has a hypophysotoxic effect, especially on adenohypophysis (Abraham ). Thus, decreases in levels of the LH could be related to the effect of the toxin on hypophysis.
Some organophosphates repress activities of G protein and might cause inactivation of LH receptors (Uriah et al. ); hence, it may decrease the level of progesterone. The decrease in FSH may be due to the increase in levels of estradiol and inhibin B that causes a decrease in the level of the FSH in the follicular phase (Omar ).
The current result indicates that AFB1 administration induced very highly significant ( P < 0.001) increase in estradiol in AHG compared with ACG. The results coincided with that recorded before in cattle (Kumar et al. ), who showed a significant increase ( P < 0.05) in estrogen levels. The elevation in the level of estrogen may be attributed to AFB1 negatively affecting hepatic alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) synthesis and AFP being known to make blockade of genital function result in reduced levels of hormonal promoters (Castelli et al. ).
The recorded high level of cortisol hormone in aflatoxin high group (AHG) complies with that observed before in catfish, where it is shown that there is a significant increase of cortisol level in the group that has intoxication with aflatoxin which could attribute to stress factors caused by intoxication. In addition, similar results were found by Bray and Ryan (Bray and Ryan ), who reported that aflatoxin contamination decrease the birds’ ability to endure stress by inhibiting the immune system, and this may be the cause of increasing cortisol level. Ray et al. (Ray et al. ) reported that abortion occurs in 12% of a herd of 68 crossbred cows in their third-trimester fetuses after feeding for 4 days on moldy peanuts. Biochemical analysis of serum indicated that liver damage occurs in the aborted cows and all of these cows died within 8 days from abortion. The peanuts contained 77 μg aflatoxin B1/g, as determined by liquid chromatography. Tissues were submitted from one cow, and liver contained 5 ng aflatoxin B1/g. Our work was done on non-pregnant animals so we could not interpret the effect of aflatoxin on the pregnancy in buffaloes.
The mycotoxins, aflatoxin B [1], aflatoxin M [1], aflatoxicol, and zearalenone were tested for binding to bovine endometrial estrogen and progestin receptors. Radio inert estradiol-17beta, estrone, testosterone, and cholesterol were evaluated for binding to the estrogen receptor (Blankenship et al. ). Zearalenone and aflatoxicol, except for aflatoxins B [1] and M [1], competed with estradiol-17beta for the estrogen receptor. The order of binding affinities for the estrogen receptor was zearalenone > estradiol-17beta > estrone > aflatoxicol (Hasanzadeh et al. ; Tiemann and Vanselow ). The affinity of zearalenone for the estrogen receptor was 2–3 times higher than that of estradiol-17beta. Progesterone, cortisol, radio inert R 5020, and cholesterol were evaluated for binding to the progestin receptor. The importance of aflatoxicol binding to the receptor of estrogen is not obvious. It is suggested that binding of aflatoxicol to the receptor may make changes in gene expression in target tissues or work at the level of the hypothalamus to suppress the secretion of gonadotropin and subsequently ovulation. These effects could explain the causes of decreased fertility in domestic animals fed on ration contaminated with aflatoxin. It is also suggested that more investigation required on the adverse effects of chronic aflatoxin ingestion on the fertility of cattle and other livestock (Blankenship et al. ).
In the present study, there is a slight elevation in AHG compared with the ACG, but this elevation was not significant in prolactin hormone level. While others reported that there is a significant increase ( P < 0.05) in the levels of prolactin hormone in dairy cattle fed on rations contaminated by mycotoxin (Handan and Güleray ), the difference between our results and that could be referred to the degree of intoxication and species difference.
Conclusion
After feeding ration contaminated with aflatoxin, there were significant positive relationships between the low level of FSH, LH, and progesterone hormone as lowering of FSH was also accompanied by lowering of LH and progesterone, while there was a significant negative relationship between the high level of two hormones (E2, cortisol) and the low level of the other three hormones (FSH, LH, and P4). The high level of E2 also has a significant relation with the high level of cortisol. Also, the prolactin hormone has a significant relation with the P4 hormone. Prolactin concentration showed a slight elevation with a non-significant difference. There were no significant differences in the milk parameters between the two groups. Aflatoxins disturb some endocrine functions of the reproductive organs, which could adversely affect buffalo’s productivity.