Introduction
Guinea fowl or horned fowl is considered to be of the pheasant category. They are from the avian class, the Galliformes phylum, the Numididae family, the Numida genus, and the Numida meleagris species. This bird is a wild African species. The name of this bird is taken from the country Guinea, which is located in West Africa. Although the bird is native to Africa, it was brought to Europe in the medieval period. Centuries ago, the Greeks and the Romans nurtured this bird; today, the guinea fowl is spread all over the world. Three species of these birds are common in the world and they are the (1) pearl fowl (2), white guinea fowl (3), and lavender guinea fowl, in which the pearl fowl is the most common. Their diet is diverse and includes all types of animal foods and plant including grains, fruits, vegetables, snails, and worms (Ebegbulem ).
The bird’s tongue along with the other organs of the digestive system plays an important role in getting food and nutrition, and also the sense of taste of the bird. The shape and size of the tongue and its morphology depend on their nutrition method and the influence of their eating habits and environment of the animal, and they also reveal distinct differences in the vertebrate diversity. The tongue consists of three parts: apex, body, and root; and in most birds, the body and the root are separated from each other by a row of giant conical papillae (Mohamadpour and Taherabadi ; Crole and Soley ; Fatahian Dehkordi and Parchami ).
Histological studies of the structure of the tongue are conducted with light microscopy in small species of birds such as domestic chickens, little tern, penguin, white-tailed eagle and cormorant, owl, falcon and kestrel, and ostrich and woodpecker. The results of morphological studies conducted so far indicate a close correlation of the shape of the tongue with the method of food intake, type of food, and habitat (Fatahian Dehkordi and Parchami ). The results of other SEM studies also conducted on the common pheasant tongue, red-necked phalarope, rainbow lorikeet, scarlet macaw, gray-crowned crane ( Balearica regulorum ), American flamingo ( Phoenicopterus ruber ), great egret ( Ardea alba ), mallard ( Anas platyrhynchos ), black-necked stilt ( Himantopus mexicanus ), Himalayan monal ( Lophophorus impejanus ), and green macaw ( Ara militaris ) represent the correlation between the shape of the tongue and the birds’ eating habits (Emura ).
The floor of the mouth has a creek-shaped depression between the branches of the lower beak that holds the tongue. The shape of the tongue in birds is proportional to the shape of the depression of the lower beak and has a very diverse variety. The tongue in the pigeon is narrow, while in poultry, it is broad and lancet-like and does not spread throughout the lower beak. In birds with webbed feet, the tongue completely covers the floor of the mouth and is only slightly thinner in the front part. The body of the tongue consists of the inner bone, which forms a moving joint with the hyoid bone that is located at the base of the tongue and ends with a cartilage process toward the front. In the tongue of birds, the internal muscular system is not the equivalent of the specific structure of the mammalian tongue. In general, an anterior third of the tongue is muscle-free, while the muscles of the extramarital system are spread across the rest of the tongue. The basic structure of the tongue consists of connective tissue, fat tissue, and glands. The mucous membrane of the dorsal tongue, especially in the apex, has an epithelium that is extremely keratinized. On the lateral and lower levels and in the base of the tongue, the keratinized layer is of medium thickness merely. In pouches and pigeons, the transfer between the body and base of the tongue is distinguished by a transverse row of lingual papillae toward the posterior. In ducks and geese, in addition to a transverse row of lingual papillae, there is another row of thorn-like lingual papilla, called keratinized papillae, which is located on the lateral edge of the tongue. Their apexes are pointed toward the pharynx, and the distance between them is occupied by filiform papillae. These papillae act as filter and effectively complete the work of the lateral edges of the beak. In birds, there is not a member that is equivalent to taste papillae of the mammalian tongue. On the other hand, taste buds may be found as well as mammalian taste buds, individually or in a group around the duct opening of the glands. These buds are most seen in the pharynx mucus and on the base of the tongue commonly and continue until the entrance to the esophagus (Neeven and Bakary ; Mohamadpour and Taherabadi ).
The purpose of this research is to study the morphology and histology of the tongue in the guinea fowl. Information obtained from this research can be used in the sciences of anatomy, histology, morphology, nutrition, breeding, and treatment of guinea fowl.
Materials and methods
Ten adult female guinea fowl were prepared. After slaughtering and bleeding, their tongues were removed from the oral cavity completely and then were washed completely with distilled water. Six samples were taken for light microscopy and four for electron microscopy. The apex, body, and root of the tongue were separated for examination with electron microscopy and were placed in 10% formalin buffer solution for 48 h. After fixation, the specimens were placed in an automatic tissue processor and after passing various stages of the tissue passage including alcohol dehydration, clarification of the tissue with xylene, and exposure with paraffin, samples were cut into paraffin blocks. Blocks with thickness of 5 μm were made and transverse and longitudinal sections of all samples were prepared by microtome. Tissue slides were stained with hematoxylin–eosin and specific staining of the masson trichrome was performed. Finally, the tissue structure of the tongue was examined and the results were recorded.
Four samples were transferred to the central laboratory of Ferdowsi University of Mashhad and the stages of tissue preparation were performed including initial fixation, washing, secondary fixation, dehydration with different degrees of ethanol, drying with carbon dioxide, gluing on an aluminum base, and coating the sample with palladium. The tongue surfaces were examined by a scanning electron microscope using the LEO 1550 VP model, and items such as the precise location of the lingual papillae and their shape and the exact location of the duct lingual glands in the three parts of the tongue were examined and, finally, the results were compared with other birds.
Results
Guinea fowl tongue was triangular in shape and similar to the lower beak morphologically and covered almost all the oral cavity, and the frenulum of the tongue was seen clearly which became the free apex of the tongue (Fig. 1 ). The average length of the tongue was 21.91 mm (Table 1 ), with a row of conical papillae whose apex was toward the posterior separating the root from the body (Fig. 2 ). The apex, body, and root were distinct and separable, whose dimensions were recorded in Table 1 . After examining the tissue of the tongue by light microscope, it was determined that the tongue epithelium of the guinea fowl in both ventral and dorsal surfaces and in all parts of the apex, body, and root of the tongue was of the keratinized stratified squamous type and it is thicker in the dorsal surface than in the ventral surface (Figs. 3 , 4 , and 5 ). The connective tissue in laminae propria of the tongue was of the irregular dense type; it contains collagen fibers and is connected to the sections of the arteries and veins (Fig. 4 ). The salivary glands were observed in the superficial and deep areas of the connective tissue, which were of a simple branched tubuloalveolar type, and the ducts were open to the surface of the tongue; in the initial regions of the apex, the glands were not seen, but appeared at the end of the apex. The density and size of the glands increased from the apex to the root, so that in the end regions of the root of the glands, they covered almost all the connective tissues (Fig. 6 ). The muscles of the tongue were observed as scattered bundles in all parts of the connective tissue and were of a skeletal type (Fig. 7 ). In the body and root of the tongue, observed in the deep part of the connective tissue were sections of cartilage; it was a kind of hyaline cartilage that increases with age and gradually becomes bony (Fig. 8 ). Examining the tongue with scanning electron microscopy, it was seen that filiform and fine papillae were more dense on the dorsal surface of the tongue (Fig. 9 ), in which the papillae were more dense in the middle region of the tongue than in the lateral edges, and at this surface, the edges were prominent and the middle region of the tongue was depressed and the tongue was stud-shaped (Fig. 10 ). The duct opening of the salivary glands was observed in the lingual root zone and at the ventral and dorsal surfaces mainly: the duct opening was denser in the dorsal surface of the tongue than the ventral surface, and was associated with mucous membranes in the duct opening (Fig 11 and Fig. 12 ). The ventral surface of the tongue had no papillae, and the keratinized cells were multi-layered that were detached, and transverse fine eminences were seen in the surface, root area, and end regions of the body; these eminences were parallel to each other and were concentric (Fig. 12 ). There was an eminence in the ventral surface, apex, and body along the length of the tongue; this eminence divided the tongue into two equal parts: the right and the left (Fig. 13 ). It should be explained that the height of this prominence was reduced from the root to the apex of the tongue. A transverse row of giant conical papillae separates the body from the lingual root (Fig. 11 ), and on this papillae were seen the keratinized cells being detached. In the root zone, the dorsal and ventral surfaces were observed with no papillae; and in the apex and body zone, the dorsal and ventral surfaces were observed with no salivary gland duct opening. Fig. 1 The shape of the tongue and the frenulum linguae of guinea fowl tongue. Frenulum of the tongue (FL) Table 1 The length and width of the three parts of guinea fowl tongue in millimeters Sample number Average SD Max Min 1 2 3 4 5 6 Tongue length 22 22.5 21.5 22.5 20 23 21.91 1.07 23 20 Apex length 8 8 7.5 9 6.5 8 8 0.95 9 7 Body length 7 6 6 7 6 5 6 0.75 7 5 Root length 7 8.5 8 7.5 7.5 6 7 1 8 6 Apex width 5 7 5 5.5 7 5 6 1.1 7 5 Body width 6.5 6 8 8 9 7 8 1.14 9 6 Root width 9 9 9 9 10 9 9 0.41 10 9 Fig. 2 Morphology of tongue in guinea fowl. Apex (A), body (B), root (R), and conical papillae (CP) Fig. 3 Transverse section of the apex of the tongue in guinea fowl. Epithelium (EP), connective tissue (CT), and lingual glands (LG) (× 40 H&E) Fig. 4 Transverse section of the body of the tongue in guinea fowl. Lingual glands (G) (× 40 H&E) Fig. 5 Transverse section of the body of the tongue in guinea fowl. Muscles (M) and lingual glands (G) (× 200 MT) Fig. 6 Transverse section of the apex in the guinea fowl. Epithelium (EP), salivary gland (G), and connective tissue (CT) (× 40 MT) Fig. 7 Transverse section of the root of the tongue in guinea fowl. Epithelium (EP) (× 400 MT) Fig. 8 Longitudinal section of the tongue in guinea fowl. Muscles (M), connective tissue (CT), epithelium (EP), keratinized layer (K), and cartilage (C) (× 40 MT) Fig. 9 Scanning electron microscope image of the dorsal of the tongue (scale 1 mm). Pay attention to the density of filiform papillae on the dorsal of the tongue Fig. 10 Scanning electron microscope image of the dorsal of the tongue. Filiform papillae (FP) (scale 10 mm) Fig. 11 Scanning electron microscope image from the dorsal surface to root zone of the tongue. Conical papilla (CP) and duct opening (DO) of the salivary glands (scale 1 mm) Fig. 12 Scanning electron microscope image of the ventral surface of the root zone tongue. Transverse ridge (TR) and duct opening (DO) of the salivary glands (scale 100 mm) Fig. 13 Scanning electron microscope image of the ventral surface of the tongue. Longitudinal ridge (LR) in the middle region of the tongue (scale 1 mm)
Discussion
The shape of the tongue in guinea fowl, like in other birds, is triangular and covers the floor of the mouth completely. Research on other birds, including the gray-crowned crane and the Himalayan monal, indicates that the shapes of their tongue are similar to the guinea fowl’s. But differences can also be seen in the shape of the tongue of the birds, such as the American flamingo’s tongue, whose lingual apex was triangular and has big fang-like structures that were present in both lateral regions of the lingual body; the tongue of the great egret was needle-like; the tongue of the mallard was elongated with a spatula-ended apex; the tongue of the black-necked stilt was needle-like; and the tongue of the green macaw was lower lip-like and had a significant difference in shape and size (Emura ).
The lingual epithelium of the guinea fowl in both ventral and dorsal surfaces and in all parts of the apex, body, and root of the tongue was of the keratinized stratified squamous type. It is thicker in the dorsal surface. Research on other bird tongues, including the Canadian ostrich and white-eared bulbul tongues, indicates that they are similar with the guinea fowl’s considering the tissue type (Mohamadpour and Taherabadi ; Neeven and Bakary ).
Connective tissue was of the dense irregular type and the observed sections of blood vessels are arteries and veins. Research on other bird tongues, including the Canadian ostrich tongue, indicates that they are similar to the guinea fowl’s tongue (Mohamadpour and Taherabadi ).
The muscles of the tongue were seen as scattered bundles in all parts of the connective tissue, and they were of the skeletal type; and in the deep area of the connective tissue, a cartilage was seen that was of the hyaline cartilage type. Research on other bird tongues, including the Canadian ostrich tongue, indicates that they are similar to the guinea fowl’s tongue (Mohamadpour and Taherabadi ).
The salivary glands of this bird were observed in the superficial and deep areas of the connective tissue, which was of the simple, branching-alveolar type, and its ducts were open to the surface of the tongue. Research on other bird tongues, including the Canadian ostrich tongue, indicates that they are similar to the guinea fowl’s tongue. But there are differences in the tongue of the birds, which can be seen in the white-eared bulbul tongue, which had a different type of glands (Mohamadpour and Taherabadi ; parchami and Fatahian Dehkordi ).
The results of this study by scanning electron microscopy showed that on the dorsal surface of the tongue fine and filiform papillae were seen to be more dense: the papillae were more dense in the middle region of the tongue than in the lateral edges, and the edges were prominent and the middle region of the tongue was depressed and the tongue was stud-shaped. Research on other bird tongues, including on the tongue of the pigeon and the Muscovy duck tongue considering the intermediate groove on the dorsal surface, the apex and the body of the tongue of the partridge considering the type of papillae, and white-breasted kingfisher with a large number of sharp papillae inclined toward the posterior of the tongue, indicate that they are similar to the tongue of the guinea fowl. But there are also differences in the tongue of birds: in the gray-crowned crane, the surface of the lingual apex was rough relatively; in the American flamingo, the surface of the lingual apex was flat relatively; in the great egret, the surface of the lingual apex and the central and posterior parts of the lingual body were flat relatively; in the mallard and Himalayan monal and black-necked stilt, the surface of the lingual apex was flat; and in the green macaw, the surface of the lingual apex had many grooves (Skieresz-Sezwezyk et al. ; Jackowiak and Godynicki ; Igwebuike and Anagor ; Emura ).
The duct opening of the salivary glands, mainly in the lingual root region, was observed at the dorsal and ventral surfaces, duct opening was denser than at the ventral surface, and mucous membranes were observed in the duct opening. Research on other bird tongues, such as those of the great egret and the Himalayan monal, observed many duct openings in the salivary glands in their lingual root, indicating that they are similar to the tongue of the guinea fowl. A lot of the salivary glands in the lingual root may be for more lubrication in the area to facilitate the entrance of the foods into the esophagus. There are also differences in the tongue of the birds, which can be seen in the gray-crowned crane’s that was observed to have many duct openings in the salivary glands in both the lateral parts of the body and the lingual root (Emura ; Fatahian Dehkordi and Parchami ).
There was a prominence on the ventral surface along the length of the tongue, dividing the tongue into two equal parts of the right and left. Research on other birds, including Muscovy duck, indicates that they have similar tongues with the guinea fowl (Igwebuike and Anagor ).
There is a transverse row of giant conical papillae toward the posterior side separating the body from the lingual root. Research on other birds, including quail, pigeon, and gray-crowned crane, found conical papillae were inclined toward the posterior side, and on Himalayan monal and black-necked stilt, the posterior part of the lingual body had several conical papillae indicating that they have similar tongues with the guinea fowl. But there are also differences in the tongue of the birds such as in the nutcracker’s that has two rows of the conical papillae; in American flamingo’s that has mustache-like structures on the posterior lingual body; in the great egret’s that has a pair of giant conical papillae inclined toward the posterior of the tongue on the lateral side of the lingual body; in the mallard’s that has saw-shaped papillae on the posterolateral region of the lingual body; and in the green macaw’s the posterior part of the lingual body has several conical papillae (Pourlis ; Parchami and Fatahian Dehkordi ; Jackowiak et al. ).
In this study, it was determined that in all birds, the structure of the beak and tongue are shaped according to their habits and their living environment.