Introduction
With the increase of the world’s population, the production of animal protein has undergone several intensifications in terms of production, with aquaculture responsible for production of 172 million tons of fish in 2017; of these, carp was the most cultivated species, representing 37% of world fish production (Peixe BR, Peixe ; FAO, ). Brazil is responsible for producing approximately 629 thousand tons of fish meat with an increase of 19.5% in 2017 compared with 2014, and 43.7% of national production derives from native species (Peixe BR, Peixe ). The Curimbatá is a native species of the Paraná river found throughout South America (Leite et al. ); the genus Prochilodus contributed 2554 tons of fish meat in Brazil in 2015; however, these values represent only 0.5% of national aquaculture production (IBGE ).
The Curimbatá ( Prochilodus lineatus ) is thought to be a promising species in Brazilian national aquaculture because of its high prolificacy, rapid growth, high rusticity, and its use as a source of food for predatory fish species (Pereira et al. ). The use of this species in carp polyculture replacing the common carp ( Cyprinus carpio ) has already shown good results in terms of productivity (Andrade et al. ; Graeff et al. ). However, this species showed a decrease in the number of natural populations in recent years due to increased fishing, increased dam construction, and consequent negative effects on reproduction, because this is a species that requires migration in order to reproduce (Oyakawa et al. ).
The curimbatá is an increasingly rare species in rivers; therefore, it has been used in agricultural fairs for visitor attraction and/or commercialization of fresh fish. These exposures can cause stress that is initiated during transport and is potentiated during exposure because of high density, management failures, improper environments of allocation, and the constant presence of people. Stress can be defined as a set of actions that an organism undergoes in order to return to a normal physiological state (Galhardo and Oliveira ); this stress can cause metabolic alterations that impair the fish’s health (Mendes et al. ; Iwama et al. ). Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate whether transport and exposure to an agricultural fair alter plasma biochemical variables in curimbatás.
Materials and methods
Fish, transport, and installations at the agricultural fair
The curimbatá ( Prochilodus lineatus ) used in this study came from the Instituto Goio-En, located in the municipality of Águas de Chapecó (Santa Catarina, Brazil). Twelve juveniles (mean weight of 209 g and mean length of 38 cm) were transferred an approximate distance of 60 km to an agricultural fair held in the city of Chapecó (Santa Catarina, Brazil), with an approximate duration of 1 h, in a transport box with controlled temperature 23.1 ± 1.12 °C, oxygen 7.10 ± 0.45 mg L −1 , and pH 6.70 ± 0.15. Some fish remained in the transport box, and after 8 h, they returned to the Instituto Goio-En where collections were made.
At the fair, groups of six fish each were housed over 3 days in two 2.5 m 3 glass aquariums. Water quality parameters such as temperature, pH, oxygen, and ammonia were monitored daily, and the results were 21.73 ± 0.48 °C, 5.99 ± 0.58, 6.03 ± 1.45 mg L −1 , and 1.19 ± 0.63 mg L −1 , respectively. To measure these parameters, a 556 handheld multiparameter instrument of the YSI® brand was used. Approximately 30% of the water in the aquariums was replaced daily, in order to maintain the quality and to control nitrogen compound levels. After the 3 days of the fair, the animals returned to the Instituto Goio-En with the same transport conditions as those of outward transport.
Blood collection
Blood collections were performed before (period 0 h) at the Instituto Goio-En, after transport to fair (period 10 h), and after the fair (period 72 h). Approximately 2 ml of blood was collected per fish with 25 × 0.7 mm syringes. Prior to collection, the fish were anesthetized with eugenol (100 mg L −1 ) (Souza et al. ) and diluted in ethyl alcohol (92.8 °C), resulting in a stock solution with a concentration of 100 mg mL −1 (1:10), and blood samples were collected by puncturing the caudal vein using syringes containing 10% EDTA. Total blood was centrifuged for 10 min at 3500 rpm, and the plasma was collected and stored in microtubes at − 20 °C.
Biochemistry analysis
Cortisol
Plasma cortisol levels were quantified using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (Diagnostics Biochem. Canada Inc., Canada), according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. The samples were measured in duplicate, and the absorbance was determined spectrophotometrically at 450 nm.
Free radical and lipid peroxidation
Plasma levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) were measured according to a method described by Ali et al. ( ) at absorbance of 488 nm and 525 nm in a LS-50 spectrophotometer, and the results were expressed as U DCF/mL.
Plasma lipid peroxidation levels were evaluated using the thiobarbituric acid reactive substance technique described by Jentzch et al. (Jentzsch et al. ), and the results were presented as nmol MDA/mg of protein.
Antioxidants enzymes
Plasma glutathione peroxidase (GPx) was measured indirectly by monitoring the oxidation rate of NADPH at 340 nm using cumene hydroperoxide (CuOOH) (Wendel ), and the enzymatic activity was expressed as U GPx/mg of protein. Plasma glutathione S-transferase (GST) was determined spectrophotometrically according to the method described by Habig et al. ( ), and the enzymatic activity was expressed as U GST/mg of protein.
Plasma superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity was determined according to the auto-oxidation of pyrogallol, inhibited in the presence of SOD. The optical density change was determined kinetically for 2 min at 420 nm, at 10-s intervals according to methodology described by Beutler ( ), and the enzymatic activity was expressed as U SOD/mg of protein.
Plasma biochemistry
Plasma levels of total protein, albumin, glucose, triglycerides, and cholesterol were measured by a semi-automated analyzer BioPlus 2000 using commercial kits (Analisa, Gold Analisa Diagnóstica, Belo Horizonte, Brazil) following the manufacturer’s recommendations. Globulin levels were obtained by the formula: total protein−albumin.
Statistical analysis
After verification of normality (Shapiro-Wilk) and homoscedasticity (Levene), subsequently, data were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA) to evaluate possible significant differences between the three time points (before/after the transport/after the fair). Differences were considered significant when P was < 0.05 using the Tukey test.
Results and discussion
Plasma cortisol levels were higher ( P = 0.014) after 72-h exposure to the agricultural fair than at initial collection (0 h) (Fig. 1 ). In fish, corticosteroids, including cortisol, are synthetized by intra-renal cells (Hontela ), and are considered important parameters for evaluation of stress (Camargo et al. ). Cortisol exerts several effects on metabolism, and alterations in its levels can alter fish performance by limiting feed intake (Pankhurts, Pankhurst ; Janzen et al. ). When the fish is submitted to stressors, cortisol is immediately released to the circulation, where it activates glycogenolysis and hepatic gluconeogenesis, both of which cause increases in plasma glucose levels (Nascimento et al. ), as shown in this study. Fig. 1 Plasma cortisol levels in curimbatá ( Prochilodus lineatus ) before transportation (0 h), after transportation (10 h), and at the end of the agricultural fair (72 h)
According to Ellis et al. ( ) and Mattioli et al. ( ), cortisol and glucose are the most suitable parameters for measuring fish stress. Augmentation of plasma glucose levels results in increased energetic metabolism (Mendes et al. ). This is considered an adaptive response to stress, because cortisol stimulates the gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis pathways that contribute to increased glucose in response to increased energy demand after stress (Sena et al. ; Refaey et al. ); this was observed by Pankhurst ( ) in the form of reduced hepatic glucose levels and increased blood glucose levels. As in our observations, significant increases in plasma cortisol and glucose levels were observed in the catfish Ictalurus punctatus (Refaey et al. ), the common carp Cyprinus carpio (Dobsikova et al., Dobšíková et al. ), and the matrinxã Brycon amazonicus (Abreu et al., de Abreu et al. ) that were exposed to transport to agricultural fairs. Fish use triglycerides as energy sources during stress situations, and there is a positive correlation between cortisol and triglycerides levels (Matiolli et al., Mattioli et al. ). This occurs because cortisol promotes lipase activation that facilitates the use of triglycerides, provoking increases in free fatty acids that can be used as energy sources (Vijayan et al. ), in agreement with our observations.
Plasma total protein, albumin, and glucose levels were higher after 10-h exposure to transport than at initial collection (0 h). Furthermore, plasma triglycerides levels were higher after 10-h exposure to transport than at 72-h exposure to the agricultural fair (Fig. 2 ). Albumin levels increased after 10 h of transport compared with levels in the baseline group. This can also be considered an attempt to suppress energy demands, because albumin serves as a reservoir of amino acids in the liver (Melo et al. ). In order to suppress the energy requirements during stress, albumin is released in the circulation to provide amino acids necessary to synthesize new proteins that can provide energy during challenging conditions. No significant difference was observed regarding plasma cholesterol or globulin levels (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Biochemical parameters of curimbatá ( Prochilodus lineatus ) before transportation (0 h), after transportation (10 h), and at the end of the agricultural fair (72 h)
Plasma ROS levels were lower after 72-h exposure to the agricultural fair than at initial collection, while TBARS levels were higher after 10-h transport than at initial collection and 72 h after exposure to the agricultural fair (Fig. 3 ). Increased plasma TBARS levels during transport suggest lipid damage, and may be considered a response to augmentation in plasma glucose levels, because hyperglycemia activates several oxidative reactions (Mattioli et al. ). Lipid peroxidation is an important oxidative stress marker (Sinhorin et al. ), and its decrease after 72-h exposure to an agricultural fair can be explained by upregulation in plasma antioxidant enzymes such as SOD and GPx. Fig. 3 Plasma reactive oxygen species (ROS) ( A ) and thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) ( B ) levels, and superoxide dismutase (SOD) ( C ), glutathione peroxidase (GPx) ( D ) and glutathione S-transferase (GST) ( E ) activities in curimbatá ( Prochilodus lineatus ) before transportation (0 h), after transportation (10 h), and at the end of the agricultural fair (72 h)
Plasma SOD activity was higher after 72-h exposure to the agricultural fair than at 10 h of exposure to transport, while plasma GPx activity was higher after 72-h exposure to the agricultural fair than at initial collection (Fig. 3 ). These enzymes contribute to reduction of free radicals produced during exposure to stressors, including ROS as well as other less toxic compounds (Modesto and Martinez ). Furthermore, the increase in plasma TBARS levels during transport can be explained by decreased or dysfunctional antioxidant defense systems because of excessive ROS formation, as described by Sinhorin et al. ( ). SOD is an enzyme of the primary antioxidant defense system that plays a key role in ROS elimination, converting superoxide radicals to water and hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) (Menezes et al. ), while GPx neutralizes the oxidative effects of H 2 O 2 (Wen et al. ).
Finally, plasma GST activity was lower after 10-h exposure to transport than at initial collection (Fig. 3 ). According to Vieira et al. ( ), the augmentation of GST activity is an important factor for improvement of the antioxidant defense system in fish exposed to stress conditions, such as improper handling.
Conclusion
Curimbatás subjected to transport and exhibition at fairs were susceptible to increase plasma cortisol levels as well as elevated levels of glucose and triglycerides, both of which are used as energy sources, characterizing a stressed state. Furthermore, the augmentation of plasma antioxidant enzymes, including SOD and GPx, may be responsible for reduction of plasma ROS levels. Therefore, curimbatás with average weights of 209 g exposed to transportation to agricultural fairs suffer from stress, and this can harm their health.