Introduction
Platelet inhibition with aspirin and P2Y12 inhibitors is the standard of care for patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Several drugs comprise the P2Y12 inhibitor class including both oral and parenteral formulations. The addition of a P2Y12 inhibitor to aspirin has been shown to decrease adverse cardiovascular events in patients presenting with acute coronary syndrome (ACS), even among those who do not undergo PCI [ ]. Moreover, adherence to P2Y12 inhibitor therapy is crucial for minimization of post-PCI complications including stent thrombosis [ ].
While the importance of P2Y12 inhibition in these populations is indisputable, the optimal timing for initiation of antiplatelet therapy is not well established. In particular, the issue of “preloading” or “pre-treatment” is controversial. P2Y12 inhibitor “pre-treatment” refers to administration of a P2Y12 inhibitor prior to coronary angiography and PCI, while “preloading” is often used synonymously but refers specifically to the upstream administration of a P2Y12 inhibitor loading dose. Given that the benefit of these medications in prevention of platelet activation, early administration with P2Y12 inhibitors may seem to be of obvious benefit, particularly in patients with ACS. However, while several observational studies suggest a benefit with P2Y12 preloading [ , , ], multiple randomized studies have not demonstrated an advantage with preloading over administration of these medications at the time of, or following, PCI [ , , ]. Furthermore, any potential advantage of early P2Y12 inhibition must be weighed against possible disadvantages of pretreatment including increased bleeding risk and the potential for delay of operative management in case coronary bypass grafting (CABG) is needed [ ]. Table 1 summarizes the major proposed advantages and disadvantages of P2Y12 inhibitor pretreatment.
Table 1 Possible benefits and disadvantages of preloading Possible benefits of preloading Possible disadvantages of preloading Reduction in progression of plaque rupture and minimization of further ischemic injury for patients with ACS Increased risk of procedural and non-CABG associated bleeding complications Reduction in peri-procedural adverse cardiovascular events during PCI Increased risk of CABG associated bleeding complications Reduction in adverse cardiovascular outcomes following PCI Need for delayed CABG and increased hospital length of stay for patients requiring CABG Reduction in peri-procedural stent thrombosis during and after PCI Risk of exposure to medication that may not be indicated (e.g. in patients with stable angina who do not require PCI) Proposed advantages and disadvantages of preloading ACS acute coronary syndrome, PCI percutaneous coronary intervention CABG coronary artery bypass graft surgery
Given the risks and unclear benefit associated with P2Y12 preloading in patients with ACS, the advantage of early platelet inhibition in patients who undergo PCI for stable angina seems less convincing, as these patients have lower overall risk. Nevertheless, up to 29% of patients who undergo elective PCI are loaded with P2Y12 inhibitor prior to cardiac catheterization [ ].
The continued advances in pharmacologic and invasive management of coronary disease further complicates the relevance of preloading. While the majority of preloading studies have been conducted using clopidogrel, more potent P2Y12 inhibitors are available, with large clinical trials supporting preferential use of these agents over clopidogrel in patients with ACS [ , ]. Furthermore, although these medications all have the final effect of ADP inhibition [ ], they each have different pharmacologic mechanisms of action, timing of onset, and duration of effect [ ]. Two randomized controlled trials have failed to demonstrate benefit with prasugrel preloading in patients with non-ST elevation ACS (NSTEACS) [ ] and of ticagrelor pretreatment in patients with ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) [ ]. However, despite these trials, some clinical issues remain. Considering the conflicting conclusions of prior preloading studies along with the continued pharmacologic advances in platelet inhibition therapy, the optimal timing for initiation of P2Y12 inhibition remains unclear. In this review, we discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the preloading strategy in patients who undergo cardiac catheterization for ACS and stable angina.
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of P2Y12 preloading
P2Y12 receptor antagonists lead to decreased platelet aggregation by inhibiting adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-mediated activation of the platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor. This class consists of several oral medications and the intravenous formulation, cangrelor [ , , , , ]. The thienopyridine compounds clopidogrel and prasugrel bind irreversibly to the P2Y12 receptor, whereas ticagrelor and cangrelor bind reversibly. Clopidogrel is a pro-drug requiring two-step bioactivation, and clinical response to clopidogrel can be variable due to its complex pharmacokinetics and influence of genetic polymorphisms that impact absorption and metabolism of the drug [ , , , ]. Prasugrel has greater bioavailability with simpler one-step metabolism but remains a pro-drug. Ticagrelor is metabolically active on its own and has one main metabolically active metabolite, AR-C124910XX [ ]. Both prasugrel and ticagrelor achieve platelet inhibition faster and with more potency than clopidogrel. Clopidogrel reaches its maximum level of 30% platelet inhibition within 4–5 h of a 300 mg loading dose and 2–3 h of a 600 mg loading dose [ ]. In contrast, prasugrel and ticagrelor begin to achieve platelet inhibition as early as 30 min after the loading dose is administered while attaining higher maximum inhibition of platelet aggregation [ ].
Cangrelor is the first intravenous P2Y12 inhibitor, which acts as an ADP analog that directly inhibits the P2Y12 receptor [ ]. This medication is active within minutes of administration. It is also short-acting with a half life of 2–5 min, which allows platelet function to normalize within 60–90 min of discontinuation of this medication.
Potential clinical benefits of preloading
One potential benefit of P2Y12 inhibitor preloading is in the setting of PCI to minimize the risk of procedural complications such as stent thrombosis and procedural MI. For patients who present with ACS, particularly STEMI, preloading is practiced with the logic that timely platelet inhibition may reduce the progression of plaque rupture at the site of a culprit lesion or prevent the development of thrombi elsewhere that could lead to further ischemic events. Conversely, patients who undergo elective cardiac catheterization for stable angina do not have acute plaque rupture, and the objective of preloading is to prevent adverse events that may occur in association with PCI itself, assuming invasive management is required. Several studies have evaluated the value of preloading in patients undergoing cardiac catheterization for a range of indications (Table 2 ). These studies were performed with different P2Y12 inhibitors and offer varying conclusions about the utility of preloading. Despite their individual differences, a comprehensive review of these studies provides reasonable insight into the potential value of preloading.
Table 2 Summary of clinical trials evaluating P2Y12 inhibitor preloading Study Study drug n Design Pre-treatment approach Time from pre-treatment to PCI Key results ACS & non-ACS CREDO Clopidogrel 2116 Randomized 300 mg upstream versus placebo 3–24 h before PCI No significant benefit for the primary ischemic endpoint, benefit observed with longer pre-treatment durations (>6 h) ARMYDA-5 Clopidogrel 409 Randomized 600 mg upstream versus 600 mg in cath lab 4–8 h before PCI No significant benefit for upstream treatment on ischemic events NSTEMI PCI-CURE Clopidogrel 2658 Pre-specified analysis of randomized trial 300 mg upstream versus placebo Median of 6 days prior to PCI Clopidogrel pre-treatment followed by long-term therapy was beneficial in reducing major cardiovascular events ACCOAST Prasugrel 4033 Randomized 30 mg upstream plus 30 mg in cath lab versus 60 mg in cath lab Median of 4 h prior to PCI No reduction of ischemic events, increased rate for major bleeding Bonello et al Prasugrel/ticagrelor 213 Randomized 180 mg ticagrelor after admission and before PCI versus 60 mg prasugrel given at the time of PCI Not specified Less periprocedural myonecrosis in ticagrelor arm, similar rates of MACE and bleeding in both arms STEMI PCI-CLARITY Clopidogrel 1863 Pre-specified analysis of randomized trial 300 mg upstream versus placebo 2–8 days prior to coronary angiography Significant reduction of ischemic events without a significant increase in major bleeding CIPAMI Clopidogrel 654 Randomized 600 mg upstream versus 300 mg downstream 47 min prior to coronary angiography No significant benefit for upstream treatment on TIMI flow LOAD & GO Clopidogrel 168 Randomized 600/900 mg upstream versus 300 downstream 65 min preload to balloon time No significant benefit for upstream treatment on TIMI flow de Waha et al. [ ] Clopidogrel 423 Randomized 600 mg loading dose pre- or post-catheterization laboratory arrival 80 min preload to balloon time Upstream clopidogrel treatment was associated with a significant decrease in the prevalence and extent of microvascular obstruction ATLANTIC Ticagrelor 1862 Randomized 180 mg pre-hospital versus 180 mg in hospital 45 min prior to coronary angiography No benefit on TIMI flow or ST segment resolution, no benefit on MACE, no increase in bleeding risk Selected studies utilizing pre-treatment with oral P2Y 12 inhibitors in acute coronary syndrome patients: the table shows selected studies with a focus on randomized trials that assessed pre-treatment strategies with oral P2Y 12 inhibitors. Reproduced with permission from Oxford University Press [ ]
Preloading in patients with STEMI
Clopidogrel
Several studies have been performed to characterize the utility of preloading with P2Y12 inhibitors in patients with STEMI. The PCI-CLARITY trial (N = 1863) was a pre-specified analysis of CLARITY TIMI, a multicenter, randomized controlled trial that investigated outcomes in patients with STEMI who received fibrinolysis and subsequently underwent PCI [ ]. Within this patient population, subjects who received 300 mg of clopidogrel with fibrinolysis 2–8 days prior to PCI experienced a significant decrease in the composite of cardiovascular death, MI, and stroke at 30 days (3.6 vs. 6.2%; OR 0.54; 95% CI 0.35–0.85, p = 0.008). Two subsequent, single center, randomized controlled trials have evaluated the value of preloading with clopidogrel, both of which had the primary outcome of Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction Perfusion Grade (TMPG) patency. Neither the CIPAMI trial (N = 337), which used a 600 mg dose of clopidogrel, nor the LOAD&GO trial (N = 168), which tested 600 mg and 900 mg doses, reported a significant effect of pretreatment on the primary outcome of TMPG 2/3 or TMPG 3 patency, respectively [ , ]. As a secondary outcome, the CIPAMI trial measured the composite of death, re-infarction, and urgent vessel revascularization, for which preloading was associated with a non-significant decrease in composite events (3.0 vs. 7.0%, p = 0.09) [ ]. Notably, the duration of pretreatment was particularly short in both studies, with an average preloading-to-PCI time of 47 min in the CIPAMI trial and 65 min in the LOAD&GO trial [ , ]. Considering the time-dependent benefit of pretreatment observed in the CREDO trial for patients with stable angina [ ], discussed below, it is possible that this short duration of pretreatment did not permit the manifestation of a significant clinical benefit. Nevertheless, given the importance of timely revascularization for STEMI, future trials are unlikely to utilize significantly longer pretreatment windows that would allow for an appreciable divergence in outcomes.
Although randomized trials do not provide a consensus on the advantage of clopidogrel pretreatment in patients with STEMI, several observational studies have shown a clinical benefit with preloading. One multicenter, prospective study that included nearly 6000 patients undergoing PCI for STEMI demonstrated an association between preloading and reduced in-hospital mortality (3.4 vs. 6.1%, p < 0.01), as well as decreased re-infarction (0.6 vs. 1.4%, p = 0.02) and stroke (0.7 vs. 1.4%, p = 0.05) [ ]. Other single center, prospective studies examining pretreatment with 600–900 mg of clopidogrel demonstrated a significantly higher rate of TMPG 3 patency [ ], reduction in microvascular obstruction on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging [ ], and a reduction in the 30-day composite of adverse cardiovascular events including recurrent ACS, stent thrombosis, congestive heart failure, and death [ ]. A large, retrospective study that included over 13,000 subjects with STEMI who underwent PCI similarly shows an association between preloading and reduced 1-year mortality (HR 0.76; 95% CI 0.64–0.90) [ ].
Other P2Y12 inhibitors
The ATLANTIC trial (N = 1862) was the first study to characterize the utility of preloading with a non-clopidogrel P2Y12 inhibitor in STEMI patients [ ]. This multicenter, randomized controlled trial evaluated pre-hospital vs. in-catheterization laboratory treatment with 180 mg of ticagrelor. No major difference was observed between the groups for the primary endpoints of TMPG 3 patency in the culprit artery or in >70% resolution of ST elevation prior to PCI. However, the investigators found a significant reduction of in stent thrombosis within the pretreatment group (0.2 vs. 1.2%, p = 0.02). As with other studies, they observed a similar rate of major adverse cardiovascular events between the groups, which may be due to the short duration of the pretreatment period (averaged only 48 min).
Preloading in patients with NSTEACS
Clopidogrel
The CURE trial (N = 12,562) was the benchmark study that demonstrated the benefit of P2Y12 inhibition in patients with ACS. Subjects with NSTEACS were randomized to clopidogrel or placebo, with clopidogrel treatment decreasing the occurrence of the primary composite endpoint including cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, and urgent target-vessel revascularization (9.3 vs. 11.4%; RR: 0.80; 95% CI 0.72–0.90, p < 0.001) [ ]. Mehta and colleagues investigated preloading prior to PCI in the subsequent PCI-CURE subgroup analysis (N = 2658), examining patients in the CURE trial who underwent PCI [ ]. Pretreatment with clopidogrel prior to PCI decreased the incidence of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or urgent target-vessel revascularization within 30 days of PCI (4.5 vs. 6.4%; RR: 0.70; 95% CI 0.50–0.97, p = 0.03). Continued treatment was associated with fewer long-term adverse events, including a reduction in cardiovascular death, MI, or revascularization (p = 0.03). However, the applicability of the CURE-PCI trial is somewhat limited by the delay between pretreatment and PCI seen in this study (an average of 6 days), which would be uncommon in current clinical practice [ , ].
While the PCI-CURE trial was the initial study to demonstrate a significant reduction in adverse outcomes with preloading in patients with NSTEACS [ ], several subsequent studies have offered varying conclusions on the value of preloading in this population. The ARMYDA-5 PRELOAD trial (N = 409) examined clopidogrel pretreatment in patients with NSTEACS or stable angina and did not support an association between preloading and reduced adverse cardiovascular events [ ].
Several additional studies have evaluated the utility of clopidogrel pretreatment in patients with NSTEACS who are concurrently receiving other antithrombotic agents. Post-hoc analysis of the TARGET trial (N = 4809), which evaluated outcomes in patients with ACS treated with tirofiban versus abciximab, demonstrated an association between pretreatment with 300 mg of clopidogrel and a decrease in the composite of adverse cardiovascular events at 30 days (6.6 vs. 10.4%, p = 0.009) that persisted at 1 year (1.7 vs. 3.6%, p = 0.011) [ ]. In the EARLY-ACS trial (N = 9166) pre-angiography eptifibatide did not reduce the primary outcome of composite adverse events in patients with ACS. However, post-hoc analysis of this trial showed that the addition of clopidogrel to eptifibatide was associated with a decrease in occurrence of 30-day death or MI (OR 0.85; 95% CI 0.73–0.99) [ ]. Conversely, post-hoc analyses of the REPLACE-2 trial (N = 6010) and the ACUITY trial (N = 13,819), which both compared treatment with bivalrudin to the combination of heparin and a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor, failed to demonstrate further improved clinical outcomes with clopidogrel pretreatment [ , ]. While the precise effect of clopidogrel preloading on clinical outcomes in the setting of treatment with these other agents remains unclear, these studies represent realistic clinical scenarios in the management of high-risk ACS patients requiring multiple antithrombotic medications.
Observational studies have demonstrated an association between preloading and improved clinical outcomes in patients with NSTEACS. A multicenter, prospective trial (N = 4160) of patients with NSTEACS and stable angina showed that pretreatment with 300 mg of clopidogrel 6–24 h prior to PCI was associated with a significant decrease in the 30-day composite of all-cause death, acute MI, and urgent target revascularization (2.77 vs. 4.74%, p = 0.002) [ ]. Additionally, a meta-analysis of seven studies evaluating preloading in 32,383 patients with NSTEACS demonstrated that P2Y12 inhibitor preloading was associated with reduced major cardiovascular events (OR 0.84; 95% CI 0.72–0.98, p = 0.02), although without an associated decrease in mortality [ ]. Of note, these outcomes were similar in patients who were treated with PCI and with medical management. While the studies included in the meta-analysis were heterogeneous, these findings reinforce the advantage of pretreatment that has been suggested by non-significant trends in several prior trials.
Other P2Y12 inhibitors
Fewer studies have evaluated the benefit of preloading with newer P2Y12 inhibitors in patients with NSTEACS. The ACCOAST trial (N = 4033) was a multicenter, randomized controlled trial that compared in-catheterization lab treatment with 60 mg of prasugrel to pretreatment with 30 mg of prasugrel paired with a second 30 mg dose during cardiac catheterization [ ]. Investigators found no significant difference between groups for the composite outcome of cardiovascular death, MI, stroke, urgent target vessel revascularization, or need for glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor bailout at 7 days. However, patients who were pretreated experienced a significant increase in major bleeding events. Of note, several questions have been raised about the methodological aspects of the trial that may underlie the reported lack of benefit with prasugrel pretreatment. First, the design of the ACCOST trial allowed for a brief, 4.3-h window between randomization and intervention that may have prevented the identification of diverging clinical outcomes between these groups. One of the components of the composite outcome in this trial was procedural MI, which required documentation of a pre-catheterization downtrend in CK-MB in order to differentiate the index MI from the insult of a subsequent ischemic event. This short pretreatment window prior to catheterization may have limited the opportunity to observe an appropriate downtrend in CK-MB to allow for detection of a subsequent and distinct procedural MI. Given that prasugrel may have improved outcomes via reduction of procedural MI, the particularly short pretreatment window may have underestimated the therapeutic effect outcomes that may have ultimately favored pretreatment [ , ].
Although no non-ST-segment elevation ACS study has been performed to directly investigate preloading with ticagrelor or cangrelor, it is possible to extrapolate the potential value of pretreatment with these agents with interpretation of prior studies. The PLATO trial (N = 18,624) compared ticagrelor and clopidogrel in patients with ACS and found that ticagrelor treatment provided a significant reduction in the composite of adverse cardiovascular events as well as a decrease in MI and mortality at 1 year [ ]. Subjects in the study with NSTEACS were administered a P2Y12 inhibitor 3–4 h prior to PCI; therefore, while PLATO did not specifically evaluate preloading vs. delayed treatment, this study does demonstrate a benefit in the reduction cardiovascular events when ticagrelor is administered prior to PCI [ ]. Furthermore, considering that PLATO led to the approval of ticagrelor for use in ACS via pretreatment, it is unknown if administration of ticagrelor can be safely recommended any other way, as there is a lack of evidence of similar efficacy with alternate dosing schedules [ ].
The three CHAMPION trials compared outcomes with clopidogrel versus cangrelor in patients with ACS and stable angina. While CHAMPION PCI (N = 8877) and CHAMPION PLATFORM (N = 5362) found no reduction in the composite of adverse cardiovascular events with cangrelor over clopidogrel administered before or after PCI, respectively, the CHAMPION PHOENIX trial (N = 11,145), which utilized a more inclusive definition of procedural MI, demonstrated superiority of cangrelor over treatment with clopidogrel [ , , ]. While these studies did not directly evaluate preloading, the CHAMPION trials offer valuable insight into the benefits of pretreatment. Because cangrelor has a half-life of less than 5 min and is almost immediately therapeutic, patients treated with cangrelor experience P2Y12 inhibition at the time of PCI [ ], which is the ultimate objective of pretreatment. These trials can therefore be considered indirect investigations of preloading.
Preloading in patients with stable angina
The value of preloading in patients with stable angina was first studied in the CREDO trial. In this randomized controlled trial (N = 2116), subjects received a 300 mg loading dose of clopidogrel or placebo an average of 9.8 h prior to PCI [ ]. Investigators found a non-significant, 18.5% decrease in the composite outcome of death, MI, and urgent target vessel revascularization at 28 days. Further analysis demonstrated a significant, time-dependent association between the duration of pretreatment and the rate of adverse events [ , ]. Whereas pretreatment for less than 6 h was not associated with a reduction in composite adverse events, patients had a 38.6% relative risk reduction after six or more hours of pretreatment (p = 0.051). After 15 h of pretreatment, there was a significant, 58.8% reduction in composite events (p = 0.028) [ , ].
While the CREDO trial evaluated preloading for stable angina and showed a time-dependent clinical benefit with pretreatment [ ], no subsequent randomized trial has supported an advantage for preloading prior to elective catheterization in patients with stable angina. The PRAGUE-8 trial (N = 1028) randomized patients with stable angina to a 600 mg clopidogrel load given before cardiac catheterization or at the time of PCI. No difference was found between groups in the composite outcome of adverse events, but preloading was associated with a significant increase in the risk of minor bleeding complications (3.5 vs. 1.4%, p = 0.025) [ ]. Another single-center, randomized controlled trial (N = 203) evaluated early vs. delayed treatment with 300 mg of clopidogrel prior to elective PCI and showed no associated reduction in levels of troponin or CKMB following intervention, nor did it show any difference in the rates of death, stroke, MI, CABG, repeat PCI, or stent thrombosis at 6 months [ ].
Observational studies evaluating P2Y12 inhibitor pretreatment prior to elective catheterization have shown mixed results. In a prospective study by Szuk et al. evaluating clopidogrel pretreatment in patients with stable angina [ ], investigators found an association between pretreatment and a lower occurrence of composite adverse events (2.38 vs. 4.04%, p = 0.031), and a higher incidence of major bleeding (1.19 vs. 0.46%, p = 0.043). Similarly, another observational study (N = 299) found that among patients with stable angina and unstable angina treated with tirofiban or abciximab, there was an association between clopidogrel pretreatment and a lower rate of MI (3.4 vs. 12.5%, p = 0.009) and MACE (5.5 vs. 14%, p = 0.03) [ ]. Conversely, a retrospective analysis of the EVENT registry (N = 4681) showed that there was no association between clopidogrel pretreatment and improved cardiovascular outcomes among patients with stable angina treated with bivalrudin undergoing elective PCI [ ].
No study has been performed to characterize the utility of preloading with one of the newer P2Y12 inhibitors in patients with stable angina, although the CHAMPION trials evaluated outcomes in both patients with ACS and with stable angina. The CHAMPION-PHOENIX trial demonstrated a reduction in adverse cardiovascular events with cangrelor over clopidogrel that was consistent in patients with ACS and with stable angina [ ].
Considerations against preloading: risk of bleeding complications
The antithrombotic properties of P2Y12 inhibitors that reduce thrombus formation in patients undergoing PCI may also increase the risk of bleeding in this population. Accordingly, bleeding and vascular complications are the most significant clinical disadvantages of preloading. While patients undergoing PCI ultimately require P2Y12 inhibition to reduce the risk of stent thrombosis, the clinical decision regarding PCI cannot be determined prior to delineation of the coronary anatomy. Therefore, patients who are preloaded with P2Y12 inhibitors but do not undergo subsequent PCI are subjected to the risks of this therapy without the specific advantage of reduced stent thrombosis. While the benefit of P2Y12 inhibition has been observed independent of PCI in patients with ACS [ ]; there is no apparent benefit of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with stable angina who undergo elective catheterization without associated intervention. Thus, justification of potential bleeding risk of preloading is variable and dependent on the indication for catheterization. The data investigating bleeding risk with a preloading strategy varies according to the clinical indication for antiplatelet therapy and is important to consider when weighing the decision to preload with a P2Y12 inhibitor.
Bleeding risk in patients with STEMI
Despite the risks associated with dual antiplatelet therapy, trial data have not found an increased risk of bleeding complications in STEMI patients who are preloaded with P2Y12 inhibitors. In patients with STEMI who received recent fibrinolysis in the PCI-CLARITY trial, there was no significant difference in TIMI major or minor bleeding with early vs. delayed clopidogrel administration (2.0 vs. 1.9%, p > 0.99) [ ]. Likewise, the rates of TIMI major bleeding were similar among patients in the CIPAMI trial who received early vs. delayed treatment with clopidogrel (9.1 vs. 8.2%, p = 0.8) [ ], and neither 600 mg nor 900 mg preloading doses of clopidogrel significantly increased major or minor bleeding events among STEMI patients in the LOAD&GO trial (1.8 vs. 0%, p = 0.55) [ ]. As with clopidogrel, patients in the ATLANTIC trial who received pre-hospital vs. in-catheterization laboratory ticagrelor experienced no difference in the rate of 30-day TIMI major bleeding events (1.3 vs. 1.3%, p = 0.91) [ ].
Observational studies are consistent with trial findings. Preloading with clopidogrel was not associated with an increase in bleeding events among STEMI patients in the prospective studies by either Dörler et al. (N = 5955) [ ] or Fefer et al. (N = 383) [ ]. Similarly, retrospective analysis of patients with STEMI from the SCAAR registry shows no increase in major bleeding complications associated with clopidogrel pretreatment [ ].
Due to the importance of timely revascularization in patients with STEMI, the interval between preloading and PCI is intentionally brief. It is possible that this short window may contribute to the similar bleeding risk associated with early versus late treatment strategies in this population. Considering the time-dependent benefit of P2Y12 inhibition the CREDO trial [ ], the risk of bleeding may similarly be correlated to the duration of pretreatment. It is possible that patients may not experience the complete antiplatelet effects of these agents in the 47–65 min pretreatment period of the above randomized trials [ , , ]. This is particularly relevant in the studies utilizing clopidogrel, which does not reach therapeutic levels for 2–6 h [ ]. Accordingly, an increased risk of bleeding may be appreciated in patients who experience longer intervals between pretreatment and instrumentation.
Bleeding risk in patients with NSTEACS
Clopidogrel
While preloading has not been associated with increased bleeding in STEMI patients, the magnitude of this risk in patients with NSTEACS is less clear. Several studies demonstrate a variable bleeding hazard with P2Y12 inhibitor pretreatment; however, even in this population, the majority of studies utilizing clopidogrel support only a modest increase, if any, in bleeding complications. In the PCI-CURE analysis, preloading did not cause a significant increase in major bleeding events at 30 days or from the time of PCI to final follow up at 3–12 months, although there was a significant increase in minor bleeding events at 30 days (1.0 vs. 0.7%, p = 0.049) that was not sustained at the time of final follow up (2.7 vs. 2.5%, p = 0.64) [ ]. In the ARMYDA-5 PRELOAD trial, no major bleeding events were observed with either early or delayed clopidogrel administration, and minor bleeding events were likewise similar between groups [ ]. Furthermore, patients with NSTEACS undergoing treatment with aspirin and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the post-hoc analysis of the TARGET trial did not experience an increase in major or minor bleeding events when pretreated with clopidogrel [ ].
Observational studies offer varied findings on the bleeding risk with clopidogrel pretreatment in patients with NSTEACS. The prospective, multicenter study by Szuk et al. demonstrated a significant association between bleeding events and clopidogrel pretreatment (1.35 vs. 0.41%, p = 0.001) [ ], although retrospective analysis of the Cornell Angioplasty Registry (N = 1041) showed that clopidogrel preloading was not associated with a significant increase in total bleeding, major bleeding, or minor bleeding in patients with NSTEACS [ ]. The risk of bleeding with preloading was further characterized in a meta-analysis that described a 30–45% increase in major bleeding with P2Y12 inhibitor pretreatment (OR 1.32; 95% CI 1.16–1.49, p < 0.0001) [ ]. Notably, however, while the majority of the studies incorporated into this analysis investigate clopidogrel pretreatment, this review also includes the outcomes from the ACCOAST trial, which reported a particularly strong association between preloading with prasugrel and bleeding complications [ ].
Other P2Y12 inhibitors
The ACCOAST trial, which evaluated the utility of pretreatment with prasugrel in patients with NSTEACS, provides the most striking example of bleeding complications associated with P2Y12 inhibitor preloading. Investigators found a significant increase in the main safety outcome of all CABG-related and non-CABG related TIMI major bleeding, both at 7 days (2.6 vs. 1.4%; HR 1.90; 95% CI 1.19–3.02, p = 0.006) and at 30 days (2.8 vs. 1.5%; HR 1.97; 95% CI 1.26–3.08, p = 0.002) with prasugrel pretreatment. There was also a significant increase in 7- and 30-day non-CABG related TIMI major or minor bleeding, as well as in 7-day GUSTO moderate or severe bleeding, STEEPLE-defined major bleeding, and the need for blood transfusions [ ]. These substantial bleeding complications ultimately prompted early termination of the trial. The results of the ACCOAST trial are conspicuously dissimilar from the findings from trials examining preloading with clopidogrel, and some have questioned whether prasugrel was an appropriate drug for pretreatment in this population [ ]. The TRITON TIMI-38 trial (N = 13,608) compared outcomes with clopidogrel and prasugrel in patients with ACS undergoing PCI and showed that prasugrel treatment decreased ischemic events, although at the expense of a significant increase in major bleeding and fatal bleeding [ ]. In the subsequent trial (N = 3534) comparing these agents in patients with STEMI, bleeding complications were similar with clopidogrel and prasugrel, although subjects who did not undergo PCI and were treated medically were excluded from the study [ ]. Conversely, PCI was performed in only 68.7% of subjects in the ACCOAST trial, leaving a large proportion to medical management [ ]. Given that prasugrel had not been previously indicated for medical management in the TRITON TIMI trials [ , ], it is queried whether prasugrel should be considered an option for pretreatment in patients with NSTEACS, as many of these patients are managed with non-invasive therapy [ ]. The substantial bleeding complications in the ACCOAST trial may further be explained by the inclusion of patients with age > 75 and those with low body weight into this trial, as these factors have been associated with increased bleeding risk [ , , ].
While it did not specifically evaluate the utility of early vs. delayed P2Y12 inhibition, the PLATO trial protocol required administration of both ticagrelor and clopidogrel as soon as possible after randomization, which was largely prior to cardiac catheterization. This allows for characterization of the relative bleeding risks of these agents with pretreatment [ ]. Investigators found that, compared with clopidogrel, ticagrelor was not associated with a significant increase in trial-defined major bleeding or in the rate of TIMI major bleeding. However, when analyzing for the occurrence of non-CABG related major bleeding, ticagrelor was associated with a significantly increased risk, both by the trial definition (4.5 vs. 3.8%, p = 0.03) and by TIMI criteria (2.8 vs. 2.2%, p = 0.03). There was also a significant increase in ticagrelor-mediated fatal intracranial bleeding, although the absolute difference was very low (0.1 vs. 0.01%, p = 0.02) [ ]. Further studies are needed to characterize the bleeding risk that occurs with early vs. delayed administration of ticagrelor.
The CHAMPION trial series conveys the relative risks of bleeding with cangrelor and clopidogrel, and the instantaneous onset of action of cangrelor allows for an accurate characterization of the risks of this medication as a pretreatment agent. Neither the CHAMPION-PCI nor CHAMPION-PLATFORM trials reported a significant difference in these agents for TIMI major or minor bleeding or for GUSTO severe or moderate bleeding [ , ]. However, in both trials, cangrelor increased GUSTO mild bleeding (PLATFORM: 16.0% versus 11.7%, p < 0.001; PCI 19.6 vs. 16.9%, p = 0.001) and ACUITY minor bleeding (PLATFORM: 12.0 vs. 9.3%, p = 0.001; PCI 17.6 vs. 15.2%, p = 0.003). Treatment with clopidogrel additionally caused a significant increase in ACUITY major bleeding in the CHAMPION-PLATFORM trial (5.5 vs. 3.5%, p < 0.001), which was driven by access site hematomas [ ]. The CHAMPION-PHOENIX found no significant difference in the primary safety outcome of GUSTO severe bleeding, although there was a significant increase in ACUTITY major bleeding (4.3 vs. 2.5, p < 0.001) and minor bleeding (11.8 vs. 8.6%, p < 0.001) [ ].
Bleeding risk in patients with stable angina
As with NSTEACS, a variable risk of bleeding complications has been observed with clopidogrel preloading in patients with stable angina. In the CREDO trial, a non-significant trend towards increased TIMI major bleeding at 1-year was reported with preloading (8.8 vs. 6.7%, p = 0.07) [ ], while patients with stable angina in the PRAGUE-8 trial had a significant increase in major and minor bleeding complications with clopidogrel pretreatment (3.5 vs. 1.4%, p = 0.025) [ ]. Conversely, analysis of the ISAR REACT trial (N = 2159) found no increase in major bleeding, minor bleeding or transfusion requirement with clopidogrel pretreatment [ ].
Observational data do not support an association between preloading and bleeding complications. A study by Assali et al. showed equal rates of bleeding with early and delayed clopidogrel administration in patients with stable angina and unstable angina receiving glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (11 vs. 11%, p = 1) [ ]. This study paralleled results from an analysis of the EVENT registry that compared TIMI major and minor bleeding with early and delayed clopidogrel treatment in patients with stable angina (1.0 vs. 1.0%, p = 0.94) [ ].
Risk of CABG delays and complications
An important consideration in preloading is the risk of complications in those who ultimately require CABG. Among patients with coronary anatomy that is most appropriate for surgical management, preloading may increase the risk of operative complications or delayed surgery. The potent platelet inhibition of these medications increases the operative bleeding risk in patients undergoing CABG, and because the antiplatelet effect of oral P2Y12 inhibitors lasts for 3–10 days, it is recommended that surgery be delayed for 5–7 days following P2Y12 inhibitor treatment [ ]. This delay can result in prolonged hospitalizations that, in turn, raise hospital costs and increase the risk of inpatient complications. Furthermore, it is extremely difficult to predict which patients will need CABG prior to cardiac catheterization [ ], making it unlikely that a systematic decision to preload based on anticipated surgical needs will be successful.
Several randomized trials have described outcomes in patients who undergo CABG after recent clopidogrel administration. Among patients with STEMI in the CLARITY trial who underwent CABG during index hospitalization, subjects who received clopidogrel preoperatively were not found to have an increase in TIMI major or minor bleeding when compared to the placebo group, either from the time of randomization to follow up (13.6 vs. 14.3%, p = 1.0) or from CABG to the time of follow up (9.1 vs. 11.4%, p = 0.78) [ ]. Even among those who discontinued the study drug <5 days prior to CABG, clopidogrel was not associated with increased bleeding. In the CURE trial, there was no difference in major bleeding events between patients with NSTEACS who received clopidogrel versus placebo and subsequently underwent CABG [ ]. When these groups were analyzed based on the timing of drug cessation, there was a non-significant increase in major bleeding among those who continued the study drug within 5 days of CABG, while no difference was observed in those who discontinued the drug >5 days prior to CABG. For patients in the CREDO trial with stable angina who underwent CABG, clopidogrel administration did not lead to increased major (7.7 vs. 5.9%, p = 0.12) or minor (4.7 vs. 4.9%, p = 0.92) procedural (including CABG) bleeding when compared to placebo [ ].
A number of observational trials have characterized the risk of CABG-related bleeding associated with clopidogrel use among patients who undergo elective and emergent surgery. Mehta et al. conducted an observational study investigating outcomes in patients with NSTEACS who received clopidogrel and subsequently underwent CABG [ ]. It was found that patients who received clopidogrel and underwent CABG after ≤5 days had a significant increase in blood transfusions (65.0 vs. 56.9%; OR 1.36; 95% CI 1.10–1.18) and the need for ≥4 units of blood (27.7 vs. 18.4%; OR 1.70; 95% CI 1.32–2.19). There was no significant increase in bleeding among patients who underwent CABG >5 days after receiving clopidogrel. In contrast, for patients with NSTEACS in the ACUITY trial, clopidogrel administration was associated with lower 30 day composite ischemia (OR 0.67; 95% CI 0.48–0.92; p = 0.001) without an increase in post CABG major bleeding (OR 0.98; 95% CI 0.80–1.19; p = 0.80) [ ]. Among those who received clopidogrel and subsequently underwent CABG, 67.8% of patients received clopidogrel <5 days prior to CABG, and these patients were found to have a significant increase in the need for transfusion (41.8 vs. 31.3%, p = 0.005), although there was no difference in post-CABG major bleeding, reoperation for bleeding, or 24-h chest tube output. Several other observational studies have investigated outcomes in patients who received clopidogrel and subsequently underwent urgent or elective CABG after varying time periods. A meta-analysis by Biancari et al. reviewed 17 observational studies and determined that recent clopidogrel exposure prior to CABG was associated with an increased risk of death (RR 1.30; 95% CI 1.02–1.67), reoperation for bleeding (RR 1.88; 95% CI 1.37–2.58), and the need for packed red blood cell transfusion (RR 1.23; 95% CI 1.10–1.37) [ ].
Less is known about risk of CABG-related bleeding associated with other P2Y12 inhibitors. In the TRITON-TIMI 38 trial comparing clopidogrel and prasugrel use in patients with STEMI, prasugrel was associated with significantly increased TIMI major bleeding (18.8 vs. 2.7%; OR 8.19; 95% CI 1.76–38.18; p = 0.0033) and minor bleeding (21.9 vs. 4.1%; OR 6.53; 95% CI 1.78–23.94; p = 0.0032) after CABG compared to clopidogrel [ ]. Among patients with NSTEACS in TRITON-TIMI 38 randomized to prasugrel versus clopidogrel who underwent subsequent CABG, prasugrel administration was associated with increased CABG-related TIMI major bleeding (13.4 vs. 3.2%; HR 4.73; 95% CI 1.90–11.82; p < 0.001) [ ]. In the PLATO trial, however, ticagrelor was not associated with increased CABG-related major bleeding when compared to clopidogrel [ ].
While the risk of delayed surgical management complicates the decision to preload, it is unclear if this potential delay, in itself, provides a substantial reason to discourage P2Y12 inhibitor pretreatment [ ]. While CABG is a common form of management of coronary disease, the frequency of CABG remains relatively low, particularly as a surgery that directly follows index cardiac catheterization. Among subjects in the CURE trial, 14.5% of patients who were treated with clopidogrel subsequently underwent CABG, and this surgery occurred at an average time of 25.5 days following the time of randomization [ , ]. Provided that surgery can be safely delayed for 5 days to allow for adequate drug washout, the risk of bleeding in a patient who is preloaded and subsequently undergoes CABG is not increased when clopidogrel is discontinued [ , ]. In fact, considering the reduction in ischemic events that occurs with P2Y12 inhibition, patients with ACS who ultimately require CABG may benefit from initial treatment with P2Y12 inhibitors following their primary ischemic event, as long as this medication is subsequently held. Analysis of the ACUITY trial showed that, compared to subjects who received no clopidogrel treatment, patients with NSTEACS who later underwent CABG had improved outcomes if they received clopidogrel treatment that was discontinued >5 days prior to surgery [ ]. In this group, clopidogrel treatment was associated with a decreased 30-day composite of adverse events (death, MI, unplanned revascularization; 12.7 vs. 17.3%, p = 0.01) without an associated increase in bleeding complications.
Conclusions
Dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and P2Y12 inhibitors has become a fundamental component of the management of coronary disease with a role that continues to evolve with ongoing advances in pharmacotherapy. The importance of P2Y12 inhibition in patients who undergo PCI is indisputable [ ], and improved outcomes have likewise been demonstrated in patients with ACS independent of PCI [ ]. However, despite the available evidence from multiple trials and observational studies, the optimal timing for initiation P2Y12 inhibitors remains unclear, as these prior studies do not allow for a consensus on preloading. Within clinical practice, the decision to preload is inconsistent and dependent on operator and institutional preferences. Even within academic centers this practice is variable, and many scholars express strong convictions for and against preloading [ , ]. While the National Cardiovascular Data Registry (NCDR) CathPCI registry does not capture preloading information, the NCDR ACTION registry does capture date/time information on P2Y12 inhibitors administered within 24 h of medical contact, which may provide future insights into modern clinical preloading practice patterns in STEMI and NSTEACS patients [ , ]. Given the challenge of balancing the risks of ischemic events and bleeding complications, the implications of preloading are not trivial, particularly in high-risk patients who present with ACS. Despite the inconsistent findings of the aforementioned studies, several conclusions about preloading can reasonably be made. When taken in sum, it is apparent that preloading is associated with some degree of reduction in adverse ischemic events, although this benefit comes with a risk of bleeding complications. While the variable results of prior studies make it difficult to quantify the magnitude of these factors, these risks and benefits should be applied to the context of patient’s clinical situation.
The 2013 ACCF/AHA guidelines for management of STEMI recommend P2Y12 inhibitor loading in patients with STEMI at the time of first medial contact (Table 3 ) [ ]. This recommendation is logical as STEMI generally involves acute plaque rupture [ ], and timely platelet inhibition may improve clinical outcomes, particularly given the lack of increased bleeding risk reported in prior trials [ , , , ].
Table 3 Guideline recommendations for P2Y12 pre-treatment Guideline P2Y12 Pre-treatment recommendation Class LOE NSTEACS 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes [ ] Administer a loading dose of a P2Y12 receptor inhibitor prior to the procedure in patients undergoing PCI with stenting I A Choices include Clopidogrel 600 mg I B Prasugrel 60 mg I B Ticagrelor 180 mg I B STEMI 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction [ ] Administer a loading dose of a P2Y12 receptor inhibitor as early as possible or at time of primary PCI I B Choices include Clopidogrel 600 mg I B Prasugrel 60 mg I B Ticagrelor 180 mg I B Most recent guideline recommendations for loading of P2Y 12 receptor inhibitors in ACS, divided by NSTEMI and STEMI LOE level of evidence
In patients with stable angina, on the other hand, the absence of acute ischemia or active thrombus makes the need for pretreatment difficult to justify in the presence of any evidence of increased bleeding risk [ ]. Considering that elective catheterization often does not result in PCI and that many patients who undergo elective catheterization do not even have coronary disease [ , ], the risks of harm likely outweigh any potential benefit of pretreatment in this population.
The decision to preload remains most difficult for NSTEACS, which occurs secondary to a range of underlying etiologies that may or may not improve with immediate platelet inhibition. Inconsistent conclusions from studies evaluating preloading in this population likewise make it difficult to determine the strategy to best optimize clinical outcomes. For patients with NSTEACS, the value of preloading will likely be contingent on the circumstances of the individual patient. Providers should base this decision on their assessment of the etiology of the underlying ischemic event and on the patient’s clinical risk factors. For most patients, however, in the absence of a clear contraindication for dual antiplatelet therapy, a challenge with P2Y12 inhibitor pretreatment should be considered. The 2014 AHA/ACC guidelines for the management of NSTEACS recommend P2Y12 inhibitor loading prior to cardiac catheterization in patients with NSTEACS, although it does not provide a specific recommendation on the timing of therapy (Table 3 ) [ ]. These recommendations are consistent with an overall consensus that can be reasonably drawn from prior trials and observational studies.
Further investigations are needed to better characterize the risks and benefits of preloading in patients with various presentations of coronary artery disease. The majority of available data on preloading comes from trials evaluating outcomes with clopidogrel. As the newer P2Y12 inhibitors become more widely utilized, the need for further investigation into these agents will become increasingly important.
In conclusion, preloading with P2Y12 inhibitors remains a controversial topic that represents the challenge of balancing the reduction of ischemic events and bleeding complications. Evidence on P2Y12 inhibitor preloading is abundant albeit with inconsistent conclusions. Review of the literature supports this practice in patients with ACS, although preloading is unlikely to be beneficial in patients with stable angina.
Funding
This manuscript was prepared without external funding.