Introduction
Ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury is a crucial issue in organ transplantation, which can lead to tissue dysfunction. Within the organ ischemia, tissue hypoxia, severe imbalance of metabolic supply, and microvascular injury occur. On the other hand, subsequent to reperfusion, innate and adaptive immune responses are activated, finally resulting in cell death (Azarpira et al. ). I/R injury is considered a major cause of acute renal injury subsequent to shock, surgery, and transplantation. This condition is associated with the over-expression of pro-apoptotic genes including BAX and BAD and the under-expression of anti-apoptotic genes like BCL2 (Supavekin et al. ). Moreover, microRNAs are introduced as powerful regulators that are involved in I/R injury process. These small non-coding RNAs result in the alteration of gene expression through the influencing on target genes. Global microRNA expression profiling indicated that miR - 21 , miR - 20a , miR146a , miR-199a-3p , miR-214 , miR-192 , miR-187 , miR-805 , and miR - 194 are differentially expressed in I/R injury (Godwin et al. ). It has been shown that miR -24 is critically involved in the endothelial and tubular epithelial cells apoptosis which leads to I/R injury. MiR - 24 targets a variety of anti-apoptotic genes, including S1PR1 , H2A.X , and HO-1 in vitro (Lorenzen et al. ).
I/R injury occurs frequently in kidney grafting that can affect short-term as well as long-term transplantation outcome. Therefore, recent studies have focused on feasible methods to overcome this complication in kidney transplantation (Azarpira et al. , , ). Applying short-time episodes of I/R in ischemic preconditioning (IPC) has been reported as a useful method for kidney protection. The underlying mechanisms of IPC are not completely defined although IPC involves anti-inflammatory, neuronal, humoral, and signal transduction pathways (Beattie et al. ). Moreover, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory, homing, and tissue regeneration properties which may reduce the undesirable effects of I/R injury in kidney transplantation (Azarpira et al. , ). In this regard, Azarpira et al. reported the promotion of kidney repair using infusion of BALB/C mice bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) in the mice model of I/R. They suggested that MSCs acted through a paracrine mechanism and improved renal function (Azarpira et al. ). In another study, researchers showed that human adipose stromal vascular fraction and adipose-derived MSCs significantly ameliorated the renal function and reduced the tubular injury of acute renal I/R injury in the rat model (Azarpira et al. ).
In addition to cell therapy in I/R injury, the application of anti-oxidant and anti-apoptotic agents has been investigated. Researchers found out MitoQ (Azarpira et al. ), obestatin (Badet et al. ), CDDO-imidazolide (Baeyens et al. ), curcumin (Awad and El-Sharif ), and nicotine (Sadis et al. ) can attenuate renal I/R injury. In the present study, we decided to appraise the effect of royal jelly (RJ), as an exclusive food, on I/R injury. This agent has protective effects on cells. RJ is produced by queen honeybee (Apismillifera) larva. It comprises water, proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, mineral salts, and vitamins (Nagai and Inoue ). This bioactive agent has been reported to possess different characteristics such as anti-bacterial/viral properties, anti-inflammatory activity, anti-oxidant activity, anti-apoptotic activity, and anti-tumor capacity (Viuda-Martos et al. ). According to these features, various studies have been designed to recruit RJ. There are some reports indicating the inhibitory and modulatory effects of RJ on the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and immune responses, respectively (Okamoto et al. ; Kohno et al. ; Vucevic et al. ). Moreover, RJ modulates the oxidative stress and apoptosis (Karadeniz et al. ). These findings show that RJ may represent beneficial effects in protecting and treating organs during and after I/R injury.
Finding reliable strategies to control I/R injury may improve the kidney transplantation outcome. Therefore, according to the previous reports on I/R injury in kidney graft, we decided to evaluate and compare the effects of MSCs, RJ, and IPC on kidney I/R injury model. In this regard, we evaluated cell tracking in tissues, kidney function, histopathological changes, and the genes expression of FADD , BAX , BAD , BCL-2 , and miR - 24 in different groups.
Materials and methods
Animal model and study groups
Male Balb/c mice were used and ethics were considered in all procedures according to Animal Care Committee of the institution. The mice, weighing 30–35 g, were housed with a 12-h–12-h light-dark cycle and complete food and water availability. Thirty-six Balb/c mice were divided into six groups including sham, I/R, I/R after IPC, I/R pre-treated with 100 mg/kg/day RJ (Najafi et al. ) for 20 days (Cemek et al. ) (I/R + RJ), treatment with 1 × 10 6 GFP + BM-MSCs (Tian et al. ) after I/R induction (I/R + MSCs), and I/R pre-treated with 100 mg/kg/day RJ for 20 days and treated with 1 × 10 6 GFP + BM-MSCs after I/R induction (I/R + MSCs/RJ). All treatments were done intraperitoneally. Ten days before the beginning of the main experiment, the right kidneys were removed from all animals. All groups were sacrificed after 48 h of reperfusion and underwent the evaluations.
Isolation and culture of BM-MSCs
After anesthesia induction in green mice (purchased from Royan Institute, Tehran, Iran), MSCs were collected by flushing the femurs with DMEM-F12 medium (Caisson, USA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco, Germany) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Caisson, USA). The cells were washed in the medium and cultured in complete medium at 37 °C in humidified 5% incubator. The medium was changed three times a week. On the 9th day, the cells were passaged and sub-cultured for obtaining enough number of cells.
Characterization of BM-MSCs
In order to characterize the isolated cells, flow cytometry was applied to determine the expression of surface antigens including CD44, CD34, CD45, and Sca1 (all from eBioscience, USA). To this end, 2 × 10 5 cells were washed and incubated with antibody against each mentioned marker for 1 h. After washing, evaluation was done using flow cytometer (BD Pharmingen, BD FACS calibur, USA). All expressions were compared with the corresponding isotype control.
On the other hand, the differentiation potential of the cells was determined with inducing the cells in adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation media for 14 and 21 days, respectively. After that, Oil Red O and Alizarin Red staining (from Sigma Aldrich, USA) confirmed the differentiation potential.
Kidney I/R model
The mice were anesthetized through administration of ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg) intraperitoneally. The left kidney was exposed by an incision and the left renal artery was clamped for 45 min followed by clamp release to conduct reperfusion. IPC was conducted before I/R by clamping the artery for 3 min thrice. The perfusion time between each clamping was considered 3 min (Kolocassides et al. ).
Cell tracking
Forty-eight hours after the injection of GFP + BM-MSCs, to confirm the migration of cells to the damaged tissue, imaging was done on fresh isolated organs by imaging instrument (Kodak, USA).
Renal function assay
After 48 h—before sacrificing—the whole blood samples were drawn from all animals. The serum was separated and analyzed for blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine (CR) levels, using an Auto Analyzer RA1000 (Technicon, USA).
Histopathology findings
Tissue samples of the left kidney were fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin. After tissue processing and embedding in paraffin, 4-μm thickness sections were prepared and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). The slides were evaluated by an expert pathologist who was unaware of the groups. The samples were assayed using the EGTI scoring system (Baranski et al. ). According to this system, scoring was performed on four aspects, including endothelial, glomerular, tubular, and tubulo-interstitial damages.
Gene expression analysis
To evaluate the expression of FADD , BAX , BAD , BCL-2 genes, total RNA extraction was done in triplicate on 50 mg kidney tissue using RNA-Sol isolation kit (Alphabio). The RNA quality was verified by Nanodrop through the Abs260 nm/Abs280 nm absorption ratio. Next, cDNA was synthesized by PrimeScript TM RT Reagent Kit (Takara, Japan). To evaluate the expression of miR-24, after total RNA extraction and qualification, cDNA was synthetized using the polyA tail reverse-transcription primer (PARSGENOME MiR-Amp kit, Iran). Small nuclear RNA U6 was also considered as the internal control.
The real-time RT-PCR reaction was done with SYBR® Premix Ex TaqTM II (Takara, Japan) using Applied Biosystems StepOnePlus™ Real-Time PCR System (ABI, USA). Small nuclear RNA U6 and GAPDH and were considered as the internal control for miR-24 and other genes respectively. The expression level of the genes was determined by Livak (2 -ΔΔCT ) method.
We designed the primers by NCBI tool Primer Blast. The designed primers are listed in Table 1 . Table 1 Primer sequences of the studied genes Genes Forward sequence Reverse sequence Size (bp) Cycle number Annealing TM (°C) GAPDH (Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase) ACTGAGCAAGAGAGGCCC TA TATGGGGGTCTGGGATGGAA 80 40 58.4 BCL-2 (B cell lymphoma 2) GGATAACGGAGGCTGGGATGC ATTTGTTTGGGGCAGGTTTGTCG 177 40 60 BAX (BCL2 associated X) TTTTGCTACAGGGTTTCATCCAGG ATCATCCTCTGCAGCTCCATATTG 166 40 60 BAD (Bcl2 associated agonist of cell death) GAGCAACATTCATCAGCAGGGACG GGTACGAACTGTGGCGACTCCG 92 40 55 FADD (Fas-associated protein with death domain) AGCGCCTGGACGACTTCGAG CTCACTCAGACTTCGGGGGTACTTC 188 40 57
Statistical analysis
For statistical analysis, T test and Mann-Whitney test were applied using Graph Pad Prism 5. The results were expressed as mean ± SD values and P value < 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
BM-MSC characterization
The isolated cells showed fibroblastic-like morphology (Fig. 1 a, b) and reached complete confluence after 9 days from the beginning of the culture. The BM-MSCs expressed CD44 and Sca-1, as MSCs markers, and did not express CD34 and CD 45, as hematopoietic stem cells (Fig. 1 c). These cells showed osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation potential after 14- and 21-day induction, respectively (Fig. 1 d, e). Fig. 1 BM-MSCs characteristics. BM-MSCs on the second day of primary culture ( a ) and at the first passage ( b ). Surface antigen expression of CD44, CD34, CD45, and Sca-1 ( c ). Osteogenic ( d ) and adipogenic ( e ) differentiation potential which were confirmed by Alizarin Red S and Oil Red O staining, respectively
Cell tracking
The homing of GFP + BM-MSCs was observed in the liver and kidney organs after 48 h (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 GFP + BM-MSCs tracking in tissue sections of kidney (A) and liver (B). The red spots indicate cells homing in these organs
Renal function assay
BUN and Cr levels were compared in different groups after 48 h. These markers were significantly increased in the I/R model in comparison with the sham group. The findings indicated that BUN level was significantly reduced in (I/R + MSCs) ( p = 0.05) and (I/R + RJ) ( p = 0.05) groups. However, Cr level was significantly decreased only in the I/R + RJ group ( p = 0.05) (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 BUN and Cr levels in different groups including sham, I/R, I/R injury after ischemic preconditioning (IPC), I/R pre-treated with 100 mg/kg/day RJ for 20 days (I/R + RJ), treatment with 1 × 10 6 GFP+ BM-MSCs after I/R induction (I/R + MSCs), and I/R pre-treated with 100 mg/kg/day RJ for 20 days and treatment with 1 × 10 6 GFP+ BM-MSCs after I/R induction (I/R + MSCs/RJ). (Asterisks (*) indicate statistical significance between each group and I/R group)
Histopathology findings
The histopathological findings such as tubular damage, tubulo-interstitial damage, glomerular damage, and endothelial damage were evaluated in all groups (Fig. 4 ). The mentioned injuries showed an increase in I/R condition when compared to the sham group. Glomerular damage significantly reduced in the I/R + MSCs/RJ ( p = 0.038) and I/R + RJ ( p = 0.038) groups compared to the I/R group. Although the tubular damage, tubulo-interstitial damage, and endothelial damage were reduced in the treated groups, it was not significant (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 4 Histopathological sections of the kidneys in different groups including sham (A), I/R (B), I/R injury after ischemic preconditioning (IPC) (C), I/R pre-treated with 100 mg/kg/day RJ for 20 days (I/R + RJ) (D), treatment with 1 × 106 GFP+ BM-MSCs after I/R induction (I/R + MSCs) (E), and I/R pre-treated with 100 mg/kg/day RJ for 20 days and treatment with 1 × 106 GFP+ BM-MSCs after I/R induction (I/R + MSCs/RJ) (F). Tubular cast (yellow arrows), interstitial inflammation (blue arrows), tubular necrosis (green arrows), loss of brush border (orange arrows), and retraction of glomeruli (deep red arrows) are pointed on the images Fig. 5 Histopathology findings in different groups including sham, I/R, I/R injury after ischemic preconditioning (IPC), I/R pre-treated with 100 mg/kg/day RJ for 20 days (I/R + RJ), treatment with 1 × 10 6 GFP+ BM-MSCs after I/R induction (I/R + MSCs), and I/R pre-treated with 100 mg/kg/day RJ for 20 days and treatment with 1 × 10 6 GFP+ BM-MSCs after I/R induction (I/R + MSCs/RJ). (Asterisks (*) indicate statistical significance between each group and I/R group)
Gene expression analysis
The evaluation of BAD , BAX , and FADD genes expression profile showed a significant reduction in these genes in the I/R + MSCs/RJ ( p = 0.024) and I/R + RJ ( p = 0.038, 0.024, and 0.013, respectively) groups. Although the expression of BCL2 gene was increased in the I/R + MSCs and IPC groups, it was not statistically significant (Fig. 6 ). On the other hand, the expression of miR-24 was statistically reduced in the I/R + MSCs/RJ ( p = 0.05), I/R + MSCs ( p = 0.045), and I/R + RJ ( p = 0.05) groups when compared to the I/R group. Fig. 6 Gene expression analysis of BAD ( a ), BAX ( b ), FADD ( c ), BCL2 ( d ), and miR - 24 ( e ) in different groups including sham, I/R, I/R injury after ischemic preconditioning (IPC), I/R pre-treated with 100 mg/kg/day RJ (I/R + RJ), I/R pre-treated with 1 × 10 6 GFP + BM-MSCs (I/R + MSCs), and I/R pre-treated with 100 mg/kg/day RJ and 1 × 10 6 GFP+ BM-MSCs (I/R + MSCs/RJ). (Asterisks (*) indicate statistical significance between each group and I/R group)
Discussion
Various pathological conditions of circulatory arrest and subsequent perfusion result in I/R injury, e.g., vascular surgery, transplantation, trauma, and ischemic stroke, which lead to morbidity and mortality (Azarpira et al. ). Although several methods have been established to ameliorate I/R injury pathway, there is no optimal way to eliminate unintended effects of I/R injury on renal tissue. In the present study, we assayed and compared the potential role of BM-MSCs and RJ on attenuating kidney I/R injury in mice model.
During the interruption of blood flow, the kidney experiences hypoxia, increased oxidative stress, and microvascular dysfunction. Moreover, subsequent reperfusion leads to the recruitment and activation of both innate and adaptive immune system which can result in the progressive tissue damage (Bagheri et al. ; Azarpira et al. ). It has been reported that IPC can improve the tolerance of organs in I/R injury condition. A number of studies have investigated the protective effects of IPC on renal I/R injury. It can be due to the modulation of inflammation in the ischemic kidney before the main I/R episode (Endre ). Even though the IPC mechanism has remained controversial, several mechanisms have been suggested for the protective effects of it. In this regard, some mediators like nitric oxide (Park et al. ; Herrero et al. ; Mahfoudh-Boussaid et al. ), regulatory T cells (Kinsey et al. ; Cho et al. ), protein kinase (Nowak et al. ), and adenosine (Lee and Emala ) are involved. The findings have shown that IPC can improve the renal function and structure subsequent to renal I/R injury. The acute phase of IPC protection is mediated by signaling the molecules and related channels, while the late phase is triggered by the modulation of mitochondrial metabolism, the suppression of ROS production, and inhibition of the inflammation and apoptotic pathways. Overall, IPC leads to activation of protective pathways to establish renal homeostasis and promotion of the tissue repair (Kapitsinou and Haase ).
Our study showed that although the reduction of BUN and Cr levels, histological damages and the expression of apoptotic genes and miR-24 occurred in the IPC group when compared with I/R induction without IPC, the differences were not significant. It might be due to our protocol for IPC induction. We used a three-cycle IPC schedule including 3 min of ischemia followed by 3 min of reperfusion (Kolocassides et al. ). Although IPC has been suggested as an effective method, there is no standard and verified protocol for conducting the procedure in the literature (Yoon et al. ). Previous studies used one-cycle or several-cycle preconditioning. Torras et al. reported one cycle of 15 min of ischemia followed by 10 min of reperfusion as an optimal protocol which can protect the renal function and morphology subsequent to the main I/R. They showed that in one-cycle protocols, lower ischemia time, 5 or 10 min, or higher ischemia time, beyond 15 min, led to partial structural protection or the disappearance of the preconditioning effects, respectively (Torras et al. ). On the other hand, a four-cycle IPC protocol of 5 min of ischemia and 5 min reperfusion were applied in experimental models (Joo et al. ; Fan et al. ). Moreover, there was a wide variety in the time window of ischemia from 5 min to 14 days (Ayupova et al. ; Yoon et al. ; Hernandez et al. ). These varieties in IPC procedure and time window may lead to different results in the literature.
Recent studies showed that MSCs were potential candidates for protection and recovery of organs in I/R injury. It seems that this potentiality is related to its anti-inflammatory, immune-modulatory, anti-oxidant, and anti-apoptotic properties of released cytokines, growth factors, and exosomes. In addition, it was reported that MSCs improved the structural and functional renal repair in acute renal failure through tubular epithelium regeneration (Baharvand et al. ).
In 2008, Barker et al. showed that the infusion of human BM-MSCs improved the renal function and survival. They found out that the administration of these cells reduced proximal tubular epithelial cell injury that can affect the animal models survival (Barker et al. ). Recently, it has been reported that stromal vascular fraction and mesenchymal stem cells derived from human adipose tissue improve the renal function and reduce the cell apoptosis, and tubular injury in Sprague-Dawley rats kidney I/R injury (Barber et al. ). According to our findings, renal I/R injury was attenuated by BM-MSCs, in harmony with previous studies (Bai et al. ; Banerjee et al. ; Banting et al. ). We observed that BUN was significantly decreased in the I/R + MSCs group. However, the reduction of BUN in the I/R + MSCs/RJ group and Cr in both I/R injury +MSCs and I/R + MSCs/RJ groups were not significant. The histopathological studies showed that the decrease of glomerular damage was obvious only when MSCs were used in combination with RJ. This finding was also true in the downregulation of apoptotic genes such as BAX , BAD , and FADD . On the other hand, BCL2 expression was reduced when MSCs were used alone although it was not significant.
In addition to cell-based therapies, researchers investigated the effect of different anti-apoptotic and anti-oxidant agents on I/R injury. Alexandropoulos et al. examined the influence of N -acetylcystein and atorvastatin on a rat model of intestinal I/R. They found out these agents may exhibit protective activity against renal and hepatic injury (Alexandropoulos et al. ). In another study, the application of açaí extract in a rat model of I/R led to the attenuation of renal I/R injury in a dose-dependent manner (El Morsy et al. ). To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first report on the effectiveness of RJ on renal I/R injury. RJ, as a honey derivative, has presented various biological properties including anti-microbial (Fontana et al. ), anti-inflammatory (Kohno et al. ; Yanagita et al. ), and cytoprotective (Silici et al. ; Karadeniz et al. ) activities. Our results suggest that the administration of RJ before I/R induction can reduce the I/R injury. In this regard, BUN and Cr levels and glomerular damage were significantly decreased and apoptotic genes including BAX , BAD , and FADD were significantly downregulated. Although the levels of Cr and BUN were decreased in the I/R + MSCs/RJ group, it was not significant as observed in the I/R + RJ group.
We also evaluated the expression of miR - 24 in our groups. MicroRNAs are involved in a wide variety of biological and pathological pathways. In the current study, we showed that miR - 24 was overexpressed in the I/R injury group when compared with the controls. Lorenzen et al. reported that miR - 24 stimulated apoptosis in the renal endothelial and tubular epithelial cells which leads to ischemic injury. They induced I/R injury in mice following the silencing of miR - 24 and showed the reduction of apoptosis and inflammatory cells infiltration and the improvement of kidney function and tubular epithelial injury (Lorenzen et al. ). Therefore, downregulation of miR - 24 may be a promising strategy in the control of undesired condition in ischemia. We observed that pre-treatment with MSCs, RJ, or both of them and not IPC could significantly decrease miR - 24 expression level. Even though the reduction of tissue damage in different compartments of the treated I/R injury groups, except for glomerular damage in the I/R + MSCs/RJ and I/R + RJ groups compared to the I/R group, was not significant, it was in harmony with the downregulation of miR - 24 . The lack of significant improvement in other parts of tissue can be due to the evaluation time.
In this study, we evaluated the effects of MSCs and RJ 48 h after renal I/R. To investigate the overall aspects of I/R injury and attenuating mechanisms, it is essential to employ biomarkers that estimate the renal function in the early and late phases of kidney injury. Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), kidney injury molecule-1 (KIN-1), and microalbumin are highlighted biomarkers that can make more reliable prediction of the prognosis in acute kidney injury stage. Furthermore, the analysis of molecular and cellular mechanisms related to the immune cells’ function and oxygen-regulated pathways can provide deeper comprehension about the late phase events. In the present study, we evaluated miR - 24 expression in different groups. The evaluation of anti- miR - 24 treatment can confirm the role of miR - 24 . Moreover, it is essential to survey the application of MSCs and RJ in different ratios to optimize it.
Conclusion
Our findings showed that RJ can attenuate the I/R injury in the kidney better than IPC. Moreover, the design of optimal protocols for using RJ may lead to impressive improvement in the protection of organs against the I/R injury. Therefore, RJ can be recommended for further analysis toward preclinical studies.