Introduction
The history of tularemia dates back to the sixteenth century in Norway where it was first officially described as the disease of rodents or lemmings (Scheel et al. ), and later Edward Francis studied its epidemiology and clinical manifestations in human beings therefore, the Francisella genus was named at his honor (Olsufiev et al. ). Tularemia, also called rabbit fever, is a highly infectious bacterial zoonosis listed in category A biological warfare agent (Kemp ; Keim et al. ; Sjöstedt ). It is one of the re-emerging infectious diseases (Sjöstedt ; Elashvili et al. ) with a wide range of hosts and ways of transmissions (Keim et al. ). Initially, it was known as the disease of the northern hemisphere only (Olsufiev et al. ) however, coming to this point, different species of Francisella have been reported all over the world including Asia, Australia, Middle East, and Americas.
Tularemia cases increase due to the prolonged conflagration, natural calamities, and compromised hygiene. In addition, pervasive humans and animals movement and the effects of climate change play essential roles in this disease dynamics (Gürcan ). It is very clear from the history that tularemia outbreaks are preceded by increased population density of rodents (Sjöstedt ). Besides ticks, rodents are important players of tularemia transmission (Keim et al. ; Elashvili et al. ), and they serve as a sentinel species. In Europe hare, common vole and European water voles are reported to maintain its epizootics (Gyuranecz et al. ) while different genera of murine rodents including Apodemus and Rattus serving as a reservoir of tularemia in Asia (Zhang et al. ; Mostafavi et al. ). A study capturing murine rodents in Nepal has reported Rattus rattus brunneusculus as the predominant rodent species (He et al. ), while Indian gerbil ( Tatera indica ), the other common rodent species of Nepal, has also been reported to be tularemia seropositive (Pourhossein et al. ). Previous studies have shown the existence of Francisella tularensis subsp. holarctica in Tibetian plateau, the bordering area of Nepal (Wang et al. ), potentiating the possibility of finding this bacteria in Nepalese territory.
It has been clear that after every events of natural disaster, lives suffer from outbreaks of infectious diseases like malaria, plague, tularemia, pneumonia, coccidiosis, leishmaniosis, etc. (Kouadio et al. ; Pourhossein et al. ). It is not only due to the tumultuous situation of housing and shelter but also due to the complete displacement of natural host (animals) and important vectors (i.e., rodents, mosquitoes, etc.) allowing them to be more exposed to humans. Moreover, limited food supply, contaminated drinking water, and compromised environmental hygiene as a result of increased population density at temporary shelters have significant roles in infectious disease outbreak (Kouadio et al. ).
According to the Global Reports on Disaster Risk, Nepal lies at the 11th position in the list of earthquake prone countries in the world. In April of 2015, a massive earthquake and hundreds of aftershocks subsequently stroked the entire country causing millions of properties to be damaged and more than 8000 reported casualties. On the other hand, deeming the potential infectious disease outbreak situation after the geophysical disaster, it is very important to assess the disease status among its mammalian natural host and vectors such as rodents, and mosquitoes, ticks, etc. (Sjöstedt ) as a part of surveillance program. Such a forward surveillance provides the opportunity to be well prepared for the imminent unwanted situation. Current study was carried out to scan the sero-prevalence status of infectious zoonotic disease tularemia among murine rodents in different parts of Chitwan District of Nepal after the devastating earthquake hit.
Materials and methods
Study area and time
Samples were collected from three different locations of the Chitwan District. Namely Nipani, Bakulahar, and Pithuwa of Ratnanagar municipality, Sharanpur, and Bijayanagar of Chitrawan municipality and ward number 11, 5, and 6 of Bharatpur metropolitan area. These sites were selected in a way that one lies in the buffer zone area of Chitwan National Park, the next lies in a rural agricultural area, and the other represents the river side and/or urban area. The study was conducted January through September of 2016.
Capture of rodents
The rats and mice were captured using metal mouse traps, and the trapped rodents were recovered for blood collection procedures. Rodents trapping was a challenging task however, the systematically designed trap with a movement sensitive bait holder made it possible. Once the bait was kept in a bait holder, it was left in a solitary place with no access to other animals, dogs, cats, or other predators. Oftentimes bakery product, bread or bun, was used as a bait, while fresh potato or tomato was also used in some locations.
Blood collection
Rodents trapped in metal traps were recovered and euthanized by using injectable anesthesia overdosing (three times the anesthetic dose of xylazine, i.e., 10 mg/kg body weight) followed by cervical dislocation. Immediately after the euthanasia, blood was collected using 5-ml syringes via direct heart puncture method. Hence, collected blood samples were then transferred to bullet tubes for serum separation by using centrifuge at 1200 rpm for 15 min. Serum samples were finally preserved at − 20 °C until laboratory testing.
Sample size and sampling
Sample size was calculated based on the previous study (Dell et al. ). A total of 80 serum samples were collected and tested to increase the power of test.
Sample testing
Serum samples were examined in microbiology laboratory of the Agriculture and Forestry University, Rampur. Immunochromatographic test kit containing lipopolysaccharides of F. tularensis bacterium was used to detect total antibodies in the serum. The test kit was manufactured by (Vircell, S.L. Pza. Domínguez Ortiz 1. Polígono Industrial Dos de Octubre.18320 Santa Fe, Granada, Spain). The qualitative detection of total antibodies against Francisella sps in serum samples was done according to the manufacturers’ protocol, and there were no invalid tests in the study.
Data analysis
Data analysis was done using SPSS version 21 and Microsoft Excel. Prevalence among the different groups was compared using chi-square test. Additionally, the data was analyzed using EpiTools. P value < 0.05 was considered as a level of significance.
Results
Out of 80 serum samples tested, 1.25% (95% CI, i.e., normal approx. CL, − 1.18 to 3.68%) of samples were positive (Table 1 ; Figs. 1 and 2 ). True prevalence of tularemia was recorded to be 0.5024% (95% CI, i.e., Blacker CL, 0 to 5.45%). Table 1 Summary table of prevalence of Francisella tularensis in rats and mice Variables Levels No. of animals tested Seropositive (%) True prevalence (%) P value Test/result Population density High 50 2 0.51 1 FE/NS Low 30 0 N/a Rural/urban Urban 27 3.703 0.515 0.675 FE/NS Rural 53 0 N/a East/west East 23 0 N/a 1 FE/NS West 57 1.75 0.505 Sampling sites Chitrawan 30 0 N/a 0.3701 Chi/NS Bharatpur 27 3.703 0.512 Ratnanager 23 0 N/a NS non-significant Fig. 1 Plot of true prevalence and predictive value Fig. 2 Apparent prevalence and 95% confidence level
Prevalence of tularemia according to the sampling sites was 3.70% in Bharatpur and nil for rest of the areas. The difference between the prevalence of tularemia in different sampling locations was statistically insignificant (* P > 0.05). Based on a population density, 2% prevalence was observed in densely populated area which was statistically insignificant (* P > 0.05). Likewise, one sample from western Chitwan tested positive resulting into prevalence 1.75%, and none of the samples from eastern Chitwan were found positive. Furthermore, we differentiated the site as urban or agricultural area and calculated the prevalence. Out of 80 samples, 27 were from the urban area and 1 out of 27 samples, i.e., (3.70%) was tested positive. The difference in prevalence was statistically insignificant (* P > 0.05). In addition, individual rodents were dissected and their liver was observed after blood sampling. It was notable that 23.75% (95% CI, i.e., normal approx. CL, 14.42 to 33.08%) animals were found with liver lesions which were whitish/grayish spots or yellowish foci (Fig. 3 a, b) and 13.75% (95% CI, i.e., normal approx. CL, 6.2 to 21.3%) animals were found with cystic liver lesions approximately 1–10-mm diameter ranging few to numerous in number (Figs. 3 c, d and 4 ). Fig. 3 Gross pathologic lesions observed in liver. a , b Whitish/yellowish foci. c , d Cystic lesions Fig. 4 Gross pathologic lesions observed in liver. a – d Cystic lesions
Discussion
In this study, one rodent was found serologically positive for tularemia out of 80 rodent sera tested. The rodents captured were of genus Apodemus sps , Bandicota sps , Mus sps , Rattus sps , and Tatera sps , but none of them were Suncus sps . Every individual rodent was dissected, and their visceral organs were observed, particularly liver after blood sampling. The important finding of this study is tularemia positive test in a black rat ( Rattus rattus ) captured close to the Narayani river basin area, i.e., Narayangadh bazar. This is a common rodent species found in Nepal, and it is reported to be distributed in India and Pakistan as well (Jnawali et al. ). According to the previous studies black rats serve as a natural host of Francisella tularensis (Christova and Gladnishka ; Zhang et al. ; Roth et al. ), however, the animal host may vary according to the geographical location (Sjöstedt ). Probably, this is the first report on tularemia in rodents of Nepal, and the result of this study has opened up an avenue for further research to ascertain role of rats in the transmission of this disease.
The gross pathological lesions observed in the liver of 19 (of 80) animals, i.e., whitish/grayish or yellowish foci (Fig. 3 a, b), are very much similar to the tularemia lesions described in small rodents (Friend ) and in other rodents (OIE ), while similar lesions could be seen in small rodents due to some other bacterial infections, i.e., Brucella suis and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis (Gyuranecz et al. ). Most probably, these rodents having granulomatous liver lesions indicate that they are less sensitive species to the disease, and therefore, these animals represent appropriate species for the sero-prevalence study (OIE ). In contrast, only one seropositive sample in this study may indicate that these animals might be very sensitive species that normally die before the development of specific antibody response (OIE ). There are several bacterial infection for example Brucella sps ., Yersinia sps ., and Legionella sps ., even in the past possess possibility of cross-reaction with Francisella tularensis antigen, and are of critical importance in case of serological tests of tularemia (OIE ).
In this study, no further confirmation by alternative methods of diagnosis retains a possibility of false positive result to some extent. Although competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (cELISA) is known for its higher sensitivity in sero-surveillance of different wild animals (Sharma et al. ), it is always good to have alternative testing methods. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) or isolation and culture of bacteria from tissue samples could have been the best alternatives, however, the lack of standardized laboratory facilities and resources availability; we could not perform those tests in this study.
Interestingly, in addition to whitish/yellowish foci, few to numerous cystic lesions approximately ≤ 1-cm diameter embedded in the liver parenchyma were observed in 13.75% of animals (Figs. 3 c, d and 4 ). These cystic lesions are very similar to the Cysticercus fasciolaris which is a larval stage of Taenia taeniaeformis . This cestode parasite is commonly found in the digestive tract of cats, the final host, and different species of rats, mice, and voles serving as an intermediate host (Sharma et al. ). Even if the number of reported cases is not high, this parasite is zoonotic in nature and sufficient human infections have been reported (Ekanayake et al. ). It is further bolstered by other studies showing the abundant presence of this parasite in rats and mice of adjoining area of India (Singla et al. ; Sharma et al. ). This prominent presence simply infers that they are circulating in the environment, and cats and human beings are at potential risk situation. To the authors’ knowledge, it is the first study reporting this parasite in murine rodents of Nepal. Though it was beyond the scope of this study, more detailed investigations are suggested for enhanced accuracy.
Preponderance of Nepalese population (approx. 66%) relies on agriculture farming and allied professions (MoAD ). To the date, there are no reported cases of this disease in Nepal which may be due to the exclusion from the list of diseases to be tested in medical laboratories. Type B tularemia is considered to be less pathogenic to human beings and is transmitted while doing the common household chores such as working in the kitchen garden, rice field or in the farm house via urine, excreta, bodily discharges from the infected animals, or drinking contaminated water (Kılıç ; Karadenizli et al. ). Of note, this bacterium can survive for a long time in the environment (Sjöstedt ; Gürcan ; Schulze et al. ) and uses amoeba as a natural host to enhance its pathogenicity (El-Etr et al. ). Besides vector born e transmission, transmission due to the consumption of contaminated food and water has been well established (Lindhusen Lindhé et al. ). An important event is that, in vector cycle of the disease transmission, vectors are infected at their larval stages via contaminated water (Mörner ). These connections have further increased the importance of investigation upon this disease in Nepal because a huge chunk of its population is involved in agriculture where paddy is one of the major crop. Manual planting of paddy is a common practice that might increase the risk of F. tularensis infection while working in muddy paddy bed.
Furthermore, geographical features of Nepal show that its southern part is heavily irrigated by more than 6000 rivers and rivulets originated at Himalayas, Mahabharata, and Siwalik range including the tallest mountain in the world (Dhungel et al. ). It is the bordering area of China from where existence of this bacterium in different animal species has been reported (Zhang et al. ) including Tibet (Wang et al. ). In addition, phylogenetic study of Francisella tularensis subspecies holartica found within Tibet has shown that it is of Asian origin and dispersed into the other parts (Lu et al. ). The huge surface runoffs from these high altitude temperate areas potentially drain flora and fauna including microbes to the lower plain area, if not all, at least river basin areas. Likewise, practices of broadcasting animal or bird manure (i.e., poultry litter) into the paddy field as a soil fertilizer is rampant among Nepalese farmers. Given that the domestic animals (cattle, pig, moose, and birds) are already reported tularemia-resistant species (OIE ) and are found seropositive as well (Javed ). These activities add the possibility of finding tularemia-like diseases in plain areas. The notable point is, the entire country suffers from fever, typhoid-like diseases and eye infections at the end of paddy planting season, and the cause may be the F. tularensis infection indicating water born epidemics as in the case of Turkey (Kılıç ).
Essentially, the agriculture profession has a close link with tularemia infection because of the daily activities in field and wilderness where the rat and mouse population is higher. This hypothesis is further corroborated by the report of F. tularensis evidences in soil samples of Lahore City of Pakistan that shares similar climatic condition to this research site (Shabbir et al. ). On the flip side living standard, level of education, access to the information, and health services are still problematic, which necessitates more research on the part of environmental zoonotic diseases, public awareness, and prevention.
There were several limitations of this study. It is a cross-sectional study, and therefore, it could not delineate the cause to effect relationship. Moreover, diagnosis solely based on a single method of serological test without supplementary testing system could sometimes produce erroneous results leading to faulty conclusions which can be avoided by using multiple testing methods in the future. Finally, the limited number of samples and site coverage does not always represent the entire population particularly, when the result is correlated with wider area.
Conclusion
As it is regarded as a potential bioterrorism agent due to its very low infectious dose via inhalation route in rest of the world, 10 6 bacterial count is not a large dose for the oral exposure. The drinking water may be naturally contaminated and sometimes intentionally, which may be overlooked in some situations (Karadenizli et al. ). In developing countries where clean drinking water is still out of reach of demotic people, tularemia-like diseases could cause many problems. The finding of this study sheds the light on the importance of more exacting investigation of F. tularensis at its genetic level in this part of the world.