Introduction
Nanomaterials, especially silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) which usually appear in the form of a suspension consisting of particles less than 100 nm, are increasingly being manufactured and used for commercial and medical purposes due to their novel and unique physicochemical properties (Kawata et al. ). They display suitable antibacterial and anti-tumor activities. Their antibacterial activities are because of increase of cytosolic calcium, impairment of mitochondrial respiratory chain, and synthesis of ATP, DNA breaking, protein carbonilation, and lipidic membrane peroxidation (Tavakol et al. ). On the other hand, activation of apoptosis and changes in the levels of p53, nuclear factor (NF)-κB, and protein kinase B (AKT) are mentioned as the anticancer mechanisms of AgNPs (Tavakol ). However, in recent years, certain adverse effects of nanoparticles on human health and on the environment have been reported. Their absorption through the lung, intestine, and skin and then their entrance into the circulation can be irritable, genotoxic to mammalian cells, toxic for reproduction and neural systems, and accumulate in the liver and kidneys (Swidwinska-Gajewska and Czerczak ; Tang et al. ). The main mechanism which AgNPs used to induce cellular damage is mediated through the reactive oxygen species (ROS) and other free radicals which caused oxidative stress (Bartlomiejczyk et al. ). It has been reported that AgNPs can induce oxidative stress in cerebral astrocytes (Sun et al. ), umbilical vein endothelial cell (Tavakol et al. ), alveolar macrophage cells (Bhattacharjee et al. ), bone marrow cells (Patlolla et al. ), and embryonic kidney cells (Sooklert et al. ).
Therefore, prevention of these adverse effects are mandatory when use of AgNPs is unavoidable. One of the applicable and inexpensive methods to combat oxidative stress in different diseases is the use of antioxidant-rich sources such as raw plants and their processed derivatives (Koohi-Hosseinabadi et al. ). Zingiber officinale , a member of Zingiberaceae, which is known as ginger, is widely used in foods as a spice worldwide. Ginger contains several active substances including zingiberene, 6-gingerol, and 6-shogaol (Thomson et al. ). Phenolic extract of ginger is a potential antioxidant, which can inhibit free radical production, lipid peroxidation, and DNA damages. Also, the use of ginger extract as a therapeutic agent in epileptic rats treated with lamotrigine prevented the decline of renal tissue’s antioxidants (Zekrizadeh and Farokhy ).
Although ginger extract was used for the biosynthesis of AgNPs previously (Priyaa and Satyan ), no studies exist about the beneficial effects of ginger extract in prevention of adverse effects of AgNPs on kidney tissue. Therefore, in the present study, antioxidant parameters, activity of gamma glutamyl transferase, and alkaline phosphatase enzymes and electrophoretic pattern and concentration of kidney proteins plus kidney histopathological changes were assessed after AgNP consumption and their changes in response to the use of ginger extract.
Methods
Animal ethics
The experiment was performed under the approval of the state committee on animal ethics, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran (IACUC no: 4687/63). Also, the recommendations of European Council Directive (86/609/EC) of 24 November 1986, regarding the protection of animals used for experimental purposes were considered. All applicable international, national, and/or institutional guidelines for the care and use of animals were followed.
Plant extraction
Ginger was purchased from a local market in Shiraz in springe (Fars province, GPS coordinates: latitude, 29.580117 and longitude, 52.56888), and its taxonomy was confirmed by an expert botanist. Plants were washed with distilled water and were shade dried at room temperature for 3 days. Then rhizomes were ground and 1.2 g of powder was used for hydroalcoholic extraction based on previous reported procedure (Koohi-Hosseinabadi et al. ). Since the solvent is composed of alcohol and water, it completely evaporated and no moisture remained in the final extract.
Animal, housing, and treatments
Forty-eight adult male Balb/c mice (25.0 ± 3.0 g) were housed under conventional conditions with 12:12-h light/dark cycle (lights on at 7:00 a.m.), at an ambient temperature of 22 ± 2 °C and 50% relative humidity. After 7 days acclimation, they were randomly divided into four equal groups ( n = 12) as follow: Control group: received distilled water intraperitoneal (IP) for 35 consecutive days. AgNP group: received 200 mg/kg AgNPs, IP, for 35 consecutive days. Ginger group: received 500 mg/kg hydroalcoholic extract of ginger, IP, for 35 consecutive days. Ginger + AgNP group: received 500 mg/kg hydroalcoholic extract of ginger and 200 mg/kg AgNPs, IP, for 35 consecutive days.
Each group was kept in separate animal cage and monitored routinely. At the end of the experiment, heart blood was collected and animals were killed by cervical dislocation under deep anesthesia. Left kidneys were harvested and stored in liquid nitrogen. Tissue extraction was performed by homogenizing each tissue in five volumes of 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 ( w / v ) on ice. The suspensions were centrifuged for 15 min at 14,000 rpm at 4 °C in a high-speed refrigerated centrifuge (MSE, Scientific Instruments, Sussex, UK) (Sepehrimanesh and Aminlari ). The supernatants were stored at − 20 °C until use.
Measurements
Renal enzymes and oxidative status measurement
Alkaline phosphatase and gamma glutamyl transferase activities were measured using commercial kits (Pars Azmoon Co., Tehran, Iran). Glutathione peroxidase (GPx) activity was measured based on previous reported protocol using Biorex Fars commercial kit (Assaei et al. ). Catalase activity was measured based on the method presented by Goth. Briefly, 25 μl of sample was mixed with 250 μl of 1× tris buffer and 500 μl of 86% H 2 O 2 in 1× tris buffer. This solution was incubated in a dark place at room temperature for 10 min. After addition of 250 μl of 4% heptomolybdate solution, centrifugation was performed (4000 rpm, room temperature, 10 min). The absorbance of sample at 410 nm was read against 1× tris buffer as blank, and the catalase activity was calculated using the following formula: $$ \mathrm{Catalase}\ \mathrm{activity}\ \left(\raisebox{1ex}{$\mathrm{U}$}\!\left/ \!\raisebox{-1ex}{$\mathrm{ml}$}\right.\right)=\frac{{\mathrm{Absorbance}}_{\mathrm{control}}-{\mathrm{Absorbance}}_{\mathrm{sample}}}{{\mathrm{Absorbance}}_{\mathrm{control}}} $$
Malondialdehyde level as one of the end-products of lipid peroxidation was assessed via the measurement of thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) in renal tissue homogenate based on previous reported method (Mardani et al. ; Placer et al. ). In this method, MDA and thiobarbituric acid were reacted together in acidic condition and at high temperature. A colored product can be measured by spectrophotometer at 535 nm.
Serum biochemical assessments
Serum biochemical analysis including uric acid by the phosphotungstic acid method, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) by the urease-GLDH method, creatinine by enzymatic colorimetric method, and blood glucose by the O -toluidine method was performed using autoanalyzer (Nazifi et al. ).
Electrophoresis pattern
The protein content of each tissue homogenate was measured based on Bradford method and serum bovine albumin as standard protein (Fattahi et al. ). Sodium dodecyl sulfate-poly-acryl amide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was performed at 12% T gel using Mini Protein cell (Bio-Rad) and sample boiling for 5 min in SDS sample buffer containing 0.1 M dithioteritol (Kazemipour et al. ). Commassiee brilliant blue (CBB) staining was performed to visualized electrophoretic pattern (Sepehrimanesh et al. ).
Histopathological evaluation
Right kidneys were cleaned of surrounding fat and immersed in 10% buffered formalin for tissue fixation immediately after removal. Formalin-fixed tissues were processed routinely and embedded in paraffin. Then 5 μm sections were prepared and stained with hematoxylin and eosin for histopathological evaluations by expert pathologist who was blinded to the study and protocols as described previously (Sepehrimanesh et al. ).
Statistical analysis
Data were expressed as mean ± SD and analyzed using SPSS version 21. Comparison between groups was performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Duncan multiple comparison test as post hoc test. P < 0.05 was considered significant difference. The graphs were created by GraphPad Prism version 6.0.
Results
The tissue concentration of MDA plus activities of catalase and GPx are presented in Fig. 1 . Significant increases in the catalase activity of ginger and ginger + AgNP groups and in the GPx activity of AgNP and ginger groups in comparison with the control group were seen. However, the level of MDA was significantly decreased in the ginger and ginger + AgNP groups compared with the control group. Also, significant differences were observed between AgNP and ginger groups in GPx activity and ginger and ginger + AgNPs in MDA concentration. Fig. 1 Renal tissue antioxidant activity and oxidant status in different groups. a Catalase activity; b glutathione peroxidase activity; c malondialdehyde concentration. Significant statistical difference was presented as different superscript letters ( P < 0.05)
The renal tissue activities of ALP and GGT are shown in Fig. 2 . Significant increases were observed just in the ALP activity of ginger and ginger + AgNP groups and GGT activity of the ginger group in comparison with the control group. Fig. 2 Renal tissue of alkaline phosphatase ( a ) and gamma glutamyl transferase ( b ) in different groups. Significant statistical difference was presented as different superscript letters ( P < 0.05)
The serum biochemical analysis is presented in Table 1 . Blood glucose level showed a significant difference between AgNPs with control and ginger + AgNP groups. Significant differences were seen in BUN concentration between ginger + AgNPs with control and AgNPs. Serum creatinine showed significant differences between AgNPs with the other three groups and between ginger with control and ginger + AgNPs. The ginger + AgNP group had a significant higher level of uric acid in comparison with the other three groups. Table 1 Serum biochemical analysis of animals in four different experimental groups Parameters (mg/dl) Groups Control AgNPs Ginger Ginger + AgNPs Blood sugar 319.50 ± 3.43 a 250.20 ± 7.92 b 290.40 ± 12.94 ab 294.00 ± 11.39 a Blood urea nitrogen 25.00 ± 1.43 a 25.70 ± 1.41 a 28.20 ± 1.62 ab 31.30 ± 0.70 b Creatinine 0.91 ± 0.03 a 0.70 ± 0.04 b 0.30 ± 0.03 c 0.84 ± 0.04 a Uric acid 4.10 ± 0.11 a 4.25 ± 0.23 a 4.26 ± 0.23 a 4.96 ± 0.28 b Different letters in each row indicate significant differences between four groups ( P < 0.05)
Different groups had similar renal protein concentration. SDS-PAFE pattern of renal proteins is presented in Fig. 3 . As shown, no significant clear differences were seen between different groups. Fig. 3 Comparison of sodium dodecyl sulfate poly-acryl amide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) of renal proteins in different groups
Renal tissue histopathological changes in different groups are presented in Fig. 4 . Periglomerular congestion was seen in all groups except the ginger group. AgNPs were precipitated in renal tissue and mostly in related connective and fat tissue which was evident in the AgNP group but moderately decreased in the ginger + AgNP group and was mostly subcapsular. However, no tubular necrosis was seen in the AgNP group. Mild tubular necrosis was seen in the ginger group based on granular and hyaline cast plus small RBCs and WBCs in the renal tubules. Also, intertubular abscess was seen in this group. Fig. 4 Renal histopathological changes in different groups. a , b Periglomerular congestion in control group; c intraglomerular and d intra-adipose tissue precipitation of AgNPs in AgNP group; e periglomerular congestion; f , g mild subcapsular precipitation of AgNPs in ginger + AgNP group; h mild tubular necrosis, granular and hyaline cast, and intertubular abscess in ginger group ( a – c , e , h × 1000, d × 400; f , g × 100; hematoxylin and eosin staining)
Discussion
Some of the constituents of ginger such as gingerols, shogaols, zingerone, and gingerols potentiate the antioxidant system and help to combat the free radicals (Morakinyo et al. ). On the other hand, one of the mechanisms that was reported for the toxicity of AgNPs is free radical production and oxidative stress (Asare et al. ). In the present study, the beneficial protective effects of ginger extract on the possible side effects of AgNPs were evaluated. We found that AgNPs in 200 mg/kg dose had no renal toxic effects and could not change the one-dimensional electrophoretic pattern of renal proteins. Ginger could compensate the AgNP-related decrease of blood sugar and serum creatinine. However, ginger extract could increase the GPx and catalase activities and decrease MDA levels, plus increase ALP and GGT activities.
Renal catalase activity and MDA content was significantly higher and lower in the ginger and ginger + AgNP in comparison with the control group. However, the highest GPx activity was seen in the AgNP and then in the ginger groups, both of which demonstrated a significant difference with the control group. These findings are most probably related to the antioxidant activity of ginger extract and possible AgNP toxic effects. Ginger contains more than 50 antioxidants in its rhizomes which can be classified in two groups of gingerol and diarylheptanoids (Masuda et al. ). With the help of different molecular techniques such as steady state and time-resolved fluorescence quenching measurements, UV-visible absorption spectroscopy, resonance light-scattering spectroscopy (RLS), circular dichroism spectroscopy (CD), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), it has been reported that AgNPs could interfere with catalase in the physiological pH (Zhang et al. ). Also, it has been confirmed that the mRNA levels of the catalase and GPx were reduced after AgNP exposure in the liver of adult zebra fish (Choi et al. ). The AgNPs can induce oxidative stress, glutathione depletion, and damage to the cell membrane, leading to apoptosis (Mukherjee et al. ). Our study is in line with all of the previous reports about the effects of AgNPs in the catalase activity and its compensation by ginger extract. This may be due to the antioxidant and chelating properties of phenolic and non-phenolic constituents of ginger which were confirmed previously (Kamali Rosta et al. ).The effects of ginger on renal function in toxicity induced by acetaminophen were also evaluated, and it was reported that ginger resulted in the improvement of renal function in acetaminophen-induced nephrotoxicity which may be due to potentiation of antioxidant system (Morshedi and Gol ).
We found that ginger extract significantly decreased serum creatinine concentration in comparison with the control group (0.30 ± 0.03 vs. 0.91 ± 0.03 mg/dl, respectively). Recently, it has been confirmed that 10-dehydrogingerdione (10-DHGD), one of the active constituents of ginger extracts, alleviated to a great extent, induced nephrotoxicity, and renal fibrosis (Elseweidy et al. ). Also, 6-gingerol as a natural antioxidant which is found in ginger extract had a significant reno-protective effect in a rat model of gentamicin-induced renal damage (Hegazy et al. ). In another study, the beneficial effects of ginger extracts on improvement of renal injury in high fructose-fed rats were reported. In their study, ginger extracts at a dose of 50 mg/kg improved renal tubular injury and decreased the inflammatory chemokines in kidney tissue (Yang et al. ). As another point of view, the creatinine level decreases when the muscular mass of the body decreases. However, we cannot confirm it in this study because we did not check the weight loss and muscular mass of the animals. Our findings about the healing of renal tissue and beneficial changes in the renal-related biochemical profile are in line with all the abovementioned studies and indicated that ginger extract has a reno-protective role when used with renal toxic agents and drugs.
High activity of ALP in the ginger and ginger + AgNP groups and GGT in the ginger group were found, which significantly differed from both the control and AgNP groups in ALP and all other three groups in GGT. The causes and underlying mechanisms of these changes are unclear, and our findings disagree with those reported previously. For instance, 12 weeks of 2 g of ginger supplementation showed a significant reduction in GGT in comparison with the placebo in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (Rahimlou et al. ). Although it has been confirmed that exposure to AgNPs caused the increase in the serum concentration of ALP, aspartate aminotransferase, and alanine aminotransferase (Patlolla et al. ; Seyedalipour et al. ), no reports exist about the inducing effects of ginger extract on renal ALP and GGT, and further studies are needed to discover the probable mechanism.
Most of the induced toxicity by AgNPs is due to oxidative stress, but they can speed up protein denaturation and also bind to proteins and interfere with their functions (Nel et al. ). However, we found that AgNPs could not induce any changes in the renal protein concentration. If such changes occurred, they could not be detected by SDS-PAGE. This is in line with what was reported by Hendi who stated that kidney is less affected than other tissue by toxicity properties of AgNPs (Hendi ). Performing further researches in the future using more sensitive protein detection techniques such as two-dimensional electrophoresis to find any changes in protein concentration of renal tissue after AgNP exposure and treatment by other agents is highly recommended.
Conclusion
Some minor changes in the renal histopathology plus renal-associated serum biomarkers and oxidative stress indices were seen in this study in response to AgNP exposure. In addition, no clear changes were seen, neither in protein concentration nor SDS-PAGE pattern of renal tissue. However, the beneficial effect of using ginger extract on these minor side effects is obvious, and it can be concluded that concurrent use of this extract with AgNPs is recommendable.