Introduction
Nowadays, increased consumption of calorie-dense food in addition to reduced physical activity are known as the principle risks that lead to enhancement of obesity in the advanced society (Oleg ). Western-style diet increases obesity in the USA and all the countries (NCD Risk factor Collaboration ). It is the main factor to cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, liver disease, and metabolic disturbances (Heidemann et al. ) and it has been stimulated the incidence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) (Odermatt ). The presence of any three of these four features—hyperlipidemia, visceral obesity, hypertension, and insulin resistance—lead to metabolic syndrome and this enhanced by fructose feeding in rats, including hyperinsulinemia, hyperglycemia, obesity, hypertension, increased levels of triacylglycerols (TAG), and fatty acids. In primates, feeding of a fructose-rich diet makes hyperuricemia stimulates de novo lipogenesis, and insulin resistance lead to elevation of TAG, low-density lipoprotein particles, and cholesterol (Fatma et al. ) . Lipogenesis is stimulated at the whole body and liver level in HFF rats that leads to increase in lipid synthesis. This might be due to insulin resistance in the HFF group, because insulin can enhance the de novo lipogenesis pathway (Choi and Ginsberg ). Obesity is an indirect risk factor for patients with reduced renal mass and CKD. At the moment, adult population lives with reduced renal mass causing the higher rates of congenital solitary kidney in children and primary kidney tumor in adults, in addition to the rising number of kidney donors (Mandelbrot and Pavlakis ). Obesity may be the principle risk factor for chronic renal disease, leading to renal insufficiency and glomerulosclerosis. In this study, HFF-fed rats have been used to satisfy obesity. Histological changes and kidney functions of uninephrectomized rats fed with LF, HF, HFF diets, and sham-operated control will be examined. The obesity has a role in the onset of proteinuria and renal insufficiency (Gai et al. ).
Materials and methods
Forty male Wistar strain male albino rats weighting 100–120 g were obtained from the animal house of National Research Centre (NRC), Giza, Egypt. The animals were housed in individual suspended stainless steel cages in controlled environment (22–25 °C) and 12-h light and 12-h dark with food and water freely available. LF was prepared according to Reeves ( ), HF according to Buettner et al. ( ), and HFF according to Christopher et al. ( ). General anesthesia of rats was done through inhalation of diethyl ether; the hair at the site of operation was clipped and shaved then washed by soap and water, and disinfected by alcohol 70%, followed by Tincture iodine 4%. A longitudinal incision in the skin and muscles was made, and by blunt forceps, the wound was widened until appearance of the kidney. Strong ligation to the renal artery and renal vein were made separately followed by excision of kidney. After nephrectomy, cooptation of the wound occurred by Lamberts’ sutures (Gai et al. ). The rats were divided to the following groups, 10 rats each: group 1: uninephrectomized rats fed 30 g/day from LF; group 2: sham rats fed 30 g/day from LF; group 3: uninephrectomized rats fed 30 g/day from HF; group 4: uninephrectomized rats fed 30 g/day from HFF. At the start of experiment, all groups fed LF diet at incubation period for 2 weeks. Weight was determined at zero time and end point after 2 months. Urine was collected before the end of experiment by 24 h in aseptic tubes centrifuged for 20 min at 2000–3000 rpm. The supernatant was collected for biochemical analysis (Kurien et al. ). After 10 weeks, animals were kept fasting for 12 h before blood sampling. Blood was withdrawn from the retro-orbital venous plexus of the eye using a capillary tube, under light anesthesia by diethyl ether. Blood was collected in tubes for the estimation of lipid parameters [total cholesterol (TC), TAG, high-density lipoprotein (HDL-C), and low-density lipoprotein (LDL-C)], kidney functions (urea, creatinine, uric acid, and microalbumin), and NLRP3 supplied from NOVA Company for detection of nephropathy. Kidneys were removed quickly and placed in ice normal saline, perfused with the same solution to remove blood cells and then it is put in formalin saline mixture for histopathological examination (Manna et al. ).
Statistical methods
The collected data were coded, tabulated, and statistically analyzed using IBM SPSS statistics (Statistical Package for Social Sciences) software version 22.0 (IBM Corp., Chicago, USA, 2013). Descriptive statistics were done for quantitative data as minimum and maximum of the range as well as mean ± SD (standard deviation) for quantitative parametric data. Inferential analyses were done for quantitative variables using paired t test in cases of two dependent groups with parametric data and ANOVA test for more than two independent groups with post hoc Tukey’s HSD test, while correlations were done using Pearson’s correlation for numerical parametric data. The level of significance was taken at p value < 0.050 which is significant; otherwise, it is non-significant.
Results
Biochemical results
Figure 1 shows the weight differences among all groups before study are not significant. There is significant increase in HFF followed by HF and LF groups regarding weight after study. Fig. 1 Weight of rats before and after intervention
Figure 2 shows significant increases ( p ≤ 0.001) in serum TC, TAG, and LDL-C in HFF and HF groups compared to LF and sham groups. Also, TC, TAG, and LDL-C levels in HFF group were increased significantly compared to HF group. Fig. 2 Serum TC, TG, and LDL-C after intervention
Figures 3 , 4 , 5 , and 6 show a significant increase ( p ≤ 0.001) in serum urea, creatinine, cystatin C, and uric acid in HFF and HF groups compared to LF and sham groups. Also, serum urea, creatinine, cystatin C, and uric acid levels in HFF group were increased significantly correlated with HF rats. Fig. 3 Serum urea after intervention Fig. 4 Serum creatinine after intervention Fig. 5 Serum cystatin C after intervention Fig. 6 Serum uric acid after intervention
In Figs. 7 and 8 , urine creatinine and microalbumin in HFF and HF groups were increased significantly ( p ≤ 0.001) in relation to LF. Also, urine creatinine and microalbumin level in HFF group significantly increased in comparison with HF rats. Fig. 7 Urine creatinine after intervention Fig. 8 Microalbumin after intervention
Figure 9 shows a significant decrease ( p ≤ 0.001) in GFR in HF and HFF rat groups in relation to LF rat group. In addition, GFR value in HFF rat group significantly decreased in relation to HF rat group. Fig. 9 GFR after intervention
In Fig. 10 , serum NLPR3 of HFF and HF rat groups shows a significant increase ( p ≤ 0.001) in comparison with LF rat group. In addition, NLPR3 value in HFF rat group was significantly elevated in relation to HF rat group. Direct relations were observed between weight and NLPR3, cholesterol, TAG, urea, uric acid, creatinine, urine microalbumin, and urine creatinine. But there were significant negative correlations between NLPR3 and GFR as shown in Table 1 . Fig. 10 Serum NLPR3 after intervention Table 1 Relation among studied markers and NLPR3 LF Sham HF HFF Weight r 0.934 0.973 0.936 0.883 p 0.002* < 0.001* 0.002* 0.008* TC r 0.895 0.931 0.925 0.840 p 0.007* 0.002* 0.003* 0.018* TAG r 0.967 0.812 0.967 0.611 p < 0.001* 0.026* < 0.001* 0.045* LDL-C r 0.943 0.892 0.915 0.782 p 0.001* 0.007* 0.004* 0.038* HDL-C r − 0.873 − 0.947 − 0.941 − 0.796 p 0.010* 0.001* 0.002* 0.032* Urea r 0.966 0.953 0.980 0.986 p < 0.001* 0.001* < 0.001* < 0.001* Serum creatinine r 0.816 0.848 0.987 0.765 p 0.025* 0.016* < 0.001* 0.045* Urine creatinine r 0.948 0.890 0.887 0.880 p 0.001* 0.007 0.008* 0.009* Uric acid r 0.862 0.942 0.911 0.847 p 0.013* 0.001* 0.004* 0.016* Cystatin C r 0.921 0.930 0.899 0.907 p 0.003* 0.002* 0.006* 0.005* Microalbumin r 0.653 0.948 0.762 0.805 p 0.011* 0.001* 0.047* 0.029* GFR r − 0.935 − 0.965 − 0.886 − 0.872 p 0.002* < 0.001* 0.008* 0.011* Pearson’s correlation test *Significant
Histopathological results
Kidney of the rat of control group shows normal distal and proximal convoluted tubule renal glomeruli (Fig. 11 ). Histopathological examination of sham rat showed nearly normal expect peritubular inflammatory cells (Fig. 12 ). The kidney section of rat administrated HF and uninephrectomy caused remarkable changes where the glomeruli appeared congested. In addition, degeneration of renal tubules, necrosis, fatty changes, and peritubular inflammatory cells were observed (Fig. 13 ). Microscopic examinations of the group that received HFF and uninephrectomy showed massive hemorrhage of glomeruli. Renal glomeruli appeared hemorrhage and distorted with areas of focal adhesions with the glomerular capsule. Also, the renal tubules showed distortion, necrosis of their lining epithelium, severe fatty change, and areas of hemorrhage were noticed between them (Fig. 14 ). Fig. 11 Normal glomeruli (G), in kidney section of rat that received LF (H&E × 400) Fig. 12 Normal glomeruli (G), with inflammatory cell in kidney section of sham rat (H&E × 400) Fig. 13 Hemorrhage of glomeruli (G) and fatty changes of tubules (F) in kidney section of rat that received HF (H&E × 400) Fig. 14 Massive hemorrhage of glomeruli, necrosis, and severe fatty change in kidney section of rat that received HFF (H&E × 400)
Discussion
The current study deduces that feeding the HFF as well as HF diets to uninephrectomized rats causes elevation in body weight due to disturbance of regulation of glucose. There was a significant elevation of weight gain in HFF group greater than HF group. These observations of the current work were in agreement with the past experiments, which included hamster strain, which have observed that the eating of HFF as well as HF meals led to rapid weight gain (Fatma et al. ). This is due to obesity which enhances the fat accumulation to maximum value which may be preferable to health. The increases of free fatty acids lead to insulin resistance in muscle by suppressing insulin action to synthesis of glycogen and glucose uptake. Results of the current work deduce that HFF as well as HF groups reported serum LDL-C, total cholesterol, and TAG in uninephrectomized rats compared to control and sham groups. In addition, total cholesterol and TAG were elevated significantly in uninephrectomized HFF group than HF group. In uninephrectomized HFF and uninephrectomized HF groups, TC was elevated and this might be due to conversion of sugar to pyruvic acid in hepatic cells. The pyruvate was converted to acetyl-coA in hepatic cell which is the precursor molecule for lipid synthesis in form of TC and TAG in the hepatic tissue. The risk of diet is correlated with fructose addition as it stimulates insulin resistance and lipogenesis (Fatma et al. ). In the present study, we found a significant increase in serum creatinine, urea, and uric acid in HF and HFF uninephrectomized rat groups compared to LF and sham groups. Also, serum creatinine, urea, and uric acid were increased significantly in HFF uninephrectomized group than uninephrectomized HF group these results were in agreement with Woodie and Blythe ( ). This was also recorded by Rayner et al. ( ) who say that HF and HFF cause hyperlipidemia-induced inflammation that led to development of glomerular injury. These results explained that hyperinsulinemia and hyperlipidemia induced inflammation in the development of glomerular injury (Tomiyama-Hanayama et al. ), by role of SREBP1 and SREBP2 which are key modulators of renal lipid accumulation. The suggested mechanism is that abnormal lipids are important in modulating glomerular sclerosis when excess cholesterol was added to the diets (Tonelli et al. ). In this study, we found that the mean values of urine microalbumin and urine creatinine in HF and HFF uninephrectomized rat groups are significantly increased compared to LF group. Also these effects were complicated in HFF group with uninephrectomy compared to HF group and these were in agreement with Rayner et al. ( ) who reported that HF and HFF cause hyperlipidemia-induced inflammation that led to development of glomerular injury . Increasing of albumin leads to increase in angiotensin II which in turn upregulates transcription growth factor-β (TGF-β) receptor expression (Wolf et al. ). Proteins in urine cause direct activation of pro-inflammatory fibrotic chemokines and cytokines as well as induction of injury of tubular epithelial cells. Many lipoproteins and complement are found in the urine; this proteinuric is a defect as a result of renal disease states which activate the oxygen radical (Fried et al. ; Perico et al. ) . In the present study, level of GFR was significantly decreased in HF and HFF uninephrectomized rat groups compared to LF and sham groups. This is in agreement with Casey et al. ( ) and there is a significant decrease in GFR in HFF uninephrectomized rat group than HF uninephrectomized rat group; this is in agreement with Stevens et al. ( ) who reported that dietary fat increased blood flow to kidney through elevation in glomerular pressure. The studies on animal and human have reported that high-protein or high-fat meals increased the blood flow to kidney, and rates of glomerular filtration through increased pressure in glomeruli cause development of glomerular sclerosis, especially in the uninephrectomized case (Brenner et al. ) . These defects might be initiated through the effects of fat and protein meals on signaling molecules of the tubuloglomerular feedback mechanism, made by the constriction of renal arterioles (Thomson et al. ). It is thought that WSD may elevate nitric oxide synthase in the renal cortex, which makes relaxation of the afferent renal arteriole (Cao et al. ). In this work, we found that the mean values of serum cystatin C in HF and HFF uninephrectomized rat groups were significantly increased compared to LF and sham groups. Also this effect was complicated in HFF uninephrectomized rat group compared to HF group. This is in agreement with Rayner et al. ( ) who reported that cystatin C increased due to relaxation of the afferent renal arteriole as a result of using HF or HFF. β2-microglobulin and cystatin C reduce molecular weight of plasma proteins that are replacing markers to creatinine for calculating GFR that causes CKD (Aksun et al. ). Cystatin C is mediated by a stable rate by all nucleated cells, filtered by glomeruli, then metabolized and reabsorbed through proximal tubule with low re-entry to blood stream (Filler et al. ). GFR estimation depends on creatinine levels in urine and serum, but as a waste of protein metabolism, and it is mediated by protein meals while cystatin C did not appear to be induced by protein meal. So, these parameters seem to be attractive and alternative to creatinine for estimation of GFR involving study changes in dietary fat and protein (Juraschek et al. ). NLRP3 significantly increased HF and HFF uninephrectomized rat in relation to LF and sham (Yan et al. ). The inflammasome NLRP3 is a principle cell mediator of disorder in ATM saturated fatty acids and inflammation that suppress energy storage regulation by decreasing AMP kinase activity and producing ROS as well as IL-1β that led to a various disturbances in metabolism because it inhibits insulin sensitivity by serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) that impairs engagement of the insulin receptor (IR) with IRS-1. It also enhances a direct insulin resistance by promoting expression of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) (Vandanmagsar et al. ). Adipose tissue dysfunction was attributed to the increase in cholesterol and triacylglycerol that causes elevation in circulating free fatty acids caused by obesity. The chronic inflammation arises from obesity that mediates a case of insulin resistance. The secretion of chemoattractants, such as MCP-1 and MIF, cytokines, and chemokines IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-1β are correlated with acute inflammation that is considered as a critical initiator of insulin resistance induced by obesity (Nishio et al. ). Histopathological examination of the kidney section of control group revealed normal renal glomeruli, proximal and distal convoluted tubules. Sham rat showed nearly normal expect peritubular inflammatory cells. HF-uninephrectomy rat group had remarkable changes, where the glomeruli appeared congested; in addition, degeneration of renal tubules, necrosis, fatty changes, and peritubular inflammatory cells was observed and this is in agreement with Decleves et al. ( ) and Gai et al. ( ). Microscopic examinations of HFF and uninephrectomy rat group showed massive hemorrhage of glomeruli. Renal glomeruli appeared hemorrhage and distorted with areas of focal adhesions with the glomerular capsule. Also, the renal tubules which showed distortion, necrosis of their lining epithelium, severe fatty change, and areas of hemorrhage were noticed between them and this is in agreement with Gai et al. ( ) . Parallel works on the correlation among decreased nephron mass and probability of kidney disease related to visceral obesity have announced that higher glomerular hyperfiltration, higher risks of proteinuria, and CKD in kidney donors are associated with obesity (Nogueira et al. ; Praga et al. ; Decleves et al. ). In conclusion, WSD lead to increase fatty acids that inhibit IRS (insulin resistance). Insulin resistance stimulates lipogenesis and this was increased by fructose. Kidney disease caused by peripheral and visceral obesity were affected more dramatically and more seriously after uninephrectomy.
Conclusion
NLRP3 inflammasome is the main factor that links between inflammation, oxidative stress, type 2 diabetes, and obesity; later, we may use it as a marker for metabolic syndrome. Further works are needed to prevent its synthesis even by drugs. Kidney disease caused by peripheral and visceral obesity is hazardous with uninephrectomy.