Introduction
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease that characterized by progressive loss of articular cartilage (Rosenberg ). About 80 to 90% of human in both sexes have evidences of OA when they reach to age 65 (Hinton et al. ). The main clinical signs in patients who suffer from osteoarthritis (OA) are pain and disability (Neogi ). Currently, no certain therapy can decrease or cease progression of OA (Le Graverand-Gastineau ). The conventional treatments such as analgesics and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) only reduce pain and improve joint function. Long-term use of these drugs is associated with essential side effects in gastrointestinal, renal, and cardiovascular systems (Patrignani et al. ; Cheng and Visco ). In ethno-pharmacology knowledge, achievement to safe drugs with low side effects and disadvantages has considered for prevention and treatment of OA. In folk medicine, Shilajit is used in treatment of bone fractures and articular pain. Shilajit (known as mumie, vegetable asphalt, mineral pitch, salajit, shilajatu, mimie, or mummiyo) exudates from high mountain rocks in different countries especially the Himalayan Mountains between India and Nepal, Russia, Tibet, Afghanistan, and the north of Chile. It has a semi-hard texture, with brownish black to dark color (Ghosal et al. ; Korago ). It seems that Shilajit originates from the bryophyte plants that grow in vicinity of Shilajit-exudated rocks (Schepetkin et al. ; Agarwal et al. ). Bryophytes including the mosses, liverworts, and hornworts are considered as the simplest plants. They have 15–20-cm height and attached to the ground and rock by rhizoids. Bryophytes do not have seeds or flowers and reproduce via spores. Shilajit is mainly composed of humic substances (humin, humic acid, and fulvic acid) (60–80%), minerals (20–40%), and more than 5% of trace elements (Fe, Ca, Cu, Zn, Mg, Mn, Mo, and P) (Frolova and Kiseleva ).
In the literature, no study really shows the histopathologic effect of Shilajit in osteoarthritis and there is a need to do that. The present study evaluated effects of Shilajit on the articular degenerative changes in an OA rat model.
Materials and methods
Animals
In the present study, 36 adult male rats (12 weeks old, weighing 200–250 g) were used. The animals were housed under a 12-h light-dark cycle with access to the standard food and fresh water ad libitum. Animals were randomly divided into two groups including OA (control) and Shilajit (OA + Shilajit) groups. Experimental duration was considered 21 days.
Induction of osteoarthritis
For induction of osteoarthritis, rats were anesthetized with intramuscular injection of xylazine 2% (5 mg/kg) and ketamine 10% (90 mg/kg) (Alfasan International Group of Companies, Holland). Then, the animals were placed on a heat pad set until deep anesthesia had been achieved. The right knees of two groups were shaved and cleaned with povidone-iodine. For each knee, 3 mg of monosodium iodoacetate (MIA; Sigma, St. Louis, MO 63103, USA; cat #I2512) was dissolved in the normal saline by vortexing. A volume of 50 μl was injected unilaterally into the articular space of the right femorotibial joint through the infrapatellar ligament by a 27-gauge insulin syringe (Fig. 1 ). The same volume of normal saline (50 μl) was used in the left contralateral knee as normal control. MIA was prepared freshly before the using (Guzman et al. ). The diameter of joints was measured every 3 days of post injection with a digital coulisse until the end of examination. Fig. 1 Intraarticular injection of MIA through the infrapatellar ligament
Shilajit extract
Shilajit was prepared from local residents of Jiroft city, Kerman province, Iran. The aqueous extract of Shilajit was provided daily. Twenty grams of Shilajit was solved in 100 mL of distilled water on a shaker at room temperature. Then, the solution was passed through a 0.45-mm filter to remove the insoluble impurities (Jung et al. ) and purred. A dose of 100 mg/kg body weight of Shilajit was given by gavage in the treatment group as daily during 21 days.
Gross and histopathologic investigations
Sixteen rats from each group were euthanized at 7, 14, and 21 days post OA induction. Ligaments and tendons were removed with sharp razor and femorotibial joints were dissected. Cartilage surfaces of the femural and tibial condyles were examined for gross changes including hemorrhage, congestion, erosion, and ulcer. The joint samples were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 48 h. The samples were decalcified in formic acid 10% and cut as frontal plane (Fig. 2 ). Both parts of the joints were embedded in the same paraffin block. Tissue sections in 5-μm thickness were stained with hematoxylin-eosin and toluidine blue for subsequent evaluation of degenerative changes and proteoglycan content. Three sections were cut from each knee with 200-μm step. Histopathologic lesions and severity of synovitis were graded in accordance with scoring system of Mankin et al. ( ) (Table 1 ) and Krenn et al. (Table 2 ), respectively. Fig. 2 Frontal section of femorotibial joint Table 1 Histopathologic Mankin score system I. Structure Grade a. Normal 0 b. Surface irregularities 1 c. Pannus and surface irregularities 2 d. Clefts to transitional zone 3 e. Clefts to radial zone 4 f. Clefts to calcified zone 5 g. Complete disorganization 6 II. Cells Grade a. Normal 0 b. Diffuse hypercellularity 1 c. Cloning 2 d. Hypocellularity 3 III. Safranin-O staining Grade a. Normal 0 b. Slight reduction 1 c. Moderate reduction 2 d. Severe reduction 3 e. No dye noted 4 IV. Tidemark integrity Grade a. Intact 0 b. Crossed by blood vessels 1 Total 14 Table 2 Histopathologic features of synovitis score Enlargement of the synovial lining cell layer 0 point The lining cells form one layer 1 point The lining cells form 2–3 layers 2 points The lining cells form 4–5 layers, few multinucleated cells might occur 3 points The lining cells form more than 5 layers, the lining might be ulcerated and multinucleated cells might occur Density of the resident cells 0 point The synovial stroma shows normal cellularity 1 point The cellularity is slightly increased 2 points The cellularity is moderately increased, multinucleated cells might occur 3 points The cellularity is greatly increased, multinucleated giant cells, pannus formation, and rheumatoid granulomas might occur Inflammatory infiltrate 0 point No inflammatory infiltrate 1 point Few mostly perivascular situated lymphocytes or plasma cells 2 points Numerous lymphocytes or plasma cells, sometimes forming follicle-like aggregates 3 points Dense band like inflammatory infiltrate or numerous large follicle-like aggregates
Statistical analysis
The obtained results were analyzed by SPSS 16.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) and presented as the means ± standard error (SE). Non-parametric analyses with Mann-Whitney test was used to compare of articular and synovitis scores. P values less than 0.05 were considered as significant difference. The joint diameter was evaluated by repeated measure analysis of variance and post-hoc Tukey test.
Results
Ethics
All animals received human care in compliance with the Guide for Care and use of Laboratory. Animals published by the National Institutes of Health (NIH publication No. 85-23, revised 1985). The study was approved by the local ethics committee of our veterinary school.
Gait analysis
In this study, hypolocomotion and abnormal gaiting was obvious after 48 h of OA induction in all experimental rats. Lameness was observed in the affected legs. The animals did not bear their weight on the affected limb, and flexion and extension were not done completely in comparison with contralateral side. Intact limb had typical flexion and extension of knee.
Macroscopic evaluation of the knee joints
In the saline injected group, no abnormal gross change and swelling occurred. The articular surface appeared smooth, shiny, pale blue, and translucent. In OA and Shilajit groups, increasing of the joint diameter reached to maximum size after 3 days and then starting to decrease in treated rats with Shilajit group until the end of examination (Fig. 3 ). The remarkable macroscopic changes in the joints of OA and Shilajit groups were swelling and redness in early stage. The cartilage surface was rough and opaque. Fine clefts, erosions, and lesser ulcers were observed in both groups after 7 days. Soft tissues around the joints were hyperemic and thickened. The articular damages progressed until 21th day and the subchondral bone was exposed in some untreated rats. In the Shilajit group, the knee articular cartilage was pale and close to normal in appearance in some rats (Fig. 4 ). However, occasional microclefts and cracks were identified in the surface of the cartilage. Fig. 3 The knee joint diameters in normal control and experimental groups Fig. 4 Gross appearance of MIA-injected joints after 21 days. a Swelling and congestion in right knee of OA rat, b treated knee with Shilajit has appearance close to the normal contralateral joint
Histopathologic findings in the articular cartilage
In this study, all articular and synovial histopathologic scores in experimental groups are shown in Table 3 and two diagrams including Figs. 5 and 6 . Table 3 Comparison of the articular damages and synovitis scores Days Group Articular scores Synovitis scores Mean ± standard error Mean ± standard error 7 OA 8.4 ± 1.74 4.8 ± 0.49 Shilajit 6.83 ± 0.30 3.5 ± 1.02 14 OA 8.20 ± 0.66 5 ± 0.31 Shilajit 8.33 ± 0.91 5.33 ± 0.71 21 OA 10± 1.18 a 7.20 ± 1/06 a Shilajit 5 ± 0.36 b 3.50 ± 0.88 b a, b Significant P ≤ 0.05 Fig. 5 The histopathologic Mankin scores show significant reduction of cartilage degeneration after 21 days treatment with Shilajit. Data expressed as the mean ± standard error of the mean (a: P < 0.05) Fig. 6 The histopathologic grading of synovitis shows significant reduction of inflammatory reaction after 21 days treatment with Shilajit. Data expressed as the mean ± standard error of the mean (a: P < 0.05)
In the saline injected group, no abnormal structural alterations were observed in the joint cartilage and the structural integrity was preserved. The meniscus separated femoral condyles from the tibial plateau. The cartilage had no degenerative changes at any interval study. The articular surfaces were smooth without irregularity and fissures or tissue debris on their surface. Cellularity was normal and chondrocytes were distributed in three appropriate oriented zones. The chondrocytes within the lacunae had light eosinophilic cytoplasm and basophilic nuclei. A clear cartilage capsule surrounded the chondrocytes. Tidemark, borderline between calcified and non-calcified zone, was intact. Staining with toluidine blue method showed intensive blue color. The Mankin scores throughout the duration of the experiment was the lowest score (0) that reflecting good quality of cartilage structure. Synovium and soft tissues around the femorotibial joint were histologically normal and no inflammatory reaction was seen (Fig. 7 ). Fig. 7 The saline injected joint. a The articular surface is smooth without fissures (thin arrow). Normal distribution of chondrocytes in the transitional (arrow) and radial (double arrow) zones, intact tidemark line (yellow arrow), b intensive toluidine blue color, and c synovium with normal histologic structure (arrow)
Seven days post MIA injection, the surface of the articular cartilage in OA group was rough, irregular, with some cracks. Chondrocytes lost their cellular details. Destructive damages were extended to transitional and lesser radial zone. The tidemark was continuous in the most samples. Staining intensity of proteoglycan decreased with toluidine blue. The hemopoietic elements between the trabecular spaces of subchondral bone were diminished and replaced by connective tissue (Fig. 8 ). Mononuclear inflammatory cells infiltrated in synovial membrane in associated with synovial cells proliferation and increasing stromal cellularity (Fig. 9 ). Moderate to advanced stages of OA were seen. Similar destructive damages and synovitis occurred in the treated rats with Shilajit. Statistical analysis showed no significant difference in the histopathologic scores of cartilage and synovium between two groups ( P ≥ 0.05). Fig. 8 Femorotibial joint 7 days post MIA injection. a Irregular surface of articular cartilage with some cracks the surface (arrows), b subchondral bone shows fragmentations, lysis of trabecular bone with osteoclasts (arrow), and replacing of bone marrow by connective tissue (asterisk). c Staining intensity of proteoglycan decreased with toluidine blue Fig. 9 Seven days post MIA injection. Synovitis is characterized with synovial cells hyperplasia (arrow), increasing of stroma, and infiltration of mononuclear inflammatory cells
After 14 days of OA induction, more deep fissures and cracks that reached down to the transitional and lesser radial zones were observed in the articular cartilage. Chondrocytes showed necrotic changes as pyknotic nuclei and lost cytoplasm. Some chondrocytes were disintegrated within lacunae and chondrons were empty. In some samples, a few cysts were formed within the articular cartilage (Fig. 10 ). The number of osteoclasts was increased rather than 7th day after MIA injection. A marked depletion of proteoglycan was determined by toluidine blue. Trabeculae of subcortical bone were thinned and fragmented. The femorotibial joints exhibited moderate to advanced level of osteoarthritis and synovitis in both OA and Shilajit groups, and was not found any significant difference between them ( P ≥ 0.05). Shilajit-treated rats revealed a marked osteogenesis activity in the periosteum of midshaft tibia in comparing with untreated animals (Fig. 11 ). Fig. 10 Femorotibial joint 14 days after MIA injection. a The articular surface shows deep fissures and cracks that reached down to the transitional and lesser radial zones (arrow) as well as necrotic chondrocytes. b Presence of cysts within the articular cartilage Fig. 11 A marked osteogenesis activity in the periosteum of midshaft tibia in Shilajit treated rats after 14 days
After 21 days, advanced stages of osteoarthritis were observed in the OA group. The affected joints displayed significant destruction of the articular cartilage including multifocal denuded of cartilage, deep fissures, and a large number of necrotic chondrocytes. In some samples, subchondral bone was exposed due to completely disorganization of articular cartilage. Subchondral bone was collapsed and hempoetic cells were replaced by fibrous tissue. Some remnants of the bony trabeculae were present. Osteophytes were formed in the margins of knee joint (Fig. 12 ). Severe mononuclear cell inflammation affected synovial membrane and soft tissues. Fig. 12 a Femorotibial joint 21 days after MIA injection shows advanced stage of osteoarthritis. Exposure of subchondral bone due to significant destruction of the articular cartilage (arrow) as well as increasing the osteoclasts (arrow head) and fibrous tissue in growth plate area. b Formation of osteophytes in the margins of knee joint
Treatment with aqueous extract of Shilajit significantly reduced degenerative damages in the cartilage structure and subchondral bone. Evidences of healing were evident. Regeneration of cartilage was identified by hyperplasia of chondrocytes. Mild depletion of proteoglycan was detected by toluidine blue stain. Shilajit suppressed considerably inflammation in the synovium. In addition, hyperplasia of synovial cells and increasing stroma was inhibited (Fig. 13 ). Histopathological scores of cartilage changes and synovitis intensity significantly reduced in compare with those rats in the OA group ( P ≤ 0.05). Fig. 13 a Femorotibial joint 21 days after MIA injection shows treatment with aqueous extract of Shilajit significantly reduces destructive damages in the articular cartilage, subchondral bone, and inflammation of the synovial membrane; b hyperplasia of chondrocytes is an evidence of cartilage healing
Discussion
Arthritis or inflammation in joints is referred to a group of diseases that cause pain, rigidity, and swelling in the joint. It can be divided to rheumatic arthritis, osteoarthritis, and arthritis arisen from gout (Di Paola and Cuzzocrea ). Osteoarthritis (OA) is a common progressive disease of the joints with clinically loss of motion and pain in human. Different risk factors such as trauma, aging, obesity, and genetic predisposition may be responsible in development of osteoarthritis (Goldring and Otero ; Iannone and Lapadula ; Adatia et al. ). Understanding of OA pathophysiology and risk factors is requirement for achievement to new treatments, but researches in human is associated with different limitations. Animal models provide appropriate opportunity for study on progressive stages of OA, influences of various physical and environment conditions, and effect of new drugs with herbal and traditional origin.
In folk medicine, Shilajit is a herbo-mineral compound applied for treatment of arthritis and bone fractures. This therapeutic substance has been used for diabetes (Bhattacharya and Sen ), digestive diseases (Abshenas et al. ), aging (Agarwal et al. ), HIV virus (Rege and Chowdhary ), blood pressure (Gaikwad et al. ), Alzheimer’s disease (Carrasco-Gallardo et al. ), spermatogenesis and oogenesis (Rege and Chowdhary ), bone fractures (Dehghan and Sharifi Faradonbeh ), and other diseases such as nervous diseases, tuberculosis, chronic bronchitis, asthma, anemia, and eczema (Acharya et al. ; Goel et al. ; Schepetkin et al. ; Agarwal et al. ). Different biological functions and medicinal properties of Shilajit are attributed to the fulvic acid (FA) and humic acid (Schepetkin et al. ; Cornejo et al. ; Maccioni et al. ).
The present study evaluated effect of Shilajit on experimental osteoarthritis in rat 7, 14, and 21 days after induction. OA was induced by injection of monosodium iodoacetate (MIA) in the articular space. Histopathologically, after 7 and 14 days, the articular cartilage revealed irregular surface, fibrillation and some fissures, necrotic chondrocytes, loss of toluidine blue staining as well as destruction of subchondral bone and synovitis. Grading of lesions showed moderate to advanced damages in both OA and Shilajit groups without significant differences in these courses. After 21 days, articular degenerative lesions and intensity of synovitis were progressed in the OA group, but aqueous extract of Shilajit had significantly reduction in the histopathologic grading of joint damages and inflammation in the synovium ( P ≤ 0.05).
Various methods are used for studying of osteoarthritis in different animal models. Intraarticular injection of chemical substances especially MIA is a common method due to its ability to develop rapid osteoarthritis (Guzman et al. ). The previous researches described that MIA causes clinical, biochemical, and structural changes in the joints resembling to human OA (Kobayashi et al. ). MIA disrupts glycolytic pathway through the inhibition of glyceraldehydes-3 phosphate dehydrogenase in chondrocytes and results in death of chondrocyte (Cournil et al. ). Naveen et al. ( ) demonstrated that induction of osteoarthritis by MIA in rat lead to degenerative changes that are comparable to induced-OA from surgical transection of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACLT) and clinically human OA.
In the current study, we observed severe osteogenesis activity in the periosteum of midshaft tibia. These findings are in consistent with the previous studies. Labban ( ) investigated the effect of Shilajit on the osteoporosis in ovariectomized rat. They showed that 3 and 30 mg/kg of Shilajit had increased cortical periosteal bone formation in the midshaft tibia to 36 and 66%, respectively in compare to control rats.
Jung et al. ( ) studied effect of Shilajit (mumie) extract on the osteoblast differentiation from mesenchymal stem cells in human and murine cell culture. They suggested that Shilajit is a powerful stimulator for osteoblastic differentiation from mesenchymal stem cells and inhibits osteoclastogenesis.
In according to the literature, dihydroxybenzo-a-pyrones in Shilajit has the ability in regeneration of ascorbic acid (Ghosal et al. ). Ascorbic acid stimulates osteoblastic differentiation, synthesis, mineralization, and deposition of collagen in culture of bone-derived cells (Franceschi et al. ; Jaiswal et al. ; Qutob et al. ). In some studies, the healing effect of Shilajit on the bone fractures was described. Primary callus formation was accelerated by daily consumption of 0.1 g/kg Shilajit (Ismailova ; Kelginbaev et al. ).
In our study, Shilajit significantly attenuated inflammation of the synovial membranes in comparison with OA group after 21 days. Shilajit is containing humic components with antioxidant properties (Kučerík et al. ; Vašková et al. , Aeschbacher et al. ). These substances may act through the inhibition of both classical and alternative pathways of complement system. In addition, degranulation of phagocytes and releasing of inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, and TNF-α will be stopped (Joone and van Rensburg ; van Rensburg and Naude ). At higher concentrations (> 200 μg/ml), fulvic acid decreases the release of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) (Junec et al. ).
Shilajit is a powerful antioxidant and protects tissues from free radical damage and lipid peroxidation (Ghosal et al. ; Tripathi et al. ). Shilajit could significantly decreased oxidative damage in subchondral bone. It may suggest that scavenging of free radicals could be a therapeutic method for controlling the clinical signs in OA.
In conclusion, the present study indicates that Shilajit decreased cartilage degenerative changes such as surface irregularity, clefts, and erosive lesions in knee osteoarthritis. Also, it reduced inflammatory reactions in synovial membrane and increased osteogenesis in diaphysis of tibia. The available data are insufficient to understand the cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible in improvement of tibiofemoral cartilage and anti-inflammatory actions of Shilajit. Therefore, future studies should focus on isolation of active constituents and clarifying their mechanisms.