Introduction
Hypoxemia (abnormal decrease of blood oxygen) and hypoxia have been considered as two of the most serious problems during general anesthesia that the researchers are trying to find a solution (Caplan et al. ). Hypoxemia occurs during anesthesia, operation, and especially long-term surgeries even in healthy animals with elective surgeries (Kung et al. ). The main causes of hypoxemia during anesthesia are decline of O 2 concentration in inspired air, decrease of alveolar ventilation, ventilation-perfusion mismatch, and presence of anatomic and physiological shunts in cardiovascular system (West ). The animals with conditions such as respiratory depression (due to anesthesia drugs) and reduced functional residual capacity (FRC) related to obesity, pregnancy, anesthesia, and attenuation of cardiopulmonary function are potentially susceptible for hypoxemia during general anesthesia (Thorpe and Gauntlett ). The hypoxia is not always accompanied by skin darkening and cyanosis but the only definite diagnosing approach is provided with pulse oximeter (measuring O 2 arterial level) and arterial blood gas analysis. The hypoxemia is reported to associate with other problems like cardiac arrest due to increase of lactic acid (acidosis), malignant arrhythmia, and previous neural, renal, and muscular injuries, and finally causes cardiac arrest.
The preoxygenation (administration of pure oxygen before induction of anesthesia) has been considered as an essential method for prevention of rapid O 2 desaturation (Kung et al. ). The aim of preoxygenation is to increase physiological stores of oxygen in order to prolong the time to desaturation during critical periods with respiration arrest/stop and lowering respiration capacity especially after a long-time surgery. In fact, the alveolar nitrogen is replaced with pure O 2 during preoxygenation in order to make a suitable pulmonary O 2 storage (Editorial ). Therefore, the hemoglobin (Hb) has been saturated with O 2 completely and the risk of low blood oxygen can be solved. Indeed, the final goal of preoxygenation is to delay the beginning of hypoxia (Machlin et al. ). The preoxygenation is recommended in these following groups: patients with low functional respiratory capacity (FRC) and high consumption of O 2 (like obese, pregnant, or young patients) and patients with low partial pressure of oxygen (PO 2 ) (Bell ). The most important challenge of surgical anesthesia is rapid Hb desaturation during 1 min. So, increase of O 2 level and decrease of Hb desaturation especially in apnea and beginning of anesthesia induction with pure O 2 (preoxygenation) is considered as an important issue.
One of the techniques of preoxygenation is administration of pure O 2 via facemask for 3–5 min before anesthesia. In other words, pure O 2 is respirated with a mask for 3–5 min (Berthoud et al. ). However, all aspects of preoxygenation therapy in medicine and veterinary fields have not been cleared completely and require more studies in order to determine acceptable standard for different animals and human with variable age and weight ranges with different anesthesia protocols. Moreover, some injectable sedatives and anesthetics in the veterinary fields especially ketamine, xylazine, and acepromazine can affect canine cardiorespiratory systems. So, respiratory rate, minute volume, heart rate, cardiac output, and finally SpO 2 can be impacted centrally during the injectable anesthesia (Klide et al. ; Haskins et al. ; White et al. ).
Therefore, evaluation of the effectiveness of preoxygenation therapy in dogs that undergo injectable anesthesia was the goal of the present experiment.
Materials and methods
Ten young mix-breed dogs aged 4 to 8 months with average body weight of 15.8 kg of both sexes were selected and were allocated to two equal groups randomly. All dogs were intact sexually and found as healthy on the basis of results of a hematologic analysis and clinical assessment. The Council of Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences of the Shahrekord University approved the experimental protocol (170-2153). All animals were premedicated with intramuscular administration of acepromazine (Neurotranq®, Alfasan, Woerden-Holland) (0.05 mg/kg). Thirty minutes after injection of premedication, a cephalic vein was catheterized and the placed catheter was immediately flushed with heparinized normal saline (0.5 mL of 25 U/mL) and occulted with a light dressing and 0.9% normal saline administered intravenously at rate of 10 mL/kg/h. The first group breathed room air through a transparent cone-shaped face mask for 5 min, whereas the other group received oxygen (100 mL/kg/min) through a face mask for 5 min. The inspired gases (oxygen and room air) were administrated by use of a standard anesthetic circle system. Immediately after the 5-min gas treatment, animals received combination of ketamine (12 mg/kg)-xylazine (1 mg/kg) intravenously through the cephalic catheter.
The SpO 2 changes in both groups were recorded before premedication (time 0) and continued at 5-min intervals using a pulse oximeter which was placed on each dog’s ear. Likewise, heart rate (HR), respiratory rate (RR), and rectal temperature were recorded from time 0 to minute 90 and animal’s complete recovery. The other recorded were included anesthesia induction period, maintenance, and recovery period.
All collected data were reported as mean ± SEM. The comparison of induction, maintenance, and recovery period mean between the two groups were analyzed with t test, and the repeated measure of variance analysis was used to evaluate mean physiological parameters in different times of the study within groups. Furthermore, statistical comparison of mean physiological parameters in same times was performed with t test in the two groups. A level of P < 0.05 was considered significant.
This study was performed under the approval of the state committee on animal ethics (2016-10-3), Shahrekord University, Shahrekord, Iran. Also, the recommendations of the European Council Directive (86/609/EC) of November 24, 1986, regarding the protection of animals used for experimental purposes were considered.
Results
At the 10th minute of the study, significant decline of SpO 2 was observed in both groups (the preoxygenated group and the room air group) ( P < 0.05). Comparison of the mean (± SEM) of SpO 2 between groups showed significant differences in minutes 35, 40, and 45. Evaluation of preoxygenated group revealed a significant decrease of SpO 2 at times 10, 25, and 30 of the study ( P < 0.05). Thereafter, a marked increase of this parameter was observed at times 35 and 45. In the other group, decrease of SpO 2 from minutes 25 to 50 of the experiment was recorded (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Comparison of SpO 2 in the preoxygenated and the room air groups
There were no significant changes in the rectal temperature of animals in both groups along the experiment. Significant decrease of RR was recorded in both groups after minute 35 (Fig. 2 ). It seemed that preoxygenation could not affect RR. In both groups, significant increase of HR was observed in the 5th and 10th minutes of the study ( P < 0.05). But there was a significant decrease of HR in the minutes 30 and 50 in the groups (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 2 Comparison of respiratory rate (RR) in the preoxygenated and the room air groups Fig. 3 Comparison of heart rate (HR) in the preoxygenated and the room air groups
Table 1 summarizes the mean (± SEM) period of induction, maintenance, and recovery of anesthesia in both groups. Indeed, there were no significant differences in these parts of anesthesia in two studied groups. Table 1 The comparison of mean (± SEM) time of induction, maintenance, and recovery anesthesia period Induction (min) Maintenance (min) Recovery (min) Preoxygenated group, n = 5 0.78 ± 0.09 42 ± 0.44 19.2 ± 0.58 Room air group, n = 5 0.68 ± 0.09 40.6 ± 0.67 17.4 ± 0.87 There were no significant differences in three parts of anesthesia in two studied groups
Discussion
Administration of ketamine causes increase of systemic and pulmonary blood pressure. The increase of HR, cardiac output (CO), and myocardial activity are other results of ketamine injection (Soliman et al. ). These changes may be due to the direct stimulation of central nervous system (CNS) with ketamine (Wong and Jenkins ). Unlike other injectable anesthetics, ketamine has no direct suppressive effect on canine respiratory system. In fact, the ventilation response to hypoxia and CO is maintained in animals that received ketamine as the anesthetic agent (Jaspar et al. ). The acepromazine is one of the most consumed sedatives in the veterinary fields. Since it has no analgesic effect, acepromazine should be used with other opioids to induce analgesia. One of its side effects is decreasing blood pressure but it has no effect on HR (Coulter et al. ). Furthermore, administration of acepromazine has little effect on pulmonary function (Muir et al. ). Although the respiratory rate usually decreases, blood gases and pH do not change significantly (Muir et al. ; Popovic et al. ). The xylazine as α2-adrenergic agonist is a profound sedative with analgesic and muscle relaxant effects (Klide et al. ). After administration of α2-adrenergic agonist, the mucosal membranes started to become pale due to decrease of peripheral blood flow (Bloor et al. ). The xylazine results in decrease of CO and HR (Klide et al. ). Although the clinical doses of xylazine induce decrease of RR, PaO 2 and pH usually are not affected (Haskins et al. ).
At the first 30 min of the present study, SpO 2 changes were found similar in both groups but after O 2 delivery (30–35-min interval), obtained data showed significant increase of SpO 2 just in the preoxygenated group. This finding confirmed positive effect of preoxygenation. Visible decrease of this parameter after injection of ketamine is related to interim diminishing effects of ketamine on respiratory rate and minute volume in dogs. Our results show no differences between RR of groups. So, decrease of SpO 2 may be the result of reduction of minute volume due to ketamine administration. Previous studies described side effects of ketamine on respiratory system. Effect of ketamine on minute volume may lead to hypercapnia, hypoxia, and acidosis. Also, ketamine reduces pulmonary circulation, increases pulmonary vascular resistance, and potentiates hypoxia and blood desaturation (Wright ; White et al. ). So, preoxygenation just before injection of ketamine prevents hemoglobin desaturation and increases SpO 2 such as this study’s results.
The RT parameter was decreased in both groups at first, and at last, it returned to the normal level. There was no significant difference between groups.
Based on the recorded data, the RR parameter in both groups had sinus pattern which first showed an increase, then decrease, and finally one more increase and that no significant difference was reported at time of oxygenation phase between the preoxygenated group and the room air group. In fact, preoxygenation had no effect on the RR.
Increase of HR at initial minutes of the present study, in both groups, may be related to the reflex tachycardia due to the hypotensive effects of this agent (Plumb ).
Before use of face mask to administrate O 2 , HR decreased markedly in both groups which indicated sedative impact of acepromazine. During oxygenation plan, HR increased in all animals secondary to stress of manipulation of animals. After IV injection of ketamine, significant decrease of these parameters was observed in both groups and no differences were recorded between them. It seemed that indirect sympathomimetic effect of ketamine which increases HR (Baumgartner et al. ) was impacted through premedication and acepromazine administration (Stepien et al. ) and preoxygenation could not affect it.
The aim of patient’s preoxygenation before general anesthesia is to maximize the time duration that patient can stand apnea. The normal amount of O 2 used in healthy adults is 250 mL/min. The O 2 desaturation in healthy adults whose O 2 FRC is 21% occurred almost in 30 to 60 s after anesthesia induction. So, the goal of preoxygenation is to increase O 2 physiological storage in order to delay the Hb desaturation in apnea period that has respiratory distress/arrest or decrease of respiratory capacity (such as a long-time anesthesia period). The Haynes and colleagues confirmed vital effect of oxygen therapy to prevent desaturation process (Haynes et al. ).
Anesthesia causes occurrence of desaturation and hypoxia in anesthetized and un-anesthetized patients, significantly (Wong and Jenkins ). The incidence of hypoxia (SaO 2 lower than 92% in at least 15 s) in anesthetized and un-anesthetized patients was reported to be 17 and 6%, respectively. The mild desaturation (SaO 2 lower than 94% in 15 s) was observed as 47 and 12% in anesthetized and un-anesthetized patients, respectively. Kashyap et al. ( ) studied the incidence and degree of hypoxemia during normal anesthesia induction and tracheal intubation in patient’s surgical operation. Their results indicated that ventilation with 100% O 2 for 1 min before tracheal intubation and preoxygenation for 3 min had the same positive effects on prevention of hypoxia after anesthesia induction. Nasal O 2 administration in anesthetized patients can decrease or eliminate Hb desaturation and prevention of subsequently hypoxia (Wong and Jenkins ). Similarly, Taha et al. ( ) showed preoxygenation via nasal cannula with flow of 5 L/min can postpone O 2 desaturation of Hb for 6 min. Ramachandran et al. ( ) confirmed preventive effect of nasal O 2 preoxygenation on O 2 desaturation. Nimmagadda et al. ( ) reported efficacy of four deep breaths just before induction of anesthesia as a proper preoxygenation method. Moreover, preoxygenation via mask before induction of anesthesia can prevent SpO 2 decrease during operations (Yong et al. ).
Preoxygenation using 5 min just before induction of canine injectable anesthesia via face mask did not affect maintenance and recovery periods of anesthesia. But increase of SpO 2 and prevention of O 2 desaturation of blood was a marked finding of the present study.