Introduction
The ability of bone to heal is based on three concepts: osteogenesis, osteoinduction, and osteoconduction (Everts et al. ). Osteogenesis is described as the ability to produce new bone and is determined by the presence of osteoprogenitor cells and osteogenic precursor cells in the area. It has been established that platelet-derived growth factors (PDGF) are present in three of the four stages of bone healing (Slatter et al. ). Osteoinduction is defined as the ability to stimulate stem cells to differentiate into mature cells through the stimulation by local growth factors such as PDGF and TGF (Solheim ). Osteoconduction is determined by the presence of scaffold that allows for vascular and cellular migration and is usually achieved by the use of autologously harvested bone (autograft), allografts, or artificial matrixes like demineralized bone matrix (DBM), hydroxyl apatite (HA), tricalcium phosphate, and collagen (Helm ). In the regulation and stimulation of the three biochemical and cellular processes outlined earlier, PDGF plays a dominant role with regard to mitogenesis, chemotaxis, and stem cell differentiation (Everts et al. ).
Platelet-rich plasma has been successfully applied subcutaneously in a diabetic femur model in man where it normalized the early cellular proliferation and chondrogenesis while improving the late mechanical strength of the bone (Gandhi et al. ). Also, several research groups have been studying platelet-rich plasma (PRP) as a matrix for tissue engineering models, since the activated PRP could release numerous platelet-derived growth factors (Zhu et al. ). One advantage of using PRP in human was that it is autologous, non-toxic, and biodegradably proportional to the development of new bone when compared to allogenic matrices which are non-degradable during the first few weeks after implantation (Anitua et al. ). Impaired bone healing following fractures, with the development of pseudarthrosis, repetition of operations in case of non-unions, causes pain, disability, and increased cost of treatment. Attempts are being made to create bone substitutes as well as to develop technologies that improve bone healing by adding biological materials. One such material that is being vigorously investigated is PRP. It is suspected that the method of preparation of this biodegradable agent may play a key role in its osteogenic potential. This could have equally contributed to the variable results obtained following the application of this agent in management of many fracture models in man.
The aim of this study therefore was to evaluate the effects of PRPs prepared with different activating agents on tibia fractures of Nigerian local dogs.
Material and methods
Animals
Twelve Nigerian indigenous dogs (8–12 months old) were used for the study. They were vaccinated against rabies, parvovirus enteritis, hepatitis, canine distemper, and kept in the Department of Veterinary Surgery small animal house. The dogs were fed the same type of food throughout the period of study. Physical and clinical examinations were carried out on these animals to ascertain their health status prior to surgery.
Preoperative procedures
Each of the dogs was sedated using 2% xylazine HCl (Indian immunobiologicals) at the dose 0.2 mg/kg body weight intramuscularly as a premedicant followed by intravenous administration of pentobarbitone sodium (6%) (Kyron South Africa) at the dose of 25 mg/kg body weight.
A generous shaving of the left hind limb extending from the proximal aspect of the tibia to the distal one third of the tibia was done. This area was aseptically scrubbed and draped prior to surgery. Each dog was positioned on the surgical table on lateral recumbency with the left limb upwards.
Surgical procedure
A skin incision was made on the medial aspect of the tibia, caudal to the anterior tibial muscle. The incision was extended from above the mid-shaft down to the distal part of the bone about 1.5–2.5 cm. The incision was continued in the subcutaneous fascia to reveal the deep crural fascia. The dorsal branch of the saphenous vessel and nerve that cross the shaft of the bone in the middle third of the tibia were bluntly freed of their fascial attachments. With an osteotome, a transverse fracture was created on each of the exposed tibia. The fractures were then reduced and immobilized using Steinmann intramedullary pin. The insertion of the pin was in a retrograde fashion using Jacob’s chuck with key. The excess pin was cut with a pin cutter. After the immobilization, the animals were then assigned into three treatment groups: Plateltex-PRP group (PPRP), CaCl 2 -PRP group (CPRP), and non-treated control. Each group was treated as follows prior to closure of the wounds: Plateltex-PRP group Blood was drawn from each dog in this group and autologous platelet-rich plasma was aseptically prepared for each dog using Plateltex Prep ® /Plateltex Act ® as described by the manufacturer (Mazzucco et al. ). The prepared PRP was then used to cover the fracture site directly on the tibial bone prior to closure of the soft tissues. CaCl 2 -PRP group Autologous PRP was also prepared from the blood of these animals using CaCl 2 as the activation agent as described by Federico et al. . These were then applied on the fractures prior to soft tissue apposition. Normal saline-treated group (control) The fractures in this group were treated by applying normal saline on the fractures prior to the closure of the soft tissues. Closure For all the animals in the three study groups, atraumatic half-curved needles were used with size 2–0 chromic catgut to appose the muscles in a simple continuous suture pattern. Subcuticular stitches were also applied with the same material in a continuous pattern. The skin incision was then closed with 2–0 nylon using a simple interrupted suture pattern. Evaluation of the rate of healing Radiographs of the fractures were taken at weeks 1, 2, 4, and 8 post treatments and the rate of healing evaluated subjectively and semi-quantitatively without bias as modified from Omar et al. ( ) by considering the following osteogenic indices: Bridging callus at week 4 Periosteal reaction at week 4 Loss of fracture line at week 8 Callus density (mineralization) at weeks 4 and 8 Level of remodeling at weeks 4 and 8 These indices were scored using a 4-point score of 0 = none, 1 = minimal, 2 = moderate, and 3 = extensive.
Results
At week 2, widening of fracture gaps was observed in most of the animals. At week 4, extensive proliferation of periosteal callus was seen in 100% of the fractures in the PPRP (Fig. 3 ) and 66.7% of the CPRP and control groups. One animal each had little or no periosteal callus in the CPRP and the control groups (Figs. 4 b and 5 a, respectively).
At week 8, the fracture lines were no more visible in all the animals in the PPRP group but this was still faintly visible in 66.7 and 100% of the CPRP (Fig. 7 ) and the control groups (Fig. 8 ), respectively. For the control, although there was bridging of the fracture gap, it was with soft tissue callus with minimal density. The fracture lines were still clearly seen with some extensive amount of periosteal callus in all the fractures. Sclerosis of the fracture ends in the control dogs was however evident in all the fractures (Fig. 8 ).
At week 8, fracture union and variable amount of remodeling were observed in PPRP (Fig. 6 ) and CPRP-treated fractures unlike the control (Fig. 8 ). Healing was better in those two groups. 66.7% of the fractures in the PPRP group had undergone extensive remodeling with appreciable periosteal callus incorporation into the cortex. At this point, the fracture in two of the animals in the CPRP group (arrow head in Fig. 7 ) was still faintly visible. There was a significant difference ( p < 0.05) between the radiological score of the PPRP (1.99 ± 0.36) and the control (0.67 ± 0.14) at week 4. Radiologically, there was no statistical significant difference ( p > 0.05) in the performance of the PPRP and CPRP but conversely, the PPRP dogs performed better in terms of functional limb usage. At week 8, all the dogs in the PPRP exhibited full weight bearing on the fractured limbs while 100% of the CPRP dogs showed partial weight bearing and were hanging the affected limb up intermittently while walking. All the fractures in the control group exhibited non-weight bearing lameness at week 8. The CPRP fractures did not show any statistically significant difference ( p > 0.05) from the control at weeks 4 and 8, respectively (Tables 1 and 2 ). Table 1 Scores of the radiologic indices at week 4 post treatment for different treatment groups Radiologic indices Total score for the treatment groups PPRP CPRP CG Periosteal reaction 9 4 2 Bridging callus 8 5 3 Callus density 6 6 3 Level of remodeling 0 0 0 Mean ± SEM 1.92 ± 0.36 a 1.25 ± 0.30 a 0.67 ± 0.14 b Different superscript letters in the same row differ significantly ( p < 0.05) Table 2 Scores of the radiologic indices of different treatment groups at week 8 post immobilization Radiologic indices Scores for the 3 treatment groups PPRP CPRP CG Periosteal reaction 0 0 0 Callus density 9 6 4 Loss of fracture line 9 7 4 Level of remodeling 9 6 0 Mean ± SEM 2.17 ± 0.39 a 1.58 ± 0.29 a 0.67 ± 0.22 b Different superscript letters in the same row differ significantly ( p < 0.05)
The following (Figs. 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 ) are lateral radiographs of some of the fractures in various stages of healing in all the groups: Fig. 1 Radiographs of one of the fractures in the three groups after fixation on day zero. Lateral radiographs of one of the PPRP ( a ), CPRP ( b ), and the control fractures ( c ), respectively (arrows) Fig. 2 Postoperative radiograph of one of the PPRP-treated fractures 2 weeks post treatment. Note the widening of the fracture gap (arrow) following the phagocytosis of debris and dead tissues at the fracture site Fig. 3 One of the fractured tibias in the PPRP-treated dogs 4 weeks post treatment. Note endosteal bridging with soft callus (arrow head) and the proliferation of periosteal callus (arrow) Fig. 4 One of the fractured tibias in CPRP-treated dogs, 4 weeks post treatment. Note the proliferation of periosteal callus (arrow) and the bridging of the fracture gap with endosteal callus (arrow head) which were of soft tissue density Fig. 5 One of the fractured tibias in normal saline-treated dogs, 4 weeks post treatment. Note the proliferation of periosteal callus, but with the fracture gap still clearly visible Fig. 6 One of the fractured tibias in PPRP-treated dogs 8 weeks post treatment. The fracture lines were no more visible in all, and there was some degree of periosteal incorporation in all the fractures. Most of the fractures in this group had attained clinical union at this stage Fig. 7 One of the fractured tibias in CPRP-treated dogs, 8 weeks post treatment. The fracture lines are still faintly visible in two third of the fractures in this group (arrow head) Fig. 8 One of the fractured tibias of the normal saline-treated dogs, 8 weeks post operation. The fracture lines are still visible in all of them (arrow head). There is still extensive periosteal callus
Discussion
Bone healing represents a continuum, often divided into overlapping stages (O’Connor and Cohen ; Heppenstall ). Radiographically, the first stage is characterized by soft tissue edema and hematoma. These features were not observed in any of the groups in this study since we did not take the radiographs at that point. In the review by O’Connor and Cohen in , resolution of these changes was noted as early as 2–5 days. The phase is characterized by inflammatory exudates and is followed by local necrosis and cellular proliferation. This is followed by the second stage, which involves granulation tissue formation and the resorption of the hematoma and other necrotic tissues at the fracture sites. Bone resorption at this time would result in a widened fracture gap. Widening of the fracture gap was seen in 100% of the animals used in this study at week 2. This means that the widening of fracture gaps was not dependent on any of the treatment agents in the study.
The third stage which is the reparative stage is characterized by periosteal and endosteal callus proliferation and the growth of new osteoid tissue. In this experiment, periosteal callus proliferation was seen in 100% of the PPRP fractures while the CPRP and the control had 66.7% each. Callus proliferation normally begins within a few days of fracture and reaches a peak after several weeks (Stacher and Firschein ). This stage is called the soft callus stage and lasts 2–6 weeks (O’Connor and Cohen ; Heppenstall ). Although callus proliferation was seen at the early stage in some of the fractures in the control group, this was not so extensive compared to those of the PPRP and CPRP indicating that the application of PRP in the two groups positively elicited greater osteogenesis in them when compared to that of the control. This could be because the growth factors released from PRP affected local vital cells since addition of PRP to stromal cells had been demonstrated to have angiogenic and osteogenic properties (Lucarelli et al. ). Han et al. ( ) also demonstrated that the use of PRP as an autologous source of growth factors could enhance the quantity and quality of osteogenesis.
At week 8, the fact that the fracture lines of the PPRP groups were no more visible while 66.7 and 100%, respectively, of the CPRP and the control were still visible, shows that PPRP has a greater osteogenic potential.
Generally, radiographic visualization of the bridging callus is predicated on the degree of mineralization which is dependent on the level of osteogenic activity at the fracture sites.
Normally, fibrocartilage can only undergo endochondral ossification where osteoids are deposited on scaffold of mineralized cartilages (Slatter ). Going by this, the PPRP fractures were far ahead of those of the CPRP and the control in terms of maturation of the osteoids. This also explains the increase in density of the callus in the PPRP and the CPRP groups at this stage (Table 2 ).
With progressive mineralization, soft callus gradually turns into hard callus with subsequent conversion of periosteal and endosteal new bone to lamellar bone whose radiopacity bridges the fracture lines (Fig. 6 ). Radiographically, this corresponds to periosteal new bone becoming inseparable from the adjacent cortex and the callus density becoming equal to that of adjacent bone. At this stage, the rearrangement of the new bones in definite orientation (remodeling) has started. This is referred to as periosteal incorporation and this probably explains what was happening in Fig. 6 for PPRP. One of the fractures in the PPRP and the CPRP-treated groups had started undergoing periosteal incorporation; however, the PPRP fracture (Fig. 6 ) had almost assumed the shape of the fully remodeled tibia.
The fact that the rate of healing of the PPRP fractures was significantly ( p < 0.50) greater than that of the control (Tables 1 and 2 ) could only be attributed to the positive osteogenic effects of the Plateltex ® PRP applied.
This result agrees with that of some other researchers who demonstrated that PRP has osteogenic potentials as a result of the numerous growth factors it contains (Kathleen and Alan ; Everts et al. ; Boyan et al. ). There was no significant difference ( p > 0.05) between the performance of the CPRP (1.58 ± 0.29) and the control group (0.67 ± 0.22) (Tables 1 and 2 ). This showed that although CPRP contributed to enhance healing, the CPRP could not elicit enough osteogenesis like the PPRP. This therefore shows that the PPRP which had been demonstrated to be superior to CPRP in terms of its concentration of platelets was also superior in experimental trial. This could also be attributed to the greater efficiency of the Plateltex Prep ® /Plateltex Act ® in platelet sequestration and growth factor recovery.