Introduction
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a double-strand DNA enveloped herpesvirus with four species of mRNA and protein capsid (Penfold and Mocarski ). CMV appears to replicate in a variety of cell types, and viral replication is assoqidated with production of large intra-nuclear and smaller cytoplasmic inclusions (Martin ). CMV infection and disease course can be classified as latent infection, active infection, disease, viral syndrome, and invasive disease. In these instances, there may or may not be evidence of viral replication in the peripheral blood (Azevedo et al. ). No distinct serotypes of CMV exist; however, strain differences can be detected by molecular analysis of DNA (Walker et al. ).
On the other hand, CMV is an important and common cause of mortality and morbidity in immunocompromised patients. After primary infection with CMV, the virus becomes latent in multiple organs and can later be reactivated during severe dysregulation of the immune system (Emery ; Mocarski ). Also, reactivation of CMV has been reported in immunocompetent patients (Jain et al. ) and the exact mechanisms of its reactivation are still not clear and many other mechanisms besides being immune mediated have been implicated in the reactivation of CMV (Cook et al. ; Hummel and Abecassis ). In addition, CMV disease is a common complication following solid organ transplantation with a variety of gastrointestinal (GI) tract manifestations (McCarty et al. ).
CMV infection in the immunocompetent host is generally asymptomatic or may present as a mononucleosis syndrome. However, occasionally primary CMV infection can lead to severe organ-specific complications with significant morbidity and mortality (Cohen and Corey ; Horwitz et al. ). During the past decade, major advances have been achieved regarding the management of CMV infection and disease. These advances have been made possible through the development of new diagnostic techniques for the detection of the virus and through the performance of prospective clinical trials of antiviral agents (Ljungman et al. ). Several methods such as antigen identification of CMV-infected fibroblasts, complement fixation test, ELISA, latex agglutination, staining immunoperoxidase, determination of IgM and IgG immunoglobulins against CMV and antigenemia, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique were used for CMV infection diagnosis (Luscalov et al. ). Monoclonal antibodies to CMV pp65 protein are used as an early and specific marker of active infection (Azevedo et al. ). On the other hand, viral load quantification in CMV by quantitative PCR is the main alternative option for the diagnosis of viral replication and for decision making regarding preemptive treatment and monitoring the response to treatment (de la Torre-Cisneros et al. ; Kotton et al. ). In this study. we aimed to investigate GI and hepatobiliary manifestations of CMV disease proved by antigen pp65 on PCR and hospital course in 13-year period from 2001 to 2013.
Patients and methods
Patients
The protocol of this study was approved by the local ethical committee. All pathological records of patients in the Department of Pathology were searched to find relevant cases. In this retrospective study, we enrolled 74 CMV-infected patients among 74,335 patients with pathologic files from 2001 to 2013. Our inclusion criteria were presence of GI or hepatobiliary system manifestations and proof of CMV infection in histological samples by expert GI pathologist.
Laboratory findings
The relationship between serum AgPP65 and blood CMV PCR with histological findings was evaluated. Usually, the absence of classic viral inclusion bodies in histology samples leads to a lack of necessity to immunohistochemistry (IHC) examination. However, according to a recent study (Yan et al. ), 30 patients labeled as CMV disease with negative histological finding for CMV infection were selected and IHC was performed on their histological samples.
Data collection
Medical records of the patients were monitored. Demographic information such as age, gender, underlying conditions, past history of CMV infection, and consumption of immunomodulating medicines was collected. Clinical manifestations of GI and hepatobiliary systems, presence CMV infectivity based on positive antigen pp65 on PCR, and hospital course were also evaluated.
Statistical analysis
The missing data were excluded from the analysis, and data were analyzed using SPSS for Windows version 23. Data were presented as mean and standard deviation (SD) for quantitative variables and frequency and valid percentage for qualitative variables. Two-independent sample t test for quantitative variable analysis was used. Categorical variables were compared using the chi-squared test. Pearson correlation analysis was used for the estimation of the relation between test parameters. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
In total, 27 (36.5%) of the patients were female. Fifty-three (71.6%) of the patients were 16–65 years old, and the most frequency was in the middle-aged group (40–65 years old) (Fig. 1 ). The total mean and SD of age was 40.37 ± 21.71 years. There was no significant difference between female and male ages (34.3 ± 20.9 vs. 42.9 ± 22.2 years, P = 0.104). Fig. 1 Frequency and percentage of patients based on age categories were presented
The most clinical manifestations of the patients were diarrhea (19 cases, 26.8%) and then melena and rectal bleeding (18 cases, 25.4%). The symptoms related to the esophagus were seen in 14 cases (19.7%), and among them, odynophagia and vomiting were the most symptoms (13 cases, 18.3%). Rising liver enzymes were seen only in 1 case (1.4%). Fifty-four patients (75%) had a history of transplantation including kidney (32 cases, 45.1%), liver (17 cases, 23.9%), multivisceral (3 cases, 4.2%), and bone marrow (2 cases, 2.8%) transplantations.
The malignancies including lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, astrocytoma, and gastric and bladder cancers were the second underlying diseases and were seen in 7 cases (9.9%). The prevalence of CMV disease in transplanted patients was high especially in multivisceral organ transplants. These were 0.6, 1.3, and 11% in liver, kidney, and multivisceral transplantations, respectively. Two patients had inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) and were labeled as corticosteroid refractory IBD. One patient presented with GI obstruction symptoms. Chronic renal failure (CRF) was the underlying cause in two patients, and in one of them, bleeding induced by CMV-related duodenal ulcer induced death. Three patients were labeled unknown cause of sepsis; one of them labeled as anemia and hepatosplenomegaly. Primary immunodeficiency was the underlying condition in one of the patients. Lupus disease after pulse of corticosteroid and cyclophosphamide was the predisposed condition in one of the patients. The underlying conditions were more common in male except liver transplantation, but it was not significant between the two genders ( P > 0.05).
The frequency of organ involvement is presented in Fig. 2 . As shown, the most involved organ was GI tract and liver was in the second place. The frequency and percentage of some variables in evaluated patients including the mortality rate in relation to some variables are presented in Table 1 . As demonstrated, the most common medications were CellCept + cyclosporine. The mortality rate of the patients receiving CellCept + cyclosporine was significantly higher than those receiving CellCept + tacrolimus ( P = 0.016). Using of ganciclovir had no significant effects on mortality rate ( P = 0.924). In a larger number of patients, hospital length of stay was significantly longer than 2 weeks, 66 vs. 34% for less than or equal to 2 weeks. Also, the mortality of them was significantly higher, 32 vs. 14% and eight (12%) of the patients needed intensive care unit (ICU) admission. Fig. 2 Frequency and percentage of involved organs in evaluated patients were presented Table 1 Frequency and percentage of some variables in evaluated patients were presented Variables Frequency Percentage Medication CellCept + cyclosporine 26 40.6 Mortality rate 8 30.8 CellCept + tacrolimus 23 35.9 Mortality rate 1 4.3 CellCept + sirolimus 1 1.6 Azaram 1 1.6 Other 13 20.3 Hospital duration >2 weeks 43 67.2 Mortality rate 13 30.2 ≤2 weeks 21 32.8 Mortality rate 3 14.3 Ag pp65 Checked 43 58.1 Positive 10 23.2 Negative 33 76.8 Non-checked 31 41.9 PCR Checked 41 55.4 Positive 8 19.5 Negative 33 80.5 Non-checked 33 44.6 Death patients PCR Checked 12 29 Non-checked 4 12 Ganciclovir Used 10 25 Not used 11 26 Interval of CMV disease and organ transplantation a (months) <1 6 12.8 1–6 35 74.5 >6 6 12.8 ICU need a Yes 8 12 No 58 88 a Data about all patients were not available for these variables, and the only available data were presented
There was no significant correlation between the histological evidence of CMV and PCR or Ag pp65 status. Mortality rate in positive PCR patients was insignificantly higher than in negative PCR patients ( P = 0.166). Also, no significant difference in the mortality rate was detected between Ag pp65+ and Ag pp65− patients ( P = 0.201). The interval of CMV disease and organ transplantation was 1–6 months in 74% of the patients, lesser than 1 month in 13% of the patients, and more than 6 months in 13% of the patients, which were statistically significant.
There was no significant difference in mortality rate. Total mortality rate was 16 of 74 patients (23.2%) with insignificant higher frequency in male against female (12 vs. 4, respectively, P = 0.286). In CMV-infected transplanted patients, the mortality rate was 6 of the 32 kidney-transplanted patients (18.7%) and 1 in 17 the liver-transplanted ones (5.9%) that was significant. In the transplanted patients, 32 of 54 had checked for IgG and IgM against CMV (59.3%). In 3 patients, IgM was positive and one case had IgG rising, therefore reactive disease; however, 28 (88%) of 32 patients had a primary infection that was statistically significant.
Discussion
Infections of the GI tract are the common form of diseases caused by CMV and are usually manifest as luminal infections such as esophagitis or colitis (Bobak ). It has been reported that the incidence rate of CMV GI infections is about 2%, which is usually seen within 1–2 years after transplantation (van Burik et al. ). In the present study, we evaluated and reported the GI and hepatobiliary complications of CMV in patients referred to the Department of Pathology from 2001 to 2013. We observed that CMV infection in immunocompromised and critically ill patients caused significant mortality especially among transplant recipients. Therefore, early detection and diagnosis of CMV infections can help prevent serious complications given the lack coordination between serology and PCR diagnosis. In addition, histology diagnosis and frequent digestive system manifestations suggest that endoscopic evaluation in suspicious CMV disease with GI manifestations is mandatory. On the other hand, due to the high cost in transplant patients and high failure rate, prevention of CMV is essential.
As seen in other studies (Arora et al. ; McCarty et al. ; Singh et al. ), the most of these patients had primary infection, so it is necessary that donor transplant organs be checked in terms of CMV and also preventive measures should be considered at higher intensity. As we saw in this study, CMV may present as unusual manifestations, for example, refractory GI bleeding in immunocompromised or debilitated patients and corticosteroid refractory IBD, as it can be seen in a previous study (Pillet et al. ), and CMV may be seen as an innocent bystander in IBD patients; however, CMV as one possibility of steroid refractory IBD should kept in mind. GI obstruction was seen as unusual presentation of CMV disease especially in children; therefore, it should be considered. Also, in unknown cause of sepsis and hepatosplenomegaly wherein a lot of works up may be unsuccessful, CMV should be considered. It has been reported that esophagitis is the second most common GI manifestation of CMV infection after colitis (Wang et al. ). Also, gastritis (Crespo et al. ), hepatitis (Tiwary et al. ), and colitis (Bhat et al. ) have been reported as GI manifestations of primary CMV infection in an immunocompetent host. However, we not found such manifestations in CMV-infected patients.
Immunomodulators and corticosteroid pulse therapy are one of the predisposing factors for CMV disease especially in collagen vascular diseases (Yoshihara et al. ). We saw the protocol of CellCept and cyclosporine in the organ transplant recipients associated with more mortality rate; therefore, it should be considered. It was observed that ganciclovir was not given in all of the patients, and so, in those who were prescribed, it did not reduce the mortality rate significantly. According to the sufficient efficacy of this medicine, it should be given in appropriate time. Most of these patients have had a hospital duration of more than 2 weeks, and a significant percent of them needed ICU care that leads to high cost and longer hospital admission. Another point is that although Ag and PCR of CMV should be checked in suspicious patients, in a significant percent of these patients despite proven histology aspects of CMV, serology and PCR were negative; therefore, investigation of histology samples is mandatory despite negativity of serology and PCR.
Conclusion
In this study, we saw in existing reviews that the most common time of CMV infection is 1–6 months after organ transplantation. Another important point is that about half of patients of this study were not labeled as CMV diseases in archive files during recent 13 years; therefore, it should be essential that we more cleverly collect the files.