Introduction
As a chronic metabolic disease, diabetes mellitus can engender disorders due to a malfunction in insulin secretion or insulin mechanism of action in carbohydrate, protein, and fat metabolism (Dallak et al. ). Many people develop diabetes mellitus each year and die as a result of the disease. Presently, diabetes mellitus threatens 2.5–7% of the world’s population, although the figures are believed to be following an ascending trend in near future (Abo et al. ). The major factors contributing to this increasing trend of the disease are lack of physical activity, reliance on energy-rich diets, and obesity (Abo et al. ).
The most serious problem facing diabetic patients is the treatment of their hyperglycemia or hyperlipidemia. To accomplish this, several aspects of a healthy lifestyle must be considered including diet control, physical exercise, and cholesterol-lowering diets and drugs. The complications of diabetes, after damaging the kidneys, can negatively affect the eyes of patients who may suffer from blurry vision or even blindness caused by the destruction of the retina and retinal blood vessels, as a consequence of diabetic retinopathy (Jyothi et al. ).
Diabetic retinopathy is divided into two categories: non-proliferative and proliferative. In the former case, small retinal blood vessels are damaged, as a result fluid can leak into the retinal tissue. This condition which is called macular edema reduces central vision. In the case of the proliferative type, newly shaped abnormal blood vessels become extremely fragile and may lead to bleeding, resulting in severe visual impairment and even blindness (Williams et al. ).
Many studies have been done on herbal treatment of diabetes. In these studies, the effects on glucose homeostasis plants such as alfalfa ( Medicago sativa ), eucalyptus ( Eucalyptus globulus ), lily of the valley ( Convallaria majalis ), and bindii ( Tribulus terrestris ) used as traditional treatments for diabetes mellitus were evaluated in normal and streptozotocin diabetic mice.
In traditional medicine, Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus) was used for the treatment of diabetes mellitus. Hyperglycemia in diabetes has been associated with increased formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative damage to tissue compounds. (Nakhaee et al. ).
Tribulus terrestris (TT) is used in the Arabic folk medicine to treat various diseases. The aim of this article was to investigate the protective effects of TT in diabetes mellitus (DM). Diabetes is known to increase reactive oxygen species (ROS) level that subsequently contributes to the pathogenesis of diabetes (Amin et al. ).
Amygdalus scoparia is an important plant from the medical viewpoint. The plant is a species of Rosacea and is resistant to heat and drought (Farhoosh and Tavakoli ). Traditionally, A. scoparia has been used to treat cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, rheumatism, and headaches, although it has other uses such as wound healing and being used as an appetizer. Also, A. scoparia is a valuable source of vegetable oil for human health with high oxidative stability and with antioxidant activity (Farhoosh and Tavakoli ). A. scoparia contain special compound called amygdalin. Cianhidric acid, benzoic aldehyde, and glucose obtained from the effect of water on amygdalin are exerted to produce drugs (Farhoosh and Tavakoli ). Recent studies have revealed that the plant can help regulate glucose homeostasis (Hashemnia et al. ). Also, Hashemnia et al. indicated that A. scoparia can increase the number of islet and volum density of ß cells in islet of pancreas. Although, this plant is used to treat many diseases but there is very few scientific information about its pharmacological activity. However, no histomorphometrical and ultra-structural evaluation of the effect of A. scoparia on diabetic photoreceptor cells of retina has been conducted yet. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effect of A. scoparia on diabetic photoreceptor cells by transmission electron microscope.
Material and methods
Animals
In this research, 15 adult rats (200–250 g) were collected from Animal House, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences. The animals were kept under favorable environmental conditions (23 ± 1 °C temperature, and a 12-h dark/light cycle), for a period of 4 weeks. Food and water (composed of 75% carbohydrates, 25% protein, and 5% fat) were provided ad libitum.
Induction of diabetes
The rats were made diabetic with streptozotocin (STZ). There were totally 10 diabetic rats which were administered single intraperitoneal injection with STZ (50 mg/kg) (Sigma, St. Luis, MO, USA). The rats did not take any food 12 h before and after the STZ injection. The range of the diabetic dose was limited, and no clear line was observed between the toxic and diabetic borders. The dose under study was calculated based on the findings in Eddouks et al. ( ) and Thomson et al. ( ). The rats in the control group were administered normal saline, equivalent to the amount of STZ injected. The animals with a blood glucose level more than 250 mg/dl were considered diabetic and they showed excessive thirst symptoms and increased urination.
Preparing A. Scoparia extract
The stems of A. Scoparia were collected from northern mountains, Fars, Iran. Primarily, the stems were dried and then filtered. Then, they were concentrated under vacuum at a high temperature (not rising beyond 60 °C), and the extract was kept at −20 °C till it was used.
Experimental design
The animals were randomly divided into three groups of five animals each: control group; group II: diabetic group with IP injection of 50 mg/kg of stereptozotocin (STZ) for two months; group III: diabetic receiving A. scoparia extract one month before and two months after diabetic–induced (200 mg/kg) (Hashemnia et al. ). Additionally, we performed pilot study on three dose of A. scoparia extract (100 mg/kg, 200 mg/kg and 300 mg/kg). Based on pilot study, the appropriate dose was chosen (200 mg/kg) in the decrease of fasting blood sugar and pathological sign of photoreceptor layer of retina. Also, the previous research confirmed this appropriate dose (Hashemnia et al. ).
Measurment of blood glucose
Blood collected from the tail of rats after 12 h fasting using a glucometer (ACCU-CHEK Performa. USA). The rats with blood glucose above 250 mg/dl were selected for the experiment in diabetic and treatment groups.
Histopathological evaluation
Two months after diabetes induction, the rats of all groups euthanized by xylazine (5 mg/kg) and ketamine (40 mg/kg). All of the experiments were conducted following protocols approved by the local ethical committee (Iranian Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and Iranian Veterinary Organization) and all studies were performed in accordance with the Guide to the CALAM Standards of Veterinary Care (Particia ). Eyes enucleated were immediately fixed in 4% glutaraldehyde in sodium cacodylate buffer for 4 h at 4°c; the retina was separated from eyeball near the optic disc and washed in cacodylate buffer and post fixed in osmium tetroxide and dehydrated in ethanol series. The retina was placed in a propylene oxide and resin and then embedded in resin. Resin-embedded 0.5-μm semithin sections were stained with toluidine blue, examined by light microscopy and the thickness of photoreceptor layers was measured as described. The semithin sections were quantitatively evaluated. The thickness of photoreceptor layer measured by Dino-Eye Digital Eyepiecee Camera (AM423x-Thailand). This eyepiece digital camera is professionally designed for microscope. The images of the observed specimen can be accurately displayed on the computer screen. This camera supplied complete with excelent imaging software which includes measurments. The thickness of photoreceptor layer measured by Dino capture software. The photoreceptor layer contain of outer segment, inner segment, outer nuclear layer and outer plexiform layer. The ultrathin sections with 50 nm thickness were obtained and placed on copper grids and stained in uranyl acetate and lead citrate. All of the grids were evaluated by Philips CM-10 transmission electron microscope (made in the Netherlands).
Statistical analysis
The data was analyzed with SPSS V16 software. The statistical analysis was determined by one-way ANOVA. P ≤ 0.05 was used for statistical significance.
Results
The mean of fasting blood sugar (FBS) in control, diabetic, and treatment groups was 100 ± 3.16, 521.8 ± 31.76, and 302 ± 93.81 mg/dl and the mean thickness of photoreceptor layers in this research was 86 ± 3.39, 69.4 ± 5.72, and 83.8 ± 2.28 μm, respectively (Table 1 ). The results of micrometry showed that the mean thickness of photoreceptor layers was decreased in diabetic group, and there was significant difference with control group ( p ≤ 0.05). In treatment group with A. scoparia extract, the mean thickness of photoreceptor layers was increased and there were slight decreases compared with control group. But, this decrement was without significant difference ( p ≥ 0.05). There was significant difference between diabetic and treatment groups ( p ≤ 0.05). The mean fasting blood sugar decreased in A. scoparia group compared with diabetic group ( p ≤ 0.05). Also, the treatment group has significance difference with control group ( p ≤ 0.05). Table 1 Effect of Amygdalus scoparia on fasting blood sugar (mg/dl) and the thickness of photoreceptor layer (μ = micrometer) Fasting blood sugar Thickness of photoreceptor layer Control group 100 ± 3.16 a 86 ± 3.39 a Diabetic group 521.8 ± 31.76 b 69.4 ± 5.72 b Amygdalus scoparia group 302 ± 93.81 c 83.8 ± 2.28 a Means within a column with different superscript letters (a, b, c) denote significant differences. P ≤ 0.05 was accepted as statistically significant.
The ultra-structural evaluation showed the outer segment of the photoreceptors consists of stacks of membranous discs (Fig. 1 ). The discs are surrounded by the cell membrane spheres. The rod outer segment was observed to be long and cylindrical. But, the cone outer segment was wide in base and slim in apex. The outer limiting membrane appeared as an intermittent dark spot between the inner segment and the outer nuclear layers. These layers are formed by zonulae adherents. The outer nuclear layers contain the nuclei of rods and cones cell. These nuclei have scattered heterochromatin (Fig. 1 ). The inner segment contained round to oval mitochondria near the outer segment, rough endoplasmic reticulum, glycogen, etc. (Fig. 2 ). In fact, the inner segment is cytoplasm of cell. Round to oval nuclei were seen in this layer. Two months after induction of diabetes, the major signs of pathology and loss of structure were seen in this group. The outer segment loss and disorganization of outer segment, the large and small vacuoles in inner segment and pyknotic, karyorrhexis and karyolytic were obvious in diabetic group (Fig. 3 ). Also, the loss of cristae was seen in disorganized mitochondria (Fig. 4 ). But, the outer limiting membrane was normal in this group. Additionally, the normal and organized outer segment, the small vacuoles in inner segment and pyknotic nuclei were seen in A. scoparia treatment group. Also, the loss of crista of mitochondria occurred in diabetic group (Fig. 5 ). On the other hand, the mitochondria appeared normal and normal cristae of mitochondria were seen in this group (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 1 Electro micrograph of the photoreceptor layer in control group. The outer segment ( OS ), the outer segment of rod cell ( R ), and cone cell ( C ), the inner segment ( IS ), the mitochondria ( thick arrows ), the outer limiting membrane ( arrowheads ), and the outer nuclear layer(ONL), (staining with lead citrate and uranyl acetate) (×3400). Scale bar = 2000 nm Fig. 2 Electro micrograph of the inner segment of photoreceptor layer in control group. The round to oval mitochondria ( M ), rough endoplasmic reticulum ( arrowheads ), and the glycogen particles ( circle ). (Staining with lead citrate and uranyl acetate) (×15,500). Scale bar = 500 nm Fig. 3 Electro micrograph of the photoreceptor layer in diabetic group. The outer segment( OS , returned arrows ), the outer segment loss ( asterisks ), disorganized inner segment ( IS ), the abnormal mitochondria ( circles ), vacuoles ( thin arrows ), the outer limiting membrane ( arrowheads ), the outer nuclear layer ( ONL ), karyolysis nuclei ( arrows ), pyknotic nuclei ( thick arrow ), and karyorrhexis ( wave arrows ). (Staining with lead citrate and uranyl acetate) (×3400). Scale bar = 2000 nm Fig. 4 Electro micrograph of the inner segment of photoreceptor layer in diabetic group. The mitochondria without cristae ( M ), rough endoplasmic reticulum ( RER ), and vacuoles ( V ). (Staining with lead citrate and uranyl acetate) (×15,500). Scale bar = 500 nm Fig. 5 Electro micrograph of the photoreceptor layer in Amygdalus scoparia group. The normal outer segment ( OS ), the outer segment of rod cell ( R ), and cone cell ( C ), the organized inner segment ( IS ), the normal mitochondria ( circles ), the vacuoles ( thin arrows ), the outer limiting membrane ( arrowheads ), the outer nuclear layer ( ONL ), and pyknotic nuclei ( arrows ). (Staining with lead citrate and uranyl acetate) (×3400). Scale bar = 2000 nm Fig. 6 Electro micrograph of the inner segment of photoreceptor layer in Amygdalus scoparia group. The normal mitochondria with cristae ( M ), the rough endoplasmic reticulum ( circles ), and vacuoles ( thin arrow ), the glycogen particle ( arrowhead ). (Staining with lead citrate and uranyl acetate) (×15,500). Scale bar = 500 nm
Discussion
Diabetic mellitus is the most common disease wherein the effects of insulin disorder are accompanied by sight dysfunction and increased risk factors such as hypertension, atherosclerosis, and hyperglycemia (Rajalakshmi et al. ). Our finding showed that fasting blood sugar decreased in treatment group compared with diabetic group. Also, A. scoparia caused the structure of photoreceptor layer such as organized outer segment to improve, decrease of vacuoles in inner segment, normal cristae of mitochondria and the absence of karyorrehxis and karyolysis in outer nuclear layer.
The glucose needed for retinal activity is transferred from the blood vessels (Park et al. ). So, failed glucose metabolism causes disorders in the retinal function when diabetes oxidative stress is associated with diabetes (Renu et al. ).
The plants are antioxidant agents and used for treatment of diabetic complications (Saberi and Gholami ). The antioxidant herbs caused blood sugar to lower and decreased the damaging effects of diabetes (Hindustan et al. ). Also, according to researchers, diabetes can be treated by plant extracts and act on reducing blood glucose via acting as potential insulin-like, inhibition of hepatic glucose production, inhibiting insulinase activity, increasing the β cells in the pancreas, and decreasing carbohydrate absorption (Eddouks et al. ; Jelodar et al. ; Eidia et al. ). In our research, the blood glucose significantly decreased in treatment group by A. scoparia . Also, the thickness of the photoreceptor layer was increased after treatment with A. scoparia extract at 3 months. Hashemnia et al. indicated that A. scoparia extract can decrease blood glucose through the action of this plant on the number of β cells and size of pancreatic islets. Inter sting, the thickness of photoreceptor layer significantly increased in treatment group as compared to diabetic animals. These results may be due to duration of A. scoparia consumption. Another observation from this study was the occurrence of major signs of pathology in diabetic group. This finding corroborates previous results (Goodarzi et al., ). But, the minor signs of pathology were seen in treatment group with A. scoparia extract. Our finding showed that cristae of mitochondria in inner segment was destroyed and disappeared. But, the normal mitochondria with cristae were seen in treatment group. This finding is in agreement with previous research (Bonnard et al. ). Reactive oxygen species production is a key feature in diabetic mitochondrial dysfunction, in agreement with the observed hyperglycemia induced oxidative stress (Bonnard et al. ). Furthermore, diabetes induced by cytochrome C from mitochondria, and probably A. scoparia treatment reversed this pro apoptotic process (Bonnard et al. ). Taken together, these observations indicate that oxidative stress in diabetic group is associated with altered mitochondrial structure and function in photoreceptor layer and that both the improvement of glycemia and antioxidant treatment restored mitochondrial structure. On the other hand, diabetes can be improved by plant extracts due to their interference with carbohydrate absorption because of herbal fiber. Also, the plant extracts can decrease hyperglycemia. In fact, mitochondria are capable of producing reactive oxygen species, as well as the network of antioxidant activity (Lin and Beal ). In this research, oxidative damage of mitochondria occurred in diabetic group and cristae of mitochondria disappeared. This damage can cause an imbalance between reactive oxygen species production and antioxidant defense, regulating in mitochondria (Andreyev et al. ). Another observation from this research showed that the cell death occurred in diabetic group. The cell death evidence including outer segment loss and karyolysis was obvious in ultra-section. These findings corroborated oxidative stress and photoreceptor damage in diabetic group. Decrement in thickness of photoreceptor layer confirmed cell death in diabetic group. Hypoglycemic effect of A. scoparia was due to number of βcells (Hashemnia et al. ) and their interference with carbohydrate absorption (Oryan et al. ; Jelodar et al. ; Eddouks et al. ). In addition, these observations in our research will support the theory that the anti-diabetic and antioxidant effect of A. scoparia might be due to restoration of mitochondria.
Conclusions
We concluded that oral administration of A. scoparia extract for 3 months caused improvement in damaged retina of diabetic rats. This could be due to the action of antioxidant in A. scoparia . Further antioxidant enzyme measurement is necessary to clarify the antioxidant activity of this plant.