Introduction
Mastitis is one of the most predominant diseases in dairy cows and buffalos. It is an endemic disease causing great economic losses in dairy herds worldwide (Babaei et al. ). The economic impact of mastitis is clearly identified in the persistence decrease in milk production either in clinical and subclinical mastitis (Ibrahim et al. ). Moreover, milk color is changed, and milk clots are detected into the affected milk, beside rise in somatic cell count (SCC) (Babaei et al. ). Several bacteria are criminated as causative agent for mastitis, while major ones were Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) , and Mycoplasma bovis (Sharma et al. ).
Mostly, the mastitis problems arise from subclinical one, which no clinical signs appeared on the affected animals, and increased somatic cell count (SCC) is the only finding, which require great effort and spending more of time (Ibrahim et al. ). Therefore, searching about alternative biochemical parameters for subclinical mastitis diagnosis is urgently required.
Acute-phase response (APR) is responsible for the immediate inflammatory response to tissue injury that protects the host from further injury and helps in establishment the healing process (Raynes ). Elevation of acute-phase protein (APP) levels is the most prominent feature in that response. Such elevation may be 10–1000-fold, 2–10-fold or <2-fold higher than the reference levels, that could be classified into a major response, a moderate response, or a minor response, respectively (Gruys et al. ). Haptoglobin (Hp) is the acute phase protein that represents the major response in cows (Gruys et al. ; Petersen et al. ). Hp has been well studied in serum and in milk during acute clinical mastitis (Eckersall et al. ; Gronlund et al. ). Many studies have been reported the increase of Hp in milk and serum of cows with acute mastitis (Hirvonen et al. ; Gronlund et al. ). The increase in Hp level was simultaneous with the increase in SCC, which indicates the importance of this parameter as indicator of the healthy udder quarters and the severity of clinical mastitis (Gronlund et al. ). Although, the plenty research on APP in cows with clinical mastitis, there is scarcity regarding this point in subclinical mastitic buffalos. Therefore, this study was planned to the comparative changes of the selected APPs, alkaline phosphatase, and lactate dehydrogenase activities in buffalo and cows with subclinical mastitis. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study comparing the changes in biochemical variables in relation to different pathogens in buffalos and cows with subclinical mastitis.
Materials and methods
Animals and samples
A septic collection to milk samples was applied after udder cleaning and throwing the first milk strips from 139 buffalos ( Bubalus bubalis ) and 146 cows (Holstein or Friesian) from Dakahlia governorate in Egypt. All animals were apparently clinically healthy at the time of milk sample collection. Buffalos and cows were raised either at smallholder farms or large-scale farms, respectively, and both system follow conventional methods of management. Animals were fed on barley, corn, and concentrates. All animals were in their first to seventh lactation. California mastitis test (CMT) was applied as previously mentioned by (Schalm et al. ) to detect the animals with subclinical mastitis. Seventy-six cows and 49 buffalos exhibited subclinical mastitis with positive CMT, and no clinical signs of mastitis. All milk samples showed negative CMT were served as control. The milk sample to be representative, samples were collected from four quarters in each animal then mixed; next, one sample was taken from the pooled milk. Subclinical mastitic animals were thoroughly examined, and appropriate samples were collected for bacteriology, somatic cell count (SCC), and biochemical analysis inclusive haptoglobin (Hp), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP).
Bacteriological examination
Bacterial analyses were applied according to traditional authenticated methods (Quinn et al. ; Abera et al. ). Briefly, 10 μl of milk samples were cultured from each positive CMT milk sample on 10% sheep blood agar, nutrient agar, or MacConkey agar plates. Next, plate incubation was applied for 24–48 h at aerobic atmosphere and 37 °C. Then, the incubated plates were examined for gross colony morphology, pigmentation, and hemolytic characteristics.
Biochemical analysis
Milk Hp, LDH, and ALP concentrations were determined in defatted milk samples (whey milk) according method previously described by (Cabaud and Wroblewski ; Bergmeyer ; Friedman ), respectively. SCC was determined using electronic cell counter (Bentley Soma count 150, Bentley, U.S.A.).
Statistical analysis
Statistical differences between mean of biochemical variables in control and subclinical mastitic cases caused by different bacteria were assessed using Kruskal-Wallis test with post hoc Dunn multiple comparison tests. Mann- Whitney test Data was used for assessment statistical differences between buffalos and cows using statistical software program (GraphPad Prism for Windows version 5.0; GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). P < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant in all tests.
Results
Bacteriological examination that was applied on milk samples collected from buffalos and cows showed positive CMT, and results revealed that Staphylococcus spp. were the most prevailing bacteria from subclinical samples in both buffalo and cow fellowed by Streptococcus spp. and E.coli (Table 1 ). The results indicated that the most prevalent bacteria in subclinical mastitic buffalos and cows were similar. Table 1 Bacteria isolated from milk from buffalos and cows cattle with subclinical mastitis ( n = 125) Buffalo Cow Number Percentage Number Percentage Staphylococcus spp. 22 44.89 32 42.12 Streptococcus spp. 16 32.65 23 30.26 E.coli 9 18.36 18 23.68 Corynebacterium spp. 2 4.1 3 3.94 Total 49 100 76 100
Clinically healthy buffalos and cows showed significant differences ( P < 0.05) in SCC, HP level, LDH, and ALP activities in comparison with subclinical mastitis in animals (Figs. 1 , 2 , and 3 ). Additionally, statistical significant differences were observed in SCC, HP level, and LDH activity between buffalos with different bacterial isolates (Figs. 1 , 2 , and 3 b). For cows, the significant difference in the measured variables was detected on LDH activity only (Fig. 3 b). Buffalos affected by Staphylococcus spp. exhibited significant differences ( P < 0.05) in ALP level in comparison with other isolated pathogens (Fig. 3 a). Diseased cows showed significant differences ( P < 0.05) in SCC with different bacteria except for Staphylococcus and Streptococcus spp. (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Somatic cell counts in buffalos and cows with subclinical mastitis caused by different bacteria. * P < 0.05 significant differences between buffalos and cows. Lower case letters ( a , b , c , d ) are statistically significantly different ( P < 0.05) between different bacteria in subclinical mastitic buffalos. Upper case letters ( A , B , C , D ) are statistically significantly different ( P < 0.05) between different bacteria in subclinical mastitic cows. Each value represents (mean ± SD) Fig. 2 Milk concentration of haptoglobin (HP) in buffalos and cows with subclinical mastitis caused by different bacteria. * P < 0.05 significant differences between buffalos and cows. Lower case letters ( a , b , c , d ) are statistically significantly different ( P < 0.05) between different bacteria in subclinical mastitic buffalos. Upper case letters ( A , B , C , D ) are statistically significantly different ( P < 0.05) between different bacteria in subclinical mastitic cows. Each value represents (mean ± SD) Fig. 3 Milk concentration of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in buffalos and cows with subclinical mastitis caused by different bacteria. a ALP. b LDH. * P < 0.05 significant differences between buffalos and cows. Lower case letters ( a , b , c , d ) are statistically significantly different ( P < 0.05) between different bacteria in subclinical mastitic buffalos. Upper case letters ( A , B , C , D ) are statistically significantly different ( P < 0.05) between different bacteria in subclinical mastitic cows. Each value represents (mean ± SD)
Cows infected with Staphylococcus spp. and Streptococcus spp. showed significant differences ( P < 0.05) in ALP activity (Fig. 3 a). Statistical significant differences ( P < 0.05) were observed in HP level between different bacteria caused subclinical mastitis in cows (Fig. 2 )
Significant differences ( P < 0.05) in SCC between buffalos and cows with subclinical mastitis infected with Streptococcus spp. and Corynebacterium spp. were observed (Fig. 1 ). While, all bacteria isolates showed statistical significant differences ( P < 0.05) in LDH activities between buffalos and cows except for animals infected by Streptococcus spp. (Fig. 3 ). ALP activity showed significant differences ( P < 0.05) between clinically health buffalos and cows and those infected with E.coli and Corynebacterium spp. (Fig. 3 ). Milk HP level showed significant differences ( P < 0.05) between clinically health buffalos and cows and those infected with different isolated bacteria (Fig. 2 ).
The concentrations of milk Hp, LDH, ALP, and SCC in subclinical mastitic buffalos and cows were significantly higher than those in control groups ( P < 0.05) (Figs. 1 , 2 , and 3 ). In subclinical mastitic buffalos and cows, Staphylococcus spp. showed the highest values of milk LDH and ALP in comparison with other bacteria (Fig. 3 ). Haptoglobin level slowed the highest values in subclinical mastitis caused by Staphylococcus spp. and E.coli in buffalos and in that caused by E.coli in cows (Fig. 2 ). While, the highest values of SCC were observed in buffalos infected with in Staphylococcus spp. and in cows infected with Staphylococcus spp. and Streptococcus spp. (Fig. 1 ).
Discussion
Mastitis is a disease of great economic importance in dairy livestock industry. The current study provides an opportunity to make a preliminary comparative estimation of APPs in buffalos and cows with subclinical mastitis under field condition.
Staphylococcus spp. were the most dominate bacteria isolated from buffalos and cows with subclinical mastitis fellowed by Streptococcus spp., that indicates the similarity between the both species in the most dominant bacteria causing subclinical mastitis. Other studies, (Schroder et al. ; Melchior et al. ) revealed that the most prevalent bacterial agents of bovine mastitis are Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus uberis . In a study similar to ours, Staphylococcus spp. were the most prevalent isolated bacterium from cows with subclinical mastitis with 13.9% (Haghkhah et al. ). Shitandi and Kihumbu ( ) reported that S. aureus, Streptococcus agalactiae , and Corynebacterium bovis were the most common bacterial agents isolated from cows affected by subclinical mastitis. Busato et al. ( ) revealed that the most common bacteria caused subclinical mastitis is coagulase- negative Staphylococci with 51%.
Secretion of acute phase proteins is the most predominate feature during mammary gland inflammation as mammary gland is considered one of the main sites for synthesis such proteins, which further involved in acute phase response. Indeed, Hp is the major APP that synthesized and secreted into the milk during mammary gland inflammation (Ceciliani et al. ). Secretion of Hp into the milk helps in filtering of foreign substances and deprivation of bacteria from free iron through its binding with free hemoglobin (Eaton et al. ; Orro ), the facts that make this APP have an indirect antibacterial activity and bacteriostatic effect.
Our study, revealed the increase in Hp level in both animal species. While the increase in Hp level in buffalos was higher than cows, suggesting the higher immunity response in buffalos. This is the first study comparing the APP response in buffalos and cows with subclinical mastitis. Our study is sustained by several studies (Hanaa et al. ; Tothova et al. ; Ahmed et al. ) who also reported higher concentrations of hemoglobin (Hp) in milk of animals suffering from mastitis. Such increase might be attributed to the intra-mammary synthesis of Hp.
Although, very few studies (Ahmed et al. ; Singh et al. ) had been described the APP response in buffalos, the response with different pathogens in buffalos was not applied yet. Pyorala et al. ( ) and Hiss et al. ( ) studied Hp in milk collected from cows with clinical and subclinical mastitis and correlate its level with different pathogens and notice significant differences in concentrations dependent on the causative agent pathogen. Both studies revealed that Hp level is considerable increase in cows affected by E. coli ; however, cows have coagulase- negative Staphylococci infection only recorded a slight increase. These results come in accordance with ours.
In conclusion, similar to cows, Hp is a sensitive marker of subclinical mastitis in buffalo, and there are remarkable variations in its level with different pathogens in mastitic buffalos. Furthermore, APPs may be valuable to explore the response to the mammary gland inflammation in buffalos. Therefore, additional studies are required on abroad range of APPs in buffalos to elucidate the pattern of response to mammary gland inflammation.