Introduction
Pseudomonas aeruginosa as a common and important Gram-negative bacterium causes serious infection (Martinez and Baquero ). It is the most frequent pathogen isolated from patients who have been in hospital for one week or longer, and it is a frequent cause of nosocomial infections (Donadio et al. ; Shokri et al. ). Due to increasing of antibiotic resistance, P. aeruginosa infections are becoming more complicated to treat (Donadio et al. ). Recently, European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) redefined conventional antibiotic resistant profiles P. aeruginosa and some other bacteria as pan-drug resistant or PDR, multi-drug resistant or MDR, and extensive drug resistant or XDR (Magiorakos et al. ). These resistant strains cause severe diseases and are important public health problem. The emergence of XDR strains of this pathogen that there are only few antibiotics for treatment with wide side-effects (such as polymyxins) and PDR strains that makes it truly untreatable with current antibiotics has renewed attempts to discover and develop active antibacterial agents. An alternative approach to antimicrobial treatment is use of lytic bacteriophage as phage therapy (Delfan et al. ; Inal ; Ryan et al. ). For the first time, bacteriophage as therapeutic agents was used against Bacillus and Staphylococcus in 1919 (Ryan et al. ). However, with coming on antibiotics during the Second World War and broad range effects of them, use of bacteriophages was limited in therapeutic procedure (Inal ). However, because of extend resistance to antibiotics in microorganism, again, phage-therapy was proposed as a main or alternative way for control of pathogen bacteria (Ryan et al. ). Advantages of phage over antibiotics are the specificity to certain bacteria and rapid isolation (Delfan et al. ). Although bacteriophages of Pseudomonas species have been studied in different studies, isolation of lytic bacteriophages as cocktail with broad spectrum activity against XDR and PDR Pseudomonas strains is rarely reported (Merabishvili et al. ; Webb et al. ).
The aims of this study were classification of different profiles of resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates based on new definitions and isolation and identification of bacteriophages with antimicrobial action against them especially in XDR and PDR isolates.
Materials and methods
Sample collection and identification
Samples collected from different clinical specimens including respiratory samples ( bronchoalveolar lavage, tracheal and bronchial aspiration), peritoneal fluid, plural fluid, blood, urine, CSF, and wound discharge that were submitted at the microbiology laboratories of three hospitals in Isfahan, Iran, during 12 months and were cultured on EMB and blood agar media (HiMedia Company, India) and then incubated at 35 °C for 18–24 h. The pure isolates were identified by Gram staining and conventional biochemical tests.
Determine of resistance profiles of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates
Resistance profiles of P. aeruginosa strains were determined according to new CDC and ECDC definitions as MDR, PDR, and XDR based on Magiorakos et al. method (Magiorakos et al. ). MDR isolate was considered as being non-susceptible to a minimum of one agent in three or additional antimicrobial categories. An XDR isolate was considered as being non-susceptible to a minimum of one agent in all except two or fewer categories. Non-susceptibility to all antibiotics was measured as PDR. Antimicrobial categories that were used here are shown in Table 1 . These agents are according to CLSI recommendation (Cockerill ). Kirby Bauer’s disk diffusion technique was used for measurement of antibiotic sensitivity test (All antimicrobial disks obtained from MAST Company, UK). As recommended by CLSI, Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 278531 and Escherichia coli ATCC 25922 were used for quality control (Cockerill ). The plates were incubated at 35 °C for 18 h. All acquired data were entered and analyzed by WHONET5.6 software (WHO, Geneva, Switzerland). Table 1 Characteristics of the 96 Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains during the 12-month period of study Sex Specimen type Age category Department M F Res Bl Ur Per Sf A/W Dr Pl Oth Ped Ger Inf Sur Eme Tra ICU Oth 63 33 37 8 29 3 2 10 2 2 3 5 91 4 21 10 9 44 8 Total: 96 Total: 96 Total: 96 Total: 96 M male, F female, Res respiratory, Bl blood, Ur urine, Per peritoneal, Sf CSF, A/W abscess/wound, Dr drain, Pl plural, Oth other, Ped pediatric, Ger geriatric, Inf infectious disease, Sur surgery, Eme emergency, Tra transplant
Isolation of bacteriophages from various resources
For bacteriophage isolation, various samples of wastewater of hospitals and urban sewages were used (Delfan et al. ). These samples were collected from a depth of 50 cm and were centrifuged in 12,000× g for 10 min, and gathered supernatants were filtrated by 0.45-μm cellulose acetate (CA) membrane syringae filters (CHMLAB) and stored in 4 °C.
Isolation and enrichment of Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteriophages
Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains were cultured in brain heart infusion (BHI) medium and after 2 hours, 1 ml of filtrated supernatants that were prepared in the previous stage were added. Bacteria and bacteriophage cocktails were incubated at 37 °C for 48 h in 60 rpm for aeration. Bacterial culture without bacteriophage suspension was used as negative control. After 48 h, suspensions were centrifuged at 12000× g for 10 min and were filtrated through 0.45-μm CA membrane filters for enrichment of bacteriophages. Phage solutions were preserved with chloroform and glycine separately and stored in 4 °C. For plaque formation assay, Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains were cultured on BHI medium and incubated in 37 °C and after 1 h, 15 μL of filtrated supernatants were added and then plates were incubated in 37 °C for 24 h. After few hours, halo plaque appearance on the cultured strains in addition to, clear plaques formation after 24 h were investigated (Ackermann ; Delfan et al. ).
Electron microscopy of bacteriophages
The plates containing plaques on bacterial lawn were selected and each plate was washed by 5 ml diluent buffer (MgSO4. 7 H 2 O, 2 g; 1 M Tris-Hcl (pH .7.5), 10 ml; distilled water to 1000 ml) for 5 min. In the next step, bacteria and bacteriophages suspension were centrifuged in 12,000× g for 20 min and supernatants were filtrated by 0.45-μm CA syringe filter. A 50 ml of phage solutions were transferred to firmware coated copper grid and were stained with uranyl acetate 2% ( w / v ), pH 4–4.5 for 90 s. The selected grids were observed by transmission electron microscope (The Philips CM-10 TEM ). Identification of bacteriophages was done using text references according to shapes, morphology, and size (King et al. ).
Results
During the12-month period of study, 96 Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates were obtained and identified from different clinical samples. Table 1 summarizes a number of P. aeruginosa isolate characteristics. Result analysis using WHONET 5.6 software showed among these 96 strains, 2 (2.1%), 94 (97.9%), 63 (65.6%), and 1 (1.1%) isolates were non-MDR, MDR, XDR, and PDR, respectively, and the effective antibiotics were colistin, polymyxin B, and fosfomycin with only 1, 1, and 5.2% resistance, respectively, and high percentages of resistance observed among other antibiotics (Table 2 ). Table 2 Antimicrobial categories and agents used to define PDR, XDR, and MDR in Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains and their percentage of resistant, intermediate, and resistant Antimicrobial category Antimicrobial agent Sensitive (%) Intermediate (%) Resistant (%) Aminoglycosides Gentamicin 19.2 2.7 78.1 Amikacin 32.9 0 67.1 Netilmicin 15.1 0 84.9 Tobramycin 8.2 0 91.8 Antipseudomonal carbapenems Imipenem 16.4 2.7 80.8 Meropenem 12.5 6.9 80.6 Doripenem 15.1 6.8 78.1 Antipseudomonal cephalosporins Ceftazidime 6.8 2.7 90.4 Cefepime 9.6 2.7 87.7 Antipseudomonal fluoroquinolones Ciprofloxacin 6.8 2.7 90.4 Levofloxacin 9.6 5.5 84.9 Antipseudomonal penicillins + ß-lactamase inhibitors Ticarcillin-clavulanic acid 7.7 1.3 91 Piperacillin-tazobactam 5.5 11 83.6 Monobactams Aztreonam 15.1 13.7 71.2 Phosphonic acids Fosfomycin 94.5 2.7 2.7 Polymyxins Colistin 98.6 0 1.4 Polymyxin B 98.6 0 1.4
The results showed the 96 Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains were in 38 different resistotypes including two non-MDR patterns and 36 MDR patterns that 14 patterns of them belonged to XDR and one pattern corresponded to PDR (Table 3 ). The prevailing resistotype among XDR group contains 41% of strains and was sensitive to polymyxins and fosfomycin (Table 2 ). Table 3 Frequencies of non-MDR, MDR, XDR, and PDR and resistotype profiles of P. aeruginosa strains Total number Resistant profiles Non-MDR MDR XDR PDR 96 2 (2.1%) 94 (97.9%) 63 (65.6%) 1 (1.1%) Most frequent resistotype profile Sensitive to Isolates % Resistant profile AMK FEP CAZ CIP DOR GEN IPM LVX MEM TZP TCC TOB ATM NET COL, POL, FOS 41 XDR
Isolated and prepared phage cocktails had potent and extended host range against all MDR, XDR, and PDR strains. The plaques completely destroyed the bacterial lawn, and bacteriophage plaques were observed on inoculation regions clearly (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Different plaques produced by prepared phage cocktails of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Bacteriophage solutions that analyzed by TEM showed three different structures (Fig. 2 ). Bacteriophage Psu1 was a tailless enveloped phage with hexagonal structure and approximately 75 nm in dimension with resistance to chloroform that it identified as Cystoviridae family. Psu2 was a tailless non-enveloped phage with spherical and icosahedral symmetry and a diameter of about 25 nm with sensitivity to chloroform. It identified as the Leviviridae family, and another shape, bacteriophage Psu3, was non-enveloped, rod-shaped, and filamentous with length of about 85 nm and a width about 10 nm and it was sensitive to chloroform. It was belonged to Inoviridae family. Fig. 2 TEM picture of bacteriophages. Psu1 (approximately 75 nm in diameter) identified as Cystoviridae family. Psu2 (approximately 30 nm in diameter) belong to Leviviridae family and bacteriophage Psu3 was belonged to Inoviridae family
Discussion
In this study frequency of PDR, XDR, and MDR profiles in Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains, that recommended by ECDC and CDC was investigated and phage cocktails against these isolates were assayed. In different studies, new definitions of ECDC and the CDC for determination of resistance profiles of P. aeruginosa strains were considered (Chung et al. ; Dash et al. ; Gill et al. ; Gomila et al. ; Mohanasoundaram ; Mulet et al. ). For example, in a study in Spain, among 56 P. aeruginosa strains, 21% MDR, 37% XDR, and 41% non-MDR strains were isolated (Gomila et al. ). Mulet et al. isolated 10.5% XDR isolates of P. aeruginosa from seven Spanish hospitals (Mulet et al. ). In Chung et al.’s study in different Asian countries, MDR, XDR, and PDR rates of P. aeruginosa isolates were 43, 5, and 0.7%, respectively (Chung et al. ). In a study in an India hospital, 84.7% of P. aeruginosa isolates were MDR, 35.7% were XDR, and no PDR isolate was isolated (Dash et al. ). MDR rate of 71% was reported in another India hospital (Mohanasoundaram ) and Gill et al. in Pakistan showed that 23% of 180 P. aeruginosa isolates were MDR, while 11 and 4.3% were XDR and PDR, respectively (Gill et al. ). No previous study in our country (Iran) has used these new definitions of CDC and ECDC in P. aeruginosa strains. The results showed high MDR and XDR rates comparing to previous reported studies among P. aeruginosa isolates . In addition, many different patterns of resistance (resistotype) have been shown in these strains. The most common and prevailing resistotypes belong to XDR group that a few antibiotics remain effective against them. This indicates a high rate of antibiotic resistance that it is very alarming. In addition, emerging of one PDR isolate of P. aeruginosa is very worrying because there is no antibiotic for its treat. Most effective antibiotics against MDR and XDR isolates were polymyxins and fosfomycin. In addition to polymyxins, that their effective activity is confirmed for P. aeruginosa infections treatment in different studies, our study showed that fosfomycin had very good effect against these isolates. Fosfomycin is well tolerated and has low harmful side effects; however, increase of bacterial resistance during therapy is common and makes it unsuitable for continued therapy of severe infections and it is not recommended for children and those over 75 years old (Mohanasoundaram ). In other hand, polymyxin antibiotics, that were effective against majority of isolates, are relatively neurotoxic and nephrotoxic (Dash et al. ). These results indicate an urgent need to use new alternative antimicrobial agents instead of antibiotics.
Previous reports about phage therapy indicated that phage can control bacterial population in vitro and in vivo completely and many companies produced phage-based products for treatment purpose of clinical and environmental grounds (Inal ; Ryan et al. ). During years 1981–1986 in the Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy of the Polish Sciences Academy, 550 cases of bacterial infection that were resistant to antibiotic were treated with bacteriophages and totally 92.4% of patients had positive response to phage therapy (Slopek et al. ). In the other hand, previous studies have indicated that the phage cocktails can enhance treatment efficacy (Merabishvili et al. ). The current study describes bacteriophage cocktails with extended spectrum activity against P. aeruginosa strains. Phage cocktails were used against Pseudomonas aeruginosa in some other studies. For example, Fu et al. showed the effect of pretreating of hydrogel-covered catheters with Pseudomonas aeruginosa phage cocktails on formation of biofilm in P. aeruginosa strains in an in vitro model (Fu et al. ). Merabishvili et al. used lytic bacteriophage cocktail for prevention and treatment of P. aeruginosa and S. aureus infection in burn wound patients (Gill et al., ). Prepared phage cocktails that were used in this study had potent and extended host activity against all MDR, XDR, and PDR Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains and can be important antibiotic alternative to treat these strains. This bacteriophage cocktail included three bacteriophages belonging to Cystoviridae, Leviviridae, and Inoviridae families. Cystoviridae are enveloped dsRNA viruses with about 75 nm in diameter and an icosahedral capsid (Magiorakos et al. ; Martinez & Baquero, ). Leviviridae are non-enveloped spherical ssRNA virions with about 26 nm in diameter (Magiorakos et al. ; Martinez & Baquero, ). The Inoviridae are a family of filamentous bacteriophages and are non-enveloped and rod-shaped and their capsid have helical symmetry and their morphological differences depend on the species from length of 85–280 nm or 760–1950 nm and a width of 10–16 nm or 6–8 nm, respectively (Magiorakos et al. ; Martinez & Baquero, ).The three mentioned bacteriophages infect Pseudomonas species but there are no previous cases that all these phages are used as cocktails for elimination of resistant strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa . In vivo study can help to investigate of the real effect of these phage cocktails against these resistant strains.