Introduction
Affecting both human beings and domestic animals, a relatively uncommon spontaneous condition that has been variously referred to as muscular steatosis (MSt), muscular pseudohypertrophy, lipomatous muscular dystrophy, atrophia lipomatosa, pseudolipomatous dystrophy, or pseudohypertrophia lipomatosa is pathologically characterized by a massive deposition of adipose tissue within the skeletal muscles. In an earlier textbook of comparative pathology, Hadlow ( ) states that the existence of MSt in domestic animals has been known since the early 1900s. Subsequently, this condition is observed in several domestic animal species, particularly meat animals, such as cattle, sheep, and pigs (Monlux and Monlux ; Goedegebuure ; Hulland ; McGavin ; Ohfuji ; Langohr et al. ; Zimmerman et al. ; Ohfuji ). Relatively little knowledge of the precise cause and pathogenesis of MSt has grown in recent years. Although this fatty muscle condition usually attracts the attention of the meat inspector rather than the pathologist (Bradley and Fell ; Goedegebuure ), it is economically and financially important problem because muscles replaced by too much fat, whether localized or generalized, may be trimmed as being unfit for human consumption.
Despite a variety of hypotheses proposed for explaining the lesion of MSt, those published reports which actually described morphological evidence or proof supporting these hypotheses are limited to a small number in the English veterinary literature. Although MSt can sometimes be a major problem when it affects a high proportion of pigs in a herd, there is no proper scientific understanding of the problem (Swatland ). Taking into account that MSt is usually found during meat inspection practice (Hadlow ; Hulland ), it is presumable that many cases with the condition might have gone undiagnosed and/or unreported. Such circumstances possibly decrease the opportunity for appreciating and understanding the pathogenesis and etiology of MSt.
This article describes the histopathological features of MSt in two steers and provides a comment on the pathology of the condition in the bovine species from the comparative viewpoint in order to serve as a reference for prospective pathological studies on the condition.
Case description
The present report concerned two 2-year-old steers, one Japanese Black (case no. 1) and, the other, Holstein-Friesian (case no. 2). Both animals had been raised on two different fattening farms with no clinical history of illness. On separate days, each steer was slaughtered at an abattoir for human consumption. On physical examination prior to slaughter, both steers were in good body condition with no motor dysfunction or other significant clinical signs. There was no evidence of traumatic wounds in these steers. The animals were stunned and killed by exsanguination. All organs and the entire carcasses were examined directly during the slaughter process. The most striking and common gross findings in both steers were occurrence of a massive amount of fat tissue that revealed an ill-proportioned arrangement within single skeletal muscles (not shown). This fatty change involved the semimembranosus muscle (case no. 1) and gluteus muscle (case no. 2) with a bilateral distribution. Affected muscles showed an irregularly streaked, uneven appearance, giving rise to a greasy texture as a whole. In general, internal visceral organs and tissues were unremarkable. To evaluate this skeletal muscle abnormality, tissue samples for histopathological examination were collected from affected muscles, normal muscles, and representative internal organs, including the liver, spleen, kidney, heart, lung, and intestine. According to standard methodology (Winsor ; Hopwood ; Ganjali and Ganjali ), all samples were fixed in buffered 10% formalin. After fixation, transversely and longitudinally cut blocks from muscles were prepared for examination. All tissue blocks were dehydrated, cleared, and embedded in paraffin wax using conventional method. Sections, cut at a thickness 4 μm, were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
Histopathologically, normal architecture of the lesioned muscles in both steers was distorted owning to the replacement of muscle fibers by large amounts of adipose tissue. All fat cells were well differentiated, exhibiting a mature appearance. Lesions of this fatty replacement varied in degree and extent within muscles. That is, several groups of muscle fibers remained in some muscle fascicles, while muscle fibers were totally lost in others. Perimysial connective tissue networks were well preserved in terms of array of structures. There was no distinctive formation of many vacuoles (fatty change) within muscle fibers. Apparent transitional features from muscle fibers to fat cells were absent. To a lesser degree, atrophic and degenerated muscle fibers were scattered in one (case no. 1) and the other steer (case no. 2), respectively. In the former case, except for the presence of atrophic muscle fibers with a solitary distribution (Fig. 1 ), other fibers were in general normal (Fig. 1 , inset). In the latter case, a small number of muscle fibers exhibited degenerative features arranged singly or in small groups, while other muscle fibers were unremarkable (Fig. 2 ). Degenerated muscle fibers revealed hypereosinophilia (hyaline degeneration) with loss of cross striations, fragmentation, or floccular appearance of sarcoplasm associated with or without macrophage reaction (Fig. 3 ). Endomysial connective tissue investing such degenerated muscle fibers was slightly thickened, but significant fibrous proliferation of the perimysial connective tissue was not recognized elsewhere in the lesions. Regenerative features of damaged muscle fibers were not found as well. There were no inflammatory cell infiltrates throughout muscle tissue, and both the intramuscular blood vessels and nerve bundles showed no significant changes. Fig. 1 In one steer (case no. 1), adipose replacement of many muscle fibers is seen in transverse section of muscle fascicles, in which single atrophic muscle fibers ( am ) are scattered, while many other muscle fibers are intact. There is prominent proliferation of mature fat cells. Perimysial connective tissue ( pc ) is well differentiated and preserved (H&E, ×70): inset showing solitary atrophic muscle fibers ( am ) among apparently normal muscle fibers (H&E, ×100) Fig. 2 In the other steer (case no. 2), transverse section of muscle fascicles shows replacement of muscle fibers by large amounts of mature adipose tissue. Some muscle fibers exhibit degenerative changes ( dm ). Perimysial connective tissue ( pc ) is intact (H&E, ×70) Fig. 3 Higher magnification of Fig. 2 displays some degenerated (necrotic) muscle fibers ( dm) which undergo varying degrees of macrophage reaction (H&E, ×200)
Other skeletal muscles that were grossly normal showed no significant changes. Internal visceral organs and tissues examined were in general normal with no evidence of preexisting disease in both steers.
Discussion
In the skeletal muscles of the present two steers, histopathological diagnosis of MSt was made based on the presence of characteristic findings composed of the appearance of massive fat tissue that replaced muscle fibers, the presence of a lesser degree of muscle fiber atrophy or degeneration, the absence of significant alteration in the majority of the remaining muscle fibers, and the absence of intramuscular vascular and nerve lesions. These histopathological findings were distinguished from those described previously in the advanced or terminal stages of nutritional myopathy (white muscle disease) and muscular dystrophy in cattle (Hadlow ; Doig ; Bradley and Fell ; Goedegebuure et al. ; Hulland ; Furuoka et al. ; McGavin ; Abutarbush and Radostits ; Biasibetti et al. ; Valentine and McGavin ). Although the spinal cord was not histologically investigated in the present animals, atrophy of muscle fibers did not exhibit a type of group arrangement, and degenerative lesions of intramuscular nerve bundles were absent. These evidences excluded the possibility of advanced phases of neurogenic muscular atrophy that is attributed to degeneration or loss of the ventral horn motor neurons in the spinal cord (Hadlow ; el-Hamidi et al. ; Dirksen et al. ; Hulland ; Agerholm and Basse ; Pumarola et al. ). In addition, the absence of inflammatory lesions ruled out myositis caused by a variety of agents (Hulland ; McGavin ). Although it has been proposed that MSt may be due to strenuous muscle exertion (Swatland ), lesions of MSt described here were restricted to only a single muscle, probably excluding the likelihood of damage by muscle exertion.
In the present steers, there was no clinical history associated with manifestations of muscle dysfunction origin since birth. Preexisting lesions suggestive of traumatic or pressure necrosis were not seen in skeletal muscles, and skeletal muscles other than those representing MSt lesions were well differentiated. Taking into account the preservation of perimysial connective tissue enclosing MSt lesions despite being prominently lacking muscle fibers, perimysial connective tissue might have developed to support varying numbers of muscle fibers arranged in fascicles (Climie and Chason ). These evidences may suggest that MSt lesions were not associated with hypoplastic or aplastic development of the muscles and, by nature, the muscles rather normally developed during embryogenesis. Therefore, the likelihood may be raised that proliferation of fat cells could have followed muscle fiber loss due to pathological process, such as muscle fiber atrophy or degeneration, and large numbers of fat cells finally filled in the missing piece of such muscle fibers. Although MSt lesions showed a bilateral distribution suggestive of nutritional or metabolic etiology, the exact mechanism for the atrophy, degeneration, and loss of muscle fibers could not be determined. It remains uncertain as to which type of muscle fibers (type I or type II) was primarily or exclusively involved, because enzyme histochemical or immunohistochemical examinations were not performed in the current study.
The results of this study failed to provide morphological evidence for the adequate interpretation of the development of MSt. To deepen the understanding of MSt, further detailed investigations by attending to a more wide sampling from affected muscles of as many cattle as possible would be necessary.
Comparative overview of MSt
Incidence and clinical aspect of MSt
Although fat cell proliferation may be a non-specific event in a variety of disorders involving skeletal muscles (Bradley and Fell ), MSt has been virtually regarded as belonging to a single nosological entity, no matter what the cause may be. In the classification of spontaneous primary myopathies in domestic animals, MSt has been categorized into a group of myopathies of unknown etiology (Goedegebuure ). Estimation of the incidence of MSt in livestock animal species (cattle, pig, and sheep) is hindered by the paucity of information regarding the prevalence of the condition. One reason for this is that, although the existence of MSt has been recognized for the past century, the majority of cases with this condition may demonstrate no significant clinical abnormality, and therefore, contributions to the knowledge of the condition have been limited to few reports on single abattoir specimens (Hadlow ). In birds, MSt is seen sporadically, particularly in obese Amazon parrots and other obese psittacine birds (Schmidt et al. ).
To the author’s knowledge, there is probably no breed predisposition for the development of MSt in cattle, considering that this condition has been reported in various breeds of the bovine species, such as Holstein-Friesian, Simmental, and Murray Grey (Ohfuji ; Langohr et al. ; Ohfuji ). Furthermore, there is no identifiable sex or age predisposition because the condition of MSt is recognized not only in cows and steers but also in fetus and adult individuals (Ohfuji ; Langohr et al. ; Ohfuji ). Although high levels of intermuscular adipose tissue may impair mobility and increase the risk for developing disability (Addison et al. ), it is generally thought that MSt may be unassociated with clinical disability (Hadlow ; Bradley and Fell ; Goedegebuure ; Hulland ), and thus, lesions of MSt may be serendipitously encountered in apparently healthy individuals at postmortem examination. However, a recently published report described that, if lesions of MSt may be so widespread as to involve almost all skeletal muscles including the diaphragm, clinical signs of locomotor dysfunction, including hindquarter weakness and difficulty in walking, can be seen in affected cattle (Ohfuji ). Therefore, antemortem clinical workup of evaluating the gait for strength and coordination, posture reactions, and other locomotor functions should be applied to animals which may present with symptoms associated, even a little, with movement disorders.
In human beings, it is probable that occurrence of MSt may be uncommon compared to that in meat animals. A human case of generalized MSt has been reported, in which the lesions occurred secondarily to a long clinical course of centronuclear myopathy that is one of genetically heterogeneous congenital myopathies (Matsushita et al. ). In terms of the relationship between decrease in muscle volume and clinical signs in human medicine, MSt showing low quality of skeletal muscle has attracted much attention, because the increase in intramuscular fat tissue and reduction in skeletal muscle (sarcopenia) with aging have been reported to be associated with muscle weakness, poor function, and increased risk of mobility loss (Song et al. ; Visser et al. ; Marcus et al. ; Hamaguchi et al. ). Age-related morphological changes in cows similar to human sarcopenia are reported in recent years (Costagliola et al. ). Taking into account that such an association between low muscle mass and incident mobility limitations is suggested to be a function of lower muscle strength (Visser et al. ), it seems important to devote more attention to evaluating whether decreased mobility of the skeletal muscle may be seen in bovine cases of MSt.
Pathology and histological diagnosis of MSt
Fat tissue is an important component of the skeletal muscle in cattle, as is in human beings and other domestic animal species. The number of intramuscular fat cells may represent nearly half the total fat cell population of the body of cattle (Kauffman ). Moreover, intermuscular fat tissue is recognized as an important predictor of muscle metabolism and function and also appears to be a modifiable muscle risk factor (Addison et al. ). On esthetic grounds, a marbled appearance of muscles, particularly in beef cattle, may be preferred for human consumption because it contributes to meat palatability (Wheeler et al. ). From gross anatomical aspect, amounts of intramuscular fat in cattle may be dependent on breed characteristics combined with feeding system (Gotoh et al. ), and the distribution pattern of marbling of muscles in fully grown cattle may keep rather harmonious and proportionate arrangement. On the other hand, muscles affected severely with MSt may appear almost like soap, and affected muscles are speckled, streaked, or replaced by fat tissue (McGavin ), which usually shows an ill-proportioned arrangement. Gross lesions of MSt are usually bilaterally symmetrical or asymmetrical (Hadlow ; Bradley and Fell ; Hulland ; Ohfuji , ). The pathological pattern of MSt may be so monotonously uniform, and its lesions need to be examined to identify postmortem. Lesions of MSt may occur at different locations in the skeletal muscle. They are usually localized in a small group of muscles of the neck, back, loin, or upper limbs (Hadlow ; Monlux and Monlux ; Bradley and Fell ; Hulland ; McGavin ; Langohr et al. ) but occasionally may be more widespread (Hadlow ; Bradley and Fell ; Ohfuji , ). Despite deposition of large amounts of fat tissue, the size, contour, and fascicle architecture of affected muscles themselves may not alter appreciably (Hadlow ; Bradley and Fell ; Ohfuji , ). MSt is very difficult to investigate scientifically because it may appear suddenly in carcasses from particular herds of animals and then disappear (Swatland ). The exact reason for this herd prevalence remains unknown.
Lesions of MSt can be tentatively identified as such on gross observation of carcasses; however, histopathological features of affected muscles are the most important criteria for establishing the diagnosis of MSt. Affected muscles in MSt are replaced to a varying degree and extent by extramyocellular fat tissue that show no recognizable regular pattern of distribution. It is not uncommon that some or many muscle fascicles may exhibit total replacement of muscle fibers by large amounts of fat cells. No matter how much fat cells may be, normal architecture of muscle fascicles with frameworks of perimysial connective tissues is usually retained (Bradley and Fell ; Ohfuji , ). Such preservation of fascicular architecture may indicate that preexisting muscle fibers were lost and then replaced by fat cells. Fat cells show well-differentiated mature features with uniform size and shape, displaying no anaplastic features. It has previously been described that atrophy and degeneration of muscle fibers are evident in most muscle specimens (Hadlow ). To the author’s knowledge, however, these non-specific histopathological changes in muscle fibers may vary in degree and are rather subtle depending on the muscle and animal affected. Hypertrophy of muscle fibers, which is frequently seen as a compensatory mechanism (Climie and Chason ), seems to be uncommon in MSt.
It is well known that the regenerative power of muscle is tremendous (Hadlow ; Aström and Adams ) and the regenerative process occurs to some degree as a natural response of muscle injured by a variety of agents (Hadlow ). Even if aged muscle displays a significant reduction in regenerative capacity attributed to a decrease in proliferative capacity of satellite cells that are alternatively referred to as myogenic progenitor cells (Billin et al. ), it seems a strange phenomenon that, regardless of age, regenerated muscle fibers are scarcely seen or completely absent in all or most cases of MSt (Hadlow ; Bradley and Fell ; Ohfuji ; Langohr et al. ; Ohfuji ). Considering that the major factors for muscle regeneration are a triad of viable population of satellite cells, reinnervation, and revascularization (Bodine-Fowler ), special and meticulous attention should be paid to the histopathology of muscle tissue components other than muscle fibers when investigating lesions of MSt. Particularly, it should be noted that a decrease in proliferative capacity of satellite cells may lead to reduction in regenerative capacity to repair injured muscles (Billin et al. ). Interestingly, a study using experimental mice indicated that there is sex-dependent difference in skeletal muscle regeneration and that adipose accumulation in regenerating muscle is influenced by sex-specific hormones (McHale et al. ). Evaluating whether these scenarios are strictly true of MSt-bearing muscles of cattle or other domestic animal species must await future study.
Pathogenesis of MSt
There are a wide variety of hypotheses as to the pathogenesis of MSt, including failed differentiation, transdifferentiation, denervation, innervation failure, disturbance of lipid metabolism, failed regeneration, and abnormal blood supply (Hadlow ; Monlux and Monlux ; Swatland ; Bradley and Fell ; Hulland ; McGavin ; Ohfuji ; Langohr et al. ; Ohfuji ). These hypotheses may indicate either myogenic or non-myogenic origin of the condition. There are limited descriptions in the veterinary literature which actually documented the existence of underlying histopathological findings accounting for the development of MSt lesions in cattle. As shown in Table 1 , these published reports deal with non-myogenic pathogenesis, either vascular (Ohfuji ) or neurogenic (Link et al. ; Ohfuji ; Langohr et al. ), while detailed descriptions that argue in favor of myogenic pathogenesis are not found in the literature. Table 1 Previously published reports that described underlying non-myogenic histopathological evidence accounting for the development of muscular steatosis (MSt) in cattle Histopathological evidence accounting for the development of bovine MSt Reference Intramuscular nerve damage caused by biopsy operation Link et al. ( ) Group atrophy of muscle fibers associated with edema and partial loss of intramuscular nerves Ohfuji ( ) Atrophy of muscle fibers associated with dysplasia and degeneration of spinal cord Langohr et al. ( ) Perifascicular atrophy of muscle fibers associated with systematic degeneration of intramuscular arterioles Ohfuji ( )
In MSt of swine, it is proposed that the myopathy has a genetic nature with modifying factors entering into its expression (Muellar ). Although many examples of breed-specific diseases with suspected hereditary etiologies are present in beef breeds of cattle (Huston ), an inherited basis has not yet been established in MSt of this species (Valentine and McGavin ). Taking into account that livestock production practices, such as embryo transfer, artificial insemination, and selective breeding, have enhanced the rapidity of genetic change in livestock and may be at risk of developing structural and functional abnormalities of cattle (Moisan et al. ), more rigorous study is warranted utilizing modern genetic testing, with the hope of determining whether condition of MSt has a genetic or an environmental basis. One author states that lesion of MSt may be congenital, in which muscle fiber development is defective and replaced by fat tissue (McGavin ). Similarly, some authors regard bovine MSt as the result of defective in utero muscle development (Valentine and McGavin ). To the author’s knowledge, it seems that clear evidences for this hypothesis have not yet been established based on reliable data. Muscle hypodevelopment and fatty replacement due to myelodysplasia may be common in arthrogryposis that is a congenital joint disease in domestic animals including cattle (Hulland ). This disease displays atrophy of muscle fibers associated with fatty replacement, which may be neurogenic in origin because of loss of central nervous system neurons (Bradley and Fell ). However, gross lesions of articular rigidity and arthrogryposis have not been found in any of bovine cases with MSt.
When vascular pathogenesis is taken into consideration, we should keep in mind a specific suggestion by one author who noted that MSt lesions most often begin at the periphery of a muscle and progressively replace normal muscle tissue (Hadlow ). In this respect, a particular reference should be made to a rare and severe inflammatory disease of dermatomyositis in human beings, which may cause a triad of ischemia, muscle fiber change (atrophy, degeneration, necrosis, or regeneration), and microvascular damage in the so-called watershed regions of muscle near the avascular perimysial connective tissue (Emslie-Smith and Engel ; Estruch et al. ; Dalakas and Hohlfeld ; Pestronk et al. ; Karri et al. ; Lahoria et al. ). It is evident that, even in normal conditions, the portion of collateral vessels and capillaries is lower in the perifascicular region than in the center of the muscle fascicle (Herrmann ). Indeed, a tight link between perifascicular muscle fiber atrophy and hypoxia-related pathology is suggested in juvenile dermatomyositis (Preuße et al. ). Likewise, implication of circulatory disturbance was suggested in the development of MSt in cattle, in which evidence of vascular pathogenesis based on the identification of systematic degeneration of intramuscular arterioles was associated with the presence of atrophic muscle fibers that occurred more preferentially at the perifascicular areas (Ohfuji ).
After many years of denervation in skeletal muscle, numerous muscle fibers are replaced by fat cells (Aström and Adams ). It is thought that failure of innervation or severe denervation injury in utero may cause failure of muscle fibers to develop and their subsequent replacement by fat tissue, giving rise to congenital MSt (Zachary and McGavin ). Occurrence of bovine MSt attributable to denervated muscle fiber loss has been previously described in a few reports. There is a report of MSt that occurred following accidental denervation during the muscle biopsy operation (Link et al. ). MSt is observed in a bovine fetus that showed focal dysplastic and degenerative changes in the spinal cord associated with denervation of musculature (Langohr et al. ). In addition, two cases of bovine MSt associated with the presence of muscle fiber changes characteristic of denervation are reported (Ohfuji ). In human patients with neuromuscular disorders, such as poliomyelitis and progressive muscular dystrophy, fatty replacement is found in the lumbosacral paraspinal muscles or lower limb muscles (Schmitt and Krause ; Hadar et al. ). As contrasted to these human disorders, fatty replacement is not always described in bovine cases of spinal muscular atrophy, in which group atrophy of muscle fibers and degeneration or loss of motor neurons in the spinal cord were present (Troyer et al. ; Agerholm and Basse ; Pumarola et al. ).
In discussing the origin of fat cells in MSt, dedifferentiation from muscle fibers to fat cells is not supported nowadays (Hulland ). Alternatively, a hypothesis of transdifferentiation, a pathological phenomenon of shift from one cell type to another, may be one of insightful possibilities and should be taken into consideration. Although not in the skeletal muscles, progressive transdifferentiation from cardiac muscle fibers to adipocytes is suggested as a pathogenetic pathway to the cardiac muscle fiber loss and adipose replacement mechanism in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy in human beings (d’Amati et al. ). Furthermore, an in vitro experimental study suggested that porcine wild-type peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 2 (PPAR gamma) and muted porcine PPAR gamma may convert myoblasts into fat cells (Yu et al. ). Similarly, another experimental study revealed that a representative n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (eicosapentaenoic acid) or thiazolidinediones induce transdifferentiation of myoblasts into fat cells (Teboul et al. ; Luo et al. ). Further investigation is needed to evaluate whether in vivo phenomenon of such transdifferentiation may actually occur in MSt lesions.
Differential diagnosis of MSt
When using the term “steatosis,” lesions of MSt should be histologically distinguished from those of lipid storage myopathy that is characterized by intramyocellular accumulation of lipids due to defects of lipid metabolism. Such type of myopathy is recorded in human being (Miranda et al. ; Aström and Adams ; Bruno and Dimauro ; Liang and Nishino ), dogs (Platt et al. ; Valberg ), and cattle (Roberts et al. , ). Again, fatty replacement of muscle fibers is a non-specific feature of many muscle diseases (Bradley and Fell ). Therefore, care should be taken to distinguish lesions of MSt from those in the advanced or terminal stages of other muscle disorders in cattle, such as nutritional myopathy (or white muscle disease) caused by a deficiency of vitamin E, selenium, or both and hereditary muscular dystrophy (Hadlow ; Doig ; Bradley and Fell ; Goedegebuure et al. ; Hulland ; Furuoka et al. ; McGavin ; Abutarbush and Radostits ; Biasibetti et al. ; Valentine and McGavin ). Degenerative lesions of muscle fibers, if present, in MSt may be similar to but far less prominent than those of nutritional myopathy. Although recognized frequently in nutritional myopathy, regenerative features of muscle fibers are scarcely found in MSt, as alluded to previously (Hadlow ; Bradley and Fell ; Ohfuji ; Langohr et al. ; Ohfuji ). In muscular dystrophy of cattle and sheep, individual muscle fibers exhibit a variety of characteristic myogenic changes in muscle fibers, including variation in size due to atrophy or hypertrophy, central nuclei, fiber splitting, sarcoplasmic mass, target fiber, ring fiber, and vacuolar or hyaline degeneration (McGavin and Baynes ; Goedegebuure et al. ; Richards and Passmore ; Hulland ), while in MSt, muscle fibers demonstrating such unique changes are almost absent. Another differential to consider that may be easily ruled out is bovine familial degenerative neuromuscular disease in Gelbvieh calves, which is a syndrome made up of a triad of myopathy, vasculopathy, and myelopathy due to a hereditary metabolic defect (Moisan et al. ). Furthermore, MSt should be distinguished from lesions of local fat cell hyperplasia or fat cell neoplasm (lipoma or liposarcoma), particularly infiltrative lipoma in cattle (Hartigan and Flynn ; Sickinger et al. ). In the latter, neoplastic cells are composed of mature fat cells infiltrating the subcutis and skeletal muscle and give rise to definite tumor masses, but cases of MSt usually lack the formation of tumor-like masses. In a clinical disorder in Brown Swiss cattle, referred to as weaver syndrome, muscles exhibit widespread fatty replacement consistent in major respects with that of MSt, in addition to atrophic/hypertrophic muscle fibers without regeneration (Leipold et al. ; Muellar ); however, this disorder is thought to be a muscular dystrophy (Muellar ).
Association of MSt with hepatic steatosis
There is increasing evidence of a close relationship between MSt and hepatic steatosis. It has been confirmed that skeletal muscle is a main target organ for the action of insulin (Rasmussen et al. ) and that there is a high degree of association of both intramyocellular lipid and intrahepatocellular lipid with insulin resistance (Lara-Castro and Garvey ). Some researchers verified that hepatic steatosis per se is a central surrogate pathology indicative of skeletal muscle insulin resistance in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, proposing the existence of a network between liver and skeletal muscle to maintain whole-body energy homeostasis (Kato et al. ). In recent years, other researchers revealed that skeletal muscle mass index is related to hepatic steatosis independently of known risk factors in patients with type 2 diabetes (Hashimoto et al. ). In addition, muscle insulin resistance may lead to a reduction of glucose consumption and then excess glucose flows into the hepatocytes, suggesting a possibility that a decline in skeletal muscle is a risk factor of hepatic steatosis (Hashimoto et al. ). An experimental study also showed that skeletal muscle insulin resistance may cause obesity and subsequent hepatic steatosis (Kim et al. ).
Furthermore, studies have demonstrated the critical role of adipose tissue in the development of insulin resistance and the importance of molecular factors intrinsic to muscle fibers and hepatocytes involved in the regulation of lipid turnover (Lara-Castro and Garvey ). With respect to the development of MSt, more noteworthy data have been provided to account for the mechanism responsible for fat deposition in skeletal muscle and liver. That is, accumulating evidence suggests that insulin resistance is accompanied by mitochondrial dysfunction in skeletal muscle and liver, resulting in impaired lipid oxidation and accumulation of intramyocellular lipid (Kelley et al. ; Petersen et al. ; Petersen et al. ; Marroquin and Kelley ). One study done by using a larger human population confirmed an association of impaired muscle mitochondrial activity with hepatic steatosis, which might support the concept of a close link between altered muscle and liver metabolism as early abnormalities promoting insulin resistance (Szendroedi et al. ).
In previously reported cases of MSt in cattle, coexistence of hepatic steatosis has been described with some frequency (Ohfuji , ), suggesting some degree of probability of a pathogenetic relationship between MSt and hepatic steatosis. However, it may be necessary to take into consideration the fact that occurrence of large amounts of fat in MSt lesions of cattle is not of intramyocellular but of extramyocellular alteration. In the veterinary literature, there is probably no documented histological evidence which could sufficiently substantiate the presence of fat within muscle fibers in this bovine condition. In the latter, for this reason, more detailed and strict investigations are needed to elucidate whether fat deposition may be an event within muscle fibers themselves or not.
Final comment
Our understanding is still inadequate for explaining the etiology and pathogenesis of spontaneously occurring MSt especially involving meat animals. Although workers already drew attention to this condition more than a century ago, it appears that little has changed since then. More studies are needed to yield much useful information from which several general conclusions about MSt can be drawn and finally to gain compelling evidence for explaining the development of the condition. Even if single case, careful pathological examination should continue to provide insight into the pathophysiology and etiology of MSt by using conventional histopathological investigation, enzyme histochemical analysis, ultrastructural observation, and immunohistochemical method using appropriate markers.