Introduction
Newcastle disease (ND) is a highly contagious viral disease of poultry that is caused by avian paramyxovirus serotype 1 (APMV 1), which together with viruses of other APMV serotypes (APMV 2–9) has been placed in the genus Avulavirus , subfamily Paramyxovirinae , and family Paramyxoviridae (Orsi et al. ). Animal cell cultures have been used for cultivation of viruses since 1950 (Ahamed et al. ). Newcastle disease virus (NDV) can be readily propagated in primary cells of avian origin, some mammalian primary cells, and some mammalian cell lines (Schloer and Hanson ). However, monolayer chicken embryo fibroblast (CEF) or chicken embryo kidney (CEK) cells are most extensively used for isolation of NDV.
Different types of primary cells, particularly of avian origin, and certain cell lines of mammalian origin such as Median–Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) cells, LLC-MK2 (a rhesus monkey kidney cell line) and Vero cell lines, and CEF cells were used for plaque production (Kournikakis and Fildes ; Ahamed et al. ; King ). NDV induces formation of plaques on monolayer cell (Schloer and Hanson ). NDV plaques are of two basic types (clear and red), intermediate turbid forms, and several sizes ranging from 0.5 to 4 mm in diameter (Beard et al. ). Plaques develop in 2–7 days depending on the strain of the virus and the influence of environmental factors (Schloer and Hanson ). Velogenic and mesogenic strains are cytopathic and produce plaques in CEF cells within 96 h (Beard et al. ). Lentogenic strains are cytopathic but rarely produce plaques without the addition of magnesium (Mg++) and diethylaminoethyl (DEAE) dextran to overlay media (Barahona and Hanson ). LLC-MK2 cells have been used by others to assay human parainfluenza viruses and have also been used in an NDV plaque neutralization disk test (Frank et al. ; Nerome and Ishida ; Ishida et al. ). The cell fusion plaque type of complete cytopathic effect (CPE) is caused by a vaccinia virus and certain other poxviruses growing in MK, Vero, NCL-H2N9, and fibroblast cells. Plaques ranging from 1 to 6 mm in diameter formed in 2–4 days, during which the infected cells fuse, form cytoplasmic bridging, and then disintegrate (George et al. ). A technique for plaquing lentogenic strains of NDV provides a method for establishing the purity of seed stock in the production of vaccine. Titration of NDV strains is more conveniently undertaken in cell culture rather than in embryonated eggs, and this is relatively easy with mesogenic and velogenic strains that are cytopathic to various cell lines, but is difficult with avirulent strains that are poorly cytopathic (Wambura et al. ). The ability of NDV to form plaque in cell culture is related to the virulence of the virus (Reeve and Poste ). The virulent strains produce a greater number of syncytia than the mesogenic or avirulent strains (Ogasawaro et al. ). Kournikakis and Fildes ( ) also reported that the optimal condition for plaque assay of the avirulent strains of NDV was agar overlay supplementation with 2.5 μg/ml trypsin, magnesium sulfate (0.03 M), and 0.02 % DEAE dextran (Kournikakis and Fildes ). Umino et al. ( ) performed a plaque assay of an avirulent strain of NDV in primary chick kidney (PCK) cells without adding trypsin to the agar overlay medium. Harper ( ) used a combination of 5 % allantoic fluid and 200 μg/ml DEAE dextran with 30 mM MgCl 2 as a supplement to a normal overlay medium and reported that this gives large, clear plaques on secondary monolayer CEF cells infected with an avirulent strain of NDV which did not produce plaques without these additions. A comparative investigation between velogenic strain and six strains of the Newcastle disease virus belonging to various pathogenic groups in CEF cell cultures showed that the velogenic strains were grown in this culture and produced a clear cytopathic effect without preliminary adaptation passages; however, LaSota, Hitchner B1, and some lentogenic strains did not produce a cytopathic effect without adaptation (Madhan et al. ; Mehrabanpour et al. ). Ahamed et al. ( ) adapted NDV on African green monkey (Vero) cell line, by five times passaging of virus in this cell line, and in the fifth passage, obvious changes in the characteristics of monolayer cell were observed (Ahamed et al. ). Feng et al. ( ) reported that there was an obvious difference of plaque formation between F48E9 and NA Newcastle strains on Vero, CEF, and goose embryo fibroblast (GEF) cells and there were also different replication processes between F48E9 and NA on cells at different stages. The aim of the present study was adaptation of QV4 seed of Newcastle vaccine (Razi vaccine) to grow on CEF cells to obtain the discrete plaques for further studies.
Material and method
Virus
APMV-1/chicken/Australia/Queensland/V4/1966 (QV4) (V4 seed of Newcastle vaccine) with 10 9.7 50 % egg infection dose (EID 50 ) was obtained from the Poultry Vaccine Production Department of Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute, Shiraz, Iran. A vial of lyophilized V4 seed vaccine was reconstituted with 1 ml sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and stored at −70 °C in 0.2-ml aliquots.
Reagents
Bovine serum albumin (0.2 %) (Sigma) was added to PBS (PBS/BSA), prepared in triple-glass-distilled water, and sterilized using a 0.22-μm filter.
Culture media
Eagle’s minimum essential medium (MEM) (Sigma) supplemented with 5 % ( v / v ) fetal calf serum (Sigma) inactivated at 56 °C for 30 min, 100 U/ml penicillin G (Sigma), 2 μg/ml gentamicin sulfate (Gibco), 0.25 mg/ml glutamine, and 0.2 % sodium bicarbonate was used as a growth medium for CEF cell culture (Kournikakis and Fildes ).
Agar overlay medium
Consisted of Eagle’s MEM, 0.7 % Bacto Agar (Difco), 2.5 μg/ml trypsin (Gibco), 0.2 % sodium bicarbonate (Sigma), 0.02 % DEAE dextran, 0.03 M magnesium sulfate (Sigma), 0.25 mg/ml glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin G (Sigma), and 2 mg/ml gentamicin sulfate (Gibco), this overlay medium was used as the first and second overlay. The second one also contained neutral red at a concentration of 1:10,000. The other media used for agar overlay consisted of Eagle’s MEM, supplemented with 5 % ( v / v ) inactivated fetal calf serum (Sigma), 100 U/ml penicillin G (Sigma), 2 μg/ml gentamicin sulfate (Gibco), 0.25 mg/ml glutamine, 0.2 % sodium bicarbonate, and 0.7 % Bacto Agar (Difco), without trypsin and DEAE dextran.
Chick embryo fibroblast culture
Nine- to ten-day-old embryonated eggs (specific pathogen-free (SPF) eggs, Lohman Co.) were used to prepare monolayer CEF cell culture according to a standard procedure. Briefly, the embryonated chicken eggs were candled for variability. The blander end of eggs was sterilized by swabbing with 70 % alcohol, the air sac was marked, and the shell covering the air sac was peaked off. The membrane peaked of allantoic membrane was removed, and then aseptically, the embryo was removed from the eggs and transferred to a Petri dish containing 10 ml of cold PBS. After washing in cooled PBS, the head, legs, wings, and viscera were cut and discarded. The rest of the body portion was further washed, cut into small pieces, and trypsinized with 10 ml of 0.25 % trypsin solution in PBS for 30 min. Trypsin was inactivated by adding 0.5 ml fetal calf serum, and the cell suspension was filtered through a two-layer sterile cheese cloth, washed three times using a cold incomplete medium, and centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 15 min. Dilution to 10 −2 in the growth medium for counting in a hemocytometer was done. The cell sediment was mixed with the complete growth medium and adjusted on 5 × 10 5 cells/ml, and 4 ml of such cell suspension was dispensed in a plate having 4 cm diameter (Nunc Co) and incubated at 37 °C in a CO 2 incubator with 5 % CO 2 . The confluent monolayer CEF cells were obtained after 24 h. Monolayer CEF cells were used for plaque production trial (Ahamed et al. ; Harper ; Kournikakis and Fildes ).
Virus titration of QV4 seed
Virus was propagated for 48 h in the allantoic cavity of 10-day-old chicken eggs at 37 °C. EID 50 titers were determined by a serial dilution of viruses in SPF eggs (Lohman Co.), and endpoints were calculated by the Reed and Muench ( ) formula.
Adaptation of QV4 seed strain of NDV
To adapt the virus, 100 μl of the virus with the titer of 10 9.8 EID 50 /ml was added to the center of a confluent monolayer CEF cell culture in a plate. PBS was added to another confluent monolayer CEF cell culture as negative control. The plate was set on a level surface for 1 h in an atmosphere of 5 % CO 2 and 80 % relative humidity. After 1 h, 4 ml MEM growth medium supplemented with 5 % ( v / v ) fetal calf serum (Sigma), 100 U/ml penicillin G (Sigma), 2 μg/ml gentamicin sulfate (Gibco), 0.25 mg/ml glutamine, 0.2 % sodium bicarbonate, and 2.5 μg/ml trypsin was added to the confluent monolayer cells and kept in a CO 2 incubator at 37 °C with 5 % CO 2 for 3 days. After 3 days, 0.5 ml of 0.25 % trypsin solution in PBS was added to monolayer CEF cells and incubated at 37 °C in a CO 2 incubator. CEF cells were detached after 30 min and centrifuged at 600 g for 15 min. The supernatant was centrifuged again at 50,000 g for 45 min, and then 100 μl PBS was added to the virus pellet and inoculated into CEF cells using the same media and techniques described above. Subsequent passages were done as well. Infected monolayer cells were examined twice a day under an inverted microscope for any change as compared to uninfected control cells (Beard et al. ; Kournikakis and Fildes ; Nagai et al. ). Five 10-day-old SPF embryonated chicken eggs were inoculated with 0.2 ml of the adapted virus from the fifth passage for propagation. All inoculated embryonated eggs were incubated at 37 °C for 48 h, the allantoic fluid was harvested, and EID 50 titers were determined by serial titration of viruses in SPF eggs (Lohman Co.). The endpoint was calculated by the methods of Reed and Muench ( ).
Rapid hemagglutination test
Twenty-five microliters of treated amniotic fluids was mixed with 25 μl of 5 % suspension of chicken red blood cells, with a plastic stick on the center of a clean glass slide, while 25 μl of 5 % suspension of chicken red blood cells was mixed with 25 μl PBS on the left side of the same slide as negative control and 25 μl of 5 % suspension of chicken red blood cells was mixed with 25 μl NDV solution at the right side as positive control and rotated for 1 min. Clear and consistent hemagglutination assay (HA) was considered as the positive reaction.
Plaque assays
The plaque assays were performed for the seed vaccine (V4 strain) of NDV as described before (Barahona and Hanson ; Mehrabanpour et al. ; Nagai et al. ). Briefly, confluent monolayer CEF cells grown in plates were washed twice with 3.0 ml of PBS/BSA. 0.2 ml of each dilution (10 −4 through 10 −10 ) (10 9.8 EID 50 ) of adapted virus was inoculated into the monolayer CEF cell culture in quadruplicate. 0.2 ml PBS inoculated into one well was used as negative control. The inoculated plates were kept in a CO 2 incubator with 5 % CO 2 and 80 % humidity at 37 °C for 1 h. The agar overlay medium with supplements was then added to the cells infected with 10 −4 –10 −10 dilutions of adapted viruses in duplicate, and the agar overlay medium (42 °C) without trypsin, DEAE dextran, and magnesium sulfate was added to the other two plates inoculated with the above dilution of viruses (10 −4 –10 −10 ). Plates were gently agitated to ensure distribution of the overlay medium, and the overlay medium was allowed to solidify by placing the plates on a level surface at room temperature for 15 min. All of the plates were incubated for 72 h at 37 °C in a CO 2 incubator with 5 % CO 2 and 80 % humidity. Seventy-two hours after infection, a second 2 ml agar overlay medium containing 1:10,000 neutral red (Difco) was added to each plate. Eighty hours after the addition of the first layer of agar overlay medium, the plaques with different shapes and size were visible. Large and small selected discrete plaques were picked up from the CEF culture by a single micropipette, and each was suspended in 0.2 ml of sterile PBS and then centrifuged for 10 min at 1500 r.p.m. The plaque variants of the supernatant were stored at −20 °C until used. Large and small plaques were inoculated into embryonated SPF eggs separately and incubated for 48 h. These propagated viruses were harvested, HA test was carried out, and HA-positive allantoic fluids were collected and stored at −70 °C for molecular investigations (Barahona and Hanson ; Kournikakis and Fildes ; Mehrabanpour et al. ).
Result
The obtained confluent monolayer chick embryo fibroblast 5 × 10 5 cells/ml were found to be satisfactory and gave a confluent monolayer after 24 h of incubation at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5 % CO 2 (Fig. 1 ). CEF cell culture was maintained in a MEM supplemented with 5 % FCS for 7 days. The calculated titer of QV4 working seed vaccine (V4 strain) virus and that of adapted virus by the methods of Reed and Muench were 10 9.2 and 10 8.4 EID 50 /ml, respectively. No plaques were observed on CEF tissue culture plates inoculated with V4 strain without adaptation. In this study, five serial passages of the working seed vaccine (V4 strain) of NDV confirmed its successful adaptation; however, in the first to fourth passages, virus did not produce any clear change in CEF cells and viruses were just started to be adapted, and infected the CEF cells; nevertheless, V4 strains found to be CPE for CEF culture were obvious in the fifth passage. In the fifth passage, cells gradually started to change in shape and nucleus and a few CEF cells aggregated in several places on the monolayer. Eight discrete large and small plaques (Fig. 2 ) were obtained in the 10 −5 dilution of adapted viruses (titer 3 × 10 7 plaque-forming units (PFU)/ml) with 2–4 mm diameter at 80 h post inoculation, and in the 10 −7 –10 −10 dilution, there was no any plaque obtained (Table 1 ). A dilution of 10 −4 produced 28 plaques (1.75 × 10 8 PFU/ml) but not discrete plaque, and at 10 −1 –10 −3 dilution, plaques were too much that they were not countable (Fig. 3 ). The plaque size and shape were found to be varied under an agar overlay medium with additives (Fig. 2 ). Cell cultures that were inoculated with adapted virus and agar overlay medium without DEAE dextran and magnesium sulfate and trypsin did not show any discrete plaques at any dilution. Plaques were referred to a necrotic patch in the cellular monolayers, visible cells stained red, while the necrotic areas caused by viral infection did not stain. A minimum of 4 h was necessary for the color contrast to appear in monolayer CEF cell cultures. Eight various plaques were collected and propagated for further investigations. Fig. 1 Confluent chick embryo fibroblast cells Fig. 2 Discrete plaques with various sizes and shapes were found in the chick embryo fibroblast infected with the adapted Qv4 strain of NDV in 10 −5 dilution Table 1 Plaque counts of the QV4 strain of NDV Dilution Cell Overlay No. of plaques Titer (PFU/ml) 10 −4 CEF Agar + DEAE + MgSO 4 28 1.5 × 10 7 10 −5 CEF Agar + DEAE + MgSO 4 8 3.7 × 10 7 10 −6 CEF Agar + DEAE + MgSO 4 NP – 10 −6 CEF Agar + DEAE + MgSO 4 NP − 10 − 8 CEF Agar + DEAE + MgSO 4 NP − NP no plaques were obtained Fig. 3 Uncountable plaques in the chick embryo fibroblast infected with the adapted Qv4 strain of NDV in 10 −3 dilution
Discussion
Many animal viruses produce cytopathic effects on their host cells during a productive infection. While some virus infections can be assayed by the production of plaques, many viruses, while producing cytotoxicity, do not easily form plaques or do not form plaques at all. Although different types of cells are used to cultivate and propagate NDV, chicken embryo fibroblast (CEF) cells are the most popular throughout the world to grow NDV (Ahamed et al. ). Khadzhiev ( ) reported some of the velogenic and mesogenic strains produced a clear cytopathic effect on the CEF cells, but without adaptation passages, lentogenic strain did not produce plaques on CEF cells. Ahamed et al. ( ) after five serial passages of wild NDV on Vero cell line obtained a cytopathic effect and, finally, a plaque.
Feng et al. ( ) reported plaque-forming characteristics of Newcastle disease viruses of chicken and goose source were compared on various cells. The result showed that there were obvious differences of plaque formation between F48E9 and NA-1 on Vero cells, CEF cells, and goose embryo fibroblast (GEF) cells (Feng et al. ). Mesogenic and velogenic strains of NDV produced cytopathic effect and clear plaques on the primary culture of monolayer chick embryo fibroblast within 48 h post inoculation without the addition of diethylaminoethyl (DEAE) dextran and Mg++ ions. Schloer and Hanson ( ) used monolayer CEF cells for characterization of strains of NDV and found that avirulent did not form plaques in cell culture without the addition of DEAE dextran and Mg++ ions or trypsin, but it is difficult with avirulent isolates that have poor cytopathic effect (Schloer and Hanson ). Virulent NDV can be different by its ability to replicate in most avian and mammalian cell types without the addition of trypsin. Schloer and Hanson ( ) reported that virulence of the NDV is associated with clear plaques on the monolayer chick embryo fibroblast. The ability of NDV to induce CPE is considered a reliable indicator of virulence. Although all NDV isolates can replicate in chicken embryo kidney cells, lentogenic strains require trypsin for replication in avian fibroblast or mammalian cell types (Seal et al. ). Lentogenic viruses can replicate only in areas with trypsin-like enzymes such as the respiratory and intestinal tracts, whereas virulent viruses can replicate in a range of tissues and organs, resulting in systemic infection (Ogasawaro et al. ). Lentogenic strains such as the Hitchner B1 and LaSota strains are widely used as live vaccines and V4 strain is used as a killer vaccine against Newcastle disease (Peeters et al. ). During replication, NDV particles are produced with a precursor glycoprotein, F0, which has to be cleaved to F1 and F2 for the virus particles to be infectious (Rott and Klenk ). This post-translation cleavage is mediated by host cell proteases. Trypsin is capable of cleaving to F0 for all NDV strains, and in vitro treatment of non-infectious virus will induce infectivity (Nagai et al. ; Olav et al. ). Kournikakis and Fildes ( ) reported trypsin was required for plaque formation by avirulent NDV, plaque size varied directly with trypsin concentration, and some degradation of the monolayer cell was seen at 5 μg/ml trypsin concentration, and they used 2.5 μg/ml as the optimal trypsin concentration for that assay. Mehrabanpour et al. ( ) reported trypsin was required for formation by the LaSota strain on monolayer CEF cells (Mehrabanpour et al. ). In the present study, 2.5 μg/ml trypsin, 0.03 M magnesium sulfate, and 0.02 % DEAE dextran, used in plates infected with adapted viruses, obtained discrete plaques in different shapes and sizes. The presence of DEAE dextran in the overlay medium provided a significant improvement in the virus titer (Kournikakis and Fildes ). Some inhibitor such as sulfate polysaccharides is present in agar, which combined with virus particle to form a non-infectious complex. DEAE dextran acts by combining with the sulfate polysaccharides to neutralize their inhibitory effect. Barahona and Hanson ( ) showed that a lentogenic strain of NDV has a cytopathic effect but fails to produce plaques in CEF cells within 96 h in the absence of magnesium and DEAE dextran. They also found that a velogenic strain of NDV when grown on monolayer CEF cells usually exhibits clear plaques (2 to 4 mm). Schloer and Hanson ( ) showed that NDV forms plaques with several sizes ranging from 0.5 to 4.0 mm in diameter. Kournikakis and Fildes ( ) cultured an avirulent strain of NDV in LLC-MK2 cells and reported that plaques were visible after 2 days and the maximum virus titer was reached in 3 days. Lentogenic strains such as the Hitchner B1 and LaSota strains are widely used as live vaccines against Newcastle disease so plaque obtained from lentogenic strains is important (Peeters et al. ). The advantage of the plaque assay is the possibility to detect mixed virus population in an isolate. This technique for plaque formation by V4 strain that is similar to LaSota strain of Newcastle disease virus provides a method for establishing the purity of seed stock used in the production of vaccine (Mehrabanpour et al. ). The present assay is a useful tool for demonstration of discrete plaques using the adapted NDV virus within 3 days on monolayer CEF cells covered with modified overlay media containing magnesium ions, DEAE dextran, and ionoagar to ascertain the purity.