Introduction
Testicular torsion is a serious genitourinary emergency caused by twisting of the spermatic cord around its longitudinal axis that usually requires immediate surgical intervention (Cubillos et al. ). Vascular occlusion due to a twisted spermatic cord may cause serious problems and should therefore be kept in mind in patients presenting with acute scrotal pain (Cubillos et al. ). Also, following this condition, ischemic reperfusion occurs which damages the tissue of the testis and affects the quality of sperm. Testicular injury depends on the degree of torsion and time until detorsion. It is demonstrated that surgical detorsion time up to 6, 12, and 24 h from the onset of symptoms causes testicular salvage rate of 90, 50, and 10 %, respectively (Ringdahl and Teague ).
Therapeutically, in order to prevent or minimize the damage caused by testicular torsion, many various antioxidant or anti-inflammatory agents have been used. Antioxidants either synthetic or natural are potent scavengers of free radicals and have beneficial effects on health and disease prevention (Bagchi et al. ). Accordingly, recent investigations on oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species generation after testicular torsion suggest that pre-treatment or treatment with antioxidants can protect the testis against reactive oxygen species insult.
Biebersteinia multifida DC (Biebersteiniaceae) is an endemic plant in Iran with wide distribution over the mountainous areas. Alkaloids, flavonoids, and polysaccharides are the main constituents of this plant (Kurbanov and Zharekeev ; Omurkamzinova et al. ; Arifkhodzhaev and Rakhimov ). Among them, the phenolic compounds like flavonoids, as a major component of this plant, are known to be active scavengers of free radicals. This study aimed to investigate the potential therapeutic effect of the methanolic extract of B . multifida DC on experimental testicular torsion in rats.
Materials and methods
Preparation of B. multifida (DC) extract
The fresh plant material was collected in April from the mountains of Khorasan Province, northeastern Iran. The plant was taxonomically identified by the research center of natural products health (NPH), North Khorasan University of Medical Sciences (Iran). The dried root of the plant (100 g) was percolated with 1.0 L of methanol (MeOH) at room temperature (25 °C) according to the European Pharmacopoeia ( ). The whole extract was filtered, and the solvent was evaporated under vacuum at 40 °C to afford 10-g extract (yield 11.11 %) (Jung et al. ). The thick solution was diluted in sterile physiologic serum for intraperitoneal (I.P.) injection. Dose administration (75 and 150 mg/kg) was chosen based on a former experimental pilot study.
Animals and surgical procedures
This experiment was accomplished under the approval of the state committee on animal ethics, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran. Also, the recommendations of European Council Directive (86/609/EC) of November 24, 1986, were used regarding the standards in the protection of animals used for experimental purposes.
Forty adult male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 240–270 g were used in this study. Rats were housed in standard shoebox cages, five per cage, in a controlled room temperature (22 °C), with a 12-h light/12-h dark cycle. Standard commercial pellets and tap water were available ad libitum. The animals were randomly divided into the following four groups (10 rats in each group): sham operation group, torsion/detorsion group plus saline (administered intraperitoneally 15 min before detorsion), and torsion/detorsion groups plus 75 and 150 mg/kg doses of DC extract (administered intraperitoneally 15 min before detorsion). Animals were anesthetized with a combination of ketamine (80 mg/kg) and xylazine (5 mg/kg) intraperitoneally. To perform a torsion–detorsion operation following routine surgical preparations, the left testis was exposed through a left-sided ilioinguinal incision and rotated counterclockwise along its longitudinal axis to 720° of its initial position without including the epididymis. Torsion was maintained in this position by suturing of testis to the scrotum with 5–0 silk and the incision was closed. After 2 h of torsion, the incision was reopened to induce reperfusion by testis twisting in the opposite direction of the torsion and bringing back to the normal anatomical position. The surgical intervention was performed for all groups except the sham operation group that the testes were expelled through the incision; a 5–0 silk suture was placed through the tunica albuginea and repositioned into the scrotum with no twisting. Animals were cared in a standard condition by placing on a heating pad during the surgery and postoperatively to prevent hypothermia. All animals were sacrificed following 6 h from the onset of surgery (2 h torsion and 4 h detorsion), and bilateral testes were removed and transferred for histological examinations in 10 % buffered formalin.
Histological examination
Testes tissue was embedded in paraffin blocks, and sections of 5 μm thickness were obtained and stained with hematoxyline and eosin (H & E). All histologic sections were blindly evaluated by an experienced pathologist.
Mid-testis cross-sections were given a score from normal to severe based on the classification of Cosentino et al. ( ): grade 1 (normal), grade 2 (mild), grade 3 (moderate), and grade 4 (severe). Normal: means normal seminiferous tubules with a regular array of germinal cells; mild injury: disturbances of seminiferous epithelium in a few tubules; moderate injury: disruption of seminiferous epithelium in many tubules. Disruptions are largely limited to loss of spermatids and spermatozoa, but sloughed germinal cells might be seen in some tubules. Finally severe injury: disturbances of seminiferous epithelium in the majority of tubules and complete loss of germinal layers.
Results
Figure 1 shows the findings of histological sections from the groups. The testes in sham operation group had normal structure. Contralateral testicular tissue had mild injury in torsion/detorsion (T/D) group, while it was approximately normal in DC-treated group (grade 1) (Fig. 1 a, e). In the T/D group, most of the testes demonstrated grade 4 in ipsilateral testes (Fig. 1 b–d). In contrast, ipsilateral twisted testicular tissue in DC-treated group showed grades 2 to 3 (Fig. 1 f). Similar histopathological results were obtained in both utilized therapeutic doses of DC (75 and 150 mg/kg). Detailed histopathological results are presented in Table 1 . Fig. 1 Photomicrographs in sham operation, torsion/detorsion (T/D), and treatment groups. a The bilateral testes in sham operation and the contralateral testes in treatment groups all showed normal tubular architecture. b – d The ipsilateral testes in testicular T/D group displayed disordered, sloughed germinal cells within the testis tubules ( white arrowhead ), giant cells ( black arrowhead ), spermatogenesis arrest ( SA ), vacuolization ( V ), severe hemorrhage, and edema ( asterisk ). e The contralateral testes in T/D group with degeneration ( D ) and mild edema ( asterisk ). f Orderly array in most of seminiferous tubules with mild edema ( asterisk ) in the ipsilateral testes of treatment groups. (H&E staining, ×100) Table 1 Mean testicular histological score in sham operation, torsion/detorsion (T/D), and T/D+ B . multifida groups Testes direction Groups Different Lesions C H E SG SA STD STA G Left Sham 1.1 ± .31 b 1.1 ± .31 b 1 ± .00 b 1.2 ± .42 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b T/D 3.7 ± .48 a 3.8 ± .42 a 3.8 ± .42 a 3.8 ± .42 a 3.8 ± .42 a 3.6 ± .51 a 3.7 ± .48 a 3.8 ± .42 a T/D+DC 75 mg/kg 2.4 ± .69 c 2.7 ± .48 c 2.9 ± .56 c 2.4 ± .69 c 2.4 ± .51 c 2.4 ± .51 c 2.3 ± .48 c 2.4 ± .51 c T/D+DC 150 mg/kg 2.3 ± .48 c 2.6 ± .51 c 2.4 ± .51 c 2.4 ± .51 c 2.2 ± .42 c 2.4 ± .51 c 2.3 ± .48 c 2.4 ± .51 c Right Sham 1.0 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b T/D 1.4 ± .51 b 1.2 ± .42 b 1.8 ± .42 d 1.2 ± .42 b 1.1 ± .31 b 1.1 ± .31 b 1.4 ± .51 b 1.3 ± .48 b T/D+DC 75 mg/kg 1.2 ± .42 b 1.1 ± .31 b 1.3 ± .48 bd 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b T/D+DC 150 mg/kg 1 ± .00 b 1.1 ± .31 b 1.1 ± .31 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b 1 ± .00 b All data expressed as mean ± SD C congestion, H hemorrhage, E edema, SG sloughed germinal cells, SA spermatogenesis arrest, STD seminiferous tubules disorganization, STA seminiferous tubules atrophy, G giant cells a,b,c At each column, different superscript alphabets show significant difference ( P < 0.05)
Discussion
High sensitivity of the testicular tissue to ischemia–reperfusion injury has been the main reason to study the free radical scavenging activities of B . multifida DC. Testicular torsion through ischemia and subsequent detorsion via reperfusion can lead to further damage to testis tissues. Animal studies in the mouse and rat model have shown that 720° torsion for 1 h is sufficient to induce ischemia and impairment of spermatogenesis. If torsion is continued by 2 and 4 h, it can lead to moderate and severe ischemic changes, respectively (Cosentino et al. ; Lysiak et al. ; Sessions et al. ). During the early phase of reperfusion that starts immediately after restoration of the circulation, the injuries are reversible. But over time and in the late reperfusion phase, the irreparable tissue changes happen due to persistent oxidative stress (Filho et al. ). Hence, to prevent further tissue damages in the early reperfusion phase, using some potent oxygen radical scavengers can strengthen the antioxidative defense system (Prillaman and Turner ).
In ischemia–reperfusion phenomenon, stimulation of intracellular signaling cascades in endothelial cells of ischemic vessels leads to neutrophil recruitment. These neutrophils are the source of free radicals which cause damaging oxidative stress and eventual germ cell-specific apoptosis (Lysiak et al. , , ). Generally, oxidative stress in any tissue results from an imbalance between the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and their efficient removal by available antioxidant systems. ROS can be produced in large amounts not only by macrophages and neutrophils but also by spermatozoa and other cell types under pathologic conditions (Aitken and Clarkson ). Long-time torsion usually results in the ipsilateral testicular atrophy and damage of contralateral testis with a poorly known pathogenesis. Also, testicular torsion can lead to loss of fertility in affected testes (Cubillos et al. ).
Recently, special attention is given to potential rich sources of natural antioxidants isolated from plant products. Among a variety of medicinal plants, some endemic and edible species are increasingly of interest in the drug industry worldwide, which can be used in the production of raw materials or preparations containing phytochemicals with significant antioxidant capacities. The only Biebersteinia grown in mountainous areas of Iran is B. multifida DC; its rhizome has been used in Iranian folk medicine for the treatment of rheumatoid, musculoskeletal disorders, and healing of bone fractures (Farsam et al. ). The anti-inflammatory, antinociceptive, antihemolytic, and antioxidant properties of B. multifida root have been reported previously (Farsam et al. ; Nabavi et al. ). Also, the flavonoid constituents of this plant are recognized. The luteolin and its derivatives form the vast majority of the flavonoids (Omurkamzinova et al. ). It has been well documented that four major compounds of the essential oil of B. multifida as Nerolidol (Keawsa-Ard et al. ), 6, 10, 14-trimethyl 1-2-pentadecane, hexadecanoic acid (Kumar et al. ), and phytol (Santos et al. ) have strong antioxidant activities (Kamali et al. ).
The results of the present study revealed that intraperitoneal administration of B. multifida extract at doses of 75 or 150 mg/kg shortly before detorsion can rescue the testis tissue following testicular ischemia–reperfusion injury. As already mentioned, the early phase of reperfusion is the golden time for the revival of the damaged testis tissue and the loss of this critical time might result in irreversible injuries. Intraperitoneal route of administration can promptly increase the bioactive components and the metabolites of the extract in rat plasma. In this way, the antioxidant effects of the B. multifida extract during the first hours of reperfusion can be useful. Histological findings of our study suggest that torsion of ipsilateral testis can affect the contralateral one that is consistent with the previous studies (Kamada et al. ; Saba et al. ; Sarica et al. ; Salman et al. ; Aktas et al. ; Yang et al. ). However, some authors in a number of experimental and clinical studies have not observed such results (Turner ; Bozlu et al. ; Al-Maghrebi et al. ; Wei et al. ). To date, there is no exact pathogenesis regarding contralateral testicular involvement in patients with unilateral testicular torsion. One of the most accepted hypotheses is that following ipsilateral testicular torsion, a neurovascular pathway is activated and by transfer through a sympathetic reflex arc results in vasospasm and decreasing blood flow in contralateral testis. Our study showed that B. multifida extract can protect testicular tissue against ischemia–reperfusion injury in both testes in a unilateral testicular torsion, evidenced by histopathological changes.
Conclusion
B. multifida is a rich source of phenolic antioxidant components that can be potentially used as a free radical scavenger in testicular damages caused by reperfusion injury, although more detailed studies are warranted.