Introduction
Hospitalization related venous thromboembolism (VTE) has been thought to mainly occur in surgical patients. However, it has been recognized that approximately 75% of the fatal episodes of VTE occur in non-surgical patients [ ]. Results from clinical trials proposed that most VTEs among hospitalized patients could be prevented by adequate prophylactic administration of anticoagulants. Therefore, early identification of potential factors in high-risk patients is important in order to define risk-benefit ratio and to determine who should receive primary thromboprophylaxis [ , ]. A common method to determine VTE probability is to combine risk factors including disease stage, immobility, trauma, cancer and presence of surgical intervention; and categorizing as “low,” “intermediate,” or “high” risk. Another approach is the use of a formal standard model for VTE risk assessment model (RAM). A RAM is an interactive tool designed to provide a quantitative risk assessment based on a variety of patient related factors.
Several RAMs have been developed to stratify patients’ risk for VTE [ , , , ]. These hospital-based models vary in a wide range of VTE prediction and outcomes. Although the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) introduced a new approach to patient selection [ ], adherence to VTE prophylaxis guidelines remain low, mainly due to lack of a simple-to-use, validated, and universally accepted risk assessment model. Limited studies are available for systematical evaluation of these risk assessment models for VTE.
Among numerous factors predisposing to VTE, immobilization is a major risk factor [ , ]. The impact of immobility and interactions with other risk factors on cumulative risk has not been well tested. To determine what role immobility plays in the risk of VTE, we systematically reviewed RAMs for VTE focusing on the variations in defining immobility in these RAMs.
Methods
Literature search
We performed a literature search in PubMed in January 2017 using search terms to identify primary articles. The key terms used in search were (“risk assessment model” or “risk score” or “risk assessment models” or “risk assessment” or “risk stratification” or “RAM” or “RAMs”) AND (“medical patients” or “medicine patients” or “medical inpatients” or “wards” or “medical floor”) AND (“VTE” or “DVT” or “PE” or “thrombosis” or “thromboembolism” or “venous thrombosis” or “deep vein thrombosis” or “pulmonary embolism”), and a cross reference check was performed for all reviews on VTE prediction models identified by our search.
Eligibility criteria
We included all primary articles that reported one or more multivariable prediction models or scales that have been proposed for individual risk estimation of any future VTE outcome in hospitalized patients.
We reviewed published studies that met the following inclusion criteria: (1) the study population consisted of adult hospitalized patients in acute care hospital settings; (2) clinical trials reported on one or more multivariable prediction models or scales; (3) published in peer-reviewed journals until Jan.8th, 2017; and (4) written in English. Reports were excluded if they: (1) were conducted in outpatient clinics, patient homes, other non-acute healthcare settings, or inpatient rehabilitation units; or (2) included a pediatric population. Furthermore, we excluded methodological articles and reviews, editorials, comments and letters.
Screening process
Initially two reviewers (FY and HZT) independently screened retrieved articles for eligibility on title and subsequently on abstract. Iterative screening rounds resolved disagreements. After consensus, full text articles were retrieved; and one reviewer screened the full text articles and extracted data. A second or third reviewer was involved in case of a conflict.
Quality of studies
The three authors (FY, HZT and SHY) reviewed all included studies independently in order to manage risk of bias across studies (i.e., publication bias, selective reporting). Two authors (FY and HZT) reviewed the articles to ensure that they met inclusion criteria and abstracted data in duplicate. The third author verified the articles accuracy.
Results
Study selection
The computer-based literature search produced 188 abstracts. After reviewing the abstracts, 150 were excluded based on the predefined criteria. The remaining 38 articles plus ten identified by manual search (cross reference check) were further reviewed leaving a total of 48 studies for full-text review. After full-text review, 27 studies were excluded [ ] (Fig. 1 ).
Fig. 1 Flow chart of literature review and analysis. RAM Risk assessment model
Characteristics of study populations
The descriptive characteristics of RAMs are shown in Table 1 . Most were cohort studies, particularly retrospective studies, and two were survey studies [ , ]. Four RAMs recruited patients from multiple sites [ , , , ]. Two RAMs were recommended as guidelines for VTE prophylaxis in medical inpatients in US and UK [ , ]. Two models were developed or validated exclusively in specific populations, such as patients with Cushing’s syndrome [ ] or cancer (80%) [ ].
Table 1 Review of risk assessment models and the definition of immobility/mobility for VTE Model Name Purpose/objective Definition of immobility or mobility in the model Study type Setting 1 Arcelus risk factor scoring system [ ] Assess the potential risk for VTE in medical patients based on a clinical risk factor scoring system Anticipated bed confinement (>72h) + 1 Past immobilization (>72h) + 1 Bedrest prior to admission (>72h) + 1 Confining travel, flight/auto (>4h within week of admission) + 1 Prospective Single site; community hospital, USA 2 Autar DVT risk assessment scale [ , ] Obtain a large enough sample to show statistical significance, yet be expedient and economical at the same time Mobility scored 0–4: ambulant, limited (uses aid, self), very limited (needs help), chairbound, complete bedrest Prospective Single site; (Two 30-bed trauma/ orthopaedic wards of a large district general hospital, UK) 3 Bagot study [ ] Evaluate the use of an “exclusion based risk-assessment model” for venous thrombosis in improving the uptake of appropriate thromboprophylaxis in hospitalized medical patients Prolonged immobility Survey Single site; (General medical wards of a secondary care center, UK) 4 Padua prediction score [ ] Detect hospitalized patients at high risk of developing VTE Reduced mobility + 3 [defined as bedrest with bathroom privileges (either due to patient’s limitations or on physicians order) for at least 3 days] Prospective Single site; (University hospital, Internal Medicine wards, Italy) 5 Chopard [ ] Help identifying patients who should receive thromboprophylaxis Immobilization (<30 min walk per day) for 3 days or more +1 Survey Multicenter; Nationwide, Switzerland 6 MEDENOX Alikhan [ ] Intend to give clinicians a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answer when deciding whether a medical patient should receive thromboprophylaxis Prolonged immobility Retrospective Single site; UK 7 Zilio [ ] Develop a model for assessing the risk of VTE in a large group of Cushing syndrome patients based on their clinical, hormonal, and coagulation parameters Reduced mobility + 2 (defined as bed rest with bathroom privileges for at least 3 days) Retrospective Single site; Two endocrinology units of a university hospital, Italy 8 Kucher [ ] Evaluate a strategy of issuing or withholding electronic alerts to physicians whose patients were not receiving prophylaxis against deep-vein thrombosis Bed rest + 1 (minor risk) (defined as an active order for bed rest that was not related to surgery) Prospective Single site; (medical and surgical units of a hospital, US 9 PRETEMED Lecumberri [ ] The impact of the implementation of an electronic alert system for the prevention of VTE among over 12,000 hospitalized patients Immobility >3 days Retrospective Single site; university hospital, Spain 10 IMPROVE [ ] Examine VTE prophylaxis practices and clinical outcomes in patients hospitalized for an acute medical illness with a range of diagnoses Immobilization (defined as being confined to a bed or chair for > 24 h) Retrospective Multicenter; 52 hospitals in 12 countries 11 Maynard [ ] A simple model with 3 levels of VTE risk using a VTE prevention protocol and a multifaceted approach that could be replicated across a wide variety of medical centers Early ambulation-low risk Prospective Single site; university hospital (medical and surgical services), US 12 JFK Medical center’s risk assessment tool [ ] JFK Medical center’s risk assessment tool develop and test the tool for validity and reliability Current immobility (bed rest, paralysis) + 3 Decreased mobility + 3 Retrospective Single site; community hospital, US 13 Geneva Risk score [ ] Develop a simple standardized estimate of clinical probability of PE Recent immobilization (defined as bed rest of 48 h or more and air or road travel of 6 h or more during the last week were considered) Retrospective Single site; University Hospital of Geneva (Emergency Center), Switzerland 14 NICE [ ] https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg92/chapter/1-recommendations UK guideline ‘Significantly reduced mobility’ is used to denote patients who are bedbound, unable to walk unaided or likely to spend a substantial proportion of the day in bed or in a chair NA UK 15 Rothberg [ ] Validate a risk stratification model Paralysis Retrospective Multicenter; 374 hospitals, US 16 Wells [ ] Determine the safety of a clinical model for patients with suspected pulmonary embolism Immobilization (defined as complete bedrest for 3 or more days in the 4 weeks before presentation) Prospective Multicenter; 5 medical centers, Canada 17 Four-element RAM [ ] Identify the minimum set of VTE risk factors that were most predictive of clinically overt VTE within 90 days of hospital admission Bed rest Retrospective Multicenter; 22 hospitals and more than 150 clinics, US
VTE RAMs (Table 1)
Missing or unclear information was noted in all studies. For example, few studies recorded the time of screening VTE risks, i.e. only three of them emphasized that all patients were required to be risk assessed within 24 h of admission [ , , ]. Three studies utilized the RAMs to predict the occurrence of VTE within 3 months of the index hospitalization [ , , ]. The remaining studies predicted or validated risk during hospitalization. Among three studies that performed continued VTE risk assessment during hospitalization, Kucher et al. and Lecuberri et al. implemented an electronic alert system to perform daily screening [ , ], while McCaffrey et al. assessed VTE risk every 3 days after admission [ ]. Interestingly, Bagot et al. developed an exclusion-based risk assessment model, and concluded that this model significantly improved the timing of initiation of VTE prophylaxis [ ]. Autar’s DVT-scale was originally developed for surgical patients [ ], but the authors re-tested this scale as a predictive index in medical patients [ ].
There are limitations in the RAMs before validations. For example, 80% of the patients included in Kucher et al. study were affected by cancer, which was considered a particularly high risk group for VTE [ ]. The risk model proposed by Lecumberri et al. [ ] was assessed in comparison with historical controls, and recruited patients who were not followed-up after discharge. Limitations of Padue’s model include its single-center setting, non-evidence-derived data assessments, small number of venous thromboembolism events, no presentation of model performance characteristics, and suboptimal external validation.
RAMs validation (Table 2)
Of all the models identified in this review, nine of them were validated [ , , , , , , , , ]. In total, external validation was performed on six RAMs [ , , , , , ]. Out of the six models that were externally validated, four were validated once. Only Well’s RAM has been externally validated in multiple, international medical centers. One study conducted by Greene et al. [ ] was externally validated and compared four RAMs. The first indirect attempt to both assess impact and validate a RAM for VTE in hospitalized patients was conducted by Kucher et al [ ].
Table 2 Review of available external validation studies for risk assessment models Model name Validation studies Definition of immobility or mobility in the Model Study type Setting 1 Padua prediction score [ ] Liu [ ] Reduced mobility + 3 Retrospective Single site, China Greene [ ] Immobile + 1 (defined as having at least one of the following: immobilizing plaster cast, paralysis, or bed rest for ≥72 h prior to hospitalization) Retrospective Single site, US Zwicker [ ] Reduced mobility Prospective Multicenter (5 centers), US 2 Kucher [ ] Greene [ ] Immobile + 1 (defined as having at least one of the following: immobilizing plaster cast, paralysis, or bed rest for ≥ 72 h prior to hospitalization) Retrospective Single site, US 3 IMPROVE [ ] Mahan [ ] Immobilized ≥7days Retrospective Multicenter (3 hospitals), US Rosenberg [ ] Immobilized ≥ 7days +1 Retrospective Multicenter, US Greene [ ] Immobile + 1 (defined as having at least one of the following: immobilizing plaster cast, paralysis, or bed rest for ≥72 h prior to hospitalization) Retrospective Single site, US 4 Geneva risk score [ ] Nendaz [ ] Immobilization 1+ (defined as complete bed rest or inability to walk for >30 min per day for >3 days) Prospective Multicenter (3 academic and 5 nonacademic acute care hospitals), Switzerland 5 Wells [ ] Wolf [ ] Immobilization (≥3d) + 1.5 Prospective Single site, US Douma [ ] Recent surgery or immobilization Prospective Multicenter (3 teaching hospitals), Switzerland and France 6 Four-element RAM [ ] Greene [ ] Immobile + 1 (defined as having at least one of the following: immobilizing plaster cast, paralysis, or bed rest for ≥72 h prior to hospitalization) Retrospective Single site, US
All the validated models have limitations that complicate widespread implementation. For example, sample sizes of the validation studies ranged from very small (e.g., 72 participants) [ ] to very large (e.g., 242,738 participants) [ ]. Only four of the externally validated studies were prospective cohorts [ , , , ]. Most external validations were performed in a different geographical area than its actual development area; for example, the IMPROVE was validated in US only [ , , ]. Furthermore, there was considerable heterogeneity in eligibility criteria for patients between validation and development studies. For example, for Padua prediction score, the external validation studies were not performed with the same age range for which the model was originally developed [ , , , ]. Interestingly, IMPROVE model was externally validated in a different manuscript with authors overlapping between the development and validation papers [ , , , ].
Immobility (Table 1)
Immobility was considered as a well-recognized predictor in all RAMs except for Rothberg model, which listed “paralysis” as a risk factor. However, in the discussion, this study acknowledged they did not assess “prolonged bed rest” [ ]. Among all the models, no study has provided routine objective screening tests or medical records for immobility. Of the 17 models reviewed, only nine studies provided a definition of immobility (although the definitions varied widely) including bed rest [ , , , , , , , , ], inability to walk [ ], immobilization [ , ], or chairbound [ , , ], etc. Some models did not define immobility at all, and only used a very vague concept of immobility in the risk assessment scale, such as prolonged immobility [ , ] or immobility [ ]. Nine studies defined immobility. Of these, two studies reported the reason of the immobility i.e. due to patient’s limitation or physician’s order [ , ]. Two studies defined the concept of immobility using degree of activity, and referred to restricted activity i.e., complete bed rest [ , ], or with bathroom privileges [ , ].
Some studies focused principally on specifying the duration rather than describing the nature of the immobility. With regard to the nine studies that defined the concept of immobility using duration, seven studies defined immobility in terms of days [ , , , , , , ], two in hours [ , ], and in terms of proportion of immobility time. Interestingly, no RAMs defined immobility in terms of distance walked.
Two studies adopted a point system, dividing patients into low, moderate, or high-risk categories for VTE based upon patient characteristics. Arcelus et al. [ ] and Autar-DVT scale [ ] assigned different scores according to the status of patient immobility. Arcelus also specified the duration of immobilization.
Rosenberg et al. [ ] used electronic nursing notes and physical therapy notes to specify immobility status at a patient-chart level and Woller et al. [ ] recorded that bed rest orders were charted electronically at the bedside by nursing staff. However, no other studies recorded how they monitored the mobility status during hospitalization.
Discussion
Summary
Both symptomatic and asymptomatic episodes of VTE are common in hospitalized patients [ ], and are associated with high mortality [ ]. The application of a simple risk assessment model to identify VTE risks in hospitalized patients, may assist clinicians in identifying patients eligible for prophylaxis. Among all VTE risk factors, immobility has a well-recognized role in VTE pathogenesis. However, the nature and magnitude of the immobility in different RAMs have not been reviewed in detail previously. In this review, we identified VTE risk in regards to the current assessment models or scales in hospitalized patients. Our results showed that there was extensive variability and lack of definitions in the definition of immobility in both model development and model validation.
Validation versus non-validation
Over the past two decades, a number of risk assessment models have been developed to assess VTE in medical inpatients. For clinicians, it is imperative that a risk assessment tool has a good ability to assess individual risks so that appropriate preventative treatment can be tailored. For such a tool to provide accurate individualized risk assessment, it must achieve a balance between sensitivity and specificity. It is therefore important when assessing any model’s performance that the setting for its use is known.
Many criticisms of the existing risk assessment models in hospitalized, acutely ill medical patient population have been noted as most of RAMs are derived from consensus or by regression analysis to identify risk factors for VTEs [ ]. The lack of reliable association between VTE prophylaxis and RAMs could be due to a number of factors. One key reason is that most of RAMs have not undergone proper clinical validation. The heterogeneity of medical population and different settings from which the model was derived limits the model’s reproducible accuracy prior to widespread clinical use.
Of the validated risk models, the Padua Prediction Score designed by adding thrombosis-related clinical scenarios derived from the Kucher model and recommended by the ACCP [ ], was empirically derived and appears promising in identifying a low-risk group of patients in whom thromboembolic prophylaxis is likely not warranted. However, the Padua score was developed from a single medical center with limited patients’ population. It has been found that Padua prediction score was not associated with VTE in hospitalized sepsis patients [ ]. Furthermore, the Padua model has been not well validated in large prospective cohorts.
The standard approaches for VTE risk stratification presented in the guidelines of the ACCP, calls for dividing patients into low-, moderate-, and high-risk groups and prescribe appropriate prophylaxis [ ]. However, even the most comprehensive RAM- the IMPROVE multinational registry derived specially for medical inpatients and has been validated in different population, could not discriminate a three-tiered VTE risk group. The IMPROVE VTE RAM particularly emphasizes a higher risk of VTE in the population in critically ill patients (Intensive Care Unit or Critical Care Unit). In addition, lack of complete validation during hospital admission also limits its applicability. Therefore, the use of prophylaxis among low-risk patients may not warrant prevention or the findings may be inconsistent.
There is no sufficient evidence to recommend one RAM over another, and prophylaxis reliability is lacking as most of the time the decisions are based on individual physician’s judgment. In addition, poor documentation and follow-up rates often-present major obstacles for validation studies, which may not align with those original studies that developed the RAMs. A unique study conducted by Yale et al. [ ] proposed a RAM to identify high-risk patients who could receive anticoagulant treatment after hospital discharge. Thus, it may help to decide which patient requires follow-up for VTE risk. With the constant development of electronic patient data systems, these RAMs may pave the way to implement computer programs tracking patient health. However, external validation of each proposed assessment model is required before definite implementation is considered.
The definition of immobility/mobility in RAMs
The VTE risk factors identified in these RAMs are consistent with those described by the most recent ACCP guidelines. One of the most important triggering factors for VTE is prolonged immobilization, especially during hospitalization. Hence, prolonged bed rest or immobility alone does not provide adequate evidence for prescribing prophylactic anticoagulant therapy. Prolonged immobility combined with other major risk factors increases the likelihood of VTE.
Warlow found that 60% of stroke patients with paralyzed limbs had asymptomatic DVT diagnosed by fibrinogen scanning [ ]. In an post-mortem study, 12% of patients with <1 week of bed rest prior to their death, were found to have venous thrombosis, whereas the incidence greatly rose to 80% for a longer period [ ]. Despite these findings, consensus is that prolonged bed rest alone, in the absence of other VTE risk factors, does not require prophylaxis. This may be misleading, as there are no formal controlled studies that have validated the role of mobility in RAMs and RAMs themselves.
Lack of mobility reduces venous blood flow, particularly in the pockets of the venous valves, resulting in stasis and increased coagulation [ ]. In prior studies, the association of immobility with hospital-acquired VTE has been identified as the main factor [ , ]. Most VTE risk factors in this review are not controversial, except for the immobility, most likely due to lack of consistent qualitative and quantitative definition. Although incorporated into the majority of risk assessment models, it is poorly defined and represented by a variety of terms including “immobile”, “mobile”, “bedrest”, and “chairbound”. Despite the well-documented association of immobility with increased risk of thrombosis, it is difficult for health care professionals to operationalize these terms in clinical practice.
It has been recommended that variables composed in a RAM should be clearly defined or identified in a univariate analysis, and qualified variables should be assessed for both clinical and statistical significance [ ]. However, differences in how the authors implemented venous thromboembolism risk factors (e.g., immobility) may still exist. Therefore, the strength of association of immobility with VTE was highly variable. Also, the variability in methods and outcome measurements precluded pooled estimates of models.
As mentioned throughout the manuscript, lack of mobility is one of the most prevalent risk factors for VTE. As risk assessment is key to prevention of VTE, standardization of a definition for lack of mobility is necessary to better assess thrombosis risk and improve adherence to prophylactic guidelines in at-risk patients. Importantly, an objective and clearly defined criterion is needed for determining the degree of reduced mobility along the continuum from immobile to ambulatory. The absence of a consistent definition may contribute to the over- or under-representation of an association between lack of mobility and VTE risk. Therefore, it may generate improper utilization of thromboembolic prophylaxis measures. Because of significant gray areas in the literature and varied infrastructure, institutions will not be able to implement identical VTE prevention programs, but institutional standardization remains a cornerstone of improvement.
Characteristics of an ideal VTE RAM
An ideal RAM for VTE should correctly detect patients who meet a threshold risk of developing a VTE by identifying and weighing exposing risk factors, reliably exclude patients replying on a benefit/harm ratio, be externally validated before definite implementation is considered, and easy to apply in clinical settings. Individualized risk assessment is a crucial component in the effective assessment of medical inpatients at high risk of VTE. Current international guidelines, including those of the American College of Chest Physicians, now emphasize the importance of using an individualized approach for patient risk assessment, both for their risk of VTE and their risk of bleeding. Even though pharmacological prophylaxis has been associated with reductions in VTE, additional large-scale, external validation studies are important to help confirm or refute the accuracy of available risk assessment models. Thus, it will lead to more tailored strategies for thromboembolic prophylaxis, and an improved estimation of the risk/benefit profile for a particular patient.
Conclusions
The design of formalized RAM is usually based on VTE risk factors, which make it complicated because of the highly selective inclusion criteria, and additional requirements. As many of the mobility definitions used in the RAMs are both qualitatively and quantitatively different, drawing comparisons between the RAMs is difficult. Integrating a standardized, practical and easily administered measure of mobility in at-risk patients would assist nurses and physicians in the clinical setting with risk assessment and adherence to thromboembolic prophylaxis guidelines. Reliable quantification of mobility is also important in the research setting to clarify the relationship between lack of mobility and risk of VTE development. Our goal is to use valid and reliable measures of mobility to design and/or enhance current risk assessment models as a method to identify patients at risk for VTE.
It has been suggested that inclusion of objective, measurable parameters will be necessary to optimally define the concept of reduced mobility. Thus, a clear understanding of the link between lack of mobility and overall risk of VTE is needed to inform future work on interventions that target ambulatory and/or sedentary behavior in populations at high risk for development of VTE. As expected, the impact of immobility in VTE risk assessment works well in the population where it was derived (internal validity) but validation on other independent datasets (external validation) is required before clinical application.