Introduction
Heparin exposure for a variety of indications is common in hospitalized patients. This is particularly true for patients with mechanical circulatory support (MCS) devices such as extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) circuits, left ventricular assist devices (LVADs), intra-aortic balloon pumps (IABP), Impella® devices, as well as TandemHeart® or total artificial heart (TAH) devices, where each device requires systemic or device-specific anticoagulation. Unfractionated heparin (UFH) is the most commonly used agent due to its ease of monitoring, reversibility, and broad action of factor inhibition within the clotting cascade. Unfortunately, 1–5% of patients exposed to UFH or low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH) can develop immune-mediated heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) [ ]. HIT is a serious prothrombotic complication with a thrombosis rate up to 53% and mortality rate upwards of 30% if not recognized and treated with alternative anticoagulant [ , ]. While suspicion for HIT is usually assisted with the use of clinical assessment tools (i.e. 4 T score), the diagnosis of HIT is supported with assays used to identify the presence of the syndrome [ ]. Additional challenges can exist as thrombocytopenia is commonly seen in the MCS population including the presence of co-morbid conditions including sepsis, presence of a cardiac balloon pump, or recent open heart surgery.
Once HIT is either considered in the differential diagnosis or confirmed with laboratory testing, clinicians are faced with several challenges. Which alternative anticoagulant to initiate and how to optimally titrate in the setting of different devices are critical considerations. The need to stop and temporarily reverse heparin while shifting to an alternative anticoagulant without loss of antithrombotic effect within the device can be challenging. Scarce literature has been published to help guide practitioners with these questions. This review summarizes the literature in combination with the clinical experience of this diverse group of authors to help guide the management of HIT in patients with MCS devices.
Thrombocytopenia with MCS devices
Thrombocytopenia is common in patients with mechanical devices due to platelet activation, as well as trapping and consumption within the device itself and eventual destruction [ , ]. Thrombocytopenia is common in critically ill patients, with estimates up to 45% of patients. Studies of patient with MCS devices have shown potentially higher rates of thrombocytopenia than in general critically ill patients [ ]. Due to the frequency of thrombocytopenia and routine heparin use in this patient population, HIT is common on the list of differential diagnoses. A key challenge is that low platelets may increase the risk for bleeding, and the paradox of increased thrombosis in the setting of HIT. The challenge with assessing and identifying for HIT is that typical screening tools (e.g. 4 T score, HEP score, Lillo-Le Louët) all rely on a predictable decline in platelet count and have not been validated in patients with MCS devices [ , , ].
Testing for HIT
Certain clinical criteria or characteristics in cardiac surgery patients have been shown to be more predictive for a HIT diagnosis. Most of these criteria were developed in patients following cardio-pulmonary bypass (CPB), which allows for some cross application to patients on MCS devices as many must be placed on CPB for implantation or the device itself acts in a similar way as CPB (i.e. ECMO). The two most predictive criteria published to date include: (1) persistent thrombocytopenia at or after 5 days of CPB and (2) a second fall in platelet count between 5 and 14 days after initial heparin exposure [ , ]. While these two criteria may not occur in all MCS patients with HIT, the likelihood of a positive HIT diagnosis is higher if present. In considering the limitations of traditional screening tools for HIT, practitioners may screen for these additional criteria to help guide how aggressive the diagnosis and treatment of HIT is pursued. Outside of these criteria, practitioners are currently left to clinical suspicion and judgement regarding when to test for HIT and change to a non-heparin based regimen.
Testing for HIT via anti-PF4/heparin antibodies is a common occurrence in hospital medicine and arguably excessive in the general hospital population [ ]. When HIT is present, thrombosis can rapidly occur, creating a dilemma of initiating treatment prior to assay results being reported [ ]. While sending for a HIT assay as an option, the lack of availability and/or cost of these labs results in a long turnaround time for many institutions. Additionally, with the formation of the anti-PF4/heparin antibody occurring in almost 50% of patients undergoing cardiovascular surgery, the potential for false positives can lead to unnecessary exposure to non-heparin anticoagulants [ ]. Despite the rate of antibody formation being so high in this population, the true incidence of HIT remains only 2–3% [ , ]. Therefore it is important to assess the probability of HIT as the laboratory component can sometimes cloud the clinical picture. For patients with a high suspicion for HIT or active thrombus it may be reasonable to order a HIT assay and switch to a non-heparin based regimen (Fig. 1 ). For patients at low or medium risk it may be a difficult decision to either assess a HIT panel or simply monitor the trend in platelets while maintaining a heparin-based regimen prior to results being reported. It is also important in this particular patient population to reconsider and continuously assess the risk of thrombosis and bleeding. Evaluating these patient- and device-specific risk factors is critical for patients at intermediate risk. In the Lepirudin Heparin-Associated Thrombocytopenia (HAT) trials most thrombotic events occurred in the initial 48 h while the results of the HIT assays were waiting to be reported [ , , ].
Fig. 1 Possible aid in the diagnosis of heparin induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) in patients with mechanical circulatory support (MCS) devices
Treatment/management
There are 3 major goals in treatment decisions: (1) prevent the complications of HIT, (2) maintain the performance of the device and (3) prevent a bleeding complication.
Literature available for use of alternative anticoagulants in MCS patients
The most common non-heparin anticoagulant choices in patients with HIT include the parenteral direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs) and the injectable factor Xa inhibitor, fondaparinux [ ]. Even with some background or experience with non-heparin anticoagulants, the decision on which specific agent to use for each device can be extremely difficult. American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) guidelines for the general population suggest the use of bivalirudin as a preferred agent if urgent cardiothoracic surgery is needed (2C evidence) and argatroban for all other indications (2C) as the anticoagulants of choice for patients with HIT [ ]. The evidence, however, is weak on the specific agent as no comparative trials have been done. The ACCP do not address the MCS population due to the lack of sufficient evidence. For these patients, clinicians must consider the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile of each medication, experience with use and guidance from literature as it evolves for the particular setting. With the thrombotic risk being unique for each device and patient, it is unlikely a ‘one-size-fits all’ approach can be recommended.
Anticoagulation in extracorporeal circuits
The management of any patient with an MCS device is always a balancing act between bleeding post transplantation, thrombosis within the patient or circuit and subsequent hemorrhagic risks. While on MCS, both the anticoagulant and pro-coagulant pathways are activated, in addition to significant impairment of platelet activity [ , ]. By the time patients require MCS, kidney and liver dysfunction may have already led to significant alterations to the patient’s baseline coagulation profile and separately the elimination of the anticoagulant [ ]. These factors combine to pose a unique challenge in the assessment and management goals.
Potential for circuit thrombosis
While specific guidelines or protocols for the anticoagulation management of MCS patients vary based on the specific device, patient, and institution, both antiplatelet and anticoagulation therapies are considered standard of care [ , ]. Some literature supports the view, however, that the thrombotic risk associated with specific devices is of less clinical concern than the potential hemorrhagic complications of anticoagulation [ , ]. This may be especially true immediately following device implantation as post-operative bleeding is the most frequent adverse event reported in clinical studies [ ]. As such, non-bridging anticoagulation protocols have been used for the management of patients after implantation of selected devices such as LVADs and pacemakers. In one study, therapeutic heparin (activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT] > 50 s, n = 118) was compared to low intensity heparin (aPTT 40–55 s, n = 178) and no heparin (no aPTT > 40 s, n = 122) as a bridge to warfarin after LVAD implantation. None of the adverse events examined in the study (i.e. ischemic stroke, hemorrhagic stroke, pump thrombosis, and bleeding requiring surgery or transfusion) were significantly different between the groups (p values of 0.64, 0.17, and 0.3 respectively) while no events of pump thrombosis or hemorrhagic stroke developed in any of the heparin arms [ ]. aPTT target goals in the development of the devices may not have controlled for different assays and sensitivities to heparin, suggesting some lack of specificity supporting a narrow target range. Implantation of certain devices (i.e. pacemakers) has been associated with increased bleeding events when performed while on heparin, therefore it is recommended to avoid heparin during the operative period in these patients. For patients treated without heparin anticoagulation, therapy with warfarin or other oral anticoagulant in most cases without a heparin bridge may suffice [ ]. In the setting of HIT however, alternative anticoagulation may need to be initiated as holding heparin is not a recommended management strategy [ , ].
Using alternative anticoagulants
In order to comprehensively review the literature of non-heparin anticoagulants in cases of confirmed HIT in the MCS population, a literature search was undertaken using MEDLINE/PubMed (1966–November 2016). Search terms included the following: bivalirudin, argatroban, fondaparinux, direct thrombin inhibitors, mechanical circulatory support, Impella, balloon pump, ventricular assist device, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, total artificial heart, heparin induced thrombocytopenia. Pediatric, non-english, and lepirudin or herudin studies were excluded. A summary of the data existing for each device is outlined in (Table 1 ). It should be noted that most of the studies included are case reports or case series. Given this, it can be difficult to compare the various studies. However, several trends can be seen within the available data.
Table 1 Device specific literature review Study Number of patients Indication for MCS device HIT confirmed Anticoagulant Loading or initial a dose Maintenance dose PTT versus ACT goal PTT/ACT range Adverse effects noted Mortality ECMO Pappalardo [ ] 1 n/a 1 ELISA positive Bivalirudin 0.5 mg/kg 0.05–0.15 mg/kg/h ACT 180–220 n/a Ventricular fibrillation-thrombus formation on atrial side of mitral valve prosthesis 0 (0%) Koster [ ] 1 1 VA 1 ELISA and SRA positive Bivalirudin 0.5 mg/kg 0.5 mg/kg/h ACT 200–220 ACT 200–220 None noted 0 (0%) Jyoti [ ] 1 1 VV n/a Bivalirudin 0.1–0.2 mg/kg/h ACT 200–220 n/a None noted 0 (0%) Pieri [ ] 10 5 VV; 5 VA 4 positive a Bivalirudin 0.025 mg/kg/h a 0.041 mg/kg/h (0.028–0.05 mg/kg/h) w CVVH 0.028 mg/kg/h (0-0.041 mg/kg/h) not on CVVH aPTT 45–60 aPTT variations: >20%- 24 (11.1%), >80 s 3(1.4%) Major bleeding 3 (30%), thrombosis 1 (10%) 4 (40%) Beiderlinden [ ] 9 9 VV 3 positive a Argatroban 0.15 mcg/kg/min aPTT 50–60 Mean aPTT 65 ± 14 (4 h after infusion, 5 > goal) 1 bleed requiring transfusion (2 mcg/kg/min dose) 3 (30%) Phillips [ ] 1 n/a 1 positive a Argatroban 0.1–0.65 mcg/kg/min ACT 170–200 or PTT 60 n/a None noted 0 (0%) Dolch [ ] 1 1 VV 1 ELISA positive Argatroban 0.35 mcg/kg/min a 0.25–1.63 mcg/kg/min aPTT 45–60 Mean aPTT 48 ± 9 s None noted 1 (100%) Johnston [ ] 1 1 VA n/a Argatroban 10 mg bolus 2 mcg/kg/h ACT 200–400 and aPTT 80–90 n/a None noted 0 (0%) Parlar [ ] 1 1 VA None sent Fondaparinux 2.5 mg sc daily None None None noted 0 (0%) VAD Pieri [ ] 12 5 HM II, 6 HW, 1 TH n/a Bivalirudin 0.025 mg/kg/h a 0.04 ± 0.026 mg/kg/h aPTT 45–60 Mean aPTT 42.1 ± 4.6 (24 h after infusion start) frequency of events (648 total events): aPTT < 40 s 133, n > 90 3 1 delayed sternal closure 0 (0%) Benken [ ] 8 6 HM II, 2 HW 1 positive ELISA (OD > 1) Fondaparinux 5 mg sc daily n/a n/a 3 patients developed thrombus 1 patient with major bleeding (not requiring transfusion) 0 (0%) Velagic [ ] 1 1 CM 1 ELISA positive and microtype strongly positive Fondaparinux 7.5 mg a Anti-Xa 0.6-1 U/mL n/a None noted 0 (0%) Samuels [ ] 28 15 AB5000, 9 IVAD, 5 BVS5000, 4 PVAD b 5 ELISA positive argatroban only 2 ELISA positive heparin-argatroban 20 Argatroban alone 8 Heparin transition to Argatroban therapy 1 mcg/kg/min a (normal liver fxn) 0.5 mcg/kg/min a (abnormal liver fxn) aPTT 60–90 n/a Argatroban only: 3 TE, 1 POB Heparin to argatroban: 3 TE, 3 POB Heparin only: 1 TE, 1 POB 10 (30%) Meyer [ ] 1 HM XVE (episode 1) HM II (episode 2) n/a Argatroban 2 mcg/kg/min a aPTT 45–55 45–55 None noted 0 (0%) Pappalardo [ ] 27 10 HMII, 4 TH, 2 CM, 12 other 27 positive diagnosis (as defined by research team) Argatroban 0.14 mcg/kg/min ± 0.13 a 0.02–1.5 mcg/kg/min aPTT 45–90 Frequency of events (total assays 3500): <45 s- 132, >90 s- 94 4 mediastinal bleeds (requiring surgery), 1 GI bleed, 1 Pulmonary hemorrhage c 5 (18%) Web [ ] 1 1 TH 1 elisa positive Argatroban 3500 mcg for act ~400 aPTT 55–85 (2.5 x baseline) n/a None noted 0 (0%) VV venovenous ECMO, VA venoarterial ECMO, HM II heartMate II, HW heartWare, TAH total artificial heart, CM levitronix Centrimag, HM XVE heartMate XVE, TH tandem Heart, TE thromboembolic event, POB post-operative bleeding, DVT deep vein thrombosis, CRRT continuous renal replacement therapy, CKD chronic kidney disease a Assay not specified b Includes 5 heparin only treated patients c All occurring in pts w renal or liver dysfunction
General treatment and physiology
Important consideration should be made when selecting specific anticoagulants and the target of therapy (Fig. 2 ). With CPB, activation of the coagulation cascade through the intrinsic or contact pathway occurs as a result of direct blood contact with foreign material (i.e. extracorporeal circuit) [ , ]. While the extrinsic system is likely activated to some degree, it is believed to mainly originate from the surgical wound itself and not the device [ ]. These principles are important when examining possible alternative anticoagulation regimens as DTIs and fondaparinux bind only specific factors within the clotting cascade (factor IIa and Xa, respectively). This is in stark contrast to the traditional antithrombotic agent used for these devices, UFH, which blocks multiple procoagulant stimuli within the coagulation cascade and has been referred to as the “ideal anticoagulant” for mechanical circuitry [ , , ]. Since these selective agents bind in the tissue factor or extrinsic pathway, blockade of the cascade will not be as complete as with UFH, which causes a more complete blockade. However, in the setting of HIT, alternative anticoagulation other than heparin-based products and management must be initiated [ ].
Fig. 2 Medication specific targets in clotting cascade
If the decision is made to go forward with a working diagnosis of HIT, it is preferred to remove any exposure to heparin including line flushes and heparin coated catheters if possible. This also includes any heparin tubes or filters within the MCS devices, if possible, however at times it may not be an option with selected circuits if only one type is available. For patients with mechanical devices, fondaparinux may not be ideal given its subcutaneous route of administration (which is sometimes unpredictable in critically ill patients), lack of reversibility, long duration of action, and specific factor binding as described previously. A few cases demonstrating mixed results have been reported using fondaparinux in MCS, but at this time it is not considered a standard therapy [ , , ]. Therefore, clinicians are commonly left to decide between bivalirudin or argatroban for initial therapy. The shorter duration of effect may have the advantage of removing effects if necessary. However, bivalirudin has more supportive literature specifically as an anticoagulant for patients undergoing percutaneous intervention, urgent cardiac surgery, and has been used successfully ‘off-label’ in patients with HIT [ , , , , ].
The fact that DTIs work independently of antithrombin potentially results in a more predictable anticoagulant response as compared to heparin. By being able to bypass antithrombin and with the ability to work directly on the thrombin that is continuously binding to the fibrin coating within the extracorporeal circuit, DTIs may potentially lead to improved prevention of thrombus formation as compared to heparin based regimens [ ].
In patients not requiring MCS, data suggest that there are no significant differences in clinical outcomes (all-cause mortality and bleeding) between argatroban and bivalirudin in patients with known or suspected HIT [ ]. Published reports regarding the time within therapeutic range, time to goal target range, and percentage of supra-therapeutic levels have been consistent, with some reports demonstrating comparable results between these two agents and others a faster onset and achieving steady-state sooner with more consistent effects with bivalirudin [ , ].
While both argatroban and bivalirudin have relatively short half-lives, in the critically ill patient prone to organ failures the half-lives tend to be prolonged [ , ]. For this reason, reported dosing in MCS patients is typically much lower as compared to standard doses (Table 1 ). While not every MCS patient is critically ill, depending on the type of device and type of flow it may offer (i.e. continuous vs. pulsatile), it is reasonable to consider the patients as’at risk’ for device-induced coagulopathy and the use of a less aggressive initial dosing strategy should be considered.
Argatroban
Of the two available DTIs, argatroban is the only one that has Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for the treatment of patients with HIT and is therefore used more often in the general population and is frequently cited in the published literature in patients with HIT compared to bivalirudin. The dosing for argatroban requires adjustments to be made in cases of hepatic dysfunction. Furthermore, adjustments have also been suggested for patients with renal dysfunction [ ]. These recommendations are to decrease argatroban doses by 0.1–0.6 mcg/kg/min for every drop in creatinine clearance (CrCl) of 30 mL/min. The mechanism could be due to renal signaling to the liver causing impaired clearance of the drug. This represents a significant problem in the critically ill, particularly in patients with mechanical devices who may have fluctuating hepatic and renal function based on altered and variable flows.
Bivalirudin
Many theoretical advantages of bivalirudin exist in this population, although the literature is insufficient to provide definitive conclusions. In addition to the inhibition of thrombin independent of antithrombin, bivalirudin also demonstrates some antiplatelet effects which could possibly advocate for omission of antiplatelet therapy during the initial LVAD management where the risk of bleeding is the highest [ ]. Safety parameters for bivalirudin have been described in several studies, and suggest a lower overall occurrence of bleeding and development of new thromboembolic events when compared to argatroban, but no statistically significant results have been shown [ , , ]. In the normal healthy population, the shorter time to steady state and a quicker “off” time of bivalirudin when compared to argatroban is likely related to its shorter half-life and predominately enzymatic elimination [ , , , ]. The shorter half-life of bivalirudin also allows for a shorter time needed to achieve a goal therapeutic aPTT and theoretically better control of the level of anticoagulation. However, as with argatroban, there is likely a prolonged clearance in patients who are critically ill given innate organ dysfunction [ ]. The enzymatic elimination of bivalirudin does have potentially significant implications when being used in mechanical devices. Since bivalirudin is broken down enzymatically by thrombin, thrombin driven coagulation may occur in extra-circulatory (stasis) blood sites either within the device or body [ ]. This has been described with the use of bivalirudin in CPB and even during cardiac surgery as blood tends to pool in the thoracic cavity during surgery. This can be problematic as stagnant blood can quickly clot once removed from systemic blood flow. It is thus important to continue flushing areas during procedures and using other methods such as citrate to prevent extra-circulatory blood (e.g. cell savers during surgery) from clotting.
Impella devices
No data were found on the use of either DTI’s or fondaparinux for patients with HIT being treated with an Impella® device, which is typically placed as a short term intervention. The problematic issue is the heparin that is considered to be standard for use in the purge solution along with 20% dextrose. Some studies have examined the use of a non-heparin based purge solution (only 20% dextrose), but in these studies systemic anticoagulation was still usually maintained with heparin [ ]. Another challenge with alternative parenteral anticoagulants is if it should be added into the purge solution alone, systemically, or both with impella devices In other cases involving intra-aortic balloon pumps (IABP), once HIT was suspected the transition to a more permanent device was made [ ]. This strategy could also potentially be used for Impella ® devices. In a situation of confirmed or suspected HIT, in a patient with an Impella® device, either transitioning to a more permanent device such as an LVAD, or taking out the heparin in the purge solution and systemically anticoagulating the patient with either argatroban or bivalirudin are likely the best options, as supported by SCAI/ACC/HFSA/STS [ ]. If systemic anticoagulation is selected, using a smaller initial dose should be considered as observed with other mechanical devices. This is especially true if the larger Impella 5.0® is to be used as the larger device increases the risk of life threatening bleeding. Given that the Impella RP was introduced into the market this year, no experience with alternative anticoagulants is available.
ECLS devices
Patients requiring support with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) predominately need either lung (i.e. veno-venous cannulation) or heart (veno-arterial cannulation) support. Depending on the type of cannulation alterations in blood flow and organ perfusion may be expected. Additionally, ECMO circuits themselves have been shown to alter many medication pharmacokinetics [ ]. Most of this alteration is binding of the medications to either the large amount of tubing within the circuit or within the oxygenator itself. With these alterations and potentially differing amounts of perfusion, as explained previously, large alterations and fluctuations in organ and drug clearance are to be expected. Consequently, these patients will usually require more frequent monitoring and may exhibit frequent changes in response on similar or consistent doses. Most of the data involving circuits and DTIs is in renal replacement therapy. In particular a significantly longer life span of each circuit was demonstrated with the bivalirudin as compared to heparin by Ranucci et al. [ , ] For patients with high suspicion of HIT it is also important to realize that many ECMO circuit tubing’s are heparin coated. Some of this tubing has the ability to be exchanged while others do not allow for non-heparin coated replacements.
Anticoagulant monitoring
Typically, the parenteral DTI’s are monitored using the aPTT for systemic effects. In selected situations, the aPTT may not change despite increasing the DTI dose. Should this occur, a thrombin time can be done to assess if excessive anticoagulant effects are present. For the studies (MCS patients with HIT) that presented their drug monitoring strategies, those using activated clotting time (ACT) to monitor therapy seemed to have lower bleeding rates. The exact reason or mechanism for this is unknown, but could be the timing of results with this particular test or resultant doses. For most institutions ACT testing is done as a point of care device with almost immediate results. This is in contrast to aPTTs which are typically required to be run in the laboratory and take longer to result. Of note however is that most bleeding episodes were noticed in patients with end organ dysfunction, either liver or renal, leading one to believe that regardless of the approach used these patients may require more frequent and careful monitoring [ ]. The overall bleeding rate could debatably be higher with these agents as compared to the risk for thrombosis.
Since the ACT is a whole blood measurement many factors can affect it including anemia and thrombocytopenia which affects most patients with MCS devices. In the operating room, the high range ACT is used whereas in the post-operative setting, the low range ACT is commonly used.
Transitioning from UFH to DTI anticoagulation
In order to effectively and safely transition to a DTI, close monitoring for both potential bleeding and thrombosis formation will be needed. To try and minimize both of these the DTI that has been selected should be initiated at the same time the UFH is being stopped. Monitoring, either with ACT or aPTT, should be performed every 1 to 2 h and close monitoring of the values as they transition from the heparin goal to the identified multiple of the baseline aPTT or ACT should be done. If the trend is increasing past the new goal then the DTI rate should be lowered and vice versa. For most patients the effect of the heparin should be negligible within 8 h. If organ dysfunction is present then the DTI may take longer to stabilize and will require continued close monitoring.
Transitioning to long term anticoagulation
Perhaps the most clinically significant problem with the parenteral DTIs is their effect on the international normalized ratio (INR). This becomes extremely problematic should a bridge to warfarin therapy be needed. In-vitro analysis and observations in patients have demonstrated that the false elevation in the INR is more robust with argatroban compared to bivalirudin, and is concentration as well as assay dependent [ ].Since the elevation in INR is not consistent from patient to patient many protocols have instituted drawing a baseline INR and then a follow up INR after the argatroban is therapeutic [ ]. This gives the practitioner an idea of the degree of INR elevation related to argatroban alone. Then once dosing with warfarin is initiated, a closer estimation of the true INR can be determined. Other approaches to assess the warfarin effect including measuring factor X have previously been described [ ].
Considerations in practice
Given the paucity of data, the following considerations or suggestions are provided based on our experience. For agent selection, consider what, if any, organ dysfunction the patient has and experience with using the available agents. In patients with liver dysfunction, bivalirudin would possibly provide a better and more consistent anticoagulation scheme. For patients with multi-organ failure or drastically changing renal or hepatic function, bivalirudin might provide easier management given its shorter half-life. The overall bleeding rate versus the thrombotic risk associated with the mechanical devices may be higher with the use of argatroban or bivalirudin compared with heparin. For this reason, especially in the acute setting coupled with bleeding concerns, starting conservatively with lower doses and titrating to effect is prudent.
Pre-implantation considerations
If the patient has a history of HIT or heparin allergy, close assessment of the medical record should be undertaken. This should include any previous assays for HIT and what type of management occurred. Was the patient safely re-challenged with heparin? If the concern for HIT remains, consider re-checking for presence of heparin antibodies and develop a plan prior to surgery. If the DTI is started pre-operatively, dosing requirements may need to be adjusted intra-operatively and post-operatively. Target goals as well may shift and should be discussed in advance. Personnel in each perspective setting managing therapy should be included in any communication of the plan.
During implantation (intra-operative) considerations
During procedures, the intensity of anticoagulation may be adjusted. Typically, the ACT will be used to manage the intensity of anticoagulation for the reasons described above. Since it may take some time to establish steady-state, ACT measures shortly after a change in the DTI infusion rate may continue to rise. The ACT goals may however change depending on if the high range ACT (commonly seen in the OR) is used in contrast to the low range ACT (commonly used in the cardiac catheterization lab or ward).
Post-implantation considerations
After the device is implanted (or removed), the DTI infusion rate may need to be adjusted. If a period of no anticoagulation is desired, then the DTI would need to be held in advance as there is no easy way to rapidly reverse their effects. One reversal agent, ciraparantag, can reverse the effects of both anti-factor Xa antagonists and direct thrombin inhibitors and is currently under investigation [ , ]. Its effects after administration may last for approximately 24 h. Its use may be problematic with mechanical devices that require continuous anticoagulation as the effects of the anticoagulant if neutralized may not be seen until the antidote effects have sufficiently diminished. Thus, use of such antidotes in setting where a MCS may be initiated should be carefully evaluated.
In the post-operative period, target goals may depend on the clinical presentation of the patient, and device target goals including how long the support device is to stay in and if there will be a switch from a short term approach (Impella) to long term (destination LVAD) approach. Both the patency of the circuit and thrombosis or bleeding in the patient should be followed. If organ (heart, kidney or liver) function either declines or improves, dosing adjustments may be necessary. The addition of antiplatelet therapy may also influenced bleeding risks where target goals may be addressed. It is unclear if target goals below 1.5 time control (aPTT) are sufficient in this setting, but if this occurs, potential risk for HIT related thrombosis until the platelet count has recovered should be noted. If the device is to be removed with a low level of anticoagulation present, the duration of holding can be estimated based on the DTI infusion rate present. Higher rates may suggest more robust elimination where the level of anticoagulation may drop faster compared to lower infusion rates with similar measured anticoagulation target goals.
The use of the new oral anticoagulants can theoretically be considered for these patients, however, at this time it is not advised in the acute MCS setting because of their longer half-lives, inability to monitor or control the degree of anticoagulation, and lack of adequate reversibility. Heightened concern for this rose with the increase in thrombosis noted with dabigatran in patients with mechanical heart valves or increased clot on guidewires with fondaparinux in the OASIS trials. The inability to influence the effects of the proposed contact pathway have been suggested and is currently suggesting some caution with the more specific acting oral anticoagulants [ , , ]. Additionally, the specific factor binding these agents provide is not ideal when compared to heparin because of the contact pathway activation.