Introduction
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are a heterogeneous myeloid cell population with an immune suppressive phenotype and are a critical component of the immune suppressive niche described in cancer [ ]. In cancer patients, the presence of MDSCs is associated with low survival rates and tumor recurrence [ , ]. MDSCs have a remarkable ability to suppress T-cell responses and to modulate the fate of multiple cells of the innate immune system [ , ]. MDSC-mediated immune suppression has been mainly attributed to upregulation of arginase (Arg1), nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) activity, and release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [ , ]. More recently, the diverse suppressive mechanisms of MDSCs have become apparent, and include antigen presentation to Tregs and secretion of cytokines, such as TGF-β and IL-10 [ , , ].
The importance of MDSCs in cancer is underscored by observations that, in tumor-bearing mice, their elimination can restore immune response and enhance anti-tumor effects of immune therapies. Gaining a clear understanding of MDSC contribution to pathological processes is confounded by their phenotypic and functional heterogeneity,[ ] which is governed in part by individual tissue compartments [ ]. Despite the variety of different mechanisms that various tumors use to expand and activate MDSCs, the resultant suppressive effects are similar [ ]. Immunosuppressive circulating immature myeloid cells negatively correlate with cancer outcomes and are recognized as a significant obstacle in cancer immunotherapy [ ]. Both the tumor-generated signals and the MDSC responses are being actively explored to overcome this obstacle.
Origin and heterogeneity of MDSCs
Generation of immature myeloid cells that are phenotypically similar to MDSCs from bone marrow progenitor cells is a normal response to acute inflammation. This myelopoiesis is transient, and the immature cells eventually differentiate into macrophages, DCs, and granulocytes [ ]. In acute inflammation, the suppressive functions that are characteristic of MDSCs; phagocytosis, respiratory burst, and subsequent release of proinflammatory cytokines are short-lived and are followed by tissue repair and resolution [ , ]. In contrast, chronic tumor-associated inflammation initiates drastic MDSC expansion from bone marrow and spleen; MDSCs represent ~ 3% of splenocytes in healthy mice compared with ~ 20% in tumor-bearing mice [ ]. This expansion is followed by continuous production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), NO, and anti-inflammatory cytokines [ ]. In turn, soluble factors such as GM-CSF and G-CSF released from the tumor microenvironment further prevent MDSC normal differentiation into mature myeloid cells. These immunosuppressive immature myeloid cells subsequently contribute to a tumor-driven microenvironment that promotes tumor growth and dissemination, and most importantly limits the response to immune-based therapies.
The detailed characterization of MDSCs and their subsets has extensively been reviewed [ ]. In brief, two major MDSC subsets have been identified based on their phenotypic and morphological features: polymorphonuclear, or PMN-MDSCs (CD11bpos, Ly6Gpos, Ly6Clo) and monocytic, or M-MDSCs (CD11bpos, Ly6Gneg, Ly6Chi) [ , ]. Studies in mice suggested that PMN-MDSCs and M-MDSCs have distinct functional specialization and localization. PMN-MDSCs, which are predominantly detected in peripheral lymphoid organs, have modest immune suppressive activity, and only elicit antigen-specific T-cell tolerance. On the other hand, M-MDSCs that predominate in tumors are immune suppressive regardless of antigen specificity and can further differentiate into tumor-associated macrophages [ , , ]. Human MDSCs are generally defined as CD3neg, CD19neg, CD56neg, CD11bpos, CD33pos, and HLA-DRneg [ ]. In humans, PMN-MDSCs (CD14neg CD15pos CD66pos) and M-MDSCs (CD14pos CD15neg CD66neg) have been identified in blood of patients with a variety of cancers. In addition, a group of more phenotypically immature MDSCs termed ‘early stage MDSC’ (eMDSCs) have been described in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells [ ]. A study has suggested that the human monocytic subset occurs in equivalent proportions in both spleen and peripheral blood, while the polymorphonuclear subset is expanded in the spleen relative to peripheral blood samples [ ]. M-MDSCs were initially thought to have a more prominent role in tumor-associated immune suppression than PMN-MDSCs, but recent studies showed that different subpopulations of MDSCs may be differentially dominant depending on the specific type of tumor [ , ]. The phenotypic and compartmental heterogeneity of MDSCs, therefore, necessitates the development of multiple strategies to counteract their immunosuppressive effects; targeting only one MDSC subset, or focusing solely on the intratumoral population is unlikely to lead to therapeutic benefit.
While MDSCs share morphology with immune cells such as neutrophils and monocytes, they are functionally and phenotypically distinct. PMN-MDSCs, compared to neutrophils, have reduced expression of CD16 and CD62L and increased expression of Arg1, Cd11b, and CD66b [ , ]. Neutrophils have high phagocytic activity and are short-lived after activation, whereas MDSCs have high ROS-mediated immune suppression activity and can persist for an extended period [ ]. Although MDSCs have distinct features, the lack of effective markers distinguishing them in tumors impedes attempts to develop therapeutic interventions. Therefore, the presence of MDSCs can only be evaluated by ex vivo T-cell suppression assays. Because of MDSC phenotype and function change in response to activated T cells or a local inflammatory milieu, it has been difficult to define markers predictive for their immune suppressive properties [ ].
MDSC-mediated immune suppression
MDSC induced suppression of the adaptive and innate immune systems
MDSCs utilize multiple mechanisms targeting the effector functions of cells involved in both the innate and adaptive immune responses to suppress anti-tumor immunity [ ]. In M-MDSCs, both iNOS and Arg1 are upregulated, whereas only iNOS is upregulated in the proinflammatory M1 macrophage subset and Arg1 upregulated in the anti-inflammatory M2 subset. Both iNOS and Arg1 catabolize l -arginine, resulting in arginine starvation and T-cell suppression. l -Arginine starvation downregulates CD3 ζ-chain in TCR complexes and causes cell cycle arrest of antigen-activated T cells [ ]. MDSCs also block T-cell activation by sequestering cysteine, an essential amino acid for T-cell activation [ ].
MDSCs are involved in the generation of oxidative stress, which perturbs T-cell function. This occurs primarily by upregulation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase (NOX2) to generate ROS, which together with the iNOS product NO, forms peroxynitrite [ ]. Peroxynitrite produced by MDSCs during direct contact with T cells results in nitration of the TCR and CD8 molecules, which alters the TCR-CD3 complex, diminishes the interaction between TCR and CD8, and renders them unresponsive to antigen-specific stimulation [ ]. Interestingly, the impacted T cells remain responsive to antigen-specific stimuli. In addition to directly suppressing tumor-specific T cells, MDSCs also mediate effects on other immune cells. MDSCs interact with Tregs during tumor progression and promote their development via the secretion of IL-10 and TGF-β [ ]. MDSCs promote the expansion of Tregs by presentation of tumor-specific antigen in an Arg1-dependent manner, and independent of TGF-β availability [ ]. The secretion of IL-10 by MDSCs also downregulates IL-12 transcription in tumoricidal M1 macrophages, promotes the M2 macrophage polarization [ ], and inhibits IL12 production in DCs [ ]. MDSCs inhibit NK-cell cytotoxicity and IFN-γ secretion though expression of membrane-bound TGF-β1 [ ]. MDSCs in melanoma patients impair DC maturation, inhibiting their ability to take up antigen, migrate, and induce T-cell IFNγ production [ ].
Intratumoral MDSCs
Historically, studies have focused on the immune suppressive properties of MDSCs from spleen and blood; however, more recent work has concentrated on the localization-dependent behavior of the phenotypically and functionally distinct intratumoral MDSCs [ ]. Whether MDSCs mediate antigen-specific or antigen non-specific suppression of T-cell responses is an open question, since T cells in the peripheral blood of patients with cancer remain responsive to viral and bacterial insult. Indeed, murine MDSCs from prostate tumor tissue can inhibit T-cell function, whereas those isolated from peripheral tissues (spleens and liver) in the same prostate tumor model are not suppressive [ ]. It is postulated that MDSC-mediated immunosuppression in peripheral lymphoid organs is mainly antigen-specific, whereas intratumoral MDSCs induce T-cell tolerance regardless of antigen specificity. Secretion of IL-6 and NO from intratumoral MDSCs has been shown to induce stem cell characteristics in breast cancer cells through STAT3 activation and Notch signaling [ ]. Peripheral blood MDSCs stimulated with specific antigens can cause antigen-specific immune suppression; CD8+ T-cell function is inhibited via the release of cytotoxic ROS, independent of IFN-γ production by T cells. This is mediated by cell–cell contact through integrins CD11b, CD18, and CD29 [ , ]. MDSCs may also function as tolerogenic antigen presenting cells by taking up and presenting antigens to tumor-specific Tregs to mediate antigen-specific Treg induction [ ].
Tumor environment-driven MDSC development and potential targets
Tumors mediate the development of MDSCs mainly through soluble factors, which can be categorized into two groups based on their effects on different MDSC developmental stages. One group of growth factors produced by tumors regulates the expansion of immature myeloid cells while inhibiting their maturation. The other group of factors, mainly proinflammatory cytokines produced by activated T cells and tumor-associated stromal cells, regulate the activation of immature myeloid cells into MDSCs. The expansion, activation, and regulatory factors are closely connected, overlapping, and sometimes governed by the same signaling pathways (Table 1 ). Studies of the mechanisms through which tumor environments and infiltrating MDSCs interact have uncovered potential novel therapeutic targets.
Table 1 Factors and pathways that regulate tumor-associated MDSCs Tumor-associated factors Signaling pathways involved Models Impacts on MDSCs Refs. PGE2 COX2 Breast cancer Arg1 and iNOS induction [ ] GM-CSF STAT5 Breast cancer Anti-apoptosis [ ] G-CSF n/a Breast cancer Expansion and infiltration [ , ] IL-6 STAT3 Lung cancer Expansion [ ] HGF STAT3 n/a Expansion [ ] Exosomal Hsp72 STAT3 Lymphomas Expansion [ ] Exosomal Hsp70 STAT3 Renal cell carcinoma Expansion [ ] TNF-a NF-κB Breast cancer iNOS expression [ ] IL-1β IL-1RI/NF-κB n/a Expansion and migration [ ] IFN-γ STAT1 Colon cancer Activation [ ] IL-4 STAT6 Colon cancer Arg1 induction [ , ] IL-13 STAT6 n/a Arg1 induction [ , ] CCL2 n/a Colon cancer Infiltration [ ] VEGF VEGFR-2 n/a Infiltration/inhibited maturation [ , ] Exosomal mRNA n/a n/a Activation [ ] S100A8/A9 STAT3/ NF-κB Lymphoma and mammary carcinomas Expansion/infiltration [ , ] Hypoxia HIF-1α n/a PD-L1 induction [ ] CXCL5 n/a Skin and eye melanocytes Infiltration [ ] SDF1 CXCR4 Mammary carcinomas Infiltration [ ] IL-6 / GM-CSF CCR5 Melanoma Infiltration [ ] TGF-β mTOR/HIF-1α NSCLC CD39 + CD73 + MDSC [ ] PGD2 n/a acute promyelocytic leukemia M-MDSC activation [ ] Semaphorin 4D n/a HNSCC MDSC differentiation [ ] Galectin-3 n/a Lewis lung cancer Infiltration [ ] SDF1 stromal cell-derived factor 1
Targets involved in MDSC expansion
The search for the critical factors and signaling pathways governing the expansion of MDSCs has identified varied and tumor-type-dependent tumor-derived factors. Most of these trigger signaling pathways in MDSCs that converge on the STAT3 signaling molecule that is involved in cell survival, proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, and have been frequently implicated in immune cell functionality [ ]. Factors involved in STAT3 signaling-mediated murine MDSC expansion include but are not limited to GM-CSF, G-CSF, IL-6, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), exosomal Hsp70, exosomal Hsp72, and S100A8/A9 [ , , , , ]. Recently, STAT3 activation has been identified in regulating estrogen-mediated expansion of human bone marrow-derived M-MDSC and PMN-MDSC from lung cancer patients [ ]. STAT3 signaling is also potentially involved in mediating the immunosuppressive function of PMN-MDSCs from both peripheral blood and bone marrow of patients with precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia [ ]. Although various MDSC inhibition or depletion approaches are often associated with STAT3 downregulation [ ], direct STAT3 targeting treatments in mice are not completely successful, partly due to alternative MDSC survival pathways adopted upon STAT3 ablation [ , ]. Moreover, PMN-MDSCs and M-MDSCs show different sensitivity to STAT3-targeted treatments, with the strongly suppressive M-MDSCs being more resistant [ , ].
The proinflammatory factor prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has a number of effects on MDSC development and activity that provide the link between inflammation and the immunosuppressive tumor environment, both of which facilitate malignant transformation and tumor progression. PGE2—a lipid synthesized by cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) in tumor, stromal, and infiltrating myeloid cells—inhibits cytotoxic T-cell activity and promotes tumor growth [ , ]. PGE2 receptors are present on MDSCs, and PGE2 induces the generation of MDSCs from mouse bone marrow stem cells in vitro, whereas PGE2 receptor antagonists block such differentiation [ ]. Similarly, in MDSCs harvested from cancer patients, disruption of the COX2/PGE2 feedback loop using COX2 inhibitors or PGE2 receptor antagonists reduces MDSC-associated suppressive factor production and CTL inhibition [ ]. Not only does PGE2 promote the differentiation of recruited BM-derived cells into MDSCs, it may also redirect mature resident monocytes into MDSCs. The presence of PGE2 and COX2 activator during the early stages of DC development suppresses the differentiation of human monocytes into functional DCs, and trans-differentiates DC progenitors into M-MDSCs with full CTL suppressive function [ ].
Other potential targets include the chemokine-signaling axes that attract MDSCs to the tumor sites. In samples from colorectal patients, C-C motif chemokine ligand-15 (CCL15)-C-C motif chemokine receptor-1 (CCR1) axis signaling attracts CCR1 + MDSCs to the invasion front and contributes to cancer progression [ ]. The C-X-C motif chemokine ligands CXCL15, CXCL2, and CXCL5 have also been documented to attract and expand C-X-C motif chemokine receptor CXCR2 + MDSCs in cancer patients [ , , ]. A CXCR2 antagonist improved the ability of the immune checkpoint inhibitor anti-PD1 mAb to reduce tumor weight and enhance CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell infiltration in tumor-bearing mice [ ]. This suggests that targeting MDSC infiltration may provide an opportunity to reprogram immune suppression.
Targets involved in MDSC activation
MDSCs that have infiltrated into tumor sites acquire an immune suppressive phenotype in response to inflammation-associated factors from activated T cells, tumor, and tumor stromal cells. These factors include IFN-γ, ligands for TLRs, IL-4, and TGFβ, etc. The immune suppressive phenotype of MDSCs is highly dependent on the particular tumor environment. In the absence of tumor-derived factors in vitro and after adoptive transfer to a tumor-free host in vivo, tumor-derived MDSCs adopt normal myeloid differentiation and mature into myeloid cells [ ]. Conversely, the normal differentiation of immature myeloid cells is blocked in the presence of tumor-conditioned medium or in tumor-bearing hosts [ ]. Furthermore, splenic MDSCs subjected to the tumor-associated hypoxic environment converted into non-specific suppressors enriched in M-MDSCs and preferentially differentiated into tumor-associated macrophages [ ].
IFNs are critical mediators of immunosurveillance and are involved in both innate and adaptive anti-tumor immune responses. In conjunction with LPS stimulation, IFN-γ inhibits PMN-MDSC differentiation into DCs and enhances MDSC-driven, NO-mediated T-cell suppression [ ]. Removal of STAT-1 mediated IFN-γ signaling in STAT1 knockout mice caused MDSCs to lose the ability to inhibit T-cell activation, as iNOS and Arg1 activity were no longer upregulated [ ]. In addition, blocking IFN-γ secretion by T cells inhibits iNOS upregulation in MDSCs and abrogates immune suppression [ , ]. Although IFN-γ is required for the suppressive function of both PMN-MDSCs and M-MDSCs, only M-MDSCs rely on STAT1 for the production of IFN-γ-mediated NO [ ].
Other proinflammatory cytokines frequently implicated in MDSC activation are macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α. Incubation of PBMCs in the presence of GM-CSF plus either IL-6 or IL-1β, PGE2, TNF-α, or VEGF is sufficient to generate CD33+ cells with the same immune suppressive phenotype as human MDSCs, which are characterized by the upregulation of iNOS, TGF-β, NOX2, VEGF, and Arg1 [ ]. In patients with renal cell carcinoma, the level of IL-1β is positively correlated with parenchymal PMN-MDSCs, and anti-IL-1β mAb decreased PMN-MDSCs in tumors, and delayed tumor growth [ ]. An in vitro study on samples from late-stage melanoma patients showed that MIF is required for human MDSC ROS generation and antigen-independent T-cell suppression [ ]. Inhibition of MIF reduced PGE2 production in human MDSCs and reverted immunosuppressive MDSCs to an immune-stimulatory DC-like phenotype [ ].
In MDSCs, both TLR ligands and TNF-α activate the NF-κB signaling pathway to release immune suppressive factors. In myeloid cells, TLRs play a prominent role in NF-κB activation via the upstream induction of myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88). TLR2 and MyD88 are both required for tumor-derived exosomes expressing heat shock protein 72 (Hsp72) to trigger STAT3 activation in MDSCs through autocrine production of IL-6 [ ]. Intact NF-κB and p38MAPK signaling is also needed for TNF-α-induced iNOS production in MDSCs [ ].
Hsp72 is not the only tumor-derived exosomal factor involved in activation and expansion of MDSCs. Exosomes themselves are endosome-derived membrane-bound microvesicles released ubiquitously by cells; they are mediators of cellular crosstalk under normal as well as pathologic conditions [ ]. While their biological relevance in cancer has yet to be fully elucidated, it is generally agreed that exosomes facilitate the transfer of bioactive molecules such as proteins, RNAs, and microRNAs. Tumor-derived exosomes have a negative effect on anti-tumor immune response as they induce MDSC expansion, promote T-cell apoptosis, and suppress NK-cell tumor cytotoxicity [ ]. In an in vitro murine mammary adenocarcinoma model, tumor-derived exosomes containing PGE2 and TGF-β were taken up by bone marrow myeloid cells, switching the differentiation of these cells to MDSCs [ ]. Exosomes released from acute myeloid leukemia patient primary tumor samples engage cMyc in MDSCs and induce proliferation via downstream effects on cell cycle proteins [ ]. In addition to the release of proteins, exosomes are also implicated in the transfer of mRNA. A recombinant mRNA reporter system was used to show that transplantation of Cre-expressing glioma and carcinoma tumor cells into mice leads to exosome release and subsequent uptake of exosome-derived Cre mRNA by MDSCs. The resultant MDSCs exhibited an enhanced immunosuppressive phenotype and altered miRNA profile compared to their non-recombinant counterparts [ ].
Metabolic targets of MDSCs
The tumor microenvironment possesses characteristics that contribute to various MDSC immune suppressive mechanisms, and also presents therapeutic opportunities. Hypoxia is usually associated with established tumors due to tumor cell compaction and the stromal barrier [ , ]. Hypoxia activates HIF-1α signaling by deactivating its inhibitor hypoxia-inducible factor prolyl hydroxylase (PHD) [ ]. HIF-1α also affects l -arginine metabolism in MDSCs, by inducing iNOS and Arg1 expression [ ], and has been recently implicated in MDSC suppressive function in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer [ ]. Exposure of murine splenic MDSCs to hypoxic environments (1% oxygen) converts these cells to non-specific suppressors and differentiates them into macrophages [ ]. The switch to antigen-non-specific phenotype is reproduced by exposing spleen MDSCs to a HIF-1α mimetic. This effect is abrogated by conditional HIF-1α deletion, indicating the governing role of HIF-1α signaling in MDSCs. In the hypoxic tumor microenvironment of a murine model, PD-L1 is upregulated in MDSCs [ ]. While intratumoral MDSCs express higher levels of PD-L1 and have a more potent suppressive phenotype than splenic MDSCs, hypoxia can upregulate PD-L1 in splenic MDSCs in tumor-bearing mice via the upregulation of HIF-1α.
Lactate buildup from aerobic glycolysis, a hallmark of the tumor microenvironment, is caused by rapid intracellular conversion of glucose to lactate during glycolysis and tumor cell upregulation of monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4), a lactate exporter [ ]. The released lactate can be taken up by MCTs expressed on neighboring cells, including immune cells, which then leads to the downstream transcription of inflammation-associated genes [ ]. Lactate influx leads to VEGF and Arg1 transcription in tumor-associated macrophages, presumably via activation of HIF-1α signaling [ , ]. Given the fact that lactate alone activates HIF-1α signaling and glycolysis, it is possible that environmental lactate, in addition to hypoxia, may play a role in MDSC function. Indeed, metabolic reprogramming towards glycolysis is seen to concomitantly increase with Arg1 activity in murine MDSCs [ ]. Glycolysis also protects MDSCs from apoptosis by scavenging excessive ROS, primarily through the antioxidant activity of the glycolytic metabolite phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) [ ]. The central role of glycolysis in MDSC activation has been shown by inhibiting glycolysis with 2-deoxyglucose, which inhibited M-MDSC differentiation. Whereas enhancing glycolysis with metformin had the opposite effect and reversed the depletion of M-MDSC number and activity caused by mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibition [ ]. Together, these studies highlight that tumor-derived lactate and glycolysis are both of interest as potential targets to counteract the immunosuppressive activity of MDSCs.
In addition to glycolysis, reprogramming lipid metabolism may also impact MDSC immune suppressive function. Biopsy samples from patients with colon, kidney, and breast ductal carcinoma all suggest that human peripheral blood and tumor-infiltrating MDSCs have an increased fatty acid uptake and expression of fatty acid oxidation (FAO) cycle enzymes carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT1) and mitochondrial trifunctional protein alpha subunit (HADHA) [ ]. Disruption of FAO by the small molecule etomoxir blocked immunosuppressive functions of murine MDSCs and enhanced the anti-tumor effect of adoptive T-cell therapy [ ]. Mechanistically tumor-derived cytokines, G-CSF and GM-CSF, and the subsequent signaling through STAT3 and STAT5 induce the expression of lipid transport receptors [ ]. The resultant increase in lipid uptake and oxidative metabolism accounts for MDSC activation. Inhibition of STAT3 or STAT5 signaling or genetic depletion of the fatty acid translocase CD36 reverses tumor-infiltrating MDSC activation and T-cell-dependent tumor growth [ ].
Strategies targeting MDSCs and their activity
Immune suppression has a crucial role in promoting tumor progression and is correlated with the failure of cancer immunotherapies. It is now apparent that successful cancer immunotherapy strategies will require the elimination of tumor microenvironment immune suppressive factors. The four ways to address MDSC immunosuppression are to differentiate MDSCs into mature myeloid cells, inhibit MDSC development and infiltration, interfere with MDSC activation, and to deplete MDSCs.
Differentiation of MDSCs into mature myeloid cells
Since the immune suppressive phenotype of MDSCs is associated with their immature state, forcing them to resume differentiation into mature myeloid cells diminishes their suppressive function. Agents that can promote MDSC differentiation include vitamin D 3 , vitamin A, CpG oligodeoxynucleotides, and IL-12 [ , ]. The vitamin A metabolite all- trans retinoic acid (ATRA), differentiates MDSCs into mature myeloid cells and effectively eliminates them in both cancer patients and tumor-bearing mice [ , ]. Mechanistically, ATRA upregulates glutathione synthase (GSS) through activating extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 signaling resulting in the accumulation of glutathione (GSH) and reduction of ROS levels in MDSCs from both mice and cancer patients [ ]. In vivo administration of ATRA dramatically reduces MDSCs, with concomitant improvement of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell-mediated, tumor-specific immune response. In a study on renal cell carcinoma patients, ATRA dramatically reduced the number of MDSCs and improved allogeneic T-cell response before IL-2 co-treatment [ ]. For patients with extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer, depletion of MDSCs by ATRA significantly enhanced the activity of a dendritic cell vaccine against p53 by increasing CD8+ T-cell level [ ]. In a recent randomized phase I/II pilot study, ATRA significantly decreased MDSC levels and increased CD8+ T-cell levels in melanoma patients undergoing ipilimumab therapy compared with patients who received ipilimumab treatment alone [ ].
Inhibition of MDSC development and infiltration
MDSC differentiation and expansion depends on several signaling pathways, among which the STAT3 and COX2/PEG2 feedback loop is well characterized. Strategies targeting those pathways are under active investigation. Curcumin and its derivatives are regulators of STAT3 signaling, and induce apoptosis in melanoma cells without having apparent impact on responses to immunostimulatory cytokines [ ]. Treatment of MDSCs with curcumin inhibits their expansion and secretion of IL-6, concomitantly with the deactivation of STAT3 and NF-κB signaling [ ]. Additional STAT3 targeting approaches include the use of STAT3 siRNA or antisense oligonucleotide to interfere with mRNA levels [ ]. However, small molecules targeting STAT3 have limited efficacy and broad side effects. Coupling CpG oligonucleotides with STAT 3 siRNA or decoy inhibitor allows targeting of STAT3 in selective cells, particularly myeloid cells and tumors [ ]. In this approach, synthetic Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) agonists are conjugated with a STAT3 siRNA or decoy STAT3 inhibitors, which allow the selective delivery of STAT3 inhibition into TLR9-positive-PMN-MDSC and -tumor cells. In a preclinical study, CpG-STAT3siRNA was internalized by TLR9-expressing PMN-MDSC from prostate cancer patients, and subsequently, STAT3 was silenced in those cells. This STAT3 inhibition abrogated the immunosuppressive effects of MDSC on CD8+ T-cell effector functions by reducing Arg-1 expression [ ].
One strategy to inhibit expansion and infiltration of MDSCs is to block local signaling in the tumor environment, for example, by targeting VEGF. While VEGF might promote tumor growth via multiple mechanisms including angiogenesis, evidence indicates that the anti-tumor effect of VEGF blockade is attributable to its inhibition of MDSCs. In a mouse metastatic renal carcinoma model, neutralization of VEGF by bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF-A mAb, decreased the CD11b + VEGFR1+ population of MDSCs in peripheral blood [ ]. Clinical studies confirmed that bevacizumab in combination with FOLFOX (leucovorin, fluorouracil, and oxaliplatin) chemotherapy could decrease PMN-MDSC number in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer [ ]. A similar decrease in PMN-MDSC level was observed in non-small-cell lung cancer patients following bevacizumab treatment [ ].
The feasibility of inhibiting tumor immunosuppression generated by COX2-mediated release of PGE2 has been shown in tumor-bearing mice. Dietary COX2 inhibitor celecoxib prevented the expansion of both MDSC subtypes and reduced PGE2 levels in this model [ ]. In addition, interfering with PGE-2-mediated MDSC expansion by targeting PGE2 binding to E-type prostanoid receptors (EPs) is another possible approach that has early clinical data. The novel and orally bioavailable small molecule EP4 antagonist, E7046 [ ], in combination with agents targeting Tregs, increased the ratio of CD8+ CTLs to Tregs and induced myeloid cell differentiation [ ]. Encouraging results from an ongoing clinical trial in advanced solid tumors showed that orally administered E7046 significantly increased tumor CD3+ and CD8+ T-cell infiltration and blood levels of the T-cell chemokine CXCL10 [ ]. However, the MDSC levels in these patients upon E7046 treatment were not reported.
Semaphorin 4D is a newly identified tumor-derived cytokine that induces MDSC expansion from monocytes [ ]. Preclinical studies demonstrated that mAb blockade of semaphorin 4D inhibited the expansion of MDSCs, which is associated with a shift of cellular phenotypes and tumor-derived cytokines toward a proinflammatory and anti-tumor milieu [ ]. Treatment with humanized IgG4 mAb targeting semaphorin 4D (VX15/2503) was well tolerated in a Phase I trial in patients with advanced refractory solid tumors [ ]. Investigation of VX15/2503 is actively planned in multiple clinical trials, in combination with avelumab for non-small-cell lung cancer, nivolumab, and ipilimumab for advanced melanoma and pancreatic and colorectal cancer [ , , ].
Finally, blocking chemokine CXCR2 signaling via anti-CXCR2 mAb treatment disrupts CXCR2-mediated MDSC tumor infiltration, and improves the efficacy of checkpoint blockade by anti-PD1 therapy [ ]. Other approaches inhibiting patient MDSC infiltration include galectin-3 inhibition by GR-MD-02 and CCR2 inhibition by CCX872 [ , , ].
Inhibition of MDSC function
Nutrient depletion and oxidative stress are two ways by which MDSCs silence effector T-cell function. Preclinical mouse models demonstrated that inhibitors of phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5) downregulated Arg1 and iNOS activity and limited MDSC suppressive activities in tumor-bearing mice [ , ]. Administration of the phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5) inhibitor sildenafil to tumor-bearing mice downregulated Arg1 and NOS2 expression. This resulted in smaller tumors with greater T-cell infiltration and activation than controls [ ]. Sildenafil also improved the anti-tumor efficacy of adoptive T-cell therapy in these mice. Moreover, it restored in vitro T-cell proliferation in PBMCs from patients suffering from multiple myeloma and head and neck cancer. The possible role for PDE5 inhibitors as immune adjuvants is under investigation in several clinical trials [ ]. Recently, a pilot trial of another PDE5 inhibitor, tadalafil, in patients with metastatic melanoma showed positive effects on CD8+ and CD4+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte activation, and improved clinical outcome [ ].
Nitration of TCRs by ROS, NO, and peroxynitrite leads to T-cell unresponsiveness. Drugs that can modulate oxidative stress have proven beneficial in controlling MDSC-mediated immune suppression in tumor-bearing mice. One such drug is nitroaspirin, which was developed by coupling a NO-releasing moiety to the conventional non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug aspirin to reduce its gastrointestinal toxicity. It has interesting properties such as ROS scavenging and suppression, inhibition of proinflammatory cytokine release, feedback inhibition of iNOS activity, and suppression of cancer cell proliferation. Orally administered NO-aspirin restores immune responses in tumor-bearing mice, increases the number and function of tumor-antigen-specific T cells, and potentiates the therapeutic effectiveness of cancer vaccination, which, otherwise, induces a weak immune response by itself and does not result in a significant anti-tumor activity [ ].
Targeting the critical molecules in the signaling pathways shared by tumors and MDSCs, such as AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), hypoxia-inducible factor 1-α (HIF-1α), and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), is also being actively investigated. Metformin has a broad impact on AMPKα and HIF-1α, which were critical for CD39 and CD73 expression in MDSCs [ ]. Metformin can directly reduce MDSC CD73/CD39-mediated suppressive functions. Encouragingly, in patients with ovarian cancer, metformin improved CD8+ T-cell functionality and increased overall survival [ ]. Pharmacologic targeting of the highly expressed PI3Kγ on MDSCs by IPI-549 has been shown to be beneficial in conjunction with immune checkpoint blocking antibodies [ ]. The efficacy of targeting PI3Kγ in promoting CTLs is being evaluated in a phase I clinical trial [ ]. PI3K-δ is an identified critical signaling molecule in Tregs, and duvelisib, the dual inhibitor of PI3K-δ and PI3K-γ, has been shown to promote the efficacy of immune checkpoint antibodies in a preclinical study [ ]. Duvelisib showed a synergistic anti-tumor effect when combined with anti-PD-1 and anti-OX40 treatment in the A20 B-cell lymphoma model, and this was associated with a strong reduction in Tregs, M2 macrophages, and MDSCs.
MDSC depletion
Several studies have reported that some cytotoxic anti-cancer agents, including paclitaxel, doxorubicin, trabectedin, gemcitabine, docetaxel, and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), may also activate the immune system via depletion of MDSCs [ , , ]. Gemcitabine and 5-FU both have been shown to specifically reduce the number of MDSCs in the spleens of animals engrafted with tumors while selectively preserving CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, NK cells, macrophages, and B cells [ , ]. Gemcitabine is currently being tested in multiple clinical trials for its ability to enhance immunotherapies including anti-PD1 therapy in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, and muscle invasive urothelial cancer [ , , ]. However, in a phase I trial combining gemcitabine with a cancer vaccine against p53 for patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer, the levels of MDSCs after gemcitabine treatment did not correlate with vaccine-induced response [ ]. It appears that the efficacy of gemcitabine is dependent on the types of combination treatment [ , , ], and may be complicated by the upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines such as GM-CSF associated with gemcitabine administration [ ]. On the other hand, gemcitabine in combination with immunotherapy targeting cytokine-induced killer cells decreased MDSC levels in patients with renal cell carcinoma and pancreatic cancer [ ]. More recently, a clinical trial showed that intravenous treatment of Omega 3 with gemcitabine reduced MDSC levels in palliative pancreatic patients, while gemcitabine alone had no significant impact. This reduction in MDSCs also correlated with enhanced PFS in patients [ ].
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have both anti-cancer and MDSC-targeting abilities. TKIs were designed to target various pathways that are critical for cancer cell survival, proliferation, differentiation, migration, and angiogenesis. In an in vitro model of induced MDSCs, several TKIs, including nilotinib, dasatinib, and sorafenib, could inhibit the early generation of MDSCs from mature human monocytes [ ]. The effect of nilotinib on MDSC levels in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia is now being investigated in a clinical trial [ ]. Ibrutinib is an irreversible inhibitor of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) and IL2-inducible T-cell kinase (ITK), and is in clinical use for the treatment of B-cell malignancies. Ibrutinib inhibited BTK phosphorylation in murine and human MDSCs, and inhibited the generation of both human MDSCs in vitro and murine MDSCs in vivo [ ]. Sunitinib is an oral inhibitor of VEGF-R1, VEGF-R2, PDGFR, KIT, and FLT3 with demonstrated anti-tumor activity in advanced renal cell carcinoma. Sunitinib treatment of patients with renal cell carcinoma was inversely correlated with MDSC and Treg levels and resulted in an increase in the number of NK cells, and activated and/or memory T cells in patient PBMCs [ ]. Due to the broad impact of TKIs on signaling pathways, it is important to note that their effects may not be restricted to MDSCs. Several studies showed that TKIs such as sorafenib and dasatinib also inhibited T cells and NK cells in a dose-dependent manner [ , ].
Antibodies against MDSC-specific markers would serve as an effective way to deplete MDSCs. To this end, anti-Gr-1 mAb was tested on tumor-bearing mice, and found to enhance CD8+ T-cell function and delay tumor progression in vivo [ ]. However, the efficacy of the anti-Gr1 mAb in MDSC depletion is strongly biased towards young tumor-bearing mice [ ]. Moreover, Gr-1 lacks specificity as it is also expressed on neutrophils, DCs, and subpopulations of lymphocytes and monocytes [ ]. DS-8273a is a mAb against TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) death receptor R2. In a clinical trial with 16 patients with advanced solid tumors, DS-8273a demonstrated selective depletion of MDSC without affecting effecting mature myeloid cells and lymphoid cells [ ]. A new peptibody specifically targeting MDSCs has been successfully identified via a competitive peptide phage display platform. Intravenous injection of this mouse MDSC-binding peptide-Fc fusion recombinant protein completely depleted both PMN-MDSCs and M-MDSCs from blood, spleens, and tumors in tumor-bearing mice without affecting proinflammatory immune cells, and inhibited tumor xenograft growth compared to controls and Gr-1 mAb treatment. The peptibody targets are thought to be the S100 family of proteins expressed on the surface of MDSCs [ ]. We are actively applying a similar approach to developing therapeutic peptides or antibodies against novel targets on human MDSCs.
Conclusion
The tumor microenvironment is characterized by an immunologic milieu that fosters immune evasion and which involves a complex network to support tumor growth. It is now apparent that successful cancer immunotherapies will only be possible with a strategy that involves the mitigation of suppressive factors in the tumor microenvironment. MDSCs are a critical element of the immune suppressive niche described in cancer and directly regulate cells of both the adaptive and innate immune systems. There are encouraging data showing that various strategies to eliminate MDSCs restore the immune response in tumor-bearing mice and greatly potentiate the anti-tumor effect of vaccine therapies. However, significant gaps in our current knowledge need to be filled before therapies directed at MDSCs can be translated into clinical practice. Central to this effort will understand the complex heterogeneity of MDSCs, In particular, further work potentially combining high-throughput proteomics and genomics technologies is needed to identify specific markers for MDSCs in human cancer models.