Introduction
Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the breast accounts for about 20% of newly diagnosed breast cancer in the era of mammographic screening [ , ]. DCIS has been thought to be a non-obligatory precursor to invasive breast carcinoma; therefore, it is assumed previously that treating screen-detected DCIS would naturally decrease the incidence of invasive carcinoma. However, epidemiological studies showed that the diagnosis of female invasive breast cancer has not decreased [ ]. Duffy et al. reported that screen-detected DCIS per 1000 women screened from 2003 to 2007 ranges from 1.57 to 1.65 while screen-detected invasive carcinoma ranges from 5.44 to 5.50 [ ]. The incidence of female breast cancer is stable since 1980’s but the female breast cancer death rate dropped 39% from 1989 to 2015 owing to advances in early detection and treatment [ ].
Pathologically, DCIS is defined as malignant proliferation of the epithelial cells confined by the basement membrane of the breast duct, also referred to as non-invasive breast carcinoma [ ]. Prior to the surge of mammographic screening, DCIS was detected as a palpable mass and comprised 1–2% of the annual incidence of breast cancer [ ]. Most DCIS lesions today are identified as screen-detected asymptomatic calcifications that are surgically removed shortly after diagnosis. Therefore, the natural history of unresected DCIS is largely unknown. Several opportunistic observational studies on the natural progression of DCIS in the past were based on women whose DCIS lesions were missed by the reporting pathologist at the time of diagnosis, and were identified on retrospective review of large series of archived benign biopsies. These important studies reported the rate of development of invasive carcinoma as ranging from 14 to 50% [ ], at 10 to 40 years after the initial diagnosis of DCIS at the same quadrant of the breast [ , , ].
The design of clinical trials in the modern era (1980s onward) have applied the therapeutic principles used for invasive carcinoma to treat DCIS, and have achieved in-breast recurrence rates, of DCIS and invasive carcinoma combined, that range from 0.5 to 1% annually. However, these were based on concepts regarding DCIS that had emerged from the pre-mammography era, when DCIS was infrequent and usually discovered in association with invasive cancer, and mastectomy was the standard therapy. Since the advent of widespread mammography, and the resultant increase in DCIS, it has become clear that DCIS, in and of itself, is a non-lethal problem despite its heterogeneity in clinicopathological subtypes. Its main threat relates to the subsequent occurrence of invasive cancer, to which it is a non-obligate precursor. Despite this, the current treatment paradigm differs from that for invasive cancer only in that chemotherapy is not used. The lesion is widely excised (complete resection requiring mastectomy if the DCIS is extensive), followed by radiotherapy if the breast is preserved, and endocrine therapy if the DCIS is hormone receptor positive. The goal of endocrine therapy is to both reduce the risk of ipsilateral recurrence in the conserved breast, and to decrease the likelihood of new primary occurrence on either side. Following these principles, long-term mortality in large studies of DCIS populations is under 2% [ , ]. However, the burden of therapy (surgery, radiation, endocrine therapy) in this non-lethal condition is significant, prompting much discussion about the need to tailor therapy to the biology of the lesion. Thus concerns regarding overdiagnosis and overtreatment have directed clinical investigations in the present era. The present generation of clinical trials is focused on the identification of subgroups of DCIS patients who do not need the entire spectrum of current DCIS therapy because of a low risk of future problems; or who might benefit from targeted therapy because of the biology of their lesion. This review summaries the major past and current clinical trials of DCIS, and the likely trajectories of DCIS management in the near future.
Locoregional Therapy
Surgery
DCIS was usually treated with mastectomy until the 1980s, and this continues to be used in 2018. Approximately 20% of women with DCIS are advised to undergo it because the extent of the imaged lesion requires mastectomy to achieve complete resection. And an increasing number of young women opt for mastectomy in order to avoid future breast events on either side [ , ]. When the first randomized trial addressing DCIS therapy was designed in the 1980s (NSABP B-17), the demonstrated success of breast conserving surgery (BCS) for early invasive breast carcinoma, investigators thought it unnecessary to include a mastectomy arm. Instead they addressed the question of whether or not breast radiotherapy was beneficial following complete excision of DCIS [ ], with the assumption that if BCS is safe for women with invasive cancer [ ], it must be so for women with DCIS. Although there are no randomized clinical trials available to date to compare the efficacy of BCS to mastectomy in patients with pure DCIS, data from large registries such as SEER demonstrate excellent breast cancer specific survival (over 95% at 10 years) for treatment with mastectomy or breast conservation [ , , ]. The major determinants of breast cancer-specific mortality in the DCIS population are not mode of therapy, but young age and African ancestry [ ]. Although invasive recurrence risk is related to DCIS therapy, most subsequent invasive cancer are curable, and do not affect overall survival.
In the majority of DCIS patients (70–80%), the current standard therapy for DCIS begins with breast-sparing surgical excision of the tumor, with tumor-free resection margins. A recent consensus statement endorsed by ASCO, SSO, and ASTRO defined free margins as ≥2 mm distance between tumor and ink [ ]. This was based on an analysis of recurrence risk observed in retrospective studies where margin width has been defined and recurrence data are available [ ].
The surgical question for the present generation of clinical trials is whether any excision is required when the risk of invasive recurrence is estimated to be low. The most widely available indicator of low risk of recurrence is DCIS grade; the impact of grade has been assessed in SEER data, where 2% of 57,000 DCIS patients treated between 1988 and 2011 did not receive surgery [ ]. The 10-years survival was 98.5% for those whose lesions were resected, and 93.4% for those who did not receive surgery. The effect of surgery differed by grade, so that among women with low grade DCIS, the survival was equal with and without surgery (98.8 and 98.6%). This, and other similar studies which identify low risk patients mainly on the basis of grade and age, have led to clinical trials that are evaluating the safety of “active surveillance”: i.e. avoiding surgical resection altogether.
Breast Radiotherapy
Once breast radiation was established as a necessary component of breast-preserving therapy of invasive cancer, post-excision radiotherapy began to be applied to DCIS in a sporadic fashion [ ], and the NSABP B-17 trial was initiated in 1985 to evaluate this formally. Just over 800 patients with unifocal screen-detected DCIS were randomized to receive wide excision (also popularly known as lumpectomy) plus breast radiotherapy versus wide excision alone. The incidence of ipsilateral DCIS recurrence was reduced from 15.4 to 9% and the incidence of invasive carcinoma recurrence was halved (19.6 to 10.7%) with the addition of radiation after 15 years of follow-up [ ]. There were no differences in the rate of distant events or overall survival with the addition of radiation [ , , ].
Two similar Phase III trials were launched in Europe from the mid 1980s to the 1990s, addressing the same question, conducted by the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC 10853), each enrolling about 1000 patients. These too showed fewer in-breast events following radiotherapy [ ], with a relative risk reduction of 47% in women at 10-years in the EORTC trial [ ] and almost two-thirds in SweDCIS (22 to 7% at 5.2 years) [ ]. All three radiotherapy trials showed no difference in contralateral breast cancer, distant metastasis, and death between groups. A similar protection against in-breast recurrence with the use of radiotherapy was observed in the UK, Australia and New Zealand (UK/ANZ trial) which utilized a 2 × 2 factorial design randomizing 1701 patients with screen-detected DCIS to evaluate the efficacy of excision alone, with radiotherapy, with tamoxifen, or with both modalities added. Radiotherapy was found to reduce the incidence of ipsilateral invasive carcinoma (HR 0.45, p = 0.01) and DCIS (HR 0.36, p = 0.0004) [ ].
Despite this robust Level I evidence of the improved local control achieved with radiotherapy following excision, there is a widely-held opinion that a subset of DCIS patients derive a small-enough benefit from radiotherapy that it can be avoided [ , ]. This led to a single-arm observational study conducted by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG, E5194), to evaluate DCIS outcomes following excision with 3 mm margins (these were wider than used in prospective trials conducted up to that point). Eligible women were enrolled into two cohorts: those with low or intermediate grade, ≤2.5 cm DCIS, or a cohort with high grade, ≤1 cm DCIS. No radiation was allowed in this study. Tamoxifen use was encouraged but not mandated; and uptake by participants was 30% overall. The risk of developing any ipsilateral breast events increased through 12 years of follow-up without plateau [ ], and was 14.4% in the low-intermediate group at 12 years, and 24.6% in the high grade group. The rate of invasive recurrence at 12 years was 7.5 and 13.4% in the low-intermediate grade, and the high grade groups, respectively. A Phase III trial by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG 9804) randomized patients with low or intermediate-grade DCIS less than 2.5 cm with margins ≥3 mm (i.e. the lower risk cohort of E5194) to radiotherapy versus observation after wide excision. Tamoxifen use was optional, as in E5194, but uptake was substantially better in both arms, at about 62%. The trial was halted early for low accrual, but 7-years of follow up demonstrated significantly different local failure rates (0.9% in the RT arm versus 6.7% in the observation arm). No differences in disease-free and overall survival were noted. Thus the 5-years recurrence rates in the surgery-alone arm of RTOG 9804 and the comparable population of E5194 are similar at 5–7 years (6 and 7%), and RTOG 9804 further demonstrates that even in women with low-intermediate grade DCIS, the relative benefit of post-excisional radiotherapy is substantial, even though absolute risk of recurrence is low [ ].
Biologic Assays to Stratify Risk and Aid Selection for Avoidance of Radiotherapy
To date, no clinical trial has successfully identified a subset of patients who would not benefit from post-operative radiotherapy. However, the lack of a survival benefit and the growing consensus regarding the importance of patient-centered care and shared decision-making has led to several new directions in the management of DCIS patients, particularly those with low-risk lesions. These include the development of clinical tools to facilitate decision-making on whether to recommend radiation therapy, and the initiation of ongoing clinical trials, discussed below. The first DCIS prognostic assay to reach the market was derived from the 21-gene recurrence score for invasive cancer patients. The gene set was pared down to 15 genes in exploratory analyses that included women with DCIS and concomitant invasion, and was validated in the population of E5194 [ ]. The DCIS-score was associated with the risk of developing ipsilateral breast events (IBE) and the 10-years risks of developing an IBE were 10.6%, 26.7 and 25.9%, respectively, for low, intermediate, and high-risk groups. The risks for an invasive IBE were 3.7%, 12.3%, and 19.2%, respectively. Further validation of the prognostic value of the DCIS-Score has come from subsequent studies [ ], and risk stratification appears to improve with the addition of lesion size and age [ ] but so far there is no suggestion that this score also predicts benefit from radiotherapy.
A second prognostic score is based on data from a case-control study nested in large cohort of DCIS patients in California [ ]. Here, a number of molecular markers were evaluated, based on known biology; three of these emerged as significant predictors of recurrence risk in the final model (COX-2, Ki67, and p16). Subsequently, an expanded full marker set includes indicators of hormone sensitivity (progesterone receptor and FOXA1); stress response (COX2 and SIAH2); HER2, Ki67 and p16, along with clinical pathologic features (age, size, margin status and palpability). This was tested in the SweDCIS study population and presented at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium 2017 [ ]. The intriguing feature of this tool is that it appears to provide predictive information regarding radiotherapy benefit; when the score is low, the hazard ratio (HR) for invasive recurrence is not significantly altered in women who received radiotherapy. In the high-score group however, the HR with radiotherapy use is significantly reduced (HR 0.24, 95% CI 0.08–0.76). If this score is further validated and the discrimination for radiotherapy benefit persists, it will potentially improve selection of women who would benefit from post-excisional radiation for DCIS.
Clinical Trials Addressing Utility of Locoregional Therapy
As concerns regarding overdiagnosis and overtreatment in DCIS mount, three current clinical trials focus on low risk patients who are expected to derive small benefits from locoregional therapy or even any therapy (summarized in Table 1 ). The most recently opened is the COMET trial, a randomized comparison of women with low risk DCIS assigned to standard-of-care management with excision, radiation, and endocrine therapy; or to active surveillance (semiannual mammograms) [ ]. The trial will enroll 1200 women, older than 40 at the time of diagnosis, with hormone receptor positive, grade 1–2 DCIS without necrosis. Patients are randomized to receive guideline concordant care (GCC) including wide excision with or without radiation plus endocrine therapy or to active surveillance (AS) including diagnostic mammogram every 6 months for 5 years plus endocrine therapy. The primary outcome is to compare the portion of patients in the GCC group who are diagnosed with ipsilateral invasive carcinoma to the patients in the AS group after 2 years of follow-up. The COMET trial will test the hypothesis that women over 40, with “low risk” DCIS will not develop invasive cancer at a rate that is unacceptable or jeopardizes survival. A number of biological assays are planned, and should help refine the selection of women who do well without locoregional therapy. Table 1 Summary of major clinical trials design evaluating standard therapy versus observation for the treatment of DCIS Clinical trial parameters COMET 02926911 LORIS LORD 02492607 Initiation 2017 2014 2017 Sample size 1200 932 1240 Age ≥40 ≥46 ≥45 Screen-detected Yes Yes Yes Hormone Receptor status positive Any Any Grade 1/2 Non-high grade 1 Treatment GCC a vs. AS b GCC vs. AS GCC vs. AS Guideline concordant care Excision ± RT c + ET d Excision ± RT c + ET d Excision ± RT c ± ET d Active surveillance Semiannual Mammogram Annual mammogram Annual mammogram Endpoint Ipsilateral invasive cancer over 2 years Ipsilateral invasive cancer over 10 years Ipsilateral invasive cancer or Grade 2–3 DCIS over 10 years a Guideline concordant care b Active surveillance c Radiation therapy d Endocrine therapy
Two European Phase III trials are recruiting women with “low risk” DCIS: the LORIS trial was developed at the University of Birmingham, and the LORD trial is run by the EORTC. They preceded the opening of the COMET trial, and are similarly structured (also summarized in Table 1 ). They have longer follow-up intervals and the primary endpoint of ipsilateral invasive breast cancer is to be measured over a 10-years time-frame. The minimum age at entry is slightly higher age limit (over 45 at the time of diagnosis); the DCIS must be asymptomatic, screen-detected, non-high grade; ER status is not specified [ , ]. Again, the hypothesis relates to non-inferiority of active monitoring to standard therapy. If this equivalence is demonstrated, particularly if the three trials show concordant results, it will provide powerful evidence for the premise that some DCIS patients do not require multi-modality therapy. The wealth of biomarker research that is planned around these trials will enable the validation of existing prediction models, and the discovery of new ones, to add further precision to present risk estimation parameters.
Medical Therapy: Past, Current, and Future
The rationale for medical therapy in women with DCIS is two-fold: to reduce risk of local recurrence of the DCIS lesion, and to reduce risk of new breast primary tumors elsewhere in the same breast, or on the other side. Thus it is a rationale with local (breast-specific) benefits, and no expectation that it will reduce the occurrence of metastases. Following the demonstration (in trials of post-operative adjuvant therapy) that tamoxifen decreased risk of new primary tumors in the contralateral breast [ ], this concept was then applied to evaluate the benefits of tamoxifen in patients with DCIS after completion of loco-regional therapy.
Endocrine Therapy
The NSABP B-24 tested the addition of tamoxifen to RT in women undergoing BCS for DCIS. Just over 1800 patients were randomized to receive tamoxifen or placebo following completion of locoregional therapy [ ]. The design did not require ER testing of DCIS lesions, therefore tamoxifen assignment in the experimental arm was not guided by ER status of the lesion. The cumulative incidence of all invasive breast-cancer events at 5 years in the Tamoxifen group was 4.1%. The ipsilateral breast events were 2.1%, the contralateral breast events were 1.8%, and metastases to the regional or distant sites were 0.2%. Tamoxifen was found to be effective in reducing the risk of ipsilateral and contralateral invasive cancer and DCIS [ ]. Some years later, Allred et al. analyzed the ER status of the NSABP B-24 patients and reported a significant decrease in breast cancer events after 10 years of follow up which was almost exclusive to the ER positive lesions [ ]; thus current practice is to recommend tamoxifen to patients with ER positive DCIS. Fifteen-years follow-up results of the B-24 study show that the rate of ipsilateral breast events was 16.6% in the placebo group and 13.2% in the tamoxifen group while the contralateral breast events were reduced from 8.1 to 4.9% respectively [ ]. The value of tamoxifen therapy in addition to RT was also tested in the UK/ANZ trial [ ]; at 12 years of follow-up, tamoxifen reduced recurrent ipsilateral DCIS (0·70, 0·51–0·86; p = 0·03) and contralateral tumors (0·44, 0·25–0·77; p = 0·005), but showed no effect on ipsilateral invasive disease (0·95, 0·66–1·38; p = 0·8).
More recently, following the successful use of aromatase inhibitors for adjuvant therapy in postmenopausal women with early-stage invasive breast cancer [ ], anastrozole has been tested against tamoxifen in the post-local therapy DCIS setting (NSABP B-35). This trial compared 5 years of treatment with Anastrozole versus Tamoxifen for reducing subsequent occurrence of breast cancer in postmenopausal patients with DCIS from 2003 to 2006, and found overall equivalence between the two agents. However, in a pre-planned analysis stratified by age, anastrozole use resulted in some improvement in breast cancer free interval in younger postmenopausal patients [ ]. At the same time, the International Breast Cancer Intervention Study-II DCIS (IBIS-II DCIS), a randomized, double blinded trial from 2003 to 2012, compared the efficacy of Anastrozole to Tamoxifen in 2980 post-menopausal women with hormone receptor positive DCIS who had breast conserving therapy [ ]. No significant difference in efficacy was reported in this study in 2016 but long-term follow-up results are awaited.
Recent and on-Going Early Phase Trials
While adjuvant endocrine therapy has been proven to reduce the risk of both non-invasive and invasive recurrence in patients with DCIS, the role of neoadjuvant endocrine therapy is an area of active investigation. It is hypothesized that anti-estrogen therapy alters or halts disease progression. The goals are to increase breast conservation and potentially to avoid surgery and radiation all together. Chen et al. studied the pathologic and biologic response of neoadjuvant endocrine therapy in patients with ER positive DCIS. Forty-One patients, median age 53, with mammography detected DCIS were randomized to receive 3 months of Tamoxifen if premenopausal or Letrozole if postmenopausal, followed by surgery. Significant pathologic alterations possibly related to reduction in proliferation were observed [ ]. Hwang et al. have now completed a phase II single-arm clinical trial studying the MRI detected volume changes of ER positive DCIS in postmenopausal women after 6 months of neoadjuvant therapy with Letrozole. The results were presented at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in December 2017 [ ], and showed that there was a 33% reduction in DCIS volume measured by MRI following 3 months of letrozole therapy, which did not increase at 6 months of therapy. Among 68 participants with histopathologic data, upstaging to invasive cancer occurred in 8% of the excision specimens, and no residual DCIS was present in 13% of specimens. The upstage rate is lower than expected (most studies report 15% or higher), while the absence of residual disease is not very different from the previously reported rate of about 10% [ ]. These data are suggestive of a reduction in disease-burden, but cannot be considered definitive given the single-arm design. They do aid the design of future trials by showing that women with DCIS are willing to delay surgery for 6 months, while being treated with an endocrine agent.
Since endocrine therapy uptake by DCIS patients has been low [ , ] efforts are underway to improve tolerability and acceptance of these agents. Alternative dosing approaches include lower doses of oral tamoxifen [ ], intermittent therapy with aromatase inhibitors [ ], and transdermal delivery through breast skin [ , ]. The goal is to achieve the same therapeutic benefit but reduce the systemic side effects. A gel formulation of the active tamoxifen metabolite 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) was tested against oral tamoxifen in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase II trial in 26 women with DCIS. The treatment was given for 6–10 weeks prior to DCIS resection. The study results suggest that topical 4-OHT reaches sufficient concentrations in the breast to have a biologic effect, but plasma levels are far lower than those seen with oral tamoxifen use. Thus, transdermal delivery promises to avoid first-pass hepatic metabolism with its resultant activation of the coagulation cascade, and cause less systemic toxicity because of low circulating levels. The promising results of this study have led to a larger, confirmatory, Phase II trial which is ongoing (NCT02993159) and will recruit 100 women across six sites in the United States.
Anti-HER 2 Therapy
HER2 positive DCIS appears to be associated with a higher risk of invasive recurrence [ , , ]. Earlier studies suggested higher rates of HER2 positivity in DCIS lesions than in invasive cancer, but with more refined assays and central laboratory testing, the frequency of HER2 positive DCIS seems to be in the range of 35% [ ]. The impact of HER2 overexpression on recurrence risk varies across studies [ , ]. Nevertheless, several HER-2 based strategies are being actively pursued, with encouraging results.
Radiosensitization of DCIS Lesions with Trastuzumab
Preclinical data indicate that a short course of trastuzumab therapy renders HER2 positive cells more sensitive to radiotherapy, with no effect on normal cells [ ]. NSABP B-43 (NCT00769379) is a phase III randomized multicenter clinical trial, initiated in 2008, which compares whole breast irradiation (WBI) alone with WBI given concurrently with two doses of trastuzumab in women with HER2-positive DCIS following BCS. The primary goal is to evaluate whether the addition of Herceptin will reduce in-breast tumor recurrence. Preliminary results regarding HER2 positivity measured in a central laboratory showed that the HER2-positive rate for pure DCIS among patients undergoing BCS is 35%, significantly lower than the previously reported rate [ ].
Neoadjuvant anti-HER2 therapy could potentially increase breast conservation rate and even reduce recurrence rates in HER2 positive DCIS. A pilot study of pre-operative trastuzumab completed at MD Anderson Cancer Center enrolled 12 patients who received trastuzumab, and 12 untreated (non-randomized) concurrent controls. The authors did not observe significant differences in proliferative or apoptotic changes, but did observe augmented antibody-dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) in all treated patients [ ]. A pre-operative window trial of lapatinib therapy was initiated (NCT00555152), where 22 patients were treated with 1G of lapatinib for 2–6 weeks prior to surgery. The primary endpoint was an anticipated decrease in cell proliferation, and secondary endpoints addresses the safety and tolerability of therapy. The treatment appears reasonably well tolerated, but results on cell proliferation are not yet available.
HER2 Vaccines
Several are under investigation for DCIS patients. The notion of HER2-directed vaccination is based on data from invasive cancer studies that revealed the presence of HER2 antibodies in the sera of women with HER2 overexpressing tumors, along with improved survival of such patients [ ]. Additionally, immune responses identified early in the course of disease, can diminish as disease progresses and are eventually not identifiable [ ]. Thus early disease states such as DCIS appear to be opportune moments in the evolution of breast cancer, for immunologic intervention. Recent data on the prognostic importance of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes adds weight to the idea that immunogenic tumors are better suppressed by the host, and strategies that increase the immunogenicity of tumor cells would therefore be helpful. Three approaches are currently under investigation, that have a bearing on the therapy of HER2 positive DCIS. One is a HER2 peptide-pulsed dendritic cell (DC1) vaccine that is engineered to produce a strong anti-HER2 immune response and sensitizes both CD4 pos and CD8 pos T cells (NCT00107211; NCT02336984;). Published trials of this vaccine include one which enrolled HER2 positive DCIS patients and tested intra-lesional against intra-nodal injection, or both, and compared immune and clinical responses to the method of injection ( N = 19, 19, and 16 in the three groups, respectively) [ ]. The safety of the vaccine was not affected by the delivery route, and about 80% of participants displayed an increased immune response post-injection, regardless of the delivery route. The authors also examined rates of pathologic complete response (pCR) in the three groups. Altogether, 12/42 evaluable patients (28%) had no residual DCIS in the surgical specimen, which is higher than the usually reported rate of around 10% in clinical practice, when no treatment is used between core needle biopsy and excision. However, the size of the trial and the lack of an untreated control group do not allow us to distinguish what fraction of patients experienced a “pCR” and what fraction simply had ablation of their DCIS lesion with core needle biopsy at the time of diagnosis. This work is now being continued in a neoadjuvant trial (NCT02336984) where the DC1 vaccine is combined with trastuzumab and pertuzumab, but enrollment for this appears to be halted at the moment.
A different approach to vaccination against HER2 positive DCIS has been taken by Mittendorf et al., where E75 (nelipepimut-S), an immunogenic peptide derived from the HER2 protein, has been combined with GM-CSF (sargramostim) to produce a vaccine they call NeuVax [ ]. This is currently being compared to administration of GM-CSF alone in patients with DCIS who are also HLA-A2 positive and undergo three vaccinations 2 weeks apart, prior to DCIS resection (NCT02636582). The primary objective is to quantitate CD8+ T cell response in the two groups, and secondary objectives include evaluations of safety and toxicity, other immune endpoints such as epitope spreading, and histological parameters including cell proliferation, apoptosis, and infiltration of the DCIS lesion with immune cells.
Another promising approach which appears likely to be applied to DCIS in the near future is that of a plasmid vaccine (WOKVAC) targeting antigens from three proteins: insulin like growth factor binding protein 2 (IGFBP2), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), and insulin like growth factor receptor-1 (IGF1R). All three are overexpressed in in pre-invasive and high risk breast lesions and are associated with progression to invasive breast cancer. These proteins are immunogenic and elicit both humoral and cellular immunity in breast cancer patients. WOKVAC has been designed to include extended sequences of the immunizing antigens that are predominantly associated with eliciting Type I immune responses. Type I immunity results in immune cells called T-cells secreting high levels of inflammatory cytokines (called Th1) that stimulate tumor destruction as well as the generation of cytotoxic T-cells that can directly kill the tumors. This vaccine is currently being tested in early phase trials of both HER2 negative and HER2 positive breast cancer. (NCT03384914 and NCT02780401).
Immune Checkpoint Blockade
Finally, a Phase I presurgical study at University of California San Francisco (PI Esserman) is recruiting patients with high risk DCIS to receive Pembrolizumab (NCT02872025). High-risk features include young age, palpable mass, hormone receptor negative, HER2 positive, or high grade DCIS. Patients with high risk features are given two intra-lesional injections of Pembrolizumab prior to standard therapy, with the primary goal of determining the maximum tolerated dose and feasibility of intralesionally administered pembrolizumab. Of particular interest is the fraction of patients who demonstrate an increase in intralesional CD8+ T cells (comparing treated to untreated participants), measured using multiplex immunofluorescence on FFPE tissue sections. This trial will identify the appropriate dose for a subsequent expansion cohort, and is prompted by the potential of immunotherapy to increase intralesional CD8+ T cells of high risk DCIS and potentially to alter the micro-immune environment [ ].
Summary and Future Trajectory
The current generation of clinical trials will lead to better selection of patients who need multi-modality therapy, and of those who can avoid specific components of treatment and the morbidity associated with these. Novel approaches in drug delivery and immunotherapy are likely to lead to a new landscape for women diagnosed with DCIS, where the risk-benefit ratio is more favorable than at present. However, the risks of new therapeutic options will need to be weighed carefully against the benefits, and it is important to recognize that an accurate risk-benefit balance is predicated on the precise estimation, not only of risk, but also the nature of new events. For example, are there features of DCIS that predict the agressiveness, or the hormone receptor status, or other biologic aspects of future events? For truly tailored therapy, the entire panoply of DCIS investigations will contribute essential components to the treatment discussion. These include research on biologic profiling to gauge risk of future breast malignancy; patient preferences that can be guided by decision tools; and precision therapy that will address the characteristics of the specific lesion. Finally, local therapy will still very likely retain a prominent place, but other effective options will augment, and in some cases, supplant it.