Introduction
The mammary gland is a highly specialized tissue to provide milk. During lactation, the mammary glands are exposed to frequent temperature changes by environmental and endogenous factors. In dairy cows, an increase in air ambient temperature leads to a rise in intramammary temperature higher than body temperature [ , ]. The temperature of freshly secreted milk also changes depending on the air ambient temperature [ ]. In contrast, a dairy cow effuses a significant amount of heat from the udder because the lactating mammary glands produce abundant metabolic heat during the process of milk component synthesis [ ]. Endogenous heat production is higher in Holstein cows with high milk productivity than in those with low ability [ ]. Berman et al. have reported that the body temperature of cows increases depending on the amount of synthesized milk components [ ]. These reports indicate that metabolic heat production and air ambient temperature frequently change the intramammary temperature during lactation.
Heat and cold stress cause adverse effects on milk yield in dairy cows [ , ]. Cows producing high quantities of milk tend to be particularly sensitive to increases in air ambient temperature [ ]. After milking, the udder skin temperature is increased and the mammary glands become more sensitive to microclimatic conditions compared with the condition before milking [ ]. Greater heat production by milk component synthesis leads to a decline in milk yield in cows in a subtropical climate [ ]. Additionally, hyperthermia changes the proportion of casein subtypes in milk, with a reduced milk protein concentration beyond the effects of restricted intake [ ]. Cowley et al. have suggested that these reductions in milk protein in heat-stressed cows appear to be a result of the specific down-regulation of mammary protein synthetic activity. These reports suggest that an inappropriate intramammary temperature directly affects milk component production in lactating mammary glands.
In lactating mammary glands, alveolar mammary epithelial cells (MECs) synthesize and secrete milk components. Alveolar MECs initiate milk production via stimulation from several lactogenic factors containing prolactin [ , ]. Additionally, less permeable tight junctions (TJs) are established shortly after parturition and are maintained throughout lactation [ , ]. Less permeable TJs prevent the leakage of milk components and body fluids across the alveolar lumen to the mammary interstitium during lactation [ , ]. However, the TJs become loose concurrently with declining milk production in MECs during weaning or in mammary glands with mastitis [ , ]. Thus, alveolar MECs maintain the less-permeable TJs along with the milk production ability for appropriate milk secretion during lactation.
Alveolar MECs are expected to suffer frequent temperature changes by metabolic heat production and air ambient temperature during lactation. Inappropriate thermal conditions lead to a decline milk production in dairy cows [ , ]. Several types of secretory epithelial cells show temperature-dependent modifications, such as sweat glands [ ], parotid glands [ ], and thyroid glands [ ]. In particular, the salivary secretion rate depends on the ambient temperature in salivary glands [ ]. These reports suggest that lactating MECs may change physiological functions depending on the intramammary temperature. However, it remains unclear whether alveolar MECs change their milk production ability and the blood milk barrier. In this study, we investigated the direct influence of temperature on MECs by using two lactating culture models [ , ].
Methods
Animals
Virgin (9–14 weeks) ICR mice were purchased from Japan SLC, Inc. (Shizuoka, Japan) and maintained under a 12-h light-dark interval at 22–25 °C. The fourth mammary glands were quickly dissected from decapitated mice to isolate MECs. All experiments were performed in accordance with the ethical principles of The Journal of Physiology and were approved by the Animal Resource Committee of Hokkaido University (permission number: 14-0005).
Materials
Dexamethasone (catalogue # D1756) and prolactin from sheep pituitary (cat. # L6520) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Epidermal growth factor (EGF) and growth factor reduced Matrigel® were from BD Biosciences (San Diego, CA; cat. # 354230) and Corning Inc. (Corning, NY; cat. # 356230), respectively. LipiDye® was purchased from Funakoshi (Tokyo, Japan; catalogue # FDV-0010). The following antibodies served as primary antibodies in the immunoassays: rabbit polyclonal antibodies against claudin-3 (Cldn3, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA; cat. # 34-1700), claudin-4 (Cldn4, Thermo Fisher; cat. # 36-4800), cleaved caspase-3 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA; cat. # 9664), the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA; cat. # sc-482), phosphorylated-STAT3 (pSTAT3, Tyr705, Cell Signaling Technology; cat. # 9363), STAT5 (Cell Signaling Technology; cat. #9363), pSTAT5 (on Tyr694; Cell Signaling Technology; cat. # 4322), pSTAT5a (Abcam, Cambridge, UK; cat. # ab30648), GM130 (Abcam; cat. # ab52649), mouse monoclonal antibodies against β-actin (Sigma-Aldrich, #A5441), occludin (Ocln; Thermo Fisher; cat. # 33-1500), and a goat polyclonal antibody against β-casein (Santa Cruz; cat. # sc-17969). The secondary antibodies (an Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody, Alexa Fluor 546-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG antibody, Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated guinea pig anti-goat IgG antibody, and Alexa Fluor 546-conjugated donkey anti-goat IgG antibody) were purchased from Thermo Fisher for immunofluorescence staining. The secondary horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-mouse, anti-rabbit, anti-guinea pigs, and anti-goat IgG antibodies for western blotting were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Cell Culture
MECs were isolated from the fourth mammary gland, and the milk production ability of MECs was induced using a previously reported method [ ]. The minced mammary glands were incubated with RPMI-1640 medium (GIBCO-BRL, Grand Island, NY) containing collagenase at 0.75 mg/mL (Wako, Saitama, Japan) for 2 h at 37 °C with gentle shaking, followed by treatment with 0.25% trypsin in RPMI-1640 for 5 min at room temperature. The fragments of the mammary epithelium were dissociated by gentle pipetting with a Pasteur pipette. After centrifugation, the pellet was resuspended in fetal bovine serum (FBS; GIBCO) and then centrifuged and resuspended two more times at 100 rpm for 5 min to separate the epithelial fragments. The epithelial fragments were cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS, 10 μg/mL insulin (Sigma-Aldrich; cat. # I6634), 10 ng/mL EGF, 100 U/mL penicillin (GIBCO), and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (GIBCO) at 37 °C. After the MECs reached confluence, they were cultured at 37 °C for an additional 2 days in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 1% FBS, 10 μg/mL insulin, 10 ng/mL EGF, 0.5 U/mL prolactin, and 1 μM dexamethasone. The MECs were then cultured for 3 days at 39 or 41 °C with differentiation medium as high temperature treatment. High temperature treatment for 1 day was performed after 4 days of culture at 37 °C with differentiation medium. The MECs were also cultured at 37 °C for 1 day as low temperature treatment after high temperature treatment at 39 °C for 2 days. The MECs were cultured on a poly-L-lysine-coated cover glass for immunofluorescence staining.
The three-dimensional culture of MECs for reconstitution of alveolar structure was performed using a previously reported method with some modifications [ ]. Briefly, the isolated mammary epithelial fragments were suspended with Matrigel and then incubated at 37 °C for 30 min for gelification. The epithelial fragments embedded in Matrigel were cultured for 5 days in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS, 10 μg/mL insulin, and 10 ng/mL EGF at 37 °C. After the formation of alveolar-like structures, the medium was changed to differentiation medium at 37 °C. After 1.5 days of culture, the MECs were cultured at 37, 39, or 41 °C for 1.5 or 3 days with differentiation medium.
Immunofluorescence Staining
MECs cultured on poly-L-lysine-coated cover glass and alveolar-like structures in Matrigel were fixed with methanol for 10 min at −20 °C and then with 1% formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min at 4 °C. For immunostaining of adipophilin, MECs were fixed with 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min at 4 °C and then immersed in 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 min at room temperature. The fixed MECs were incubated with PBS containing 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA; Sigma-Aldrich) to block nonspecific interactions and were then incubated with the primary antibody diluted in the blocking solution overnight at 4 °C. After washing with PBS, they were exposed to an appropriate secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature in blocking solution. Lipid droplets were stained with 1 μM LipiDye for 1 h at room temperature after immunostaining of adipophilin. Control samples were processed in the same manner, except that the primary antibody was absent. Images of the stained slices and MECs were acquired using a confocal laser-scanning microscope (TCS SP5; Leica, Mannheim, Germany).
Western Blotting Analysis
Samples of the MECs and the cultured media were analyzed using electrophoresis in a 7.5% or 12.5% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). The membranes were blocked for 1 h with PBS containing 4% nonfat dried milk and 0.05% Tween-20 and were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies diluted in PBS containing 2.5% BSA. For β-casein analysis, we used PBS containing 0.5% BSA and 2.5% fish gelatin (Sigma-Aldrich) as the blocking solution. Subsequently, the membranes were washed in PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20 and incubated for 45 min at room temperature with appropriate secondary HRP-conjugated antibodies diluted in each blocking solution. The immunoreactive bands were detected using Luminate Forte Western HRP Substrate (Millipore, Billerica, MA). The images of the protein bands were obtained with a ChemiDoc EQ densitometer and processed with Quantity One software (Bio-Rad).
Reverse Transcription PCR
Total RNA from the MECs was extracted using an Isogen II (Nippon Gene, Tokyo, Japan). Reverse transcription (RT) was performed using ReverTra Ace qPCR RT Master Mix (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan). Quantitative RT-PCR was conducted on a Light Cycler 480 (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) with Thunderbird SYBR qPCR Mix (Toyobo). We used the following cycling conditions: 95 °C for 1 min, followed by 40 cycles at 95 °C for 15 s and 58 °C for 1 min. The primer sequences are listed in Table 1 . Table 1 Primer sequences for real-time PCR Gene Accession number Primers Product size Forward Reverse α s1 -casein NM_007784 cctttcccctttgggcttac tgaggtggatggagaatgga 193 β-casein NM_009972 cttcagaaggtgaatctcatggg cagattagcaagactggcaagg 330 κ-casein NM_007786 tcgaccccattactcccattgtgt tgtaaaaggtaagggaagacgagaaagat 289 Fabp3 NM_010174 agtcactggtgacgctggacg aggcagcatggtgctgagctg 230 Srebp-1 NM_011480 gtcagcttgtggcagtggag tctgagggtggaggggtaag 90 Adipophilin NM_007408 caggggtggtggataagacc ggtgataagcccgagagca 291 α-lactalbumin NM_010679 accagtggctacgacacac cggggaactcactacttttacac 106 Ugp2 NM_139297 tcacaaacaaaacacgagcaga cacttgagcgatttccacca 89 Pgm2 NM_028132 caagcaagctgtccctctgt gatgtcctccacgctctgtt 137 Cldn3 NM_009902.4 agccagtctccaaagccaca ctgggaatcaactgcccttc 150 Cldn4 NM_009903.2 tggcgtctatgggactacagg gatgttgctgccgatgaagg 119 Ocln NM_008756.2 cggaccctgaccactatgaaa cctgcagacctgcatcaaaa 398 Gapdh NM_008084 gagcgagaccccactaacatc gcggagatgatgaccctttt 144
Measurement of TJ Permeability
To measure transepithelial resistance (TER), MECs were cultured on a cell culture insert in a 24-well plate (0.4-μm pore size; BD Biosciences). The electrodes of a Millicel-ERS system (Millipore) were placed in the upper and lower chambers, and TER was measured.
Measurement of Cellular Proliferation Activity
Cellular proliferation activity was investigated with a cell counting WST-8 kit (KISHIDA Chemical, Osaka, Japan). After MECs were cultured for 3 days in growth medium, MECs were cultured with WST-8 for 2 h in an incubator. Subsequently, the conditioned medium was evaluated with a microplate reader (450 nm).
Statistical Analysis
The data are expressed as the mean (standard error of the mean [SEM]). Statistical analysis was performed by Student’s t test or analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a two-tailed multiple t test with Bonferroni correction using the Analyze-It add-in (Analyze-it Software, Ltd., Leeds, United Kingdom). Differences were considered significant at p values <0.05, which are indicated by asterisks or lowercase letters. All experiments were performed a minimum of four times using MECs originated from different mice.
Results
High temperature Treatment Activates Milk Production in MECs
To induce milk production ability, MECs were cultured in differentiation medium containing prolactin, dexamethasone and EGF for 2 days before high temperature treatment at 39 and 41 °C [ ]. After high temperature treatment of MECs for 3 days, the milk production ability of MECs was evaluated by immunostaining, western blotting and quantitative RT-PCR.
MECs cultured at 37 °C showed a cobblestone-like appearance. In MECs cultured at 39 and 41 °C, large size of lipid droplets (3–8 μm) were observed (Fig. 1 ). The lipid droplets were stained with LipiDye, which reacts with neutral lipids such as triglycerides. Adipophilin, which is a major protein that coats milk lipid droplets [ ], was also localized to the surface of lipid droplets in MECs. In MECs cultured at 37 °C, the lipid droplets labelled with LipiDye and adipophilin were small. The intracellular localization of β-casein was observed in most of the MECs treated at 39 and 41 °C for 3 days. Beta-casein co-localized with the Golgi marker GM130 in MECs cultured at 39 °C, whereas MECs cultured at 41 °C showed minimal co-localization of β-casein with GM130. MECs treated with 37 °C showed similar localization of β-casein to those in MECs treated at 39 °C, although the positive reaction to β-casein seemed to be weak compared to MECs cultured at 39 and 41 °C. Fig. 1 High temperature treatment changes the localization of β-casein and lipid droplets in MECs. MECs were cultured at 37, 39 and 41 °C for 3 days after induction of milk production ability. Phase-contrast microscopic images and immunostaining images of adipophilin (green), β-casein (green), and GM130 (red). Nuclei and lipid droplets were stained with DAPI (blue) and LipiDye (red), respectively. The scale bars represent 20 μm
Western blotting and densitometry analyses showed that high temperature treatment at 39 °C and 41 °C for 3 days significantly increased both intracellular and secreted β-casein in MECs compared with those at 37 °C (Fig. 2 a, c). In MECs cultured at 41 °C, intracellular and secreted β-casein increased 4.4-fold and 8.7-fold compared to those at 37 °C, respectively. Adipophilin was also increased in MECs cultured at 39 and 41 °C for 3 days compared with MECs cultured at 37 °C. MECs cultured at 41 °C showed significant increases in adipophilin compared wot MECs cultured at 39 °C. Intracellular and secreted β-casein gradually increased depending on the 39 °C treatment time (Fig. 2 b, d). Fig. 2 High temperature treatment activates milk component production ability in MECs. MECs were cultured at 37, 39 and 41 °C for 3 days ( a , c ) or at 39 °C for 0, 1, 3 days ( b , d ) after induction of milk production ability. The results of western blotting ( a , b ) and the densitometry analysis ( c , d ) of intracellular and secreted β-casein and intracellular adipophilin with β-actin used as an internal control; n = 8. The data are presented as the mean (SEM). Different lowercase letters show significant differences among the treatments; p < 0.05. d – f The mRNA expression levels related to caseins ( α s1 -, β-, κ-casein ; d ), triglyceride synthesis ( Fabp3 , Srebp-1 , Adipophilin ; e ), and lactose synthesis ( α-lactalbumin , Ugp2 , Pgm2 ; f ) in MECs cultured at 39 °C for 1 day determined by qRT-PCR; n = 5. The data are presented as the mean (SEM). * p < 0.05
The expression levels of mRNA related to the synthesis of milk components were determined by quantitative RT-PCR. Casein is the major milk specific protein and consists of multiple subtypes such as α S1 -, β-, and κ-casein [ ]. MECs cultured at 39 °C for 1 day showed increased expression of α S1 - , β- , and κ-casein by 2.5-, 7.4- and 1.4-fold compared with MECs cultured at 37 °C (Fig. 2 e). UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase 2 (Ugp2), phosphoglucomutase 2 ( Pgm2 ), and α-lactalbumin participate in lactose synthesis [ ]. Ugp2 was significantly up-regulated by 39 °C treatment, whereas α-lactalbumin showed a tendency to be down-regulated (Fig. 2 f). The expression of Pgm2 did not show significant differences between MECs with 37 and 39 °C treatment for 1 day. Fabp3 and Srebp-1 are involved in the synthesis of triglycerides [ ]. The expression of Fabp3 and Srebp1 significantly increased concurrently with the up-regulation of adipophilin in response to 39 °C treatment (Fig. 2 g). These results indicate that high temperature treatment activates milk component production in MECs, at least caseins and lipid droplets.
High Temperature Treatment Changes the Expression and Activation of STAT5
Activation of STAT5 signaling induces the transcription of specific sets of lactogenesis-related genes in MECs [ , ]. The influence of high temperature treatment on the amount of phosphorylated and total STAT5 was examined by western blotting. Both pSTAT5 and total STAT5 significantly increased in MECs cultured at 39 and 41 °C for 3 days (Fig. 3 a, d). The amounts of pSTAT5 and STAT5 were almost the same between MECs cultured at 39 °C for 1 and 3 days (Fig. 3 b, e). MECs treated at 41 °C for 1 day showed drastically increased pSTAT5 and STAT5 (Fig. 3 c, f). However, 41 °C treatment for 3 days significantly decreased the amounts of pSTAT5 and STAT5 compared with those in MECs cultured for 1 day at 41 °C (Fig. 3 c, f). The pSTAT5/STAT5 ratio was the almost same between MECs regardless of the temperature and culture period. Fig. 3 High temperature treatment regulates activation of STAT5 signaling in MECs. a – f MECs were cultured at 37, 39 and 41 °C for 3 days ( a , d ) or at 39 °C ( b , e ) and at 41 °C ( c , f ) for 0, 1, 3 days after induction of milk production ability. The results of western blotting ( a – c ) and densitometry analysis ( d – f ) of pSTAT5 and STAT5 with β-actin used as an internal control; n = 8. Different lowercase letters show significant differences among the treatments; p < 0.05. ( g , h ) MECs cultured at 37, 39 and 41 °C for 1–5 days were immunostained with pSTAT5a ( g ; green), β-casein ( h ; green), and GM130 ( h ; red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). The scale bars represent 20 μm
The activation of STAT5 signaling has been confirmed by the localization of pSTAT5 in nuclei [ ]. MECs cultured at 37 °C showed nuclear localization of pSTAT5a with relatively weak positive reactivity in the cytoplasm (Fig. 3 g). The nuclear localization of pSTAT5a became clear in MECs cultured at 39 °C for 3 and 5 days. MECs treated at 41 °C for 1 day showed clear nuclear localization of pSTAT5a. However, the cytoplasmic localization of pSTAT5a seemed to increase in MECs cultured at 41 °C for 3 days, and some MECs became pSTAT5a-negative after 5 days of 41 °C treatment. In addition, aggregated localization of β-casein and β-casein-negative cells was observed in MECs cultured at 41 °C for 5 days (Fig. 3 h).
High Temperature Treatment Inactivates STAT3 Signaling
The lactating mammary glands gradually cease milk production and weaken the blood milk barrier in association with activation of STAT3 signaling in MECs after weaning [ ]. The influence of high temperature treatment on STAT3 signaling was evaluated by western blotting and immunostaining. The amount of pSTAT3 and total STAT3 significantly decreased in accordance with the culture temperature upshift (Fig. 4 a, c). Phosphorylated and total STAT3 in MECs cultured at 41 °C was 34 and 63% compared with those at 37 °C. In MECs cultured at 41 °C, a time-dependent decrease in pSTAT3 and STAT3 was observed within 3 days (Fig. 4 b, d). Additionally, the pSTAT3/STAT3 ratio decreased in MECs cultured at 39 and 41 °C in temperature- and time-dependent manners. Immunostaining of pSTAT3 showed the presence of pSTAT3-positive cells in MECs cultured at 37 °C (Fig. 4 e). The pSTAT3-positive cells seemed to decrease in MECs cultured at 39 and 41 °C. However, few pSTAT3-positive MECs were intensely stained after the 41 °C treatment. GR, which regulates milk production and alveolar TJs together with STAT5 [ ], was localized in the nuclei of most MECs regardless of the temperature treatment. Fig. 4 High temperature treatment inactivates STAT3 signaling without affecting GR signaling. a – e MECs were cultured at 37, 39 and 41 °C for 3 days ( a , c ) or at 41 °C for 0, 1, 3 days ( b , d ) after induction of milk production ability. The results of western blotting ( a , b ) and the densitometry analysis ( c , d ) of pSTAT3 and STAT3. The bands of β-actin in Fig. 3 were used as an internal control; n = 8. Different lowercase letters show significant differences among the treatments; p < 0.05. e MECs cultured at 37, 39 and 41 °C for 3 days were immunostained with pSTAT3 (green), GR (green), and Ocln (red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). The scale bars represent 20 μm
High Temperature Treatment Changes the Expression of TJ Proteins and the Epithelial Barrier
After parturition, lactating MECs forms the blood-milk barrier by sealing the paracellular pathway with less-permeable TJs to block leakage of milk components and infection by bacteria [ ]. We have also reported that lactating MECs express high levels of Cldn3 and low levels of Cldn4 in the apical-most regions [ ]. MECs cultured at 39 and 41 °C for 3 days showed significantly increased levels of Cldn3 and Ocln, whereas Cldn4 decreased in accordance with the temperature upshift (Fig. 5 a, c). In MECs cultured at 41 °C, Cldn3 and Ocln gradually increased, whereas Cldn4 rapidly decreased for 1 day (Fig. 5 b, d). Quantitative PCR showed that high temperature treatment induced an up-regulation of Cldn3 and Ocln and a down-regulation of Cldn4 in MECs (Fig. 5 e). The barrier function in the MEC layer was evaluated by measuring TER. TER gradually increased in response to the 39 °C treatment and was significantly higher than in MECs treated at 37 and 41 °C after 64 h. The TER in MECs cultured at 37 °C increased between 0 and 40 h, but it was maintained between 40 and 64 h. The TER in MECs cultured at 41 °C for 16 h was significantly lower than in MECs at 37 and 39 °C. The TER in MECs treated at 41 °C did not increase between 40 and 64 h (Fig. 5 f). Fig. 5 High temperature treatment influences the expression of TJ proteins and the epithelial barrier. a – f MECs were cultured at 37, 39 and 41 °C for 3 days ( a , c ) or at 41 °C for 0, 1, 3 days ( b , d ) after induction of milk production ability. The results of western blotting ( a , b ) and densitometry analysis ( c , d ) of Cldn3, Cldn4, and Ocln. The bands of β-actin in Fig. 3 were used as an internal control; n = 8. e The mRNA expression of Cldn3 , Cldn4 , and Ocln was determined by quantitative RT-PCR. The data are presented as the mean (SEM); n = 5. f The transepithelial resistance (TER) in MECs cultured at 37, 39 and 41 °C was measured 16, 28, 40, and 64 h after treatment. Different lowercase letters show significant differences among the treatments; p < 0.05
Cldn3 was mainly localized along the apical-most regions of MECs, as represented by the localization of Ocln in MECs with and without high temperature treatment. In MECs cultured at 37 °C, there were some interruptions at the tricellular contacts, where three cells join together (Fig. 6 ). In MECs treated at 39 °C, the rectilinear localization of Cldn3 and Ocln were observed along the apical-most regions, and the line of Cldn3 and Ocln tightly intersected at the tricellular contacts without disconnection points. Some enlarged intercellular spaces were observed at the tricellular contacts in MEC cultured at 41 °C. Cytoplasmic Cldn3 and fragmented nuclei were also observed around enlarged intercellular spaces. Fig. 6 High temperature treatment changes the localization of Cldn3 and Ocln in MECs. MECs were cultured at 37, 39 and 41 °C for 3 days after induction of milk production ability. The immunostaining images of Cldn3 (green) and Ocln (red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Arrowheads (white) indicate interruptions at the tricellular contacts in MEC cultured at 37 °C. Arrows indicate enlarged intercellular spaces in MEC cultured at 41 °C. The scale bars represent 20 and 5 μm in the magnified images
High Temperature Treatment Induces Cell Death and Inhibits Cell Proliferation
To investigate whether high temperature treatment induces cell death, MECs were immunostained with cleaved caspase-3. Cleaved caspase-3-positive cells were sparsely presented in MECs cultured at 37 and 39 °C (Fig. 7 a). There were many positive reactions to cleaved caspase-3 in the MEC layer cultured at 41 °C. A positive reaction to cleaved caspase-3 was also observed around enlarged intercellular spaces at the tricellular contacts, as indicated by Ocln in MECs cultured at 41 °C (Fig. 7 b). Treatment of MECs at 39 and 41 °C increased the number of caspase-3-positive cells 2- and 10-fold compared with 37 °C treatment (Fig. 7 c). The cell density was measured by counting DAPI-positive nuclei per unit area. The high temperature treatment decreased the cell density in a temperature-dependent manner (Fig. 7 d). The amount of β-actin per well in 24-well culture plates significantly decreased in MECs treated at 41 °C than in those cultured at 37 and 39 °C (Fig. 7 e). Cell proliferation activity was also measured by the WST-8 assay. The proliferation activity measured by the WST-8 assay was down-regulated in MECs in a temperature-dependent manner (Fig. 7 f). Fig. 7 High temperature treatment adversely affects cell viability. MECs were cultured at 37, 39 and 41 °C for 3 days after induction of milk production ability. a , b The immunostaining images of cleaved caspase 3 ( a ; green) and Ocln ( b ; red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). The localization of cleaved caspase-3 was observed around enlarged intercellular spaces at the tricellular contacts represented by Ocln. The scale bars represent 20 μm in A and 5 μm in B. c The graph shows the number of cleaved caspase-3-positive cells in 0.01 mm 2 . n = 24. d The graph shows the number of MECs by counting DAPI-positive nuclei in 0.01 mm 2 ; n = 16. e The graph shows the amount of β-actin per cell culture well; n = 8. f The cell proliferation activity was measured by the WST-8 assay; n = 16. The data are presented as the mean (SEM). Different lowercase letters show significant differences among the treatments; p < 0.05
High temperature Treatment Influences Reconstituted Alveoli
The mammary epithelial fragments cultured in Matrigel form alveolar-like structures with luminal spaces [ ]. To evaluate the influence of high temperature treatment on lactating MEC reconstitution of the alveolar-like structures, reconstituted alveoli in Matrigel were cultured with the differentiation medium and then treated at 37, 39 and 41 °C for 1.5 or 3 days. The alveolar-like structure were observed in Matrigel with and without high temperature treatment (Fig. 8 ). The reconstituted alveoli cultured at 41 °C for 3 days showed abundant lipid droplets in the epithelial layers. Most MECs were pSTAT5a-positive in the reconstituted alveoli cultured at 39 °C for 1.5 days. In reconstituted alveoli cultured at 37 and 41 °C for 1.5 days, some MECs were pSTAT5a-negative, and positive reactions in nuclei seemed to be weak. Most MECs treated at 41 °C for 3 days were pSTAT5a-negative and showed pSTAT5a localization in the basolateral membrane. Beta-casein was accumulated in the alveolar rumen of the reconstituted alveoli. The staining intensity of β-casein seemed to be high in the reconstituted alveoli cultured at 39 and 41 °C, and aggregated β-casein was observed in the alveolar lumen at 41 °C. Beta-casein was also localized on the outer side of alveoli cultured at 41 °C. Cldn3 was localized mainly at the apical most regions with Ocln in reconstituted alveoli cultured at 39 °C, whereas reconstituted alveoli cultured at 37 and 41 °C showed the additional localization of Cldn3 in the lateral membrane of MECs. The extracellular Cldn3 was observed in the alveolar lumen cultured at 41 °C for 1.5 and 3 days. Fig. 8 Influences of high temperature treatment on reconstituted alveoli. The mammary epithelial fragments were cultured in Matrigel to form alveolar-like structures. The reconstituted alveoli in Matrigel were cultured at 37, 39 and 41 °C for 1.5 and 3 days after induction of milk production ability. Bright field images and immunostaining images of pSTAT5 (green), β-casein (green), Cldn3 (green), GM130 (red), and Ocln (red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Arrowheads (white) indicate β-casein localized at the outer side of the reconstituted alveoli. Scale bars represent 20 μm
To investigate whether effects of high temperature treatment are reversible, MECs were cultured at 37 °C for 1 day as low temperature treatment after 2 days of culture at 39 °C. Low temperature treatment at 37 °C significantly decreased both intracellular and secreted β-casein in MECs compared with those at 39 °C (Fig. 9 a, e). Both pSTAT5 and total STAT5 also significantly decreased in MECs cultured at 37 °C for 1 day (Fig. 9 b, f). The pSTAT5/STAT5 ratio was the almost same between MECs cultured at 37 and 39 °C. On the other hands, the amount of pSTAT3 significantly increased in accordance with the culture temperature downshift (Fig. 9 c, g). Additionally, the pSTAT3/STAT3 ratio increased in MECs cultured at 37 °C. In MECs cultured at 37 °C as low temperature treatment, Cldn4 increased 2.2-fold compared to that at 39 °C whereas the amount of Cldn3 hardly change in accordance with the temperature downshift (Fig. 9 d, h). Fig. 9 Influences of low temperature treatment on lactating MECs. Lactating MECs were cultured at 37 °C for 1 day as low temperature treatment after 2 days of culture at 39 °C. The results of western blotting ( a – d ) and the densitometry analysis ( e – h ) of intracellular and secreted β-casein ( a , e ), pSTAT5 and STAT5 ( b , f ), pSTAT3 and STAT3 ( c , g ), Cldn3 and Cldn4 ( d , h ) with β-actin ( a ) used as an internal control; n = 4. The data are presented as the mean (SEM). The data are presented as the mean (SEM). * p < 0.05
Discussion
Heat stress and excess metabolic heat production lead to a decline in milk production in dairy cows [ , ]. Wheelock et al. have reported that reduced nutrient intake accounted for only 50% of heat stress-induced decreases in milk yield [ ]. Heat stress affects in hormonal system containing prolactin and somatotropin in dairy cows [ , ]. Endocrine changes occurring during heat stress are suggested to be involved in a decline in milk production in dairy cows. However, it remains unclear whether the effects of heat stress are directly affecting in alveolar MECs in the lactating mammary gland. Alveolar MECs proliferate during late pregnancy and initiate the secretion of milk components after parturition [ ]. Alveolar MECs also form less-permeable TJs as a blood-milk barrier, which restrict the leakage of milk components from the alveolar lumen [ , ]. During lactation, mammary glands are exposed to temperature changes by endogenous metabolic heat production and exogenous air ambient temperature [ , ]. In this study, we investigated whether temperature change directly influences milk production ability and barrier functions of MECs. The results showed that 39 °C treatment activated milk production and enhanced the formation of less-permeable TJs (Fig. 10 ). In contrast, 41 °C treatment caused adverse effects on the epithelial barrier and cell viability, although milk production ability of MECs was temporarily up-regulated by short-time treatment at 41 °C. MECs cultured at 37 °C showed relatively low milk production ability and high proliferation activity. Additionally, Low temperature treatment reversibly inactivated milk production in MECs cultured at 39 °C. These results suggest that changes in temperature directly influence milk production ability, the blood-milk barrier, and the viability of MECs. Fig. 10 Influence of high temperature treatment on lactating MECs. At 37 °C, MECs synthesize and secrete milk proteins (red, blue, purple dots) and lipid droplets (yellow circle) at a low level. At 39 °C, MECs secrete abundant milk proteins and relatively large-sized lipid droplets. At 41 °C, over the short-term, MECs secrete abundant milk proteins and intracellularly accumulate large-sized lipid droplets. The epithelial barrier is partially disrupted by cell death. At 41 °C, over the long-term, MECs show aggregation of milk proteins, leakage of milk proteins through the disrupted epithelial barrier, and a decreasing cell number
In this study, we investigated three kinds of transcription factors relating to lactogenesis, STAT5, STAT3 and GR. STAT5 signaling was activated at 39 and 41 °C via an increase in total STAT5 without a change in the ratio of pSTAT5/STAT5. However, long-term treatment led to a decline in activation of STAT5 signaling via a decrease in total STAT5. In contrast, STAT3 signaling was inactivated by high temperature treatment through decrease in total STAT3 and inhibition of phosphorylation. Additionally, low temperature treatment inactivated STAT5 signaling and activated STAT3 signaling. GR signaling was activated in MECs cultured at 37, 39, and 41 °C, without detectable differences. In healthy lactating mammary glands, STAT5 signaling is activated by prolactin to maintain milk production ability in MECs [ , ]. GR signaling is also activated by glucocorticoid to facilitate less-permeable TJs and milk secretion together with STAT5 signaling [ , , ]. In contrast, STAT3 signaling is activated after weaning and in mastitis in association with declining milk production [ , , ]. Therefore, 39 °C is suggested to be a suitable temperature for the control of transcription factors relating to lactogenesis in MECs. In fact, 39 °C treatment in MECs induced and maintained high milk production ability with less-permeable TJs concurrently with activation of STAT5 and GR signaling without STAT3 signaling. The body temperature of mice is approximately 37–38 °C [ ]. Lactating mammary glands, which produce metabolic heat in the process of milk component synthesis, function as a heat source to raise body temperature (0.02 °C/kg 4% fat-corrected milk in cows) [ ]. Thus, the local temperature surrounding MECs is suggested to be somewhat higher than the body temperature. Moderate high temperature conditions may exert enough lactating MECs as milk secretory cells by regulating lactogenesis-relating transcriptional factors in vivo .
Short-term 41 °C treatment induced activation of STAT5 and inactivation of STAT3 with high milk production ability in MECs. However, long-term treatment at 41 °C led to inactivation of STAT5 signaling by reducing the total amount of STAT5. Conditional repression of STAT5 expression during lactation leads to declines in the milk production ability of MECs [ ]. High temperature treatment at 41 °C also decreased the total number of MECs by inducing cell death and inhibiting cell proliferation in this study. Kapila et al. have reported that heat stress at 42 °C induces cell death and a decrease in cell viability and cell proliferation in a time-dependent manner in MECs originating from buffalo [ ]. Knight and Wilde have suggested that milk yield is determined by the total number of MECs regulated by cell proliferation and cell death in lactating mammary glands [ ]. Thus, it is suggested that long-term exposure at 41 °C leads to a decline milk production capacity in lactating mammary glands by inactivation of STAT5 and a decrease in the total number of MECs. Furthermore, prepartum heat-stressed cows show lower milk production than cooled cows during lactation [ ]. In this study, 37 °C treatment facilitated cell proliferation without cell death, whereas 41 °C treatment caused cell death and a decline in cell proliferation. Cool and hot envelopments may directly influence the total number of MECs in mammary glands during late pregnancy and lactation.
TJs are the most apical junctional complexes, and the extracellular structure of TJs is constructed from Cldns [ ]. Compositional changes in Cldns at the apical-most regions induce changes in the barrier functions of TJs [ ]. Ocln also contributes to enhancement and maintenance of TJ barrier function [ , ]. We have previously reported that lactating MECs have lactation-specific TJs consisting of abundant Cldn3 and Ocln with few Cldn4 [ ]. In this study, 39 °C treatment caused an increase in Cldn3 and Ocln and a decrease in Cldn4 in MECs. In MECs cultured at 39 °C, Cldn3 and Ocln were continuously localized along the apical-most regions, and the epithelial barrier was high, compared with MECs treated at 39 and 41 °C. STAT5 signaling down-regulates Cldn4 expression, and GR signaling facilitates the formation of less-permeable TJs with up-regulation of Cldn3 and Ocln [ ]. Thus, moderate heat treatment at 39 °C is suggested to enhance the formation of the lactation-specific and less-permeable TJs consisting of Cldn3 and Ocln through control of STAT5 and GR signaling. In contrast, 41 °C treatment caused a decrease in TER and leakage of β-casein into the outer side of the reconstituted alveoli, although the amounts of Cldn3 and Ocln were the same level as in 39 °C-treated MECs. The immunostaining images of Cldn3 and Ocln revealed that the TJ network was partially disrupted at empty holes in the MEC layer after 41 °C treatment. Around the empty holes, apoptotic cells and scattered localization of Cldn3 was observed, suggesting that local disruption of the TJ network is caused by apoptosis. Heat stress reduces intestinal barrier integrity, although Cldn3 and Ocln expression are increased [ ]. In addition, the heat stress-induced increase in Ocln has been postulated to be a protective response against heat stress-induced disruption of the intestinal epithelial barrier [ ]. Modulation of heat treatment at 39 °C may induce impermeable barrier functions by a protective response inducing an up-regulation of Cldn3 and Ocln without disruption of the epithelial barrier in MECs. Furthermore, small gaps were observed at tricellular regions in MECs treated at 37 °C. At tricellular regions, specialized structures called tricellular TJs are formed to seal the tricellular gaps and stabilize the TJs [ , , ]. The epithelial barrier may be weakened by a partial lack of tricellular TJs in addition to reduced amounts of Cldn3 and Ocln.
In this study, high temperature treatment changed the activation/inactivation of STAT3 and STAT5, cell viability, expression of milk production-related and TJ-related proteins in MECs. Temperature changes activate several intracellular signaling pathways to control gene expression and cell behavior [ ]. Two candidates are suggested to regulate MECs in response to high temperature. One is represented by the heat shock proteins (HSPs) that are activated by heat shock factor (HSF) [ , ]. In bovine MECs, expression of HSP27, HSP70 and HSP90 is enhanced in response to heat stress [ ]. HSP27 regulates the expression and phosphorylation of STAT3 [ , ]. HSP90α is regulated by STAT5 and is involved in the regulation of apoptosis [ ]. Down-regulation of Hsp60 induces Bax-dependent apoptosis under heat stress [ ]. Activated HSP-1 also directly up-regulates Ocln by binding to the Ocln promoter [ ]. Second is a heat-sensitive ion channel, transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 4 (TRPV4). TRPV4 is activated by several stimuli, such as low osmotic, mechanical, chemical, and heat stimuli [ ]. MECs express TRPV4, and progesterone regulates the expression of TRPV4 [ ]. Selective TRPV4 activator (4α-PDD) increases paracellular permeability accompanied by a down-regulation of the Cldns containing Cldn3 and Cldn4 in the mammary epithelial cell line HC11 [ ]. In contrast, activation of TRPV4 strengthens the TJ-associated barrier, with up-regulation of Ocln and Cldn4 in skin keratinocytes and corneal epithelial cells [ , ]. TRPV4 activation also regulates salivary secretion in mouse submandibular gland [ ]. These reports suggest that HSPs and TRPV4 are candidates for intracellular signaling activated by temperature changes in MECs. However, this hypothesis remains unclear based on this study.
In summary, our results revealed that thermal conditions influence milk production ability and the epithelial barrier of MECs at the transcriptional level through control of STAT3 and STAT5 signaling. A moderate high temperature condition is suggested to induce the lactation capacity of MECs through STAT5 activation and STAT3 inactivation. Furthermore, high temperature conditions caused inactivation of STAT5 and decreased the total number of MECs. It is well known that heat-stress-induced reductions of milk production are caused by decreases in food intake, inappropriate luminal function of the microbiota, inhibition of lactogenic hormone secretion, metabolism in the liver, and reduced plasma nutrition [ , , , ]. In addition, the results of this study may explain how heat and cold stress during pregnancy and lactation adversely influence milk production by directly affecting MECs.