Introduction
Breast cancer is a neoplastic disorder of the mammary gland that remains one of the leading causes for cancer-induced death among women worldwide [ ]. The current understanding of this disease has been greatly improved by preclinical mouse models that mimic the complex human disease process from primary tumor growth to metastasis [ ]. Most of these mouse models are established through orthotopic inoculations of tumor cells in the mammary gland. Based on its anatomy, the mammary gland is roughly composed of two compartments that are separated by the basement membrane and the mammary epithelium, but can equally function as locations for tumor cell inoculation (Fig. 1 ). The mammary fat pad can be considered as the stromal or adipose compartment of the mammary gland and is the typical inoculation site for tumor cells in many breast cancer studies. The mammary ducts can be considered as the luminal compartment of the mammary gland and are increasingly gaining territory as inoculation site for tumor cells [ , , , , ]. Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the mammary gland and its different compartments. Macroscopic view of the mammary gland suggesting the network of mammary ducts surrounded by the mammary fat pad. The sentinel lymph node can also be identified. A more detailed view shows the luminal mammary gland compartment lined by the mammary epithelium (containing luminal- and myo-epithelial cells) and the basement membrane. The stromal/adipose compartment of the mammary gland comprises the fibroblast-rich extracellular matrix and, most significantly, adipose-rich tissue. Capillaries embedded in the adipose tissue ensure sufficient blood supply to the mammary gland
Sflomos et al. recently provided first insights in whether and how intraductally inoculated estrogen receptor (ER)-positive mammary tumor cells grow and metastasize differently than their fat pad inoculated counterparts in immunocompromised mice [ ]. Here, we further contributed to this comparison by conducting both types of inoculations using luciferase-expressing 4T1 mouse mammary tumor cells (ER-negative, progesterone receptor (PR)-negative and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative) in syngeneic and therefore immunocompetent BALB/c mice. The 4T1 primary tumor growth and metastases were monitored weekly in the tumor-bearing mice for up to 6 weeks post-inoculation. Fluctuations in the levels of chitinase 3-like 1 (CHI3L1) and lipocalin 2 (LCN2), both identified in breast cancer patients as potential prognostic biomarkers for immunoedited tumors [ , , ], were investigated at the local (i.e. the primary tumor) and at the systemic level for their correlations with tumor progression in an immunocompetent preclinical context.
As observed in the immunocompromised ER-positive preclinical model of Sflomos et al., our study provides strong indications that the epithelial microenvironment also impacts the primary tumor growth in an immunocompetent preclinical model for triple-negative breast cancer. Moreover, we show that in this context the levels of the immune system biomarkers LCN2 and especially CHI3L1 are relevant to monitor tumor progression.
Materials and Methods
Mice
Female BALB/c mice were purchased from Harlan Laboratories (The Netherlands). The mice were conventionally housed in a temperature- and relative humidity-controlled facility under a 12 h light/dark cycle. Food and water was supplied ad libitum. This research was conducted in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The study protocol was approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments of Ghent University (approval number: EC2014/101).
4T1 Tumor Cell Culture
4T1 mouse mammary tumor cells that resemble human metastatic (stage IV) breast cancer (lacking ER, PR and HER2 overexpression) [ , ], constitutively express firefly luciferase and carry the zeocin resistance gene were a kind gift from Prof. Clare Isacke of the Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, London, UK. The 4T1 tumor cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) and 2.5 μg/ml fungizone (Bristol-Myers, Squibb, Belgium) in culture flasks. Selection of luciferase-expressing 4T1 tumor cells was performed every 10 passages by adding zeocin (500 μg/ml; Invitrogen) to the culture medium. Cultured 4T1 tumor cells were harvested for usage in mouse experiments by treatment with 0.25% trypsin-EDTA (Invitrogen), washing of the cell suspension through centrifugation (1500 rpm for 5 min) and resuspension of the cell pellet in PBS. Harvested 4T1 tumor cells were counted with a Bürker chamber.
4T1 Tumor Cell Inoculations
Eight-week-old female BALB/c mice were inoculated with 4T1 mammary tumor cells in either the adipose or the luminal compartment of the third mammary gland pair. All tumor cell inoculations were conducted under inhalation anesthesia (2-3% isoflurane with oxygen for induction and 1–1.5% isoflurane with oxygen for maintenance) combined with intraperitoneal administration of the long-acting analgesic buprenorphine (10 μg/kg Vetergesic, Patheon UK Ltd, Swindon, UK).
Tumor cell inoculations in the luminal compartment of the mammary gland were conducted in lactating mice. Mice were therefore allowed to mate with 10-week-old male BALB/c mice. Following delivery, the pups were weaned after 12–14 days to enhance mammary gland development and lactation. One h after weaning, mice were inoculated in the mammary ducts through the teat canal using a 32-gauge blunt needle with 4.6x10 4 4T1 tumor cells, suspended in a 100 μl cold mixture of PBS and Matrigel (Corning, Bedford, MA, USA) (1:10).
Mice that were selected for inoculation of the adipose compartment were divided in three subgroups in which the mammary glands were present under a different physiological condition. More specifically, mammary glands in the different subgroups were either non-pretreated/naive, pretreated with 17ß-estradiol (1 mg in 10% ethanol and 90% sesame oil; Sigma-Aldrich, Bornem, Belgium) in the mammary fat pad at 7 days before tumor cell inoculation, or non-pretreated/lactating (similarly to mice that received inoculation in the luminal compartment). Inoculations in the adipose compartment were conducted by performing classical mammary fat pad injections with 4.6x10 4 4T1 tumor cells, suspended in a 100 μl cold mixture of PBS and Matrigel (1:10).
Analysis of Primary Tumor Growth and Metastasis
Inoculated mice were palpated and screened weekly using a digital caliper to allow the calculation of the tumor volume (length x width x height). Weight changes were also documented during the weekly screening. Bioluminescence imaging was performed to monitor the 4T1 luciferase-expressing primary tumors and metastases using the IVIS lumina II system (PerkinElmer, Zaventem, Belgium). To visualize the 4T1-derived bioluminescent signals, the inoculated mice were pre-anesthetized by isoflurane and a suspension of 200 μl D-luciferin in PBS (2 mg/100μl; Gold Biotechnology, St. Louis, MO) was injected intraperitoneally. Images were acquired approximately 10 min following D-luciferin injection. The luciferin is oxidized by tumor cell-produced luciferase together with ATP, yielding a detectable luminescent signal. In order to examine distant metastases, mice were sedated by administrating a mixture of 100 mg/kg ketamine (Anesketin, Eurovet Animal Health BV, Bladel, The Netherlands) and 10 mg/kg xylazine (Xylazini Hydrochloridum, Val d’Hony-Verdifarm, Beringen, Belgium) and subsequently sacrificed through cervical dislocation. Liver and lungs were harvested and 4T1-derived metastases were visualized ex vivo through imaging. Spleens were also harvested and imaged to determine the spleen surface using the living image analysis software 3.2. The intensity of the 4T1-derived bioluminescent signals from primary tumors and metastases in lungs and liver is normalized by dividing the total flux data with the selected area as calculated by the living image analysis software 3.2.
Histology
Following sacrifice of inoculated tumor-bearing mice, the 3rd mammary gland pair, primary tumors and axillary lymph nodes were dissected. Complete mammary glands and a part of the primary tumor and tumor-containing lymph node tissue was fixed in buffered 3.5% formaldehyde for 24 h at room temperature and subsequently embedded in paraffin wax. Paraffin sections of 5 μm were deparaffinized, hydrated and stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E). The tissue sections were then dehydrated and mounted to allow histological evaluation.
Measurement of CHI3L1 and LCN2 Biomarker Levels
A part of the isolated primary tumor tissue (other than the one used for histology) was homogenized and cellular proteins were subsequently extracted by mixing the homogenate with 300 μl lysis buffer (1% Nonidet P-40, 10 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 200 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol (all from Sigma-Aldrich)) supplemented with protease inhibitors (100 μM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF; Sigma-Aldrich), 0.15 μM aprotinin (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), 2.1 μM leupeptin (Roche) and 1 mM oxidized L-glutathione (Sigma-Aldrich)). The mixtures were incubated overnight at −20°C and centrifuged twice the following day at 12250 rpm for 1 h at 4°C to extract the pellet. The protein concentration was determined in the final supernatant using the Bradford Protein Assay (BioRad, Hercules, CA) and spectrophotometrical measurement (Genesys 10S). Serum of sacrificed tumor-bearing mice was prepared from blood that was harvested through cardiac puncture, incubated at 37°C for 1 h and then centrifuged at 12250 rpm for 1 h at 4°C to extract the blood clot. Lysates and sera were stored at −80°C and thawed at room temperature prior to analysis.
CHI3L1 and LCN2 levels were measured in tissue lysates and sera of tumor-bearing mice by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (Biotechne, Minneapolis, MN, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The absorbance was measured at 450 nm and 550 nm using a microplate reader and a correction for optical imperfections was performed by subtracting the readings at 550 nm from the readings at 450 nm. CHI3L1 and LCN2 concentrations in the samples were determined from the measured optical densities by applying a standard curve from known quantities of recombinant mouse CHI3L1 and recombinant mouse LCN2 using Deltasoft.
Statistical Analyses
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) tests (with Tukey and Tamhane’s T2 post-hoc tests) and Student’s t-tests were used to calculate the p-values of normal distributed data. If necessary, log 10 transformation was performed for data normalization. P-values below 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. All statistical analyses were conducted in SPSS Statistics 23.
Results
Orthotopically Inoculated 4T1 Mammary Tumor Cells Grow at a Slower Rate in the Luminal Versus the Adipose Mammary Gland Compartment
To monitor and compare 4T1 primary tumor growth in the differentially inoculated mice through sensitive bioluminescence imaging, a 4T1 murine mammary tumor cell line engineered to constitutively express the firefly luciferase gene was chosen. Syngeneic immunocompetent BALB/c mice were divided in two main groups according to the location of 4T1 tumor cell inoculation (Table 1 ). Mice selected for inoculation of the adipose compartment were further subdivided into three subgroups: a non-pretreated/naive subgroup ( n = 15), a hormonally (17ß-estradiol) pretreated/naive subgroup ( n = 15), and a non-pretreated/lactating subgroup ( n = 16). These three subgroups allowed the evaluation of the influence of different physiological conditions on the inoculation efficiency and the growth of the transplanted tumor cells within the mammary fat pad (Table 1 ). Mice selected for inoculation of the luminal compartment were all lactating without hormonal pretreatment ( n = 19, Table 1 ), a condition that allows to perform technically feasible inoculations through the teat canal without microscopic guidance or the need of surgery. All inoculations were conducted in both contralateral glands of the 3rd mammary gland pair using a relatively low amount (4.6x10 4 ) of 4T1 tumor cells, as preliminary titrated and found to be the lowest dose which still allowed reproducible inoculations (data not shown). Interestingly, tumor cell inoculations in the fat pad were remarkably easier to conduct in non-pretreated/lactating mice than in either hormonally pretreated/naive or non-pretreated/naive mice. Macroscopic, bioluminescence and microscopic localization of the 4T1 tumor cells in the first week post-inoculation in the adipose and luminal compartment of non-pretreated/lactating mice provided preliminary evidence of differential primary tumor outgrowth in both mammary gland compartments (Supplementary Fig. 1 ). Indeed, 4T1 tumor cells remained locally in the adipose compartment (i.e. fat pad) compared to a more diffuse spreading of the tumor cells in the luminal compartment (i.e. mammary ducts). Table 1 Study set-up Adipose compartment Luminal compartment Physiological condition of the mammary glands No pretreatment/naive 17ß-estradiol pretreated/naive No pretreatment/lactating No pretreatment/lactating Number of mice a /number of glands 15/30 15/30 16/32 19/38 a BALB/c mice were used as syngeneic strain with the 4T1 cell line
All inoculated mice developed palpable primary tumors over time in all inoculation groups (Fig. 2a ). The adipose compartment subgroups showed no difference in primary tumor growth up to 4 weeks post-inoculation (Fig. 2b and c ). However, a significantly slower onset of primary tumor growth was seen following inoculations in the luminal compared to the adipose compartment. More specifically, mice inoculated in the non-pretreated/lactating luminal compartment demonstrated on average 4-, 5- and 3-fold lower 4T1-derived bioluminescence compared to the non-pretreated/lactating subgroups of mice inoculated in the adipose compartment at respectively 1 week ( P < 0.001), 2 weeks ( P < 0.001) and 3 weeks post-inoculation ( P = 0.035) (Fig. 2b ). Corroborating these findings, tumor volume in the luminal compartment was on average 11-, 5-, and 9-fold lower compared to the non-pretreated/lactating adipose compartment inoculation subgroups at respectively 1, 2 and 3 weeks post-inoculation ( P < 0.001) (Fig. 2c ). At 4 weeks post-inoculation, the 4T1-derived bioluminescence and tumor volume no longer differed significantly between both non-pretreated/lactating inoculation groups ( P > 0.05, Fig. 2b and c ). Fig. 2 Differential primary tumor growth kinetics following 4T1 tumor cell inoculations in the luminal versus the adipose mammary gland compartment. Luciferase-expressing 4T1 mammary tumor cells (4.6x10 4 ) were inoculated in the mammary gland compartments of immunocompetent BALB/c mice. Mice receiving inoculations in the adipose compartment were subdivided in a non-pretreated/naive (group A, n = 15), a 17ß-estradiol pretreated/naive (group B, n = 15), and a non-pretreated/lactating (group C, n = 16) subgroup. Mice receiving inoculations in the luminal compartment were all lactating and not pretreated with 17ß-estradiol (group D, n = 19). ( a ) A representative image of the bioluminescence signal from the primary tumors in each inoculation group at 3 weeks post-inoculation. Scaling of the intensity of the bioluminescent signal was based on the radiance (p/s/cm 2 ). ( b ) Primary tumor growth was monitored weekly up to 4 weeks post-inoculation through bioluminescence imaging. The total flux radiance at the primary tumor site (in p/s/cm 2 ) is considered as a quantitative measurement for the primary tumor size. ( c ) Tumor volume (in mm 3 ) as a measurement of tumor growth was monitored weekly up to 4 weeks post-inoculation through caliper measurements. Both bioluminescence signaling and caliper measurements identified that the onset of primary tumor growth was slower in the luminal than the adipose compartment of the mammary gland. Data in panel b and c are shown as the means +/− standard error of the mean (SEM) of the measurements. ANOVA test was used to identify statistical differences between the adipose compartment inoculation subgroup C versus the luminal compartment inoculation group D. *: P < 0.05, **: P < 0.001
4T1 Mammary Tumor Cells Inoculated in the Luminal Versus Adipose Mammary Gland Compartment Equally Develop Liver and Lung Metastases with Lymphatic Spreading and Induction of Progressive Splenomegaly
Metastasis is an important aspect of malignant and aggressive breast tumors, and is usually manifested at later stages of the disease. Histological examination of primary tumor tissue from the non-pretreated/lactating adipose and luminal compartment inoculation group at 4 weeks post-inoculation revealed that both tumor cell inoculation methods eventually gave rise to invasive carcinoma and tumor cell metastasis (Fig. 3a ). Primary tumors at that time were mildly differentiated and were associated with a lymphocytic reaction. Histology of axillary lymph nodes from the non-pretreated/lactating inoculation groups provided evidence for lymphatic metastasis of tumor cells with both tumor cell inoculation methods (Fig. 3b ). Metastasis of luciferase-expressing 4T1 tumor cells to distant organs in each inoculation group was further determined through ex vivo bioluminescence imaging. The 4T1-derived bioluminescence signal was detected in lungs and in liver of all tumor-bearing mice at 4, 5 and 6 weeks post-inoculation. No difference in metastasis kinetics of 4T1 tumor cells was found in the different adipose compartment subgroups as well as between the non-pretreated/lactating adipose and luminal compartment inoculation group ( P > 0.05) (Fig. 3c ). Tumor progression was also accompanied by splenomegaly in all groups (Fig. 4a and b ), indicating the presence of an immune response to the mammary tumor growth and corroborating with the lymphocytic reaction found in primary tumor tissue. Remarkably, spleen sizes increased on average 2-fold between 4 and 6 weeks post-inoculation in the luminal compartment inoculation group ( P < 0.001) and in the non-pretreated/naive mice of the adipose compartment inoculation groups ( P = 0.002). In the other groups splenomegaly was less pronounced, but still significant between 4 and 6 weeks post-inoculation. Fig. 3 Similar distant metastases and lymphatic dissemination with tumor cell inoculations in the luminal versus adipose compartment. 4T1 mammary tumor-bearing immunocompetent BALB/c mice were sacrificed at 4, 5 and 6 weeks post-inoculation to identify and examine metastasis. ( a ) Histology of isolated primary tumor tissue from the non-pretreated/lactating adipose and luminal compartment inoculation group at 4 weeks post-inoculation. The H&E stained sections showed evidence of tumor cell invasion in tissue surrounding the mammary gland (including thoracic muscle tissue) which leads to metastasis and is accompanied by infiltration of lymphocytes with both inoculation types. ( b ) Histology of isolated axillary lymph nodes from the non-pretreated/lactating adipose and luminal compartment group at 6 weeks post-inoculation. H&E stainings revealed infiltration of tumor cells in the lymphatic tissue, identifying the presence of lymphatic dissemination with both inoculation methods. The dashed white line indicates the border between the normal lymphocyte-rich and the malignant tumor-rich region on the lymphatic tissue section. ( c ) Ex vivo bioluminescence imaging of isolated lungs and liver from each inoculation group ( n = 4 for each inoculation group at each time point). The metastasis kinetics of the luciferase-expressing 4T1 mammary tumor cells to these organs was equal in all inoculation groups. A representative image of the bioluminescence signals from 4T1-derived metastases in liver and lungs at 5 weeks post-inoculation is shown. Scaling of the intensity of the bioluminescent signal was based on the radiance (p/s/cm 2 ). Total flux radiance (p/s/cm 2 ) in isolated lung and liver tissue at 4, 5 and 6 weeks post-inoculation is represented in bar graphs and is considered as a measurement of tumor metastasis. Data in panel c are shown as the means +/− SEM. ANOVA test was used to identify statistical differences (NS = not significant) Fig. 4 Progressive splenomegaly and use of CHI3L1 and LCN2 as cancer biomarkers in immunocompetent mice with tumor cell inoculations in the luminal versus adipose compartment. Spleens were harvested from the tumor-bearing mice of each inoculation group at 4, 5 and 6 weeks post-inoculation ( n = 4 for each inoculation group at each time point). ( a ) Quantification of spleen size was performed by calculating the spleen surface (measured in mm 2 through imaging software) relatively to the mouse body weight (in grams, g). ( b ) A representative image of the spleen isolated from non-pretreated/lactating mice that were inoculated in the luminal compartment at 4, 5 and 6 weeks post-inoculation, highlighting the progressive splenomegaly within this inoculation group. ( c and d ) 4T1 primary tumors were dissected from the non-pretreated/lactating adipose and luminal compartment inoculation groups at 4, 5 and 6 weeks post-inoculation ( n = 4 for both inoculation groups at each time point). Lysates were used to measure CHI3L1 and LCN2 levels with ELISA. CHI3L1 as well as LCN2 levels increased progressively over time in the primary tumor lysates. ( e and f ) Whole blood was collected from the non-pretreated/lactating adipose and luminal compartment inoculation groups between 2 and 6 weeks post-inoculation (adipose compartment inoculation group: n = 1 at 2 weeks, n = 3 at 3 weeks, n = 4 at 4 and 5 weeks, n = 6 at 6 weeks post-inoculation; luminal compartment inoculation group: n = 1 at 2 weeks, n = 2 at 3 weeks, n = 4 at 4 and 5 weeks, n = 8 at 6 weeks post-inoculation). Serum was prepared and used to measure CHI3L1 and LCN2 levels with ELISA. Both CHI3L1 ( e ) and LCN2 ( f ) levels increased in serum between 2 and 4 weeks post-inoculation, but stabilized at 5 and 6 weeks post-inoculation, correlating with tumor progression and metastasis. Serum levels of CHI3L1 showed a slower increase in the luminal compartment inoculation group than in the adipose compartment inoculation group, corroborating with the differential tumor growth kinetics in mice that received tumor cell inoculations in the luminal versus adipose compartment. Data in all panels are shown as the means +/− SEM. Student’s t -test was used to identify statistical differences. *: P < 0.05; **: P < 0.01; ***: P < 0.001
Local and Systemic CHI3L1 and LCN2 Biomarker Levels Reflect Primary Tumor Progression After Inoculation in the Luminal Versus the Adipose Mammary Gland Compartment
Both CHI3L1 and LCN2 are upcoming tumor biomarkers which have recently been associated with breast cancer progression, suggesting their potential as prognostic tool for human breast cancer patients [ , , ]. To investigate whether they could also serve as biomarkers for primary tumor progression in our preclinical immunocompetent breast cancer models, CHI3L1 and LCN2 levels were measured both locally and systemically. For this purpose, analyses were focused on the two non-pretreated/lactating groups being physiologically most comparable to each other and therefore allowing direct comparison of the intraductally and fat pad inoculated mice. Levels of both CHI3L1 and LCN2 were found to increase up to 2-fold between 4 and 6 weeks post-inoculation in the primary tumors of both inoculation groups ( P = 0.022 for the adipose compartment inoculation group and P = 0.042 for the luminal compartment inoculation group), but did not differ significantly between the groups ( P > 0.05) (Fig. 4c and d ). Please note that biomarker levels were not measured prior than 4 weeks post-inoculation as primary tumors were too small to allow efficient dissection of the primary tumors at those earlier time points (data not shown).
In contrast to the local level, earlier time-points were additionally available for serum. As for the primary tumors, a progressive increase in CHI3L1 and LCN2 levels was observed up to 6 weeks post-inoculation in the adipose as well as luminal compartment (Fig. 4e and f ). Between 3 and 4 weeks post-inoculation, a 3-fold increase in circulating CHI3L1 and a 5-fold increase in circulating LCN2 was detected. Moreover, corroborating the differential observations at the primary tumor level, serum CHI3L1 levels in non-pretreated/lactating mice inoculated in the luminal compartment showed a slower increase than non-pretreated/lactating mice inoculated in the adipose compartment. This was demonstrated by the on average 3-fold ( P = 0.034) and 2-fold ( P = 0.041) lower CHI3L1 levels between both inoculation groups, respectively at 3 and 4 weeks post-inoculation. In contrast, the serum LCN2 levels showed a similar increase at all time points with both inoculation methods. The systemic levels of the two biomarkers eventually stabilized in all mice at 5 and 6 weeks post-inoculation.
Discussion
Inoculation of tumor cells in the fat pad or adipose compartment of the mammary gland is frequently used as a tool to induce mammary carcinomas in mice for the study of human breast cancer. On the other hand, tumor cell inoculations in the luminal compartment of the mammary ducts have been reported by several groups as alternative preclinical breast cancer models. In most of these papers the intraductal inoculations were performed to develop a mouse model for human ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) [ , , , ]. Recently, Sflomos et al. extended these models with intraductal inoculations in immunocompromised mice to recapitulate human ER-positive breast cancer [ ]. This pioneer study was also the first to gain insights into the differential growth and metastasis of inoculated tumor cells between both compartments, yet in the absence of the immune component, which is increasingly recognized to play an important role in cancer development [ ]. Therefore, the goal of our study was to include a functional immune system upon comparison of the two inoculation methods. Moreover, we focused on another subtype of breast cancer being the highly metastatic triple-negative tumors induced by injecting luciferase-expressing 4T1 mouse mammary tumor cells lacking expression of ER, PR, and HER2. We then compared their growth and metastasis in lactating, syngeneic BALB/c mice. Our results show that 4T1 tumor cells grow at a similar rate after injection in the adipose compartment of non-pretreated/naive, hormonally pretreated/naive and non-pretreated/lactating mice, indicating that these different physiological conditions of the mammary gland have no significant impact on tumor growth in the mammary fat pad. However, a significantly slower onset of primary tumor growth was observed after tumor cell inoculation in the luminal compartment compared to inoculations in the non-pretreated/lactating adipose compartment subgroup. Primary tumors in the lactating luminal compartment grew exponentially and were able to catch up with those in the non-pretreated/lactating adipose compartment subgroup by 4 weeks post-inoculation. Despite the markedly different primary tumor growth rate in the mammary ducts, distant metastases in liver and lungs seemed to occur at a similar kinetics through the hematogenous as well as the lymphatic system in both inoculation types and were accompanied by progressive splenomegaly. These results indicate that the size of the primary tumor is not related to its metastatic capacity and that the basal-like 4T1 mammary tumor cells after inoculation in the luminal compartment display a lag phase in growth before becoming aggressive and invasive.
The differential tumor progression following fat pad versus intraductal inoculation observed in the current study, was previously described by Sflomos et al. in the context of ER-positive breast cancer in immunocompromised mice. These authors suggest that TGF-ß/SLUG signaling in the mammary fat pad caused basal differentiation of the tumor cells inoculated in the latter compartment [ ]. However, the post-lactational and immunocompetent state of the inoculated mice in our study opens novel perspectives to speculate on the underlying mechanism for the observed difference in kinetics of tumor progression in both compartments. Indeed, tumor growth in the mammary gland compartments can be substantially influenced by the involution that occurs after weaning. In immunocompetent mammals, this switch from a lactating to a non-lactating state is characterized by a strongly immunogenic wound healing phenotype, that has been recognized as an important risk factor for pregnancy-associated breast cancer in women [ , ]. We therefore hypothesize that the involution-mediated pro-inflammatory environment contributes to the exponential tumor progression in the luminal compartment and exacerbates the metastatic potential of the 4T1 tumor cells. On the other hand, the observed splenomegaly in our study has been associated with 4T1 tumor cell inoculation in mammary glands [ ]. Although we have not yet investigated in detail the tumor-associated immune responses of the immunocompetent tumor-bearing mice, it is tempting to relate the different tumor progression in the adipose and luminal compartment with a different immunological signature.
Albeit cytokine profiles were not assessed, which is recognized as a limitation of our study, we focused on two alternative immune biomarkers, CHI3L1 (also referred to as breast regression protein 39 (BRP 39) in mice or YKL-40 in humans) and LCN2 (also known as neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin (NGAL)), that were kinetically measured at the local as well as systemic level. The rationale for our choice of the latter inflammatory molecules is that they have recently been discussed as highly potential biomarkers for breast tumorigenesis [ , , ]. Their increase as a function of time in the tumor and serum confirms the in vivo bioluminescent signal of the tumor cells and the caliper-based measurements of tumor volume. Although the function of both biomarkers is not completely clear in breast cancer, a lack of CHI3L1 was shown to exhibit decreased inflammation and enhanced metastasis [ , , , ]. LCN2 on the other hand seems to be important for tumor progression by maintaining iron homeostasis [ ], promoting epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) transition [ ], stimulating angiogenesis [ ] and modulating matrix metalloproteinase function [ , , ].
Of relevance for the current study, 4T1 mammary tumor cells have previously been reported to express CHI3L1 and LCN2 [ , , ]. Our results corroborate these findings showing that CHI3L1 and LCN2 levels increased in the primary tumors from non-pretreated/lactating 4T1 tumor-bearing immunocompetent mice. Serum levels of CHI3L1 and LCN2 have been associated with disease progression and poor prognosis in breast cancer patients [ , ]. In line with these observations, a previous study found elevated CHI3L1 serum levels in metastatic 4T1 mammary-tumor bearing mice compared to their premetastatic counterparts [ ]. In our study, both CHI3L1 and LCN2 levels also increased progressively in serum of non-pretreated/lactating immunocompetent mice following 4T1 tumor cell inoculation in the luminal or adipose compartment of the mammary gland. These levels correlated with the progressive increase in tumor growth and subsequent metastasis in the 4T1 mammary tumor-bearing mice, further indicating that both CHI3L1 and LCN2 truly are primary tumor-derived biomarkers for tumor progression. Nevertheless, mice inoculated in the luminal compartment showed a slower increase in circulating CHI3L1 levels, but not in LCN2 levels. This slower increase pinpoints towards a slower onset of tumor growth and progression in the luminal compared to the adipose compartment and further supports the in vivo imaging results and caliper measurements of differential primary tumor progression.
Our observations regarding slower onset of ER/PR/HER2-negative tumor growth in the luminal compartment may also have advantages for screening of novel therapeutic candidates. Indeed, the primary tumor in the luminal compartment is still relatively small when the first metastases occur, which could allow evaluation of the effect of anti-cancer agents on metastases without the need of removing the primary tumor or euthanizing the mice regardful of the size of the primary tumor. Although more in-depth analyses are warranted focusing on these first weeks post-inoculation to further elucidate the pathophysiology underlying differential tumor progression in the adipose and luminal compartment of the mammary gland, the current study has its merits as it provides innovative insights that at least encourage the use of the luminal compartment as tumor cell inoculation site for breast cancer induction in future preclinical studies.