Introduction
Development and function of the mammary gland is dependent upon dynamic interactions between the hormone responsive mammary gland epithelium and surrounding stroma. As the epithelium undergoes development to form a network of ducts during puberty, differentiation into alveolar buds during pregnancy, and the involution process that follows weaning of the offspring, local stromal cells, including fibroblasts, adipocytes and immune cells provide essential support through complex interactions [ , , ]. Macrophages are a major component of mammary gland stroma, and have the capacity to direct a diverse range of biological processes, including cell proliferation, differentiation, phagocytosis, and tissue remodeling under the direction of different cytokines and hormones [ , , , , , ].
In the mammary gland, a number of cytokines are secreted by the epithelium under particular hormonal conditions or during specific developmental stages, where they affect macrophage phenotype and function. Transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFB1), colony stimulating factor 1 (CSF1) and chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) are known as key epithelial cell-secreted cytokines that mediate macrophage recruitment, phagocytosis and activation in the mammary gland [ , , , , ]. A number of other cytokines, including interleukin 4 (IL4), interferon gamma (IFNG) and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFA) are also secreted by the epithelium and are likely to affect local macrophage populations. Significantly, aberrations in expression of cytokines that mediate epithelial cell-macrophage crosstalk increases the risk of tumour formation in some cases, and utilisation of stromal cell support by tumours can also increase the invasive and metastatic potential of the cancer. Here, we review the current understanding of the significance of epithelial cell-macrophage crosstalk in mammary gland development and tumourigenesis, and the cytokines that mediate this communication.
Macrophages in the Mammary Gland
Macrophages are highly versatile cells derived from bone marrow haematopoietic stem cells, and capable of diverse roles in development, homeostasis and immunity. Macrophages can undergo either classical “M1” activation or alternative “M2” activation [ ]. The “M1” phenotype is characterised by the expression of high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and production of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species, which can suppress tumour development, however, continuing expression of inflammatory mediators can also drive tumour progression [ , ]. In contrast, alternatively activated “M2” macrophages are considered to be involved in tissue repair and remodeling, phagocytosis of dying cells, suppression of adaptive immunity and promotion of tumour progression [ , ]. The classification of “M1” and “M2” macrophages provides a valuable framework in understanding and predicting macrophage functions in response to different stimuli. However the increasingly recognized phenotypic and functional diversity of macrophages in health and disease suggests that macrophage populations are far more diverse and complex [ ]. Therefore, not all macrophage phenotypes fit into this simplistic model.
At all stages of postnatal and adult development, macrophages are located in very close proximity to mammary gland epithelial cells. During early postnatal development in mice, macrophages are located in the mammary gland around the rudimentary ductal tree that emanates from the nipple at 2 weeks of age, and macrophages increase in abundance at 3 weeks age when terminal end buds begin to form [ , ]. During puberty, macrophages are found within the stroma that forms along the neck of the terminal end buds [ , ]. In adult life, macrophages are found to be localized around the mammary epithelium over the course of the ovarian cycle, with the highest abundance during diestrus [ ]. During pregnancy and lactation, macrophages are closely associated with the alveolar epithelium [ , ]. During mammary gland involution, macrophages increase in abundance on day 4 following forced weaning, and are located adjacent to involuting epithelial cells [ ]. The close spatial vicinity between macrophages and the mammary gland epithelium suggests that crosstalk between them is likely to occur. Indeed, macrophages are part of the epithelial stem cell niche in the mammary gland, and macrophage-derived factors are believed to be important for normal stem cell activity [ ]. A number of mouse studies have shown that macrophages are essential for mammary gland development during puberty, ovarian cycling, pregnancy, lactation and involution (Table 1 ) [ , , , , , ]. Although the cellular and molecular mechanisms of how macrophages interact with epithelial cells to regulate mammary morphogenesis are unclear, macrophages are likely to secrete a variety of cytokines and growth factors that assist hormone-mediated epithelial cell development. For example, the lactogenic effect of prolactin is inhibited by epithelial cell expression of suppressor of cytokine signalling 1 (SOCS1) [ ]. This intracellular protein attenuates signalling of not only prolactin, but a number of cytokines including interleukin 6, tumour necrosis factor alpha and leukaemia inhibitory factor, all of which can be expressed by macrophages under certain conditions, and may interact with epithelial cells to modulate appropriate lobuloalveolar development [ , ]. In addition to supporting mammary gland development, macrophages also play a crucial role in cancer progression. Macrophages participate in anti-tumour immune system responses; however, the capacity of macrophages to promote tumorigenesis has also been widely recognized in recent years. Macrophages suppress cancer development as part of innate and adaptive anti-tumour immune responses, through recognition of DNA damaged cells, phagocytosis and antigen presentation to tumour-specific T cells [ , , ]. On the other hand, macrophages can promote the proliferation and survival of cancer cells, facilitate tumour invasion, increase angiogenesis, and upregulate the production of pro-tumourigenic factors within the tumour microenvironment, and thus promote tumour progression [ , ]. Solid tumours, including breast, lung, ovarian and pancreatic cancers, frequently contain a high abundance of infiltrating macrophages [ , , , ], and the presence of tumour-associated macrophages has been found to correlate with poor prognosis in breast cancer [ ]. It is evident that the multiplicity of macrophage populations and phenotypes allows their direction of distinct biological processes, with the balance of pro-tumourigenic or anti-tumourigenic activities likely to be dependent on cytokines derived from the local tissue microenvironment [ , ]. Table 1 Macrophages have diverse and essential roles in mammary gland development Role of macrophages in mammary gland development and cancer References Puberty Ductal extension, terminal end bud morphology, collagen fibrillogenesis Cecchini et al., 1994 Gouon-Evans et al., 2000 Nguyen et al., 2002 Ingman et al., 2006 Ovarian cycle Epithelial cell proliferation, alveolar budding, clearance of dying cells, tissue remodeling Chua CL et al., 2010 Pregnancy Secondary branching and alveoli development Pollard and Hennighausen, 1994 Lactation Transition of gland to lactational state Pollard and Hennighausen, 1994 Involution Promote epithelial cell apoptosis, adipocyte repopulation O'Brien et al., 2012
CSF1
CSF1 has long been recognized as a critical cytokine that regulates recruitment, survival, proliferation and differentiation of macrophages [ , ]. CSF1 signals via the binding to its cell surface receptor, CSF1 receptor (CSF1R), which is encoded by the c - fms proto-oncogene [ , ]. CSF1 and its receptor are expressed by many different cell types, such as endothelial cells, tissue macrophages, epithelial cells, osteoblasts and trophoblasts [ , , , ]. Mammary epithelium has been identified as a major source of CSF1 production affecting local macrophage populations during mammary gland development. In human breast, high abundance of CSF1 mRNA transcripts and protein was detected in normal and non-lactating breast epithelium, with an increased abundance of CSF1 observed in lactating breast [ , , ]. Furthermore, transgenic mice expressing a reporter gene under the control of the CSF1 promoter showed strong expression of the reporter in normal and pregnant mammary epithelium which suggests CSF1 is primarily synthesised by mammary epithelium [ ]. CSF1R is predominantly expressed by macrophages in the mouse mammary gland, indicating that macrophages are the major cell type that responds to CSF1 in this tissue [ , ].
CSF1 in Mammary Gland Development
The Csf1 null mutant mouse, which is almost completely devoid of macrophages, has been used extensively to investigate the role of CSF1-regulated macrophages in mammary gland development. During puberty, Csf1 null mutant mice exhibit an atrophic and poorly branched ductal structure, with fewer terminal end buds, a lower rate of ductal elongation, and reduced branching morphogenesis compared to CSF1 replete mice [ , ]. A study utilising multi-photon imaging further analysed mammary glands of pubertal Csf1 null mutant mice, and demonstrated that CSF1-regulated macrophages promote collagen fibrillogenesis around the terminal end bud, and development of the characteristic club shape of the terminal end bud, likely to be important for normal ductal extension [ ]. CSF1-regulated macrophages are also required for regulation of mammary gland development during pregnancy and lactation [ ]. Pregnant Csf1 null mutant mice exhibit reduced branching morphogenesis, with premature alveolar development and milk protein expression [ ]. After parturition, lactation failure is observed in Csf1 null mutant mice. Milk proteins continue to accumulate in the mammary gland, but the switch to a lactational state does not occur, and the milk is not secreted [ ].
These descriptive and functional studies have shown that CSF1-regulated macrophages contribute to a number of stages of mammary gland development through regulating epithelial duct morphogenesis and alveolar development. The significance of epithelial cells as a source of CSF1 that directs macrophage activity was demonstrated by rescue of perturbed pubertal mammary gland development in Csf1 null mutant mice with a mammary epithelial cell-specific transgene driving expression of CSF1 [ , ]. This demonstrates that epithelial cell-derived CSF1 can recruit macrophages in the absence of systemic CSF1, to provide critical support for epithelial duct morphogenesis. Thus, a positive paracrine loop is established, where epithelial cells direct macrophage populations to provide functional support for further epithelial cell development.
CSF1 in Breast Cancer
A number of studies have revealed that abnormal expression of CSF1 and CSF1R is frequently observed in human breast carcinomas, and patients with advanced breast cancer have a 10-fold increase in serum levels of CSF1 compared to normal individuals [ , , , ]. Moreover, a high level of expression of mRNA encoding CSF1 in breast cancer has also been found to correlate with infiltration of tumour-associated macrophages and poor prognosis [ , ]. These studies suggest that CSF1 not only regulates macrophage function in mammary gland development, but also plays a significant role in breast cancer. Although the underlying mechanism of how tumour-derived or epithelial cell-derived CSF1 regulates macrophages in breast carcinogenesis is still unclear, several mouse studies have shed light on the significance of CSF1-regulated macrophages in mammary gland tumourigenesis.
The role of CSF1-regulated macrophages in tumour progression and metastasis was demonstrated through crossing Csf1 null mutant mice with transgenic mice carrying the polyoma middle T antigen (PyMT) oncogene driven by a mammary gland specific mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) promoter [ ]. Deficiency in CSF1 resulted in reduced abundance of tumour-infiltrating macrophages. Although growth of the primary tumour was not affected by CSF1 deficiency, the absence of CSF1 resulted in a remarkable reduction in tumour progression and lung metastasis. Furthermore, re-introduction of CSF1 to the mammary epithelium of Csf1 null mice caused increased infiltration of tumour-associated macrophages and accelerated tumour progression [ ]. Another study used immune-deficient mice with human mammary tumour cell xenografts, demonstrating that administration of small interfering RNAs and antibodies directed against CSF1 could suppress mammary tumour growth and macrophage infiltration [ ]. Further studies in Csf1 null mice have demonstrated that crosstalk between tumourigenic epithelial cells and CSF1-regulated macrophages results in a feedback loop that promotes tumour cell motility and metastasis [ ] The significance of CSF1 in directing tumour-associated macrophages in breast cancer is discussed in greater detail by Sullivan and Pixley.
TGFB1
TGFB1 is one of three mammalian isoforms of TGFB, and was first identified as a factor that promotes the transformation of cultured fibroblasts [ ]. It is a multifunctional cytokine that controls diverse biological processes, including cell proliferation, differentiation, migration, apoptosis, adhesion, angiogenesis and immune system responses [ , , ]. TGFB receptors are expressed by most cell types in the mammary gland, and thus TGFB1 is able to act on many different cell types, such as epithelial cells, fibroblasts and macrophages [ , ]. TGFB1 binds with high affinity to transforming growth factor beta type II receptor (TGFBRII), which trans activates the TGFB type I receptor (TGFBRI). The receptor-ligand binding triggers TGFB signal transduction causing phosphorylation of SMAD protein 2 and 3. Phosphorylated SMAD2 and SMAD3 form a complex with SMAD4, and the SMAD protein complex translocates to the nucleus and activates target gene expression [ , ]. However, the cellular responses upon TGFB1 signal transduction are highly dependent on the cell type that TGFB1 acts upon, the activation state of the cell, and other stimuli present within the cell microenvironment [ , , ].
TGFB1 is widely secreted by many different cell types as an inactive latent complex (LTGFB1), which consists of the active mature TGFB1 dimer non-covalently bound to a latency-associated peptide (LAP). This large latent complex is also associated with latent TGFB binding protein (LTBP) [ , , ]. A number of studies have shown that a range of extracellular stimuli including proteolysis, heat, acid or alkaline treatment, and irradiation can activate TGFB1 [ , , , , ]. Activation of latent TGFB1 is necessary before TGFB1 can exert biological effects [ , ]. TGFB1 associated with its latent complex has a half-life of 90 min [ ], whereas active TGFB1 has a very short half-life of approximately 2 min. As a result, the bioavailability of TGFB1 to a target cell is highly dependent on the sites and circumstances of its activation [ , , ].
TGFB1 in Mammary Gland Development
The gene encoding TGFB1 is highly expressed by mammary epithelial cells in pubertal and virgin adult mice, lowly expressed during pregnancy-induced alveolar morphogenesis, and is not detected in the lactating gland [ ]. The expression and activation pattern of TGFB1 in the non-pregnant adult mouse mammary gland also fluctuates over the course of the ovarian cycle [ ]. Immunofluorescence utilising antibodies specific to latent and active TGFB1 demonstrated that both forms were observed in greatest abundance during the diestrus phase of the cycle, with a linear positive relationship between their expression. During the estrus phase of the cycle however, two distinct populations of epithelial cells were evident, one population was characterised by low abundance of latent TGFB1 and the other population characterised by high abundance of active TGFB1, suggesting differential activation of latent TGFB between the two cycle stages. TGFBR1 is highly expressed by mammary epithelial cells and surrounding stroma cells in adult, pregnant and involuting mammary gland, indicating that both epithelial and stroma cells can respond to TGFB1 [ , ].
The role of TGFB1 in mammary gland development was first demonstrated by a series of experiments whereby pellets containing TGFB1 were implanted into the pubertal mammary gland. TGFB1 caused cessation of DNA synthesis in the highly proliferative terminal end buds resulting in complete inhibition of ductal growth [ , , ]. The use of transgenic and null mutant mouse models further explored the role of TGFB1 in mammary gland development. Transgenic mice that constitutively express active TGFB1 in the mammary epithelium under the control of the MMTV promoter caused remarkable retardation of ductal development as well as a significant reduction in mammary epithelial cell proliferation rate. However, alveolar development was not inhibited during pregnancy in these mice and all the transgenic females could feed full litters [ ]. However, a different transgenic model, whereby the whey acidic protein (WAP) promoter was used to drive overexpression of active TGFB1 in the mammary epithelium during pregnancy and lactation, demonstrated that alveolar development was inhibited during pregnancy [ ]. Comparison of the transgene expression level between the two transgenic strains indicated that expression of mRNA encoding TGFB1 was higher with the WAP promoter than with MMTV [ , ] which may account for the different findings on the effect of TGFB overexpression on alveolar development during pregnancy. These studies support the notion that the primary role of epithelial cell-derived TGFB1 is to inhibit branching morphogenesis and ductal outgrowth in the mammary gland.
Other transgenic mouse approaches to investigate the role of TGFB in the mammary gland have utilised a dominant-negative TGFB receptor which can inhibit all TGFB isoform signalling in the mammary gland [ , , , ]. This approach has enabled investigation of the impact of disabled TGFB signalling in a specific cell type on the overall mammary gland phenotype. The expression of such a dominant-negative receptor in the mammary epithelium under control of the MMTV promoter in virgin female mice resulted in mammary epithelial cell hyperplasia and inappropriate alveolar development [ ]. This finding suggests that TGFB acts directly on epithelial cells to maintain normal mammary gland development. The dominant negative receptor construct has also been expressed in mouse mammary stroma under control of the metallothionein promoter, with the expression of this construct induced by zinc [ ]. An increase in lateral branching of the ductal epithelium in the mammary gland was observed, suggesting that TGFB1 also acts on stromal cells to inhibit mammary gland development [ ]. Further reciprocal transplantation experiments confirmed that increased branching morphogenesis was due to the dominant negative receptor activity in the stroma, and the resulting mammary gland phenotype was mediated through TGFB-regulated stromal cells [ ]. Taken together, these studies suggest that epithelial cell-derived TGFB1 exerts biological effects on both epithelial and stromal cells, and TGFB responsiveness in both cell compartments is necessary for appropriate mammary gland morphogenesis.
The generation of Tgfb1 null mutant mice has provided further insights into the role of TGFB1 in the mammary gland. A study by Ewan et al. investigated mice heterozygous for the Tgfb1 null mutation, which have only 10 % of wild type TGFB1 abundance, and reported significantly increased ductal invasion and increased epithelial cell proliferation rate during pubertal mammary gland development [ ]. This study did not address the effect of complete deficiency of TGFB1 on mammary gland development, as mice homozygous for the Tgfb1 null mutation die at 3 weeks of age due to multifocal inflammation [ , ]. However, by using mice on a severe combined immunodeficient background, Tgfb1 null mutant mice can develop to adulthood [ ]. Tgfb1 null mutant and heterozygous mice on a background of severe combined immunodeficiency exhibit normal mammary gland development during puberty apart from fewer number of terminal end buds in Tgfb1 null mice [ ]. The discrepancy between the mammary gland phenotype of Tgfb1 heterozygous mice reported by Ewan et al. and Ingman and Robertson is likely to be caused by the different abundance of TGFB1 in the mice, with 10 and 50 % of wild type TGFB1 abundance respectively [ , , ]. However, accelerated ductal extension was observed in both studies when epithelium with very low or absent TGFB1 expression was transplanted into wild type recipients. Apparently normal mammary gland development in Tgfb1 null mutant mice together with accelerated ductal development in Tgfb1 null epithelium transplanted into TGFB1 replete mice suggested two opposing roles of TGFB1 in the mammary gland; autocrine inhibition of epithelial cell proliferation and development, and stromal cell or systemic stimulation of development [ ].
TGFB1 Affects Macrophage Phenotype and Function
Although the identity of the TGFB1-responsive cell type in the mammary stroma that supports pubertal development is not known, TGFB1 is known as a key cytokine that regulates macrophage function in many other tissues. TGFB1 acts as a chemoattractant for immature monocytes during inflammation, however when monocytes differentiate into macrophages, TGFB1 exerts primarily inhibitory effects [ ]. TGFB1 down-regulates the expression of macrophage scavenger receptor during macrophage mediated phagocytosis, down-regulates the production of nitric oxide (NO) and the expression of “M1” marker inducible NO synthase (iNOS) in activated macrophages, and inhibits the production of inflammatory cytokines [ , , ]. These inhibitory effects of TGFB1 on macrophages are likely to play significant roles in resolving inflammation and preventing disease progression [ ]. It has been noted that Csf1 and Tgfb1 null mutant mice have strikingly similar reproductive phenotypes, including perturbations in mammary gland development and function, which suggests the possibility of a mechanistic link between TGFB1 and CSF1-regulated macrophages in mammary gland development [ ].
Direct regulation of macrophage phenotype by epithelial cell-derived TGFB1 has been demonstrated through transplantation studies of Tgfb1 null and wild type epithelium into the cleared mammary gland of wild type recipients [ ]. Deficiency in epithelial cell-derived TGFB1 caused increased macrophage invasion into the epithelium and increased abundance of “M1” iNOS positive macrophages. TGFB signalling promotes expression of genes associated with “M2” macrophages including ym1 , mcr2 and mgl2 and expression of “M2” phenotypic marker Arginase I (Arg1) on macrophages suggesting that TGFB is involved in “M2” macrophage polarization [ ]. These recent findings suggest that expression of TGFB1 by mammary epithelial cells during specific stages of development alters the balance between macrophage phenotypes. However, the effect of TGFB1 on macrophage function in the mammary gland, and how this influences mammary gland morphogenesis is still far from clear.
TGFB1 and Breast Cancer
The International Breast Cancer Consortium reported a significant association between breast cancer risk and the TGFB1 L10P gene polymorphism [ ]. The TGFB1 L10P gene is linked to increased cellular expression of TGFB1 and elevated circulating TGFB1 [ ], suggesting that increased abundance of TGFB1 might increase breast cancer risk. However, the roles of TGFB1 in breast cancer are complex and conflicting, and this cytokine both suppresses tumour development and promotes tumour invasion and metastasis [ ]. TGFB1 can suppress tumour development through inhibition of cell proliferation, induction of apoptosis, and suppression of growth factor and cytokine production [ , ]. However, sensitivity to these suppressive effects of TGFB1 is frequently lost through mutations or functional inactivation of TGFB1 signalling pathways. At later stages of cancer progression, tumour cells can express large amounts of TGFB1 which appear to have pro-tumourigenic effects [ , ]. This overexpression of TGFB1 by tumour cells modulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition, impaired immune surveillance and promotes angiogenesis, therefore promoting tumour invasion and metastasis [ , ].
The utilisation of genetically modified mouse models has been particularly enlightening for the exploration of the roles of TGFB1 in breast cancer. Overexpression of TGFB1 in the mammary epithelium driven by the MMTV promoter resulted in decreased incidence of mammary tumour formation following challenge with the chemical carcinogen 7, 12-Dimethylbenz (a) anthracene (DMBA) [ ]. Similarly, MMTV-Neu transgenic mice with expression of the activated form of TGFB receptor in the mammary epithelium exhibit reduced tumour formation and longer tumour latency [ ]. On the other hand, transgenic mice carrying a dominant-negative TGFB receptor driven by the MMTV promoter develop mammary tumours spontaneously, and exhibit increased susceptibility to mammary gland tumour following DMBA administration [ , ]. Furthermore, loss of TGFB signalling via conditional deletion of TGFBRII in the mammary epithelium results in shorter tumour latency [ ] and promotion of tumour cell survival, tumour heterogeneity and enhanced invasion and metastasis [ , ]. These studies provide strong evidence that epithelial cell-derived TGFB1 exerts tumour suppressive effects in mammary gland tumourigenesis, possibly due to its autocrine role in inhibiting epithelial cell proliferation and mammary morphogenesis.
However, when tumours attain resistance to the suppressive effects of TGFB, epithelial cell-derived TGFB1 acts on adjacent stromal cells to promote an immune microenvironment conducive to tumour progression. Loss of TGFB signalling in epithelial cells is accompanied by increased expression of the gene encoding inflammatory COX2, and increased immune cell infiltration including macrophages [ ]. In MMTV-Neu transgenic mice, although expression of a dominant negative TGFB receptor transgene suppressed mammary tumour formation, the later stages of tumorigenesis including tumour invasion and metastasis was significantly promoted [ ]. Moreover, overexpression of active TGFB1 in the mammary gland of MMTV-Neu transgenic mice resulted in acceleration of tumour invasion and metastasis [ ]. Systemic attenuation of TGFB1 through administration of a soluble TGFB1 antagonist resulted in reduced spontaneous metastasis in both MMTV-Neu transgenic mice and in mice injected intravenously with malignant carcinoma cells [ ]. In MMTV-PyMT transgenic mice, ablation of TGFB signalling in the mammary epithelium caused a significant increase in pulmonary metastasis [ , ]. The pro-tumourigenic effects of TGFB1 may be a result of a number of autocrine and paracrine interactions within the tumour microenvironment, particularly in mediating stromal cell tumour support, reducing anti-tumour immunity and promoting invasion and angiogenesis [ , , ].
Clearly, TGFB is an essential component of a complex and finely orchestrated signalling pathway, which underpins normal mammary gland development and affects breast cancer progression. The role of epithelial cell-derived TGFB1 in tumourigenesis is multifaceted; it initially acts as a tumour suppressor and subsequently a tumour promoter through modulation of surrounding stroma including immune cells. Although genetically modified mouse studies have shed light on these interactions, caution should be taken in interpretation of these findings. Gene manipulation in mice generally results in complete ablation or non-physiological overexpression of the target gene, whereas altered TGFB signalling in human breast cancer is far less definitive. The roles of TGFB1 are cell specific, context dependent and can be dramatically altered through regulation of TGFB1 activation, TGFB binding proteins, receptor binding and are dependent on the concentration of TGFB1 protein at the cell surface. No doubt the rich literature on the role of TGFB1 as an essential autocrine and paracrine cytokine in the mammary gland will continue to develop as we further explore these epithelial-stromal interactions in human and mouse models.
CCL2
CCL2, also known as monocyte chemotactic protein 1, is a small pro-inflammatory cytokine and a highly potent chemoattractant for monocytes and macrophages to sites of tissue injury and inflammation [ , ]. CCL2 is produced by various cell types, including epithelial cells, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts, monocytes and adipocytes; however, as CCL2 is an “inflammatory cytokine”, it is not normally constitutively expressed. Expression of CCL2 can be induced by oxidative stress, and activation of the cell by other cytokines and growth factors [ , , ]. The sole receptor for CCL2 is CCR2 which is primarily expressed by leukocytes, particularly monocytes and macrophages. The binding of CCL2 to its receptor on leukocytes results in cell activation and recruitment [ , ].
The chemoattractant ability of CCL2 was first identified through a series of in vitro studies, where purified CCL2 protein was able to induce chemotaxis of various leukocytes, including monocytes, T lymphocytes and natural killer cells [ , , , ]. In vivo studies with genetically modified mouse models have further demonstrated the chemoattractant role of CCL2 in regulating macrophage recruitment. These studies have shown that deficiency in CCL2 or CCR2 causes perturbed recruitment of monocytes and macrophages, whereas overexpression of CCL2 results in increased macrophage infiltration [ , , ].
The human breast epithelium expresses low but detectable quantities of CCL2 protein [ , ]. Although the role of CCL2 in mammary gland morphogenesis has not been studied, this cytokine may be responsible for macrophage recruitment under particular conditions. CCL2 protein increases on day 2 of involution in rats [ ], and may act as an early chemoattractant for macrophages that infiltrate the involuting mammary gland. Similarly, an increase in serum CCL2 precedes macrophage recruitment to the mammary gland following lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation during lactation [ ]. Increased abundance of CCL2 in this context may form part of the immune signalling fingerprint that promotes partial mammary gland involution.
CCL2 in Breast Cancer
In breast carcinomas, CCL2 can be highly expressed by both the tumour and surrounding stromal cells [ , ]. CCL2 is implicated in early relapse of breast cancer and a number of studies have shown that CCL2 expression in breast carcinomas is highly associated with macrophage infiltration [ , , , ]. This is likely to be a causal relationship, as administration of a neutralising antibody to CCL2 to mice xenografted with human breast tumour cells resulted in a significant reduction in the number of infiltrated macrophages and reduced tumour growth [ ].
Population studies support the notion that increased CCL2 expression increases breast cancer risk and metastasis of established tumours. The risk of developing metastasis is significantly increased in breast cancer patients carrying the CCL2-2518 A/G promoter polymorphism compared to A/A homozygotes [ ]. As the A/G genotype causes increased CCL2 production in monocytes after stimulation compared to the A/A genotype [ ], this suggests that increased production of CCL2 plays a significant role in promoting cancer metastasis. On the other hand, the CCR2-64I polymorphism, which results in slightly impaired capacity to transduce inflammatory signals, is underrepresented in breast cancer patients [ , ], and this might provide protection from tumour formation through reduced recruitment of tumour-promoting macrophages.
Recent mouse studies have implicated tumour epithelial cell-derived CCL2 and CCR2-expressing macrophages as a critical factor in metastasis of breast cancer to the bone and lungs. CCL2 administered intravenously increased metastasis of organ-specific metastatic human breast cancer cells to both sites, conversely, blockade of CCL2 with a neutralising antibody largely suppressed metastasis [ ]. Increased metastasis was highly associated with increased infiltration of macrophages to the distant site, and tumour epithelial cell-derived CCL2 required engagement with CCR2 on cells of monocytic origin to promote tumour seeding [ ]. Extravasation of tumour cells into the lung involves a distinct population of inflammatory monocytes that require expression of CCR2 for migration [ ]. Depletion of tumour cell-derived CCL2 inhibits migration of these monocytes, and as a consequence inhibits metastasis and increases the lifespan of tumour-bearing mice. Non-epithelial cell sources of CCL2 are also significant in regulating cancer metastasis, as macrophage infiltration to the primary tumour and lung metastasis are reduced in Ccl2 null mutant mice transplanted with epithelial carcinoma cells into the mammary gland fat pad [ ].
However, not all studies support the notion that CCL2 promotes metastasis in breast cancer. Indeed, CCL2 may in certain conditions play an inhibitory role. Overexpression of CCL2 in breast cancer cells that are highly metastatic to the bone resulted in reduced metastasis to the lung and bone and prolonged mouse survival [ ]. In an orthotopic breast cancer model utilising metastatic breast cancer cells, CCL2 inhibits metastasis through recruitment of tumour-entrained neutrophils [ ]. In addition, null mutation in the gene encoding either CCL2 or CCR2 results in increased lung metastasis in MMTV-PyMT transgenic mice [ ]. The role of CCL2 in breast cancer metastasis is likely to be dependent on the specific tumour subtype and other factors within the microenvironment that regulate immune responses to the tumour. Therefore, although CCL2 exhibits an overall pro-tumourigenic role in cancer development and metastasis, it may also play a role in regulating local immune cell populations which may in some cases provide protection against tumorigenesis.
Other Epithelial Cell-Derived Cytokines
Mammary epithelial cells secrete a variety of other cytokines which are likely to affect local macrophage populations and mammary gland morphogenesis. Notably, KIM2 cells, which are a mouse mammary epithelial cell line, express interleukin 12 (IL12), interferon gamma (IFNG) and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFA) under undifferentiated conditions, and switch to expression of interleukin 4 (IL4), interleukin 5 (IL5) and interleukin 13 (IL13) when differentiated into luminal epithelial cells, suggesting that mammary epithelial cells secrete a specific cytokine signature dependent on differentiation status [ ]. IFNG appears to have no essential role in alveolar development during pregnancy [ ] IL4 and IL13 are key cytokines that promote the “M2” macrophage phenotype, and increase in abundance in the mammary gland during involution [ ]. Null mutation in the genes encoding both IL4 and IL13 results in delayed lobuloalveolar development during pregnancy [ ]. However the role of these cytokines in mammary gland involution, and whether macrophages participate in IL4/IL13-mediated morphogenesis, has not been investigated.
Conclusions
There is substantial evidence from genetically modified mouse models suggesting that mammary epithelial cell-derived CSF1, TGFB1 and CCL2 play significant roles in regulating macrophages during mammary gland development (Fig. 1 ). Cytokines expressed by mammary epithelial cells become part of a complex microenvironment that includes other stromal cells and extracellular matrix. Together with hormonal cues, this microenvironment directs macrophage function, and is essential for normal mammary gland development. However, cytokine-mediated epithelial cell-macrophage interactions can also act to both affect the risk of breast cancer, and coerce stromal macrophages to support development of established tumours. Cytokine-based therapies for breast cancer treatment are impaired by the fundamental requirements for these proteins in normal tissue homeostasis. Further studies that dissect the specific cell types and cytokine signalling pathways that regulate mammary gland morphogenesis, breast cancer risk, tumour progression and metastasis are essential to develop improved therapeutic approaches to breast cancer prevention and treatment. Fig. 1 Summary of the actions of cytokines known to mediate epithelial cell-macrophage crosstalk in the mammary gland. Epithelial cell-derived CSF1, TGFB1 and CCL2 affect macrophage recruitment and activation. Cytokine-regulated macrophages have essential roles in normal mammary gland morphogenesis and affect progression and metastasis of neoplastic breast epithelium