Introduction
Tobacco consumption has been causally implicated for many sites of cancer, most strongly and convincingly for cancers of the lung [ ], and has long been considered to account for nearly one third of all cancer deaths [ ]. Notably, many cancers for which smoking is a well established cause, including cancers of the stomach, pancreas, bladder, kidney, liver, uterine cervix, ovary, and colon [ , ] are not directly on inhalation pathways, hence supporting the notion of systemic effects from exposure.
Tobacco smoke contains a mix of hundreds of toxic chemicals with delivery via inhalation from both active and secondhand smoking (SHS) [ ]. Secondhand smoke consists of both the (sidestream) smoke given off by the burning of tobacco products and the mainstream smoke exhaled by smokers. As early as 1964, the first Surgeon General’s report on Smoking and Health noted the carcinogenic properties of tobacco smoke, notably several polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons [ ]. Cigarette smoke, either mainstream or sidestream, is now known to contain over 7,000 chemicals, 69 of which are established carcinogens [ ], including over 20 of which are established mammary carcinogens [ ]. There is good evidence for uptake of many of these carcinogens reaching mammary tissue [ ]. Although the toxicities for various agents in tobacco smoke vary with direct inhalation vs. secondhand smoking, they are considered to have similar effects [ ]. There is interesting evidence, however, that the ratio of several toxic chemicals, including benzene, formaldehyde, and benz(a)pyrene, is substantially higher in sidestream than in mainstream smoke [ ].
The relationship between tobacco exposures and cancers of the female breast, the most common cancer in women, has been the subject of animated debate, active research and several expert panel reviews. To date, human health evidence has been accumulating to suggest that active smoking is a likely cause of breast cancer, but the role of secondhand smoking (SHS) is less clear. Recent literature on the role of genetic polymorphisms influencing the metabolism of tobacco products has served to strengthen many of these observations, but also to introduce additional uncertainty.
Active Smoking and Breast Cancer
Expert Panel Agency Reviews
The contribution of smoking to breast cancer risk has been the subject of extensive review by many agencies including the Office of the Surgeon General [ , , ], the International Agency for Research on Cancer [ , ], California’s Environmental Protection Agency [ , , ], and the Canadian Expert Panel on Tobacco Smoke and Breast Cancer Risk [ , ] (see Table 1 ). As more, and better-designed, epidemiologic studies have been published there has been an increasing shift in opinion to implicate active smoking in the development of breast cancer. Table 1 Expert panel agency reviews of active smoking and breast cancer Agency Year Published Literature Covered Findings IARC Monograph 38 [ ] 1986 (18 studies) “suggestion of a decreased risk was noted” California EPA [ ] 1997 Through 1996 (21 studies) “the results are inconclusive” U.S. Surgeon General [ ] 2001 Through 1999 (24 studies) “active smoking does not appear to appreciably affect breast cancer risk” IARC Monograph 83 [ ] 2004 Through mid-2002 (44 studies) “the evidence is indicative of no association between smoking and breast cancer” U.S. Surgeon General [ ] 2004 Through 2002 (3 additional large studies since Palmer [ ] review) “the evidence is suggestive of no causal relationship between smoking and breast cancer” California EPA [ ] 2005 Through 2005 (52 studies) “the data provide support for a causal association between active smoking and elevated breast cancer risk” Canadian Panel [ ] 2009 Through 2008 (Terry [ ] meta-analysis, plus 40 more studies) “the relationship between active smoking and both pre- and post-menopausal breast cancer is consistent with causality” IARC Monograph 100E [ ] 2012 Through 2008 plus one 2009 study in preparation (>130 studies) “a positive association has been observed between tobacco smoking and cancer of the female breast”
At the turn of this century most authorities considered the human health evidence to negate a risk for breast cancer associated with smoking. In reviewing studies published to 2000, the 2001 Surgeon General’s report [ ] concluded that “[t]he totality of the evidence does not support an association between smoking and the risk for breast cancer”. The 2004 reports of the Surgeon General and the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), both covering published studies through all or part of 2002, reached the same conclusion [ , ]. Both quite strongly argued against such an association. The IARC report concluded there to be evidence “suggesting a lack of carcinogenicity of tobacco smoking in humans for cancers of the female breast”. The Surgeon General’s report concluded that “[t]he evidence is suggestive of no causal relationship between active smoking and breast cancer.”
Both the 2004 Surgeon General and IARC reports relied heavily on a meta-analysis conducted by the Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer, published in 2002 and encompassing data from 53 published studies of smoking, alcohol consumption and breast cancer [ ]. The conclusion from that analysis was that, because smokers are more likely to consume alcohol, and it is difficult to disentangle effects from those behaviors, the observed smoking related risk for breast cancer was likely an artifact of alcohol consumption, and that no tobacco-associated risks were evident in the absence of alcohol consumption. The Canadian Panel took issue with that conclusion, largely because the authors only examined ever vs. never smoking and failed to account for dose effects [ ].
Expert panels convened more recently by the California Environmental Protection Agency (CalEPA) and by Canadian agencies had the opportunity to examine as many as 40 more original epidemiologic studies on tobacco and breast cancer. Although the CalEPA report focused on secondhand smoking risks, their analysis of high quality studies of active smoking published through 2005 found a significant elevated summary risk for breast cancer, and compelling evidence for dose response [ , ]. Similarly, the Canadian Panel determined the association between active smoking and breast cancer to be consistent with causality [ , ]. In a 2009 special report from IARC, prior to the release of Volume 100 of the IARC monographs updating evidence for several potential carcinogens [ ], cancer of the female breast was classified as a tumor site with “limited evidence for causality from tobacco smoking” [ ].
Study Considerations
Many scientific reviews of the literature to date have noted features of study design and execution that may influence some of the variations in results. In an early review of studies published between 1960 and 1992, Palmer and Rosenberg reviewed the evidence from 10 case control and 5 cohort informative studies, eliminating those with ill defined exposures and controls with smoking-related conditions [ ]. Selected studies all included some covariates of breast cancer risk. Noted issues of validity included selection and recall bias, often problems in retrospective studies, and differential follow-up, often a problem in prospective studies. In all, these were deemed minor in the reviewed studies. At the time, the prevailing hypothesis was that cigarette smoking might have an inverse relationship with breast cancer because of its anti-estrogenic effects [ , ], although a contrary hypothesis was also offered to suggest a positive risk association based on direct carcinogenic effects on the breast [ ]. Palmer and Rosenberg noted some patterns of modest increased risk, and some of decreased risk, but no compelling evidence for a consistent risk association for active smoking and breast cancer.
Nearly a decade later Terry and Rohan [ ] reviewed the evidence for smoking and breast cancer from 24 case–control studies and 12 cohort studies, as well as evidence for smoking and potential intermediate endpoints such as benign breast disease and breast density. Of the 24 case–control studies reviewed, only 16 were population-based studies. Five were hospital based studies, three of which included colorectal cancer controls, which may have influenced observed null risk associations. Three of the case–control studies were screening based, hence including a non-representative sample of women. Careful consideration was given to risk associations in subgroups of particular interest, including pre- vs. post-menopausal women, women who started smoking at a young age, and smoking patterns prior to a first full-term pregnancy—all representing potential windows of increased susceptibility. General conclusions from this review were that, in fact, the evidence did not seem to support a protective effect of smoking, but rather tended to suggest a positive risk association with long term smoking.
A provocative review by Alfredo Morabia in 2002 [ ] posed the hypothesis that the failure of some studies to find a risk relationship of active smoking with breast cancer might be due to the fact that the earlier “first generation” studies did not account for the effects of secondhand smoke exposures. In the light of early suggestions that breast cancer risk was elevated with secondhand smoking [ ], he reasoned that inclusion of women with SHS exposures in the referent group in studies of active smoking would tend to artifactually bias risk estimates to the null. His review of “second generation” studies published between 1996 and 2000, which also assessed SHS risks, yielded a distinct pattern of positive risk associations with active smoking [ ].
Early studies of smoking and breast cancer tended to make relatively simple comparisons of smokers vs. non-smokers. As subsequent studies have collected greater detail in smoking characteristics, such as dose and duration, and accounted for additional breast cancer risk factors, the evidence has strengthened for a modest risk association, although inconsistencies remain. Since breast cancer is not a single disease, and many established risk factors vary by subtype, some attention has been paid to tobacco effects in relevant tumor subgroups. Some studies have suggested a risk association only for pre-menopausal breast cancer, others for post-menopausal breast cancer. Studies that have accounted for tumor receptor status have suggested the risk to be limited to estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancers, and some studies have seen stronger risk associations for ductal carcinomas, although power considerations may have limited the ability to detect risk associations for the less common ER- and lobular tumors. Most studies reviewed to date have focused on invasive breast cancer, although some have suggested different risk relationships for in situ carcinomas of the breast. Some earlier studies focused on breast cancer mortality rather than incidence.
The issue of timing of exposure is one that has gained increasing traction in more recent studies of smoking and breast cancer, as it has generally for studies of breast cancer etiology. Animal studies indicate heightened susceptibility to chemical carcinogens prior to full differentiation of the breast [ ], which in humans is prior to a first full term pregnancy [ ]. As such, the theme of early life exposure patterns set the framework for the recently released Institute of Medicine (IOM) report on breast cancer and the environment, titled “Breast Cancer and the Environment: A Life Course Approach” [ ]. The IOM report emphasized evidence from studies reporting the higher risk associations for greater smoking intensity among women who initiated smoking at an early age or prior to a first pregnancy. Variations in these and other factors in studies published to date have contributed to varying assessments of the literature.
Recent Studies
Studies published since the most recent assessments of the expert panels have tended to reinforce the role of active smoking in breast cancer risk. Of particular interest has been the evidence associated with age at smoking initiation, and smoking prior to a first full term pregnancy. In a recent meta-analysis of studies published through 2009 [ ] there appeared to be only weak associations with early age of smoking initiation or for smoking prior to a first full term pregnancy. Subsequent reports from two large prospective studies, the Nurses Health Study (with 8,772 cases of breast cancer) and the observational arm of the Women’s Health Initiative (with 3,520 cases of breast cancer), however provided stronger evidence for these risk associations [ , ]. A very large study, pooled analyses of 6,900 breast cancer cases and 9,093 controls drawn from 6 participating studies in the Breast and Prostate Cancer Consortium (including the Nurses Health Study) yielded an odds ratio (OR) = 1.28 (95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.17–1.39) for breast cancer among women with 20 or more pack-years of active smoking [ ]. Based on more recent assessments of expert panels, and the evidence from subsequently published studies, the 2012 Institute of Medicine Report on breast cancer and the environment identified active smoking as a risk factor for breast cancer [ ].
Secondhand Smoking and Breast Cancer
Expert Panel Agency Reviews
As early as 1982, the US Surgeon General’s report on Smoking and Health found the few published studies of secondhand smoking and breast cancer at that time to be provocative [ ]. Since then there have been many studies published on the topic, with less consistency of the evidence than has emerged for active smoking (expert panel reviews summarized in Table 2 ). Table 2 Expert panel agency reviews of secondhand smoking and breast cancer Agency Year Published Literature Covered Findings U.S. Surgeon General [ ] 1986 1985 (one study) “the associations between cancers, other than cancer of the lung, and involuntary smoking require further investigation…” California EPA [ ] 1997 Through 1996 (4 studies) “studies on ETS and breast cancer suggest an association” “this requires further investigation” IARC Monograph 83 [ ] 2004 Through 2002 (17 studies) “the evidence. . . is inconsistent” “the lack of an association of breast cancer with active smoking weighs heavily against the possibility that involuntary smoking increases the risk” California EPA [ ] 2005 Through 2002 (26 studies) “regular ETS exposure is causally related to breast cancer diagnosed in younger, primarily premenopausal women” U.S. Surgeon General [ ] 2006 Through 2005 (21 studies) “the evidence is suggestive, but not sufficient to infer a causal relationship between secondhand smoke and breast cancer” Canadian Panel [ ] 2009 Through Oct. 2008 (30 studies) “the relationship between SHS and breast cancer in younger, primarily menopausal women is consistent with causality.” “evidence was considered insufficient to pass judgment on SHS and postmenopausal breast cancer” IARC Monograph 100E [ ] 2012 Through part of 2009 (60 studies) “Overall, the results for an association with premenopausal breast cancer are. . .inconsistent”
Two concurrently generated expert reviews in 2005 and 2006 drew somewhat different conclusions on this topic. Both the report of the Surgeon General, The Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke [ ], and the report of the California Environmental Protection Agency, Proposed Identification of Environmental Tobacco Smoke as a Toxic Air Contaminant [ ], examined studies published through mid to late 2005. Although based on essentially the same literature, the Surgeon General’s report concluded that “[t]he evidence is suggestive, but not sufficient to infer a causal relationship between secondhand smoke and breast cancer”, while the CalEPA report concluded that “the weight of the evidence. . .is consistent with a causal association between ETS exposure and breast cancer in younger, primarily premenopausal women.” Meta-analyses included in each report yielded similarly elevated summary risk estimates for premenopausal women: relative risk (RR) = 1.68 (95 % CI 1.31–2.15) in the CalEPA report and RR = 1.85 (1.19–2.87) in the Surgeon General report. Neither meta-analysis found an elevated risk for postmenopausal women.
The 2009 report of the Canadian expert panel, a very recent expert review, included information on additional studies on SHS and breast cancer not included in the Surgeon General or CalEPA reports [ , ]. One of four additional studies found significantly elevated premenopausal breast cancer risks with SHS exposure, but the panel cited problems of exposure misclassification in two [ , ] and one study included only postmenopausal women [ ]. This report drew the same conclusion on SHS and breast cancer risk as the CalEPA report [ , ]. In the re-evaluation of studies published through most of 2008, IARC reviewers were less convinced, and based primarily on the evidence for those reporting “ever” vs. “never” exposure to SHS, considered the results for breast cancer risk, primarily in premenopausal women, to be “inconsistent” [ ].
Study Considerations
It is of interest to note that early studies of active and passive smoking and breast cancer tended to find more compelling evidence for SHS effects than for active smoking [ , , ]. The somewhat counterintuitive observation in later studies that the magnitude of risk for both active and passive smoking has tended to be the same has been the subject of some discussion, and has been cited by some as evidence against robust risk associations for either [ , ].
A 2008 meta-analysis by Pirie and colleagues, incorporating 7 cohort and 17 case–control studies published through 2007 (plus results published in the same paper from the U.K. Million Women Study cohort), presented results separately for prospective (cohort) and retrospective (case–control) studies [ ]. Summary risk estimates from the case–control studies were consistent with a positive association between SHS and breast cancer (RR = 1.21, 95 % CI 1.11–1.32), but summary risk estimates from the cohort studies were not (RR = 0.99, 95 % CI 0.93–1.05). Citing the problem of recall bias inherent in retrospective studies, the authors largely dismissed the case–control results in favor of the evidence for no association from the prospective cohort studies.
As is the case for active smoking, there are many considerations in evaluating the several studies published to date on secondhand smoking and breast cancer. Case–control studies often have problems with non-representative controls, recall bias (in which cases are more likely to recall exposures that might have caused their disease), and small numbers. Measurement error is a problem in all studies, and is likely a larger problem for secondhand smoking than for active smoking. Most early studies of secondhand smoking relied solely upon self-report of ever living with a spouse that smoked. For populations with a large proportion of women who did not work outside the home, this might be a good proxy for exposure, but for populations with many women in the workforce it might miss a major source of potential exposure [ ]. Few studies to date have collected detailed information on opportunities for exposure to the tobacco smoke of others by source, by setting and by any measure of dose. The evaluation of the Canadian panel considered the quality of exposure assessment to be a critical factor, and deemed studies with “lifetime exposure assessment” to be those of highest quality, and carrying higher weight [ ]. The lack of consistency in quantified measurements for SHS across studies, compared to the more standard measures used in studies of active smoking, undoubtedly contribute to the variations in findings.
Some studies have also queried participants about whether either parent ever smoked, as a way to assess childhood exposures. Consonant with the increasing importance of assessing early life exposures for active smoking, this might be thought to be an important aspect of studies of SHS. Exposure to SHS is associated, for instance, with earlier age at menarche, one risk factor for breast cancer later in life [ , ]. Almost universally, however, SHS studies with any metric of childhood SHS exposure tend to report null results for breast cancer risk [ , , ]. This may in part be due to the fact that self-report of parental smoking is subject to even greater error than that for living with a partner who smokes.
Recent Studies
Three large prospective cohort studies have been published since the latest expert panel review on SHS [ ], and subsequent to the meta-analysis by Pirie et al. [ ]. The evidence from two of these studies suggests a modest risk elevation in breast cancer with SHS exposure. Among 57,523 lifetime nonsmokers in the California Teachers Study, and 41,022 lifetime nonsmokers in the Women’s Health Initiative study, postmenopausal breast cancer risk was elevated among women at the highest levels of SHS exposure [ , ]. Follow-up of 36,017 nonsmokers in the Nurses Health Study through 2006, however, saw no elevations in breast cancer risk with SHS levels reported in 1983 [ ].
Genetic Susceptibility
N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2)
Some of the more intriguing evidence for smoking-related risk for breast cancer comes from the literature suggesting that it may be modified by genetic polymorphisms influencing the metabolism of tobacco smoke. Prominent among these are allelic variations in the N-acetyltransferase 2 ( NAT2 ) gene, influencing the detoxification of aromatic and heterocyclic amines (which are present in tobacco smoke). Several studies to date have reported that individuals characterized as “fast” vs. “slow” acetylators, based on NAT2 polymorphisms, may experience different risks in the presence of tobacco exposure. This finding is also cited as one of the reasons the Canadian Expert Panel found the evidence of biologic plausibility for smoking and breast cancer risk to be compelling [ , ].
In a 2002 review, Terry and Rohan examined five studies of smoking and breast cancer that had assessed risk among NAT2 rapid vs. slow acetylators [ ]. Results from these early studies were mixed, but based on the observation that risk estimates were most elevated among both pre-menopausal and post-menopausal rapid rather than slow acetylators, they speculated that NAT2 polymorphisms might likely play a role in the metabolism of heterocylic amines, which are activated by NAT2 , rather than aromatic amines, which are detoxified by NAT2 [ , ].
Contrary to the early findings, several meta-analyses of this literature now have suggested that women who are long term heavy smokers and “slow” acetylators may experience as much as a 50 % higher risk of breast cancer [ , , ]. Terry and Goodman [ ] conducted a meta-analysis of smoking and breast cancer risk according to NAT2 genotypes for 13 published studies, finding similar risk estimates among slow and fast acetylators. When they examined risk associations by subgroup, however, they found over a two-fold risk for high levels of smoking among postmenopausal women who were slow acetylators (RR = 2.5, 95 % CI 1.7–3.3) and no elevated risks for other categories.
In pooled and meta-analyses of the literature between 1996 and 2006, Ambrosone and colleagues [ ] found significant interactions with pack-years of smoking and NAT2 , with higher pack-years significantly associated with breast cancer risk in slow acetylators. Summary point estimates were similar for the 13 studies (including all but one of the studies in the Terry meta-analysis, and one subsequently published study) in the Ambrosone meta-analysis (RR = 1.49, 95 % CI 1.08–2.04), and for the 9 studies in the pooled analysis for which they could obtain the raw data (RR = 1.44, 95 % CI 1.23–1.68). This appeared to be true for both pre-menopausal and post-menopausal women, but there was no risk association with smoking among women with the NAT2 fast genotype. The overall risk of breast cancer among ever smokers, irrespective of acetylation status, in the meta-analysis was also significantly elevated (RR = 1.27, 95 % CI 1.16–1.40). A subsequent meta-analysis conducted by Zhang et al. in 2010 [ ] of 26 studies published through 2010 (including all but one of the studies in the Ambrosone meta-analysis) reported no overall evidence for higher risk of breast cancer in smokers with the NAT2 slow genotypes, but similar to the earlier meta-analysis, found a significantly elevated summary risk estimate among heavy smokers who were classified as slow acetylators (RR = 1.40, 95 % CI 1.10–1.78).
Most recently, in the very large pooled analysis from the Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium, Cox and colleagues found no evidence for risk modification of active smoking by acetylation status [ ]. Similarly, in a newly reported Canadian case–control study of passive smoking, there was little evidence for an interaction of NAT2 polymorphisms and tobacco smoke on breast cancer risk [ ].
The functional variants in NAT2 , known to be involved in aromatic amine metabolism and carcinogenesis [ ], have made it an attractive candidate for identifying susceptibility in individuals exposed to tobacco products. NAT2 acetylation status has been well established as a modifier of risk from such exposures for bladder cancer [ ]. The particular acetylator phenotype associated with a NAT2 genotype can result from any of several genetic polymorphisms in NAT2 . More than 25 SNPs in the coding region have been identified, and functional effects are known for many of them [ ]. According to the most recent consensus workshop on NAT2 nomenclature, there are 14 alleles, most of which have been characterized as fast or slow acetylators. Few studies in the epidemiologic literature assess more than a few alleles, typically three of the most common. The meta-analyses by Terry [ ] and Ambrosone [ ] each classified rapid acytlators as carriers of at least one of the rapid acetylator alleles. Three alleles were used to classify slow vs. rapid acetylators for the recent large pooled analysis from the Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium [ ]. It is not clear how comparable classification may be from each original study based on these lowest common denominators.
There is fairly good consensus that that NAT2 poloymorphisms do not influence breast cancer risk in the absence of an environmental agent such as tobacco. In a Human Genome Epidemiology (HuGE) review and meta-analysis of studies published through 2006, summary estimates showed no association with breast cancer risk for NAT2 slow-or rapid-acetylators [ ]. Studies exploring the interaction effects between NAT2 acetylation status, active or secondhand smoking, and breast cancer risk are often too small to detect such effects if they exist. This, coupled with the problems of misclassification of active or secondhand smoking exposure, and differences between studies in the NAT2 alleles examined to classify acetylation status, contribute to uncertainties from the literature.
Other Genetic Factors
In their 2006 review and meta-analyses, Terry and Goodman considered the evidence for a modification effect on smoking and breast cancer in several genes [ ]. These included genes involved in carcinogen metabolism such as the NATs ( NAT1 and NAT2 ), the cytochrome P450 (CYP) family, the glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) and the sulfotransferases (SULTs). They also evaluated these relationships for genes involved in oxidative metabolism (including SOD2 ), and DNA repair (including XRCC1 , XPD , and MGMT ). Only NAT2 showed evidence of any consistency for a smoking effect according to genotype.
A few additional studies of interest have been published on this topic since the very comprehensive review by Terry and Goodman [ ]. In a 2008 study of active and passive smoking risks for breast cancer among non-Hispanic white and Hispanic or Native American women, investigators explored the potential mediating effects of interleukin 6 ( IL6 ) and estrogen receptor alpha ( ESR1 ) polymorphisms [ ]. Although based on small numbers, their data suggested significant interaction effects for both IL6 and ESR1 among pre-and peri-menopausal Hispanic and Native American women, but not among non-Hispanic white women. These results raise the interesting notion that inflammation and/or estrogen metabolism pathways might mediate risk from tobacco exposure in some groups of women. In contrast, the analysis of NAT2 variants, smoking, and breast cancer risk in this same study yielded significant interactions for non-Hispanic white women, but not for Hispanic or Native American women [ ].
A 2009 publication on smoking and breast cancer among women enrolled in the large Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project case–control study examined patterns of association between several glutathione S -transferase (GST) polymorphisms and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)-DNA adducts, as markers of PAH exposure [ ]. Polymorphisms in the GST genes are involved in the metabolism of PAH exposures, prominently present in tobacco smoke. Although they did not see any risk association for PAH-DNA adducts, or for breast cancer, for individual GST polymorphisms, nor for measures of smoking, there was some evidence of joint effects for a 50 % increase in breast cancer among women with detectable adducts and three or more GST variants.
Although it makes intuitive sense that the effects of toxic exposures from tobacco might differentially affect individuals carrying polymorphisms that act to enhance or detoxify their action, the relationships are clearly complex. As more well conducted and well-powered studies provide evidence on the tobacco-breast cancer association, some of the current inconsistencies may be resolved. The ability to assess the influence of environmental exposures in the context of genetic susceptibility from genes with varying roles in metabolism is a growing area of research, and although it has not yet yielded definitive relationships for smoking and breast cancer, holds great promise for our better understanding of these important risk relationships.
Summary
Although not initially considered to be a tobacco-related cancer, breast cancer has been the subject of well over 100 studies of tobacco-related risk, both via active and secondhand smoking. This is an area that has been extensively studied, and widely reviewed. The very careful and comprehensive attention from expert agency panel reviewers over time has reflected the increasing sophistication with which many of the original research efforts have been conducted. As more information has accumulated, some inferences have shifted, and some new questions have arisen. Early speculation that smoking might be protective for breast cancer has given way to more compelling evidence that it might play a causal role. Although still a topic of some debate, consensus has been building that active smoking is likely to pose a modest risk for breast cancer. Contributing to that view is evolving evidence for biologic plausibility, risk estimates from large well designed human health studies, evidence from pooled and meta-analyses, and evidence for higher risk in more susceptible subsets of the population.
Highlighted from the literature on active smoking and breast cancer is the importance of timing, with evidence for increased risk among women who initiated smoking at an early age and/or who smoked heavily prior to a first full term pregnancy. This is complemented by increasing evidence for host susceptibility associated with genetic polymorphisms involved in tobacco metabolism.
Less clear is the role of secondhand smoke exposure in breast cancer risk, although there is some speculation from reviews to date that this may be of particular importance for pre-menopausal breast cancer. As active smoking rates have declined in the population, this has become a more important source of tobacco exposure, and has been the subject of increasing policy restrictions on smoking in public places.
As more large and well-designed studies are collecting biospecimens, and as new methods are being developed to analyze the complexity of questionnaire and genetics data, there is promise for better assessing risk relationships between tobacco exposures and breast cancer risk. Irrespective of their role in breast cancer etiology, however, both active and secondhand smoking have been well documented to be responsible for a host of adverse health outcomes and targeted as important for public health risk reduction strategies.