Introduction
Ionizing radiation is one of very few environmental agents that is an unequivocal carcinogen in humans [ ]. The efficiency of radiation for increasing cancer depends on radiation dose (reported herein in units of Gy or Sv, which for the purposes of this review are similar) and quality [ ]. The risk of cancer induction also varies widely across different tissues; however, the increased risk of fatal radiation-induced cancer for a general population following chronic exposure is about 5 % per Sv [ ]. Most cancer risk takes decades to be manifest. Notably, the use of ionizing radiation in diagnostic and therapeutic medical applications has doubled the annual dose of the American public over the last 20 years [ , ].
Radiation epidemiology shows that there is a strong effect of age at exposure on modifying breast cancer risk. Risk is inversely related to age at exposure, with the youngest children having the highest risk. Young girls (<10 years old) exposed to ionizing radiation at Nagasaki-Hiroshima were much more likely to develop breast cancer but there was no significant elevation for comparable radiation doses among women > 40 years old at the time of the A-bomb detonation [ ]. A similar age effect was found for high dose radiation exposures to the breast from fluoroscopy for tuberculosis and radiation therapy for Hodgkin’s disease (HD) [ , , ]. These observations point to a common theme of increased risk for a young age at exposure even though there are substantial difference in total dose, fractionation and volume.
Ionizing radiation is a complete carcinogen able to both initiate and promote cancer. Ionization of DNA causes double and single-strand breaks that in turn activate the DNA damage response, a molecular cascade necessary to recognize and repair such breaks. The possibility of misrepair initiating an oncogenic mutation is widely believed to be the critical mechanism of radiation carcinogenesis [ ]. Both human and experimental animal data also suggests that there are poorly understood factors associated with maturation, aging and other life events, like pregnancy, that are permissive for, or actively promote, radiation carcinogenesis. It is thought that the fact that functional morphogenesis occurs after birth, largely under the stimulus of ovarian hormones during puberty and pregnancy is somehow linked to the degree of radiation risk for breast cancer as a function of age at exposure, which is not observed in most tissues.
Radiation can not only affect genotype as a result of misrepaired DNA damage, but can also induce heritable phenotypic changes that affect the composition of tissues and the behavior of the epithelial cells at risk for transformation. Thus recent studies suggest that host biology, which is persistently altered by radiation exposure, can also contribute to breast carcinogenesis. This perspective will broadly summarize key epidemiological findings, which can be found in more detail in cited reviews [ , , ]. The main goal is to highlight new concepts about radiation carcinogenesis developed from experimental investigations.
Epidemiology of Radiation Exposure and Breast Cancer
A combined analysis of almost 78,000 women and 1,500 breast cancer cases from eight cohorts showed radiation dose response linearity and little effect of dose fractionation on absolute risk [ ]. Boice reviewed fourteen cohort studies that provide quantitative information on the level of risk following a wide range of doses in different populations around the world [ ] and discussed three key features of these data: dose response linearity; the age at exposure effect in which risk is inversely related to exposure age and exposures past the menopausal ages appear to carry a very low risk; and the minimal effect of fractionating dose on subsequent risk. Thus total dose is associated with excess cancer, regardless of fractionation, e.g. low radiation doses as occurred with repeated diagnostic fluoroscopy [ , ]. Either excess absolute risk (EAR) or excess relative risk (ERR) for breast cancer in three high dose/rate studies were similar to those from two low dose/rate studies [ ]. Chronic low dose rate exposure the Mayak nuclear weapons facility in Russia discharged liquid radioactive wastes into the Techa River in the 1950s causing protracted exposure of almost 10,000 women to estimated mean doses of 4 cGy [ ]. A significant linear radiation dose–response relationship was observed ( P =0.01) with an estimated excess relative risk per Gy of 5.00 (95 % confidence interval (CI), 0.80, 12.76). It is estimated that 12 % of the 109 observed breast cancers could be attributed to radiation. This is in contrast to other organs, like thyroid in which high dose rate and low dose rate exposure show a 6-fold difference in EAR [ ]. However the epidemiology is not entirely consistent. Breast cancer risk was reduced with fractionation in children under age 1 who were irradiated for enlarged thymus while it was not those irradiated for hemangioma [ ], and studies of airline crews, who receive a chronic low dose rate from cosmic radiation, have been inconclusive [ ]. These examples underscore the difficulty of interpreting epidemiology (reviewed in [ ]).
The rate of breast cancer in post-war Japan was among the lowest in the world, but breast cancer contributes a disproportionately large fraction of radiation-related cancer burden in the atomic bomb survivors [ ]. The data from the Hiroshima and Nagasaki survivors provides strong evidence for increased breast cancer following single acute doses of the order of 20 cGy and linearity with increasing dose [ , , ]. Land et al. conducted a nested case–control study of 196 breast cancer patients and 566 matched controls among Japanese atomic bomb survivors [ , ]. Statistical modeling indicated that early first birth, multiple births and long cumulative lactation history protected against radiation-induced breast cancer in this population. The protective effect of age at first birth held for women parous at exposure and for women who completed a first pregnancy only after radiation exposure.
Medical radiation exposures are linked to increased risk of breast cancer. Radiotherapy for breast cancer can result in a significant radiation exposure to the contralateral breast and is related to development of secondary breast cancers only among women younger than 45 years of age [ ]. Increased risk of breast cancer was noted in populations of girls with scoliosis who were usually monitored with medical X-rays from the onset of the growth spurt through puberty and adolescence [ ]. TB patients, monitored with fluoroscopies, also show greater breast cancer incidence later in life [ ]. The average dose to the breast was lower in the scoliosis cohort (0.11 Sv) compared to the fluoroscopy cohorts (0.79 and 0.89 Sv). X-rays were used for treatment of benign breast disease and acute postpartum mastitis in women of childbearing ages [ , ]. Doses to the breast were considerably higher compared to the above mentioned studies. Women with benign breast disease had a 3.58 fold increase risk for breast cancer when compared to a control group never treated with radiation [ ]. Women treated for postpartum mastitis who were exposed to more than 1.5 Sv were at 2 to 4-fold increased risk of breast cancer compared to a combined control group of siblings and un-irradiated mastitis patients [ ]. Similar radiation doses of several Gy used to treat hemangiomas on the chest region of children under age 1 year are also linked to elevated risks of breast cancer [ ].
Pooled analysis of eight radiation-exposed cohorts showed that women with benign breast disease (BBD) or post-partum mastitis had the highest excess rates of breast cancer following radiation therapy for those disorders, an effect most pronounced among young women with BBD [ ]. The observation might be partly related to the underlying association of BBD and breast cancer. Hill et al. reported increased risk of breast cancer in a case–control study of young women (<40) exposed to diagnostic radiation before age 20, but only among women who also reported a history of BBD [ ]. The long latency (approximately 40 years) between exposure and disease occurrence, the absence of excess when exposure occurs after age 45, and the effect of tissue and reproductive processes suggests that breast biology is a strong determinant of radiation risk.
Evidence of a Window of Susceptibility for Breast Cancer
Unraveling the biological basis for breast cancer risk is important because radiation exposure from medical uses, accidents, combat, and occupation (e.g. space travel), is unavoidable. Nonetheless, these populations are not easily compared due to differences in dose, dose rate and radiation quality. Ionizing radiation can be broadly classified as sparsely ionizing (e.g. X-rays, γ-radiation) or densely ionizing (e.g. α particles, cosmic radiation). Densely ionizing radiation is often more carcinogenic than sparsely ionizing [ ]. A recent mammary carcinogenesis studies in rodents by Shimada and colleagues demonstrate these challenges and further support the concept that age at exposure is critical factor in determining the subsequent cancer risk [ ]. In this study both age of exposure and type of radiation were compared. Female Sprague–Dawley rats were irradiated with either sparsely ionizing 137 Cs γ rays, or densely ionizing 290-MeV monoenergetic carbon ion beam (linear energy transfer, 13 keV/μm) as fetuses, juveniles or adults. When exposed at embryonic day 3, 13, or 17 or as adult mice 15 weeks after birth, rats did not develop more tumors over a lifetime (90 weeks) compared with the control group. However rats irradiated 1, 3, and 7 weeks after birth showed similar dose dependent increase of tumors to γ rays. In contrast, the effect of carbon ions increased with advancing age. When compared to γ rays the relative biological effectiveness (i.e. effect of densely ionizing radiation divided by that of sparsely ionizing radiation) were 0.2 (−0.3, 0.7), 1.3 (1.0, 1.6), and 2.8 (1.8, 3.9) (mean and 95 % confidence interval) for animals that were 1, 3, and 7 weeks of age, respectively. This lifetime study underscores three important factors affecting radiation carcinogenesis: genetic background, age at exposure and radiation quality.
The conceptual and mechanistic basis of radiation carcinogenesis impact studies of other exposures associated with risk in humans. For example, since DNA damage is thought to be the main mechanism by which radiation increases cancer, the WECARE study sought to determine whether there is a relatioship between DNA damage response gene polymorphisms and second breast cancers after radiotherapy [ ]. Just as the knowledge of its effect on DNA damage and responses focused attention on DNA damage pathway genes in the search for polymorphisms associated with cancer risk, understanding radiation’ can reveal unsuspected environmental agents. For example, radiation generates reactive oxygen species, thus environmental agents that induce oxidative stress, like asbestos, could have comparable consequences. Radiation also subsequently elicits processes like inflammation that are common to many models of carcinogenesis.
The age dependence of breast cancer risk following radiation motivates concern that a window of susceptibility might also be true for other environmental exposures. Most studies of breast cancer and exposure to DDT, a pesticide introduced in 1945 and banned in the US in 1972, assess exposure after breast maturation, after most DDT had been eliminated, and after DDT had been banned. An innovative prospective, nested case–control study assayed blood samples obtained during 1959–1967 from young post-partum women for p,p ′ - DDT, the active ingredient of DDT [ ]. High levels of serum p,p ′ - DDT predicted a statistically significant 5-fold increased risk of breast cancer before the age of 50 among women who were under 14 years of age when DDT came into widespread use, and mostly under 20 years as DDT use peaked. Women who were not exposed to p,p ′ - DDT before 14 years of age showed no association between p,p ′ - DDT and breast cancer. The authors note that many women exposed during the period of heavy DDT use are not yet at the peak age of breast cancer diagnosis. These findings are consistent with rodent studies which show that effects of environmental exposures depend on whether the exposure occurs during critical periods of mammary development [ , , ].
A systematic review of 11 retrospective studies and three case–control studies concluded that risk of breast cancer increased as early as 8 years following chest radiation and did not plateau with increasing length of follow-up [ ]. The authors point out that the cumulative incidence of breast cancer by 40–45 years of age ranged from 13–20 %, and by 25–30 years of follow-up ranged from 12–26 %. This incidence is similar to that in women with a BRCA gene mutation, where by age 40 the cumulative incidence ranges from 10–19 % and is substantially higher than in young women in the general population in whom the cumulative incidence of invasive breast cancer by age 45 is only 1 %. However, the ERR of 0.06 (95 % CI: 0.01, 0.13) per Gy estimated for HD survivors as a function of dose provides a lower ERR is than that estimated for the Japanese life span study [ ].
A 2007 study from Milan revealed an striking new aspect of radiation effect on breast tumor type. In this study, the molecular and marker analysis of the breast cancers of women exposed to therapeutic radiation for childhood/young adult cancers substantiated high risk of breast cancer diagnosed at an early age (39 compared to 57 in a sporadic consecutive series) and revealed an unexpected higher frequency of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative tumors [ ]. More than half (53 %) of the breast carcinomas from irradiated women showed features of basal-like tumors compared to 11 % in a consecutive series of breast cancers not preceded by radiation. When compared to age-matched controls, basal-like cancer were still significantly more likely ( p =0.0001) in women irradiated at the expense of HER2+ and luminal cancer subtypes. Interestingly there is little evidence of disproportionate frequency of contralateral ER-negative breast cancer in older women treated with radiation for breast cancer, suggesting a physiological basis for the shift identified in the Milan study. Consistent with this idea, the timing of radiotherapy was important; girls treated with radiation after breast maturation were much more likely to be ER- and progesterone receptor-negative and p53 and cytokeratin 5/6 positive and less likely to be HER2+ compared to whose radiation exposure occurred before maturation [ ]. Similarly, Broeks and colleagues used expression profiling to compare sporadic and radiation preceded breast cancer. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering resulted in clustering the 22 tumors obtained from patients who developed breast cancer after radiation therapy for HD from 20 control tumors. The radiation–preceded tumors were characterized by genes associated with a more aggressive tumor type [ ]. These studies suggest that radiation exposure not only modifies the timing of breast cancer, but the type as well, which is unexpected and understudied.
Effect of Life Events on Radiation Risk
HD patients whose ovaries receive 5 Gy or more or who were treated with certain chemotherapies have decreased breast cancer risk due to ovarian deficit or early menopause, respectively, supporting the widely held view that the duration of ovarian hormone exposure is strongly associated with cancer risk [ ]. More than 50,000 women in the United States have been treated with chest radiation (≥20 Gy) for a pediatric or young adult cancer. According to the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study, breast cancer risk is greatest among women treated for HD with high-dose mantle radiation, but it is also elevated among women who received moderate-dose chest radiation (e.g., mediastinal, lung) for other pediatric and young adult cancers, such as non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, Wilms tumor, leukemia, bone cancer, neuroblastoma and soft tissue sarcoma [ ]. Children treated for cancer with radiotherapy have a 2.9 relative risk of subsequent malignancy compared to those without [ ]. These women are at significantly increased risk of breast cancer and breast cancer mortality following cure of their primary malignancy, comparable to that of women with BRCA1 mutations [ ].
Pregnancy also affects breast cancer risk, but is associated with a short (5–10 years) increase in risk and a longer term protective effect [ ]. A recent pregnancy is associated with particularly aggressive disease, which experimentally is associated with Cox-2 and collagen remodeling [ ]. In contrast, studies in rats by Clifton et al. showed that radiation-exposure followed by pregnancy reduced tumorigenesis [ ]. They speculated that differentiation of a given mammary cell for milk secretion markedly reduces the proliferative potentiality of that cell, such that the presence of hormones stimulate end-differentiation of the mammary cells, and radiation-altered mammary cells are lost from the high proliferative potential population. Sivaraman et al. proposed a cell-fate hypothesis to explain the protective effect of pregnancy on breast cancer risk in general [ ]. They suggest that the hormonal milieu of pregnancy affects the developmental fate of a subset of mammary epithelial cells, possibly by changing signal transduction and/or gene expression, thereby reducing the risk of breast tumor development following subsequent carcinogenic exposures. However neither hypothesis would explain the data from atomic bomb survivors showing that early pregnancy either before or after exposure reduces the risk of radiation-induced breast cancer.
Mammary Stem Cell Response to Radiation
Understanding the biology of mammary stem cells is considered to be fundamental to understanding the development of cancer because their properties and programs make stem cells an ideal target for neoplastic transformation [ , , , , , , ]. One idea is that stem cell transformation can lead to functionally unlimited number of progeny. A single cell can give rise to an entire mammary epithelial tree [ ], although this capacity appears to be highly restricted in situ. Chemical carcinogen dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) and N-methylnitrosourea (NMU) treatment during ductal morphogenesis concomitant with stem cell symmetric division dramatically increases tumorigenesis [ , , ].
Another idea is that the mitotic index of stem cells makes them highly susceptible to mutagenesis, i.e. the damage can be ‘fixed’ by passing it on to daughter cells that then expand further, each round of replication being the occasion for more mistakes. If so, then physiological events that stimulate proliferation like puberty and pregnancy should be associated with sensitivity to carcinogens. Both human and mouse mammary glands are highly proliferative while undergoing lobular and ductal morphogenesis respectively during puberty [ ]. Even though proliferation during pregnancy is by far greater, pregnancy, at least at a young age, is protective long term, which may be explained due to other mechanisms of cellular differentiation [ ] or altered hormonal signaling [ ].
Some studies suggest that stem cells have distinctive capabilities in terms of repair or response to DNA damage. For example, AldH, which is expressed by stem cells, is a detoxification enzyme [ ]. Cairns proposed that stem cells maintain a primordial strand to prevent introducing replication errors [ ]. Potten and colleagues showed that stem cells in adult tissues like skin, gut and brain are most susceptible to cell killing by ionizing radiation [ ]. Consistent with sensitivity, Rosen and colleagues showed that high (4 Gy) dose radiation significantly decreased ( p <0.01) the mouse mammary population marked by CD24+CD29+, which is enriched for mammary repopulating units [ ], even though side-population or Sca+ progenitor cells were radiation resistant [ ].
Only a few studies have attempted to assess the radiation sensitivity of the mammary stem cells or progenitor cell. A comprehensive analysis of the radiosensitivity of rat mammary clonogens was conducted by Gould and colleagues [ , , ]. In this model, monodispersed rat mammary epithelial cells are injected into the intrascarpal fat pad where they form clonogenic organoids. The surviving fractions of clonogenic mammary cells measured in groups of virgin rats from 1 to 12 weeks after birth after single exposures to 137 Cs γ-rays [ ], showed high radiosensitivity of clonogens from prepubertal rats, which decreased with the onset of puberty at between 4 and 6 weeks of age. Additional studies suggest that the ability of immature tissue to process chemical carcinogen damage is different than that of the mature tissue [ ].
To test whether stem cells are susceptible to transformation, a clonogenic transformation assay was developed by experimental strategy in breast and thyroid, Clifton and colleagues, who found transformation frequencies as high as one cancer per 10–300 clonogens [ ]. Similarly Kennedy and Little showed similarly high initiation, as evidenced by focal transformation assays, in irradiated C3H10T1/2 mouse fibroblasts [ , ]. Interestingly, transformation in either fibroblasts or epithelial cells was suppressed when the cells were at high density or cultured in the presence of additional unirradiated cells. These data and others led to the conclusion that radiogenic initiation can be a high frequency epigenetic event rather than a low frequency mutational process [ ].
Recent studies suggest that stem cell activity can change as a function of life events or environmental exposures known to influence breast cancer risk. Pregnancy reduces the long term risk of developing breast cancer if it occurs early (reviewed in [ ]. One study suggests that an early pregnancy during ductal morphogenesis can reduce stem cell number [ ], while another study showed that a later pregnancy showed no effect [ ]. Other studies in mice suggest that changes in stem cell number could associate with long term risk. Transgenic mice in which stem cell self-renewal is increased are more susceptible to cancer [ ]. It may be that radiation affects the distribution of cells along the mammary hierarchy mediated in part by Wnt signaling [ ]. Freshly isolated mammary epithelial cells sorted by FACS for stem cell markers following exposure in vivo to a high dose of radiation (4 Gy) showed that this population decreased by approximately one-third. However radiation exposure selectively increased the Sca1 positive population in vivo, the side-population of primary mammary epithelial cells after 3 days of culture, and the Sca1 positive fraction of MCF7 breast cancer cells and COMMA-D murine epithelial cells. The authors thus concluded that mammary progenitor cells increase following radiation, which they attribute to increased survivin signaling [ , ]. Although a high dose (400 cGy) decreases mammary repopulating cells [ ], a low radiation dose (10 cGy) increases stem cells frequency as identified by either marker analysis or functional repopulating capacity [ ].
Radiation Induced Mutagenesis and Genomic Instability
Evidence from rodent models indicates that neoplastic initiation by radiation or chemical carcinogen in rodent models is relatively frequent [ ], while progression to neoplasia is much less frequent [ ]. Studies from Gould and Clifton showed that approximately one in 13 irradiated (7 Gy) rat mammary clonogens gave rise to cancer, which indicated that at least 1 of approximately 95 clonogens was radiogenically initiated [ ]. A similar high initiation frequency was seen in grafts of methylnitrosourea (MNU)-treated clonogens. Such initiation is far more frequent than specific locus mutations. However, larger cell inocula suppressed cancer incidence per clonogen inversely as the numbers of irradiated or MNU-treated clonogens per graft increased. Addition of unirradiated cells to small irradiated graft inoculates also suppressed progression to tumors. In general, the expression of dysplasia in vivo and neoplastic transformation in culture is inversely correlated with the number of cells seeded [ , , , , ]. The nature of the cell dose dependence is unclear but appears to be due to suppression of the initiated cells’ expression of its altered phenotype by the normal cells. These epithelial-epithelial interactions are clearly involved in a variety of normal and neoplastic processes.
The preneoplastic phenotype in situ is usually recognized as a focus of autonomously proliferating cells, or hyperplasia, progressing to a focus characterized by cellular and morphological disorganization, a dysplasia. Subsequent appearance of neoplasia at the sites of such lesions has been well-documented in experimental models in a variety of tissues [ ], but it is not clear what factors dictate the efficiency with which preneoplasitic lesions progresses to clinical cancer. In mouse mammary gland, depending on the carcinogen, parous status and hormonal environment of the gland, hyperplasias will appear to be ductal, alveolar or ductal-alveolar [ ]. Some carcinogens, such as DMBA and radiation, produce ductal hyperplasia and dysplasia [ ], which are similar in their range of severity and histology to those abnormalities observed in the pathogenesis of human cancer [ ]. Dissociation of exposed tissues and transplantation to naive host glands increases the expression of malignancy over those observed in intact mammary glands, indicating that tissue interactions suppresss preneoplastic potential present long before it is expressed in the intact gland [ ].
The frequency and severity of dysplasia is also affected by the size of the inoculate and the age of the animal at analysis [ ]. Interestingly, smaller inoculates are most effective. This is thought to reflect the increased number of cell divisions required to fill the mammary gland, which allows for a greater opportunity to express the altered phenotype. Analysis of the recombinant tissue during morphogenesis (immature) or in a resting state (mature) allows a distinction to be made between the expression of the preneoplastic phenotype, which is greatest in the growing gland, and the persistence of the altered phenotype in the resting gland. Some lesions regress or remodel following the cessation of growth. However, the altered phenotype can be re-expressed upon retransplantation even in an apparently normal recombinant gland. Persistence of a lesion following cessation of gland growth is considered to reflect the acquisition of some autonomy from tissue regulatory mechanisms. Increasing the time between carcinogen exposure and transplantation increased the frequency of persistent preneoplastic lesions, which also indicates progression of cells that continue to acquire new characteristics with time. If 1 year is allowed to elapse between exposure and transplantation then a third characteristic is observed: the ability to elicit a host response [ ]. The dynamics of neoplastic progression were found to be similar for exposure to DMBA or radiation at these low doses and this reveals commonalities between two qualitatively different carcinogens. Although DMBA did induce more persistent lesions than radiation, when 1 year elapsed between exposure and transplantation this difference was eliminated.
A qualitative relationship between preneoplastic lesions and tumorigenesis is generally accepted because such lesions have been noted to precede neoplasia and progressively acquire phenotypes consistent with increasingly autonomous behavior. The quantitative relationship is less well understood. The efficiency of tumor induction is usually related to dose of a given agent, however other factors such as the toxicity of the agent or the hormonal status of the tissue can influence tumour incidence. For example, at DMBA exposures below 0.125 mg tumour incidence is highly dose-dependent, at doses above 0.25 mg toxicity and carcinogenic effects in other tissues become important, and at higher doses the histological tumour type changes from adenocarcinoma to adenocanthomas [ ]. The preneoplastic lesions preceding such dose effects have not been studied. Experimental models that maximize the progression to frank tumours for radiation have been developed by altering the hormonal environment of the gland [ ] but have not yet been studied in terms of their specific effects on preneoplastic lesions. As noted previously, efficiency of radiation for initiating tumourigenesis depends on dose and the quality of radiation [ ], and the latter also influences progression [ ].
Rats stimulated with high prolactin levels and glucocorticoid deficiency for 48 days increased tritiated thymidine uptake by nearly fourfold, and total mammary clonogens by about five-fold [ ]. Irradiation with 4, 40, and 80 cGy X-rays after hormone stimulation increased total mammary carcinomas per rat-day-at-risk linearly with dose, while a dose of 40 cGy X-rays before hormone treatment yielded tumour frequencies insignificantly different from unirradiated controls. In contrast to results with X-rays, 10 cGy neutrons prior to hormone treatment yielded tumour frequencies and latencies insignificantly different from those for 10 cGy neutrons after hormones. The authors concluded that the carcinogenic action of X-rays, but not of neutrons, was thus influenced by total clonogen numbers and/or their proliferation rates.
The Irradiated Mammary Microenvironment
Epithelial-stromal interactions, mediated by the extracellular matrix, play a pivotal role in normal mammary gland biology [ ]. Normal stroma can suppress neoplastic progression [ , , , ]. Specific stromas are induced by breast cancer [ ]. Indeed it has been postulated that cancer can be promoted by an abnormal stroma (reviewed in [ , , , ]). Based on the observation that radiation induces rapid and persistent remodeling of the mammary microenvironment (reviewed in [ , , , , , , ], we and others have postulated that radiation-induced microenvironments contribute to the carcinogenic potential of radiation [ , , , ].
We designed a mammary chimera model to test whether radiation effects on the stromal microenvironment contribute to its carcinogenic potential [ , ]. This model consists of surgically removing the endogenous epithelium of the mammary gland at puberty, the mouse is irradiated and the gland subsequently transplanted orthotopically with unirradiated, non-malignant epithelial cells. In one set of experiments, host irradiation with a high dose (400 cGy) up to 2 weeks before transplantation with unirradiated, immortalized mammary epithelial cells, led to rapid formation of large, aggressive tumors even though normal outgrowths formed in non-irradiated hosts [ ]. There are several other examples of such ‘non-targeted’ radiation effects. A series of experiments from the laboratory of Kaplan in the late 50’s showed that mice irradiated (~700 cGy) and then transplanted with an unirradiated thymus develop thymic lymphoma at the same incidence and latency as intact irradiated mice [ ]. An immortal myogenic cell line forms tumors rapidly in irradiated mice but gives rise to normal tissue in unirradiated host muscle [ ]. Likewise, brain tumors develop in Ptch mutant mice following partial body irradiation (300 cGy) even when the brain is shielded [ ]. Together these studies are evidence of mechanisms of radiation acting via persistent changes in the host or microenvironment.
A radiation chimera model consisting of donor epithelium primed to undergo neoplastic transformation by genetic loss of p53 transplanted to mice irradiated with a low dose (<1 Gy) has proved to be particularly informative [ ]. Syngeneic Trp53 null mammary gland transplanted to wildtype hosts develop normal ductal outgrowths but undergo a high frequency of spontaneous transformation. This is evident histologically around 8 months post transplantation as ductal carcinoma in situ and genomic instability. By 12 months most (~60–70 %) transplanted glands exhibit palpable tumors that are classified as carcinomas [ ]. The high frequency of neoplastic transformation in Trp53 null mammary gland is thought to be enhanced by a propensity for stem cell self-renewal [ ], mediated by Notch signaling [ ]. Moreover, the tumors generated from Trp53 null mammary transplants recapitulate 4 of the 5 intrinsic subtypes defined by expression profiling of human breast cancer [ ]. In radiation-chimera experiments in which mice were exposed to doses of 10–100 cGy, the first tumors were detected at about 170 days post transplantation in both irradiated and non-irradiated hosts. By 300 days, 100 % of transplants in hosts irradiated with either 10 or 100 cGy had developed tumors compared to 54 % of transplants in unirradiated hosts. Tumor development was accelerated by more than 2 months in hosts exposed to low dose irradiation.
Surprisingly irradiated mice gave rise to almost twice as many ER- negative tumors than unirradiated hosts, which implicates radiation-induced heterotypic signaling in determining critical clinical features of breast cancer. ER is perhaps the most important clinical marker in breast cancer and is associated with distinct risk factors, pathological features, and clinical behavior [ ]. The effect of host irradiation on ER-negative tumor frequency did not correlate with the effect of radiation on latency per se.
What determines the prevalence of ER negative cancer is not well-understood [ ]. ER negative breast cancer is most frequent in young women and certain racial groups, particularly African-American women [ ]. It is has been proposed that breast cancer heterogeneity is determined in part by the cell of origin and its position within the epithelial lineage hierarchy of normal organs [ ]. A corollary is that the tumors retain fundamental programming that remains evident in the biology, behavior, and signature of the cancer subtype. Indeed, the expression profiles of isolated mammary stem cells (MaSC), which are thought to give rise to luminal progenitor cells that in turn generate mature luminal cells, segregate breast cancers with specific markers and prognoses [ ]. Some Trp53 null murine tumors, similar to claudin-low breast cancer [ ], are enriched in the MaSC signature [ ]. Notch is preferentially activated in the normal ductal luminal epithelium and promotes commitment of MaSC in vivo [ ]. Notch nuclear co-localization was significantly increased by radiation [ ]. These data suggested that radiation could affect stem cell activity by inducing key regulators of mammary self-renewal and lineage commitment. Gene expression profiling was carried out to evaluate the signaling pathways that mediate the communication between cell types after radiation exposure. The tumors arising in the irradiated host did indeed exhibit a strong MaSC profile and as did the irradiated mammary gland [ ].
Together these data suggested the hypothesis that low dose host irradiation might affect the mammary lineage hierarchy by altering self-renewal in mammary stem cells. To test this idea, mice were irradiated with graded low doses at 3 weeks of age and cells isolated from fully mature glands were analyzed using Cd24 med /Cd49 hi mammary repopulation markers [ ]. The proportion of lin-/Cd24 med /Cd49 hi cells in irradiated mice was significantly increased compared to sham-irradiated mice. The absence of dose dependence indicates that this effect is not mediated by cell kill per se. Functional analysis of repopulating potential is the gold standard to assess mammary stem cells [ ]. Mammary repopulating activity increased nearly 2-fold in mice irradiated with at 3 weeks of age compared to sham-irradiated mice, again without evidence of dose dependence between 10 and 100 cGy. Thus, the window of pubertal susceptibility can be explained as follows: low doses of ionizing radiation elicit a tumor promoting microenvironment by inducing the Notch pathway that in turn increases mammary stem cell self-renewal. Increased stem cells primes the tissue for tumorigenesis and correlates with the increased frequency of ER-negative tumors [ ].
Summary and Conclusions
The most striking feature of breast cancer risk following radiation, as compared to other organs, is the strong and consistent effect of age at exposure [ ]. Why is there a window of susceptibility during adolescence? The biology of breast differs from almost all other tissues in that the parenchyma is generated post-natal, primarily mediated by the action of ovarian hormones initiated with puberty. The nascent epithelial bud expands to generate a adult ductal tree that is capable of preparatory cycles of proliferation as function of the menstrual cycle, and explosive proliferation and differentiation under the hormones of pregnancy. The capacity of the organ to undergo repeated expansion, differentiation, and involution throughout adult life speaks to a huge reservoir of regenerative capacity. This capacity is thought to reside in mammary stem cells whose self-renewal during puberty lead to their distribution throughout the gland.
Weissman and colleagues argued that understanding stem cell biology will provide insight into the origins of cancer [ ]. They propose that the similarities between self-renewal in stem cells and cancer cells could be exploited therapeutically if more was known about the mammary stem cell populations. Indeed, breast stem cell biology has provided important insights for the origins of breast cancer. The rapidly advancing knowledge of critical pathways, as well as definitive stem cell markers in breast in humans and mammary gland in experimental models, will likely provide greater insight into the age dependence of breast cancer risk in humans.
A growing body of evidence suggests that radiation may affect breast cancer risk by altering tissue composition and stem cell regulation. Low doses of radiation significantly increased the mammary repopulating activity, and could thereby increase the number of target cells that could initiate cancer [ ]. Understanding the effect of radiation on the mammary stem cell is likely to provide key insights into physiological and genetic determinants of cancer risk. Our data in the radiation-chimera mammary model [ ] suggest that radiation exposure early in life can alter heterotypic interactions set the stage for stem cell expansion and increase the risk of developing ER-negative breast cancer, which is observed in women treated with radiation for childhood cancers [ ]. A plausible scenario is that radiation produces a transient change in signaling or a persistent change in the inflammatory, macrophage, or vasculature compartment of the gland. This changed microenvironment then in turn permanently alters the pool of mammary epithelial stem/progenitor cell
Gene expression profiling of radiation-preceded tumors is a new avenue for exploring the effects of radiation both on the source cells and host biology. Mao et al. suggested the hypothesis that specific early events after radiation exposure induce changes in caretaker genes, and the nature of the early events may determine the overall genomic signature observed in the resulting tumor [ ]. Consistent with this, analysis of profiles of radiation-preceded breast cancer indicated programs that regulate cancer, cell growth and proliferation, implying that a large number of affected genes are indeed caretakers and gatekeepers [ ]. The radiation-chimera mouse model shows that host irradiation alone can ‘imprint’ the tumor expression profile with a specific signature and shift the biology toward a more aggressive phenotype [ ].
Ionizing radiation is both a documented risk factor for breast cancer and a means to probe the biology of the mammary gland. Arguably the prototypic carcinogen in humans, understanding its actions in terms of DNA damage has been extremely valuable. New approaches that cast radiation carcinogenesis as necessarily complex evolution of both the target cell and host holds promise to provide a more complete understanding of radiation, and thus of cancer risk in general.