Introduction
Adnexal torsion is defined as complete or partial twisting of the ovary and fallopian tube on its ligamentous supply, which eventually compromises ovarian circulation. It is a fairly uncommon diagnosis with an estimated incidence of 4.9/100,000 in females ages 1 to 20 years [ ]. It is estimated to account for 3% of all cases of acute abdominal pain in adult women who come to the emergency department with an annual prevalence of 2–6% [ ]. It is a surgical emergency and prompt diagnosis is imperative. The clinical findings of adnexal torsion are nonspecific, especially in the pediatric age group. Therefore, imaging plays a critical role in making the diagnosis, or more often excluding it. Transabdominal ultrasound (US) is the imaging modality of choice in pediatric patients owing to its lack of nonionizing radiation, widespread availability and lack of need for sedation [ ]. The pediatric reproductive organs are better imaged when the patient has a full bladder, as the urinary bladder is used as a sonographic window [ ]. Filling the bladder, however, often delays image acquisition and subsequent diagnosis and treatment of adnexal torsion. At times, it can also subject the patient to invasive bladder catheterization.
The key sonographic feature of adnexal torsion is unilateral ovarian enlargement, present even before infarction has occurred since venous and lymphatic outflow initially are obstructed before arterial inflow, resulting in edema of the ovary [ ]. Ovarian volume is variable among different ages and patients, highly dependent on hormonal status, and therefore comparison with the contralateral ovarian volume is of utmost importance as it serves as internal control [ , , , , ]. Different volume ratios between ovaries have been suggested in the literature as concerning for adnexal torsion. In a study conducted in a cohort of girls (0–21 years old), the median volume ratio of the torted adnexa compared to the normal adnexa was 12 [ ]. Another series suggested that a ratio of abnormal to normal ovarian volume greater than 5 is strongly correlated with torsion [ ]. Others have advised that torsion should be suspected when the volume is at least three times greater than the contralateral side [ ]. A different study suggested that an adnexal volume <20 ml is strong evidence against adnexal torsion in menarchal females [ ].
As per current practice in our institution, transabdominal US is performed until visualization of the ovaries is completed which, in many instances, means waiting for the bladder filling, often delaying decision-making. With this in mind, we postulate that, in the emergency setting of suspected adnexal torsion in children, the torted ovary is large enough to be visualized even if the bladder is not well distended and therefore adnexal torsion can potentially be excluded based on non-visualization of the ovaries. At the same time, as the ovarian volumes are highly variable among children of different ages, this may potentially be limited to post-menarchal girls only (the typical expected ovarian volume for a premenarchal child is 1–2 cm 3 while in teenagers the mean ovarian volume is 6–9 cm 3 , with normal volumes as large as 22 cm 3 [ ]).
The purpose of this study was to retrospectively investigate if clinically suspected adnexal torsion can be ruled out based on non-visualization of the ovaries on transabdominal US with a non-distended bladder in pediatric patients.
Materials and methods
Patient population
This retrospective study was approved by our institutional review board.
The study comprised 349 patients divided into 2 groups. The first group (Group A) comprised 341 patients with transabdominal US studies performed between Jan. 1, 2013, and July 30, 2018. Inclusion criteria included (a) female patients younger than 19 years, (b) patients with lower abdominal pain referred from the emergency room for US to assess for adnexal torsion and/or appendicitis, and (c) ovaries that were not initially visualized on US were shown once bladders were subsequently filled, distended and rescanned. US findings were correlated with clinical outcomes in the patient’s chart.
The second group (Group B) comprised nine patients with surgically confirmed adnexal torsion in the same date range. Inclusion criteria included (a) female patients younger than 19 years and (b) the preoperative transabdominal US was performed with a non-distended bladder.
A total of 41 girls with surgically confirmed adnexal torsion were identified; however, 33 had an initial scan with a full bladder and were therefore excluded from the study.
There was an overlap of one patient between the two groups of patients.
Transabdominal US
All individuals underwent diagnostic gray-scale US performed on one of two systems (iu22 [Philips, Bothell, WA] or Aplio 500 [Toshiba, Tustin, CA]) using 9- to 4- or 5- to 2-MHz curvilinear transducers. Longitudinal and transverse US images were recorded electronically and transferred the picture archiving and communication system (PACS) server (Syngo imaging version 36D, Siemen Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany).
Image analysis
The images were evaluated on the PACS workstation by a pediatric radiology fellow (G.S.-Z.). For the US of the 341 girls who initially were scanned with a non-distended bladder (Group A), the age of the patient, the time between the initial scan with a non-distended bladder (in which the ovaries were not visualized) and the scan with a distended bladder and visualization of the ovaries, and the ovarian volumes were documented.
The US studies of the nine girls (Group B) with surgically confirmed adnexal torsion were reviewed and divided as follows: (1) cases in which the girls` were initially scanned with a non-distended bladder and the torted adnexa was seen, and (2) cases in which the girls were initially scanned with a non-distended bladder and the torted adnexa was not seen. The age of the patients and ovarian volumes were documented.
After visualizing the ovaries, we also looked at the position of the ovaries, follicular distribution and Doppler assessment in most cases. We limited the results to ovarian volumes as this is the key sonographic finding that determines visualization versus non-visualization of adnexal torsion.
Statistical analysis
Descriptive results are displayed as means (standard deviation [SD]) and medians (interquartile range [IQR]) for continuous data, and percentages for categorical data.
The negative and positive predictive values (NPV and PPV), sensitivity and specificity for excluding adnexal torsion with a non-distended bladder were calculated based on the following terminology: (1) True positive – surgically confirmed adnexal torsion, as suggested on US with a non-distended bladder, (2) True negative -- no adnexal torsion and non-visualization of the ovaries with a non-distended bladder with normal-appearing ovaries after bladder filling, (3) False positive -- suspected torsion on US with a non-distended bladder with no real torsion, and (4) False negative -- non-visualization of the ovaries with a non-distended bladder with subsequent adnexal torsion.
The ratio of the volume of the larger ovary to the smaller one was calculated and patients with >3 and >5 ratios were identified. The proportion of patients above and below these cutoff points was calculated. The proportion of patients with the same ratio cutoffs and volumes of more than 20 cc for girls >12 years old (assumed to be menarchal) or more than 6 cc for girls ≤12 years of age (assumed to be premenarchal) was also calculated. The same analysis was then done after dividing the cohort into two age groups (>12 years and ≤12 years). The level for statistical significance was set a priori at ≤0.05.
The distribution of time (in min) between the first and second scan was also assessed.
Comparison of volume ratio per age group, as well as time difference between scans per work shift was conducted with Mann-Whitney U tests, owing to the skewness in the distribution of these two variables.
Statistical analysis was performed using R statistical software version 3.5.1 (R Development Core Team, Vienna, Austria).
Results
Patient population
A total of 349 girls were included in the study. The mean age was 13.0 years (SD: 3.4 years) and the median age was 14.0 years (IQR: 11.0, 16.0 years). Of the 349 patients, 137 (39.3%) were 12 or younger and the remaining 212 (60.7%) were older than 12 years. The demographics are summarized in Table 1 . Table 1 Patient demographics Age (years) Mean (SD) Age (years) Median (IQR) Categorized by age >12 years n (%) Categorized by age ≤12 years n (%) All ( n =349) 13.0 (3.4) 14.0 (11.0, 16.0) 212 (60.7) 137 (39.3) Group A 13.1 (3.3) 14.0 (11.0, 16.0) 207 (60.9) 133 (39.1) Group B 11.3 (5.5) 13 (7, 15) 5 (55.6) 4 (44.4) Group A: Girls without visualization of the ovaries on initial scan with a non-distended bladder, rescanned with a distended bladder showing the ovaries ( n =340). Group B: Girls had surgically proven adnexal torsion and a preoperative transabdominal ultrasound with a non-distended bladder ( n =9) IQR interquartile range, SD standard deviation
Transabdominal US
Among the 341 girls whose US were reviewed and the ovaries were not visualized in the initial US (Group A), one girl had surgically proven adnexal torsion (0.3%); her preoperative US demonstrated symmetrical and normal-appearing ovaries after bladder filling, and adnexal torsion was not suggested on US evaluation. This girl went to surgery based solely on clinical suspicion. The presentation, imaging findings and clinical outcome of those in Group A who had abnormally large ovaries seen after bladder filling or high clinical suspicion of torsion are detailed in Table 2 . One patient (a 15-year-old girl with right lower quadrant pain, vomiting and nausea, and left and right ovarian volumes of 12.4 and 18.7 ml, respectively) was taken to the operating room based on clinical concern for torsion; however, two normal ovaries were surgically seen with no evidence of torsion. Two girls had suspected ruptured hemorrhagic cysts. One of these patients was a 14-year-old girl with left lower quadrant pain and left and right ovarian volumes of 37 and 20.4 ml, respectively, and the other patient was a 17-year-old girl with right lower quadrant pain and left and right ovarian volumes of 8.6 and 23.2 ml, respectively. Both cysts had resolved on follow-up studies (4–8 weeks later). Pelvic inflammatory disease was clinically diagnosed by gynecology in another 17-year-old girl with left and right ovarian volumes of 9.0 and 28.0 ml, respectively. Simple, large ovarian cysts were seen in three patients who had subsequent gynecological consult and adnexal torsion was clinically excluded. One of these patients was a 17-year-old girl with left and right ovarian volumes of 6.8 and 79.0 ml, respectively. A cyst measuring 30 ml in volume was seen in the right ovary. The second patient was a 15-year-old girl with left and right ovarian volumes of 6.3 and 48.3 ml, respectively, and a right ovarian cyst measuring 17 ml. Follow-up pelvic US for these 2 patients showed cyst resolution (4–8 weeks after initial US). The third patient was a 14-year-old girl with left and right ovarian volumes of 63.3 and 15.7 ml, respectively, and a left ovarian cyst measuring 25 ml. Her pain resolved 2 days later and a follow-up US was not obtained. Non-gynecological findings included appendicitis ( n =28), renal colic ( n =4) and enterocolitis ( n =8). Table 2 Group A: Patients with gynecological findings after bladder filling and non-visualization of the ovaries on initial transabdominal ultrasound with a non-distended bladder Age (years) Presentation Right ovarian volume (mL) Left ovarian volume (mL) Ovarian volume ratio Outcome 15 RLQ pain, vomiting and nausea 18.7 12.4 1.5 Clinically suspected torsion, normal ovaries in OR 14 LLQ pain 20.4 37 1.8 Ruptured hemorrhagic cyst, resolved on f/u study 17 RLQ pain 8.6 23.2 2.7 Ruptured hemorrhagic cyst, resolved on f/u study 17 RLQ pain 28.0 9.0 3.1 PID per gynecological exam 17 RLQ pain 79.0 Including a 30-mL cyst 6.8 11.6 Ovarian cyst, resolved on f/u study 15 RLQ pain 48.3 Including a 17-mL cyst 6.3 7.7 Ovarian cyst, resolved on f/u study 14 RLQ pain 15.7 63.3 Including a 25-mL cyst 4.0 Ovarian cyst, pain resolved 13 LLQ pain 9.1 * 9.7 * 1.1 Taken to OR based on clinical suspicion of torsion. Surgically proven left adnexal torsion f/u follow up, LLQ left lower quadrant, OR operating room, PID pelvic inflammatory disease, RLQ right lower quadrant
Of the 340 girls in Group A who did not have adnexal torsion, the ratio of volume of the larger ovary to smaller one was <3 in 327 patients (96.2%), between 3 and 5 in 10 patients (2.9%), and >5 in 3 patients (0.9%). An ovarian volume ratio between 3 and 5 with a volume of >6 cc for girls 12 years or younger (assumed to be premenarchal) ( n =1) and >20 cc for girls older than 12 years ( n =2) was seen in 3 patients (0.9%). An ovarian volume ratio >5 with the same size limitations was seen in 2 patients (0.6%) (both >12 years). These 2 patients (0.6%) were considered false positive (i.e. high suspicion of adnexal torsion per US but clinically no torsion). The results are summarized in Figs. 1 and 2 . Fig. 1 Group A. The graph shows the percentage of cases with ovarian volume ratio <3, between 3 and 5, and >5 among the 340 girls without adnexal torsion Fig. 2 Group A. The graph shows the distribution of volume ratio for girls younger and older than 12 years of age among the 340 girls without adnexal torsion
In 8 of the 9 (88.9%) girls who had surgically proven adnexal torsion (Group B), the torted ovary was identified with a non-distended bladder. One girl (1/9, 11.1%) had surgically proven ovarian torsion and the ovaries were not visualized with a non-distended bladder (the one patient with overlap of Group A). However, after bladder filling, the ovaries appeared symmetrical and normal, as described previously. The clinical presentation and imaging findings of the nine girls with surgically proven adnexal torsion are summarized in Table 3 . Table 3 Group B: Patients with surgically proven adnexal torsion Age (years) Presentation Right ovarian volume (mL) Left ovarian volume (mL) Ovarian volume ratio 15 RLQ pain 248 (including cyst volume, 235 mL) Not seen – 7 LLQ pain 1.1 * 100 90.9 11 LLQ pain 4.8 29.5 6.1 18 RLQ pain 965 (including cyst volume, 957 mL) Not seen – 13 RLQ pain 77 (including cyst volume, 51 mL) 13 5.9 7 RLQ pain 8.1 Not seen – 1 LLQ pain 0.7 * 4.8 6.9 17 RLQ pain 616.9 (including cyst volume, 571 mL) 8.2 75.2 13 LLQ pain 9.1 * 9.7 * 1.1 *Seen only after bladder filling LLQ left lower quadrant, RLQ right lower quadrant
The overall incidence of adnexal torsion in all patients initially scanned with a non-distended bladder over the time course of the study was 2.6% (9/349).
The calculated PPV for excluding adnexal torsion with a non-distended bladder is 0.8. The calculated NPV for excluding adnexal torsion with a non-distended bladder is 0.997. The sensitivity and specificity are 88.9% and 99.4%, respectively. The results are summarized in Table 4 . Table 4 Positive and negative predictive values, sensitivity and specificity for excluding adnexal torsion based on non-visualization of the ovaries with a non-distended bladder, with 95% confidence intervals Condition: Adnexal torsion Condition positive (i.e. torsion) Condition negative (i.e. no torsion) Test: Visualization of abnormal ovaries on transabdominal US Test outcome positive (i.e. abnormal ovaries seen on initial scan with a non-distended bladder or after bladder filling) TP 8 FP 2 PPV = TP/(TP+FP) = 8/(8+2) = 0.8 CI (0.444–0.975) Test outcome negative (i.e. non-visualization of the ovaries on a TUS with non-distended bladder and normal ovaries seen after bladder filling) FN 1 TN 338 NPV = TN/(FN+TN) = 338/(338+1) = 0.997 CI(0.984–0.999) Sensitivity = TP/(TP+FN) = 8/(8+1) = 88.9% CI(51.8–99.7%) Specificity= TN/(FP+TN) =338/(2+338) = 99.4% CI(97.9–99.9%) CI confidence interval, FN false negative, FP false positive, NPV negative predictive value, PPV positive predictive value, TN true negative, TP true positive, TUS transabdominal ultrasound, US ultrasound
Time between US scans
The mean (SD) and median (IQR) time difference between the scans were 105.1 (65.8) and 89.0 (59.0, 130.5) min, respectively. No significant difference ( P =0.11) was seen between the morning shift and the evening and night shift (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Group A. The graph shows the distribution of time difference between transabdominal ultrasound scans according to work shift hours
Discussion
Our study is the first to investigate if clinically suspected adnexal torsion can be ruled out based on non-visualization of the ovaries on US with a non-distended bladder in pediatric patients, as the key sonographic feature of adnexal torsion is asymmetrical ovarian enlargement. An enlarged ovary would be expected to be seen even without a distended bladder as a window.
Of the 341 girls with pelvic/abdominal pain who had an initial US study done with a non-distended bladder and non-visualized ovaries, one had a positive diagnosis of adnexal torsion. Among the 340 girls who did not have ovarian torsion, when the ovaries were subsequently visualized after bladder filling, the vast majority of the girls (99.1%) had an ovarian volume ratio <5, of whom 97% had an ovarian volume ratio <3. The three largest ovarian volume ratios were 11.6, 7.6 and 5.3, all in post-menarchal girls. The two girls with the larger ovarian volume ratios (11.6 and 7.6) also had an ovarian volume of the larger ovary >20 ml, radiologically concerning for adnexal torsion, and accounting for the two false-negative cases in our study. It is of note that the largest ovarian volume ratios documented are still under the median volume ratio of the torted adnexa compared to the normal adnexa according to some studies [ ].
Our study reveals that 88.9% of girls with surgically proven adnexal torsion were correctly identified preoperatively by the reading radiologist using non-distended bladder US. In the only case with adnexal torsion and non-visualization of the ovaries with a non-distended bladder, the ovaries were subsequently seen after bladder filling and appeared symmetrical and normal. In this case, the sonographic images were not concerning for ovarian torsion and the patient was taken to surgery based solely on clinical findings.
The very high NPV (0.997) and specificity (99.4%) of the test point to excellent capability of non-visualization of normal ovaries on US with a non-distended bladder to exclude adnexal torsion.
A limitation of the study stems from the operator-dependent nature of US. In addition, because of the retrospective design, bladder volume was not documented for all patients. Non-distended bladder is therefore a subjective observation and a volumetric cutoff was not applied. The patients’ body habitus, which can affect visualization on US, was also not documented. Lack of clinical follow-up is yet another limitation arising from the retrospective design. The group is heterogeneous with pre- and post-menarchal girls, but reflects the routine clinical practice. Further studies with a prospective design documenting bladder volumes and incorporating clinical data (such as age of menarche and follow-up) will overcome some of the limitations of our study.
Numerous scoring systems have been developed to support the clinical diagnosis of adnexal torsion, some based solely on clinical signs and symptoms [ ], others on imaging findings (ovarian volume and ovarian ratio) and clinical symptoms (nausea, duration of pain) [ ]. Perhaps future studies could evaluate a predictive scoring system based on clinical data and non-visualization of the ovary on non-distended bladder US. The ability to exclude adnexal torsion with a non-distended bladder has the potential to substantially shorten the time between the request for US study and the exam results, helping in decision-making as well as decreasing the stay in the emergency department. It can at times also alleviate the need for invasive bladder catheterization and even intravenous line placement for fluid bolus injection in this age group.
Conclusion
Our results show that non-visualization of the ovaries with a non-distended bladder on transabdominal US study performed by experienced sonographers or radiologists can help exclude clinically suspected adnexal torsion, alleviating the need for bladder filling and prolonging the wait time in the emergency department. Including non-visualization of the ovaries using transabdominal US as one of the features in a predictive score for adnexal torsion should be considered.