Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is commonly used for hepatobiliary indications in the pediatric population, including but not limited to characterization of hepatic lesions, evaluation of diffuse liver disease, assessment of biliary pathology, and postoperative evaluation. The use of hepatocyte-specific contrast agents (HSCAs) for hepatobiliary imaging has been described in both the adult and pediatric populations [ , , , , ]. HSCAs have extracellular properties similar to conventional gadolinium-based contrast agents (GBCAs) and are also partially taken up by hepatocytes and excreted into the biliary system in people with normal hepatic function. There are no evidence-based guidelines for the use of HSCAs for contrast-enhanced hepatobiliary MRI in children [ , ]. The use of HSCAs in children is primarily based on adult guidelines and clinical experience.
The purpose of this article is to provide an overview of HCSA use in children. We review currently approved HSCAs and their mechanism of uptake, along with a discussion of pediatric dosing within the context of potential gadolinium deposition, which has been shown to have no known deleterious effects to date. We outline MRI technique for imaging with HSCAs, with a discussion of pediatric hepatic and biliary indications for use of HSCAs, focusing on technical considerations and a review of hepatocyte-phase imaging findings. Finally, we discuss the challenges and pitfalls associated with use of HSCAs in pediatric patients.
Hepatocyte-specific contrast agents in children
Two HSCAs are currently approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA): gadoxetate disodium (Eovist [also known as Primovist]; Bayer Healthcare, Leverkusen, Germany) and gadobenate dimeglumine (MultiHance; Bracco Diagnostics, Monroe Township, NJ). Both HSCAs are linear ionic agents, which is relevant when considering the potential gadolinium tissue deposition/retention following multiple administrations (see Safety section). HSCAs have extracellular properties that are similar to conventional GBCAs; however HSCAs have the advantage of being taken up by hepatocytes and excreted by the biliary system. The primary difference between the two HSCAs is their proportion of biliary versus renal excretion, with 50% biliary excretion of gadoxetate disodium in children with normal hepatic and renal function, compared with 5% biliary excretion by gadobenate dimeglumine. Because of these differences, gadoxetate disodium provides greater hepatocyte-phase enhancement than gadobenate dimeglumine [ ] and allows for a shorter interval to hepatocyte-phase imaging relative to time of contrast injection (20+ minutes delayed imaging for gadoxetate disodium versus 40–60+ minutes delayed imaging for gadobenate dimeglumine).
The gadolinium chelate in HSCAs targets the contrast molecules for uptake by specific hepatocyte transporters and is subsequently excreted into the biliary system [ ]. The uptake transporter, adenosine triphosphate-dependent organic anion transporting polypeptide 1 (OATP1), binds the HSCA competitively with bilirubin. The contrast agent is excreted via the multi-drug-resistance-associated protein (MRP2) primarily into the biliary ducts, with a smaller amount (MRP3) excreted into the sinusoids for extrahepatic clearance [ ] (Fig. 1 ). Optimal use of HSCAs relies upon normal underlying hepatic function; therefore abnormal liver function, including hyperbilirubinemia, can alter hepatocyte uptake of HSCA. Contrast agent remaining in the bloodstream in children with abnormal liver function moves into the interstitial spaces and ultimately undergoes renal excretion like conventional extracellular GBCAs, assuming normal renal function. Uptake and excretion of HSCAs by liver lesions is dependent on the lesion-specific transporter expression. Understanding this concept is crucial for correct interpretation of imaging performed with HSCAs. Fig. 1 Diagram shows mechanism of uptake and clearance of hepatocyte-specific contrast agents. Adenosine triphosphate-dependent organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP) receptors take up the contrast agent into the hepatocytes. Contrast agent is excreted via the multi-drug-resistance-associated protein transporter MRP2 into the biliary tree and via MRP3 into the sinusoids for extrahepatic excretion. The expression of these transporters can vary in lesional hepatocytes; therefore the enhancement characteristics of hepatic lesions and the clearance of the contrast agent are variable
Age of use of hepatocyte-specific contrast agents in pediatric patients
The package insert for gadoxetate disodium does not specify formal age restrictions and it is currently approved by the FDA for children of all ages [ ]; however the package insert for gadoxetate disodium states that “adequate and well controlled studies of Eovist in pediatric patients have not been conducted” [ ]. One study reported no adverse events in 52 pediatric patients older than 2 months and younger than 18 years who were given gadoxetate disodium for evaluation of focal liver lesions [ ]. In addition, no data suggest adverse reactions in neonates [ ]. Gadobenate dimeglumine is FDA-approved for use in children 2–18 years of age [ ].
A survey by the Society for Pediatric Radiology (SPR) Quality and Safety Committee evaluating the usage patterns of GBCAs in the pediatric population showed that 18% of respondents used gadoxetate disodium in neonates younger than 1 year and 26% used gadobenate dimeglumine in children younger than 1 year [ ]. This survey also found that the majority of respondents (79%) did not have any specific requirements or adjustments for administering GBCAs in neonates or infants younger than 1 year. Nine percent of the respondents cautiously used GBCAs in this age group and avoided it if possible.
A subsequent survey of the SPR members assessing the use of HSCAs for abdominal MRI in pediatric patients (response rate 149/1,768, 8%) showed that 68% of respondents used HSCAs in all ages [ ]. Although HSCAs can be, and are, used in children of all ages, these agents should be used judiciously for specific clinical indications where the results of imaging with HSCAs are expected to substantially change clinical management. This is especially true in neonates because immature renal function early in life can impact clearance of the contrast agent, which can be particularly problematic in the setting of superimposed impaired hepatic function. Although there is no literature on adverse effects in neonates, caution must be exercised when any GBCA is administered to a neonate [ ].
Dosing of hepatocyte-specific contrast agents in pediatric patients
The FDA-approved dosage for gadoxetate disodium is 0.1 mL/kg (0.025 mmol/kg) regardless of age; however studies have shown that a higher dose of 0.2 mL/kg (0.05 mmol/kg) can be used (“double dosing”) [ ]. Double dosing provides a larger injection volume, which can be particularly important when imaging neonates and infants because it can be challenging to administer GBCAs in very small volumes. Gadoxetate disodium has a quarter of the concentration of gadolinium of conventional GBCAs, so double dosing might lead to better arterial-phase enhancement, regardless of age [ ]. The SPR survey regarding use of HSCAs in children for abdominal MRI showed that the majority of respondents (73%) used 0.1 mL/kg (0.025 mmol/kg), which is also the current FDA-approved dose of gadoxetate disodium in adults; 27% of the respondents used 0.2 mL/kg (0.05 mmol/kg) [ ]. It should be noted that another means to increase the volume of the contrast bolus is to dilute the HSCA in a small volume (5–10 mL) of saline.
The most commonly used dose for gadobenate dimeglumine, both in the literature and according to the SPR membership survey, is 0.2 mL/kg (0.1 mmol/kg), and this is the FDA-recommended dose regardless of age [ , ]. A review of use of gadobenate dimeglumine in 30 children described the use of 0.15 mL/kg (0.075 mmol/kg) in 11 children and 0.2 mL/kg (0.1 mmol/kg) in the remaining 19 children [ ]. The initial lower dose was used to take advantage of the high T1 relaxivity of the contrast agent, with the standard dose ultimately selected to increase the overall volume of the injected contrast agent.
Although no studies outline the specific diagnostic benefits of a single dose of one HSCA versus another, increasing recognition of deposition of gadolinium in the brain, bone and soft tissues with multiple administrations of contrast agent (see Safety section) suggests that GBCAs, including HSCAs, should be cautiously used and optimized for each patient.
Safety of hepatocyte-specific contrast agents in children
Allergic-like contrast agent reactions
Acute allergic-like contrast agent reactions are a rare complication of intravenous administration of GBCAs in children, with the majority of documented reactions being mild, according to the classification of the American College of Radiology (ACR) Manual on Contrast Media version 10.3 [ , ]. Allergic-like contrast reactions are similar to true allergic reactions and are thought to be caused by histamine release triggered by mast cell degeneration or other mediators, such as the complement and kinin systems [ ]. A study of 32,365 intravenous injections of GBCAs in children identified a total of 21 reactions, with 10 of those classified as mild. In that study, no reactions were reported among the 672 children who received gadoxetate disodium [ ]. Additional studies in children and adults evaluating the administration of gadobenate dimeglumine confirmed a low rate of acute allergic-like reactions [ , ]. When reactions occur, most are mild; however a small percentage has been documented as severe, including anaphylactoid-like reactions. Although allergic-like reactions to GBCAs in children are rare, it is important for radiologists to be able to recognize and treat these reactions quickly and appropriately [ , ]. Given that these adverse and allergic-like reactions are rare, with no specific patient predilection, the use of these contrast agents should not be avoided if the use is clinically warranted [ ].
Gadolinium deposition
Both gadoxetate disodium and gadobenate dimeglumine are linear ionic gadolinium-based contrast agents. Recent literature describes gadolinium deposition in the dentate nucleus and globus pallidus in people with multiple administrations of all types of GBCAs for MRI [ , , , , ]. However some data suggest differences in the degree of gadolinium retention in the brain between macrocyclic agents and linear agents, with greater deposition of linear agents [ ].
The International Society of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (ISMRM) provided recommendations for use of gadolinium-based contrast agents, stating that caution should be exercised when using all GBCAs and that multiple factors should be evaluated for each clinical situation to determine the best contrast agent to be used [ ]. The ISMRM stated that discordance in detection of gadolinium deposition between macrocyclic agents and linear agents might be caused by differences in relaxivity between the agents and the deposited chemicals rather than real differences in the degree of deposition, which complicates interpretation of signal abnormalities in tissues.
A study by Kahn et al. [ ] evaluated gadolinium deposition in the brain with multiple administrations of gadoxetate disodium and showed a statistically significant increase in signal intensity in the dentate nucleus with greater than 10 prior administrations of gadoxetate disodium. The signal abnormalities were hypothesized to be caused by gadolinium deposition, based on the results of prior studies. In contrast, a study by Ichikawa et al. [ ] comparing signal changes in the dentate nucleus after administration of gadoxetate disodium versus gadodiamide showed higher signal in the dentate nucleus in those receiving multiple administrations of gadodiamide than in those receiving gadoxetate disodium.
To date, there is no evidence of adverse biological or neurological effects from gadolinium deposition in the brain [ ]. Many retrospective studies in adult populations have investigated whether the abnormalities involving the dentate nucleus result in neurological deficits, with all studies showing no adverse neurological outcomes [ , , ]; however further studies are needed for confirmation, particularly in pediatric patients.
The SPR Quality and Safety Committee recommendations for use of GBCAs in the pediatric population included having a pediatric radiologist protocol these examinations whenever possible, using GBCAs judiciously for contrast-enhanced MRI. Additional scrutiny must be considered for infants and children who have received multiple administrations of gadolinium because the long-term effects have not been completely elucidated. There were no specific comments or safety concerns regarding the use of HSCAs in children [ , ]; however the authors believe these same recommendations should be followed for the use of HSCAs in the pediatric population.
Renal impairment
Similar to other GBCAs, HSCAs are labeled with a black box warning concerning nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF). NSF is a potentially fatal complication of GBCA administration that involves fibrosis of skin, muscle and internal organs. The people at highest risk include children with known acute kidney injury or advanced chronic kidney disease (estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] <30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 in children older than 2 years, or 2 standard deviations below normative mean values for younger children, specific for gender and body size). Given that HSCAs are partly excreted by the renal system, NSF is a risk after use of these agents as well. A prospective study evaluating the incidence of NSF in adults with moderate to severe renal impairment who received gadoxetate disodium for liver imaging showed no increased incidence of NSF in these adults [ ]. To date, no similar studies in pediatric patients have been performed. Few cases of NSF have been reported in the literature in pediatric patients, and no reported cases specifically related to HSCAs [ ]. Despite this, a risk/benefit discussion should occur for any at-risk child in whom use of HSCA is being contemplated. In dialysis-dependent children with chronic kidney disease, prompt dialysis after administration of the contrast agent might aid in clearing the agent and decreasing the risk of NSF, although studies have not shown this in a clinical population [ ]. Last, although no studies have reported cases of NSF in very young children after administration of GBCAs, cautious use of these agents in these children, especially preterm neonates, is recommended given the relatively immature renal function and uncertainty of the level of risk for NSF [ ].
Hepatic impairment
Uptake of HSCAs depends on normal hepatocyte function; therefore enhancement characteristics are altered with underlying hepatic impairment. Quantitative studies have shown that the uptake of HSCAs by hepatocytes varies based on the liver function [ , ], with one study showing significant differences in pediatric patients with and without liver disease [ ]. In addition, hyperbilirubinemia can affect HSCA uptake into hepatocytes because of competitive uptake. Notably, there is no contraindication to administering HSCAs in children with severe hepatic impairment [ ] because decreased hepatic excretion leads to preferential renal clearance of these agents. However, caution should be exercised when interpreting HSCA-enhanced MRI in children with severe hepatic dysfunction. In addition, impaired uptake of HSCAs can complicate interpretation of liver lesion enhancement characteristics and might preclude post-contrast assessment of biliary anatomy (Fig. 2 ). Background abnormal liver parenchyma with diffuse fatty infiltration or hepatic iron deposition can also confound characterization of lesions [ ] (Fig. 3 ). These clinical situations should be considered when determining which GBCA to use. Fig. 2 Hepatocyte-specific contrast agent (HSCA) use in a 5-month-old girl with hepatic impairment. Child had a history of biliary atresia status post Kasai procedure and was undergoing MRI evaluation for liver transplant using gadoxetate disodium. a–c Axial T1-W pre-contrast ( a ), post-contrast arterial-phase ( b ) and late venous-phase ( c ) MR images demonstrate enhancement of the liver parenchyma. d On axial T1-W post-contrast hepatocyte-phase image performed at 20-min delay, there is no excretion of contrast agent into the biliary tree, which was expected because of underlying hepatic dysfunction Fig. 3 Hepatic lesions against abnormal background liver in a 17-year-old obese girl on oral contraceptives. The girl presented with new liver lesions on ultrasound, therefore contrast-enhanced MRI using gadoxetate disodium was performed. a, b Axial T1-weighted in-phase ( a ) and opposed-phase ( b ) MR images demonstrate background liver parenchyma with diffuse loss of signal on the opposed-phase imaging, consistent with steatosis. c Axial T1-weighted fat-saturated pre-contrast image shows hepatic lesions that are hyperintense to background liver because of the background steatosis. d, e Axial T1-weighted post-contrast arterial-phase ( d ) and hepatocyte-phase ( e ) images show the lesions are hyperintense on all phases, with enhancement confirmed on subtraction images (not shown). These lesions were diagnosed as adenomas versus focal nodular hyperplasia, and short-term follow-up imaging was recommended. The abnormal background liver parenchyma lent to the inability to accurately distinguish the two entities
Transient dyspnea
While not a safety issue per se, one recognized side effect associated with use of gadoxetate disodium is transient dyspnea after administration, which can result in respiratory motion artifact on the arterial phase post-contrast imaging. After administration, some people report acute transient dyspnea that lasts for approximately 10–20 s. To date, there have been no documented adverse health effects to people from transient dyspnea. The mechanism underlying this effect is uncertain [ ]. One study comparing the incidence of transient dyspnea after administration of gadoxetate disodium and gadobenate dimeglumine in adults showed a higher incidence with gadoxetate disodium [ ]. A recent study evaluating the incidence of transient dyspnea among a cohort of 140 pediatric patients showed a rate of 6% for transient severe respiratory motion artifacts, which is similar to previous reports in adults [ ]. Another study in a separate pediatric patient population showed a higher incidence among awake patients than those under general anesthesia [ ]. Although some studies have attributed motion artifact on the arterial phase imaging to the subjective feeling of transient dyspnea itself, one study showed that it might be caused by breath-hold failure [ ]. Recent studies have shown that new faster MRI techniques might help to decrease motion artifact on arterial phase imaging after administration of HSCA [ ].
Imaging technique with hepatocyte-specific contrast agents
When imaging with HSCAs, the technique should be tailored to the specific indication (hepatic parenchymal/lesion assessment vs. biliary [see “Indications for use” section]). For parenchymal indications, conventional T1-weighted post-contrast dynamic imaging is supplemented with hepatocyte-phase imaging to help characterize liver lesions. Peak arterial enhancement and peak portal venous enhancement for HSCAs have similar timing to the post-contrast sequences for conventional GBCAs [ ]. Transitional-phase imaging is generally performed approximately 3–5 min after contrast administration and is relevant to characterization of liver lesions according to the Liver Imaging Reporting and Data System (LI-RADS) [ , ]. One issue to be aware of specifically when using gadoxetate disodium is relative decreased arterial-phase vascular enhancement. This is thought to be caused by the combination of smaller volume of contrast agent and decreased gadolinium concentration in gadoxetate disodium because it contains one-quarter the dose of gadolinium relative to conventional GBCAs [ ]. This can be addressed by using double dosing, as discussed in the “Dosing of hepatocyte-specific contrast agents” section. Conspicuity of the vessels is also somewhat less with HSCAs than conventional GBCAs because these contrast molecules are more rapidly taken by the hepatocytes, leading to rapid parenchymal enhancement and relatively (vs. conventional GBCAs) less contrast between the vessels in comparison to the liver parenchyma within a few minutes of the injection [ ]. For biliary indications, hepatocyte-phase imaging optimized for biliary tree visualization supplements pre-contrast T2-weighted MR cholangiopancreatography images.
The optimal timing of hepatocyte-phase imaging in children with normal hepatocyte function differs between the two HSCAs. For gadoxetate disodium, 20 min is optimal for parenchymal assessment and lesion characterization [ ] as well as for visualization of the intrahepatic biliary ducts and common bile duct [ , ]. Imaging can be performed as late as 40–60 min with this agent to further characterize the biliary tree if necessary [ ]. The optimal timing for hepatocyte-phase imaging with gadobenate dimeglumine is markedly longer, approximately 1–3 h, generally necessitating removing the child from the MRI scanner after initial imaging and bringing the child back 1–3 h later for the hepatocyte-phase sequence [ ]. Alterations in liver function can affect timing of optimal hepatocyte and biliary imaging; therefore it is important to consider the hepatic function of the child when using any HSCA. Children with impaired hepatic function might require longer delays to hepatocyte-phase imaging. Of note, whenever hepatocyte-phase imaging is performed, it is optimized by using a higher than typical flip angle. This can vary from 15° to 45° depending on the HSCA and varies for optimization of liver enhancement or biliary tree enhancement [ ].
When imaging with gadoxetate disodium, the interval between contrast agent administration and hepatocyte-phase imaging can be used productively by acquiring T2-weighted fast spin-echo imaging and diffusion-weighted imaging, neither of which is adversely affected by the presence of gadoxetate disodium and both of which are relatively long sequences [ , ]. By performing imaging in the pre-hepatocyte-phase post-contrast interval, the total examination time can be minimized.
Contrast-agent-sensitive sequences, such as heavily T2-weighted MR cholangiopancreatography, should not be performed in the post-contrast interval preceding hepatocyte-phase imaging. Contrast agent that is excreted into the biliary tree results in T2 shortening and can prevent or limit visualization of the biliary tree on this sequence. For this reason, consensus guidelines by the ACR in conjunction with multiple national societies recommend performing MR cholangiopancreatography before injection of intravenous GBCA [ ].
Indications for use of hepatocyte-specific contrast agents in pediatric patients
Parenchymal indications for HSCA use include: (1) liver lesion characterization, (2) assessment of primary liver tumor, (3) assessment of hepatic metastatic disease and (4) assessment of parenchymal function. Biliary indications for HSCA use include: (1) evaluation of biliary anatomy, (2) characterization of cystic hepatic or biliary lesions and (3) assessment of biliary injury.
In a survey of the SPR membership, the most common indication for HSCA use was characterization of a new liver lesion or evaluation of a suspected benign liver lesion [ ]. Use of HSCAs to characterize liver lesions has been shown to decrease the need for liver biopsies and repeat MR imaging in adults [ ], and in children it has been shown to improve lesion detection and increase diagnostic confidence for hepatic tumors [ ].
In the same SPR survey, 36% of respondents reported using HSCAs always or almost always for characterization of hepatobiliary pathology, such as biliary obstruction or choledochal cysts. The majority of respondents (80%) did not use HSCAs with an MR cholangiopancreatography protocol. Nine percent of respondents used HSCAs for all MR cholangiopancreatography exams [ ]. HSCAs can be useful adjuncts for assessing the biliary tree by allowing acquisition of a contrast-enhanced T1-weighted image of the biliary tree to visualize small biliary radicals and potential communications between cystic lesions and the biliary tree. Disadvantages of performing MR cholangiopancreatography with HSCAs in a pediatric population include the need for delayed imaging, which prolongs sedation in the children who require it. In addition, underlying hepatic dysfunction, severe hyperbilirubinemia, and biliary obstruction can compromise the uptake of, and delay excretion of, the HSCA, thereby decreasing the sensitivity of the examination.
Parenchymal indications for hepatocyte-specific contrast agents
A simplified understanding of HSCA enhancement characteristics has been that solid hepatic lesions that are hyperintense or isointense on the hepatocyte phase are likely benign. However this is overly simplistic and increasing data show this distinction does not always hold true [ ].
Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH)
The most common benign solid hepatic lesion in children is focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH), which has a characteristic imaging appearance on HSCA-enhanced liver MRI. FNH is thought to develop because of congenital or acquired vascular abnormalities and is composed of disorganized hepatocytes with lack of normal bile ducts and central veins. This lesional structure has a characteristic appearance on hepatocyte-phase imaging, appearing diffusely iso- to hyperintense or with rim-like enhancement; this is because the hepatocytes with functioning OATP transporters take up the contrast agent but there are no bile ducts for excretion [ ]. The central stellate scar can enhance with conventional GBCAs, which is thought to be from the presence of a central vascular malformation component [ ]; however enhancement should not be observed on the hepatocyte-phase imaging using an HSCA (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 Focal nodular hyperplasia in a 10-year-old boy with history of asthma and autism, with liver lesion incidentally noted on CT performed for abdominal pain. The boy underwent MRI with gadoxetate disodium for further characterization. a Axial T2-weighted MR image of the hepatic lesion demonstrates slight T2 hyperintensity , particularly of the central scar. b Following contrast administration, there is avid enhancement on the axial T1-weighted post-contrast arterial phase. c On axial T1-weighted post-contrast hepatocyte-phase image, the lesion is isointense to the adjacent liver parenchyma. The central scar demonstrates no enhancement on the post-contrast imaging ( arrow in b and c ). Because the patient was experiencing continuing pain, the lesion was surgically resected and was pathologically proved to be focal nodular hyperplasia. The patient’s symptoms resolved after surgical resection
Multiple FNH-like lesions have been shown to develop in children with a history of treated malignancy, specifically neuroblastoma, thought to be a result of vascular insults secondary to chemotherapy [ ], although this study was based on characteristic imaging findings with few pathologically proven specimens. HSCA-enhanced liver MRI can be beneficial for a child with previously treated malignancy presenting with newly discovered liver lesions to distinguish FNH-like lesions from tumor recurrence or metastases, and possibly precluding the need for biopsy. One caveat is the overlap in appearance of some types of hepatocellular adenomas, FNH-like lesions and FNH, all of which show retention of contrast agent in the hepatocyte phase. Atypical imaging findings not characteristic of typical FNH or FNH-like lesions, such as T1 hyperintensity or intra-lesional lipids, might warrant biopsy for confirmation.
Hepatocellular adenomas
Hepatocellular adenomas are considered benign hepatic lesions. Four histological types have been described, each of which has different imaging characteristics [ ]. The four types of adenomas include inflammatory adenoma (40–50%), hepatocyte nuclear factor alpha 1 (HNF-α1) mutated adenoma (30–40%), beta-catenin-activated adenoma (10–15%) and unclassified adenoma (10–25%) [ ]. Although hepatocellular adenomas are thought to be benign, there is variable incidence of malignant degeneration to HCC, reported to be 4–8% [ ].
Adenomas have variable appearance on hepatocyte-phase images, ranging from hypointense to hyperintense. Therefore certain subtypes, specifically inflammatory adenomas and beta-catenin-activated adenomas, can be difficult to distinguish from FNH and FNH-like lesions [ , ] (Fig. 5 ). Given this variable appearance, it is important to consider clinical history in conjunction with imaging findings and maintain a low threshold to recommend biopsy if there is uncertainty. There is a very small risk of bleeding associated with biopsy, with other complications being less common [ ]. These risks should be taken into account but should not preclude biopsy when needed for proper management. Fig. 5 Hepatic hepatocellular adenoma in a 16-year-old girl with elevated liver function tests and new hepatic lesion seen on initial ultrasound, further characterized on MRI with gadoxetate disodium. a, b Axial T1-weighted in-phase ( a ) and opposed-phase ( b ) MR images demonstrate the lesion is iso- to slightly hypointense and demonstrates no signal dropout on opposed-phase imaging, confirming the lack of intracellular lipids. T1-weighted post-contrast arterial- and portal-venous-phase images (not shown) showed enhancement of the lesion. c The lesion remains isointense to the liver parenchyma on coronal T1-weighted post-contrast hepatocyte-phase image ( arrow ). Pathology confirmed beta-catenin-activated hepatocellular adenoma. This lesion has similar enhancing characteristics as focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH)-like lesions; however in the setting of elevated liver function tests and lack of a characteristic FNH central scar, this resulted in a low threshold for biopsy. This case shows that hepatic adenomas can have a variable appearance on delayed hepatobiliary phase that can overlap with that of FNH-like lesions
Nodular regenerative hyperplasia, regenerative nodules and dysplastic nodules
Various hepatocellular lesions can occur as a result of liver injury. Nodular regenerative hyperplasia typically develops as multiple lesions caused by altered blood flow in the liver, secondary to various etiologies such as Budd–Chiari syndrome, myeloproliferative syndromes, collagen vascular disorders and certain drugs. These lesions have no surrounding fibrosis [ ]. On hepatocyte-phase imaging, these lesions demonstrate peripheral enhancement with relative hypointensity centrally [ ].
Regenerative nodules occur in cirrhotic livers and form in response to necrosis or altered perfusion [ ]. These nodules are characteristically surrounded by regions of fibrosis. Because these lesions contain hepatocytes that resemble those in the adjacent normal liver parenchyma, these lesions usually are isointense to the liver parenchyma on hepatocyte-phase imaging [ ].
Dysplastic nodules occur in the background of cirrhosis or chronic hepatic injury and are classified as low-grade or high-grade based on the degree of atypia within the lesions. There is variable expression of the OATP receptors in these lesions; however the majority of nodules demonstrate iso- to hyperintense signal on the hepatocyte phase. High-grade dysplastic nodules demonstrate hypointense signal on the hepatocyte phase. High-grade lesions are premalignant and have more frequent progression to HCC [ ] and might warrant biopsy.
Hepatoblastoma
Hepatoblastoma is the most common primary malignant liver lesion in children and is characteristically associated with elevated serum alpha fetoprotein levels. Many hepatoblastomas are quite large and can generally be adequately characterized with conventional GBCAs. When HSCAs are used, hepatoblastoma is typically hypointense to the remainder of the normal liver parenchyma on hepatocyte-phase imaging. This imaging appearance is advantageous for not only defining lesion extent but for establishing the relationship of the tumor to the biliary tree, and improving detection of multifocal disease/intrahepatic metastases [ ], which can play a role in PRETEXT (pretreatment extent of disease) tumor staging [ ] (Fig. 6 ). Fig. 6 Hepatoblastoma in a 10-year-old boy with elevated alpha fetoprotein (>100,000 ng/mL) and new liver mass. MRI with gadoxetate disodium was performed for characterization. a Axial T1-weighted post-contrast hepatocyte-phase image shows the lesion is hypointense to the remainder of the liver parenchyma. b Coronal T1-weighted post-contrast hepatocyte-phase image demonstrates the relationship of the lesion to the biliary tree and highlights an additional smaller lesion ( arrow )
Conventional hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
Hepatocellular carcinoma is a less common malignancy in children than in adults. On dynamic three-phase T1-weighted post-contrast sequences, MR imaging characteristics of HCC with HSCAs is similar to that seen with conventional GBCAs. In the hepatocyte phase, HCCs are typically hypointense. The transitional phase, defined as the phase between the extracellular dominant phase (portal venous phase) and the intracellular dominant phase (hepatocyte phase), requires particular attention in the context of suspected HCC. During this phase, both extracellular enhancement and hepatocyte enhancement are present. Lesion hypointensity during the transitional phase previously was not thought to represent true washout, a feature that is characteristic for HCC. Instead, this was thought to reflect, in part, relative hyperintensity of the surrounding liver parenchyma from hepatocyte uptake of the HSCA [ , ]. However a recent study expanded the definition of true washout to include hypointensity in the transitional phase and hepatocyte phase, which allows for higher sensitivity in detection of HCC without lowering specificity [ ]. About 10–27% of HCCs remain iso- to hyperintense on hepatocyte-phase imaging because of the variable expression of OATP receptors [ ]. This atypical characteristic is thought to be associated with lower-grade histology [ ]. This represents one of the potential pitfalls to following a simplistic approach of hepatocyte-phase hyperintensity being indicative of benignity. As with other lesions, hyperintensity on hepatocyte-phase imaging should be considered in conjunction with available clinical and laboratory data, and biopsy should be recommended if there is sufficient concern for malignancy. Of note, some authors describe a very small risk of tract seeding as a complication of percutaneous biopsy [ ].
Biliary indications for hepatocyte-specific contrast agents
Because HSCAs are partially excreted by the biliary system, these contrast agents allow for superb delineation of the biliary tree on T1-weighted post-contrast hepatocyte-phase images [ ]. This can be advantageous for evaluating biliary anatomy, biliary tree anomalies, postoperative complications, and biliary trauma.
Biliary imaging with HSCAs allows for T1-weighted contrast-enhanced MR cholangiopancreatography, which is useful for identifying communication between the biliary tree and structures of interest as well as for evaluating biliary leaks, two diagnoses that can be challenging to make on traditional US and MRI alone. Contrast enhancement is not needed for all MR cholangiopancreatography studies but can be helpful for problem-solving, especially in the postoperative setting.
Biliary anatomy
Variant biliary anatomy is seen in approximately 30% of people and has particular relevance in the context of planned surgery, such as liver donation or partial hepatic resection. Studies in adults have shown contrast-enhanced MR cholangiopancreatography with HSCAs to be superior to CT cholangiography for pre-liver transplant evaluation, providing needed diagnostic information prior to surgery, in people with normal and variant anatomy [ ]. In addition, contrast-enhanced MR cholangiopancreatography with HSCAs provides higher signal-to-noise ratio than conventional MR cholangiopancreatography, especially for normal, non-dilated intra-hepatic biliary ducts [ ], and can be a complementary sequence for evaluating biliary anatomy.
Biliary congenital anomalies
Hepatocyte-specific contrast-enhanced MRI can be helpful to evaluate congenital biliary abnormalities by depicting small-caliber biliary structures and identifying communication of abnormalities with the biliary tree. Evaluating the biliary tree on hepatocyte-phase and additional delayed phases has been shown to contribute to characterization of congenital biliary lesions such as choledochal cysts [ , ]. Contrast agent excreted into the biliary tree can fill communicating abnormalities, such as choledochal cysts, distinguishing these from other peribiliary cystic lesions that do not communicate with the biliary tree, such as pseudocysts, duodenal diverticula, and duodenal duplication [ ] (Fig. 7 ). However HSCAs are not necessary for all congenital biliary abnormalities. One study in 21 pediatric patients described the use of HSCAs to evaluate biliary atresia and Alagille syndrome with hypoplastic biliary tree but found no advantage over conventional T2-weighted MR cholangiopancreatography [ ]. Fig. 7 Intrahepatic biliary anomaly in a 4-year-old boy with liver cyst found incidentally on abdominal ultrasound. MRI with gadoxetate disodium was performed to determine whether the lesion communicated with the biliary tree. a Axial heavily T2-weighted MR image demonstrates the lesion is lobulated and has fluid signal. b Axial T1-weighted post-contrast hepatocyte-phase imaging at 20 min post contrast injection shows contrast agent filling an anteriorly displaced duct. c, d Thirty-minute axial ( c ) and 45-min axial ( d ) delayed post-contrast injection images show the lesion filled with contrast agent ( arrow ), confirming the diagnosis of intrahepatic choledochal cyst. Extension of acquisition of imaging to 45 min post contrast administration was performed to increase the radiologist’s confidence in making a definitive diagnosis
Biliary strictures
Biliary strictures are a known complication of surgical biliary anastomoses, particularly post-liver transplant. Conventional T2-weighted MR cholangiopancreatography has been shown to have limitations in differentiating non-obstructive from obstructive biliary dilatation in the setting of surgical anastomoses; 20% of obstructed ducts might not be dilated on imaging in liver transplants [ ]. Excretion of contrast agent into the biliary tree on HSCA-enhanced MR cholangiopancreatography can distinguish obstructing and non-obstructing strictures, which might preclude the need for confirmatory percutaneous cholangiography (Fig. 8 ). Tamrazi et al. [ ] showed high clinical utility of using HSCA to evaluate for iatrogenic and non-iatrogenic biliary strictures in children. Fig. 8 Postoperative biliary complication in a 9-year-old boy with a history of whole - liver transplant for biliary atresia with question of obstructing stricture of distal biliary duct at the biliary anastomosis. MRI with gadoxetate disodium was performed for further investigation. a Coronal T2-weighted image shows mild central intrahepatic biliary ductal dilatation with possible stricture at the hepaticojejunostomy junction ( arrow ). b Axial T1-weighted post-contrast hepatocyte-phase images show contrast agent being excreted into the duodenum ( asterisk ). c Coronal subtraction post-contrast image confirms contrast agent excretion into small bowel ( asterisk ), demonstrating that there is no obstruction
Postoperative complications (biliary leak)
Historically, biliary scintigraphy has been the imaging modality of choice for evaluating biliary leak, with a high sensitivity for detecting leak; however anatomical detail regarding the site of the leak is limited unless single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) is employed. Delayed imaging using contrast-enhanced MR cholangiopancreatography with HSCAs has been shown to be similarly helpful for detecting and localizing bile leaks and can be useful for evaluating postoperative collections suspected to reflect bilomas, although this is an off-label use of the contrast agents [ ]. The advantage of MRI over scintigraphy is the exquisite anatomical detail that can allow precise localization of the leak [ ]. Biliary leaks typically can be detected on hepatocyte-phase imaging; however one disadvantage of MRI is that if the leak is not identified during the standard hepatocyte phase, it can be logistically difficult to bring a child back to the MR scanner for further delayed imaging. Delayed images are commonly and generally easily performed with scintigraphy. Another disadvantage of MRI, relative to scintigraphy, is that planar scintigraphy can generally be achieved without sedation/anesthesia, even in the youngest pediatric patients.
Conclusion
Hepatocyte-specific contrast agents, based on their distinct pattern of uptake and excretion, can be helpful for evaluating hepatic and biliary pathologies in children. Knowledge of the mechanisms of uptake and clearance of the contrast agents, and how they are impacted by hepatic function, is important for optimal use of these contrast agents. One should be aware of the effects that underlying hepatic dysfunction can have on the optimal use of an HSCA prior to using it for hepatic and biliary indications in children. In the current climate of concern regarding gadolinium deposition, use of all GBCAs, including HSCAs, should be judicious in the pediatric population.