Introduction
Heterotaxy constitutes a complex, heterogeneous group of congenital anomalies in which the internal thoracoabdominal organs including the atrial appendages are abnormally arranged across the left–right axis of the body because of a looping defect during embryologic development [ , , ]. Heterotaxy is often associated with severe, complex congenital heart disease and extracardiac anomalies [ , ]. Heterotaxy accounts for approximately 3% of all congenital heart diseases [ ], with a reported incidence of 1 in 6,000–20,000 live births [ ].
Given the anatomical complexity in children with heterotaxy, accurate radiologic depiction of the findings constitutes one of the biggest challenges in paediatric cardiac imaging. Echocardiography and cardiac MRI are the imaging modalities of choice, particularly for paediatric patients, because they are noninvasive and do not involve ionising radiation. Echocardiography is usually limited to the delineation of extra-anatomical bypasses or systemic shunts, and cardiac MRI is usually time-consuming. In addition, visualisation of small structures in children with high heart rates using cardiac MRI can be technically challenging [ , ]. The major drawbacks of cardiac MRI are that it might be not readily available, it is a relatively expensive modality, and young children might need to be sedated to undergo this examination. Cardiac catheterisation reveals excellent anatomical detail; however it is an invasive procedure and not ideal for children, and, in addition, obstructed vessels could be easily missed. Therefore at many institutions cardiac catheterisation is primarily reserved for people in whom accurate haemodynamic data are necessary or in whom an interventional procedure is anticipated [ , ]. In clinical practice, and particularly for children who are at high risk for sedation or need emergent imaging, CT angiography serves as an excellent, rapid, noninvasive imaging alternative. With continuous improvements in multidetector-row CT technology, radiation dose reduction strategies, reconstruction algorithms and computer hardware, the use of CT angiography for assessing children with congenital heart disease has gained broader acceptance [ ]. In addition, considering the growing data on the possible neurotoxic effects of anaesthesia in the developing brain [ , ] and the emerging data on the increased signal intensity in certain brain structures associated with gadolinium-based contrast agents [ , , ], CT angiography might play a role for these children. Some institutions already use CT angiography for preoperative assessment of infants with complex aortic coarctations, especially if the abnormalities cannot be fully elucidated on echocardiography [ ], or for the evaluation of abnormal pulmonary venous anatomy [ , ]. Anomalous veno-atrial connections, which are not easily identified on echocardiography, are one of the paramount features of heterotaxy [ , ]. Given these facts, CT angiography might be extremely useful in children with heterotaxy.
We reviewed a cohort of paediatric patients who were diagnosed with heterotaxy during a 4-year period and received CT angiography at a single institution. Their imaging data were subjected to sequential segmental analysis and analysed using the latest nomenclature consensus [ ]. Hence the purpose of this study was to evaluate and report the range of cardiac and extracardiac CT angiography findings in paediatric patients with heterotaxy and to compare the different types of isomerism as characterised by CT angiography.
Materials and methods
Our institutional review board approved this retrospective study and waived the requirement for informed patient consent. This study was performed at our tertiary paediatric cardiovascular centre (Instituto Nacional de Salud del Niño San Borja in Lima, Peru), which is a national referral centre for children with complex congenital heart disease and receives children from multiple cardiology departments across Peru.
We conducted an imaging database search using the keyword heterotaxy and cross-referenced all results against patient charts.
We identified 64 paediatric patients who were referred for CT angiography. All CT angiography procedures were performed between June 2013 and September 2017. All 64 children had undergone echocardiography at our institution. The study population included 34 boys and 30 girls, with a mean age of 1.6 years (range, 2 days to 14.6 years), normal renal function, and no known allergies to iodinated contrast agents. Postoperative patients were excluded from the study except in the cases of three children who received a Blalock–Taussig shunt, which is a procedure that does not typically alter the original anatomy.
Nonionic iodinated contrast material (iopamidol, 370 mg I/mL, Iopamed; Medifarma, Lima, Peru) was used. Contrast material (2–2.5 mL/kg) was injected into a peripheral vein of an upper extremity or foot with a power injector at a rate of 0.9–4 mL/s. At our institution the radiologist is present at the time of injection for all studies and the studies are triggered when adequate opacification of the pulmonary arteries is appreciated or at the discretion of the radiologist. The scans are acquired in craniocaudal direction during a single breath-hold in cooperative children or during quiet respiration in children unable to suspend respiration.
All exams were performed on a single-source 64-slice multidetector CT scanner (Toshiba Aquilion ONE 64 detector row CT scanner; Otawara, Japan). The field of view extended from the thoracic inlet to the mid-abdomen; however in 10 children in whom an interrupted vena cava was suspected, the acquisition extended below the iliac crests. Approximately 95% (61 of 64) of the examinations were performed with a routine non-electrocardiogram-gated (ECG-gated) technique. In the remaining 5% of the patient cohort, we prospectively gated the studies because concomitant assessment of coronary arterial anatomy was requested.
Images were transferred to a picture archiving and communication system (PACS) for review and analysis and to a thin-client server-based workstation (Vitrea; Vital Images, Minnetonka, MN).
All exams were initially reviewed by two paediatric radiologists, with 9 (C.F.U.C.) and 5 (I.A.M.R.) years of experience. They evaluated the entire anatomy using sequential segmental analysis, primarily in the axial plane [ ], with multiplanar and 3-D reformatting imaging used as needed. Right and left atrial isomerism were determined by the consensus of two paediatric radiologists evaluating the morphology of the atrial appendages (Fig. 1 ) [ , ]. The right atrial appendage is typically broad-based and pyramidal in shape, with the pectinate muscles extending into the body of the atrium, while the left atrial appendage is characteristically tubular in shape with a narrow, smooth-walled neck, and the pectinate muscles are confined to the body and distal portion of the appendage [ , , , , , , , ] (Fig. 1 ). Multiplanar reformatting was used when the appendage morphology was not evident in the standard axial images. Fig. 1 Configuration of the atrial appendages in heterotaxy. a Right isomerism. Multiplanar reformatted CT angiography image in a 17-month-old boy with right isomerism shows the right-side configuration of both atrial appendages (*), which are broad-based and triangular. Note the extensive interatrial septal defect. b Left isomerism. Multiplanar reformatted CT angiography image in an 8-year-old girl with left isomerism shows the left-side configuration of both atrial appendages (*). Both appendages are narrow, elongated and finger-like in shape. Note the extensive interatrial septal defect
We resolved disagreements by consensus. We tabulated findings by organ system following sequential segmental analysis [ ]. We used descriptive statistics to summarize patient characteristics and imaging data. We tabulated the types of cardiovascular and extracardiac abnormalities and calculated the prevalence of each abnormality.
Results
All 64 CT angiography studies were diagnostic for the anatomy in question, and most scans had optimal quality. No scans were considered non-diagnostic, and no studies needed to be repeated. The indications for the CT angiography exams included anatomical delineation, assessment of pulmonary arteries or veins, assessment of coronary anatomy, or workup before cardiac surgery.
In total, 44 (69%) children had right atrial isomerism (Fig. 2 ) and 18 (28%) had left atrial isomerism (Fig. 3 ). For the 2 (3%) remaining children the anatomy of the atrial appendages was classified as undefined [ , ] and the situs could not be determined (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 2 CT angiography in a 14-day-old boy with right isomerism. a The atrial appendages (*) are similar in configuration and show right atrial morphology; both are broad-based and triangular. b Minimum-intensity projection CT image shows symmetrical configuration of the bronchi ( arrows ), with bilateral right bronchi arrangement. Both bronchi are short, less angled and consistent with right isomerism of the bronchi. c Axial CT angiography image shows dextrocardia and common atrioventricular canal in the setting of univentricular heart. d Multiplanar reformatted CT angiography image of the upper abdomen demonstrates fusion of the adrenal glands ( arrows ). e Multiplanar reformatted CT angiography image shows asplenia and midline configuration of the liver. f A 3-D volume-rendered CT angiography image viewed from a posterior approach shows total venous anomalous return, infracardiac type. The pulmonary veins connect to a vertical vein, which ultimately connects to the portal vein. Note focal narrowing ( arrow ) of the vertical vein at the level of the diaphragm Fig. 3 CT angiography in a 3-year-old girl with left isomerism. a Multiplanar reformatted CT angiography image shows mirror-shape configuration of the atrial appendages (*) with left morphology. b Minimum-intensity projection CT image shows symmetrical branching pattern of the bronchi ( arrows ), with bilateral left bronchial arrangement. c Multiplanar reformatted CT angiography image shows dextrocardia. Notice partial anomalous venous return to the right atrium ( arrow ). d Multiplanar reformatted CT angiography image shows polysplenia. e Multiplanar reformatted CT angiography image demonstrates inferior vena cava interruption with azygos continuation ( arrow ). f Coronal reformatted CT angiography image shows direct drainage of the hepatic veins to the left atrium ( arrow ) Fig. 4 CT angiography in a 28-day-old boy with undefined situs. a Axial CT angiography image shows a hypoplastic right atrium with no discrete visualization of its appendage. b Minimum-intensity projection image shows symmetrical configuration of the bronchi ( arrows ), which have left-side morphology. c A 3-D volume-rendered reconstruction viewed from a posterior perspective shows bilateral superior venae cavae ( white arrows ) and inferior vena cava interruption with azygos continuation ( black arrow ). d Axial CT angiography image demonstrates right polysplenia ( arrows ), a left-side liver with heterogeneous perfusion and a right-side stomach (*)
Table 1 details the situs of the children as determined by the atrial appendage anatomy and compares it with the bronchial anatomy (Fig. 5 ). Table 1 Summary of CT angiography findings according to appendage and bronchial anatomy ( n =64) Right bronchial anatomy Left bronchial anatomy Right appendage anatomy 43 0 Left appendage anatomy 0 19 Undefined 1 1 Fig. 5 Coronal minimum-intensity projection images show symmetrical configuration of the airway with right ( a ) and left ( b ) bronchial arrangement. a In right bronchial isomerism both bronchi are short and less angled, a morphology consistent with that of the right bronchus. This 3-year-old boy had bilateral tri-lobed lungs. b In left bronchial isomerism both bronchi are long and angled, a morphology consistent with that of the left bronchus. This 8-year-old girl had bilateral bilobed lungs
The main cardiovascular and extracardiac findings according to appendage anatomy, which showed great variability, are summarised in Table 2 . Table 2 Summary of the main cardiovascular and extracardiac findings according to appendage anatomy ( n =64) Right isomerism Left isomerism Undefined Cardiovascular findings Heart position Levocardia 31 11 1 Mesocardia 7 4 0 Dextrocardia 6 3 1 Inferior vena cava (IVC) Right-side IVC 18 2 1 Left-side IVC 21 1 1 Bilateral IVC 3 0 0 Undefined 2 0 0 IVC interruption/azygos continuation 0 15 0 Pulmonary vein (PV) connection Normal PVs 5 9 1 Intracardial TAPVR 15 5 0 Supracardial TAPVR 15 0 0 Infracardial TAPVR 7 0 0 Mixed 1 0 0 Partial APVR 1 4 1 Septal defects No septal defects 0 1 1 CAVC 41 10 1 VSD 1 1 0 ASD 1 2 0 VSD and ASD 1 4 0 Ventricular morphology Biventricular balanced 11 12 1 Biventricular unbalanced/left hypoplasia 12 2 0 Biventricular unbalanced/right hypoplasia 7 2 1 Single ventricle 14 2 0 Ventriculoarterial connection Concordant 1 6 1 Double-outlet right ventricle 13 5 0 Pulmonary atresia 21 2 0 Double-outlet left ventricle 2 1 1 Transposition of the great arteries 2 2 0 Tetralogy of Fallot 0 1 0 Double-outlet single ventricle heart 5 1 0 Ductus arteriosus Patent 26 11 0 Absent 18 7 2 Aortic arch Right 16 5 1 Left 28 13 1 Hepatic vein drainage To the right atrium 18 8 1 To the left atrium 13 6 0 To both atria 10 3 1 Undefined 3 1 0 Extracardiac findings Splenic anatomy/position Left-side 3 1 0 Right-side 6 0 0 Left polysplenia 0 12 1 Right polysplenia 1 5 1 Asplenia 34 0 0 Superior mesenteric artery/superior mesenteric vein relationship Normal 21 8 2 Inverted 11 8 0 Not evaluable 10 0 0 Superposition 2 2 0 Pancreatic anatomy Normal 20 9 1 Right-side 18 3 0 Not evaluable 5 0 0 Dorsal hypoplasia 1 6 1 Liver position Midline 19 3 0 Right-side 13 10 2 Left-side 12 5 0 Gastric position Left-side 21 12 1 Right-side 23 6 1 APVR anomalous pulmonary venous connections, ASD atrial septal defect, CAVC complete atrioventricular canal, TAPVR total anomalous pulmonary venous connections, VSD ventricular septal defect
We found that the most useful extracardiac finding for determining the type of heterotaxy was the bronchial branching pattern (Fig. 5 ). Isomerism of the right or left bronchial tree was typically concordant with atrial appendage morphology, as shown in Table 1 . The two children with undefined atrial morphology each had right and left bronchial configurations. On the other hand, asplenia was noted in only 34 of the 44 children (77%) with right atrial isomerism, while right or left polysplenia was observed in 17 of the 18 children (94%) with left atrial isomerism, as noted in Table 2 .
Systemic venous, superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena cava (IVC) anomalies (Fig. 2 ) were common, with bilateral SVCs present in approximately 45% of children ( n =28). A bridging vein was noted in only 7 of the 28 children with bilateral SVCs.
The hepatic venous connections could be assessed in 60 of the 64 children. In 4 children, the hepatic venous anatomy could not be delineated because of the phase of contrast acquisition. The hepatic veins drained into the right atrium in only 27 of the 60 children. In 19 children, the hepatic veins drained into the left atrium, while dual hepatic venous drainage pathways into both atria were noted in 14 children.
All 44 children with right isomerism and 17 of the 18 with left isomerism had septal defects. CAVC was the most frequent septal defect in both groups, affecting 41 children with right isomerism and 10 patients with left isomerism.
Anomalous pulmonary venous return was more common in those with right isomerism than in those with left isomerism and was found in 39 of the 44 children, 38 of whom showed total anomalous pulmonary venous connections. However, pulmonary venous return was normal in half of the children with left isomerism. Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return was more common in children with left isomerism (4 of 18) than in those with right isomerism (1 of 44).
For many children in our cohort, evaluation of the ventriculoarterial connection anatomy was the most important indication for CT angiography examination to plan corrective or palliative surgery. The ventriculoarterial connections were abnormal in 43 of the 44 children with right isomerism and in 67% of the children with left isomerism ( n =12). Pulmonary atresia and a double-outlet right ventricle were the most frequent anomalies (Table 2 ), found in approximately 67% of the 64 children.
We classified the relationship of the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and superior mesenteric artery (SMA) as follows [ , , ]: (1) a normal relationship when the vein was located to the right of the artery, (2) an inverted relationship when the SMV was located to the left of the SMA or (3) an SMV anterior to the SMA [ ]. Of the 54 children with abdominal situs ambiguous, we found a normal SMV/SMA relationship in 28 children, an inverted relationship in 13 children and an SMV anterior to the SMA in 3 children. This relationship could not be determined in 10 children because of the phase of contrast and inadequate opacification.
A preduodenal portal vein was identified in 9 of the 64 children (14%), including 6 of the 18 children with left isomerism (33%) and 3 of the 42 children with right isomerism (7%).
We found one child with horseshoe/fused adrenal glands who also had right atrial isomerism. No children in our cohort had biliary atresia.
Technical and radiation dose data were not available before 2017 ( n =56); therefore we excluded these cases from this analysis. In the remaining 8 children, the following scan parameters were used: thin collimation (0.5 mm), pitch of 0.8–1.0, a rotation time of 0.35 s, tube voltage of 80–100 kVp and a reference tube current of 60–200 mAs, based on the child’s weight. All studies were obtained using automatic tube current modulation during shallow free-breathing or suspended inspiration. The volumetric data were reconstructed at 3- to 5-mm slice thickness for routine viewing and at 1- to 2-mm thickness for multiplanar reformatting and 3-D volume-rendered reconstructions. A review of these 8 children (4 girls and 4 boys ages 8 days to 5 months) at our centre revealed a median volumetric CT dose index (CTDI vol ) of 7.6 mGy (range 5.8–11.2), median dose–length product (DLP) of 226.2 mGy*cm (range 121.3–423.2 mGy*cm) and median size-specific dose estimate (SSDE) of 19.1 mGy (range 13.6–29 mGy). SSDEs were based on the American Association of Physicists in Medicine task group 204 report [ ].
Discussion
“Heterotaxy” refers to an abnormal arrangement of the visceral organs in the thoracic and abdominal cavities across the left–right axis of the body [ ]. Other terms are also used to describe these disorders of lateralisation. “Isomerism” is the situation in which some paired structures on opposite sides of the left–right axis of the body are localised on both sides of the body and, in morphologic terms, are symmetrical mirror images of each other [ ]. In heterotaxy, this isomerism can occur in the atrial arrangement and in many but not all patients in the bronchial anatomy, which can lead to an incomplete and confusing picture of organ arrangement.
Although the use of the term “right or left atrial isomerism” is generally accepted, this terminology is partially incorrect because only the atrial appendages are truly isomeric in heterotaxy [ , ]. Isomeric atrial appendages are assessed by evaluating their morphology, including the extent of the pectinate muscles relative to the atrioventricular junctions [ ]. While this is difficult to adequately determine with echocardiography, the morphology of the atrial appendages is significantly easier to evaluate on CT angiography or cardiac MRI [ ].
The terms “polysplenia syndrome” and “asplenia syndrome” should be discontinued for describing heterotaxy because our findings and those of other authors [ , ] show that the status of the spleen is weakly correlated with the type of heterotaxy. Therefore, while these terms are important for describing splenic morphology, they should not be used to stratify the disease as left or right isomerism. The literature now supports that right or left isomerism should be determined by the morphology of the atrial appendages [ , , , , ] and independent description of each organ system should be pursued when arrangements are discordant among the different organ systems [ ].
Defining heterotaxy syndrome is always difficult because categorising the precise morphology of the atrial appendages can be quite challenging in some cases. Given the fact that in our cohort, atrial appendage morphology was congruent with bronchopulmonary branching in all except two children, in whom the actual anatomy of the atrial appendages could not be defined, evaluation of the bronchial anatomy — which is relatively easy to evaluate and determine, particularly for paediatric radiologists — could be used as an initial step when evaluating these complex cases. Nonetheless in some children the morphology of the atrial appendages does not correspond with the side of the intra-abdominal organs nor the bronchial branching pattern [ , , ]. Therefore we agree with Yim et al. [ ] that when arrangements are discordant among the various organ systems, it is preferable to describe the anatomy of each organ system.
Anomalies of the ventriculoarterial connections were also frequent in our study. It is well known that discordant or double-outlet ventriculoarterial connections with severe pulmonary atresia are often associated with right isomerism but are usually concordant in left isomerism [ ]. We found that all children with right atrial isomerism showed abnormal ventriculoarterial connections, with pulmonary atresia being the most common. In contrast to the findings of previous studies, we found that only 33% ( n =6) of children with left atrial isomerism had normal ventriculoarterial connections. A double-outlet right ventricle was the most frequent anomaly in this group of children with left atrial isomerism, followed by pulmonary atresia. Therefore based on our experience in heterotaxy any anomaly of ventriculoarterial connection can be found, although these anomalies are more frequently observed in right isomerism than in left isomerism.
We also found that most of our patients (50 of 64 patients, or 78%) showed anomalous pulmonary venous connections, similar to previous findings [ , , ] (Table 2 ).
In our experience anomalous hepatic venous drainage occurred in nearly 50% of the children in our cohort, while in the literature it is generally accepted that anomalous hepatic venous drainage occurs in heterotaxy in only 30% of patients [ , ]. This finding has important surgical implications because many children with heterotaxy require a Fontan or Kawashima procedure. Therefore careful description of the individual hepatic venous connections to the inferior vena cava or to the atrial mass is of utmost importance in these children [ , ] because exclusion of normal hepatic venous flow from the pulmonary circulation can result in the development of pulmonary arteriovenous malformations [ , , , ].
Although right atrial isomerism has been classically associated with asplenia, and left atrial isomerism with polysplenia, in our experience exceptions are common and the spectrum of variability is high and seems to include some overlap [ , , , ].
In polysplenia, multiple spleens (varying in number from 2 to 16) that are usually poorly functioning are present either on the left or right side, but most patients (64–75%) have right-side spleens [ , ]. This agrees with our findings that nearly 95% of the children with left atrial isomerism had polysplenia. However we also found polysplenia in one (2.4%) child with right atrial isomerism. We encountered asplenia in 77% of our patients with right atrial isomerism, which is a higher incidence than the 42% that Van Praagh [ ] reported. This finding of an absent spleen is not only an anatomical curiosity but also implies functional asplenia, which can lead to important functional immunodeficiencies that increase the significance of this diagnosis [ ]. In polysplenia, the multiple small spleens are usually poorly functioning, and these findings have management implications. Assessment of splenic function is important in all children with heterotaxy, and antibiotic prophylaxis and vaccination against Pneumococcus should be instituted in children with functional asplenia to protect against bacterial organisms [ ].
Our study had several limitations. The major limitation of our study was its monocentric and retrospective nature. In addition, one major limitation is that many specific parameters of radiation exposure were unavailable for analysis and we could not confidently determine the radiation doses in all subjects. In our country, as is the case in many underdeveloped countries, the reporting of radiation doses is not mandatory. We only started to collect and report our radiation data in 2017. Another limitation was the lack of precise documentation of contrast doses. Therefore, the stated doses were based on in-house standards. In addition, observer bias was present in our study because the observing radiologists were aware that all the study patients had heterotaxy. An additional limitation of CT angiography studies is the time needed to produce 3-D images, particularly for separating the cardiovascular structures from the osseous structures and reconstructing the anatomy. Cardiac MRI is better in this regard and has the inherent advantage of not requiring ionising radiation. However, cardiac MRI has other limitations including the length of the study, the need for sedation, the use of gadolinium and the lack of availability, particularly in developing countries.
Conclusion
Our clinical experience with CT angiography for assessing heterotaxy has been encouraging. Despite some limitations, we have shown that CT angiography provides extensive and valuable cardiovascular and extracardiac data on heterotaxy and shows that the bronchial branching pattern is the only constant feature in all patients, a finding that it is easily assessed with CT angiography. Our study has also shown that the approach for classifying heterotaxy based on the terms “asplenia syndrome” and “polysplenia syndrome” is not ideal and should be avoided. Although heterotaxy frequently constitutes a pattern of side-related findings, many children have considerable anatomical variability.
It is important to note that other institutions should validate our findings, preferably in a prospective manner.