Introduction
Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), which is encoded by the gene NKX2–1 , was discovered in thyroid cellular nuclei in 1989 when it was found to be essential for thyroglobulin promoter expression [ ]. Subsequent research demonstrated that TTF-1 plays a role in the normal fetal organogenesis of not only the thyroid, but also the lungs and brain [ , , , ]. NKX2–1 homozygous null mutations result in nonviable phenotypes with dysplastic formation of the lungs, pituitary and thyroid [ ]. Children with NKX2–1 mutations of a single allele have haploinsufficiency of TTF-1, which has been associated with neonatal respiratory distress, hypotonia and congenital hypothyroidism. This clinical constellation of findings has been coined TTF-1 deficiency syndrome or brain–lung–thyroid syndrome, although not all three organ systems are always affected. Mutations have also been implicated in choreoathetosis in children and adults.
TTF-1 was found to be a major transcription factor for maintaining homeostasis of surfactant proteins A, B and C as well as ABCA3 [ , , , , ]. A NKX2–1 mutation has also been shown to be involved in one family pedigree involving neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy (NEHI) disease [ ]. Mutations in the genes encoding these proteins have been demonstrated to cause interstitial lung disease in children [ , , ].
Description of high-resolution CT findings of TTF-1 deficiency are sparse in the literature, confined to brief mentions within broad review articles [ ]. A more recent article reviewed the heterogeneity of lung disease in NKX2–1 mutations, with a short description of the imaging findings on HRCT; however the imaging findings were not systematically reviewed and description of the CT findings was limited [ ]. The goal of this study was to further characterize the HRCT findings of TTF-1 deficiency.
Materials and methods
Following approval by the institutional review board, we performed a 10-year retrospective review to identify pediatric patients (ages <18 years) who underwent lung biopsy and HRCT at Children’s Hospital Colorado. We added patients from the pulmonary department database who had tested positive for a NKX2–1 mutation but did not have lung biopsy. We identified seven children at our institution with a NKX2–1 mutation confirmed via genetic testing; one child was excluded because no HRCT imaging was performed before the child died from neonatal respiratory failure. We reviewed the earliest HRCT exams for the remaining six children. We recorded the patient demographics, thyroid status, neurologic symptoms, Fan severity score [ ], desaturation with 6-min walk, comorbidities, treatment and outcome for each child. The Fan severity score was initially described in 1997 as a “severity of illness score” ranging from asymptomatic to symptomatic with pulmonary hypertension [ ].
A total of 14 HRCTs were performed on the six children on either a Somatom 40 CT or Flash dual-source CT (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) scanner or on an outside-hospital CT scanner. The local imaging protocol evolved over time because of technological advances; however a representative protocol included thin images (0.6–1 mm) obtained either contiguously or axially every 10 mm in inspiration and every 20 mm in expiration. Our current imaging protocol (Siemens Flash) utilizes CareDose4D with a quality reference mAs of 80, kVp of 100, slice thickness of 0.6 mm, pitch of 1.2 and 0.5-s rotation time, and 125×0.625 collimation for inspiratory images. Limited axial expiratory images are obtained at four levels utilizing CareDose4D, with a quality reference mAs of 80, kVp of 100 and 2×1.0-mm collimation. All but four scans were performed under anesthesia, with one child undergoing endotracheal tube placement, seven using laryngeal mask airway and two using bag mask ventilation. More recent scans were performed utilizing our controlled ventilation protocol with minimization of induction time, minimization of use of FiO2 (fraction of inspired oxygen), and 20–25 cm H 2 O airway pressure with passive expiration. Note that non-standardization in ventilation protocol could be a confounding factor in interpretation of older and outside CTs.
The imaging features on initial CT were ranked in order of severity and location by consensus of three observers: two board-certified fellowship-trained pediatric radiologists, each with 10 years’ experience (L.P.B. and J.P.W.) and a pediatric radiology fellow (B.D.L.) utilizing a rating system originally described by Brody et al. [ ] and used by the authors in previous studies [ , ]. Parenchymal ratings included interlobular septal thickening, linear or reticular opacities, nodules, honeycombing, consolidation, ground-glass opacification, diffuse or patchy air-trapping, and cysts. Airway abnormalities included bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening, mucus plugging and tree-in-bud, and centrilobular nodules. Other findings included cardiomegaly, increased vascularity, pleural effusion, thickened fissures, pneumothorax, adenopathy and calcification. The lobar distribution of the imaging features was recorded. We reviewed subsequent HRCT exams to assess stability of imaging findings over time. Patient 5 had 1 CT; patients 1 and 2 had 2 CTs; and patients 3, 4 and 6 each had 3 CTs. We studied electronic medical charts and available histopathology, including pathology reports and tissue samples in patients 3, 4 and 5, in conjunction with CT findings, although we did not perform formal correlation. Histopathology was not available for patients 1, 2 and 6 because they were diagnosed via genetic testing only.
Results
The patient population comprised four girls and two boys, ranging in age from 23 days to 27 months (median 6 months) at the time of their initial HRCT. Ground-glass opacities were the most common feature, present in all but one child (Table 1 ). Consolidation was the second most common finding, identified in four of the six children. Architectural distortion was also a common feature, identified in four children; however it was a minor finding compared to ground-glass opacities and consolidation. No consistent distribution of imaging findings was found. Ground-glass opacities were generally patchy without predilection for upper or lower lobes. Patient 3 had diffuse hazy opacities on his initial chest radiograph at 9 days of age, with more patchy areas of ground-glass opacity and consolidation on HRCT at 23 days of age (Fig. 1 ). However, Patient 1 had diffuse ground-glass opacification throughout the lungs (Fig. 2 ). Table 1 Summary of high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) imaging, pathology and genetic findings in children with thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) deficiency Patient Age at HRCT Gender Genetic mutation HRCT findings in order of prevalence (location of finding) Histopathology (biopsy site) 1 68 days F Nonsense • Ground-glass opacification (diffuse) • Mosaic air-trapping (LUL) • Interlobular septal thickening (diffuse) No biopsy performed 2 5 months F Deletion • Ground-glass opacification (diffuse) • Consolidation (RUL, RLL, LLL) • Interlobular septal thickening (diffuse) • Architectural distortion (RLL, LUL, LLL) • Hilar and mediastinal adenopathy No biopsy performed 3 23 days M Nonsense • Consolidation (RUL, RLL) • Ground-glass opacification (RLL, RUL) (Biopsy of RML and RLL) BALT Pulmonary hypertensive arteriopathy Alveolar growth abnormality Increased alveolar macrophages Interstitial lymphocytic infiltrate 4 17 months F Nonsense • Architectural distortion (RLL, LLL, RUL, LUL, RML) • Ground-glass opacification LUL, LLL, RLL, LLL) • Mosaic air-trapping (LUL) (Biopsy of LUL and LLL) BALT Pulmonary hypertensive arteriopathy Alveolar growth abnormality Increased alveolar macrophages 5 7 months M Duplication with possible functional protein • Consolidation (LLL, RLL, RML, LUL, RUL) • Segmental air-trapping (RUL, RML, LLL, RLL, LUL) • Architectural distortion (LLL, RLL, RML, LUL, RUL) • Bronchiectasis (LLL, RLL, RML, LUL, RUL) (Biopsy of RUL and LUL) BALT Pulmonary hypertensive arteriopathy Alveolar growth abnormality Interstitial lymphocytic infiltrate 6 27 months F Deletion • Ground-glass opacification (diffuse) • Consolidation (RUL, LLL, RLL) • Architectural distortion (RUL, LUL, RLL, LLL) • Hilar adenopathy No biopsy performed BALT bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue, F female, LLL left lower lobe, LUL left upper lobe, M male, RLL right lower lobe, RML right middle lobe, RUL right upper lobe Fig. 1 Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) deficiency in a hypothyroid boy with chorea and hypotonia (Patient 3). a Anteroposterior (AP) chest radiograph at 9 days of age demonstrates diffuse hazy opacity throughout the chest. b , c Axial inspiratory ( b ) and expiratory ( c ) high-resolution CT images of the same patient at 23 days of age demonstrate areas of ground-glass opacity ( arrows in b ) on inspiratory images and mosaic attenuation/air-trapping ( arrows in c ) on expiratory images. d , e A 10x hematoxylin and eosin stain ( d ) shows alveolar growth abnormality with enlarged irregular alveoli ( arrows ) and a 20x hematoxylin and eosin stain ( e ) demonstrates increased intra-alveolar macrophages ( arrows ) Fig. 2 Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) deficiency in a 68-day-old girl with chorea and hypotonia. a , b Axial ( a ) and coronal ( b ) high-resolution CT of Patient 1 demonstrate diffuse ground-glass opacities
Subsequent HRCT imaging demonstrated evolution of findings over time. Ground-glass opacities and consolidation were more common in infants (Figs. 1 , 2 and 3 ), with relatively decreased consolidation and ground-glass opacities and worsening architectural distortion later in life (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) deficiency in a girl with ataxia and verbal delay (Patient 2). a Axial high-resolution CT (HRCT) at 5 months of age demonstrates ground-glass opacities ( black arrows ), areas of consolidation ( white arrows ) and septal thickening ( arrowheads ). b Follow-up HRCT at 5 years of age demonstrates decreased areas of ground-glass opacity ( black arrows ), scattered areas of septal thickening ( arrowheads ) and architectural distortion ( white arrows ), with a similar distribution of areas of consolidation on the prior CT
Three children had lung biopsies for workup of their respiratory symptoms. The presence of TTF-1 nuclear expression was confirmed via immunostaining in all three children with pulmonary biopsies. Similar histopathological findings were seen in all three children for whom tissue samples were available. All of the biopsies demonstrated alveolar growth abnormalities, alveolar macrophages, lymphocytic infiltrates, bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT) and pulmonary hypertensive change (Table 1 , Figs. 2 and 4 ). Fig. 4 Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) deficiency in a 17-month-old boy with developmental delay, chorea and ataxia (Patient 4). a Axial high-resolution CT (HRCT) shows architectural distortion ( black arrows ) and patchy ground-glass opacities ( white arrows ) on HRCT. b , c These findings correlate to alveolar growth disturbance ( black arrows in b ) with associated displacement and distortion of septa, alveoli and vessels ( arrowheads ) on 5x hematoxylin and eosin stain ( b ) and increased intra-alveolar macrophages on 20x hematoxylin stain ( c , black arrows )
Initial clinical presentation varied from neonatal respiratory failure to respiratory insufficiency first appearing with coexistent viral upper respiratory infections (Table 2 ). In the neonatal period, hypotonia was the most common neurologic symptom, with choreoathetosis becoming more apparent at a few months of age and severely debilitating some children as they became older. Hypothyroidism was diagnosed in five children via laboratory testing. A failed newborn screening for hypothyroidism was the initial presentation for Patient 3 before he developed respiratory distress at 9 days of age. Table 2 Clinical findings and medications Patient Initial presentation Hypothyroid (Y/N) Neurologic symptoms Fan severity score Desaturation with 6-min walk (Y/N) Room air saturation Respiratory medications 1 Born at 35 weeks, respiratory insufficiency at birth requiring CPAP Y Chorea, hypotonia Asymptomatic N 99% Advair, azithromycin, ciclesonide, budesonide 2 Born at 40 weeks by planned c-section, mechanical ventilation at birth and ECMO at 3 days×15 days Y Ataxia, verbally delayed Asymptomatic N/A 91% Steroids (NOS) 3 Born at 39 weeks, abnormal TSH on newborn screen, presented at 23 days with lethargy and cyanosis Y Chorea, hypotonia Symptomatic at rest Y 94% Azithromycin, oral prednisone 4 Born at 38 weeks. Presented at 14 months with failure to thrive and hypoxia requiring intubation Y Developmental delay, chorea, ataxia Asymptomatic N/A 95% Amoxicillin, prednilosone 5 Born at 30 weeks, required CPAP for 1 day and then nasal cannula N Hypotonia Asymptomatic N/A 98% Budesonide, albuterol 6 Born at 40 weeks by c-section. Presented at 2 years of age due to failure to thrive and suspected respiratory process with wheezing and persistent opacity on chest radiograph Y Chorea Symptomatic at rest N/A N/A Hydrochlorothiazide, azithromycin, budesonide, DNase C-section caesarean section, CPAP continuous positive airway pressure, ECMO extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, min minute, N no, N/A not available, NOS not otherwise specified, TSH thyroid-stimulating hormone, Y yes
All children encountered were heterozygous for NKX2–1 mutations, deletions or duplications resulting in haploinsufficiency. We did not encounter any cases that were homozygous for NKX2–1 mutations, as expected because this has been shown to be lethal in animal models [ ]. Five children had deletions or a nonsense mutation. One child (Patient 5) had a heterozygous 9 base duplication likely resulting in 3 glycine amino acids added to a stretch of 8 glycine amino acids found in the wild-type protein. Because this mutation has not been previously described, the clinical significance is unclear because this mutation might result in a functional protein. Further confounding the clinical picture, this was the only child in our population who was premature, born at 30 weeks’ gestational age, and who did not have hypothyroidism or choreoathetosis. On pathology this child had alveolar growth abnormality as well as lymphocytic interstitial infiltrates, and bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue.
Discussion
This study demonstrates that the predominant HRCT findings of NKX2–1 mutation and resultant TTF-1 deficiency are ground-glass opacities (5 of 6 children) and consolidation (4 of 6 children). This corresponds to the findings reported by Nattes et al. [ ], although they were seen in a higher proportion of our patients. In their population infiltrates were a common finding, likely corresponding to the consolidation seen in our study. Similarly, fibrosis was reported in their study, which might correspond to architectural distortion seen in four of our patients, although it was thought to be a more minor finding in our patients [ ]. Given the regulatory role that NKX2–1 and the TTF-1 protein play in the synthesis of surfactant, there is significant overlap of the imaging findings of TTF-1 deficiency and other surfactant dysfunction mutations. For example, ground-glass opacities have been described in ABCA3 , surfactant protein B and surfactant protein C gene mutations [ , , ]. We have observed similar findings of ground-glass opacities in pulmonary interstitial glycogenosis, and ground-glass opacities have been reported in preterm infants with surfactant deficiency and chronic lung disease of prematurity [ , ]. Cystic lucencies, as have been reported in surfactant dysfunction mutations and pulmonary interstitial glycogenosis [ , ], were not observed in our patients. Lymphoproliferative lung disease such as follicular bronchiolitis and lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia seen in people with immune dysregulation can result in ground-glass opacities and areas of consolidation, although nodules are often observed on CT in these disorders, and these were not present in any of the CTs in this study [ , ]. Pulmonary hemorrhage can result in ground-glass and airspace opacities, as well, and should be considered especially in the setting of hemoptysis or blood found on bronchoscopy or endotracheal suctioning, although as in lymphoproliferative disease nodules are often present [ ]. None of the HRCTs had the typical pattern seen in people with NEHI [ ]. All but one of our patients were born at term, helping differentiate TTF-1 deficiency from prematurity-related surfactant deficiency, which demonstrates a similar HRCT appearance [ ]. While infection could also result in ground-glass opacities or consolidation, none of our patients had clinical features of infection at the time of imaging and no evidence of infection was seen on pathology in any of our patients who underwent biopsy.
The histopathology of people with TTF-1 deficiency is known to be highly variable [ , ]. Of the three children in our study who had biopsy, there was no evidence of pulmonary alveolar proteinosis material or chronic lobular remodeling, and there was no type 2 cell hyperplasia, features typically seen in surfactant abnormalities. The patchy chronic inflammation has been described with TTF-1 deficiency or it could be post-infectious.
This study is limited by its small sample size, always a challenge in characterizing rare diseases. Initial HRCT imaging was performed at different ages for each child, likely capturing a snapshot in time of a dynamic disease. Detailed clinical history was not always available for each child because most were born elsewhere and sought care at our institution years afterward. Only three children underwent a lung biopsy, limiting our ability to do histological and imaging comparisons. Varying degrees of imaging quality were noted because some chest imaging was performed on older scanners with scanned printed films reviewed. With a retrospective review of a rare disease, it would be challenging to comment on effects of treatment on imaging given the inconsistent interval between treatment and imaging.
Conclusion
Our study describes the HRCT findings of TTF-1 deficiency in multiple pediatric patients. There is overlap of the HRCT findings of prematurity-related surfactant deficiency as well as other surfactant dysfunction mutations and TTF-1 deficiency syndrome. TTF-1 deficiency should be considered in term infants with respiratory distress syndrome or children presenting with imaging findings of surfactant dysfunction, especially if hypotonia, choreoathetosis or hypothyroidism is present. Consideration of this diagnosis based on imaging and clinical features can lead to genetic testing, and biopsy can potentially be avoided. Additional studies with larger populations of patients and long-term follow-up are required to characterize the full spectrum of this disorder.