Introduction
Renal calculi can present in children of all ages, although they are much less common than in adults [ ]. The incidence of pediatric renal stone disease is increasing with one study reporting a fivefold increase in hospital admissions for pediatric kidney stones in the past decade [ ]. Several theories are postulated for this, including diet, childhood obesity and climate temperature change [ , ]. In children, the main causes for stone disease are metabolic disorders and infectious disease; in adults, obesity, hypertension and chronic kidney disease are the principal aetiologies [ ].
The classical presentation of renal colic is unusual in children. They often present with more insidious symptoms such as nonspecific abdominal pain or sepsis [ , ]. In adults, non-enhanced computed tomography (CT) has been established as the preferred examination for stone evaluation due to its sensitivity and specificity, which approach 100% in some studies [ , ]. However, in children we should limit the exposure to ionising radiation wherever possible. Ultrasound (US) is widely available, avoids ionising radiation and offers high-resolution imaging. US should be the initial imaging modality in children with nonspecific abdominal symptoms and those suspected of having renal stones [ , , ]. CT should be reserved for complex pretreatment work-up (e.g., percutaneous nephrolithotomy), and in situations with a high index of clinical suspicion in the absence of a US abnormality [ ].
Several studies have assessed the usefulness of US, employing CT as a reference standard, but have mainly focused on adults. Reported detection rates in those selected adult populations vary between 59% and 86% and, with false-positive rates, up to 51% [ , , , ]. A recent study including only children [ ] reported a sensitivity and specificity for kidney stone US in children of 66.7% and 97.4%, respectively. When they excluded children with an abnormally high body mass index (BMI), this improved sensitivity to 85%. To optimize US performance, several stone features are assessed: the presence of an echogenic focus, twinkle artifact [ ], acoustic shadowing and stone size. In adults, twinkle artifact is associated with a high sensitivity, but also a high false-positive rate [ , ]. Several imaging findings have been demonstrated to alter urological management, including evidence of obstruction (e.g., hydronephrosis), number and location of stones [ , ].
Acoustic shadowing has received less attention in literature than twinkle artifact, and its usefulness in children may be underestimated. Previous largely adult populations observed shadowing to have a sensitivity of 31–40.6%, and a positive predictive value of 95–97.8% [ , , ]. A recent pediatric study [ ] reported one false positive with shadowing on US in their series of pediatric patients but did not provide any further information concerning shadowing. From our experience working in a pediatric stone referral centre, shadowing is more common than reported and it appears to be very reliable when present. Because twinkle artifact is associated with false positives [ ], in our practice all stones are assessed for shadowing in an effort to reduce false-positive findings based on twinkle artifact alone.
Given the pivotal role of US in pediatric stone disease in terms of further tests and treatment options, the aim of our study was to assess the usefulness and limitations of acoustic shadowing. We set out to test the hypothesis that, in a pediatric stone referral centre, acoustic shadowing is present in the majority of true-positive stones and with a high (>90%) specificity.
Materials and methods
This was a retrospective study at a pediatric renal stone referral centre. Local institutional approval was acquired and the need for patient informed consent was waived.
Children who had a non-enhanced abdominal CT performed for suspected or known renal tract calculi between January 2015 and December 2016 were included. When multiple CT scans had been performed in an individual patient, only the first scan performed at the study site was included. All scans had been acquired on a dual-source 2×192-slice CT scanner (Siemens SOMATOM Force, Erlangen, Germany). For those with known stones being assessed because of presurgical intervention, the CT protocol prescribed a field of view limited to the kidneys, supplemented with a kidney-ureter-bladder scout view. For those with hydronephrosis or no stones on US but high clinical suspicion of ureteric stones, the CT protocol prescribed a field of view including the pelvis to image the entire urinary tract. All CT scans were non-enhanced, performed without sedation and with breath-hold where possible. For all patients, 1-mm axial slices and 5-mm coronal slices (without gap) were reconstructed. Further multiplanar reconstruction was at the discretion of the reporting radiologist. Tube voltage (kVp) had a median of 100 with interquartile range (IQR): 20 and range: 80–150, and tube current (mAs) had a median of 37 with IQR: 23 and range: 11–245; both were adjusted according to patient weight. Iterative reconstruction was always used.
The most recent US scan before the CT was used for this comparative study. Clinical US examinations had been performed by radiologists (all with >7 years of dedicated paediatric radiology experience) or senior pediatric sonographers (all with >4 years of dedicated paediatric experience) using a GE LOGIQ E9 scanner (General Electric, Fairfield, CT). The standard protocol consisted of images of both kidneys taken in supine and prone positions to assess echogenic foci, acoustic shadowing and stone size. In the preset pediatric abdomen setting, spatial compounding was enabled, grey-scale dynamic range set at 72 dB and the pulse repetition frequency set at 1.9 kHz. The scanning frequency was set as high as possible for each patient’s habitus. The assessment of twinkle artifact was at the discretion of the operator.
Anonymized US and CT reports and images were randomised and retrospectively reviewed by two radiologists in consensus (M.V.V. and M.H., both with 2 years of dedicated pediatric radiology experience). The readers were masked to the corresponding US or CT, respectively. The following parameters were recorded: number of stones, location of stones (left/right, upper pole/interpolar/lower pole, collecting system/ureter), echogenic focus (yes/no), acoustic shadowing artifact (yes/no), twinkle artifact (yes/no/not assessed), size (mm), and number of days between US and CT. Stones described on both US and CT were matched based on the specific location within the kidney. Each suspected and/or confirmed stone was included as a separate data point.
Patients with nephrocalcinosis or ureteric and bladder stones detected on imaging (without renal or ureteric stones) were excluded. Patients with >3 months between US and CT were also excluded.
Non-enhanced CT was used as the reference standard. Subgroup analysis was based on discrepancies of stone location between US and CT. The first subgroup consisted of stones diagnosed on US but not demonstrated on CT (false-positive US), the second of stones both found on US and CT (true-positive US), and the third of stones seen on CT but not US (false-negative US).
Statistics consisted of description and test performance assessment. The level of significance was set at P <0.05. SPSS for Windows (release 25; IBM Corp., Armonk, NY) was used to determine the significance of interval/ratio variables by using a t -test or analysis of variance.
Results
Thirty-five abdominal CT scans of 35 patients (21 male, 14 female) fulfilled the entry criteria. Two CT scans were excluded because of bladder stones alone, another two patients were excluded because the interval between US and CT had been >3 months. No patient was excluded based on the presence of a ureteric stone alone. This resulted in 31 children enrolled. The median effective dose was 1.0 mSv (IQR: 1.1, range: 0.2–12), with 2 outliers at 6.9 mSv and 11.7 mSv, respectively, a 12- and a 15-year-old weighing 85 kg and 135 kg, respectively. The median overall age was 13 years (IQR: 2.5, range: 1–17 years). The median number of days between the US and the subsequent CT was 16 (IQR: 36, range: 0–91 days). The median scanning frequency of ultrasounds was 5 MHz (IQR: 1, range: 4–9 MHz).
US of the kidneys detected 66 hyperechoic foci suspected for calculi; 59 were confirmed true positive on CT (true-positive US; Table 1 , Fig. 1 ), 7 were not (false-positive US; Table 1 , Fig. 2 ). CT further detected 11 renal and 6 ureteric calculi; the 11 renal calculi were included for false-negative US subgroup analysis (Table 1 ). The overall median stone size was 5 mm (IQR: 5 mm). Table 1 Subgroup analysis Ultrasound False positive True positive False negative Stones per group, n 7 59 11 Days between ultrasound and computed tomography, median (interquartile range) 15 (32) 15 (36) 10 (24.5) Twinkle artifact, % 100% 88.2% N/A Shadowing, % 0% 69.5% N/A Size in mm, median (interquartile range) 5 (3) 8 (5) 4 (2.25) N/A not applicable Fig. 1 A 13-year-old girl with right-side flank pain. US demonstrates multiple echoic foci with the largest focus (1 cm; white arrow ) seen in the lower pole of the right kidney with marked acoustic shadowing ( open arrow ) ( a ) and twinkle artifact ( arrow ) at a pulse repetition frequency of 4.2 kHz ( b ). c Non-enhanced CT performed 2 h after the US, which was performed to aid the treatment options for multiple stones, confirmed the stone ( arrow ) seen in a-b Fig. 2 A 13-year-old girl with suprapubic pain. a – b US demonstrates an echoic focus ( arrow in a ) in the upper pole of the left kidney with marked twinkle artifact ( arrow in b ) at a pulse repetition rate of 1.9 kHz. c CT performed 5 h after the US because of concern for ureteric stones did not demonstrate any stone, consistent with a false-positive US finding based on twinkle artifact without shadowing
Sensitivity for acoustic shadowing was 70% (95% confidence interval [CI] 56–80%) (Table 2 ). From this, we conclude that our first hypothesis (shadowing occurs in the majority of stones) was confirmed. Specificity for acoustic shadowing was 100% (95% CI 56–100%). However, because of the wide confidence interval (due to the low number of true negatives, n =7), the second hypothesis of specificity >90% was not confirmed. Table 2 Sensitivity and specificity of particular ultrasound findings, and of ultrasound overall, in the diagnosis of stones Sensitivity Specificity Per individual stones Shadowing, % (95% CI) 69.5 (55.9–80.4) 100 (56.1–100) Twinkle artifact, % (95% CI) 88.2 (71.6–96.2) N/A Overall % (95% CI) 84.3 (73.2–91.5) N/A CI confidence interval, N/A not available due to lack of true negatives
Twinkle artifact sensitivity was 88% (95% CI 72–96%) (Table 2 ). Specificity for twinkle artifact could not be calculated due to a lack of true negatives. Overall sensitivity for individual stones, independent of shadowing or twinkle artifact, was 84% (73–92%) (Table 2 ).
For the true-positive US group, the median stone size was 8 mm (IQR: 5 mm, range: 1–35 mm), and the median days between US and CT in the true-positive group was 15 (IQR: 36, range: 0–91 days). There was no significant difference between sizes measured on US compared to those measured on CT ( P =0.21).
Within the true-positive US subgroup, 41/59 stones demonstrated shadowing. All stones measuring ≥9 mm showed shadowing, and shadowing was observed in 17/35 (49%) of those calculi measuring ≤8 mm (Table 3 ). Table 3 Size threshold within the true-positive ultrasound subgroup Subgroup, stone diameter Stones ( n ) Size median, mm (interquartile range) Shadowing (%) Twinkle artifact % Median CT number (interquartile range) ≤8 mm 35 5 (3) 48.6% 90% 360 (321) ≥9 mm 24 11.5 (6) 100% 85.7% 521 (456.5)
Twinkle artifact had been assessed in 34 of these 59 true-positive stones, of which 30/34 (88%) demonstrated twinkle artifact. Twinkle artifact was not dependent on stone size (Table 3 ). The distribution of twinkle artifact in combination with shadowing is specified further in Table 4 . Table 4 Twinkle and shadowing combinations specified Twinkle Shadowing False-positive ultrasound True-positive ultrasound Total Yes Yes 17 17 Yes No 5 13 18 No Yes 4 4 No No 0 Not done No 2 5 7 Not done Yes 20 20 Total 7 59 66
The false-positive US subgroup consisted of 7/77 kidney foci (9.1%). Median size was 5 mm (IQR: 3 mm, range: 1–6 mm). The median number of days between US and CT in this subgroup was 15 days (IQR: 32, range: 0–48 days). None of the false-positive foci had acoustic shadowing. Five of the seven stones were assessed for twinkle artifact, all of which showed twinkle artifact.
The false-negative US subgroup contained 11 stones (14%). Ten of the 11 stones were found in kidneys with true-positive stones. The median size was 4 mm (IQR: 2.3, range: 3–6 mm). The number of median days between US and CT was 10 days (IQR: 25, range: 0–91 days).
There was no difference between subgroups regarding stone size, age or days between US and CT ( P =0.19, P =0.88 and P =0.66, respectively).
Discussion
This was a retrospective observational study using non-enhanced CT as a reference standard to test the hypothesis that acoustic shadowing occurs in the majority of pediatric kidney stones, and with high specificity. To create a level of analysis beyond individual patients, each suspected and/or confirmed stone was included as a separate data point entry for subgroup analysis. This was done to compensate for the selection bias of our cohort, which consisted of children with more stones than would be expected in an unselected population.
Acoustic shadowing was shown in the majority of true-positive stones on US, with a sensitivity of 70% (95% CI 56–80%). Our hypothesis that acoustic shadowing occurs in the majority of pediatric kidney stones in children was therefore confirmed. The sensitivity was higher than the reported sensitivity in adults of 31–41% [ , , ]. We attribute this to children being more suitable than adults for US.
The hypothesis that shadowing has a high specificity (>90%) could not be confirmed (specificity 100%, 95% CI 56–100%). Although in our cohort specificity was >90%, this was based on a small group of true negatives ( n =7), which resulted in a wide confidence interval and was therefore not significant. The low number of true negatives in our study resulted from our decision not to include kidney sectors without stones as true negatives. Although this method was used in previous studies [ , ], in our study we believed a high number of expected true-negative kidney sectors might embellish specificity. Although not significant, the high specificity in our cohort does suggest that shadowing is a reliable tool in the specification of echoic renal foci in the clinical setting of kidney stones.
Twinkle artifact had a sensitivity of 88% (95% CI 72–96%). This is higher than reported in adults in whom sensitivity varies between 61 and 69% [ , , ]. Sensitivity was also higher compared to a pediatric study reporting sensitivity of 41%; however, they reported an abnormally high body mass index in 22/57 children, which may have had an impact [ ]. Other causes may be differences in US protocols or operator experience. Based on our results, twinkle artifact appears to be a relatively sensitive marker of a calculus even when small; however, there is an associated false-positive risk.
Although not significant, there was a trend toward true-positive stones being larger (median: 8 mm) compared to false-positive and false-negative stones (median: 5 mm and 4 mm, respectively). Although acoustic shadowing demonstrated a tendency toward high specificity, the occurrence of shadowing depended on stone size and was only consistently seen in the larger stones (≥9 mm). This highlights the difficulties in detecting smaller stones using US, with previous studies reporting that it is especially true for stones <5 mm [ , ]. Detecting such small stones is considered less important than those measuring >5 mm, as these are more likely to result in complications such as obstruction; hence, a 5-mm threshold is generally used as an indication for intervention [ ]. Still, smaller stones cannot be ignored if they represent residual stones after stone surgery; one-third of these <5 mm stones will grow over a period of 1 to 4 years [ , ], and dictate the need for serial follow-up US.
Adapting US settings and features to create a specific stone protocol may be beneficial for the accurate detection of stones and the accuracy of shadowing and twinkle artifact. For shadowing, a potentially important feature to disable is spatial compounding (referred to by different names depending on machine brand, e.g., crossbeam [GE] and sono CT [Philips]), which involves the acquisition of each frame from different view angles to improve contrast resolution and reduce artifacts [ ]. This may reduce shadowing from a genuine calculus, but the impact needs to be assessed with further research; the question would be whether the conspicuity of shadowing increases when spatial compounding is switched off. Twinkle artifact is independent of pulse repetition rate; therefore, increasing the pulse repetition rate to the highest available will decrease false-positive findings (real vascular flow signal) [ , , ].
Though the relationship between renal calculi and twinkle artifact is well established, it is less clear why it occurs [ , , , , ]. The most recent hypothesis is that it comes from internal band noise resulting in phase jitter [ ]. Factors such as stone composition [ ], aetiology of the stone [ ], trapped surface bubbles [ ], rough surface [ , , ] and US optimization [ ] may influence whether twinkle artifact is demonstrated. The significance of these factors is not fully understood. False-positive twinkle artifact is thought to be the result of causes such as parenchyma-vascular interface [ ], nephrocalcinosis and (to a lesser extent in children) vascular calcification [ ].
We excluded ureteric stones from analysis because our retrospective methodology did not allow us to determine if the ureters were assessed specifically. The difficulty of detecting ureteric stones in adults is well known [ ]. Because children are generally more suitable US patients it seems likely that US would perform better in children. The operator should scan the course of the ureters in all children with renal calculi, particularly those with hydronephrosis and abdominal pain and those with multiple calculi. In the presence of renal colic and unilateral hydronephrosis without evidence of calculus, CT is required.
The principle limitation of the study is that it is retrospective. The presence or absence of an acoustic shadow could be examined from the stored images; however, where Doppler images to examine for twinkle artifact were not recorded, this information was lost. This was the case for 29 of 69 echogenic foci recorded on US. Where twinkle artifact was assessed, we could not retrospectively adjust the parameters to optimise detection. This prevents us from being definitive on the role of twinkle artifact.
A second limitation is that the cohort reflects a selected population of children in whom a CT scan was undertaken for urolithiasis. At our institution, CT is only used for planning complex stone surgery, and rarely for children with a high clinical suspicion of stones and a normal US. Sensitivity and specificity of subgroups were calculated for individual stones and not for patients to compensate for this bias; nevertheless, the data must be interpreted in the setting of this selection bias. Thirdly, for most children there was an interval between US and CT assessment (median: 16 days). As a result, interim passage, formation of new stones and change in stone size may have affected the false-positive and false-negative subgroups, respectively. For a future prospective study, US should be performed on the same day as the CT. It may also be interesting to include stone analysis and metabolic assessment in the reference standard.
Conclusion
Acoustic shadowing occurred in the majority of kidney stones, was specific and occurred at a higher rate in larger stones, in particular in those with a diameter ≥9 mm. Twinkle artifact was sensitive but had a false-positive rate; therefore, twinkle artifacts without acoustic shadowing may not be diagnostic of a stone.