Introduction
Noonan syndrome is a congenital autosomal-dominant multisystem disorder characterized by short stature, facial dysmorphism, cardiac defects and skeletal abnormalities [ , , , ]. Besides trisomy 21, Noonan syndrome is the most common syndromic cause of congenital heart disease, most often pulmonary stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy [ ]. In 15–20% of people with Noonan syndrome, lymphatic abnormalities are also present [ ]. The most common manifestation of the lymphatic abnormalities is lymphedema but protein losing enteropathy, pulmonary lymphangiectasia and chylothorax have also been described [ , , , , , ].
The description of lymphatic system imaging in Noonan syndrome has been limited to small case series and case reports, with conventional transnodal lymphangiography sometimes followed by CT [ , , , ]. Lymphatic mapping with MRI has been used to demonstrate anatomical abnormalities using either non-contrast heavily weighted T2 imaging [ , ] or dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography [ , ]. Dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography is a lymphatic imaging technique that allows for imaging of the central lymphatic system following delivery of a gadolinium-based contrast agent into inguinal lymph nodes with ultrasound (US) guidance providing both anatomical and dynamic information [ , ].
In this study we describe the central lymphatic imaging findings in children with Noonan syndrome and clinical suspicion for lymphatic system dysfunction using conventional lymphangiography, non-contrast heavily T2-weighted imaging, and dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography.
Materials and methods
The institutional review board at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia approved the study, which was a retrospective review of all children (0 to 18 years of age) with a confirmed history of Noonan syndrome who presented for lymphatic imaging evaluation between Jan. 1, 2012, and Oct. 31, 2017. Genetic confirmation was performed, with the specific gene variant if available. Imaging evaluation consisted of conventional lymphangiography, non-contrast heavily T2-weighted MR imaging or dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography.
Conventional lymphangiography was performed in a fluoroscopic suite. Bilateral inguinal lymph nodes were accessed using a 25-gauge (G) needle using ultrasound guidance. After confirming position under fluoroscopy, 1–3 mL of Lipiodol (Guerbet, Bloomington, IN) was injected into lymph nodes and the progression of contrast agent was followed by intermittent fluoroscopy.
All MR imaging was performed on 1.5-tesla (T) MR magnet (Magnetom Avanto; Siemens, Malvern, PA). Dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography was performed as previously described using an XMR suite that combines an MR scanner and catheterization laboratory (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) [ ]. Similar to conventional lymphangiography, bilateral inguinal lymph nodes were accessed with a 25-G needle using US guidance and the position was confirmed with injection of the iodinated contrast agent under fluoroscopy. The child was then transferred to the MR scanner. Initially, heavily T2-weighted non-contrast imaging was performed with a three-dimensional (3-D) T2-weighted SPACE (sampling perfection with application-optimized contrasts using different flip-angle evolution) sequence with the following parameters: matrix 256 × 256, field of view (FOV) 300–450, repetition time/echo time (TR/TE)=2,500/650 ms, flip angle 140°, and voxel size 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.0 mm to 1.3 × 1.3 × 1.3 mm. Following this, slow injection of gadobutrol (Gadavist; Bayer Healthcare, Whippany, NJ) at 0.5–1.0 mL per minute was performed. Time-resolved MR angiography was then performed beginning 1 min after injection at intervals of 20 s to 30 s, for a total of 15 min. Finally, a navigated 3-D spoiled gradient echo sequence was performed.
Imaging was evaluated in consensus by a pediatric radiologist (D.M.B., 8 years of experience) and pediatric interventional cardiologist (Y.D., 7 years of experience) who specialize in lymphatic imaging and were blinded to the patients’ clinical outcomes. The T2-weighted imaging was evaluated for the distribution of abnormal signal including presence or absence of increased signal in the soft tissues of the upper chest and neck, axilla, perihilar region, interstitial lung parenchyma, periportal region, mesentery, body wall, and upper thighs. Additionally, we noted the presence or absence of ascites and pleural and pericardial effusions.
In a normal conventional lymphangiogram and dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiogram following intranodal injection within the groin, contrast agent passes to the retroperitoneal lymphatics, then superiorly to the cisterna chyli and the thoracic duct, where it courses to the left venous angle [ ]. During the examination, we considered contrast agent passing to other anatomical regions as abnormal lymphatic flow. Conventional lymphangiography and the dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography portion of the exam were therefore evaluated for abnormal lymphatic flow in the upper chest and lower neck, axilla, perihilar region, lungs, pleural space, intercostal lymphatics, periportal distribution, mesentery and body wall. Intercostal lymphatic flow was defined as contrast agent passage into the intercostal space along the chest wall. We also evaluated dermal backflow and defined it as passage of intranodal contrast retrograde into the subcutaneous tissues of the upper thighs and perineum. The presence or absence of the thoracic duct was noted, including the central portion of the duct. Subjectively, we determined the thoracic duct to be normal in caliber, dilated, or rudimentary when there was a small connection extending to the left venous angle.
We retrospectively reviewed the medical record and recorded the available history including the gene variant of Noonan syndrome and the clinical indication for lymphatic imaging. We also noted medical management and lymphatic interventions along with outcomes including mortality.
Results
A total of 11 people with a known diagnosis of Noonan syndrome and lymphatic abnormalities underwent lymphatic imaging evaluation. We excluded one patient based on age (24 years) at the time of imaging. The final study population included 10 children (6 boys, 4 girls). The average age of the children at the time of imaging was 18.0 months (range 11 days to 6.9 years).
All children except one had some form of concomitant congenital heart disease. Pleural effusions confirmed as chylothorax by either gross appearance or laboratory criteria (triglycerides>110 mg/dL) were present in all but one child who presented for lymphatic evaluation. Two of these nine also presented with ascites and anasarca,. The other child presented with ascites. Additional pertinent demographic and clinical information is listed in Table 1 . Table 1 Demographics and clinical history of the children with Noonan syndrome who presented for lymphatic evaluation Patient # M/F Age at time of study (months) Clinical presentation Congenital heart disease Gene variant 1 F 10.9 Chylothorax ASD, mild pulmonic stenosis PTPN11 2 M 7.2 Chylothorax Unbalanced AV canal, HLHS PTPN11 3 M 0.4 Chylothorax Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy PTPN11 4 M 9.6 Chylothorax, chylous ascites ASD PTPN11 5 F 83.3 Chylothorax ASD, supravalvular pulmonic stenosis Unknown 6 M 1.9 Chylothorax Bicuspid aortic valve PTPN11 7 F 0.7 Chylothorax Pulmonary valve stenosis PTPN11 8 F 1.7 Chylothorax VSD, pulmonary valve stenosis, ventricular hypertrophy RAF1 9 M 1.2 Chylothorax, anasarca None PTPN11 10 M 63.1 Ascites ASD Unknown ASD atrial septal defect, AV atrioventricular, F female, HLHS hypoplastic left heart syndrome, M male, VSD ventricular septal defect
All but one child (patient 1) had T2-weighted imaging. On T2-weighted imaging, all children showed pleural effusions, and four of these also had increased interstitial signal within the lungs. Additionally, six children had ascites and four had body wall edema (Figs. 1 and 2 ). Fig. 1 Chylothorax and anasarca in a 1-month-old girl. a Coronal T2-weighted MR image demonstrates abdominal ascites (*) along with a loculated left pleural effusion ( arrow ) and body wall edema. b Coronal maximum-intensity projection (MIP) of an anteroposterior dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiogram shows lymphatic perfusion to both lungs, left greater than right, with intercostal perfusion ( arrow ) along with dermal backflow ( arrowhead ) and mesenteric flow. c Anteroposterior image from a conventional lymphangiogram demonstrates absence of central lymphatic duct up to the mid thorax ( arrow ) Fig. 2 Chylothorax in a 1-month-old girl. a Coronal maximum-intensity projection (MIP) T2-weighted MR image demonstrates a right pleural effusion ( arrow ) without ascites or tissue edema. b Coronal MIP dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography shows lymphatic perfusion, mainly of the right lung ( arrow ), with bilateral intercostal flow more to the right and bilateral central ducts. Also seen is normal lumbar lymphatic flow
Seven of the 10 children had dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography. Six of these seven had lymphatic perfusion to the lungs and intercostal lymphatic perfusion (Figs. 1 and 2 ). The child without intercostal perfusion had only large-volume ascites with peritoneal lymphatic perfusion, without lymphatic perfusion anomalies within the chest. Three children had dermal backflow. The thoracic duct was not present in three of the seven children, was rudimentary in one child, and was duplicated in one child (Fig. 2 ). In one child the central thoracic duct was not present. In the final child the thoracic duct was dilated but present (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Chylothorax and anasarca in a 1-month-old boy. a Coronal maximum-intensity projection (MIP) dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiogram demonstrates a dilated thoracic duct ( arrow ) along with lymphatic perfusion to the lungs ( arrowhead ). b Coronal MIP delayed navigated 3-D gradient-echo MR sequence shows dermal backflow, with backflow to the peritoneum ( arrow ) along with lymphatic perfusion to the abdominal wall ( arrowhead ). c Anteroposterior image from a conventional lymphangiogram demonstrates the dilated thoracic duct ( arrow ) along with multiple lymphatic collaterals within the left neck during abdominal palpation ( arrowhead )
Conventional lymphangiography was performed in 7 of 10 children and demonstrated perfusion to the lungs in 6 children and perfusion to the peritoneum in 1. The thoracic duct was not present in 2 children and the central thoracic duct was not present in 3 children.
Both conventional lymphangiogram and dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography were performed in five children. In one (patient 6), the thoracic duct was not present on dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography but bilateral lower ducts with absence of the central thoracic duct was seen on conventional lymphangiography. In another child (patient 9), the thoracic duct was seen and dilated on dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography coursing to the left venous angle, but distal thoracic duct outlet occlusion with a network of lymphatic collaterals was visualized within the left neck with abdominal palpation on conventional lymphangiogram (Fig. 3 ). Overall, when combining conventional lymphangiography and dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography for evaluation of the thoracic duct, three children had an absent thoracic duct, three had an absent central thoracic duct, one had a rudimentary thoracic duct and two had a double thoracic duct (one of these also had absence of the central thoracic duct). Table 2 lists the pertinent imaging findings on conventional lymphangiography, T2-W imaging and dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography. Table 2 Imaging findings, management and outcomes of children with Noonan syndrome who presented for lymphatic evaluation Pt T2-W Dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography Conventional lymphangiography Management Intervention Outcome Perfusion TD Perfusion TD 1 Not performed Not performed Right and left lung Present yet dilated Low-fat diet Lipiodol embolization of chest lymphatics Resolution of pleural effusion 2 Bilateral pleural effusions, body wall edema Not performed Right and left lung Double duct with central TD not present Monogen, sildenafil, diuretics Glue embolization at the level of the cisterna chyli Worsening effusions, death 3 Bilateral effusions, ascites, body wall edema Not performed Not performed NPO with TPN None Worsening effusions, death 4 Bilateral effusions, large ascites, body wall edema Both lungs, peritoneum with dermal backflow Not present Right and left lung Not present Monogen, sildenafil, diuretics, ocreotide Lipiodol embolization of abdominal and chest lymphatics Worsening edema and ascites, death 5 Large right pleural effusion, pericardial effusion, small ascites Retroperitoeum, lungs bilaterally Central TD not present Right and left lung Central TD not present Low-fat oral feeds, diuretics Lipiodol embolization of right chest lymphatics Stable trace pleural effusion 6 Small bilateral pleural effusions with lung interstitial T2 signal, body wall edema Lungs bilaterally with dermal backflow Not present Right and left lung Bilateral converging to 1 duct; central TD not present Monogen, diuretics, octreotide Lipiodol embolization of chest lymphatics Resolution of pleural effusion 7 Bilateral pleural effusions, central lung interstitial T2 signal, ascites Lungs bilaterally, peritoneum Rudimentary Not performed Breast milk fortified with monogen, diuretics None Stable small pleural effusions and ascites 8 Small right effusion with lung interstitial T2 signal Right lung Double duct Not performed Monogen, diuretics None Resolution of pleural effusion 9 Small bilateral effusions with lung interstitial T2 signal, ascites, and body wall edema Lungs and peritoneum with dermal backflow Present yet dilated Right and left lung. Network of prominent lymphatic collaterals in left neck visualized with abdominal palpation Present yet dilated Skimmed breast milk, diuretics Lympho-venous anastomosis Transferred to hospital closer to home on BiPAP and diuretics 10 Large volume ascites Peritoneum Occluded Peritoneum Not present Diuretics, low-fat diet Glue embolization of abdominal lymphatics Stable abdominal girth BiPAP bilevel positive airway therapy, NPO nil per os (nothing by mouth), Pt patient, TD thoracic duct, TPN total parenteral nutrition
Medical management of the children consisted of a low-fat diet ( n =3), Monogen ( n =4; Nutricia, Rockville, MD), diuretics ( n =8) and sildenafil ( n =2). Percutaneous interventions of Lipiodol embolization ( n =4) and glue embolization ( n =2) were performed; two of these children had worsening effusions and died, and four of them improved or remained stable. A lympho-venous anastomosis was performed in one child (patient 9) who was transferred and continued on diet modification and diuretics after resolution of the effusions. Of the children without interventions ( n =3), one had worsening effusions and died (patient 3), one had stable pleural effusions and ascites (patient 7), and one had resolution of the pleural effusions (patient 8). Table 2 lists the management, interventions and outcomes for each child.
Discussion
Although lymphatic abnormalities are known to be present in children with Noonan syndrome, the central lymphatic findings seen on both non-contrast T2-weighted MR lymphangiography and on dynamic-contrast MR lymphangiography have not been described. We report the central lymphatic imaging findings in children with Noonan syndrome with lymphatic flow abnormalities during conventional lymphangiography or MRI lymphangiography that are common and of varying degrees. The two main characteristic findings were retrograde intercostal flow and agenesis or dysgenesis of the central conducting lymphatic system. Previous case reports demonstrated similar findings with retrograde flow into subcostal channels and into the lungs, and thoracic duct interruptions [ , ].
When evaluating these children, determining whether the lymphatic disorder affects only the pulmonary system (pulmonary lymphatic perfusion syndrome [PLPS]) or there is more general central lymphatic flow disorder affecting more than one compartment (chest, abdomen, tissue) is a potentially important distinction and could have significant implications regarding interventions and patient outcome [ ].
The children who presented with pleural effusion, ascites and soft-tissue edema had poor outcome and did not respond well to interventions (Table 2 , patients 2–4; Fig. 1 ). Even limited interventions in these children led to worsening outcomes. In contrast, children with preserved central lymphatic flow and abnormal perfusion limited to the lungs responded well to conservative management or limited interventions using Lipiodol-only embolization. In this series only one child had complete thoracic duct glue-embolization with a poor outcome. Conservative management and limited interventions with Lipiodol have worked in several cases to resolve chronic effusions. However it remains unclear whether more aggressive procedures such as thoracic duct embolization could also work and in which select cases.
All three children who died had PTPN11 mutations, which were present in the majority of these children. It is unclear from this study whether certain gene defects confer a higher risk for a more severe lymphatic abnormality. Further studies need to be conducted to determine whether there is such a correlation, which could give insight into which children are at high risk for a poor outcome. Furthermore, there is limited knowledge about the nature of the lymphatic channelopathy that leads to the abnormal flow patterns described here. Better understanding of these mechanisms might help guide us toward a therapeutic intervention for these children.
The main limitations of our study are its retrospective nature and small number of patients. Given the rarity of the disease, a multisite study is needed to overcome these limitations. Although all children had genetically proven Noonan syndrome, the studies were performed based on symptomatology necessitating lymphatic workup and therefore lymphatic imaging. A comprehensive study of all children with Noonan syndrome could answer a more generic question of how often lymphatic abnormalities are present. However, this question was beyond our aims, which were limited to describing the type of lymphatic anomalies present and their relationship to outcomes.
Conclusion
Children with Noonan syndrome and lymphatic flow disorders have varying degrees of central lymphatic abnormalities. Retrograde intercostal lymphatic flow, pulmonary lymphatic perfusion, and agenesis or dysgenesis of the central lymphatic conduction system appear to be characteristic findings in these children. Larger sample studies are needed to determine the channel defects that lead to these findings and their clinical consequence.