Introduction
Anorectal malformation is classified based on the location of the fistula, and this location determines the surgical intervention performed [ , , ]. Almost all cases with perineal fistula or vestibular fistula are managed by one-step transperineal anorectoplasty shortly after birth, while cases with rectourethral fistula or rectovesical fistula usually require initial diverting colostomy, followed by posterior sagittal anorectoplasty [ , ].
The surgical approach used for addressing anorectal malformation depends on the skill of the operating surgeon [ ]. Recently, it has been reported that male neonates with anorectal malformation with rectourethral fistula could be managed by primary neonatal reconstruction without colostomy. A one-stage surgical procedure is advantageous in terms of reducing medical expenses as well as the number of hospital days [ , , , , ]. Although evaluation of the location of the fistula by colostogram before posterior sagittal anorectoplasty is important for preventing urethral injury complications [ , ], this procedure can be performed post-colostomy, but cannot be performed before primary neonatal reconstruction without colostomy. Knowing the precise anatomy before surgery is important in every case to prevent surgical complications.
In addition, minimally invasive surgery, such as using a laparoscopic approach, has been reported to be useful for repair and reconstruction of anorectal malformation, and this approach was introduced for use with the one-stage surgical procedure [ , , ]. However, urinary complications, such as posterior urethral diverticulum or urethral injury, have also been reported [ , , , ]. Therefore, detecting the presence and location of a fistula by using modalities other than colostography is crucial for primary neonatal reconstruction of anorectal malformation cases with rectourethral fistula, without colostomy.
Before the initial surgical procedure, ultrasound (US) and voiding cystourethrogram have been performed to assess the presence of other anomalies, such as spinal anomalies and urogenital anomalies, including a vesicourethral reflex [ , , , ]. Although US during the neonatal period has been reported to be useful for detecting a fistula [ , , , , , , , ], the diagnostic accuracy of detecting a fistula by voiding cystourethrogram has not been reported.
The purpose of this study was to compare the diagnostic accuracy of US and voiding cystourethrogram, performed on the same day, before the initial surgical procedure, for detecting the presence and location of fistulas in neonates with anorectal malformation.
Materials and methods
Patients
This retrospective study was approved by the Ethics Committee of our institution and was performed in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. The need for informed consent from patients or their guardians was waived. We reviewed the medical records at our hospital from May 2007 to July 2018 and identified 25 male neonates with anorectal malformation with rectourethral fistula, rectovesical fistula or no fistula who underwent multistage surgery and augmented pressure colostography. Among these neonates, 23 had undergone US and voiding cystourethrogram on the same day. Two of these neonates were excluded because they had undergone urethral catheterization a neonatologist before US. The US revealed that the tip of the urinary catheter was located in the rectum. Thus, this study finally included 21 neonates in whom US was performed first, followed by voiding cystourethrogram.
Fistula assessment
During the review of the records, the observers (see below) were blinded to surgical, physical and other imaging findings. Imaging of fistulas on US and voiding cystourethrogram was classified as follows: grade 0, no tract was visible (Fig. 1 on US, and Figs. 2 , 3 and 4 on voiding cystourethrogram); grade 1, the proximal or distal sides of the tract were visible, but the whole length of the tract was not (Fig. 3 on US); and grade 2, the proximal and distal sides, as well as the whole length of the tract, were visible (Figs. 3 and 4 on US, and Fig. 1 on voiding cystourethrogram). Grades 1 and 2 were defined as being positive for a fistula. Fig. 1 Case 2. Imagings in a 1-day-old male neonate with anorectal malformation with a rectoprostatic urethral fistula. a, b Longitudinal sonogram ( a ) and schematic representation ( b ) taken by the suprapubic approach show the distal rectal pouch ( curved line ), but the fistula cannot be detected. This fistula was classified as grade 0 on ultrasound. c, d Voiding cystourethrogram ( c ) and schematic representation ( d ) taken during the voiding phase: The fistula that arises from the rectoprostatic urethra is visible and the distal rectal pouch is clearly detected. Arrowhead shows utricle. This fistula was classified as grade 2 on voiding cystourethrogram Fig. 2 Case 21. Imaging in a 1-day-old male neonate of anorectal malformation without a fistula. a, b Longitudinal sonogram ( a ) and schematic representation ( b ) taken by the perineal approach show the distal rectal pouch. Although the beak shape of the distal rectal pouch is revealed and this was diagnosed as the proximal side of the fistula ( arrowhead ) on ultrasound, the distal side cannot be detected. Air bubbles are not detected in the distal rectal pouch; therefore, the proximal side of the fistula is visualized, but the distal side of the fistula is not visualized. This fistula was classified as grade 1 on ultrasound. This fistula was diagnosed as most likely being a rectobulbar urethral fistula. c Voiding cystourethrogram taken during the voiding phase: The fistula is not visible. This fistula was classified as grade 0 on voiding cystourethrogram Fig. 3 Case 14. Images of a 0-day-old male neonate of anorectal malformation with rectobulbar urethral fistula. a, b Longitudinal sonogram ( a ) and schematic representation ( b ) taken by the perineal approach show the distal rectal pouch. Air bubbles are detected in the distal rectal pouch and fistula ( arrowheads ). This was diagnosed as a rectobulbar urethral fistula. This fistula was classified as grade 2 on ultrasound. c Voiding cystourethrogram taken during the voiding phase: The fistula is not revealed. This fistula was classified as grade 0 on voiding cystourethrogram. d, e Radiographically obtained distal colostogram and urethrogram ( d ) with schematic representation ( e ) performed in the same patient at 3 months of age, after the first surgical procedure. The distal rectal pouch and a rectobulbar urethral fistula are clearly revealed Fig. 4 Case 1. Images of a 1-day-old boy with anorectal malformation and rectovesical fistula. a, b Longitudinal sonogram ( a ) and schematic representation ( b ) taken by the perineal approach show the distal rectal pouch and the whole length of the fistula. This was diagnosed as a rectoprostatic urethral fistula. This fistula was classified as grade 2 on ultrasound. c Voiding cystourethrogram taken during the voiding phase: The fistula is not revealed. This fistula was classified as grade 0 on voiding cystourethrogram. d, e Radiographically obtained distal colostogram and urethrogram ( d ) with schematic representation ( e ), performed in the same patient at 1 month of age, after the first surgical procedure, show the distal rectal pouch and a rectovesical fistula
In addition, we evaluated the location of the fistula on imaging diagnosis: rectovesical, rectoprostatic urethral or rectobulbar urethral, by using US and voiding cystourethrogram. The reference standard for the location of the fistula was confirmation during surgery, according to the Krickenbeck classification [ ].
Ultrasound
All sonograms were obtained with a 9- to 15-MHz linear transducer (LOGIQ 7, E9, or S8; GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) via longitudinal scanning by the suprapubic approach, as previously described by Donaldson et al. [ ], and the perineal approach, as previously described by Teele and Share [ ]. Gray-scale images were obtained by 1 of 4 board-certified diagnostic radiologists: T.H. with 7 years of experience, Y.T. with 10 years, Y.S. with 12 years and E.O. with 20 years of experience in pediatric radiology and pediatric sonography. All neonates were examined without specific preparations. The fistula on the sonograms was defined as a hypoechoic linear tract that ran from the proximal side (i.e. the distal rectal pouch) to the distal side, involving the bladder (rectovesical fistula), prostatic urethra (prostatic-urethral fistula) or bulbar urethra (rectobulbar urethral fistula) [ ]. Two radiologists with 15 (Y.T) and 10 (T.H) years of clinical experience, respectively, evaluated the sonograms taken by the suprapubic and perineal approaches for the presence of the internal fistula in consensus, on a 1,600×1,200-pixel monitor. The fistula was classified using the three grades as described above and the final diagnosis of the presence or absence of a fistula was determined based on the findings of both suprapubic and perineal approaches.
Voiding cystourethrogram
Voiding cystourethrogram imaging was performed using one of two similar devices (Sonialvision G4 or C-vision Safire; Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). All voiding cystourethrograms were performed by 1 of 4 board-certified diagnostic radiologists: T.H. with 7 years of experience in pediatric radiology and pediatric sonography, Y.T. with 10 years, Y.S. with 12 years and E.O. with 20 years.). All neonates were examined without specific preparations. This technique was performed according to previous reports [ , ]. Catheterizing was performed from the external urethral orifice to the bladder using a 5- to 8-Fr feeding tube. The bladder was filled with diluted contrast medium (150 mgI/ml concentration) under 75 cmH 2 O pressure. Under fluoroscopy (real-time radiographs), the radiologists observed the contrast entering the bladder and voiding by the neonate. Two radiologists with 15 (Y.T) and 10 (T.H) years of clinical experience, respectively, evaluated the radiograph taken by voiding cystourethrogram for the presence or absence of the fistula, in consensus, on a 1,600×1,200-pixel monitor. Fistulas were classified using the three grades as described above.
Evaluation of fistula location
The location of the fistula was classified as follows: involving the bulbar urethra (rectobulbar urethral fistula), prostatic urethra (rectoprostatic urethral fistula) or bladder (rectovesical fistula) [ ]. We compared the location of the fistula as identified using US or voiding cystourethrogram and identified surgically (as the reference standard).
Statistical analysis
Variables are expressed as mean±standard deviation [SD]. A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to compare the diagnostic performance of US and voiding cystourethrogram for detection of a fistula; surgical findings served as the reference standard for establishing the presence/absence of a fistula. The area under the curve and its 95% confidence interval (95% CI) were calculated for US and voiding cystourethrogram. In addition, we evaluated the accuracy of the fistula location by using US and voiding cystourethrogram. All data were analyzed with a commercially available software program (JMP version 12; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). The 95% CIs for sensitivity, specificity and accuracy were calculated using a Clopper–Pearson method.
Results
Patients
Patients’ characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . The mean weight of the neonates at birth was 2,778.6±445.1 g (range: 1,814–3,826 g), and the mean gestational age was 38 weeks 2 days±4 weeks 5 days (range: 32 weeks 5 days–40 weeks 6 days). One neonate had a surgically confirmed rectovesical fistula (Fig. 4 ). Eleven neonates had surgically confirmed rectoprostatic urethral fistulas (Fig. 1 ). Five neonates had surgically confirmed rectobulbar urethral fistulas (Fig. 3 ). Four neonates had an anorectal malformation without a fistula; this was defined as the surgical finding of a blind ending of the distal side of the rectal pouch (Fig. 2 ). Table 1 Patient characteristics Weight (g) Gestational age (weeks, days) Detection of fistula on ultrasound Location of fistula according to ultrasound Detection of fistula on voiding cystourethrogram Location of fistula according to voiding cystourethrogram Location of fistula according to reference standard 1 3,162 40, 0 Present Rectoprostatic urethral fistula Absent None Rectovesical fistula 2 2,966 40, 6 Absent None Present Rectoprostatic urethral fistula Rectoprostatic urethral fistula 3 2,680 36, 4 Absent None Present Rectoprostatic urethral fistula Rectoprostatic urethral fistula 4 2,466 39, 4 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Absent None Rectoprostatic urethral fistula 5 1,814 32, 5 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Absent None Rectoprostatic urethral fistula 6 3,088 40, 5 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Absent None Rectoprostatic urethral fistula 7 2,400 37, 4 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Absent None Rectoprostatic urethral fistula 8 3,826 37, 5 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Present Rectoprostatic urethral fistula Rectoprostatic urethral fistula 9 2,260 38, 0 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Present Rectoprostatic urethral fistula Rectoprostatic urethral fistula 10 2,740 39, 1 Present Rectoprostatic urethral fistula Absent None Rectoprostatic urethral fistula 11 2,608 37, 0 Present Rectoprostatic urethral fistula Absent None Rectoprostatic urethral fistula 12 2,878 37, 3 Present Rectoprostatic urethral fistula Present Rectoprostatic urethral fistula Rectoprostatic urethral fistula 13 2,698 38, 5 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Absent None Rectobulbar urethral fistula 14 2,916 40, 0 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Absent None Rectobulbar urethral fistula 15 3,404 39, 6 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Absent None Rectobulbar urethral fistula 16 2,260 38, 1 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Rectobulbar urethral fistula 17 2,722 39, 0 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Rectobulbar urethral fistula 18 2,364 38, 0 Absent None Absent None None 19 3,200 38, 0 Absent None Absent None None 20 2,928 40, 2 Absent None Absent None None 21 2,970 39, 0 Present Rectobulbar urethral fistula Absent None None
Diagnostic performance of US and voiding cystourethrogram for detecting fistulas
The presence or absence of fistulas as determined by US and voiding cystourethrogram are summarized in Table 2 . One neonate underwent 2 voiding cycles (case 16) and the other neonates underwent 1 voiding cycle each. The diagnostic accuracy for determining the presence of a fistula on US and voiding cystourethrogram was 85.7% (95% CI: 63.7–97.0%) (18/21) and 52.4% (95% CI: 29.8–74.3%) (11/21), respectively. The diagnostic performance for determining the presence or absence of a fistula on US was significantly better than that on voiding cystourethrogram ( P =0.04); the area under the curves on the US and voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) were 0.904 (95% CI: 0.700–0.974) and 0.706 (95% CI: 0.573–0.811), respectively (Fig. 5 ). Table 2 Sensitivity, specificity and accuracy for the detection of fistula by ultrasound and by voiding cystourethrogram Ultrasound (95% confidence interval) Voiding cystourethrogram (95% confidence interval) Sensitivity for all patients (%) 88.2% (15/17) (63.6–98.5%) 41.2% (7/17) (18.4–67.1%) Specificity for all patients (%) 75.0% (3/4) (19.4–99.3%) 100.0% (4/4) (39.8–100%) Accuracy for all patients (%) 85.7% (18/21) (63.7–97.0%) 52.4% (11/21) (29.8–74.3%) Fig. 5 Receiver operating characteristic curves for the diagnosis of the presence or absence of the fistula. The area under the curve on ultrasound was 0.904 (95% confidence interval: 0.700–0.974). The area under the curve on the voiding cystourethrogram was 0.706 (95% confidence interval: 0.573–0.811). The difference was statistically significant ( P =0.04)
Location of the fistula
In cases in which a fistula was detected by using US or voiding cystourethrogram, the accuracy of locating the fistula on US was 50.0% (95% CI: 24.7–75.3%) (8/16) and on voiding cystourethrogram was 100% (95% CI: 59.0–100%) (7/7).
Discussion
This study demonstrated that the diagnostic accuracy for determining the presence of a fistula on US was significantly better than that on voiding cystourethrogram. Although voiding cystourethrogram was not adequate for detecting a fistula, especially regarding accuracy, its specificity was relatively high. In addition, when the fistula was detected, its location could be clearly visualized on voiding cystourethrogram. Although US was previously reported to be useful for classifying the type of anorectal malformation, these reports focused on differentiating low and intermediate/high types [ , , , , , , , , ]. In the current study, although US could accurately detect the fistula, it could not accurately locate the fistula in neonates with anorectal malformation. In particular, US may not allow easy differentiation between rectoprostatic urethral and retrobulbar urethral fistulas. Furthermore, the beak shape of the distal rectal pouch could be misidentified as the proximal side of a fistula (Fig. 3 ) on US. In addition, the shape of the urethra may change during the examination, depending on the bladder volume and the orientation of the penis. Although US is less invasive, its susceptibility to these confounding issues may be a disadvantage. Therefore, when planning primary neonatal reconstruction without colostomy, voiding cystourethrogram could be useful, as it can yield additional and relatively accurate information about the location of the fistula when the fistula is detected.
Other approaches, including contrast-enhanced voiding urosonography and retrograde urethrograms, may also be useful for visualizing the urethra [ , ]. Contrast-enhanced voiding urosonography is a dynamic imaging technique and gold standard for diagnosing vesicoureteric reflux in children [ , , ]. Contrast-enhanced voiding urosonography was reported to be useful for evaluating the urethra [ ] and for detecting vesicourethral reflex in the first year of life [ ]. To the best of our knowledge, there have been no reports of evaluation of fistulas in neonates with anorectal malformation by using contrast-enhanced voiding urosonography; therefore, further study using contrast-enhanced voiding urosonography would be desirable from the point of view of reducing radiation exposure. Retrograde urethrograms have also been reported to be useful for diagnosing urethral anomalies and stricture [ , ]. Some studies have used the retrograde urethrogram to evaluate fistulas and surgical complications in children with anorectal malformation [ , , ] and the complications of this approach were reported to be low [ , ]. During the retrograde urethrogram, injecting a contrast agent at the site where the fistula is suspected may improve the diagnostic accuracy for detecting the fistula. In this study, no patients underwent retrograde urethrograms. Although it may be difficult to place a catheter at the distal site of a fistula in the urethra of neonates, this approach may facilitate determination of the location of the fistula.
The accuracy of determining the location of fistulas in neonates with anorectal malformation with rectourethral fistula (intermediate/high types) was reported to be 61–75% [ , , ]. In the current study, the accuracy for determining the location of fistulas in rectourethral fistula (intermediate/high types) in neonates with anorectal malformation was consistent with these previously reports.
The current study had some limitations. First, a small number of patients were included in the study; therefore, 95% CI for sensitivity/specificity/accuracy overlapped between US and voiding cystourethrogram. Thus, additional studies including a larger number of patients are required to confirm our preliminary findings. Second, although all images were obtained by experienced radiologists using the same methods, the US and voiding cystourethrogram skills of the radiologists may not have been uniform, which may have affected the results of study.
Conclusion
The diagnostic accuracy for determining the presence of a fistula on US was significantly greater than that on voiding cystourethrogram. Although voiding cystourethrogram could not adequately detect a fistula, in our small cohort, this approach had relatively high specificity. In addition, when the fistula was detected, the location of the fistula could be clearly visualized on voiding cystourethrogram. Therefore, voiding cystourethrogram could be helpful when planning primary neonatal reconstruction of anorectal malformation without colostomy.