Introduction
A closed degloving injury is a type of blunt force trauma originally referred to as a Morel-Lavellée lesion when located at the hip. This was first described in the literature in 1863 by its namesake, Victor-Auguste-François Morel-Lavelle, as a lesion occurring over the greater trochanter [ ], though this is the preferred terminology for degloving injury occurring elsewhere including in many locations of osseous protuberances [ , , ]. The etiology of a Morel-Lavellée lesion is due to high force blunt injury resulting in shearing-type injury with separation of the superficial layers, including the subcutaneous fat and skin, from the underlying fascia. This interface represents a potential space. The forceful tangential impact results in not only shearing away of the overlying subcutaneous tissues but also disruption of the capillaries and lymphatics. A hemolymphatic collection then fills the potential space. The different components of the collection have been thought to be conditional on the severity of impact, where a more forceful injury results in more blood products [ ]. Due to its location at the deep layer of the subcutaneous fat, intralesional fat is seen on pathological analysis [ ] and is important for distinguishing a Morel-Lavellée lesion from other traumatic lesions, such as hematoma or bursitis, in which fat is not seen [ , ].
As multiple stages of these lesions exist, the appearance will change and with time the collection may become encapsulated and filled with chronic blood products, necrotic fat, debris and fibrin [ ]. The presence of a capsule is thought to be related to a secondary inflammatory reaction [ ]. The capsule may prevent resorption of fluid and thus lead to lesion persistence or continued growth with chronic discomfort due to decreased amenability of conservative management [ ].
While motor vehicle collisions are the most common etiology in adults [ ], it has been reported in children as occurring in those collisions and less commonly after sports-related injuries [ ]. Additionally, Morel-Lavellée lesions from sports-related injuries have been seen in professional athletes’ knees [ ]. When injuries occur at the knee, it is more commonly reported over the medial aspect of the knee [ ]. However, sports-related injuries in children predominantly involving the knee have not been reported in the literature, to our knowledge, as the most common mechanism and location.
The pediatric population is especially at risk for degloving injuries due to increased exposure to blunt force from sports injuries and the lack of thickened subcutaneous fat to absorb impact [ ]. Furthermore, while literature exists on the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) features about the hip in adults [ ], there is limited literature on pediatric Morel-Lavellée lesions as a whole, and limited availability of imaging parameters defining the pediatric Morel-Lavellée lesion.
Materials and methods
This is a retrospective study approved by our Institutional Review Board and performed in compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). The requirements for informed consent and assent were waived. We searched our institution’s medical records for patients ages 0–17 years diagnosed with a Morel-Lavellée lesion, or a lesion described similarly, between 2007 and 2017, including diagnoses made by imaging and by clinical assessment. All patients presented to the emergency department or the orthopedic clinic with a pelvic or lower extremity trauma. During work-up, all patients had an MRI of the same body part for the indication of traumatic injury.
All patients were evaluated on either a 1.5-T or 3-T scanner. Though the exact sequences changed over the course of this retrospective study, sequences with and without fat saturation were acquired in all instances. Our current standard knee imaging protocol calls for an axial proton density with fat saturation, coronal T1 spin echo (SE) without fat saturation and proton density (PD) turbo spin echo (TSE) with fat saturation, sagittal T2 TSE with fat saturation and PD TSE without fat saturation. Only one patient received intravenous contrast, though those images were not reviewed for the purpose of this study.
Patient demographics, including age and gender, as well as mechanism of injury were recorded. The time frame from the injury to MRI was also recorded. If a fluid collection was seen within the subcutaneous tissues, it was further interrogated. If the collection was not subcutaneous and did not abut a fascial plane, it was excluded, as it did not meet criteria for the classically defined Morel-Lavellée lesion. At least a single internal fat droplet was required for inclusion; this was determined by utilizing fat-saturation sequences and the nondependent location of the droplets within the fluid location. If no fat was seen internally, the lesion was excluded as an alternative diagnosis.
The lesions were then independently evaluated by two radiologists with 8 years (V.M.H.-F.) and 1 year (J.B.R.) of experience for body region location and sublocation within that region (e.g., predominantly overlying, medial or lateral to the patella). The lesion was determined to be medial or lateral if more than half of the fluid collection was beyond the respective margin of the patella. The lesions were also assessed for shape, size and internal fluid composition. The lesions were all measured in a similar manner using the longest dimension in the axial plane for uniformity purposes, using two orthogonal lines in the horseshoe lesions. The fluid was described by components of blood, septations or crossing vessels. The presence or absence of a complete or incomplete capsule was recorded. Any other abnormality, such as an associated injury to adjacent tissue, was assessed. Differences in the radiologists’ interpretations were minor and typically involved lesion size and shape and were resolved by consensus. The chart was reviewed for follow-up recommendations or treatment by the referring physician.
Continuous variables were presented as means and categorical variables as percentages and counts. The comparison of quantitative variables was carried out using an independent-sample t -test. A two-tailed P -value of <0.05 was considered significant.
Results
A total of 21 patients had a fluid collection with internal fat at the fat-fascial interface in the pelvis or lower extremities. The internal composition varied. Thirteen (62%) had one or more septations. Seven (33%) had internal blood products. Five (24%) had a crossing vessel. Thirteen (62%) had at least a partial capsule.
Patients ranged in age from 7 to 17 years, with a mean of 13.4 years. Fifteen (71.4%) patients were male. The vast majority of injuries occurred after sports-related activities in 18/21 (85.7%) cases. Two lesions occurred in pedestrians struck by a car. One had trauma of unknown etiology (Table 1 ). Table 1 Mechanism of injury and anatomical location of Morel-Lavellée lesions Mechanism n =21 Location Wrestling 3 Anterior knee Soccer 3 Anterior knee American football 2 Anterior knee Basketball 2 Anterior knee Hockey, lacrosse 1 each (2) Anterior knee Dodgeball, tag, ran into wall, “sport injury” 1 each (4) Anterior knee Pedestrian in motor vehicle collision 2 1 - Posterior knee, youngest patient (7-years-old) 2 - Lateral proximal thigh lesions (13-years-old) Fall from scooter, bike 1 each (2) Anterior knee Unknown trauma 1 hip
The time from the inciting event until MRI evaluation was often delayed. The earliest presentation was a pedestrian who presented on the day of injury. However, all others presented between 3 days and 4 months, with a mean of 33.3 days. The mean presentation time in patients with a capsule (13/21, 61.9%) associated with a Morel-Lavellée lesion was 41 days (range: 12–120 days) from the inciting event. Those without a capsule (8/21, 38.1%) presented between 0 and 104 days, with a mean of 25 days. When evaluated with a two-tailed Student’s t -test, the results were not statistically significant ( P =0.12). However, of the 8 patients who did not have a capsule, all but one presented within 32 days of injury, with an outlier at 104 days. This patient underwent percutaneous drainage before imaging and the subsequent diagnosis of Morel-Lavellée lesion. If this outlier were to be removed, the results become statistically significant ( P =0.005, Student’s t -test).
Most commonly, the lesions were seen over the anterior knee in 18 (85.7%) cases. The other knee injuries occurred at the lateral thigh, gluteus and posterior knee. Those located at the knee were most commonly seen immediately over the medial retinaculum (8/18) and lateral retinaculum (7/18) (Table 2 ). These lesions all had a similar ovoid shape, some with a small thinner tail that extended to the midline patella (Fig. 1 ). The next most common appearance was a horseshoe configuration where the collection was seen draping over the patella, with the apex of the lesion directly anterior (Fig. 2 ). The more commonly associated location of the greater trochanter or hip occurred on two occasions and were ovoid in appearance (Fig. 3 ). Table 2 Location and shape of Morel-Lavellée lesions Location n =21 Shape Medial retinaculum 8 Ovoid Lateral retinaculum 7 Ovoid Central overriding patella 3 Horseshoe Posterior knee 1 Ovoid Hip 1 Ovoid Proximal lateral thigh 1 Ovoid Fig. 1 A 15-year-old boy injured playing American football 17 days before imaging. a Lateral radiograph of the knee demonstrates soft-tissue density anterior to the patella ( star ). No knee joint effusion is present. Sagittal proton density without fat saturation (b ) and sagittal T2 with fat saturation ( c ) at the same level demonstrate a fluid-containing lesion at the subcutaneous fat/fascial interface ( arrows ), a crossing vessel ( open arrow ) and fat droplets ( arrowheads ). d Axial T2 with fat saturation demonstrates the location over the medial retinaculum, with a thin tail ( arrow ) extending superficially over the patella Fig. 2 A 15-year-old boy injured wrestling 28 days before imaging. a Axial T2 with fat saturation demonstrates a horseshoe-shaped fluid collection draped over the midline patella ( star ) with a single nondependent fat droplet ( arrowhead ). Multiple septations are noted. b Sagittal proton density without fat saturation and ( c ) T2 with fat saturation demonstrate a fat droplet ( arrowheads ) and a fluid-fluid level ( arrow ) indicating blood products Fig. 3 A 13-year-old boy was a pedestrian injured in a motor vehicle collision. Initial imaging ( a, b ) performed 90 days after the injury. Axial ( a ) and sagittal T2 fat saturation ( b ) demonstrate a large fluid collection ( arrow ) with a fluid-fluid level ( curved arrow ) and a solitary dark T2 fat droplet ( arrowhead ). Imaging ( c, d ) 10 months after injury. Axial T2 fat saturation ( c ) and coronal T1 without fat saturation ( d ) show the lesion has begun to contract with resolution of hemorrhage and new septations ( open arrow ). Note the T1 bright fat droplet ( arrowhead ). Twenty-two months after injury, axial T2 fat saturation ( e ) and coronal T1 without fat saturation ( f ) demonstrate further contraction of the lesion with a thicker capsule ( arrow ), continued septations ( open arrow ) and residual fat droplet ( arrowhead )
Owing to the nature of the lesion shape, particularly over the patella, accurate measurements were challenging. The mean longest dimension was 7.3 cm with a range between 2.6 and 15.6 cm.
Lesions involving the anterior knee were then evaluated further for internal derangement. One patient with a lesion over the lateral retinaculum had a medial meniscal tear of indeterminant age. The remaining anterior knee Morel-Lavellée lesions did not have evidence of acute internal derangement. One lesion was associated with a bone marrow contusion. No associated fractures were seen. Many lesions were associated with superficial soft-tissue swelling. One patient who presented after a motor vehicle collision with a lesion located in the posterior knee also had evidence of a partially torn gastrocnemius, and medial and lateral retinaculum tears. The gluteal and hip lesions had no associate soft-tissue or osseous injuries.
The majority of patients with anterior knee lesions (16/18) received solely conservative management, treated with combinations of observation, sports avoidance, compression stockings and physical therapy, with the vast majority resulting in clinical resolution ranging from early resolution seen at as little as 3 weeks after imaging to complete resolution seen at a 1-year follow-up. At least two patients (one with anterior knee lesion) underwent percutaneously drainage either upon diagnosis or after failed conservative management; the knee lesion ultimately required surgical excision. The patient previously mentioned who underwent drainage before diagnosis was treated with conservative management upon MRI diagnosis with resolution of symptoms. The remainder did not have long-term follow-up to determine outcome.
Discussion
The distribution of Morel-Lavellée lesions along the anterior knee as the most common anatomical location in the pediatric patient has not been reported to date. In fact, there has been limited literature of Morel-Lavellée lesions in the pediatric patient [ , , , ]. The anterior knee has become increasingly recognized in adults as a not uncommon location for Morel-Lavellée lesions [ , , , , ]. Interestingly, a recent study of 20 cadaveric adults showed the most common location in the knee is by far over the medial retinaculum [ ]. The study reports the medial knee was more susceptible to separation of the fat/fascial layer at lower pressures than the lateral retinaculum in cadaveric subjects and correlates the findings of medial lesions in 16 of the 24 knee lesions. However, we saw a ratio of medial to lateral closer to 1:1 (actual ratio of 8:7). This may be due to the differences in pediatric tissue strength and/or difference in mechanisms in children relative to adults, though further biomechanical research would be needed in this area.
While there was a variety of sport activities as the inciting event, in every case of known sports-related injury the lesion occurred over the anterior knee (Table 1 ). This most likely is related to glancing blows with other participants or falls on a hard surface. Reports of knee-related injuries are more often seen after American football [ , , ], or other activities such as lacrosse, volleyball, basketball, skiing and frisbee [ , , ]. However, a few lesions did appear in more expected locations over the hip or gluteal region when the history was a pedestrian in a motor vehicle collision or with a trauma of unknown etiology. Lack of internal derangement in most of our patients is likely a result of the tangential nature of the inciting injury reflected as a degloving injury of the soft tissues/fascia. A single patient had a concurrent meniscal tear; however, the temporal relationship between the injuries in an active wrestler was difficult to ascertain and therefore correlation could not be fully assessed.
Earlier diagnosis of Morel-Lavellée lesions will prevent delay in care and faster recovery times. If the patient does not receive appropriate initial treatment with compression sleeves and sports avoidance, the lesions are likely to persist, worsen or recur. Furthermore, the mass effect of continued growth could lead to denervation with fat and/or skin necrosis [ , ]. With as many as 44% of Morel-Lavellée lesions missed at the time of initial clinical diagnosis [ ], it is important to gain a further understanding of the imaging appearance of these traumatic degloving injuries.
In the acute setting, extensive high force lesions, which have the potential to lead to skin necrosis, may require aspiration or debridement [ , , ]. Conservative management with a compression sleeve is performed for less severe cases at our institution. Patients were also often instructed to avoid sports, particularly that which has caused the injury, and may need physical therapy to improve range of motion [ ].
Over time, a capsule may form as the result of a secondary inflammatory reaction, resulting in further enlargement or persistence of the lesion preventing symptom improvement [ ]. Our study also demonstrated a later appearance to the capsule, consistent with previous reports. Few lesions had long-term imaging follow-up to allow for proper assessment of the evolution of Morel-Lavellée lesion. However, the lesion overlying the hip after a motor vehicle collision was assessed on three occasions and the lesion demonstrated moderate decrease in size, thickening of the capsule and an appearance more consistent with a chronic hematoma on the most remote imaging (Fig. 3 ). This is important as lesions have been known to be confused with a chronic hematoma, and perhaps have the same etiology and therefore are under-recognized early [ ]. Mellado and Bencardino [ ] developed a classification system in 2005 for describing different appearances of Morel-Lavellée lesions. While not widely used, the system stresses that a Morel-Lavellée lesion can have differing appearances based on timing and mechanism of injury, differing in size and signal intensity, with more chronic lesions appearing similar to a hematoma.
Three of the lesions were seen directly anterior to the patella. Lesions draped over the patella may be confused with prepatellar bursitis, as evidenced by its inclusion in the differential diagnosis in each radiologist’s report and/or orthopedic note in our series [ ]. The prepatellar bursa should not extend beyond the mid-coronal plane in the axial image, or above the level of the quadriceps tendon [ , ]. Bursas should not have internal fat and are usually not complex, though they may occasionally have blood products. History can also be a guiding factor as repetitive activities are the most common cause of bursitis, while an acute traumatic injury can result in a Morel-Lavellée lesion. Differentiation may help guide management as bursas may experience improvement with steroid injection, which would not be seen with a Morel-Lavellée lesion [ ].
Limitations to our study include patients who were excluded because they did not have MRI. Patients may have had an injury severe enough to require urgent surgical management before imaging. Few patients had ultrasound (US) as alternative imaging to MRI, and therefore were not included. And while US may be a promising way of evaluating Morel-Lavellée lesions, our cohort was too small for an extensive statistical analysis [ ]. Several patients were excluded based on their inability to recall an injury causing the Morel-Lavellée lesion based on our search of the medical records of those who had imaging, and likely many more were missed who did not come to the radiology department. Furthermore, if the radiologist did not recognize the imaging pattern as a potential Morel-Lavellée lesion, and subsequently did not report the findings as a Morel-Lavellée lesion, the patient may have been excluded from this study.
Conclusion
The Morel-Lavallée lesion is not common, but it is likely under-recognized by clinicians and radiologists due to unfamiliarity with the MRI features and the location in pediatric patients. A fluid-filled collection located at the knee should be further investigated for features consistent with Morel-Lavallée. If those features are present, most importantly at the fat-fascial interface and internal fat, then the lesion should be referred to as a Morel-Lavallée and appropriate treatment should be sought. However, other internal components such as blood, septations and vessels should not disuade one from considering Morel-Lavallée as these are not uncommon features.