Introduction
The classic metaphyseal lesion (CML) is a strong indicator of infant abuse [ , , , , ]. It is usually detected on skeletal surveys performed to assess for occult injury [ , ]. Injuries may be encountered acutely, or in various stages of healing. In a study of 124 CMLs from 567 infants, Barber et al. [ ] found that 12% of CMLs were acute and 58% were healing on initial skeletal survey. The remaining 30% of these CMLs were noted to be indeterminate, with 41% showing signs of healing on follow-up imaging. The anatomy of the acute and healing CMLs has been studied in detail with radiologic-histopathologic correlations [ , ]. In these studies, the radiologic features of healing included subperiosteal new bone formation, marginal sclerosis and tongues of hypertrophic cartilage extending into the metaphysis. Despite these reliable indicators of fracture healing, a systematic dating scheme for these distinctive injuries remains elusive [ , ]. Fracture dating is often critical in cases of suspected infant abuse since it provides a temporal interval during which the injury has occurred. Established guidelines for dating fractures with abuse have relied heavily upon inferences drawn from initial and follow-up imaging of similar injuries occurring in the context of known injury events, such as obstetrical and accidentally sustained fractures [ , , , , ]. This approach is limited with CMLs since similar fractures are rarely encountered outside the context of infant abuse. Therefore, pinpointing the origin of these metaphyseal injuries temporally is usually not feasible.
Subperiosteal new bone is one of the most reliable indicators of fracture healing [ , , ]. Radiologic-histopathologic correlations in abused infants at the time of death suggest that subperiosteal new bone formation has a low association with the CML [ ]. To our knowledge, there has been no systematic study of the prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation with CMLs. If subperiosteal new bone formation was consistently associated with healing CMLs, then its absence would imply an acute injury; if not, then little can be said regarding the age of an injury purely on the basis of absent subperiosteal new bone formation on a single point-in-time radiograph. The purpose of this study was to (1) determine the prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation with CMLs on anteroposterior (AP) radiographs from initial skeletal surveys, and then (2) to assess the additional diagnostic yield of lateral radiographs from the initial surveys and AP radiographs from the follow-up surveys in the detection of subperiosteal new bone formation with CMLs.
Materials and methods
This retrospective study was approved by the institutional review board and was compliant with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act guidelines. Informed consent was waived.
Study population
Since the distal tibia is one of the most common sites for CMLs [ , , ], we chose this anatomical region to estimate the frequency with which subperiosteal new bone formation is encountered radiographically, as detected by various combinations of radiographic views. Reports of 1,084 American College of Radiology-compliant skeletal surveys performed on infants (<1 year old) for suspected abuse during a 12-year period (July 2005–August 2017) were reviewed by one of the authors (A.T), who has 8 years of post-fellowship experience. The inclusion criteria were: 1) AP and lateral radiographs of a distal tibial CML from the initial survey, 2) AP radiograph from the 2-week follow-up survey, 3) additional fractures documented radiographically, 4) hospital child protection team consults and 5) mandated report filing for suspected abuse (Fig. 1 ). These inclusion criteria were designed to optimize confidence with respect to both the diagnosis of CMLs (criteria 1 and 2) and the foundations for concerns of child abuse (criteria 3–5). Fig. 1 A flow chart illustrates the identification, screening and eligibility assessment for the inclusion of distal tibial classic metaphyseal lesions for this study
Skeletal surveys
Skeletal surveys were performed according to the American College of Radiology guidelines [ ]. Specifically, the survey radiographs were acquired either with a 50-μm high-resolution dual-side-read computed radiographic (CR) system (Fujifilm Medical Systems, Stamford, CT) or a 148-μm high-resolution digital radiographic (DR) system (Philips Healthcare, Andover, MA). Depending on the size of the infants, the tube voltage and current-time settings of these systems varied to optimize for bone detail (65–75 kV and 6–12 mAs for the CR system, 60–65 kV and 4-8mAs for the DR system). To minimize magnification and geometric distortion, the radiographs were acquired “table-top” with beam centering. Our skeletal surveys typically consist of AP views of the appendicular skeleton, AP and lateral views of the axial skeleton, and oblique views of the thorax. Additional oblique, lateral and/or coned-down views of a particular body part are obtained if deemed necessary based on the initial radiographic findings and the discretion of the interpreting radiologist. In addition to the customary AP view of the entire tibia/fibula, our inclusion criteria required either a lateral view of the entire tibia/fibula or a coned-down lateral radiograph of the ankle. Since the beam centering for a lateral radiograph of the entire tibia/fibula is different from that of a coned-down radiograph of the ankle, these two types of radiographs provide slightly different projections of the distal tibia. The images shown were magnified and tightly cropped to 1) provide standardized region of interest for reader assessment, as some cases had full views of the tibia while others have coned-down views of the ankle, 2) focus the attention of the readers and permit a more accurate assessment of the distal tibia in evaluation for subperiosteal new bone formation, 3) hide any clues within the large field-of-view image that may potentially bias the readers in knowing which was the initial and which was the follow-up study in the assessment of subperiosteal new bone formation (i.e. presence of soft-tissue swelling, peripheral intravenous lines, other fractures and size of the epiphyses), and 4) reduce the possibility that subperiosteal new bone formation from a coexistent healing tibial diaphyseal fracture or physiological subperiosteal new bone formation would be mistaken for subperiosteal new bone formation from a CML [ ]. Two of the 22 tibias with distal tibial CMLs had traumatic subperiosteal new bone formation extending down from the tibial shafts on follow-up imaging. However, in both these cases, the new bone did not reach the distal tibial metaphyses; both these zones were cropped from the images shown to the readers to prevent potential confusion with the subperiosteal new bone formation from distal tibial CMLs.
Image interpretation
Skeletal survey radiographs of distal tibial CMLs were shown on the picture archiving and communication system (PACS) to two pediatric musculoskeletal radiologists with 21 and 24 years of post-fellowship experience (K.E. and S.A.C., respectively). The readers were informed that CMLs had been previously identified in these cases, but otherwise they were blinded to study design, patient demographics, skeletal survey reports and each other’s readings. To ensure uniformity of assessment, the radiographic appearance of the subperiosteal new bone formation was explained to the readers as being variable, ranging from a hazy cortical margin to a laminar linear or solid-appearing zone of cortical thickening, which is intimately associated with the CML. Three example CMLs with subperiosteal new bone formations (not part of the study cohort) were shown to the readers before the reading sessions. First, randomly ordered initial and follow-up AP radiographs of each distal tibial CML were simultaneously shown to the readers on PACS for interpretation. The readers were asked whether subperiosteal new bone formation was present or absent for each of these two radiographs (Figs. 2 and 3 ). The readers generated four assessments per CML, two by each reader. Approximately 2 months later, the initial AP and lateral radiographs of each distal tibial CML were simultaneously shown to the readers on PACS for interpretation. The readers were asked whether subperiosteal new bone formation was present or absent for each CML, based on these two orthogonal views (Fig. 4 ). This generated two assessments per CML, one by each reader. These two reading sessions, each using a different combination of radiographs, generated a total of six assessments per CML. Fig. 2 Classic metaphyseal lesion #3 (see Table 1 ). Serial anteroposterior (AP) skeletal survey radiographs of the distal tibial classic metaphyseal lesion in a 4-month-old boy. Readers agreed that subperiosteal new bone formation ( arrows ) was unlikely to be present on the initial AP radiograph ( a ) but was likely present on the 13-day follow-up AP radiograph ( b ) Fig. 3 Classic metaphyseal lesion #11 (see Table 1 ). Serial AP skeletal survey radiographs of the distal tibial classic metaphyseal lesion in a 29-day-old boy. Readers agreed that subperiosteal new bone formation ( arrow ) was likely present on the initial AP radiograph ( a ) but was unlikely to be present on the 29-day follow-up AP radiograph ( b ) Fig. 4 Classic metaphyseal lesion #7 (see Table 1 ). Initial skeletal survey radiographs of the distal tibial classic metaphyseal lesion in a 4-month-old boy. Readers agreed that subperiosteal new bone formation was unlikely to be present on the initial AP radiograph ( a ); however, when both the AP ( a ) and lateral ( b ) radiographs from the initial survey were interpreted together, readers agreed that subperiosteal new bone formation ( arrow ) was likely to be present
Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using either MATLAB 8.3 (MathWorks, Natick, MA) or SAS/STAT 14.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Absolute agreement (proportions) and agreement adjusted for chance (kappa statistics) were used to measure agreement between readers. Interpretations of kappa statistics can be based on the guideline that kappa values in ranges of 0–0.40, 0.41–0.60, 0.61–0.75 and 0.76–1.00 indicate poor, fair, good and excellent agreement, respectively [ ].
Analyses of the difference in the prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation based on two radiographic combinations that differ in time and in space were calculated using a model that accommodated possible correlations between assessments, readers and sides (for subjects with bilateral assessments). Specifically, we used a population-average correlated generalized linear model with an identity link function and binomial probability distribution. A robust (sandwich) variance estimate was used in conjunction with a working independence correlation structure. The model was estimated using SAS’s GENMOD procedure based on generalized estimating equation methods. A 5% one-sided Wald test was used given that our alternative hypothesis was that additional imaging increases the detected prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation. The 95% confidence intervals (CI) were also calculated.
Results
Study population
We found a total of 31 distal tibial CMLs, but 9 were excluded due to the lack of an initial lateral view. No cases were excluded due to the lack of additional fractures, child protection team consults or mandated report filing. Based on the inclusion criteria, our study cohort consisted of 22 distal tibial CMLs (6 right, 4 left, 6 bilateral) from 16 infants (mean age=2.4 months; standard deviation [SD]=1.7 months; range=0.7–6.4 months) with male-to-female ratio of 14:2. The average time interval between initial and follow-up skeletal surveys was 15.4 days (SD=4.7 days; range=8–29 days, mode=14 days). As per the inclusion criteria, all 16 infants had additional fractures documented on their skeletal surveys, including rib fractures (11/16), CMLs at other sites (13/16) and non-metaphyseal lesion long bone fractures (13/16). The detail demographics of this study cohort are shown in Table 1 . Of note, the spatial distributions of fracture involvement in a subset of these CMLs (16 from 12 infants) were reported in a prior study [ ]. In terms of the distribution of the 2 different types of radiographs shown to the readers, the ratio of coned-down radiographs of the ankle to dedicated radiographs of the entire tibia was 4:18 for the initial AP view, 2:20 for the follow-up AP view and 18:4 for the initial lateral view. Table 1 Study cohort demographics Classic metaphyseal lesion Infant Age (months) Gender Time between surveys (days) Laterality Rib fracture(s) Additional classic metaphyseal lesion(s) Other long bone fracture(s) 1 1 2.4 M 16 R No Yes Yes 2 2 3.4 M 14 R No Yes Yes 3 3 4.7 M 13 R Yes No No 4 4 1.2 F 17 R Yes No Yes 5 5 0.9 M 8 R Yes Yes Yes 6 6 1.2 M 10 R Yes Yes Yes 7 7 4.3 M 21 L No No Yes 8 8 2.2 M 15 L Yes Yes Yes 9 9 6.4 M 17 L Yes Yes No 10 10 1.4 F 14 L Yes Yes Yes 11 11 1.0 M 29 R No Yes Yes 12 L 13 12 0.9 M 14 R Yes Yes Yes 14 L 15 13 3.1 M 13 R Yes Yes Yes 16 L 17 14 0.8 M 15 R No Yes Yes 18 L 19 15 0.7 M 16 R Yes Yes No 20 L 21 16 3.3 M 14 R Yes Yes Yes 22 L F female, M male, L left, R right
Reader agreements
Reader agreement for the estimated presence of subperiosteal new bone formation averaged over the four different radiographic combinations was 0.75 for the proportion of absolute agreement and 0.47 for kappa. Inter-reader agreement for the interpretation of initial AP radiographs was 0.77 (17/22) for absolute agreement and 0.50 for kappa. Inter-reader agreement for the interpretation of initial and follow-up AP radiographs was 0.77 (17/22) for absolute agreement and 0.55 for kappa. Inter-reader agreement for the interpretation of initial AP and lateral radiographs was 0.68 (15/22) for absolute agreement and 0.35 for kappa. Lastly, inter-reader agreement for the interpretation of all three radiographs (initial AP and lateral radiographs and follow-up AP) was 0.77 (17/22) for absolute agreement and 0.46 for kappa.
Estimated prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation
Table 2 summarizes the estimated prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation when using the various combinations of radiographic projections of the distal tibial CMLs. Using only the AP radiograph from the initial skeletal survey, the estimated prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation with the distal tibial CML was 34% (95% CI: 14%, 54%). Table 2 Table of summary statistics illustrates the baseline and added diagnostic yields of using various combinations of initial anteroposterior (AP), initial lateral and follow-up (f/u) AP radiographs of distal tibial classic metaphyseal lesions in assessing for the prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation Combinations of radiographs used Initial AP Initial AP + initial lateral Initial AP + f/u AP Initial AP + initial lateral + f/u AP Initial AP 34% [14%, 54%] +23% [7%, 38%] P =0.002 +23% [9%, 36%] P <0.001 +37% [19%, 54%] P <0.001 Initial AP + initial lateral 57% [38%, 75%] +14% [2%, 25%] P =0.010 Initial AP + f/u AP 57% [38%, 75%] +14% [0%, 27%] P =0.024 Initial AP + initial lateral + f/u AP 71% [55%, 86%] The 95% confidence intervals and P -values of the 1-sided test were provided
The estimated prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation when using both initial and follow-up AP radiographs was 57% (95% CI: 38%, 75%). The percentage point increase in this prevalence from using only the initial AP radiograph was 23% (95% CI: 9%, 36%, P <0.001). The estimated prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation when using both initial AP and lateral radiographs was 57% (95% CI: 38%, 75%). The percentage point increase in this prevalence from using only the initial AP radiograph was 23% (95% CI: 7%, 38%, P =0.002). The estimated prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation when using all three radiographs (initial AP and lateral radiographs and follow-up AP) was 71% (95% CI: 55%, 86%). The percentage point increase in this prevalence from using only the initial AP radiograph was 37% (95% CI: 19%, 54%, P <0.001). The estimated difference in prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation between all three radiographs and both initial and follow-up AP radiographs was 14% (95% CI: 0%, 27%, P =0.024). The difference in prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation between all three radiographs and both initial AP and lateral radiographs was 14% (95% CI: 2%, 25%, P =0.010).
Discussion
Our study shows that on initial screening skeletal survey using only the AP radiograph of the lower leg, the estimated prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation with distal tibial CMLs is 34%, increasing to 57% with the addition of initial lateral or follow-up AP radiograph, and further increasing to 71% when using all three views. We found these increases in prevalence to be statistically significant.
The periosteum is a thin connective tissue that covers the outer surface of all bony cortices. It consists of two distinct layers: an outer fibrous layer that contains fibroblasts, and an inner osteogenic (cambium) layer capable of membranous and enchondral ossification [ , ]. In infants, the periosteum is more loosely attached to the long bone shafts than in adults, but the periosteum inserting on the epiphysis and physis (perichondrium) is tightly fixed [ ]. Within days of the disruption of the periosteal attachments, cells within the inner layer produce trabeculae of reactive woven bone that undergoes mineralization resulting in radiographically evident subperiosteal new bone formation [ ]. Radiographically, post-traumatic subperiosteal new bone formation may be lamellated, multilayered or solid [ , ].
The prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation with healing long bone shaft fractures in children is high. In a study of 37 long bone shaft fractures from 31 children (ages 0–44 months), Halliday et al. [ ] found that subperiosteal new bone formation was seen on all radiographs performed 11 days after the initial injury (with the exception of 2 radiographs of healed fibula fractures). Of the 707 radiographs used to assess 205 forearm shaft fractures from 141 patients (ages 1–17 years), Islam et al. [ ] noted that subperiosteal new bone formation was seen in all fractures by 4 weeks. Of the 131 radiographs used to assess birth-related clavicle fractures in infants (0–3 months old), Walters et al. [ ] found that subperiosteal new bone formation was rarely seen in fractures fewer than 7 days old but nearly always seen by 10 days.
In contrast to the frequent occurrence of subperiosteal new bone formation with healing long bone shaft fractures, we found an estimated prevalence of only 34% on single point-in-time frontal radiographs of distal tibial CMLs. Although we demonstrated significant increases in the visualization of subperiosteal new bone formation when employing additional radiographs in time and in space (serial AP radiographs [up to 57%], initial lateral radiographs [up to 57%], and serial AP and initial lateral radiographs [up to 71%]), 29% of distal tibial CMLs still failed to demonstrate this sign of fracture healing. In these cases, the subperiosteal new bone formation might never have developed, have been too subtle to be identified radiographically or, in the case of mature injuries, already incorporated into the cortex at the time of the initial examination.
What explains this difference between the estimated prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation with healing long bone shaft fractures versus CMLs? The histopathological features of CMLs manifest a broad spectrum, ranging from gross cortical fracture with subperiosteal hemorrhage, subperiosteal new bone formation and extensive disruption of the immature medullary spongiosa, to a pattern of only modest trabecular disruption, osteoclastic resorption and bony repair within a fibrovascular stroma − often in the absence of periosteal disruption or subperiosteal hemorrhage [ ]. Given the normal tight fixation of the periosteum to the adjacent physis and epiphysis, and the often modest extent of bony injury/repair apparent histologically, it is not surprising that subperiosteal new bone formation may be absent radiographically. Furthermore, bony injuries of the immature skeleton may be evident with scintigraphy [ , , , , ] or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [ , ], but not apparent radiographically, remaining occult if there is no subperiosteal new bone formation. For these reasons, caution should be exercised in dating a CML as acute on a single radiograph simply because there is no radiographic evidence of subperiosteal new bone formation.
Follow-up skeletal surveys have been shown to increase the sensitivity for detecting healing fractures. A recent study indicated new fracture identification on follow-up imaging of 8–28% [ ]. Initial and follow-up studies provide two samples in time of the dynamic radiographic changes of fracture healing, permitting more precise timing of injury. Our findings lend support to the recommendation that follow-up skeletal surveys be routine in all infants with significant concerns of physical abuse [ , ].
The addition of lateral radiographs to skeletal surveys has been shown to increase the detection of metaphyseal fractures, particularly those involving the tibia [ ]. Our study showed that additional lateral radiographs provided a significant increase (23%) in the prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation, lending some support to the recommendation from Karmazyn et al. [ ] for lateral views of the lower extremities with skeletal surveys. The acquisition of a coned-down lateral view of the ankle with the x-ray beam centered over the metaphysis is an attractive option since it not only provides another anatomical perspective, it also minimizes the additional radiation dose with a tightly collimated exposure. This approach has been advocated by the British Royal College of Radiologists and adopted by the European Society of Paediatric Radiology [ ]. Further study of the cost versus benefit of these additional views when incorporated in routine skeletal survey imaging is encouraged.
Our study is limited by its retrospective methodology. The distal tibial CMLs were identified based upon a text search of radiology reports, and thus some subtle distal tibial CMLs may have been missed, biasing our study toward those cases with more conspicuous radiographic findings. Bias toward more conspicuous injuries may also have resulted from our inclusion of only cases with lateral views that were added to the routine AP views by the interpreting radiologist. However, we believe this additional view may have heightened confidence that the findings noted on the initial AP view indeed reflected a CML. Furthermore, having lateral as well as AP views on all cases permitted assessment of the additional yield of identifying subperiosteal new bone formation on a two-view versus a one-view examination. The possibility exists that physiological subperiosteal new bone formation could have been mistaken by readers for healing of an adjacent CML. However, physiological subperiosteal new bone formation tends to be most conspicuous in diaphysis [ ] and thus our methodology of cropping the diaphysis off the images would likely minimize this possibility. Our cohort size was only 22; however, this number was sufficient to achieve statistical significance of the 3 sets of comparisons employed in this study. Our overall reader agreement was only fair. However, subperiosteal new bone formation is a somewhat subjective and often subtle finding, and thus only modest reader agreement is not surprising. Since our findings relate only to distal tibial CMLs, caution should be exercised in drawing inferences with respect to the healing of these lesions at other sites.
Conclusion
Our study shows that on initial skeletal surveys, using only the AP radiograph, the prevalence of subperiosteal new bone formation with distal tibial CMLs is just 34%, but this figure rises to 71% with the addition of lateral and follow-up imaging. Our findings lend strong support to the current recommendations of North American and European radiology societies for rigorous and comprehensive serial radiographic surveys [ , ]. However, it should be cautioned that even when skeletal surveys include initial AP, lateral and follow-up AP radiographs of the tibia, nearly one-third of distal tibial CMLs will fail to demonstrate subperiosteal new bone formation. Thus, the lack of subperiosteal new bone formation on a single point-in-time study should not be construed as evidence that a CML is acute. Furthermore, when a CML is confidently diagnosed on an initial skeletal survey, the lack of subperiosteal new bone formation on follow-up survey should not exclude a traumatic injury.