Introduction
Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract are one of the most common malformations in children [ ]. The spectrum ranges from transient hydronephrosis to bilateral renal agenesis. Postnatal imaging strategies are designed to distinguish between children with a favorable course of disease and those who need surgery to prevent progressive decline of renal function. Diagnostic workup is well-defined for single-system pathologies, such as ureter-pelvic junction obstruction, vesicoureteral reflux or primary obstructive megaureter. For those cases, classic imaging modalities (ultrasound, voiding cystourethrogram and diuretic renal scintigraphy) are reported to be sufficient for proper risk stratification [ ].
In more complex malformations of the urogenital tract, MR urography allows for comprehensive evaluation combining morphological and functional information without exposure to radiation [ , ]. Therefore functional MR urography has been well established in diagnostic workup in the last decade [ ]. The major drawback of functional MR urography in infants is the need for sedation or general anesthesia as the key factor for successful performance because of the length of the study [ ]. Severe complications associated with sedation or anesthesia for MR imaging have been reported, such as respiratory obstruction, prolonged desaturation and increased atelectasis scores [ ]. Also, there is uncertainty regarding suspected apoptotic neurodegeneration in the developing brain [ ]. Although these data are controversially discussed and need to be confirmed by prospective trials, care should to taken not to expose infants to general anesthesia unnecessarily [ ]. Moreover, sedation or general anesthesia requires the presence of anesthesiologists or non-anesthesiologist health care professionals, thereby increasing the overall cost of the examination. Hence, to overcome these disadvantages, an optimized functional MR urography protocol for infants enabling the MR examination in natural sleep in the form of a feed-and-sleep procedure became the standard of care at our clinic. Our approach is supported by a recently described short functional MR urography protocol [ ]. Also for infants, the feasibility of MR imaging of the brain or the heart in natural sleep has been reported [ , ]. Indeed, Vivier et al. [ , ] described their MR urography protocol without the use of general anesthesia but with the use of oral sedation based on hydroxyzine in infants older than 6 months, but to our knowledge the feasibility of such an examination procedure had not been scientifically evaluated.
Therefore we evaluated and report the success rate of our optimized functional MR urography protocol in infants in comparison to functional MR urography obtained from anesthetized infants with regard to image quality.
Materials and methods
Patient selection
At our institution, we have performed functional MR urography according to the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP) protocol [ ] since 2010. Functional MR urography in natural sleep has been performed since 2012. In all children scheduled for a functional MR urography examination, sonography of the urinary tract by an experienced pediatric radiologist was carried out at least 1 week before the MR examination. In this setting, the interaction between child and parents was subjectively estimated. If the parents gave positive feedback for collaboration along with their consent, we scheduled infants for feed-and-sleep functional MR urography. This retrospective study was approved by our institutional review board.
We identified all children age 1 year and younger who underwent functional MR urography between 2010 and 2017, using a search in the radiology database. We grouped the children by the kind of “sedation”: general anesthesia or feed-and-sleep. We extracted demographic and clinical data, noting the date of functional MR urography, type of MR scanner, the duration of the examination, the suspected diagnosis/indication for the examination, and the diagnosis made by functional MR urography. Further we analyzed the results of a 99mTc-mercaptoacetyltriglycine renography scan if available within the same time frame and clinical context, respectively.
Pre-scanning preparation
In all infants, pre-scanning preparation followed a standardized procedure. All children got intravenous cannulation and received intravenous hydration (10 mL/kg body weight) [ ].
Infants scheduled for a feed-and-sleep examination were deprived of sleep and were fasted for 4 h before MRI scan. Intravenous cannulation and bladder catheterization using a single-use catheter (6-Fr, Lofric; Wellspect Healthcare, Mölndal, Sweden) were performed at least 2 h before the MR urography. Because we usually schedule functional MR urography on the same day with voiding cystourethrogram, each infant was catheterized only once for both examinations.
Then in a comfortable atmosphere, each child was fed just before the scan. Dedicated ear muffs for infants were carefully placed. Before being placed in a vacuum immobilizer (MedVac® bag; CFI Medical Solutions/Contour Fabricators, Fenton, MI, USA), the infant was swaddled (Fig. 1 ). Oxygen saturation was monitored throughout the scan. Fig. 1 Clinical images of a 4-month-old boy swaddled and placed into the vacuum immobilizer. a Patient ready to be placed and ( b ) after being placed on the scanner table with a body array coil. Notice pulse oximetry probe upon the infant’s foot
In infants examined using general anesthesia, bladder catheterization was only performed under anesthesia and infants were placed directly on the MR table in a supine position.
Functional magnetic resonance urography protocol
MR urography was performed at field strength of 1.5 T or 3.0 T using a state-of-the-art scanner (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany). In general, our scan protocols were adopted according to the publication of Khrichenko and Darge [ ] because we also used the described functional analysis software “CHOP-fMRU (Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia functional MR urography protocol)” for the evaluation of the examinations. This protocol was used in infants examined with general anesthesia.
For the feed-and-sleep functional MR urography we shortened the protocol. Moreover the presence of an experienced pediatric radiologist who was aware of the individual benefit by MR urography was defined as a standard. For morphological analysis, we acquired T2 half-Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo spin-echo in transverse, coronal and sagittal orientation. If the infants didn’t fall immediately asleep, we repeated the morphological T2 sequences till the infants calmed. In complex cases, additional sequences (e.g., axial T2 turbo spin echo, coronal 3-D T2 sampling perfection with application optimized contrasts using different flip angle evolutions [SPACE]) were performed if the infant was in a deep sleep.
Next we acquired a single 3-D fat-saturated T1-weighted gradient recalled echo volumetric interpolated breath-hold examination as a static urography sequence pre- and post-contrast administration, and a dynamic 3-D fat-saturated T1-weighted gradient recalled echo volumetric interpolated breath-hold examination with 50 repetitions as the dynamic urography sequence. Both sequences were obtained in coronal orientation. As described, 0.8 mg/kg of furosemide, with a maximum dose of 20 mg, was administered intravenously approximately 15 min prior to the contrast agent injection [ ]. Static and dynamic contrast sequences were administrated after injection of 0.1 mL gadobutrol (Gadovist; Bayer Vital, Leverkusen, Germany) per kg body weight at a injection rate of 0.2 mL/s [ ].
Evaluation of functional magnetic resonance urography examinations
The functional MR urography examinations identified by our search were retrospective, evaluated by a pediatric radiologist (I.T.) and by a pediatric surgeon (F.O.) (both with more than 10 years of experience in MR urography) in consensus using a 3-point scale for motion artifacts (1: no artifacts visible; 2: moderate artifacts without hampering the diagnostic quality; 3: marked artifacts hampering the diagnostic quality). All examinations were evaluated in transaxial, coronal and sagittal planes. Also, the evaluaters rated delineation of anatomical details of the kidneys, the ureters and the vesicoureteric junction (1: clear delineation; 2: impaired delineation; 3: no visualization). They calculated a final score by summing the points for each category. Image quality was defined as diagnostic for a sum score ≤12, and as not sufficient for a sum score >12.
We tested analyzability of the functional sequences (coronal 3-D T1-weighted gradient recalled echo volumetric interpolated breath-hold examination) by the functional analysis software CHOP-fMRU [ ], as mentioned. Split renal function of functional MR urography was correlated to split renal function of radioisotope renography if available and performed within a same clinical context.
We evaluated the length of the examination using time difference between the time of performing the localizer and last image. Additionally, we listed the numbers of morphological sequences acquired in every examination.
Statistical analysis
We used descriptive statistics to describe the distribution of functional MR urography in both groups (“general anesthesia” and “feed-and-sleep”). Differences between the groups were tested for functional analyzability using χ 2 -test, for continuous data using independent t -test and for categorical data using the Mann–Whitney U test. Split renal function of both kidneys was correlated to radioisotope renography by calculation of the Pearson correlation coefficient and Bland–Altman plots. The significance level for differences was accepted at P <0.05. Statistical analyses were performed using MedCalc (version 12.6; MedCalc Software, Ostend, Belgium).
Results
From 2010 to 2017 we identified 61 functional MR urographies in 59 children (30 boys, 29 girls) younger than 1 year. More than two-thirds of all MR urographies were carried out at 3 T (70%, 43/61). The indication focused mainly on duplex collecting system (46/59 infants). In 42 examinations (69%; 25 boys, 17 girls) functional MR urography was performed using the feed-and-sleep procedure, while in 19 (31%; 6 boys, 13 girls) the examination was performed using general anesthesia. The infants who underwent imaging using the feed-and-sleep procedure were younger than those examined under general anesthesia (mean age ± standard deviation [SD]: 131±61 days, range 37–293 days, vs. 192±87 days, range 75–363 days; P =0.0026). The youngest child receiving gadolinium was 37 days old. In general we did not perform functional MR urography in newborns because the effects of gadolinium chelates in the context of renal immaturity are not well known.
In the feed-and-sleep group, 38 of 42 examinations (90%) were completed successfully. In 4 of 42 examinations (10%; 1 boy, 3 girls) functional MR urography had to be aborted before contrast medium was injected because the infants had not fallen asleep. The ages of the children in whom the feed-and-sleep examination had to be terminated before completion of the study were 81 days, 111 days, 168 days and 198 days (mean ± SD: 139±53 days). In two infants the functional MR urography was repeated under general anesthesia. In the remaining, a radioisotope renography was performed instead.
Image quality
In the feed-and-sleep examinations image quality was rated as diagnostic or even excellent in all studies except in 3 of the 4 aborted examinations (median sum score of 8, ranging from 6 to 17; Tables 1 and 2 ). In the general anesthesia group image quality was rated as excellent (median score of 6, ranging from 6 to 7). Thus we found a significant difference in the quality sum score between the feed-and-sleep group and the general anesthesia group ( P <0.0001; Fig. 2 ). It should be noted, however, that odd-number scales, such as the 3-point scale used, have a preference-bias for the central point and could therefore affect the results. Examples of image quality are shown in Fig. 3 and in the electronic supplemental material. Table 1 Motion artifacts in morphological sequences (T2-weighted half-Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo spin-echo) for both groups a Sequence orientation General anesthesia group Feed-and-sleep group Mann–Whitney U test, P -value None Moderate Marked None Moderate Marked Axial 18 1 0 19 19 4 0.0004 Coronal 19 0 0 22 17 3 0.0004 Sagittal 19 0 0 26 13 3 0.0026 a Numbers are given according to the observed artifacts graded by both raters in consensus. Differences for categorical data were tested using the Mann–Whitney U test. The significance level for differences was accepted at P <0.05 Table 2 Delineation of anatomical details of kidneys, ureters and vesicoureteric junction in morphological sequences (T2-weighted half-Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo spin-echo) for both groups a General anesthesia group Feed-and-sleep group Mann–Whitney U test, P -value Clear Impaired No visualization Clear Impaired No visualization Kidneys 19 0 0 39 3 0 0.3009 Ureters 19 0 0 28 12 2 0.0059 Vesicoureteric junction 19 0 0 23 15 4 0.0007 a Numbers of examinations are given according to the grading by both raters in consensus. The significance level for differences was accepted at P <0.05 Fig. 2 Comparison of image-quality sum score (lower number signifies higher quality) between general anesthesia and feed-and-sleep groups. Individual sum scores are given as dots, median as black arrowhead. Markers are for 95% confidence interval of median ( P <0.0001). Dotted line corresponds to the diagnostic border of 12 points Fig. 3 Sample images of functional magnetic resonance urography on a 3-T scan of a 6-month-old boy with duplicated collecting system of the left kidney with megaureter. a Axial T2-weighted MR image (repetition time/echo time [TR/TE] = 880/78 ms) shows elongated megaureter (*) of the dysplastic upper pole. b Coronal T2-weighted MR image (TR/TE 880/78 ms) demonstrates the dysplastic upper pole ( arrow ) and megaureter (*). c In sagittal T2-weighted MR image (TR/TE 880/78 ms), ectopic insertion of the megaureter (*) in the urethra ( arrow ) is clearly visualized. d Urographic phase shows only slight excretion of the left upper pole. e Color overlay of segmentation of kidneys in CHOP-fMRU ( blue =right kidney; green =left lower pole; pink =left upper pole). f Enhancement curves display the change in signal intensity over time (minutes) in the segmented part of the aorta ( red ) and the right ( blue ) and left ( green ) lower poles and left upper pole ( pink ) renal parenchymas. CHOP-fMRU Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia functional MR urography protocol
Functional analyzability
The functional analyzability in the mentioned software CHOP-fMRU [ ] was given in all but the four examinations aborted before contrast medium was injected. Thus no significant difference was detected between the subgroups ( P =0.405).
Thirty-two radioisotope renography studies were performed in the same period. We excluded examinations that were performed after (partial) nephrectomy and found a total of 26 examinations within the same clinical context, of which 18 examinations were in the feed-and-sleep group (18 of 38 of the functional MR urographies without aborted examinations; 47%) and 8 in the general anesthesia group (8/19 examinations; 42%). The median time interval between the radioisotope renography and functional MR urography was 62 days in the feed-and-sleep group and 222 days in the general anesthesia group. We found a strong correlation of the values of split renal function estimated by both methods in the feed-and-sleep group ( R =0.96) and the general anesthesia group ( R =0.93). According to Bland–Altman plot, mean difference of split renal function between functional MR urography and radioisotope renography was 0.3% with a standard deviation of 11% in the feed-and-sleep group.
Examination time
Examination time was significantly shorter in the feed-and-sleep group than in the general anesthesia group (mean time ± SD: 28±8 min vs. 71±11 min, respectively; P <0.001; Fig. 4 ). There was no significant correlation between the age of children and duration of the examination, neither in the complete cohort (correlation coefficient R =0.04) nor in the subgroups of general anesthesia ( R =0.35) and feed-and-sleep ( R =−0.18). Fig. 4 Comparison of examination times for functional magnetic resonance urography in the general anesthesia and feed-and-sleep groups. Individual examination times are given as dots, median as black arrowhead. Markers are for 95% confidence interval of the mean ( P <0.0001)
Number of morphological sequences and additional sequences
Regarding the number of morphological sequences needed to be performed in the feed-and-sleep examinations, we didn’t find a correlation to the age of the infants ( R =0.08). However we found a significant correlation between the number of morphological sequences performed and the duration of the examination in the feed-and-sleep group without additional sequences ( R =0.90). Further, examination time was significantly shorter in feed-and-sleep examinations without compared to the examinations with additional sequences ( P =0.0032).
Discussion
Overall, our retrospective study shows a high success rate of performing functional MR urography in infants in natural sleep using a feed-and-sleep procedure. In 38 of 42 infants (90%) examined in natural sleep, functional MR urography could be completed without problems. Only four examinations had to be aborted before contrast medium was injected because the infants had not fallen asleep and marked motion artifacts were observed. In one of these infants image quality was diagnostic but the examination was aborted by the mother, who was excessively worried.
Our results correspond to previously published data in cardiovascular and brain MRI [ ]. In our study, the oldest infant to complete functional MR urography successfully using the feed-and-sleep method was 10 months old, and the age of the four infants who did not complete the examination varied from 3 months to 7 months. Thus the feed-and-sleep procedure is applicable for functional MR urography in infants younger than 10 months, and success rate might not be directly related to age in this group.
There are several reasons for these promising results. In our opinion, the highest impact on success of the feed-and-sleep procedure was the detailed information of the parents. The relationship between parents’ presence and their verbal and nonverbal caring behaviors, and child distress have been described for several medical procedures [ , ]. Further, a timely pre-scanning preparation of the infants and an execution of the examination with care and patience are necessary to guarantee optimal cooperation. At our institution, the selection of the infants for the feed-and-sleep procedure depends on the experience of the pediatric radiologist. An additional systematic standardization of selection criteria, e.g., by a psychological questionnaire, could help to raise the success rate of the feed-and-sleep procedure further. Finally, the presence of the radiologist during the full examination seems to be notable. This condition gives not only the opportunity to interact with parents during examination but also to accelerate the examination because of the awareness of the value of functional MR urography for the individual child, especially regarding morphological images in combination with previously performed ultrasound studies.
The benefits of the feed-and-sleep procedure are obvious. There is a higher safety rate by reducing anesthesia-related immediate risks like cardiorespiratory depression, post-sedation nausea, vomiting and sleep disturbance. Jaimes et al. [ ] have recently shown that the use of sedation/general anesthesia is an independent risk factor for a safety report in pediatric MRI. In addition, potential anesthesia-related neurocognitive side effects, as demonstrated in animal models [ ], need to be discussed [ , ]. Although a recently published prospective study by Davidson et al. [ ] did not show any cognitive impairment in the general anesthesia group compared to the control group, care should be taken not to unnecessarily expose infants to general anesthesia. Furthermore, increased cost, decreased magnet utilization, and poor examination turnaround times associated with examinations using general anesthesia could be avoided by implementing the feed-and-sleep procedure. Moreover, functional MR urography could also be performed in regions with limited availability of anesthesiologists. In our study we observed a significant shorter examination time during feed-and-sleep procedures compared to those with general anesthesia (mean time ± SD: 28±8 min vs. 71±11 min). This saving of time is attributed to two reasons: (1) the adapted scan protocol that was shortened to the essential sequences and (2) the proper preparation of the patients in the feed-and-sleep group using an adjoining room. That was not possible in the general anesthesia group because the connection for the ventilator is installed in the scanner room.
Functional MR urography has already shown potential in radiation-free imaging of the kidneys and urinary tract with a comprehensive and definitive evaluation of morphological and functional information in congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract [ , , , , ]. Several publications deal with the technique, diagnostic power and reproducibility of functional MR urography [ , , , ]. Boss et al. [ ] demonstrated an excellent correlation between MR urography and radioisotope renography. Consistent with these data, we could also show a strong correlation of split renal function between functional MR urography and radioisotope renography for the feed-and-sleep and general anesthesia groups. Especially in evaluation of duplicated collecting system, functional MR urography has the advantage of higher morphological resolution compared to radioisotope renography, and thereby allows for better differentiation between renal poles [ , ]. Functional MR urography also has the advantage of a radiation-free examination compared to technetium-99 m dimercaptosuccinic acid scintigraphy, delivering a better quantification of functional renal parenchyma than radioisotope renography [ ]. Further, Khrichenko et al. [ ] found a high reproducibility for functional MR urography with intra- and inter-observer variabilities of 5% using the CHOP-fMRU software. Therefore in some instances, functional MR urography might be a substitute for the isotopic study.
Conclusion
We demonstrated a very high success rate of functional MR urography in infants younger than 10 months using an adapted scan protocol in natural sleep in the form of a feed-and-sleep procedure. Thus functional MR urography can be performed less stressfully and with a decreased risk in this age group, and thereby serve as a comprehensive and definitive imaging modality combining morphological and functional information in the evaluation of kidneys and urinary tract.