Introduction
Congenital hydronephrosis is one of the most common urological diseases in childhood and it is mostly caused by ureteropelvic junction obstruction, which may be attributed to intrinsic or extrinsic causes [ , , ]. The most common extrinsic cause, especially in patients with intermittent obstruction, is an aberrant or accessory vascular branch leading to the lower pole of the kidney and crossing anteriorly to the ureteropelvic junction or upper ureter [ , , , ]. Intrinsic causes of hydronephrosis are typically found in infants, whereas crossing renal vessels are usually observed in older children with a late presentation [ , ]. Patients with vascular ureteropelvic junction obstruction are often symptomatic with intermittent flank or abdominal pain, nausea, emesis and urinary tract infections [ , ]. In literature, no studies about the imaging investigation of crossing renal vessels in infants and young children younger than 4 years old are reported.
Knowing that a patient has ureteropelvic junction obstruction due to a crossing renal vessel is essential in choosing the appropriate surgical treatment [ ]. The surgical gold standard for ureteropelvic junction obstruction both with and without crossing renal vessels is the open Anderson-Hynes dismembered pyeloplasty. When a crossing renal vessel is detected in the preoperative phase, a valid alternative to dismembered pyeloplasty is the laparoscopic vascular hitch. It consists of displacing the lower pole crossing renal vessel cranially and anchoring it to the anterior pelvic wall using vascular adventitial sutures. This procedure doesn’t need the opening of the urinary collecting system and eliminates the need for drainage and ureteral stenting.
Contrast-enhanced colour Doppler ultrasound (US), computed tomography (CT) and contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance (MR) angiography are all established methods for detecting crossing renal vessels at the ureteropelvic junction [ , , , ] with different limitations.
Diagnostic techniques based on ionizing radiation and gadolinium-based contrast agent should be used with caution, especially in the paediatric population.
Researchers have reported promising data on using non-contrast-enhanced MR angiography to evaluate the renal arteries in adults [ , ] and in children older than 4 years [ ].
Following those results, the first purpose of our study was to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of an MR sequence without contrast, the balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement, in detecting crossing renal vessels even in children younger than 4 years, comparing its findings with surgical results.
The second aim was to evaluate the agreement between balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement and the contrast-enhanced MR angiography sequence, which is considered the referenced sequence.
Materials and methods
Subjects
A retrospective review was conducted of all MR urography performed at Giannina Gaslini Children’s Hospital between January 2013 and February 2017.
All patients 4 years old and younger referred for unilateral hydronephrosis diagnosed by US, examined also by the balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement sequence, were considered. In these patients, the balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement was performed in the MR urography protocol to have a more accurate detection of possible crossing renal vessels. Informed consent was obtained from the participants’ parents. As the study was observational and retrospective in design and did not examine patients’ personal information, ethical committee approval was not required.
MR protocol
MR urography was performed in all patients using a standardized institute protocol according to French technique by Vivier et al. [ ].
Venous access and a bladder catheter were placed in all children before the examination. In our case, 2/29 children underwent MRI using the “feed and wrap” technique [ ] while 27/29 children needed sedation, according to protocols established by the anaesthetist (induction with intravenous agent and maintenance of the sedation with inhaled agent via a facial mask), because of the increased duration of the exam related to the administration of contrast medium.
All MR images were acquired using a 1.5-T MR system (Achieva Intera; Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands) with a SENSE cardiac coil and performed before surgery. The child was positioned supine on the imaging table. After scout image acquisition to determine the position of the kidneys, axial, coronal and sagittal single shot T2-weighted free breathing sequences and 3-D heavily T2-weighted sequences were performed to depict kidney and vessel anatomy (Table 1 ). Table 1 Magnetic resonance urography protocol selected for detecting crossing renal vessels in a patient of approximately 12 kg Sequences Plans Repetition time (ms) Echo time (ms) Field of view (mm) Pixel size (mm) Thickness/gap Number of excitations Gating T2-weighted spectral attenuated inversion recovery spin echo Coronal, axial 830 95 230 × 180 1 × 1 3/0 2 respiratory Balanced turbo field echo Axial 3.3 1.6 200 × 200 1.4 × 1.4 4/0 4 none High-resolution T2-weighted spin echo Coronal 1,100 100 230 × 200 1 × 1 3/0 2 respiratory Balanced gradient echo triggered angiography without contrast enhancement Axial 7.1 3.6 130 × 130 1.1 × 1.1 3-D isotropic 1 electrocardiography 3-D gradient echo angiography Coronal 2.7 1 200 × 180 1.2 × 1.2 3-D isotropic 1 none 3-D gradient echo angiography Coronal, axial 4.9 2.4 200 × 200 1 × 1 3-D isotropic 2 none 3-D spin echo urography Coronal 1,050 400 200 × 200 1 × 1 3-D isotropic 1 respiratory
The balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement is a free-breathing, cardiac triggered 3-D sequence combined with a slab-selective inversion prepulse; free-breathing is enabled by using navigator gating, suppression of the renal parenchyma and the venous structures is achieved by appropriate selection of the inversion delay time, in combination with saturation bands overlying each kidney and inferior to the imaging slab. The renal arteries appear bright due to the inflow of non-saturated blood from the aorta within the inversion delay time.
The angio-urographic study involves the injection of a contrast bolus of gadoteric acid 2 ml/kg (Dotarem; Guerbet, Roissy, France) and the acquisition of 3-D gradient echo with fat saturation T1 post-contrast sequences in the angiographic, nephrographic and urographic phases. Furosemide injection immediately preceded the contrast medium injection according to the F0 technique [ ].
In our case, the contrast medium for the angio-urographic phase was administered in 25/29 patients; in 1 case, the angiographic phase was not performed because of a technical error.
The total time of acquisition of the images was around 30-50 min, depending on the degree of obstruction of the urinary tract. In selected cases, later urographic scans were needed.
Image analysis
To evaluate the reliability of the balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement, both in terms of image quality and diagnostic validity in identifying a possible crossing renal vessel at the ureteropelvic junction, the MR urography studies were evaluated retrospectively and independently by a paediatric radiologist (M.B.D., with 10 years of experience) and a resident in radiology after 6 months of training (V.I.). The image assessment was blinded to clinical details.
An abnormal vessel and its relationship with the ureteropelvic junction were first evaluated on the balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement (Fig. 1 ). The balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement was combined with T2-weighted and balanced turbo field echo sequences as an anatomical supplement and to recognize whether the accessory vessel was obstructive. Two weeks later, the same evaluation was made considering only the post-contrast sequences. Fig. 1 A 4-year-old boy with symptomatic left hydronephrosis. a Coronal contrast-enhanced MR angiography (repetition time/echo time: 2.7/1 ms), ( b ) balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement (repetition time/echo time: 7.1/3.6 ms), and ( c ) turbo spin echo-T2 weighted (repetition time/echo time: 1,100/199 ms) sequences show a crossing renal vessel ( arrows ) with an aortic origin that crosses the ureteropelvic junction, causing obstruction
A second analysis was performed 3 months later by the expert reader to evaluate the intra-reader reliability.
To assess the image quality, a 3-point scale was used, according to the previous experience of Brucher et al. [ ] as follows: 1 -- good, visualisation of whole main renal artery with segmental arteries; 2 -- fair, visualisation of whole main renal artery from the ostium to the hilum, and 3 -- poor, faint visualisation of main renal artery.
Surgical methods
Indications for surgical intervention comprised a split renal function <40%, a decrease of split renal function of >10% in subsequent studies, poor drainage function after furosemide, increased >anteroposterior diameter on US, and grades III and IV dilatation as defined by the Society for Fetal Urology [ , ]. During the operation, when a crossing renal vessel was identified, the pelvis was mobilized and a Hellstrom vascular hitch was performed dislocating the ureteropelvic junction more caudally. When a crossing renal vessel was not present and/or a narrow ureteropelvic junction was visualized during the dislocation of the pelvis, a pyeloplasty was preferred.
Statistical analysis
The agreement between MR urography images and surgical findings was based on the evaluation by the experienced radiologist (M.B.D.).
The agreement between the balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement and the contrast-enhanced MR angiography sequences in detecting crossing renal vessels, their diagnostic accuracy and their concordance with surgical findings were evaluated. The diagnostic accuracy was defined by sensitivity, specificity and binomial exact confidence intervals.
Inter- and intra-reader agreement for balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement and contrast-enhanced MR angiography sequences was calculated by Cohen’s kappa value.
Results
We considered the MR urography of 29 patients (17 males and 12 females), with an average age of 20 months (range: 1 month to 4 years), 62% with left hydronephrosis and 38% with right hydronephrosis in single system kidneys (Table 2 ). Twenty-four patients were diagnosed with prenatal US and postnatal follow-up, and 4 were diagnosed with postnatal US because of clinical manifestations as colic lumbar pain and urinary tract infection. One asymptomatic case was incidentally detected during the screening for developmental dysplasia of the hip. Table 2 Characteristics of the study population Parameter Age Mean: 20 months, range: 1 month to 4 years Female/male 12/17 Right ureteropelvic junction obstruction 11 (38%) Left ureteropelvic junction obstruction 18 (62%) Single renal artery 20 Lower pole crossing vessel 9
The balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement demonstrated the presence of a crossing renal vessel in 9/29 patients (7 obstructive, 2 non-obstructive vessels) while contrast-enhanced MR angiography found that presence in 7/25 patients (6 obstructive vessels, 1 non-obstructive vessel). Four patients did not undergo contrast-enhanced MR angiography.
Twenty-four of the 29 patients underwent surgery, which revealed a crossing renal vessel in 10 patients (7 obstructive, 3 non-obstructive vessels). Of those 7 patients with an obstructive crossing renal vessel, 5 underwent a vascular hitch and 2 dismembered pyeloplasty were performed because an intrinsic stenosis was detected (mixed ureteropelvic junction obstruction) after the pelvis dislocation. The other 5 patients did not undergo surgery because they did not meet the criteria for surgical intervention, but we decided to keep them included for the comparison between contrast-enhanced MR angiography and balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement.
In one case, the MR urography detected a single vessel while two abnormal vessels were found intraoperatively. In two cases, a crossing renal vessel could only be detected in the contrast-enhanced MR angiography sequence because of the low aortic origin, at aortic bifurcation, which resulted from the balanced triggered angiography field of view without contrast enhancement (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 A 3-year-old boy with left hydronephrosis. a The coronal balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement (repetition time/echo time: 7.1/3.6 ms) shows a single crossing renal vessel ( arrow ). b Coronal contrast-enhanced MR angiography (repetition time/echo time: 2.7/1 ms) shows two crossing renal vessels ( arrows ); the crossing renal vessel leading to the lower pole of the kidney originates from the aortic bifurcation, which is not included in the balanced triggered angiography field of view. The smaller field of view of the balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement represents the main limitation of this sequence
Qualitative analysis
Considering the balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement, for both readers more than 85% of subjects had good or fair image quality (93% for M.B.D. and 87% for V.I.) and less than 14% had poor image quality (7% for M.B.D. and 13% for V.I., respectively) with an inter-reader agreement of 72.4% (Cohen k=0.37).
Considering the contrast-enhanced MR angiography sequence, for both readers more than 95% of patients had good or fair image quality (96% for M.B.D. and 100% for V.I.) with an inter-reader agreement of 80% (Cohen k=0.61). The intra-reader agreement on the image quality resulted 90.9% (Cohen k=0.76) for the balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement and 63.6% (Cohen k=0.32) for the contrast-enhanced MR angiography (Table 3 ). Table 3 Inter-reader and intra-reader agreement Parameter Sequence Image quality Crossing renal vessel identification Inter-reader Balanced triggered angiographic non-enhanced MRI 72.4% (κ=0.37) 100% (κ=1) Contrast-enhanced MR angiography 80% (κ=0.61) 88% (κ=0.73) Intra-reader Balanced triggered angiographic MRI without contrast enhancement 90.9% (κ=0.76) 100% (κ=0.58) Contrast-enhanced MR angiography 63.6% (κ=0.32) 90.9% (κ=0.80) MR magnetic resonance, MRI magnetic resonance imaging
Quantitative analysis
The disagreement between the balanced triggered angiography without contrast and the contrast-enhanced MR angiography sequences in detecting a crossing renal vessel were deemed acceptable (2/25; percentage of disagreement: 8%; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1–26%).
The disagreement between balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement and surgical findings in detecting crossing renal vessel was present in 4 out of 24 patients (percentage of disagreement: 16.7%; 95% CI: 4.7–37.4%). The disagreement between contrast-enhanced MR angiography and surgical findings was observed in 5 out of 20 patients (percentage of disagreement: 25%; 95% CI: 8.7–49.1%).
The balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement had a sensitivity of 70.0% (95% CI: 34.8-93.3%) and specificity of 92.9% (95% C I: 66.1-99.8%). The contrast-enhanced MR angiography had a sensitivity of 55.6% (95% CI: 21.2-86.3%) and specificity of 90.9% (95% CI: 58.7-99.8%) (Table 4 ). Table 4 Diagnostic accuracy of balanced gradient echo triggered angiographic magnetic resonance imaging without contrast enhancement and contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography for identifying crossing renal vessels in paediatric patients compared with surgical findings Presence of crossing renal vessels at surgery Absence of crossing renal vessels at surgery Total Balanced gradient echo triggered angiographic magnetic resonance imaging without contrast enhancement ( n =24) Presence of crossing renal vessels 7 1 8 Absence of crossing renal vessels 3 13 16 Total 10 14 24 Sensitivity= 70% 95% CI: 35-93% Specificity= 93% 95% CI: 66-100% Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography ( n =20) Presence of crossing renal vessels 5 1 6 Absence of crossing renal vessels 4 10 14 Total 9 11 20 Sensitivity = 56% 95% CI: 21-86% Specificity = 91% 95% CI: 59-100% CI confidence interval
The agreement between imaging findings and surgical results in recognizing whether the accessory vessel crossed the ureteropelvic junction causing obstruction was 92% (Cohen k=0.80) for the imaging without contrast enhancement (T2-weighted, balanced turbo field echo, balanced triggered angiography) and 85% (Cohen k=0.85) for contrast-enhanced MR angiography, respectively.
Inter-reader agreement for identifying crossing renal vessels was 100% (Cohen k=1) for the balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement and 88% (Cohen k=0.73) for the contrast-enhanced MR angiography. Intra-reader agreement was 100% (Cohen k=0.59) for the balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement and 90.9% (Cohen k=0.80) for the contrast-enhanced MR angiography (Table 3 ).
Discussion
Unilateral hydronephrosis in a child or young adolescent is most likely due to ureteropelvic junction obstruction, which may be attributed to intrinsic or extrinsic causes. The most common extrinsic cause of ureteropelvic junction obstruction, 11-49% of cases, is an accessory vascular branch crossing anteriorly to the ureteropelvic junction or upper ureter [ , , , , , ]. Crossing renal vessel causing ureteropelvic junction obstruction has been documented in the pediatric population, but primarily in older children and adolescents presenting with intermittent flank pain associated with intermittent hydronephrosis, nausea and emesis [ , ]. To date, no data are available in the literature regarding imaging of crossing renal vessels in infants and children younger than 4 years of age.
Finding an abnormal vessel as a cause of obstruction is extremely important as it represents a surgical indication for the risk of ischemia due to the dilated pelvis’ compression of the crossing renal vessel. Furthermore, these children may benefit from a less invasive surgical treatment compared with dismembered pyeloplasty, the vascular hitch [ , ], resulting in a shorter hospital stay, and fewer complications and costs. Moreover, considering the risk of bleeding during surgery, being aware of an abnormal vessel is important even if it is not directly responsible for the obstruction.
To date, the imaging tools used to detect crossing renal vessels in the paediatric population are the color Doppler US and contrast-enhanced MR urography. Although colour Doppler US is an operator-dependent technique and is very difficult to perform on young patients, especially if the child is 2-3 years old, it has a sensitivity of 92.8% and a specificity of 76.5% on detecting crossing renal vessels [ ]. Thus, it represents the first-line imaging method and great effort should be made to disclose the possible crossing renal vessel by all radiologists.
Magnetic resonance is a radiation-free diagnostic tool able to acquire images with a high spatial resolution and excellent soft-tissue contrast. Functional MR urography offers the advantage of vertical integration of the anatomy with functional information obtained from the quantitative analysis of the dynamic acquisitions after the introduction of a paramagnetic contrast medium [ , , , , , , , , ]. Contrast-enhanced MR angiography has high sensitivity (88.2%) and specificity (91.7%) in detecting crossing renal vessels [ ].
Brucher et al. [ ] have demonstrated the reliability and feasibility of MR angiography without contrast enhancement, using the time-spin labelling inversion pulse (time-SLIP) technique, in indentifying crossing renal vessels in children older than 4 years of age with intermittent ureteropelvic junction obstruction. The overall image quality results were fair or good in 88% of cases, and inter-reader and intra-reader agreements were good for the image quality. The sensitivity and the specificity results were 92% and 100%, respectively, for predicting the presence of crossing renal vessels.
The aim of our study was to investigate the diagnostic accuracy of a sequence without contrast enhancement-- -- to identify the presence of crossing renal vessels even in infants and very young children (1 month to 4 years old) with ureteropelvic junction obstruction, requiring surgical treatment.
The relevance of our study results also from the reported alert on the gadolinium contrast medium. Indeed, in addition to the well-known reported risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis in patients with severe impaired renal function [ , ], recent several recent studies performed on adults demonstrated the association between gadolinium-based contrast agent and increased signal intensity on unenhanced T1-weighted MRI, in specific deep grey matter regions in patients with normal renal function who underwent contrast-enhanced MR studies [ , ]. Recently, published articles reported abnormal T1 hyperintensity in the dentate nucleus and globus pallidus of children following repeated administrations of both linear and macrocyclic gadolinium-based contrast agent; moreover, it has been recommended to use a more stable macrocyclic gadolinium-based contrast agent in children who are considered at risk because of potential age-related immature renal function [ , , , ]. Thus, imaging techniques without contrast enhancement should be proposed and validated especially in children.
In our study, the balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement turned out to be even superior to the angiographic sequence because the contrast medium dose is low in small children, resulting in suboptimal contrast resolutions so that the small vessels are hardly identified (Fig. 3 ). Moreover, the angiographic sequence is a 3-D sequence that suffers from movement and respiratory artefacts, resulting in lower image quality. The balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement is triggered with breath and heart rate. Newborns have heart and respiratory rates physiologically higher compared to older children, but we found that those rates do not affect the technical quality of the sequence as the expert reader has assigned a score of 1 (good) in 21/29 cases, 2 (fair) in 6/29 cases and 3 (poor) in 2/29 cases (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 3 A 7-month-old boy with left hydronephrosis. a,b The balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement (repetition time/echo time: 7.1/3.6 ms, a ) was superior to contrast-enhanced MR angiography (repetition time/echo time: 2.7/1 ms, b ) because the contrast medium dose is low in small children, resulting in suboptimal contrast resolutions; thus, small crossing renal vessels ( arrows ) are hardly identified Fig. 4 A non-enhanced balanced gradient echo in a 4-month-old boy with left hydronephrosis and crossing renal vessel. a-c Axial sections at the level of the main renal vessels ( a ) and below this level ( b ) and coronal reconstruction ( c ) show optimal contrast and spatial resolution even in infants with evidence of a left lower pole crossing renal vessels ( arrows )
Since the time of acquisition of the images is quite short (about 5 min), another advantage of the balanced triggered angiography sequence without contrast enhancement is that patients do not require sedation, avoiding invasive procedures. In infants, this sequence can be performed using the “feed and wrap” technique. Moreover, if the resulting images are not satisfactory, it is possible to repeat the sequence.
The main limitation of the balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement is related to the volumetric coverage of a limited aortic segment in order to shorten the acquisition time. The field of view is usually centered on the renal arteries. A crossing renal vessel originating away from the main renal artery or a very low vessel in major hydronephrosis could not be included in the field of view and was eventually missed (Fig. 2 ); this does not happen with contrast-enhanced MR angiography because it is acquired on the coronal plane with a wider coverage. However, this balanced triggered angiography limitation does not negatively influence the diagnosis in infants and children because the field of view is normally ample enough for their small body sizes. Moreover, morphological sequences provide other useful information that permits this limitation of the balanced triggered angiography without contrast enhancement.
The main study limitation is related to the small number of the sample; further studies are needed.
Conclusion
A balanced triggered gradient echo non-enhanced angiographic MR sequence may be considered a valid alternative to contrast-enhanced MRI in infants and children younger than 4 years with suspected crossing renal vessel.