Introduction
Brachial plexus birth palsy is an infrequent complication related to vaginal delivery with an incidence of 0.4-5 per 1,000 live births [ , , , , ]. In up to 35% of these patients who do not recover full motor function within the first 2-3 years of life, some degree of glenohumeral dysplasia, weakness or contracture will subsequently develop [ , ]. When brachial plexus birth palsy persists past the first 1-2 years of life, children are prone to developing glenohumeral joint deformity; however, dysplasia has been documented as early as 3 months of age [ ]. Muscle imbalances lead to a dominant internally rotated and adducted position resulting in progressive glenoid retroversion, generally quantified by measurement of the glenoid version angle, as well as posterior subluxation of the humeral head [ , , , ]. Although strict criteria for when to intervene and which intervention to pursue do not currently exist, earlier intervention is shown to help halt deformity progression. Current imaging classifications for stratifying glenohumeral dysplasia involve quantification of glenoid retroversion, posterior humeral head subluxation and humeral head/glenoid morphology [ ]. Commonly used imaging classification schemes for glenohumeral dysplasia include Waters’ classification, which defines upgrading from normal (I) to mild dysplasia (II) as a greater than 5° difference in glenoid retroversion between affected and unaffected shoulders. Ultimately, the timing of surgical intervention is a clinical decision with imaging providing objective quantification of structural glenoid changes, which is particularly useful when there is a progressive worsening of deformity or when the clinical picture is unclear [ , , ].
Randelli et al. [ ] first described glenoid version assessment with cross-sectional imaging in 1986, and a standardized method using computed tomography (CT) was first proposed by Friedman et al. [ ] in 1992. While the method described by Friedman is quick and easily reproducible, recent literature has shown that measurements made on routine axial images may underestimate the degree of glenoid retroversion [ , , , ]. More accurate measurement of glenoid version using images reformatted in the true axial plane of the scapula, described in recent literature, are validated against anatomical models, and may be performed with CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [ , , , , ]. However, we have found that this latter method is time-consuming, requiring additional post-processing expertise and labor on a dedicated 3-D computer workstation.
The purpose of this study was to compare Friedman’s original method for measuring glenoid version to a novel technique we recently developed (“modified Friedman”), which attempts to better account for scapular positioning on routinely obtained axial images at the workstation. Our modified Friedman technique uses anatomical reference points relatively constant in relation to the glenoid articular margin, independent of scapular rotation. Our hypothesis is that glenoid version measurements using the modified Friedman method are more accurate than those obtained with Friedman’s original method compared to reference standard measurements using reformatted images in the true axial plane of the scapula.
Materials and methods
This study was approved by our institutional review board, and the need for informed consent was waived. The cohort for this retrospective study included 30 normal and 30 dysplastic shoulders obtained from MRI examinations of 30 patients between January 2012 and September 2017 with an established diagnosis of brachial plexus birth palsy in one shoulder. These patients were selected by performing a search in our PACS of the following terms: glenohumeral dysplasia, glenoid retroversion and brachial plexus palsy. Each patient selected had an unaffected, asymptomatic contralateral shoulder, which collectively constituted the 30 normal shoulders in our study that were used as an internal control. The only exclusion criterion was a maximum patient age of 48 months. The average age of the patients was 22.1±13.7 months (range: 4-48 months); 16 were boys, and 14 were girls. All MRI examinations were obtained on either a 1.5-T or 3-T scanner (Achieva; Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands) at our institution. All imaging protocols included acquisition of large field-of-view proton density or T2-weighted axial images including both shoulders, with or without fat saturation, which were used to obtain our measurements.
Glenoid version angles of all 60 shoulders were measured using the method first described by Friedman et al. [ ] (Fig. 1 ) for use on axial cross-sectional images; a method using Friedman’s technique on images reformatted in the true axial plane of the scapula on an independent machine as described by van de Bunt et al. [ ] (Fig. 2 ) and our institutional internally developed technique that modifies Friedman’s method (modified Friedman’s) (Fig. 3 ). The modified Friedman technique is as follows, performed at the workstation on axial images of the scapula: first, one line is drawn to connect the anterior and posterior points of the glenoid articulating surface at the level of the mid-glenoid. A second line is generated by selecting the most cephalad axial slice, which includes the junction of the acromial spine with the scapular body. The most anteromedial point along the scapular body cortex at this level is then identified as a reference point, at which the mouse cursor is placed. This reference point was chosen as it is a consistent anatomical landmark that can consistently be identified between different patients. The user then scrolls back to the level of the mid-glenoid while maintaining the reference point with the mouse cursor, and a line is drawn from the transposed reference point to bisect the first line lying across the glenoid articulating margin. A glenoid version angle is then measured. Fig. 1 Axial T2-weighted image of the right shoulder in a 30-month-old boy demonstrates measurement of glenoid version using the method as described by Friedman et al. [ ]. The angle ( * ) is subtracted from 90 to obtain the glenoid version angle. Negative values indicate retroversion; positive values indicate anteversion Fig. 2 Axial T2-weighted image ( a ) of both shoulders in a 30-month-old boy (same patient as in Fig. 1 ) before multiplanar reformatting in the axial plane of the scapula. Multiplanar reformats are generated using the method described by van de Bunt et al. [ ]. b Coronal T2-weighted image of both shoulders undergoing coronal correction per the method described by van de Bunt et al. to generate reformatted images in the true axial plane of the scapula. The green line is aligned to connect the superior and inferior most points of the glenoid articulating margin. c Sagittal T2-weighted image of both shoulders undergoing sagittal correction per the method described by van de Bunt et al. [ ] to generate reformatted images in the true-axial plane of the scapula. The blue line is aligned with the plane of the scapular body. d Axial T2-weighted image of both shoulders after completing multiplanar reformatting in the axial plane of the right scapula Fig. 3 An axial T2-weighted image ( a ) of the right shoulder in a 30-month-old boy (same patient as in Figs. 1 - 2 ) demonstrate slice selection for the modified Friedman technique. This image is selected at the most cephalad slice including a portion of the acromion at its junction with the scapular body ( arrow ). A reference point is then set ( dot ) for use at a more inferior slice at the mid-glenoid, as shown in ( b ). b An axial T2-weighted image of the right shoulder demonstrates the reference point ( dot ) from Fig. 3 a, which is then used at the level of the mid-glenoid to draw a glenoid version angle. A line bisecting the glenoid articulating surface and connected to our reference point is joined with a second line across the articulating surface of the glenoid to form an angle. The angle ( * ) is subtracted from 90 to obtain the glenoid version angle. Negative values indicate retroversion; positive values indicate anteversion
All studies were independently reviewed by four readers: two pediatric radiologists with additional musculoskeletal radiology expertise (J.H.K. and R.C.O., with 13 years’ and 9 years’ experience, respectively) and two pediatric radiology fellows (M.G.D., M.A.).
Before measuring glenoid version angles, all readers were instructed on how to perform measurements using all three methods. Before this study, all four reviewers were familiar with Friedman’s technique but unfamiliar with the modified Friedman’s technique and with 3-D post-processing to generate true axial reformatted images of the shoulder. Therefore, all readers were given instructions on how to use the post-processing software, by one of the fellows involved with the project, to generate the desired images using the method described by van de Bunt et al. [ ]. A test case was used to practice each method until the readers expressed comfort with the measurement techniques. All readers were blinded to each other’s measurements. While obtaining measurements, each reader was supervised by the same fellow that instructed them on how to perform the measurements (M.D.), and any questions regarding the measurement techniques were referenced to the test case. Using a single method, instructor and supervisor and referring all questions to the test case served.
Inter-rater agreement was assessed using intraclass correlation (ICC) according to the (3,1) method described by Shrout and Fleiss [ ], using the software package developed by Revelle in R [ ]. ICC was interpreted with the guidelines described by Cicchetti [ ]. Inter-method agreement was derived, on a per-reader basis, using paired t -tests. Overall inter-method agreement of all readers combined was analyzed with a mixed linear model. Lastly, equivalence tests comparing Friedman’s original method and the modified Friedman method to the reference standard of true axial reformats were performed with a margin of 5°. Equivalence tests are not used to show exact equality between measurements, but to assess whether any observed difference is relevant within predefined margins or ranges of acceptability [ ].
Results
The mean glenoid version angle of normal shoulders for all reviewers was -10.8±5.7° using Friedman’s technique, -6.3±5.8° using the modified Friedman technique and -8.8±5.3° using true axial reformations (Table 1 ). A significant difference was observed when comparing measurements obtained using both Friedman’s ( P ≤0.001, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.3, 3.1) and the modified Friedman’s ( P ≤0.001, 95% CI -3.5, -1.5) method with reformats. Equivalence tests with a margin of 5° demonstrated equivalence of measurements obtained by either Friedman’s or the modified Friedman method with those of reformations for all readers. Inter-rater agreement determined by ICC ranged from 0.61 to 0.63 depending on the method utilized. Table 1 Comparison of measurements for glenoid version of normal shoulders Normal n =30 Friedman (F) Modified Friedman (MF) Reformatted (R) Paired t -test Equivalence test with margin of 5° P -value (F vs. R) P -value (MF vs. R) P -value (F vs. R) Conclusion P -value (MF vs. R) Conclusion Reader 1 -10.6° -7.1° -8.7° 0.01 0.07 ≤0.001 Equivalent ≤0.001 Equivalent Reader 2 -9.5° -4.4° -7.9° 0.07 ≤0.001 ≤0.001 Equivalent 0.02 Equivalent Reader 3 -11.9° -7° -9.1° ≤0.01 0.04 ≤0.01 Equivalent ≤0.01 Equivalent Reader 4 -11.2° -6.9° -9.3° 0.06 0.01 ≤0.01 Equivalent ≤0.01 Equivalent Overall -10.8° -6.3° -8.8° ≤0.001 0.06
The mean glenoid version angle of dysplastic shoulders for all reviewers was -34.6±17.7° utilizing Friedman’s technique, -29.0±18.3° using the modified Friedman’s technique, and -28.1±17.5° using true axial reformations (Table 2 ). Significant differences were observed when comparing measurements obtained using Friedman’s method to those of reformats ( P ≤0.001, 95% CI 4.8, 8.1). A significant difference was not observed when comparing measurements made using the modified Friedman technique with those of reformats ( P =0.14, 95% CI -0.3, 2.4). Equivalence tests with a margin of 5° demonstrated nonequivalence of measurements obtained by Friedman’s method with those obtained using reformations for all readers; equivalency of measurements made between the modified Friedman method and reformations was demonstrated for three of four readers (the fourth reader demonstrated non-equivalence between measurements). Inter-rater agreement determined by ICC ranged from 0.85 to 0.87. Table 2 Comparison of measurements for glenoid version of dysplastic shoulders Dysplastic n =30 Friedman (F) Modified Friedman (MF) Reformatted (R) Paired t-test Equivalence test with margin of 5° P -value (F vs. R) P -value (MF vs. R) P -value (F vs. R) Conclusion P -value (MF vs. R) Conclusion Reader 1 -35.2° -29.2° 29.7° ≤0.001 0.68 0.68 Not equivalent ≤0.001 Equivalent Reader 2 -35.5° -29.6° -29.5° ≤0.001 0.93 0.81 Not equivalent ≤0.001 Equivalent Reader 3 -32.4° -27.2° -26.2° ≤0.001 0.3 0.86 Not equivalent ≤0.001 Equivalent Reader 4 -35.2° -30.2° -27.2° ≤0.001 0.05 0.99 Not equivalent 0.10 Not equivalent Overall -34.6° -29.0° -28.1° ≤0.001 0.06
Inter-method reliability among all shoulders for all readers, as determined by ICC, was 0.93 (0.92, 0.95) when comparing Friedman’s method with reformats. ICC was 0.93 (0.91, 0.94) when comparing the modified Friedman technique with reformats. When separated into groups of normal and dysplastic shoulders, ICC was 0.69 (0.59, 0.76) when comparing normal shoulder measurements obtained by Friedman’s method to reformats and 0.65 (0.54, 0.73) when comparing the modified Friedman method. Comparing measurements of dysplastic shoulders obtained with Friedman’s method to reformats yielded an ICC of 0.92 (0.89, 0.94); ICC when comparing modified Friedman method measurements to reformats was 0.92 (0.89, 0.94).
Discussion
In the setting of glenohumeral dysplasia, our study demonstrated that we were able to generate similar glenoid version measurements using our proposed modified Friedman technique compared with true axial reformations without the additional time burden and required expertise of 3-D post-processing on a separate workstation. Although presently there are no strict criteria to guide when and what intervention to perform, imaging criteria do exist [ ]. Using Waters’ criteria, upgrading from normal (grade I) to mild dysplasia (grade II) involves only a 5° difference in glenoid retroversion between affected and unaffected shoulders. Therefore, providing objective, reproducible and accurate measurements of glenoid version is important for helping to guide physical therapy and the timing of potential surgical intervention for glenohumeral dysplasia. Friedman’s method was also shown to consistently overestimate the degree of retroversion in both normal and dysplastic shoulders. While this has little impact in the setting of normal shoulders, this is a shortcoming for dysplastic shoulders when treatment stratification for physical therapy, bracing and open surgical procedures are predicated, in part, on imaging findings that supplement the clinical exam.
Although Friedman et al. [ ] first described their technique nearly 30 years ago, it is still widely used in clinical practice given its reproducibility, low learning curve, and ability to be performed without proprietary 3-D post-processing software or a dedicated workstation. Previous authors have shown that the method described by Friedman can inaccurately characterize glenoid version as it does not account for scapular position, which can alter glenoid version in the same patient by up to 10 degrees [ ]. Similarly, the lack of standardization for slice selection using Friedman’s method can result in similar variation in glenoid version, with more cephalad positions along the glenoid trending toward higher retroversion [ ]. Recent literature supports the use of 3-D reconstruction and true axial reformation methods validated against cadaveric models [ , , ]. While these methods provide a more accurate representation of the true glenoid version angle, they are more time-consuming, present a higher learning curve, and require dedicated post-processing software and/or hardware. Our hope is that our modified Friedman technique will provide a convenient and accurate assessment of glenoid version that can be performed with similar acceptance to the Friedman technique, and without the need for a dedicated workstation or time-consuming reformation techniques.
Comparing our results to those of recent studies shows that our degree of inter-rater reliability for measurements obtained using Friedman’s and true axial reformatted techniques is similar to other studies. Van de Bunt et al. [ ] showed an ICC of 0.70 for measurements obtained with Friedman’s technique and an ICC of 0.66 using the reformation technique they describe, utilizing CT scans in adult. Van der Sluijs et al. [ ] measured glenoid version in children with brachial plexus birth palsy on MRI examinations and reported Bland-Altman correlation coefficients between their readers ranging from 0.59 to 0.64. Lippert et al. [ ] similarly demonstrated an average ICC of 0.848 among their readers when measuring glenoid version of normal and dysplastic shoulders on MRI using a method similar to Friedman’s technique.
In a more recent study from van de Bunt et al. [ ] referencing MRI examinations in pediatric patients with glenohumeral dysplasia, Bland-Altman correlation plots demonstrated nearly all measurements of normal and dysplastic shoulders falling within 95% levels of agreement, using both Friedman’s technique and the reformation method they describe. Further, they described wider differences in the range of angle measurements obtained in dysplastic shoulders when compared to measurements of normal shoulders, which we have further corroborated.
A recent study from Stein et al. [ ] using their own novel reformation technique to account for scapular rotation demonstrated an ICC of up to 0.86 among their readers using their new technique on dysplastic shoulders, and up to 0.88 using a method similar to Friedman’s technique. Like our study, their interobserver variability, using ICC, in normal shoulders (0.64 using their novel technique, 0.38 using Friedman’s method) was in less agreement than in dysplastic shoulders. This discrepancy in ICC between normal and dysplastic shoulders is likely due to the wider range of version angles observed in dysplastic shoulders.
Limitations for our study include that our readers were not blinded to their own results and performed all three glenoid version measurements for each shoulder during the same sitting but were not allowed to change their measurements after final recording by a third-party monitor. We did not control for slice selection during any part of our study, and some degree of variability resulting from that is not accounted for in our analysis. Lastly, we did not assess measurements from each reviewer at different time points and therefore could not assess intra-rater variability, which will need to be addressed in a future study.
Conclusion
In the setting of glenohumeral dysplasia, the modified Friedman method and 3-D post-processed true axial reformation techniques provide statistically similar and reproducible values. We propose that our modified Friedman technique can be performed in lieu of labor-intensive 3-D post-processed true axial reformations to generate glenoid version measurements in the setting of glenohumeral dysplasia.