Introduction
Gadolinium-based contrast agents have been proved in general to be very safe for human administration. However the risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis in children with acute or chronic renal failure has been demonstrated [ ]. A systematic search of databases published in 2014 [ ] reported 23 pediatric cases of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, but no recordings in children younger than 6 years.
As a result of restrictive guidelines there has been a significant decrease in the number of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis cases [ ]. Depositions of gadolinium have been found in the brain (globus pallidus and dentate nucleus) of people who underwent repeated administrations of gadolinium-based contrast agents, in the absence of clinically manifest disease or renal failure and with an intact blood–brain barrier [ , , , ]. It is evident that the quantity of gadolinium deposited in tissues is extremely small and measurable only using the most sensitive equipment [ , ]. Currently there are no reports of gross histological changes [ ] and no reports of clinical manifestations of gadolinium deposition in the brain. The actual risk has not been proved, but the potential unknown risks of residual gadolinium should be considered regarding gadolinium-based contrast administration in daily clinical practice. Continuous efforts should be made to minimise gadolinium-based contrast administration whenever possible.
It is recommended to evaluate the cost–benefit ratio every time contrast-enhanced MRI is considered. Furthermore, rigorous attention is mandatory in children, who may receive more doses during their longer lifespan compared with an adult population [ ].
Gadoteric acid, meglumine salt forming gadoterate meglumine (Dotarem; Guerbet, Roissy, France) is a macrocyclic and ionic gadolinium-based contrast agent with very high stability. In more than 75 countries, gadoterate meglumine is approved for intravenous administration at a recommended dose of 0.1 mmol/kg of body weight, in adults as well as children, without dose adjustment, including children younger than 2 years [ ].
Several recent studies have explored the benefit of high magnetic field strength in potentially reducing contrast agent dose. It has been reported that 3-tesla (3-T) MRI studies can be performed in adults with a lower gadolinium dose by exploiting the higher signal-to-noise ratio available, without compromising image quality as compared with the recommended dose [ ]. Furthermore the administration of a half dose of contrast agent for different applications such as dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion studies in gliomas [ ], hand and finger joints [ ] and in whole-body magnetic resonance angiography [ ] at 3 T have been documented.
The aim of our prospective intra-individual study was to compare half-standard and full doses of the macrocyclic ionic agent gadoterate meglumine in contrast-enhanced MRI studies of paediatric bone and soft-tissue diseases, acquired with a 3-T scanner.
Materials and methods
Our institutional review board approved this prospective study. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. We prospectively and consecutively enrolled 45 children ages 2.7 months to 17.5 years who were evaluated at our Imaging Department on a 3-T magnet (Skyra; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). All children underwent a diagnostic or follow-up MRI to investigate bone and soft-tissue disorders, for overall 49 anatomical segments examined (right and left limbs in three children and two consecutive follow-up MRIs in one child). Patient characteristics and MRI data are summarised in Table 1 . Table 1 Patient characteristics and MRI data Patients n =45 Gender, n (%) Male 20 (44.4) Female 25 (55.6) Age, median (interquartile range) Male 13.0 (11.0–15.8) Female 13.3 Magnetic resonance imaging examinations n=49 Anatomical areas, n (%) Head–neck 15 (30.6) Vertebral/paravertebral 9 (18.4) Lower/upper limb 25 (51.0) Sequences, n (%) Turbo spin echo 41 (83.7) Dixon turbo spin echo 8 (16.3) Anatomical plane Sagittal 1 (2.0) Axial 39 (79.6) Coronal 9 (18.4)
The MRI protocol was modelled on the specific pathology and anatomical region for each child. All children underwent T1-weighted turbo spin-echo sequences (fat-saturated turbo spin echo, or Dixon turbo spin echo, Table 1 ).
Our cohort included children affected by a variety of conditions including benign and malignant neoplasms, inflammatory and infectious diseases, schaemic conditions and vascular malformations. All clinical disorders in the study are listed in Table 2 . The presence of disease-related contrast enhancement was deemed necessary in order to include a child with one specific disease in our protocol. An anatomical segment was considered separately if it contained at least one enhancing lesion. Exclusion criteria were renal impairment and known allergic-like reactions to gadolinium-based contrast agents. Table 2 Types of lesions Lesion type n % Malignat 14 28.6 Benign 10 20.4 Inflammatory 17 34.6 Ischemic 4 8.2 Vascular 4 8.2 Total 49 100.0
In every child, a 24-gauge intravenous catheter was placed in an antecubital vein and connected with an electronic injector (Medrad Spectris Solaris; Bayer HealthCare, Warrendale, PA) before the examination. All children received the same contrast agent (Dotarem; Guerbet, Roissy, France). Contrast agent was injected at a rate of 2 mL/s, followed by 15 mL of saline flush at the same flow rate in all children.
Immediately after the first dose of contrast agent (0.05 mmol/kg, i.e. 0.1 mL/kg) was administered, corresponding to half of the recommended dose (0.1 mmol/kg, i.e. 0.2 mL/kg), a T1-weighted sequence was performed (Table 1 ). Immediately at the end of the acquisition another bolus of 0.05 mmol/kg of contrast agent was injected, and the same T1-weighted sequence was obtained. Thus, the second post-contrast image set was taken at a cumulative standard dose of 0.1 mmol/kg, thereby avoiding the ethical/forensic problems related to an off-label use.
The mean (standard deviation [SD]) acquisition time was similar between post-contrast T1-weighted sequences and was 277.0 (82.2) seconds for fat-saturated turbo spin-echo sequences and 277.7 (10.4) seconds for Dixon turbo spin-echo sequences. Every sequence (for half- and full-dose images) was acquired immediately after contrast administration. Our aim was to minimise potential effects on signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio from the potential variations in gadolinium serum concentration following administration of two consecutive half-doses instead of a full dose of contrast agent. The systematic use of the automatic injector avoided time losses and possible inter-operator variations related to manual injection. Therefore, with the exception of injection time, virtually no time elapsed between the two post-contrast sequences.
The approved full dose of contrast agent was thus administered to all patients.
Image analysis
First, half-dose and full-dose sequences for each child were anonymised, randomly mixed and transferred to a separate workstation. Then, three radiologists (a junior radiologist with 3 years of experience and two expert paediatric radiologists with 16 years of experience in paediatric MRI after residency and 28 years of experience in paediatric MRI, respectively) independently analysed and compared post-contrast T1-weighted sequences performed after the injection of half and full doses of contrast agent by using a separate workstation in three different sessions. Radiologists were masked to the dose of contrast agent used in each image series. Radiologists were also blinded to other radiologists’ evaluation and to the other sequences of the exam and did not have access to clinical information about the patients. They analysed the diagnostic quality of each set of images to specifically evaluate: visibility and enhancement of lesion(s), lesion border delineation, and visualization of lesion internal morphology (if present). They also collaterally performed a qualitative evaluation of anatomical details and their delineation.
They evaluated overall image quality using a number scoring system. They blindly compared each image from the half-dose dataset with its corresponding full-dose image. The reason for this blind comparison was two-fold. First, this avoided possible diagnostic inaccuracies on half-dose images from lack of adequate enhancement of a lesion. Second, by asking the radiologists to blindly compare the imaging datasets we could investigate whether any systematic difference or error between the image datasets was noted, i.e. if the radiologists systematically gave low labels to half-dose images (which could potentially imply a systematic error in the anonymisation process) or full-dose images (which could potentially imply a systematic error in the qualitative evaluation). Images were labelled from 0 (“poor” image quality — significant motion artifacts) to IV (“excellent” enhancement — adequate diagnostic information). The number scoring system is summarised in Table 3 . Table 3 Scoring system used for qualitative analysis Score Quality of imaging and diagnostic information 0 Poor image quality — significant motion artefacts 1 Poor enhancement — poor diagnostic information 2 Fair enhancement — moderate diagnostic information 3 Good enhancement — adequate diagnostic information 4 Excellent enhancement — adequate diagnostic information
We took quantitative measurements of signal intensity by drawing circular regions of interest from enhancing lesions in all children to quantitatively determine tissue enhancement with different contrast doses and compare the results. The images were prepared and randomly mixed. The reader positioning the regions of interest (the junior radiologist) was also blinded to the patients’ identities and contrast doses used in all images. Regions of interest were adapted on anatomical areas of interest and copied into exactly the same position in both sets of T1-weighted images, in order to consistently measure the maximum signal intensity in both series. Specifically, regions of interest were placed on the enhancing lesions. For a comparison with anatomical tissue samples, regions of interest with the same area were copied and pasted onto muscle tissue on the same slice. The regions of interest were as large as possible and positioned to cover the most homogeneous-enhancing part of the lesions. Regions of interest were never smaller than 4.5 mm 2 (mean 9.38 mm 2 , SD 2.29). The signal intensity of the enhancing lesion was compared between the half-dose and full-dose protocols.
We measured noise as the standard deviation of signal intensity measured by a region of interest copied and pasted in the air surrounding the anatomical segment and devoid of artefacts. Contrast-to-noise ratio was calculated using the same method, and with the mean value of signal intensity measured from the region-of-interest set in a normal muscle visible at the same level as the lesion as a comparator. Contrast-to-noise ratio values were normalised for analysis.
Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using Stata release 13 (StataCorp, College Station, TX). We compared absolute and relative frequencies, median, interquartile range, range, means and standard deviation as appropriate. We applied the Shapiro–Wilk test to assess the normality of the distribution of each variable. Metric data such as region-of-interest lesion were presented as the mean ± standard deviation. Ordinal data such as image quality were presented as the median. Differences in region-of-interest lesion, detection as well as the contrast-to-noise ratio and the signal-to-noise ratio, were evaluated on full-dose and half-dose images with a paired t -test (Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-ranks test was used to compare median values). We assessed the correlation between these measures with Bravais-Pearson correlation. We used linear regression analysis to obtain a formula to convert half-dose region-of-interest lesion into full-dose region-of-interest lesion. We used t -tests to evaluate age and gender distribution in the study population. We used the Kruskal-Wallis rank test to compare the elapsed time between post-contrast sequences. Spearman rho evaluated the relationship between time and signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio. We estimated interobserver qualitative analysis using the Cohen κ coefficient (poor agreement κ=0; slight agreement, κ=0.01–0.2; fair agreement, κ=0.21–0.4; moderate agreement, κ=0.41–0.6; good agreement, κ=0.61–0.8; and excellent agreement, κ=0.81–1.0).
Results
Qualitative analysis
Two of the three readers rated both half- and full-dose images in 47/49 segments as “excellent” and the third rated both half- and full-dose images in 48/49 segments as “excellent” (Table 4 ). In the remaining segments half-dose images were evaluated as “good”, while full-dose images were evaluated as “excellent”. The mean rating of the overall enhancement quality of the half-dose group was “excellent”. The interrater agreement obtained a κ=0.8 with 98% of agreement. Table 4 Qualitative analysis of 49 MRI examinations Score as defined in Table 3 0 1 2 3 4 Reader 1 0 0 0 2 47 Reader 2 0 0 0 2 47 Reader 3 0 0 0 1 48
In the half-dose image group all enhancing lesions were adequately visualised (Figs. 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 ). All readers agreed that in only one case the internal septa of an enhancing lesion were less enhanced compared with the corresponding image at full-dose protocol; however the image quality was sufficient for diagnosis and treatment planning for every observer (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 1 Sacroiliitis in a 7-year-old boy. Axial fat-saturated turbo spin-echo T1-weighted (repetition time/echo time [TR/TE] 600/17 ms) MR images post contrast agent administration. a Half dose. b Full dose. Both images show enhancement ( arrows ) in the right iliac wing consistent with sacroiliitis. The qualitative score did not differ between images obtained after half-dose and full-dose gadoterate meglumine administration Fig. 2 Osteomyelitis in a 14-year-old girl. a–d Axial fat-saturated turbo spin-echo T1-weighted (repetition time/echo time [TR/TE] 682/23 ms) post-contrast MR images with a half dose ( a, c) and full dose (b, d ) of contrast agent all show extensive contrast enhancement ( arrows ) in the right tibia at the level of the fibular head ( a, b ) and proximal fibular shaft ( c, d ), consistent with osteomyelitis. The qualitative score did not differ between half-dose and full-dose images Fig. 3 Neurofibromatosis type 1 in a 5-year-old girl. a, b Axial T1-weighted turbo spin-echo Dixon (repetition time/echo time [TR/TE] 492/9 ms) post-contrast MR images at a half dose ( a ) and a full dose ( b ) of contrast agent all depict an enhancing lesion ( arrows ) in the subcutaneous tissue of the right cheek, consistent with neurofibroma. The quality score did not differ between half-dose and full-dose images Fig. 4 Left paravertebral ganglioneuroma ( arrows ) in a 13-year-old girl. a–f Axial fat-saturated turbo spin-echo T1-weighted (repetition time/echo time [TR/TE] 600/8.9 ms) post-contrast MR images at a half dose, at successively more cranial sections, ( a–c ) and a full dose, at successively more cranial sections, ( d–f ) of contrast agent all depict the left paravertebral lesion characterised by heterogeneous contrast enhancement. The qualitative score did not differ between half-dose and full-dose images Fig. 5 Foreign body (palm thorn, arrows ) granuloma in a 7-year-old girl (left ankle). a, b Axial fat-saturated turbo spin-echo T1-weighted (repetition time/echo time [TR/TE] 520/19 ms) post-contrast MR images at a half dose ( a ) and a full dose ( b ) of contrast agent demonstrate the granuloma. Image ( a ) was scored as grade 3 by two readers because of the visibility of the internal septa of the granuloma ( arrowheads )
Quantitative analysis
Forty-nine MRI studies were obtained. T1-weighted post-contrast images included 41 fat-saturated turbo spin-echo and 8 Dixon turbo spin-echo sequences (Table 1 ). Post-contrast sequences were acquired after a mean (SD) time of 277.7 s (82.2 s) for fat-saturated turbo spin-echo and 277.7 s (10.4 s) for Dixon turbo spin-echo sequences.
The lesion signal intensity was compared for the half-dose and full-dose images. The normalised numbers (min=0; max=1) showed that mean±SD lesion signal intensity was significantly higher for full-dose (0.39±0.24) than half-dose (0.33±0.24, P <0.001) images. Because there was a very high linear correlation ( r =0.96, P <0.001; Fig. 6 ) between the ratio of half-dose signal intensity lesion to the reference value and the ratio of full-dose signal intensity lesion to the reference value, the following formula was possible and helpful in converting normalised signal intensity lesion from half dose to full dose: Ratio of signal intensity lesion at full dose = 0.038 + 1.06 x signal intensity lesion half dose. Fig. 6 Linear regression line for normalised (scale 0–1) region-of-interest lesion values for half dose and full dose. Because of the very high linear correlation ( r =0.96, P <0.001) between the ratio of half-dose signal intensity lesion to the reference value and the ratio of full-dose signal intensity lesion to the reference value, it was possible to convert normalised signal intensity from half dose to full dose and compare the quantitative results obtained from the half-dose and full-dose images
Quantitative measurement showed that the mean signal intensity of enhancing lesions was higher in the full-dose group (655.0±314.5) than in the half-dose group (543.7±279.8, P <0.001). In the half-dose group mean±standard deviation, median and interquartile range signal-to-noise ratio values (168.9 ±166.0 and 121.3, 61.9–220.0, respectively) did not show significant differences compared with signal-to-noise ratio values measured in the full-dose group (190.3±201.5 and 109.2, 76.1–215.8, respectively; P =0.110). No significant differences were found between normalised mean±standard deviation, median and interquartile range contrast-to-noise ratio values in the half-dose group (36.4±20.3 and 32.8, 23.2–44.8, respectively) and normalised contrast-to-noise ratio values in the full-dose group (37.7±20.2; 29.8, 25.3–43.7, respectively; P =0.101; Fig. 7 ). We found no significant correlations between time and signal-to-noise ratio (⍴=0.17 in the half-dose group; ⍴=0.09 in the full-dose group) and time and normalised contrast-to-noise ratio (⍴=0.20 in the half-dose group; ⍴=0.15 in the full-dose group). Fig. 7 Comparison of median and interquartile range of region-of-interest measurements signal-to-noise ratio and normalised contrast-to-noise ratio values obtained from half-dose and full-dose images. In the box plot the central rectangle spans the first quartile to the third quartile (the interquartile range). The segment inside the rectangle shows the median. The whiskers on the two sides of the box show the locations of minimum and maximum values. No significant differences were found in signal-to-noise ratio and normalised contrast-to-noise ratio between half-dose and full-dose images ( P =0.110 and P =0.101, respectively)
We further stratified the data by sequence type. We found no significant differences in signal-to-noise ratio and normalised contrast-to-noise ratio values between the half-dose and full-dose protocol, both utilising fat-saturated turbo spin-echo and Dixon turbo spin-echo sequences.
All data for the signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio analysis, with median and interquartile range of region-of-interest measurements, stratified by sequence (fat-saturated turbo spin-echo or Dixon turbo spin-echo) and the dose regimen (half- or full-dose), are shown in Fig. 8 . Fig. 8 Median and interquartile range of region-of-interest measurements, stratified by sequence (turbo spin echo or Dixon turbo spin echo) and dose regimen (half dose or full dose). No statistically significant differences in signal-to-noise ratio and normalised contrast-to-noise ratio were obtained from half-dose and full-dose images, TSE turbo spin-echo
Discussion
Our results support the feasibility of reducing gadoterate meglumine dose in paediatric bone and soft-tissue MRI studies, notably without detriment to either reader confidence or overall qualitative evaluation at 3-T MRI studies. We emphasise the absence of any significant differences in image quality or diagnostic information between half-dose and full-dose protocols among any of the examined studies.
Gadolinium-based contrast agent is an essential tool for MRI in the paediatric population [ ]. All gadolinium-based contrast agents are administered to humans in chelated forms to avoid the presence of free gadolinium. The molecular structure can be linear or macrocyclic and can be divided into ionic or non-ionic compounds according to their charge. In linear gadolinium-based contrast agents the gadolinium ion is surrounded by an incomplete ring or open structure that is more apt to release free gadolinium; macrocyclic agents have a complete ring surrounding and encasing the gadolinium ion in a cage-like structure that tends to hold on to it more tightly and is more resistant to release or transmetallation of the gadolinium [ ]. The initial concerns about gadolinium-based contrast agent safety were related to incidents of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis linked with the administration in patients with severe renal impairment [ ]. However nephrogenic systemic fibrosis has been virtually eradicated within last years since the implementation of restrictive guidelines for the use of gadolinium-based contrast agents, increasing confidence in the safety of use in children with preserved renal function. Despite this, recent reports have demonstrated that gadolinium deposition in human tissue after gadolinium-based contrast agent administration also occurs in people with normal renal function [ , , , ].
In 2014, the association between brain MRI abnormality (T1-shortening in deep brain areas) and a history of linear gadolinium-based contrast agent administration was first reported by Kanda et al. [ ]. Increased signal intensity in the dentate nucleus and globus pallidus on unenhanced T1-weighted images showed a positive correlation with previous exposure to gadolinium-based contrast agents, with an apparent dose–response relationship. Other reports also documented a strongly positive dose-dependent relationship, with tissue concentration based on cumulative lifetime gadolinium-based contrast agent dose and type of gadolinium-based contrast agent [ , , , ]. The same phenomenon was also reported in children [ , ]. Macrocyclic gadolinium-based contrast agents seem to be less linked to this phenomenon, but this argument is still a matter of study [ , , ].
Reversible hepatic deposition of gadolinium was also demonstrated by Maximova et al. [ ] in children with iron overload undergoing MRI with the macrocyclic agent gadoteric acid.
Spectrometry revealed that gadolinium deposition rates for linear and macrocyclic agents vary within a given class and that different chemical forms of gadolinium appear to be depositing within tissues, some of which could be invisible using MRI [ ]. Therefore, although MRI signal changes led to the observation that several chemical forms of gadolinium were being deposited in the brain, they are less reliable to determine the quantity of gadolinium deposition in general [ , ]. Frenzel et al. [ ] found three distinct forms of the residual free gadolinium in the brains of rats with normal renal function after repeated administration of linear and macrocyclic gadolinium-based contrast agents; the same authors found lower gadolinium concentrations after administration of macrocyclic gadolinium-based contrast agents.
For all these reasons, many international agencies such as the European Medicines Agency and its Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the European Society for Urological Medicines Agency and the American College of Radiology have recently published several precautions and recommendation on the use of gadolinium-based contrast agents for MRI. Specifically, the European Medicines Agency’s Committee for Medical Products for Human Use concluded on July 2017 that intravenous linear products should be suspended while macrocyclic agents could continue to be used in their current indications but “in the lowest doses to enhance images sufficiently” [ ]. As for gadoterate meglumine, the molecule has thus far proved safe, as recently highlighted by the SECURE observational study, performed on as many as 35,499 patients [ ].
Accurate detection of lesions throughout the body is a goal in all MRI studies. Optimal contrast agent performance is therefore of great importance in consideration of the evolution of radiologic clinical practice, gadolinium contrast agent dose optimization [ ] and the availability of increasing magnetic fields [ ]. The increasing availability and routine clinical use of 3-T MRI scanners also raise a number of questions. First, how does the contrast agent behave at 3 T? Second, what are the optimal doses in routine clinical application or in advanced MRI studies [ , , , ]?
In our study we performed both a quantitative and a qualitative analysis to evaluate whether quantitative signal intensity differences would translate to a qualitative loss of diagnostic power on images acquired with half-dose gadoterate meglumine. Differences were revealed by quantitative analysis in signal intensity in half-dose and full-dose T1-weighted images. However when accounting for noise by comparing signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio, we found no significant differences between half-dose and full-dose images. When stratifying for the type of sequence we also did not find significant differences in signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio between the two datasets (Fig. 7 ). Although quantitative analysis did reveal significant signal intensity differences between the half-dose and full-dose protocols, signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio did not vary significantly between the two sequences. These findings were somewhat surprising, more so if considering a variety of different protocols were used for the different diseases in our cohort (Table 2 ; Fig. 7 ). Indeed, it is worth further discussing factors affecting signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio. In the literature MRI signal-to-noise ratio dependence upon the following factors has been reported [ ]: $$ signal- to- noise\ ratio=K\times {B}_0\times Voxel\ Volume\times \surd Sampling\ time $$ where K is a constant, B0 is the magnetic field and voxel volume is determined by slice thickness, field strength, the number of in-plane samples and field-of-view in a given direction. Based on this equation, changes in acquisition protocol parameters could significantly affect signal-to-noise ratio, for example doubling the bandwidth and halving slice thickness result in a loss of 29% and 50% of signal-to-noise ratio, respectively. Another relevant contributor to signal-to-noise ratio performance is the efficiency of the radiofrequency coils and the receiver coils [ ].
As for contrast-to-noise ratio, it was reported that relaxivity of gadolinium does not significantly change between 1.5 T and 3 T [ ]. This consideration could also be relevant for gadoterate meglumine. It was indeed reported that gadoterate meglumine relaxivity values present little variation between 1.5 T (3.9±0.1 mmol −1 s −1 ) and 3 T (3.5±0.3 mmol −1 s −1 ) [ ]. However, because of the longer tissue T1 times at higher field strengths, the T1 shortening caused by the contrast agent produces an increased contrast effect and allows for the use of a lower dose of contrast agent at higher magnetic fields [ ].
In our study signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio were indeed higher for full-dose protocols, as expected, but not significantly higher. Although most factors mentioned in the aforementioned equation did not vary in our cohort (such as magnetic field, slice thickness and sampling time), it could be speculated one of the other factors, such as coil efficiency, could have influenced these results. Nevertheless the alternative hypothesis that a full dose of gadoterate meglumine does not add significant information in terms of signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio compared to a half dose has to be considered.
It is worth mentioning that signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio mean values obtained with quantitative analysis are similar to other signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio mean values found in the literature on a similar patient population and employing the same molecule [ ], although there are differences between this study and ours in terms of aim, methodology and study protocol. Contrast-to-noise ratio values in our cohort were normalise. We chose to normalize contrast-to-noise ratio values to account for possible cases where a lesion had lower signal intensity than surrounding tissue.
From a clinical standpoint, the qualitative analysis with blind comparison of the half-dose and full-dose images showed that all lesions and anatomical details detected on full-dose contrast-enhanced images have also been seen on half-dose contrast-enhanced images. The half-dose image group always provided relevant information for diagnosing and staging the lesion, for planning therapy and for follow-up examinations. Agreement between readers was excellent (k>0.8). Although kappa value interpretation was discussed in the literature [ ], criticism was mainly directed against interpretation of lower kappa values than the ones presented in our cohort.
We did not specifically ask the paediatric radiologists to search for the type of sequence. The qualitative results, though, were deemed excellent for both fat-saturated turbo spin-echo and Dixon turbo spin-echo sequences, suggesting no significant sequence-based differences were found.
The topic of gadolinium-based contrast agent dose reduction has already been explored in literature. The feasibility of half-dose reduction was well demonstrated in magnetic resonance angiography [ , ] by using gadolinium-based contrast agents with high relaxivity in adult populations. Further, Schueller-Weidekamm et al. [ ] showed that half-dose gadobenate dimeglumine at 3-T MRI might be sufficient for assessing synovitis or tenosynovitis in early rheumatoid arthritis [ ]. Meyer and Jaramillo [ ] reported that in their experience at 3 T the volume of gadolinium can be halved for routine paediatric musculoskeletal disorders while maintaining image quality by also using reduced doses of gadolinium-based contrast agents with lower relaxivity such as gadopentetate dimeglumine (0.1 mL/kg, i.e. 0.05 mmol/kg, to a maximum of 10 mL).
We did not find works exploring gadoterate meglumine dose reduction in the literature. Two recent works explored gadolinium-based contrast agent dose reduction by comparing results from a half dose of gadobenate dimeglumine and a full dose of gadoterate meglumine administration in central nervous system gliomas [ , ]. In both studies a half dose of gadobenate dimeglumine was not inferior to the full dose of gadoterate meglumine. Our study explored dose reduction of gadoterate meglumine in bone and soft-tissue diseases, so the findings of the studies might not be directly relatable. We can only speculate whether it could be feasible to further reduce gadolinium-based contrast agent dose with higher-relaxivity agents.
To date, no gadolinium-based contrast agents are approved for central nervous system or body indications (excluding the liver) at lower than standard dose, specifically 0.1 mmol/kg. Indeed, in the case of gadobenate dimeglumine, the application to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for approval of a half dose (0.05 mmol/kg) for the central nervous system was rejected in years past, despite the higher relaxivity, presumably because of a lack of comparable efficacy. Similarly, the attempt to receive approval by the FDA for a half-dose protocol of gadopentetate dimeglumine in young children, potentially reducing the contrast burden in this vulnerable population, failed. Approved dose translates to the recommended lowest effective dose, with health care providers advised not to decrease dose because of the potential lack of efficacy [ ].
In studies where contrast medium is necessary for diagnosis, optimised dose reduction could prove crucial in a population with long lifespans such as paediatric patients, in a clinical context where we are still investigating the effects of gadolinium deposition in the tissues.
To our knowledge, this is the first intra-individual study that describes consistent qualitative and quantitative results showing the feasibility of a 50% dose reduction of the macrocyclic ionic contrast agent gadoterate meglumine in a paediatric population with bone and soft-tissue disorders.
This study has some limitations. It was a mono-centric study employing a relatively low number of subjects. Another possible limitation of our study is the clinically heterogeneous population, with different diseases located in different anatomical regions. Other similar studies on dose reduction in bone and soft-tissue tumours had to acknowledge the same heterogeneity [ ]. However this limit was mitigated by the intra-individual analysis between the two contrast dose regimens in each patient, meaning that difference in conspicuity rather than overall conspicuity was evaluated [ ].
Another possible limitation of our study was the method used for qualitative evaluation, in which multiple radiologists from the same institution, potentially having access to patient clinical information and other exam sequences, directly compared half-dose and full-dose images. We tried to overcome this issue by anonymising the patients, by limiting radiologists’ access to other sequences and clinical information, and by having performed three blind evaluations in three different sessions. The potential benefits of directly comparing half-dose and full-dose images were delineated in the materials and methods section. Another possible concern in our study was that full-dose imaging was performed after the cumulative application of two half-doses, relating to the potential influence of the time interval of the first half-dose. The use of the automatic injector allowed us to start the second half-dose injection immediately after the end of the first post-contrast T1-weighted sequence. It might be possible that gadolinium serum concentration with our administration protocol could vary with respect to a single full administration protocol. While this might be true, we believe this variation was not significant and that the slight difference in contrast administration protocol did not significantly influence signal-to-noise ratio and contrast-to-noise ratio. Quantitative analysis indeed revealed no significant correlation between time and signal-to-noise ratio and time and contrast-to-noise ratio, supporting our hypothesis.
Conclusion
Using half of the standard dose (0.05 mmol/kg) of gadoterate meglumine at 3-T MRI in children with bone and soft-tissue disorders proved feasible and showed comparable qualitative and quantitative results to those of a full-dose protocol in our study using a 3-T scanner. Further multicentre randomised studies should be performed to validate our findings. These findings are important in the search for dose optimisation of gadolinium-based contrast agents in paediatric patients.