Introduction
Noninvasive imaging modalities for evaluating portomesenteric vasculature in pediatric patients are limited by small patient size, often resulting in poor spatial and contrast resolution. As a result, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) portography may provide incomplete information for liver transplant or portosystemic shunt planning. While transsplenic splenoportography was performed more commonly in prior eras, the technique has become less commonplace, possibly falling out of favor due to bleeding concerns and replacement by improved noninvasive cross-sectional imaging modalities [ , , ]. Caridi and colleagues [ ] reintroduced the technique with modifications to fine (21- to 25-gauge) needle access and carbon dioxide venography for unique circumstances where noninvasive imaging yielded inconclusive results. While five of the eight patients described in this report were children, subsequent larger series in pediatric population are lacking.
Beyond an access site for diagnostic splenoportography, the spleen provides direct portal venous access for endovascular intervention. Safety and efficacy in adults has been demonstrated for percutaneous transsplenic access for portal interventions. Liang and colleagues [ ] described 17 cases of percutaneous transsplenic access with no major complications and only 3 cases of minor bleeding. More recently, Zhu and colleagues [ ] reported a series of 46 adults undergoing percutaneous transsplenic access to treat gastroesophageal varices without an adequate transhepatic access route. Three cases (6.5%) of major bleeding and six cases of minor bleeding (13%) were reported in this series. Other small case series and case reports have also demonstrated the safety and efficacy of percutaneous transsplenic access in adults [ , , , ]. Until recently, descriptions of transsplenic portal interventions in pediatric patients have largely been limited to case reports and small series [ , , ]. Pimpalwar and colleagues [ ] have since reported their experience performing 44 procedures in 30 pediatric patients. Excellent technical success was reported, but a large number of cases (27%) were complicated by intra-abdominal bleeding [ ]. While most instances could be managed conservatively, the bleeding rate was higher than reported in similar-sized adult series.
The purpose of this study is to report our experience with transsplenic splenoportography and portal venous interventions in children at two large tertiary-care pediatric hospitals. We hypothesize that small-gauge transsplenic access for imaging is safe and effective for characterizing portal venous anatomy and portal hypertension, the transsplenic route affords stable portal venous access for a wide spectrum of complex portal interventions, bleeding risks are proportional to tract size, and bleeding can be mitigated by tract embolization.
Materials and methods
Institutional review board approval was obtained with waiver of consent granted for this multi-institutional study. A retrospective review was performed of the electronic medical records of all patients undergoing percutaneous transsplenic portal venous access and intervention at two large tertiary pediatric institutions, Seattle Children’s Hospital and Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, between January 2012 and April 2017 with assessed parameters including procedural indications, procedural and relevant prior imaging, technical details, laboratory values and clinical follow-up. Data were reviewed by three of the study investigators, E.J.M., C.M.H. and A.E.G., who have an average of 2.5 years of post-fellowship practice experience (range: 1.5 to 3.5 years).
All patients were between the ages of 0 and 18 years. All patients referred to interventional radiology for transsplenic splenoportography had undergone prior noninvasive imaging and/or transhepatic wedged portography and pressure measurements with inadequate characterization of portal venous anatomy or degree of portal hypertension (Table 1 ). All patients undergoing transsplenic portal intervention had undergone prior noninvasive imaging for procedural planning (Table 2 ). Table 1 Diagnostic splenoportography: patient characteristics and technical details Patient Age & gender Weight (kg) Indication Prior imaging Access Approach Platelets INR Ascites Contrast agent Tract embolization Complication Success 1 18 years, F 53 Portal hypertension - shunt planning Wedged portogram 3-Fr dilator Intercostal 61 1.2 No Iodinated None None Yes 2 11 months, F 7 Portal hypertension - shunt planning CT 3-Fr dilator Subcostal 70 1.2 No Iodinated Gelatin slurry None Yes 3 14 years, M 60 Congenital mesenteric venomegaly CT 4-Fr dilator Intercostal 193 1.2 No Iodinated Gelatin pledget None Yes 4 3 years, F 12 Portal hypertension - shunt planning CT 3-Fr dilator Subcostal 160 1.2 No Iodinated None None Yes 5 20 months, F 9 Pretransplant planning CT 21-g needle Intercostal 350 1 Yes CO 2 Gelatin slurry None Yes 6 19 months, M 10 Portal hypertension - shunt planning CT 21-g needle Intercostal 84 1.3 No Iodinated, CO 2 Gelatin slurry None Yes 7 17 months, F 9 Surgical splenorenal shunt occlusion US 3-Fr dilator Subcostal 106 1.5 Yes Iodinated Gelatin slurry None Yes 8 15 years, M 65 Pretransplant planning US 22-g needle Subcostal 32 1.6 No CO 2 None None Yes 9 15 years, F 43 Portal hypertension - shunt planning MR 22-g needle Subcostal 57 1.2 No CO 2 None None Yes 10 15 years, F 53 Portal hypertension - diagnosis US 22-g needle Subcostal 64 1.2 Yes CO 2 None None Yes 11 6 years, M 25 Transplant portal vein stenosis MR 22-g needle Subcostal 85 1.2 Yes CO 2 None None Yes 12 11 years, M 49 Transplant portal vein stenosis MR 22-g needle Subcostal 181 1 No CO 2 None None Yes 13 12 years, F 24 Portal hypertension - diagnosis MR 3-Fr dilator Subcostal 37 1.4 No Iodinated, CO 2 Gelatin slurry None Yes 14 16 years, F 72 Meso-Rex shunt stenosis MR 22-g needle Intercostal 126 1.1 No CO 2 None None Yes 15 15 years, M 54 Portal hypertension - shunt planning MR 22-g needle Subcostal 72 1.2 No CO 2 None None Yes 16 7 years, M 26 Meso-Rex shunt stenosis MR 22-g needle Subcostal 82 1.2 No CO 2 None None Yes 17 14 years, F 55 Transplant portal vein stenosis MR 22-g needle Subcostal 73 1.1 No CO 2 Gelatin slurry None Yes 18 3 years, M 15 Portal hypertension - diagnosis MR, US 4-Fr dilator Subcostal 202 0.9 No Iodinated Gelatin pledget None Yes 19 4 years, F 13 Transplant planning MR 6-Fr sheath Subcostal 45 1.6 No Iodinated Gelatin pledget Major Yes 20 18 years, M 67 Portal hypertension - diagnosis CT 22-g needle Subcostal 83 1.3 No Iodinated None None Yes 21 8 years, F 20 Portal hypertension - shunt planning MR, US 22-g needle Subcostal 120 1.1 No CO 2 None None Yes 22 4 years, F 14 Portal hypertension - shunt planning CT, US 3-Fr dilator Subcostal 222 1.1 No Iodinated None None Yes CO 2 carbon dioxide, CT computed tomography, F female, Fr French, g gauge, INR international normalized ratio, kg kilogram, M male, MR magnetic resonance, US ultrasound Table 2 Transsplenic portal venous interventions: patient characteristics and technical details Patient Gender Weight (kg) Procedure Access Approach Platelets INR Ascites Heparinization Tract embolization Complications Success 1 11 years, F 32 Meso-Rex shunt angioplasty 6-Fr sheath Subcostal 57 1.2 No 2,400 IU Gelatin pledgets None Yes 2 5 years, F 24 Snare targeted TIPS (cavernous transformation) 6-Fr sheath Intercostal 136 1.1 No None Gelatin pledgets, vascular plug None Yes 3 17 years, M 76 Pharmacomechanical thrombolysis 8-Fr sheath Intercostal 185 1.1 No 7,500 IU Gelatin pledgets Minor Yes 4 16 years, M 75 Transplant portal vein angioplasty 8-Fr sheath Intercostal 142 1.2 No 7,500 IU Gelatin pledgets None Yes F female, Fr French, INR international normalized ratio, IU international units, kg kilogram, M male, TIPS transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt
All procedures were performed under general anesthesia by one of six board-certified interventional radiologists. Subcostal or intercostal US visualization of the spleen and access planning was performed using either a Philips iU22 or EPIQ US machine with C5–1, C8–5, L9–3, L12–5 or L15–7 transducers (Philips Healthcare, Eindhoven, The Netherlands). Perisplenic ascites, when present, was drained. Access into an intrasplenic tributary of the splenic vein was performed under continuous US guidance with 21- or 22-gauge needles. If required, needles were exchanged for 3- or 4-Fr micropuncture introducers or side-arm sheaths. Diagnostic digital subtraction splenoportography was performed either with carbon dioxide or iodinated contrast (Optiray 320; Mallinckrodt, Hazelwood, MO). Direct portal pressures, when indicated, were acquired at the portal confluence using a standard saline-filled tube pressure transducer or a wireless digital pressure wire (PressureWire Aeris; St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN). Additional technical details of patients undergoing transsplenic intervention are summarized in Table 2 .
Access tract embolization was performed at the operator’s discretion using gelatin sponge slurry or pledgets (Gelfoam; Pfizer Inc., New York, NY) or vascular plug (Amplatzer Vascular Plug-IV; Abbott Vascular, St. Paul, MN). Gelatin slurry was injected via needle or 3-Fr dilator access. Gelatin pledgets were deployed for 4-Fr dilator or larger access via a stylet technique as previously described [ , ]. Manual compression was applied for at least 10 min after tract embolization to augment hemostasis. Immediate perisplenic hematoma was assessed with US. Medical record review up to 1 week post procedure was used to identify and categorize delayed complications.
The primary endpoint of technical success was defined as successful transsplenic intervention as planned or, for diagnostic procedures, successful transsplenic access and venography with subsequent satisfactory splenoportography to answer the clinical question. The secondary endpoint of complications was categorized using Society of Interventional Radiology (SIR) criteria [ ]. Demographics, technical details and complications were analyzed using descriptive statistics. Further statistical comparison between subgroups was not performed due to small sample size.
Results
Twenty-six patients were identified. No patients were excluded. Twenty-two (84.6%) procedures were performed for diagnostic purposes (Table 1 ) with a mean age of 9.3 years (range: 11 months-18 years) and a mean weight of 34.3 kg (range: 7–77 kg). The mean platelet count was 114,000 per microliter (range: 32,000–350,000) and mean international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.2 (range: 0.9–1.6). One patient (diagnostic patient 7) was receiving platelets, packed red blood cells and fresh frozen plasma before and during the procedure because of active variceal bleeding. No patients were medically anticoagulated requiring reversal. Indications included surgical and endovascular portosystemic shunt planning in 8 (36.4%), diagnosis of portal hypertension and characterization of portal venous anatomy in 4 (18.2%), suspected transplant portal vein stenosis in 3 (13.6%), pretransplant planning in 3 (13.6%), meso-Rex shunt stenosis in 2 (9.1%) and other in 2 (9.1%) (Figs. 1 , 2 and 3 ). Ascites was present in 4 patients (18.1%) and drained prior to splenic access. A subcostal approach was used in 17 patients (87.3%) and a low intercostal approach was used in 5 (22.7%). Access and imaging were performed via 21- or 22-gauge needles in 13 (59.1%), 3-Fr dilators in 3 (13.6%), 3-Fr sheaths in 3 (13.6%), 4-Fr sheaths in 2 (9.1%) and a 6-Fr sheath in 1 (4.5%). Splenoportography was performed using carbon dioxide injection in 11 patients (50%), iodinated contrast in 9 (40.9%) and a combination in 2 (9.1%). In both cases of combined contrast agents, initial iodinated needle contrast injection resulted in parenchymal staining and subsequent imaging was performed with carbon dioxide for lower viscosity and theoretical lower risk of parenchymal injury from subsequent forceful injection. Tract embolization with absorbable gelatin sponge was performed in 9 patients (40.9%). Technical success was achieved in all patients. One major complication, defined as SIR Class C, was encountered following 6-Fr transsplenic access for characterization of an Abernethy malformation (diagnostic patient 19). The patient experienced abdominal pain and a 3.9 g/dL drop (10.3 ➔ 6.4) in requiring transfusion with 15 mL/kg packed red blood cells (after which there was an increase in hemoglobin to 12.9 g/dL), 10 mL/kg platelets and 1 unit of fresh frozen plasma. Additionally, US performed immediately following the procedure and again on post-procedure day 1 demonstrated no evidence of perisplenic hematoma or intraperitoneal hemorrhage. In this case, 6-Fr access was required to introduce an occlusion balloon into the superior mesenteric vein to characterize complex portosystemic shunting secondary to Abernethy malformation (Fig. 3 ). Systemic side access had been considered but was not chosen because of uncertainty regarding the complexity of outflow and concern that venographic injections against the direction of flow would not provide sufficient detail for operative planning. There were no other complications in the diagnostic group. Fig. 1 A spontaneous splenogastrorenal shunt and transjugular portosystemic shunt (TIPS) in a 4-year-old girl presenting with cavernous transformation of the portal vein and gastroesophageal variceal bleeding. Splenoportogram following placement of a 4-Fr micropuncture introducer ( a ) demonstrates reversed flow within the splenic vein ( black arrow ) and splenic drainage via a large spontaneous splenogastrorenal shunt ( white arrow ) flowing into the renal vein and inferior vena cava ( arrowhead ). Surgical splenorenal shunt was believed to be unlikely to provide adequate portal venous decompression. A portal venogram following intravascular US-guided transhepatic portal access ( b ) demonstrates cavernous transformation of the portal vein ( open arrow ) and reversed flow within the splenic vein ( black arrow ) with redemonstration of the splenogastrorenal shunt ( white arrow ) and renal vein ( white arrowhead ) as well as large gastroesophageal varices ( open arrowhead ). A venogram following TIPS placement ( c ) with a Viatorr stent-graft (WL Gore and Associates, Flagstaff, AZ, USA) confirms brisk hepatopetal flow Fig. 2 An occluded surgical splenorenal shunt in a 17-month-old girl with cavernous transformation of the portal vein status postsurgical splenorenal shunt creation and devascularization of the lesser curvature of the stomach. Doppler US acquired on post-procedure day 2 for recurrent variceal bleeding ( a ) is confounded by collateral veins and indeterminate with respect to surgical shunt patency. Early ( b ) and late ( c ) splenoportogram images demonstrate multiple residual splenogastric collateral ( arrows in b ) veins supplying massive ascending esophageal varices ( arrows in c ) and no flow in the expected region of the surgical splenorenal shunt ( arrowheads ). Due to ongoing hemodynamic instability, the patient underwent an emergency splenectomy Fig. 3 Abernethy malformation in a 4-year-old girl with Turner syndrome, hepatic fibrosis and splenomegaly. Axial ( a ) and coronal T1-weighted, fat-saturated ( b ) venous phase images from a contrast-enhanced MR of the abdomen had suggested Abernethy malformation but was inadequate for portal venous mapping prior to liver transplant due to nonvisualization of the superior mesenteric vein. Splenoportogram images following placement of a 4-Fr micropuncture introducer ( c , d ) demonstrate splenic venous drainage into large perigastric varices subsequently draining into the hemiazygos vein ( arrow ). To enable a more forceful contrast injection, the micropuncture introducer was exchanged for a 6-F sheath. Subsequent splenoportogram image ( e ) demonstrates reflux into a patent superior mesenteric vein ( arrow ) and no identifiable portal vein
Four (18.2%) transsplenic portal venous access procedures were performed for planned intervention (Table 2 ): meso-Rex shunt angioplasty, snare-targeted transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) through cavernous transformation, pharmacomechanical thrombolysis and aspiration thrombectomy for acute or chronic portomesenteric thrombosis, and transplant portal vein angioplasty (Figs. 4 , 5 and 6 ). The mean patient age was 12.3 years (range: 5–17 years) and the mean weight was 51.8 kg (range: 24–76 kg). The mean platelet count was 130,000 per microliter (range: 57,000–185,000) and the mean INR was 1.15 (range: 1.1–1.2). No patients undergoing transsplenic portal intervention had ascites. No patients were medically anticoagulated requiring reversal. A subcostal approach was used in 1 case (25%) and a low intercostal approach was used in 3 (75%). Two cases (50%) used 6-Fr sheaths and 2 (50%) used 8-Fr sheaths. Three patients (75%) were heparinized during the procedure (range: 75–100 IU/kg). The patient undergoing thrombolysis/thrombectomy received a bolus dose of 8 mg of tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) in the portomesenteric system in addition to systemic heparinization. After infusion of t-PA with the Angiojet device in power pulse mode, suction thrombectomy was performed with the 8-Fr aspiration catheter (Penumbra Indigo System; Penumbra Inc., Alameda, CA). Tract embolization was formed with gelatin pledgets alone in 3 patients (75%) and a combination of gelatin pledgets and a 4-mm vascular plug (Amplatzer Vascular Plug-IV; Abbott Vascular, St. Paul, MD) in one. All procedures were technically successful. One minor complication, defined by SIR Class B, occurred following 8-Fr transsplenic access for catheter directed thrombolysis (interventional patient 3). The tract had been embolized with gelatin pledgets. The patient experienced worsening abdominal pain after the procedure. Free fluid was noted on abdominal US concerning for intraperitoneal hemorrhage, but the patient remained hemodynamically stable and did not require transfusion (pre-procedure hemoglobin= 3.4 g/dL; 3 days post-procedure=9.4 g/dL; 5 days post-procedure=11.3 g/dL). There were no other complications in the interventional group. Fig. 4 A meso-Rex shunt angioplasty in an 11-year-old girl presenting with increased splenomegaly, splenic sequestration and US evidence of recurrent stenosis within a previously stented meso-Rex surgical shunt. Splenoportogram following placement of a 4-Fr micropuncture introducer ( a ) demonstrates moderate stenosis at the hepatic end of the stented shunt ( arrow ). After exchange for a 6-Fr sheath, angioplasty was performed ( b ) with an 8-mm balloon catheter (Mustang; Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA). Completion splenoportography ( c ) confirms resolution of the previous stenosis ( arrow ) Fig. 5 A percutaneous transsplenic snare targeting for complex transhepatic portal access and transjugular portosystemic shunt (TIPS) creation in a 5-year-old girl with cavernous transformation of the portal vein and variceal bleeding. Early ( a ) and late ( b ) splenoportogram images following transsplenic access and placement of a 6-Fr sheath demonstrate cavernous transformation of the portal vein ( arrow ) and large gastroesophageal varices ( arrowhead ). Coils are present from prior arterioportal malformation embolization. c Fluoroscopic image demonstrates coaxial transsplenic introduction of a 4-Fr angled catheter and catheterization of an intrahepatic portal vein branch ( arrowhead ) beyond the main portal vein obstruction. d The catheter was then exchanged for a 10-mm gooseneck snare (Microvena, White Bear Lake, MN) through which a transjugular intrahepatic Colapinto needle (Haskal Transjugular Intrahepatic Portal Access Set; Cook, Bloomington, IN) was advanced ( arrow ). e After a 0.035-in. wire was passed from the transjugular access, snared and brought through the transsplenic access, the transjugular sheath was advanced to the main portal vein remnant and venography confirmed position and the previous findings. f Venogram after TIPS creation with a Viatorr stent-graft (WL Gore and Associates, Flagstaff, AZ) confirms brisk hepatopetal flow. An intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) probe is present within the inferior vena cava, placed for initial search for any dominant channel of cavernous transformation which could be targeted for transhepatic portal access (none was present) and remained in the event that transsplenic snare targeting was not successful, necessitating IVUS-guided direct intrahepatic portosystemic shunt creation Fig. 6 A catheter-directed portomesenteric thrombolysis in a 17-year-old boy with antiphospholipid syndrome and known cavernous transformation of the portal vein presenting with severe abdominal pain after cholecystectomy (anticoagulation therapy was discontinued for the surgery). MR image ( a ) demonstrates thrombosis of the portal vein, superior mesenteric vein and distal splenic vein. Initial splenoportogram following the placement of an 8-Fr sheath confirms portomesenteric thrombosis. Pharmacologic and rheolytic thrombolysis was performed with AngioJet (Boston Scientific Corporation, Marlborough, MA) and 8 mg of tissue plasminogen activator, followed by aspiration thrombectomy. Completion splenoportogram ( b ) demonstrates resolution of acute thrombosis with persistent underlying cavernous transformation
Discussion
Our experience adds to the small body of literature surrounding pediatric transsplenic imaging and interventions. The technique can be especially useful in small patients, in whom spatial resolution of CT and MR portography is limited. In these patients, small size and main portal venous flow reversal can further complicate contrast bolus timing. Indirect splenoportography from splenic and superior mesenteric artery injections results in bolus dilution and may be limited by splenic congestions and/or main portal vein flow reversal (Fig. 7 ). Accurately assessing main portal vein and major portal venous tributary patency, caliber, pressures and flow direction is essential for liver transplant planning. In our series, transsplenic portography uniformly yielded this critical information when the results of noninvasive methods were unclear. Fig. 7 Limited indirect splenoportography in an 8-month-old girl with biliary atresia presenting for pre-liver transplant imaging. Prior CT was incomplete with respect to portal venous anatomy characterization. Splenic arterial contrast injection ( a ) followed by delayed imaging to 30 s ( b ) demonstrates splenic retention of contrast with no meaningful splenic venogram. Superior mesenteric arterial contrast injection ( c ) followed by indirect portal venogram ( d ) demonstrates the superior mesenteric vein with outflow into the splenic vein with reversed flow ( arrowheads ). The main portal vein is not visualized at its confluence ( arrow ) and is presumably reversed
Partial or complete extrahepatic portal vein occlusion resulting in portal hypertension may be alleviated by portal venous recanalization, meso-Rex shunt bypass or portosystemic shunt creation (surgical or endovascular). Fine detail of small cavernous transformation veins may not be resolved by noninvasive imaging methods, making the selection of treatment options unclear. Furthermore, because the extrahepatic portal obstruction results in partial or complete isolation of intrahepatic portal vein branches from the portal confluence, wedged hepatic portal venous gradient measurements are unreliable, usually underestimating the degree of portal hypertension. In the authors’ experience, portal venous occlusion also results in extensive intrahepatic veno-venous collateralization, further falsely depressing hepatic portal venous gradient measurements and precluding high-quality wedged portography. Transsplenic portography with or without direct pressure measurements is, therefore, particularly useful in the characterization and treatment planning for extrahepatic portal vein occlusion.
Transsplenic portal access can also be used for intervention in both adult and pediatric patients [ , , , , , , , , , , ]. While the subgroup of patients in this series receiving intervention is small, all procedures were performed successfully. In negotiating extrahepatic portal venous occlusion, transsplenic access provides inline access to the main portal vein. Venography from the portal confluence makes use of hepatopetal flow for identification and subsequent catheterization of the dominant pathways of cavernous transformation, useful for both portal vein recanalization and TIPS creation. Although transhepatic portal vein access for transplant portal vein intervention is usually preferred, in select pediatric cases transsplenic access may be more favorable. Intra-abdominal positioning of left lateral segment split allografts frequently results in colon and bowel interposed between the liver and lateral abdominal wall, precluding a right lateral approach. While epigastric access to the left portal vein branches is feasible, this often results in the need for a “U-turn” into the portal confluence, which may create unfavorable mechanics, awkward operator ergonomics and increased radiation exposure to the operator’s hands. Instead, the transsplenic approach affords inline main portal vein catheterization and subsequent intervention.
Despite its advantages for imaging and intervention, transsplenic access raises concerns about bleeding. Uller and colleagues [ ] reported their experience embolizing large percutaneous transhepatic and transsplenic puncture tracts in pediatric patients using concentrated gelatin slurry. The series included three technically successful applications for transsplenic access with sheath sizes of 4, 6, and 6 French, respectively. While any foreign material theoretically increases the risk of infection and subsequent abscess, this has not been frequently reported. Anaphylactic reactions to gelatin can also occur, but this is rare [ ]. Dollinger and colleagues [ ] reported a small series of tract embolization using vascular plugs following transhepatic and transsplenic interventions. One case in this series was of a 3-year-old accessed with an 8 Fr vascular sheath and successfully embolized with an Amplatzer Vascular Plug-II (Abbott Vascular, St. Paul, MN) [ ]. No bleeding complications were observed in the series, but one abscess formation was reported. The authors suggested a role for vascular plug embolization when parenchymal access tracts are short, which is balanced against the risk of infection, foreign body reaction and potential plug dislodgement. In addition to gelatin, plugs and coils, liquid embolic agents can also be used for tract embolization. Chu and colleagues [ ] performed nine transsplenic portal vein interventions using 4- to 9-Fr sheaths and embolized tracts with coils and n-butyl cyanoacrylate, with no bleeding complications.
Two instances of post-procedural bleeding were observed in this series: 1 in a patient with platelets of 45,000/mL and an INR of 1.6 (diagnostic patient 19) following 6-Fr transsplenic access and 1 in a patient with platelets of 185,000/mL and an INR of 1.1 (interventional patient 3) following 8-Fr transsplenic access and catheter-directed thrombolysis. The single case of bleeding requiring transfusion in this series (diagnostic patient 19) was confounded by patient agitation, multifactorial tachycardia and limited communicative capacity. The low hemoglobin observed post-procedure was not repeated prior to transfusion and the rise in hemoglobin post transfusion was greater than expected, introducing the possibility of a spurious lab result. A post-procedure US showed no perisplenic or intraperitoneal fluid. However, as the patient received transfusion therapy, we have recorded this as a bleeding complication requiring additional therapy. A lower intraperitoneal bleeding rate observed in this study compared to the larger study by Pimpalwar and colleagues [ ] (7.7 versus 27%, respectively). Similar to their experience, however, supportive measures are frequently sufficient to manage bleeding when encountered. Patient coagulation parameters were similar between the two studies, as was the frequency tract embolization. Pimpalwar and colleagues [ ] observed a statistically significant association between intraprocedural anticoagulation and subsequent bleeding ( P =0.005). Three out of 4 patients (75%) undergoing intervention in our series received intraprocedural anticoagulation with 1 patient subsequently experiencing minor bleeding. While the presence of ascites, tract embolization technique, and maximum vascular sheath size did not reach statistical significance in Pimpalwar and colleagues’ experience, maximum vascular sheath size approached a statistically significant correlation with subsequent bleeding ( P =0.05). Additionally, they reference using microfibrillar collagen (Avitene microfibrillar collagen hemostat; C R Bard Inc., Warwick, RI) and subsequently abandoning the agent due to high rate of catheter occlusion and failed deployment; 4 of 12 bleeding complications were observed with this listed as the tract embolic agent. While the overall low bleeding complication in our series may, therefore, be explained, in part, by a high proportion of smaller gauge access for diagnostic studies, we also attribute more effective tract embolization techniques. On the basis of these results and the available literature, we recommend thresholds of platelets > or = 50,000 mL and INR < or = 1.5, consideration of gelatin slurry embolization for access 3-Fr or smaller and gelatin pledget embolization for access 4-Fr or larger. Operators may elect to avoid tract embolization altogether for transsplenic needle splenoportography in patients with normal coagulation parameters. Vascular plugs may be useful in achieving and maintaining post-procedure hemostasis when access 6-Fr or larger, particularly for anticoagulated or coagulopathic patients.
This study has several limitations, largely stemming from retrospective, uncontrolled study design. Variable access and tract embolization techniques limit generalizable conclusions regarding best practice. While we assume major complications requiring treatment did not go unreported, lack of a standardized laboratory and imaging follow-up in all patients creates the potential for underreporting of clinically silent access-related complications. Suggested coagulation parameters and embolization techniques are extrapolated from our and others’ experience, but scientific validation is limited by the nature and size of the available data.
Conclusion
Diagnostic transsplenic splenoportography in children is safe and effective when noninvasive imaging methods have failed to provide necessary surgical planning information. The transsplenic route also has advantages for complex portal interventions. Bleeding risks are proportional to tract access size and may be mitigated by tract embolization.