Introduction
Temporomandibular joints (TMJs) are one of the most common synovial joints affected in children with inflammatory disorders, particularly in those with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) [ , ]. However, symptoms of TMJ involvement have seldom been reported by patients and frequently do not correspond with the severity of disease [ , ], leading to unfavorable long-term outcomes from associated joint damage [ , ]. Therefore, imaging plays a major role in detecting TMJ involvement and is considered an essential diagnostic and follow-up assessment tool in JIA patients [ ].
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been widely used to detect TMJ synovitis [ , ] due to its enhanced soft-tissue contrast for examining intra-articular components (i.e. synovial thickness, joint enhancement, joint fluid and articular disc) and for assessing bone marrow changes in both JIA and non-JIA patients [ , , ]. However, for assessing osseous components of TMJs (i.e. mandibular condylar morphology, including condylar shape, condylar flattening and surface erosions), computed tomography (CT) has been accepted as a more accurate imaging modality [ ] compared to MRI [ ]. However, taking into consideration the long-term nature of required follow-ups in JIA patients and the radiation exposure associated with CT examinations, MRI has been recommended as the preferred imaging modality for evaluating TMJs in JIA patients.
To our knowledge, there is a paucity of studies presenting a large series of normative reference data for assessing osseous components of TMJs using MRI [ ]. Recognizing the normal bone maturation of TMJs using MRI is essential to assess early arthropathic changes in children and adolescents. This study aimed to determine the normative morphological change of growing TMJs according to age and gender, both qualitatively and quantitatively, using MRI based on a dedicated TMJ protocol concerning bone marrow conversion and structural changes over time.
Materials and methods
Selection of images
This cross-sectional study was approved by the Research Ethics Board of the Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada. Consecutive contrast-enhanced MRI examinations of TMJs performed in all pediatric patients including JIA and non-JIA patients, younger than age 18, at our institution between January 1, 2010, and August 31, 2016, were retrospectively screened to identify MRI exams done according to standard TMJ dedicated protocol (Supplementary Table 1 ), which showed at least one normal TMJ. The unaffected sides of these patients’ joints, according to the reports, were used as a screening criterion for normal reference in our study. The joints with any previous abnormality, including fractures, inflammation or history of intra-articular injection, were excluded at this stage of the screening. To confirm the normalcy of the screened TMJs according to study criteria, all the exam images from the initial screening were reviewed one-by-one by a radiologist with 3 years of experience after resident training (T.J.). The selection criteria for normal TMJ appearance on MRI were based on recent studies [ , , ], as follows: the absence of flattening and surface irregularities in the osseous components, and the absence of evidence of joint inflammation, such as synovial thickening or enhancement, or significant joint fluid. Any study with a discrepancy between the initial report and the current review were reevaluated by a senior pediatric musculoskeletal radiologist with more than 12 years of experience after fellowship training (A.S.D.) to reach a consensus for inclusion as a normal-appearing joint. To avoid overrepresentation of data and the potential effects of additional interval treatments, only the earliest MRI exam from each patient done within the screened interval was included into the study. To further avoid overrepresentation, in patients with bilaterally normal-appearing TMJs, one TMJ was selected by simple randomization to be part of this study.
The indication of the MRI of the TMJ included JIA patients with symptom of TMJ or abnormal physical examination and non-JIA patients who presented with TMJ-related symptoms, including healthy children who presented with jaw locking, pain, crepitation and asymmetry, history of trauma involving TMJs from nonspecific causes and the children who had other comorbidities with TMJ-related symptoms (Table 1 ). Table 1 Demographic data of the study population Parameters JIA Non-JIA With underlying diseases* No known underlying diseases Number of patients, n (%) 104 (66.3%) 33 (21.0%) 20 (12.7%) Gender: female, n (%) 81 (77.9%) 25 (75.8%) 14 (70%) Age (year): mean (SD) 11.28 (4.0) 14.1 (2.1) 12.5 (3.3) Number of cases with bilateral normal-appearing TMJs, n (%) 43 (41.3%) 15 (45.5%) 10 (50%) Side: right, n (%) 50 (48.1%) 22 (66.7%) 7 (35%) Indication for examination, n (%) - Screening 8 (7.7%) 0 2 (10%) - Abnormal physical examination 46 (44.2%) 6 (18.2%) 8 (40%) - TMJ symptoms 50 (48.1%) 22 (66.7%) 10 (50%) - Trauma 0 4 (12.1%) 0 - Other 0 1 (3.0%) 0 JIA juvenile idiopathic arthritis, SD standard deviation, TMJ temporomandibular joint *Underlying diseases of the patients: 3 Crohn disease, 2 chronic temporomandibular joint syndrome, 2 nonspecific arthritis, 2 chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis, 1 ankylosing spondylitis, 1 tenosynovitis, 1 relapsing polychondritis, 1 chondrolysis of the hip, 1 myositis, 1 systemic lupus erythematosus, 1 pigmented villonodular synovitis, 1 osteoporosis, 1 muscular dystrophy, 1 neurofibromatosis and 1 Frey syndrome
Imaging protocol
The complete dedicated MRI protocol for imaging TMJs at our institution is provided in Supplementary Table 1 , and includes unenhanced non-fat-saturated (non-FS) bilateral true coronal (to the head) T1-weighted fast spin echo, sagittal-oblique proton density (PD), FS sagittal-oblique T2-weighted, and contrast-enhanced FS bilateral true coronal, bilateral axial and sagittal-oblique T1-weighted sequences using gadolinium-based contrast (Gadovist; Schering Pharma, Berlin, Germany) at 0.1 ml/kg of body weight. The examinations were performed at 1.5 T and 3.0 T on MR scanners using dual surface or 32-channel head coils. Study MRI examinations of TMJs were retrieved and analyzed in standard Pictures Archives Communicating Systems.
Assessment and measurement of MR images
Selected MRI examinations were retrospectively reviewed by two independent reviewers, a radiologist (T.J.) and a 3rd year dental student (A.A.). These two primary readers were trained in the study’s measurement specifications with a senior radiologist (A.S.D.) using cases not in the study, until sufficient intra- and inter-reader correlation could be achieved. For quantitative parameters, discrepancies comprising more than 30% difference in scores between the two reviewers were resolved by consulting a senior radiologist (A.S.D.) to perform an independent measurement. The most similar measurement pair was selected and averaged to use for analyses. For qualitative parameters, discrepancies were resolved by a consensus of all reviewers. Intra class correlation coefficient (ICC) between two readers were calculated to assess the achieved inter-reader reliability. All qualitative and quantitative assessments were performed with the reviewers blinded to patient demographic information, including age, gender, and the presence and characteristics of JIA.
Qualitatively measured parameters
Mandibular condylar shape
The mandibular condylar shape was evaluated in the sagittal-oblique plane either on PD or contrast-enhanced FS T1-weighted sequence depending on which sequence gave the nearest mid-mediolateral position of the condyle, in cross reference with T1-weighted coronal images [ ]. Consistent to growth-dependent morphological changes observed in previous studies [ , , ], the condylar shapes were categorized into (a) round head without an anterior tilt, (c) rectangular head with an anterior tilt and (b) intermediate appearance between categories (a) and (c) (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Configuration of mandibular condyle. Unenhanced sagittal-oblique proton density images show three different types of mandibular condyle configuration in three distinct subjects: ( a ) rounded head without an anterior tilt in a 3-year-old girl, ( b ) intermediate configuration in a 10-year-old girl and ( c ) rectangular head with an anterior tilt in a 16-year-old girl
Bone marrow type
The bone marrow signal intensity was qualitatively assessed in the head of the mandibular condyle. Subchondral bone marrow changes were categorized into (a) hematopoietic (red), (b) mixed type and (c) fatty marrow. Hematopoietic marrow was defined as low signal intensity (isointense to muscle) in unenhanced non-FS coronal T1-weighted sequences and as intermediate signal intensity (hyperintense to muscle) in FS sagittal-oblique T2-weighted sequence, while the fatty marrow was defined as isointense to subcutaneous fatty tissue in all imaging sequences [ ] (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Bone marrow type. Unenhanced true coronal T1-weighted images demonstrate three types of bone marrow signal intensity in three distinct subjects: ( a ) hematopoietic (a 3-year-old girl), ( b ) mixed (a 10-year-old boy) and ( c ) fatty marrow (a 16-year-old girl)
Quantitatively measured parameters
Mandibular condylar size
Two-dimensional measurements were performed using contrast-enhanced FS T1-weighted sequences in axial, sagittal-oblique and coronal planes [ ] to determine the mandibular condylar size. For condylar width or mediolateral measurements, coronal and axial sequences were used, by selecting the slice on which the condylar head appeared with the largest size and by measuring the distance between the medial-most to the lateral-most outer cortex of the condyle. For condylar depth or AP measurements, axial and sagittal-oblique sequences were measured from the anterior-most to the posterior-most aspect of the condyle. The condylar height or craniocaudal size of the condyle was determined by measuring the perpendicular distance between the most superior aspect of the condyle to the widest mediolateral axis in the coronal plane and the widest AP axis in the sagittal-oblique plane (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Two-dimensional measurement of the mandubular condyle of a 12-year-old girl. Contrast-enhanced fat-saturated bilateral axial ( a ), bilateral true coronal ( b ) and sagittal-oblique ( c ) T1-weighted images show the 2-D measurements used in this study: ( a ) axial condylar width ( solid line ) and axial condylar depth ( dashed line ), ( b ) coronal condylar width ( solid line ) and coronal condylar height ( dotted line ) and ( c ) sagittal condylar depth ( dashed line ) and sagittal condylar height ( dotted line )
Mandibular condylar shape: Anteversion angle and head neck angle
The reviewers performed anteversion angle [ ] and head-neck angle [ ] measurements. The anteversion angle is defined as the angle in the axial plane between the mediolateral axis of the condylar head and the line connecting the posterior-most aspect of the left and right condylar heads [ ], on contrast-enhanced FS T1-weighted axial image where the condylar head appeared the largest (Fig. 4 ). The head-neck angle is the angle between the condylar head and the longitudinal axis of the ramus of the mandible [ ], measured on sagittal-oblique PD sequence [ ] by cross-linking with the corresponding coronal T1-weighted image to ensure that the angle was evaluated midway mediolaterally (Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 Anteversion angle and head-neck angle measurements from a 16-year-old girl. a Contrast-enhanced fat-saturated T1-weighted image demonstrates the anteversion angle measurement, an acute angle between a line connecting the posterior aspect of bilateral condyles and another line passing through the condylar axis. b Unenhanced sagittal-oblique proton density image shows the head-neck angle, an acute angle between the axis of the condylar head and the axis of the condylar neck, an imaginary line lying along the center of the mandibular condyle
Mandibular condylar volume
Two methods were utilized to evaluate mandibular condylar volume. The first method (ellipsoid volume) provided an approximate value of the condylar volume using the ellipsoid eq. (0.52 x height x width x depth). The second method (condylar volume) more correctly estimated the condylar volume by multiplying the condylar area of interest as measured using a Picture Archiving and Communication Systems tracing tool, by the slice spacing between consecutive sections of the condyle, and summing up these values to estimate the total condylar volume. To delineate the area of the mandibular condyle on each slice, the axial views of contrast-enhanced FS T1-weighted images, cross-referenced with coronal and sagittal-oblique views, were magnified and outlined using the freehand drawing tool in the viewer.
For both methods of volume estimation, the upper limit of the condyle outline was defined as the most superior visualized bony structure. The inferior point of measurements was at the sigmoid notch between the mandibular condyle and ramus, confirmed by the cross-referenced coronal and sagittal-oblique views or looking at the condyle in the axial plane, at the section where the condylar shape changes from an ellipse into a circle shape and when the coronoid process is no longer seen [ , , , ]. Condylar volume measurements were performed by a single investigator (T.J.).
Results
A total of 1,036 dedicated TMJ MRI scans were screened for identification of normal-appearing TMJ. There were 224 normal-appearing TMJs from 157 patients (76% female; ages 2–18 years). Of these patients, 104 (66.2%) were diagnosed with JIA and 53 (33.8%) were categorized as non-JIA patients. The demographic data, distribution of patient’s age and range as well as indication for the examination are described in Tables 1 and 2 and Supplementary Fig. 1 . The average measurements from two readers are shown in Supplementary Table 2 . Table 2 Demographic data and clinical characteristics of juvenile idiopathic arthritis patients with at least one normal-appearing and two normal-appearing temporomandibular joints Parameters One normal-appearing joint Two normal-appearing joints Number of patients, n (%) 61 (58.7%) 43 (41.3%) Age at diagnosis (years): mean (SD) 6.4 (4.2) 7.64 (4.8) Disease duration (years): mean (SD) 4.7 (4.1) 3.82 (3.8) New diagnosis (<3 months), n (%) 11 (18.0%) 11 (25.6%) Age at scan (years): mean (SD) 11.20 (4.1) 11.46 (3.8) Females, n (%) 50 (82.0%) 31 (72.1%) JIA subtypes, n (%) - Oligoarticular 32 (52.5%) 20 (46.5%) - Polyarticular 21 (34.5%) 11 (25.6%) - Psoriatic 1 (1.6%) 3 (7.0%) - Enthesitis-related arthritis JIA 5 (8.2%) 7 (16.3%) - Systemic-onset 0 1 (2.3%) - Undifferentiated 1 (1.6%) 0 - N/R 1 (1.6%) 1 (2.3%) Positive ANA, n (%) 41 (67.2%) 19 (44.2%) Medication treatment, n (%) 41 (67.2%) 25 (58.1%) - NSAIDs 20 10 - DMARDs 10 8 - Corticosteroid 2 1 - TNF inhibitors 1 0 - Combination of drugs with corticosteroid 2 1 - Combination of drugs without corticosteroid 6 5 ANA anti-nuclear antibody, DMARDs disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs, JIA juvenile idiopathic arthritis, N/R not reported, NSAIDs nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, SD standard deviation, TMJ temporomandibular joint, TNF tumor necrosis factor
In bivariate analysis, the head-neck angle and the condylar volume showed the highest positive correlation with patients’ age (β = 0.60, P <0.001 for both parameters). This implies that the older the patients, the higher the degree of the head-neck angle and the larger the size of mandibular condyle. The nonstandardized coefficient indicated that the degree of the head-neck angle increased 1.6 degree per year (Table 3 ). Table 3 Results of the bivariable regression analysis between age and quantitatively measured characteristics of the joint ( n =157) Parameters Standardized coefficients Unstandardized coefficients P -values β B 95% CI Head-neck angle 0.60 1.65 1.30–1.99 <0.001 Anteversion angle −0.20 −0.36 −0.63 – −0.09 0.01 Coronal condylar width 0.50 0.32 0.23–0.41 <0.001 Coronal condylar height 0.48 0.14 0.10–0.18 <0.001 Axial condylar width 0.51 0.30 0.22–0.38 <0.001 Axial condylar depth 0.01 0.002 −0.045 – 0.049 0.94 Sagittal condylar depth 0.13 0.04 −0.01 – 0.09 0.09 Sagittal condylar height 0.34 0.06 0.03–0.08 <0.001 Ellipsoid volume 0.44 12.6 8.6–16.6 <0.001 Condylar volume 0.60 45.5 35.8–55.1 <0.001 CI confidence interval, SNR signal-to-noise ratio, TMJ temporomandibular joint This table represents the pooled sample from the 104 normal joints from juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) patients, and 53 joints from non-JIA patients. Standardized beta is equivalent to the correlation coefficient between the measured parameter and age, whereas the unstandardized beta is the rate of change in the measured parameter per each year of age (degrees per year, mm per year, etc.). Multiple regressions correcting for gender, presence of JIA and presence of unilateral disease showed similar significance pattern in the results (Supplementary Table 4 )
There was also a significant negative correlation between the anteversion angle and the patient’s age (β =−0.20, P =0.01). Condylar width and height as well as volume of mandibular condyle also demonstrated positive correlations with increasing age (Table 3 ). Between males and females, quantitative measurements for condylar depth and width showed significant differences in both planes (Table 4 ), with condyles from males being 1.1 mm wider and 0.5 mm larger in the AP axis. Table 4 Difference in the measured parameters between males and females Parameters: mean (SD) Females ( n =120) Males ( n =37) P -values Demographics: Diagnosis: JIA, n (%) 81 (67.5%) 23 (62.2%) 0.56 Age (years) 12.0 (3.9) 12.0 (3.6) 0.99 Measured parameters Bone marrow type (1, 2, 3) 7, 89, 24 5, 28, 4 0.18 Condyle type (1; 2; 3) 4, 48, 68 0, 19, 18 0.40 Head-neck angle (degree) 37.5 (10.5) 39.5 (10.6) 0.33 Anteversion angle (degree) 22.1 (6.8) 23.5 (6.8) 0.30 Coronal condylar width (mm) 15.7 (2.4) 16.8 (2.5) 0.02 Coronal condylar height (mm) 4.9 (1.2) 5.2 (0.99) 0.09 Axial condylar width (mm) 15.8 (2.17) 16.9 (2.40) 0.01 Axial condylar depth (mm) 6.7 (1.1) 7.3 (1.2) 0.01 Sagittal condylar depth (mm) 7.8 (1.1) 8.5 (1.2) 0.003 Sagittal condylar height (mm) 3.4 (0.6) 3.6 (0.7) 0.051 Ellipsoid volume (mm 3 ) 272.1 (100.8) 336.9 (120.8) 0.001 Condylar volume (mm 3 ) 972.0 (271.11) 1110.5 (333.7) 0.01 JIA juvenile idiopathic arthritis, SD standard deviation, SNR signal-to-noise ratio Student’s t -test was done for continuous data, and Fisher exact test was done for ordinal and categorical data. Multiple regression correcting for presence of JIA, Age and presence of unilateral disease showed similar significance pattern in the results (Supplementary Table 4 )
All measured parameters were also analyzed using multiple regression analyses to correct for possible factors that may confound the measured parameters of change in normal-appearing TMJs, including the patient’s age, gender, the presence of unilateral TMJ disease and the diagnosis of JIA (Supplementary Table 3 ). The results of the multiple regression analyses were similar to the bivariable analyses, in which the head-neck angle and condylar volume were the two independent factors that mostly correlated with patient age (unstandardized coefficient 1.623 [95%CI 1.26–1.66] and 44.5 [95%CI 34.7–54.4]) (Table 5 ). It is noteworthy that the diagnosis of JIA or the presence of any TMJ disease in the contralateral joint showed no significant correlation with any of the measured parameters in the normal TMJ. Table 5 Multiple regression analysis of potential factors influencing the effect of head-neck angle measurements in the mandibular condyles, including age, presence of juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), gender and evidence of unilateral disease Covariates Standardized coefficients Nonstandardized coefficients P -values β B 95% CI Age 0.59 1.623 1.26–1.99 <0.001 Presence vs absence of JIA 0.03 −0.66 −3.61 – 2.30 0.66 Gender* 0.08 −1.91 −5.10 – 1.27 0.24 Presence of unilateral disease 0.003 0.04 −2.71 – 2.78 0.98 CI confidence interval, JIA juvenile idiopathic arthritis, TMJ temporomandibular joint *Negative values indicate an increase in the measured parameter associated with males The age of patients was the only significant factor that affects the head-neck angle when controlling for the other variables (β =0.59, P -value<0.001). Model fit (R) was 0.614, adjusted R 2 0.35. Results of other measured parameters appear in Supplementary Table 4
Concerning qualitative assessment of the morphological appearance of the mandibular condyle, age-dependent variability was observed when investigating condylar shape ( P <0.001) with the rounded condylar head configuration being most commonly seen in younger subjects, and the rectangular condylar head shape with anterior tilt seen most frequently in older subjects. Qualitative bone marrow assessment also showed a predictable pattern with red marrow predominance more commonly observed in younger subjects and fatty marrow more predominant in older subjects (Fig. 5 ). Fig. 5 Box plots demonstrate the differences in the distribution of patients’ ages across different groups of ( a ) mandibular condylar shapes and ( b ) bone marrow types. The results are provided as means and standard deviations (in brackets)
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to report normative data and create a reference MRI database with regard to the osseous component of the TMJs in healthy children and adolescents. Several studies using CT have reported the dynamic changes of the skeletal morphology of TMJs, including the mandibular condyle and temporal fossa [ , , , ]. Previous MRI studies evaluating large samples of normal-appearing TMJs ( n =54–142 joints) assessed only the inflammatory joint components such as joint and bone marrow enhancement [ , , , , ]. To the best of our knowledge, there are no large studies with normative data on the osseous parameters as measured by MRI on growing TMJs in the pediatric population.
In our study, apart from the expected increased volume of the growing mandibular condyle, the measured head-neck angle for mandibular condyle on sagittal-oblique views at the mid portion of the TMJ showed a high positive correlation with the patient’s age, which also was confirmed to be the only independent variable that affected the head-neck angle. Increasing degrees of the head-neck angle for growing TMJs corroborated well with the qualitative assessment of the condylar configuration, which confirmed the anterior tilt with rectangular head contour observed on sagittal-oblique views in older patients. Measurements of the head-neck angle in this study have been modified from the originally measured angles by Baek et al. [ ], which defined landmarks and reference lines for sagittal condylar head angles and sagittal condylar neck angle by CT images and accessed condylar configuration after mandibular surgery. Therefore, we believe this study is the first to evaluate the head-neck angle in the configuration of growing mandibular condyles by MRI.
The anteversion angle, measured in axial view, demonstrated a small negative correlation with age, similar to what was noted in the previous study by Karlo et al. [ ], which used CT for evaluating growing TMJs.
From the practical point of view, we have found that there may be difficulties in performing measurements according to the location of the TMJ on sagittal-oblique views on MRI. Due to the relatively large slice thickness, the exact middle portion of the TMJ may not be accessible during measurements, which may cause measurement error for the head-neck angle. Therefore, we recommend combining head-neck angle and anteversion angle measurements to provide the best morphological assessment of growing TMJs.
Growth-related changes in the mandibular condyle include changes in the transverse configuration from round to oval, and also increases in its size in all dimensions [ ]. In our study, condylar width and height demonstrated a significant correlation with age, and it was possible to determine the position where the transverse view of the condyle changes from round to oval by calculating the ratio of condylar depth to condylar width. While an oblique coronal plane aligned to the mediolateral axis of the condyle would be better for measuring the width compared to the true coronal plane, both the coronal and axial measurements of the condylar width correlated to the same extent with age (Table 3 ). Furthermore, we have found that the mandibular condyle appears slightly larger and more oval in the TMJs of males than females.
Our study has design limitations. Ideally, we would have included only healthy children who had MRI exams with the dedicated TMJ protocol. However, due to the rarity of healthy children who underwent the dedicated protocol at our institution, we also included both patients with JIA diagnosis in addition to those with non-JIA diagnosis who were found to have either unilateral or bilaterally normal-appearing TMJs on imaging, assuming that these joints are developmentally normal. However, the assumption is challenged by the fact that patients with JIA have experienced long-term inflammatory stresses that may have affected the TMJ development, even if no adverse orofacial outcomes had been observed on clinical examination or on prior imaging. To test this assumption, the measured parameters were reanalyzed by separating the normal-appearing joints of non-JIA patients from those of JIA patients. Indeed, regardless of whether the non-JIA patients had clinical TMJ symptoms, or the presence of potential inflammatory stresses in the TMJ of JIA patients, the age-dependent changes in the measured parameters, including the head-neck angle, were mostly similar in the two groups and the absolute differences between these values were small (Supplementary Table 4 ). Moreover, in multiple regression analysis, including potential factors that can affect the growth of TMJ (i.e. age, diagnosis of JIA, presence of contralateral TMJ disease and gender), the change in the head-neck angle by age was not seen to be influenced by any of these potentially confounding factors (Table 5 , Supplementary Table 3 ). Also, a recent study by Angenete and colleagues [ ] assessed TMJs of patients who underwent head MRI for clinical indications not related to TMJ symptoms or diseases. In that study, the anterior inclination of the condylar heads appeared to increase with age, consistent with the incremental change of the head-neck angle demonstrated in our study. Taking into consideration that the technique used in their study was not the one expected in a dedicated TMJ MRI, and that we have not excluded patients with clinical complaints potentially related to TMJs in our study, the results from both studies are consistent and corroborate each other’s conclusions.
Another limitation of our study is that there are fewer cases within low and high age groups with the 50th percentile of cases presenting with ages ranging from 9.8 to 15.2 years. There were also fewer male cases included than female cases (Supplementary Fig. 1 ). Therefore, results for male subjects in the younger age group in this study should be interpreted with caution. It is also noteworthy that we assumed a linear correlation between the parameters and patients’ age (Supplementary Fig. 2 ). It is expected that a growth-spurt effect or a ceiling effect will deviate the rate of anterior tilting of the condyle from a linear relation. Dividing our population into 4 equal subgroups according to quartiles of age revealed that the correlation coefficient between the head-neck angle and age differs between each subgroup, with the highest coefficient (4.4 degrees per year) occurring in the second age group of 9.8 to 12.2 years. However, the third (12.2 to 15.2 years) and fourth (15.2 to 17.8 years) age groups did not reach statistical significance for the observed correlation coefficients (2.9 and 2.2 degrees per year, respectively), suggesting a variable and diminishing rate of anterior tilting of the condyle after age 12, which the sample was underpowered to detect.
Conclusion
This study demonstrated age-related changes of growing TMJs during childhood, such as the interval increase of size of condyles in mediolateral and craniocaudal diameters, the increase in volume, the configuration change from a rounded head without anterior tilt to a rectangular head contour with anterior tilt, and the interval increase of the head-neck angle and decrease of the anteversion angle. Moreover, the patient’s age was the only independent factor that affected the head-neck angle. Despite the aforementioned limitations, we hope that these observations in MRI examinations of normal-appearing TMJs of children and adolescents can help investigators distinguish physiological from early arthropathic changes in pediatric patients, thus facilitating the detection of early TMJ disease by MRI and enabling appropriate personalized management of JIA patients. Further studies with larger series of healthy pediatric subjects is required to confirm our findings and more closely characterize TMJ variations in growth by age.