Introduction
During the past decades, we have noted that the biology of tumors can no longer be understood simply as the accumulation of tumor cells, but instead must encompass the contributions of the tumor microenvironment to tumorigenesis [ ]. Immune evasion in the tumor microenvironment is an important hallmark of tumors, and a better understanding of the mechanism is quite essential to develop strategies against tumors.
In lung cancer, multiple cell types contribute to immune evasion, including regulatory T cells [ ], tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) [ ], and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) [ ]. Among all the cell types associated with the tumor microenvironment, TAMs are the most influential cells for tumor progression [ ]. Lung cancer is characterized by having a large population of TAMs, and experimental models have indicated that TAMs interact with and influence the surrounding tumor cells by multiple mechanisms [ ].
The classically activated type I macrophages (M1) are potent effector cells that can kill tumor cells and produce pro-inflammatory cytokines, and the alternatively activated macrophages (M2) can inhibit inflammatory responses and adaptive Th1 immunity but promote angiogenesis and tumor development [ , ]. It is widely accepted that TAMs have an M2 phenotype and show major pro-tumoral functions, promoting tumor cell survival and proliferation [ , ].
Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1; also termed B7-H1 or CD274) is a co-inhibitory factor that is expressed on many types of cancer and immune cells and has an important role in blocking cancer immunity by binding programmed death-1 (PD-1) [ ]. PD-L1 transmits a signal that inhibits T-lymphocyte activation by combining to PD-1 on T cells [ , ]. In clinical trials, the efficacy of anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 antibodies for patients in clinical oncology has shown durable responses, and this therapy may change the medical treatment strategy [ , , ]. Research found that tumor environment factors could upregulate the PD-L1 expression on lung cancer cells, MDSCs, and regulatory T cells, and provided inhibitory signals for T-cell activation, resulting in the suppression of antitumor immune responses [ , ]. These results would provide insights in terms of the mechanisms of cancer escape from immune surveillance.
Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) is a kind of cytokine that is produced mainly by CD8 + cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), natural killer cells, and macrophages and is critical for innate and adaptive immunity [ ]. IFN-γ is generally regarded as an inflammatory cytokine that promotes cellular immunity against viral and bacterial infections and tumor development. IFN-γ regulates the differentiation and effector function of various types of immune cells and inhibits the growth and survival of cancer cells [ ]. A randomized phase III trial suggested that IFN-γ in the first-line treatment of ovarian cancer resulted in an improvement in progression-free survival [ ]. However, increasing evidence suggests that IFN-γ is a cytokine with both anti- and pro-tumorigenic functions [ , ]. The role of IFN-γ in regulating antitumor immunity appears to be complex and paradoxical. IFN-γ can promote tumor development by enhancing a Th17-associated inflammatory reaction [ ]. A melanoma trial for adjuvant application of IFN-γ had to be prematurely terminated because the IFN-γ-treated patients fared worse than the untreated population [ ]. Similarly, another phase 3 trial of IFN-γ plus carboplatin/paclitaxel versus carboplatin/paclitaxel alone for treating advanced ovarian carcinomas was stopped early because the overall survival (OS) time of the patients receiving IFN-γ was significantly shorter [ ]. However, the mechanism underlying the dual aspects of IFN-γ function in antitumor immunity is incompletely understood.
Commonly, in the cancer microenvironment, tumor-associated immune cells, especially macrophages, are recruited into cancer sites and induce inflammation. The process triggers the release of a wide variety of inflammatory mediators including IFN-γ and interleukin (IL)-10, subsequently ensuing the induction of various proteins such as programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) in cancer cells [ ]. Mandai et al. investigated the role of PD-L1 expression in the local tumor environment and found that IFN-γ has a pivotal role in PD-L1 expression in cancer cells and the consequent immune escape by the tumor cells [ ].
In this study, we focused our analysis on the possible molecular mechanisms of pro-tumorigenic function for IFN-γ in lung cancer cells.
Materials and methods
Cell lines and reagents
Human lung carcinoma cell line A549 was obtained from the Biotechnology Research Institute of Soochow University (Suzhou, China). Cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS). IFN-γ and AG490 were purchased from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN, USA) and Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology (Haimen, China), respectively. PD98059 and LY294002 were purchased from Cell Signing Technology (Boston, MA, USA). FITC-conjugated anti-IL-6, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, IFN-γ monoclonal antibody (mAb), and PE-conjugated anti-PD-L1 mAb were purchased from eBioscience. Recombinant IL-6, IL-10, TNF-α, and IFN-γ were purchased from R&D Systems (Minneapolis). Anti-human-PD-L1 antibody was purchased from R&D Systems.
Isolation of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs)
Mononuclear cells were separated with Ficoll density gradient centrifugation after collecting the malignant pleural effusion of lung cancer. The mononuclear cells were then plated on 6-well plates and allowed to adhere for 40 min at 37 °C. The plates were then washed with Hank’s balanced saline solution (HBSS) to remove all nonadherent cells. The cell population achieved by these procedures was 95% macrophages as determined by cell markers. After culturing for 24 h, the supernatant of TAM was collected for the following assay.
Coculture experiments
The A549 cells were plated in 6-well plates at a density of 2 × 10 5 cells/well and cultured in the absence or presence of pleural effusion or the supernatant of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs supernatant) for 72 h. The A549 cells were then stained with PE-conjugated anti-PD-L1 mAb and processed for flow cytometry.
Invasion assay
Invasion capacity was measured in vitro using trans-well invasion assays. The A549 cells were cocultured with the pleural effusion or the supernatant of TAMs for 72 h before the experiment. After coculturing for 72 h, cells were seeded into the inserts (2 × 10 4 cells/well) of the trans-well chamber (Corning Costar, Cambridge, MA, USA). The inserts were then put into the bottom chambers loaded with 20% FBS-containing medium, and the cells were cultured in a humidified incubator at 37 °C for 24 h. The inserts were then taken out and the cells remaining on the upper surface were gently scraped off. Cells on the bottom surface of the inserts were fixed with 75% ethanol for 30 min, and stained with 0.1% crystal violet at room temperature for 1 h. Images of the migrant cells were captured using confocal microscopy. Five randomly selected images per well were used for cell counting and the average finally calculated. All these assays were performed in triplicate.
Detection of cytokines in TAMs
The mononuclear cells were separated with Ficoll density gradient centrifugation after collecting the malignant pleural effusion of lung cancer as before. The cytokines in TAMs were also analyzed by flow cytometry with intracellular staining. In brief, single-cell suspensions were collected and stained with PECY7-conjugated anti-CD68 mAb for 30 min, then washing with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Then, the single-cell suspension was fixed by Reagent A (fixative medium, 100 μl) for 15 min, then washed with PBS. Next, the cells were permeated by Reagent B (permeabilization medium, 100 μl) and immediately stained with FITC-conjugated anti-IL-6, anti-IL-10, anti-TNF-α, and anti-IFN-γ mAb. The A549 cells were then processed for flow cytometry.
Cytokine experiments
The A549 cells were plated in 6-well plates at a density of 2 × 10 5 cells/well and cultured in the presence of IL-6 (10 ng/ml), IL-10 (10 ng/ml), TNF-α (10 ng/ml), or IFN-γ (10 ng/ml), respectively. The cells were then cultured in a humidified incubator at 37 °C for 72 h. The A549 cells were then stained with PE-conjugated anti-PD-L1 mAb and processed for flow cytometry.
Detection of proteins p-AKT, p-ERK, and p-Stat3
The A549 cells were plated in 6-well plates at a density of 2 × 10 5 cells/well and cultured in the 10% FBS-containing medium until the cells were adhered to the well. Then, new 10% FBS-containing medium with IFN-γ was added into the 6-well plate for 15 min. Cells were harvested in lysis buffer (20 mM NaCl, 50 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100) containing protease inhibitor. The cell lysates were separated using 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) gels and then transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). The membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat milk diluted in PBS for 2 h at room temperature before the addition of the appropriate primary antibody. The antibodies used in this study included anti- p -AKT (1:2000), anti- p -ERK (1:2000), anti- p -Stat3 (1:1000), and anti-β-actin (1:2000). The membranes were then washed with PBS containing 0.05% Tween and incubated with the appropriate horseradish-peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. The specific proteins were visualized using ECL Plus Western Blotting Reagent (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA).
Study of the effect of ERK/AKT/Stat3 on the expression of PD-L1
The A549 cells were plated in 6-well plates at a density of 2 × 10 5 cells/well and cultured in the presence of PD98059, LY294002, or AG490 for 6 h, respectively. Then the PD98059 (25 μM), LY294002 (25 μM), or AG490 (50 μM)-containing medium was removed and the cells cultured in the 10% FBS-containing medium with IFN-γ (10 ng/ml). The cells were cultured in a humidified incubator at 37 °C for 72 h. The A549 cells were then stained with PE-conjugated anti-PD-L1 mAb and processed for flow cytometry.
Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software version 19.0. Values were given as mean ± SDs, and the differences between groups were assessed with Student’s t test. p values less than 0.05 were considered as being statistically significant.
Results
Malignant pleural effusion or TAMs supernatant induced the surface expression of PD-L1 and increased invasion capacity in lung cancer cells
The surface expression of PD-L1 in lung adenocarcinoma cells A549 were detected by flow cytometry; the basal expression was 7.8% (Fig. 1 a). Malignant pleural effusion could upregulate the expression of PD-L1 in A549 cells; the expression was 21.9% (Fig. 1 a). Further experiments showed that the TAMs supernatant could also upregulate the expression of PD-L1 in A549 cells; the expression was 37.3% (Fig. 1 a). This finding indicated that the malignant pleural effusion, especially the TAMs, could induced the expression of PD-L1 by a certain mechanism. Invasion capacity was measured in vitro using trans-well invasion assays. The cells that invaded through the filter were stained with 0.1% crystal and counted under a light microscope (magnification, 100×). Compared with the general A549 cells, A549 cells cocultured with malignant pleural effusion or TAMs supernatant could increase invasion ability with an increased invasive index (invasion cell number) (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 1 Surface expression of Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) induced by malignant pleural effusion or tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) supernatant. a , b Surface expression of PD-L1 on A549 cells cocultured with malignant pleural effusion or the TAMs supernatant. Data represented as mean ± SD of three independent fields (** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001) Fig. 2 Invasion capacity of A549 cells cocultured with malignant pleural effusion or TAMs supernatant. a , b Image for general A549 cells cocultured with malignant pleural effusion or the TAMs supernatant that penetrate the Matrigel-coated membrane. Data represented as mean ± SD of three independent fields (*** p < 0.001)
Tumor-associated macrophages produced IFN-γ, IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-10, and IFN-γ could then induce the expression of PD-L1
The cytokines in TAMs were also analyzed by flow cytometry with intracellular staining. The results showed that the expression of IL-6, TNF-α, and IFN-γ was 30.1%, 40.2%, and 12.5%, respectively; a negligible level of IL-10 was detected (Fig. 3 ). We used cytokines IL-6, TNF-α, IFN-γ, or IL-10 cocultured with A549 cells, and flow cytometry indicated that IFN-γ could upregulate the surface expression of PD-L1 significantly, at 99.5%. When cocultured with IL-6, TNF-α, or IL-10, surface expression was 6.0%, 15.5%, or 7.2%, respectively (Fig. 4 ). This experiment suggested that IFN-γ produced by TAM mainly induced the PD-L1 expression of A549 cells. Fig. 3 Cytokines in TAMs analyzed by flow cytometry with intracellular staining. a Proportion of CD68-positive cells. b Expression of interleukin (IL)-6 in TAMs. c Expression of IL-10 in TAMs. d Expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α in TAMs. e Expression of interferon (IFN)-γ in TAMs. f Data represented as mean ± SD of three independent fields Fig. 4 Induced expression of PD-L1 cocultured with cytokines measured by flow cytometry. a , b Surface expression of PD-L1 on A549 cocultured with IL-6, IL-10, TNF-α, and IFN-γ. Data represented as mean ± SD of three independent fields (ns p > 0.05, * p < 0.05, *** p < 0.001)
The expression levels of p-AKT and p-Stat3 stimulated with IFN-γ were upregulated dramatically although the levels of p-ERK remained unchanged
In this experiment, we detected the expression by Western blot of p -AKT, p -ERK, and p -Stat3 after stimulation with IFN-γ. Experimental results showed that compared with general A549 cells, the levels of p -AKT and p -Stat3 stimulated with IFN-γ were upregulated dramatically, whereas the levels of p -ERK remained unchanged (Fig. 5 ). This finding indicated that the induced expression of protein p -AKT and p -Stat3 may participate in the upregulated expression of PD-L1. Fig. 5 Expression levels of protein p -AKT, p -Stat3, and p -ERK stimulated with IFN-γ detected by Western blot. Sample on left stimulated with IFN-γ; that on the right without IFN-γ. Samples from up to down are p -ERK, p -AKT, p -Stat3, and β -actin. Levels of p -AKT and p -Stat3 stimulated with IFN-γ were upregulated dramatically but the levels of p -ERK remained unchanged
LY294002 and AG490 could inhibit the induced expression of PD-L1 stimulated by IFN-γ
It was found that treatment with LY294002 (P13K/AKT signaling pathway inhibitor) and AG490 (JAK/STAT3 signaling pathway inhibitor) could inhibit the expression of PD-L1 on the surface of A549 cells, although PD98059 (MAPK/ERK signaling pathway inhibitor) could not decrease the expression of PD-L1 (Fig. 6 ). As expected, the JAK/STAT3 signaling pathway and the P13K/AKT signaling pathway both participate in the upregulated expression of PD-L1 stimulated by IFN-γ. Fig. 6 Inhibiting effect of signaling pathway inhibitors LY294002, AG490, and PD98059 measured by flow cytometry. a , b Surface expression of PD-L1 on the A549 cocultured with cytokines IFN-γ with or without LY294002, PD98059, and AG490. Data represented as mean ± SD of three independent fields (ns p > 0.05, *** p < 0.001)
Discussion
In this study, we found that membrane expression of PD-L1 molecules in A549 cell lines in vitro was low and that PD-L1 could be upregulated when cocultured with malignant pleural effusion. It was suggested that PD-L1 could be regulated as a reactively high expression in the micro-environment of malignant pleural effusion. This change indicated that the tumor cells could express certain molecules selectively in the face of the body’s immune system, thereby affecting the local immune response. The present results show that the expression of PD-L1 may have two mechanisms [ , , ]. One is regulated by oncogenes, known as the innate immune resistance, and the expression of PD-L1 is continuous and has nothing to do with the inflammatory response in the tumor microenvironment; the other mechanism is driven by the inflammatory factors of the tumor microenvironment, which is also known as adaptive immune resistance. Here PD-L1 is induced by the inflammatory signaling in the process of antitumor immune response, and its expression, which can protect the body from tissue damage mediated by infection and immune response, is not persistent [ , ].
Since 1994, when Dighe et al. first reported the role of IFN-γ in tumor removal, IFN-γ has been expected to possess antitumor effects in cancer patients. However, recent studies have shown that IFN-γ is involved in tumor promotion by upregulating the number of immunosuppressive cells, such as Treg cells, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC), and inflammatory cells, Th17, under certain conditions. Moreover, IFN-γ could also decrease the infiltration of neutrophils in the tumor microenvironment [ ]. In the study of melanoma cells, IFN-γ promoted tumors by inducing the expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), and thereby upregulated the number of Treg cells and inhibited the activity of CTL [ , ]. MDSC could be induced into the tumor microenvironment by IFN-γ and thereby inhibited the activity of T cells [ ]. Morel et al. reported that exogenous IFN-γ could affect the antigen processing of melanoma cell, and thus the tumor cells could escape the recognition of CTL and then avoid the killing of CTL [ ]. Our study found that both endogenous and exogenous IFN-γ could upregulate the expression of PD-L1 in the lung cancer cells, thereby promoting the immune escape of tumor cells. It also revealed a new mechanism of tumor promotion for IFN-γ.
Based on the foregoing discussion, our study focused on analyzing the regulation of PD-L1 in lung cancer cells by tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) in malignant pleural effusion. We found that the malignant pleural effusion contains large amounts of TAMs and the TAMs could induce the expression of PD-L1 by the secretion of IFN-γ. Our study revealed a new mechanism of immune escape mediated by TAMs in the tumor microenvironment, which acted by upregulating the expression of PD-L1 on the surface of lung cancer cells and mediating immune escape, which also reflected the complexity, diversity, and intrinsic link of local immune regulation in the tumor microenvironment.
At present, the molecular mechanism of PD-L1 expression in lung cancer cells induced by IFN-γ is not clear. Researchers have found that the promoter region of PD-L1 contains several responsive elements of IFN-γ [ , ]. In the study of breast cancer, it was found that the expression of PD-L1 was induced by IFN-γ, which was regulated by the JAK/STAT signaling pathway [ ]. Our research also found that the signaling pathways of PI3K/AKT and JAK/STAT3 were involved in the expression of PD-L1 induced by IFN-γ. The signal pathway blockers LY294002 or AG490 could block the expression of PD-L1 induced by IFN-γ. There was no evidence that the signaling pathway of MAPK/ERK1/2 was involved in the induced expression of PD-L1. However, the intracellular signaling pathway is a complex network, and the role of MAPK/ERK1/2, PI3K/AKT, and JAK/STAT3 signaling pathways in the induced expression of PD-L1 on the surface of the lung cancer cell is unclear. Further research is still needed.
It is conceivable that cancer cells are exposed to IFN-γ in the tumor microenvironment, which can exert harsh conditions for cancer cells. The cells can escape immune surveillance by suppressing cancer-specific CTLs through upregulation of a coinhibitory molecule PD-L1 on the surface. Therefore, researchers should be cautious in using IFN-γ as a therapeutic agent for cancer treatment.