Introduction
Endometrioid type of endometrial adenocarcinoma is the most frequently encountered endometrial malignancy [ ]. This subtype of endometrial carcinoma is preceded by a precursor lesion which is also described as atypical hyperplasia or endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia (EIN) [ ]. This precursor lesion has been shown to carry a specific monoclonal molecular signature. The characteristic histological feature of this precursor lesion makes its identification possible by pathologists. But, as with other malignancies, carcinogenesis has its inception in lesions before the histologically identifiable precursor lesion develops [ ]. Researchers believe that stable long-lasting changes may develop within the histologically unremarkable endometrium secondary to non-genetic risk modifiers such as unopposed oestrogen [ ]. Biomarkers can be informative in unravelling the early stages of neoplasia and offer a tantalising possibility of evaluating the various events of carcinogenesis, well before the clinical detection of the disease. It has been seen in both mouse models and human observational studies that inactivation of PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue), which is a known tumour suppressor gene, is associated with the carcinogenesis of endometrioid carcinoma [ ]. This role played by PTEN is consistent with its inherent anti-tumourigenic role, by acting as a cell division mediator and a promoter of apoptosis [ ]. It has been shown that a small proportion of PTEN protein is seen to be deficient in endometrial tissue of pre-menopausal women with otherwise normal menstrual cycles, due to a somatic PTEN gene mutation [ , , ]. These PTEN protein-deficient occult glands are imperceptible by customary examination and are delegated as latent precancerous lesions which require additional genetic mutations before they transform into a morphological recognisable clinical entity [ ]. The latent pre-cancer risk rate of 35% determined by the absence of PTEN function is offset by lifetime risk of endometrioid cancer of 2.5% only [ ]. The manifestation of an overt clinical lesion in the form of EIN from a latent precancerous lesion is ineffective so as to be treated as an uncommon event, but one which is known to transpire, with the accrual of auxiliary genetic aberrations [ ]. Oestrogen exposure, especially those unopposed by progestins, has been hypothesised to act as an influential factor in progression of pre-existing latent precancerous lesion to EIN or endometrioid carcinoma [ ]. This can be explained by the effect of unopposed oestrogen by increasing the proliferative and hence the mutational rates in the endometrium [ ]. PAX2 (paired box 2) is required for development of uterus and oviducts in females and persistent expression in adults and reflects an important role in endometrial self-renewal and proliferation [ ]. Reports advocate that loss of PAX2 is associated with endometrial malignant transformation, hence acting as a tumour suppressor gene [ ]. Loss of expression of these markers, viz. PAX2 and PTEN, on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections may assist the histopathologist to identify precancerous/cancerous lesions [ ]. We proceeded to study the application of EIN criteria to classify endometrial tissue and study the expression of markers PTEN and PAX2 by immunohistochemistry on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections of endometrial biopsies.
Materials and Methods
After approval by the institutional ethics committee, haematoxylin- and eosin-stained sections of endometrial biopsies received between 2012 and 2016 were screened by two pathologists and 30 consecutive cases each diagnosed as proliferative endometrium, hyperplastic endometrium and endometrioid adenocarcinoma were included in the study. Exclusion criteria included endometrial biopsies with secretory endometrium, disordered proliferative endometrium, pill endometrium, endometrium with metaplasia and those with insufficient tissue. Those diagnosed as hyperplastic endometrium were reviewed and reclassified as per EIN criteria (Table 1 ) by two pathologists separately. Discordant cases were reclassified after arriving at a consensus on the multi-header microscope. All 90 cases were subjected to immunohistochemistry (IHC) for two immunohistochemical markers PTEN (Clone Y184, Abcam, 1:100 dilution) and PAX2 (Clone EP3251, Abcam, 1:1000 dilution). IHC was performed manually using Dako REAL™ EnVision™ Detection System followed by counterstaining with haematoxylin. Table 1 Endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia criteria Crowding of glands Abnormal cytology in comparison with background glands Minimum size of 1 mm in diameter Exclusion of histological mimics and adenocarcinoma
The loss of expression of these protein markers PTEN and PAX2 was in each case semi-quantitatively analysed. The stromal cells were used as an internal control for both antibodies. Retained staining in all cross sections of all glands was categorised as no loss (Score 1), absence of staining in one or more cross section of glands was categorised as a partial loss (Score 2), and absence of staining in all glands was categorised as a complete loss (Score 3). These antibodies were chosen because both PTEN, a lipid phosphatase with tumour-suppressing abilities, and PAX2, a transcription factor, have been found to be selectively lost in endometrioid carcinoma and their precursor lesions, after understanding an article by Owings et al. [ ] who suggested that they have some utility in identifying EIN. Thirty cases of endometrial biopsies with proliferative endometrium were also included in the study. These aided us in standardising the IHC protocols and discerning the IHC pattern in normal endometrium. Data entered were analysed using Microsoft Excel to arrive at the frequency of distribution of cases with loss of expression of PAX2 and PTEN in the spectrum of proliferative, benign hyperplasia, EIN and endometrioid carcinomas. Sensitivity and specificity of PAX2 and PTEN were also calculated.
Results
A total of 30 consecutive archival cases each of proliferative, hyperplasia and endometrioid carcinoma were selected by screening endometrial biopsies. The 30 hyperplastic cases included 15 cases of simple hyperplasia without atypia, five cases of complex hyperplasia without atypia and ten cases of complex hyperplasia with atypia. The 30 hyperplastic cases were re-evaluated as per EIN criteria (Fig. 1 ), by two pathologists, who were blinded to each other. Following the review, the discordant cases were discussed over the microscope to reach a common consensus. A total of ten cases of EIN were identified, all of whom were initially diagnosed as complex hyperplasia with atypia (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 1 Representative cases of Endometrial intra-epithelial neoplasia (Hematoxylin and Eosin stain, 100× magnification) Fig. 2 Distribution of cases diagnosed as hyperplasia by WHO criteria relassified as per EIN criteria
On the assessment of the immunohistochemistry-stained sections, PAX2 showed a nuclear expression in the glandular epithelial cells and PTEN showed a pan-cellular expression in the glandular epithelial cells. Assessment of PAX2 was easier being a nuclear expression in comparison with the pan-cellular expression PTEN. All cases of proliferative endometrium showed retained expression of PAX2 and PTEN in the glandular epithelial cells (Fig. 3 ). In contrast, all cases of endometrioid carcinoma showed complete loss of PAX2 and PTEN in the glandular epithelial cells (Fig. 4 ). Distribution of all 90 cases with their expression of PAX2 and PTEN is represented in Fig. 5 . Amongst the cases of hyperplasia, five showed retained expression and 20 showed partial loss of PTEN expression in the endometrial glandular cells. Amongst the cases of hyperplasia, 18 showed retained expression and 12 showed partial loss of PAX2 expression in the endometrial glands (Fig. 6 ). Distribution of cases of endometrial hyperplasia as per WHO classification and EIN criteria with their expression of PAX2 and PTEN is represented in Figs. 7 and 8 , respectively. All the cases of EIN showed partial loss of both PAX2 and PTEN expression in the glands. However, amongst the cases reclassified as benign hyperplasia, 15 cases and two cases showed partial loss of PTEN and PAX2, respectively. On analysis, with respect to identifying EIN, the loss of both PTEN and PAX2 expression showed 100% sensitivity and negative predictive value. However, loss of PAX2 expression showed better specificity and positive predictive value of 90% and 83.33%, respectively, in comparison with PTEN (Table 2 ). Fig. 3 Representative cases of proliferative endometrium ( a ) (Hematoxylin and Eosin stain, 100× magnification) with retained PAX2 ( b ) (100× magnification) and PTEN (C) (100× magnification) expression Fig. 4 Representative cases of Endometrioid carcinoma ( a ) (Hematoxylin and Eosin stain 100× magnification) with loss of PAX2 ( b ) (100× magnification) and PTEN (C) (100× magnification) expression Fig. 5 Distribution of cases: Proliferative, Hyperplasia and Carcinoma Fig. 6 Representative cases of Endometrial hyperplasia ( a ) (Hematoxylin and Eosin stain 100× magnification) showing retained expression of PAX2 ( b ) (100× magnification) but partial loss of PTEN (C) (100× magnification) Fig. 7 Distribution of cases as per WHO classification with expression of PAX2 and PTEN Fig. 8 Distribution of cases as per EIN criteria with expression of PAX2 and PTEN Table 2 Utility of partial loss of expression of PTEN and PAX2 immunohistochemistry for identifying EIN PTEN (%) PAX2 (%) Sensitivity 100 100 Specificity 25 90 Positive predictive value 40 83.33 Negative predictive value 100 100
Discussion
Endometrial cancer is the commonest gynaecological malignancy. An estimated 61,380 women were diagnosed with endometrial cancer in the year 2017 as per SEER data, forming 3.6% of all cancers [ ]. There have been about 10,920 deaths due to endometrial cancer, accounting for 1.8% of all cancer deaths. At present, more than 7,00,000 women are suffering from endometrial cancer [ ]. In the Indian scenario, endometrial cancer lags behind cervical cancer but is slowly rising in incidence, especially amongst pre-menopausal women [ ]. The incidence of endometrial hyperplasia and atypical endometrial hyperplasia is estimated to be 355/100,000 woman-years and 56/100,000 woman-years [ ]. As the hyperplasia precedes all cases of atypical hyperplasia and endometrial carcinoma, it highlights the potential advantages of identifying women at risk of developing endometrial carcinoma by possible analysis of histopathological features supplemented by a pattern of expression by molecular markers involved in the carcinogenesis [ ].
Hyperplasia and carcinoma constitute different positions along the spectrum of endometrial proliferation [ ]. Endometrial hyperplasia is defined by the 2003 World Health Organization (WHO) classification as a range of morphologic variations ranging from benign changes to premalignant disease, caused by an anomalous hormonal milieu [ ]. Histologically, these lesions display a range of increasing structural intricacy and nuclear atypia. A faction of investigators has proposed an optional scheme to define precancerous lesions of the endometrium. They use the term “endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia” to define premalignant endometrial lesions that show specific morphologic features, exhibit monoclonality and share molecular alterations with endometrioid carcinoma (EC) [ ]. Endometrial hyperplasia occurs frequently; it is predicted that 150,000–200,000 fresh cases are diagnosed every year [ ]. It usually occurs in women about menopause; however, it can occur in adolescents and young women [ ]. The most significant aetiological factor is an unimpeded oestrogen source (endogenous or exogenous), which has been known to occur under the following conditions: (1) successive prolonged periods of anovulation; (2) unimpeded oestrogen administration in the dearth of progesterone; (3) peripheral transformation of androgens to oestrogen in adipocytes in obese women or in patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome; or (4) oestrogen-secreting neoplasms of ovary [ ]. Endometrioid adenocarcinoma or type I endometrial carcinoma is an oestrogen-driven carcinoma which acquires many genetic mutations as it progresses from the precursor lesions [ ]. The clinician can act upon a report which can alert him for the presence of a precursor lesion by administering progesterone, if the lady intends to preserve fertility or do a simple hysterectomy, thus avoiding possible future radical surgery and chemotherapy which may be mandated in an established carcinoma [ , ]. The role of the pathologist is paramount in identifying lesions which can be acted upon in a timely manner to prevent overall morbidity and mortality from endometrial carcinomas [ ].
The classification recommended by the International Society of Gynecological Pathologists (ISGP) and devised by the WHO in 1994 and 2003 divides endometrial hyperplasia into four subtypes, according to the degree of structural complexity and the presence or absence of nuclear atypia [ ]. Although exercising this system may seem simple, it is often problematic to implement in everyday practice. Few studies have established a considerable absence of replication in the diagnosis and classification of endometrial hyperplasia, especially following appreciation of cytologic atypia [ ]. The EIN system has now been incorporated as part of 2014 WHO classification of endometrial proliferative lesions [ ]. The reasoning for the evolution of this scheme comes from the inferior replication, associated with the previous WHO classification in numerous studies. The EIN scheme is based on consolidation of morphology, molecular, morphometric and prognostic parameters. Conforming to this concept, true precancerous lesions are a monoclonal expansion of cells that are derived from normal, polyclonal cycling endometrial glands following mutations that bestow small increases in growth leverage [ ]. Albeit genetically aberrant, these lesions may display a benign growth template. Accretion of ample genetic impairment permits malignant transformation, a phase at which hormonal aid is no longer obligatory for survival. Morphometric scrutiny has advocated that crowded glands may be a principal diagnostic character as nuclear atypia. In this system, three contrasting classes are recognised: (1) endometrial hyperplasia related to benign architectural changes secondary to unopposed oestrogen (benign hyperplasia sequence); (2) EIN; and (3) adenocarcinoma [ , , , ]. The diagnostic criteria of EIN include maximum linear dimension exceeding 1 mm in size, a scale that usually encompasses > 5–10 glands; area covered by glands exceeding that of stroma (stromal volume < 55%); cytologic features that differ between the architecturally crowded focus and the background endometrial glands. Benign mimics (hypersecretory endometrium, basal endometrium, regenerative endometrium and endometrial polyps), as well as adenocarcinoma, should be excluded [ ]. Most EIN cases conform to lesions classified as complex atypical hyperplasia by the 2003 WHO classification (79%) [ ]. In contrast, only 2% of simple hyperplasia and 44% of complex hyperplasia without atypia belong to the diagnostic category of EIN [ ]. The liability of consternation when using the word neoplasia in a precancerous lesion is one of the principal drawbacks of the EIN approach. The designation of endometrial lesions into benign hyperplasia (BH) and EIN accurately dichotomises the histological feature seen because of unimpeded oestrogen and those secondary to the accretion of neoplastic mutations. Candidly put forth, EIN is the histological expression of a lurking molecular evolution in endometrial carcinogenesis and is a lesion that can be recognised and utilised for making therapeutic decisions [ , , ]. Exponents of the BH/EIN classification system have demonstrated improved implementation in diagnostic setting. Issues relevant to intra-observer uncertainty with the WHO classification have been widely reported, with J values for most endometrial diagnosis being 0.2–0.71 and 0.31 when compared to hyperplasia with, and without, atypia, respectively, which is contemplated to be a major therapeutic breakpoint. In comparison, the J value for subjective EIN diagnosis is between 0.73 and 0.90 at the point at which patients receive treatment [ , , ]. The EIN classification scheme also precisely divides neoplastic lesions with neoplastic mutations, namely PTEN and PAX2, from those that do not harbour such potential [ , ]. The EIN scheme empowers pathologists to identify and stratify truly neoplastic lesions which have a greater rate of evolution from those that are due to hormonal lopsidedness [ ].
Both the pathologists involved in the interpretation of the biopsies trained themselves to familiarise with the criteria using an online training module. Amongst the 30 hyperplastic cases included in this study, ten cases satisfied the morphological criteria for EIN; other studies showed up to 78% of complex hyperplasia with atypia being reclassified as EIN. In contrast, all cases initially diagnosed as atypical hyperplasia was diagnosed as EIN in our study. None of the cases of hyperplasia without atypia in our study fulfilled the EIN criteria, and all were reclassified as benign hyperplasia. However, a study has shown 4 to 44% of cases of hyperplasia without atypia satisfied the criteria of EIN. This absence of EIN in cases of hyperplasia without atypia can be attributed to the small sample size. However, the overall trend of higher-frequency incidence of EIN in cases with atypical hyperplasia is as per the previous studies. The reclassification of hyperplastic endometrial biopsies into benign hyperplasia and EIN showed a 90% concordance between the two pathologists. The pathologists differed in only one case, on which consensus was reached on the discussion at the multi-headed microscope and classified as EIN. This showed a fair reproducibility of the laid down criteria which is as per the current literature on reproducibility.
Following immunohistochemistry, all 30 cases of proliferative endometrium included in the study showed retained expression of both PTEN and PAX2 in the glands. This is in contrast to another study which showed 49% and 36% loss in normal proliferative cycling endometrium. Amongst the 30 cases of endometrioid carcinoma included in our study, all 30 cases showed complete loss of PTEN and PAX2 in the neoplastic glands. However, a study by Monte et al. [ ] has shown retained expression of PTEN and PAX2 in up to 32% and 23%, respectively. Amongst the 30 cases with hyperplasia, partial loss of PTEN expression was seen in 25 cases, while the remaining five cases showed a retained expression. In contrast, 18 cases showed retained expression of PAX2 with only 12 cases showing a partial loss. Amongst the biopsies, all ten cases reclassified as EIN showed a joint partial loss of expression of both PAX2 and PTEN. However, the previous study by Monte et al. [ ] showed up to 56% and 29% retained expression of PTEN and PAX2, respectively.
Overall, the study showed good reproducibility of the EIN criteria which can be replicated in routine practise after educating the gynaecologists about the possible treatment implications. This simplifies the spectrum from four subtypes as prescribed by previous WHO classification to a more convenient dichotomous subtyping into BH and EIN. The trend in the loss of expression of both PAX2 and PTEN shows a convincing role of the proteins and the genes thereof in the endometrial carcinogenesis. The stepwise increase in frequency of loss of PAX2 and PTEN amongst the various stages of endometrial carcinogenesis seen in our study showed an all-or-none phenomenon amongst the two ends of the spectrum, i.e. the proliferative endometrium and endometrioid carcinoma, which may not representative, in view of the small sample size and the intended design being as a pilot study. However, the study highlighted a possible role in using PTEN and PAX2 in highlighting areas of EIN for pathologists who are a novice at using the criteria or in equivocal cases. However, the routine use of PTEN and PAX2 is not recommended as the objective criteria laid down can be reproduced with training. In the choice of antibodies for immunohistochemistry, PAX2 scores in being a nuclear marker in contrast to PTEN which is a pan-cellular marker. PAX2 also scores in having a better specificity and positive predictive value in comparison with PTEN. We suggest a simple algorithmic approach in the evaluation of endometrial biopsies which have a low power appearance of oestrogen-driven glands (Fig. 9 ). Fig. 9 Suggested algorithmic approach
The sample size in the index study was of 90 cases only, with 30 cases in each arm, which shall remain a limitation of the study. Studies with a larger sample size, preferably having a follow-up period to assess the progression of the cases with EIN to carcinoma or otherwise will further strengthen the classification. However, this study has demonstrated a reasonably easy replication of the EIN criteria on endometrial biopsies showing an oestrogen-driven proliferation. The same can be introduced in routine gynaecological pathology practice after apprising the gynaecologists about the benefits of the new classification which in due course will be ratified and replace the erstwhile four-tiered WHO classification. The study has also shown the continuum in loss of expression of protein molecules PTEN and PAX2 in the various stages of endometrial carcinogenesis leading up to type I endometrial carcinoma, reflecting the important role played the eponymous genes. Though PTEN and PAX2 showed a loss of expression in cases with EIN, the use of IHC in routine diagnosis of EIN is not needed due to the easy replicability of EIN criteria. However, in occasional equivocal cases, a pathologist may resort to using of PAX2 over PTEN to arrive at a diagnosis.