Introduction
The incidence of double primary cancers is not as rare as it may seem [ , ]. With the recent advancements in diagnostic and treatment modalities, there has been increase in the number of patients surviving the treatment and living long enough to develop the second malignancies, which can be detected by the newer diagnostic tests at the initial stages. Genetic predisposition and prior usage of radiotherapy and chemotherapy are the most common factors for occurrence of such cases. Depending on the duration between the appearance of the two primaries, second primary cancers can be divided into two different types. According to IARC guidelines, synchronous malignancies are second tumors which occur either simultaneously or within 6 months after the first malignancy while metachronous malignancies are secondary tumors that have developed after 6 months, or even more than that from the first malignancy [ , ]. The criteria have been given by Warren and Gates for the diagnosis of double primary malignancy. The criteria include histological confirmation of primary and secondary tumors, at least 2 cm of normal mucosa between the tumors. If the tumors are in the same location, they should be separated in time by at least 5 years and also the probability of one being the metastasis of the other should be excluded [ , , ].
Methods and Materials
A hospital-based prospective data were collected from the patients presenting to the Gynecology Oncology Department of Gujarat Cancer Research Institute, which is a high-volume tertiary center. This study was done over a period of 3 years, i.e., 2015–2018. Out of these patients, the patients presenting with dual malignancy, either synchronous or metachronous, were included in the study if they met the Warren and Gates criteria [ ]. Those patients in which exact histological confirmation was not feasible or those in which the second malignancy was proven to be metastasis of the primary were excluded.
Data regarding personal details were collected from all patients: date and place of birth, information of the first admission at the institute, data regarding the tumor site, stage, histopathology and treatment of both the cancers, date of the last follow-up and death, if applicable.
Results
This data of double primary malignancies has been collected over a period of 3 years from the patients attending the gyanecological OPD of Radiation department at our center. The data of all the patients belonging to both the categories have been presented in Tables 1 and 2 . The average age of patients presenting with metachronous tumors is 50 years, those presenting with synchronous malignancies was 53 years, and they do not differ statistically ( p > 0.05). Of all the cases, 64% of the cases belonged to the metachronous and the rest 36% belong to the synchronous tumors. Eighty-three percentage of the patients with metachronous malignancies had received radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy as a treatment for first tumor, suggesting the role of these kind of treatment in developing second primary cancer. In metachronous cancers, the most common first primary site was cervix followed by breast. In synchronous tumors, the most common was uterus with ovary and uterus with cervix. Out of all metachronous malignancy cases, breast–cervix cases were found to be the highest (28%). Out of all presented cases, cervix was reported as the first site in 56% of cases followed by breast (25%). Table 1 The presented cases of metachronous malignancy S. no. Age at first presentation (years) Primary site Histopathology Treatment Time interval (years) Age at second presentation (years) Second primary site Histopathology Treatment 1. 50 Colon Adenocarcinoma Surgery 3 53 Uterus Adenocarcinoma Surgery 2. 55 Cervix Squamous cell ca Chemoradiotherapy 4 59 Colon Adenocarcinoma Surgery 3. 32 Uterus Adenocarcinoma Chemotherapy 2 34 Buccal mucosa Squamous cell carcinoma Surgery f/b radiotherapy 4. 64 Breast Adenocarcinoma Surgery 10 74 Cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 5. 64 Breast Adenocarcinoma Surgery 10 61 Ca cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 6. 50 Ca cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 6 56 Ca esophagus Scc Chemoradiotherapy 7. 55 Ca cervix Scc Palliative RT 2 57 Ca breast Adenocarcinoma Sx-chemo 8. 55 Ca cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 22 77 Ca vulva Scc Chemoradiotherapy 9. 45 Ca cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 3 48 Ca cervical esophagus Scc Chemotherapy M 10. 50 Ca cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 2.5 53 Ca parotid Pleomorphic adenoma Sx-adjuvant RT 11. 58 Ca cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 5 64 Ca lung Scc NACT-CT/RT 12. 55 Ca post-cricoid and upper 1/3 esophagus Scc Chemoradiotherapy 6 61 Ca cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 13. 57 Breast Adenocarcinoma Sx-chemo-adjuvant RT (t3n0) 2012 6 63 Ca cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 14. 66 Cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 4 70 Sts gluteal region High-grade spindle cell sarcoma Post-op RT 15. 50 Cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 7 57 Ca lung Scc (t2n0) 16. 61 Breast Adeno Sx-chemo-RT 1 62 Cervix Scc Adjuvant RT Table 2 The presented cases of synchronous malignancy S. no. Age (years) Primary site Histopathology Treatment Secnd primary site Histopathology Treatment 1. 50 Uterus Adenocarcinoma Surgery Cervix Squamous cell carcinoma Chemoradiotherapy 2. 62 Ovary Serous papillary Surgery and chemotherapy Cervix Squamous cell carcinoma Chemoradiotherapy 3. 56 Ovary Serous papillary Surgery–chemotherapy Uterus Adenocarcinoma Surgery 4. 48 Vulva Scc Radical vulvectomy and bilateral groin dissection Cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 5. 52 Cervix Scc Adjuvant RT Breast Adenocarcinoma Sx (breast) and cvc 6. 55 Uterus Adenocarcinoma Sx–cvc Rcc Clear cell Observation 7. 50 Breast Adenocarcinoma Sx-chemo-RT Vault Scc Chemoradiotherapy 8. 50 Ovary Serous papillary Sx-chemotherapy Cervix Scc Chemoradiotherapy 9. 55 Vulva Squamous cell carcinoma Radical RT–CT Cervix Squamous cell carcinoma Chemoradiotherapy
Discussion
Multiple primary cancer (MPC) refers to more than one primary tumor that occurs at the same time or in succession in one or multiple organs within the same individual [ , ]. MPC is usually found in the neck and head region, and these patients have known to have 36% cumulative lifetime risk of developing second primary malignancy over 20 years [ ]. This has attributed to field carcinogenesis. However, there are rare reports of the same in the female genital system. The age of onset of MPC is similar to that of single cancer, which usually happens in patients between 50 and 70 years. There are chances of misdiagnosing in synchronous malignancies, while metachronous malignancies can be mixed with recurrent and metastatic cancer. As a result, accurate diagnoses and appropriate treatment of multiple primary cancers are necessary.
Although the mechanisms responsible for the appearance of multiple primary cancers have not been fully explained, among the most frequent factors involved are the genetic susceptibility, the immune system of patients and the intensive exposure to carcinogens including chemo- and/or radiotherapy used in the treatment of tumors. The etiology of occurrence of multiple primary cancers in the female genital system is not fully known. It may be associated with the fact that the ovaries, fallopian tubes and the uterus are all derived from coelomic epithelium. Therefore, when these different tissues are affected by the same carcinogenic factor, it is possible for primary malignant neoplasms to occur in these organs. This theory is known as ‘secondary Mullerian system’ [ , ]. Also, the female genital system, including the breast, ovaries, uterine and fallopian tubes, possesses large amounts of ERs, and excess estrogen may result in multiple cancers [ , ]. The carcinogenic effects of radio/chemotherapy have also been proposed for the secondary malignancies development. The treatment used for the first malignancy has resulted in damage to specific regions of DNA with chromosome rearrangement or loss, responsible for tumorigenesis [ ]. There are certain new technologies available which could analyze various genetic changes such as punctiform mutations, loss of heterozygosity or genetic instability. Microsatellite instability (MSI) has been noticed that occurs more frequently in cases of multiple primary malignancies than in sporadic cancers [ ]. Patients with head and neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC) have been known for 36% cumulative lifetime risk of developing second primary malignancy over 20 years. This has attributed to field carcinogenesis related to exposure to common risk factors like tobacco chewing, smoking and alcohol consumption.
Review of the literature suggests that the possibility of simultaneous occurrence of ovarian cancer and uterine cancer is 1.4–3.8% [ ]. In a study done by Dragoumis et al. [ ], this association was found to be 2.9%. In our study, ovarian cancer and endometrial cancer occurred in the first case, and cervical cancer and ovarian cancer occurred in the second case. MPC usually occurs in families with a variety of genetic abnormalities [ ]. In our case series, cervix and breast association was found to be the highest, i.e., 7 out of 25 cases (28%), five were metachronous and two were synchronous. The next frequent association was ovary–uterus (two cases) and cervix–cervical esophagus (three cases). We found one case of association of uterus and colon, one case of colon–ovary and one case of ovary–uterus which may point toward Lynch syndrome or hereditary non-polyposis colorectal carcinoma (HNPCC) and familial breast–ovary syndrome (BRCA1, BRCA2, MMR genes). Further genetic testing for these genes could not be possible due to logistics reasons.
The prognosis of patients with multiple primaries could be determined independent of the stage of each cancer. The treatment of choice, depending on the tumor location, involved curative surgical resection of each cancer, radiotherapy and chemotherapy [ , , ]. In some studies, the survival and prognosis of patients with synchronous ovarian and endometrial neoplasms and that of patients with synchronous colorectal tumors, respectively, were not influenced by the presence of multiple locations [ , ]. However, the prognosis of patients with synchronous breast neoplasms seems to be more reserved as compared with that of patients with unilateral or metachronous neoplasms [ ].
The possibility of multiple primary malignancies existence should always be considered during pretreatment evaluation. Diagnosis of such cases is difficult, especially distinguishing it from metastatic cancer. As a result, some rules should be noted for the diagnosis of female genital multiple primary cancers. The criteria used for the diagnosis of double primary malignancies have been primarily given by Warren and Gates and refined later. There is some evidence that screening will improve outcomes among patients who may develop second malignancies, although the data are limited. The optimal screening modalities and strategies to reduce mortality from second malignancies remain to be defined for most tumor sites. With careful monitoring, secondary tumors could be detected earlier, and, with appropriate intervention, might be better managed, without compromising survival.
Conclusion
The incidence of multiple malignancies, though considered rare, is on the rise given the increased follow-up period, advanced treatment and wider diagnostic testing. In our study, consistent with the literature, most of the patients were diagnosed with advanced stage of cancer and with metachronous more common than synchronous. There have been limited studies of multiple primary malignancies developing in the pelvic region. Our study shows the epidemiological data of such cases from a tertiary care center. Early diagnosis and management of such double malignancies remains a challenge and should be approached on a case-to-case basis.