Introduction
Ovarian neoplasms are an important cause of morbidity and mortality in women. Ovarian neoplasms are a heterogeneous group of tumors including surface epithelial tumors, germ cell tumors, sex cord stromal tumors, and secondary malignancies. The management plan for germ cell tumors even if malignant differs from surface epithelial tumors in respect of conservative surgical approach and preservation of fertility. For surface epithelial tumors, the surgery differs for benign, borderline, and malignant tumors. In malignant cases, staging laparotomy is performed which includes total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic, and para-aortic lymph node dissection, multiple peritoneal cytology, peritoneal biopsies and omentectomy [ ]. Benign tumors are generally managed with removal of ovarian cyst or mass only (cystectomy) especially for young women who want to preserve fertility. Tumors of borderline malignancy are an important group characterized by some histologic features of malignancy (epithelial cell stratification, increased mitotic activity, and nuclear atypia) but lack of stromal invasion. They have an excellent long-term outcome even after conservative surgery. It is extremely helpful and sometimes critical to know intraoperatively the category of tumor one is dealing with, primarily to decide the extent of surgery.
Although disseminated tumors are obvious at surgery, early stage disease (FIGO 1 or 2) are not and when faced with such situations intraoperatively, surgeon can have two management options—either treat each case as a potential case of malignancy and perform a radical surgery or to manage the case as benign without an adequate staging. Both the options have their own disadvantages. First option will lead to an unnecessary staging in around 30% cases and second option will subject the patient to a completion surgery or empirical chemotherapy along with its associated morbidity and overutilization of hospital resources and time. Benign and borderline tumors can be adequately treated with conservative surgery, which may involve preservation of fertility and hormonal function in younger women [ , ].
Preoperative imaging and tumor markers have only limited value in differentiating between these tumor categories [ , ]. Intraoperative frozen section diagnosis of ovarian tumors is widely used in taking the decision regarding the surgical plan. Therefore, the accuracy of this technique is very important. It has been reported to have a good diagnostic accuracy in benign and malignant tumors, but a lower accuracy for borderline tumors [ ]. The aim of the current study was to evaluate the accuracy of intraoperative frozen section in the diagnosis of ovarian tumors at our institution.
Aim of the Study
The aim of the current study was to evaluate the accuracy of intraoperative frozen section in the diagnosis of ovarian tumors at our institution.
Subjects and Methods
All patients with suspected ovarian neoplasm who underwent frozen section service at our hospital from January 2010 to December 2016 were included in our study. Patients with the following indications received intraoperative frozen section services:
1. Clinically benign looking tumors (on preoperative radiology or intraoperative inspection) with raised CA- 125.
2. Clinically malignant looking tumors but have normal CA-125 and look benign on preoperative radiology and on intraoperative inspection.
3. Young patients with ovarian neoplasms in whom fertility sparing surgery was planned.
The procedure for carrying out the frozen section diagnosis was as follows: the pathologist was informed prior about the case details and plan for frozen section. A staging laparotomy was performed, and all organs inspected and the specimen removed and immediately delivered to the frozen section laboratory situated near the operation theatre with all the clinical details of the patient. All fresh gross specimens were examined by a resident and a pathologist or particularly gynecopathologist, in terms of localization, size, color, content, heterogeneity, infiltration pattern of the tumor and condition of the ovarian capsule. One to four sections depending on the size and heterogeneity of the tumor were sampled in a cryostat and sections were stained by hematoxylin–eosin. Slides were evaluated and the frozen section diagnosis was conveyed to the surgical team on phone who then proceeded with the appropriate surgery according to the report. The frozen section diagnosis was categorized as one of the following: primary epithelial ovarian neoplasm—benign, borderline or malignant; primary ovarian germ cell tumor, primary ovarian sex cord stromal tumor, metastatic carcinoma to ovary, benign non-neoplastic conditions and no definite opinion possible. Reports mentioned as ‘suggestive of’, ‘suspicious of’ or ‘compatible with’ were included in the diagnoses mentioned. Frozen section diagnosis was compared to the final paraffin section diagnosis. The reporting of the frozen section is always done by a set of trained senior onco-pathologists who have been working in our institute for a long time and have sufficient training for the same.
Statistical Analysis
The overall accuracy was defined as the total number of agreements between the frozen section and the final diagnosis divided by the total number of tests performed. For the purposes of this study the final histopathology diagnoses were assumed to be correct and gold standard. The sensitivity and specificity and predictive values of frozen section for the diagnosis of various categories of neoplasms were calculated using the standard 2 × 2 method.
Results
During the above-mentioned period, 292 ovarian neoplasm specimens were sent for frozen section reporting. The average time taken for the procedure (sending the sample to obtaining the result) was approximately 30 min. The median age of the patients was 44 years (10–80 years). The breakdown of the frozen section reporting, and the final paraffin section report are shown in Table 3 .
Out of 292 patients, 152 were diagnosed as benign on final (paraffin) examination, whereas 20 were borderline and 120 were malignant. Out of 172 benign cases, 40 were benign cystic lesions of the ovary including follicular, endometriotic, and haemorrhagic cysts. The most common benign neoplastic tumor was mucinous cystadenoma (54 cases) followed by sex cord stromal tumors (22 cases), germ cell tumors (20 cases), and serous cystadenoma (14 cases) (Tables 1 , 2 ). There were two cases of tubercular tubo-ovarian masses. Among borderline tumors, 13 were serous and seven were mucinous neoplasms. The most common malignant neoplasm was serous carcinoma (58 cases) followed by mucinous carcinoma (30 cases), endometrioid carcinoma (8 cases), clear cell carcinoma (2 cases), sex cord stromal tumors (8 cases), germ cell tumors (12 cases) and metastatic carcinoma (2 cases). In one case on frozen section, report was possibility of metastatic mucinous cystadenocarcinoma and final paraffin reporting was primary from appendix and in another case frozen was malignant adenocarcinoma and on IHC primary was from Gall Bladder. Table 1 Distribution of tumors by histology for germ cell tumors Germ cell tumors ( n = 32) Benign Malignant Dermoid cyst 20 2 (with malignant transformation—squamous cell carcinoma) Immature teratoma 3 Dysgerminoma 2 Yolk sac tumors 2 Mixed germ cell tumors 3 Total = 32 20 12 Table 2 Distribution of tumors by histology for sex cord stromal tumors Sex cord stromal tumors ( n = 30) Benign Malignant Fibroma 15 Fibro-thecoma 6 Granulosa cell tumors 5 Sertoli leydig cell tumor 3 Steroid cell tumor 1 Total ( n —30) 22 8
Of the 292 patients, the frozen section diagnosis was in agreement with the final histopathology as to the classification of benign, borderline, or malignant in 281 cases (96.2%) and disagreed in 11 cases (3.7%). Table 3 is a 3 × 3 table showing the results in 292 patients in whom a frozen section diagnosis was given. It should be noted that the diagnosis ‘benign’ included benign ovarian neoplasms and benign non-neoplastic conditions like corpus luteal cysts, endometriosis. The overall accuracy of the test was 96.2% (281 of 292 cases). Table 3 Overall frozen and paraffin section profile for ovarian neoplasms ( n = 292) Frozen section diagnosis n —292 Final diagnosis (Paraffin) Benign Borderline Malignant Benign (160) 152 6 2 Borderline (15) 0 13 2 Malignant (117) 0 1 116 Total (292) 152 20 120
Table 4 shows the performance of frozen section in the three categories of ovarian tumors in our patients. Frozen section had a high sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values for benign conditions (including benign tumors) and malignant ovarian tumors (Table 4 ). However, frozen section had low sensitivity (65%) for borderline tumors while retaining high specificity and negative predictive value in them. Accuracy for germ cell tumors and sex-cord stromal tumors was 100% in our study. Table 4 Frozen section accuracy with respect to final diagnosis % Benign Borderline Malignant Sensitivity 100 65 96.67 Specificity 94.28 99.26 99.42 PPV 95 86.66 99.15 NPV 100 97.47 97.71
Out of total 292 cases, total of 11 cases showed discrepancies (misdiagnosis) between intraoperative frozen section reports and the permanent paraffin section report. There were total ten cases of underdiagnosis and one case of overdiagnosis as summarized in Table 5 . One of the most common causes of underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis were large mucinous tumors. Table 5 Summary of misdiagnosed cases Frozen section diagnosis Final paraffin section diagnosis Under diagnosis (10) Mucinous cystadenoma Well differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma Bilateral serous cystadenoma Unilateral serous cystadenoma and contra lateral well differentiated serous cystadenocarcinoma Mucinous cystadenoma ( n = 3 patients) Borderline mucinous tumor ( n = 3) Serous cystadenoma Borderline serous tumor Bilateral serous cystadenoma Unilateral serous cystadenoma and contra lateral Borderline serous tumor Benign Brenner tumor Borderline mucinous tumor with benign Brenner tumor Borderline mucinous tumor ( n = 2) Well differentiated Mucinous cystadenocarcinoma ( n = 2) Over diagnosis (1) Mucinous cystadenocarcinoma Borderline mucinous tumor
Discusssion
Diagnosis of ovarian tumors is difficult due to vague symptoms, non-specific tumor markers and no preoperative histopathological diagnosis. Histopathologic assessment of an ovarian mass is crucial to select an appropriate surgical procedure and avoid under- and over-treatment of the patient. An accurate diagnosis and staging is necessary to decide the correct management of these tumors especially in early stage disease where there are chances of missing around 30% occult metastasis otherwise. A repeat second surgery is a common problem encountered in a developing country like ours due to inadequate preoperative assessment and inadequate staging. Even the use of indexes such as RMI, ROMA, and IOTA ADNEX model have failed to help us in accurately determining which patients will require an expert gynec-oncologist at the time of surgery instead of a routine gynecologist. Hence the use of a frozen section service for immediate intraoperative reporting helps us in deciding the complete surgical plan of these patients in one sitting [ ].
The results of the present study show that frozen section analysis has a high overall accuracy for the diagnosis of ovarian neoplasms (96.2%). Most studies have reported the accuracy of frozen section from 90% to 97% [ , , , , , ]. This figure would obviously depend on the expertise of the pathologists but the overall inaccuracy should be consistently less than 10% for this procedure to be useful in large tertiary centers dealing with ovarian neoplasms. Evidently, this procedure is technically feasible in an overwhelming majority of patients.
A recent Cochrane database has reviewed 38 studies with 11,181 patients with ovarian masses wherein average sensitivity was 90.0% and average specificity was very high at 99.5%. Their analyses showed that, if the frozen section showed a benign or invasive cancer, the final diagnosis would remain the same in, on average, 94% and 99% of cases, respectively. In cases where the frozen section diagnosis was a borderline tumor, on average 21% of the final diagnoses would turn out to be invasive cancer. They also concluded that the highest discordance is within reporting of frozen section of borderline tumors. The highest accuracy in the database review was noted for specialist gynecological pathologist [ ].
Further analysis showed that the test fared very well on all four conventional indices (sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values) in benign conditions and malignant tumors. It was evident that frozen section did not miss the diagnosis of benign and malignant ovarian tumors in the vast majority of patients (high sensitivity), and furthermore frozen section diagnosis of benign and malignant ovarian tumors was correct in the vast majority (high predictive values). Thus only in six patients out of the 180 called benign by frozen section; the diagnosis was changed to borderline tumor and 2 to malignant on the final histopathology (with the implication that these patients might have been under-treated at initial surgery). In borderline tumors, only in 2 patients diagnosis was mucinous adenocarcinoma on final histology. In only 1 patient out of the 97 patients diagnosed as malignant on frozen section, the final diagnosis was changed to borderline while none was changed to benign (with the implication that this patient might have been over treated at initial surgery).
A meta-analysis of eighteen studies comparing frozen section diagnosis of ovarian pathology with the final histopathology showed the sensitivity of frozen section for benign and malignant lesions to vary from 65% to 97% and 71% to 100%, respectively [ ]. The same analysis showed the specificity to vary from 97% to 100% and 98.3% to 100% for benign and malignant lesions [ ]. However, the situation was different in borderline tumors. The sensitivity and positive predictive value of frozen section were 65% and 86.7%, respectively, in the current study. The reported sensitivity of frozen section in borderline tumors varies from 0 to 87% in various studies [ , , , , , , , , ]. Various reasons have been advanced for the relative inaccuracy of frozen section in the diagnosis borderline tumors.
The problems presented by borderline ovarian tumors are said to be mainly related to sampling errors due to large tumor size and histopathological heterogeneity. It may also arise since mucinous tumors frequently contain benign, borderline and malignant components in different areas of the same tumor in contrast to the most uniform serous tumor. It is obvious that compared to permanent pathological evaluation, there is not enough time to take too many slices during frozen section procedure and large tumors may require multiple slices which is not always feasible in limited time settings [ , ]. In our cases, out of the 20 patients with a final diagnosis of borderline tumors, 13 were correctly identified by frozen section, 6 were incorrectly labeled as benign, which may not have critical therapeutic implications since patients with borderline tumors also do well with conservative surgery [ ]. Of greater therapeutic implication was the incorrect frozen report of malignancy in 1 of these 20 patients since extensive surgery is not required in borderline tumors, particularly in early stages.
The clinicians and pathologist must be aware of the pitfalls of this method; therefore, a good communication established between them is necessary to obtain more accurate results and to minimize the number of deferred cases. Ultimately, any frozen section service must be of clinical use. The surgeon must have sufficient confidence in the intraoperative report, and must believe it to be sufficiently accurate to allow him or her to base surgical action upon it. The surgeon must also accept that there is an inherent error rate, and that may vary according to the type and size of tumor. Regular dialogue between surgeon and the pathologist is vital.
Conclusion
We concluded that frozen section is an accurate and useful test in the intraoperative evaluation of patients with suspected ovarian neoplasms. Its results can be used to guide the type and extent of surgery, especially in institutions with experienced pathologists. However, under-diagnosis can occur in tumors of borderline category particularly mucinous borderline tumors which can be minimized by increased sampling from area where wall appears thick or there is evidence of solid growth on the frozen section.