Background
Uterine carcinosarcoma is considered as metaplastic carcinoma comprising of both carcinomatous and sarcomatous components which are believed to arise from a single metaplastic clone. Carcinosarcomas have resembled in epidemiology, risk factors and clinical behavior with endometrial adenocarcinoma as opposed to uterine sarcomas and are therefore considered a high-risk variant of endometrial carcinoma. The aim of this study is to evaluate clinical presentation, histopathologic pattern, management, recurrence pattern and outcome of uterine carcinosarcomas presenting to a tertiary care cancer center over an 8-year period.
The case records of all the histologically proven uterine carcinosarcomas treated at the Basavatarakam Indo American Cancer Hospital, Hyderabad, India, a tertiary cancer care center from June 2008 till January 2015 in Department of Surgical Oncology, were retrieved from a prospectively maintained database. The clinical, treatment, pathological and follow-up details were analyzed. All the patients underwent routine hematological, biochemical and radiological tests. Computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging of abdomen and pelvis was done. Any additional imaging done was based on the patient’s symptomatology. Stage of disease was determined using the FIGO 2009 classification as for endometrial adenocarcinoma: Stage I—tumor confined to the corpus uteri, IA—no or less than half myometrial invasion, IB–invasion equal to or more than half of the myometrium; Stage II—tumor invades cervical stroma but does not extend beyond the uterus; Stage III—local and/or regional spread of the tumor, IIIA–tumor invades the serosa of the corpus uteri and/or adnexae, IIIB–vaginal and/or parametrial involvement, IIIC–metastases to pelvic and/or para-aortic lymph nodes; Stage IV—tumor invades bladder and/or bowel mucosa and/or distant metastases, IVA—tumor invasion of bladder and/or bowel mucosa, IVB—distant metastases, including intra-abdominal metastases and/or inguinal lymph nodes. Patients were reviewed every 3 monthly for initial 2 years with history, physical examination and relevant imaging and then 6 monthly for next 3 years. All the patients were followed until June 2017. The patients who missed a scheduled follow-up were contacted on the telephone.
Numerical data are represented as mean, median and frequency wherever appropriate. Mann–Whitney test was used for comparing numerical data and Kruskal–Wallis test for comparing > 2 independent samples. A p value of ≤ 0.05 was taken significant. Statistical analysis was performed on GraphPad Prism software version 5 for windows and survival analysis by Kaplan–Meier survival estimates using SPSS 20 software.
Results
A total of 20 cases of carcinosarcoma of the uterus were diagnosed. The median age of patients at presentation was 60 years (range 47–73 years). The main presenting symptoms were abnormal vaginal bleeding in 70%, low abdominal pain in 25% and white discharge in 5%. All the women were postmenopausal. All except one patient underwent surgery following evaluation. Twelve of the 20 women presented in FIGO Stage I (60%), 1 in Stage II (5%), 4 in Stage III (20%) and 3 in Stage IV (15%) (Table 1 ). Eighteen women underwent hysterectomy with salpingo-oophorectomy (TAH BSO). One of the patients underwent posterior exenteration, and twelve patients also underwent pelvic node dissection (Table 2 ). Two patients who underwent surgery elsewhere, their block and slides were reviewed in the institute. Patients in Stage IVB presented with omental metastasis, ascites or with pleural effusion. Table 1 Patients demographics parameters Number of patients 20 Median age at presentation (years) 60 Range 47–73 Menopausal status Postmenopausal ( n ) 20 (100%) Premenopausal ( n ) 0 Presentation Bleeding per vaginum ( n ) 14 (70%) Discharge per vaginum ( n ) 1 (5%) Abdominal pain ( n ) 5 (25%) Stage ( n ) IA 7 (35%) IB 5 (25%) II 1 (5%) IIIA 2 (10%) IIIB 0 IIIC 2 (10%) IVA 0 IVB 3 (15%) Median overall survival in months 21.5 Table 2 Depicting details of surgery and adjuvant therapy Treatment modality Details of treatment Number of patients Surgery TAH BSO 18 Posterior pelvic exenteration 1 Pelvic lymphadenectomy 12 Curative surgery 17 Palliative surgery 1 Adjuvant radiotherapy 8 Adjuvant chemotherapy Paclitaxel, ifosfamide, carboplatin 1 Paclitaxel, carboplatin 3 Ifosfamide, doxorubicin 1 Chemotherapy for recurrence/metastatic disease Ifosfamide, doxorubicin 1 Paclitaxel, carboplatin 1 Carboplatin 2 Doxorubicin 1 TAH BSO total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Includes two patients who underwent surgery elsewhere
Median follow-up was 22 months ranging from 2 to 108 months. Median survival was 21.5 months. The median overall survival was 43 months in Stage IA, falling to 28 months in Stage II and further dropping to 5 months in Stage IVB (Table 3 ). Most of the recurrences occurred in the retroperitoneum (50%) and pelvis (30%) across the stages (Table 4 ). The pattern of recurrences across the stages is detailed in Table 4 . The details of adjuvant therapy and treatment of recurrence are mentioned in Table 2 . Table 3 Stage-wise survival and mortality Carcinosarcoma stage Median OS (month) Mortality (%) DFS (month) 1A ( n − 7) 43 43 19 1B ( n − 5) 17 60 14 II ( n − 1) 28 100 24 IIIA ( n − 2) 20 50 20 IIIC ( n − 2) 60 50 8 IVB ( n − 3) 5 100 OS overall survival, DFS disease-free survival Table 4 Details showing survival, recurrence pattern, DFS and adjuvant therapy of carcinosarcoma patients Serial no Stage Surgery Heterologous element Adjuvant treatment Recurrence DFS (Months) OS (months) Status 1 1A TAH + BSO + PLND Present CT Nil 5 5 Died (medical issues) 2 1A TAH + BSO Absent Nil Nil 74 74 Alive without disease 3 1A TAH + BSO + PLND Absent RT Bones, cervical, mediastinal, retroperitoneal nodes 7 69 Alive without disease 4 1A TAH + BSO Absent RT Para-aortic nodes 19 43 Dead 5 1A TAH + BSO + PLND Present RT Nil 7 7 Died (medical issues) 6 1A TAH + BSO elsewhere Absent CT Pelvis, lung 35 43 Alive with disease 7 1A TAH + BSO + PLND Absent Nil Nil 30 30 Alive without disease 8 IB TAH + BSO + PLND Absent RT Lung, skeletal, adrenal, brain 10 22 Dead 9 IB TAH + BSO Absent Nil Liver, para-aortic and parietal wall deposits 12 17 Dead 10 IB TAH + BSO + PLND Absent Nil Para-aortic nodes 15 17 Dead 11 IB TAH + BSO + PLND Absent RT Lost to follow-up after 14 months 14 14 Lost 12 IB TAH + BSO + PLND Absent Nil Breast cancer 33 33 Alive 13 II TAH + BSO Present CT Para-aortic nodes 24 28 Dead 14 IIIA TAH + BSO + PLND Absent Nil Para-aortic nodes 5 5 Dead 15 IIIA TAH + BSO + PLND Present RT Nil 35 35 Alive 16 IIIC TAH + BSO + PLND Absent RT Pelvis 6 108 Alive 17 IIIC TAH + BSO + PLND Absent RT Pelvis 10 12 Dead 18 IVB TAH + BSO elsewhere Absent CT Omental deposits 5 Dead 19 IVB No surgery CT Ascites and bilateral pleural effusion 21 Dead 20 IVB Posterior exenteration palliative (bleeding tumor) Present Nil Omental deposits 2 Dead TAH BSO total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, PLND pelvic node dissection, CT chemotherapy, RT radiotherapy, DFS disease-free survival, OS overall survival
A total of 7 patients were in Stage 1A. One patient received 5 cycles of paclitaxel and died of medical problem 5 months after surgery; the second patient is alive and doing well at 74 months of follow-up. She did not receive any adjuvant treatment. The third patient who underwent TAH, BSO and received RT in adjuvant setting had bony metastasis at 7 months after surgery; she underwent 6 cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel-based chemotherapy and remained disease free till 52 months when she had cervical, bilateral supraclavicular, mediastinal and retroperitoneal nodal relapse. She received 5 cycles of ifosfamide and Adriamycin and had complete regression of disease on whole-body PET CT scan and doing well till the last follow-up, i.e., 69 months. The fifth patient had the para-aortic nodal recurrence at 19 months, was advised chemotherapy but refused and died of disease at 43 months post-surgery. The sixth patient died of medical issues at 7 months post-surgery. The seventh patient is disease free at 30 months of follow-up. The details and pattern of recurrence are presented in Table 4 .
Five patients were managed in Stage IB, three developed recurrences and died of disease, and one patient developed breast cancer 15 months after primary surgery, underwent treatment for breast cancer and is doing well at 33 months of follow-up. Another patient was lost to follow-up after 14 months of primary treatment. Details of recurrence are given in Table 4 .
There was a single patient in Stage II, developed para-aortic recurrence at 24 months after surgery, received ifosfamide and doxorubicin-based chemotherapy but died at 28 months of follow-up.
There were two patients in Stage IIIA: one patient developed para-aortic recurrence and died of disease at 5 months of primary surgery, and another patient is doing well without disease at 35 months of follow-up.
In Stage IIIC two patients were managed. The first patient developed pelvic recurrence at 6 months, received 6 cycles of doxorubicin and ifosfamide, had complete regression of disease on whole-body PET CT scan and doing well and is disease free at 108 months of follow-up. The second patient also developed pelvic recurrence at 10 months, could not receive chemotherapy owing to poor performance status and died at 12 months. Both of these patients received adjuvant radiotherapy.
Three patients were in Stage IVB. The first patient who underwent a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and omental biopsy at a periphery hospital was referred to our hospital for further management. There were omental deposits at the time of initial surgery (both the primary and omental deposits were confirmed on slide review at our hospital), received 6 cycles of paclitaxel, ifosfamide and cisplatin-based chemotherapy and died of disease at 5 months of follow-up.
The second patient at presentation had metastatic uterine carcinosarcoma with ascites and bilateral pleural effusion, received 6 cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin and second-line chemotherapy ifosfamide/peg-grafeel and died of progressive disease at 21 months of follow-up.
The third patient presented with bleeding per vaginum and lower abdominal pain. She underwent preoperative evaluation including MRI abdomen which revealed a grossly enlarged uterus (15 × 11 × 8 cms) with rectal involvement. Surgery (posterior pelvic exenteration) was planned with a curative intent. But intraoperatively a large bulky tumor was present in relation to the uterus and was found to infiltrate the rectum; few omental metastases were also present. There was no cleavage between the uterus and rectum; therefore, she underwent palliative hysterectomy with anterior resection. It was done upfront. She was planned for chemotherapy but died 2 months after surgery.
Patients with disease restricted to corpus uteri had a significantly higher median survival of 28 months than those with disease extending beyond the uterus (12 months) ( p = 0.018). Of 17 patients with nonmetastatic disease at presentation, 10 recurred, of which 9 patients died of disease at a median follow-up of 28 months. Patients who received postoperative radiotherapy had a median survival of 34 months, while those who received adjuvant chemotherapy had a survival of 21 months and those with no adjuvant therapy 17 months although not significant ( p = 0.61). There was no significant difference in overall survival in patients of uterine carcinosarcoma with heterologous elements (17.5 months) and heterologous elements (30 months) ( p = 0.25). Also, the presence of lymphovascular invasion, the size of the tumor and pelvic lymphadenectomy did not confer any significant difference in survival (Table 5 ). For nonmetastatic disease, we did not find adjuvant RT decreasing local recurrence rate. Three- and 5-year survival by Kaplan–Meier survival estimates was 40% and 32% for the entire cohort (Fig. 1 ). Table 5 Various prognostic factors Median overall survival in months p value Heterologous elements 17.5 0.25 No heterologous element 30 Adjuvant radiotherapy 34 0.61 Adjuvant chemotherapy 21 No adjuvant therapy 17 Uterine limited 28 0.018 Extrauterine spread 12 Pelvic lymphadenectomy 19.5 0.86 No pelvic nodal dissection 28 Tumor size 0.67 <5 cm 28 5–10 cm 22 >10 cm 35 Lymphovascular invasion 0.93 Presence 30 Absence 25
Discussion
Uterine carcinosarcomas are uncommon tumors accounting for less than 5 percent of all uterine malignancies [ , ]. Uterine carcinosarcomas are regarded as metaplastic carcinomas, the sarcomatous component being developed from dedifferentiation of the carcinomatous element [ ]. They are known to be a high-risk variant of endometrial adenocarcinoma since they share resemblances in epidemiology, risk factors and clinical behavior with endometrial carcinoma as opposed to uterine sarcomas [ ].
The patients with uterine carcinosarcoma present with the classical clinical triad of pain, bleeding per vaginum and an enlarging mass per abdomen, of which the commonest presenting sign is vaginal bleeding [ ]. In a large report of 300 patients with carcinosarcoma, the presenting signs were postmenopausal bleeding in 82%, pelvic pain in 13% and vaginal discharge in 10% [ ]. In the present series, the main presenting symptoms were abnormal vaginal bleeding in 70%, low abdominal pain in 25% and white discharge in 5%. The primary management of carcinosarcoma confined to both staging and management. Surgical staging includes total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic and para-aortic lymph node clearance, peritoneal washings, omentectomy and random biopsies of peritoneal surfaces. A post-hoc analysis of the Gynecologic Oncology Group LAP2 trial evaluated 72 patients with carcinosarcoma combined with the 403 patients of other “type II” cases. Women with apparently early-stage uterine serous carcinoma and carcinosarcoma had poorer outcomes than women with grade 3 endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Patterns of recurrence and survival were not impacted by the surgical approach [ ]. All patients with carcinosarcoma should undergo pelvic lymphadenectomy for both staging and well as therapeutic purposes. In a study of 1855 patients of carcinosarcoma of the uterus from SEER database, 5-year overall survival (OS), disease-free survival and median survival were significantly improved for patients receiving lymph node dissection (LND) that received no LND, irrespective of radiotherapy. Adjuvant radiation therapy had no improvement on overall survival regardless of LND [ ]. Five-year survival of patients who underwent LND was 49 versus 34% who did not. Median survival with and without lymphadenectomy was 54 and 25 months, respectively [ ]. But in the present series, the addition of pelvic lymphadenectomy did not translate into a survival advantage (19.5 vs 28 months) ( p = 0.86). Benefit of pelvic lymphadenectomy is not evident in the present series can be due to less number of cases.
About 10 percent of the patients with uterine carcinosarcomas have metastatic disease at presentation and another 60 on staging scan [ ]. Patients with uterine carcinosarcomas have a poorer prognosis than those with high-grade endometrioid, papillary serous and clear cell tumors, especially for those with early-stage disease. In a study, patients with early-stage disease (Stage I or II) had a shorter median survival than controls (high-grade endometrioid, papillary serous and clear cell tumors), 26 months versus 95 months. There was no difference in median survival when comparing advanced disease [ ]. In the present series, the median survival of patients with Stages I and II uterine carcinosarcomas was 28 months similar to earlier studies. In a study of 203 patients with Stages I and II carcinosarcoma, at a median follow-up of 31 months, only 50% of patients were alive [ ]. The recurrence was nodes and pelvis [ ]. In the present series, 10 of the 17 patients with nonmetastatic uterine carcinosarcomas had a recurrence of disease, of which 9 died of disease at a median follow-up of 28 months. The median survival was 21.5 months. In line with above studies, most of our patients had relapses in the para-aortic area (50%) followed by pelvis (30%). Fig. 1 Kaplan–Meier curve showing the survival of patients with carcinosarcoma
Few studies have reported on uterine carcinosarcomas from India. Anupama et al. [ ] have reported on 20 patients with carcinosarcoma from South India. Patients who had the gross extrauterine disease at the time of surgery had a survival of 9 months, whereas in patients with disease confined to the uterus, the survival was 36 months. In the present series, patients with carcinosarcoma had a median survival of 28 months; those with disease extending beyond the uterus had a survival of 12 months ( p = 0.018). Another series of 42 patients from North India reported a median overall survival (OS) of only 6.6, 6.8 and 9.4 months, respectively, in patients with carcinosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma and endometrial sarcoma [ ]. In the present study, the median overall survival was 43 months in Stage IA, dropping to 28 months in Stage II, further falling to 5 months in Stage IV B. Median survival was 21.5 months for the entire series.
The EORTC prospective randomized trial accessing the role of postoperative pelvic RT in Stage I–II uterine sarcomas demonstrated no difference in either overall or disease-free survival but there was an increased local control for the carcinosarcoma patients receiving radiation but without any benefit for leiomyosarcoma [ ]. The incidence of distant relapse was not significantly different. In the present series, patients with carcinosarcoma who received postoperative radiotherapy had a median survival of 34 months, those who received adjuvant chemotherapy had a survival of 21 months, and those with no adjuvant therapy had survival of 17 months although not significant ( p = 0.61).
GOG-150, a phase 3 randomized study of whole abdominal irradiation (WAI) versus three cycles of cisplatin, ifosfamide and mesna (CIM), did not find a statistically significant advantage in recurrence rate or survival for adjuvant CIM over WAI in patients with uterine carcinosarcoma. However, the observed differences favored the use of combination chemotherapy in future trials [ ]. There is no clear role for RT in the adjuvant setting. In the large report of 300 patients (53% treated with surgery and radiotherapy), adjuvant RT resulted in a lower rate of pelvic recurrence compared with surgery alone (28 versus 48%, respectively, p = 0.0002). However, there was no difference in five-year overall survival (27 versus 36%, p = 0.10) with adjuvant radiation [ ]. However, in the present series addition of radiotherapy did not impact any local recurrences significantly. A small GOG prospective study comparing adjuvant doxorubicin versus observation in Stage I or II leiomyosarcomas and carcinosarcomas found no in local recurrence or survival with adjuvant doxorubicin [ ]. The French Sarcoma Group randomized trial comparing adjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin, cisplatin and ifosfamide (API) followed by RT versus RT alone in patients with localized uterine sarcomas including carcinosarcomas found that the 3-year disease-free survival was significantly improved, i.e., 55% in patients receiving chemoradiation versus 41% for RT alone ( p = 0.048). The corresponding 3-year overall survival rates were not significant different, 81% versus 69%, respectively ( p = 0.41) [ ].
However, the prognosis and survival rates of patients of uterine carcinosarcomas remain poor because of a high rate of distant recurrence. Lack of consensus regarding adjuvant therapy stems from lack of evidence. Most of the studies investigating the role of adjuvant treatment are retrospective, and prospective randomized controlled trials comparing the various adjuvant chemotherapy schedules and multimodal treatment are lacking. There is no consensus regarding the optimal mode of adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy or radiation or both) in patients with uterine carcinosarcoma. Till more and more effective systemic therapies are being available, the role of local therapies, i.e., surgery and radiation in controlling locoregional disease, assumes a greater role. Further studies with multimodality treatment should be undertaken to maximize the efforts for a cure.
The present study has lots of shortcomings. Less number of cases, retrospective nature, lack of pelvic nodal dissection in all patients might have contributed to confounding factor like the benefit of adjuvant therapy. However, there were few patients with early disease, had recurrence but a good responses to adjuvant treatment and were long-term survivors. Such patients if identified by molecular markers can potentially be benefited by chemotherapy. The molecular typing of these tumors along with mutational analysis in future can open new windows for therapeutic strategies and to understand the biology and clinical behavior of these tumors.