Ovarian cancers present in advanced stage disease (stage III/IV) in 2/3 of cases, and majority present at 50–70 years of age. Chemotherapy and surgery are the main treatment modalities for treatment of AOC. Unlike chemotherapy regimes for AOC, surgical treatment is influenced by multiple variables which are dependent upon the surgical abilities and attitudes of surgeons, availability of adequate operating facilities and equipment and patient factors.
Timing of Surgery
Surgery is offered both as primary debulking surgery (PDS) or delayed debulking surgery (DDS) after neo-adjuvant chemotherapy (NACT). Two RCTs [ , ] have shown no adverse impact of delayed debulking on patient outcome when compared with primary debulking surgery. Interval debulking surgery (IDS) is referred to where surgery follows chemotherapy treatment but is performed after an initial unsuccessful attempt at primary debulking.
Cytoreductive surgery (CRS) for AOC requires careful decision-making on both timing of surgery, patient selection and type of surgery which should be performed. Surgical attempt is regarded as palliative procedure if complete/optimal debulking is not achievable (residual disease 0/< 1 cm, R0/R1). A multidisciplinary approach is adopted for careful decision regarding which patients to offer primary debulking and when to offer delayed debulking and what is the extent of radical debulking procedure is the patient capable of tolerating.
Patient selection for ovarian debulking surgery—primary versus DDS—is influenced by disease distribution and patient factors. Disease distribution which favours NACT is miliary serosal involvement of small bowel, bulky porta hepatic disease, and gross mesenteric involvement likely to involve > 2 bowel resections, stage 4 disease. Associated medical comorbidities, albumin level which indirectly reflects nutritional status and WHO performance status, are an integral part of decision-making in ovarian cytoreductive surgery (CRS).
Who Should Operate?
Cytoreductive surgery for ovarian cancers involves multicompartmental procedures and requires surgical abilities to perform upper abdominal debulking procedures like diaphragm resections, splenectomy, supracolic omentectomy, bowel resections and para-aortic nodal dissections. This type of surgery has best outcome with site-specific gynaecological surgical oncologist. However, a multispecialty team which includes upper GI, colorectal and hepatobiliary with a gynaeoncologist is an acceptable option.
Preparation for ovarian cytoreductive surgery
Ovarian cytoreductive surgery requires stabilisation of the medical comorbidities and optimisation of the nutrition with supplemental feeds like enteral or parenteral nutrition in patients with advanced stage ovarian cancer. Both a detailed anaesthetic review and a detailed consent are obtained, explaining the proposed operative procedure, its possible outcome (complete/optimal and suboptimal cytoreduction, R0/R1/R2) and associated risks of surgery. Preoperative preparation also involves bowel preparation (low roughage diet, bowel kinetic therapy/Kleanprep), ITU booking, adequate surgical and nursing team availability and adequate equipment.
Anaesthetic preparation requires preoperative transoesophageal Doppler monitoring for fluid replacement, arterial and central line insertion (make sure a port of central line is left unused for post-operative parenteral nutrition if required), regional block/epidural for post-operative analgesia and insertion of nasogastric (NG) tube/(nasojejunal) NJ tube.
Patient positioning requires Lloyd Davies leg supports as a third of patients are likely to require rectosigmoid resections for complete cytoreduction, and this position is essential for colorectal anastomosis/anterior resections.
Equipment and Instruments
Self-retaining retractor is a must for major debulking surgery which can be Grays self-retaining, Omni tract, etc. Several types of energy devices are available and depending upon surgeon’s preference and include diathermy monopolar/bipolar, Ligasure impact, Harmonic Ace, Plasmajet. Homeostatic devices like hemoclips, Floseal/Tacoseal, surgical and vascular sloops are useful to have on standby to control any surgical haemorrhage.
Specific instruments include long artery forceps (Roberts), Little woods, Babcocks, MayoRussians forceps, Laheys, Duvals, Zehpplins clamps, St. Marks retractor, instrument for bowel resection and anastomosis, non-crushing bowel clamps and circular and linear staplers (TA45, CEEA, sigmoid sizers). Sutures which are useful to have available are 2–0 vicryl, 3–0 PDS and 4–0 prolene.
Surgical Procedures
Ovarian CRS requires multicompartment surgery depending upon the disease distribution (Fig. 1 ). Each compartment surgery usually can take up to 90 min. This helps in planning theatre time and staff. Fig. 1 Multicompartment disease distribution in AOC
Different surgical procedures which may be required are tabulated in Table 1 . Table 1 Planning of theatre time—approximately 90 min required for each quadrant surgery Diaphragm resection/stripping Superficial liver deposit excision Cholecystectomy Supracolic supra-arcade omentectomy Lesser omentum resection Diaphragm resection/stripping Splenectomy Morrisons pouch peritonectomy Para-aortic lymphadenectomy Ileal/mesenteric deposit resection Splenic flexure mobilisation Parietal peritonectomy Appendicectomy Right hemicolectomy TAH + BSO Pelvic peritonectomy Rectosigmoid resection/anterior resection
Adequate Exposure and Retraction
This is mandatory for all ovarian CRS-adequate incision, exposure and retraction for accessibility to all compartments. Above shows insertion of a self-retaining Gray’s retractor used in Pan-Birmingham Gynaecology Cancer Centre.
Surgical Procedures in Ovarian CRS
Omentectomy
This involves complete excision of the greater omentum extending from the greater curvature of the stomach to its inferior attachment to the transverse colon and splenic flexure on the left and hepatic flexure on the right side. Omentum consists of 4 layers, and usually, excision is between layer 2 and 3 which allows entry into lesser sac. However, if there is posterior infiltration of layer 3 or superficial mesenteric infiltration of transverse colon, then dissection between layer 3 and 4 is required. After excising the first 2 layers from the transverse colon, lesser sac is opened, and one can access the posterior surface of stomach pancreas and lesser omentum, and if no involvement is found, then one proceeds to mobilisation of splenic flexure to avoid traction on splenic surface. Fine adhesions to spleen are released, and flimsy adhesions to posterior surface of stomach are released. Another useful trick is to keep a rolled up medium swab on superior surface of spleen which avoids traction on the short gastric from the spleen at the cardia of the stomach and also makes them easily accessible by this downward traction on spleen.
If the lower part of greater omentum is infiltrated with tumour, then omentectomy may start with first detaching the omentum from the greater curvature of the stomach by ligating the gastro-epiploic arcade and then pealing it off the transverse colon. Detachment of momentum from hepatic flexure is usually without any difficulty.
Figure 2 Peritoneal reflections in abdomen showing lesser sac in blue and greater sac in pink shade. Fig. 2 Adequate exposure and retraction a Grays self-retaining retractor assembled, b Gray’s self-retaining retractor unassembled, c adequate incision from pubic symphysis to xiphisternum
Splenectomy
Removal of spleen is required in 10–15% of ovarian debulking surgery. Indications for splenectomy are because of metastatic disease or splenic trauma/tear during radical omentectomy. Splenic infiltration is seen mostly at the hilum as a direct infiltration from metastatic omental deposits. Subcapsular and parenchymal splenic deposits are an extension of vascular metastasis.
Splenectomy is performed either by mobilisation of its surrounding ligaments gastrosplenic, phrenosplenic, splenorenal and splenocolic ligaments and then approaching the vascular pedicle at the hilum. This technique allows a retrograde dissection of the tail of the pancreas. Second technique is direct splenic vessels ligation at the splenic hilum. Care has to be taken that the splenic artery is ligated first followed by the splenic vein. This allows reduction in vascular pooling in the spleen. Ligation of splenic artery and vein together has to be avoided because of the risk of forming arterio-venous fistulae.
Splenic artery is a branch of coeliac plexus and traverses the superior surface of the pancreas and can be easily identified and ligated at this level.
Non-suction drain should be left post-splenectomy, and amylase should be analysed in the drain fluid to diagnose any undetected pancreatic leakage.
Direct infiltration of the tumour in the pancreatic tail can be removed with the spleen, but care has to be taken to carefully suture the pancreatic duct with 3–0 PDS suture or put staples with a GIA (gastro-intestinal anastomosis) stapler (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 Useful surgical anatomy for splenectomy a vascular relations of spleen, b anatomic display of vascular branches of coeliac trunk, c anatomical posterior relations of stomach, d surgical display of spleen and its cotyledons and e surgical display of splenic relation to the stomach and short gastric
Diaphragm Resection/Stripping
Diaphragm involvement is common with AOC, and the right hemidiaphragm is more commonly and extensively involved compared with the left hemidiaphragm; which may be due to the clockwise flow of intraperitoneal fluid, which is indirectly linked to peristalsis of the bowel and diagonal attachment of the small bowel mesentery.
Hepatophrenic Anatomy
The diaphragm is a musculofibrous septum connected to the spine, ribs and sternum and consists of peripheral muscular part and central membranous aponeurosis. The liver is attached to the diaphragm and the abdominal wall by ligaments and loose connective tissue. The falciform ligament attaches the liver to the abdominal wall anteriorly and superiorly continues into right and left coronary ligaments which connect the liver to the diaphragm and posterolaterally extend to form the right and left triangular ligaments. The right triangular ligament also fixes the liver to the right renal Gerota’s fascia which needs to be divided to get access to Morrison’s pouch. The blood vessels in relation to the coronary ligaments are the hepatic veins (right, middle and left) which leave the liver and drain in the IVC. Ligament teres also referred to as the round ligament of the liver lies in the free lower edge of the falciform ligament and represents the obliterated left umbilical vein.
Tumour deposits are invariably found at its base of this ligament and are obscured by a band of tissue between segments III and IV of the liver.
Technique of Liver Mobilisation
Positioning of patient is important, and Trendelenberg with Lloyd Davies position with hperextension of the thoracic spine by putting a jelly bag under thoracic spine allows easy access to the right subdiaphragmatic space. It is easier for the operating surgeon to stand caudally between patient’s legs for ease of access. An extended incision is made from pubic symphysis till xiphisternum and the xiphoid process may be sacrificed if required to improve surgical access. Self-retaining retractor is required for both lateral and upward retraction thus ensuring an optimal view in the subphrenic space. The falciform ligament is detached from the parietal peritoneal attachments and then from the surface of the liver in its membranous part reaching the coronary ligaments which are carefully divided on both sides using fine gentle dissection to avoid damage to the hepatic veins/IVC. The right triangular ligaments are divided, and the IVS is visualised. Liver is retracted to the left and upwards to avoid traction injury to the hepatic veins.
Diaphragm stripping is undertaken by first detaching it from the costal margins and extending it centrally towards the central tendon. Traction and counter-traction by assistant is the key to an easy stripping of the diaphragm. If there are thick plaques of tumour and infiltrative tumour deposits are suspected, then excision of the diaphragm is undertaken by entry into the pleural space. One may encounter phrenic vessels which are variable in their distribution on the diaphragm and may need coagulation if encounter bleeding. Anaesthetist needs to be informed about the entry into pleural space as patient may experience transient bradycardia and hypotension secondary to traction on the liver. The defect in the diaphragm is usually sutured with 2–0 prolene as a continuous non-interlocking suture. Before the last suture, a low suction catheter is inserted in the chest cavity which will be pulled out with the tying of the last knot. Air leak test is performed by filling the subdiaphragmatic space with saline and requesting the anaesthetist to inflate the lungs to check for any air bubbles.
Usually, chest drains are not required unless unable to close the diaphragm defect adequately. Non-suction drain is left in the right hypochondrium. Post-operative monitoring is performed in the HDU or intensive care to ensure adequate continuous monitoring of oxygen saturation and vitals. Chest X-ray is performed post-operatively to exclude any significant pneumothorax. Active chest physiotherapy is a key to a quick recovery after such procedures to avoid any hypostatic pneumonia [ ].
Morrison’s Pouch Peritonectomy
This is another common site for tumour deposits in AOC, and after mobilisation of the right triangular ligament and identifying the IVC and the duodenum medially and the adrenal gland posteriorly, the peritoneum is gently dissected off with monopolar diathermy. Care must be taken to avoid any deep dissection as it can potentially result in injury to kidney or adrenals. At this stage, explore for any deposits from foramen of Winslow which leads to entry into lesser sac from the greater sac and also allows palpation of the gastrohepatic ligaments for any metastatic deposits.
Pelvic Phase of Debulking
This involves hysterectomy + bilateral salpingo-oopherectomy ± pelvic peritonectomy ± rectosigmoid resection. If there is extensive pelvic peritoneal infiltration, then an extraperitoneal approach is adopted by first ligating the ovarian pedicle extraperitoneally after identifying the ureters and slooping them by rubber vascular sloops. Peritoneal incision is extended caudally, and round ligaments are divided extraperitoneally, and vesical peritoneum is lifted of the bladder in continuity. Bladder is denuded of the vesical peritoneum, and the vesico uterine plane is dissected, and bladder is reflected down. Bilateral uterine vessels are clamped and cut extraperitoneally after identifying the extraperitoneal path of the ureter in the pelvis. Bilateral cardinal ligaments are ligated extraperitoneally, and vagina is opened anteriorly from 3 to 9o’clock position. Rectovaginal space is opened posteriorly, and a retrograde approach may be adopted to approach the TME (transmesometrial resection) plane. This allows the pouch of Douglas peritoneum to be removed in continuity with the rest of the pelvic peritoneum. The rectosigmoid resection is performed if required by first ligating its mesenteric vessels and then the inferior mesenteric vessels and joining up the TME plane dissection from above. Rectosigmoid is transected using contour and the en bloc removal of uterus, cervix, tubes and ovaries and rectosigmoid with all the pelvic peritoneum is removed en bloc. Reanastomosis of sigmoid is usually done to rectal stump using circular staplers. Vagina is closed with interlocking vicryl sutures, and integrity of the bowel anastomosis is checked with bubble test.
Documentation of the outcome of surgery is crucial relating to the outcome—whether total macroscopic clearance was obtained (R0) or < 1 cm residual disease left (R1) or gross > 1 cm residual disease left (R2). Clear documentation of estimated blood loss and swab, needle and instrument count are all indicative of essential and safe practice.
Anaesthetic and Post-operative Management
A dedicated anaesthetic team is essential as all patients require combined general + regional analgesia, intra-arterial monitoring, transoesophageal Doppler for adequate fluid balance, central line for fluid resuscitation and post-operative parenteral nutrition. Multicompartment debulking procedures do require post-operative monitoring in intensive care, adequate thromboprophylaxis, active physiotherapy and nutritionist input.
Conclusions
Ovarian debulking procedures require right attitude and motivation towards debulking. Careful case selection for debulking is a clinical art. Knowledge of anatomy, familiarity and skills of performing surgical procedure, adequate availability of equipment, retractors and haemostatic devices are all essential to obtain a good outcome in ovarian debulking surgery.