Introduction
Cervical cancer is often diagnosed during child-bearing years, and families are increasingly delayed due to career obligations and effective contraception. Cervical cancer treatment options include fertility sparing options, and many young patients will enquire about or request these treatments.
Gynaecologic oncologists need to translate the applicability and safety of these options to the individual patient so that treatment decisions can be taken that do not compromise oncological safety, while retaining fertility potential where possible.
This overview will attempt to describe the surgical radicality and place the cancer treatment ability of the available surgical options into perspective and outline the indications for each. Radical trachelectomy will be discussed in more detail, and the principles of oncological safety will be discussed as well as the place and indications for adjuvant treatment. Lastly, the current data on pregnancy outcome will be summarised.
Fertility Sparing Surgical Procedures
Local destruction methods including cryotherapy, photodynamic therapy and cold coagulation techniques are only suitable to treat pre-invasive lesions and will not be discussed further [ ]. Treatment options for invasive lesions that will spare fertility to varying extent include large-loop excision of the transformation zone (LLETZ) (also called LEEP), cold knife cervical conisation, simple trachelectomy, radical trachelectomy and embryo, oocyte or ovarian preservation including ovarian transposition [ ].
LLETZ treatment usually involves excision of only the transformation zone and a shallow excision technique with removal of minimal amounts of stroma. It can, however, be adapted to remove more endocervix using the cowboy-hat-shape excision for endocervical lesions. Ideally, LLETZ treatment is reserved for pre-invasive lesions and even a “deep” LLETZ should still include minimal stroma.
Needle cautery conisation or laser cone is a hybrid term which implies removal of more stroma. The technique involves a circulating straight wire, needle or laser excision of a cone shape out of the cervical centre. It can be higher and wider than a LLETZ and is potentially equally therapeutic as a cold knife cone. For diagnostic purposes, cold knife technique enables better evaluation of the margins and should therefore be the preferred method for known or suspected invasive lesions.
Cold knife conisation implies removal of some cervical stroma, without removal of the full thickness or depth of the cervix. The lateral and vertical size of the cone should be adapted to the size and epithelial type of the lesion as well as the position, shape and size of the cervix. Histopathology of the resulting specimen is ideal for diagnosis and for accurate staging of very early lesions, provided the cutting margins are free of pre-invasive and invasive disease (and the lesion can therefore be evaluated completely). Presence or absence of lymphovascular invasion must be reported as well as the disease-free surgical margin, horizontal diameter and depth of stromal invasion [ ].
Simple trachelectomy is the removal of the cervix in a non-radical way, therefore, without removal of the para-cervical ligaments (parametrium). After colposcopy to outline the extent of the cervical epithelial lesion, the technique is similar to that of the first part of vaginal hysterectomy. All cervical stroma can be removed using this technique which will impact negatively on cervical fertility and obstetrical function [ , ]. Simple vaginal trachelectomy has more or less the same indications as a cone; it can be adapted for larger lesions or recurrent pre-invasive disease [ ]. Radical trachelectomy is the radical removal of cervix, therefore, with removal of some of the parametrium and usually vaginal cuff. It can be combined with pelvic node dissection if warranted by the size of invasion. Radical vaginal trachelectomy follows the first step of the classical Schauta operation [ ] and radical abdominal trachelectomy can be done as an open technique [ ] or with minimally invasive techniques as robotic [ , ] or laparoscopic radical trachelectomy [ , ]. Outcomes are probably dependent on correct patient selection, radicality and ability of the surgeon.
Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy is widely studied to downstage tumours in order to reduce the radicality of the surgery without oncological compromise [ , ]. It can then be followed by conisation, simple trachelectomy or used to enable radical trachelectomy rather than radical hysterectomy [ ]. Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy, however, remains experimental, is not accepted standard therapy, and indications are therefore unclear. Completion surgery must include removal of the complete initial tumour bed and a full pelvic lymphadenectomy.
Ovarian preservation is indicated for most young patients with cervical cancer undergoing surgery with the exclusion of adenocarcinoma larger than 4 cm due to the risk of ovarian metastases [ ]. The risk for women with cervical adenocarcinoma between 2 and 4 cm is also considered by some experts as large enough to indicate removal of the ovaries. This is debatable and should be discussed and weighed against age and the wish for ovarian function including future fertility [ ]. Ovarian cryopreservation retains the risk of re-inplantation of potentially malignant tissue, but oocyte preservation is oncologically safe.
For patients who are more likely to need pelvic radiation, it has long been standard procedure to transposition the ovary on its vascular pedicle to a position which will be outside the radiation field. The risk for ovarian recurrence is slightly higher as these ovaries will not be treated by adjuvant radiation [ ]. Oocyte retrieval for in vitro fertilisation and surrogacy is also standard procedure, but many factors limit the number of patients who are lucky enough to benefit from a successful pregnancy outcome. Ovarian transposition, cryopreservation or oocyte preservation should be discussed with all pre-menopausal women according to the availability of these techniques [ ]. The rest of this manuscript will focus on safe and effective preservation of the uterine body as a method to preserve fertility.
Appropriate Choice of Surgical Procedure
The FIGO staging system is designed around the local and lymphatic risks per tumour size and characteristics. Tumour stage is therefore an appropriate determinant for choice of treatment. Pre-invasive disease is FIGO stage 0 as it carries no risks of spread.
Pre-invasive disease implies that there is no stromal invasion, and these lesions are best classified as pre-malignant. Complete excision or destruction of all involved epithelium in the canal and/or on the ectocervix is the required therapy. Pre-invasive adenocarcinoma may be difficult to distinguish from early invasive disease. In both squamous and adenomatous lesions, the full extent of the lesion must be examined to exclude invasion. This is especially important in immune-deficient patients and in large and high-grade lesions.
FIGO stage IA1 is best described as minimally invasive disease. In the absence of lymphovascular invasion (LVI), cold knife conisation is sufficiently therapeutic. If the cutting margin is not clear of all invasive AND pre-invasive disease, a second cone or re-cone is indicated to obtain a safe margin and to confirm the diagnosis and stage. Simple trachelectomy may be used to obtain safe and complete excision. Minimally invasive or FIGO stage IA1 lesions without LVI does not require lymph node assessment or removal and should have no risk of spread via the local lymphatics which will indicate removal of paracervix.
Lesions with any LVI or larger than 3 mm deep or 7 mm wide but smaller than 2 cm diameter are called very early-stage invasive disease and require removal of some parametrium. This includes FIGO stage IA2 and small IB1 tumours. Radical trachelectomy or type B or C1 radical hysterectomy is considered appropriate surgical treatment because of the risk for lymphatic spread [ , ]. Removal of the cervical stroma, parametrium and lymph nodes is indicated. These risks are still related to lesion size, and the radicality of surgery should be tapered to the lesion size and histological type [ ]. The same indications are used to determine the need for adjuvant therapy whether the uterine body is saved or not [ ].
Lesions between 2 cm and 4 cm (FIGO stage IB1) but still confined to the cervix are called small early-stage disease which require more radical tissue removal and have a higher risk for lymphatic spread [ ]. Inclusion of these patients into uterine body preservation protocols is increasingly common, but most reported cases have tumour sizes smaller than 3 cm. Open abdominal radical trachelectomy using radical hysterectomy principles (C1 or C2 depending on tumour size) and at least a 1-cm tumour-free isthmus margin offers acceptable radicality for well-selected patients with tumours larger than 2 cm [ ].
Large early-stage invasive disease (FIGO stages IB2 to IIA2) is usually defined as tumours larger than 4 cm confined to cervix or involving the upper vagina. The risk for tumour spread to surrounding lymphovascular vessels and lymph nodes relates to tumour biology, size and depth of invasion [ ]. Exophytic growth of a well-differentiated, large tumour with sufficient length of retained healthy cervical stroma may sometimes equate to the possibility for safe fertility sparing surgery. Importantly nodal treatment must not be compromised, and the need for completion surgery will arise more often. Patients should be carefully informed of the risks and fully counselled.
Patients with vaginal spread (stage IIA disease) have even higher risks for positive lymph nodes and therefore fertility sparing is not indicated. Resection will require at least type C2 radicality on the parametrial and vaginal sides [ , ]. Simplified indications for uterus sparing surgery in early-stage cervical cancer are shown in Table 1 . Table 1 Selecting appropriate surgical procedures for fertility sparing surgery Interpretation FIGO stage Definition Disease extent and risks Treatment Prerequisites Pre-invasive disease Stage 0 No invasion Confluent clone or multifocal intra-epithelial disease No risk for stromal disease or nodal disease Local destruction with coagulation or LEEP/LLETZ Follow-up needed Minimally invasive disease Stage IA1 <3 mm deep <7 mm wide No LVI Risk for cervical stromal disease No risk for parametrial disease No risk for nodal disease (<1%) Simple cone/trachelectomy Margins totally clear of pre-invasive disease and invasive disease (If not: risk for residual cancer unacceptable) Very early-stage invasive disease Stage IA2 to IB1 Any LVI ≥7 mm wide Or ≥3 mm deep <2 cm High risk for known cervical stromal disease Risk for parametrial lymphatic disease Small risk for pelvic nodal disease Radical trachelectomy (any route) is appropriate Wide margins around cervical tumour and vaginal cuff Diagnostic removal of pelvic nodes Small, early-stage invasive disease Stage IB1 2–4 cm, cervix only Known cervical stromal disease Risk for parametrial/lymphatic disease Significant risk for pelvic nodal disease Radical trachelectomy may be appropriate in selected cases Wide margins around cervical tumour and vaginal cuff Diagnostic (+) removal of nodes Large, early-stage invasive disease Stage IB2-IIA2 >4 cm, or vaginal invasion Significant risk for isthmus invasion, vaginal and for parametrial disease High risk for pelvic and para-aortic nodal disease Fertility sparing usually not appropriate Possible after neo-adjuvant chemotherapy Safety uncertain Wide margins around cervical tumour and vaginal cuff Therapeutic removal of suspicious nodes Diagnostic removal of pelvic and para-aortic nodes Adjuvant therapy often indicated
Radical Trachelectomy: Important Considerations
Indications for Fertility Preservation
The most important reason for preserving the uterine body is the patient’s wish to have and carry a child in future. Only the minority of patients who undergo fertility saving will probably eventually have an own child, but the psychological and societal advantages of retained menstruation and potential for motherhood can also be beneficial regardless of whether realised or not [ ]. The probability of successful conception and pregnancy should, however, be taken into account during counselling and decision making.
Pre-operative Assessment
Full assessment of tumour characteristics will include a comprehensive histology report, clinical determination of tumour size, position and cervical invasion. Imaging including transvaginal ultrasound and MRI can assist in the assessment of size, depth of invasion and remaining cervical stroma; CT scanning may indicate involved nodes (>1 cm) [ ]. MRI is regarded as imaging modality of choice to evaluate the tumour before fertility sparing surgery.
Indications
Radical trachelectomy enables excision of all cervical epithelium, a vaginal cuff and varying amounts of parametrial/para-cervical tissue. Removal of the cervical stroma is limited by the level of the isthmus which is needed to retain pregnancy. Radical trachelectomy is indicated in patients who wish to retain their fertility or uterus; who need radical cervical tumour excision; and where the size and position of the tumour allows resection with an estimated 10-mm free margin while retaining the uterine isthmus. All these patients require complete diagnostic pelvic lymphadenectomy to determine the need for adjuvant therapy.
Adenocarcinomas
Adenocarcinoma was initially considered a contra-indication for uterus preservation, but is now included in all series. This tumour type is more common in younger women and increasingly common among populations screened by cytology [ ]. Because the architectural pattern is more complex, special attention must be paid to the deepest margin (isthmus). The tumour margin may be difficult to determine with an increased risk for ‘skip’ lesions in the remainder of cervix or uterus. Assessment difficulties and possible more aggressive behaviour can increase risks for local recurrence and metastases.
Adenosquamous carcinoma carries an increased risk for lymphatic vessel and nodal spread and requires wider local excision and comprehensive lymphadenectomy. Ovarian metastases in adenocarcinoma types are more common and relate to tumour size [ ]. For these reasons, fertility sparing should be limited in adenocarcinoma types to tumours smaller than 2 cm.
Surgical Approaches
The degree of local radicality needed as well as surgeon experience determines the approach. Except for enthusiasts of vaginal and minimally invasive surgery, most surgeons can achieve wider resection by open pelvic surgery [ ].
The expertise to do diagnostic pelvic lymphadenectomy via laparoscopy (with or without robot assistance) is now widespread, and this is the preferred approach if no large malignant nodes are suspected and no other indication for laparotomy exists.
Surgical Technique
Radical trachelectomy is done by adapting the Schauta technique and combining it with laparoscopic lymphadenectomy [ ]. This technique is well suited to ectocervical lesions and where pre-cancerous lesions involve the vagina. Removal of upper vagina and ventral parametrium can be achieved with ease and safety while resection of dorsal (and lateral) parametrium is more difficult than with abdominal approaches.
Abdominal radical trachelectomy follows the steps of abdominal radical hysterectomy and is therefore relatively easily learnt. Parametrial removal can be adapted to the tumour characteristics so this is the preferred approach for larger and high-risk tumours. Smaller tumours that qualify for fertility sparing allow nerve-sparing surgery [ ]. Usually the round ligaments are initially severed and the corpus re-suspended at the end of surgery. The uterine arteries can be tied at their origin with safety to uterine circulation; alternatively, the uterine branches can be spared, especially in smaller tumours.
The Role of Intra-Operative Histology
Theoretically the only margin where uterus sparing places an extra limit to resection is at the isthmus. At this superior resection margin, the size and depth of the tumour will limit the length of remaining cervix or isthmus and therefore the potential pregnancy outcome. The aim should be to remove 10 mm of tumour-free cervix superior to the tumour, and this should be confirmed at the time of surgery with frozen section. Retaining the isthmus is essential to save fertility, and all remaining cervical stromal length will improve pregnancy outcome [ ].
Frozen section of the pelvic nodes is recommended but has a relatively low sensitivity, which is improved if sentinel nodes are assessed [ ]. Positive nodes necessitate adjuvant therapy which is usually radiation or chemoradiation. Further surgery is thus usually abandoned in favour of primary radiation treatment if nodes are positive. Alternatively, surgery can be completed but uterus sparing is abandoned; ovaries can be suspended to limit radiation damage.
Re-anastomosis and Cervical Cerclage
When adequacy of cervical resection is confirmed, permanent cervical cerclage is considered and the vagina is anastomosed to the isthmus or cervix with dissolvable material. The contribution of high cerclage to successful pregnancy outcome is uncertain, but using existing obstetrical principles, cerclage is important if cervical length is less than one centimetre. Permanent monofilament suturing may erode less through the vagino-isthmus anastomosis than braided tape [ ]. This suture can be placed successfully using endoscopy and at a later stage.
Adjuvant Therapy
The estimated risk of recurrent disease, including all the known high and intermediate risk factors, will determine the need for adjuvant treatment. The percentage of women referred for such therapy differ per series and depend on inclusion and referral criteria used. Currently radiation or chemoradiation is recommended using the post-operative indications after radical hysterectomy [ ]. Evidence is emerging demonstrating the effectiveness of chemotherapy alone as an alternative to radiation which may increase the number of women who achieve saving of their fertility [ ].
Nodal status remains the strongest predictor of oncological outcome and indication for adjuvant therapy. It is important that in all cases with an indication for nodal assessment, full pelvic lymphadenectomy is completed and histological assessment of at least 12 nodes is done. Otherwise, negative nodal status is not confirmed and adjuvant therapy is indicated.
Oncological Outcomes
When the oncological outcomes of procedures involving reduced radicality are evaluated, it is of utmost importance to compare these with controls which are equally matched in all other aspects. In this way, radical trachelectomy outcomes cannot be compared with radical hysterectomy groups, as the criteria to qualify for trachelectomy are stricter. Radical trachelectomy patients as a group should therefore need less adjuvant therapy and must have better disease-free survival and overall survival rates than the combined FIGO stage I group [ ].
Data on oncological outcomes have wide variation between series and reviews, but generally about 5% will have positive nodes, 5% needing completion surgery and 5% needing radiation treatment [ , , ]. Available literature suggests a crude recurrence rate of <5% (<1% for FIGO stage 1A, 1–4% for FIGO stage IB) and overall survival rate of > 98% [ , ]. Outcome data for tumours >2 cm are scarce and cases are carefully selected; recurrence occurred in about 5% and death in >2% [ ].
Fertility Outcomes
The main purpose sparing the uterine body is to retain the potential to conceive and then carry a pregnancy to viable age. Important fertility outcomes that are reported in the literature include ability to conceive, abortion and late pregnancy loss, prematurity and near-term live deliveries. These outcomes are influenced by factors like termination of pregnancy, wish to conceive and partner availability and must be compared with women of similar age and fertility status (older women without proven fertility) [ ].
Published series combine women with different tumour characteristics and different types of surgery, with and without cerclage. According to available data including a recent meta-analysis, about one half of all patients had attempted to conceive by the time of evaluation and about half of these conceived naturally [ , ]. Pregnancy rates after radical trachelectomy varied according to tumour size, with combined rates of about 20%. Of pregnancies achieved, 15% (after conisation) to 25% (after radical trachelectomy) ended in abortion and ~10% were lost during the second trimester [ , ]. In combined data, about two-thirds of pregnancies achieved have resulted in a baby born alive and viable; the preterm delivery rate after radical trachelectomy is about 25% and the mean gestational age is 33 weeks [ , , , ]. Almost all babies were born by caesarean section, either high transverse or classical; growth impairment was not a problem. Table 2 shows factors to consider in selecting appropriate candidates for fertility sparing surgery. Table 2 Selecting appropriate candidates for fertility sparing surgery Factors influencing fertility outcomes Factors influencing oncological outcomes Fertility wish Nodal status Relationship status Tumour size Age Histological type Previous pregnancy Resection margins Ovarian reserve Depth of stromal invasion Socio-economic factors Adjuvant therapy Preserved cervical length Vaginal invasion
Conclusion
Fertility sparing surgery is established as a valid treatment for early-stage cervical cancer. Careful attention should be paid to selection of an appropriate patient and appropriate operative approach following the known principles of cervical cancer surgery including the indications for node dissection and adjuvant therapy. Removal of the para-cervical tissue should be similar to removal at the time of radical hysterectomy for the same tumour, while 10-mm tumour-free cervical stroma should in principle be removed above the tumour. Simple hysterectomy can be replaced by cone or simple trachelectomy, while radical hysterectomy can be replaced by radical trachelectomy if the prerequisites are met.
Care should be taken when oncological outcomes are interpreted as patients who qualify for fertility sparing should comprise a low-risk group. Further attention is warranted to understand the uptake and outcomes of fertility after uterus and ovarian sparing treatment. Regardless of successful pregnancy, retention of fertility potential is experienced by women as a very positive outcome.