Introduction
Surgeons continuously try to reduce complications in patients undergoing surgery. Patients have different preoperative risks leading to difference in surgical outcomes and complications. Gawande et al. recently developed and validated a simple “Apgar score for surgery” (or surgical Apgar score: SAS) based on intraoperative blood loss, heart rate and blood pressure (Table 1 ). These authors demonstrated that such a scoring system is useful in rating the condition of patients after general and vascular operations [ ]. We sought to assess the ability of this metric to predict postoperative complications among patients undergoing surgical procedures for gynecological malignancies. Table 1 10-point surgical outcomes score 0 point 1 point 2 points 3 points 4 points Estimated blood loss (ml) >1000 601–1000 101–600 ≤100 – Lowest MAP (mm Hg) <40 40–54 55–69 ≥70 – Lowest HR (beats/min) >85 76–85 66–75 56–65 ≤55 Surgical score = sum of the points for each category in the course of a procedure
The APACHE score and the Physiologic and Operative Severity Score (POSSUM) for the Enumeration of Mortality and Morbidity have both been proposed as clinical measures of patient condition. These scores are not easily calculated at the bedside, require numerous data elements and rely on laboratory data that are not uniformly collected. As a result, neither has come into standard use for surgical patients. Many believe that intraoperative management contributes importantly to overall outcomes, but quantitative metrics of operative care have not been available. Among intraoperative factors, alterations of patient condition, including hypotension, hypertension, hypothermia, bradycardia, tachycardia and blood loss, have been independently linked with adverse outcomes. And some risk prediction methods have integrated intraoperative variables, yet no consensus has been reached on how to directly evaluate performance and safety in the operating room. All three variables of SAS has been independently studied and found to be strongly predictive of major postoperative complications and death in different surgical specialties [ , ]. The SAS has since been validated externally by several other groups in patients undergoing general, vascular, urological, gynecological, orthopedic and pancreatic surgery and neurosurgery [ , , , , , , , , ]. There have been no studies on validation of this core in India.
Methodology
A total of 100 patients being operated at the Department of Gynecologic-Oncology, The Gujarat Cancer & Research Institute (GCRI), Ahmadabad, from September 1, 2015, to November 30, 2015, were included in this study. Their clinical preoperative, intraoperative and postoperative parameters were recorded; each patient was followed for a period of 30 days from the day of surgery. Data on demographics, clinicopathological characteristics, comorbidities, intraoperative and postoperative complications were collected. GCRI is a high volume regional cancer centre in western India. All the consultant gynecological oncologists are senior specialist with decades of surgical experience; thus, quality of surgery was uniformly maintained.
SAS was calculated using intraoperative blood loss, lowest mean arterial pressure and lowest heart rate as previously described. Specifically, SAS was determined by adding points assigned for each of the 3 individual variables (estimated blood loss, lowest mean arterial pressure and lowest heart rate). Definition of major complications included those previously reported by Gawande et al. during development and validation of the surgical score. Additionally, we considered clinically relevant complications specific to the gynecologic oncology field, like injury to bladder, ureter, bowel or pelvic vessels. The occurrence of postoperative complications within 30 days of surgery represented the primary outcome.
Data were analyzed statistically by computing Student’s t test using SPSS-16 software. p value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
A total of 100 patients were included in the study. Table 2 gives the clinicopathological characteristics of study population. The median age was 51 years old, and mean body index (BMI) was 25.8. Of our cohort, 42% of patients were found to have ovarian malignancy, 31% benign pathology, 17% endometrial, 6% cervical and 4% vulvar cancer. Patients who were found to have benign pathology had pelvic masses of undetermined malignant nature, and thus an exploratory laparotomy was done; majority were benign ovarian masses, rest being myomas/endometriosis. Our study population represented a diverse range of women from different age groups, youngest being just 11 years old and eldest being 80 years. Table 2 Patient characteristics ( n = 100) Age (median, range) 50 (11–80) BMI (mean, range) 25.8 (17–32.3) ASA class (mean) 2.5 (2–3) HPE ( n , %) Carcinoma endometrium (17) Carcinomas ovary (42) Carcinoma cervix (7) Carcinoma vulva (4) Benign pathology (31)
We had a total of 38 complication events in 25 patients (Tables 3 , 4 ).Complication events were divided as “intraoperative complications” and “postoperative complications”. Nine patients had varying intraoperative complications, 25 had postoperative complications and 5 had both. Delayed extubation requiring longer ventilation was our commonest intraoperative complication. Incomplete wound dehiscence ( n = 19) was the commonest postoperative complication. Table 3 Intraoperative complications N Delayed extubation 5 Ureteric injury 1 Bladder injury 2 External iliac vein injury 1 BT ≥ 4 U PRBCs 1 Table 4 Postoperative complication events N Readmission <30 days 10 Unplanned ICU admission 2 DVT 2 BT ≥ 4 U PRBCs 2 Incomplete wound dehiscence 19 Post-op ventilatory support ≥48 h 2 Sepsis &/or SIRS 1 Reoperation 1 Burst Abdomen 2
There were 2 deaths in the entire study population. One of these patients developed sepsis syndrome. Many patients required blood transfusion intraoperatively or postoperatively. but only 3 patients required 4 or more transfusions within 48 h.
The mean length of stay in the hospital was 8.7 days. This may be higher than average due to administrative reasons like lack of accommodation, especially for outstation patients.
There were only 2 planned bowel surgeries in the study population (one right hemi-colectomy and other feeding jejunostomy). There was one case of ureteric transection and 2 bladder injuries, which were recognized and repaired intraoperatively itself. One patient had sustained injury to external iliac artery, which was managed by the operating gynecologic oncologist herself.
The commonest postoperative complication was incomplete wound dehiscence ( n = 19). This could be attributed to various reasons like malignancy, preoperative anemia, excess blood loss, poor nutrition. There were just 2 cases of complete wound dehiscence (burst abdomen) (Table 5 ). Table 5 Result of Student’s t test for comparing postoperative complications with other variables Groups T value Significance Postoperative complications v/s SAS 3.4661 p = 0.0008 (highly significant) Postoperative complications v/s age −0.2877 p = 0.3871 (not significant) Postoperative complications v/s BMI 1.3660 p = 0.9125 (not significant) EBL v/s postoperative complications −3.3541 p = 0.0006 (highly significant) Two-tailed Student’s t test between presence and absence of postoperative complication group showed significant mean difference in mean SAS ( p = 0.0008) suggesting lower SAS as a risk factor for postoperative complication
There was a significant increase in rate of complications as SAS decreased, with values of 5 or less most significantly associated with likelihood of postoperative complications (Fig. 1 ). Previous studies have found similar results, especially as SAS approaches 4 or below [ , ]. Table 6 gives distribution of patients as per their SAS. Majority of patients had a rather uncomplicated surgery, and their SAS was between 6 and 9. Fig. 1 Correlation of SAS with postoperative complications Table 6 Distribution of rate of postoperative complications at each surgical Apgar score SAS Postoperative complication Total Absent Present 1 0 2 2 2 1 1 2 3 0 1 1 4 3 4 7 5 11 3 14 6 17 4 21 7 24 8 32 8 18 2 20 9 1 0 1 Total 75 25 100
At a cutoff of SAS less than 5, sensitivity is 44%, specificity is 80%, positive predictive value (PPV) is 42.3% and negative predictive value (NPV) is 81%, Positive likelihood ratio (LR+) is 2.22 and negative likelihood ratio (LR−) is 0.7. There was significant association between SAS and postoperative complications. With each unit increase in SAS, there was 37.8% reduction in postoperative complications. This was significant even after adjustment with other covariates like age, BMI.
Discussion
Cancer incidence in India is estimated to be around 70–90 per 100,000 population. About 50–60% of all cancers among women in India are related mainly to the four organs; cervix uteri, breast, corpus uteri and ovaries [ ]. A vast majority of these women require some form of surgery as part of their management, and perioperative complications are common. Dependent on disease sites and concomitant surgical procedures, reported complication rates for oncology surgeries inclusive of hysterectomy range between 7.5 and 87.6% [ , , , , , ]. Prevention of perioperative complications is particularly important in oncology patients. Complications may postpone a planned chemotherapy or radiation treatment, expose an immunocompromised patient to nosocomial infection, increase stress on a patient and their caregivers and reduce the patient’s ability to spend limited time with family and friends.
To date, we surgeons lack an effective tool that allows us to easily and accurately categorize a patient’s risk of postoperative complications before the patient has left the operating room. The surgical Apgar score (SAS) was developed for this purpose; it is a simple postoperative score derived from easily obtained data including EBL, lowest MAP and lowest heart rate. In several series, this score has been identified as a significant predictor of 30-day morbidity and mortality in general and vascular surgery patients. Due to this, it has gained much interest as a possible tool for postoperative care redesign.
This study was undertaken like a pilot study to see results of application of SA to our subset of patients. Our results suggest that a previously validated risk-assessment metric (SAS) predicts postoperative complications in patients undergoing surgery for gynecologic malignancies overall. Our data support that the SAS does predict the likelihood of postoperative complications in a broad cohort of women undergoing surgery for gynecological malignancy. This metric may therefore assist in triage of gynecological cancer patients to optimal postoperative levels of care and facilitate counseling, monitoring and management in the postoperative period.
In addition to its role in the management of individual patients, the SAS performs well as a marker for intraoperative performance. The use of the SAS as a potential tool for surgical quality outcome research in gynecologic oncology seems attractive and must be evaluated.
A large, multicentre, prospective study across 8 countries also validated the score in 5909 adults undergoing non-cardiac operations [ ] and in the largest study to date, the score was validated retrospectively in 101,907 patients across a wide range of surgical subspecialties in a single American centre [ ]. There have been no validation studies of SAS in India as yet, and this study, though small, is an attempt in this direction.
The shortcomings of this study were the small sample size. We ultimately found 30% patients with benign pathology, thus a larger study especially looking at only malignant cases would have stronger outcomes and more valid as far as specialty of gynecology–oncology is concerned. A larger patient population can further strengthen this metric and possibly establish surgical Apgar score as a tool to triage postoperative patients. This is the first Indian study analyzing surgical Apgar score as an analytical marker of surgical outcome.
Conclusions
Low SAS significantly associates with morbidity in women undergoing surgery for gynecological malignancies. A larger study can strengthen the association of SAS with operative morbidity/mortality.