Introduction
Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most fatal of all gynaecologic malignancies. It is the seventh most common cancer in women worldwide (18th most common cancer overall), with age standardized incidence and mortality rates of 6.1 and 3.8% per 100,000 women, respectively [ ]. The standard treatment remains complete surgical staging in early stage and maximal cytoreductive surgery in advanced cases with neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy. Despite various advancements in its management, mortality from EOC remains high due to diagnosis in advance stage.
The age-specific incidence rate for EOC increases from 35 years onwards and reaches a peak between the ages of 55 and 64 years [ ]. Less than 20% of EOC occurs in women below 40 years [ ]. Young patients tend to have better survival compared to older patients. This may be due to greater proportion of early-stage disease and lower tumour grade seen in this age group [ ]. The difference in tumour biology in these two age groups may also contribute to the variable survival rates. Young women with EOC comprise a special subset as some of these patients may desire future fertility and hormonal function preservation. Studies have shown fertility-sparing surgery (FSS) to be safe and effective method in young patients who have undergone a thorough staging laparotomy in grade 1 or 2, stage 1A and 1C tumour [ ].
The purpose of this study was to evaluate clinical and pathological characteristics of patients with epithelial ovarian cancer in age 20–40 years and secondarily, to assess outcome of fertility-sparing surgery in these young patients.
Methods
All patients in the age group 20–40 years with malignant ovarian tumour treated at GCRI between the years 2010–2012 were identified from the hospital computer database. For the purpose of this study, only the data of patients with EOC were collected retrospectively from the case records. Patients with all stages of EOC in the age group of 20–40 years who underwent treatment (surgery and/or chemotherapy) at GCRI were included in the study. This also included patients who were operated elsewhere but received chemotherapy at GCRI. Histopathological slides of all patients were reported or reviewed by gynaecologic oncologic pathologists at our institute. Patients with germ cell, metastatic, sex cord stromal tumours and those with age outside the study criteria were excluded. The data collected were patient’s age, parity, history of infertility, stage and grade of the tumour, type of surgical procedure, proportion of patients operated elsewhere, chemotherapy used, recurrence of the disease and outcome of patients who underwent fertility-sparing surgery.
Results
Between 2010 and 2012, 189 patients with malignant ovarian tumours in the age group 20–40 years were treated at GCRI. A total of 134 (72%) of these patients had EOC and remaining were germ cell (20.4%), metastatic (7%) and sex cord stromal tumours (0.6%). The data of 134 patients with EOC were analysed for this study. The mean age of patients with EOC was 34.5 years and mean parity was two. More than 80% of the patients with EOC presented with abdominal pain and distention or a feeling of lump in the abdomen for a mean duration of two months. Thirty-two (23.8%) patients were infertile and nulliparous, and three patients were unmarried. EOC was diagnosed during pregnancy in three patients (2.2%): two during first trimester and one during caesarean section. The demographic and clinical details are summarized in Table 1 . Table 1 Patient’s symptomatology and tumour characteristics Patient and tumour characteristics Age (years) 34.5 Parity 2 (0–5) Symptoms No. of patients (%) Abdominal pain 106 (56) Abdominal distention/lump abdomen 61 (32.2) Urinary symptoms 13 (6.8) Loss of appetite/early satiety 12 (6.3) Nausea/vomiting 10 (5.2) Constipation 09 (4.7) Incidental 06 (3.1) Menstrual irregularities 05 (2.6) Backache 04 (2.1) Weakness 03 (1.5) Mean duration of symptoms (days) 66 (2–365) Mean tumour size (cm) 12 (5–22)
Of the 134 patients with EOC, eighty-seven patients (65%) had advanced-stage EOC (stage III and IV). The grade of the carcinoma was known only in 87 patients (65%). Overall, thirty-two patients were under 30 years of age, of which half had advanced-stage disease. Serous carcinoma was the most common histological type which accounted for 49.2% of the patients followed by mucinous tumour. Other histological types were rare. For all EOC subtypes, grade 2 differentiation was most frequent (26.1%) as shown in Table 2 ; however, the grade was not specified in 47 patients (35%). Table 2 Pathological characteristics Tumour features No. of patients (%) Stage I 43 (32) II 4 (3) III 73 (54.5) IV 14 (10.5) Histological type Serous 66 (49.2) Mucinous 22 (16.4) Endometrioid 9 (6.7) Brenner 2 (1.5) Clear cell 1 (0.8) Adenocarcinoma, not otherwise specified 34 (25.4) Grade 1 23 (17.2) 2 35 (26.1) 3 29 (21.6) Grade not specified 47 (35.1)
Seventy-five (56%) of the 134 patients had their primary surgery at our centre. Only 14 (19%) of these patients had early-stage disease and all underwent staging laparotomy. Of the remaining 61 (81%) patients who had advanced disease, 6 (10%) underwent primary debulking surgery, 49 (80%) interval debulking surgery and 6 (10%) were given palliative chemotherapy. All the patients who underwent primary surgery had optimal debulking surgery. Only one patient was found to be inoperable due to advanced disease during interval surgery and hence was relegated to palliative treatment.
Fifty-nine (44%) of the 134 patients with EOC had some initial surgery elsewhere before they came or were referred to our centre. Majority of these surgeries were performed by general gynaecologists. Only 25 (42%) of these surgeries were complete surgery of which 19 (76%) were early stage and 6 (24%) were advanced stage. The remaining 34 (58%) patients were either incompletely staged or debulked; this included 10 patients with early-stage disease and 24 patients with advanced disease. All patients with early disease underwent completion surgery with staging at our centre, and there was no upstaging on final histopathology. Of the 24 patients with advance disease incompletely operated elsewhere, 10 (42%) underwent interval surgery following neoadjuvant chemotherapy, 1 (4%) patient underwent completion surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy and 13 (54%) patients were given palliative chemotherapy—this included two patients who had recurrent disease. One patient had to undergo palliative ileostomy for intestinal obstruction.
In this study, four patients underwent fertility-sparing surgery (FSS)—2 at our centre. The first patient underwent FSS at 20 weeks of gestation. As the final stage was Ia grade 1 of serous EOC, the patient was kept under observation. She delivered a healthy baby at term by caesarean. She was pregnant for the second time at the time of last follow-up. The other patient underwent FSS at 8 weeks of gestation and had stage Ic1 grade 2, serous EOC. The patient aborted during adjuvant chemotherapy (carboplatin and paclitaxel) following which she became amenorrheic but was free of disease till the time of last follow-up. Two unmarried patients underwent FSS elsewhere. Both had received six cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy and were unmarried till the time of last follow-up.
Overall, thirty-two (23.8%) patients with EOC had infertility. Of these, 11 patients had clinically apparent early-stage disease. Four of these patients had initial conservative surgery elsewhere which was followed by completion surgery at our centre. Seven patients with early disease opted for hysterectomy; two of them were performed at our centre. On reviewing the final histology of all these patients, only one patient (3%) had low-grade stage Ia disease which strictly fulfilled the criteria for FSS.
Discussion
Among the gynaecological malignancies, EOC has the highest mortality rate. The relative frequency and type of malignant ovarian tumour vary across different age groups. While >80% of EOC occur in women above 40 years of age, germ cell tumour accounts for up to 80% of malignant ovarian tumour in women <20 years of age [ ]. There is scarce documentation of the pattern and characteristics of EOC in the age group 20–40 years among Indian population in the literature. As women in this age group are in their prime reproductive phase, fertility-preserving surgery should be considered in women who seek and are eligible to undergo it.
In present study, as expected, EOC was the most common ovarian malignancy in 20–40 years age group. Sixty-five per cent of the patients with EOC had advanced disease (stage III and IV). However, the proportion of low-grade disease (grade 1 and 2) was more than high-grade (grade 3) disease (43 vs 22%) across all the histological types. Studies have shown that young women with EOCs tend to have more of early-stage and lower-grade tumours [ , ]. In one study, 65% of patients less than 30 years of age had early stage and 51% had grade 1 and 2 disease [ ]. Similarly, other studies have reported predominance of early-stage disease (60% stage I disease under 40 years of age) and of low-grade disease in up to 58 to 83% of patients <30 years of age [ ]. Majority of the patients treated at our centre are from underprivileged section of the society. Furthermore, many patients treated at our centre rely upon the free health schemes provided by the government for their treatment. The paucity of information, lack of education, patient’s attitude, affordability and availability of health services may be partly responsible for delayed diagnosis, and hence, more advanced-stage disease is seen in our patient population.
Fifty-eight per cent (34 out of 59) of the patients operated elsewhere had incomplete surgery which included 10 patients with early-stage disease. The usual reasons for incomplete surgery/staging are increased risk of difficulty of the procedure, lack of knowledge of the sites at risk of ovarian cancer metastases, lack of requisite surgical skill and lack of adequate facility such as frozen section [ ]. An initial incomplete staging or debulking surgery has been shown to adversely affect the prognosis in EOC. One study concluded that primary upfront surgery had a better survival than those with initial incomplete cytoreduction followed either by re-intervention or interval surgery. Also, for patients who had undergone incomplete procedure, neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by interval debulking surgery (IDS) was associated with survival benefit as compared to upfront re-intervention [ ]. In our centre, we prefer to give neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by interval surgery to such patients with incompletely operated advanced EOC. From our results, ten patients with advanced EOC who were incompletely operated elsewhere underwent interval surgery at our centre as compared to one patient who underwent upfront re-intervention. All except one patient in the IDS group had optimal surgery.
The significance of age as a prognostic factor in EOC has been debated. Some studies have attributed the increased survival in young women with ovarian cancer to increased frequency of early-stage, low-grade disease, and more indolent nature of the tumour. The ability of younger patients to better tolerate the chemotherapy has also been suggested as a contributing factor for improved survival. However, other studies have not found age to be an independent prognostic factor after adjusting for tumour stage and grade [ ]. Besides conventional pathologic prognostic factors, other important molecular markers include p53 expression, Her2neu, and DNA ploidy can also help elucidate the survival differences between younger and older women [ ].
In our study, the overall 2-year disease-free survival (DFS) rate was 69%. A recent large population-based study showed that younger patients with EOC had better prognosis with an overall 5-year disease-specific survival of 78.8% in younger patient compared to 35.3% in older age group [ ]. This holds true even when the survival is compared in advanced-stage ovarian cancer. The 5-year survival rate for women with stage III and IV tumours aged < 30 years has been reported to be 56% compared with only 22% for patients aged 60 years [ ]. The lower DFS in EOC in our study may be ascribed to greater proportion of stage III and IV disease compared to other studies that had more patients in the early stage.
Fifty-eight per cent of the patients had initial incomplete surgery elsewhere which might have contributed towards less DFS rates seen in our study. Further, 13 patients of these patients were given palliative treatment at our centre, which indicates that some of these surgeries could have been avoided in the first place. In contrast, in our centre only one patient was found to be inoperable during interval surgery and six patients were directly assigned for palliative treatment. This difference underlines the significance of proper preoperative evaluation for resectability of the tumour and involvement of gynae-oncologist during the decision-making process in management of EOC in centres that are well equipped and provide comprehensive cancer care.
The primary surgical management of epithelial ovarian cancer consists of hysterectomy in combination with bilateral oophorectomy with staging procedure. However, in young women, this not only results in the loss of reproductive function but also subjects them to the long-term consequences of hypo-oestrogenism. Fertility-sparing surgery is an effective and safe option in patients with low-grade stage IA EOC. Recently, satisfactory oncological and reproductive outcomes following FSS were also reported in low-grade, favourable histology stage IC1 which were comparable to that of stage IA disease [ ]. In a series of 52 patients with stage IA and IC disease, Schilder and colleagues reported a 5-year survival rate of 98% and concluded that ovarian conservation was safe and was associated with an excellent outcome [ ]. The reported conception rate in patients following FSS is high—66 to 71%. The abortion rates are also comparable to that of general population. Ninety-four per cent of patients retain regular menstrual cycle following FSS [ ]. In our study, none of the four patients with EOC who underwent FSS had any recurrent disease during the follow-up period (24–51 months). As aforementioned, one of these patients had a stage IC1 disease. As shown in the results, only 3% of the patients with clinically stage I A EOC actually fulfilled the criteria for FSS after final histopathology. This signifies the need for thorough staging procedure in these patients.
Conclusion
Majority of the patients with epithelial ovarian cancer were in advanced stage which may have resulted in decreased survival rate. However, grade 1 and 2 was more common than grade 3 disease. Fertility-sparing surgery appears to be safe and should be considered in young patients seeking future pregnancy in selected early-stage disease. A thorough staging procedure is a must in clinically apparent early-stage ovarian cancer as many will be upgraded on final histology and hence may not be considered for fertility preservation. This study also emphasizes the need for involvement of gynaecologic oncologist in management of patients with EOC for better surgical outcome and improved survival.