Introduction
Squamous cell carcinoma of cervix is the second most common cancer among women throughout the world [ ]. It is estimated that more than 100,000 cases of cervical cancer occur every year in India (1/5th of the global burden) and more than 70% of these cases are advanced at presentation (stage III and above) [ ]. Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) are polypeptides with molecular structure similar to the hormone insulin [ ]. IGF-1 acts by binding to insulin-like growth factor receptor-1 (IGFR-1) on the cell surface. IGFR-1 is a receptor tyrosine kinase which is auto-phosphorylated on binding with IGF-1 and activates multiple downstream pathways like the AKT/mTOR and Ras/Raf pathways [ ]. IGFs act virtually on every cell in the body and play an important role in regulating cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis via the activation of downstream tyrosine kinase pathways mentioned above [ ]. The IGF family has been implicated in pathogenesis of various cancers. However, the literature on association between IGF and increased risk of cancer has been contradictory with some studies suggesting an increased risk for prostate, breast, colorectal and ovarian cancer with higher circulating IGF-1, while others suggesting no association [ ]. The role of IGF-1 in response to chemotherapy or radiotherapy has been ambiguous with increased levels associated with resistance in certain cancers and sensitivity in others [ ]. There are no published data in the literature on IGF-1 levels in advanced cervical cancer. The present study was conducted to study the effect of chemo-radiation on the levels of IGF-I in patients with cervical cancer.
Materials and Methods
The study was conducted at the Radiation Oncology Department and the Receptor and Growth Factor Laboratory at the Gujarat Cancer Research Institute (GCRI), Ahmedabad, India. Previously untreated patients less than 70 years of age with stage IIIB squamous cell carcinoma of uterine cervix with an Eastern Co-operative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status ≤2 were enrolled in the study. Patients were enrolled in the study from October 2007 to January 2009. IGF-1 levels were prospectively evaluated in the study patients. A total of 32 patients were found eligible and enrolled in the study after obtaining informed consent. The study was approved by the institute ethics committee. All the patients received external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) along with two sittings of intra-cavitary radiotherapy (ICR). Concurrent cisplatinum chemotherapy was given along with radiotherapy. Blood samples for IGF-1 were collected before the start of therapy, 1 month after the completion of treatment and 6 months after the completion of treatment. Pelvic EBRT was planned using megavoltage beam on telecobalt unit or linear accelerator by two parallel opposed AP/PA portals. Dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions was delivered in 5 weeks. After a period of 7–10 days, patients were assessed for brachytherapy. ICR was delivered as an additional dose of 20–30 Gy to point A using selectron high-dose radiotherapy (HDR) or low-dose radiotherapy (LDR). Cisplatinum was given at a dose of 30 mg/m 2 (1 h IV infusion with prior hydration) on days 1, 8, 15, 22 and 29 of EBRT and on the day of brachytherapy. Immunoradiometric assay (IRMA DSL 2800 Diagnostic Systems Laboratories) was used to measure the IGF-1 levels in the study patients. The IRMA procedure incorporates a two site immunoradiometric assay. It is a noncompetitive assay in which the IGF-1 to be measured is sandwiched between two antibodies. The first antibody is coated to the inside walls of the tube, and the second antibody is highly specific and radiolabeled for detection of IGF-1. The absolute sensitivity of the IGF-I IRMA kit is 0.04 ng/ml. IGF-1 levels are affected by age, liver disease, hypothyroidism and diabetes mellitus. IGF-1 levels decline with increasing age. Normal ranges by age for IGF-1 are: 182–780 ng/ml for ages 16–24, 114–492 ng/ml for ages 25–39, 90–360 ng/ml for ages 40–54 and 71–290 ng/ml for people 55 and older [ ].
All the patients were regularly monitored at weekly intervals to ascertain their performance status and treatment tolerance. Response to treatment was assessed clinically after completion of EBRT, at the completion of brachytherapy session and at monthly intervals thereafter. Patients were followed up at monthly interval during the first 6 months, every 3 months during the next 1 year then at 6 monthly intervals thereafter. In case of persistent disease or progression of disease, suitable symptomatic/palliative treatment was offered. Those who had complete disappearance of their tumor or more than 50% reduction in the size of their tumor were defined as treatment-responsive group, while those with less than 50% response or progressive disease were placed in the progression disease category.
Statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS software. Descriptive statistics like mean and standard error were calculated, and student’s T test was performed to compare the means. Median values were used to classify variables, and the Mann–Whitney U test was used to compare clinical and laboratory parameters.
Results
A total of 32 patients with stage IIIB cervical cancer were enrolled in this study. The median age of the patients was 45 years (range 35–69 years). The median duration of follow-up was 14 months (range 6–20 months) IGF-1 levels were analyzed in all 32 patients during the pre-defined time points. All patients had Stage IIIB disease. The mean IGF-1 in the study patients at baseline was 168.40 ng/ml [standard error (SE) ± 13.76]. The mean IGF-1 levels of the study patients were within the normal range. There was an increase in IGF-1 levels at one month after completion of treatment (mean 197.1 ng/ml, SE: 19.6, P = 0.13); however, this was not statistically significant. The IGF-1 levels declined at 6 months after treatment (mean 146.51 ng/ml, SE 15.1) and this was significant in comparison with end of treatment levels ( P = 0.003). There was no significant change in the mean IGF-1 values at baseline and 6-month follow-up ( P = 0.16). The results indicate that IGF-1 levels increase with chemo-radiotherapy and then normalize at 6-month follow-up.
A decrease in the levels of IGF 1 at diagnosis was seen in patients with >50 years of age as compared to younger women [ p < 0.05]. Also, a decrease in the levels was observed after chemo-radiotherapy in this patient age group as compared to younger women [ P < 0.05]. However, it is known that IGF-1 levels decline with age, and therefore, the significance of this observation is not clear.
Response to treatment was seen in 27/32 patients, and disease progression was seen in 5/32 patients at the end of treatment. All 32 patients were alive at last follow-up. Baseline IGF-1 levels and the change in IGF-1 levels with treatment did not significantly correlate with treatment response and tumor size.
Moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma was observed in 26/32 (81%) of patients, 4/32 (12%) had well differentiated, and 2/32 (7%) had poorly differentiated tumor. No correlation was seen between the tumor grade and baseline IGF-1 or change in IGF-1 with treatment.
Discussion
Literature showing the significance of IGF family on cervical cancers has been sparse and conflicting. Mathur et al. [ ] studied the expression of IGF-2 in patients with early-stage cancer cervix and the impact of radiotherapy on their levels. They observed high levels of IGF-2 in cancer cervix patients and a decline in the levels after radiotherapy. We observed a rise in IGF-1 levels with treatment followed by a decline on follow-up. IGF-2 is mainly involved in prenatal growth and development, whereas IGF-1 is involved with postnatal growth and development. Lloret et al. [ ] studied the IGF-1R (receptor) expression in patients of early-stage cancer cervix treated with chemo-radiation. They observed increased receptor expression in the patients which declined after complete response to chemo-radiation. Serrano et al. [ ] observed that IGF-1 levels were lower in patients with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and early-stage cervical cancer in comparison with controls. Huang et al. [ ] observed that preoperative serum IGF-1 levels did not correlate with 5-year survival outcome in early-stage cervical cancer. Although our study did not have controls, the mean IGF-1 levels in our patients at all time points were within the reported range for normal adults [ ]. There are no published studies on IGF-1 in advanced cervical cancers.
The IGF pathway is implicated in tumor proliferation, survival, metastasis and drug resistance. IGF-1 binds to IGF-1R and activates downstream RAS and AKT pathway which in turn upregulate cyclin D1 levels [ , ]. The AKT pathway is a potent inhibitor of apoptosis. Apoptosis or programmed cell death is an important mechanism by which cancer cells damaged by chemotherapy or radiotherapy are destroyed. The serum IGF-1 levels in our study patients increased immediately after completion of chemo-radiotherapy and declined on 6-month follow-up. It is possible that increased tumor kill with chemo-radiotherapy in cervical cancer leads to an increase in serum IGF-1 level as a protective mechanism by the cancer cells to evade apoptosis. Therefore, we postulate that IGF-1 can be a therapeutic target to increase efficacy of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Individual studies have been ambiguous on the association between IGF-1 and cancer. Some studies have shown that elevated IGF-1 levels are associated with cancer and few have shown that low IGF-1 levels are associated with cancer [ , , ]. Both low and high IGFs have been associated with increased mortality in elderly men with cancer [ ]. In a meta-analysis by Renehan et al. [ ] that included 21 studies with 3609 cases and 7137 controls, high normal concentrations of IGF-1 were associated with a twofold increased risk of prostate cancer, colorectal cancer and premenopausal breast cancer but not postmenopausal breast cancer or lung cancer. The ambiguity could be due to different methodology of IGF-1 estimation and potential influence of the cancer itself on the growth hormone/IGF-1 axis or by the possible secretion of IGF-1 by the cancer. The IGF family includes IGF-1 and 2, the IGF receptors and binding proteins. The effect of the IGF system in cancer would depend on the interaction between the components of the IGF family and on the interaction with other hormones and cytokines.
In prostate cancer, higher baseline IGF-1 levels were associated with lower-grade and less aggressive tumors [ ]. Majority of our study patients had moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Our study could not find a correlation between serum IGF-1 levels and tumor histological grade.
Virtually all cases of cervical squamous cell carcinoma are caused by human papilloma virus (HPV) infection. High IGF-1 concentration in cervical cancer has been associated with a reduced risk of being positive for HPV-16 and HPV-18 [ ]. It has been postulated that IGF-1 decreases a woman’s risk of high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (HCIN) by increasing the turnover of the cervical epithelium thereby reducing the risk of infection by HPV [ ]. Cervical cancer cell lines, positive and negative for HPV, differ in the type of insulin and IGF-1 receptors expressed. Pre-clinical studies have shown that downregulation of IGF-1 receptor using micro-RNA can reverse HPV induced changes in cell lines [ ]. HPV testing on the biopsy specimen was not performed in our study patients.
Our study has limitations, and these include small sample size, lack off normal control group and lack of follow-up for survival analysis. However, our findings can act as a platform for future studies on IGF-1 levels in advanced cervical cancer.
Conclusion
The IGF system is being investigated as a potential therapeutic target in cancer in various clinical trials, and targeting the IGF system to reverse the changes induced by HPV is being studied [ , ]. High serum IGF-1 levels have been clearly shown to be associated with breast, prostate and colorectal cancers; however, the data in cervical cancer are not clear due to paucity of studies. Unlike other cancers, serum IGF-1 has been found to be low in CIN and early-stage cervical cancer and elevated IGF-1 has been observed to protect against HPV infection. Our study showed that patients with stage III B cervical cancer had normal IGF-1 levels at diagnosis; however, the levels increased with treatment and later declined on follow-up, indicating that IGF-1 plays an important role in response to chemo-radiotherapy. Further studies are needed to clarify the exact role of IGF-1 in advanced cervical cancer.