Introduction
Ovarian cancer incidence is quite variable across the globe with highest rates reported in North America and Europe. Total 238,719 cases of ovarian cancers were reported in 2012 in the world, and in spite of the recent advances in management, the disease has a very high case fatality rate, higher than 50% [ ]. Though the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) reported ovarian cancer to be the fourth most common cancer in Indian women in 2012, the latest report of the National Cancer Registry Program (NCRP 2012–2014) of India shows ovarian cancer to be the third most common cancer in many of the population-based cancer registries, e.g., Bangalore, Chennai, Bhopal, Barshi, Mumbai, Ahmedabad and Kolkata [ ]. Epithelial ovarian cancers comprise nearly 90% of all ovarian malignancies and have poor survival due to the advanced stage at diagnosis. A population-based survival estimate in Greater Mumbai (1992–1994) observed an age standardized 5-year survival of only 25.4% for ovarian cancers compared to 46.2% for breast cancer and 47.7% for cervical cancer [ ]. The 5-year survival drastically reduced from 54.7% for early-stage ovarian cancer to 20.4 and 4.6% for regional and metastatic diseases, respectively, thus highlighting the need for detecting the disease early.
Rationale for Ovarian Cancer Screening
Screening is defined as administration of a simple, acceptable and affordable test on an asymptomatic and apparently healthy population to identify those who are at high risk of having a particular disease. The screen positive men and women need further investigations for disease confirmation followed by appropriate treatment. Screening of the population at average risk of any cancer is generally considered in the context of a public health program, in which every eligible individual has equal access to quality-assured screening, further diagnosis and treatment services. The criteria to select a disease that is appropriate for screening through such a public health program were first described by Wilson and Jungner for the World Health Organization (WHO) in 1968, and these criteria are still applicable with minor changes [ ]. Ovarian cancer fulfills at least some of the criteria identified by Wilson and Jungner, e.g., the cancer is an important health problem and there is satisfactory treatment available if the disease is detected at an early-stage disease. The natural history of epithelial ovarian cancer is much better understood now—another prerequisite for a disease to be amenable to screening. The other important criteria to guide the selection of conditions that would be suitable for screening are the availability of suitable tests with proven effectiveness. The most important measure of effectiveness for any cancer screening test would be the ability of the screening test to reduce mortality from that particular cancer in the target population. A randomized controlled trial demonstrating the reduction in ovarian cancer mortality in the women offered screening compared to the control arm not offered screening would be the most appropriate evidence in support of ovarian cancer screening. Additionally the tests are to be safe, feasible to apply in population setting and the potential harms caused by screening (false positive diagnosis and resulting interventions) should be within acceptable limit and the benefits should clearly outweigh the possible harms. In the subsequent sections, we will review the evidence obtained from the randomized controlled studies (RCTs) to decide whether screening of general population for ovarian cancer is at all justified.
Natural History of Ovarian Cancer
Ovarian malignancy is in reality a heterogeneous group of diseases comprised of invasive epithelial cancers, borderline epithelial tumors with low malignant potentials and non-epithelial cancers. The targets for ovarian cancer screening are the invasive epithelial cancers as they are responsible for the vast majority of the deaths.
Based on the morphological and the molecular genetic features, the invasive epithelial cancers are classified into type I and type II cancers with very distinct natural histories [ ]. The type I cancers are slow growing, remain confined to the ovaries at diagnosis and often have a borderline variety, suggesting that there is a continuum from benign to malignant neoplasms. These cancers include low-grade serous, low-grade endometrioid, mucinous, transitional (Brenner) and clear cell carcinomas. They are characterized by specific mutations, including KRAS, BRAF and ERBB2, and have comparatively better prognosis. The better prognosis is more likely to be due to detection at earlier stages and an indolent disease course. They are relatively easier to detect at early stages by imaging techniques like ultrasound. The type II cancers are the more aggressive ones, corresponding to more than 70% of epithelial cancers, and around 80% of those are detected at late stage [ ]. They include high-grade serous and endometrial cancers, undifferentiated tumors and carcinosarcomas. These cancers originate from a premalignant condition usually detected at the fimbrial end of the fallopian tubes, known as the serous tubal intraepithelial cancers (STICs) [ , ]. It is now recognized that the occult preneoplastic conditions originating in the fallopian tubes involve the ovaries to give origin to the type II cancers. The STICs were initially observed in the women undergoing the risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy due to known BRCA mutation [ ]. STICs have subsequently been reported in up to 60% of the sporadic ovarian cancer cases. The clonal relationship between the type II cancers and the STICs has been demonstrated by the presence of same TP53 mutations [ , ]. The mutations observed in the type I cancers are not observed in the type II cancers. Epithelial cancers of ovary and fallopian tube are now considered as two variants of the same disease process.
Detection of the occult serous carcinomas at the risk-reducing surgeries in women with BRCA mutations has also allowed modeling of the natural history. It is likely that the cancers remain at in situ stage, stage I and stage II for more than 4 years before initiating an explosive growth and being clinically obvious [ ]. Such a long window of opportunity may make yearly screening feasible, though a suitable biomarker is necessary to detect the disease at the preclinical (<1 cm) stage. This concept of ‘minimal ovarian carcinoma’ comes from the understanding of the impact of small residual disease following surgery on the prognosis. Radiological examinations like ultrasound alone are not likely to detect early type II cancers or minimal disease. They are more efficient in detecting the type I cancer, due to its slow grow, or the more advanced type II disease. Unfortunately, type I cancers correspond to only 30% of cases. About type II cancers, assuming that its precursor is the fimbrial STICs, it can be considered a disseminated disease once it reaches the ovary, and they are not likely to be diagnosed at a clinical stage when an optimal treatment can be offered.
Screening Tests for Ovarian Cancer
Bimanual Pelvic Examination
Bimanual pelvic examination to detect ovarian cancer is not only poorly sensitive but also is subjective and non-reproducible. The test alone does not have any value in ovarian cancer screening. In the ‘prostate, lung, colorectal and ovarian (PLCO) cancer screening trial,’ bimanual pelvic examination was dropped from the intervention arm after 5 years of the beginning of the randomization because no cancer was detected solely by this modality of test [ ].
Cancer Antigen (CA-125)
CA-125 is the most widely evaluated biomarker for ovarian cancer. Its level is raised (>35 U/ml) in approximately 50% of stage I epithelial cancers and approximately 90% of the stage II+ epithelial cancers [ ]. However, the levels may be raised in several benign conditions, e.g., during menstruation, in endometriosis, fibroid, pelvic inflammatory disease and inflammatory conditions of the bowel and peritoneum leading to low specificity of the test (<50%). The specificity of the test improves if the rate of change in the serum level rather than a fixed threshold value is considered. The value of CA-125 as a screening test was evaluated in Sweden where 5550 women aged more than 40 years had two rounds of annual testing and in the UK where 22,000 postmenopausal women above 45 years of age had a single round of test [ , ]. The screen positive women had ultrasound examination to confirm disease in both the studies. The specificity of such an approach was high with only two unnecessary surgeries due to false positive results per diagnosed case of ovarian cancer in the Swedish trial and only five in the UK trial. The positive predictive value of CA-125 testing in the UK trial was 26.8%, and the sensitivity was estimated to be 78.6 and 57.9% at 1- and 2-year follow-up, respectively.
Risk of Ovarian Cancer Algorithm (ROCA)
A sharp rise in the CA-125 level (change-point) predicts ovarian malignancy better than the isolated values. ROCA is an algorithm to calculate risk of having ovarian cancer diagnosis by comparing an individual’s serial CA-125 profile with that of known cases and controls. The algorithm takes into consideration woman’s age, menopausal status, risk status and serial measurements of serum CA-125 over time to produce a score [ ]. The algorithm defines an intermediate and a high level of risk. At an intermediate risk, the CA-125 is repeated in 3 months and the risk is recalculated. The women with elevated risk are referred for transvaginal ultrasound scan (TVS). Such a screening protocol is also known as multi-modality screening (MMS). The UK Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening (UKCTOCS) compared MMS to TVS in a large number of postmenopausal women. During prevalence screening, the sensitivity of MMS to detect ovarian cancer (including fallopian tube cancer but excluding borderline tumors) was 90%, significantly higher than that of TVS (75%). The positive predictive value of MMS was also significantly higher compared to TVS (35.1 vs. 2.8%) [ ].
Other Biomarkers
Biomarkers others than CA-125 have been evaluated in an attempt to detect the disease at a minimum volume. The rational is that they alone or in combination with CA-125 may improve early detection. Multiple markers on a panel may improve sensitivity, while maintaining the high specificity desired. No randomized clinical trial has prospectively evaluated biomarkers in the context of screening.
The best evidence of the performance of biomarkers comes from retrospective analyses of cases. In the PLCO trial, 118 cases were matched with 951 controls to test for CA-125 and a panel of seven proteins (apolipoprotein A1, truncated transthyretin, transferrin, hepcidin, β-2 microglobulin, connective tissue activating protein III and interalpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy-chain 4), using prediagnostic sera. Authors concluded that the addition of those biomarkers to CA-125 did not improve sensitivity for preclinical diagnosis [ ].
Another study pooled samples of PLCO trial to those collected from the patients with early ovarian cancers or benign ovarian tumors at sites participating in the Early Detection Research Network or Ovarian Cancer Specialized Program of Research Excellence in the USA [ ]. Multiple biomarkers were tested, and the ones that showed best performance in symptomatic women at diagnosis were CA-125, HE4, transthyretin, CA15.3 and CA72.4, with sensitivity at 95% and specificity ranging from 40 to 73%. However, regarding the assessment of asymptomatic individuals before clinical diagnosis, the authors concluded that CA-125 remained the isolated best biomarker. A recent retrospective study measured CA-125, human epididymis protein 4 (HE4), matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7), CA72-4, CA19-9, CA15-3, carcinoembryonic antigen and soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule (sVCAM) from pretreatment sera from 142 stage I ovarian cancer cases. Authors showed that a 4-marker panel comprises CA-125, HE4, MMP-7 and CA72-4 performed with the highest sensitivity (83.2%) at 98% specificity. The analyses of multiple samples in the controls indicated baselines concentrations of the markers, suggesting a possible use in a longitudinal algorithm [ ].
Serum biomarkers are promising to distinguish patients with low or minimum disease from healthy individuals, even used alone or in combination with existing methods. The ideal combination of the biomarkers in the context of ovarian cancer screening is yet to be decided.
Transvaginal Ultrasound Scan (TVS)
TVS uses morphology and ovarian volume to detect malignancy, but it has limitations in differentiating between benign and malignant lesions. The following features of an adnexal mass on TVS are highly suggestive of ovarian malignancy: Solid component that is nodular or papillary but not hyperechoic Septations of at least 2–3 mm thickness Bilaterality The presence of ascites Doppler shows increased blood flow to the solid component of the mass
Unilocular ovarian cysts of <10 cm diameter without any of the above features are very unlikely to be malignant. In spite of various attempts to improve the diagnostic accuracy using different scoring systems and mathematical models, the false positivity of TVS to detect malignant ovarian lesions still remains high. TVS was used to screen 25,327 women annually in the Kentucky Screening Study that did not have any control arm [ ]. At a mean follow-up of 5.8 years, the 5-year survival rate in women diagnosed with primary invasive epithelial OC in the screening study was 74.8%, which was significantly higher compared to the survival of the ovarian cancer patients (53.7%) non-participants to the study, but treated at the same institution during the same period. However, this being a non-randomized study the estimates were biased (lead time and healthy volunteer biases) in favor of the study subjects.
RCTs to Evaluate Ovarian Cancer Screening
Ovarian cancer screening in women with average risk has been evaluated through three large RCTs. The details of the trial designs are shown in Table 1 , while the main outcomes of the studies are described in Table 2 . The earliest trial (Shizuoka Cohort Study of Ovarian Cancer Screening; SCSOCS) was initiated in Japan in 1985 to screen postmenopausal women attending the hospitals for routine gynecological examinations [ ]. Screening was conducted annually by transvaginal and/or trans-abdominal ultrasound and serum CA-125 estimation. Women with abnormal ultrasound were referred for further evaluation, including a repeat scan prior to surgery. If only CA-125 levels were raised (>35 U/mL), the women were rescreened at 6 months. The women in the control arm did not receive any screening. After an average of 5.4 rounds of screening over a mean follow-up of 9.2 years, the detection rates of ovarian cancer were same in the study and the control groups. The proportion of patients diagnosed with early-stage (stage I/II) ovarian cancer was comparatively higher in the study group though the difference was not statistically significant. The study has not yet published any mortality benefits of screening. Table 1 Randomized controlled trials to evaluate ovarian cancer screening in average-risk populations (trial design and protocols) Screening trial Country of implementation and recruitment period Eligibility Screening strategy in study arm Screening strategy in control arm Shizuoka Cohort Study of Ovarian Cancer Screening (SCSOCS) Japan; 1985–1999 Postmenopausal women attending hospital for routine gyn. check up; H/O ovarian or other cancers excluded Annual screening with ultrasound and CA-125 (>35 U/Ml) No screening; routine care only Prostate, lung, colorectal and ovarian (PLCO) cancer screening trial USA; 1993–2001 Age: 55–74 year H/O ovarian cancer or bilateral oophorectomy excluded Yearly TVS at baseline and for 3 years and yearly CA-125 (>35 U/ml) at baseline and for 5 years No screening; routine care only UK Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening (UKCTOCS) UK; 2001–2005 Postmenopausal women aged 55–74 year H/O ovarian cancer or bilateral oophorectomy or those with high familial risk of ovarian cancer were excluded Annual multi-modality screening (MMS) with CA-125 interpreted with ROCA with TVS as second-line test in one arm and with TVS in the second arm No screening; routine care only Table 2 Randomized controlled trials to evaluate ovarian cancer screening in average-risk populations (study outcomes) Author and trial Number recruited and follow-up duration Outcomes of screening Harms of screening Kobayashi et al. [ ] SCSOCS trial Study arm: 41,688; Control arm: 40,799 Mean follow-up duration: 9.2 years Detection rates of ovarian cancer were 0.31/1000 at the prevalent screen and 0.38–0.74/1000 at subsequent screens Proportion of cases detected at stage I: 63% in study versus 38% in control arms ( p = 0.2) Mortality benefit not yet reported Rate of false positive tests: 5% of all screened at each round Buys et al. ( ) PLCO trial Study arm: 39,105 Control arm: 39,111 Median follow-up duration: 12.4 years Number of ovarian cancer detected was 21% higher (RR 1.21 0.99–1.48) in study arm Proportion of cases detected at stage III/IV; 77 versus 78% Ovarian cancer-specific mortality ratio: 1.18 (0.82–1.71) Rate of false positive tests: 8.4% Rate of false positive surgeries: 3% Rate of oophorectomy 33% more in study arm Rate of major complications among false positive surgeries: 15% Pinsky et al. [ ] PLCO trial Study arm: 39,105 Control arm: 39,111 Median follow-up duration: 14.7 years Ovarian cancer-specific mortality ratio: 1.06 (0.87–1.30) All-cause mortality ratio: 1.01 (0.97–1.05) Jacobs et al. [ ] UKCTOCS trial Study arm (ROCA): 50,640 Study arm (TVS): 50,639 Control arm: 101,359 Incidence of ovarian cancer*: MMS—62/100,000 women year; TVS—57/100,000 women year; Control—57/100,000 women year Mortality reduction over 0–14 years*: MMS—15% ( p = 0.10); TVS—11% ( p = 0.21) After excluding prevalent cases mortality reduction in MMS arm significant (20%) Rate of false positive surgeries: 14/10,000 screens in MMS group and 50/10,000 in TVS group Major complication rate after surgery: 3.1% in MMS group and 3.5% in TVS group * Primary peritoneal cancer excluded
The prostate, lung, colorectal and ovarian (PLCO) cancer screening trial conducted in the USA used both TVS and CA-125 to screen women of average risk annually [ ]. Screening with TVS was continued for 4 years and with serum CA-125 estimation for 6 years. After a median follow-up of 12 years, more ovarian cancers (includes fallopian tube cancers and primary peritoneal cancers) were detected in the study arm compared to the control arm, though the difference was not statistically significant (RR 1.18; 95% CI 0.99–1.48). The stage at diagnosis was also similar between the groups. The positive predictive value of the combined approach (TVS and CA-125) was very low (1.0–1.4% over four screening cycles), and nearly 20 surgeries were required to detect one cancer without any significant stage shift. A recent update with a median extended follow-up of 15 years observed no significant reduction in ovarian cancer mortality in the screened women compared to the unscreened ones (Risk Ratio (RR) 1.06; 95% CI, 0.87–1.30) [ ].
The UK Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening (UKCTOCS) was a three-arm randomized controlled study conducted among postmenopausal women aged 50–74 years with average risk of ovarian cancer [ ]. In one study arm, the participants had annual screening with CA-125 testing with follow-up TVS if CA-125 results were abnormal (multi-modality screening; MMS). In this group, a patented ovarian cancer risk algorithm (ROCA) was used to assign an ovarian cancer risk score (normal, intermediate or high) to women based on age, CA-125 level at the first screening and CA-125 value and trajectory for subsequent visits. In the second arm, the participants were screened with annual TVS examination. In the third arm, women were not screened routinely. Overall, 1% of the women screened underwent surgery and 2.9% of the women in whom surgery did not find any malignancy had major complications. The latest publication of the study results demonstrates a nonsignificant mortality reduction of 15% (95% CI −3 to 30; p = 0.10) over years 0–14 in the MMS group and of 11% (95% CI −7 to 27; p = 0.21) in the TVS group during the same time interval. However, the mortality benefit was significant after excluding the prevalent cancers in the MMS group (20%; 95% CI −2 to 40; p = 0.02) and the benefit was much more obvious between years 7 and 14. There was reduction in the incident cases of ovarian cancer in the screened populations with longer follow-up.
Ovarian Cancer Screening in Women with High Risk
Approximately 10% of ovarian cancers are familial due to germ line mutations in the high penetrance genes like BRCA1 and BRCA2 and mismatch repair genes in Lynch syndrome [ ]. The risk of ovarian cancer (until age 70 years) varies between 39 and 65% in BRCA1 carriers, 11–37% in BRCA2 carriers and 3.4–33% in Lynch syndrome [ , ]. Usually the susceptible women are advised risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy at a young age that compromises their cardiovascular system and make them prone to osteoporosis. It is theoretically feasible to delay the surgery by performing regular screening. One of the largest trials to investigate the role of ovarian cancer screening in these high-risk women is being conducted in the UK (UK Familial Ovarian Cancer Screening Study; UKFOCSS). The criteria used by the study to identify those at higher risk of ovarian cancer are listed in Table 3 . The first phase of the trial was conducted between 2002 and 2008 to recruit 3563 high-risk women. Women were excluded if they had undergone bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy or were below 35 years of age. The participants were screened annually with both CA-125 and TVS. After a mean 3.2 years of screening, 26 ovarian or fallopian tube cancers and one primary peritoneal cancer were detected. Additional ten cancers were detected 1 year after the last screen or censoring. 66.7% of the prevalent cancers and 30.8% of the incident screen detected cancers were in stage I/II. Both mean overall and disease-specific survival were 48.4 months (95% CI, 39.4–57.4) in women not screened in the year before diagnosis, compared with 71.9 months (95% CI, 60.7–83.2) in those who were screened in the year before diagnosis ( p = 0.23). The rate of false positive surgery was 1.5% of the screened women. The study concluded that screening in the year before diagnosis reduced the proportion of patients diagnosed at stage IIIc or worse. There was no effect on the proportion of women getting early diagnosis. This leads the investigators to increase the screening frequency to once in 4 months (three times a year) and introduces ROCA instead of single threshold value of CA-125. The study expects to recruit 4531 women in the second phase that is already undergoing. Table 3 Criteria used in the UK Familial Ovarian Cancer Screening Study to identify the families with high risk of ovarian cancer Source : http://www.instituteforwomenshealth.ucl.ac.uk/womens-cancer/gcrc/ukfocss ; accessed on 29 November 2016 Criteria to identify the families at high risk of ovarian cancer Families with ovarian or ovarian and breast cancer ≥2 individuals with ovarian cancer who are first-degree relatives (FDRs) One ovarian cancer and 1 breast cancer at <50 years who are FDR One ovarian cancer and 2 breast cancers at <60 years who are FDR Breast cancer in volunteer (≤45 years) and mother with both breast and ovarian cancers Breast cancer in volunteer (≤40 years) and sister with both breast and ovarian cancers Families with a known gene mutation An affected individual in the family with a mutation of one of the known ovarian cancer predisposing genes, e.g., BRCA1, BRCA2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS1 and PMS2. Families with colorectal cancer (HNPCC or Lynch syndrome) The family contains ≥3 individuals with a HNPCC-related cancer (colorectal, endometrial, small bowel, ureteric or renal pelvic cancers), who are FDR and ≥1 case is diagnosed before 50 years and the cancers affect ≥1 generation HNPCC-related cancers Families with only breast cancer ≥4 breast cancers 3 breast cancers related to FDR one ≤30 years or all ≤40 years or one male breast cancer (MBC) and one bilateral breast cancer Breast cancer in volunteer (≤50 years) and Breast cancer in mother (age of onset being ≤30 years in one and ≤50 years in the other) or Bilateral breast cancer in mother (≤40 years onset) or One MBC and one bilateral breast cancer Two MBCs (one <40 years) in the family and the volunteer is a FDR of one of them Families with Ashkenazi Jewish ethnicity AJ ethnicity and any one of the following: Breast cancer (<40 years) or bilateral breast cancer (first cancer <50 years) in volunteer, irrespective of family history of cancer Breast cancer in volunteer (<50 years) and one FDR with breast cancer (<50 years) or ovarian cancer (any age) or MBC (any age) Breast cancer in volunteer (<60 years) and one FDR with breast cancer (<40 years) or ovarian cancer (any age) or MBC (any age) One FDR with ovarian cancer (<50 years) FDR with breast and ovarian cancers in the same woman (any age) Two FDRs with breast cancer (<40 years) Two MBCs (<60 years) in the family and the volunteer is a FDR of one of them
Conclusions
There is a general conception that detecting cancer at earlier stages improves survival as well as quality of life. For ovarian cancer, mortality reduction has not been demonstrated in RCTs even when downstaging has been achieved. It is desirable that an ovarian cancer screening program aims to detect very minimum volume of disease or in a timely manner to allow diagnosis at a status whether no residual disease after surgery can be achieved. Since the screen positive women are likely to undergo major surgery that is associated with morbidity, cost and hospital stay, the false positivity of the test should be as low as possible. Indeed, the balance of benefits and harms should carefully take into account the unnecessary surgical interventions and overtreatment of benign disease.
With the new insights on the morphological aspects of ovarian cancer, it is likely that a more rational approach for screening should rely on biomarkers identification rather than on imaging that can detect mostly the indolent tumors. Image tests should be used only in the context of triage, i.e., to be used as a sequential test after a positive biomarker test, thus improving the specificity of the process.
Based on the evidence available till date, the multi-modality screening using the combination of ROCA and TVS is promising, but yet to demonstrate the benefits convincingly. Further follow-up of the screened cohorts of the UKCTOCS trial may demonstrate the life-saving effect of ovarian cancer screening in the women who are at average risk. However, the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of such intensive screening approach also need to be carefully evaluated in the contexts of different health-care delivery models.