Introduction
Endometrial cancer (EC) accounts for nearly 50% of all new gynecological cancers diagnosed in the USA and are the third most common gynecological malignancy after carcinoma cervix and carcinoma ovary in a hugely populated developing country like India [ ]. The disease predominates in the older postmenopausal women with an average age of onset around 60 years; however, women younger than 50 years occupy 10–15% cases and those younger than 40 years up to 5% cases [ ]. Most of the cases are confined to the uterus at the time of diagnosis with 73% cases found in stage I.
The standard treatment for EC in most centers in the developing world is still a staging laparotomy with total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection and omental sampling in Type II EEC despite adequate evidence to support minimal invasive approach for the same. But over the past decade, fertility-preserving treatment using hormonal treatment especially, medroxy-progesterone acetate (MPA) and megestrol acetate (MA) with different schedules and doses have emerged as a great possibility for these younger aged women with EC [ ]. On pathological analysis, most of the EC in younger age group belongs to the well-differentiated endometrioid adenocarcinoma with infrequent myometrial invasion or lymph node metastasis. However, in these cases the endometrial pathology should be reviewed with great accuracy and reliability.
The histological subtype and grade of EC are the key features impacting the likelihood of disease spread and recurrence, along with other uterine histopathological factors such as myometrial invasion, cervical stromal involvement and lymphovascular space invasion (LVSI) [ ]. The group of poorly differentiated grade 3(G3) endometrioid variant and non-endometrioid EC are at an increased risk for early spread and recurrence and will definitely require surgical staging with lymphadenectomy. It is only the low-risk group comprising of grade 1(G1) or grade 2(G2) endometrioid-variant EC with <50% myometrial invasion and no LVSI which poses a surgical dilemma and an accurate preoperative sampling, and a good imaging can help in reducing the surgical morbidity and operative time of these cases.
The question of how accurate is the preoperative endometrial sampling as an adequate predictor of final surgical pathology always stays and hence the origin of the study.
Aim of the Study
The aim is to compare diagnostic accuracy of histopathological reporting of endometrial sampling with the final hysterectomy specimen histopathology in clinically stage 1 endometrioid-type EC.
Subjects and Methods
The present work is a comparative analysis of histological type and grade of preoperative endometrial sampling and final surgical pathology of EC patients at a tertiary cancer care referral center.
EC cases treated at our institute between April 2008 and March 2016 were identified and retrospectively reviewed from hospital records and tumor registries. Cases with endometrial sampling by either dilatation and curettage or endometrial biopsy with a histopathology report of EC were included. For those cases which were referred to our institute with an endometrial sampling, a review of the slides was done before subjecting the patient to staging laparotomy. The slides were reviewed by a team of trained pathologists of our institute with adequate expertise in onco-pathology.
Only cases of EC surgically treated at our institute with a preoperative endometrial sampling demonstrating FIGO G1 or G2 of endometrioid variant of EC were included. FIGO G3 endometrioid variant and non-endometrioid variants of EC were excluded. Only those cases of EC which were confined to the uterus both clinically and on imaging were included. Those with extension beyond the uterus based on clinical findings and imaging (ultrasonography and MRI or CT) were excluded. All these cases underwent primarily surgical staging including total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection and para-aortic lymph node sampling of enlarged nodes and peritoneal fluid washings.
After reviewing 547 consecutive EC cases between the above-mentioned time period, 147 cases were selected for this study after applying inclusion and exclusion criteria (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1 Total number of cases included in the study
Patient demographics including age, presence of co-morbidities like diabetes mellitus (DM) or hypertension, weight, body mass index (BMI), Pap smear, symptoms and any other suggestive history was noted and studied. Preoperative histology and grade were also included. Surgical pathological data including histology, grade, size of tumor, depth of myometrial invasion, cervical stromal invasion, LVSI, spread to adjacent organs, lymph node and omental metastasis were noted.
FIGO recommendations for non-squamous architectural grading used for endometrioid variant of EC were used for grading the tumors where G1 has </5% solid growth pattern, G2 has between 6 and 50% solid growth pattern, and G3 has >50% solid growth pattern. In addition to the solid growth pattern, a markedly atypical nuclear pattern inappropriate for the architectural grade could increase the final tumor grade by one [ ].
Patients were grouped according to preoperative and postoperative histology and grade. Agreements and discordance between these groups were noted and analyzed.
Results
A total of 147 cases were included in our study after applying inclusion and exclusion criteria. Majority of women, i.e., 125 of 147 (85%) were postmenopausal and 22 (15%) were in the premenopausal age group (Table 1 ). Average and median age of our patients were 55.7 and 56 years, respectively. The mean and average BMI were 29.12 and 29 kg/m 2 , respectively. Most common presenting complaint was postmenopausal bleeding per vaginum (PMBLPV) in the postmenopausal group, and among the 22 women belonging to the premenopausal age group, 19 had heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB), two had irregular cycles and one presented with postcoital bleeding. Ninety-one cases were hypertensive and 63 were diabetic. Majority of women had a normal Pap smear, though a few (10) reported as AGUS, one with adenocarcinoma cells and 3 with one each of HSIL, ASCUS and ASC-H. Table 1 Patient demographics • Patient characteristics ( n = 147) Age (years), median (average), range 56 (55.7), 26–85 Body mass index (kg/m 2 ), median (average), range 29 (29.12), 14.8–51.9 Postmenopausal 125 (85.03) Premenopausal 22 (14.97) Parity n (%) Nulliparous 18 (12.25) Parity 2 or more 97 (65.99) • Co-morbidities: n (%) Hypertension 91 (61.9) Diabetes mellitus 63 (42.86) Carcinoma breast 2 (1.3) Hypothyroidism 38 (25.85) • Presenting complaints n (%) PMBLPV 112 (76.2) White discharge PV 18 (12.2) Pain in abdomen 5 (3.4) HMB 19 (12.9) Irregular menses 2 (1.4) • Pap smear ( n = 134) n (%) Negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy (NILM) 120 (89.6) AGUS 10 (7.4) Adenocarcinoma 1 (0.74) ASCUS 1 (0.74) HSIL 1 (0.74) ASC-H 1 (0.74) PMBLPV Postmenopausal bleeding per vaginum, HMB heavy menstrual bleed, AGUS atypical glandular cells of undetermined significance, ASCUS atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance, HSIL high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion, ASC-H atypical squamous cell cannot exclude high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion
In the present study, a total of 147 cases were included and 73 cases were preoperatively graded as G1 (49.65%) and 74 as G2 (50.34%) on the basis of preoperative endometrial histology (Table 2 ). Among these 147 cases, 39 were diagnosed on the basis of endometrial biopsy (EB) and 108 through dilatation and curettage (D&C). Since there were fewer EB samples, separate correlation for both groups was not done. Of the 73 G1 EC, after final pathology reporting, 56 were G1, 12 were upgraded to G2, 4 were upgraded to G3 and 1 was reclassified to serous papillary carcinoma. Of the total 74 G2 EC, only 39 maintained G2 in final hysterectomy specimen, 31 were downgraded to G1, while 2 were upgraded to G3 and one case was reclassified as mixed mullerian tumor (MMMT) and one was reclassified into a case of atypical hyperplasia. There was concordance between preoperative and posthysterectomy specimen in 76.71% of G1 and 52.7% of G2 specimens. Table 2 Correlation between preoperative and final hysterectomy histopathology report and change in risk stratification based on other histological markers Open image in new window
Despite the fact that 9 cases were upgraded to the high-risk group on the basis of posthysterectomy histopathology, out of the total 147 cases, only 5(3.4%) cases had a positive nodal status (1 in grade 1 and 4 in grade 2) and in these five cases also, three had intraoperative palpable enlarged lymph nodes (Table 2 ). Overall, a total of 2 cases (1.36%) would have been missed if selective lymphadenectomy was not performed. In both the cases with ovarian metastasis, the tumor invasion was more than half thickness of myometrium, and hence, synchronous malignancies were ruled out. Out of six cases wherein fallopian tube metastasis was present, two had concomitant ovarian metastasis and two had positive cervix stromal invasion. Only two cases had isolated fallopian tube metastasis with less than half myometrial invasion. In all the four cases of positive cervix stromal invasion, myometrial invasion was more than half thickness. However, when preoperative grade was correlated with depth of myometrial invasion in hysterectomy specimen, in G1, 38 cases (52.05%) were confined to less than half myometrium and 35 cases (47.94%) invaded more than half myometrium (Table 2 ). In G2 cases, each half of cases were confined to less than and more than half myometrium.
Discusssion
EC is usually diagnosed at an early stage as a case of abnormal bleeding in the form of PMBLPV or HMB. A high index of suspicion is required in the diagnosis and pathological evaluation of endometrium and can easily clinch the diagnosis. Previously D&C as a day care procedure was needed to evaluate and reach such diagnosis, however, with the advent of EB; it can be easily done on an outpatient basis with an accuracy ranging from 91 to 99% [ ]. Hysteroscopic-guided biopsy can act as an adjunctive diagnostic modality with an accurate visualization of the pathology; however, it doesn’t aid in improving the accuracy of EB. Pap smear screening may occasionally detect endometrial cells with an abnormal cervical cytology like adenocarcinoma cells, AGUS and AIS. Imaging including transvaginal sonography (TVS) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may only help in assessing and evaluating the endometrial thickness and extent of lesion in the myometrium and involvement of adjacent and distant organs [ , ]. Biomarkers like CA 125 and recently human epididymis protein 4 (HE 4) may help in prognosticating the disease and also help in the follow-up of these cases postsurgery for an early detection of recurrence and response [ , ].
The recent ESMO-ESGO-EORTC consensus conference in Milan, Italy (2015), updated the clinical recommendations for EC and redefined risk groups into low, intermediate, high-intermediate, high, advanced and metastatic to aid in prognostication and guiding adjuvant therapy use. Low-risk groups included stage 1 endometrioid type with G1–G2 with <50% myometrial invasion with no LVSI (Level of evidence I) [ ]. The role of lymphadenectomy in early endometrial cancer remains unclear, and controversy still exists regarding indications of, the anatomic extent of and the therapeutic value of lymphadenectomy in the management of the disease. Patients with low-risk endometrioid carcinoma have a low risk of lymph node involvement, and lymphadenectomy was not recommended (Level of evidence II) [ ].
The only predictive histological features determined preoperatively are cell type and tumor grade. Poorly differentiated endometrioid (G3) as well as non-endometrioid histological subtypes are a high risk for early spread and recurrence, and the risk of microscopic lymph node metastasis was found to be as high as 20% for G3 endometrioid tumors, 20% for clear cell endometrial cancers, 20–50% for uterine serous cancers in different reports and 15–20% for carcinosarcomas [ , , ]. However, when studies were compared for low-grade endometrioid cancers, they were consistently found to have a low risk for lymphatic dissemination and recurrence ranging from 0 to 10%, depending upon the presence of other features [ , ].
Although D&C is considered a standard method in the preoperative evaluation of abnormal uterine bleeding in postmenopausal patients and therefore leads to the finding of histologically verified EC, only few reports address the frequency of a higher grade being established at subsequent hysterectomy. In a recent study by Helpman et al. [ ], a total of 18% cases were upgraded in G1 EC. Despite this, they concluded that omitting surgical staging in preoperatively diagnosed G1 endometrioid cancers without deep myometrial invasion would result in missing nodal involvement in only 1% cases.
Our study demonstrates that endometrioid tumors do show frequent shifts between risk groups when comparing preoperative and postoperative histology. Our data corresponds to the findings in previous studies [ , ]. Leitao and Kehoe [ ] analyzed 490 cases of G1 endometrioid-type EC, and correlation was found in 85% of cases and 13.7% cases were upgraded to G2 and 1% were upgraded to G3; serous and clear cell histology was found in 1.2% cases. In our study, correlation with G1 was present in 76.7% cases; however, in G2, only 52.7% correlated with preoperative histology grade. Similar results were obtained by Francis et al. [ ], wherein poor correlation was found with G2 specimens and only 52% cases correlated with final histopathology in G2 and 33.2% were similarly downgraded to G1 EC. This study attributed such high discrepancy rates to a teaching hospital setup and interobserver variability.
These grade shifts in our study can be partly explained by the heterogeneity of the tumor and volume of tissue available for examination and also the fact that preoperative sampling is done more frequently with office endometrial biopsy than dilatation and curettage [ ]. A larger volume of tissue may help in better assessment of the solid growth component and avoid change in cell types in the final hysterectomy specimen. Interobserver variability as well as interobserver variability might also be another reason for such discrepancies between preoperative and postoperative findings of histological grade and cell type.
Some of the factors such as tumor size and location can be assessed preoperatively with the help of imaging or intraoperatively with the help of frozen section [ ]. Assessment of depth of myometrial invasion cannot be accurately determined by preoperative imaging but intraoperative frozen section is accurate; however, such intraoperative consultation for every case with preoperative diagnosis of low-grade endometrioid-type EC is costly and may not be available in some centers and is not of any advantage if lymphadenectomy is going to be performed which is not a possibility in all hospitals.
However, in spite of the frequent shifts between preoperative and postoperative histological features, multiple studies have shown that avoiding lymphadenectomy had no deleterious impact on the overall survival or disease-free survival. The recent ESMO-ESGO-EORTC guidelines also show a level of evidence II for no lymphadenectomy in low-risk groups. According to Mayo clinic, Mariani el al [ ] suggested that selective lymphadenectomy using grade and intraoperative assessment of myometrial invasion would yield a negative predictive value of 99% with only 1% node positive cases missed, thereby avoiding lymphadenectomy in >40% of patients. This study also demonstrates that despite of shifts in pathology and grading, only a small number of nodal metastasis will be missed if we plan staging only according to preoperative grade and intraoperative myometrial assessment. In our study also, a total of 5 cases (3.4%) could have been missed if selective lymphadenectomy was not performed. However, even among those five cases, three of them had intraoperative palpable enlarged lymph nodes; therefore, only two cases out of 147 (1.36%) would have been missed. Leitao and Kehoe [ ] also reported similar results of lymph node metastasis in 4.4% cases.
Though there has been an increased use of sentinel lymph node biopsy in early EC and selective algorithms have been designed to ease the decision regarding lymphadenectomy, the setup and infrastructure required for such procedures is not feasible in all centers and will lead to an increased cost incurred per patient [ ]. Hence, selective lymphadenectomy based on risk factors available preoperatively and intraoperatively may maximize the benefits of surgical staging while limiting the complications of a more extensive surgical procedure.
Moreover, only tumor grade and histology are not sufficient predictors of tumor behavior and may in fact underestimate tumor risk. In our analysis, a total of 18 cases (5 in G1 and 13 in G2) were also reclassified as high-risk group based on LVSI, nodal spread and extrauterine spread to adnexa and cervix (Table 2 ).
However, when depth of myometrial invasion was also included in risk stratification, nearly half of the cases were reclassified into intermediate group on the basis of more than half myometrium involved in both G1 and G2 cases. Helpman et al. [ ] reported a reclassification of nearly 25% cases on the basis of myometrial invasion in G1 EC and 21% in G2 EC. Ben-Shachar and Pavelka [ ] also reported similar reclassification in 26% cases. Hence, surgical staging in preoperative G1 EC would have significantly impacted postoperative treatment decisions and staging in more than half the cases on the basis of myometrial invasion.
Although determining lymph node status is a guide to decision-making for postoperative adjuvant treatment and selective lymphadenectomy based on preoperative and intraoperative risk factors may maximize the benefits of surgical staging and avoid unnecessary extensive surgical complications in low-risk EC cases, a consensus still needs to be formed and institutional decisions may vary. Our data mainly focus on the clinical usefulness and reliability of the finding of a well-differentiated tumor rather than on the reasons for a discrepancy.
Conclusion
This study is a large retrospective study over a span of eight years coming from a tertiary care regional cancer institute which caters to the oncology burden of majority of Gujarat and its neighboring states. This institute has a well-established gynecological oncology and pathology department with adequate expertise and workload. However, exclusion of G3 EC and non-endometrioid variants of EC was the major limitation of this study. Another limitation of this study was non-inclusion of depth of myometrial invasion as a preoperative predictor for EC since only half the cases had an MRI available due to cost and infrastructure constraints. Comparing myometrial invasion in preoperative MRI with intraoperative and final hysterectomy specimen would have definitely strengthened the study.
Our study strengthens the belief that discrepancies between preoperative and final pathology are known to exist, and the decision around surgical staging based on preoperative histology may result in undertreatment, with potentially unrecognized nodal disease, or overtreatment, with unnecessary lymphadenectomy and potential complications. Preoperative endometrial sampling may hence be considered only a modest predictor of final histology and tumor biology in endometrial cancers, and hence, decisions regarding universal versus a selective surgical staging policy will definitely vary between institutions and surgeons. Continued investigation and further research, however, is still warranted.