Introduction
The term “Endosalpingiosis” implies the presence of fallopian tubal type of ciliated low cuboidal epithelium in ectopic sites. It is a non-neoplastic lesion which is homologous to endometriosis and endocervicosis [ ]. All these three entities are together grouped under the umbrella of “Mullerianosis” which includes epithelial proliferations of normal structures of the female genital tract involving tissues such as uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, urinary bladder, appendix, colon, omentum, and pelvic/retroperitoneal and para-aortic lymph nodes [ , ]. Endosalpingiosis was first described by Sampson in 1930. The ovary is the most common site though the lesion has been reported to appear in many tissues and organs both inside and outside pelvic cavity [ , , , , , , , , , , , ].
Several theories about the development or origin of endosalpingiosis have been proposed. Among them two are more popular. One is as metaplasia of peritoneal pleuripotential coelomic epithelium into fallopian tube-like, ciliated, low cuboidal epithelium [ ]. The alternative theory, based on numerous observations and laboratory investigations, is tubal-cell origin [ , , , ]. The theory of tubal-cell origin is plausible in that it is able to explain why the lesion is exclusively seen in women [ ] and why the lesion is most frequently seen in the ovaries [ ]. Chronic tubal inflammation is considered to contribute to the process [ ].
Most often, the lesion exhibits few symptoms and signs and is accidently found during surgery [ ]. One meticulous study shows that 40 % of the endosalpingiosis occur in postmenopausal patients and 34.5 % coexist with endometriosis [ ]; a condition probably makes the coexisting endometriosis refractory or partially responsive to hormonal therapy [ ].
Endometriosis is significantly correlated with infertility and chronic abdominal pain, while endosalpingiosis is not [ ]. Morphologically both endosalpingiosis and endometriosis can cause tissue adhesion; however, the remote and recent hemorrhage is not observed on the site of endosalpingiosis [ ]. When inclusions of endosalpingiosis are large in number and/or cystic, the lesion may present as a tumorlike mass [ , , ]. The lining cells of the inclusions may undergo proliferation, which exhibits as multilayers of cells, cell clusters, papillary structure, and even free papillae. Occasionally the proliferation is profound and accompanied by cellular atypia, a condition defined as atypical endosalpingiosis. Psammoma body-like calcification can appear on site.
A body of evidence shows that endosalpingiosis is the precursor of serous tumors, especially low-grade serous carcinoma [ , ]. Li et al. [ ] claim that 78 % of the ovarian inclusions are of tubal-cell origin. The proliferative index is higher in lining cells of the inclusions than in those of the fimbriae. The morphologic and immunohistochemical phenotypes resemble more like ovarian cystadenoma and borderline serous tumor. In fact, transitional changes from hyperplasia, dysplasia to carcinoma can often be observed [ , , , , , , ].
Endosalpingiosis is considered to have an association with the relapse of ovarian serous tumors [ , , , , ].
Based on the tubal-cell theory and the way of its formation, most often endosalpingiosis is not solitary. Once the lesion is found in one site, there is a great possibility that it exists in other sites, especially the ovaries. Since endosalpingiosis is hard to be defined before and during surgery unless it causes significant pathologic changes, such as adhesion, calcification or cyst, it is indeed a challenge for those who want to preserve the ovaries in dealing with their gynecologic problems.
The diagnosis of endosalpingiosis will be made during conventional pathologic observations if a pathologist is aware of the lesion. Under tough circumstances, immunohistochemical analysis is used for differential diagnoses. PAX-8 positive and calretinin negative indicate the tubal-cell origin.
Based on its relationship with the development of serous tumors, we feel that the morphologic presentations of the lining cells need to be addressed in details in routine pathologic reports.
At the moment, the lines between ovarian serous cystadenoma and cystic endosalpingiosis are obscure. In daily practice, a cyst in the ovary lined with cuboidal cells is logically diagnosed as a serous cystadenoma if large enough. Perhaps there is little necessity to differentiate the one from the other for they may be very close in nature [ ]. However, one may face a dilemma when a cyst presents with focal papillary structure lined by atypical cells [ ].
Case 1
A 45-year-old lady (G4P4) presented to Gynecology Department with vaginal bleeding. Ultrasound revealed bulky uterus with picture of adenomyosis. MRI was not done as not indicated. Serum tumor markers were not done as were non-indicated. Total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was done. The specimen was submitted for histopathological examination. There were multiple small clear vesicles over the uterine wall on the lateral side which may indicate the tubal theory and the fallopian tube (Fig. 1 ). IHC cell staining and histological markers to assist in differential diagnosis were not performed as unaffordable to our patients. Fig. 1 Hysterectomy specimen with multiple tiny clear vesicles on the lateral side of the uterus at the upper part near the tubes
The cyst wall lining was with embedded fallopian tubal epithelium. Multiple tiny cystic spaces and glandular structures lined by low cuboidal epithelium were seen in the cyst wall. Histopathological diagnosis was endosalpingiosis with adenomyosis in the uterine wall.
Case 2
A 30-year-old lady (G0P0) presented to Gynecology Department with infertility and was scheduled for laparoscopy. Ultrasound revealed nothing abnormal. MRI was not performed as not indicated and unaffordable in our country. Serum tumor markers were not performed preoperative as were not indicated. Laparoscopy revealed moderate endometriosis with black spots and endosalpingiosis over the tube. The vesicle specimen was submitted for histopathological examination. There were multiple small clear vesicles over the fallopian tube (Fig. 2 ). IHC cell staining and histological markers to assist in differential diagnosis were not performed as unaffordable to our patients.
Histopathological diagnosis revealed endosalpingiosis.
The patient was advised to have serial ultrasound and tumor markers every 6 months. Her follow-up ultrasound 6 months after surgery was within normal limits.
Clear "amenorrheic" lesions of endometriosis have been confused in clinical practice with psammoma bodies, endosalpingiosis and ovarian cancer. The difference between these must be made on the basis of histology and appearance. The presence of psammoma bodies in an infertility population is more compatible with post-inflammatory changes from chlamydia than with cancer. The diagnosis of cancer is based on epithelium and not the appearance of calcification. Fig. 2 Laparoscopy showed multiple tiny clear cysts over fallopian tubes
Discussion
Endosalpingiosis is the presence of ectopic, cystic glands outside the fallopian tube that are lined with fallopian tube-type ciliated epithelium. Endosalpingiosis may occur in pelvic organs, including ovaries, fallopian tube serosa, uterine serosa, myometrium, or pelvic peritoneum. It may also occur in the bladder or in a retroperitoneal or axillary lymph node. Endosalpingiosis is diagnosed only through surgical biopsy, so it is unknown if there are asymptomatic cases.
Another notable feature of endosalpingiosis is its histologic relationship with pelvic serous neoplasms (e.g., low-grade pelvic serous carcinoma). However, the role of endosalpingiosis as a risk factor or as part of the pathogenesis of these conditions is unknown.
Clement and Young reported four cases of cystic endosalpingiosis of the uterus with tumorlike manifestations in 1999. One of their four cases had transmural uterine involvement by endosalpingiosis which was the first reported case of transmural uterine endosalpingiosis [ ]. Cil et al. [ ] have reported tumorlike cystic endosalpingiosis in the uterine myometrium throwing light on the fact that salpingiosis could assume huge proportions in size by undergoing cystic changes and mimic neoplasms.
A similar case of tumorlike multilocular cystic endosalpingiosis of the uterine serosa has been reported by Lee et al. [ ] and also by Heatley et al. [ ], and a case of omental endosalpingiosis has been documented by Santeusanio et al. [ ]. Endosalpingiosis in association with ovarian surface epithelial tumor of borderline malignancy has been reported by Ryoko et al. [ ]. Tumorlike foci of endosalpingiosis have been rarely described in the vermiform appendix and the urinary bladder [ ].
Sometimes, endosalpingiosis may present with non-specific symptoms including pelvic pain, hyper or dysmenorrhea or infertility [ ]. They have been found in association with endometriosis and uterine leiomyomas. Endosalpingiosis closely resembles endometriosis from which it can be differentiated by the absence of characteristic endometrial stroma and cyclical hemorrhage. The other differential diagnoses include endocervicosis (characterized by tall, columnar, mucin secreting epithelium), deep glands in the uterine cervix (which show continuity with the uterine canal), multiple peritoneal inclusion cysts or benign cystic mesothelioma which are distinguished by the presence of mesothelial lining.
Papillary tubal hyperplasia has been suggested as a putative precursor of endosalpingiosis and of low-grade serous ovarian carcinomas. Low-grade serous ovarian carcinomas are molecularly distinct from the more common high-grade pelvic serous carcinomas, but the notion that the fallopian tube may serve as a site of origin for serous carcinomas is gaining some favor. High-risk women (HR), in particular those carrying BRCA mutations, are at risk of development of high-grade pelvic (ovarian, fallopian tube, primary peritoneal) serous carcinomas. There is not yet a clear or consistent association of low-grade serous carcinomas with the HR status. Moreover, to date, there are no previous reports examining the association of endosalpingiosis with being HR. A potential link between ovarian ES and the development of pelvic serous carcinoma in women who are BRCA mutation carriers has been observed in 1 case report. Malignancy has been reported to occur significantly more in premenopausal women with ES than without it [ , ].
Conclusion
The recognition of the lesion lies in its quiet and continuous evolution that may lead to a dreadful outcome of serous carcinoma in addition to other problems. Accurate pathologic diagnosis and proper management of the patients to avoid overtreatment or substandard care are the main purposes of this article. This article highlights the importance of microscopic examination in resolving the crucial diagnostic dilemma that a rare, simple, benign and seldom reported entity like cystic endosalpingiosis could create. Uterine cystic endosalpingiosis can be serosal or intramural, differential diagnosis to be made with adenomyosis.
The diagnosis of endosalpingiosis will be made during conventional pathologic observations if a pathologist is aware of the lesion. Under tough circumstances, immunohisto-chemical analysis is used for differential diagnoses.
Based on its relationship with the development of serous tumors, we feel that the morphologic presentations of the lining cells need to be addressed in detail in routine pathologic reports.
The data regarding this condition wether management and treatment or follow-up is not much, so we invite others to show their experience in practice to set a guideline for it.