Introduction
Cancer of the uterine cervix is second most common cause of malignancy-related mortality in females in India [ ]. The staging system proposed by the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) is commonly used for locoregional staging of carcinoma of the cervix [ ]. Since, FIGO staging is a clinical staging, accurate assessment of tumor volume, and lymph node status is not included. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the preferred imaging modality as it gives better soft tissue delineation than computed tomography in pelvic tumors. MRI is an important adjunct to clinical examination in description of extent of disease in cervical cancer. The importance of clinical examination including examination under anesthesia (EUA), especially in clinical staging and vaginal extension, cannot, however, be underestimated. MRI is particularly useful to ascertain involvement of the lower uterine segment, parametrial extension. MRI is superior in assessment of treatment response after chemoradiation [ ]. Recently, role of diffusion-weighted imaging for detection of recurrent or residual disease in pelvic malignancies including gynecological cancer has been investigated [ ]. The aim of this review is to discuss the role of conventional and diffusion-weighted MRI in cervical cancer.
MRI Imaging of the Normal Cervix
T2-weighted high-resolution MR images provide excellent resolution of the cervical anatomy. There are different cervical zones that can be appreciated on MRI sequences. Usually endocervical mucosa is of high signal intensity, whereas inner fibromuscular stroma is hypointense. The fibromuscular stroma situated in the peripheral part, is of intermediate signal intensity. The diagnostic accuracy is improved by incorporating the axial, coronal and sagittal images.
MRI Imaging in Cervical Cancer
Body coil is commonly used for abdomen and pelvis MRI imaging, but use of phased-array coil may increase the resolution and decrease the imaging time [ ]. Table 1 summarizes the imaging sequence needed for delineation of tumor and locoregional extent of disease [ ]. Dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) imaging may help to differentiate between residual diseases from postsurgical changes. MRI is also useful in delineating abdominal or pelvic lymph node. A lymph node having short axis diameter >10 mm with border irregularity, heterogeneity of signal on T2W images and the presence of necrosis are highly likely to be malignant [ ]. Table 1 MRI protocol for imaging in cervical cancer adapted from Ref. [ ] Imaging sequence Structures T2W sagittal imaging T2W FSE, sagittal Extension of the cervical lesion to adjacent part of lower uterus or vagina, involvement of adjacent organs like posterior wall of bladder (bladder base) or recto-vaginal septum Axial oblique T2-weighted FSE sequence perpendicular to the long axis of the cervix Parametrial involvement T2W FSE, axial Lymph node, hydronephrosis
MRI is particularly useful to diagnose the parametrial disease. The parametrial infiltration has been classified by Schmid et al. [ ], into five categories: (1) expansive with spicule; (2) expansive with spicule and infiltrating parts; (3) infiltrative into the inner third of the parametrial space (4) infiltrative into the middle third and (5) infiltrative into the outer third of the parametrial. The authors showed that category 3–5 have higher chance of residual disease after external beam radiotherapy. Tumor volume delineation by conventional MRI incorporating the diffusion-weighted imaging improves the sensitivity and makes the dose escalation in high-precision radiotherapy possible. In a study, Grigsby et al. [ ] showed better local control by such dose escalation strategy in stage IB-IVA cervical cancer using MRI- and PET-based treatment planning. Similar result was reported by Dyk et al. [ ]. Both Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) guideline for external beam radiotherapy and GEC-ESTRO guideline for brachytherapy strongly recommend the use of MRI in tumor volume delineation in cervical cancer [ , , ]. Not only in target volume delineation, MRI-based volumetry can also reduce the systematic and random errors during high-precision radiotherapy in pelvic malignancies. According to Kerkhoff et al. [ ], intrafraction MRI-guided soft tissue registration using an MRI accelerator significantly reduced intrafraction error. For external radiotherapy boost by IMRT technique, position shifts and volume changes in the pelvic and paraaortic nodes are better accommodated by MRI scan taken periodically during radiotherapy [ ]. Functional MRI with perfusion parameters is useful in assessment of response to radiotherapy [ ]. Feasibility of characterization of tumor regression by weekly MRI during radiotherapy was shown by Lim et al. [ , ] from an initial tumor volume of 8–209 cm 3 , and the authors observed relative reduction in volume during treatment was up to 79 %.
Tumor Regression
Tumor regression is an important parameter in cervical cancer affecting the outcome. In a study, Datta et al. reported the clinically assessed regression of the tumor during external beam radiotherapy. Tumor regression dose for 50 and 80 % response was found to correlate with outcome [ , ]. Pathologically tumor regression has been classified into complete and partial response. The various pathological changes induced by radiation and chemotherapy include epithelial, stromal and vascular changes in tissue microenvironment. These include desmoplasia, fibrosis, inflammation, endothelial plaque formation, intimal or intimo-medial fibrosis of arterioles and granulation tissue formation. Mandard et al. classified the tumor regression in esophageal cancer after chemoradiotherapy into five grades. Tumor response was graded as follows: grade 1—complete regression with absence of residual cancer; grade 2—rare residual tumor cells scattered throughout the fibrosis (near complete response); grade 3—predominant fibrosis but increase in the number of cancer cells (moderate response); grade 4—residual cancer cells outgrowing the fibrosis (minimal response); grade 5—absence of regressive changes (no response) [ ]. Attempts have been made to develop radiological tumor regression grade in other pelvic malignancies. After the MERCURY (Magnetic Resonance Imaging in Rectal Cancer European Equivalence Study) trial, a tumor regression grade was proposed for rectal cancer [ ]. In rectal cancer, this grading system was found to correlate with histological grading. According to this system, grade 1: predominant fibrosis without residual disease, grade 2: predominant fibrosis with minimal residual tumor signal, grade 3: predominant fibrosis with substantial residual tumor signal, grade 4: predominant tumor signal with minimal fibrosis, grade 5: tumor unchanged from baseline [ ]. Therefore, MRI can be a useful tool for assessment of chemoradiotherapeutic changes in cervical cancer, but it requires further investigations.
Role of Diffusion-Weighted MRI in Cervical Cancer
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is based on the principle of diffusion of water molecules in tissue microenvironment. In tissue, this signal is derived based on the restriction to flow of water molecules by tissue cellularity and cell membrane integrity [ ]. In highly proliferative tumors, DWI shows restricted diffusion. After treatment, due to reduction in the bulk of proliferating tumor cells due to greater movement of water molecules, DWI shows decreased signal intensity. This is accompanied by increased signal intensity on corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps. Use of diffusion sensitizing gradient helps to acquire the diffusion restricted images [ ]. In cervical cancer, DWI is useful in staging of the primary tumor, evaluating the metastatic disease (like liver metastasis) and assessment of treatment response [ ]. Interpretation of DWI along with ADC significantly improves diagnostic accuracy. Liu et al. has shown that high pre-treatment ADC values indicate more necrotic tumors which are frequently hypoxic, acidotic and less perfused. The authors also noted an increase in mean ADC after treatment [ ]. Harry et al. [ ] showed the role of DWI and ADC (measured after 2 weeks of treatment) as an early and reproducible response indicator to chemoradiotherapy for advanced cervical cancer. Heo et al. [ ] showed that pre-treatment ADC analyses by histogram technique can be used as an image marker for predicting early tumor recurrence. In a review, Shigenobu et al. had described that cellular tumors with lower baseline pre-treatment ADC values responded better to chemotherapy or radiation than tumors with higher pre-treatment ADC values [ ]. Increase in ADC value after chemoradiation was also noted by Park et al. (0.89–1.57) [ ]. In a recent meta-analysis, Fu et al. demonstrated high correlation between treatment response and ADC value in cervical cancer. The authors suggested that diffusion-weighted MRI along with ADC value can be very useful in predicting treatment response in cervical cancer [ ]. The role of MRI in assessment of the parametrial disease, vaginal extension and uterine involvement is illustrated in Figs. 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 . Fig. 1 A 39-year-old lady with carcinoma cervix clinically growth involving both lips of cervix and fornices. Left parametrium was involved up to lateral pelvic wall, while right parametrium was not involved (stage IIIB). Her MRI shows a T2 hyperintense lesion in the posterior lip infiltrating the posterior vaginal fornix. Left parametrial stranding was present. Lesion shows restricted diffusion. Radiologically it was restaged as carcinoma cervix IIB Fig. 2 63-year-old lady with carcinoma cervix stage IIB clinically. CT scan showed bulky cervical lesion. The parametrium involvement was well appreciated in the MRI. MR imaging showed T2 hyperintense and T1 hypointense mass lesion in the cervix involving posterior wall of the vagina. Lesion extends laterally to both parametria (stage IIB) Fig. 3 Upper panel 53-year-old lady with carcinoma cervix on examination shows an infiltrative growth involving both lips with medial involvement of left parametrium (stage IIB). MRI pelvis shows bulky cervical mass involving the lower uterine segment in addition to the posterior fornix and parametrial involvement. Lower panel 54-year-old lady with carcinoma cervix clinically had an ulcero-proliferative growth involving both lips of cervix with no parametrial involvement (stage IB2). MRI shows a T2 hyperintense lesion involving both posterior and anterior lips measuring 5.1 × 3.8 × 5.5 cm involving the lower uterine segment. There was parametrial stranding, more so on the left side, not extending to the pelvic side wall, and there was minimal extension into the anterior wall of the upper vagina. So it was restaged as stage IIB Fig. 4 65-year-old lady with previous h/o hysterectomy evaluated for pervaginal bleeding. Clinically, there was induration of the vault extending up to the lower one third of vagina. Bilateral paravaginal tissue involved till the pelvic side wall. Recto-vaginal septum and rectal mucosa were normal. MRI shows T2 hyperintense lesion of 3.4 × 5 × 1.5 cm with mild parametrial stranding on the left side ( upper panel ). The lower panel shows the diffusion images and ADC sequence
MRI and Image-Guided Brachytherapy
Brachytherapy is an integral component of treatment of cervical cancer which has evolved from preloaded application to high dose rate remote after loading system using various image guidance platforms to improve accuracy [ ]. Even though image-guided brachytherapy has several advantages compared to 2D conventional “point A”-based brachytherapy, cost and logistical issues are important limiting factors in resource constrained settings [ ]. Several studies have shown that image-guided brachytherapy results in decreased chronic complications with improved local control and survival [ , ]. The additional cost of cross-sectional imaging for brachytherapy, time for planning and other logistics issues could presumably stretch the already overloaded radiotherapy centers in developing countries. Therefore, the cost-effectiveness analysis for image-guided brachytherapy should take into consideration the treatment cost, human resource, time of treatment planning balancing with the achieved local control and survival benefit, decreased complications and better quality of life. Very few studies have analyzed this issue from health economic point of view, and the literature is especially scarce in developing countries like India. By analyzing the Medicare reimbursement and Healthcare Cost and Utilization project database in USA, Kim et al. [ ] showed that 3D image-guided brachytherapy is a clinically feasible option compared to the 2D conventional brachytherapy in cervical cancer in terms of quality-adjusted life years. The generalization of this result in Indian context needs further investigations keeping in mind that only 25 % of Indian population is covered by any form insurance and “out-of-pocket” expenses amounts to almost 79 % of the total health sector expenditure [ ]. Since routine use of MRI can put additional financial burden, alterative imaging modalities like CT scan with applicator can be useful. CT based on high-risk CTV (CTV HR) using the information from pre-brachytherapy MRI can improve the precision and accuracy of target delineation, especially in stage IIB and IIIB with limited parametrial extension. MRI with applicator is, however, very useful to avoid geographic miss in disease with extensive parametrial or adjacent organ involvement [ ]. Therefore, clinical judgment is very important while choosing the appropriate cost-effective imaging modality in cervical brachytherapy.
Conclusion
Magnetic resonance imaging is a useful tool for delineation of tumor volume in radiotherapy planning in cervical cancer. It is more sensitive than computed tomography in delineation of tumor volume, assessment of locoregional extent like lower uterine segment, involvement, extension to parametria. Incorporation of diffusion-weighted imaging and perfusion parameters can significantly enhance the capability of conventional MRI in assessment of treatment response after chemoradiotherapy. Judicious use of MRI in image-guided brachytherapy keeping the cost benefit ratio in mind can improve the clinical outcome in cervical cancer, especially in developing countries. Whether conventional and functional MRI can be used for response assessment after neoadjuvant treatment needs to be investigated.