Introduction
With their cancer treatments behind them, the survivors face the challenges of living a normal life and experiencing menopausal symptoms, such as hot flashes, dyspareunia, atrophic vaginitis and sleep disturbances. Menopause may be prematurely precipitated by the therapy or the symptoms may result from radiation-induced vulvovaginal changes.
Projecting the number of Cancer Cases in India (2010–2020) by Cancer Groups, the National Cancer Registry Program of Indian Council of Medical Research, has speculated that the total cancer cases are likely to go up from 979,786 cases in the year 2010 to 1,148,757 cases in the year 2020. The female cancer cases will go up from 75,289 in the year 2010 to 93,563 in the year 2020. Gynecological-related cancers are estimated to go up from 153,850 in 2010 to 182,602 in 2020. Cancer of breast alone is expected to cross the figure of 100,000 by the year 2020 [ ].
Successful treatment of patients with the gynecological and breast cancers has resulted in increasing number of cancer survivors. Of these, 30–40 % women are pre- or perimenopausal. This has been made possible because of earlier detection of some cancers, stabilization of treatment protocols, the availability of treatment and improved survival rates [ , ]. These women experience menopausal symptoms at an earlier age than that occurs naturally following surgery, chemotherapy or radiation treatment for cancer. Ovarian destruction is immediate after surgical removal of ovaries. Radiotherapy is more toxic to ovaries in depleting the function of ovaries than the chemotherapeutic agents. Exposure to radiation of 2 Gy is considered to be lethal to half of oocyte pool and that of 6 Gy results in irreversible hypogonadism [ ]. Ovaries of women aged beyond 40 years are more susceptible to the radiation-induced damage [ ]. Sudden or abrupt menopause may result in severe vasomotor and psychological symptoms, and there is a need of effective and yet safe hormone replacement therapy (HRT) to address to their quality of life.
The issue of HRT is reviewed from time to time [ , ] and is felt necessary to reiterate in the regional context. In the absence of regional data, the extrapolation and application of inferences drawn elsewhere remain the only guidelines requiring reiteration.
HRT in Women Without Cancer
After menopause, the vasomotor disturbances like hot flashes, night sweats and sleep disturbances are manifest in nearly two-third of the cases. The psychological symptoms include mood disturbances in more than half of the cases and also include irritability, fatigue, memory loss and lowered libido. It is seen that HRT improves vasomotor symptoms, vaginal dryness, mood and overall mental health, sleep, bone health and the quality of life including decrease in incidence of cardiovascular disease [ ]. This resulted in extended HRT being inducted in menopausal health program to prevent myocardial infarction, stroke and osteoporosis. But, the reports questioning cardiovascular benefits [ , , ] and increased risk of breast cancer on long-term use [ ] lead to mass discontinuation of HRT as a menopausal women health program. However, the closer scrutiny showed that there was no increase in hazard ratios of stroke, coronary accidents and venous thrombosis after 3 years of discontinuation of HRT. The risks reported in were rather incriminating progesterone component of the combined estrogen–progesterone arm of the study. It may be deduced that with only estrogen for replacement therapy, the absolute risk is very low and that younger patients who had bilateral salpingo-ovariectomy (BSO) are the potential candidates, and can be recommended for use in the smallest effective dose with frequent reassessment, after discussion of risk/benefit ratio.
HRT in Caner Survivors
Although HRT is considered safe in women unaffected with cancer, since they are infrequently prescribed in cancer survivors their safety profile is not very clear. There is always a theoretical risk of quiescent residual malignant cells getting stimulated by the HRT. After Women Health Initiative (WHI) trial and misconceptions, the HRT trials on large scale are less likely. One has to make do with extrapolation of the results obtained from the existing already accumulated data.
Almost all gynecological cancer survivors irrespective of their age may require HRT in some form to alleviate different problems (Table 1 ). Some who are treated early in age would require supplementation to overcome the sudden ovarian deprivation. Those cancers that affect late or after natural menopause would also require maybe to take care of vaginal dryness and/or urogynecological symptoms. Table 1 Risk of cancer for menopausal hormone replacement therapy in cancer survivors Cancer survivor Risks Increased No change Decreased Endometrial cancer (HRT vs. no-HRT) Recurrence 2.3 versus 1.9 %; new disease 1.3 versus 1.6 %; deaths 0.8 versus 0.6 % [ ] Recurrence: nil versus 8 % [ ]; 1 versus 14 % [ ] Disease-free survival: longer [ ] Epithelial ovarian cancer HR 1.58; 95 % CI 0.77–3.24 [ ] Disease-free survival (34 vs. 27 months, p = 0.785); overall survival (44 vs. 34 months, p = 0.354) [ ] HR 0.83; 95 % CI 0.65–1.08 (except serous) [ ] Risk of death/disease: OR 0.9; 95 % CI 0.24–5.08 [ ] HR 0.57; 95 % CI 0.42–0.78 (in Serous) [ ] Better OS: HR 0.15, p = 0.6; PFS: HR 0.44, p = 0.7 [ ] Cervical cancer Adenocarcinoma: OR 2.1; 95 % CI 0.95–46 [ ] Squamous cell ca: OR 0.85; 95 % CI 0.34–2.1 [ ] DFS and OS not influenced by receptor status, p > 0.05 [ ] 5 year survival: 80 and 65 %; RR 20 and 32 %, in those on HRT than on non-HRT; not significant [ ] Breast cancer RR with and without progesterone use: 0.12, 95 % CI 0.02–0.25; and 0.03, 95 % CI 0.01–0.06 [ ] HR 2.4, 95 % CI 1.3–4.2 [ ] BRCA 1, 2 carriers HR = 0.37; 95 % CI, 0.14–0.96 [ ] BRCA breast cancer, CI confidence interval, DFS disease-free survival, HR hazard ratio, HRT hormone replacement therapy, OR odds ratio, OS overall survival, PFS progression-free survival, RR recurrence rate
Endometrial Cancer
Incidence of endometrial cancer in India is on the increase maybe because of rising prevalence of obesity [ ] and declining fertility [ ]. The widening life expectancy [ ] makes one to think about its survivors and in making their living better.
Though endometrial cancer is considered to be the disease after menopause, 25 % are detected premenstrually and when diagnosed a fifth of them are below 40 years of age [ ]. Surgery, removal of ovaries along with uterus, remains the mainstay of management.
Most of these are considered as hormone-dependent tumors and the worrisome report of increased recurrence in African-American women while on HRT [ ] maybe a cause of concern to prescribe the latter. But, it can be overlooked in the light of several other studies that showed either no increased risk because of HRT [ , ], or significantly lower relative risk in a placebo controlled study [ ]. Another strategy suggested is to conserve the ovaries at the time of hysterectomy in young women. The theoretical risk of dual primaries may preclude such an option despite the surveillance, epidemiology and end results analyses suggesting no significant effect on either cancer-specific or overall survival even after excluding the cases that received pelvic radiotherapy [ ].
The short course of estrogen-based HRT can be recommended for women with low risk, early-stage endometrial cancer who have undergone a hysterectomy/BSO and staging procedure if they have menopausal symptoms. In patients with Type II endometrial cancers, there are no data to guide the use of estrogen replacement therapy, and it need not to be withheld as they are not hormone dependent.
Uterine Sarcoma
Uterine sarcomas form a heterogeneous group and constitute 5 % of uterine cancers. Not much is known about their pathogenesis. The common types are leiomyosarcoma, carcinosarcoma and endometrial stromal sarcoma. Leiomyosarcomas are non-hormone dependent, and there should not be any concerns for HRT use should they require. However, no data are available regarding HRT use in carcinosarcomas, and these tumors have a potential link to hyperestrogenism. Endometrial stromal sarcomas are steroid receptor-positive and hormone-sensitive malignancies and in them HRT is contraindicated [ ].
Ovarian Cancer
Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) accounts for more than 90 % of ovarian malignancies. Nearly 40 % of women diagnosed with ovarian cancer are between 30 and 60 years of age and 60 % present with advanced disease (stages III–IV) [ ]. Bilateral salpingo-ovariectomy with total hysterectomy (BSO-TH) and aggressive chemotherapy is the standard of care.
Steroid hormones have been implicated in ovarian carcinogenesis with no convincing evidence for estrogen to act as an initiating or promoting factor for the development of EOC [ , ]. Some studies have reported correlation between risk of epithelial ovarian carcinoma and history of HRT [ ] and found increased incidence in current users than in the never users, and others have reported the disease progression and occurrence of breast cancer in HRT users [ ].
The post hoc analysis of WHI study [ ] failed to show increased risk of EOC in HRT users, and other studies neither have noted difference in disease-free survival [ ], any adverse effects [ ], nor increase in disease-related mortality [ ]. On the contrary, better survival is shown with the hormone consolidation [ ].
It should be remembered that endometrioid EOC is estrogen sensitive although no association with prior HRT use is implicated in their occurrence [ ], and HRT is better avoided in women who had had an advanced disease or that was not optimally dissected. Similarly, HRT is avoided in granulosa cell tumors they being endocrinologically active and hormone dependent.
There is no evidence to refute the use of HRT in cases with germ cell tumors.
It may be concluded that in most of EOCs HRT may be offered if required; the caution needs to be exercised in steroid hormone-expressing tumors and avoiding altogether in advanced endometrioid EOC and granulosa cell tumors.
Cervical Cancer
Cancer of the uterine cervix is the second most common malignancy after breast cancer and is the cause of significant morbidity and mortality.
Estrogen and progesterone receptors are expressed in cervix [ ]. Adenocarcinoma of cervix is associated with increased rate of ovarian metastasis, and hence, BSO is performed whenever surgery is considered [ ]. Radiotherapy is the standard of care since most of the cancers when diagnosed leave no option for surgery.
Cervical cancers, squamous cell or adenocarcinoma is not shown to be hormone dependent [ , ], and hence, receptor-positive status does not seem to have any prognostic significance [ , ]. Use of HRT neither has increased the risk of cancer cervix, squamous cell or adenocarcinoma [ ], nor is the prognosis of the disease affected [ ].
Recommendation is that HRT use can be considered as safe in cancer cervix patients and used with caution in patients with adenocarcinoma because of some studies recording two times higher odds ratio [ ].
Vulvar Cancer
Vulvar cancer is frequently seen in postmenopausal women with mean age at diagnosis of 65 years and accounts for 5 % of gynecological cancers [ ]. It is increasingly seen in younger women because of its association with human papillomavirus (HPV)-related intraepithelial neoplasia [ ]. Squamous cell cancer is a non-estrogen-dependent tumor. Even in elderly age group, the need for HRT or local estrogen treatment will arise post-radiotherapy.
There is no evidence that HRT has a negative effect on the course of treated disease [ , ]. Systemic and topical estrogens can be used safely after radiotherapy in squamous cell cancer of the vulva.
Vaginal Cancer
The most common histological subtype of vaginal cancer is squamous cell variety and accounts for approximately 0.3 % of all gynecological malignancies [ ]. These are usually a disease of postmenopausal women in their late age and could be a consequence of HPV-related lower genital syndrome. These are non-hormone-dependent tumors. Topical estrogens or systemic HRT if required can be used safely.
The subtype of adenocarcinoma is rare and can be seen in women even younger than 20 years of age. The ones with diethylstibesterol (DES)-related clear cell adenocarcinoma also afflict in second decade of life. There is no definitive evidence refuting or recommending the use of HRT in this group of women with vaginal cancer. These women are young and may be prescribed HRT with caution after due discussion.
Breast Cancer
We have already seen that cancer of breast alone is expected to cross the figure of 100,000 by the year 2020 in India and is the most common and frequent cancers in women [ ]. Occurrence of breast cancer has seen an age shift with almost 50 % patients being below 50 years of age. In steroid receptor-positive cases, the standard of care involves risk-reducing salpingo-ovariectomy (RRSO).
In current users of estrogen–progesterone contraceptive pills, transient increase in probability of breast cancer was seen, more so if the first-degree relative had a breast cancer [ ]. Regarding behavior of the disease in relation to pregnancy, there is no uniform opinion. Studies have shown that the disease diagnosed in pregnancy to be associated with increased mortality [ ], whereas survivors becoming pregnant to have similar or improved prognosis than never pregnant [ ]. The report that can have significant importance in planning HRT is the axillary node positivity. The relative risk of recurrence with HRT was found to be higher in the first 2 years of use and remained at 5 % up to 9 years, while it remained nil in node negatives even after 5 years [ ]. Without reference to nodal disease, increased risk of recurrence is also reported after HRT in breast cancer survivors [ ].
It can be concluded that HRT remains an option for previously treated axillary node-negative breast cancer patients and those with estrogen/progesterone receptor-negative status.
BRCA Gene Mutation Carriers
It is shown that RRSO decreases incidence of ovarian, fallopian tube and breast cancers and even provides a short-term benefit in life expectancy up to 50 years [ ]. Most of these are premenopausal interventions and leave these women with abrupt menopause. Use of HRT in them may be feared to potentiate existing risk of breast cancer.
The prescribed dose of estrogen–progesterone is very low. But the concerns that in estrogen receptor/progesterone receptor (ER/PR)-positive cases there could be increased recurrence or the occurrence of disease in contralateral breast or even recrudescence of metastases remains. What is interesting to note is that nearly two-third of the cases of breast cancer are ER negative. Short-term HRT use is said not to negate the protective effect of RRSO on subsequent breast cancer risk in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers [ ].
The recommendation is that there is no contraindication for HRT in ER/PR-negative carriers and short course can be prescribed. It should be avoided in ER/PR-positive cases.
Lynch II Syndrome (HNPCC) Mutation Carriers
Every sixth case of 60 % endometrial carcinoma that is seen in these women is below 40 years of age. The ovarian cancers are seen in 10–15 % of carriers, and germ-line mutation is said to occur more than two decades earlier in them. RRSO with total hysterectomy is advised for these women.
The role of hormones in cancer genesis in HNPCC mutation carriers is yet to be elucidated, and there are no published studies regarding the safety profile of HRT use in these women who have undergone RRSO and hysterectomy.
Short course of HRT in the symptomatic women may be considered reasonable.
Conclusion
Prescription for HRT is a deliberate balancing decision to be made by the clinician in open discussion with the cancer survivor to maintain the quality of life without any detrimental effect on their survival and minimize the physical and psychological impact of treatment side effects (Table 2 ). Table 2 Hormone replacement therapy—contraindications Cancer survivor Hormone replacement therapy Contraindication No contraindication Drugs Endometrial cancer High risk Low risk, early stage I–III; type 2 cancers Systemic therapy: Estrogen alone–estradiol valerate 2 mg/day; estrone 1.25 mg/day; conjugated equine estrogen 0.625 mcg/day Progestins–progestins are advised concurrently if woman has not had hysterectomy. They are given continuously or intermittently. Sequential combined regimens should be used in women in the perimenopausal years or who have had their last menstrual period within 1 year prior to starting HRT or continuous if they do not wish to have withdrawal bleeds). Medroxyprogesterone acetate 2.5 mg/day Selective tissue estrogenic activity regulator—tibolone 2.5 mg/day Selective estrogen receptor modulator—ospemifene 60 mg/day Local therapy: Vaginal creams—17 beta estradiol; conjugated estrogen Transdermal—17 beta estradiol matrix or reservoir patches, gel, spray or emulsions Vaginal rings—17 beta estradiol; estradiol acetate Vaginal tablets—estrone with Lactobacillus acidophilus Uterine sarcoma Carcinosarcoma; endometrial stromal sarcoma Leiomyosarcoma Ovarian cancer Endometrioid EOC; Granulosa cell tumor EOCs; germ cell tumors Cervical cancer ±Adenocarcinoma Squamous cell cancers Vulvar cancer – Any Vaginal cancer ±Adenocarcinoma; ±Clear cell cancer Squamous cell cancer Breast cancer – ER/PR negative; axillary lymph node negative EOC epithelial ovarian cancer, ER/PR estrogen receptor/progesterone receptor Short-term HRT does not adversely affect oncological outcome. There should not be any concerns to advise HRT to endometrial, cervical, epithelial ovarian, vulvar, vaginal and node-negative breast cancer survivors. HRT should be avoided in ER/PR-positive and node-positive breast cancer, endometrial stromal sarcoma and granulosa cell tumor survivors. Caution should be exercised before prescribing in advanced or incompletely resected endometrioid EOC
Recommendations are summarized in Table 3 . Table 3 Recommendations for HRT use in gynecological cancer survivors Cancer survivor HRT Level of evidence Endometrial cancer Low risk, early stage Short course of ERT (at the smallest possible doses) II, III Type II cancers No data to guide HRT; possibly safe Uterine sarcoma Leiomyosarcoma Safe Carcinosarcoma No data available Endometrioid stromal sarcoma Contraindicated Ovarian cancer EOC HRT may be offered I, III Advanced endometrioid EOC Avoid Estrogen/progesterone expressing tumors Caution should be exercised Granulosa cell tumor Avoid Cervical cancer Safe II–IV Vulvar cancer Safe Vaginal cancer Squamous cell cancer Safe Adenocarcinoma Safety not known; prescribe with caution Clear cell cancer Breast cancer Can be used II—2B Axillary node positives Avoid BRCA gene mutation carriers ER/PR negative No contraindication; short course of HRT II ER/PR positive Avoid II Lynch II syndrome (HNPCC) mutation carriers No data available Short course of HRT in the symptomatic women BRCA breast cancer, EOC epithelial ovarian cancer, ER/PR estrogen receptor/progesterone receptor, ERT estrogen replacement therapy, HNPCC hereditary non-polyposis colonic cancer, HRT hormone replacement therapy