Introduction
Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death among all gynecological malignancies in developed countries [ ]. The incidence of ovarian cancer is up to ten times higher in Western countries than in rural Asian and African ones. Different reproductive characteristics, life styles and specific medical conditions are responsible for different pattern and incidence of ovarian cancer worldwide [ ].
Eighty to ninety percent of ovarian cancers are epithelial, and more than two-thirds are diagnosed at an advanced stage [ ]. Epithelial ovarian cancer is the most leading cause of death in females with pelvic malignancies, because the early symptoms of ovarian cancer are easily overlooked, a diagnosis of ovarian cancer is infrequently made before the cancer has progressed to stage III or IV [ ].
The current standard of management for a patient with advanced (stage III or IV) ovarian cancer is cytoreductive surgery followed by administration of systemic chemotherapy. The 1980s clinical trials demonstrated that platinum-based chemotherapy improves survival in women with advanced disease, since mid-1990s a combination of platinum (cisplatin or carboplatin) and taxol (paclitaxel) have become the standard first-line chemotherapy regimen for treatment of ovarian cancer [ ].
In certain cases, however, it is not prudent for the patient to undergo cytoreductive surgery at the time of diagnosis secondary to increased surgical risk. Often, these patients will have massive accumulating effusions or severe medical problems that prevent major surgery [ ]. In such patients, a presumptive diagnosis can be made by cytological examination of pleural fluid or ascites, or by fine needle aspiration of a soft tissue mass [ ].
Diagnostic imaging criteria have also been developed to identify patients with advanced ovarian cancer in whom optimal cytoreduction is unlikely to be achieved at the initial surgery. Following diagnosis, these patients may benefit from (two or three cycles of) chemotherapy during which time the effusions or medical contraindications to surgery may resolve, after that cytoreductive surgery called “interval cytoreductive surgery” and additional (three cycles of) chemotherapy may be more feasible [ ].
This technique called “neoadjuvant chemotherapy” has been evaluated in retrospective, matched control trial in Europe comparing 88 patient who underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy with 244 patients who underwent standard therapy, all of whom had advanced ovarian cancer; the 3- and 5-year survival rates were no different between groups, but the percentage of patients cytoreduced to <2 cm of residual tumor, quality of life, and disease-free interval were improved in patients who underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy [ ].
Recently, the efficiency of “neoadjuvant chemotherapy” in ovarian cancer treatment has been widely discussed, but the data for legitimating of this treatment technique are not sufficient [ ].
Patients and Methods
Thirty patients ( n = 30) were treated by (CP regimen: carboplatin and paclitaxel) as neoadjuvant combination chemotherapy and then followed by cytoreductive surgery (interval debulking surgery). These patients were divided into two equal groups based on interval till surgery, 15 patients each, as regards the timing of IDS. Group A: Patients who underwent IDS within 42 days from last cycle of chemotherapy. Group B: Patients who underwent IDS after 42 days from last cycle of chemotherapy. All patients ( n = 30) received (CP regimen) as neoadjuvant chemotherapy: carboplatin (AUC = 6, Day 1) and paclitaxel (175 mg/m 2 , Day 1). Chemotherapy regimen was given by the intravenous route of administration. The cycle was repeated every 3 weeks. Total numbers of cycles were six cycles for all responsive patients. Patients with stable disease (by CT) received different chemotherapy regimen (liposomal doxorubicin) postoperatively as adjuvant chemotherapy. After the completion of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, all patients were then referred for interval debulking surgery and the surgico-pathologic response assessment. Informed consent was obtained from all participants. This study was conducted after being passed from the ethics committee as retrospective study.
Results
Patients base line characteristics were similar in both groups. Thirty patients (100 %) in our study received three cycles of preoperative chemotherapy (CP regimen) as (neoadjuvant chemotherapy) (15 in Group I and 15 in Group II); 27 patients (90 %) of both groups in our study received three cycles of preoperative chemotherapy; and two patients (8 %) had received preoperative six cycles and one patient (5 %) had received five cycles. All patients (100 %) underwent interval debulking surgery; 15 in Group I and 15 in Group II). Twenty-seven patients (90 % of cases) of both groups received three cycles (CP regimen) of postoperative chemotherapy as (adjuvant chemotherapy); as two patients (8 %) who has six preoperative cycles and complete pathological response did not have postoperative chemotherapy and other patient (5 %) who received five preoperative cycles had received only one postoperative cycle. Total numbers of cycles were six cycles for all responsive patients (Table 1 ).
The mean of interval from drugs to surgery is 2 weeks with range of 1–6 weeks in Group I and mean of 7 weeks in Group II with range of 7–12 weeks. Table 1 Chemotherapy cycles Chemotherapy cycles Group I Group II Number % Number % Preoperative chemotherapy (3–6 cycles) = (Neoadjuvant chemotherapy) 15 100.00 15 100.00 Interval debulking surgery 15 100.00 15 100.00 Postoperative chemotherapy (0–3 cycles) = (adjuvant chemotherapy) 14 93.33 13 86.67 P 0.788
Table 2 shows the clinical response after neoadjuvant chemotherapy according to WHO criteria. The most frequency response was partial response (85 % of cases) by CT scan. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy response was noted clinically by subjective and objective improvements mainly due to resolution of ascites, absence of previously pleural effusion, decrease of tumor size and significant regression of omental/peritoneal thickening (down-stage of tumor). All of that reflect positively on both physical and psychological condition of the patients before interval debulking surgery. Table 2 Clinical response after neoadjuvant chemotherapy Clinical response Number % Complete response 1 (5) Partial response 26 (85) Stable response 3 (10) Progressive response 0 (0.0)
Optimal residual disease in advanced ovarian cancer defines as being ≤1 cm in largest tumor diameter. But it is now established that the most favorable prognosis is in patients with no macroscopic residual disease at all. Table 3 shows that optimum cytoreduction was achieved in 15 patients in Group I (100 % of cases of Group I); these patients included: seven patients (46 % of cases of Group I) had complete macroscopic resection and eight patients (53 % of cases of Group I) had residual disease ≤1 cm in largest tumor diameter; and this shows statistically significant differences between Group I and Group II where P = 0.0012. Optimum cytoreduction was achieved in three patients in Group II (20 % of cases of Group II); these patients included: one patient (6.7 % of cases of Group II) had complete macroscopic resection and two patients (13.3 % of cases of Group II) had residual disease ≤1 cm in largest tumor diameter. Table 3 Evaluation of surgical optimization Residual size of tumor Group I Group II Number % Number % Complete macroscopic resection 7 46.7 1 6.7 ≤1 cm 8 53.3 2 13.3 >1 cm 0 0.0 12 80.0 P 0.0012* * Statistically significant difference between groups
Suboptimal cytoreduction was achieved in 12 patients of Group II only (75 % of cases of Group II) with residual disease; mainly in pelvis, abdominal surface of diaphragm and liver surface.
Discussion
As the optimal number of chemotherapy cycles to be given before planned, surgery is still a major unsolved issue. The number of cycles was determining according to the evidence of regression or progression of disease, response to CA125 level and patient’s ability to tolerate neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
The numbers of preoperative cycles ranged from (2 to 6); most patients were explored after three cycles. In this study, neoadjuvant chemotherapy administration was (90 %) of patients received three cycles, (5 %) received five cycles and (5 %) received six cycles.
It seems that the chance of achieving an optimal debulking increases in responding patients with the numbers of cycles before surgery. This potential advantage has to be balanced against the risk of emergency/selection of drug resistant cell clones and cumulative drug toxicity associated with the increased number of chemotherapy cycles.
Many studies have already shown that this sequential approach (neoadjuvant chemotherapy) is safe and seems to produce at least similar or equivalent results compared to initial surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy.
Since the amount of residual disease is the most important prognostic factor, every effort should be made to increase the optimal cytoreduction rate; NACT followed by surgical cytoreduction is one such approach. Hou et al. [ ] concluded that optimal cytoreduction rate was (95 %) for neoadjuvant chemotherapy arm and (71 %) for primary surgery arm. Hegazy et al. [ ] concluded that optimal cytoreduction rate was (72 %) for neoadjuvant chemotherapy arm and (62 %) for primary surgery arm.
In the present study, it was concluded that the optimal timing for standard cytoreduction surgery was within 42 days of last NAC cycle, and we found that longer interval between neoadjuvant chemotherapy and interval debulking surgery (IDS) have an adverse effect on survival. These patients were divided into two equal groups using the closed envelope technique, 15 patients each, as regards the timing of IDS, Group I (GI): patients who underwent IDS within 42 days from last cycle of chemotherapy and Group II (G II): patients who underwent IDS after 42 days from last cycle of chemotherapy. We analyzed the data of patients with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer to evaluate the effect of interval from last cycle of chemotherapy to interval debulking surgery (IDS) on surgical results.
In accordance with this finding, Haupreased et al. [ ] indicated better outcome for patients who undergo interval debulking surgery within 6 weeks after last cycle of neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
In non-randomized trials, many authors have reported an optimal cytoreduction rate of (60–95 %) following neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In the current study, optimal cytoreduction rate was (60 %) which is compatible with that reported in the literature using neoadjuvant chemotherapy [ , , , ].
In the present study, in (GI) optimum cytoreduction was achieved in 18 patients (60 % of cases); these patients included: 8 patients had complete macroscopic resection; one of them had also complete pathological response, and suboptimal cytoreduction was achieved in 12 patients (40 % of cases) with residual disease; mainly in pelvis, abdominal surface of diaphragm and liver surface in (G II).
This data compared with Hegazy et al. [ ] who reported that non-standard surgery performed in (22.2 %) for neoadjuvant chemotherapy group which was less than (34.4 %) for primary surgery group. However, Braid et al. [ ] reported that only (14 %) of patients who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy had non-standard surgery.
Conclusion
The current study suggests a potentially wider role for “neoadjuvant chemotherapy” in management of advanced epithelial ovarian cancer.
“Neoadjuvant chemotherapy” considers an alternative method for inoperable cases to be operable cases; neoadjuvant chemotherapy caused significant subjective and objective improvements before the surgical procedures which a positively reflect on surgeon’s ability to achieve optimum cytoreduction surgery in advanced ovarian cancer. These occur in the view of adequate selection criteria for NACT, consideration of surgical morbidity and the possibility of successful debulking. With the disease under control, relief of distressing symptoms as abdominal distension and discomfort and nutritional improvement result in improving patient’s performance status and perioperative outcome. Although our data on “neoadjuvant chemotherapy” are promising, they still exist a need for prospective randomized trials assessing survival and quality of life of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for advanced ovarian cancer. The optimal timing for standard cytoreduction surgery was within 42 days of last NAC cycle, and we found that longer interval between neoadjuvant chemotherapy and interval debulking surgery (IDS) have an adverse effect on survival.