Introduction
Pharmaceutical drug products are conventionally manufactured by batch processing—a method where all starting materials are charged into the equipment at the beginning of a process and the product is discharged once the process is completed. Sequential unit operations are performed one after the other, and the size of the used equipment limits the batch size. Usually, each step follows an empirically determined recipe and quality is tested by off-line analysis. Batches of material that do not meet their pre-defined quality expectations, for instance caused by unexpected variations in starting material characteristics or process conditions, are discarded [ , ]. In contrast, continuous manufacturing (CM) is a rather new advancement in the pharmaceutical industry with the potential to increase flexibility, efficiency, and safety of pharmaceutical manufacturing. In CM, all process units are directly connected with each other; starting material is charged at the beginning of the line while final product is simultaneously discharged at the end ( first-in-first-out principle ). Batch size is determined by runtime; thus, equipment can be significantly smaller, which enables process intensification. The implementation of process analytical technologies (PAT) and associated control loops enable the adaption of process parameters according to the current ingoing process and material conditions, rather than following a fixed recipe, and material that does not meet its specifications can be diverted from the line immediately. One of the most notable benefits of CM, resulting from the combination of runtime-determined batch size and comprehensive PAT-based real-time process control, is the potential for unlimited scale up of production volumes at consistent product quality. In reality however, continuous processes are susceptible to unforeseen incidents like equipment wear-out, clogging of transfer pipes, or PAT-probes, which could force a temporary shutdown of the whole production line until the incident is resolved. To avoid this scenario, locally confined, temporary scaling of total material throughput, together with the implementation of decoupling elements, are proposed in this paper as part of the control strategy. This concept allows to buy time for incident handling in the affected unit operation, while keeping the controlled state active in the unaffected areas, thus minimizing time and material loss. Consequently, a thorough CM-control strategy needs to consider all possible sources of process variability, at variable rates of total material throughput, to reduce the risk for complete operation shutdown and ensure in the meantime that the finished batch of drug product has consistent, uniform character and quality within pre-defined limits at all times [ , , , ]. Since the pickup of CM by the pharmaceutical industry as the new manufacturing standard is slower than possible, due to perceived regulatory uncertainties, re-registration of already registered products, and capital investments into new production facilities, little knowledge on science-based control strategy development in CM has been published up to this date. To help the adoption and overcome uncertainties, this article demonstrates how to systematically gain a thorough CM-process understanding for variable rate control strategy development in continuous manufacturing of tablets [ , ]. The same approach can be transferred in a generic fashion to other CM processes as well, be it chemical or pharmaceutical processes, even if first-principle-based models are not or hardly obtainable.
The investigated continuous manufacturing line for solid oral dosage forms enables a fully continuous first-in-first-out manufacturing process from excipients and drug substances(s) to film-coated tablets. To reduce complexity, the presented study focusses on controlling the consecutive process-units twin-screw wet-granulation (TSG) and continuous fluid-bed drying (FBD). In TSG, excipients, drug substances(s), and granulation liquid are continuously fed into a barrel containing a set of co-rotating screws that produce granules through high shear forces. Wet granules are then transferred to the FBD by compressed air. The FBD-product container holds a 10-segmented rotor whose chambers are sequentially filled with wet granules emerging from the TSG. Wet granules then travel 8/10th of a full rotation between the inlet and the outlet, while they are dried. Process variables include rotation speed and hence residence time, inlet air temperature, and airflow rate. Dried granules are discharged from the rotor-segments by compressed air and released through two alternating discharge valves before being transferred to sieving and tableting via a vacuum powder transfer system. The tablet press hopper serves as a decoupling element that allows scaling of total material throughput in the granulation and drying process unit while keeping the tablet press at constant speed. The entire CM process includes numerous factors that could potentially be critical for drug product performance; thus, a first-principle’s-based control strategy that considers all of them would require complex and costly development efforts and vast computation power during production and is prone to interpretation errors, if no sound understanding of process mechanistics is present. Alternatively, a QbD-based descriptive model can be applied, by identifying critical factors and quantifying their effects in order to implement a systematic, science-based variable rate control strategy.
A general guideline for pharmaceutical development of drug products (DP), independent of the manufacturing process, is provided by ICH Q8 R2, which forms the basis for the established methodology in this project. The guideline recommends summarizing the drug product’s desired characteristics and level of quality that is required to ensure safety and efficacy for the patient in the Quality Target Product Profile (QTPP) at the beginning of development. Based on the QTPP, the drug products’ critical quality attributes (CQAs) should then be identified. CQAs are product characteristics that have to remain within appropriate, pre-defined limits to ensure the desired level of product quality. They are directly influenced by their corresponding critical process parameters and critical material attributes of input materials (CPPs and CMAs, further summarized as factors ). Factors are highly product and process dependent and should be determined by a combination of quality-risk-management methodologies and systematic experimental analysis, to generate thorough, science-based process understanding. Design of experiments (DoE) is the preferred method for the investigation of complex processes, compared to the traditional step-by-step approach. It enables testing a large number of factors with optimal efforts and permits the identification of factor interactions, by systematically varying factor settings between their respective low and high limits and assessing the quantitative effects on CQAs (also referred to as responses ) by statistical analysis. The gained qualitative and quantitative knowledge on factor-response relationships builds the foundation for developing a comprehensive science-based control strategy of the manufacturing process [ , , , ].
The QTPP of film-coated tablets for immediate release generally lists assay, aspect, dissolution rate, content uniformity, and stability as the drug products CQAs, as they can sufficiently ensure the products’ safety and efficacy for the patient when they meet their pre-defined limits. Corresponding intermediate CQAs of the abovementioned CM process by wet-granulation and fluid-bed drying are dried granules’ content uniformity (CU), moisture content (LOD), and particle size distribution (PSD), as they directly influence all drug product CQAs [ ]. To limit the complexity of the project, this publication focusses on variable rate control strategy development for intermediate CQAs LOD and PSD of dried granules. Since both are primarily defined by the process-units twin-screw-granulation and continuous fluid-bed drying, all other units were excluded; the powder blend was prepared beforehand in a batch blender and granules were collected after the dryer for analysis. Diclofenac sodium, formulated at 25% drug content with standard excipients, was used as a drug substance for all trials. The study concentrated on identification and characterization of factor-response relationships and subsequent process control opportunities, without going into detail about available process analytical tools. In detail, first risk assessment of twin-screw wet-granulation and fluid-bed-drying was conducted in an interdisciplinary team exercise. It identified all potential critical process parameters (pCPPs) and potential critical material attributes (pCMAs) that can affect dried granule CQAs LOD and PSD. Second, identification and effect quantification of CPPs and CMAs were performed by DoE testing and selected follow-up trials. It was demonstrated that most factors in the described process affect both CQAs simultaneously, but dryer rotation speed and TSG screw speed showed the potential for independent control of LOD and PSD. Third, control actions on LOD were implemented and their effectiveness was confirmed, to serve as an example to enable model-based real-time process control at variable total material throughput. Although the quantitative findings of this study are distinctively related to the investigated substance and process, the demonstrated methods and the generated general CM-process understanding can be transferred to other CM processes with the capability to improve future development efforts. For that reason, all performed steps of the methodology are explained in detail in this manuscript, with the intention that it allows the reader to repeat the same procedure with a different process.
Materials and Methods
Materials
Diclofenac sodium (Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium) was used as a model compound in all trials. The formulation contained 25% diclofenac sodium, 5% sodium starch-glycolate, 5% sodium stearyl fumarate, 4% hypromellose (Cellulose-HP-M 603), 12.2% calcium hydrogen-phosphate waterfree, and 48.8% microcrystalline cellulose PH102 (all excipients supplied by Novartis Pharma AG, Stein, Switzerland). Purified water was used as granulation liquid, and wet granules’ L/S-ratio varied depending on the experimental settings of liquid and solid feed rate (see 6.2 in the supplementary materials).
Methods
Risk Assessment
Risk assessment was conducted in two-steps. First, fishbone diagrams for TSG and FBD were created that list all conceivable process parameters and material attributes (further summarized as variables ) that could potentially vary over the course of production. For better overview, the diagrams are divided into the five sub-categories: environment, materials, process parameters, machine, and people. To ensure that all possible scenarios were reflected during risk assessment, formulators, process engineers, and analytical experts were included into the discussion.
Theoretically, all of the variables identified in the fishbone diagrams are potential critical process parameters or potential critical material attributes for dried granules’ LOD and PSD. However, some variables are not likely to vary significantly during production. Therefore, in the second step of the risk assessment, each variable was individually reflected in a criticality matrix rating. If a sound justification was presented that the probability for a certain variable to fluctuate during production is low, it was downgraded to not critical. All remaining variables were defined as pCPPs or pCMAs ( factors ) that need to be investigated in detail for their criticality on dried granules CQAs LOD and PSD ( responses ).
Factors can either be quantitative or uncontrolled. Quantitative factors are process parameters that can be directly manipulated to a precise setting to investigate their influence on CQAs (e.g., liquid feed rate, screw speed); uncontrolled factors are common variations during production that cannot be set to a desired value (e.g., relative humidity, pre-blend LOD). The experimental matrix of a DoE is designed from quantitative factors; whereas, uncontrolled factors are merely monitored during all trials, to investigate their common variation and to assess potential criticality on responses [ ] (Table 1 ). Table 1 Criticality matrix rating with examples in each category for twin-screw wet-granulation. Each fishbone-parameter is reflected individually for its probability to fluctuate during production and is thereby rated as either potential critical or not critical process parameter or material attribute (pCPPs, nCPPs/pCMAs, nCMAs, respectively) Category Factor Decision Justification Environment Room temperature nCPP Tightly controlled by room control (21 ± 6 °C); also, TSG and FBD have internal heating/cooling elements Relative humidity pCPP Relative humidity of environment defines dryer inlet humidity, which could influence drying behavior Materials Temperature of granulation liquid nCMA Processed at room temperature ➔ low probability that significant variations occur. Also, TSG is heated individually Pre-blend LOD pCMA Can vary with varying batches of drug product and excipients or with relative humidity. Potential influence on drying behavior Process parameters TSG barrel temperature pCPP Problems with cooling/heating unit could change granulation behavior Transfer pressure TSG to FBD nCPP Low probability of occurrence Machine Runtime pCPP Potentially critical --> investigate Type of granulator nCPP Low probability of occurrence People Operator nCPP Only trained operators allowed (GMP)
DoE Design
A fractional factorial screening DoE on two levels with 2 7–4 = 16 different factor level combinations and three center points was designed from quantitative pCPPs. The design allows modeling of linear factor-response relationships at resolution IV: three-factor interactions are confounded with main effects and two-factor interactions cannot be fully resolved as they are partially confounded among each other; quadratic effects cannot be identified distinctively but can be suggested from statistical methodologies. An overview of the DoE experimental design matrix is attached in the supplementary materials (see 6.2 ). Generally, a screening DoE aims to identify and quantify CPPs with low experimental effort, at the cost of low resolution and confounding of interaction terms and quadratic terms [ ]. To be able to use DoE models as a basis for process control loops, follow-up trials are required. All follow-up trials performed in this project are described in the Results and Discussion section, as they are directly linked to the findings from the initial screening DoE (see Optimization DoE and Follow-up Investigations ).
Design of experiments and evaluation of results were performed with software package MODDE 11 (Sartorius-Stedim, Malmö, Sweden), Origin Pro 2016 (Origin Lab Corporation, Northampton, USA), and Microsoft Excel 2010 (Microsoft, Redmont, USA).
Preparation of Powder Blends
Powder blends for all trials were prepared beforehand in batches of 5 kg by weighing all ingredients and blending two times for 5 min at 20 rpm with a Turbula Mixer (T10B, WAB AG Maschinenfabrik, Muttenz, Switzerland). Between the two blending steps, the powder was sieved through a 1 mm-mesh sieve to break agglomerates.
Twin-screw Wet-Granulation
Continuous wet-granulation was performed on a Thermo Fisher Pharma 16 twin-screw granulator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Karlsruhe, Germany) with screw diameter (D) of 16 mm and a total screw length of 53 ¼ × D Screw configuration was as follows (from inlet to outlet of the barrel): 2 D feed screw elements (FSE), 2 D long helix feed screws, 22 D FSE, 2 ¼ D 30° mixing element, 22 D FSE, 3 D distributive feed screw elements. The powder blend was fed through the first feeding port in the barrel by a loss-in-weight powder feeder (K-Tron T20, Coperion K-Tron GmbH, Niederlenz, Switzerland). Granulation liquid at room temperature was fed through the second port of the TSG barrel by a custom-made dispensing pump system (based on Watson Marlow, Zollikon, Switzerland) through a nozzle of 0.12 mm inner diameter. Feeder-calibration was performed each day by the feeder’s internal calibration modes. Refill of feeders was performed manually, before the hopper-fill level decreased by more than 50%. Barrel temperature, screw speed, and the feed rate of both feeders were set according to the experimental plan (see 6.2 in the supplementary materials for details).
Continuous Fluid-bed Drying
Continuous fluid-bed drying of wet granules was performed on a Glatt GPCG 2 CM fluid-bed dryer (Glatt GmbH, Binzen, Germany). The dryer’s product container holds a 10-segmented rotor whose ten chambers are sequentially but continuously filled with wet granules supplied from the TSG outlet. The wet granules then travel 8/10th of a full rotation from the inlet port towards the dryer outlet, while being dried on a bottom plate with a pore-size of 25 μm at variable rotor speeds, drying temperatures, and airflow rates. Dried granules are then discharged from the dryer outlet by compressed air (2 bar) followed by two alternating valves. See 6.2 in the supplementary materials for used dryer settings.
To follow the discussions around the dryer, the relationship between dryer rotation speed DRS, drying time t d , and chamber fill mass m f needs to be understood: at constant total material mass flow ṁ tot , the dryer rotor speed DRS (rph) influences t d and m f simultaneously in a non-linear, negative relationship. In detail, when increasing DRS, t d and m f simultaneously decrease as described by Eqs. ( 1 ) and ( 2 ). $$ {t}_d\left[\min \right]=\frac{60\ast 0.8}{\mathrm{DRS}} $$ (1) $$ {m}_f\left[\mathrm{g}\right]=\frac{{\dot{m}}_{tot}}{10\ast \mathrm{DRS}} $$ (2)
Trial Execution and Process Parameters
All experiments were performed according to the following general procedure: Before the first trial of the day, the empty dryer was preheated at the designated drying temperature and an airflow rate of 150 m 3 /h for at least 100 min. Heating of the TSG barrel at the desired process temperature was started simultaneously. Once the temperature equilibration of the equipment was completed, granulation and drying was started. For each run, dried granules were discarded during a ramp-up period of 20 min before sampling, in order to equilibrate the process and avoid transient effects on the data. Afterwards, ten full chambers of dried granules (= one full rotation of the dryer rotor) were collected in a PET-sample bag resulting in a sample size of 166–644 g. The sample was carefully mixed, before analysis of CQAs was performed. When a temperature change was required between experiments, granulation was stopped and equilibration time of 60 min was given to the system at the new designated temperature settings. All DoE experiments were performed in groups of the same temperature in random order, split between 6 days. An additional center-point trial was added on each day to investigate the common day-to-day variation of the process. Details on the execution of optimization DoE and follow-up trials are described in the respective sections, if it differed from the general procedure.
Influence of Runtime and Common Day-to-Day Variation on Responses
Runtime of a continuous granulation and drying process can influence responses, due to changing cleanliness of the equipment and thermodynamic equilibration time [ , ]. To avoid bias in statistical analysis of DoE results, the criticality of runtime on responses LOD and PSD was investigated prior to starting DoE experiments. To assess the influence of runtime, granulation and drying were started on clean equipment at DoE center-point settings, and the progression of dried granules’ LOD and PSD was monitored consecutively over 180 min.
Analysis of Water Content
Sample LOD was measured with a loss-on-drying moisture analyzer (HS153, Mettler Toledo, Greifensee, Switzerland), by drying approximately 5 g of granules at 105 °C, until the drying rate was lower than 1 mg/50 s. Granules were measured immediately after sampling, and the average sample LOD and standard deviation (in w / w %) were calculated from three consecutive measurements.
Analysis of Particle Size Distribution
PSD of dried granules was analyzed by two different dynamic image analyzers: CamSizerXT (Retsch Technology, Haan, Germany) and Qicpic Gradis/L (Sympatec GmbH, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany). CamSizer XT is equipped with an X-Jet module operating at 30 kPa dispersion pressure and is suitable for fine and sticky granule samples in the range of 1 μm–3 mm. Samples from runtime assessment, day-to-day variability, and all follow-up trials were analyzed by CamSizer, since the pressured air dispersion system results in a better resolution of fine particles. Qicpic is equipped with a gravity dispersion unit and is suitable for a wider range of particle sizes (1 μm–10 mm). Qicpic was used for all screening DoE samples, because few samples were too coarse for CamSizer. With both analyzers, each sample was measured three times with approximately 5 g of granules per measurement, and the average PSD was calculated. Both techniques report volume-based particle size distributions, calculated based on the smallest of all maximum chord lengths of the particle projection (inner width); fractions X10, X50, and X90 were calculated for data analysis.
Results and Discussion
Results are divided into four sections. First, risk assessment results are presented. Second, screening DoE results, including runtime assessment and day-to-day variability are discussed. Third, subsequent optimization DoE and other follow-up trials are described and their outcomes are discussed. At the end, an example for the applications of the established variable rate process models in manually applied process control loops is demonstrated.
Risk Assessment
Fishbone analysis identified 44 variables for TSG and 23 variables for FBD. Figure 1 shows an excerpt of the fishbone diagrams for TSG with a few examples in each category. Detailed fishbone diagrams for TSG and FBD are attached in the supplementary materials (see 6.1 ). Fig. 1 Step 1 of process risk analysis by fishbone diagrams—the illustration lists a few examples in each category for twin-screw wet-granulation. Full diagrams are attached in the supplementary materials
Subsequent criticality matrix rating identified ten variables as potentially critical for dried granules’ CQAs: seven quantitative pCPPs and three uncontrolled pCPPs/pCMAs. A few examples for the criticality matrix rating are listed in Table 2 , and the detailed table is attached in the supplementary materials (see 6.1 ). A summary of all identified potential critical factors is provided in Table 2 , together with abbreviations for future reference and investigated factor ranges. Uncontrolled factor relative humidity can vary depending on the weather, and pre-blend LOD can slightly vary between batches of drug substance and excipients. Runtime , defined as the time for which the manufacturing process was running continuously since start-of-production, is an uncontrolled pCPP that can be of high importance for continuous manufacturing. To avoid bias of DoE results by runtime, its influence on CQAs LOD and PSD was assessed prior to starting trials (see below). Table 2 Summary of potential critical process parameters and potential critical material attributes for continuous twin-screw wet-granulation and fluid-bed drying as identified during risk assessment # Factor Abbrev. Factor Factor type* Range to investigate (− to +) Unit 01 Solid feed rate SFR pCPP Q 2–4 kg/h 02 Liquid feed rate LFR pCPP Q 0.65–1.15 kg/h 03 Screw speed TSG SS pCPP Q 200–400 rpm 04 Barrel temperature TSG BT pCPP Q 30–40 °C 05 Dryer rotation speed FBD DRS pCPP Q 8–16 rph 06 Drying temperature FBD DT pCPP Q 70–90 °C 07 Drying air flow rate FBD DAV pCPP Q 80–110 m 3 /h 08 Room relative humidity N/A pCPP U Monitored %rH 09 Pre-blend LOD N/A pCMA U Monitored % 10 Runtime of equipment N/A pCPP – Monitored** h * Q , quantitative factor; U , uncontrolled factor **Runtime was assessed prior to screening DoE trials to avoid biased results
Screening DoE
Runtime and Common Day-to-Day Variation
During process ramp-up, an increase in dried granules’ LOD and a decrease in PSD were observed. Due to the lack of statistical reference values, the process’ equilibration time was initially estimated to be approximately 20 min and this time-frame was set as the standard equilibration time in all succeeding screening DoE trials. Nevertheless, the estimation was statistically confirmed after trials were finished: By calculating average and residual standard deviation of CQAs within the conducted center-point trials ( n = 6), the 1σ-acceptance range for response variations (i.e., common variation of the process) was defined. Under these premises, common variation for LOD was found to be ± 0.5% (absolute, equals ± 22% relative variation), common variation for PSD X10, X50, and X90 was found to be ± 7 μm, ± 28 μm, ± 161 μm, respectively (equals, ± 9%, ± 12%, and ± 14% relative variation; see supplementary materials 6.3 for details). In comparison, the observed average error of the reference methods was ± 3 μm, ± 20 μm, ± 95 μm, for PSD X10, X50, and X90 respectively, and ± 0.13% (absolute) for LOD (calculated from three repeating measurement of the same sample). The reference methods’ errors being smaller than the process’ common variation suggests that process variations as well as measurement errors are responsible for the observed variation between center-point trials.
The response-average during the last 60 min of the runtime trial (i.e., fully equilibrated system) ± the common variation then was set as the 1σ-acceptance range. It was confirmed that the process was statistically equilibrated only 10 min after start-up (see Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Runtime assessment for 180-min granulation time. PSD initially decreases while LOD increases after starting the process. Equilibration was reached after 10 min. The acceptance range is defined by average response during the last 60 min ± RSD of common variation in screening DoE center-point trials (av., average)
Cleanliness of Equipment
To save time and energy, the equipment was not cleaned between trial days. To demonstrate that this procedure did not bias the results, responses from a steady-state process (5 h of equilibration time) were compared to granules’ responses from a “dirty” granulator that was left to dry overnight (at room temperature). It was confirmed that granules’ CQAs from “dirty/dry” equipment are statistically comparable to steady-state granules after 20 min of equilibration time (calculation based on center-point common variation in analogy to Runtime and Common Day-to-Day Variation ). A graphical display of results is attached in the supplementary materials .
In conclusion, it was verified that 20 min equilibration time was sufficient to generate granules with statistically significant response variations. Hence, the time constant of the process is no longer than that, and by discarding ramp-up material within these transient processes a dynamic model is not needed to control the quality of the product.
Statistical Analysis of Screening DoE: Uncontrolled Factors
Room humidity varied between 14 and 26% rH (= 2.10–3.98 g/kg at RT) and pre-blend LOD varied between 2.23 and 2.37% ( w / w %). Within this range, no critical effect on granules’ CQAs was observed. However, both parameters should be monitored in the future (see supplementary materials 6.5 for individual values).
Statistical Analysis of Screening DoE: Quantitative Factors
A default linear model was fitted to each response by MLR analysis; to avoid false weighting on the fit, only three of six center-point trials were included into the statistical analysis. A summary of factor settings and observed responses for each experiment is attached in the supplementary materials (see 6.6 ; for details on MLR refer to Rajalahti et al. [ ]). The goodness of a model can be judged by the parameters R 2 , Q 2 , model validity, and reproducibility. R 2 is the fraction of the variation of the response explained by the model, Q 2 estimates the predictive ability of the model by generalized cross-validation, validity reflects the model appropriateness in a general sense, based on ANOVA lack of fit test, and reproducibility is a measure for the variation in center points compared to overall variability. Generally, a good model with statistically acceptable prediction precision is indicated by values > 0.5 for all parameters. For more details on statistical methods in DoE, refer to Eriksson et al. [ ].
With this in mind, model refinement of the default linear model was performed as follows: log-transformation of raw data improved the linear fit to a non-linear factor-response relationship, since raw response-data was scattered over a broad range with low weighting on extreme maximum values resulting in a skewed distribution (see supplements 6.6 for details). For LOD, main effects of BT, SS, and DRS were identified as not significant in the tested range and thus were removed as not critical process parameters (nCPPs). Furthermore, statistical analysis suggested interaction term SFR*LFR or DT*DAV or SS*DRS to be significant (all confounded due to the selected design, ANOVA p = 0.005). An interaction effect between SS and DRS has not been described in literature up to this date. Since also no significant main effect on neither SS nor DRS was identified, it was concluded to be insignificant. This theory was later confirmed during a follow-up trial as described in the Optimization DoE and Follow-up Investigations section. Interaction effects between solid and liquid feed rate (SFR*LFR) as well as drying temperature and drying air flow (DT*DAV) seem both likely as both have been described in literature before [ , , , ]. Theoretically, the observed interaction effect consists of the sum of all three interactions, but the selected design does not allow to identify their individual contribution to the model. SFR*LFR was selected to be included, as it increased the models predictive power the most ( Q 2 increased from 0.658 to 0.874). For PSD X10, statistical analysis suggested interaction terms SFR*SS or LFR*DRS or BT*DAV (all confounded, ANOVA p = 0.042) and interaction terms DT*DAV or DRS*DT or SFR*BT (all confounded, ANOVA p = 0.037), as well as a quadratic term with either one of the seven factors (all confounded, ANOVA p < 0.022). While plausibility for BT*DAV and SFR*BT seems low and no literature was found describing these effects, the remaining interaction terms are reasonable and extensively described in literature [ , , , , ]. Nevertheless, their individual contribution to the model cannot be resolved. SFR*SS and the quadratic term SS 2 were then selected to be included, based on Gorringe et al. reporting that the channel fill level φ , which is directly related to SS and SFR, correlates to changes in PSD [ ]. Furthermore, DT*DAV was selected, as the term improved the predictive power of the model the most ( Q 2 increased from 0.679 to 0.906). Main effect of BT was not significant and therefore removed. Model refinement steps for PSD X50 and X90 were similar to PSD X10 with small differences in the final model: DRS was not significant for either X50 or X90; interaction term SFR*LFR was significant for X90. Reasoning for selecting these interaction terms over the other confounded interaction terms was done in analogy to the above-described procedure and literature sources. Overall, significance of the quadratic term SS 2 decreases with increasing particle size. Refined models for LOD and PSD X10 are very good, with parameters R 2 , Q 2 , and reproducibility ≥ 0.9; models for PSD X50 and PSD X90 are sufficient with all parameters > 0.5 (see Fig. 3 a). Coefficient plots of final models are presented in Fig. 3 b. Fig. 3 a Summary of fit of final models. All models have good predictive power and most of the observed variation is explained ( R 2 and reproducibility > 0.9, Q 2 and validity > 0.6). b Coefficient plot for final models. Model refinement was performed by log-transformation of raw data, deletion of insignificant model terms, and addition of interaction terms and potential quadratic terms, based on statistical methods. All coefficients are orthogonally scaled and centered. See Table 2 for abbreviations
Evaluation of Predictive Power
Although a screening DoE is not intended to be used for prediction in process control models, due to limited resolution, sufficient prediction of responses could still be feasible if good models were found. To assess the predictive power of the models, four test-experiments at varying material throughputs and process parameters were performed. Factor combinations were selected both from corners of the DoE design matrix (i.e., ± factor combinations that were not part of the initial DoE) as well as from within the design matrix (i.e., factor settings between ±). A graphical illustration of performed test trials is given in Fig. 4 a; predicted and observed responses are plotted in Fig. 4 b–d. A detailed overview of factor settings and observed responses is attached in the supplementary materials (see 6.7 ). Fig. 4 a Factor settings in test trials were selected from different corners of the DoE matrix (corner 1 and 2) as well as from inside of the matrix (inside 1 and 2). b – d Graphical illustration of predicted and measured responses in test trials. LOD differed within 1σ-RSD range of center-point variation; PSD differed mostly within 2σ-RSD range of center-point deviation (see Table 8 for details). Since models were generated by a screening DoE at low resolution, the observed predictive power is reasonable
Prediction of LOD is accurate with all deviations between observed and predicted responses within the 1σ-RSD range of center-point variations ( common variation , see Table 8 ). Prediction of PSD is less accurate, and most predicted values differ within the 2σ-RSD range of center-point variations. Considering that the models were generated by a screening DoE at low experimental efforts and thus low resolution, predictive power of all models is reasonable. Nevertheless, few selected follow-up investigations had to be performed, to increase the models capability for variable rate process control.
Optimization DoE and Follow-up Investigations
The ability to predict the quantitative effects of CPPs and CMAs on CQAs is a prerequisite for adaptive process control for continuous wet-granulation and drying in real time; for high flexibility, independent control of LOD and PSD is desirable. According to Fig. 3 b, screw speed SS is the only independent CPP for PSD, but a follow-up trial is required to quantify its effect and to evaluate the relevance of the suggested square term (SS 2 ). LOD cannot be controlled fully independent of PSD with the current model, as the only independent model-term drying temperature (DT) is not suitable to rapidly fine-tune LOD due to long reaction times. Drying airflow rate (DAV) is critical for LOD, but it also has a minor influence on PSD. Dryer rotation speed (DRS) was found to be not critical between 8 and 16 rph, but this might change when the full range (5–29 rph) is applied. In conclusion, a follow-up DoE was planned, with the aim to confirm the significance of SS/SS 2 on PSD and to re-evaluate the criticality of dryer rotation speed at a wider setting range. SS and DRS were investigated on five levels in a central composite circumscribed (CCC) design with eight trials and three center points. A CCC design on two factors allows to estimate all linear model terms, as well as two-factor interactions and quadratic model terms, without confounding effects [ ]. Investigated ranges for SS and DRS were 200–800 rpm and 5–29 rph, respectively; all other process parameters were kept constant as follows: solid and liquid feed rate at 4 and 1.2 kg/h, respectively, barrel temperature at 35 °C, drying temperature at 80 °C, and drying airflow at 140 m 3 /h. The experimental matrix can be found in the supplementary materials . All trials were performed in random order, split between 2 days without cleaning in-between.
Statistical analysis and model refinement were performed in analogy to the screening DoE; no data transformation was required. A linear model was fitted for LOD, and polynomial models were fitted for PSD. Figure 5 shows observed responses compared to the fitted models. Values for R 2 , Q 2 , validity, and reproducibility are all > 0.8 for LOD and X10 and > 0.5 for X50 and X90 with the exception of Q 2 of X90, which is − 0.61, indicating a model with no significant predictive power. The models coefficient plots and the summary of fit plot can be found in the supplements . Fig. 5 Observed responses and corresponding fitted models of LOD and PSD (X10, X50, and X90). A linear relationship between DRS and LOD was confirmed. The significance of square term SS 2 was confirmed for PSD
In summary, DRS demonstrated to have a significant critical effect on LOD and a minor effect on X10, when the range between 5 and 29 rph is applied. According to the presented formulas in the Continuous Fluid-bed Drying section, DRS is negatively correlated to drying time t d and chamber fill mass m f . More precisely, at a total material mass flow of 5.2 kg/h, each chamber contains 104 g of wet granules that are dried for 9.6 min when DRS is set to 5 rph, while each chamber contains only 18 g that are dried for 1.7 min when DRS is set to 29 rph. While it is generally known from literature that bed height (i.e., m f ) and drying time have opposite effects on LOD [ ], LOD significantly decreased in the presented data, when drying time and bed height (i.e., chamber fill mass) were increased through DRS. Therefore, the presented data suggests that drying time has a larger impact on LOD than chamber fill mass in the investigated CM fluid-bed dryer at the applied range of settings. In the initial screening DoE, DRS was rated not critical for LOD, because the model’s confidence interval was larger than the observed variation in LOD between 8 and 16 rph.
Furthermore, SS has a substantial main and quadratic effect on PSD, with highest significance on X10 (ANOVA p < 0.5 for all models and terms). Table 3 summarizes all critical and not critical process parameters and material attributes in continuous granulation and drying of pharmaceutical granules for the used formulation and process, based on all DoE trials. Since data matrices from the screening DoE and follow-up DoE trials are not symmetrical, it is not possible to combine both trials to one model, but both data sets can be used individually for process control. An example will be given in the Establishing Process Control section of this paper. Table 3 Summary of DoE results. pCPPs and pCMAs that were initially identified by risk analysis were either confirmed to be critical (CPPs) or downgraded to not critical (nCPPs/nCMAs) Response List of pCPPs demonstrated to be critical (CPPs) List of pCPPs and pCMAs demonstrated not to be critical (nCPPs/nCMAs)* LOD Liquid feed rate Solid feed rate Dryer rotation speed Drying temperature FBD Drying air flow FBD (Runtime**) Relative humidity Pre-blend LOD Barrel temperature TSG Screw speed TSG PSD (X10, X50, X90) Liquid feed rate Solid feed rate Screw speed TSG Drying temperature FBD Drying air flow FBD Dryer rotation Speed (Runtime**) Relative humidity Pre-blend LOD Barrel temperature TSG *Rating of not critical is only valid within the tested ranges **Runtime was demonstrated to be only critical during the first 20 min of process ramp-up
Establishing Process Control
During continuous manufacturing, it is not desired at any time to stop production, as it would generate transient conditions potentially leading to out-of-spec (OOS) material, which might delay production deadlines and cause economical losses. In reality, fouling of probes, wear-out of equipment-pieces, sticking in the tablet press, or other unforeseen incidents are not always preventable. A feasible alternative to stopping the whole line is the implementation of decoupling elements that allow to temporarily decouple a certain unit operation from the continuous process while the other unit operations keep on running (e.g., to clean a fouled NIR-probe). To avoid overfilling of the buffer-elements during incident-management, slowing down of total material throughput ṁ tot might be necessary. Likewise, briefly increasing ṁ tot could allow preventive cleaning of equipment at pre-defined time points (e.g., the transfer tube between TSG and FBD), by rapidly filling a following decoupling element with dried granules prior to cleaning.
In conclusion, even in a desired constant production rate scenario, variable flow rates per unit operation can be a helpful tool to improve overall runtime of a chain of unit operations. However, scaling ṁ tot during production is only worthwhile, if the CQAs of the dried granules will remain within their specification limits. LOD of the dried granules was found to be a linear function of ṁ tot ( R 2 > 0.99) with a slope of 1.2 %LOD/(kg/h), when all other process parameters are kept constant (tested ṁ tot range between 2.6 and 10.4 kg/h; process parameters as follows: DT, 65 °C; DAV, 120 m 3 /h; other parameters as in the Optimization DoE and Follow-up Investigations section. a graphical illustration of results is attached in the supplements, see 6 ). Therefore, scaling ṁ tot at constant LOD is only feasible through CPP adaption. Additionally, implementation of on-line or at-line PAT-System as part of the control strategy, to monitor CQAs under such variable rate conditions, is recommended. For more information on available PAT-options refer to [ , , ].
The previously described DoE trials found DRS and DAV suitable for LOD-control. Table 4 summarizes the individual effects of ṁ tot , DRS, and DAV on LOD (based on models from screening DoE, optimization DoE, and ṁ tot scaling further referred to as S, O, and M, respectively). Table 4 Summary of the models’ individual effects on LOD. Certain CPPs have to remain constant for the models to be valid, the models’ predictive power is only confirmed within the investigated range, and interpolation outside of the range might be possible but can cause prediction errors and should be confirmed if needed. See Table 2 for abbreviations Model Short name Factor Tested range Constant CPP, for model to be valid Factor effect on LOD Total effect over tested range ṁ tot increase M ṁ tot 2.6–10.4 kg/h DRS, L/S = 0.3* 1.2 %LOD/(kg/h)** 7.8 %LOD Optimization DoE O DRS 5–29 rph ṁ tot , L/S = 0.3* 0.072 %LOD/rph 1.8 %LOD Screening DoE S DAV 80–110 m 3 /h – − 0.060 %LOD/(m 3 /h) 1.8 %LOD * L/S , liquid-to-solid ratio **Mean effect over covered range
To confirm that precise, model-based adaption of dryer rotation speed and drying airflow can control dried granules’ LOD within acceptance limits at varying ṁ tot , the following trial was conducted: Granulation was initially started at a total material mass flow ṁ tot of 5.2 kg/h and DRS of 17 rph and DAV of 120 m 3 /h. Then, ṁ tot was first decreased and later increased by 50% from its initial setpoint; DRS/DAV was adapted according to the developed process models. Predicted LOD (based on models M, O, and S) and measured LOD were compared. Figure 6 summarizes the performed experiments and measured results. Table 5 explains each trial # from Fig. 6 in detail. Complete results can be found in the supplements . Fig. 6 Demonstration of developed process models in scaling of total material mass flow rate while keeping dried granules’ LOD within its specification. After a setting change, one full rotation of granules was discarded before one chamber full of granules was sampled for analysis. It was demonstrated that model-based adaption of DRS and DAV enables control of LOD within its acceptance range. Refer to Table 5 for details on each trial # Table 5 Individual trial settings from Fig. 6 explained in detail. For model short names M, O, and S, see Table 4 Trial # Actions and observations Rating* 1 Start: ṁ tot , 5.2 kg/h; DRS, 17 rph; DAV, 120 m 3 /h ➔ Model M predicts LOD at 6.5% (= target LOD), observed LOD = 6.8% in-spec 2 ṁ tot decreased by 50%, DRS/DAV constant ➔ Model M predicts LOD to drop to 3.4%, observed LOD = 3.4% OOS! 3 ṁ tot still decreased by 50%, DRS increased to 30 rph, DAV decreased to 85 m 3 /h ➔ Models O and S predict LOD to increase to 6.5%, observed LOD = 6.1% in-spec 4 ṁ tot still decreased by 50%, DAV decreased to 85 m 3 /h without adapting DRS ➔ Models O and S predict LOD at 5.6%, observed LOD = 4.9% OOS! 5 ṁ tot increased by 50%, DRS/DAV constant (compared to trial #1) ➔ Model M predicts LOD to rise to 9.6%, observed LOD = 9.2% OOS! 6 ṁ tot still increased by 50%, DRS decreased to 5 rph, DAV increased to 150 m 3 /h ➔ Models O and S predict LOD to decrease to 6.9%, observed LOD = 6.6% in-spec 7 ṁ tot still increased by 50%, DAV increased to 150 m 3 /h without adapting DRS ➔ Models O and S predict LOD at 7.7%, observed LOD = 7.7% OOS! 8 Repeat target settings: ṁ tot , 5.2 kg/h; DRS, 17 rph; DAV, 120 m 3 /h ➔ Model M predicts LOD at 6.5% (= target LOD), observed LOD = 6.3% in-spec *“ in-spec ,” LOD is within acceptance range; OOS , out-of-specification, LOD is outside of acceptance range
In summary, it was confirmed that the developed control strategy can control LOD within its acceptance range at varying ṁ tot . Furthermore, it was verified that adaption of DAV without DRS was not sufficient to control LOD (see Fig. 6 ). Therefore, DRS proved to be a valuable addition to on-line process control of dried granules’ LOD, especially since airflow rates further below 80 m 3 /h resulted in LOD values of > 17%, due to insufficient fluidization (data not shown). For completeness, it has to be mentioned that a decrease in ṁ tot at constant granulator screw speed could change granules’ PSD due to a different fill level and thus different granulation behavior in the screws [ ]. However, the observed effect on PSD was not significant in the described trials and will therefore not be discussed further (data not shown). Also, it needs to be mentioned that a screening DoE is not well-suited to generate precise prediction models, due to the low resolution, if better prediction accuracy is desired selected follow-up trials are advised. Furthermore, the model was developed for drying airflow between 80 and 110 m 3 /h and drying temperature between 70 and 90 °C, hence predictions at 65 °C and 150 m 3 /h airflow were extrapolated outside of the knowledge space and small prediction errors were anticipated.
Summary and Outlook
It was demonstrated how quantitative process understanding in continuous manufacturing of solid oral dosage forms can be systematically enhanced and how an empirical model-based, real-time process control of CQAs at variable material throughput can be established. First, a two-step risk assessment of the unit operations twin-screw wet-granulation and continuous fluid-bed drying was performed. Fishbone-diagram analysis and subsequent criticality matrix rating provided a thorough listing of all potential critical process parameters (pCPPs) and potential critical material attributes (pCMAs) that can influence intermediate critical quality attributes LOD and PSD of dried granules. Succeeding experimental analysis of factors by means of a screening DoE and a selection of follow-up experiments established comprehensive process understanding about qualitative and quantitative CPP/CMA-to-CQA relationships. In detail, it was revealed that most CPPs influence LOD and PSD simultaneously, which makes it difficult to control them independently from each other. Drying temperature is only critical for LOD, but its reaction time is too slow for rapid on-line control. However, dryer rotation speed DRS and drying air flow rate DAV were demonstrated to be useful factors in fine-tuning LOD of dried granules, while having only little influence on PSD, and granulator screw speed showed the potential to fine-tune PSD.
The last part of the paper gives an example on how the gained process knowledge can be applied to real-time process control of LOD at varying total material throughput while maintaining acceptable quality. The implemented control strategy allowed to vary total material throughput while keeping dried granules’ LOD within specification limits (upper and lower). This ability can be utilized upon appearance of unforeseen incidents like equipment wear-out or clogging of transfer pipes. Instead of shutting down the line to handle such events, a temporary scaling of total material throughput in confined, local unit operations together with the implementation of decoupling elements, allows to resolve the incidents in the affected unit operation while the controlled state is kept active in the unaffected areas. This can minimize the risk for time and material loss and further advance CM benefits over traditional batch processing. In the future, more process units and thus more CQAs will be included into the control strategy.
The suggested methodology for enhancing process understanding and development of variable rate process control strategies in continuous manufacturing of solid oral dosage forms is summarized in Fig. 7 . The quantitative findings in this work are distinct for the particular formulation and process used. However, the demonstrated procedure of systematically enhancing process understanding in CM can be transferred to any other continuous process to speed up future development work and create a variable flow rate regime that can be accurately controlled. Moreover, samples and process data from performed DoE trials can be used for PAT-method development and validation (e.g., LOD prediction by NIR spectroscopy), further accelerating development times in continuous manufacturing. As the methodology used here does not demand a first-principle’s-based process understanding and was demonstrated on a case that is complex to predict at a first-principle’s level, it can be expected that this approach is widely useable across different unit operation chains, which is subject for further research. Fig. 7 Summary of demonstrated methodology for variable rate control strategy development in pharmaceutical continuous manufacturing