Introduction
Tablets subdivision before intake is a routine practice recommended by physicians for dose adjustments or easy swallowing [ , ]. Although widely disseminated, the safety of such practice is still not a consensus, since high dose variability and stability issues have been reported with tablets division [ , , , ].
The majority of studies evaluating the impact of tablets subdivision on their quality requirements have been conducted on immediate-release tablets [ , , , ]. However, the impact of breaking a modified-release tablet is virtually unpredictable [ ], except in those cases where the tablet is coated with a gastro-resistant film and the subdivision would disrupt the coating film and obviously affect the mechanism of drug release. Tablets produced with pellets, for example, have demonstrated do not provide regular distribution of the granules over the tablet matrix, which compromises dose uniformity after subdivision [ ].
Orally disintegrating tablets (ODTs), also known as orodispersible, fast dispersing, fast melting or rapid melt tablets, are systems designed to instantaneously disintegrate in saliva, allowing easy swallowing without drinking water [ , ]. These particular tablets have become quite popular in the pharmaceutical market over the years as a rapid therapeutic intervention can be achieved due pregastric drug absorption, which improves pharmacokinetic profile [ ]. Opinion surveys have revealed patients and caregivers prefer ODTs to any other conventional pharmaceutical dosage forms [ , ]. Further, ODTs are considered as the first choice for patients with dysphagia [ ], besides pediatric and geriatric patients, which are the main ODTs consumers. In such cases, however, there is a clear need for fractionating this dosage form to adjust the dose according to their individualized demands [ ].
ODTs fast-dissolving properties are assured with the use of appropriate manufacturing techniques, as lyophilization and molding, which lead to poor mechanical strength tablets [ ]; together with the use of highly water-soluble excipients, which may be highly hygroscopic [ ]. Thus, once removed from the hermetic package, ODTs could be extremely sensitive to environmental conditions. The fast water uptake, for example, can trigger hydrolysis reactions and bring harmful consequences to drug stability in a short time period.
Considering the lack of studies in the literature on ODTs subdivision, this study aims to elucidate the impact of subdivision on selected ODTs produced with different technologies on their structural and functional properties. Stability of these drug products once out of their hermetic packaging was also assessed mostly due the possibility of patients keeping the subdivided tablets to be consumed days or weeks later.
Material and Methods
Material
Ten different ODTs products were selected: Alavert® (loratadine 10 mg, lot K00295, Pfizer, USA), Wal-itin® (loratadine 10 mg, lot 2,658,140, Walgreen CO., USA), Unisom® (diphenhydramine 25 mg, lot 15H409/2644265, Sanofi, USA), Zyrtec® (cetirizine 10 mg, lot 42,604,475, McNeil Consumer Healthcare, USA), Cold Remedy® (zincum, lot 29,774, Matrix Initiatives Inc., USA), Razapina ODT® (mirtazapine 15 mg, lot FS7495, Sandoz, India), Remeron SolTab® (mirtazapine 15 mg, lot 42,605,134, Shering-Plow, EUA), Vonau Flash® (ondasetron 4 mg, lot L5080493, Biolab, Brazil), Zyprexa Zydis® (olanzapine 5 mg, lot 1548510A/1594762C, Lilly, England), and FeldeneSL® (piroxican 20 mg, lot 544P68, Pfizer, England). All above-mentioned tablets were round and non-scored. Details of each drug product are described in Table 1 . Manufacturing process was deduced based on the drug product formula, surveys published in articles, promotional material from laboratories and SEM and OM photomicrographs [ , ]. Table 1 Formula evaluation and probable manufacture technology of the ODTs studied Drug product /origin Drug Excipients - in bold hygroscopic compounds and underlined the materials responsible for disintegration) Manufacture process Disintegration mechanisms Granules presence Alavert/ USA loratadine citric acid, sodium bicarbonate, aspartame, colloidal silicon dioxide, corn syrup, crospovidone, dextrin, ferric oxide, magnesium stearate, maltodextrin, mannitol, microcrystalline cellulose, modified starch, flavors. tableting effervescence, solubilization and swelling Yes Cold Remedy / USA zincum ascorbic acid, crospovidone, dextrose, magnesium stearate, maltodextrin, starch, sucralose, yellow 6, flavors. tableting solubilization and swelling Yes Feldene SL / England piroxican gelatin, mannitol, citric acid, aspartame. freeze-drying solubilization No Razapina ODT/India mirtazapine mannitol, crospovidone, silicon dioxide, aspartame, calcium stearate, flavors. tableting solubilization and swelling Yes Remeron / USA mirtazapine citric acid, sodium bicarbonate, hypromellose, povidone, sugar balls, aminoalkyl methacrylate copolymer, aspartame, crospovidone, magnesium stearate, mannitol, microcrystalline cellulose, flavor. tableting Effervescence, solubilization and swelling Yes Unisom / USA diphenhydramine citric acid, ethylcellulose, hydroxypropyl cellulose, mannitol, microcrystalline cellulose, crospovidone, starch, sucralose, sucrose, red 7, flavor. tableting solubilization and swelling Yes Vonau / Brazil ondasetron mannitol, microcrystalline cellulose, crospovidone, magnesium stearate, aspartame, colloidal silicon dioxide, flavor. tableting solubilization and swelling Yes Walitin / USA loratadine aspartame, croscarmellose sodium, magnesium stearate, mannitol, sodium stearyl fumarate, flavors. tableting solubilization and swelling No Zyprexa / England olanzapine gelatin, mannitol, sodium methylparaben, propylparaben sodium. freeze-drying solubilization No Zyrtec / USA cetirizine citric acid, sodium bicarbonate, amino methacrylate copolymer, colloidal silicon dioxide, crospovidone, hydroxypropyl cellulose, magnesium stearate, mannitol, microcrystalline cellulose, sodium starch glycolate, sucralose, flavors. tableting effervescence, solubilization and swelling Yes
Sample Treatment
ODTs were subdivided in two parts by a single trained operator using a commercial tablet splitter (Inconterm, Brazil). Subdivided tablets outside their primary packaging were aged in climatic chamber (Nova Etica, Brazil) at 30 °C ± 2 °C and 75% ± 5% of relative humidity for 15 days. Characterization tests described below were performed whenever possible on the whole tablets, on freshly subdivided tablets and on aged subdivided tablets [ ]. The results were expressed as a percentage.
Characterization Assays
Weight Measurements
All measurements were performed using an analytical balance (Shimadzu, Japan) with 10 replicates for each sample. Weight variation after subdivision was measured by the difference between the weight of each fresh subdivided tablet and the weight of whole tablet divided by two. Weight loss was calculated as the difference between the weight of the whole tablet and the sum of the two halves freshly subdivided. Weight variation after aging was measured by the difference between the weight of half tablets before and after the aging process.
Dimensions and Image Analyses
Tablets dimensions were measured using a pachymeter (Mitutoyo Sul Americana Ltda, Brazil) with ten replicates for each sample. Thickness variation and diameter variation were calculated by the difference between these measurements in tablets halves before and after the aging process.
In addition, samples were analyzed using a stereomicroscope model XTL (Laborana, China) connected to a video camera. The images were captured with the software ISCapture Version 2.5.1 and tablets surface area were measured in mm 2 . Surface area variation after subdivision was calculated considering the difference between the area of each fresh subdivided tablets and the area of the whole tablet divided by two. Surface area variation after aging was calculated as the difference between the area of the tablets halves before and after the aging process. Ten replicates of each sample were analyzed, and the results were expressed as a percentage [ ].
Disintegration Time
Disintegration time of the samples was determined using a disintegration tester model 301–6 (Nova Etica, Brazil) in water at 37 ± 2 °C. The time for the complete disintegration of the sample was measured for whole tablets as well as the half tablets before and after the aging process.
Moisture Content
Moisture content of the samples was determined using a Karl Fischer 787 (Metrohm, Switzerland). Half tablets before and after the aging process were analyzed using at least two replicates. Moisture content variation was calculated by the difference between the measures in the half tablets before and after the aging process.
Wetting Time
Wetting time was determined placing the samples on a tissue paper wet with methylene blue dye and recording the time taken for the dye to wet the top of the tablet [ , ]. This determination was performed in triplicate for whole tablets as well as for tablets halves before and after the aging process.
Porosity Measurements
Mercury intrusion porosimetry assay was performed using an AutoPore IV 9500 V.07 Serial 714 equipment (Micromeritics Instrument Corporation, USA). Total porosity (%) and total intrusion volume (mL g −1 ) were calculated from the pressure-volume data during sample penetration by mercury in intrusion and extrusion cycles with equilibration time of 200 s [ ]. Tablets halves with appropriate mechanical resistance were analyzed before and after the aging process.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS® version 20.0 and Prism version 5.0 softwares. Tablet characterization data was expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean, and p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Quantitative variables were tested for normal distribution with the Shapiro-Wilk test. Student’s t test was used to compare the groups.
Results and Discussion
None of the ODTs studied was scored or presented any manufacture recommendation for subdivision. Still, clinical practice suggests these tablets may be fractionated for dose adjustments, based on the need of individualizing the therapy, especially when dealing with children and elderly. Furthermore, in most of drug products here evaluated, there is no express prohibition by the manufacturer since there is no drug control release associated to a coating, which in the understanding of numerous prescribers is sufficient information to indicate the feasibility of the practice [ ]. The particularities of ODTs regarding their manufacture and formulation evidence the need to study the structural and functional aspects of this type of tablets after subdivision.
The first part of the present study evaluated the impact of the ODTs subdivision just after this procedure. Subsequently, the subdivided tablets were subjected to accelerated aging under controlled humidity and temperature conditions and their structural and functional characteristics were evaluated.
Orally Disintegrating Tablets Behavior Just after Subdivision
Results of weight and dimensions of ODTs before and after their subdivision are demonstrated in Fig. 1 . Weight variation is one of the most important variables once it is directly dose related. A recent study of our group evaluating 15 conventional tablets found a mean weight variation of 9.9% among the subdivided samples [ ], whereas literature has reported an average weight variation of around 7% [ ]. In the case of the ODTs studied here, mean weight variation values after subdivision were 14.3 ± 7.9%, with some drug products presenting variations superior to 20%, particularly referring to Alavert and Vonau (21.5% and 28.4%, respectively). Fig. 1 Weight variation (in modulus), weight loss and surface area variation (in modulus) after ODTs subdivision expressed in percentage as the mean. Bars represent the standard error values and asterisks indicate a significant difference between groups according to Student’s t test ( p < 0.05). Dashed lines indicate the mean value described in the literature for conventional tablets
Other studies have shown conventional tablets weight loss related to fragmentation and crumbling followed by subdivision ranges from 0.2% to 3.8% [ , , , , , ]. Once again, mean weight loss with ODTs subdivision was higher, with a mean weight loss of 4.6 ± 3.0%; again, the drug product Alavert exhibited the most discrepant result with a weight loss of 10.6%.
Image analyses of the samples revealed a correlation between weight and surface area variations with subdivision process [ ]. ODTs exhibited a surface area variation of 15.7 ± 10.0%, highlighting the individual high surface area variation exhibited by Razapina, Vonau and Zyrtec with values of 25.8 ± 15.6%, 25.5 ± 13.6% and 25.1 ± 19.0%, respectively (Fig. 1 ).
These results imply most of evaluated ODTs have a physical structure that does not support the fracture process. Specifically, ODTs produced using granulated components (7 of 10, Table 1 ) showed particularly poor subdivision performance, with high weight loss, surface area variation and weight variation after subdivision. The presence of granules in the tablets microstructure can be observed on the sectioned surface of the divided tablets as seen in SEM and OM photomicrographs (Fig. 2 ). In fact, in some cases there are differences in color pattern between the granulated components and the matrix of the tablets (Alavert and Unisom, Fig. 2 ). These granules may be originating from the granulation process of the formulation previous to compression or may result from the use of specific components such as direct compression fillers or coating drug in their granulated form [ , ]. Apparently, the insertion of granules in powder matrices leads to an irregular tablet subdivision. Fig. 2 Optical microscopy and SEM micrographs of ODTs drug products studied before and after the aging. Arrows indicate the presence of granules and the dotted circles indicate the presence of pores. N/A, not assessed
In contrast, the two orodispersible products produced by freeze-drying, which are clearly fragile and usually packed in peel-off blisters, showed contradictorily excellent behavior for subdivision, being fractionated without appreciable weight variation or crumbling. Comparable result derived from the Wal-itin tablet, which is manufactured following direct compression of powder components (Table 1 ). Freeze-dried tablets have a very porous and brittle structure and their low mechanical strength might explain the superior behavior when submitted to subdivision. Similarly, direct compression of a powder mixture gives rise to a more uniform and continuous internal structure and, consequently, allows to a more uniform force distribution during subdivision. Indeed, hydrophilic matrix tablets of identical composition prepared using either direct compression, dry or wet granulation showed higher uniformity when prepared by direct compression [ ].
Structural Evaluation of Aged Subdivided Tablets
ODTs high cost, leading patients to keep the subdivided tablet half for a next use, is other factor to be considered, especially for occasional use products, such as those containing antiallergics (loratadine, cetirizine and diphenhydramine) or antiemetics (ondansetron) used in acute crisis situations. This raises not only a question of ODTs suitability to subdivision but also stability concerns of tablet halves removed from the original hermetic package to be consumed days or weeks later. In this way, in this study we forced subdivided ODTs aging using an accelerated stability protocol applied to climatic zone IV [ ].
Subdivided tablets were then evaluated regarding their appearance, morphology, dimensions, weight, moisture content and microstructure (Figs. 2 and 3 ; and Tables 2 and 3 ). Some samples softened after aging, preventing the execution of some measurements, as indicated in Fig. 2 and Table 2 . Fig. 3 Area, diameter and thickness variations of ODTs after aging expressed in percentage as the mean. Bars represent the standard error values and asterisks indicate a significant difference in each drug product before and after the aging process according to Student’s t test ( p < 0.05) Table 2 Weight and moisture variations after aging expressed in percentage means together with standard error values Weight variation (%) Moisture variation (%) Alavert + 1.4 ± 0.4 −1.1 ± 0.7 Cold-Remedy + 28.0 ± 12.4* + 1.5 ± 0.6* Feldene + 3.7 ± 0.1* +1.0 ± 0.4 Razapina + 0.6 ± 0.4 0.0 ± 0.2 Remeron + 2.4 ± 1.0* + 2.7 ± 0.3* Unissom + 6.7 ± 0.3* + 2.0 ± 0.4* Vonau + 4.1 ± 0.8* + 3.0 ± 0.4* Wal-itin + 0.5 ± 0.3 + 0.8 ± 0.6 Zyprexa + 44.4 ± 19.2* N/A Zyrtec - 1.5 ± 2.3 + 1.8 ± 0.6 * indicate a significant difference in each drug product previous and after the aging process according to Student’s t test ( p < 0.05). N/A, not assessed Table 3 Total intrusion volume and porosity of fresh and aged subdivided tablets Total intrusion volume (mL g −1 ) Porosity (%) Feldene fresh 6.68 93.1 aged 0.46 49.4 Razapina fresh 0.31 36.7 aged 0.36 40.2 Remeron fresh 0.18 23.6 aged 0.45 40.2 Wal-itin fresh 0.26 31.0 aged 0.38 42.5 Zyrtec fresh 0.27 34.1 aged 0.45 40.7
As expected, formulation and production technology variations involved in each of the selected ODTs (Table 1 ) led to fairly different results.
In the case of Alavert, accelerated aging resulted in a clear lamination of its matrix (Fig. 2 ), corroborated by substantial increase in its dimensions (varying from 20 to 40%, Fig. 3 ). Weight and moisture content have not significantly changed (Table 2 ) and porosity tests were not performed due to the aged tablet low mechanical strength. Darkening of the aged tablet completes the scenario of important structural modifications verified for Alavert (Fig. 2 ).
Similar changes were noted for Wal-itin, even though less pronounced. Increases of approximately 5% (Fig. 3 ) were verified in area, thickness and diameter measurements, correlated to an increase in sample porosity (from 31% to 42%, Table 3 ). Although for this product no change in sample weight or water uptake after aging were identified (Table 2 ), increases in porosity and dimensions indicated the mechanism of swelling of the croscarmellose sodium disintegrant may have been triggered.
An exactly opposite behavior was observed with the only two tablets produced by freeze-drying, Feldene and Zyprexa. In both cases, there was an impressive reduction in tablet dimensions by up to 80% (Fig. 3 ). The highly porous and laminar structure of these tablets gave rise to a compact and collapsed matrix after aging (Fig. 2 ). The difficulty in sample handling did not allow for the evaluation of microporous structure and moisture content of Zyprexa. However, Feldene porosity showed an impressive porosity and total pore volume reduction (Table 3 ). Microscopy images suggest a similar effect with Zyprexa, which showed a color change indicating a possible chemical degradation (Fig. 2 ).
Weight gain in subdivided tablets is related to water uptake during aging process under controlled conditions of high humidity (75%). High moisture content of Cold-Remedy aged subdivided tablets is clearly observed by optical microscopy (Fig. 2 ). As Cold-Remedy formulation contains several hygroscopic components (Table 1 ), the water uptake was so intense that resulted in its partial dissolution (deliquescent behavior) and prevented further analyses. In addition, aged subdivided tablet showed a color change suggesting a chemical instability (Fig. 2 ).
Similarly, three other tablets showed significant water uptake and consequent weight gain: Remeron, Unisom and Vonau (Table 2 ). Unisom and Vonau showed a wet appearance with no perceptive changes in shape (Fig. 3 ), although the sample softening, which was more pronounced in the case of Vonau, prevented porosimetry and some dimensions determinations. Differently, Remeron showed a swelling of its structure (Fig. 2 ), corroborated by a porosity increase of almost 100% (from 23 to 40%, Table 3 ). Probably the wetting of Remeron caused a premature swelling of the superdisintegrant crospovidone. In such three above-mentioned samples, there are a considerable number of hygroscopic substances in their composition (Table 1 ), especially in the case of Remeron, which possess six hygroscopic excipients besides the effervescent compounds, and Unisom, which has seven hygroscopic excipients in its composition.
Finally, two of the studied ODTs practically did not show structural changes with aging under forced conditions: Razapine and Zyrtec. There were not observed any significant change in their microporous structure (Table 3 ) or any alteration in their weight and moisture content (Table 2 ). The modifications in their dimensions were quite small (Fig. 3 ) and no relevant changes in microscopy images were appreciated (Fig. 2 ).
Functional Evaluation of Aged Subdivided Tablets
Although the structural evaluation already makes clear the quality loss of most of subdivided ODTs after aging, the impact of storage under accelerated conditions should be jointly assessed with the functional behavior of these tablets, specifically with respect to their rapid wetting and disintegrating ability, characteristics that distinguish an ODT from other kinds of tablets.
Six from the ten tablets studied in this work indicated damaged functional features after aging, showing disintegration and/or wetting, which did not meet the requirements for an ODT. In the case of Cold-Remedy, disintegration and wetting time assays were not assessed due to the high uptake of water that solubilized their samples, as shown in photomicrographs of Fig. 4 . Fig. 4 Aspect of aged subdivided tablets at the end of wetting time assay. N/A, not assessed
Regarding the time tablets spent to completely disintegrate (disintegration time), only Alavert, Unisom and Vonau preserved their initial capacity of instantaneously disintegrate (Table 4 ). Significant increases in disintegration times in the range of 5 to 15 times were identified for Wal-itin (1.6 min) and Remeron (2.5 min), respectively. Still worse results in terms of disintegration were obtained for Zyrtec, Zyprexa, Feldene and Razapina tablets, which presented disintegration times of 4 min, 4.5 min, 7 min and 9 min, respectively. In all these cases, the US pharmacopeia recomendation for disintegration time of ODTs within 30 s has not been met [ ]. Table 4 Disintegration and wetting times of fresh and aged ODTs expressed in percentage means together with standard error values Disintegration time (s) Wetting time (s) Loss of functionality Alavert fresh 6.3 ± 0.7 25.0 ± 4.0 No aged 14.0 ± 1.5* 18.0 ± 1.7* Cold-Remedy fresh 249.0 ± 0.9 25.0 ± 4.0 Yes aged N/A N/A Feldene fresh 3.7 ± 0.3 1.3 ± 0.3 Yes aged 392.7 ± 57.2* >1800* Razapina fresh 26.0 ± 25.0 30.6 ± 1.8 Yes aged 552.3 ± 196.5* >1800* Remeron fresh 10.3 ± 0.7 45.7 ± 2.3 Yes aged 150.7 ± 55.5* 72.7 ± 15.9 Unisom fresh 12.0 ± 1.0 23.0 ± 1.2 No aged 4.0 ± 1.2* 8.3 ± 0.9* Vonau fresh 11.7 ± 0.3 4.3 ± 0.1 No aged 5.3 ± 0.9* 11.3 ± 3.3 Wal-itin fresh 19.0 ± 0.6 25.0 ± 0.6 Yes aged 95.0 ± 17.8* >1800* Zyprexa fresh 1.7 ± 0.3 97.3 ± 3.7 Yes aged 268.3 ± 19.2* >1800* Zyrtec fresh 9.7 ± 0.3 53.3 ± 2.9 Yes aged 242.7 ± 78.7* 12.7 ± 3.7* *indicate a significant difference in each subdivided tablets fresh and after the aging process according to Student’s t test ( p < 0.05). The results that do not meet the specifications accepted for orally disintegrating tablets are in bold. N/A, not assessed
Wetting time measurements, which evaluates the water uptake capacity of the tablets by capillarity, showed a similar result found for the disintegration time tests (Table 4 ). Feldene, Razapina, Wal-itin and Zyprexa tablets completely lost the ability to be wetted, even after 30 min in contact with the aqueous dye solution. The water only rises to the first portions of these tablets without completely soaking them as expected (Fig. 4 ). Although Zyrtec has shown difficulties in disintegrating, its wettability capacity has been preserved (Fig. 4 , Table 4 ). Similarly, Remeron, even with a delay of about 60% in its wetting time, retained this property within acceptable limits (Fig. 4 , Table 4 ). In both cases, the presence of effervescent agents in their matrices possibly contributed to tables wetting (Table 1 ).
Finally, Alavert, Unisom, and Vonau, even experiencing substantial changes in their structural characteristics with aging, including matrix softening, preserved their disintegration and wetting ability. It can be observed in Fig. 4 the water ascends by the tablet rapidly, wetting its entire matrix. The association of disintegrating agents with different mechanisms of action, as observed for Alavert (effervescence, solubilization and swelling) and Unisom (solubilization and swelling) and possibly the use of high concentrations of mannitol as solubilizing agent, in case of Vonau, should be responsible for such result (Table 1 ).
Conclusions
The evaluation of the ODTs subdivision suggests the production method plays an important role in the success of the procedure. More specifically, ODTs produced using granulated components showed poor performance when subdivided, with weight variation and weight loss in much higher levels than conventional tablets. On the other hand, tablets obtained by freeze-drying or by direct compression of powder components showed acceptable levels of weight variation and loss after subdivision since they have a more regular matrix structure that better supports the process. Hence, subdivision could be recommended for tablets obtained by freeze-drying or by direct compression of powder mixtures if subdivided tablet is immediately used. Instead, if subdivided tablets are kept for posterior use, results suggest structural and/or functional damages may occur, including matrix softening, water uptake and darkening, and ultimate loss of disintegration and wetting capacities.