Introduction
Cardiovascular disease is the principal cause of morbidity and mortality, accounting for more than 30% of all deaths worldwide. β-blockers have demonstrated a potential in the treatment of cardiovascular diseases such as chronic heart failure, stable angina, myocardial infarction, arrhythmias, and also hypertension; however, they are not the first choice for initial treatment of hypertension since they are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular events. Furthermore, β-blockers as a class are loaded with a mix-up of having poor tolerability. However, carvedilol offers the benefits of both β and α adrenergic receptor blockade resulting in vasodilation which decreases the total peripheral resistance that may produce an overall positive effect on tolerability [ , ]. The major hurdle to overcome for a formulation scientist is aqueous solubility; for a drug to be absorbed, it must be present in the form of a solution at the site of absorption [ ]. Since carvedilol belongs to BCS class ΙΙ drugs (low solubility and high permeability), it exhibits poor solubility and poor bioavailability (around 25% due to hepatic first pass metabolism) [ , ].
Carvedilol is a non-selective beta-adrenergic blocking agent with additional alpha1-blocking activity. Carvedilol is an enantiomer where S (−) enantiomer has a beta-adrenoreceptor blocking activity while R (−) and S (−) have both beta and alpha-blocking activity at equal potency. The beta-blocking ability of carvedilol decreases the heart rate, myocardial oxygen demand, and myocardial contractility while the alpha-blocking activity declines systemic vascular resistance. It has additional properties like antioxidant (metabolite-910228) and calcium antagonist activity. Carvedilol is used for the treatment of hypertension and moderate heart failure of ischemic or any cardiomyopathic origin. Carvedilol lacks intrinsic sympathomimetic activity and inverse agonist activity hence decreases the side effects compared to other beta-blockers [ , , ].
High oral bioavailability is desired to show optimum therapeutic effect; however, many drugs suffer from poor oral bioavailability which may be due to poor aqueous solubility or high first pass metabolism and drug reflux. Since carvedilol exhibits low solubility so, therefore, once it is available in the dissolved form, it rapidly gets absorbed with an oral bioavailability of around 25% due to hepatic first pass metabolism. Carvedilol has a half-life of 6–8 h. When carvedilol is administered with food, it decreases the oral absorption without affecting the bioavailability, therefore it can be taken along with food to avoid orthostatic hypotension.
The low aqueous solubility and bioavailability of carvedilol is a major obstacle in drug formulation development. Hence, to reach systemic circulation, carvedilol should be present in the dissolved form. To overcome its problem of poor aqueous solubility, various approaches have been examined including physical and chemical modifications of the drug which include converting the crystalline form to amorphous, reducing the particle size to increase the effective surface area, and enhancing porosity and wettability. Certain polymers are also used to increase the solubility of the drug (solid dispersions). Several other approaches have been used to increase the solubility of the carvedilol by micronization, nanosuspensions, solid dispersions, cryogenic techniques, cyclodextrin complexes, hydrotropy, dendrimers, solid lipid nanoparticles, and polymeric nanoparticles. Some methods like cocrystals and supercritical fluid process have not been used so far and have good scope in future for improving the solubility of carvedilol [ , ].
Work Done So Far to Increase Solubility of Carvedilol
Micronization
Hydrophilic drugs show high dissolution rate and bioavailability after oral administration irrespective of particle size distribution; however, carvedilol is a hydrophobic drug, therefore the dissolution rate and bioavailability are widely affected by particle size. Hence, it is necessary to control the particle size of hydrophobic drugs to achieve equivalent dissolution profiles and blood concentration profiles (animal pharmacokinetic profile). Particle size is inversely proportional to surface area, hence reducing the particle size increases the effective surface area thus decreases the diffusion layer around each particle (according to Noyes and Whitney equation) which increases the contact with the solvent thus increasing the solubility. Conventional methods like comminution and spray drying caused a reduction in particle size via mechanical stress to disaggregate the active compound. They possess several benefits such as reproducibility, efficiency, and cost effectiveness. The drawback is that the mechanical forces like grinding and milling impart an excess amount of physical stress and thermal stress thus causing degradation of the product. Micronization is another conventional technique that enhances the dissolution rate of the drug but does not raise the equilibrium solubility. Micronization is achieved by colloidal mill, rotor-stator mill, jet mill, and media mill. The drawback with micronization is that it is not suitable for drugs having a higher ratio of the drug compared to excipient [ , ].
Case Study
The process of micronization was applied to carvedilol phosphate, where its micronization was accomplished by air jet mills. Chatterjee B et al. studied the particle size distribution by separating the micronized particle of carvedilol phosphate after feeding into the jet mill using electromagnetic sieve shaker containing sieves of different sizes (63, 53, 43, 38 μ). Fractions of particle retained on every sieve were collected and subjected to particle size analyzer (Master Sizer 2000SM, Malvern, UK) to determine the particle size. The particles that passed through the 38-μ sieve were used to prepare the sustained release matrix tablets. They concluded that micronization improved the dissolution rate of carvedilol phosphate by comparing the in vitro drug release profiles where the formulation of matrix tablet containing 40 mg equivalent micronized carvedilol phosphate showed 99% drug release after 24 h while the same formulation without micronization of the drug showed 75% drug release [ ].
Solid Dispersion
Solid dispersion is the most widely used method to increase the solubility, dissolution rate, and consequently, the bioavailability of poorly soluble drugs. Solid dispersion is formed when a drug is dissolved in a hydrophilic carrier in solid state [ ]. Solid dispersions consist of two different products, i.e., hydrophilic matrix (e.g., citric acid, urea, lactose, polyvinyl pyrrolidone, methyl cellulose, and polyethylene glycols 4000 and 6000) and hydrophobic drugs. The drug is dispersed molecularly in the crystalline or amorphous state with the hydrophilic matrix (crystalline or amorphous). Solid dispersion can be classified based on their molecular arrangements into three types, i.e., eutectic mixture, solid solutions, and glass solution. i. Simple eutectic mixtures: A eutectic mixture is a mixture of two or more components that react chemically with each other only at specific ratios thus inhibiting the recrystallization step and hence lowers the melting point of the mixture in comparison with its individual melting point. When a eutectic mixture containing the hydrophobic drug is exposed to water, the carrier crystallizes and dissolves while the hydrophobic drug crystallizes out in small particulate sizes. The increase in surface area of the drug due to reduction in particle size generally increases the solubility, dissolution rate, and bioavailability of the poor soluble drug. ii. Solid solutions: In solid solution, a solid solute dissolves in a solid solvent to form a homogenous one-phase system. Compared to eutectic mixtures, solid solution has higher solubility because its particle size is reduced to its molecular size. Solid solutions can be classified on basis of extent of miscibility (continuous and discontinuous solid solution) and on basis of crystalline structure (substitutional and interstitial solid solution). In continuous solid solution, the two components are soluble at any proportion, because the bonding strength between the two components is higher than the bonding strength of individual components. Discontinuous solid solution has limited solubility of solid solute in solid solvent, i.e., solid solute dissolves in solid solvent up to an extent above their eutectic temperature but as the temperature decreases, the mutual solubility of both the components decreases. The substitutional solid solutions are crystalline in nature where the solid solute molecules replace the solid solvent molecules in the crystal lattice of the solid solvent which is possible only if size of solute is less than 15% of the solvent molecule. In interstitial solid solution, the solute molecules enter the interstitial spaces between the solvent lattice and form a discontinuous solid solution. For the solute molecule to enter the interstitial spaces of the solvent molecule, it should have a diameter less than 0.59 and volume less than 20% of the solvent molecule. iii. Glass solutions: A glassy or vitreous state is generally obtained during melting which is characterized by transparency below the glass transition temperature. Therefore, a glass solution is a homogenous mixture of solute dissolved in a glassy solvent. On heating, it softens and does not display a sharp melting point.
Solid dispersion can be prepared by three methods given below: a. Solvent evaporation method: In this method, the drug and carrier together are dissolved in an organic solvent and then allowed to evaporate at room temperature under vacuum. The main advantage of this method is that thermolabile drugs and carriers can be used. This method is not widely used due to the requirement of a common solvent to dissolve both drug and carrier, high cost of preparation, difficulty in reproducing the crystals forms, and residual solvent toxicity which may affect the chemical stability of the drug. b. Fusion method: In this method, the carrier is melted just above its melting point and subsequently, the drug is added to form a homogenous dispersion, or a physical mixture of drug and carrier is made and then melted. This melt is allowed to cool at room temperature or in an ice bath. The solidified mass is then crushed and sieved. This method is useful as it is economical and simple but thermolabile drugs cannot be used. c. Melt-solvent method: In this method, the drug is dissolved in a solvent and added in the melt of carrier without removing the solvent. This method possesses the advantages of both melting and solvent methods. The disadvantage with this method is that drugs having a high therapeutic dose cannot be used [ , , ].
Case Study
a. Sharma A et al. prepared solid dispersions of carvedilol by using poloxamer 188 as carrier. The drug and carrier were taken in three ratios, i.e., 1:1, 1:3, and 1:5 and solid dispersions of carvedilol were prepared by method of fusion. The solid dispersions were characterized for particle size, solubility, and dissolution rate. Particle size of solid dispersions was found to be 33.47 to 37.14 μm which could be one of the factors in enhancing the solubility. At 40% concentration of poloxamer, solubility increased 22 folds and further increase in solubility with increase in concentration of poloxamer 188 was observed (due to reduction in interfacial tension between the drug and aqueous medium). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and X-ray diffraction (XRD) confirmed that pure carvedilol was in the crystalline form which got converted to amorphous form when formulated into solid dispersion which resulted in higher dissolution rates. Dissolution studies of pure drug were found to be less than 10% while solid dispersions of ratio 1:5 showed around 93% drug release. SEM images depict a new kind of structure formed when solid dispersion was formed as shown in the Fig. 1 which suggested loss of crystallinity of the drug when mixed with the carrier. Hence, they concluded that carrier played an important role in enhancing the dissolution of carvedilol after forming solid dispersions [ ]. Fig. 1 SEM of carvedilol ( a ), poloxamer 188 ( b ), and solid dispersion ( c )
b. Solid dispersion of carvedilol containing porous silicone dioxide as carrier was successfully prepared by Planinšek O et al. using solvent evaporation method. The solid dispersions prepared showed increase solubility and dissolution rate which may be due to several reasons such as decrease in particle size which was confirmed by SEM which also shows that carvedilol was well dispersed within the carrier (absence of the crystalline form of the drug in solid dispersion) as shown in Fig. 2 . Conversion of the crystalline form of the drug into amorphous form was confirmed by thermal analysis and powder XRD. Weak interactions between carvedilol and porous silicon dioxide in solid dispersion were detected by atomic total reflectance (ATR) spectroscopy which contributes to increase solubility due to rapid desorption of the drug from the carrier upon contact with the dissolution medium. Dissolution rate increased with increase in the carrier concentration [ ]. Fig. 2 SEM of carvedilol ( a ), porous silicon dioxide ( b ), and solid dispersion ( c )
c. Ayoub M et al. enhanced the oral bioavailability of carvedilol by preparing solid dispersion of carvedilol with three different carriers, i.e., PEG 4000, PVP K30, and tartaric acid. Solid dispersions were prepared using solvent evaporation method. In vitro dissolution studies were carried out for 120 min where solid dispersion prepared using tartaric acid as carrier showed 91.42% drug release compared to the pure drug that showed 7.8% drug release. Hence, they concluded that carrier solubility plays an important role in enhancing the solubility of finally prepared solid dispersions and proved that increase in solubility and dissolution rate was observed on preparing solid dispersions of carvedilol. An in vivo study was also performed to check the antihypertensive effect of the prepared solid dispersion of carvedilol. Hypertension was induced in albino rats using penicillin G, solid dispersion of carvedilol containing tartaric acid as carrier dispersed in 2% gum mucilage was administered to albino rats, and the mean arterial pressure were recorded, where solid dispersion showed reduction in mean arterial blood pressure in hypertensive rats for duration of 5 h while rats administered with just pure drug showed reduction of mean arterial blood pressure for a duration of 2 h. The difference in antihypertensive effect proved that solid dispersion of carvedilol containing tartaric acid significantly increased the bioavailability of carvedilol [ ].
Cyclodextrin Inclusion Complex
Cyclodextrins are non-hygroscopic crystalline substance containing cyclic oligosaccharides. They are of three types, i.e., alpha cyclodextrin containing six glucose units, beta cyclodextrin having seven glucose units, and gamma cyclodextrin containing eight glucose units that are linked by alpha 1–4 glycosidic bonds. Alpha cyclodextrins generally tend to form inclusion complexes with aliphatic hydrocarbons while beta cyclodextrins form inclusion complexes with small aromatic molecules and are most commonly used due to increase water solubility, easily accessible, and low cost, while gamma cyclodextrins form inclusion complexes with more bulky groups. Cyclodextrins are hydrophilic externally and lipophilic internally hence lipophilic drugs can be enclosed within the internal cavity forming inclusion complexes [ ] as shown in Fig. 3 . Fig. 3 Schematic illustration for preparation of inclusion complex
Some advantages that cyclodextrin complexes possess are improved solubility, bioavailability, stability, and prevent incompatibility. Some drawbacks involve stability issues, difficulty in scaling up, and expensive methods of preparation. Cyclodextrin complexes are prepared by different methods such as grinding, kneading, co-precipitation, solvent evaporation, neutralization precipitation, spray drying, freeze drying, microwave irradiation, and supercritical antisolvent technique [ , ]. Each technique will be described below in brief. a. Grinding : This technique involves mechanical trituration where the drug and cyclodextrins in different ratios are vigorously triturated and then passed through a sieve to get the desired particle size. The product is then stored in an airtight container at room temperature. b. Kneading : In this method, a paste of cyclodextrin is made by adding water or hydro-alcoholic solution and later, drug is added and mixture is kneaded. This kneaded mixture is dried and passed through sieve. This is the most common method used with low cost of production. c. Co-precipitation : Drug is added gradually in a solution of cyclodextrins with continuous magnetic agitation. The complexes were precipitated, filtered, and dried at room temperature. This method has certain drawbacks such as low yield and organic solvents used are in larger quantity, hence this method has little attraction in industrial scale. d. Solvent evaporation : This is a simple method where the drug and cyclodextrins are separately dissolved in two mutually miscible solvents. Both the solutions are mixed with each other to get molecular dispersion with continuous stirring, then the solvent is allowed to evaporate under vacuum to give powdered complex which is pulverized, sieved, and stored in airtight containers. e. Neutralization precipitation method : In this method, the drug is dissolved in alkaline solution and mixed with aqueous solution of cyclodextrins to get a clear solution. Hydrochloric acid is added to the given solution dropwise so that precipitates of inclusion complex can be formed then filtered, dried, and stored at room temperature. f. Spray drying : Spray drying or atomization involves spraying a clear solution of drug and cyclodextrins throw fine nozzle into a chamber where drying conditions are set to achieve solid dried powder as final product. Spraying rate, drying temperature, nozzle diameter, and atomizing air pressure are some important parameters to be considered that can affect the formation of inclusion complexes. g. Freeze drying : This technique yields a porous amorphous powder with high degree of interaction between the drug and cyclodextrins. Here, the drug and cyclodextrin are added in common solvent and subjected to freeze drying. The solvent system is eliminated during primary freezing and drying takes place at reduced pressure. This method can be used as an alternative to solvent evaporation. h. Microwave irradiation : This is a novel method and has wide applicability in the industrial field due to high yield and short reaction time. The drug and cyclodextrins are dissolved in a mixture of water and organic solvent and reacted for short period at 60 °C in a microwave oven. Once the reaction is complete, excess solvent mixture is added to remove the uncomplexed drug and cyclodextrin and precipitate is filtered and dried. i. Supercritical fluid process : A supercritical fluid for CO 2 exists as a single phase above its critical temperature and pressure. Once drug particles get solubilized in the supercritical fluid, they may recrystallize at reduced particle size
Supercritical fluid process can be classified as follows: i. Rapid expansion of supercritical processes (RESS): Solution of drug in supercritical fluid is depressurized through nozzle to get micronized particles of the drug due to rapid nucleation of fine particles. ii. Supercritical antisolvent process (SAS): Organic solvent containing the drug comes in contact with the supercritical fluid to cause solid precipitation by antisolvent effect. iii. Particles from gas-saturated solution (PGSS): The drug and excipients are melted and equilibrated with supercritical fluid which is expanded in an expansion chamber through the nozzle to form fine particles. iv. Impregnation: Solution of drug is liquified in supercritical fluid which is depressurized in a vessel holding porous excipient on which the compound gets adsorbed.
Drug and cyclodextrins are dissolved in a good solvent which is sprayed via pressurized vessel through a nozzle into supercritical fluid antisolvent (carbon dioxide). The solvent diffuses into the antisolvent and antisolvent counter diffuses into the solvent and expands since antisolvent has low solvent power than the pure solvent thus causing supersaturation which results in precipitation of solute while the solvent is carried away with the supercritical fluid. This method is non-toxic and fast with low maintenance cost [ , , , , , , , ].
Case Study
a. Wen X et al. studied the possibility of solubility enhancement of carvedilol by preparing inclusion complex of carvedilol with cyclodextrin in stoichiometric ratio of 1:2. They utilized the novel method, i.e., microwave irradiation method by wetting the mixture of carvedilol and cyclodextrin by ethanol:water (1:1) and this mixture was allowed to react for 90 s in microwave at 60 °C. The precipitate formed was filtered and dried. Inclusion complex was successfully formed that was characterized by DSC (due to melting point shift to lower temperature) and infrared radiation (due to change in shape and intensity of the bands compared to pure carvedilol). Phase solubility studies performed showed that carvedilol solubility enhanced due to formation of soluble inclusion complex with cyclodextrin. They determined the structure of inclusion complex by fluorescence spectroscopy where enhancement in the fluorescence intensity suggested that carvedilol existed in the hydrophobic cavity of cyclodextrins and was stable as well. Hence, by the data given above, they concluded that solubility of poor-soluble carvedilol can be enhanced several folds by successfully preparing inclusion complexes with beta cyclodextrin in stoichiometric ratio of 1:2 [ ]. b. Carvedilol inclusion complex using methyl beta cyclodextrin was successfully prepared by Hirlekar R et al. They prepared the inclusion complexes of carvedilol and methyl beta cyclodextrin in a ratio of 1:2 by three methods, i.e., kneading, co-precipitation, and grinding. Formation of the inclusion complexes was confirmed by DSC, Fourier transformation infrared spectroscopy, and powder XRD. Phase solubility studies showed A L -type curve indicating the formation of inclusion complexes in a ratio of 1:1. The in vitro dissolution studies showed highest dissolution rate for carvedilol methyl beta cyclodextrin inclusion complexes formed by kneading (kneading > co-precipitation > grinding > pure drug). Hence, they concluded that methyl beta cyclodextrin can be used to prepare inclusion complex with carvedilol and subsequently increase the dissolution rate as well [ ].
Hydrotropy
Hydrotropy is a solubilization process where large amounts of second solute are added to increase the solubility of the first solute. Hydrotropes are ionic organic salts of various organic acids, e.g., sodium benzoate, urea, and sodium acetate. Hydrotropy works by the mechanism similar to complexation involving weak interaction between the hydrotropic agents and the poorly soluble drug. Several advantages include no chemical modification of drugs required and only water is required to mix the hydrotropic agent with drug. Mixed hydrotropy is a new term where the mixture of hydrotropic agents is used to increase the solubility of the drug. The main advantage is that small amounts of hydrotropic agent are used to increase the solubility of the drug [ ].
Case Study
Harish C et al. prepared hydrotropic solid dispersion using sodium benzoate, nicotinamide, and sodium citrate in ratio of 20:15:5. Sodium benzoate, sodium citrate, and nicotinamide were dissolved in water and carvedilol was added to the above solution by maintaining the solution at 50 °C to evaporate the water thus forming a wet mass which was dried, triturated, and sieved. DSC, powder XRD, and SEM were used to characterize the product. The dissolution rate of the prepared hydrotropic solid dispersion increased (99% in 1 min) compared with that of the marketed preparation. Therefore, they concluded that the approach of mixed hydrotropy is novel, safe, cost effective, and a unique approach to increase the solubility and oral bioavailability of carvedilol [ ].
Nanotechnology
Drugs that are potent and fail clinical efficacy due to poor solubility, poor bioavailability, and low permeability are currently being developed as nanoproducts utilizing nanotechnology. Nanotechnology offers several advantages such as site-specific targeting, improved permeability and solubility, lower dose, improved bioavailability, and controlled and sustained release. The most commonly used nanotechnology are dendrimers, polymeric nanoparticles, nanocrystals, nanosuspension, and nanoemulsions [ ]. Nanonization can improve solubility of poorly soluble drugs by decreasing the particle size in a nanoscale range of 100 nm or less, thus improving the dissolution rate and bioavailability and reducing the systemic side effects. Nanoparticles are produced via a top-down approach that involves breaking larger materials to nanoparticles (e.g., milling or homogenization) or by a bottom-up approach that involves building into nanoparticles from atoms and molecules (e.g., controlled precipitation, controlled droplet evaporation). Nanoparticles can be further classified into nanocrystals, nanosuspensions, and nanoemulsions [ , ].
Nanocrystals
Nanocrystals are drugs that are crystalline in nature and in nanometer size range (< 2000 nm). They purely contain the drug, i.e., no presence of any carrier material. They can be further formulated into tablets, capsule, sachets, and powder. They can also be formulated into nanosuspension containing aqueous or non-aqueous media and stabilizer to prevent reaggregation of the particles. They possess several advantages such as increased rate of absorption, rapid effect, enhanced bioavailability, reduction in dose, and improved dose proportionality. Different methods of preparing nanocrystals include precipitation, antisolvent crystallization, high gravity-controlled precipitation (bottom-up approach), high-pressure homogenization, milling (top-down approach), and spray drying [ , , ]. a. In the bottom-up approach, the drug is dissolved in an organic solvent and added in a non-solvent (in presence of a stabilizer) that leads to precipitation of nanocrystals; this approach is simple and easy to scale-up. However, certain parameters like temperature, solvent/non-solvent addition rate, stabilizer, and type of solvent can have significant effects on formation of nanocrystals. b. In the top-down approach, the nanocrystals are obtained by milling or homogenization. In milling bead, pearl and ball milling can be used. The drug is dispersed in a medium along with a stabilizer and added in grinding chamber where the balls are rotated at very high speeds until nanocrystals are formed. Some important parameters like milling time, size and number of balls, type of grinding chamber, and stabilizer need to be controlled as it affects the physicochemical properties of nanocrystals. In homogenization, either ultrasonification or high-pressure homogenization may be used to obtain nanocrystals. In ultrasonic homogenization, probes are placed in the dispersion medium and due to high frequency mechanical vibrations, the particle size reduces and forms nanocrystals. In high-pressure homogenization, microfluidizer and piston gap homogenizers (DissoCubes®, Nanopure®) are used to produce nanocrystals in submicron range. c. Spray drying technique is used for drying of suspensions and solutions by spraying them through atomizer in a conical chamber where the supply of hot air is provided, and spherical particles are obtained. Spray rate, viscosity, temperature, and concentration can be adjusted to obtain nanocrystals [ ].
Case Study
Janakiraman AK et al. formulated a direct compressible sustained release tablet using carvedilol nanocrystals that were prepared by emulsion diffusion method (solvent exchange) followed by high-pressure homogenization; the product was dried in the oven at 60 °C for 12 h with a yield of approximately 80%. The formation of nanocrystals was confirmed by appearance, color, odor, pH, melting point, saturation solubility, and scanning electron microscopy image that were conducted in their earlier reports. They proved that the dissolution rate of carvedilol increased by forming carvedilol nanocrystals by comparing the drug release profiles of carvedilol and carvedilol nanocrystals in the optimized formulation containing hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose and ethyl cellulose as rate-controlling polymers. The in vitro dissolution studies were conducted for a period of 24 h where formulation containing carvedilol nanocrystals showed 99.46% release (due to an increase in surface area on forming nanocrystals) while formulation containing carvedilol alone showed 73.64% drug release in 24 h [ ].
Nanosuspension
They are liquid dispersion containing solid drug nanoparticles which are stabilized by a polymer or a surfactant [ ]. The advantages offered by nanosuspension include higher dissolution rate thus improving bioavailability, absence of Ostwald ripening effect due to uniform particle size obtained, and improves the stability of the drug. Nanosuspensions are commercially prepared by different methods such as melt emulsification, high-pressure homogenization, media milling, and emulsion diffusion method. In melt emulsification method, the drug is dispersed in an aqueous solution along with a stabilizer. The nanosuspension is heated above the melting point of the drug and homogenized at high speed to form an emulsion. The further step is to cool the emulsion at room temperature or in an ice bath. Cooling conditions, temperature, and type of stabilizer are some factors that may affect the particle size. The factor that makes this technique very useful is the absence of any organic solvent thus possesses no residual toxicity. In emulsion diffusion method, the drug is dispersed in a mixture of organic solvents and homogenized to form an emulsion. This emulsion is added into aqueous phase causing diffusion of the internal phase into external phase and as droplets convert into solid particle, the size of the droplets determines the particle size. This technique is not widely used due to potential environmental hazards and residual toxicity [ , ]. Protein drug formulations have poor stability when formulated as nanosuspension, hence drying step is required to convert he nanosuspensions into nanopowder, however when drying proceeds possibilities of the nanoparticles to form aggregates are very high and will show poor dissolution when reconstituted in water, hence freeze drying is a new approach, where the nanosuspensions are converted into nanopowders, once on reconstitution with water reverts back to nanosuspensions with improved dissolution. Nanosuspensions are prepared by any method described above and then subjected to freeze drying or lyophilization; the concentration and type of the cryoprotectant, the freezing rate, and temperature play major roles in redispersibility [ ].
Case Study
Liu D et al. explored the effect of particle size on dissolution and absorption by formulating micro and nanosuspension of carvedilol by antisolvent precipitation method in combination with an ultrasonification process (only for nanosuspensions). Micro and nanosuspension prepared by this method were subjected to freeze drying using maltose 3% w / v as a cryoprotectant to improve the stability of carvedilol nanosuspension. They observed that carvedilol nanosuspension (212 nm) particles showed narrow size distribution while microsuspension (4895 nm) particles were widely distributed when analyzed by Coulter LS 230 analyzer (Beckman-Coulter Co., Ltd., Brea, CA, USA) at room temperature. This data was confirmed from SEM analysis as shown in Fig. 4 [ ]. Fig. 4 SEM micrographs of carvedilol coarse powder ( a ), microsuspensions ( b ), and nanosuspensions ( c )
The SEM images showed that the carvedilol coarse powder had an irregular shape while microsuspensions were globular in shape and nanosuspension showed a flaky shape which would influence the dissolution behavior and bioavailability. Dissolution studies were performed on four formulations, where carvedilol nanosuspensions showed highest drug release of 90% in 60 min while pure carvedilol showed drug release of just 40% at pH 1. The intestinal absorption of carvedilol nanosuspension was greatly improved compared to microsuspension and solution in the in situ single-pass perfusion experiment performed in Wistar rats. An in vivo study was also performed in beagle dogs which showed increase C max (2.09 and 1.48-fold) and AUC 0-t (2.11 and 1.51-fold) and decreased T max (0.34 and 0.48-fold) of nanosuspension and microsuspension in comparison with coarse carvedilol suspension. Hence, they concluded that as particle size decreased (nanosuspensions), the dissolution and oral absorption of carvedilol increased several folds [ ].
Nanoemulsion
They are composed of two immiscible liquids (oil and water) in submicron range (100–600 nm) stabilized by a surfactant. They are oil in water dispersion. Nanoemulsions are optically transparent and kinetically stable if the components and preparation methods are conveniently selected. Nanoemulsion can be prepared by high-energy and low-energy techniques. High-energy techniques require the input of extensive mechanical energy, e.g., microfluidization, sonication, high-amplitude ultrasonic method, and high-pressure homogenization. Low-energy techniques require lower energy input since it utilizes the stored chemical energy within the system, e.g., spontaneous emulsification which is divided into phase inversion and solvent displacement. Nanoemulsions require a lower concentration of surfactant (3–10%) as compared to microemulsion to form a kinetically stable system [ ]. Spontaneous emulsification via phase inversion is subdivided into two types, i.e., transitional phase inversion and catastrophic phase inversion. The slow addition of the water phase to the oil phase allows the transitional phase inversion to be effective forming submicrometric droplets. On the other hand, larger droplets were formed when the addition of water to oil phase was rapid thus allowing catastrophic inversion to be dominant. However, when surfactant concentration is kept low, the rate of addition does not affect the droplet size. Spontaneous emulsification process depends primarily on the interfacial and bulk viscosity, interfacial tension, region of phase transition, surfactant structure, and concentration [ ].
Case Study
Chidi E et al. prepared carvedilol nanoemulsion using aqueous phase titration method. Screening of oil, surfactants, and cosurfactants was carried out where solubility of carvedilol in various oils (capryol 90, isopropyl myristate, oleic acid, olive oil, sunflower oil, clove oil, linseed oil) was used as a criterion for selection of oil in which carvedilol showed the highest solubility while percentage transparency and ease of emulsification were the criteria used for selection of surfactant (tween 20 and tween 80) and cosurfactant (transcutol P, propylene glycol, PEG 400, and glycerol). After performing several trials, clove oil, tween 20, and PEG 400 were selected as oil, surfactant, and cosurfactant respectively. Three ratios of oil and surfactant-cosurfactant mix ( S mix ) 1:1, 1:2, 1:3 were taken and pseudo-ternary phase diagram was plotted where the shaded area represented the area of nanoemulsion as shown in Fig. 5 . Fig. 5 Pseudo-ternary phase diagram of clove oil, tween 80, and PEG 400 in three different ratios
Eight formulations were characterized for droplet size, polydispersity index (PDI), pH, and percent transmittance. All formulation showed low PDI, indicating good droplet distribution within the formulation, refractive index was similar to water indicating nanoemulsions were clear and transparent, and zeta potential was also in range (− 18.34 to − 26.47 mV), thus indicating good stability. The in vitro drug release study showed around 80% drug release for batch containing oil and S mix in ratio of 1:3. Hence, from the above data, they concluded that preparing nanoemulsion increased the solubility, dissolution rate, and oral bioavailability of carvedilol [ ].
Dendrimers
Dendrimers are highly branched nanoscopic macromolecules with low polydispersity index. They are constructed of three main components: (a) initiator core, (b) interior layer made of repeated units attached to the central core, and (c) surface functional groups. They possess several advantages such as high solubility, biocompatibility, and polyvalency. These features make dendrimers suitable for drug targeting. Different types of dendrimers available are distinguished based on the polymers used, e.g., polyamidoamine (PAMAM), polyamine, and polyesters. Solubility enhancement through dendrimers depends on various factors such as concentration, pH, core, terminal functionality, and generation size. PAMAM dendrimers were the first synthesized dendrimers introduced in 1980 and are also known as Starbust® dendrimers (Dow chemical company) [ , ]. Studies have shown that dendrimer solubility enhancement of hydrophobic drugs is superior to that of micelles and cyclodextrins. Dendrimers increase the solubility of poorly soluble drugs through different mechanisms that include hydrogen bonding, ionic interaction, covalent conjugation, hydrophobic interaction, and internal encapsulation [ ].
There are two methods of synthesis of dendrimers [ ], i.e., the divergent approach and convergent approach depicted in Fig. 6 . In the divergent approach, outward branching results from the initiator core around which branches of dendrimers originate while in the convergent approach, the synthesis ends by adding the central core in the final step [ ]. Fig. 6 Construction of dendrimer by convergent and divergent approach
Case Study
Zheng X et al. successfully synthesized carvedilol PAMAM-multiwalled carbon nanotubes utilizing the divergent growth approach for construction of the dendrimer. The carboxylic acid-linked multiwalled nanotubes were prepared to finally form PAMAM-multiwalled carbon nanotubes after undergoing several steps. Three methods were used to incorporate carvedilol into the dendrimer, i.e., fusion method, incipient wetness impregnation method, and solvent methods. In the physicochemical characterization, powder XRD studies revealed that no crystalline form of carvedilol was seen in carvedilol-PAMAM-multiwalled nanotubes and this data was confirmed by DSC. In vitro drug release studies were carried out in HCl buffer (pH 1) and phosphate buffer (pH 6.8) where the fusion method showed highest dissolution rate for carvedilol-PAMAM-multiwalled carbon nanotubes, i.e., 83% release in HCl buffer and 72% release in phosphate buffer after a period of 8 h (fusion method > incipient wetness impregnation > solvent method). Solubility also increased for every product made with PAMAM-multiwalled nanotubes. Hence, they concluded that this new drug delivery system may be advantageous to hydrophobic drugs in order to improve its solubility, dissolution rate, and drug loading capacity [ ].
Polymeric Nanoparticles
Polymeric nanoparticles are solid colloidal particles in size between 10 and 1000 nm and are prepared from biodegradable and biocompatible polymers in which the drug is dissolved, encapsulated, entrapped, and attached to nanoparticle matrix. The main advantages regarding solubility include enhanced bioavailability, reduced toxicity and dose, and site specificity. Polymeric nanoparticles can be classified into two types, i.e., nanospheres and nanocapsules. Nanospheres contain the drug dispersed in the polymeric matrix while polymeric nanocapsules contain the drug within the central compartment which is surrounded by a solid envelope of polymer nanoparticles can be prepared by the following methods: a. From dispersion of preformed polymer: Solvent evaporation, nanoprecipitation, solvent diffusion, salting out, dialysis, and supercritical fluid technology b. From polymerization of monomers: Emulsion, miniemulsion, microemulsion, interfacial polymerization, and controlled radical polymerization c. Ionic gelation or coacervation of hydrophilic polymers [ , ].
Case Study
S. Khan et al. studied the effect of solubility and dissolution rate on carvedilol nanoparticles that were prepared using poly lactic co glycolic acid (PLGA), polyethylene glycol 8000 (PEG 8000), and ethyl cellulose in different ratios (1:1, 1:2.5, 1:5). The prepared nanoparticles were characterized for mean particle size, zeta potential, polydispersity index, entrapment efficiency, and percent drug loading. They observed that as the polymer concentration increases, the mean particle size also increases with largest particle size seen with carvedilol-PLGA-PEG nanoparticles which were also confirmed by SEM. Zeta potential was highest for carvedilol-PLGA-PEG nanoparticles, thus improving the colloidal stability. High entrapment efficiency and loading capacity were seen for carvedilol-PLGA-PEG nanoparticles (1:5). In vitro dissolution test showed that nanoparticles prepared using ethyl cellulose showed maximum drug release of 95% in 24 h with initial burst release, while PEG nanoparticles and PLGA-PEG nanoparticles showed 85 and 65% of drug release respectively. They concluded that the solubility and dissolution of carvedilol nanoparticles using different polymers increased solubility and prevented the first pass metabolism as well as premature degradation of carvedilol by gastric milieu [ ].
Future Prospective
There are several techniques to increase the solubility of carvedilol and has yet not been explored such as cocrystallization, coamorphous technology, supercritical fluid technology, and sonocrystallization. These techniques are described below with case studies belonging to poorly soluble drugs (BCS class II) that may possess similar properties of carvedilol.
Cocrystallization
Cocrystallization is a promising approach to increase the solubility and bioavailability of active pharmaceutical ingredients, their thermodynamic stability, and a wide range of mechanical properties. Any API irrespective of acidic, basic, or ionizable groups could potentially be cocrystallized. Cocrystals are well defined as crystalline materials composed of two or more molecules within the same crystal lattice held together by non-covalent bonds [ , , ] shown in Fig. 7 . Fig. 7 Schematic illustrations for preparation of multicomponent cocrystal system
Different Methods of Preparing Cocrystals
a) Cocrystallization from solution [ , ] 1. Solvent evaporation: This is a conventional method of preparing cocrystals. In this method, the drug and coformer are dissolved in a common solvent in either molar ratio or stoichiometric ratio and are allowed to evaporate at room temperature or by slight heating for 48 h. The product is then stored in airtight containers and then placed in desiccators to avoid moisture. There is formation of hydrogen bonding between complementary groups of drug and coformer, thus rendering the cocrystals thermodynamically stable. However, this technique has several disadvantages like residual solvent toxicity and large amounts of organic solvents used. In order to overcome these disadvantages, other techniques are being used.
Case Study
Mounika P et al. proved the increase in solubility and stability of fexofenadine by using tartaric acid as coformer in molar ratio of 1:1. The cocrystals were prepared using solvent evaporation and its formation was confirmed by DSC (change in melting point compared to drug and coformer), FTIR, and microscopic images as shown in Fig. 8 [ ]. Fig. 8 Microscopic images of fexofenadine ( a ), tartaric acid ( b ), and cocrystal form of fexofenadine and tartaric ( c )
The dissolution studies showed maximum drug release of 86.9% in 1 h in 0.1 N HCL as compared to the marketed tablet that showed around 37% drug release. Hence, they concluded that formation of cocrystals increased the solubility and dissolution rate of poor-soluble fexofenadine [ ]. 2. Solvent crystallization: In this method, solid mixtures of the drug and coformer are made at their saturation solubilities to favor formation of cocrystals. Once the crystallization solvent (acts as catalyst) is added to these solid mixtures of drug and coformer, the resulting suspension is stirred at room temperature for 24 h after which the solvent is filtered and product is dried for few minutes.
b) Grinding [ , ] 1. Solid state grinding: The drug and coformer are physically mixed in a mortar and pestle or spatula or by a ball mill. However, polymorphic transition can take place which may lead to dangerous side effect of compound. However, the advantage here is that it is a simple method to produce cocrystals but depends on the tendency of the drug and coformer to form non-covalent bonds. 2. Solvent drop grinding: This process is similar to solid state grinding but with an addition of small amount of solvent that acts as a catalyst.
Case Study
Shewale S et al. prepared cocrystals of fenofibrate with nicotinamide in a molar ratio of 1:1 by method of grinding, solvent drop grinding, and solvent crystallization. The formation of cocrystals was confirmed by DSC, FTIR, and powder XRD. The in vitro drug release studies showed that solubility of fenofibrate cocrystals increased several folds as compared to that of pure drug (52.7% in 90 min). Cocrystals produced by solvent drop grinding showed highest dissolution of 103.2% in 45 min as compared to solvent drop grinding (100.2% in 90 min) and grinding (95.2% in 90 min) which may be due to small, uniform, stable cocrystals with increased surface area. Therefore, they concluded that fenofibrate formed stable cocrystals with nicotinamide. The solubility, dissolution rate, and stability of fenofibrate increased by forming cocrystals using nicotinamide as coformer in a molar ratio of 1:1 [ ].
c) Hot melt Extrusion [ ] Extrusion is a beneficial method for synthesis of cocrystals; it involves highly effective mixing of drug and coformer with improved surface contacts. Producing cocrystals via HME has several advantages over the other techniques, for example, increase in yield, preclude solvent, and less time consumption. Several parameters such as feeding rate, temperature of barrel, screw speed, and residence time need to be controlled to achieve good cocrystals.
Case Study
Dhumal RS et al. prepared cocrystal agglomerates of ibuprofen using nicotinamide as coformer in ratio of 1:1 by using a solvent-free, readily scalable HME technique by optimizing the screw speed, barrel temperature, and feeding rate to get good cocrystals. These cocrystals were characterized by DSC, FTIR, powder XRD, and SEM which confirmed formation of cocrystals. They observed that processing above the eutectic point of mixture of carvedilol and nicotinamide was required for cocrystals to form. Product received was in a form of spherical agglomerates which could be directly compressed hence avoiding any further size reduction step. In vitro data suggest that cocrystals showed significant improvement in dissolution around 50% release in 120 min as compared to pure drug (20% in 120 min). Hence, they concluded that HME is solvent-free, scalable, single-step continuous process that led to increase in solubility, stability, and dissolution rate of ibuprofen cocrystals [ ].
d) Sonocrystallization [ , ] In this method, the drug and coformer are added in a common solvent and then subjected to sonication thus forming a turbid solution. This process of sonication is carried out in cold water to prevent fragmentation. This technique can also be used to produce nanocrystals.
Case Study
Aher S et al. successfully prepared cocrystals of caffeine maleic acid by sonocrystallization and solvent cooling. The molar ratios of caffeine and maleic acid (1:0.5, 1:1, 1:2, 1:3, and 1:3.5) were dissolved in a common solvent, i.e., methanol. The slurry prepared was then subjected to ultrasonication (only in case of sonocrystallization) and filtered. The product was dried and characterized by Raman spectroscopy and powder XRD which proved the formation of cocrystals [ ].
Carvedilol cocrystals have not been prepared so far, but this technique has been successful in increasing dissolution rate and solubility of other BCS class II drugs, and carvedilol also belongs to BCS class II thus, cocrystals of carvedilol can be produced to increase the aqueous solubility utilizing different methods of preparation under cocrystallization.
Coamorphous Technology
Crystalline drugs have low solubility, hence to overcome this problem, several approaches are being used to convert the crystalline drug into an amorphous form. However, the amorphous drug has low physical stability so to overcome problem, coamorphous technology is being used (Fig. 9 ). Combining a drug either in crystalline or amorphous form with an amorphous polymer forms glass solution that is characterized by an increase in glass transition temperature. Coamorphous drugs can be prepared by quenching, solvent evaporation, and ball milling [ ]. Fig. 9 A graphical presentation of coamorphous drug formation
Case Study
Coamorphous drug delivery containing naproxen-arginine, naproxen-arginine-proline, and naproxen-tryptophan were prepared by Jensen KT et al. by the method of ball milling where naproxen-arginine and tryptophan were used in a ratio of 1:1 and 1:1:1 on the addition of proline. Powder XRD and DSC confirmed the amorphization of the mixture by showing broad peaks and absence of sharp melting point peak (increase in glass transition temperature) respectively. Dissolution studies showed a 1.9-fold increase in dissolution rate for naproxen-tryptophan cocrystals while naproxen-tryptophan-proline showed higher solubility than naproxen-tryptophan which may be due to high solubility and stability of proline. They concluded that coamorphous technology can be used to increase the solubility and stability of naproxen [ ].
Patented Formulations of Carvedilol
There are several formulations of carvedilol that have been patented due to novel findings in improving the solubility of carvedilol using unique approaches like solubility enhancers, nanonization, cryogenic techniques, milling, and solid dispersions. Some patents of carvedilol along with their patent number and issued date are listed in Table 1 . Table 1 Patented formulations of carvedilol Patent office Patent no. Inventor Description Date of issue Reference no. WIPO (World Intellectual Property Organization) WO 2003092625 A2 Wei Chein, Kimberly A. Lamey, Jennifer Malofiy, Choon Oh Solubility enhancement of carvedilol using solubility enhancers Pharmasolve® November 30, 2003 [ ] United States US 20040186158 A1 Oh Choon K. Composition of carvedilol oral suspension containing Ora-plus® as suspending agent September 23, 2004 [ ] Canada CA 2643492 A1 Gary Liversidge, Scott Jenkins Nano particle formulation of carvedilol September 7, 2007 [ ] EP (European Patent Office) EP1996161A2 Gary Liversidge, Scott Jenkins Nanoparticle formulation of carvedilol prepared by milling, homogenization, and supercritical fluid process (cryogenic techniques) December 3, 2008 [ ] WIPO (World Intellectual Property Organization) WO 2014108921 A3 Reddy Bandi Parthasarathi, Rathnakar R, Muralidhara R, Subash C, Vamsi K Amorphous solid dispersion of carvedilol phosphate in combination with pharmaceutically acceptable carrier and, process for its preparation April 2, 2015 [ ]
Conclusion
For a drug to be therapeutically effective, it must initially dissolve in gastrointestinal (GI) fluids and then permeate through GI membrane to reach the systemic circulation. Solubility is an important parameter for oral bioavailability of carvedilol and since carvedilol exhibits poor aqueous solubility, it is necessary to increase its solubility to increase its oral bioavailability. Different solubility enhancement techniques described in the article have been applied on carvedilol which improved its solubility and dissolution rate but due to scale-up issues, it has little attraction in industrial scale, e.g., micronization and nanoformulations (dendrimers, nanoemulsion, nanosuspension, nanocrystals, polymeric nanoparticles) are the most widely used technique for enhancing the solubility of carvedilol on laboratory scale due to higher solubility and dissolution rate but they have difficulty in scale-up and low yield. Therefore, it is necessary to apply upcoming and novel methods that have good industrial applicability. Hence, efforts are being made to carry out novel solubility enhancement techniques. Cocrystals and coamorphous approach for BCS class II poor-soluble drugs have shown good solubility, dissolution, and oral bioavailability compared to few techniques discussed in this review, and this technique can be applied to enhance solubility of carvedilol, hence it has been widely explored to overcome the drawbacks associated with other techniques by carrying out certain advancements in its methods of preparation (e.g., hot melt extrusion) to produce carvedilol cocrystals and coamorphous compound with unique properties in future development.