Introduction
Polymorphism is an ability of a compound to exist in more than one crystalline form. Chemically identical different crystal structures (polymorphs) show significant diversity in the physicochemical properties. Polymorphic forms of an active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) have shown variation in many important pharmaceutical properties including tabletting behavior, dissolution rate, chemical, and physical stability during storage [ ]. Several reports have discussed relevance of polymorphism [ , , ]. In spite of knowing the significance of polymorphic forms, there is no standard method for conducting a comprehensive screening of polymorphs of an API. Discovery of new polymorphs often involves trial and error with use of variety of solvents for API recrystallization. Diversity in the physicochemical properties of solvent plays vital role in polymorph generation [ ].
Various crystallization techniques including solvent evaporation [ ], melt crystallization [ ], melt sonocrystallization [ ], antisolvent crystallization [ ], antisolvent sonocrystallization [ ], and rapid expansion of supercritical carbon dioxide solutions [ ] are reported in the literature for obtaining different polymorphs of an API [ , ]. Thus, screening newer crystallization technique for obtaining polymorphs with limited solvents has remained thirst area for most of the formulation scientists.
Electrospray technology involves use of high voltage to form a mist of tiny droplets of liquid, a process known as “coulomb fission”. The initiation of coulomb fission begins with the formation of “Taylor cone” at the tip of a needle. A Taylor cone, an equilibrium shape of free liquid form at the tip due to high electric field which then transforms into mist of ultrafine charged solution droplets due to high potential difference [ , ]. Due to enormous increase in surface area of solvent, evaporation takes place rapidly. Taylor cone exhibits high energy vibrations before it propagates in cone-jet. The literature reports preparation of nanocrystals and cocrystals of API with improved physicochemical properties using electrospray technique [ , ]. Thus, it is believed that electrospray technique may influence polymorphism of drugs when crystallized from different solvents.
In the present work, carbamazepine (CBZ), an anticonvulsant BCS class-II drug is used as a model drug for electrospray crystallization because its polymorphs are well reported in the literature. Electrospray crystallization of CBZ using methanol as a solvent is reported by Wang et al [ ]. However, the processing methodology adopted for crystallization involved electrospray followed by annealing at high temperatures to prepare nanocrystals of CBZ. The objective of the current work is to investigate the influence of electrospray technology on crystallization of CBZ. Further examination of the influence of solvents with diverse physicochemical properties on CBZ crystallized by electrospray technology has been included.
Materials and Methods
Materials
Carbamazepine (CBZ, purity 99%, polymorph form III) was a generous gift from Emcure Pharmaceuticals, Pune, India. Analytical-grade solvents obtained from the commercial sources were used for the study.
Methods
Measurement of Surface Tension
Surface tension of methanol, ethanol, and 2-propanol alone and in presence of CBZ (200 mg) in dissolved state was determined using electrowetting-based microliter drop tensiometer [ ]. A drop of liquid (10 μL) was placed on dielectric plate below a planar electrode and the interfacial tension was recorded based on the change in sessile drop contact angle of the liquid.
Electrospray Crystallization of CBZ
Carbamazepine (200 mg) was dissolved in methanol (5 mL), ethanol (5 mL), and 2-propanol (7 mL) until saturation level separately. The prepared solutions were electrosprayed maintaining the following parameters: syringe type, 5 mL; sample volume, 4 mL; flow rate, 1.5 mL/h; voltage, 20 kV; temperature, 35 ± 1 °C; and distance between syringe and collector, 24.5 cm. Each trial spray of 4-mL sample took around 2.5 h. The crystals collected after electrospraying methanol, ethanol, and 2-propanol solutions are abbreviated as methanol (MCBZ), ethanol (ECBZ), and 2-propanol (PCBZ).
Scanning Electron Microscopy
SEM analysis of unprocessed CBZ, MCBZ, ECBZ, and PCBZ was performed to investigate morphological characteristics of the crystals. Samples were mounted on a double-faced adhesive tape and sputtered with thin gold-palladium layer using sputter coater unit (VG Microtech, UK). Jeol JSM-6360 scanning electron microscope (SEM Jeol, Japan) operating at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV and was used to analyze surface topography.
Powder X-Ray Diffractogram
The physical state of unprocessed CBZ, MCBZ, ECBZ, and PCBZ was evaluated by powder X-ray diffraction study. PXRD patterns of all samples were recorded using X-ray diffractometer (PW 1729; Philips, Almelo, Netherlands) with Cu K α radiation (1.542 Å) operating at a voltage of 40 kV and a current of 40 mA. Samples were scanned from 5 to 30°2θ with a scanning rate of 0.2 s/step [ ].
Differential Scanning Calorimetry
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) scans of MCBZ, ECBZ, and PCBZ along with unprocessed CBZ were obtained using DSC 821e (Mettler-Toledo, Greifensee, Switzerland). Samples (5–10 mg) were heated in hermetically sealed aluminum pan with a heating rate of 10 °C/min over a range of 25–270 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere (flow rate 50 mL/min) [ ]. DSC temperature scale and enthalpy response was calibrated using Indium standard.
Fourier-transform Infrared Spectroscopy
FTIR spectra of MCBZ, ECBZ, and PCBZ crystals along with unprocessed CBZ were obtained using Fourier-transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR-8400; Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a diffuse reflectance accessory (DRS-8000; Shimadzu Corporation, Japan). KBR discs were prepared containing about 2–3 mg of crystals separately. The scanning range was 400–4000 cm −1 with a resolution of 1 cm −1 .
Particle Size Analysis
Particle size of MCBZ, ECBZ, and PCBZ crystals along with unprocessed CBZ was recorded using Malvern Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern, UK) working on the principle of laser diffraction fitted with dry powder assembly (Scirocco, Malvern, UK). Mixture of helium and nitrogen gas with a pressure of three bars was used for dispersion of samples (1 g). The measurements were done in triplicate.
Saturation Solubility Study
Solubility studies were performed according to the method reported by Higuchi and Connors [ ]. Unprocessed CBZ, MCBZ, ECBZ, and PCBZ crystals in amounts exceeding their solubility were separately transferred to screw capped vials containing 5 mL distilled water. Magnetic stirrer was used to stir the contents of vials at room temperature for 24 h. Preliminary experiments suggested 24 h duration to be sufficient to reach equilibrium since no improvement in solubility was observed after this period. Samples were filtered through a 0.45-μm Whatman paper after 24 h and suitably diluted with distilled water. The diluted samples were analyzed for CBZ content at 286 nm using UV spectrophotometer (Shimazdu-1601, UV–vis spectrophotometer, Shimadzu Corp, Kyoto, Japan).
Intrinsic Dissolution Rate Study
USP testing conditions were followed while performing intrinsic dissolution testing of unprocessed CBZ, MCBZ, ECBZ, and PCBZ (USP 2012) [ ]. The parameters used in the study include compression force (100 psi), die distance (0.5 in.), drug (unprocessed CBZ, MCBZ, ECBZ, and PCBZ) loading (100 mg), and rotation speed (50 rpm). The dissolution medium (distilled water) volume was 250 mL in vessel. All the experiments were run at 37 °C maintaining sink conditions. An aliquot of the solution was withdrawn at 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30 min. The filtered samples (0.45-μm Whatman paper) were analyzed for CBZ content at 286 nm using UV spectrophotometer.
Stability Study
Accelerated stability study for 1 month was conducted as per ICH guidelines at 40° ± 2°/75% ± 5% RH. The electrosprayed crystals were stored in a stability chamber (Thermolab, Maharashtra, India) maintained at 40 °C/75%RH. The samples were tested for physical appearance and PXRD patterns after 1 month.
Statistical Analysis
The data obtained from particle size analysis and saturation solubility of electrosprayed CBZ samples were analyzed by Dunnett multiple comparison test. The values are expressed as mean ± SD.
Result and Discussion
Surface tension plays an important role in the formation of mist of droplets upon coulomb fission. The literature states that the process of coulomb fission and in turn mist formation occurs only when the surface tension of solvent is overcome by the electric charge applied during electrospray crystallization. Thus, surface tension of solvents alone and in presence of CBZ (Table 1 ) was determined using electrowetting-based microliter drop tensiometer instrument. Table 1 Physicochemical properties of solvents used for electrospray crystallization Solvent Surface tension (dynes/cm) at 20 °C Volatility Dielectric constant HBA/HBD value Methanol 22.50 ± 0.02 High 32.7 ≥ 0.5 Ethanol 22.39 ± 0.01 Medium 24.5 ≥ 0.5 2-propanol 22.3 ± 0.03 Low 17.9 ≥ 0.5 CBZ loaded methanol 21.5 ± 0.02 CBZ loaded ethanol 21.3 ± 0.01 CBZ loaded 2-propanol 21.5 ± 0.02 Mean ± SD ( n = 3)
It was observed that a voltage of 20 kV was sufficient for crystallization of CBZ from methanol having the highest surface tension value when compared to all the tested solvents. The other process parameters such as needle size, distance between collector plate and needle, and voltage were kept constant as the objective of the current work was to study the influence of solvents on electrospray crystallization of CBZ. The literature reports more than 50 forms of CBZ including five crystalline forms designated as form I, form II, form III, form IV, and form V [ , , , , , , ]. Form III of CBZ is the most stable and commercially used amongst all other polymorphs of CBZ. The electrosprayed crystals of CBZ obtained from methanol, ethanol, and 2-propanol were then characterized further.
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Crystal morphology of electrosprayed CBZ crystals was revealed using SEM. Unprocessed CBZ crystals showed typical prism-like shape, whereas MCBZ showed aggregates of fine needles (Fig. 1 ). SEM photomicrograph of ECBZ showed aggregates of prisms along with flat-plated crystals, whereas PCBZ crystals consisted of mixture of densely packed needles and aggregated of elongated prisms. It has been put on the record that CBZ polymorphs I, II, and IV exhibit needle shape while form III has a typical prism-like shape [ ]. Thus, electrospray technology influenced morphological characteristics of CBZ when compared to unprocessed CBZ. PXRD and DSC studies were performed to determine and confirm the type of CBZ polymorph generated upon electrospray crystallization. Fig. 1 SEM image of a Unprocessed CBZ, b MCBZ, c ECBZ, and d PCBZ
Powder X-Ray Diffraction
PXRD has been reported to be the most reliable technique for distinguishing all the four polymorphs of CBZ [ ]. According to literature, form I of CBZ shows characteristic peaks at 2ϴ = 7.92°, 9.37°, 12.28°, and 19.99°. Similarly, few high intensity peaks at 2ϴ = 8.68°, 13.26°, 18.56°, and 24.54° are shown by form II of CBZ. Form III of CBZ exhibits indicative peaks at 2ϴ = 15.36°, 19.56°, 25.00°, and 27.47° whereas characteristic peaks at 2ϴ = 14.11°, 17.89°, 21.79°, and 33.11° suggest presence of CBZ form IV.
The study of PXRD patterns of unprocessed CBZ confirmed its existence as form III. However, PXRD pattern of MCBZ suggested presence of CBZ as a mixture of form I and II (Fig. 2 ). Surprisingly, mixture of form I, II, and III was observed in case of ECBZ while PCBZ revealed presence of mixture of form II, III, and IV of CBZ. The samples were further analyzed by DSC in order to confirm the results obtained by PXRD studies. Fig. 2 PXRD patterns of a Unprocessed CBZ, b MCBZ, c ECBZ, and d PCBZ
Differential Scanning Calorimetry
DSC thermograms of unprocessed CBZ and electrosprayed CBZ were recorded. All the four polymorphs of CBZ show characteristic melting endotherms [ , ]. P-monoclinic form III of CBZ shows two endotherms along with one exotherm. The first endothermic peak is observed at 174.40 °C followed by an exotherm at 181.2 °C with subsequent endothermic peak at 191.78 °C. The melting of form III is associated with the first endothermic peak which crystallizes as form I represented by an immediate exotherm while the second endothermic peak coincides to the melting of form I. Thus, form I of CBZ shows a single melting endotherm at 190.68 °C. Form II of CBZ shows very small endotherm in the range of 140–160 °C followed by a sharp endotherm at 192.1 °C. The first endotherm suggests crystal transformation from form II to I followed by melting of form I as a sharp endothermic peak. C-monoclinic form IV shows two melting endotherms along with one exotherm. The first endothermic peak is observed at 183.1 °C followed by an exotherm for crystallization of form I at 187.7 °C which then melts at 191.5 °C. Thus, the comparison of DSC thermograms with reported melting endo and exotherms suggested polymorphic transformation in CBZ upon electrospray crystallization (Fig. 3 ) from different solvents (Table 2 ). Fig. 3 DSC thermograms of a Unprocessed CBZ, b MCBZ, c ECBZ, and d PCBZ Table 2 CBZ polymorphs obtained upon electrospray crystallization from different solvents Serial no. Sample Polymorphic form of CBZ 1 Unprocessed CBZ Form III 2 MCBZ Form I and II 3 ECBZ Form I, II, and III 4 PCBZ Form II, III, and IV
Fourier-transform Infrared Spectroscopy
FTIR spectroscopy is one of the tools to distinguish polymorphic forms of CBZ. The primary regions used for identification of CBZ polymorphs include 3500–3392, 1731–1629 and 1427–1317 cm −1 corresponding to N–H stretching vibration, C = C stretching vibration, and C–H bending vibration, respectively [ ]. FTIR spectrum of form I show absorption bands at 3485, 1688, and 1396 cm −1 whereas absorption bands at 3485, 1690, and 1395 cm −1 indicate form II of CBZ. Form III of CBZ shows absorption bands at 3466, 1677, and 1386 cm −1 whereas absorption bands at 3474, 1674, and 1395 cm −1 with a small band at 1418 cm −1 confirm form IV of CBZ. Additionally, a double band at 773 and 765 cm −1 is shown by form IV whereas other forms of CBZ show single absorption band at this position. MCBZ showed characteristic peaks at 3485, 1690, 1688, and 1396 cm −1 whereas ECBZ showed peaks at 3485, 3466, 1690, 1688, 1677, 1396, and 1386 cm −1 . PCBZ showed peaks at 3485, 3474, 3466, 1677, 1674, 1418, 139, 1386, 773, and 765 cm −1 confirming the readings of PXRD and DSC studies ( Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4 FTIR spectrum of a Unprocessed CBZ, b MCBZ, c ECBZ, and d PCBZ
Particle Size Analysis
Particle size of unprocessed CBZ was found to be 2.13 ± 0.78 μm. Electrosprayed samples of CBZ showed significant reduction ( P < 0.01) in the particle size of CBZ when compared to unprocessed one. Particle size of MCBZ, ECBZ, and PCBZ was found to be 980 ± 2.56, 924 ± 3.13, and 892 ± 2.65 nm. However, there was no significant difference ( P > 0.05) in the particle size of electrosprayed samples. It has been stated earlier that electrospray technology has yielded particles in nano-size range. Thus, results of particle size analysis of the current work were in agreement with previous literature.
Saturation Solubility Study
The saturation solubility of unprocessed CBZ was found to be 346.55 ± 0.39 μg/mL in distilled water. The electrosprayed crystals of CBZ showed significant enhancement in saturation solubility when compared to unprocessed CBZ ( P < 0.01). The saturation solubility of MCBZ, ECBZ, and PCBZ was found to be 724.12 ± 0.71, 489.21 ± 0.11, and 540.13 ± 0.37 μg/mL, respectively. Thus, MCBZ, ECBZ, and PCBZ showed 2, 1.4, and 1.5-fold increase in saturation solubility of CBZ upon electrospray crystallization, respectively.
Intrinsic Dissolution Study
The results of intrinsic dissolution studies showed marked difference in dissolution behavior of the electrosprayed crystals and unprocessed CBZ (Fig. 5 ). The dissolution rate for MCBZ was the highest whereas that for ECBZ was the lowest amongst the electrosprayed crystals of CBZ. The cumulative amount of CBZ dissolved from MCBZ, ECBZ and PCBZ was 5, 2.4, and 4 times greater as compared to unprocessed CBZ after 30 min, respectively. The order in which reduction in dissolution rate was observed can be presented as MCBZ > PCBZ > ECBZ > unprocessed CBZ. Fig. 5 Intrinsic dissolution rate of A Unprocessed CBZ, B MCBZ, C ECBZ, and D PCBZ
Stability Studies
The stability study at higher temperature and high humidity level may show some physical changes probably due to some phase transitions while retaining chemical identity. PXRD of MCBZ and/or ECBZ showed remarkable reduction in the intensity of peak at 7.92°, 12.28°,13.26°, 19.99°, and 25.4°2θ whereas PCBZ showed reduction in the intensity of peaks at 7.92°,8.68°,12.28°,13.26°, 19.99°, and 25.4°2θ with subsequent increase in the intensities of peaks allotted for form III of CBZ (Fig. 6 ). Thus, the results of stability studies suggested polymorphic transformation from polymorphs I, II, and IV of CBZ to form III. It is obvious because amongst all four polymorphs of CBZ, form III is the most stable in terms of surface-free energy and used commercially as reported in the literature [ ]. Fig. 6 PXRD patterns of A Unprocessed CBZ, B MCBZ, C ECBZ, and D PCBZ upon 1 month storage at 40 °C/75% RH
Discussion
The current work was undertaken with an objective to study the influence of solvent properties on electrospray crystallization of CBZ. It has already been stated that electrospray crystallization involves formation of mist of solution through a Taylor cone having positive charge due to applied voltage. The evaporation of solvent eventually crystallizes the components of solution till it reaches collector plate. The process often termed as a coulomb fission. In the present work, solvents with different physicochemical properties were utilized for crystallization of CBZ which are depicted in Table 1 .
The hydrogen-bond propensity of the solvent plays a vital role in the nucleation and phase transformation of CBZ polymorphs when initial supersaturation is constant. The difference in CBZ nucleation behavior may be attributed to the specific CBZ-solvent interaction. It was observed that electrospraying of CBZ from methanol, ethanol, and 2-propanol altered morphological features of CBZ.
The nucleation outcomes and in turn crystal habit depends on the hydrogen-bonding propensity of a solvent. It is stated that solvent affects crystal nucleation and growth in two ways [ , ]. During nucleation and growth, on one hand, solvation of solvated solute molecules must take place during its integration into the crystal lattice. While at the same time on the other hand, the solvent molecules adsorbed on the growing crystal surface must be replaced by the incoming solute molecules so as to get integrated into the crystal lattice. Both aspects depend on the solvent − solute interaction involving van der Waals force and hydrogen bonding. In the present work, methanol had the highest while 2-propanol had the lowest polarity and volatility amongst the solvents tested for electrospray crystallization. Additionally, the polymorphic transformation in CBZ was evident even though all the three solvents had similar hydrogen-bond acceptor (HBA)/hydrogen-bond donor (HBD) value. It is believed that due to high polarity (high dielectric constant) methanol might have been pulled from the needle tip (positive charge) towards the negatively charged plate (High Taylor cone region) to a greater extent when compared to other solvents used in the study. During this process, subsequent evaporation (due to high volatility) of methanol might have initiated nucleation and growth of crystals in the Taylor cone itself leading to formation of needle-shaped crystals as evident from SEM images. In case of ethanol and 2-propanol, the area of Taylor cone was smaller due to low polarity and volatility of both solvents which in turn might have initiated nucleation of CBZ in the mist propagated from the cone with subsequent evaporation solvent droplets obtaining mixture of prism and needle aggregates of CBZ.
Additionally, it is well reported that the monoclinic CBZ (form III) involves partial overlap between CBZ molecules that load through π-π interactions along the a- and c-axes with the centrosymmetric dimers being present mainly along the b-axis which leads to the prismatic shape whereas the presence of hydrogen bonding and loading of CBZ dimers through π-π interactions primarily along the c-direction (major axis of growth) yields CBZ with needle morphology [ ]. Thus, variations in face dimensions or the appearance or disappearance of some crystal faces might have been responsible for changes in morphology of CBZ crystals leading to their growth through specific axis. The findings of the current work suggest the process is dependent on the solvent properties and an electric charge.
Crystallization of CBZ by solvent evaporation technique has been performed by the researchers. Slow evaporation of CBZ saturated methanol at room temperature in presence of hydroxypropyl cellulose has been reported to yield form IV [ , ]. Saturated solutions of ethanol (80 °C) upon cooling have yielded form II of CBZ [ ]. In the present work, CBZ polymorphs obtained upon electrospray crystallization from the same solvents were different suggesting the vital role of electric charge in the crystallization of CBZ. Additionally, form IV of CBZ was obtained upon electrospray crystallization without using HPMC from 2-propanol.
Saturation solubility data suggested the highest solubility for MCBZ while the lowest for ECBZ in distilled water. According to literature, the stability of polymorphs of CBZ has an order of form III > form I > form IV > form II considering their free energy [ ]. MCBZ consisted of mixture of form I and II. The needle-shaped crystals of MCBZ might have exposed high surface area for dissolution leading to the highest solubility. Additionally, owing to presence of the most unstable form IV of CBZ along with form II and III in case of PCBZ, saturation solubility was higher than ECBZ containing mixture of form I, II, and III of CBZ. The results of intrinsic dissolution rate were in accordance with the saturation solubility data supporting the proposed hypothesis. Further, it was obvious to observe conversion of all the polymorphs of CBZ to form III upon 1 month of storage at higher temperature during stability studies since it the most stable form of CBZ.
Conclusion
Thus to conclude, electrospray technology induced polymorphic transformations in CBZ crystals. Further, such transformations were dependent on properties of solvents used for crystallization along with an electric charge. Thus, dissolution rates of poor water soluble drugs can be enhanced by altering their polymorphs through proper selection of solvent during electrospray crystallization. In the present study, since the bioavailability of CBZ is limited only by its dissolution rate, even a small increase in dissolution will result in a remarkable increase in its bioavailability. Additionally, the process of electrospray crystallization can be used for continuous manufacturing of API with altered physicochemical properties. Thus, electrospray crystallization can serve as an alternative technique for crystallization of API with an ability to modify their physicochemical properties.