Introduction
Drugs are a basic human need, and because they affect people’s lives, drug products should be safe and manufacturing processes should comply with international standards such as Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) and regulatory standards. Approximately 150 pharmaceutical companies operate in Thailand, and these include government-owned and private manufacturers. All Thai pharmaceutical companies have to comply with the GMP standards established by the Thai Food and Drug Administration (Thai FDA) and require approval according to Thai laws and regulations. Most local manufacturers produce generic drugs for the domestic market and for export to some bordering countries. The pharmaceutical market in Thailand comprises local and original brands, and annual sales come to 100,000 million Baht or approximately 3000 million United States dollars (USD), with 70–80% of products delivered to hospitals and 20–30% delivered to drugstores. In 2012, the domestic market volume was 116,600 million Baht or 3625 million USD with a 5% growth rate, and 77% of this was sent to hospitals and the remaining 23% to drugstores. It is expected that trends toward the generic drug industry will increase because numerous original drug patents are due to expire in the near future [ ]. The insurers and patients regularly can save their costs, if they use generic drugs rather than branded products. In the USA, the healthcare expenditure has been reduced because of the increasing of generic drugs products utilization [ ]. Because market growth is increasing every year, the related supply chain processes that deliver final products to final users are complex and uncertain. Merna and Althani [ ] stated that the top 20 international pharmaceutical companies generate half of all global pharmaceutical sales, and most of these companies are located in the USA and Western Europe. They also indicated that new drug development costs are between 300 and 800 million USD and that it takes between 8 and 12 years from starting until the final product is marketed. Shah [ ] classified the pharmaceutical industry as a complex series of processes, operations, and organizations that control drug and medication discovery, development, and manufacture. Hence, supply chain risk management concepts are required to manage the inherent obstacles and risks. Accordingly, as suggested by Oke and Gopalakrishnan [ ], supply chain risks and vulnerabilities are increasingly studied, although many aspects of these remain poorly understood. Tang [ ] addressed the issue of supply chain risk management in terms of (1) supply chain risk and (2) mitigation approaches. The pharmaceutical supply chain is also confronted with many obstacles and risks, particularly in the development of new drugs. Merna and Al-Thani [ ] identified pharmaceutical industry obstacles that are associated with each stage of the drug development process (DDP), including time and cost, untrustworthy test data, quality problems, difficulties sourcing raw materials, difficulties during the scaling-up process, inappropriate equipment for chemical processes, lack of personal skill, inappropriate testing and validation, delays during each process, and regulatory risks. Shah [ ] studied supply chain optimization in the pharmaceutical sector and showed that time-to-market is the most significant driver in the pharmaceutical industry. Specifically, companies have only 5–12 years to gain returns for their successful drugs before similar products are launched onto the market. Competition with brand name manufacturers limits local Thai pharmaceutical manufacturing in terms of cost, time, resources, and risks in the supply chain, and most can only produce generic drugs. Thus, we investigated the upstream pharmaceutical supply chain for the new generic DDPs as a case study and identified, assessed, and managed obstacles to the generic drug supply chain.
Method
To identify and evaluate the risks that are inherent in new generic DDPs, we performed a survey using a qualitative research method with a semi-structured interview protocol. In-depth interviews were then implemented to gather data, and participants were chosen according to a purposive sampling theory. Participants were selected from the stakeholders who were listed in the top ten local manufacturers and other involved parties. A total of 19 representatives were interviewed from the various stakeholders, including the Government Pharmaceutical Organization, Local Pharmaceutical Manufacturers, Clinical Research Organizations (CROs), and the FDA. Participants were executive members of each organization and bore titles such as Chief Executive Officer, Managing Director, Director, and Manager. The interview period was scheduled for approximately 1–3 h, and information about the current generic DDP and its related risks were compiled. Field notes were recorded, and all interviews were tape-recorded and transcribed consecutively. During the analysis, expert panel had been discussed several rounds in order to evaluate and form a group of risk categories. In addition, a focus group with 42 participants from the stakeholder organizations was held to acquire and discuss interview results and obstacles in the pharmaceutical industry.
Then, we applied the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) method that was developed by Thomas L. Saaty and built a decision-making process using various hierarchies to equip decision makers with methods for translating subjective opinions into objective measures. AHP methods are the choice of a decision tool in many research fields, including engineering, food, ecology, health, and government investigations, because it is simple and flexible for calculations [ ]. AHP builds decision-making problems in hierarchies that include goals, criteria, sub-criteria, and decision alternatives. Thus, pair-wise comparisons in AHP are used to determine relative importance of elements at each level of the hierarchy. These AHP comparisons are also used to evaluate alternatives at the lowest level of the hierarchy to make the best decisions among multiple alternatives that transform subjective opinions into objective measures for the decision maker. The fundamental scales and pair-wise comparisons developed by Thomas L. Saaty are illustrated in Table 1 . Table 1 The fundamental scale for pair-wise comparisons [ ] Priority Definition Explanation 1 Equal importance Two activities contribute equally to the objective. 2 Weak or slight 3 Moderate importance Experience and judgment slightly favor one activity over another 4 Moderate plus 5 Strong importance Experience and judgment strongly favor one activity over another 6 Strong plus 7 Very strong or demonstrated importance An activity is favored very strongly over another; its dominance is demonstrated in practice 8 Very, very strong 9 Extreme importance The evidence favoring activity over another is of the highest possible order of affirmation Reciprocals of above If activity i has one of the above non-zero numbers assigned to it when compared with activity j , then j has the reciprocal value when compared with i
At last, the AHP structure was formed based on the interview results, and these were then converted into a questionnaire. This questionnaire was then distributed to 10 selected experts in the pharmaceutical industry to formulate decisions that comply with Thomas L. Saaty’s fundamental scales or pair-wise comparisons, and to prioritize the risks in the new generic DDP.
Results
The results were separated into three sections. Section I interpreted generic drug development processes. Section II explained risks in the new generic drug development process. Section III stated the prioritized risks decision based on AHP technique.
Generic Drug Development Processes
Generic drugs are products that can be produced and sold after patents and other exclusive brand rights have expired. The US FDA states that “a generic drug is identical--or bioequivalent--to a brand name drug in dosage form, safety, strength, route of administration, quality, performance characteristics, and intended use.” Specific new generic DDPs that start from a new generic drug selection and its subsequent progression include the following phases: (1) research and development (R&D), (2) production of pilot batches and stability studies, (3) bioequivalence studies, (4) process validation, (5) protocol development, (6) registration, (7) commercial production, and (8) process validation. Finally, new products are ready for marketing to customers or patients. The basic timeline for these phases and the related stakeholders are shown in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 The new generic drug development process (Author)
Risks in the New Generic Drug Development Process
Obstacles to the development process for new generic drugs follow each of the development steps shown in Fig. 1 and are explained below. 1. During the selection phase, manufacturers have to select registered and marketed original drugs to produce as new generic drugs. In addition to problems with market information, patents and intellectual property are obstacles. Patent details of finished products and primary raw materials or active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) and their process details are often hard to understand, especially when local manufacturers want to produce generic products after expiry of original patents. 2. During the R&D stage, difficulties are perceived with sourcing raw starting materials, devising formulations, lab scale production, analytic method development, and with finished product specifications. In addition, primary raw materials are often APIs for which patent information is required and is often difficult to acquire. Among thousands of developed formulas, many were unsuccessful, representing huge R&D investments into trial and error testing of raw materials, human resources, equipment, technology, and methodological competence. 3. Similar to the R&D stage, pilot production and process validation protocol development are demanding of money, materials, human resources, and technologies and methods, presenting severe obstacles during this stage. 4. Following the pilot production phase, bioequivalence studies are hampered by conformance with quality systems and good laboratory practice (GLP). These standards require research laboratories and organizations to ensure the conformity of personnel, facilities, equipment, test systems, and many other regulatory tenets. Thus, high investment in laboratory resources is needed to comply with these standards, especially for a company’s first new generic drug. In addition, numbers of Clinical Research Organizations (CROs) are often insufficient for local manufacturers. This phase is also time-consuming. 5. When applying for new generic drug registration from the Thai FDA, all interviewees noted obstacles such as long lead times, insufficient numbers of public servants, uncertain regulations and policies, and the lack of databases and online registration as the main difficulties encountered during correspondences with the Thai FDA. 6. Commercial production is the final step for new generic drug development. During this phase, in addition to operation problems, the first three commercial batches of 100,000 tablets are produced for process validation and must be disposed of at cost to the manufacturer. 7. After final approval, the official registration number is generated and the new generic drug can finally be sold.
The government bidding policy in government hospitals is another relevant problem for manufacturers of new generic drugs and directly influences market competitiveness and price appropriateness. As a consequence, manufacturers have to reduce prices as much as possible, at times to lower than the cost price or with very low-profit margins. In addition, doctor’s perceptions of generic drugs can remain doubtful of efficacy in comparison with original drugs.
The result from the interview showed 17 major problems including difficulties with bioequivalence (BE), distribution, FDA, finances, government policy, human resource, information, marketing, operation, patent, quality, registration, regulations, research and development (R&D), supply, technology, and trade barrier problem. These problems were reviewed by expert panel for relationships and were reclassified into the following seven risk factor categories: (1) financial, (2) information, (3) intellectual property, (4) market, (5) operation, (6) regulatory, and (7) technology. These categorized risk factors were introduced to a focus group with 42 participants from the stakeholder organizations; they provided insightful discussion and agreed with the interview results. Interpreted risks are shown in Fig. 2 . These risks were used as criteria for and developed a questionnaire according to the AHP structure for the next stage. Fig. 2 Risk categories
AHP Data Analysis
To prioritize the seven risk factors, the AHP questionnaire had been developed. The AHP structure, including goal and criteria, is shown in Fig. 3 . Data was collected using the AHP questionnaire as described before. Experts were requested to make decisions based on the Saaty fundamental scale of the AHP [ , , , , , , , , ] with respect to prioritizing risks in the new generic DDP. This study was conducted with ten experts from the pharmaceutical supply chain in Thailand and included executives from the Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, local manufacturers, R&D organizations, drug development and regulatory affairs services, the Thai Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, and the Thai Food and Drug Administration (TFDA). The decision-making process and pair-wise comparisons from the questionnaire were completed between 30 min and 1 h per participant. Table 2 provides an example of pair-wise comparisons of decision criteria with respect to the goal given by expert No.1, and importance is represented by values from 1 to 9 as explained in Table 1 . The transverse values were reciprocals of those values and were defined as a ij = 1/ a ji . Expert No.1 decided that regulatory risks were three times more important than operational risks, giving a transverse value of 1/3, and the operational risk was three times less important than regulatory risk ( a ij = 1/ a ji ). Fig. 3 Risks in the new generic drug development process based on the AHP Table 2 Pair-wise comparison matrix of expert No.1’s decision criteria (risk factors) with respect to the goal Open image in new window R , regulatory risk; IP , intellectual property risk; O , operational risk; T , technology risk; F , financial risk; M , market risk; I , information risk
Because ten expert opinions were included, the geometric mean was suitable for calculating averages and was interpreted as the n th root of the product of n numbers as shown in the following equation: $$ \mathrm{Geometric}\ \mathrm{mean}\kern0.5em =\kern0.5em \sqrt[n]{\kern0.5em {x}_1{x}_2{x}_3\cdots {x}_n} $$
Therefore, the average scores of ten expert opinions for each pair-wise comparison of criteria i and j ( a ij ) could be calculated and shown in Table 3 . Table 3 Average scores of pair-wise comparisons of ten expert’s decision criteria (risk factors) with respect to the goal Open image in new window R , regulatory risk; IP , intellectual property risk; O , operational risk; T , technology risk; F , financial risk; M , market risk; I , information risk
Eigenvector and Weight Calculations
We generated a pair-wise comparison matrix of criterion (risk factors) from Table 3 by dividing each matrix element by the column total as illustrated in Table 4 . For example, the value of 0.227 in Table 4 was computed by dividing 1 (from Table 3 ) by the sum of column values (1.000 + 0.512 + 0.728 + 0.533 + 0.506 + 0.388 + 0.735 = 4.403). Eigenvector or relative weights of criteria (risk factors) that fulfill the goals in Table 4 were computed as row averages. For example, the relative weight of a regulatory risk that fulfills the goal and minimizes risks in the new generic DDP was calculated by dividing the sum of the rows (0.227 + 0.250 + 0.187 + 0.215 + 0.259 + 0.284 + 0.197) by the number of risk factors/criteria (7), giving a value of 0.2314. Accordingly, priority vectors for each criterion/risk factor which sequenced as the priority vector matrix are shown in Table 4 as well. Table 4 Synthesized matrix of criteria (risk factors) R IP O T F M I Weights R 0.227 0.250 0.187 0.215 0.259 0.284 0.197 0.2314 IP 0.116 0.128 0.158 0.137 0.119 0.140 0.115 0.1304 O 0.165 0.110 0.136 0.144 0.116 0.130 0.137 0.1343 T 0.121 0.107 0.108 0.115 0.101 0.109 0.135 0.1137 F 0.115 0.142 0.153 0.150 0.131 0.107 0.137 0.1337 M 0.088 0.101 0.115 0.116 0.135 0.110 0.134 0.1143 I 0.167 0.161 0.143 0.123 0.138 0.119 0.145 0.1423 R , regulatory risk; IP , intellectual property risk; O , operational risk; T , technology risk; F , financial risk; M , market risk; I , information risk
Subsequently, to verify the consistency of the comparison matrix, consistency indexes (C.I.) and consistency ratios (C.R.) should be computed as Saaty suggestion [ ]. The consistency index of a comparison matrix is given by C.I. = ( λ max – n) / (n – 1); λ max is the largest eigenvalue of the matrix of pair-wise comparison [ , ]. The consistency ratio is obtained by C.R. = C.I. / R.I., whereas random consistency index (R.I.) is shown in Table 5 . The suitable value of an R.I. for a matrix size of seven was 1.35 as displayed in Table 5 as well. If C.R. is less than or equal 0.1, the appraisal is accepted or else a new pair-wise comparison matrix is re-decided until C.R. is ≤ 0.1 [ , ]. Table 5 Average random consistency index (R.I.) [ ] N 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Random consistency index (R.I.) 0 0 0.52 0.89 1.11 1.25 1.35 1.40 1.45 1.49
Then, we can calculate the C.R. as explained above. The result revealed that C.R = 0.0063 and did not exceed 0.10 (10%). Hence, the experts’ opinions were sufficiently consistent to deliver a suitable decision for these criteria.
Discussion
The AHP structure in Fig. 3 illustrates the level 1 goal, prioritizing risks in the new generic DDP, and the level 2 criteria, major risk factors in the new generic DDP. The weights obtained for the seven criteria or risk factors, including regulatory, intellectual property, operational, technology, financial, market, and information risks, are presented in Table 4 . This table showed the results of the synthesized matrix of criteria with an acceptable C.R. of 0.0063 (≤ 0.10), and eigenvectors (weights) were computed. These results revealed that regulatory risk is the most important risk factor in the new generic DDP, with a priority of 0.2314 (23.14%). The second and following risk ranks were sequenced as follows: information (0.1423, 14.23%), operational (0.1343, 13.43%), financial (0.1337, 13.37%), intellectual property (0.1304, 13.04%), market (0.1143, 11.43%), and technology (0.1137, 11.37%). All priorities are shown in Table 6 . Table 6 Priorities of criteria (risk factors) Criteria Weights Rank Regulatory risk 0.2314 1 Information risk 0.1423 2 Operational risk 0.1343 3 Financial risk 0.1337 4 Intellectual property risk 0.1304 5 Market risk 0.1143 6 Technology risk 0.1137 7 ( λ max = 7.051; C.I. = 0.0085; R.I. = 1.35; C.R. = 0.0063 ≤ 0.1)
The pharmaceutical industry in Thailand is a downstream formulation industry for which upstream (drug discovery) and middle stream (APIs) manufacturing is operated in other countries, especially in the USA and Europe. The top local and international pharmaceutical companies in Thailand are Hitachi, Greater Pharma, iNova, Siam Pharmaceutical, Biolab, Thai Meiji, Pfizer, Sanofi-Aventis, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, and Novartis, and together produce various types of drugs for human and animal use. These include antibiotics, epinephrine, interferon, nitroglycerine, vitamins, and zinc methionine [ ]. The present AHP data analyses show that regulatory risk is the most significant risk factor to minimize and manage in the new generic DDP. Because drugs have health effects, these regulations are very strong and companies must concentrate on chemical compound safety and efficacy through plant designs and manufacturing operations. The FDA is the primary regulator and companies have to follow FDA regulatory protocols, and the ensuing complex manufacturing activities for new drug development are highly consuming of time and money. Drug intellectual property (IP) and registration laws are also strong considerations and IP laws and patents ensure that inventors of new drugs and chemical entities (NCE) have legal rights to initiate litigation against anyone making the same product without permission. Hence, to market pharmaceutical products, manufacturers must be aware of IP laws, must seek approval from the FDA, and must observe drug registration laws. Operation, financial, and technological obstacles are also needed to be considered as mentioned by Thailand Board of Investment (BOI). They stated that there are a number of obstacles for new drugs development among developing countries including Thailand; manufacturer has to invest much for research and development (R&D), laboratory infrastructure, technology, and human resource [ ].
In a previous study, Enyinda [ ] showed that regulatory legislation was highly significant for risk mitigation and management in pharmaceutical global supply chain logistics, followed by operational, reputation, financial, market, and relationship risks. Kaplan et al. [ ] also described major obstacles for generic drugs policy implementation in low- and middle-income countries. In their study, important barriers included negative perceptions of qualities of entities in the supply chain, the need for high-profit margins, and jurisdictional regulations. KPMG International [ ] survey results also indicated that regulatory risks are the most significant for all pharmaceutical and life sciences companies, followed by human capital and financial risks. In addition, Laínez et al. [ ] indicated that pharmaceutical industry characteristics differed from those of other sectors of the chemical process industry (CPI). Moreover, although these huge regulatory burdens vary among countries, they comprise significant challenges for enterprise-wide decision-making.
Conclusion
The contribution of this study is the completed picture of the new drug development process and the problem statements associated with the process. The entire process of new generic drug development has been studied and structured in detail. Specifically, for ease of comprehension, the new generic DDP was assembled into a basic flow over time as a prototype for local manufacturers who were interested in producing new generic drugs. Herein, we identified the obstacles and risk factors that are faced during the new generic development process and prioritized these according to opinions of experts in the pharmaceutical supply chain. Our computations using the AHP identified regulatory risk as the greatest risk factor, as shown in previous studies. Regulatory risk was the most significant barrier to developing new generic drugs in multiple countries, and the remaining ranked factors were information, operational, financial, intellectual property, market, and technology risks. These risks need to be considered and prioritized so that appropriate risk mitigation strategies can be used to manage them. Subsequently, researchers should study the other steps in the risk management process carefully, including selection and implementation of risk mitigation methods or strategies, which should be reviewed as alternatives in the AHP. The Charter Quality Institute [ ] suggested the use of risk mitigation tools such as root cause analyses (RCA), corrective action and preventive action (CAPA), the 4 T’s (Treat, Transfer, Terminate, Tolerate), risk evasion strategies, and brainstorming. Finally, the entire AHP structure, including goals, criteria (sub-criteria if needed), and alternatives, may be applied and further investigated in future studies.