Introduction
Bacillus atrophaeus undergoes sporulation as the consequence of depletion of one or more essential nutrients, resulting in the formation of extreme stress-resistant spores that can be further applied to assess the efficacy of dry heat, ethylene oxide, microwaves, low-temperature gas plasma, and electrothermal deactivation sterilization processes [ ]. The application of dry heat microbial reduction to flight hardware and spacecraft is of high importance to the flight projects to meet the planetary protection requirements [ ]. Calibrated Bacillus atrophaeus ATCC 9372 spores are more specifically recommended in dry heat sterilization by the US Pharmacopeia (USP) and the International Standard Organization (ISO) [ ].
The biological indicator (BI) or biological indicator system (BIS) is a microbiological test system providing a validated examination for a specified sterilization process due to its defined resistance. The system consists of a known number of microorganisms (10 3 –10 6 of bacterial endospores), with a determinate resistance to the mode of sterilization, in/on a carrier and enclosed in a protective package supplemented by a recovery medium that promotes the growth of any surviving test cells [ ]. BIs allow for qualitative evaluation, e.g., by visual identification of a color change or turbidity of the substrate media containing a pH indicator. The acid metabolites are the result of enzyme-catalyzed catabolism reactions that occur during the growth, producing a pH change in the medium [ , ].
A self-contained bioindicator (SCBI) consists of a plastic vial with a cap, a crushable glass ampule supplemented with recovery media, as well as a paper disc inoculated with spores, whereas a non-self-contained bioindicator consists of glass ampoules containing paper strips inoculated with 10 3 –10 6 (colony-forming unit/mL) spores supplemented with tubes containing a sterile recovery culture medium. The recovery medium enables the germination and outgrowth of heat-damaged spores, promoting a D 160 °C value of 3 min [ ].
All of the BI system components, including spore characteristics, the carrier material on which the spores are deposited, and the primary packaging, and in particular, the recovery media, have an impact on the BI performance [ ]. In general, strips of paper with a defined number of thermal-resistant B. atrophaeus spores have been applied in the validation of dry heat sterilization by placing them in strategic positions. The economic price, small size, and ease of handling are the main advantages of the paper carriers [ ]. Although in previous studies, fermented materials in solid-state fermentation on sugarcane bagasse, sand, and vermiculite have been directly used in the BI package, generally, paper strips are used in commercial BI [ ].
Nanomaterials are another potential carriers, being produced from various bulk materials, either from organic or inorganic material [ ]. Materials in the nanoscale range have a higher surface-to-volume ratio compared with their microscale counterparts. This allows nanomaterials to be able to attach more copies of biological molecules, which confers greater efficiency [ ]. The structure of the nanomaterials suggests their potential to open new innovative applications in life science technology, including applied microbiology. Owing to their physiochemical properties, nanoscale materials have been investigated for antimicrobial activity as growth inhibitors, killing agents, or antibiotic carriers. Nanotechnology also offers versatility in the control and detection of various microorganisms [ ]. For this purpose, various biofunctionalized nanomaterials have been developed for rapid and sensitive detection, capture, and separation of pathogens, with applications in clinical diagnosis, environmental monitoring, and food quality control. For example, galactose biofunctionalized single wall nanotubes (Gal-SWNTS) act as highly efficient aggregating agents through their multivalent interaction with galactose-binding surface proteins on certain pathogenic bacteria. In another example, carbon nanotubes have been conjugated with antibody to form immunonanotubes for microbial detection and control. Nanoparticles have also been applied in microbial detection using dye-doped silica, in which conjugated dye-doped fluorescent silica nanoparticles with antibody provides a rapid bioassay for single bacterial cell detection [ ]. Some other applications of nanomaterials in biology or medicine include fluorescent biological labels, drug and gene delivery, bio-detection of pathogens, detection of proteins, probing of DNA structure, tissue engineering, or viral photoinactivation [ ].
The small size, surface extent, improved solubility, and multi-functionality of nanoparticles offer the ability to interact with biological surfaces. In order to interact with the biological target, a molecular coating or layer acting as a bioinorganic interface should be biocompatible and attach to the nanoparticle [ ]. Chitin and chitosan are effective materials for biomedical applications because of their biocompatibility, biodegradability, and non-toxicity, apart from their antimicrobial activity and low immunogenicity. These candidate polymers can be easily processed into the form of gels, sponges, membranes, beads, and scaffolds. Despite the extensive application of nanomaterials in biotechnological processes, this study was the first report on the application of nanomaterial as a carrier for BI production [ ]. Thermal stability, uniform pore size distribution, availability, and modified physiochemical properties are among the characteristic of silica and alumina as conventional supports. Biological interaction of silica-based materials depends on the type of silica and surface characteristics, and therefore, some types of silica are predicted to have tendencies for the adsorption of spores. Among silica materials, MCM-41 exhibits a high amine to silica ratio due to its large surface area, as well as the high availability of surface hydroxyl groups [ ].
The increasing emergence of new tools, products, and equipment for sterilization purpose presents new challenges to prove their efficacy, validation, and safety. Due to their non-pathogenicity and resistance characteristics, B. atrophaeus spores are among the important tools in performance monitoring and validation of new sterilization and disinfection products and process performance evaluation [ ]. The effectiveness of bioindicator production depends on spore population and resistance, recovery media, and its potential application as a spore carrier. The optimization of spore production and recovery media of B. atrophaeus have been reported previously [ ]. The cost-effective production of their spore in the biofilm state of solid-state fermentation is also already reported [ ].
The main aim of the current study was to increase spore resistance as well as kill time. For this purpose, paper strips were replaced with nanomaterials in order to enhance the spore resistance and stability. Although various nanomaterials have previously been applied in clinical diagnosis, food quality control, environmental monitoring, and detection of various microorganisms, this is the first report on their implementation in the production of BI as a spore protectant.
In this work, the possibility of replacing regular paper strips of BIS by different chemical types of nanomaterial was assessed and their potential as more efficient carriers for spores of B. atrophaeus was investigated. To accomplish this, the effect of nanomaterial on spore resistance, stability, and potency of spore absorption was investigated and compared with conventional carrier of this product. Ultimately, the feasibility of these newly introduced BIS to replace the conventional commercial BI based on increasing the spore recovery and bioindicator stability is discussed.
Materials and Methods
Materials
Silica, alumina, nanocellulose, lignocellulose, and chitin were purchased from NanoNovin Polymer Company. Two different nanoporous materials of mild acidic silica-based SBA-15 [ ] and amphoteric alumina [ ] were obtained from Chemistry & the Chemical Engineering Research Center of Iran. These hydroxyl-rich materials were prepared by the sol–gel method. Natural carriers, including cellulose, lignocellulose, and chitin nanofiber gel (2.5 %) with an average nanofiber diameter of 32 nm were purchased from NanoNovin Polymer Co., Iran.
Bacterial Strain
The bioindicator bacterium, B. atrophaeus ATCC 9372, was obtained from the University of Tehran Microorganism Collection (UTMC). The substrate media consisted of 0.8 % yeast extract, 0.4 % nutrient broth, 0.005 % MnSO 4 .4H 2 O, and 0.005 % CaCl 2 .6H 2 O with pH adjusted at 8.0 ± 0.1 before sterilization at 121 °C for 20 min [ , ].
Inoculum Preparation and Sporulation Process
The freeze-dried culture of B. atrophaeus was revived by suspending it in 3 mL of salt-peptone solution (0.1 %) and standing it at room temperature for 30 min before transferring the inoculation into the broth medium containing 5-mL tryptone soy broth (TSB). This suspension was transferred to 5-mL tryptone soy broth and incubated. Following 24 h of incubation at 36 °C, a few drops of the culture broth were streaked on tryptone soy agar plates and incubated at the same temperature. After 24 h, the transparent colonies were transferred to TSB and incubated at 36 °C for 24 h. This medium was used to inoculate a slant bottle containing 100 mL of sporulation medium [ , ].
Sporulation was conducted at 36 °C for the duration of 14 days. Thereafter, spores were detached from the agar medium with a sterile glass rod and preserved in cold, sterile 0.02 M calcium acetate solution, pH adjusted to 9.7 with 0.14 % calcium hydroxide [ , ]. The spore suspensions were passed through a cotton and gauze filter, and the precipitate was washed three times with cold, sterile 0.02 M calcium acetate solution with pH 9.7 using centrifugation at 2500 rpm (1048× g ) for 20 min at 4 °C. The reconstituted precipitates of the spore suspensions were subjected to heat shock treatment (80 °C, 10 min) and stored at 4 °C. Viable spores were counted by serial decimal dilutions in sterile distilled water and 50 μL of each dilution was spread on a tryptone soy agar plate followed by 18 h of incubation at 36 °C. All experiments were done in duplicate [ , ].
Preparation of the Biological Indicator System
The non-self-contained biological indicator (BI) consisted of glass ampoules containing inoculated paper strips with 10 3 –10 6 (CFU/mL) spores and culture vials supplemented with sterile recovery culture medium containing (%) TSB, 3.0; CaCl 2 ·6H 2 O, 0.018; soluble starch, 0.1; and bromothymol blue, 0.002. This medium was further incubated at 36 °C for 48 h [ ].
Sterile 48 g/m 2 strips, filter papers, dimension of 1.0 × 2.0 cm, were soaked in 500 mL of 0.02 M calcium acetate solution with pH 11 (adjusted with 0.14 % calcium hydroxide solution) and kept at room temperature for 18 h. The strips were spread on trays and dried at 45 °C in a heated air oven. The spore suspensions were homogenized and 100 μL of it was dispensed on each strip. The inoculated strips were dried at 45 °C in a heated air oven for 24 h. Each strip was placed in a 7-mL sterile glass vial, sealed with aluminum on its rubber stopper, and stored at 4 °C [ , ].
In order to evaluate the efficacy of the alternatives to the strips, nanomaterial suspensions were sterilized for 15 min at 121 °C. Amounts of 500 μL of spore suspensions (10 8 CFU/mL) were mixed with an equal volume of 15 % ( w / v ) of natural nanomaterials, including nanocellulose, chitin, and lignocellulose or 5 % of synthetic particles, including gamma alumina and silica. These mixed suspensions of carrier-spores were dried at 60 °C in a heated air oven for 48 h. The dried mixtures were placed in vials, covered with aluminum foil, and stored at 4 °C.
Sterilization Resistance
The D value of a specified set of conditions is defined as the time taken to one log reduction of the spore population [ ]. The D values of the produced spores were determined by fraction negative analysis, using the Limited Spearman–Kaber method [ ]. Dry heat treatments were conducted at 160 °C for 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, and 40 min in a benchtop air oven. Ten units per exposure were tested. Following exposure, samples were cultured in a proprietary formulated recovery medium (mentioned in the biological indicator system preparation section) for growth, and then incubated at 36 °C for 48 h. The germination and growth of the spores were observed at the time range of 24–48 h following the incubation [ ].
The F value is the interval of time required at the constant reference temperature in order to determine the probability of spore survival to the pre-established sterility assurance level, (SAL), whereas the thermal resistance constant ( Z value) is defined as the change in exposure temperature, which corresponds to a tenfold change in D value [ ]. The survival/kill times, Z value and F value, were determined by the formula provided by the United States Pharmacopeia [ , ].
BI Recovery Kinetics
The survivor curve is based on the direct enumeration of the spores after BI submission at two or more sterilization times. Unheated BIs (spores in vials) were subjected to 160 °C of heat treatment for five different time alternates (5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 min). After the dry heat resistance test, viable spore counts were carried out by serial decimal dilutions in distilled sterile water by inoculation of 50 μL of each dilution on a tryptone soy agar plate surface. Plates were incubated overnight at 36 °C for 48 h and growth was monitored by colony-forming unit evaluation [ ].
Viability Assessment of Dried Bioindicator by the Accelerated Storage Approach
The viability survival rates of dried bacterial samples preserved for 20 years correlated well with those after preservation for 6–8 years at 5 °C, as well as with those after the accelerated storage test for 2 weeks at 37 °C. The approximate survival rate after preservation at 5 °C and the time in which the dried culture becomes unviable during the preservation at the same temperature can be calculated using Eqs. ( 1 ) and ( 2 ), respectively [ ]. $$ t=8 \log {S}_0/\left( \log {S}_0- \log Sac\right) $$ (1) $$ \mathrm{Log}\ {S}_{\mathrm{t}}= \log {S}_0-\left( \log {S}_0- \log Sac\right)\ t/8 $$ (2)
where S t is the survival rate after preservation for t years at 5 °C, S 0 is the survival rate immediately after drying, and Sac is the survival rate after preservation for 2 weeks at 37 °C.
Results
BIS Sterilization Resistance
Determination of the D 160 °C value was conducted by the limited Spearman–Kaber (LSK) and survival curve methods. Decimal reduction time ( D value), survival time, kill time, and F value of strip-based bioindicator were 4.5, 18, 45, and 54 min, respectively, and the Z value was obtained at 20 °C. Obtained results for the nanomaterial-based investigated bioindicator are presented in Table 1 . Table 1 The spore absorption of implementing nanomaterials along with potency and their effect on D values Carrier Water absorption (mL g −1 ) Spores (CFU g dry matter −1 ) Incompatibility with recovery medium D value S t (min) K t (min) F value (min) Filter paper NA 2 × 10 6 Negative 4.5 18 45 54 Gamma alumina 5 % 0.3 2 × 10 7 Negative 6 30 66 84 Silica 5 % 0.26 4 × 10 7 Negative 6.5 32.5 71.5 91 Nanocellulose 15 % 33 2 × 10 7 Positive False positive NA NA NA Lignocellulose 15 % 30 1 × 10 7 Positive False positive NA NA NA Chitin 15 % 30 2 × 10 6 Positive False positive NA NA NA NA not applicable
The determined values of the assessed parameters were in accordance with those recommended by the FDA for a spore population of 10 6 (CFU/mL) ( D 160 °C value ≥3.0 min, Z value ≥20 °C, 4 < S t < 14 min, 10 < K t < 32 min) [ , , ]. The values of the control commercial BIS were obtained as D 160 °C = 5 min, survival time = 20 min, and kill time = 50 min for the LSK method [ ].
The comparison among the five nanomaterial carriers showed that silica had the highest spore adsorption capacity. The mesoporous nature of silica with higher surface area and defined pore sizes between 2 and 50 nm, made them especially suitable as a preservative support. On the other hand, nanoporous aluminas are widely considered as support and adsorbent in many chemical processes owing to their amphoteric character and unique thermal stability. The gamma form of aluminas has a nanoscale pore diameter that can tolerate heat treatment up to 450–800 °C. High specific surface area as well as controllable and uniform pore size distribution of alumina has attracted particular attention for their biotechnological applications [ , ]. Silica acts as highly efficient aggregating agent via its multivalent interaction with surface proteins on spores [ ]. The initial attachment of a microorganism to a substratum is believed to be because of net attractive physico-chemical interactions, including electrostatic, Lifshitz-van der Waals forces, and acid–base interactions that occur between the two surfaces, as outlined by the extended Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (XDLVO) theory. These interactions are mediated by the functional groups which are present within proteins and polysaccharides on the surfaces of microorganisms [ ]. A typical spore consists of a core surrounded by a darkly stained membrane and a lightly stained cortex. The core is surrounded by a spore coat, which is comprised of the stratified inner and an electron dense outer layer. The outermost layer of the exosporium consists of a basal membrane surrounded by dark amorphous structures on the outer surface. It was concluded that the surface of spores consists largely of glycoproteins containing anionic groups such as carboxylate [ ]. To further elucidate the nature of the functional groups present on the surface of spores, attenuated total reflection spectroscopy (ATR-IR) has revealed a surface comprised of proteins, carbohydrates and, to a lesser extent, phosphodiesters. As expected from the zeta potential data, carboxylate was found to be the predominant functional group responsible for the net negative charge on the spore surface. All spores investigated adhere more easily to the hydrophobic than to the hydrophilic surface [ ]. The increased hydrophobicity of the spores may be due to a relative abundance of protein in the outer coats and exosporium that can affect their adherence to the surface of the carriers [ ].
Evaluation of Inoculated Carrier for Bioindicator
The proposed BI exhibited admissible results with N 0 = 1.2 ± 0.6 × 10 7 CFU/unit for silica, gamma alumina, nanocellulose, and lignocellulose carriers; and 1.2 ± 0.6 × 10 6 CFU/unit for chitin carrier with 100 % viability after 24-h incubation time. All six inoculated carriers showed tenfold increase in spore absorption potency compared to the paper material as control carrier. The viability test results showed that all the studied nanomaterials promoted spore germination and outgrowth when cultivated with the recovery medium. The efficacy of nanocellulose, lignocellulose, chitin, gamma alumina, and silica in respect to spore absorption and their effect on D values were compared with those of conventional filter paper strips. The qualities of the produced BIs were evaluated according to their resistance to the sterilization process.
The compatibility with media was confirmed when neither turbidity nor color change in the recovery medium was observed after exposure to 7-day incubation at 36 °C [ ]. However, dried nanocellulose, lignocellulose, and chitin, as the spore adsorbent, exhibited incompatibility with the recovery medium by changing its color to yellow due to the acidification.
The comparison of the physical properties among the five studied supports showed that nanocellulose, lignocellulose, and chitin had the highest (30–33 %) water retention capacity, whereas silica and gamma alumina displayed low (3 %) water absorption (Table 1 ). Low water retention is considered an important property since it reduces the duration of the drying processes [ ]. Additionally, both silica and gamma alumina carriers have a stable framework in the presence of acidic and basic media. Moreover, they have mechanical and thermal stability in comparison to natural substrates. The mentioned inorganic materials could be reused numerous times after the calcination at 550 °C, while other organic materials decompose at this temperature. In addition to the biocompatibility of these inorganic materials, the absorption of spores with sol–gel derived silica and gamma alumina demonstrated a distinctive thermal stability in comparison to the strip-based bioindicator.
A small amount of silica (5 % w / v ) could attach to as much as 10 7 CFU/mL of spores, which manifests their effectiveness in the adsorption of bacterial spores. Moreover, the addition of Ca +2 can activate silica to form large spore aggregates, each composed of hundreds of spores captured by a silica. High-spore absorption could have a positive impact on bacterial stability, which increases the BIS resistance. Surface interactions of small ions are generally accepted to be predominantly electrostatic, which is supported by the results where the extent of the absorption of positive/negative ions increases with a pH rise/decrease. The regulation of the adsorption capacity of the supports can be done by treatment of solid oxides with electropositive (Na + , Ca ++ ) ions, which results in an increase of their adsorption [ ]. Silica and gamma alumina indicated the highest spore adsorption, and, as a result, calcium acetate treatment has not been applied in this study. The problem observed in the implementation of nanocellulose, lignocellulose, and chitin as spore carrier was that a large volume of material per vial was needed to achieve the desired concentration (10 7 CFU/unit). Consequently, this caused an inherent non-homogeneous texture and relative low density of these polymers. In addition, they presented the disadvantage of absorbing part of the recovery medium and promoting its color change to yellow due to the acidification. The incompatibility of cellulose and hemicellulose based material with the recovery medium has also been reported before [ ], which was observed in their nanoscale forms. In contrast, silica could be a potential carrier for direct application in BI production due to its simple homogenization, filling properties, and recovery medium compatibility. Owing to its small particle size, silica fills the voids between the particles, improving the packing factor and reducing the porosity [ ].
The replacement of conventional paper strips with nanomaterials was successful due to the ability of silica and gamma alumina to attach to the spores, and, in turn, increase the spore resistance. Production of nanosilica-based BI in high quantities and low price for a number of applications in BI production is also feasible.
Kinetics of the BI Recovery
Unheated BI (spores in vials) were subjected to 160 °C heat treatment at five fraction times of 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 min (Table 2 ). High-absorption potency was exhibited by the silica and gamma alumina adsorbents by reducing one log spore population in 20 min and contained 10 5 (CFU/mL) spore content after 25 min of incubation. In contrast, nanocellulose and lignocellulose showed the same spore population reduction after 10 min and contained only 10 2 and10 3 (CFU/mL) viable spores, respectively, after 25 min. Chitin showed the lowest stabilizing effect among the studied carriers. Viable spore counts at various investigated times are presented in Table 2 and the survivor curve is illustrated in Fig. 1 . Table 2 The population of Bacillus atrophaeus recovered after heating at 160 °C Spore carriers 0.0 5 10 15 20 25 Exposure time at 160 °C (min) Cellulose strip 2.5 × 10 6 1 × 10 6 2 × 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 Population Recovered (CFU/mL) Nanocellulose 15 % 2 × 10 7 1.5 × 10 7 10 6 10 5 10 4 10 3 Lignocellulose 15 % 1 × 10 7 1 × 10 7 10 6 10 5 10 4 10 2 Chitin 15 % 1.5 × 10 6 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 0 Gamma alumina 5 % 3 × 10 7 1.5 × 10 7 1 × 10 7 10 7 10 6 10 5 Silica 5 % 4 × 10 7 2 × 10 7 1 × 10 7 10 7 10 6 10 5 Fig. 1 Survivor curve of spore population of Bacillus atrophaeus after heating at 160 °C. Silica and gamma alumina with the lowest concentration ( overlapped values ) exhibited the most potency in spore absorption and recovery, whereas chitin showed the lowest capacity
The correlation coefficients were calculated to be 0.95. The results of previous studies indicated that the survival rates of these dried samples were unchanged during preservation time in 16 years at 5 °C, and the rate after preservation for over 20 years can be estimated by the accelerated storage test immediately after drying. Previous studies illustrated that the accelerated storage test is useful for predicting viability after long-term preservation with the assumption that the inactivation of the dried cultures increases in a linear mode by preservation at 5 °C [ ].
The accelerated storage test was implemented for viability assessment of dried bioindicators. It was suggested that the viability of dried cultures after long-term preservation may be predictable from the data obtained in an accelerated storage test at an elevated temperature. Viability examination of 53-L dried bacterial cultures after preservation for 2 weeks at 37 °C and after preservation for 6–8 years at 5 °C have shown correlated survival rates. The accelerated storage and preserved strains at 5 °C had a correlation coefficient of 0.96 [ ]. Our results showed that the viability of dried spores on filter paper and nanomaterials with a spore population of 10 6 and 10 7 (CFU/mL) after 2 weeks incubation at 37 °C resulted in one logarithmic reduction of the population, which is interpreted as the viability corresponding to 48–56 years preservation at 5 °C.
Discussion
The higher tendency of sol–gel alumina and silica to adsorb spores, in comparison to the strip paper, to a great extent, is attributed to their hydroxyl-rich surface rather than their larger surface areas [ ]. In addition to the application of these modified silica and gamma alumina as efficient spore carriers, they can be introduced as potential adsorbents of bacterial cells for various biotechnological purposes such as strain preservation and pathogen detection. The ease of production and the high stability of silica during storage and autoclaving suggest that silica can be applied for diverse microorganism cultivation purposes [ ]. Therefore, silica-based ordered mesoporous materials have experienced a growing interest by biotechnological researchers due to their potential to host very different interacting molecules. Interaction would take place between the silanol groups located at the surface of the host matrices and the functional groups from the guest molecules. This interaction would have a strong effect on the adsorption of the biological agents and release properties of the carrier matrices [ ]. Additionally, textural and structural properties have been observed to modulate the adsorption and release characteristics of these ordered mesoporous materials.
The nanomaterial-based BIS of this study showed greater resistance to dry heat than strip-based BI. This may be inferred as a positive parameter in improving the monitoring of dry heat processes. Since the regular cycle time is 120 min, a BI with a kill time of approximately 71 min provides a more reliable estimation of sterilization compared with those with a kill time of 45 min, as higher kill time manifests spore stability and resistance, to a greater extent [ , , ]. The developed BIS showed greater resistance to dry heat sterilization than commercial BI, which can be considered a positive parameter to improve sterilization process monitoring. Experimental evidence and scientific modeling may allow the modification of the dry heat sterilization process time or parameters in further studies [ ]. The newly developed BIS has the potential to replace the commercial one with only a slight modification in the spore preparation process.
The use of nanomaterial as spore carriers introduces novel opportunities for the development of new BIS generation. The advantages of such applications include cost-effectiveness, spore resistance, and stability improvement by making the bioindicator preparation process shorter and less complicated, with no requirement for the calcium acetate treatment process and filtration. The results of this study suggest that nanomaterials can be a suitable replacement for conventional strips due to their higher perdurability. Finally, due to being a higher heat resistant structure, as well as the recycling nature of silica and gamma alumina-based carriers, no environmental pollution is expected.